PHILIPPINE 
MAGAZINE 

VOL. XXXIV August, 1937 No - 8 ( 352 ) 




PHILIPPINE M AGAZINE 



August, 1937 




The Only Low-Priced Car That Can Give 

This Complete Safety! 

/CHEVROLET, alone of all low-priced cars, brings to you 
and your family this impressive list of safety features: 



Perfected Hydraulic Brakes: the highest devel- 
opment of the hydraulic brake system — • 
the most modern and dependable brakes built 
today. 

Improved Gliding Knee-Action Ride: the safest, 
steadiest, most comfortable ride ever developed, 
according to the verdict of over two million 
Knee-Action tusers. 

New High Compression Valve-in-Head Engine: 
which will get you out of traffic tangles in a 
hurry— operate economically and dependably 



during the long life of the car. 

All-Steel Bodies: the safety of all steel bodies 
and the All-steel "Turret Top"— protection 
you'll appreciate while you ride in peaceful 
quiet. 

Safety Plate Glass: windows and windshield of 
safety plate, and Fisher Nc-Draft Ventilation, 
to protect your health. 

Shockproof Steering: makes driving easy and 
insures control of your car under all driving 
conditions. 



Choose Chevrolet— for greatest safety— for greatest 
all around motoring enjoyment 




Pacific Commercial Company 



Cebu 



2 Is la de Romero 
Manila 



Iloilo 



PHILIPPINE 
MAGAZINE 

A. V. H. Hartendorp, Editor and Publisher 




VOL. XXXIV CONTENTS FOR AUGUST, 1937 No. 8 (352) 

The Cover: 

"Thrift" Gavino Reyes Congson Cover 

Philippine Economic Conditions J. Bartlett Richards 338 

News Summary 339 

Editorials: 

Yea, yea and Nay, nay — Empires, Colonies, and Treaties — 
Mrs. Sanger and the Mayor of Manila — Marconi and 

Modern Demagogy— " Trouble-Makers' ■ or Leaders? The Editor 345-347 

Love (Verse) Anonymous 347 

Manila's Cloud Year — A Review Frank G. Haughwout 348 

Servant Girl (Story) Estrella D. Alfon 350 

Last Word (Verse) Luis Dato 351 

Shadows over Indo-China Marc T. Greene 252 

Leper Women Voted for Suffrage, 918 to 5 Eloise Sterling Hirt 354 

Barrio Episode (Story) Redentor Ma. Tuason 355 

The Soul of Man (Verse) Mariano Salvador Moreno. . . 355 

The Alupasi Industry of Caba, La Union Dominador Z. Rosell 356 

Cinquain Herminio M. Beltran 356 

With Charity to All (Humor) "Putakte" and "Bubuyog".. . 357 

Idilio de Amor (Verse) Aurelio Alvero 357 

Note from the Finance Editor John Truman 358 

Cebuano-Visayan Kinship Terms Ignacio T. Quijano 359 

Four O'Clock in the Editor's Office 371 

Astronomical Data for August, 1937 Weather Bureau 380 



Entered at the Manila Post Office as Second Class Mail Matter 
EDITORIAL AND BUSINESS OFFICES 

Uy Yet Building, 217 Dasmarinas, Manila 
P. O. Box 2466, Telephone 4-93-76 



Subscription rates: P2.00 in the Philippines, P4.00 elsewhere. The Magazine will be stopped without notice at 
the expiration of a subscription unless otherwise ordered. When informing the Publisher of a change in address, please 
give the old address as well as the new. Remittances should be made by money order. Advertising rates will be 
furnished on application. 



Copyright, 1937, by A. V. H. Hartendorp. All Rights Reserved. 



337 




PHILIPPINE MAG^A^ZLNE 



GES PLEASE 



• Users of the Ticonder- 
oga Pencil take its quality 
for granted. They know it 
will be uniformly smooth 
right down to the eraser. 
They know it will make 
the same clean-cut legible 
lines without interruption 
of writing speed and 
comfort. 

And they know that the 
next Ticonderoga will be 
just as good as the one 
they are using. 

It pays to use Ticonder- 
oga Pencils in business. 
You will find them well 
worth their price for use 
in business, home and 
school. 

Philippine Education Co., Inc. 

Distributors 




Philippine Economic 
Conditions 

By J. Bartlett Richards 
American Trade Commissioner 



EXPORTS appear to 
have fallen off some- 
what in June, in most lines, 
although ships continue to 
obtain full cargoes. Sugar 
shipments£were lower than 
in May and continue to 
run substantially behind 
last year. Copra exports 
were a little better than in 
May, but continue much 
below last year. Coconut 
oil shipments fell off in 
June, but copra cake and meal were exported in 
good quantity and desiccated coconut shipments 
reached record levels. Abaca exports improved and 
are well ahead of last year. Leaf tobacco shipments 
were reduced, following the heavy May shipments. 
Log and lumber exports were also apparently reduced. 
Sugar prices were firm, but copra, coconut oil ana 
abaca prices were easy. 

The export sugar market was improved, with 
fairly active business at prices which were firm during 
most of the month, receding a little at the end. Ship- 
ments were light but sales on the New Yorkjmarket 
were active. The market for domestic consumption 
sugar continues easy, with ample stocks and active 
demand. There were some moderate shipments 01 
reserve sugar to Hong Kong, but this was stopped 
when it became clear that it was contrary to the 
protocol conditions of the London Sugar Agreement. 

Copra arrivals increased substantially, although 
still somewhat below expectations. Prices continued 
to decline throughout the month, due to a declining 
oil market in the United States, the fact that oil 
purchasers have apparently pretty well covered their 
requirements for the next few months and the ex- 
pectation of increased copra production. The oil 
market was also weak throughout the month, im- 
ports of copra were slightly better than in May but 
still running substantially behind last year. Ihcy 
are going entirely to the United States. Oil exports 
were considerably lower than in May but continue 
well ahead of last year. Copra cake and meal were 
exported in good volume, with the United States 
getting the major portion. Desiccated coconut 
exports were larger than in any previous month on 
record. 

The abaca market was weak, due to iack>f demand 
from abroad and in spite of reduced product/on. 
Only a few weak holders sold at the lower prices, 
however, and a reaction upward appears probable at 
the end of the month. Exports continued to run 
well ahead of last year to all markets, excepting to 
Continental Europe. 

The tobacco market continued firm but quiet. 
Buying of the new crop is well under way in the 
Ilocos Provinces and is starting in the Cagayan 
Valley. Leaf tobacco exports fell off in June, fol- 
lowing the heavy May shipments, but cigar exports 
were exceptionally good. 

The rice market was a little firmer during June. 
Arrivals continue steady and stocks so far appear 
adequate. Some imports will probably be necessary 
this year, but it is expected that revised estimates 
will show a considerable increase over the preliminary 
estimate of the 1936-37 crop. 

Lumber mills continue to operate at capacity, 
although exports were apparently a little lower than 
in May. Demand continues excellent both in export 
and domestic markets. 

Gold production continued to increase, although 
it'still fell a little behind the record set in December, 
1936. Exports of base metals tojthe United States 
fell off in June but should increase from now on, with 
the shipping situation easier. Base metal shipments 
to Japan increased in June, the usual 60,000 tons of 
iron ore being supplemented by about 5,000 tons of 
manganese and copper. 

The value of import collections was 12 percent 
greater than in May and 23' percent greater than in 
June, 1936. The value of commercial letters of 



August, 1937 



collections continue excellent. 

Imported goods continue in generally g^de- 
mand, although a seasonal Wgfg^ was 
m ?, St "W nHhXn^here was some indent business 

Flour imports ^^^^S^ffi 
of about 60 present from *c United^ bt « d 
ports from Japan were also -above normal. . d 
continues very light, P°^,^ canned 
moderate price of rice. Very little ™ ly 
fish arrived in June but there wan ^amp q( 
of Japanese fish. Prices arc ^"^^f cva- 
condensed milk were faMylgod. £™Epl e 3tocks 
porated milk were below normal, .due to v N _ 
and the approach of the rainy season. c£mncd 
lands continues to get the is improving, 

milk business, but the Amerieonpo«t ^ 
Imports of automobiles and trucks wer § 
June Stocks now b « continue 

although some djaleraare : stitt short. = fa n 
verv Rood, considering the iact cxc cllent. 
hearted The P"^.. b v ^ u S nc C D ^t coSinue good. 
Tire sales fell off seasonally in June ou . 

Ordering of iron and **S3^S3W hand- 
in spite of construct^ activity. btoC c ^ gidcr 

and shipments en route, at pne bc 
under present replacement IgJOJrtSo on light 
ample* Japan is offering competition o ^ 
galvanized sheets and cast iron pipe a 
°Vhfleather market was seasonally quiet, with 

but ships are able to °°ffi^fJ25 l v over May and 

Consolidated WJSfiL^uf^&ZB* 
tacre^fa!^,S$<k^J^to '& payment of 
ended July 3, 1937, due^ "J' 1 "^ to to ^ Nn tionnl 

due mainly to tax PW»«g ™*££tf' malt i n y ac- 
assumed, to P°X me "V% ' n tock market decline. The 
counts as a "» u Vfh^chnnB?morket, apparently 
dollar was easy on the exchange m £ f augar 

bSfsltiu^^ofef^hfre'were no very heavy 
actual offerings of sugar bills. 

Government revenue . was ><*^^»CoVl£ 
mainly to very heavy ™™^£™£*?^ m nearly 
tions by the Bureau °f J^emal Kevcnuc 

those for the same period last year by pc 

Power production totaled 11,419,195 K.W.H. to 
June, an increase over the ^jfe^^J? about 

^6lW&K^'tS& same period last year. 

Real estate sales registered k t June [^taW 
691 087, exceed ng the figure for June, 193b, py 
flo percent, but fatting -Jg^^J^ real 
record May figure of fi£?Sx month* 

estate cont nues active, sales for the nrst s 1 * ^ 
of this year totaling ■P14.986.796. "ceeding Bgurc 
for the first half of 1936 by nearly 130 pc rccnt ana 
substantially exceeding any six months figure 
record. New building permits in Manila fell on u 
June and were not much better than ho f a .great 
as in June, 1936. For the tat 
year, they are 24 percent below the same perioa tus 
• year in which, however, construction activity .was 
unusually great. Permits for repairs were just n 
as great as in June last year and for the sa mo^ . 
period not much better. There appears never tn i 
less to be a fair degree of interest in building. The i 
domestic cement companies' arc finding it u 
to keep up with demand for cement and a sm 
amount of cement was imported from Japan m juu . . 
despite the fact that its duty-paid cost soraewnu 



Atlas Assurance Company, 


The Employer's Liability 


Limited. 


Assurance Corporation, Ltd. 


Continental Insurance Co. 


Orient Insurance Company 


Insurance Company ot North America 


E. E. ELSER, INC. 

GENERAL AGENTS 


\ Kneedler Bldg. No. 400 


. Telephone 2-24-28 



August, 1937 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



339 



exceeds the wholesale price of domestic cement. 
A company has been organized to build a large em- 
porium or arcade. Construction activity has been 
based to a considerable extent on stock market 
profits, however, and is likely to be impeded by the 
very severe decline in share quotations. 

• v^ 161 ^ were 538 new radio receiving sets registered 
m|May and 90 cancellations. In May last year, 
there were 383 registrations and 119 cancellations. 
For the first five months of this year and last year, 
registrations and cancellations were as follows: 



Registrations . 
Cancellations . 



Total 5 months 
1936 1937 
1,933 2,452 
544 451 



News Summary 



The Philippines 

June 14. — Captain Bonner 
Fellers, member of the U. S. 
Military Mission, who ac- 
companied President Quezon 
to the United States returns 
to Manila after a short vaca- 
tion in Russia. He tells the 
press: "Anybody who believes 
Russia is not making a success 
of its experiment, is crazy! 
Russia is a howling success! 
I traveled throughout Rus- 
sia, including 6,000 miles in Siberia, and from the 
train windows I noticed a building boom every- 
where. I tell you, the Russians are just going places! 
There is no such thing as hunger or unemployment 
in | Russia. There is a great deal of construction 
work, including military preparations. Oh, they 
are building an army all right!" "But we can lick 
them, can't we?" asks a reporter. Captain Fe l le ™ 
bursts into a loud guffaw, and exclaims, I would 
like to see who can lick 'em". 

\ Or. Regino Ylanan returns to Manila. He states 
that the Far Eastern Olympic Games under the 





I 
m 

I 



% There are two halves to 
every shave. The first is to 
get rid of the whiskers. The 
second is to care for your skin. 
So don't be a half-shaver. Do 
a full job— this way: 

1. To FEEL fine, shave with 
Mennen Lathrr Shave: Men- 
thol-iced or Plain. Then use 
Mennen Skin Bracer — a skin 
conditioner and a real pro- 
tec tioiu 

2. To LOOK fine, use Mennen 
Talcum for Men. Doesn't 
show. Kills face shine. Makes 
skin look smoother, younger. 
Use it after the bath. In the 
new green and white can. 




Amateur Athletic Association of the Orient at Osaka 
will be held whether the Philippines will participate 
or not, but that two officials of the A.A.A.O. are 
coming to Manila to make further negotiations for 
Philippine participation. 

June 15. — Twenty thousand twenty-year old 
trainees, drafted from the 180,000 registrants last 
year, complete their five and a half months of training 
in 128 training cadres throughout the Islands and 
become the country's first reserves. Next month 
another group of 20,000, selected from among 139,000 
registrants this year will begin their five and a half- 
month training. 

High Commissioner Paul V. McNutt at a banquet 
given in his honor by former service men, pays a 
glowing tribute to the American "old-timers" in the 
Philippines who "not only brought the Phlippines 
under the American flag, but who have done so much 
for the development of the Islands." 

June 16. — Felipe Buencamino tells a group of As- 
semblymen that plans have been made on the basis 
of independence on July 4, 1939, with an allowance 
of fifteen years from that date for necessary economic 
adjustments. 

June 19. — Protest of the Dutch government to the 
State Department discloses a Philippine violation 
of the London sugar agreement in the dumping of 



4,000 tons of reserve sugar in Hongkong at one-third 
below the market price. The High Commissioner 
suggests to the President of the Commonwealth 
through his Secretary, Jorge B. Vargas, m his capa- 
city as Domestic Sugar Administrator, that furtner 
such shipments should be prevented. Secretary 
Vargas states he will do so, although the Common- 
wealth government has not yet been officially in- 
formed of the agreement. An unofficial copy in pos- 
session of the High Commissioner provides that, 
though the agreement will not go into effect until 
September, 1937, "signatory governments will main- 
tain the spirit of the agreement until that date. 
Assemblyman Felipe Buencamino states it is nis 
understanding that the Philippine Assembly must 
pass a ratifying act. 

Vice-President Sergio Osmena, Secretary Vargas, 
Maj.-Gen. Paulino Santos, and other high officials 
attend the ceremonies in Cebu upon the official 
presentation of the military airplane, "Spirit of 
Cebu", a gift of the province to the government. 

June 20. — Speaker Gil Montilla and his daughter, 
Mercedes, return to Manila. He tells the press 
that he foresees early independence with a reciprocal 
trade pact and states that "if the Negros sugar 
planters who are opposed to early independence 
were given the assurance that it would come with 
adequate safeguards to protect the national economy, 




PalayerO 



—a good durable plow for less money 

The PALAYERO carabao plow is not just a steel plow made merely to dis- 
tinguish it! from the old, inefficient, wooden plow. It is a modern plow, de- 
signed and built especially to meet local rice farming requirements by the oldest, 
and largest agricultural machinery manufacturer in the world. 

fT \ it's a quality plow that characterizes all 

^ McGormick-Deering Farm Implements. 




The PALAYERO carabao plow weighs 20 kilos and has a 414-inch cut. 
For the convenience of both plowman and the carabao, the handle and 
beam can easily be adjusted as illustrated above. 

International Harvester Company 

OF PHILIPPINES 

154 M. de Comillas, Manila 
Branches at: ILOILO — BACOLOD — CEBU — DAVAO — LEGASPI — BAGUIO 



340 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1937 



he could not sec how any Filipino could reasonably 
seek to block the movement. Itlwould.be the reali- 
zation of life-long aspirations/ andfwouldLbe adecided 
improvement over the Tydings-McDuffie k Law." 

A mass meeting is held in Iloilo after a torch parade 
in protest against the proposed appointment of Al- 
fredo Eugenio for Mayor as recommended to Pres- 
l? en * Quezon recently by Secretary of the Interior, 
Elpidio Quirino. 

June 21. — Speaker Montilla radiograms' President 
Quezon endorsing Secretary Quirino's recommenda- 
tion of Alfredo Eugenio for Mayor of Iloilo. 

Disclosed that Commissioner Quintin Paredes 
has again written T to local political leadersfas he did 
more than a month ago to'a member'of thej Assembly 
urging amendment of the Constitution to pave the 
way for the re-election of President) ManuellL. Que- 
zon. He states that independence in two|years^may 
not find favor with Congress in view of the reports 
of opposition to it from thef Philippines and the cur- 
rent belief in Congressional circles that independence 
might prove more harmful than beneficial to the 
Islands. He also reiterates his} wish to be relieved 
of the commissionership and states he may run for 
the Assembly. 

June 22. — Thirty-five businessmen, representing 
twenty-two important firms in Manila meet at a 
luncheon at Manila Hotel under the auspices of the 
Philippine- American** Trade Association and agree 
on a plan to submit their representations atlthe forth- 
coming public hearings of the joint committee of 
xperts. In the absence of Rafael^Alunan, President 



of the Association, Judge J. W. Haussermann, Vice- 
President, presides. The Association will act as a 
clearing house[and coordinating center for the various 
business interests. They will limit themselves to 
the presentation of economic facts, leaving political 
questions alone. 

June 23. — Secretary Vargas announces that an 
inspection service is planned by the Domestic Sugar 
Administration to check on the production and 
milling of sugar and to prevent over-production. 
In the meantime, he states, there will be no further 
shipments of reserve sugar abroad, pending receipt 
of the official text of the London quota agreement 
and a statement on it by the State Department. A 
cablegram has been received! from Secretary of Justice 
Jose* Yulo, urging strict adherence to the London 
pact. 

The government starts investigations o the re- 
ported flight of a mysterious airplane over Davao 
last Friday and the movements of a Japanese ship 
in Lingayen Bay. 

June 24. — The Cabinet rules that Philippine 
oil deposits should be closed to private exploitation 
and development until after the government has 
defined a policy on what to do with them. 

Announcing a public hearing on the cost of gaso- 
line next Monday at the Legislative Building, As- 
semblyman; Gregorio Perfecto, chairman of the com- 
mittee on rate reduction of public utilities, states 
that in his opinion there is no reason why gasoline 
in the Philippines should sell at a price four times 
that of the price in Japan. The local managers of 



Why Train Travel is Preferred 

IT'S SAFE — No loss of. life of a single passenger in many 
years. 

IT'S FAST — The Kailroad owns its road and regulates 
traffic thereon. Trains are run on schedule. 

IT'S COMFORTABLE — Good [road bed makes possible 
train speed with even, gliding smoothness. 

IT HAS MODERN COACHES — Air-conditioned coaches 
makes you ride oblivious of outside heat, dirt 
or noise. 

3rd class coaches are roomy, and smooth 
riding. 

IT'S ECONOMICAL — Fares are Extremely Low. You 
save when you buy a railroad ticket. 

PATRONIZE ALSO BUSES OF 

Benguet Auto Line 
Luzon Bus Line 



For 
information, 
write to 
Traffic 
Department 
Tel. 4-98-61 
Information 
Local 42 



R. B. BERNABE 
Chief Clerk 




LEON M. LAZACA 
Traffic Manager 



City Office 
521-523 Das- 
marinas 

Tel. 2-31-83 



CANDIDO SORIANO 
City Agent 



Manila Railroad Company 



943 Azcarraga 



Manila 



various oil companies have been summoned to appear 
before the committee. 

Assemblyman Justino Nuyda of Albay states he 
will introduce a resolution colling for a legislative 
inquiry into the rapid and "scandalously extrava- 
gant'* promotions of army officers. 

* letter from the Los Angeles Chamber of Com- 
merce is published in Manila stating that that or- 
ganization has protested against the short notice 
given to submit its views to the Philippine-American 
joint committee of experts and that it has! declared 
"off-hand" that California business interests which 
are "greatly concerned in the trade with the Philip- 
pines, "would be disposed to oppose" the 1938-39 
independence proposals, but that this attitude might 
be modified if they knew the reasons for the proposal. 

June 25. — Eight different Manila chambers of com- 
merce submit a joint memorandum against the 
proposed increose of retailers' license fees by the 
Municipal Board. A "reasonable increose" in rates 
is not objected to, but the proposed rates are exces- 
sive, it is stated, amounting in some lines'of business 
to on advance of 850%. The memorandum sug- 
gests that the Board consider "whether the time has 
not come for a general revision of the taxation struc- 
ture of the city along modern lines, distributing the 
burdens equitably in all quarters able to bear them 
withrut disturbing the general progress of the ca- 
pital", and proposes in the mean time, pending such 
revision, "to retain the present license fee scole 
subject to a 50 % increose in every category, except 
in those for which no increase is indicated in the 
Boord's proposed new scole". 

The Securities and Exchange Commission an- 
nounces that "no galena or spahclrite ores of commer- 
cial importance are indicated" in the properties of the 
Batangas Mineral Company, the announcement 
causing the price of the stock to topple from P.42 
to P.28. The Commission sent investigators to the 
mine because of the "sudden and sharp fluctuations 
of the price of the shares". "Our duty is to protect 
the buying public," states Commissioner Ricardo 
Nepomuceno. 

Legislators interested in oil development, among 
whom are Speaker Montilla and Assemblymen Ni- 
colas Rofols and Ruperto Montinola, are reported 
to be opposed to the Cabinet ruling on the reserving 
to the government of oil fields. 

Moj.-Gen. Santos denies unjustified promotions 
in the Army stating most of those promoted have 
served from ten to fifteen years in the Constabulary. 
"The army still locks officers. We have only one 
officer for every 30 men. The United States has one 
officer for every 10 men." 

Secretary Vargas tells S. Sakamoto, member of 
the organizing committee of the Amateur Athletic 
Association of the Orient, that the matter of sending 
a Philippine athletic delegation to Osaka next year 
will depend on whether the Assembly will appro- 
priate the amount needed for training, transpor- 
tation, subsistence, and equipment expenses (about 
P50,000). 

John Joseph Russell, prominent Manila business 
man, dies aged 69. He was born in Manila in 1867. 
son of one of the founders of the famous Russell & 
Sturgis firm, established in 1825, oldest American 
company in the Philippines. His widow, t Mrs. 
Socorro Moreno and twelve children survive. 



Freckles 




Secretly and Quickly Removed! 

Stillman*8 Freckle Cream bleaches 
them out while you sleep. Leaves 
the skin soft and white — the com- 
plexion fresh, clear and natural. 
For 37 years thousands of users 
huve endorsed It. So easy to use. 
The first jar proves its magic worth. 

CUE MA 

BELLA AURORA 

Removes T Whitens 
Freckles 1 The Skin 



For sale at all good drug stores 
Stillman Co., Manufacturers, 
Aurora, 111., U. S. A. 



August, 1937 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



341 



June 5(5— Secretary Vargas announces that .Pres- 
ident Quezon has appointed Valenano Gatuslao 
Governor of Occidental Negros to succeed the late 
Governor Emilio Gaston. Gatuslao has been Acting 
Governor since the late Governor fell ill. 

Secretary Rodriguez cancels the Crown Mines 
Baguio claims, the action being based on an opinion 
of Acting Secretary of Justice Jose" Melencio that oil 
mining claims within the Baguio townsite are illegal. 
Other corporations will also be affected. 

T H Marsman and a number of others arrive in 
Manila' on a chartered K.N.I.L.M. plane from Ban- 
doeng Java, given special permission to land here 
by the State Department. The trip took approx- 
imately twelve hours. Mr. Marsman tells the press 
there is no cause for fear of a drop in the price of gold. 

June 27.— The new Philippine Racing Club track 
at Santa Ana is inaugurated. m 

June 28. — ^he Legislative inquiry into an alleged 
gas combine opens. Assemblyman Perfecto states 
that gasoline sells for fifteen centavos a liter here 
which is about sixty centavos a gallon or four time* 
the price in the United States despite the fact that 
it enters the Philippines duty free. He states further 
that k sells at sixteen centavos a liter in Manila and 
fifteen centavos in the provinces. Attorney E. E. 
Selph questions the authority of the committee to 
institute the inquiry. Managers of the local cor- 
porations point to the high cost of the distribution 
of gasoline, and state that prices arc fixed by the 
home offices. " . _ 

Malacanang announces that President Quezon has 
designated Provincial Treasurer Angel S. Tadeo 
temporary Mayor of Iloilo. 

The Army command decides on a redivision of the 
Islands into ten instead of five army districts. 

The board of directors of the Batangas Minerals 
Mining Company issues a statement challenging the 
correctness of the report submitted by the Bureau 
of Mines to the Securities and Exchange Commis- 
sioner which caused the latter to denounce the Com- 
pany's stock as too highly priced. 

Director of Education Dr. Luther B. Bewley re- 
turns to Manila after several months absence in the 
United States for rest and medical treatment. 

Luis Meneses, until recently executive officer and 
secretary of the Pension and Investment Board, is 
sentenced to pay a fine of P3,350 with subsidiary 
imprisonment in case of insolvency and to pay the 
cost of theiproceedings, for violation of the law pro- 
hibiting public officers from being personally inter- 
ested in any contract or transaction in which he 
participates by reason of his office. 

Vice-President Osmena orders the opening of new 
classes toaccommodatel50,000more children to school 
after President Quezon approves a plan to advance 
P 1,000,000 from unappropriated treasury funds 
subject to refund by legislative authority. A caucus 
of assemblymen passed a resolution pledging support 
of larger appropriations and recommending release 
of sufficient funds to accommodate 250,000 children! 

June 29. — Secretary Rodriguez makes public a 
report on irregularities in connection with timber 
concessions in Mindanao, naming a number of army 
officers and government officials who have obtained 
such concessions, and proposing remedies. 

Mariano Cu Unjieng, scion of a wealthy and pro- 
minent family, who was accused and convicted of 
estafa, loses the last round of his fight for freedom 
when Judge Jose O. Vera of the Manila Court of 
First Instance denies his petition for probation. He 
was prosecuted for estafa through falsification of 
Commercial documents at the behest of the Hong- 
kong & Shanghai Banking Corporation and was 
sentenced to from four to eight years imprisonment, 
being convicted separately with Rafael Fernandez, 
former professor of economics in the University of 
the Philippines, for an estafa of Pl.411,000 through 
the'use of fake sugar quedans or warehouse receipts. 
Fernandez and others later retracted their charges 
of Cu Unjieng's complicity. The Supreme Court 
increased the penalty to from five to seven years and 
the United States Supreme Court refused to review 
the decision. The trial established a record in all its 
phases in Philippine courts. The trial began on 
October 30, 1931, and was completed November 3, 
1933. More than 50,000 documentary exhibits 
were presented both by the prosecution and the 
defense, and stenographic notes covered 22,923 pages. 
Judge Vera suggests in his decision that the accused 
seek executive clemency. 

The Manila Daily Bulletin states editorially with 
reference to a recent suggestion of Charles Edward 
Russell that the Philippines undertake to provide 
cotton for Japanese textile mills, that this is a "pro- 



QUICK, SAFE 

RELIEF — 

from COLDS 
HEADACHES 
NEURALGIA 




Anacin contains— AcetylsaUcyHc Add (N. F.) 
46%, Acetphenetldin (U. S. P.) 46%, Quinine 
(Sulphate; (U. S. P.) 4%. Caffeine Alkaloid 
(U S. P.) 4%. Total 100% 



posal to throw the Philippines to the control of 
japan. If the Philippines wish admission to the 
Japanese sphere of influence, or, to be more exact, 
to ttie Japanese realm of control, cotton production 
would be a convenient start". 

M J £ ne t 80 z — A number of assemblymen launch a 
school reform" movement that would shorten the 
present course in the elementary schools from 7 to 5 
years and in the high schools from 4 to 3 years. 
Utners plan to push through a bill providing for 
more systematic and more adequate financing of 
the schools. 

Secretary Rodriguez releases a report on land- 
grabbing in Mindanao, accusing almost the same 
set of persons named in the report on irregular lumber 
concessions. 

July 1. — The National Economic Council endorses 
Egg" . r an ind eP€ndent currency system for the 
Philippines, a central bank, and a merchant marine, 
the latter to begin with 5 ocean-going steamers. 
Drafts of the necessary bills are in preparation. 

Malacanang announces that President Quezon 
V a8 ' i by a P roclam ation in New York, dated June 
14. Closed to prospecting certain portions of Bontoc 
and Kalinga to safeguard the rights of the Non- 
Christian inhabitants. 

July 2. — Ma j. -Gen. Douglas MacArthur in a 
requested interview with the Philippines Herald 
points to the beneficial by-products and the less ob- 
vious accomplishments" during the first Philippine 
Army training period. These, besides the accom- 
plishments in the technical phases of military train- 
ing, demonstrate the soundness of the defense plan, 



he declares. He refers to the improved physical 
condition of the trainees, increase in literacy, 
and their general enthusiasm. He speaks of the 
rapidity with which the officer corps is mas- 



Use Mercolized Wax 

for Beautifying Skin 



The most successful way of beautifying the skin 
is the Mercolized Wax threc-in-onc treatment of 
softening, bleaching, cleansing. As you know, of 
course, when the skin is young, nature constantly 
scuffs off the dead cells of surface skin. But this 
action subsides as skin grows older and a veil of dead 
skin obscures the beauty that lies underneath. That 
is why every woman should use Mercolized Wax to 
hasten Nature's process of shedding the dead cells. 
Mercolized Wax gently takes off the drab, dull, dis- 
colored skin in minute, invisible particles. Merco- 
lized Wax unleashes for you a radiant skin of alluring 
smoothness. Mercolized Wax brings out the hidden 
beauty of any complexion. 



BE MODERN 
BE THRIFTY 




COOKfWITH 

Electricity 



Manila Electric Company 



134 SAN MARCELINO 




TELEPHONE 2-19-11 



342 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1937 



tering the new tasks in spite of obstacles. The air 
corps has made commendable strides, he states, 
and the U. S. Navy) Department is at work on plans 
and specifications for the speedy torpedo boats 
proposed for the offshore patrol. 

Secretary Rodriguez instructs the Director of 
Lands to authorize no claims on unsurveyed lands 
in Cotabato pending the completion of present inves- 
tigations into land-grabbing, illegal timber grants, 
and dummy corporations. 

The Philippine Railway Company, which operates 
lines in Cebu, Iloilo, and Capiz, is placed under a 
receivership by the Supreme Court on petition by 
Solicitor-General Pedro Tuazon on behalf of the 
Philippine government. G J. Kennedy General 
Manager of the Railway, and Rufino Melo, Comp- 
troller of the National Development Company, are 
appointed receivers. A preliminary injunction is 
also issued to prevent "a race of creditors for pre- 
ference. . .and a multiplicity of suits, actions, at- 
tachments, etc." 

j u ly 5 # — Reported that Dr. H. Foster Bain, ad- 
viser to the Bureau of Mines who left the Philip- 
pines recently, has urged the government to interest 
large private oil companies in undertaking a thorough 
survey of oil possibilities as the government itself 
does not command the necessary technical experience 
and the requisite capital, and it being "an unwise 
field for the expenditure of public funds". He has 
also recommended the liberalization of the corpora- 
tion law, permitting a corporation to acquire more 
than a 15 per cent interest in another corporation, 
which is the present legal limit, and extending the 
lease period from 5 to 25 years. He suggests on the 
other hand that government royalties be raised to 
50 per cent of the net profits. As an alternative, 
he suggests that one or more private companies be 
employed as contractors by the government in first 
exploring and later developing any fields present, 
the companies to be paid for their services by an 
agreed percentage of the oil produced. "It is pos- 
sible," he declared in his report, "and even probable 
that commercially important petroleum fields exist 
in the Philippines, but the matter remains to be 
proved." 

Philippine sugar producers radio President Que- 
zon expressing their opposition to the Jones sugar 
compromise bill pending in Congress, particularly 
to the provision classifying the Philippines as a 
foreign country for the purpose of quota allocation 
and taxation instead of an insular possession, and 
against the lack of a provision for the benefit refund 
to the Philippine government as provided in the 
original bill. 

Jose P. Laurel, Associate Justice of the Supreme 
Court, in reply to a circular letter sent out by Acting 
Secretary of Justice Melencio, calling attention to 
the ruling of the Cabinet prohibiting outside teach- 
ing, declares that as a member of the Supreme Court 



he refuses to be "dictated to" by any executive de- 
partment. Later Secretary Melencio denies that 
he gaye the Justice any orders and characterizes the 
latter s pronouncement as "bombastic". 

July J t . — Former Justice Claro M. Recto, who was 
President of the Constitutional Convention, states 
in a Tribune interview that the Cabinet ruling which 
prohibits government officials from teaching outside 
of their office hours is based on an erroneous interpre- 
tation of the constitutional prohibition against 
government officials engaging in other professions. 
"I do not think the Convention had in mind the idea 
that teaching is a profession. What it had in mind 
was, for instance, that a secretary of justice, or city 
fiscal, or a solicitor-general could not run a law office 
or a secretary of finance could not be the president 
or manager of a business organization. The pur- 
pose was to insure a clean government". He states 
the executive ban could not apply to members of 
the judiciary or to legislative officials. Secretary 
Vargas is quoted in the press that the matter is "not 
a question of the independence of the judiciary. . . . 
It concerns cooperation in an administrative policy 
of the administration. I think and hope that should 
the members of the Supreme Court be requested to 
cooperate in such a policy they would gladly do so." 
In so far as the permanent personnel of the Assembly 
is concerned, who are members of the Civil Service, 
they come under the prohibition, he declares. 

July 6. — In a Fourth of July (observed on Mon- 
day, July 5) address, High Commissioner McNutt 
states that "the independence, won and maintained 
by force of arms in America, is to be given freely to 
the people of the Philippines in recognition of their 
capacity for self-government and their pledge of 
adherence to democratic and constitutional prin- 
ciples. . . . Lip h©mage is not enough. Formal 
acceptance will not suffice. Nothing short of the 
substance of democracy will satisfy those respon- 
sible for the independence program or give validity 
to the enterprise". 

July 7. — The Cabinet endorses a proposal of Se- 
cretary Rodriguez to forbid officials from acquiring 
public lands without previous authority from their 
superiors. 

Reported that a number of members of the judi- 
ciary and of the Assembly will give up private teach- 
ing as a gesture of cooperation with the executive 
department for greater efficiency in the government 
service. It is stated that Justice Laurel has al- 
ready given up his law teaching and that he resented 
only the "wrong approach". 

July 8. — Reported that High Commissioner Mc- 
Nutt has been advised by the State Department to 
see to it that there will be no further ground for 
complaints of violation of the London sugar agree- 
ment. 

In his annual report, Maj.-Gen. Santos states that 
of the Pl5,960,140.12 appropriated for national 
defense expenditures during 1936, P12.383.465.80 



From the Tree to the Bottle 




natural fresh orange 
juice in the famous 
beverage 



ROYAL TRU GRANDE 



that is why this 
sparkling fruit 
drink is so ap- 
petizing and re- 
freshing— 

Order it by the case 
and keep a few 
bottles in the refri- 
gerator—It is even 
more delicious when 
chilled— 



Another quality product of the 



San Miguel Brewery 



was expended, leaving the balance available for the 
present year. He praises the efficiency of the officer 
corps, which, he declares, is short-handed. 

j u l u o— High Commissioner McNutt announces 
the application here of the U. S. Neutrality Law 
which prohibits any activities which might be cons- 
trued as favoring one side or the other in the Spanish 
conflict, including the soliciting of contributions 
except for medical aid and food and clothing, in which 
case, however, permit must be obtained from the 
State Department and monthly reports made of the 
amounts collected and their exact disposition under 
oath. . . 

Securities and Exchange Commissioner Ncpo- 
muceno postpones until October 15 the date of the 
effectiveness of the rule requiring 60 percent cash 
and 40 per cent margin in brokers' accounts instead 
of the 50 per cent heretofore. The rule was to have 
gone into effect on the 15th of July and postpone- 
ment was requested by brokers who pointed out 
that the application at this time would force many 
sales at the prevailing low prices. 

W. Turner, new British Consul-Gencral for the 
Philippines, arrives in Manila. He was stationed 
in Peking f r some 20 years, was for 2 years in Hawaii, 
and before coming here for a half year at Yunanfu, 
South China. 

July 10. — Despite the Exchange Commissioner's 
decision to permit the continuation of present margin 
accounts, the Manila gold stock index declines slight- 
ly to 126.64, down 1.46 points. 

July 12. — A group of American educators on the 
way to the educational conference in Tokyo next 
m«nth, arrives in Manila and a program of entertain- 
ment is arranged for the members. Vice-President 
Osmena in a brief address to them states that High 
Commissioner McNutt's remarks on democracy 
were meant to be general but were mistakenly un- 
derstood to imply that democracy in the Philippines 
was one of form rather than substance. He de- 
clares that decmocracy is not a straight-jacket and 
that actual conditions and needs of a country must 
be taken into consideration and principles adapted 
to changing needs and circumstances. 

July IS. — Secretary Vargas in an address at the 
weekly student convocation of the University of the 
Philippines gives examples of government policies 
showing there is "no lack of the substance of democ- 
racy in this country". He states that President 
Quezon is a "very democratic man" and that "any- 



it&iUfctay lo%Iy| 
Don't risk d^ppointifient Jtfour sm 
has D-M-C jfnd D M | hal evcrytli^ig 
— fast colofs, uniformity, st^ength^Jjp- 
pleness, arid wash-proof lu£tr^£ This 
unique all-round qualjty is worthy of 
your time aphskai^se DMC dreads 
and you cam, be sure it will sta^lovely ! 
• At arj^needlework counters see 
D M C Jfe>ooks of desig^for crochet, 
knitting, embroidery^ ; they will inspire 
yourrtCever hands I 




row-brty» tn 




§S procured 



^^^^^^ ^^Mx^M^ can F rwtw/M « 

from all art needlework stores, //difficult to obtain, write to 
F. £ 2UELLIG. ING.. P. 0. B. 604. MANILA. 



August, 1937 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



343 



body intimate with the inner workings of the As- 
sembly" knows that while it has heeded the Presi- 
dent's recommendations of national importance and 
true cooperation exists between the executive and 
the legislative departments, "many recommenda- 
tions of the President have been disregarded by the 
Assembly or left without being acted upon". 

The stock market sags further to 116.28, down 
4.10 points. 

The United States 
June 15. — President Franklin D. Roosevelt, in a 
press conference, criticizes the steel companies for 
not signing contracts with John L. Lewis' C mmittee 
of Industrial Organization and ending the strike. 
If the operators are willing to agree verbally, he said, 
there is no reason why they should not put the agree- 
ment in writing. He also states that if the sugar 
lobbyists would get out of Washington, Congress 
could pass the administrations sugar control tax 
bill without trouble. He characterizes the lobby as 
the "most pernicious of all groups seeking to influence 
the Congress". 

June 16. — The United States Beet Sugar Associa- 
tion representative appearing at the opening of the 
hearings of the Philippine-American joint committee 
of experts urges full tariffs on Philippine sugar after 
independence, and the maintenance of a graduated 
scale of taxes as provided in the Tydings-McDuffie 
law until then. The American Sugar Cane League 
submits a statement along similar lines. 

June 17— Rep. Fred Crawford, Michigan Repu- 
blican, spokesman for eastern beet growers, tells 
the joint committee that to retain naval and mili- 
tary bases in the Philippine Islands after independ- 
ence "would invite trouble on a large scale . It 
would lead to "such bitter protests on the part of 
other nations with economic and political interests 
in the vicinity of the Philippines that it would be- 
come impossible for us to prevent serious difficul- 
ties arising". He warns that the Philippines should 
not rely too much on the retention of the American 
market for sugar and suggests it seek "working agree- 
ments" with India, Formosa, and Java for alloca- 
tion in the Far Eastern market for sugar not allowed 
to enter the United States. He declares that Japan 
is "digging in" in the Philippines and urges the 
United States' withdrawal of all naval and military 
forces to "avoid embarrassment and final defeat 
after tremendous costs in dollars and men . tie 
states there is "some room to feel that the future 
of the Philippines may be serene because world 
destiny has down through the centuries been pre- 
paring a great power and a magnificent race to 
assume a peculiar role over affairs in the Far 
East and the Philippines. That nation is the 
Empire of the Rising Sun, Japan". He calls the 
Philippines the "treasure chest of the s Far East 
a vast, untouched storehouse filled with the most 
precious of metals for the conduct of war as well 
as peace." 

A representative of the American vegetable fats 
and oils industry appears before the joint 
and recommends preferential tariff for the Philip- 
pines and consideration for the Philippine coconut 
oil industry. Hawaii-Philippine Packing Corpora- 
tion files a brief on behalf of the Philippine P^PPl e 
industry. A representative of the Philippine Maho- 
gany Manufacturers Import Association urges that 
American investors be given equal rights on the 
lumber industry development in the Philippines. 

Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins names a three- 
man mediation board to settle the steel strike under 
the chairmanship of Charles Taft prominent Cin- 
cinnati lawyer. The two other members are Lloyd 
Garrison, former chairman of the National Labor 
Relations Board, and Edward McGrady, Assistant 

^Gov ar M° f L La Davey of Ohio telegraphs President 
Roosevelt asking him to undertake settlement of 
the steel strike. "Enormous economic losses and 
potential danger to thousands of people make early 
settlement supremely important." 

Bethlehem Steel company officials reject a union 
proposal for an election conducted under the National 
Labor Relations Board to determ ne whether the 
C.I.O. should have sole bargaining fights. We 
are convinced that a signed agreement with the 
would be of no advantage to our employees, the 
community, or the company". . 

President Manuel L. Quezon accompanied by 
Rafael Alunan, General Basilio Valdcs, and Major 
Manuel Nieto leave Washington for a brief visit to 
Cuba. The Cuban Embassy at Washington an- 
nounces President Quezon will be the "official guest 
of the government. 

June 18. — The United States government sends 
notes to the naval powers asking if they will agree to 
limit the calibre of guns on battleships to 14 inches. 
All except Japan have already agreed to 14-inch 
limitation provided it i3 universally adopted. 

Reported that Philippine Resident Commissioner 
Quintin Paredes will tender his resignation upon | 
leaving the United States next month for the trip \ 
to the Philippines with the joint committee of ex- " 



perts. It is hinted he is not pleased with certain 
developments in Washington affecting the Philip- 
pine representation and the recognition given his 
work as Commissioner. 

Representatives of the United States coconut 
products industry tell the joint committee that 
their industry will be doomed unless the Philippines 
export taxes beginning in the sixth year of the Com- 
monwealth period are abandoned. 

Jane 19. — Representatives of the desiccated co- 
conut interests tells the joint committee that they 
will be forced out of business as soon as the United 
States tariff applies to imports of desiccated coconut 
from the Philippines. Another spokesman states 
that the Philippine oils should be treated at least 
on a parity with the foreign oils such as babassu nut 
oil from Brazil which is on the free list. 

After Eugene Grace, President of the strike-beset 
Bethlehem Steel Corporation refuses to close the 
Cambria plant at Johnstown, Pennsylvania, at the 
request of Gov. G. H. Earle, "to preserve peace and 
avoid bloodshed pending action by F deral media- 
tors", the Governor declares martial law and closes 
the plant. Grace claimed that forcible closing of the 
plant would be "an admission that the law forces 
of Pennsylvania are powerless to protect men in the 
exercise of their right to work." 

President Quezon announces in Havana that a 
message from the State Department necessitates 
his return to Washington and an elaborate program 
of entertainment is cancelled with the exception of 
the official reception of President Fedenco Laredo 



Clear up Pimples 

with th4s proven treatment. Stillman's 
Actone by laboratory testB kills moBt 
common pimple germ. Writes one thank- 
ful young lady: "Actone has cleared my 
face of pimples after having them lor 
four years. I tried everything with little 
results, but now my face is practically 

ClG Ask your druggist today about this new 
relief. Stillman's Actone. He has a free 
folder for you. Remove the Pimples. 

Distributors— BOTICA BOIE, Manila 



Bru the reception of Col. Fulgcncio Batista, Cuban 
dictator, and a tea with Jos6 Manuel Casanova, 
President of the Cuban Sugar Stabilization Insti- 
tute. 

Secretary of Justice Jos6 Yulo and his family suil 
for Europe. 

Junc Si.— John L. Lewis threatens to call a strike 
Off (StiOQ members of the United Mine Workers as 
a final MOW to force the four huge steel corporations 
to stan the labor contracts. The strike involves 
100 000 workers in seven states. Union leaders 
appeal to President Roosevelt to intervene personally 
h? tnc steel strike situation at Youngstown as blood- 
shed would ensue if attempts were made by the steel 
owners to open the mills. They also appeal to Se- 
crew Perkins asking her to halt the "ccntcmptated 
butchery" by non-strikers in Youngstown and War- 
ren. 

June ^.-President Roosevelt asks the ; )^ads « « 
the Republic Steel Corporation and Youngstown 
Sheet & Tube Company not to open their plants 
"for the promotion of public safety and in the in- 
terests of a reasonable and peaceful settlement. 
The C.I.O. orders swelling strike pickets to dis- 
band, and the Ohio National Guard is called out b> 
Governor Davcy. The first conference conducted 
by the Federal Mediation board ends in a refusal 
of the executives of the four steel companies to sign 
collective bargaining contracts with C.I.O. and they 
indicate they would defy the Governor's order by 

{Continued on page 378) 




Satisfies 
Hearty 



Appetites! 



N 



OTHING like meat for strength-building nourish- 
ment! Nothing better than Libby's Corned Beef 
as the main dish for a hearty meal! 

Fine lean beef is selected for making Libby's Corned 
Beef. The greatest care and supervision are given to its 
preparation. That's the reason for the appetizing flavor. 

Serve this wholesome meat often. It is cooked ready to 
serve right from the tin. That means time and fuel saved 
—as well as satisfying, healthful food your family will 
enjoy. 

For quality in tinned meats— "Libby's" 

at all dealers' 



344 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1937 



for a greater and more beautiful Manila 



the CEBU PORTLAND 
CEMENT COMPANY 



contributes the one indispen- 
sable element insuring solid 
strength and permanence — 
"Apo" cement. 




BAY VIEW HOTEL 




Today edifices shoot skyward, 
great hotels, apartment build- 
ings, and office structures, mas- 
ses of steel and concrete, that 
defy time and all the elements, 
insure safety and comfort, and 
achieve lasting beauty. 



APC CEMENI 



Best by Test 



Editorials 




own 
1938 



The literal-minded are naturally always greatly 
irked by such verbal maneuvering as that exhibited 
by President Quezon on his way 
Yea, yea and across the American continent 
Nay, nay headed for the Philippines. In 

New York he was quoted as say- 
ing in a widely-reproduced interview in the World 
Telegram that ' 'any substitute proposals [to his 
proposal for independence for the Philippines in 
or 39] by Congress to end the present unsatisfactory 
arrangement will receive serious consideration by the 
Philippine Common wealth". Questioned by reporters in 
Chicago the same day, he remarked that what he had said 
in New York 1 'should not be construed as an invitation 
to Congress for a counter-proposal looking toward the 
continuation of the American flag in the Philippines , \ 

Such apparently conflicting declarations give some 
people a head-ache and fill others with indignation, righteous 
or otherwise, and anyone is apt to call to mind the simple 
and restful Biblical injunction: "Let your communication 
be Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these 
cometh of evil". 

Yet Mr. Quezon's statements become consistent enough 
when considered from the point of view of his position. 
He knew very well that his first statement would be inter- 
preted as it was, and, in fact, can have had no other reason 
for making it. But he knew also that there would be dolts 
in Congress who, thinking they now had him pinned down 
like a bug on an entomologist's cork, would counter imme- 
diately with statements to the effect that regardless of 
Mr. Quezon's "new position", they favor granting the 
Philippines independence as soon as possible, if not sooner. 
And he knew, too, that he would be attacked in the Phil- 
ippines by the so-called Popular Front, which is neither 
popular nor presents much of a front (it were better called 
the Popular Behind) but can make some trouble, for 
his new "betrayal" of the sacred this and that. Mr. 
Ouezon therefore, immediately cancelled (verbally) what 
he had said in New York by what he said in Chicago, and 
,hen the labored and prematurely exultant comebacks 
from his opponents had found printer's ink, he was not 
Lre he had been anymore, and his enemies' darts passed 
r JSessly overhead. Like a skilled boxer, Mr. Quezon 

uA Aod&ed Yet his object had been S ained-which was > 
* ,H? to indicate that the way is open, in so far as he 
n ° erried for compromise. This he logically had to 



do, else why bother about the elaborate hearings 
new being conducted by the Philippine-American 
joint committee of experts? 

Whether we like it or not, the relationship 
between America and the Philippines has become 
to a large extent and in actual practice a diplomatic 
relationship in the broad sense of that word— as 
always happens when numerous and very important conflict- 
ing interests or points of view are engaged. In such a situa- 
tion, especially for the weaker side, to frankly announce 
its exact position and furnish a chart of its full intentions, 
is to lay itself wide open to all sorts of unfortunate 
consequences. It is true that all of this, indeed, 
"cometh from evil"— the evil of human selfishness, but no 
statesman, be he ever so pure of heart, may act as if 
this were the Millennium, the thousand-year reign of 
the good Lord. We are still living in the age of pre- 
perfection, alas, alas. 

Of the making of peace pacts, apparently, there is no 
end— nor of the breaking of them. 
Empires, Colonies The present renewed Japanese ag- 
and Treaties gression in North China is as good 

an answer as any to the proposal of 
Premier Joseph Aloysius Lyons of Australia of a Pacific 
peace pact, which proposal was taken seriously by some 
people and which, indeed, a Japanese spokesman said at 
the time met in principle with Japan's approval. So long 
as nations can not be depended upon not to disregard their 
treaty obligations, it is certainly worse than futile to make 
more treaties, for if they serve for anything at all, it is to 
establish a sense of confidence and security which is wholly 
false and likely to interfere with precautions which might 
otherwise be taken against brigandage on a national scale. 

There is no negotiating with robbers. The recent world 
movement on the part of sentimentalists to seek to buy off 
the war-threatening nations with colonial concessions 
would be likely only, if carried into practice, to whet their 
appetites and further implement their rapacity. There 
were those who advocated to allow Japan to have its way 
in Manchuria, as this would satisfy Japanese ambitions 
and reduce the danger of their moving in another direction 
for conquest! Now it proves that Manchuria, many times 
the size of Japan proper, is not enough. Japan wants 
North China, an area inhabited by 100,000,000 people. 
There were those who advocated allowing Italy to have 

345 



Ethiopia and that unfortunate country disappeared in the 
map of the new "Roman Empire". Mussolini afterwards 
said that he was satisfied, but a robber's hunger grows by 
what it feeds on, as his present policy in the Mediterra- 
nean proves. 

And what about the people' most vitally concerned— the 
native peoples of the regions that it is proposed to turn 
over to the "dissatisfied powers'? How many of them 
would want to exchange the comparatively light rule, to 
which they have become accustomed, of the experienced 
colony-possessing nations, for the heavy regime of exploita- 
tion under which they would fall with a change in masters? 

It must not be forgotten that the few great world em- 
pires now in existence acquired their colonies in most cases 
centuries ago, establishing their rule over savage and under- 
populated or else backward regions which have, from 
the long view, probably benefited by the control imposed 
by these more advanced states. Today, this much could 
not be said for a change of sovereignty from that of say 
Britain to Italy or from Holland to Japan. In many 
places, these native populations have embraced the ways 
of modern civilization and are on their way to more auto- 
nomous rule. A change in masters could mean only a back- 
ward step to them. 

The evolution of world civilization would seem to point 
away from colonial systems to more general autonomous 
intercourse between countries and peoples of every race and 
clime. The policies of the "dissatisfied powers" today are 
atavistic, as well as criminal in so far as they translate 
them into aggressive wars. 

It would seem, too, therefore, that they can not prosper. 
The twentieth is no longer the seventeenth or the eighteenth 
century. The "dissatisfied powers" would in time be 
brought to realize this, but to avoid perhaps decades of 
disorder and strife, it would be well for the rest of the world 
to waste no more time in firmly putting them in their 
proper places. It is not these nations as a whole which 
dream of imperialistic adventures, but their leaders. It is 
these mock Napoleons and Alexanders and the hidden 
monopolist cliques which they chiefly represent that will 
have to be brought to realize the hopelessness of their vain 
dreams of conquest and empire. 

Italy might be a very fine country as Italy; Japan very 
charming as Japan. If their people were sensible and had 
a genuine pride, they would be content to be just this and 
nothing more nor less, like Denmark is Denmark and Sweden 
Sweden, unperturbed by dreams of an out-of-date imperial 
glory, keeping their populations sensibly under control 
instead of forcedly breeding more men so their leaders can 
say their countries are over-populated and use this as an 
excuse for robbing their neighbors of their place in the sun. 
Thus they would avoid the enormous expenditures for 
armaments their pirate-policies now impose on them, could 
develop their own distinct cultures, and regain the respect 
and good will of all their neighbors. 

Such a state of affairs can not be brought about, however, 
by truckling to the autocrats who now hold sway, for this 
only increases their holds over their own misguided people. 
Treaties signed by the agents of such personages are worth- 
less, as they have no intention to abide by them. The 
united pressure of the world must be brought to bear on 
them to the point of their obliteration. 



It seems a little peculiar— that announcement of Mayor 
Juan Posadas that Mrs. Mar- 
Mrs. Sanger and the garet Sanger will not be permit- 
Mayor of Manila ted to give popular lectures in 

Manila because, as he said, "I 
am strongly opposed to birth-control". The question 
naturally arises, What has the Mayor's personal opinion 
to do with the matter? Because His Honor happens to be 
"opposed" to the movement known as birth-control, are all 
those who are interested in meeting and hearing this noted 
and courageous woman leader, who is one of the founders 
of the movement and whose name is in every important 
work of reference, to be denied this rare opportunity when 
she arrives here a month or so hence? Officiousness and 
the bigotted stupidity which backs it up, could hardly be 
more strikingly expressed. The Mayor went on to say 
that he "believes birth-control is both immoral and im- 
practical, especially for the Philippines", which is obviously 
a rather confused statement for if it is immoral, from his 
point of view, it should make no difference whether it is 
impractical or not; and why should it be both immoral 
and impractical, especially for the Philippines, — more so 
than for any other country? 

Similar confusion as to the question is to be noted in the 
letter which Mrs. Pilar H. Hidalgo Lim, President of the 
National Federation of Women's Clubs, took it upon her- 
self to write to Mrs. Sanger. She expressed regret for "our 
inability to cooperate with you for the spread of your move- 
ment in our country." "Our objective now", she went on, 
"is for better babies and more intelligent parenthood". 
Mrs. Lim does not realize, apparently, that this is precisely 
the aim of the leaders of the movement Mrs. Sanger repre- 
sents. Lectures by Mrs. Sanger would clear up some very 
stupid misconceptions. Cooperation with her might initiate 
a movement that would react favorably on our still shocking 
infantile death rate and help our men and women bring 
into the world more vigorous new generations than the 
seriously underfed and anemic generation of today. But 
His Honor the Mayor is "opposed." 



Guglielmo Marconi, born of an Italian 
father and an Irish mother, was the 



Marconi and 
Modern Demagogy 




346 



first to devise the 
practical means of 
wireless telegraphic 
communication. 
This invention may be said also to have laid the founda- 
tion for the development of modern radio broadcasting 
and television, today still in the preliminary stage. George 
Lansbury, the English "peace ambassador", was one of the 
last people to interview Marconi and told the press on the 
day of his death that the inventor, though fairly cheerful 

ZZ Ve T7'^ d bCen W ° rried about ^ difficulties 
between England and Italy. "He felt deeply for both 

^ a f b ° V V U he fdt — erned at*e possible 

Z£*J?T1? or such barbarous and horrib ^ p^- 

£XZ™*>> ^ feSUlt in the dest ™«- of all 
A writer in the London Spectator stated recently: 



years, the Dictator will stand visibly on the television screen and, with 
the power of oratory which he will no doubt possess, will be able to 
exert his personal influence on the whole nation and so raise a fervour 
which hitherto has been confined to the bounds of a political meeting. 
Already the amplifier has increased the possible size of a public meeting 
from a few thousands to as many millions as transport can bring and 
open spaces hold. It may well be that the historian will mark the 
recent age as that of the birth of Broadcasting and the renascence of 

Demagogy Science will supply the means by which a future Lenin 

or Hitler will be able to shape our wants in accordance with his wishes. 
Are we perhaps too young to be trusted with these elaborate toys?" 

Another writer in the same issue of this noted British 
publication wrote that modern advance in communication 
facilities is not a merely mechanical phenomenon, but 
much more than that. 

"The mechanisms which help to bind a great community together, 
and enable its members to be of one mind, serve no merely material 
purpose. For the very spirit of man is inconceivable, save as commu- 
nication exists between different men; the fact that we can talk to one 
another is at least as important as, if not prior to, the fact that we can 
think. . . . [Modern communication] is but an extension of that ele- 
mentary human intercourse, much as representative government is an 
extension of the direct government possible only in tiny communities- 
For reasons partly economic and partly political, we have today to 
live in great societies. Without mechanisms for communication, they 
would either be ruled by force only, or not ruled at all. Press, film, 
and broadcast may, of course, as the dictatorships show us, be made 
to rivet new forms of tyranny. But they may also operate to develop, 
as indeed they are indispensable for developing, that parallel growth 
of freedom with concord in ever-widening circles, which is the British 
ideal". 

These two views are equally true, being merely different 
aspects of the same thing. The fact is that with every 
advance, we run new risks, and these are not separable. 
The higher the climb, the deeper the fall, is an old adage. 
Success throws the door open to failure. Great victories 
may entail great disasters. The world has not become 
safer since the days of early man. The dangers that en- 
compassed him then were simple dangers most of which 
could be met by direct action. But safety was never 
the aim of life. The warm waters in which life first de- 
veloped was a safer environment than the land and the open 
air which primitive creatures nevertheless sought. Shells 
and carapaces protected, but also confined and constrained. 
Naked man won out in the struggle for survival. He came 
down out of the trees, sallied forth from his caves, entered 
the valleys and plains, launched out upon the sea, finally 
flung himself into the air. He has courted danger at every 
turn. Now in command of many hidden forces of nature, 
he has set out to control his own destiny with truly supreme 



daring. It would seem to be too late to hold back now, 
play the cautious role, to discourage inventive genius (as 
some have indeed proposed), to make any effort to main- 
tain the status quo ante. It is also not to be believed 
that mankind, regardless of the press, the film, the radio, 
and television, will ever long suffer the imposition of a new 
tyranny, through large-scale demagogy or any other 
means. Thought can never be restrained nor ever wholly 
guided, and inevitably translates itself into action, unexpect- 
ed, incontrollable, even by despots. 



At this writing, the Court of Industrial Relations, which 
recently ordered some three hundred fifty striking em- 
ployees of a local bus transporta- 
4 'Trouble-makers" tion company to go back to work 
or Leaders? after a three weeks' strike which 

paralyzed transportation in a num- 
ber of provinces, informing them that if they did not 
he would authorize the company to employ other workers, 
has not yet decided on whether to compel the company 
to re-employ five men who led their fellows in the strike, 
which the company is reportedly reluctant to do because 
it considers these men as "trouble-makers". 

Yet the strike was admittedly called in protest against 
a lay-off of a number of employees because of the rainy 
season when business is slacker than during the rest of 
the year, which would seem to be an admissible cause for 
protest, and there is no doubt that the people generally 
in the community where the company maintains its head- 
quarters backed the strikers, even going to the extent of 
raising strike funds and supplying needed food. It does 
not appear plausible, therefore, that the five men could 
have been mere trouble-makers. They were not outsiders, 
but were themselves employees of the company with all 
the others. 

The issue of whether or not these men are to be taken 
back or not by the company is an important one, for if 
the natural leaders among our workers anywhere are to 
be singled out for punishment in such cases as this strike, 
this would have .a very unfortunate effect on the cause of 
the workers generally. It would tend to paralyze all effort 
on their part to secure better working conditions. It ap- 
pears to the writer of this comment that the Court of 
Industrial Relations should see to it that these men, if 
they are not mere agitators, are not discriminated against, 
either now or in the future. 



Love 

Anonymous 

AH, love forever seeking love 
As warmth and only solace 
In this cold and orbed hell! 
Poor fond man and maid 
So desperately clinging. . . . 
Like agglutinating microbes 
In fermenting gel. 
What divine simplicity 
In all this complicacy! 



3«7 



Manila's Cloud Year— A Review 



By Frank G. Haughwout 



"For my part I enjoy the 
mystery [of cloud pheno- 
mena], and perhaps the 
reader may. I think he 
ought. He should not be 
less grateful for the sum- 
mer rain, or see less beauty 
in the clouds of morning 
because they come to prove 
him with hard questions; 
to which, perhaps, if we 
look close at the heavenly 
scroll, we may find also a 
syllable or two of the an- 
swer illuminated here and 
there." 




Fig. 1. Cirrus clouds, 



SO wrote Ruskin 1 and 
such seems to be the inspiration that moves every 
writer, lay or scientific, who undertakes to explore 
Cloudland, if the things that men have written about 
clouds are significant. There probably is no other branch 
of physical science that so spectacularly exemplifies the 
narrowness of the line that separates the artistic from the 
scientific or more poignantly stimulates the quest for 

"Edens that wait the wizardry of thought, 
Beauty that craves the touch of artist hands, 
Truth that but hungers to be felt and seen," 

than the study of the clouds. 

These thoughts arise in the mind of the reviewer as he 
turns over the pages of the latest publication to be issued 
from the Manila Observatory. It is a piece of work repre- 
sentative of the highest type of scientific research, and one 
of international importance in the science of meteorology. 
Of itself, it is a thing of beauty. 

The publication takes the form of an atlas of clouds— 
the diary of a year of weather and cloud formation over 
Manila— and is issued from the pen and camera of the Rev. 
Charles E. Deppermann, S.J., Assistant Director of the 
Philippine Weather Bureau, under the title: "The Weather 
and Clouds of Manila." It is the first cloud atlas to be 
put out m the archipelago, although a study of the clouds 
of the Philippines was published by the late Father Jose 
Algue as far back as 1898 2 . However, Father Algue's 
book was not illustrated with pictures of cloud forms 
whereas Father Deppermann's carries one hundred plates 
executed from his own photographs. These were selected 
from more than 5,000 photographs taken during the year 
of observation. Aside from their scientific significance*^ 
many of them are of surpassing beauty and will gi ve pleas- 
ure to anyone who has the opportunity to look at them 
Father Deppermann has kindly permitted the reproduction 
here of four of these pictures, that some idea may be gained 
of the character of the work. 

During the past few years the study of the clouds has 
been given an impetus by the growing appreciation of the 

348 



true and false, with underlying cumuli. 
Month of May. 



importance of the study of the 
upper air currents and their 
bearing on the problems of 
weather forecasting and avia- 
tion. Accordingly, Father 
Deppermann's publication is 
much broader in scope than 
would be comprehended by a 
simple enumeration and des- 
cription of the clouds of this 
region. It forms his latest 
contribution to a series of 
studies bearing on weather 
forecasting in the tropics that 
he has recently published. It, 
of course, deals more partic- 
ularly with the area embraced 
by the latitudes and longitudes 
between which the Philippines and adjacent countries lie. 
Although the task is large and admittedly difficult, he has 
made a definite contribution towards a degree of cors- 
relation between cloud forms and weather forecasting 
in this geographical area. It is a piece of work tha 
is destined to be of great importance notwithstanding the- 
fact that the subject is at present the basis of some contro- 
versy and occasional polemics. Other papers on the same 
general subject are in press or in preparation. 

Shorn of its highly technical aspects, Father Depper- 
mann's work may be said to represent his endeavor to 
apply to the analysis of Philippine weather, the principles 
of the method of air mass analysis introduced in temperate 
regions by the Norwegians, V. Bjerknes and J. Bjerknes, 
father and son. These two meteorologists confronted, 
during the World War, with the problem of forecasting 
weather in Norway in the absence of reports from neigh- 
boring countries, organized a large group of amateur 
observers to furnish data on wind and weather over a 
close network of stations established throughout the 
country. 




Fig. 2. A series of four cumulus -towers" on a June afternoon. 



This, of course, led to the accumulation of a vast amount 
of data which, on mathematical and practical study by the 
two men, led to the development of a system of air-mass 
analysis and the formulation of what is known as the 
'polar front" theory, a conception that now dominates 
the science of weather forecasting in temperate regions. 
The theory deals with the interactions between discon- 
tinuous masses of cold air emanating from the polar regions 
on the one hand and masses of warm air derived from the 
equatorial regions on the other. These air masses move 
about and tend to meet, but there is no steady mixture 
of the air in the two masses at the points where they meet. 
Instead, there is a sharp line of demarkation — a discon- 
tinuity as it is called — which is styled the "polar front." 
The air on the northern side, which is dry and comparative- 
ly free from clouds, is spoken of as polar air; that on the 
southern side is styled equatorial air and, on the other 
hand, tends to be warm, rich in moisture, and more or 
less cloud-filled. Depressions and storms form along the 
front between these two masses of air that have these 
widely differing properties, physical changes occurring 
that result in the production of wind, rain, and other 
phenomena that characterize storms, the intricate details 
of which can not be discussed here. Father Deppermann 
has succeeded in demonstrating the origin of typhoons 
along similar fronts in these latitudes. 

One of the difficulties that has retarded the application 
of the Bjerknes theory to cyclonic storms of the tropics 
has lain in the fact that the respective temperature differ- 
ences between the northern and southern air masses in 
tropical latitudes are comparatively slight — insufficient, 
it has been held by some meteorologists, to initiate the 
phenomena that bring about such profound results in lati- 
tudes where the temperature differences between the two 
air masses may be quite large. This has led some meteoro- 
logists to the a priori assumption that the Bjerknes theory 
can not be applied to typhoons and other tropical cyclones. 
In rebuttal of this, Father Deppermann points out that 
humidity differences are potent of much mischief in the 
tropics. 

Having spent some time at the observatory in Norway 
where he studied at first hand with the authors the work- 
ings of the Bjerknes theory, Father Deppermann, on his 
arrival in Manila, early undertook the investigation of the 
possibilities of extending the principles of the air mass 
system to this region. The results of his work he summar- 
ized last year in the publication of his "Outlines of Phil- 
ippine Frontology" 3 in which he laid down new prin- 
ciples of weather forecasting and demonstrated a system 
of fronts which, he has shown, exert a very definite influence 
over changes of weather in the Philippines. The cloud 
atlas is an extension and application of this work, and the 
two, combined with the author's studies on the upper air 
of Manila 4 and the mean transport of air in the Indian 
and South Pacific Oceans, 5 constitute about as compre- 
hensive a manual of weather forecasting in the Philippine 
area as it would be possible to produce in the present state 
of knowledge. It may be added that the new methods 
have been tested and applied in the daily work of the Ma- 
Ha Observatory as may be seen by going through the 
files of the Philippine Monthly Weather Bulletin of 
recent years. 




Fig. 3. A fine example of a squall line curving as it emerges from the 
plains north of Manila and enters the Bay on an August afternoon. 

With his Frontology as a basis the author, accordingly, 
proceeds to the formulation of a classification of Manila 
weather according to the various frontal situations that 
arise as a result of the movements of fronts from place to 
place on the weather map. This, he has carried out to 
a minute and ingenious degree, but with the realization 
that no system of classification can at present meet the 
countless vagaries of the weather and that future discovery 
will likely modify his views. The argument is, however, 
that similar frontal situations may be expected to yield 
similar types of weather. 

There are thirty-seven pages of text devoted to the 
analysis of weather-types, data being derived from airplane 
observations and other sources, throughout the year. 
The author, in his introduction, goes on to say: 

"After the above analysis had been completed, it was noticed that, 
although most days in each subdivision had similar weather, still the 
weather of each subdivision was not characteristic of itself alone, — 
it was often quite identical in its main features with that of some other 
subdivision. This led to a briefer and probably a more natural clas- 
sification of weather types, based mainly upon the lower clouds." 

The results have been reduced to a series of tables which, 
at first glance appear rather complicated but are, in fact, 
really very easy to visualize once the principle on which 
they are constructed has been apprehended. At the end 
of the text the author has added other tables which are 
designed to aid the reader to form some idea of what weather 

(Continued on page 367) 




Fig. 4. Typhoon clouds of a small typhoon center only forty miles 
to the east of Manila; 11:45 a. m., April 17, 1935. 

349 



Servant Girl 



By Estrella D. Alfon 



■ V OSA was scrubbing the clothes she was washing 
slowly. Alone in the washroom of her mis- 
^ tress' house, she could hear the laughter of 
women washing clothes in the public bathhouse from 
which she was separated by only a thin wall. She 
would have liked to be there with the other women 
to take part in their jokes and their laughter and their 
merry gossiping, but they paid a centavo for every ten 
pieces of soiled linen they brought there to wash and her 
mistress wanted to save this money. 

A pin she had failed to remove from a dress sunk its 
point deep into her finger. She cried to herself in surprise, 
and squeezed the finger until the blood came out. She 
watched the bright red drop fall into the suds of soap, 
and looked in delight at its gradual mingling into the white- 
ness. Her mistress came upon her thus, and shouting 
at her, startled her into busily rubbing, while she tried 
not to listen to the scolding words. 

When her mistress left her, she fell to doing her work 
slowly again, and sometimes she paused to listen to the 
talk in the bathhouse behind her. A little later her mis- 
tress* shrill voice told her to go to the bathhouse for drink- 
ing water. Eagerly wiping her hands on her wet wrap, 
she took the can from the kitchen table and went quickly 
out. 

She was sweating at the defective town pump when 
strong hands closed over hers and started to help her. 
The hands pressing down on hers made her wince 
and she withdrew her hands hastily. The movement 
was greeted by a shout of laughter from the women wash- 
ing and Rosa looked at them in surprise. The women 
said to each other, "Rosa does not like to be touched by 
Sancho", and then slapped their thighs in laughter. Rosa 
frowned and picked up her can. Sancho made a move 
to help her but she thrust him away, and the women roar- 
ed again, saying "Because we are here, Sancho, she is 
ashamed." 

Rosa carried the can away, her head angrily down, and 
Sancho followed her, saying "Do not be angry," in coaxing 
tones. But she went her slow way with the can. 

Her mistress' voice came to her, calling impatiently, 
and she tried to hurry. When she arrived the woman 
asked her what had kept her so long, and without waiting 
for an answer, she ranted on, saying she had heard the 
women joking in the bathhouse, and she knew what had 
kept the girl so long. Her anger mounting with every 
angry word she said, she finally swung out an arm, and 
before she quite knew what she was doing, she slapped 
Rosa's face. 

She was sorry as soon as she realized what she had done. 
She turned away, muttering still, while Rosa's eyes filled 
with sudden tears. The girl poured the water from the can 
into the earthen jar, a bitter lump in her throat, and thought 
of what she would do to people like her mistress when 
she herself, God willing, would be "rich." Soon however, 
she thought of Sancho, and the jokes the women had shout- 

350 




ed at her. She thought of their laughter and Sancho 
following her with his coaxing tones, and she smiled 
slowly. 

Getting back to her washing, she gathered the 
clothes she had to bleach, and piled them into a 
basin she balanced on her head. Passing her mis- 
tress in the kitchen, she said something about going to 
bleach the clothes and under her breath added an epi- 
thet. She had to cross the street to get to the stones 
gathered about in a whitened circle in a neighbor's yard 
where she was wont to lay out the clothes. She passed 
some women hanging clothes on a barbed-wire fence to dry. 
They called to her and she smiled at them. 

Some dogs chasing each other on the street, she did not 
notice because the women were praising her for the white- 
ness of the linen in the basin on her head. She was answer- 
ing them that she hadn't even bleached them yet, when 
one of the dogs passed swiftly very close to her. Looking 
down, she saw in wide alarm, another dog close on the 
heels of the first. An instinctive fear of the animals made 
her want to dodge the heedlessly running dog, and she 
stepped gingerly this way and that. The dog, intent on 
the other it was pursuing, gave her no heed and ran right 
between her legs as Rosa held on to the basin in frantic 
fear lest it fall and the clothes get soiled. Her patadiong 
was tight in their wetness about her legs, and she fell down, 
in the middle of the street. She heard the other women's 
exclamations of alarm, and her first thought was for the 
clothes. Without getting up, she looked at the basin 
and gave obscene thanks when she saw the clothes still 
piled secure and undirtied. She tried to get up, hurrying 
lest her mistress come out and see her thus and slap her 
again. Already the women were setting up a great to-do 
about what had happened. Some were coming to her, 
loudly abusing the dogs, solicitousness on their faces. 
Rosa cried, "Nothing's the matter with me." Still strug- 
gling to get up, she noticed that her wrap had been loos- 
ened and had bared her breasts. She looked around 
wildly, sudden shame coloring her cheeks, and raised the 
wrap and tied it securely around herself again. 

She could stand but she found she could not walk. The 
women had gone back to their drying, seeing she was up 
and apparently nothing the worse for the accident. Rosa 
looked down at her right foot which twinged with pain. 
She stooped to pick up the basin and put it on her head 
again. She tried stepping on the toes of her right foot 
but it made her wince. She tried the heel but that also 
made her bite her lip. Already her foot above the ankle 
was swelling. She thought of the slap her mistress had 
given her for staying in the bathhouse too long and the 
slap she was most certain to get now for delaying like this. 
But she couldn't walk, that was settled. 

Then there came down the street a *tartanilla without 
any occupant except the cochero, who rang and rang his 
bell, but she couldn't move away from the middle of the 
street. She looked up at the driver and started angrily 
to tell him that there was plenty of room at the sides of 



the street, and that she couldn't move anyway, even if 
there weren't. The man jumped down from his seat and 
bent down and looked at her foot. The basin was still 
on Rosa's head and he took it from her, and put it in his 
vehicle. Then he squated down and bidding Rosa put a 
hand on his shoulders to steady herself, he began to touch 
with gentle fingers the swelling ankle, pulling at it and 
massaging it. They were still in the middle of the street. 
Rosa looked around to see if the women were still there to 
look at them but they had gone away. There was no one 
but a small boy licking a candy stick, and he wasn't paying 
any attention to them. The cochero looked up at her, 
the sweat on his face, saw her looking around with pain 
and embarrassment mingled on her face. Then, so swifty 
she found no time to protest, he closed his arms about her 
knees and lifted her like a child. He carried her to his 
tartanilla, plumped her down on one of the seats. Then 
he left her, coming back after a short while with some coco- 
nut oil in the hollow of his palm. He rubbed the oil on 
her foot, and massaged it. He was seated on the seat 
opposite Rosa's and had raised the injured foot to his 
thigh, letting it rest there, despite Rosa's protest, on his 
blue faded trousers. The basin of wet clothes was beside 
Rosa on the seat and she fingered the clothing with flutter- 
ing hands. The cochero asked her where she lived and 
she told him, pointing out the house. He asked what 
had happened, and she recited the whole thing to him, 
stopping with embarrassment when she remembered the 
loosening of her patadiong and the nakedness of her bosom. 
How glad she was he had not seen her thus. The cochero 
had finished with her foot, and she slid from the seat, her 
basin on a hip. But he took it from her, asking her to 
tell him where the bleaching stones were. He went then, 
and himself laid out the white linen on the stones, knowing 
like a woman, which part to turn to the sun. 

He came back after a while, just as Rosa heard with 
frightened ears the call of her mistress. She snatch- 
ed the basin from the cochero's hand and despite the pain 
caused her, limped away. 

She told her mistress about the accident. The woman 
did not do anything save to scold her lightly for being care- 



less. Then she looked at the swollen foot and asked who 
had put oil on it. Rosa was suddenly shy of having to 
let anyone know about her cochero, so she said she had 
asked for a little oil at the store and put it on her foot 
herself. Her mistress was unusually tolerant, and Rosa 
forgot about the slapping and said to herself this was a 
day full of luck! 

It was with very sharp regret that she thought of her 
having forgotten to ask the cochero his name. Now, in 
the days that followed, she thought of him, the way he 
had wound an arm around her knees and carried her like 
a little girl. She dreamed about the gentleness of his 
fingers. She smiled remembering the way he had laid 
out the clothes on the stones to bleach. She knew that 
meant he must do his own washing. And she ached in 
tenderness over him and his need for a woman like her to 
do such things for him, — things like mending the straight 
tear she had noticed at the knee of his trousers when her 
foot had rested on them; like measuring his tartanilla 
seat cushions for him, and making them, and stringing 
them on his vehicle. She thought of the names for men 
she knew and called him by them. She changed his name 
every day until she hit on the name of Angel, 1 and that 
seemed to her most proper, so she called him by it in think- 
ing of him, ever afterwards. In her thoughts she spoke 
to him and he always answered. 

She found time to come out on the street for a while, 
every day. Sometimes she would sweep the yard or trim 
the scraggly hedge of viola bushes; or she would loiter 
on an errand for tomatoes or vinegar. She said to herself, 
He dreams of me too, and he thinks of me. He passes 
here every day wishing to see me. She never saw him 
pass, but she said to herself, He passes just when I am in 
the house, that's why I never see him. 

Some tartanilla would pass, and if she could, as soon as 
she heard the sound of the wheels, she looked out of a 
window, hoping it would be Angel's. Sometimes she would 
sing very loudly, if she felt her mistress was in a good humor 
and not likely to object. She told herself that if he could 
not see her, he would at least wish to hear her voice. 

lAngcl, a Spanish name pronounced annol'. 

(Continued on page 362) 



Last Word 

By Luis Dato 

BELOVED, I regret 
The world to leave, 
Since you might not forget; 
Still burns unquenched an ember. 

You still remember — 

Was this my fate? 

Still burns unquenched an ember 

In you of hate. 

Beloved, I must leave, 
Is there regret? 
If love were wrong, forgive, 
If right, forget. 



351 



Shadows Over Indo-China 



By Marc T. Greene 



FRANCE is the second colonial empire in ex- 
tent and value of far-flung possessions. 
Upon the welfare of these possessions and 
the regularity with which revenue pours in from 
them depends much of France's own economic 
security. Portugal and Spain both fell from power 
because they were unable to keep their widely- 
scattered empires together. The same thing can 
happen today with any one of the several nations whose 
possessions abroad constitute the main sources of its wealth. 

No doubt whatever that it can happen and well the 
leaders of these nations know it. For that reason there 
is much concern as to economic conditions in their colonies, 
as to the state of mind of the native peoples, as to possible 
menace by other countries lacking colonies and thus cov- 
etous. 

Disturbing as are conditions in many of the colonial 
possessions of all the powers, probably France has the most 
to worry about. Its North African native subjects are 
more restive than ever because they have been told and 
believe that the people of Spanish Morocco are going to 
get their independence as a reward for their assistance 
to the mad dogs of European fascism in Spain. More- 
over, like all the rest of Islam, the natives of Algeria and 
Tunisia, and to some degree of the French middle African 
colonies, are excited over the turbulence in Palestine. 
Concessions granted Mohammedans there or anywhere 
else will excite them still further, fanning to a flame the fire 
of nationalistic feeling that has always smouldered and 
which religious solidarity if nothing else has kept from 
dying out. 

France faces these difficulties and possibilities in Africa 
and the Near East, but it faces even more serious con- 
ditions in Indo-China because there the economic state 
of the natives is so deplorably low as to cast a cloud of 
gloom and depression over the whole eastern colonial empire. 
No small part of this condition is due to the economic and 
financial policy of French governments preceding that of 
honest, well-meaning, large-hearted Leon Blum. 

The policy of those governments was exploitation pure 
and simple in respect of the colonies. Indeed, French 
colonial policy has rarely been anything else. It has not 
even pretended to be anything else. The French have 
been in Asia and Africa and the South Seas for 1 'what they 
could get out of it," and let the natives make out the best 
they might. 

Possibly it will be retorted that this is the colonial policy 
of every nation, and that will not be very far from right. 
Yet it must be admitted that England, and America too 
in its relatively insignificant possessions, have done a good 
deal to benefit the native peoples, have even in some measure 
tried to be what England, at least, always insists it is, a 
"moral force" in colonization. 

But when one finds that even today, after what the Blum 
Government in France has been able to do in a short time 
to improve their lot, the minimum wage of Indo-Chinese 
miners is 13 cents a day and the maximum about 35, and 

352 




that the compensations of workers in all lines are 
proportionate, one finds difficulty in characterizing 
this as anything but exploitation. 

In any case, the Indo-Chinese natives deem it 
that. Out of 23,000,000 of them inhabiting a 
territory about 270,000 square miles in area, 18,- 
000,000 at least are estimated to have an average 
income of not more than $25. 
Incredible as this may seem, it is the fact, as careful 
investigation and computation by disinterested observers 
has revealed. So far as this correspondent has surveyed 
the world, and that is a considerable way, nothing like 
such a condition exists anywhere else. Less than $.50 
a week to live on! Bad as is the condition of workers 
in the British-owned Indian jute-mills with their wage of 
25 or 30 cents for a sixteen-hour day and six-day week, 
disgrace as that is to the thing some people still refer to as 
"civilization", what of the worker in a country and climate 
like Indo-China's who receives for a long day's hard labor 
the munificent emolument of $.07? 

Shadows over Indo-China! Probably the workers and 
the agriculturalists there are worse off than any in the whole 
Orient, and you will agree that that is saying a good deal . 
Why? It is a rich producing land, this. It grows as fine 
rice as any in the world and exports an enormous amount, 
especially to nearby China. Much of the rice used by 
the British Crown Colony of Hongkong comes from Saigon. 
More is sent to other French tropical colonies, especially 
Equatorial Africa. 

Why is it, then, that the people who produce this must 
exist in half-starved fashion and with no assurance that 
after a while they will not starve altogether? Exploita- 
tion. That is the answer and there is no other. True, 
the world depression hit Indo-China hard, but the financial 
skullduggery that accompanied it was worse. For when 
France returned to the "gold standard" a few years ago 
Indo-China was also forced to cling to it. That left the 
country a financial wreck stranded on a silver coast. All 
the neighbors with which Indo-China traded were on a 
silver basis, Siam, the Straits, China, and so forth. 

The result was impoverishment for the Indo-Chinese 
people. Moreover, about that time the Bank of Indo- 
China resorted to a weird move, disposing of its large stock 
of silver to China, all for the benefit of some of the exploit- 
ers^^ Indo-China back in France. Out of 
all this business the natives, Annamese, Tonkinese, Cam- 
bodians, and the rest, grew poorer and poorer. The Anna- 

hH J*! ? a n fied " by the French in th e course of 
£2? Hi ♦ \ finally SUbjUgated ^do-China, have never 
aken kindly to French dominance and do not today. In 

no th SoTd V ^ ,atGr S ° me ° f them ***** * the 

Zt, X% £si c * niaI ,roops ' and severa ' 

rou?dlfnn Ch ^^acteristically with this mutiny, 

have had ^ by chance could 

^«^T^ t0 d ° [t Ten or twelve were ex- 
ecuted and several score imprisoned for life or transported. 



though every last one denied any guilt whatever. Thus 
the northern natives were left more resentful than ever 
and remain so today, ready to revolt whenever the least 
chance of success offers. 

It is another thing to the credit of Leon Blum and his 
government that, well aware of the desperate conditions 
in the Oriental empire and sincerely desirous of remedying 
them, likewise anxious to conciliate and gain the allegiance 
of natives of other colonial possessions, measures should 
at once have been taken to do those things. 

Up to now Indo-China, like the rest of the French col- 
onial empire, has been under what has amounted to an 
authoritarian form of government. Subsidized sultans, 
sheiks, and chiefs, lavishly paid in order that they may 
maintain an establishment that shall impress the natives 
though possessing as much actual power as one of those 
natives and not a bit more, are part of the policy of the 
French in colonial government. But the resident French 
official, under the French Residente Superieur, and the 
whole lot under the Governor- General, constitute the 
real power and it is flagrantly dictatorial. There is, nom- 
inally to assist the Executive but actually to approve 
what he decides, a body with a grandiloquent name called 
the Grand Council of Economic and Financial Interests. 
Twenty-eight of its fifty-one members are French, some 
chosen by various French bodies and interests such as 
the Chamber of Commerce, but enough appointees of the 
Governor- General himself to leave with him always the 
balance of power. 

This state of things the Blum Government promised 
to remedy, and great was the disgust among the French 
of Indo-China when it came into power. Now, vital 
and significant loss to the whole of European liberalism, 
Blum has fallen and one hears no great good of his suc- 
cessor though the declared policy at the moment is a con- 
tinuation, even a strengthening, of liberalism. But there 
is so much dishonesty, chicanery, and intrigue in French 
politics, that parting with such a pilot as Leon Blum at 
such a critical time in France's, Europe's, and the whole 
world's affairs, is a grave risk to everybody concerned. 

It is particularly unfortunate as to Indo-China, and if 
the new French government fails to fulfill the promises 
made by its immediate predecessors, then the shadows 
which hang so heavily over the impoverished country will 
lower until perhaps the tempest will burst through them. 

As in other countries, the coming into power in France 
of a liberal government after so many years of reaction 
and all its accompanying selfishness and intrigue, encour- 
aged the Indo-Chinese to hope for social and economic 
legislation that would somewhat relieves their distress. 
As elsewhere, too, they commenced to implement their 
resentment at prevailing conditions in strikes far and wide. 

This is not the best way to greet the inauguration of 
a new government sympathetic to the needs and wishes 
of the common people and the workers. But, human 
nature being as it is at the moment, such things will gen- 
erally happen. The people have been exploited, crush- 
ed and scorned. Now their chance has come, or seems 
to have come, and they determine to meet it more than 
half way. That is precisely what is happening in Amer- 
ica How can one expect anything else among a people 



who have been treated like the Indo-Chinese? 

However, M. Moutet, Colonial Minister in the Blum 
Cabinet, included in his first declarations of policy an 
assurance to all native colonial subjects of France of 
* 'equality of treatment with the peasantry of France itself 
in all concernments." At the same time he promised 
Indo-China social legislation which should improve work- 
ing conditions and living generally. The working day 
was to be reduced gradually to a minimum of eight hours. 
Holidays with pay were to be granted, likewise a weekly 
rest day, minimum wages, free medical attention, half- 
pay for the incapacitated through injury or illness, and 
other boons never existing before. 

At the same time M. Moutet made it clear that com- 
munistic agitation or violence in connection with strikes 
would be dealt with on something like the old terms. In 
other words, France was now determined to help Indo- 
China in such ways and as rapidly as could be done, but 
Indo-China must not resort to extremes in the hope 
of hastening the new regime. 

That was all very well, and all but the extremists were 
disposed to heed the warning and to wait for the new day, 
especially as harbingers of its coming were not long in 
appearing. But now Blum with his good intent has fallen, 
another in the long and drab list of victims of the ruthless 
French financial system which buys men and newspapers 
and munitions factories and combines them in an instru- 
ment as ruthless and as menacing to the welfare, to the 
very existence, of France, as the worst foe it could pos- 
sibly have abroad. 

If this fell power gets its grip upon France again, as it 
seems to be making progress toward doing in its defeat 
of the Blum government, then nothing can prevent trouble 
in the colonies, first of all, perhaps, in Indo-China. Under 
the reactionary governments which have ruled France, 
native restiveness in the colonies has been kept under control 
by intimidation and by force alone, as witness the exist- 
ence in Algeria of a French army of more than 100,000 
and in Indo-China of one of 28,000. These armies are 
supplemented by extensive air forces and the latter, es- 
pecially in Algeria, are being strengthened and expanded 
at a very rapid rate. 

Only in such fashion can a reactionary France, a 
"system"-dominated France, hold its two most profit- 
able N colonies. And the endeavor to hold them that way 
must presently result in conflict and much bloodshed. 
Everywhere the alien peoples under European dominance 
are determined to throw off the yoke of medieval tyran- 
nical rule. The sooner Europe recognizes that, the greater 
the assurance of peace in and continued profit from the 
colonies. But colonial natives have awakened to a real- 
ization of their value to the power that dominates them, 
likewise to the fact that nothing like an adequate return 
has been made or is being made to them for the aforesaid 
value. If such a return is now made, well and good. Col- 
onies will continue to be of profit and empires will hold 
together. If not, then, the contrary. In the case of 
Indo-China, where a selfish and ill-advised policy has caused 
the shadows to gather so heavily, a liberal France may 
hold it in friendly and therefore profitable fashion. A 
reactionary France will have to fight harder to do so than 
it has ever done yet. 

353 



Leper Women Voted for Suffrage, 918 to 5 



» w n 



r E have to shout hurrah ! Our labor was not in 
vain. Is it not splendid for all Filipina wo- 
men that we can now cast our vote? ,, 
Thus writes a woman on the leper island, Culion. Nine 
hundred eighteen women down there are echoing her 
hurrahs. These women are going about their daily routine 
in the isolated settlement with a new feeling about their 
lives. They are not outcast. The world has not consigned 
them to the grave. Other Philippine women needed and 



By Eloise Sterling Hirt 

Culion with its flame of life only flickering 200 miles away 
between the China and the Sulu Seas answered the call 
with a shout that amazed the most sanguine of the surirage 
leaders at National Headquarters. 

The leper women were not without leaders. Among 
the afflicted ones were women who had campaigned before, 
well educated women who lost no time in showing others 
the far reaching importance of the national suffrage plebis- 
. cite. Nurses and doctors' wives worked too, worked hero- 

called for their voices at one of the most critical times ically. They provided the material help which swung the 

campaign to such a smashing victory. 

It was my privilege to talk to almost a thousand leper 
women in a hastily called meeting early in March. Fili- 
pino nurses with whom I stayed knew that I had toured 
the northern provinces of Luzon with the suffrage leaders, 
Mrs. Pilar Hidalgo Lim and Mrs. Josefa Escoda. Nurses, 
doctors, teachers, working on the island, suffer the same 
isolation as the leper. They were all eager for details 
of the campaign, eager to get a finger in it. Having heard 
the official speeches some sixteen times, I knew I could 
parrot them fairly well. I volunteered. Before I could 
get my notes together the meeting was called in the open- 
air theater in the Plaza which is quite like any other small 
(Continued on page 360) 



in the life of the Commonwealth. And the leper women 
answered, answered gloriously. 

Culion has been called the Island of the Dead. The 
vote on April 30, 1937, invalidates that name for all time. 
Had Manila been as alive as the leper colony, the city vote 
in the plebiscite would have been over 100,000. 

In one way the leper women had an advantage. Going 
to the poles was not new to them. Their city sisters 
suffered a timidity which the Culion women shed 32 years 
ago. Leper women of Culion were among the first women 
of the world to vote, in 1906. Only seven nations had 
granted any kind of franchise to their women prior to that 
time. The Austrian Empire, Sweden, Finland, Iceland, 
New Zealand, Norway, Australia had given more or less 
limited powers to women. Some allowed only high tax 
payers to vote. Some gave women a voice only in munic- 
ipal affairs. Iceland and Sweden extended the privilege 
only to widows and spinsters. What compensation! 
Leper women were not so hampered. From the first 
they had full privileges. No opinion was excluded. 
The current literacy test had not been devised in 1906. 
And since nobody owned property in Culion there was 
never any discussion as to the vote being limited to tax- 
payers. There were only two qualifications: residency 
in Culion and an age of 21 years. 

Dr. Victor Heiser, using every means possible to make 
life in the isolation settlement as attractive as possible, 
offered the vote to men and women alike. His gesture 
stimulated a great interest in the affairs of the colony. 
A preside nte and ten councillors had to be elected, as 
well as a committee representing all the leading dialect 
groups in the Islands, a kind of clearing house made neces- 
sary by the barrier of language. It was bad enough to 
be torn away from home and loved ones; intolerable to be 
where one had little understanding and no part in the 
system of life around him. Helping to run the town gave 
the leper women a sense of importance they had never 
known at home. 

Deep in their hearts they realized it was only a means 
to keep them contented, a trick to give them a feeling of 
normal life. They guessed that Manila had never even 
heard of their voting activities, as indeed it hadn't. 

But when the Filipino woman was backed against the 
wall by those who had written into the Constitution a 
demand for 300,000 affirmative women's votes as a pre- 
requisite to woman suffrage, she called to every corner of her 
Islands and the cries came back, full throated, positive. 

354 




CULION SUFFRAGE LEADERS 

Left to right, front row:— Miw p r :.„ . « 
Mrs. Josefa Jugueta, superv.W ? , 7°'' ^ Pau,a A - de VM "' 
Mr,. Ca,imiro B. Lara, P X „ r r d ' et,tian • M "- Apolonio Cacher0 ' 
Physician, Mr,. Victoria Nicola" LI u C ' Ub and Wife ° f the Chief 

Amagan, Mrs. Damiana N. de PoatiinH 2*% '°w:-Mrs. Elena Raraire* de 

All but the three in the lower Z . ^ ' Concordia s - & Lasilas. 
colony from 4 to 21 year, Th T " B are Iepers and have been in the 

served in the colony 17 year, M "' Ju « ueta an ° Mr,. Nicola,, have 

S u?ragc worker J but dueTat'v.T'' m" ^ ° f the Col °™ waa a "° an actiVC 
to a severe illne,, wa, unable to be in the picture. 



Barrio Episode 

By Redentor Ma. Tuazon 




LITTLE Ambo was drowned during Lent. 
Having taken his father's carabao to the 
corral from the mudhole at the back of the 
house and fed him freshly cut sugar-cane leaves, he 
had gone up-river to see the flagellants perform the 
rites supposed to purge their souls of sin. 

The next morning, Indang Juana roused the people 
with an anxious question: 4 'Have you seen my boy, Ambo? 
He has not been home since yesterday morning !" She 
went from house to house with the tearful query. Fathers 
asked their wives and children. All they could tell her 
was that Ambo was last seen going to a place beyond 
Whitaker's hacienda to see the flagellants. 

Then Incong Berong said that possibly (but God for- 
bid!) he had been drowned. Many tongues took this 
up and the fear spread. If Ambo could not be found, he 
must have drowned. In no time the people could not be 
shaken out of this belief. Barrio folk lead uneventful 
lives and rumors of occurrences that transcend the ordinary 
gain quick acceptance. But where, at what spot did Ambo 
drown? All eyes turned to the silent river that held the 
awesome answer. 

Incong Berong remembered Apung Teban whose prowess 
as a diver was known to all. Did he not out-stay every one 
when they went to the river to dive for clams? It was 
said of him that in the water he was like a fish. It was his 
fame in the barrio. It was like the renown of Esiong, 
the cacambal ubingan, when it came to snake-bites. 
Esiong could cure people bitten by poisonous snakes be- 
cause he had that power over them by being born with a 
snake brother, as the people believed. Apung Teban 
could easily recover Ambo's body if it were but known 
where it lay. . . . 

Apung Teban sent his wife to town hurriedly. When 
shf returned, she had a rice-pot with her, a new bnck-red 
ban ja Teban took it up to his house and asked for a 
candle He set the candle upright inside the pot and hghted 
^ TW he Placed the whole thing before the images of 
the Sly Sild and the Christ with the crown of thorns. 
His wi f kSTt down and began to pray. When she nmshed 
Sb^ook ^ pot and started for the river. Meanwhue, 



people hadl gathered and followed him. Reach- 
inglthe river, he reverently floated the pot on the 
water, the candle still lighted. 

For a long while, the pot remained motionless. 
The air was stirless; the water itself was quiet. The 
people waited with bated breath. Suddenly, excla- 
mations broke out. The pot was beginning to move! 
Uncertainly at first. Upriver; then downriver. It got en- 
tangled among the reeds. The people looked on in des- 
pair. "Why does not some one free it?" an impatient 
man asked. "No!" answered another, "let it alone, or 
you'll drive away the spirit that makes it move." 

As if to confirm this, the pot began to turn a little. Slow- 
ly it moved on and on . . . past the sugar central's wharf, 
past the moored cascos, past the bridge. 

At sundown, when the fateful pot which was expected 
to point out the spot in the river where the body of Ambo 
lay, reached the nipa groves, the excitement reached a high 
pitch. This was the place where the flagellants had begun 
their gory trail, where Ambo was known to have gone. 
Suddenly the pot seemed to hesitate in its course. The 
candle went out mysteriously. The water around it 
became troubled. The pot turned around and round as if 
caught in a whirlpool. 

"He's there!" cried a nervous woman. Apung Teban 
took off his shirt. He solemnly made the sign of the cross 
and then entered the water. He swam toward the now 
strangely immobile pot. He dove. 

One minute and he had not appeared. Two minutes. 
Would he never come up to breathe? Had it erred, the 
spirit that supposedly guided the candled pot to this spot? 
Was the body really there under the water where the pot 
had stopped? Then the head of Apung Teban bobbed 
into sight. Laboriously he swam for the bank, holding 
something, towing it along. 

"AMBO!" The cry escaped the spectators' lips in 
unison. Indang Juana heard it. 

"Ambo, my son! anak Ao/" she sobbed hysterically. 
Apung Teban was on his feet in the shallow water now. 
He held an inert form in his arms, the lifeless body of little 
Ambo. 



The Soul Of Man 

By Mariano Salvador Moreno 

And yet another said: 

A L ttZ^X the sun. "He is painting a gloomy night! - 

A passerby said: I asked the artist 

« H e is painting a cow! " And he replied: 

Another said: "I am painting none of those things. . . . 

"He is painting a pig! I am painting the soul of man 

Another said: M Weary of the life he leads on earth! " 
« He is painting the sun! ^ 



The Alupasi Industry of Caba, La Union 

Random Notes of A Student of Soil Geography 



By Dominador Z. Rosell 



CABA is a small town in La 
Union located between 
Aringay and Bauang, 265 
kilometers from Manila. The po- 
pulation is approximately 7,000. 
Agriculture is the main source of 
livelihood of the people who are, 
however, handicapped by the lack 
of good, level agricultural land, 
located as the community is on the 
narrow coastal plain of the Ilocos 
region. There are, in fact, only 
a few hundred hectares of level 
land. The soils of this land run 
from sandy to loamy in texture 
and are not very rich. The 
rest of the land is hilly and 
mountainous, and consists of 
loose, friable, and droughty soils. 
In addition to this, areas that 
should have been allowed to 
forest are badly skinned and almost barren. 

The narrow level coastal plain is planted to rice during 
the rainy season and tobacco during the dry season. Vege- 
table crops are also grown but to a limited amount. Corn 
is planted after the rice in some places where tobacco is 
not grown. The hillsides and the rolling areas are planted 
to upland rice. Bamboo abounds in steep areas. Coconut 
trees line the seashore. 

Tobacco being the leading crop of La Union, however, the 
alupasi industry has become a very good source of income 
for the people of Caba. Alupasi is the Ilocano term for 
the Tagalog word lapnis, — dried banana sheaths used for 
wrapping bales of tobacco whether for storage or ship- 
ment. During the last several years the town of Caba 
has produced as much as P20,000^ worth of this wrapping 
material annually. 

The banana is a common Philippine ' plant and grows 
everywhere, as it may be planted either in sandy or clay 
soils provided there is sufficient moisture. 

The hillsides and the rolling lands of Caba are planted 
to different varieties such as the Latundan, Saba, Tar- 
nate, Bongolan, Botohan, and others. The variety 
of banana used for making alupasi is the Botohan varie- 
ty, the tall trunks being very suitable for the produc- 
tion of long, wide strips of the wrapping material. 




The narrow coastal plane of Ilocos with a stripped 
banana plantation in the foreground. 



In other parts of the Philippines 
the Botohan banana is grown for 
its leaves, which are also wide. 
People of Laguna, Batangas, 
Cavite, and Rizal gather them for 
sale in the Manila markets, where 
they are used as wrapping ma- 
terial for fish and other commodi- 
ties. The panciterias in Manila 
used banana leaves extensively 
for wrapping pansit that is taken 
home. 

In Caba, the Botohan variety 
is planted in open, sunny places. 
When the plants have reached a 
certain age, the leaves of the whole 
plantation are removed, this ex- 
posing the bare trunks. When the 
trees have reached their maximum 
growth, they are cut down, 
the younger ones being left 
standing. The sheaths are then removed one by one and 
laid besides the remaining trees, and are left there from 
one to two weeks. They are not allowed to become too 
dry because then they crack and break easily. The length 
of the sheaths ranges from two to two and a half meters 
and the width from 15 to 20 centimeters. When dry they 
are tied in bundles of 100 each. A bundle sells at retail 
from forty to fifty centavos. The wholesale price for 1,000 
sheaths or ten bundles runs from P3.50 to P4.50. 
The Chinese are usually the best buyers of the 
alupasi. 

During a conversation I had with one man who was 
removing the sheaths from some banana trunks, I learned 
that the reason for cutting off all the leaves in a whole 
plantation is to allow the sunshine to get to the sheaths. 
But, why not gather the sheaths of only those trees that 
have reached maximum growth and place them outside 
the plantation to dry? This method would allow the 
younger trees to grow without interruption. How many 
sheaths can be obtained from a tree that has reached its 
maxxmum growth? How dry is g 0od alupasi? What is 

JlScT Pr °? UCti ° n? What is the ^ 

SHLS "t£V££ ttt r ,han 

at after - — - o nly 



Cinquain 

By Herminio'M. Beltran 

OSTAR 
Of morning— fade I 

The sun doth rise Youth's dreams 

Must flee, it seems, from Reality's 
Dire eyes I 



356 



With Charity To All 

By Putakte and Bubuyog 



Mr. Toastmaster: 

We own (as a matter of fact, this is the 
only thing we own; everything else, we owe) 
we are not aware of any task that we confront, 
nevertheless, like High Commissioner McNutt, 
we approach it with great humility. As Aris- 
totle did not say, "This is a most extraordinary occasion. 
Never before in my life have I listened to a few words of 
mine in advance cf the words themselves. Well, why not? 
Before our lives, we ourselves had a similar experience. 
Our descendants, like those of Under-Secretary of Justice 
Melencio, will never forgive us if we did not have such 
experience. Neither will our ascendants. Under-Secretary 
Melencio is fortunate in that he has evidently none of the 
latter to worry about. Magna est Veritas et prevale- 
babbitt. 

As we were saying, we never heard of Democracy in the 
Philippines until McNutt called our attention to it. As 
Weyl asks in this connection "Was ist Materie? " (An 
English translation of this epoch -unmaking work will 
soon .appear under the title "What's the matter?" to be 




followed by an Italian translation by Com- 
mander Balbon "Wazzo maro? " The Japan- 
ese translation "Watzu Maru? " has already 
disappeared.) Now that we come to think of 
it, we have in fact more democracy than is 
good for Secretary Quirino. The other day, in 
San Fernando, he made the following statement before the 
poor helpless Pampangos already handicapped by their lingo : 
"During the first year of the Soviet government, the earnings 
were divided, one half for the leader and the other half for the 
laborers. Second year, the ratio was two for the leader and 
one for the laborer; the third year, three for the leader and 
one for the laborer and so on, with the share of the leader 
ever increasing and the poor laborer's fixed at one." In a 
better governed country Secretary Quirino would have 
immediately been overwhelmed with orders and decorations. 
He would have been [created Knight of the Most 
Noble Order of the Grand Double Cross, Commander of 
the Order of the Golden Fleece, Companion of the Order 
of the Pink Elephant, Knight Commander of the Most 

(Continued at the bottom of the next page) 



Idilio de Amor 



By Aurelio Alvero 



FOR the fifty-four^thousand 
Nine hundred 
And sixty-sixth time — 
Miguel Pelaez y Romero 
Asked the beautiful Consuelo, 
Daughter of Don Pancho de la Riva 
'And of Dona Juana Pascuala 
Mariana Rosario Lopez de la Riva, 
If she 
Could learn 
To care 
For him. 

And for the fifty-four thousand 

Nine hundred 

And sixty-sixth time— 

The beautiful Consuelo 

Answered bluntly, 

Cruelly, 

Heartlessly, 

Mercilessly, 

Definitely— 

"No! 

And Miguel Pelaez y Romero, 

Who had been asking the age-old question 

Of Consuelo 

Ever since they were mere (tots 



Playing in the backyard 

Of Dona Menchang, 

Bethought himself 

Of a nice, 

Dramatic, 

Romantic, 

Sentimental 

And sensational way 

Of ending existence 

By a high jump 

From the topmost floor 

Of the Equitable Life 

Skyscraper. . . . 

And so he took his hat, 
Said gruffly a goodbye, 
And pacing slowly 
With a determined mien, 
He went to Joe's Saloon 
And took a drink 
And another drink, 
And another, 

And then he got into a taxi 
For the cabaret 
In far San Juan — 
And just forgot 
The whole caboodle! 



357 



Finance and Investment Section 

When You Buy Mining Stock 

By John Truman 



Editor's Note:— The following note and nothing else was cs^- 

received from Mr. Truman for this issue of the Philippine iBIfl 

Magazine, and not knowing what else to do with it or this fill I g 

section, I made up my mind to publish the note— evidently -—■ 
written after a glance at the Stock Exchange bulletin board 
for July 27 and the Lord knows how many gulps of whiskey. 

The Note 

"Dear Editor:— As it appears that not only investors 
but even the gamblers are keeping away from the stock 
market for the present, leaving the field entirely to the 
sellers — long and short, another road to fortune should 
be opened. I suggest you invite the public to participate 
in a prize contest for the best* replies to the* following 
problem : 

When will bottom be reached? 
"Contestants should answer in one sentence of not to 
exceed 125 words, giving either a date |or the expected 
lowest price of some well known stock. For example: 

(1) August 8, 1937, 13:61 a. m. 

(2) When Antamok sells at two bananas a share. 
"I suggest that you offer the following prizes: 

First Prize — Five pesos cash; 

Second Prize — -A seat on either the Manila or the 
International Stock Exchange; 

Third Prize — Two hundred assorted mining stock 
certificates of from 100,000 to 500,000 shares each 
of companies organized .during the last boom; these 
may be used as wallpaper and are also of interest to 



I collectors of autographs as each certificate bears 

| B p^ the signatures of well known national business 
men; 

Fourth Prize—A job in a brokerage office; 
01 ^SL the winner would have to present a medical cer- 
tificate to the effect that he needs a vacation, 
and would receive no salary but fifty per cent of the 
broker's net income; 

Fifth Prize— Three dozen assorted items of good 
advice from a newly arrived expert on how to make 
money on the Exchanges. 
"Shouldn't these prizes be attractive enough, each 
winner might be offered in addition easy chairs for three 
members of his family in the lobby of any brokerage office, 
to be used, however, only during office hours. 

"The Board of Judges should be composed of the follow- 
ing persons: 

(1) The night watchman of the Manila Stock 
Exchange, 

(2) The messenger boy of the International Stock 
Exchange, 

(3) The janitor of the Securities and Exchange 
Commissioner's office, and 

(4) The editors of the Exchange columns of the 
Bulletin and the Herald. 

"I think such a contest would arouse great interest 
throughout the Philippines. 

"Yours, 

(in a quavering hand) "J. T." 



With Charity. To All 

(Continued from, page 357) 

Ancient Order of the Balderdash, Companion of the Most 
Recent Order of the Pink Parisian Garter, Pale Trembling 
Knight of the Order ofJjDon Manuel, Knight of the Half 
Order of Tenderloin Rare, P. D. Q., Companion of the 
Merry Wives of Windsor, Night (Saturday) of the Order 
to the Bath, K.D.O.M., K.R.S.V.P., Companion of the 
Noble People of Batac, Knight Commander of the Order 
for Encouragement of Cruelty to Communists, Companion 
of the Order of the Irish Male Cow, and K.A.B.C.D.E. 
F.G.H.I.J.K.L.M.N.O.P.Q.R.S.T.U.V.W.X.Y.Z. But un- 
fortunately, Secretary Quirino can only dream of all these 
grand things. If only McNutt had not discovered de- 
mocracy in the Philippines! 

As we were saying, High Commissioner McNutt's grand- 
father once said that every speech or sermon would be 
better if it were short. Our own grandfathers entertained 
a similar view. They said that every speech or sermon 
would be better if it were not delivered at all. 

Well, as we were saying, this here Democracy is a hard 
Nutt to crack. According to ourselves, "President Jorge 
Bocodo nas favorably received the suggestion to establish 

358 



and advanced police school in the University of the Phil 

ippines, to meet the scientific needs and higher educational 

requirements of the national state police." And according 

to the supporters of the police, school plan, "The school 

would give training in scientific police work and crirnf 2 

tectiom Aside from this, the need for the school Z zlso 

justified by the fact that higher educational »L 

are required of officers of ^^^^^^^ 

ourselves, among the courses to be offered in ^ f 

will be: Guinto steak smothered j£h Po Z 

the Municipal Golf Course; DemoTr acy | ^ 

and Cure; How to Administer the Third 0 

Higher Degrees; Honor among Policemen * ? eVen 

Other Murders; From Gozar to Mrs w!ul " d 

Were Suicided; Clues and Other Nuiianc^ T^"^ 

of True Love," which, according to PutaS^TS 

leads to the nearest woman. Bub "yog, 

Ve pausen as ve Schwarzbrot mit T 
Pabstbeerdrinken. Hoch! Leber wurst eaten ^ 

As ve nicht sagen were, ve approachen der P A 
Task mit Sen-Sen uf grat Humiditat. * d Unser 

"S-s-s-show me the way to go home. . . .» ' ' # ' 



Cebuano-Visayan Kinship Terms 

By Ignacio T. Quijano 



THE Visayans constitute the largest ethnic 
group , m the Philippines. Due to the fact 

separate if. Spread th ^ h out numerous 

swate islands, they speak various dialects. The 
two most widely spoken dialects are the Cebuano- 
Visayan and the Ilongo-Visayan. The former is the 

in Z W d / aleCt J n the Easte ™ Visayas and the latter 
m the Western Visayas. Cebuano-Visayan is, however, 
srxDken over a wider territory because most of the 
Northern Mindanao provinces are largely inhabited by 
people from the Eastern Visayas. Though the Cebuano- 
Visayan is not so highly developed a tongue as Tagalogs, 
yet it is a not insignificant rival. The terms of kinship 
prevalent among the people who 'speak Cebuano-Visayan 
are here compiled. 

Parent-Child Group 
FATHER: The Cebuano-Visayan term for father is 
amahan. The children address their father as tat ay or 
ta tang. 

MOTHER: For mother the term is inahan. Nanay 
or nanang are terms used by the children. 

SON, iDAUGHTER: As .in Tagalog, the Cebuano- 
Visayan term for child is anak. For indicating the sex the 
word lalaki (male) or babaye (female) is affixed, as the 
case may |be. A ison is thus called anak nga lalaki and 
a daughter anak nga t babaye. Bata generally means a 
child. 

The first born child is known as the kamagulangan and 
the youngest the kamanghuran. The term used for an 
only child is bugtong. An adulterous or incestuous child 
is called anak sa gawas (gawas — outside). Pinaangkan 
is used, too. Inday and undo are terms of affection used 
by parents and older relatives for young boys and girls, 
respectively. 




Sibling Group 

BROTHER, SISTER: Igso-on is the term for sibling 
irrespective of age or sex. For the indication of sex igso-on 
nga lalaki for a brother and igso-on nga babaye for a 
sister are used. 

There are various terms used by a minor child for his 
older brothers and sisters. Mano, manoy, or manong 
are used for the oldest brother, and ingko, inkoy, and 
iyo for the succeeding older brothers. For the oldest sister 
mana, manang, or manay is used and uray y manding, 
and insi for the succeeding older sisters. 

Grandparent-Grandchild Group 
The term used for grandparents is apohan, whether male 
or female. The term is also used for a granduncle or a 
grandaunt. For a grandchild apo is used. Apo nga 
lalaki and apo nga babaye are a grandson and grand- 
daughter, respectively. 

The degrees of relationship with respect to one's grand- 
h\\A (aoo) are expressed as follows: apo sa sungkod for 
TgreaVgrandchild; apo sa tvhod for a grandchild of the 



third degree; apo sa sungay for a grandchild of the 
fourth degree. 

Uncle-Nephew Group 
UNCLE : The Cebuano-Visayan term for uncle is 
uyoan. The male cousins of either father or mother 
are known as uyoan sa pangagawan. 

A child calls his uncles by the same terms he uses for his 
older brothers. 

AUNT: For an aunt the term is iyaan. The female 
cousins of either father or mother are known as iyaan sa 
pangagawan. 

A child calls his aunts by same terms he uses for his older 
sisters. 

NEPHEW, NIECE: The generic Cebuano-Visayan 
word for nephew or niece is pag-umangkon. For the 
indication of sex the term pag-umangkon nga lalaki 
and pag-umangkon nga babaye are used for a nephew 
and niece respectively. The sons and daughters of cousins 
are called pag-umangkon sa pangagawan. 

Cousin Group 
The Cebuano-Visayan term for cousin is ig-agaw. A 
first cousin is an ig-agaw 9 g tagsa; a second cousin, ig- 
agaw' g tagurha; etc. When addressed by minors, the 
terms used for older brothers or sisters are applied. 

Parent-in-Law and Child-in-Law Group 

PARENT-IN-LAW: The term for parent-in-law is 
ugangan. 

CHILD-IN-LAW: A child-in-law, whether male or 
female, is called umagad. 

Sibling-in-Law Group 
BROTHER-IN-LAW, SISTER-IN-LAW: The Cebua- 
no-Visayan word for a brother-in-law or a sister-in-law 
is bayao. 

SPOUSE'S SIBLING'S SPOUSE: For the husband 
or wife of a sibling-in-law, the term is bilas. 

Step-Relatives Group 
STEP-FATHER: A stepfather is called ama-ama. 
STEP-MOTHER: A stepmother is called ina-ina. 
When addressing directly his stepfather or stepmother 

a child uses the same terms as for older brothers or sisters. 

A stepchild is called humabdos. 

Other Kinship Terms 
Parents whose children have intermarried address each 
other as pare and mare, contractions of the Spanish 
compadre and comadre, respectively. Bana means 
husband; asawa, wife; kabanayan y relatives in general; 
inanak, godchild; amahan sa bunyag, godfather; inahan 

359 



360 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1937 



sa bunyag, godmother; igsoon sa dios, godbrother or 
godsister. An adopted child is known as anak-anak. 

A young unmarried man is called olitaWo; a young 
unmarried woman, dalaga. Bayong is the term for a 
boy entering his prime; dalagita for a girl entering maiden- 
hood. Balo is used for a widow or widower. 



Leper Women Voted . . . 

(Continued from page 354) 

town plaza even to its statue of Dr. Jose Rizal. Leonard 
Wood, in bronze, stands there too. I know how glad he 
would have been to see the leper women finding a cause 
into which they could throw so much of their fine energy. 

Of course, I couldn't speak Tagalog, not even Spanish. 
In order to appear a little less of a foreigner, I dressed in a 
Filipino gown, a lovely blue and white one lengthened 
and loaned for the occasion by a nurse, Miss Paula Lopez. 
In it, I felt just as I thought (Mrs. Lim looked, very dig- 
nified and important. And as I saw the crowd that had 
gathered, I needed all the moral support a gown could 
give me. 

Two hours ahead of schedule, the Plaza was full of 
people, both men and women. Every woman who could 
get there on her own feet or with the help of friends 



or Boy Scouts was dressed in her best and out! 

With their Commonwealth only in its second year they 
were intent on seeing the Filipino woman take as important 
a part in the upbringing of the nation as she takes in the 
rearing of her family. Men had plotted against her in the 
framing of the Commonwealth Constitution. Not a 
politician in the Islands thought she could rally a vote of 
300,000 literate women, which perhaps is the only comment 
necessary on the judgment of the Filipino man. 

The leper women were as inflammable as guncotton. 
Although the suffrage speech reached them twice removed — 
from Mrs. Lim to me, from me to the able leper linguist 
Mr. Pedro Pasion who translated the talk sentence by sen- 
tence into Tagalog — -they sat on the edges of their seats 
and punctuated every point with unreserved approval. 
They asked questions. To see their eyes brighten, their 
backs stiffen, their shoulders square as they realized what 
an unfair challenge the politicians had set them, was an 
experience that will never come to me again, and one I 
am sure that they had never dared hope would come to 
them. To feel they were not forgotten! To see their 
ballots assume importance and fit into the pattern of chang- 
ing national affairs! To know their voices were needed 
by the women of the Philippines! To be told that their 
votes — -and could they possibly get 1000? — might be the 
very deciding factor in the emancipation of their country- 




In this soup, you enjoy tomatoes 
at their best! 



T 



At all grocers' 



HINK of the most luscious, full-ripe tomatoes you 
ever tasted — then remember the soup which brings 
them to you with their fresh-off-the-vine tang captured 
by a recipe which delights all who like good things to 
eat — Campbell's ! 

The tomatoes themselves are specially cultivated by 
Campbell's for brilliant color, for lush richness and superb 
flavor. But that is only the beginning. Campbell's 
exclusive recipe blends them with a cooking genius that 
makes every spoonful a rare delight. Once tasted, it is 
a flavor never to be forgotten. 

Why not serve this wonderful soup often? 




August, 1937 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



361 





Safety Billboard erected by 
the City of Manila with the 
cooperation of thePhilippine 
Advertising Corporation. 
Located at the south end 
of St a. Cruz Bridge. 



Lubricate Your Car Safely I 

OVERLOOKING the necessity of properly and safely lubricating your 
car is simply ignoring the cause of driver's fatigue. 

Lack of lubrication increases the difficulty of handling your car. 
It slows up both your response in an emergency and the response of mechan- 
ical parts. It causes greater wear and more frequent breakage of parts on 
which your safe driving depends. 

Make your car safer for driving by 
having it Mobilubricated at regular inter- 
vals. Drive into the — 

STANDARD-VACUUM 
SERVICE STATION 

Mablni & San Luis, Manila 



t 




and have our experts service your car 
with special equipment the Certified 
Mobilubrication way. We invite you to 
watch us do the work. 



CERTIFIED MOBILUBRICATION INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING 
GEKIMTW «w SAFETY SERVICES: 



^^w-a rrankcase oil, differential and transmission, universal 
Chassis lubrication; «9?S»2%£z!t checking wheel bearings; washing windows and 
joint; lubricating ^^^t^^^d^l^^B nnd checking bulbs; properly inflating 
checking windshield wiper, ^gSSbSkbMS, fuses, and putting water in radiator, etc. 
tires and checking for cuts, cnecKiu* * 



L Insular Motors, Inc. 

Calle Orozco 
2 Luneta Motor Company, mc 

827 R. Hidalgo 
3. Manila Motor Company 

Tanduay & Arlegui 



AUTHORIZED MOBILUBRICATION DEALERS: 

' Motorists' Filling Station 

Ayala Bridge & M. de Comlllas 
Standard-Vacuum Service Station 

Taft Avenue & Herran 
Standard-Vacuum Service Station 
Mabinl & San Luis 



Inc. 



4. 
5. 



6. 



S0C0NY 1N °M0BIL0IL 

STANDARD -VACUUM OIL COMPANY 




women, gave them more vitality than ten years' injections 
of chaulmoogra oil. Even the men, edging the crowd, 
caught fire and shouted not only approval but willingness 
to help in the campaign. Boy Scouts too volunteered to 
carry any women unable to walk to the poles. 

The literacy test was a high hurdle for many. They all 
wanted to vote. There were six weeks before the plebis- 
cite! Classes were started. 

The day before registration came, and through some 
oversight Culion was without official blanks. Could those 
women have marched into the offices of the Department 
of the Interior that night there would have been a reck- 
oning! They had staged a house to house, bed to bed, 
campaign. They had taught old women to read and write. 
They were all but standing in line to register. 

And register they did ! One of the nurses had a sample 
copy of the official form. She took it to a Boy Scout of 
Troop 113. He and some fellow scouts stayed up more 
than half the night to mimeograph 1000 blanks for the 
committee. The next day 952 women set their names on 
the registration list. 

Campaign funds, all too slim, could not be shared with 
Culion. But nothing could stop that steam roller! Dr. 
Jose Raymundo, Chief of the Colony, and Mr. Frederick 
Jansen, missionary, gave their busses for the purpose of 
gathering all the women in on April 30. But they couldn't 
give gasoline; it's expensive down there. As resourceful 
as any heroine in a Walt Disney film, the nurses put on a 
benefit dance and came out P54.00 to the good. They 
saved enough of it to send me a telegram after the plebis- 
cite: "918 women vote yes. 5 vote no." 

In the thirty-five years of Culion's life the Colony has 
never been so alive. The curse was even removed from 
isolation when they saw their ballots helping to swell 
the total vote to the astounding volume of 492,000 voices 
insistent on having speaking parts in their government. 

Philippine women leaders are "on the spot" now! On 
what will they keep this great body of women working? 
Are there any intelligent enough, courageous enough to 
hoist the flag of Public Health and lead a crusade against 
leprosy? In that war they can count on the women of 
Culion to help! 



Servant Girl 

(Continued from page 351) 

She longed no more to be part of the group about the 
water tank in the bathhouse. She thought of the women 
there and their jokes and she smiled, in pity, because they 
did not have what she had, some one by the name of Angel, 
who knew how to massage injured feet back to being good 
for walking and who knew how to lay out clothes for 
bleaching. 

When they teased her about Sancho, who insisted on 
pumping her can full every time she went for drinking water, 
she smiled at the women and at the man, full of her hidden 
knowledge about someone picking her up and being gentle 
with her. She was too full of this secret joy to mind their 

362 



teasing. Where before she had been openly angry and 
secretly pleased, now she was indifferent. She looked at 
Sancho and thought him very rude beside . . . beside 
Angel. He always put his hands over hers when she made 
a move to pump water. He always spoke to her about 
not being angry with the women's teasing. She thought 
he was merely trying to show off. And when one day 
Sancho said, "Do not mind their teasing; they would tease 
you more if they knew I really feel like they say I do," 
she glared at him and thought him unbearably ill-man- 
nered. She spat out of the corner of her mouth, letting 
him see the grimace of distaste she made when she did so, 
and seeing Sancho's disturbed face, she thought, "If Angel 
knew, he'd strike you a big blow." But she was silent 
and proud and unsmiling. Sancho looked after her with 
the heavy can of water held by one hand, the other hand 
flung out to balance herself against the weight. He waited 
for her to turn and smile at him as she sometimes did, but 
she simply went her way. He flung his head up and then 
laughed snortingly. 

Rosa's mistress made her usual bad-humored sallies 
against her fancied slowness. Noticing Rosa's sudden 
excursions into the street, she made remarks and asked 
curious questions. Always the girl had an excuse and her 
mistress soon made no further question. And unless 
she was in bad temper, she was amused at her servant's 
attempts at singing. 

One night she sent the maid to a store for wine. Rosa 
came back with a broken bottle empty of all its contents. 
Sudden anger at the waste and the loss, made her strike 
out with closed fists, not caring where her blows landed 
until she saw the girl in tears. It often touched her when 
she saw Rosa crying and cowering, but now the woman 
was too angry to pity. 

It never occurred to Rosa that she could herself strike 
out and return every blow. Her mistress was thirtyish, 
with peaked face and a thin frame, and Rosa's strong arms, 
used to pounding clothes and carrying water, could easily 
have done her hurt. But Rosa merely cried and cried, 
saying now and then Amy! Arvy! y until the woman, 
exhausted by her own anger, left off striking the girl to 
sit down in a chair, curse loudly about the loss of such 
good wine, and ask where she was going to get the money 
to buy another bottle. 

Rosa folded her clothes into a neat bundle, wrapped them 
in her blanket, and getting out her slippers, thrust her feet 
into them. She crept out of a door without her mistress 
seeing her and told herself she'd never come back to that 
house again. 

It would have been useless to tell her mistress how the 
bottle had been broken, and the wine spilled. She had 
been walking alone in the street hurrying to the wine store, 
and Sancho had met her. They had talked; he begging 
her to let him walk with her and she saying her mistress 
would be angry if she saw. Sancho had insisted and they 
had gone to the store and bought the wine, and then going 
home her foot had struck a sharp stone. She had bent 
to hold a foot up looking at the sole to see if the stone 
had made it bleed. Her dress had a wide, deep neck, and 
it must have hu n away from her body when she bent. 
Anyway she had looked up to find Sancho looking into the 
neck of her dress. His eyes were turned hastily away as 



August, 1937 



PHILI PPINE MAGAZINE 



363 



PHILIPPINE 

NATIONAL BANK 



MANILA, PHILIPPINES 




(Sole Depository in the Philippines of the Commonwealth) 

NEW YOKK AGENCY 

25 BROADWAY, NEW YORK CITY, NEW YOKK 

Complete 

BANKING AND TRUST FACILITIES 



Agricultural Banking Letters of Credit 

Commercial Banking Travelers' Checks 

Deposit Accounts Cable Transfers 

Commercial Credits Personal Trusts 

Foreign Exchange Corporate Trusts 

Executor and Administrator 



BRANCHES IN TEN PROVINCES 
AGENCIES AND SUB-AGENCIES IN 1010 MUNICIPALITIES 



Correspondents in All Important Cities of the World 



August, 1937 



soon as she straightened up, and she thought she could 
do nothing but hold her peace. But after a short distance 
in their resumed walk home, he had stopped to pick up 
a long twig lying on the ground. With deft strokes he 
had drawn twin sharp peaks on the ground. They looked 
merely like the zigzags one does draw playfully with any 
stick, but Rosa, having seen him looking into her dress 
while she bent over, now became so angry that she swung 
out and with all her force struck him on the cheek with 
her open palm. He reeled from the unexpected blow, 
and quickly steadied himself while Rosa shot name after 
name at him. Anger rose in his face. It was nearly dark, 
and there was no one else on the street. He laughed, short 
angry laughter, and called her back name for name. Rosa 
approached him and made to slap him again, but Sancho 
was too quick for her. He had slipped out of her way, 
and himself slapped her instead. The surprise of it angered 
her into sudden tears. She swung up the bottle of wine 
she had held tightly in one hand, and ran after the man to 
strike him with it. Sancho slapped her arm so hard that 
she dropped the bottle. The man had run away laughing, 
calling back a final undeserved name at her, leaving her 
to look with tears at the wine seeping into the ground. 
Some people had come toward her then, asking what had 
happened. She had stooped, picked up the biggest piece 
of glass, and hurried back to her mistress, wondering whe- 
ther she would be believed and forgiven. . . . 

Rosa walked down street after street. She had long ago 
wiped the tears from her face, and her thoughts were of 
a place to sleep, for it was late at night. She told herself 
she would kill Sancho if she ever saw him again. She 



The Aristocrat of the Orient 



u ^oH saving, I wish a cold wind 
picked up a stone from the road, sy ^ ^ ^ 

would strike him dead, and so on, throw this at 

tightly, saying, If I meet him ^W,^W ^ ^ 

him, and aim so well that 1 worn nu mbing blow 

She rubbed her arm in memory 
the man had dealt it, ^^J%^Zc. Her fists 
shame for the slap he had d area t s 
closed more tightly about the stone and she 
her as if she expected Sancho to appear. ^ . 

She thought of her mistress. She in a 

year in the woman's e ^ loy ;^ it was 

place, at the most, for four men** So ^ ^ 

the master's smirking ways and evil ey^ 
was the children. = t^rfE^-ocLl 

with this last mistress ^^^^ sh e would be 
humor, there were periods ^ with other 

generous with inoncy fcra dress, or i Some . 
maids. And they had been *J^J she would slobber 
times the mistress would get so Jwktot. 

into her drink and ™^£^ t per haps have 
died. When she was helpless sne hub" f *■ 
"Id if Rosa had not forcibly fed her. Now howe V e 
thought of the fierce beating the woman had given her 
made Rosa cry a little and repeat her vow that she would 
never step into the house again. 

Then she thought of Angel, the cochero who had been 
gentle, and she lost her tears in thinking how he would 
never have done what Sancho did. If he knew what had 
happened to her, he would come running now and take her 
to his own home, and she would not have to worry about 
a place to sleep this night. She wandered about, not stop- 



The Rendezvous of Smart Society 






liar \namwnm -mr.m m ^W 

._!! gBF] 




>- .... r 1 , •■ 



I 



The Manila Hotel, showing the new air-conditioned addition, overlooking Manila Bay. All suites in the 
new section are de luxe, in period and modern decorations; every room with bath and modern in every respect. 



Even in the most remote corners of the globe, the Manila 
Hotel is a symbol of hotel excellence— it is the Manila home 
and meeting place of important personages from all parts of 
the world. 

International big names, among them the world's greatest 
financiers, business wizards, the highest ranking military and 
naval officials, government dignitaries, suave diplomats, and 
titled rulers, have been guests at the Manila Hotel. 

"it's the place to go 



Every convenience and luxury is incorporated for the comfort 
and pleasure of our thousands of yearly guests. The dis- 
tinguished atmosphere, the impeccable service, and the match- 
less cuisine of this famous and modern hotel are a revelation 
to world travelers who visit our shores. 
Our greatest recommendation comes from those who have 
made the Manila Hotel their headquarters in the Philippines 
They know, and they tell their friends, 



H. 



C. ("Andy") ANDERSON 
Managing Director 



We 



MANILA HOTEL 



Cable Address: 
"MANHOCO" 



August, 1937 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



365 



£V£M 




Yet only a thin film of oil stands 

between costly breakdown and 

economical operation! 



TEMPERATURES as high as 3000° F. are often developed 
inside your Diesel. 

Here's what your Diesel must "take" day after day: 
Explosions within the cylinder generating heat greater than 
a blast furnace or raging volcano! 

Only the correct lubricant can protect your Diesel against 
the strains of terrific heat and tremendous pressure. Only 
the correct lubricant can insure you against breakdowns and 
costly delays. ^ . 

You will find Shell Oils are the W^SgP*^"^ 
cants for your Diesel. Shell Oils are TOUGH. They are 



refined from selected crudes to provide a film which is resistant 
to rupture under terrific heat and pressure. Their high 
chemical stability is insurance against oxidation and dangerous 
sludge formation. 

Shell Oils are FAST-FLOWING. The development of 
the correct oils of high fluidity for every type of Diesel insures 
fast, complete lubrication. . . yet affords a minimum consump- 
tion per horsepower-hour. 

There is a Shell industrial Oil to meet every demand. 
It is backed by the reputation of Shell for efficient lubrication 
of stationary and automotive Diesels. 




OIIS 



Consult our Lubricating Oil and Technical Department on your Lubrication Problems 

THE ASIATIC PETROLEUM CO. (P.I.) LTD. 



Hongkong & Shanghai Bank Bldg. 
MANILA, P. L 



366 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1937 



Manila to Baguio 

for 1*32° 



By 

TELEPHONE 



THAT is the 
day time 
rate for a sta- 
tion-to-station 
2-minute tele- 
phone call be- 
tween Manila 
and Baguio. 

AFTER 8:30 
P. M. the 
rate is reduced 
to P2.20 for the 
same initial 
period of two 
minutes. 

THE map 
shows some 
of the places 
north of Manila 
served by 
"LONG DIS- 
TANCE . 
Many other 
places in the 
Philippines can 
also be reached 
by telephone. 
Also the United 
States and many 
overseas coun- 
tries. See the 
front pages of 
the telephone 
directory for 
rates, etc. 



BAGUIO 




PHILIPPINE 

LONG DISTANCE TELEPHONE 

COMPANY 



ping at those places where she knew she would be accepted 
if she tried, her mind full of the injustices she had received 
and of comparisons between Sancho and Angel. She 
paused every time a tartanilla came her way, peering 
intently into the face of the cochero, hoping it would be 
he, ready to break her face into smiles if it were indeed. 
She carried her bundle on her arm all this while, now clench- 
ing a fist about the stone she still had not dropped and 
gnashing her teeth. 

She had been walking about for quite a while, feeling 
not very tired, having no urgent need to hurry about 
finding herself a place, so sharp her hopes were of some- 
how seeing her cochero on the streets. That was all she 
cared about, that she must walk into whatever street she 
came to, because only in that way would he see her and 
learn what they had done to her. 

Then, turning into a street full of stores set side by 
side, she felt the swish of a horse almost brushing against 
her. She looked up angrily at the cochero's laughing 
remark about his whip missing her beautiful bust. An 
offense like that, so soon after all her grief at what Sancho 
had done, inflamed her into passionate anger, and mouth- 
ing a quick curse, she flung the stone in her hand at the 
cochero on his seat. It was rather dark and she did not 
quite see his face. But apparently she hit something, for 
he suddenly yelled a stop at the horse, clambered down, 
and ran back to her, demanding the reason for her throw- 
ing the stone. She exclaimed hotly at his offense with 
the whip, and then looking up into his face, she gasped. 
She gasped and said, "Angel !" 

For it was he. He was wearing a striped shirt, like so 
many other people were wearing, and he had on the very 
same trousers of dark blue he had worn when he massaged 
her foot But he gazed at her in nothing but anger, asking 
whether her body was so precious that she would kill his 
horse. Also, why did she keep saying Angel; that was not 
his name! 

Rosa kept looking up at him, not hearing a word of his 
threats about taking her to the municipio, saying only 
Angel, Angel, in spite of his protests that that was not his 
name. At last she understood that the cochero did not even 
remember her and she realized how empty her thoughts 
of him now were. Even his name was not Angel. She 
turned suddenly to walk away from him, saying, -You do 
not even remember me". 

whT£ e »nf r ° at ^ f3Ce and excIaim «i after a 

Wr ^ "** the swolIen foot!" Rosa 

i V7f CSS * ^ 8Udden sinki *e of her 
whTo afaT, , reaHZed ^ CVen he ™** flick hi * 
a"him 2 ^ r ° ad ' and Hfted her «"* 

she wlHo L , t° Cher ° 3Sked her after a ^ where 

no flU «t™. u ' 1 33X1 g01n S home!" He asked 

late H Tl L T WhCre 8he had been ' ^ *» -s so 
would " t b WS VeWcle ' S-dly -ying he 

exclamationThl L y, r d many * ^ 

house. Se * he drove her to her mistress' 



August, 1937 



PHILIPPINE 



MAGAZINE 



367 



thin \ dldn t teU him what had happened. Nor any- 

«™f «£ dreamS - She merel y answered the ques- 

tions the cochero asked her about how she had been. "With 
the grace of God, all right, thank you." Once he made 
a sly joke about his knowing there were simply lots 
men courting her. Rosa laughed breathlessly and denied 

did -SL Wlshed they would never arrive - but the y soon 

• he cochero waited for her to get out, and then drove 
' Saying <<D °n't mention it" to her many thanks. She 
ran after the tartanilla when it had gone off a little way, 
and asked, running beside the moving vehicle, looking up 
mto his face, "What is your name?" 

The cochero shouted, not stopping his horse, "Pedro!" 
and continued to drive away. 

Rosa went into the house without hesitation, forgetting 
all her vows about never stepping into it again and wonder- 
ing why it was so still. She turned on the lights and found 
her mistress sleeping at a table with her head cradled in 
her arms, a new wine bottle before her, empty now^of 
all its contents. With an arm about the thin woman's 
waist, she half dragged her into her bed. tWhen thej-woman 
would wake, she would say nothing, remembering nothing. 
Rosa turned on the light in the kitchen, and hummed over 
her preparations for a meal. 



Manila's Cloud Year 

(Continued from, page 349) 

types are to be expected for the different months of the 
year. They may be studied in connection with the cloud 
photographs which embellish the remainder of the book. 
It may be added that the author mercifully refrains from 
making extensive additions to the already replete nomen- 
clature of cloud forms. 

With characteristic scientific caution the author asks 
this question: "How far can the weather classification out- 
lined in this paper and the clouds of Manila be used for 
forecasting purposes?" and he then proceeds to show how 
the classification may be correlated with the data regard- 
ing frontal situations appearing on the daily weather maps 
and how a forecast of the type of weather that will accom- 
pany the prevailing frontal situation may then be {under- 
taken. The task, admittedly, is difficult when it is realized 
that cloud formations in this part of the world can^not 
be relied upon to depict impending changes of the weather 
to the extent upon which reliance may be placed in temper- 
ate zones. This naturally brings usfto the consideration 
of typhoon skies which Francis Thompson might well 
have had in mind in his great epic poem "The Hound of 
Heaven" where he exclaims: 

"I knew all the swift importings 

On the wilful face of skies; 
I knew how the clouds arise 

Spumed of the wild sea-snortings." 

The lay reader, in particular, will be disappointed that 
Father Deppermann's atlas contains only three plates of 
these, and one he characterizes as "a good imitation of a 
typhoon sky/' which, anomalously, seems much more 
''characteristic" than the pictures of the genuine typhoon 
skies In another publication 8 Father Deppermann 
Jives his reasons for so robbing the public of its thrills 




Your Teeth Need 
Constant Care! 



KEEP teeth clean the safe, easy way: 
Use Dr. West's Tooth Paste on 
your Dr. West's Tooth Brush. 
Both paste and brush are important — 
the paste to be sure that film and stain 
are removed quickly and safely — -the 
brush, to make it easy to reach every 
part of every tooth, cleansing the sur- 
face thoroughly and efficiently. 



Dr. West's Tooth Brushes 
in Glass Containers 



Buy your Dr. West's Tooth Brush 
in the glass container — the new and 
modern way of selling tooth brushes. 
You know that your brush is surgically 
sterile — its bristles hard and firm, free 
from moisture. 



Dr. West's- 

At All Dealers 



Tooth Brushes 
Tooth Paste 



368 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1937 




ONEfREASON WHY 
SO MANY SELECT 
THE 




CONTAX 



Unrivaled in 
optical perfec- 
tion, Zeiss car- 
ries on the 
ninety-year 
tradition for su- 
preme quality 
and utmost 
performance. 

The Contax equipped with a Zeiss Tessar 
F3.5 or F2.8 lens of 5 cm. focal length 
answers fully for all average subjects, just 
as one lens is found sufficient as a rule with 
other cameras. 

Those who frequently take special sub- 
jects, however, soon discover that other 
lenses are invaluable. 

Contax is the camera of universal appli- 
cation because with its wide range of Zeiss 
objectives, it can easily and quickly be 
adapted to any field or phase of photo- 
graphy, such as sport and theater shots, 
cloud pictures, etc. 

See the article in this issue of the Philippine 
Magazine, "Manila's Cloud Year", page 348. 



BOTICA BOIEM 



95 Escolta, Manila 



IKON 



and, in the belief of the reviewer, they are worth the atten- 
tion of the amateur weather-wise who seek probabilities 
in cirrus clouds (and false cirrus) and ever endeavor to 
build up a catastrophe on every cumulo-nimbus cloud- 
bank that insinuates itself above the eastern horizon. 

"Readers may perhaps be disappointed that no examples of 'typhoon 
clouds' are given; but it must be remembered that a typhoon, though 
it is of a whirling nature like a waterspout or a tornado, is of much 
vaster extent, and the clouds, by the time the winds begin to rage fierce- 
ly, are mainly of the dull nimbus type which give very little detail 
and are uninteresting to view. Are there perhaps types of clouds which 
are peculiar to typhoons and not of otherjdepressions and storms? 
Some favour 'scuds' and radiating Cirrus, but the writer is forced to 
admit that up to the present he has been unable to find any type of 
cloud present in typhoons which he has not been able to duplicate in 
other situations. Often, for instance, the chaotic state of the sky 
of an early evening at Manila, just before the series of surrounding 
thunderstorms, is practically identical with a typhoon sky (so-called), 
and the parallel Cirrus frequently seen in perfectly good weather can 
scarcely be distinguished from the radiating Cirrus which sometimes 
but not always precedes a typhoon." 

Few, outside of those who have actually undertaken 
cloud photography will appreciate the technical difficulties 
that had to be met by Father Deppermann in making 
these cloud studies. Many photographers will be surprised 
to learn that the photographs that form the plates in the 
atlas were enlarged from the movie-sized films of an ordi- 
nary Contax hand camera, fitted with a Zeiss Tessar lens. 
In view of this great enlargement and the fact that the half- 
tone plates were executed from them, the finished product 
commends itself to critical eyes. 

In his Dresden publication, Father Deppermann points 
out the attractiveness of cloud photography to amateurs. 
He goes on to say: 

"But Manila is not the only inviting place for such cloud photo- 
graphy. Almost every locality has its own peculiarities of cloud for- 
mation, and there is]hardly a more inviting field for the amateur who 
washes at the same time to do something really useful for science anS 
also satiate his desire for the beautiful t-h™ „i a «T I 
w . . . . _ *. c Deau titul than cloud photography. . 

to us in His heavens? In £ w^ 00 "^ preSenti "^ 

clouds' as shown in such pictures T ° Plm ° n ^ ' truth of 

artist's canvas, wou./he^ °" 

be many, will do well to 71 be h ° ped there wil1 

starting work so that the V ma T UniCate *** him before 
as to the data that should Z S ' mple instru ctions 

without which it may be utt Cach P hoto g ra P h - 

work even though aes^ticaHy ^J*** for scientific 

The reviewer dislikes, exceeL i 
of work such as this bv an , g y ' to de g r ade a piece 
cations." Unfortunately \ ySiS ° f " itS practical a PP U " 
valuable piece of research f ° WeVer ' a continuation of a 
ability of its author to dem depends largely upon the 
versed in the skullduggery f ^ t0 those who are more 
magic of science, that the P° rk -barrel than in the 

bilities" capable of dispell} " commer cial possi- 

million dollars. The w" 8 tra ditional timidity of a 

CWer can only say of Father 



August, 1937 



ZiLLLIPPINE MAGAZINE 



369 



Deppermann's studies, as he would say of the other re- 
search that is constantly under way at the Manila Obser- 
vatory, that if Father Deppermann is enabled to arrive 
at the point to which the results he has so far achieved 
seem to be leading him, governmental and business circles 
may feel a degree of assurance that greater "efficiency" 
will be added to the methods by which the probable behavior 
of typhoons may be forecast, with consequent benefit to 
the shipping industry and business in general. Moreover 
ships' officers will continue to be grateful and co-operative 
in the common cause and, not improbably, human life 
will be conserved. 



In the course of the preparation of this paper, the reviewer 
had occasion to go to his library shelves to check his re- 
collection of a quotation, and his eye fell upon the volumes 
on the clouds. His glance rested upon one in particular— 
a book entitled "Cloudland" by the Rev. W. Clement 
Ley, 7 who pursued cloud study as a hobby and became 
a recognized authority on the subject. This book, pub- 
lished in London nearly half a century ago, is now very 
difficult to obtain, for it is a classic and those who once 
possessed themselves of it usually held on to it. The 
reviewer had seen a copy of the book, and had particularly 
admired the six beautiful colored plates, executed from the 
original water-color studies of the author, among them, 
one of the cloud distribution in a typical cyclone. For 
years he sought the book in vain until one day, while going 
over the shelves in a dusty second-hand-book-store in 
Shanghai his eye lit upon a tattered cover bearing the 
legend "Ley. CLOUDLAND." 

Restraining his excitement, for the owner of the store 
was very near and had, in the past, shown ability to read 
poker faces with amazing accuracy, he carelessly — non- 
chalantly — laid the book aside on a pile he had reserved 
for further inspection, and went on with his search of the 
shelves. After a decent interval, he made his selections, 
casually adding "Cloudland" to the pile, paid the price, 
and walked out with his precious find which, after all, was 
the only book in the lot he greatly wanted. 

Then came the feverish turning over of the pages at 
home and the desolating discovery that some one had care- 
fully cut out all the colored plates. Quite evidently, that 
"some one" had been a person who appreciated the beauty 
of those pictures, but who yet lacked the faculty to perceive 
that they were a whole only with the text of the delightful 
and scholarly gentleman who wrote the book. It was a 
desecration it is true, but the sin was venial if one takes 
into consideration the impulse that prompted it. 

But, despite that, just beyond the title page lie stanzas 
of Shelley's "Ode to the West Wind", starting: 

-Thou on whose stream, 'mid the steep sky's commotion, 
Loose clouds like earth's decaying leaves are shed, 
Shook from the tangled boughs of heaven and ocean . . ." 

and turning over the leaves we encounter fragments of 
verse neatly interpolated to make graphic some point in 
the scientific discussion. 

A neighboring book, Humphrey's "Fogs and Clouds 
of recent date, showed that author also invoking Shelley, 
from whose poem "The Cloud", he quotes as prelude to 
the preface and, as an opening to the first chapter, a further 
quotation from the same poem: 




Owners Everywhere 

PRAISE 
ELECTROLUX 

THE SILENT 



REFRIGERATOR 




CAUS 



the very silence of Electrolux testi- 
fies to its simpler, more efficient re- 
frigerating method — no machinery 
at all! Thanks to this simplicity of 
operation, it's the only refrigerator 
that can offer you all these long-life 
advantages : 

# No moving parts to wear 

# Lasting efficiency 

9 Continued low operating cost 

# Fullest food protection 

# Savings that pay for it 




Ask us about our 
Easy Purchase Plan 

MANILA GAS CORPORATION 

136-138 T. Pinpin 



Ad. Bur. 



370 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1937 



STENCILED FABRICS 

have wonderful possibilities 
for decor ative purposes 

. . . whether to enrich the home as wall hang- 
ings, window draperies or table runners, — -or 
to use as classroom projects in developing the 
child's artistic talents. 




is an unusually easy medium to use for sten- 
ciling. It is the original fabric crayon and 
has been used successfully in stenciling and 
decorating fabrics for more than twenty-five 
years. The rich colors and smooth texture 
of Crayola, the beauty achieved by blended 
Crayola colors, make Crayola a delightful 
means of producing color and design which 
you can use and enjoy in your home. 
Crayola comes packed 6, 8, 12, 16, or 24 as- 
sorted colors to the box. Each crayon is 
paper-wrapped and not affected by climatic 
changes. 

Send for our FREE folder "Use of Color"— 
it is illustrated in full color, 
contains complete instructions 
for stenciling with much other 
helpful information. Send 
your request with your name 
and address plainly written. 

Crayola is only one of the Gold Medal Line 
Products for Home and Schoolroom Use 
Send for Catalog 

Manufactured only by 

BINNEY & SMITH COMPANY 

Room 1902, 41 East 42tid St., New York 




"I am the daughter of earth and water, 

And nursling of the sky; ghores; 

I pass through the pores of the 
I change but I cannot die. 

that are produced each second. 

• 4.-. ;,,cf nne more "scientific treatise" 
Finally, *f^^^£ atlas published under 
on the clouds McAdxes Jg«* Opening the cover 
the auspices of Harvard Vw**& - P tr£mslation of 
we find right there m *^^ y of the Clouds" 
lone passage from Aristophanes ^omcuy 
from whi* we take these lines from the chorus perso- 
nifying the clouds: 

"We are the clouds of splendid hue 

Rising from Sea with garments ever new, 

We are the breath of Ocean old 

Who rest awhile, then journey far 

Marching with swift, resistless tread 

O'er plain and mountain. 

We enfold the peaks, enshadow fields, 

We are kin to the rivers, the streams and the pools, 

We master the wind and the swelling wave; 

Weeping, we furrow the well-tilled earth, 

Digging swift channels to the Sea." 

Now, when the reviewer has completed his task, he picks 
up the current issue of the Atlantic Monthly and glancing 
through it he comes across a brief article headed "Dry 
as Dust". Clearly, the author of this is a kindred spirit, 
and it is unfortunate that he is anonymous for he would 
be a man worth knowing. He, too, has browsed through 
old scientific texts and periodicals, though his search has 
led him into different channels. However, the impressions 
he seems to have gained are identical. After a charming 
little dissertation he concludes: 

^ " 'Dry as Dust' is the conventional term applied to scholarship of 
the learned journals; less complimentary is the term usually applied 
to those who read them for pleasure. There is, however, no statute 
against eccentricity, even in its most advanced stages and so today, 
when friends discourse to me on the sterility of scholarship, I reflect 
to myself how much less life and literature would be if I did not know 
that Chaucer ate violet and onion salad, and that Charlemagne's pet 
elephant walked all the way from Indo-China for the blossoms from the 
Emperor's best rose tree." 

Yet, there doubtless are those who on reading the fore- 
going will say: 

"How trivial scientists are!" 

Deppermann SJ Rev. Charles E.: The Weather and Clouds of 
Mamla. Introduction and text 37 pp., 100 pi., 5 tables. Manila: 
1937, Bureau of Printing. 



LITERATURE CITED 
S' ^; u k i n ' J t n: T M0dCrn Paintcr3 « L ondon: 1843 

(10 Junio 1896-31° 
Deppermann, Charles R n , P °'" L,t0 - Priv - del Observatorio. 
Bureau of PdntinJ ° f Frontology. Manila: 1936. 

Deppermann, Charles R> Th» tt . tf« 

Observ., 2 (1934) No 5 m PPCT Air at Ma ™ lfl - Publn. Manila 
Deppermann, Charles E • ThU^ ° f Printin *- A 

South Pacific Oceans. Man"'! Trans P°rt of Air in the Indian and 

Deppermann, Charles E • Th^ 1935 ' Burcau of Printing', 
graphic und Forschun*" r , QX ° nd Cloud Study at Manila. Photo- 
Ley. W. Clement: cioudlalj T c^' N °* 9 ' ° Ct ' PP ' 282 ' 296 ' ^ 
of Clouds. London- lRok l~7 StUdy 011 the Structure and Character 
Humphreys, W. J . p °. ' E l Ward Stanford. 

kins. 88 and Cloud ». Baltimore: 1926. Williams & WU- 

McAdie, Alexander- n™.,i „ 

Press. Cr ' CIoud »- Cambridge (Mass.): N. D. Harvard Uruv- 



(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 



August, 1937 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



371 




Four O'clock 

In the Editor's Office 

\3] f=4^ g Professor Frank G. Haughwout, protozoo- 
a 1 1 t £= logist, formerly of the College of Medicine and 
the Bureau of Science, and who now conducts 
a clinical laboratory in Manila, pursues, as all 
those who have read his articles on typhoons in 
this Magazine (he is working on a book on the 
subject) know, meteorology as a hobby. His 
article on Manila clouds is a review of a recent 
publication of the Philippine Weather Bureau and a piece of litera- 
ture in itself. 

Though young and though she began writing only a year or so ago, 
Miss Estrella D. Alfon, of Cebu, is already to be considered in the front 
rank of Filipino writers in English. She wrote me some months ago 
in reply to a little note of commendation I sent her: "Perhaps you 
know how your say adds a lot to a writer's reputation. Yet the 
encouragement of you and of others seems only to awaken me to my un- 
worthiness. So far I have been inclined to believe that what little 
success I've had has been due to good luck rather than talent. That 
is why I have not written anything lately." Later, together with her 
very fine story, "Servant Girl", published in this issue, she wrote me in 
part: "When I grow unsure of myself, I read your letters to me, what 
few of them there are, and forthwith confidence reasserts itself and I feel 
that I can write a story if I wanted to, yes, and even write it well. That 
*s the way I felt when I wrote this story. ..." 

Mrs. E. S. Hirst, who writes of the efforts on behalf of woman 
sum-age on the part of the women of the Culion Leper Colony, is 
the representative in the Philippines of the Pasadena Star-News, 
and was formerly Associate-Director of the Pasadena Community 
Playhouse. She was a guest of the Bureau of Health on the Spring 
trip of the S. S. Apo to the Colony. She came to the Philippines 
last September to stay for a month or two, but found the program 
of social and educational work so interesting here that she decided 
to remain. 

Redentor Ma. Tuazon, author of "A Barrio Episode" in this issue, 
stated in a letter accompanying the sketch that this was an actual 
happening witnessed by him many years ago in Pampanga. 

Ignacio T. Quijano, who writes on Cebu-Visayan kinship terms, is a 
graduate of the Cebu High School and is at present connected with the 
Bureau of Internal Revenue in that city. His article may be compared 
to past articles in the Magazine on kinship terms in other parts of the 
Philippines. 

D. Z. Rosell is a member of the staff of the Bureau of Science. 

Herminio M. Beltran, author of the Cinquain published in this issue, 
who has already contributed a number of poems to the Magazine, is 
now a sophomore in the College of Law, University of the Philippines. 
He says he took up law because his degree of Litt. B. "unfortunately 
never got me a job". 

Aurelio Alvero, who already has a book of poems to his credit, "Moon 
Shadows on the Waters", contributes a poem in the lighter mood to this 



c 

Luis Dato, poet of Camarines Sur, is preparing a third volume 
poetry of which "Last Word" in this issue, and his poem, "Forgotten 
Songs", in the July issue, are to be included. 

During the month I received a letter from Mrs. L. Wendover of Port 
Holland, Zamboanga, praising the covers of the Magazine. She wrote: 
"The cover pictures of the Philippine Magazine— I hope they will al- 
ways be so. I am crazy about them. When the Magazine arrives, 
the first thing I say is: 'Let's see the cover'. Some day when I am no 
longer in the Philippines, I'll have them framed and hang them on the 
wall. My home folks in Germany will understand my story better with 
these illustrations. I compliment the artist who represents real Fili- 
pino life so clearly. . ." 

Other notes of commendation for the covers came from Dr. Gilbert 
Perez who wrote "That cover artist of yours may not have studied 
formal psychology, but he is a psychologist," and from Mr. O. F. Wang of 
the Advertising Bureau, Inc., who contented himself with saying, 
"Your July cover in GOOD." 

I ! received a sociological note from Percy Warner Tinan anent Marc 
Greene's article in the June issue, " 'White' Russians on the China 
Coast". "I enjoy very much the issues of the Magazine that come to 
me through the kindness of Mr. Hayter. But may I rise to remark that 
your Mr. Greene misses the facts of the case quite badly in the last two 



Restores 
, ^Natural Whiteness 
to Dull Off -color Teeth 

Kolvnos quickly removes stain 
and discoloration and makes 
teeth beautiful and white. Try 
Kolynos and note the difference 
in the brightness and lustre of 
your teeth. 

Economize-buy *hc large tube 




ALKALIZE with 

"Alka-Seltzer" 

So you have days when you feel sick and all out of sorts — 
days when you feel sluggish, run-down, weary — days when 
petty things irritate and you are sour and sarcastic? 



Watch out! The chances are your 
trouble is EXCESS ACIDITY! It is 
the cause of most of your everyday 
ailments, common aches and pains. 
When there is an accumulation of 
EXCESS ACID in the stomach, look 
out for trouble. You may suffer with 
Sour Stomach, Acid Indigestion, Gas 
on the Stomach, Headaches, Colds. You 
become tired out, run-down, dull, and 
depressed. Most of these common ills 
are the result of excess acidity. When 
such a condition exists, here is the 
quickest and best way to get relief and 
correct the cause of your trouble. 

Alkalize with ALKA-SELTZER — 
the marvelous new Effervescent, Anti- 
Acid tablets which give you double relief. 



One or two tablets in a glass of water 
make a sparkling alkaline drink. It 
sweetens the stomach, relieves the pain, 
and corrects the excess acid condition 
that causes your discomfort. A drink of 
ALKA-SELTZER is delightful — it 
refreshes you. Contains no harmful in- 
gredients. It is NOT 
a laxative. It quickly,'' \ .A-'P? ^ 
picks you up and ^0^W£^4 
makes you feel your 
happy, healthy self W&sm 
again. Try it today 
and if you are not 
perfectly satisfied 
your money is re- 
funded. 




At All Druggists 

ForrnnU: Acetyl Salicylic Acid 6 gnim (9%). Sodlam BIrcarbonito 31 *nln» 0*4%). Cltrie Add 21 gnlnu (37%). 

Sole Agents for the Philippine Islands: Ed. A. Keller & Co., Ltd., 178 Juan tuna, Manila 



372 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1937 



paragraphs of his story on the White Russians? The only girls in the 
only worth while cabarets in Shanghai today are still Russians, at least 
ninety-five per cent. Particularly is the Del Monte, and next the 
Casonova, noted for many rather good looking ones, and far from 
'worn out'. The Chinese girls who know more than a few words of 
'business English' are few and far between. ..." I wish I were a 
traveler like Mr. Tinan. My editorial blue pencil would then, no 
doubt, be wielded with greater authority. 

With a great deal of satisfaction, not to say pride, I reproduce here 
an unsolicited letter I received during the month from Edward J. 







SAY. •♦SIS.'' YOUR TEETH LOOK 
DULL, COVERED WITH FILM! 
START USING PEPSODENT 
TOOTH PASTE TODAY AND 
WATCH THEM IMPROVE! 



WHY. MY TEETH DO LOOK 
CLEANER AND BRIGHTER AF- 
TER USING PEPSODENT THIS 
WEEK! I WONDER IF BOB WILL 
NOTICE .... 




DARLING— ALL AT ONCE I 
REALIZED THAT I WANTED TO 
SEE YOUR SWEET SMILE— AL- 
WAYS .... 




SUPER-SOFT HIGH-POLISH 



PEPSODENT! 

Pepsodent's exciting $200,000 tooth paste formula contains an utterly 
new type Super-Soft ingredient. It polishes teeth to a brilliant luster that 
can't be equaled the world over! 

1 HIGH-POLISHES TEETH TO TWICE THE BRILLIANCE— SAFELY 

So dazzling a luster does Pepsodent's new Tooth Paste 
restore to dull teeth, that you, too, will say it gives twice 
the polish! 

O MAKES TEETH LOOK CLEANER TWICE AS LONG-SAFELY 

Teeth look whiter, feel cleaner, and film-free hours longer! 
What's more, it retards formation of tartar. 

Q GIVES THIS SAFETY-BECAUSE TWICE AS SOFT 

Tests prove Super-Soft Pepsodent twice as soft as polish- 
ing agents generally used. Hence it high-polishes teeth 
without danger to tooth enamel. 

.... _ » *. if m fL rnrr This coupon entitle* you to a Free generous supply of the new 

H/gfl-P0!lSh YOUr Teein rntt Super-Soft Effeb-Poliata Pepsodent Tooth Paste. Just mail to 

DODGE & SEYMOUR (Manila),Inc 
P. O. Box 1345 
Manila, P. I. 

Name J 

A d dress. . ~ 

7-2-E 



O'Brien the world's leading short story anthologist, which proves that 
U C " "\ . . I? roV, Q r. beginning to receive genuine recog- 
our Filipino writers in English are ^mn| 
nition. The letter is dated June 1, Oxford, Mg- 

"The Editor 

PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 
Manila, Philippine Islands 

SKS&S is*- as have already appeared 

since the beginning of 1937. <<sincerely y0urs> 

"Edward J. O'Brien." 

A recent issue of the Literary Digest (May 29) characterizes 
O'Brien as he "acknowledged arbiter of the short story" For twenty- 
has edited his "annual volumes of the ^ A = sta 
stories," and since 1921 he has edited collections of Bnttth ^Stones as 
well. According to the Digest, "When the idea of a cojecbon of short 
storiesnrstcametoO'Brienasareporteron the .Boston Evening Trans- 
cript in 1915, he had no idea of the success he was destined to have. 
Undaunted by the knowledge that he had never written a short story^- 
to this day he has never written one-O'Brien plowed through the 
magazines. The choice was made and published quietly. The idea 
caught quickly; overnight, the collection was a best-seller. Today, 
O'Brien still does the enormous job single-handed. With painstaking 
thoroughness, he reads eighty-two quarterlies, monthlies, and weeklies 

to select the best American stories of the year British magazines 

read, including those of Ireland and the dominions, number fifty-six.. . . 

He now edits his books from England " That the Philippine 

Magazine has now been added to the comparatively few, selected 
magazines published in the English language from which Mr. O'Brien 
draws his selections is, I think, a real triumph for our Filipino writers. 
I have said for some years that our local authors are beginning to make 
a real contribution to the great English world-language— a new and 
unique element, and Mr. O'Brien's letter, I feel, goes far to bear me out. 



We scored off the Philippine Army today. It seems that the Army's 
telephone lines and ours get mixed once in a while, and Romero (the 
chief factotum in my office down-stairs) occasionally gets an army order. 
I myself, late one night, was addressed as the sergeant of the guard. 
Romero always politely explains to the man on the other end of the line 
that he has the wrong number and on a few such occasions has met with 
the scant return courtesy of having the line cut off with a bang that 
hurt his ear. This naturally peeved him and this morning he was ready 
with a different come-back. Somebody asked him in a very gruff voice : 
"Get me Sergeant so and so and be snappy about it!" In an equally 
gruff voice Romero demanded, "What company do you want?" 
"Isn't this the Supply Department?" came back the voice with a note of 
hesitance. "No", barked the usually mild Romero, "this is the Major- 
General's office!" Came the now very meek reply: "Oh, I beg your 
pardon. . . Sir. ..." Romero told me he got a great kick out of that"Sir". 



The July Current History reprinted parts of the edi torial 
on President Quezon's earlier independence proposals in the 
April issue of the Philippine Magazine. The excerpt was inclosed in a 
box and with a black headlines "The Road to Ruin". So the Maga- 
zine's influence grows. 



Neglected 
Colds are 
Dangerous! 
applv f®> 



MENTHOLATU M 




Formula 



: Menthol 0.3 K m. f Campho 



Km., Oil Pinu 8 Pupillo oT^"*' r^- 3 g M °" EuC8, yP*« ^ Boric A °* 
"Pino u.i fi m. Excipienta to mako 30 gm. 



1 



August, 1937 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



373 



News Summary 

(Continued from page 843^ 

empowering Pr ha . t . Co , n 8ress adopt a resolution 
forcw in^trike JS?* 1 *** 1 * '? U3< L fcderal ar ™d 
Protections wTshlng' ITL^^' <** '° 

onjn'e 3&ig2&J2& * ^ 

apfeSre 3 /-^ C ° tt0n Textile *n»«tute 
mancnt ^scSSd^L^ commi ^ce advocate per- 
between ^e^I^V^^ d . prcfei ; cn f ml tradc relations 
loss o??hl Arri • Cd StQt f s and the Philippines as a 
Piner a nd A ^ lerican market would injure the Philip- 
?c25dh2 r *2Sl gCn v! cman s agreement with Japan 
ncS ^i? g tc . xt . llc shipments to the Philippines has 
Textile ob >l ct ™' . A representative of ?he 

Srd%rnf^ te ?^ 83 ^ a i lon declares that "the 
United States certainly needs the Philippine market". 

sid^ fC1 ?^^ his ^ r0p0s . al . of a second term f« Pre- 
"vflftl J^f*?"' Commissi 9 ner Paredes states that 
wealth y fh^, tCr t t mgS ai ? P Iann ed for the Common- 
of 6 ^LS " ¥t a - m effcct in the short Period 

hi Ji^h Xt »». °bvious that the President should 
be allowed sufficient time to carry out his great 
program . 

fh/?!^ 13 ' £ 3 ~ yea £ 0l 2 Detroi t Negro, knocks out 
rSL t R* 0, £ W ? r ^ champion heavyweight boxer. 
James J. Braddock, in the eighth round of a match 
JSfrrLS C <?4 C ???- £ radd °ck weighed 197 pounds 
and Louis 197-1/4 Braddock had not fought since 

fi thC , t,l - le i r ° m Ma * Bacr ' Thc ^counter 
was the first mixed heavyweight title bout since the 
Jefferson- Johnson fight at Reno, 27 years ago, and 
J^ouis becomes the second Negro champion in thc 
ni story of the ring. 

June 28 .--Premier Paul van Zeeland of Belgium 
arrives in Washington to confer with officials in the 
international financial situation. 

_ E - P- Thomas, President of the National Foreign 
Irade Council, tells the joint committee that "there 
is a growing realization by thinking Filipinos that 
their long-sought independence may be nothing 
more than immediate freedom to starve and ulti- 
mate domination by some other nation. . . . Any 
present attempt to establish definitely the date 
after which the Islands would be thrown on their 
own resources, would be a most unnatural act on 
the part of the United States. If this is done, the 
Philippines will eventually revert to their status of 
40 years ago, while if preferential trade relations 
are established, the Islands have a great future". 

Joe Louis receives a $400,000 offer to defend his 
title against Max Schmelling. The promoter, Jack 
Kearns, has offered the latter $200,000. 



June 24.— The State Department mokes public 
a statement by President Quezon declaring that he 
will recommend to the Assembly that the oil tax 
refund money be used in part for the purchase of 
large landed estates for resale to the tenants in small 
parcels, in part for the building of roads in Minda- 
nao and other undeveloped regions, in part for the 
building of more schools and government institu- 
tions to take care of the insane, the indigent, etc., 
all this requiring a total of perhaps $20,000,000. 
The balance of $0,000,000 "would be kept intact 
to be spent ultimately for the readjustment of Philip- 
pe T?uM noiny as thc j° int committee of American 
and Philippine experts may recommend". President 
Quezon makes farewell calls on President Roosevelt 
Secretary of State Cordell Hull, Secretary of War 
u ir Woodnn K» an d others, and states, "I am very 
thankful and very happy with the splendid coopera- 
tion shown me by American officials on behalf of my 
country". Later he states in New York, "I am 
against reelection and I stand on my published state- 
ments against a second presidential term. Our 
Constitution must be respected. Any proposal to 
amend it now is out of order and should not be given 
any consideration at all". It is reported he has se- 
cured the services of Police Captain Thomas F. 
Dugan of New York City to help reorganize the 
Philippine police system. 

June 25.— The Republic Steel Corporation and 
the Youngstown Sheet & Tube Company reopen 
their plants under the protection of state police and 
national guard units, and C.I.O. leaders protest to 
president Roosevelt against their use, begging him 
to intervene to prevent a massacre. 

President Quezon cancels a farewell luncheon to 
Commissioner Paredes and other Filipino officials 
nSSh , T« ca11 ? h e has a Iuncneon engagement with 
Cardinal Dennis Dougherty in Philadelphia. 

June -ff-— Executives of the four large steel com- 
panies make their "final" appearance before the 
Mediation Board and file a formal statement rei- 
terating their refusal to sign a contract with the 
"irresponsible" C.I.O. 

JW £S.~The heads of the Bethlehem, Inland, 
Republic and Youngstown steel companies claim 
that the steel strike is broken and that more men are 
retur: mg to work every hour. C.I.O. leaders accuse 
Ohio Governor Davcy of "strike-breaking" activities 
because he is keeping national guard units at thc 
gates of the steel mills to protect the men returning 
to work. 

President Roosevelt sends the London agreement 
regulating the production and marketing of sugar to 
the Senate for ratification, stating it has his approval 
and that after Senate ratification the Philippine 
Assembly must also approve it before he can effec- 
tuate thc agreement. 

It is stated that President Roosevelt's three-day 
week-end "pow-wow" with members of Congress on 



lonely Jefferson Island, Chesapeake Bay, has solidi- 
fied support for him. 

Chinese Finance Minister H. H. Kung arrives in 
Washington for a series of conferences. 

Captain H. L. Heath, former Philippine old-timer, 
dies in McMinnville, Oregon, aged 70. 

June 29. — Norman Thomas, former Socialist 
candidate for thc presidency, urges President Roose- 
velt to invoke the neutrality law against Germany 
and Italy for waging a "left-handed war" against 
the Spanish government. 

Dynamite blasts wreck two vital water pipe lines 
feeding the giant Bethlehem Steel Corporation plant 
at Johnstown, Pennsylvania. 

Mrs. Amelia Earhart Putnam, American aviatrix 
on a flight around the world, lands at Lae, New Gui- 
nea, after a 1200-mile hop from Port Darwin, Aus- 
tralia. 

June 30. — Announced by the U. S. Maritime Com- 
mission that 16 subsidiary agreements covering a 
6-months experimental period have been effected 
with steamship companies as the old ocean mail 
contracts expired. The government will pay the 
owners of 151 ships thc difference in operating costs 
between foreign-line working expenses and those 
of American ships. The new subsidies total $4,645,- 
580 for the period, as against payments under the 
old system of $8,058,892. No agreement has been 
reached with thc Dollar Line, it is announced, which 
owes the government $15,000,000. 

President Quezon leaves New York for Paris. 

July 1. — The Inland Steel Corporation signs 
agreement to recognize the C.I.O. and some 12,000 
men prepare to return to work. The dead-lock 
remain unbroken in other sectors of the seven-state 
strike front. 

Vicente Villamin, Filipino economist, states in 
Washington that the present political status of the 
Philippines as a "self-governing unit under the 
American flag is most ideal, safest, and most advan- 
tageous for the Philippines, as it is a status that 
makes the country actually more independent than 
many technically sovereign nations". 

Franklin Roosevelt, Jr., son of the President Roo- 
sevelt, marries Ethel duPont, member of a wealthy 
family which is politically opposed to him. 

J uly 2. — A radio message is intercepted from Mrs. 
Putnam and her copilot, Capt. FrcdNoonans, stating 
that they have only a half hour's supply of fuel left 
and that they can not see land. They had flown 
for 19 hours out of Lae, New Guinea, for a hop to 
Howland Island. The plane is equipped with a 
rubber life boat and it is said the empty gasoline 
tanks would keep the plane afloat for some time. 

July 4. — The Mayo Brothers Foundation an- 
nounces that the germ of dreaded infantile paralysis 
has been isolated by Dr. Edward Carl Rosenow and 
that preliminary work on developing a serum or 
vaccine has begun. 



Representing The Following Products And Firms 



ATLAS POWDER CO., SAN FRANCISCO 
Dynamite and Supplies 

AMERICAN POTASH and CHEMICAL 
CORP., LOS ANGELES 
"TRONA" Brand Soda Ash 

THE DENVER FIRE CLAY CO., DENVER, 
COLO. 

DFC Assay Equipment and Supplies 

DENVER EQUIPMENT CO., DENVER, 
COLO. 

Mine and Mill Equipment 

THE EIMCO CORP., SALT LAKE 
New and Second Hand Machinery 

FRASER & CHALMERS ENGINEERING 

WORKS, ERITH, KENT. 
Ball Mills and Heavy Mining Machinery 

C. C. FILSON CO., SEATTLE 
Hats, Coats, Pants, Waterproof 

FAGERSTA, SWEDEN 
Drill Steel 



Mine and Mill 

Supplies and 

Equipment 




GREAT WESTERN ELECTRIC CHEMICAL 
CO., SAN FRANCISCO 
Flotation Reagents, Xanthates, etc. 

JOSHUA HENDY IRON WORKS, SAN 
FRANCISCO 
Mine Hoists 

MANCHA STORAGE BATTERY LOCO- 
MOTIVE CO., CHICAGO 
Battery Locomotives 

PORTABLE LAMP & EQUIPMENT CO 
PITTSBURGH 
"Cool Hats" and "Cool Caps" 

D. MORGAN REES & SONS LTD 
ENGLAND 
High Grade Wire Rope 

T. C. WILSON CO., SAN FRANCISCO 
Pine Oil 

JUSTRITE MFG. CO., CHICAGO 
Carbide Lamps 



Diesel Engines 

W. H. ALLEN SONS & CO.. LTD., BEDFORD, ENGLAND 



MARSMAN AND COMPANY, INC. 



August, 1937 



374 



The State Department begins a widespread reor- 
ganization, placing it virtually on a war footing by 
ordering transfers and gathering into the Depart- 
ment a group of career diplomats noted for their 
expert knowledge of conditions in the countries 
most likely to be involved in war. 

Gov. G. H. Earlc of Pennsylvania in a surprise 
appearance before a mass meeting of steel workers 
and coal miners striking against the Bethlehem 
Steel Corporation, appeals to them to "stamp those 
damned communists out of the ranks of your organ- 
ization". The New Deal, pro-labor governor, how- 
ever, also criticizes the steel companies which have 
refused to sign contracts with the unions. 

July 5. — United States warships race over the 
Pacific in the greatest sea-hunt ever mobilized in 
answer to faint radio signals believed to have been 
sent out by Mrs. Putram and her flying companion. 

July 6. — Included in the ships searching for the 
two lost fliers are the Coast Guard cutter Itasca, 
the battleship Colorado, the U.S.S. Swan, the air- 
craft carrier Lexinnton, four destroyers, and a num- 
ber of seap'anes from Honolulu. The Japanese 
Navy Department orders an airp'ane carrier and 
scores of other ships to the scene to aid in the search. 

The first survey flights between London and New 
York are completed by the Pan-American Airways 
Clipper III which lands at Foynes, Ire 1 and, after a 
12 -hour 34 -minute flight from Botwood, New found- 
land, and the Imperia Airways flying boat Caledonia 
which traveled the same route in the opposite direc- 
tion and ran into a fog, taking 14 hours 23 k minutes 
to make the hop. The journey covers approxi- 
mately 2,000 miles. 

July 7. — The Republic Steel Corporation mills 
in Cleveland reopen and observers speculate on a 
possible break in the friendly relations between 
President Roosevelt and John L. Lewis. Secretary 
Perkins has recently for the first time condemned 
g it-down strikes as illegal and unsuited to the Amer- 
ican worker. Secretary of Commerce Daniel C. 
Roper has stated that "the people will*not long pa- 
tiently forbear unnecessary strife and disturbance, 
no matter by whom provoked". President Roose- 
velt himself stated that the public regards the actions 
of extremists in the light of "a plague oniboth your 
houses". 

j u ly 5, — One striker is killed and 20 are hurt in a 
riot at the Aluminum Company of America plant, 
Alcoa, Tennessee. *~ 

July 9. — Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgen- 
thau and Finance Minister H. H. Kung issue a joint 
communique in Washington announcing that the 
United States has arranged to sell gold to China 
in return for silver in order to establish a dollar 
exchange and for currency stabilization purposes. 
The gold will remain in the United^tates. 

July 11. — Secretary of the Interior Harold S. 
Ickes states that reports that the 'administration 
favors the sugar measure now on the House calendar 
are not founded on fact and that it will oppose any 
bill discriminating against the territories, mentioning 
specifically Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin 
Islands. He criticizes the can sugar refining interests 
whose lobbying activities were partly responsible 
for the measure in its present form. 

It is announced that guns of 16-mch caliber will 
be mounted in the two battleships now under con- 
struction. . , 

George Gershwin, Jewish-American composer and 
author of the famous "Rhapsody in Blue", dies in 
Hollywood, following an operation for brain tumor. 
He was 38 years old. 

July 12 —Secretary Hull warns Japanese Ambas- 
sador H. Saito and Z. Ting, Counsellor of the Chinese 
Embassy, that a Sino- Japanese war would be a blow 
to the cause of world peace and progress . 

Dr J R. Hayden, formerVVice-Governor of the 
Philippines, states before the Institute of Pacific 
Affairs at Charlottesville, Virginia, that there is 
danger the Tydings-McDuffie Act and other related 
legislation may produceleconomic ruin followed by 
political and social chaos in the Philippines , and 
that "the United States in formulating its final policy 
toward the Islands should place its national honor 
above the demands of any special American group. 
He declares that the United States has an inescapa- 
ble moral responsibility for Philippine welfare; that 
it would be compelled to intervene, by military force 
if necessary, to reestablish peace, order, and govern- 
mental stability in the event these were destroyed 
before the establishment of a Philippine Republic; 
and suggests that the graduated scale of export 
taxes beginning in the 5th year of the Commonwealth 
might bring about such destruction Althc ugh the 
establishment of a Philippine Republic appears im- 
minent, changing international relationships may 
aker the direction of this move and delay the pro- 
gress of independence, he warns. 



President Roosevelt approves the selection ^by 
the American experts on the joint Philippiw-Ain^Br. 
ican committee as permanent chairman, of John Wan 
A. MacMurray, Ambassador to Turkey. He « 
considered highly qualified because of his knowledge 
of the Far East, having served many years »n China, 
Japan, and Siam. He was Assistant Secietary ot 
State in 1924-25. 

Other Countries 
June 10.— Dr. C. T. Wang, new Chinese Ambas- 
sador to the United States, states that : China would 
be very happy to participate with other nations in 
guaranteeing the neutrality of the l PP -?h?'hi B h 
June 11.— Announces at Moscow that eight . high 
army officers have confessed to plotting to overthrow 
the government, and that they will be brought to 
trial immediately. The principal detoiant, 
Marshal Michael Tukhachevsky, regarded as Kus 
sia's most brilliant soldier, who was recently removed 
from the command of the Volga military area. 

June /^.-Britain, France, Italy, and 
agree to resume the four-power control of the Spa«J«g 
coast with the understanding that each nation will 
protect itself from any Spanish attack but not resort 
to such reprisals as the shelling of Almcrm. Tne 
rebels send a formal note to Bilbao threatening that 
continued resistance would lead to the bombing ot 
the city by n force of 300 bombers "as in the case oi 
Guernica". The western Basque front is crumbling, 
but elsewhere the lines are holding. 

The London Imperial Conference approves a 
proposal to subsidize British shipping lines in tne 
Pacific. The Australian and New Zealand delegates 
were particularly anxious to overcome competition 
from United States vessels. . 

Eight ranking Russian army generals are convicted 
of treason and executed. It is said they planned 
to give the Soviet Union's western provinces to uer- 

m June IS.— The outskirts of Bilbao are aflame as 
the rebels come to within three miles of the city walls. 

Mrs. Amelia Earhart Putnam reaches Massawa, 
Italian Eritrea, having crossed the African continent 
in six days. Her next hop is to Karachi, India. 

June 14— General Jos6 Fidel Davila with 50,000 
troops, 150 tanks, and 200 warplanes breaks tne 
"El Galla" line around Bilbao after 73 days of mer- 
ciless siege. Five suburbs are in flames as the fas- 
cists reach the gates of the city. The government 
is seeking to rally the 340,000 citizens with the 7UU 
year old slogan "Invincible". 

The Dail Eireann by a vote of 62 to 48 adopts the 
new Irish Free State constitution which, however, 
is still to be ratified in a plebiscite. It declares 
Ireland a sovereign state named Aire (pronounced 
"air") including all of the island except the six 
northern protestant countries of Ulster which now 
function as a separate part of the British Empire. 
It guarantees freedom of religion while recognizing 
Roman Catholicism as the "principal religion , and 
abolishes all titles of nobility. 

President Kemal Ataturk of Turkey donates his 
private fortunes of several million pounds sterling 
to the government. 

The Rev. Anderson Jardine who conducted the 
wedding of the Duke and Duchess of Windsor re- 
signs. He states his resignation has nothing to do 
with recent events. 

Dr. H. H. Kung, Chinese Vice-Premier and Finance 
Minister, holds a conference with Adolf Hitler near 
Munich. 

June 15.— The Imperial Conference closes in 
London after reaching agreement on the desirability 
of strengthening the League of Nations and that this 
would be facilitated by separating the Covenant 
from the peace treaties. The conference also agreed 
on the importance of negotiations for arms limitation 
whenever there is reasonable prospect of success, 
while recognizing at the same time that the plans 
for British armament increases are no more than 
necessary for defense and for the fulfilment of obliga- 
tions. The Australian proposal for a Pacific pact 
is to be the subject of further consultation. 

President Jos6 Antonio de Aguirre of the semi- 
autonomous Basque state appeals personally to 
British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden, "The 
enemy threatens to destroy central Bilbao. We beg 
you as leader of a movement to humanize the Spanish 
civil war to use all diplomatic means to avoid accom- 
plishment of such an atrocity before we have time 
to evacuate civilians". Basque officers charge that 
five German and one Belgian ship brought the war 
material used to smash the last lines of Bilbao's de- 
fenses. Fascist planes are reported machine gun- 
ning long lines of refugees. Meanwhile British ships 
are continuing evacuation by sea of women, children, 
and old men. Davidi Lloyd George, British war- 



n trleeram to President de Aguirre 
tuncpf«nleT.s^^^ c j^e, for permitting the 
condemnmgdemoeratw ^ hbcrtiea of ^ 

dicUtorsh^p3^Eu^opc mmun . ty wit h 0Ut a gesture 

on in 



dictotorships of Europe without a g 

ancient and ^ n ° rc o d r0 C t ° st . . . when they look 



ieir fathers ^tt^^ Karochif India. 
Mrs. Earheart ianas ut reD orted to have 
JuZ 16.-Thc *^ c ^off& by the city's 
circled Bilbao and to ^ecut^^ sub urbs, 
340,000 population. children seeking to escape 

killing scores of M ° fl m ^U also heavily shelled, shells 
to Santander. Madrid »s a 3Q eQch mmute . 

exploding at .the : rate of "^France win9 tt vo te of 
Premier ^ con ,.° chamber of Deputies and is 

^SffhSrmo.ly approved in 
Reported that K us . s »a «4 3 p micr j. A. Lyons of 

g&StfS rS^JSSy « oon-a gg res- 
2SfSS ■ mm f-^^Franco demands the 
SUM I7-^ ca "°\JZ " of Bilbao. President de 
uncoaditioaal surrender ot eu o Cnbinet ^ve 
Aguirre aad some members ot . ™" Seventy 
WOWd-^OU^to'^jeSa Santnnder. 

&S the air by fascist 

rebel planes. +-Um ; n the Rrip of widespread 

Russia ^W^^A? Thf Soviet motor car 

teems 

l^S^^AS^ to infect cattle 

E^^^lteM^^ C0UnCil 
*ig8£2i airmen in single motored, hermeti- 
cally sealed plane, leave Moscow for a non-stop 
flight to Oakland, California via the north pole, 

enrrvina fuel to last 100 hours. 

line 18 -The Netherlands government announces 
that gold may be again exported J^thout reatactj^. 
The export prohibition was placed on gold corns and 
bullion in September, 1936, when the European gold 

bl0 GenerdTrfnco asks Britain for belligerent *h£ 
so he may establish a blockade against the Spanish 
government. Germany. Italy, and Portugal have 
already granted him the recognition. Britain lor- 
wards the communication to France with an in- 
quiry as to whether France is willing. 

June 19.— The Fascist army of General Franco 
enters Bilbao. The ancient capital had been be- 
sieged four times in 700 years, but had never fallen. 

The Graf Zeppelin, grounded when the Zappthn 
Hindenburo exploded and was destroyed with the 
loss of 35 lives, will be scrapped, it is announced, as 
it is unsuited for helium gas. Following the blast, 
the German Zeppelin interests indicated that future 
dirigibles will use helium. 

Sir James M. Barrie, noted novelist and playwright, 
author of "The Little Minister" and "Peter Pan , 
dies in London, aged 77. 

June SO. — The Russian aviators are forced to land 
at Vancouver, Washington, about 8:30 a. m. after 
their flight from Moscow across the north pole. 

Loyalist planes attack rebel planes on patrol duty 
over Bilbao and shoot down six of them. General 
Davila, as a penalty for the stubborn resistance at 
Bilbao, annuls the ancient laws of Basque sover- 
eignty to which Spanish kings pledged themselves 
and declares martial law, naming Miguel Ganuzo 
de Cielo, military governor. The first person to 
congratulate General Franco is Chancellor Adolf 
Hitler. Later Premier Benito Mussolini congratu- 
lates him, "on the noble undertaking which has given 
back to the Spanish fatherland one of its noblest 
provinces and mark3 a gigantic step in the national 
cause." 

The Senate rejects the bill granting Premier Blum 
plenary powers to deal with the financial crisis and 
approves its own more moderate measure. 

June 21. — The Russian flyers arrive in Oakland, 
California, on a chartered plane. They state ihat 
on their cross-polar flight they were compelled to fly 
high and that their chief hardship was lack of oxygen. 
Weather conditions sometimes forced them off their 
course. They expect to remain in the United States 
for a month studying American planes and flying 
facilities and state that their next goal will be a 



Portrait 
of a 

FRIENDA 




BEAR BRAND 

Natural Swiss NILK 



August, 1937 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



That home and garden which 
you always dreamed of — 

San Juan Heights 
is the best place for it. 



375 




SAN JUAN HEIGHTS CO, INC. 



680 Ave. Rizal 



P. O. Box 961 
MANILA 



Tel. 21501 



376 



fc w to New York non-stop flight via the pole. 
Kusaian arctic authorities urge the United States 
to establish a radio station and airbases on the Amer- 
ican side of the North Pole as this is necessary be- 
fore regular flights can be undertaken. The Rus- 
sians flew 6,000 miles in a 64-hour hop. President 
Koosevelt sends Russian Ambassador Alexander 
lroyanovsky, who flew from San Francisco to Van- 
couver yesterday a telegram stating, "I have learned 
with great pleasure of the successful conclusion of 
™ first non-stop Soviet Union-United States flight. 
The skill and daring of the three men who brilliantly 
carried out this historic endurance feat should om- 
mand the highest praise. Please convey to them 
my heartiest congratulations". The aviators chose 
Vancouver to land because it was the first field they 
sighted on the American side of the Canadian boun- 
dary in circling about trying to pierce the storm 
clouds. Fog and rain and poor visibility turned 
them back and they decided to land there rather 
than spoil an already epochal achievement. Va 
lerie Chakalov was at the controls continuously for 
63 hours. The others are George Baidukov, and 
Alex Beliakov, all "renowned air heroes" of the 
Soviet. A Russian official states they are not publi- 
city seekers but scientists doing a "matter-of-fact 
job in the world's greatest attempt to build planes 
for long-range flying." 

Spanish loyalists, by means of a huge mine ex- 

Slosion; blow up the Hospital sector in Madrid held 
y fascists for the past six months, killing and wound- 
ing, it is believed, all of the 750 men entrenched 
there. 

German Foreign Minister von Neurath's visit to 
London is postponed in view of the alleged Spanish 
torpedo attack on the German cruiser Leipzig last 
week at Valencia. The Spanish government has 
denied the German charges. Lord Plymouth, 
acting head of the non-intervention committee, 
hints that Britain might withdraw from the body 
unless other governments operate to prevent 
further breaches" in neutrality. 

Premier Blum resigns following refusal of the 
Sf^te to join the Chamber of Deputies in granting 
him dictatorial powers to meet the critical financial 
situation. President Albert Lebrun asks Camiile 
Chautemps, of the Radical Socialist party and a 
member of the Blum Cabinet, to form a new cabinet. 

Mrs. Putnam arrives at Bandoeng, Java, from 
Singapore. 

June 22. — Germany is reported to have presented 
an ultimatum to France and Britain demanding 
joint punishment of Spain for alleged attempted 
destruction of the Leipzig. 

She has what it 
takes 



A joint communique by Britain, France, Germany, 
and Italy states that the four powers have found it 
"unfortunately impossible" to agree on Germany s 
demand for a joint naval demonstration off Valencia 
as a protest against the alleged torpedo attack on 
the Leipzig by a Spanish submarine at Barcelona. 

June 23.— Germany and Italy quit the non-inter- 
vention committee and it is rumored they plan a bloc- 
kade of western Spain. The Spanish representative 
at Geneva states that all Spanish submarines were 
far removed from the scene of the alleged torpedoing 
of the Leipzig. Stated at Paris that any unauthor- 
ized patrol of Spain by Italy and Germany will be 
regarded as an act of war against Spain — France 
and Britain could not remain indifferent to the pre- 
sence of German and Italian vessels in Spanish waters 
now they have withdrawn from the international 
patrol. The Austrian government rejects the appeal 
of General Franco for recognition in spite of the fact 
that both Germany and Italy made strong represen- 
tations in his favor 

A special position of Vice-Chancellor without port- 
folio is created for former premier Blum. Georges 
Bonnet, Ambassador to Washington, is appointed 
Minister of Finance. 

The International Labor Conference at Geneva 
adopts a draft convention providing for a 40-hour 
week in the world textile industry. Conventions 
for a similar week in the chemical and printing trades 
failed to secure the requisite two-thirds majority. 

June 24. — Britain informs Germany it would 
"view with extreme gravity" any German action 
against the Spanish loyalists. 

Yasato Shubo, Japanese commercial attache 1 at 
Berlin, tells the Raw Materials Committee of the 
League that the "assertion that colonies are of little 
value is not convincing. . . . The question of colo- 
nies can never be satisfactorily settled wihout an 
equitable redistribution of territory . . . although 
such a solution would be difficult to carry out in 
actual practice". He emphasizes the importance 
of reaching a realization of colonial ambitions through 
"pacific means" and suggests (1) freedom of trade 
in raw materials and manufactured articles, (2) 
equality of treatment, natives a nd foreigners in the 
exploitation of raw materials in undeveloped regions 
by the sovereign nation, and (3) freedom of labor 
movement necessary for such exploitation. 

June 25. — The Basques appeal to the Valencia 
government for planes as Franco moves his forces 
against Santander. Announced at London that 
Britain and France have agree djto continue to patrol 
Spanish waters jointly, but I taly is reported to be 
strongly opposed to the two nations taking over the 



August, 193 7 

nn A German sectors, Mussolini hold- 
former Italian and uerm mugt b ^ nsultcd 

•ng that Italy German warships are re - 

the new * rra "f r S in the Mediterranean and 
ported concentrat ing & f hours away from 

Italy has scores ot snips French fleet is massed off 
the Spanish coast. 1 unccs it contemplates 

North Africa. Gc " na ^L i n S t the loyalists. Prime 
£ bemge^^t^|^5 n t n the House of 
Minister Nev He c ™£^ ment will not "say or do 
Commons that tne s • itnte Q situation cvery- 
anything that wouiu v situation is serious but 
body wishes to nv "' ' ern ment or country wants 
not hopeless gSwering Lloyd George's 

to see a European l war government toward 

criticism of the Po^ncy Lloyd G 

Spain, Secretary Eden ™ d w hUe undoubtedly 
hEs kept Russia n the b acKgr ial hnvc b £ 

Russian contr.butions^f ^ ^ « of ^ 
very large. . A "'=, ;m : tec i support and competition 
intervention 1 ' unhm i ' t h the attending risks". He 
in arn VdoubTs that the abolition of the policy 
states he doubts inu Spanish government, 

would necessarily benent g * 0 f Commons 

w^^^cfflSy^ncouraging" signs of i ra - 
that ^.ff Aj^SStfaM" situation in the Far 
& r T m . C . A more ^enniteVhange of views encourages, 
E . ast u ^rfiShS orogress". but he reiterates that 
f. he h ^^Jl^JS^^aD0iog would not be 
-any }»!fS?SSw8 of China". The Imperial 
ronfefence *fr^ruSuii«noualy that a Pacific pact 

f non awressfon is a desirable objective and prcli- 
oflnwy^EuX* will shortly be made among the 
m asted governments to decide whether definite 
SSStacSuld be utefully advanced. 
P The Tientsin-Peiping air-line is suspended, ,t is 
understood because of heavy operating losses, but 
k is announced the Tientsin-Tokyo line will be con- 
tinued. 

June 26— German technicians arc reported to 
have arrived in Bilbao to manage Basque mines, 
smelters, and foundries, and to reorganize the tele- 
phone and street car service. The fascists say they 
can supply two-thirds of the ore necessary for the 
British rearmament program but will demand Brit- 
ish recognition of Franco's government before ship- 
ping such ore. . . . 

The Chinese are reported to be receiving reports 
of formal conversations between Britain and Japan 
regarding their political and economic interests in the 
Far East with apprehension lest the conference result 
in an agreement inimical to China. The recent sus- 
pension of Sino-Japanese negotiations gives the 
matter added significance. Lord Lytton, Chairman 




She's pretty, lively, a snappy dresser. 
Yet men "side-step" her. Other girls 
ignore her. For the best reason in the 
world — carelessness about the odour 
of underarm perspiration. 

It's so easy to avoid this intolerable 
fault — with Mum. You can apply 
Mum in half a minute — before or after 
dressing. For it's harmless to cloth- 
ing. And it's soothing to skin, too. 
You can shave your underarms and 
use Mum at once. 

Don't risk letting this fault shut you 
out of popularity. Use Mum daily— 
and be safe-for all day. 




7M-1J 



TAKES THE ODOUR OUT OF PERSPIRATI 




Here is a "cow" you 
can keep in your kitchen! 




TT IS KLIM, the most reliable and convenient 
X milk supply the world has yet produced. 

rf. !? n °. thiHg bUt fine ' P urs niUk-poir- 

tZl ; a * ft?* Water 58 removed t° make * 
ke P .An dltdoeskeep ...anywhere... with- 
out refrigeration. 

flavor of b 1 the cream y> natural 

your £ A T- milk that has e ver passed 

dealer tJSSSi^ hm t0day ' If yOUf 
•ddress PPly you ' 8en d « his name and 

— THE^MILK THAT ALWAYS KEEPS FRESH 

Gets Bros. & Co . 



A. Soriano Bldg- 



August, 1937 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



377 



the ^JSJ a ?? G 3 miss,on to Manchuria in 1931, tcUs 
rvurrhn^ 3 ^ at any /«M.«tion that Britain should 
chu^ C J^u eS % fricnd * hi P by recognizing Man- 
should K? 1 the 1 J fl P an «e Protection of Manchuria 
should be clearly repudiated. "The only visible 
solution", he states, "is the establishment of Man 
cnukuo as a really independent state, guaranteed 
not by the presence of the Japanese army but bv the 
wishes of the inhabitants and by international treatv 
to which all Manchukuo's neighbors would hi 
pledged". c 
June 37.-- Chancellor Hitler declares in a public 
address: "Germany needs Spanish ores— that is 
«r hy ^ e want a nationalist government in Spain. 
We shall take the Leipzig > incident in our own hands! 
We have seen how collective action works We 
have seen how our problems are treated. We are 
Selves WC ^ Str ° ng enoUgh to P«tSS 

June 28.— The Italian press charges that the 
wheat-laden steamer Capapino was deliberately 
ESSui? F ^ d Y m ^ Dar danelles Straits by Spanish 
loyalists. Earlier reports indicated that the shin 

JS2J an rE? P n a , fog ,^ y A hc S P a nish tanker Va^a- 
llanes. The Popolo d Italia lvrn«:cr>i;«;»o 

predicts that Madrid Sffi *filljS*U& "abSHS 
that this will end the war "and definitely solve the 
fiES£ Mysterious unidentified warships bombard 
iSfSJl SS^?™ t Mediterranean coast line, and 
? H Pa ^-! h °^ cials cl f*™ the shells fired bear German 
?^f£ at }° Q ,- ma J ks .' . An unidentified submarine 
sank the loyalist freighter Cabo Palos near AHcan^e 
Saturday with a loss of five lives, it if reported! 
Fifty Russian and Italian tanks battle in the Jarama 
river valley, 15 miles southeast of Madrid and Tc 
rebels, who attempted to cut the Madrid-Valencia 
highway, are driven back. 

i~u Gei \l He J naann Goering tells the International 
Chamber of Commerce meeting in Berlin that Ger- 
many s intentions are peaceful but that it "will 
contmue to bring up its colonial problems until its 
urgent and legitimate desires with regard to colonics 
are fulfilled". 

The execution of 37 more "wreckers" at Khaba- 
vorsk is announced in Moscow. Karl Radek, fore- 
most Russian journalist, imprisoned some time ago 
as a Trotskyist, is released. 

June 29. — Finance Minister Bonnet, arriving in 
Pans from the United States, declares a suspension 
of all gold and foreign exchange payments until 
further notice. Security and commodity exchanges 
have also been closed. 

June 80. — Portugal moves to support Italy and 
Germany by temporarily suspending the facilities 
it has been granting to British observers under the 
non-intervention program on the grounds that the 
Italian and G rman withdrawal from the naval 
patrol upset the equilibrium and provided an ad- 
vantage for the Spanish loyalists. Italy and Germany 
threaten to send their merchant ships into Spanish 



rebel ports without submitting them to inspection 
by Franco-British control agents. Britain and 
France threaten to abandon the neutrality patrol 
and recognize both sides as belligerents unless Italy 
and Germany change their stand. 

The Chamber of Deputies and the Senate approve 
a measure granting Premier Chautemps dictatorial 
powers to deal with the financial crisis. A member 
of the Senate declares that similar powers were 
refused former premier. Blum because "he would 
have used them for coercion and nationalization 
rather than for national recovery". 

Reported that a Soviet gunboat in the Amur riv- 
er was fired upon by Japanese and Manchukuoan 
soldiers. According to a Japanese communique, 
heavy losses were inflicted and that two other 
Russian boats driven off. The boats were allegedly 
"invading" Kanchatzu island, below Blagoveschensk, 
and "opened fire on Japanese and Manchukuoan 
guards". The Japanese Ambassador M. Shige- 
mitsu at Moscow tells Foreign Commissar Maxim 
Litvinov that Japan will "take measures" unless 
Russian forces are withdrawn from the disputed 
island and some others. He later denies to the 
press that he served an ultimatum and that refusal 
might mean war. 

July 1. — An editorial in the Popolo d'ltalia, believ- 
ed to have been written by Mussolini himself, charges 
England and France with assisting the "Reds" in 
Spain, and declares that Germany and Italy have 
done everything possible to isolate the Spanish con- 
flagration. "Italian volunteers", however, "went 
to Spain to give General Franco proof of solidarity 
against anti fascism. . . . Not to have accepted the 
Red's challenge would have been suicide. With- 
drawal of volunteers is impossible because too com- 
plicated. . . A European conflagration i3 certain 
unless France and Britain change their course. . . 
The last word is decisive — and it now belongs to 
cannon". 

The Bank of France authorizes further advances 
of 15,000,000,000 francs to the bankrupt national 
Treasury. The stock exchange reopens. 

The Japanese army and navy general staffs are 
in continuous sessions both in Tokyo and Hsinking. 
The Cabinet in Tokyo decides the Russian-Japanese 
crisis can be settled peacefully only if Russia with- 
draws all its armed forces from the Amur region 
territory claimed by Manchukuo. The Russian 
version of the affair is that a Japanese and Man- 
chukuoan cutter fired on a Soviet frontier guard 
boat in the vicinity of Sennufu island and following 
return fire Japanese artillery from the Manchukuoan 
shore opened up on the boat, killing two of the crew 
and wounding three. 

The Chinese government promulgates the 1936-37 
budget effective for the fiscal year beginning today 
and balanced at a record total of Sl.000,649,000 
Mex. (approximately 5300,000,000). Foreign Min- 
ister Wang Chung-hui states that China has achieved 



real national unity and is capable of setting its own 
house in order provided it is given a chance to CVOlVC 
without interruption and unembarrassed. This 
chance we want and arc determined to have . 

Eamon de Valera is reelected President of the 
Executive Council of Ireland and the acceptance ot 
the new constitution introduced by him is therefore 
virtually assured. . 

July 2— Final efforts to patch up the international 
non-intervention agreement collapse in London, 
Italy and Germany rejecting the proposal by which 
Britain and France would take over complete control 
of the neutrality naval patrol around Spain, the ships 
to carry neutral observers as a guarantee that their 
work would be carried out impartially. They also 
opposed recognition of both Spanish factions a3 
belligerent with equal rights. Britain and France 
opposed to Italo-German proposal to retain the 
non-intervention body in London and the interna- 
tional control of the Franco-Spanish land frontiers. 
Franco throws his army against Santander in an 
effort to trap the nearly 100,000 loyalist troops there, 
Italian volunteers leading the assault. Simulta- 
neously he accuses Britain and France of intervention 
on behalf of the loyalists and threatens "economic 
reprisals" unless given "belligerent rights". It is 
believed he refers to the rich Basque mines which 
he now controls, Britain operates, and Germany 
wants. Although he previously stated that British 
iron shipments from Bilbao might be resumed, he 
dec' ares foreigners are forbidden to return to insur- 
gent-held territory. The Spanish loyalist fleet, 
bottled up for months in the government naval bases 
at Cartagena and Almcria, sail into the Mediter- 
ranean following a Madrid announcement that 
the sea-parade by Italian and German warships 
off Mahon, Minorca port, wa3 an act of war. 

Commissar Litvinov and Ambassador Shigcmitsu 
announce at Moscow after a lengthy conference that 
the Amur incident has been settled and that a tri- 
partite commission will be created to settle the dis- 
putes over the Bolshoi and Sennufu island groups 
in the tortuous channel of the Amur river. 

China is reported to be inaugurating a nation- 
wide conscription program with the aim of eventually 
providing 40,000,000 young men with military training. 

j u ly — a United Press dispatch from Rome 
states "it is reported tonight" that Mussolini has 
abandoned all hopes of an understanding with 
Britain and is actively preparing for a possible war 
in the Mediterranean within one year. . . . The 
younger fascist group has been urging II Duce to 
pick a quarrel now before Britain is fully prepared 
The British begin reenforcing the Mediterranean 
fleet and Secretary Eden in a public address warns 
Italy as well as British critics that Britain will not 
permit foreign use of the Spanish war as a means of 
injuring British interests. "We are still prepared 
to cooperate in any fair and just measures to prevent 
the Spanish war becoming a European war. . . but 




SLIGHT GOLDS, 

Like Tiny Acorns, 

GROW FAST 

Nobody ever died of a 
cold. But a big percent- 
age of deaths every- 
where can be traced to 
common colds! 

CWI-BEC-LAX 

the laxative cold remedy prepared by 

BOTICA BOIE 

Stops Colds Sooner Than You Ever 
Expected Before 

HAVE A READY SUPPLY OF IT 
AND KEEP SAFE FROM COLDS 

A TREATMENT ENVELOPE OF 6 
TABLETS COSTS ONLY P.10 

Made in the Philippines by 

RCTICA BOIE 

lfl . Quiz, brom.. Pbonolpht. aa 0.005: Caps. Caff. Quia, aa 0.01 
Formula. Q"' n - Scnna 0-0 5 



MILITARY 



Infantry — Cavalry 
Artillery — Engineers 
Medical Corps 



Tactics and Strategy 
General References 
Administration 



PHILIPPINE EDUCATION CO., INC 



IOf-103 Escolta 
Manila 



378 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1937 



our efforts must not be interpreted as a policy o f 
peace at any price* "Britain is determined to 
maintain the territorial integrity of Spain", he 
declares. Reported that Portugal's representative 
on the London non-intervention committee has 
received instructions not to oppose any action which 
Britain and France decide to take. Italians are 
reported to be astonished at the sudden hardening 
of the French and British policy. Diplomats 
believe that Holland, Belgium, the Baltic and Scan- 
dmavian nations, the Little Entente and Ireland 
will support Britain and France. The Russian 
representative on the committee states: "The 
Spanish conflict is practically an international war 
now '. The Spanish government orders an im- 
mediate offensive on all fronts. 

. July 5. — The Diario de Buroos states that Franco 
is not opposed to the British proposal for the with- 
drawal of all foreign volunteers from Spain, which 
statement is taken as an attempt to placate Britain. 
Employees of the British-owned Orconera Iron Ore 
Company who left Bilbao for France when the 
rebels took the city, have been informed by Franco 
that they may return with safety. 

Premier Paul van Zeeland of Belgium, returning 
from Washington, interviews officials in London and 
expresses himself as pleased with the "open-minded 
and receptive attitude" of American officials. It is 
understood he brings specific proposals on economic 
rehabilitation, exchange stablization, tariffs, and 
rearmament. 

President Manuel L. Quezon of the Philippine 
Commonwealth arrives in Paris from New York. 
July 6. — Franco is reported to have appealed to 



Italy and Germany to throw new huge forces into 
the fight, according to a loyalist news agency— 125,- 
000 men, 500 warplanes, 50 artillery batteries, and 
a supply of tanks in order to "mop up the entire 
northern front in three months" and permitting 
simultaneous assaults on Madrid. It is said that 
his 80-day offensive against Bilbao cost him 20,000 
men and 20 per cent of his equipment. Twenty-five 
thousand workers are reported to be preparing some 
60 airfields throughout Italy, to be completed as 
soon as possible. British publicists declare that 
Germany will refuse to join Italy in a war against 
British rearmament is progressing swiftly and that 
its vast resources are more than sufficient to check 
Mussolini. Hitler is permitting II Duce to "vent 
his spleen" while secretly preparing for an adventure 
of his own, possibly the naziheation of Austria, they 
say. 

The German press attacks the 4th of July speech 
of American Ambassador Robert W. Bingham in 
London in which he declared that "despots have forc- 
ed America and Britain to undertake rearmament. . . 
We must win the rearmament race. . . 

President Quezon arrives in Berlin and lunches 
with General Goering and later inspects a number 
of labor camps. Earlier he called on American 
Ambassador W. R. Dodd and was luncheon guest 
of F. L. Mayer, Embassy Counsellor. He tells the 
press that he has not visited Germany since 1910 and 
is greatly interested in all the developments. "That 
is all I have to say for my visit is purely private". 

Twenty-two more officials of the Soviet Eastern 
Railway are reported to have been executed at Vla- 
divostok, convicted of terrorism and espionage on 



The total number of officials of 

M^'^^^aS^it-te. that „ 
jJ3 S--T he f c °i the danger of war through 
program designed to coa nsemen t3 has been 

Political, and^econom.c^app^ D Rojwevelt^M a 



S£fS? and'" -ceo***. ^SSS*S Itoo^lt 7, " 
suggested by P" s ' d n e .^ n fw"th Premier Von Zeeland. 
result of his conversation^ ^international conference 
Hasty organization o. diplomatic exchanges 

would be avoided, out » ncy credits, armaments, 
^abchMoaf^ e ^ e ^^«^, first ai 
~U, andbur at Washington. 
Brussels, an ( claims v dories on three 

^iP-^d^TndiuciTand south of the 

Tagus river. Quezon are luncheon guests 

President and M^y* e Mflchenscn> Enrlicr 

I^^U^^d Ec0n ° miC MimStCr HjQlm ° 
Schacht. • ion on Palestine in its report 

ffi\5P 3 toiSn^SSda the partitioning of 
published .today rcc0 ™ arntc states as the only 
Palestine '"to three £P ar £ ntinued outbreaks of 
feasible solution of tne c ^ ^ 

vl ^-S!^XtX>m&Bdl the termination, of 
past 20 years, ic rc ts thc negotiation 

the Brigbjg^^JUg sum z . onist Q 
of treaties with the Arabs } nn Afob secti 

ThwoSd b? united with Trans-Jordan, (2) a 
Jewish section ,and (3) an enclave under Britbh man- 
date extending from a p tut north of Jerusalem to a 
• V?n,ifh of Bethlehem with a corridor to thc sea 
gSS *f«5m Jemsalem to Jaffa. The Arab state 
would [ also be given an outlet to the sea at Jaffa. 




PHILIPPINE 

Orf 

PAIMTIMeS 

By Isidro G. Anchtta 

Bountiful! Realistic! Nepal 

Unexcelled for Art Appreciation and Oral Theme Activity 

Teach love of our own country by seeing it 
through an artist's eyes 

A few of the titles — 

Pagsanjan Falls Boy on a Carabao 

Plowing thc Riccfields Sunset at Marbles 

Sylran Stream Biraboo Foot Bridge 

Fisherman and Hii Boat HarTeit Season 

After thc Harvest Signal No. 3 

Homeward Boand p lf j an Gatc 

C^ 1 WatcrJ Enchanted Pool 

Montalban Gorge Goadalnpc Ruim 

Santiago Gatc At thc Foot of Mouo| M 

Laguna dc Bajr p, iniing R|a 

Planting Season MoTning MJjl 

Sunset in thc Tropics A Country Road 
Fire Tree in thc Old Churchyard 

On the finest of canvas-donc in Weber', unexcelled Artist,' Oil P aino 
framed wuh quality American hardwood molding- in tim that 
schoolroom — ni an 7 

Site A— Small Classroom Site (15" x 10") 

Sire B— Medium Classroom Site (18" x 14") PlO.OO 

Site C— Large Classroom Site (28" x 22") 16,50 

Site D— Auditorium Site (38" x 28") 5000 

63.00 

(lO% Amount to UajLu and OooL) 

For beauty, depth, color, lift, . , 

Philippine Oil P„i„« nq8 for 

room „nd libror,,. Let SjT ^ 

exhibit of repre^nfoHve p„in« 

»o«r»extTeaehers»In S KS hn?8f ° r 

PHILIPPINE EDUCATION C Q. 



Auguei, 1937 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



379 



^^gliTpp^ed 1o a ^' howe Y e . r . known to be 
Landf oppose<1 to any partitioning lof the Holy 

Ja{^e a m^SS Jfe? Chin , es ? tro °P s and 
Polo Bridee i?m?i 6 ng near the fam °us Marco 

beginSng^etownoTwn° f F^ft* the latter 
from 5 until 9 o?cWfc ^iS Wan 8P^ghsien continuing 

of People The ll;iT nm l and killing score * 
continually in this P d^f^ ? VC been man ^vcring 
trampling y down i C ro£f » Ef ^SF th u 3n a year « 
dragging field I* im« ? ' and , ndlng horses a «d 
Japan^ claim acro l s unfenced fields. The 

thaTtnetr SStSSnSK ° f their men waa lo3t and 
to 8ea^fw U &^SnTiw°?h- 0 ™ te ' the u walled town 
the Chinese ClSKL at thls » tap ted the brush with 
dressed^ Lilian t « at arn ^ d J a P a «"e 

have AmSMth???™^ 6 ^ The J a P a *« c 
cuatic^ of the trr,V,Ki mmedl ? te and complete eva- 
we wm % p^ e tnem b out ZOne by ChineSC f — 'or 
oftSi3£fa1£ Far V K^ ^arns Japan that all Soviet 
to resist with all thi aVC bcen gi Y cn " firm orders 
any ™^£^S^ & t&MBff 
ag h re/n^nSr e ^ 

t^e^™o^^?n^TK lC 5 both side3 were to withdraw 
««SvP^ that - Brlta »n will fortify Penane at the 
°JutJ n ^ mity ° f * he Malacca Straits g * ' 
border in^f iS nce threat «™ to leave its Spanish 
enrwteto W^'T 8 °£* n to men ^ and munitions 
to^U^Trr 1683 th , e ne ^trality plan is revived 
wb^*^^^^ 1 ^^ 1 ^ fr ° ntier and 3SP a ^'3 
kin^'jJfJi?- !? igh Committee appeals to four Arab 
Sst n^,T ° f G r°^ ^ d . r eli8ion" to intervene 
sfnctf<Sn JhrV t! ° n ° f Pa il stine now waiting the 
VOOO 000 A«fc LeagU u e ' The British a PP« al to the 
to SSri^SS and J£ c J00.000 Jews in the region 
to keep the peace. The Jews are protesting against 



the loss of their Dead Sea potash works and their 
electric plants along the Jordan under the plan. Dr. 
Stephen Wise of New York, President of the American 
Zionist movement, states that Britain is guilty of the 
"gravest betrayal of a sacred trust. . . . The de- 
cision strikes at the heart of Jewish hopes and is an 
affront to the League of Nations. This partition 
is a timorous escape — not imperial statesmanship; a 
Palestine government house improvisation \ 

The Japanese Foreign office asserts that Japanese 
military maneuvers in China arc entirely legal under 
the Boxer protocol and subsequent exchanges of 
notes between the Japanese and Chinese govern- 
ments. The Chinese are ignoring Japanese d mands 
that they withdraw from the Fengtai area south of 
Peiping. Yesterday's fighting in which the Japanese 
encountered unexpected opposition, subsided at 
midnight. 

July 10. — Franco is reported to have told Mussolini 
and Hitler that if France throws open the boundary, 
he will need at least 150,000 additional troops and 
100 planes to carry out his plans. 

The Emir Abdullah of Trans-Jordan, ruler of some 
300,000 Arabs, second son of King Husein of the 
Hejaz and a brother of ling Feisal of Iraq, declares 
that the recommendations of the Royal Commission 
provide^the best solution'considcring the circumstan- 
ces. 

July 11. — Renewed fighting breaks out in the 
vicinity of Peiping Saturday night and Sunday 
morning, with both sides rushing up reenforcements. 

Premier Mussolini issue a deer c limiting news- 
pipers to six pages, effective July 17, because of the 
shortage of paper. 

Catholic pulpits throughout Germany note with 
"great satisfaction" that Protestant churches in 
the country remain faithful and staunch in the face 
of "arrests and other tribulations". Catholic 
priests declare that "if all remain faithful to the 
Christian faith we will all win. As Christians we 



must stand together in the struggle against Christ . 

j u ly 12 1 — The five-day battle fought by the loyalists 
to break the rebel ring around Madrid is reported 
to have lost 13,000 dead and 30,000 wounded, 
casualties being about equilly divided although the 
drive is making some progress. France is said to 
have refused a Bri;ish request to delay the execution 
of its threat to open the Franco-Spanish frontier on 
Tuesday, although it declares this does not neces- 
sarily mean the immediate dumping of arms and 
munitions into Spain. 

Three Soviet flyers leave Moscow for a secona 
attempt to r;ach Los Angclc3 by way of the North 
Pole. They are using a single-motored monoplinc 
a sister-ship to the plane used in the first flight. 
They are carrying 2,000 gallons of gasoline. 

July 12. — The Japanese charge d'affaires in a 
communication to the Chinese Foreign Office states 
that "if Nanking extends military or diplomatic 
aide to local authorities in North China, Japan will 
have to make a final decision". Chinese officials 
believe Japan will force the issue of a major war and 
reiterate that "will recognize no local Sino-Japanesc 
agreement settling the Wanpinghsien incident be- 
cause the issue is national. China is anxious for a 
peaceful settlement but can not accept neutralization 
of the area or further Japanese consolidation in North 
China. China would welcome the good offices of 
mediation by a third pow^r: Japan is reported to 
have rushed a number of warships based on Formosa 
to various South China porta. 

July 13. — A battle lasting several hours is reported 
half a mile south of Peiping. Fighting at Wang- 
pinghsien resulted in the withdrawal of a Japanese 
force faced by a superior number of Chinese troops, 
the Chinese corps of "Big Swords" going into action 
against the bayonet-armed Japanese. The Chinese 
Foreign Office requests consuls in Peiping to evacuate 
their countrymen as the government can not assure 
their protection under present circumstances. 




380 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1937 




Astronomical Data for 
August, 1937 

By the Weather Bureau 

Sunrise and Sunset 
(Upper Limb) 

Rises Sets 
Aug. 1. 5:39 a.m. 6:26 p.m. 
Aug. 6. 5:40 a.m. 6:23 p.m. 
Aug. 12. 5:41 a.m. 6:21 p.m. 
Aug. 18. 5 42 a.m. 6:17 p.m. 
Aug. 24. 5:43 a.m. 6:14 p.m. 
Aug. 31. 5:44 a.m. 6:09 p.m. 

Moon rise and Moonset 
(Upper Limb) 
A - Rises Sets 

£ u 8«st 1 12:07 a.m. 1 ; 21 p.m. 

August 2 1:03 a.m. 2:22 pm 

August 3 2:03 a.m. 3:23 p.m.* 

Au * us i J 3:05 a.m. 4:21 p.m 

Au « U3t 1 4:07 a.m. 5:14]p.m 

Au * u *t 6 5:07 a.m. 6:04 p.m 

Au 8U9t 7 6.06 a.m. 6.50 p.m 

Au *ust 8 7:01 a.m. 7:33 p.m 

Au *ust 9 7:54 a.m. 8:14 p m 

Au 8uat 10 8:45 a.m. 8:53 p m 

Au K u *t " 9:36 a.m. 9:34 S m 

Au K U8t J2 io;25 a.m. 10:15 p m 

Au * U8t " lias a.m. 10:57 pS 



August 14 12:05 p.m. 11:42 p.m. 

August 15 12:55 p.m. 

August 16 1:44 p.m. 12:29 a.m. 

August 17 2:33 p.m. 1:18 a.m. 

August 18 3:21 p.m. 2:08 a.m. 

August 19 4:07 p.m. 3:00 a.m. 

August 20 4:51 p.m. 3:52 a.m. 

August 21 5:34 p.m. 4:44 a.m. 

August 22 6:16 p.m. 5:37 a.m. 

August 23 6:59 p.m. 6:31 a.m. 

August 24 7:41 p.m. 7:24 a.m. 

August 25 8:26 p.m. 8:19 a.m. 

August 26 9:14 p.m. 9:16 a.m. 

August 27 10:04 p.m. 10:14 a.m. 

August 28 10:59 p.m. 11:14 a.m. 

August 29 H:56 p.m. 12:16 p.m. 

August 30 1:15 p . m . 

August 31 12:56 a.m. 2:13 p.m. 

_ _ ■■ Phases ff the Moon 

New Moon on the 6th at 8:37 p.m. 

First Quarter on the 14th at 10:28 a.m. 

Full Moon on the 22nd at 8:47 a.m. 

Last Quarter on the 29th at 7:55 a.m. 

Perigee on the 3rd at 12:00 noon 

Apogee on the 15th at 11:00 a.m 

Perigee on the 29th at 11:00 a.m* 

**T, n ~„„J hc Plon cts for the 15th 
MERCURY rises at 7:37 a. m. and sets at 7:45 
p. m. Just after sunset, the planet may be found 
,n _ t J j2lSv western sky in the constellation of Leo. 

VENUS rises at 2:50 a. m. and sets at 3:38 p. m. 
Just before sunrise, the planet may be found about 



40° above the eastern horizon in the constellation of 

^tlS'^^oTi? the constellation of 
SC tt?PITER rises at 4:10 p. m. and sets at 3:18 a. m 

transits the meridian at 9: 8 p. m. 

SATURN rises at 8:46 p. m. on *c 14th sets 
at 8:44 a. m. During the entire night the planet 
may be found in the constellation of Pisces. The 
planet transits the meridian at 2:49 a. m. 
Principal Bright Stars for 9:00 p. 

North of the Zenith South of m the £nitf 

Deneb in Cygnus Formalhaut in Pisces Aus- 

Vega in Lyra trails 
Arcturu. in Bootis Aha^.n AQ-gta^ 

Spica in Virgo 



Prof. FRANK G. HAUGHW0UT 

announces the opening 
of his laboratory of 

Clinical Microscopy 



No. 20 Alhambro 
(Homo Studio Building) Ermita 
Tel. No. 2-31-98 



i 



HEW BOOKS 



(FICTION) 

The Wound and the Scar— Rotor P2.00 

As Long As I Live — Loring 4.40 

The Bridal Canopy — Agnon 6.60 

Buckskin Breeches — Stong 5.50 

Busman's Honeymoon — Sayers 5 50 

The Case of the Dangerous Dowager— Gardner 4.40 

The Dragon's Jaws — Packard 4. 40 

Fragile Armour— Pa trick 4 40 

Gallows Hill — Winwar 5 50 

Gentlemen from England— Lovelace 5 50 

Jordanstown — Johnson 4 40 

Laughter in the Sun — Frankau 4 40 

Living China: Modern Chinese Short Stories— Snow 5 50 

Murder on the Mountain — Govan 4 4 0 

Nights of an Old Child— Liepmann . . . . . ] 5 50 

The Pretender — Feuchtwanger 5 5Q 

Son of Han — La Piere 5 5Q 

The Sound of Running Feet— Lawrence 5 50 

The Stone Field— Ostenso 5 5Q 

A Woman of Washington — Vanderbilt, Jr 

4 . 4W 

(NON-FICTION) 
Asia Answers — Townsend 

Asia's Good Neighbor; American Relationships with the Far East— Karig 5 50 

Beloved Friend: The Story of Tchaikowski and Nedefda Von Meek— So wen & Mekc fi fin 

Be Glad You're Neurotic— Bisch 

Careers After Forty— Pitkin 4 40 

" 3 or 

Five Minute Biographies — Carnegie 

In 1936— Eurich <S» Wilson ' . ............................ 4 40 

The Miracle of England: An Account of Her Rise to Pre-Eminence and Present Position— Ma urois . !'! 

The Renaissance of Physics — Darrow 

The Revolution Betrayed — Trotsky 6 60 

Road My Body Goes — Gessler 5 50 

Ships of the World's Battlefleets— Talbot-Booth 7 ' 70 

Some Great Political Idealists of the Christian Era — Hearnshaw 3,30 

Spain in Revolt— Gannes & Repard 6 fi 0 

Streamline Your Mind — Mursell 4.4° 

The Tropical Garden: Its Design, Horticulture and Plant Materials — Kuck &> Tongg 4 40 

Viewed Without Alarm: Europe Today— Millis 6 60 

We Or They: Two Worlds in Conflict — Armstrong 2 75 

The World of Science — Taylor 3 30 

Zero Hour: Policies of the Powers— Freund 8 25 

5.90 

Philippine Education Company. Inc. 

101-103 Escolta, Manila 
Philippine Islands 



August, 1937 



Philippine magazine 



WHEN A CHILI) won't eat at mealtime, it may be'that 
the child is seeking attention. But more likely, It is 
because the child's appetite is at fault. There is a 
way to stimulate appetite, when it is below normal. 
Thousands of mothers have discovered this method. 
Read about it! 




If Your 
Child wont Eat 
at Mealtime... 

Try this scientific method to stimulate his 
Appetite and build up his Weight to normal! 



MOTHER, when a child won't eat at 
mealtime, look first to his appetite. Here 
is a way that often gives remarkable 
results . . . in stimulating below-par appetite. 

It is to give the child Ovaltine. When 
Ovaltine is added to the child's diet, it 
does three things which often have a most 
unusual effect: — 

(1) It adds to the diet an additional 
amount of Vitamin B. This is the 
vitamin without which normal appetite 
is impossible. 

(2) It helps digest starches in the 
stomach. A child's diet is made up to 
a large degree of starchy foods. W hen 
Ovaltine is taken with a starchy meal, 
that meal leaves the stomach qu.cker. 
Hunger has a chance to return. 

(3) Ovaltine aids the digestion of 
milk by preventing it from forming large, 
loqvV '.nrds. In addition, it makes 



rurds. In 



milk better-tasting. 

And, in addition, Ovaltine is very nou- 
rishing and sustaining in itself. It supplies 
certain "protective" factors to the diet. 

Thus, if your child won't eat or build 
up properly, try giving him Ovaltine. 
Considering the remarkable record of its 
results — it is certainly worth a trial. 

Give your child Ovaltine regularly, at 
his breakfast always, and often at other 
meals. And between meals. See if he 
won't add weight. 

Just mix 2 or 3 teaspoonfuls in a cup of 
milk, and serve this delicious drink as a 
treat. 

Do this for a month at least. Then 
note the results. See if your child isn't 
eating better. See if he hasn't more 
energy, more desire for play. See if he 
doesn't seem healthier. 



MAIL FOR TRIAL SUPPLY 



^ fmm actual X-rays of stomach Get a tin of Ovaltine at,y our dealer' s today ! 

Drawings 

below made rrom ^ ^ dcpcnds lar gely on 

— — — — i r~ . *- A«M«k*tft«<i <-»f tUf» mfomach. 



I 



Ed. A. Keller & Co., Ltd., Dept. I\ I. 8-1 
178 Juan Luna, Wise Bldg. 
P. O. Box 313, Manila— Tel. 4-89-81 
I enclose P. 10 to cover cost of packing and mail- 
ing. Send me your 2-day test package of 
Ovaltine. 




ger depends largely 
the prompt emptying of the stomach. 
X-ray at left shows stomach when Oval- 
tine was drunk with the meal. Note the 
greater emptiness of stomach at right, in 
same time. This is because Ovaltine 
helped digest the starch. 

So serve Ovaltine Often. And sprinkle 
it. dry. on your breakfast cereal, io\help 
digest it. It's delicious! 



Name.... 
Address. 



j City. 



OV/3 LTI N 

The Swiss Food-Drink 
Now Made in the U.S.A. 



.J 




MCCULL^UGH PRINTING CO. 
MAN 



