
.\nNii,A :: BijRFAij or printinr 



FREEDOM is our heritage. It has been the dream perennial of 
centuries before our time. It was the vision of everlasting hope 
from Mactan to Bataan. It is the consummate reality of our day 
and age. 

FREEDOM is our exquisite passion flower. It arises in auroral 
beauty from a soil enriched by the blood and flesh of immortal fore- 
bears — from the desolate wreckage of a global war. 

FREEDOM is our eternal treasure. And we shall keep it in- 
violate unto the consummation of the world. 




C^HE Philippine Republic was born out of the ruins of a war- 
devastated land. But there was more destruction in the Philippines 
than met the eye. The moral fiber of the Filipino was visibly frayed not 
only by his enervating experience in the war but also by the repression and 
oppression occasioned by the Japanese occupation of the Philippines. 

The finances of the government were sadly and dismally depleted. The 
economy was wrecked. Industry and commerce were in shambles. 

Out of the fallen rubble arose the Philippine Republic. At the head of 
the State was a new man, a veteran of battle and of the political arena, a 
man who had endured and suffered the privations and miseries of the Japanese 
occupation and had remained steadfast and true to the ideals of American 
and Philippine democracy. 

Handicapped as he has been by adverse factors and by a dearth 
of experienced administrative and political assistance, the first President of 
the Republic, nevertheless, has been able to lift the country out of chaos to 
peace; to secure American aid for the rebuilding of the country; to establish 
the means to assist the Filipino people in rebuilding their homes and 
establishing their business; to reestablish sound and amicable Philippine- 
American relations; and .in a thousand ways to pave the way to normalcy 
and prosperity. 

The first year of the Republic, therefore, has been a year of accomplish- 
ments despite the storm and stress it had to go through. 

This book is being published as a testimony of that first year of 
successful struggle. It is ardently hoped that in the years to come, what Pre- 
sident Roxas, his cabinet, and the men who worked as architects and builders 
of this Republic, have done, will be looked upon as a great step toward the 
erection of real democracy in the Orient. 

The task of preparing this Blue Book fell upon the shoulders of Dr. Jose 
M. Hernandez, Pedro Padilla, and Manuel C. Garcia — all of the Public Rela- 
tions Ofiice. They left no stone unturned to make this a factual, true, and 
faithful document of the first trying year of the Republic. 

J. C. Orendain 

Public Relations Secretary 




VI 



^able of (ontents 



Title Page - j I 



"Freedom" II 

The Philippine Flag - - , , HI 

Foreword V 

The President VI 

Table of Contents VII 

Inauguration of the Republic of the Philippines 1 

Proclamation of the Philippine Republic 2 

Philippine and American Flags Exchanging Places , , , , 3 

The Philippine Flag Rises Alone ,,,,,, 4 

President's Pictures with Important Quotations - - - - 7 

Greetings to the New Republic ------ - 8 

His Excellency, Manuel Roxas ------- 25 

The President (Biography) 26 

Vice President Elpidio Quirino ------- 34 

The Vice President (Biography ) 35 

President Roxas before Congress -39 

Congress in Joint Session -------- 40 

The Honorable Jose Avelino 42 

Honorable Eugenio Perez 43 

The Members of Congress 44 

The Supreme Court 48 

The Cabinet 49 

The Picture of the Year 50 

Twelve Months of the Republic 57 

Public Relations Office Staff 64 

A Brief Record of the Accomplishments of President Roxas - - 65 

Office of the President .68 

Department of Foreign Affairs 75 

Department of the Interior 78 

Department of Finance 80 

Department of Justice - - 83 

Department of Agriculture and Commerce 86 

Department of Public Works and Communications - - , 91 

Department of Instruction 97 




VII 



TABLE OF CONTENTS-(Con^mucJ) 




Bills Approved and Signed 



Pictorial Section - ' ' ' ' 
inaugural Address of the President - ' ' ' 
Senator Tyding's Address - - ' ' ' 
Ambassador McNutt's Address - ' ' ' 
General MacArthur's Address - - ' ' 
Symbol of the Nation - - ' ' ' ' 
History of the Arms and Great Seal of the Philippines 
Evolution of the Filipino Flag - - ' ' 

The Philippine National Anthem - - - ' 

A GI Writes to the President 

Treaties 

The Constitution ^ - - - - - 
Official Program of the First Anniversary 
The President's Speech 

Commemorative Bronze Tablets - - - - 





VITI 



TTTTTTTTTITITTTTlinmnniJUJ'UJuiiJJ 



PROCLAMATION OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



WHEREAS 



the United Slates of America by the Treaty of Peace with Spain 



of December 10, 1898, commonly known as 



the Treaty of Paris, and by the 



ot uecemoer ju, iojo, y.^..-. ^ „..„:„.,(,. „vni- fho Phil- 

Treaty with Spain of November 7, 1900, did acquire sovcreigntj ovc, the Ph.I 
iicdij >viiii oi u T„„,.oi.x' 9 lO'SO with Great Britain did 

ippincs and by the Convention of Januaij 2, IJJO uitn o 
delimit the boundary between the Philippine archipelago and the State o 
North Borneo, and whereas the United States of America has consistentlj and 
faithfully during the past forty-eight years exercised jurisdiction and control 
over the Philippines and its people, and 

WHEREAS it has been the repeated declaration of the legislative and ex- 
ecutive branches of the Government of the United States of America that full 
independence would be granted the Philippines as soon as the people of the 
Philippines were prepared to assume this obligation, and 

WHEREAS the people of the Philippines have clearly demonstrated their 
capacity for self-government, and 

WHEREAS the act of Congress approved March 24, 1934, known as the Phil- 
ippine Independence Act, directed that on the 4th day of July immediately 
following a ten-year transitional period leading to the independence of the 
Philippines, the President of the United States of America should by proclama- 
tion withdraw and surrender all rights of possession, supervision, jurisdiction, 
control or sovereignly of the United States of America in and over the territory 
and people of the Philippines except certain reservations therein and thereafter 
authorized to be made, and, on behalf of the United States of America should 
recognize the independence of the Philippines; now therefore, I, Harry S. 
Truman, President of the United States of America, acting under and by virtue 
of the authority vested in me by the aforesaid Act of Congress, do proclaim that, 
in accord with and subject to the reservations provided for in the pertinent 
provisions of the existing acts of Congress, the United States of America hereby 
withdraws and surrenders all rights of possession, supervision, jurisdiction, 
control or sovereignty now existing and exercised by the United States of 
America in and over the territory and people of the Philippines and on behalf 
of the United States of America, I do hereby recognize the independence of the 
Philippines as a separate and self-governing nation and acknowledge the au- 
thority and control over the same of the Government instituted by the people 
thereof under the constitution now in force. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have 
hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States of America to be 
afTixcd. Done at the city of Washington this fourth day of July in the year of 
our Lord nineteen hundred and forty-six and of the independence of the United 
States of America, the one hundred and seventy-first. 



HARRY S. TRUMAN 




By the President: 



DEAN ACHESON 
Actiiifl Sccrctarii of State 



— ■ — — ,|,.,...,n iiirmii 

(Ucad hu U. S. Iliiili Connni^siottcr I'ai,! V McNull !„ il,^ 



nnmmnnminTTmf ^ 



/ his ajnvch on the 




2 



C/ie Filipino Flag 
T(ises .... Alone 



S 



UDDENLY there was a deep silence a sdence that was the prelud 

- to a glorious event. The vast, nondescript multitude was hushed and 
still Ou? of the east came a thai wisp of cloud no larger than a man s hand 
A brisk young wind from the bay came surging over the distant trees and 
swept the pearly cloud beyond the spectral ruins of the City. 

The sun was not there. Thick, cumulus masses gathered and shifted 
and blended in never-ending succession like grey, puffed sails of immaterial 
ships upon an immaterial sea. But the sun did not emerge effulgent, proud, 
and swift to see the glorious birth of a Nation, the calm, quiet departure of 
another. And the enveloping silence was so thick— it was almost audible. 

Behind the stage was the ruined city, in front was a wide stretch of green 
reaching for the opalescent waters of historic Manila Bay. This was a mo- 
ment of eternity. Time seemed to have paused to watch this apotheosis of 
Democracy in the Far East. This was the culmination of the Dream of 
one who watched us, still from his marble pedestal behind us. This was 
the final note of that many-centuried melody of yearning and entreaty that 
arose one dark morning on the beaches at Mactan, gathered force and tragic 
sweetness in the precipitous defile of Tirad Pass, on a lonely hill at 
Balintawak, on a sunny patch of ground at Bagumbayan, and rolled in global 
thunder through the thick, malarial jungles of Bataan. 

Here were the architects of the House Beautiful of Philippine Freedom- 
Here sat the men that planned our final emancipation from fear and want 
and sorrow. Here was the Knight Supreme who had come on wings of 
lead before his echelons of steel. He was come clothed in the fresh glory of 
conquest over the Monster of the East whom he had driven back to his lair in 
the north. And here was a giant of a man with silver hair, strong-sinewed, 
vibrant-voiced— symbolic of the Titan Nation of modern times— the United 
States of America. And here was a brown man, a man of his people- 
bronzed by tropic suns but bearing on his brow the iridescent star of the West. 
His was the hand that bore the torch of liberty through the dark night of 
our communal suffering in the shadow of the Japanese sun. 

In a moment we saw a silver pole-so tall, so bright, so magnificent. 
Then we saw Ambassador Paul Vories McNutt. he of the silver hair, arise 



and slowly, gracefully, patiently pull the great American Flag from the top 
of the pole. The United States Army Band struck up the opening strains of 
the Stdr-Spanglcd Banner and kept the music solemn, sweet, and sad. And 
we sang in our hearts, with tears streaming down our cheeks, "O'er the land 
of the free and the home of the brave". Forty-seven years! This was our 
song too. This was our flag. Beneath it we fought the epic battles of 
Bataan and Corregidor. Beneath it we felt that this vi'as not a mere patch 
of tropical soil with swaying palms and tawny sunsets and siK'cr breakers 
creeping on the. oozing sands. This was a piece of America. This was 
American Democracy. This was the last outpost of freedom in the Pacific. 

Then the President of the nev.' Republic of the Philippines slowly, grace- 
fully, patiently raised the Flag of the Filipinos to the top of the silver pole. 
The Philippine Army Band began to play the Philippine National Anthem. 
As it gathered volume and reached for the climax we intoned in silent deter- 
mination, a tingling thrill running through our hearts: "Ne'er shall invaders 
trample thy sacred shores." Never again! No, never again shall a foreign 
power set foot upon this, our hearth and home. Never shall the barbarian 
crush beneath his booted heel the writhing bodies of our women and children. 

At this point the two flags met on the way — one going up, the other 
coming down. There v^'as a brief, split-second pause. They touched each 
other for a fleeting instant as if in a last caress, a last kiss. A breeze was 
rising from the west. It brought echoes and memories. We harked back to 
the dark days of 1942 when the whole world seemed crashing about our 
ears. We heard the voice of the American President — the incomparable 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt: 

"Your freedom will be redeemed and your independence established and 
protected." 

This was the Voice that sustained us through the long, unequal fight. 
This was the promise that now found consummate realization and fulfillment. 
It was worth the sterling valour and the unspeakable sacrifice. It was worth 
the blood, sweat, tears, and treasure that any nation could ofler upon the 
altar of immaculate liberty. 

In another moment the American Flag was folded carefully, solemnly, 
tenderly. At that moment the Philippine flag, its red bar below the blue in 
token of beneficent and dearly bought peace at last, began to wave in the 
sweeping wind. The wind came in swift, low gusts. The spell was broken. 

Guns — big guns of the Army began to bark not in accents of defiance 
but in salvos of applause. A siren sounded screeching like a New Year's 
greeting. From a hundred spires churchbells began to peal the mellow golden 
song of freedom. 



• 1 A^n crale And che long, slender crystal 
From the west came a ram- laden g • ^^^^^^^j 
threads came down from the grey white masses 

'^^:2r:!^:^^-'^^ ,o. ...... a,, o, 

'''""ZTZC^tZ^^ and ov„ chis e.bacded .a„d, alone, 

Above us new i sweeoin^ ga es and whippuig rain— the 

happy, and unperturbed amidst the sweepin^ ga 

Flag of the Philippines. 

GOD! May it stay there e\'er, ever, ever, eN'cr. 




''Many of us live today in the chambered 
Nautilus of our own mental construction. 
There are those lolio close their eyes to the 
problems that conjront us, and prefer to direct 
the national attention and the national energy 
at objects outside ourselves, at fancied enemies, 
at fancied fears of imperialistic acjgression." 



i 





"With the help of God, let us btiild in this our land 
a monument to freedom and to justice, 
a beacon to all mankind." 



"Our appointment with destiny is upon %is 
... I ask from the nation the fidl and undi- 
vided support of heart, mind and energy for 
the necessary tasks which await xis." 



Qrcetings to the Nciv 
Republic 



PATTERN FOR A FREE WORLD 

"The unselfish accion of the United States in promoting the independence 
of tl^ PhUippines is so revolutionary in character as to challenge the colonial 
policy of every other nation. 

"In our treatment of the Filipinos we have set the pattern for a free 
world. None can escape it." 



— Edwin C. Johnson 
U.S. Senator from Colorado, 
Member of Military Affairs and 
Interstate Commerce Committees 



A NEW ERA IN HUMAN RELATIONSHIP 

"***** The Independence of the Philippines marks a new era in human 
and international relations. It is the fulfillment of a promise; a lofty, noble 
gesture. It is more than an experiment, it is a world example worthy of 
emulation. * * * * As between the Philippine Republic and the United 
States, it is inconceivable that there should ever be any misunderstanding. 
Instead, we look forward to an era of uninterrupted friendship and 
prosperity. * * * *." 



• — John D. Dingell 
V. S. Congressman from Michigan 




THE NEW REPUBLIC IS AN INSPIRATION 

"Americans everywhere feel a deep sense of satisfaction in this hour of the 
birth of the new Filipino nation. * * * 

******* The people of the United States are resolved to assist the 
Philippine Republic toward rehabilitation and in her own efforts for national 

security. 

"No new nation ever faced more complex responsibilities in the hour 
of freedom. ^he promise of the new republic is an inspiration 

throughout the world. * * * *" 



— Warren Magnuson 
U.S. Senator from Washington 



CROWNING ACHIEVEMENT 

"This great event comes as the crowning achievement of the courage 
which the people of the Islands have given such splendid demonstration of. 
It is fitting that, at the close of the great struggle against forces of tyranny 
and oppression during which they underwent bitter suffering, the people of 
the Philippines have the satisfaction of entering the family of nations, 
upholding the principles of liberty, justice and democracy." 



— L. S. RowE 
Director-Cjcneral 
Pan-American Union 




9 



FOR SECURITY AND PEACE 

•The Philippine RepuWic is descined CO be a faccor for security and 
peace t sLacL, ,s scLegic and che character and customs of^peop^ 
Le such that *78Ho- c,,e eKper,e,KC of^^^^^^^^^ 

the government and people ot the i^hilippines, tiicy la . r \ u \- c 
pLiple of freedom. * * * * Their vitaUty is a sound basts for the behef 
in the wonderful possibilities for progress. We will not ask for too much or, 
too speedy progress and will always stand by with readiness to help. 



— Warren R. Austin 
U. S. Senator fro^n Vermont, 
United States Delegate to the 
United Nations Organization 



INDEPENDENCE OBVIOUSLY NECESSARY 

"It has been obvious since America took over the Philippines nearly 
fifty years ago that permanent relationship between the United States and 
the Philippines would have to be satisfactory to both peoples. 

"The desire for independence was so general in the Philippines that it 
obviously was necessary. 

"I anticipate close relationship with the Philippines. They will look 
to us for protection and we will look to them for access to the Oriental mar- 
ket and also for naval and air bases." 



— W. Cameron Forbes 
Former Qovernor Qeneral 
of the Philippines 




FOR WORLD PEACE 



"The people of the United States greet the people of the Philippine 
Islands as they enter upon the operation of a new independent government. 
We wish for them all the prosperity and active participation in the 
movement to organize the world for the establishment and protection 
of international peace." 

— NicHOL.As Murray Butler 
President Emeritus, Columbia University 



DEMOCRATS REJOICE 

"All true democrats will rejoice at the decision taken by the United 
States to accord complete independence to the Philippine Islands. It is to 
be hoped that the new Republic will be capable of governing herself and 
of assuming her destiny both from the political and economic points of view, 
without pain and without difficulty. 

"The French Government, which has always been a partisan of the 
liberty of peoples as to self-determination, cannot but congratulate itself to 
see the great American democracy display the same broadness of vision as 
that of which we have given proof in Indo-China. 

"Thus, little by little, the great and generous democratic principles 
triumph in the world for the great well-being of humanity." 

— Francisque Gay 

Minister of State (without portfolio ) 
France 




11 



FULFILLING A PROMISE 

* * Wc realize what an undertaking it is for these people to carry 
on successfully as an independent nation of the world after takrng the brunt 
Tf the war 'against Japan. A bond ex.sts between our country and 
the Philippines which I trust will never be broken. 

"In granting the Philippines independence we are fulfilhng a promise. 
We know that other great nations of the world are watd.u.g the experiment 
and I feel confident these worthy Filipinos will build a true economic 
independence and maintain a high position among the nations of the world^ 

"Our best wishes go to the Filipinos on this July fourth, the 1/Oth 
anniversary of our own independence.' 



— ^Jay LeFevre 
V. S. Bfiprescntativc from Nciv York, 
Member Committee on Insular Affairs 



AN EXAMPLE TO OTHER NATIONS 

"The people of the Philippines have proved to the world they possess 
characteristics which v/ill ensure enlightened humane advance through their 
own initiation, intelligence, and resourcefulness. 

"The granting of independence by the United States to the Filipinos 
is an enlightened action which I hope will stand as an example to 
other nations having dependencies. We in this country rely on the continued 
cooperation and friendship of all the people of the Philippines." 



Herman P. Eberharter 

v. S. Keprcscntativc from Pennsylvania 



FOUGHT FOR 400 YEARS 

''This is a day of rejoicing, the da)' for which Phihppine patriots have 
hoped and planned and worked and fought for nearly 400 years. 

"True lovers of liberty throughout the world join in your joy just as 
other friends of freedom rejoiced on another Fourth of July 170 years ago. 

"The rule which governs free men that they may continue to be free 
is simple but inexorable. It was well stated nearly 2,000 years ago by the 
Apostle of spiritual freedom and brotherhood when He said, 'So speak and 
so act as men about to judge by the law of liberty.' " 



-Lewis B. Schwellenbach 
L'. S. Secretary of Labor 



GREAT TRANSITION 

"* * * * Will the people of Asia be given a chance to develop more 
nearly along the truly democratic pattern established in the Philippine Islands 
through the joint efforts of the Filipinos and Americans^ It began as an 
overlordship, moved rapidly to a trusteeship and today it will become a 
full-fledged partnership. 

"All Asia watches eagerly this great historical transition because it is 
a pattern which the overwhelming majority of the people of Asia wants. 
Only as that pattern of mutual assistance on the basis of genuine partnership 
continues to succeed in the Philippines will it spread throughout Asia. 

"And only as it spreads throughout Asia can we look forward 
to steadily bettering political and economic conditions in the Pacific basin 
with the maximum benefit to all countries concerned." 



• — Walter W. Judd 
v. S. Kejirescntativc from Minnesota 



REWARD TO A PEOPLE 



-The withdrawal by che United States, of ics sovereignty over 
Che Pha ppinT tands as an eloquent evidence o the f 
States to assist small nations to attain independence and establish a 

government oJ^_^^^^^^ evidence of reward to a people who 

fought against the greatest odds to defend the cause of liberty against the 
most vicious aggressors in history. 

. — C. Wayland Brooks 

U. S. Senator from Illinois 



FULL NATIONHOOD 

"The granting of full independence to the Philippine nation will always 
be remembered as one of the great historic dates in the long history — slow 
and often painful — of the liberation of the human race. 

"In peace and war, the Filipinos have shown themselves worthy of 
full nationhood, and I am convinced they will play a worthy part 
in the progress of the world and the establishment of firm and lasting peace." 



— Lord Strabolgi 
Member, House of Lords, and 
Chief, Whig Labor Party, 
British Parliament 




KEEPING FAITH WITH FILIPINOS 

"The United States will never forget the sacrifice and heroism of the 
people of the Philippines in the cause of democracy and will remain 
a steadfast friend ever willing and anxious to aid the regeneration of our 
new sister nation. 

"The Philippine people by their ceaseless resistance to the Japanese 

during the dark hours which followed the fall of Bataan and Corregidor 

proved beyond doubt that their trust in the United States never wawred 
* * * * 



* * * * 



"We have kept faith with the Philippine people. They are now free. 



"Equality and freedom will once more be enjoyed by the people of the 
Philippines. Commercial intercourse with other nations will grow and 
flourish. The industry of the Islands will raise its bruised head and with 
mternational cooperation bring to the new nation increased opportunity 
for the health, happiness, and security of all its citizens." 

— John W. McCormack 
Majority (Democratic ) Floor Leader 
V. S. House of T{epresentatives 



EARNED INDEPENDENCE BY UNQUENCHABLE SPIRIT 

"The Philippine people willingly earned their independence by their 
loyal and valiant help during the war and by the unquenchable spirit with 
which they endured oppression during the bitter years of the Japanese 
occupation. The spirit of the Philippine people never flinched. They were 
of invaluable assistance in the liberation of their Islands. What they did 
as allies and brothers must never be forgotten. Independence was their due 
in any event since it was guaranteed them by the solemn promise 
of the people of the United States. For many decades they have shown 
themselves politically mature and eminently fitted for autonomy. 

"I am sure I speak for the people in New York in wishing them 
prosperity and great happiness." 



— Thomas E. Dewey 
Qovernor of J^ew York 



15 



A MILESTONE IN HISTORY OF FREEDOM 

, 1 • ^i/nrlfl freedom because July 

■•This day is a milestone in the ^'-'°'^2TJI co.c.na.. holiday 
Foutth from now until the end of tmne w,ll o tmue 
fot the United States and the Phihpp.ne Rep b 

"As an American and as attorney gene °f ^e JJm' 

•The people of the PhUippines fought magnificently for themselw^^ 
for the United States, and for world freedom ^-^^e darkest hours of World 
War II It was loyalty they were returning for loyalty that had been shown 
them by the United States through decades of American government. 

"Today is one of the brilliant days in the annals of freedom^ 
The society of free and independent peoples of the earth welcome to the fold 
the newest of its members— the Philippine Republic." 



— ^ToM Clark 

V. S. Attorney Qcncral 



ADMIRATION AND PRAISE 

"The attainment of independence on July fourth by the people of the 
Philippines symbolizes the victory of another nation that has never wavered 
in its purpose of triumphing over all obstacles in its determination to be 
economically and politically free * * *. 

"Their patience, courage, and loyalty draw admiration and praise from 
all liberty-loving people who hail them as they take their rightful 
place among the independent nations of the v^orld, the goal for all countries 
seeking to build upon the basic principle of independence. 

"I rejoice with the Philippine citizens in their achievement and 
I commend them most highly for the splendid manner in which they have 
justified their right to their own government. I am sure they will exert 
their newly gained power with the same wisdom, ability and success they 
manifested in acquiring it." 

— James Domegeaux 
L^. S. Representative from Louisiana 
Member, Committee of Insular Affairs 



16 



A HISTORICAL MILESTONE 

"The establishment of the Phihppine Repubhc is a historical milestone 
along the road to freedom for the peoples of the Orient. 

"The people of the Philippines have earned freedom and independence 
in long years of peaceful commerce with their neighbors, and valiantly 
defended their rights as free men on the battlefields which so recently marked 
the end for the Japanese. 

"* * * I can appreciate the pain, anguish, and stoic determination that 
it took to carry the people of the Philippines through their war years to final 
victory, over our common enemy. 

"There can be no finer reward at that long struggle's end than 
independence. It is fitting that the Filipino people should take their place 
as the second republic in the Far East, and the United States to preserve the 
Pacific peace that all of us fought so hard to obtain. 

"The birth of the Philippine Republic is tangible proof that the ideals 
we fought so hard for are not empty phrases. I salute the new government 
and its people * * *." 

— Claire L. Chennault 
Major Qencral, V. S. Army 



RIGHTS BALANCED BY RESPONSIBILITIES 

"1 am concerned with the first steps of the Philippines as a nation be- 
cause I have always wanted the Philippines to be free. It is necessary to be 
realistic. Rights must be balanced by responsibilities. Progress must be 
governed by what is good for all. 

"It is my hope and prayer that this new nation, strong in independence, 
will continue to maintain its independence. There are worthy and 
wholesome foundations of our government which can be taken over in their 
entirety or in part and adapted for purely Filipino use. I refer to 
the Constitution's Bill of Rights, the system of executive, legislative and 
judicial checks and balances, and a free and mature electorate. Of equal 
importance is the need for original action initiated by Filipinos for Filipinos. 
There is no lack of tradition for such action. Remember Jose Rizal." 

— Karl Stefan 
V. 5. Ticprcsentativc from Nebraska 




IT 



ENDURING PEACE AND PROSPERITY 

v„ ,/r.ii offer me to send the people of 
.<! welcome the oPP-7; ^./^^ ^'^^ ^ 
Che Philippines my l— w.h. .n^ in the Filipino peopll 

I„ ^'J::; islands and wotted with the. as 

Go™ General, my interest deepened to affection and adm.at.on. 

"As Secretary of War through the great world struggle now ended in 
victory, we have watched with the pride of confident fri ndship the 
extraordinary demonstration of courage and loyalty g^" W the Fihpmo 
people when the Japanese, with sucking cruelty, invaded their homeland. 

"As they take their place among the free peoples of the world, 
the Filipino people will face grave responsibilities and even dangers. But 
over the years, they have shown a constantly growing ability to face the 
problems of self-government and self-reliance, and it is my earnest hope 
that they may now go forward to achieve enduring peace and . . . prosperity. 

"The abiding faith, friendship and understanding which have so long 
existed in our two countries will not be dissolved by our new relationship. 
The people of America will continue to watch with sympathetic interest 
and affection the progress of their friends in the Philippines." 

— ^Henry L. Stimson 

Formerly V. S. Secretary of War and 
Qovernor-Qencral of the Philippines 



MISSION ACCOMPLISHED 

"On behalf of the Navy Department I send greetings to the people of 
the Philippines on the inauguration of their Republic. 

"It was lately the mission of the United States Navy, in company with 
sister services and our gallant allies, to aid in reestablishing the freedom on 
whicli Philippine independence is predicated 

James V. Forrestal 
IJ- S. Secretary of the T^avy 




ENDURING PEACE AND PROSPERITY 

nffer me to send the people of 
"I welcome the opportunity you oft ^ ^ 

Che Philippines my heartiest wjs .^^^^ in the Filipino people. 

In ^^'J:: islands and worked with che. as 

gJZ:^J^, my interest deepened to affection and admiration. 

"As Secretary of War through the great world struggle now ended m 
victory, we have watched with the pride of confident friendship the 
extraordinary demonstration of courage and loyalty f^l^V^^' ^^l^P^no 
people when the Japanese, with sucking cruelty, invaded their homeland. 

"As they take their place among the free peoples of the world, 
the Filipino people will face grave responsibilities and even dangers. But 
over the years, they have shown a constantly growing abdity to face the 
problems of self-government and self-reliance, and it is my earnest hope 
that they may now go forward to achieve enduring peace and . . . prosperity. 

"The abiding faith, friendship and understanding which have so long 
existed in our two countries will not be dissolved by our new relationship. 
The people of America will continue to watch with sympathetic interest 
and affection the progress of their friends in the Philippines." 

— ^Henry L. Stimson 

Formerly U. S. Secretary of War and 
Qovernor-Qencral of the Philippines 



MISSION ACCOMPLISHED 

"On behalf of the Navy Department I send greetings to the people of 
the Philippines on the inauguration of their Republic. 

"It was lately the mission of the United States Navy, in company with 
sister services and our gallant allies, to aid in reestablishing the freedom on 
whicti Philippine independence is predicated. 

fiahri"^^"' '''i'T ^^^°^^^Pli^h^d in cooperative effort with the gallant 
^l^;;L^. - - ^P^^^^ of freedom^ould 

States Ntrrwird ^'^^ women of the United 

Nav> go with this message to the people of the Philippines." 

James V. Forrestal 
L'- S. Secretary of the l^avy 




JUST CLAIM OF FILIPINOS 



~ " "For the first time in our national history, we are granting complete 
independence to a former possession. That is a unique situation and there 
is no precedent for us to follow in providing for the transition. The 
difficult task has been made more difficult by the ravages of war, in which 
the Filipinos participated. 

"It is a cherished maxim of Anglo-Saxon jurisprudence that there is no 
wrong without a remedy. By the same token there must be no just claim 
upon us which all arc unwilling to meet. The Filipinos have a just 
claim upon us, which I believe is fully recognized both here and abroad. 

"We have taught the Filipino people our principles of democracy. It 
is the survival of those teachings that we have at stake. If they are 
to survive in the Philippines, they must have economic as well 
as political independence. Ever since we took the Philippines from Spain, 
their economy has been geared to ours. They cannot survive economically 
without access to our markets." 

— A. Willis Robertson 
v. S. 'Representative from Virginia 



WILL ALWAYS HAVE BEST INTEREST OF FILIPINOS 

"As one who fought side by side with and commanded the gallant sol- 
diers of the Philippine Army during the hopeless campaign in your Islands 
in 1941 and 1942, I take this occasion to congratulate you upon your 
liberation from the yoke of tyranny under which you suffered for more than 
two years. 

"Today marks the birth of your nation, the Republic of the Philippines, 
as an independent sovereign country. You have been under the protectorate 
of the United States and now you are fully independent. 

"You may rest assured that my country will always have your 
best interest at heart, and I personally wish to express on this occasion my 
deep affection for the people of the Philippines and for these fair islands." 

— Jonathan M. Wainright 

Qeneral, United States Army 




BOND OF FRIENDSHIP STRONG 
■The fricndshfp between the United States Navy and the people of the 

PhiliDPines is one of long standing. . „ , • i r>> j 

\fn ■ ■ ■ iqq^ when our fleet under Admiral Dewey steamed 
"Beginning in 1898, when our 
inrn Manila Bay it has grown through tne year. & 
into ivianua Day, i ^ s Beside your forces, we fought 

to Navy peop e stationed at bases there. dl:>iu y ^ u a c 

Lu i^axy t--- F 1 „j „^„r rnurase and loyalty. Our bond of 

the common foe and we admired your courage auu y r 

friendship is strong. r t r icn i. 

"Now, as your struggle for independence finds fulfillment on this 
Fourth of July, we of the Navy wish success to the Republic of the 
Philippines." 

— Chester W. Nimitz 

Admiral of the Fleet and Chief of 
Naval Operations, V. S. Navy 



GREATER FRIENDSHIP LIES AHEAD 

"The United States Army Forces in the Western Pacific extend to the 
people of the new Philippine Republic the most heartfelt congratulations 
on this Independence Day. 

"As we welcome the Philippines to the family of free and democratic 
nations of the world, we, of the United States Army, are proud to have had 
the citizens of these Islands as our comrades in arms during the long and 
arduous struggle to roll back and defeat the enemy who sought to subdue 
those who believed in the principles of freedom and democracy. 

"We are confident that the years of independence ahead will lead to 
e^ven greater friendship and cooperation between the United States of 
America and the Philippine Republic." 



— W. D. Styer 

Lieut. Cjeneral, V. S. Army, and 
Commanding Qeneral, AFWESPAC 



^^^^ 



20 



A GREAT DAY 



'']u\y 4, 1946 will stand out in Philippine history as the succcsstul cul- 
mination of many decades of sacrificial and de\'oted activity on the part of 
Philippine patriots to achieve independent nationhood. This is the day 
worked for and yearned for by Rizal and a long line of Filipino heroes * * 
The Filipino people have abundantly earned their right to (independence) 
by years of careful and patient preparation, by the courageous defense of their 
country shoulder to shoulder with American troops during the tragic years 
of the Japanese invasion and by sustained resistance of the civilian population 
to Japanese pressures and aggression. 

"July 4, 1946 will stand out in world history as an important 
milestone date when the ways of nineteenth century imperialism were 
discarded and supplanted by twentieth-century ways of international 
brotherhood. * * *. 

"July 4, 1946 does not mean and will not mean the termination of 
American assistance in the Philippines, nor the end of American interest in 
and friendship of the Filipinos. * * * *. 

"July 4, 1946 is a great day for both Filipinos and Americans, a day 
on which every American will breath a prayer in his heart for all success to 
the Filipino people in their brave adventure of nationhood. Godspeed the 
newly-born Filipino nation!" 

— Francis B. Sayre 

Diplomatic Adviser of VNKKA 
Former V. S. High Commissioner 
to the Philippines 

' VICTORY IS CROWNED 

"At no time during the past 48 years have the people of the United 
States felt a closer bond of friendship with the people of the Philippines than 
now. Your people and our people worked, fought, and bled together in 
the cause of freedom and it seems appropriate that the victory we 
won together should be crowned by the celebration of your Independence Day. 

"We in the United States are keenly aware of the serious economic prob- 
lems you face as a result of the war. We realize that you lost more than 
two-thirds of your livestock, and that your rice production has been seriously 
reduced We know too that a great part of your transportation and 
manufacturing equipment was destroyed, and that it will require heroic 
efforts for you to restore production to what it was betore the war. We 
shall do everything possible to assist you in establishing your economy so 
that you may enjoy the full fruits of living under your own democratic in- 
stitutions." 

— Henry A. Wallace 

v. S. Secretary of Commerce 




HAS DOUBLE SIGNIFICANCE 

, .. • • in pxtendine felicitations to the 

■■All U„,ced Staccs sold.crs ,ou c " exten g^^ i„d,p,„a,„ee. u 

people of Che Philippines as che — ° independence day in the 
is a happy circumstance that the fourth ot J ^i„,,,,„,, ,( 

Philippines as well as m f,^^ significance for both of 

anniversary now and in 'j „^ independence in the Orient, 

our peoples— independence in the Occident ana \, . , , . 

. . * The association of our soldiers with the people of the 
Philippines during the bitter years of fighting against the Japanese greatly 
increased our adniiration for the courage and resolution of the citizens of the 
new republic. 

"It is a great privilege to join in welcoming such a people to the society 
of nations. May the new democracy enjoy the well-deserved blessing of 
peace and prosperity and embrace this opportunity to the contniued happmess 
and well-being of humanity." 

— Robert P. Patterson 
v. S. Secretary of War 



PATH OF FREEDOM 

"I am happy to convey my congratulations to the Philippine people 
and to express my confident hope that the path of freedom and democracy 
which they so steadfastly have followed may lead them to greater national 
glory and enduring prosperity. 

"Since Philippine economy is essentially agricultural, the fulfillment of 
this hope depends to a large degree upon the rehabilitation and development 
of Philippine agriculture and the restoration and expansion of Philippine 
agricultural trade. 

"I trust that the agricultural mission of the United States experts, which 
by invitation wi 1 advise with Philippine officials beginning this month, 
may make a worthy contribution to this end.* * * *" 



— Clinton P. Anderson 

V- S. Secretary of Agriculture 



COVENANT FINDS FULFILLMENT 



"Independence Day dawns at last in the Islands. It is an event 
to gladden the hearts of men where freedom is treasured; a spectacle to uplift 
the spirit of a world weary of war. 

Elsewhere on God's footstool, disillusionment and dissension hlidit 
the joy of peace returned. Though the conflict is ended, the leaders of men 
are hard-pressed to preserve the tranquility which is ours. 

"But in the Philippines, on the Fourth of July, a covenant between two 
great peoples finds fulfillment. While elsewhere there is contention over 
territories and spheres of influence, here a free and independent nation is born. 
A noble people taken into their own ends the guidance of their destinies. 

"The beautiful islands have been ravaged by fire and the sword 
of modern war. The road ahead is vastly harder than eleven years ago when 
the Commonwealth Government was inaugurated. I knov.' the nobility 
of their character and the depth of their fortitude. I have seen their talent 
and seal for democratic government. They will build their Republic well 
and it will prosper and endure. God speed them on their way!" 

— Frank Murphy 
Associate Justice, V. S. Supi-emc Court 
Former Qovernor-Qeneral of the Philijjpines and 
United States High Commissioner to the Island 

DEMONSTRATED LOVE REINFORCED 

"Philippine Independence Day, synchronizing as it does with the day 
on which we celebrate our own independence, has much significance. 

"We gained our independence by battle and with bitterness. The 
Filipinos will have their independence as a result of voluntary action of the 
United States taken because we have no desire to control or oppress 
any people anywhere. 

"By this voluntary surrender of our domination in the Philippines, we 
gain world-wide moral strength and set the pattern of desirable international 
conduct. We reinforce our demonstrated love for a new nation which 
embarks on a career with our blessings and high hopes." 

— ^Eugene D. Millikin 
V. S. Senator from Colorado 




23 



HAVE JUST CAUSE TO BE THANKFUL 

, r -11 • Americans whcn I say that on this 

"I am sure ■ ,^P-^f°""''''2 llf « Ph ippincs ■„ celebradng this 
historic July Fourth we )<'>'f"">' ^'^^t of eve y American who loves 
H-iv which has bng been sacred to the tieart '-^ > 
Hbenrand the day'wh.ch henceforth will be honored and revered by every 
loyal and liberty-loving Filipino. 

"* * * * You people of the Philippines also have just cause 
to be thankful and proud that the first President of your Republic is a great 
statesman, profound in his knowledge of the affairs of your country, wel 
versed in the principles of your government, brilliant in intellect and 
unshakeable in his love for your country and the people of the Phihppmes. 

"I predict permanent and lasting friendship between America and the 
Philippines. We have much in common. America is the greatest among 
Christian nations in the Western hemisphere. The Philippines is the outpost 
of Christianity in the Orient. Your hearts are imbued with the same 
principles of government which moved the great statesmen of America to 
write the Constitution under which this country thrived and prospered. 

"Although your country today is devastated by the withering hand of 
the most brutal war the world has ever known, your land is rich in natural 
resources and your people are rich in courage and native intelligence, and in 
due time you will recover from the effects of war. 

"* * * * I join with my fellow Americans in extending to you the hand 
of friendship and brotherhood. We v/ish you liberty, justice, and prosperity. 
May the God of nations watch over you." 

« 

— C. Jasper Bell 

v. S. -Rep rescntativc from Missouri 
Chairman, Insular Affairs Committee 




24 




His Excellency, MANUEL ROXAS 
President oj the Republic of the Philippines 



'Che President 



-The bigg.sc dream of Manuel Roxas as Prcs.dcnc of the Ph,l,pp« 
i RcpubH? is to make this nation a land of opportunity. Th.s rs no rdle 
talk Xht along, as he tightens each loose string from the tangled skem of 
a war.de*royed eointry, his constant thought is for every Frhp.no ot.zen to 
have before him the opportunity to succeed. 

He works from early morning to late at night trying to solve 
the intricate and multifarious problems of a prostrate country demoralized by 
war He has set his goal. He wants to establish an honest, Pi^osperous 
government that can inspire awe and majesty not by force, but through the 
processes of democracy. He has had an uphill fight because the country 
is demoralized— selfishness had become the primordial idea of a starved and 
tormented people, greed for grab, the rule rather than the exception after four 
years of Japanese occupation, and those who have a little honesty left are 
now impatient and ready to cast blame and censure upon the rest of 
the population. 

Amid this tangled morass is one nian who holds faith with himself and 
his God and thinks calmly, labors industriously and struggles toward his 
goal patiently. Many a time impatience tests the mettle of Manuel Roxas, 
many a time he becomes discouraged. But every time impatience and 
discouragement get hold of him, he shakes them off as a duck shakes off the 
raindrops on its back and emerges more determined, more understanding. 

The enemies of Manuel Roxas have never been kind to him. The press 
in this Republic, which is the freest in any country, never spares him when 
he slips. But he has never been unkind to the persons who write against 
him. He receives them with equal cordiality and warmth a gesture which 
taxes the patience of his closest friends and admirers. 

Manuel Roxas climaxed 29 years of outstanding and controversial 
public service on becoming President of the Philippines on May 28, 1946. 

Viewed from the point of recognition of achievement, Roxas' election 
to the presidency was the greatest grant in the gift of the people whom he 
the h^P . " ? ^""S elected on April 23, 1946, he became 

P esfdel^ July 4 of the same year the first 

d^t^^^^^^^ ■ Pl^y^d and will continue to play 

nistor) oi the Philippines. To become the first President of 

26 





the Philippine Repuhhc under any circumstances would endow him with 
historic potentiaUties. To become President in the wake of the most 
devastating war on record meant that he would have in his hands the heaviest 
responsibilities ever held by any single man in the annals of the Filipino people. 

In one year of office, President Roxas has provided a leadership which 
has restored national vitality and safely bridged the critical transition 
period from Commonwealth status to that of Republic. He laid down the 
lines along which the Philippine nation shall tra\'el during the coming years. 

Whatever the specific judgment of history may be, President Roxas' 
program during the past year will loom large in our annals. 

In one year. President Roxas reorganized the governmental machinery 
and formulated a legislative program for an "all-out" attack on the economic 
and social problems left by the war. Among the measures for which he 
secured congressional as well as national approval are: (1) a GI Bill of 
Rights for Filipino veterans; (2) establishment of a Rehabilitation Finance 
Corporation; (3) provision for streamlining the governmental machinery; 

(4) revision of tax laws to increase government revenues; (5) establishment 
of a Department of Foreign Affairs and organization of a foreign serx'icc; 

(6) agrarian reform measures, including provision for a 70 30 crop division; 

(7) provision for the establishment of a Surplus Property Commission; 

(8) purchase of Church estates; and (9) the approval by plebiscite of the 
Trade Relations, Reconstruction and Rehabilitation acts. 

President Roxas, together with Vice President Quirino, negotiated with 
the United States Government (l) a treaty of amity, (2) a treaty on bases, 
(3) a treaty on military assistance, (4) a treaty on Consular Convention, 

(5) a treaty on fisheries, and with China, (6) a treaty of Amity. Working 
together they laid down a definitive foreign policy based upon close ties with 
the United States and cooperation with the United Nations. 

He secured congressional authorization for, and signed, an Executive 
Agreement providing for preferential trade relations with the United States 
for 28 years. He negotiated a vast surplus property transfer agreement 
which made available to the Philippine Government Fl,274,000,000 worth 
of surplus property plus P50,000,000 in cash in return for the assumption by 
the Philippine Government of the obligation to redeem guerrilla currencies 
and other war-time obligations of the United States Army. 

An outstanding advocate of intimate cooperation with America, 
President Roxas was able to secure authorization from the U. S. Congress for 
a P150 000 000 loan and the establishment of a joint financial commission 
to consider 'other budgetary loans to the Philippines. He arranged for the 
transfer to the Philippines of many millions of dollars worth of equipment 




A for the continued supply of essential needs to 
for the Phihppine Army ana Military Police Command and placed 

the armed forces. He reorganize Department, pending its eventual 

it under the jurisdiction of the Interior U p 
conversion into a civilian police torce. 

•on reform program and measures designed to 
By stressing an agrarian retor i | ^^^^ ^^^^^^ ^.^^^^ 

i..prove the lot of the -"^-'P^^^^'^ga "t Ro,- Xas'able to minimize the 

a vigorous P^'^^^^'^^^^" ^^7^^,° ' „,ovement and to restore a major measure 
adverse effects o the Hukbah^^ ^^^^^^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

of peace to embattled Central reaffirmed, 
was reestablished in that area and the supremacy oi 

By a vigorous attack on the problem of illegally held arms and by other 
n.easures. considerable progress was made in the decrease of lawlessness and 
banditry throughout the Philippines. A sweeping attack on graft and 
corruption was also carried out under President Roxas direction; instances of 
malfeasance uncovered during the past year were vigorously prosecuted. 
When he found it necessary to wield the big stick he did so and cleaned his 
government of corrupt officials. 

The President placed every emphasis on the role of education and of the 
schools and gave every possible support to the increase of school facilities. 

A nation-wide food production campaign, urged by the President 
through the Department of Agriculture, helped to avert threatened famine 
and to assure a satisfactory food supply in the face of world-wide 
precarious conditions. 

These are but a few of the almost numberless steps taken administra- 
tively and legislatively under President Roxas' leadership to bring order out 
of chaotic conditions prevailing in April and May, 1946. 

As a result of his leadership, the Philippines was recognized by 
all nations of the world as a vigorous and growing democratic republic. 
Above all, the President preached to the people a doctrine of courage and 
national dedication, at the same time emphasizing his determination to 
uphold democratic forms of freedom, at whatever cost. 

Manuel Roxas is a dynamic political genius whose keen mind 
and electric imagination have made him the leader of his people. In 
traimng and ability he has no peer; only the incomparable Quezon, his master 
and benefactor, ever beat him in a political fight. 

As a lawyer he showed on countless occasions his mastery of procedure 
and corporation aw. He tonncrl rl-.^ • . . , , , 

nf h.^,.■ncT .rr ■ A u u , ^" examiiiations and held the record 

ot having attained the highest mark. 



As economise, he has no master, his penetrating mind foreseeing what 
most students and observers miss. 

As orator, he is without an equal in the country. His sincerity, 
persuasiveness, and use of dramatic pauses which are natural with him, 
capture the immediate interest of his audience. 

As a writer, he can take his reader to a realm of fancy on the wings of 
ecstacy, or load his pen with vitriol and make his subject a ridiculous 
Quasimodo. 

He is singular in that he shows an expert dexterity in almost anything 
he touches — a versatile performer who unknowingly fills in the leading role. 

When the scintillant Manuel Luis Quezon picked out the Young Manuel 
Roxas as his teammate to fight Osmena, little did the elder Manuel think 
that it was this young protege of his that would challenge his leadership 
later on. 

Roxas proved to be everything Quezon had expected, and more. When 
Quezon defeated his former mentor, Sergio Osmeiia, Roxas filled in a very 
creditable manner, the post of Speaker of the House, formerly occupied by 
Osmefia, while Quezon ruled the legislature from the rostrum of the Senate. 
Osmena was forced to capitulate and join the party which had wrested the 
leadership away from him. 

When Roxas was snubbed by President Coolidge in Washington, he 
returned to the Philippines, organized the Bagong Katipunan and met with 
fair success in indoctrinating the Filipinos in the creed of nationalism. 

Not believing that much could be done in Washington toward the 
winning of Philippine independence, but continuing his labors to keep ali\'c 
the ardour of his people, Quezon sent Osmefia and Roxas to Washington on 
a mission. This wzs called by the papers the Osrox mission. 

To Quezon's surprise, the Osrox mission was able to persuade 
the American Congress to approve the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act granting 
independence to the Philippines. 

The clever Quezon, one of the world's master politicians, started a 
campaign to defeat the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law. He succeeded in Wash- 
ington to change a sentence of the law and its name to Tydings-McDuflie 
law. 

Meanwhile, in the Philippines, the Nacionalista party was split into pro 
and anti-Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law. Osmeiia and Roxas v^'erc for accep- 
tance of the law while Quezon was opposed. Despite Quezon's great strength, 
however, he could not defeat Roxas in the three provinces of the island of 



29 




T-i .rr rrillinr showed Quezon that he was 

Panay, Roxas' own island, .^^e ^n^^^f^ ^a ^^^^^ 

.not master of all. The provn.ce o[^2rOnczon was presidential candidate, 
be anti-Quezon even to the last election when ^^uezonwa t 

^ J Rnvns turned to the practice or law. 

When Quezon emerged supreme, Koxas, cmncu f 

' ^ ,^ ^. fr^rmcd and Roxas found himself leading 

The Constitut onal Convention was tormcd, ana r^u^a & 
, . ■ Ti n K,-a rhance to disrupt the convention and 

the minority. There was a big cnance lu ^ t 

discredit its president, Quezon's man, Claro M. Recto. The su cess of any 
plan to disturb the work of the convention was almost assured when Vicente 
Lopez who held a bloc of almost 100 delegates offered his men to Roxas. 

At this point Roxas turned statesman. He told his followers that the 
drafting of the Constitution was not political and politics must not interfere 
with the workings of the convention. So, it came to pass, that Roxas 
gained prominence in the convention as the leading spirit and inspiration of 
that body. Those who wished to hate him learned to admire him and 
even came to love him. 

Quezon, at this time, was willing to forgive Roxas, but the rebellious 
disciple preferred to stay away from the Quezon band-wagon. When Quezon 
ran for the presidency, he took along Osmefia as his teammate. Roxas 
devoted his time to the practice of law and in a short time, recouped his 
fortune. 

Quezon, really, did not have a deep-seated antipathy toward Roxas. 
Quezon's love for Roxas was that of an older brother — it had the element 
of forgiveness and concern. He offered Roxas the secretaryship of finance 
and the latter accepted, provided he would be let alone to decide for his de- 
partment. This was too much for Quezon who loved pov^er. Parleys fol- 
lowed until finally Quezon dropped Roxas at the last minute. 

To Roxas it was nothing, but to Quezon this was a great disappoint- 
ment. Here was an excellent mind of which he was in dire need, but this 
mind refused to yield to the master politician of the Philippines. 

Quezon's persuasiveness, however, came to the rescue, and finally Roxas 
was won back to the fold and later became secretary of finance and head of 
government corporations. 

Claro M. Recto, a great admirer and intimate friend of Roxas, started 
the ball rolling to boost him for President. The Commonwealth Constitu- 
tion did not provide for reelection ■^^^A R^^-., r> . t-i 

r^„e,v J I , Koxas was Recto s man. The 

v_onstitution was amended however ■^,■,A k„ . i r , 

nur-^r^n if ...\ A 1 J ^"d by arrangement with Wash ngton 

2 al o T' 7° -'vc no more 

k oZ o!Zf lr''A" 'f^""''*'^ 'l^'^ Vice President would 

, t cime ="8^'" 1''=^ -'""'"8 mate. Roxas bided 




30 



Then the war came. Roxas who was a major in the reserve force was 
commissioned lieutenant-colonel in the USAFFE. He was brigadier-general 
when he surrendered to the Japs at Malayhalay. 

Now came the hardest role to perform. To become President in the 
puppet Jap republic, or to take a desperate chance with death by refusina 
Koxas, the actor, succeeded. He played sick. The Japs although not totafh' 
convinced could not accuse him of feigning, much less kill him. All this 
time Roxas was the inspiration of the underground resistance and by ably 
playing his cards saved himself to serve the Philippine Republic. 

When Roxas launched his candidacy against Osmefia, he had to fight 
an up-hiU struggle. His enemies branded him collaborator. Then he was 
up against a machine turned by the government against him, reinforced by 
foodstuffs and clothing which a dishonest government had given to hungry 
and naked people in exchange of votes. 

But Roxas had faith in himself. Never for a minute did he doubt that 
he would win. This faith strengthened that of his leaders and it gained 
momentum until it finally swept the country. 

Roxas' election brought fear and trembling to his enemies. They feared 
vengeance. They thought Roxas was to turn a vindictive plutocrat. 

His wisdom, understanding, and forgiving nature, however, astounded 
his enemies. He did not make a move to oust honest oflicials even if they 
had been against him. He became more kindly and more humble instead of 
getting intoxicated with power. 

Today he rules his country with a wisdom based on humility and justice. 

Manuel Roxas, the first product of the American system of education 
in the Philippines to become President of the Republic, was born in Capiz, 
Capiz, on January 1, 1892. He is the youngest son of Gerardo Roxas, who 
died in the hands of Spain's Guardia Civil, and of Rosario Acuiia. 

He received his early education in the public schools. Then he was 
sent to Hongkong to study at St. Joseph's College for one year and later to 
Manila to complete his education. He attended the Manila High 
School, graduating in 1910. Choosing law, he entered the Law School 
opened by the Y. M. C. A. Here he studied for six months and 
then transferred to the University of the Philippines where he finished the 
law course with high honors in 1913. In the same year, he passed the bar 
examination with the highest rating. 

His first positions in the government service were modest. The records 
show that in his student days, he acted as interpreter in the Court of First 
Instance in the Fifteenth Judicial District. After topping the bar examina- 



31 



rUe- rhen Chief justice Arellano 
cion in 1913, he attraacd ^hc "^^f He riigned in 1917 

and was employed as law clerk of that gteat juris 

to enter politics. . , 

The first call to public office came with an appointment to the 
Uic hrst can to p ^vinnine the oovcroorship of the provnicc in 
Municipal Council of Capiz. Winning tl e g p 
his next move gave him his first major victory at tne pons 

o over bto^ him permanently to the national political scene. 
Attaidii g the Governors' Convention in 1920, he impressed every one with 
his mag^^^ personality and fluent speech, and was made the presiding 
officer. He had become a national figure. His gubernatorial aehiexjment 
was also outstanding. He linked the far ends of his province by roads and 
Stepped up public improvements. 

His legislative career dates from his election as Representative from the 
First District of Capiz. He was immediately elected Speaker of the House 
of Representatives, a position which he held for eleven years, hi 1934, as 
a member of the Constitutional Convention, he became one of the 
outstanding leaders of that body and probably more than any other individual 
member influenced the drafting of that instrument. The last reward for his 
legislative service was the presidency of the Philippine Senate in 1945. 
With his elevation to the presidency of the Philippines, he has set a record 
in Philippine elective office. 

His work for Philippine independence in Washington is as distinguished 
as that of any other national leader. He has been a member of most of the 
independence missions sent to the United States to v^'in the country's freedom. 
He was on his first mission in 1923 and has since become well known as a 
pleader of the cause in Washington. Jointly v^ith Quezon, he headed the 
Third Mission, hi 1929, he was Chairman of the Special Mission sent by 
the Eighth Philippine Legislature. Again he headed the House delegation 
which formed part of the hidependence Mission of 1931. The year 1933 
marked the climax of the long struggle in Washington. Roxas, Osmena, 
and others secured the passage of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law. Quezon 
commended Roxas for his brilliant work. "If any member of the mission,." 
he said, "was most useful in the campaign in America, that member was 
Speaker Roxas." The resulting Pro and Anti struggle is still vivid in the 
political memory of the nation. True, Roxas lost the Speakership, but "he 
fell into the arms of the people". He had qualified as a national leader to 
be reckoned with in every affair of State. 

In the Commonwealth era he was in every national planning enterprise. 

Me served hi most of the agencies rrr■^^rA r,^ .-^ j j it r i 

cut agencies created to study diflcrcnt aspects of the 

national lite. He was a mFmbn- rU^ t ■ r> ^ 

vva^ a membci of the Joint Preparatory Committee on 




Philippine Affairs, and he was chairman of the following bodies: die 
National Economic Council, the Tax Commission, the Rural Progress 
Administration, the Board of Directors of the National Development 
Company, and the Committee on Educational Policy to reorgani-e the 
University of the Philippines. He was a member of other gox'crnment 
boards, such as the National Rice and Corn Corporation, the Mindanao Land 
Settlement Project, the National Relief Board and the Board of Regents of 
the University of the Philippines. In 1938 he was made Secretary 
of Finance, a position which he held until 1941, when he resigned to run for 
the Senate. 

The war in the Pacific revealed fully the soldier and patriot in Manuel 
Roxas. In the Philippine Army, he rose to the rank of Brigadier-General. 
As soon as Pearl Harbor was bombed he \ olunteered his services to the Army 
and was immediately appointed one of the aides of General MacArthur. 
He saw action on Bataan and Corregidor and Mindanao. His record during 
the three years of enemy occupation, including his underground work, after 
he had refused to leave the country for a haven ol safety, is now well known. 
His election to the presidency makes him the leader of the Filipino people 
during these crucial times and the first President of the Philippine Republic. 

General Roxas is married to Trinidad de Leon of Bulacan. They have 
two children: Ruby, and Gerardito, who is studying in the College of Law, 
University of the Philippines. 

He was inducted into othcc as the third and last President of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines on May 28, 1946. 

On July 4, 1946, he became the first President of the Republic of the 
Philippines. 



6^ 



33 




Hon. Elpidio Quirino 
Vice President of the Philippi 



7ies 



^he Vice President 



^ U ^l-^^/^^ '""^^ °f ^ Pfoph'^t is often a risky proposition-one may 
• J '^^^'^ particularly true when one is young and inex- 

perienced. What Fate has written remains a mystery to all Possible 
exceptions are those who are blest with the gift of divination. But even 
those who think themselves thus gifted are not unlike many a weather fore- 
caster who forecasts a fair and clear day even when rain is actually coming. 

Thirty-two years ago, a young man who had just finished his law course 
at the University of the Philippines took it upon himself to play the part of 
a class prophet. He stalked up to the stage and boldly predicted what would 
become of his happy but unimpressed and incredulous classmates. Time, 
the ultimate judge, has strangely borne out some of his predictions. In 
fact, many of the niches he assigned to his fellow-graduates they now occupy, 
some with pride, the rest with resignation. Provokingly silent about his 
own future, he vaguely alluded to his becoming a world traveller, although 
he did not reveal what his mission would be. 

The class prophet then is now the Vice President of the Philippines and, 
as modern political trends would have it, concurrently Secretary of Foreign 
Affairs in which, since he embarked on politics, he has been hugely interested. 

Elpidio Quirino, the third child of a poor but happy family, was born 
in the warden's quarters adjoining the provincial jail of Vigan, Ilocos Sur, 
on November 16, 1890. The warden was his own father— Mariano 
Quirino. From early childhood, he struggled with poverty and the 
environment that poverty produces. His lot, however, did not depress or 
discourage him.. If at all, it helped him acquire and develop those sturdy 
and sterling qualities that lead to self-reliance and self-confidence. They 
gave him strength of character and the will to succeed no matter what the 
odds may be. It is no uncommon trait among the hardy people who are 
often as rugged as the rocky terrain in their place of abode in northern Luzon. 

From his fond mother, Gregoria Rivera, by whom his father had nine 
children, Elpidio or Pidiong as the neighborhood called him, received his 
first schooling. It was the hard way, but both parents and teachers at the 
time agreed that it was the best and most effective way of learning. It was 
in Aringay, La Union, that he first entered the primary grades. There he 
finished his elementary course. He moved to San Fernando, the capital, to 




35 



co„c<„ue Hi. scudies ac .he H,gh scHoo. X^f-^^^^^^^^^^^^ fa^^H<s pa™. 

decided it was necessary for them to return to tneir 
Caoayan, near the coast of Vigan. 

Resolved to share in the family upkeep, young Elpidio secured a teaching 
job .n a barr.o. For his pains he received the ^f^^^^^^'y^^fl^^^^ 
month. At the same time, he enrolled at the Vigan High School. The 
distance from his house to the school was not less than five kilometers, but 
he did not mind walking, it, having read in one of his books that 
Abe Lincoln used to walk a longer distance in order to attend school. 

His teaching gave Elpidio an idea. By working, he could support 
himself while studying and still be of help to the family. Accordingly, he 
saved part of his earnings. His plan was to pursue his studies in Manila 
where he could earn more and learn more. Besides, his eldest brother, Ernesto, 
had just returned from the United States as a pensionado and was tempo- 
rarily living in the city. 

At the capital Elpidio arrived in time to enroll at the Manila High 
School. Among his schoolmates were brilliant orators and debaters. He 
was both himself. He headed the Cryptia Debating Club and his senior 
by one year, Manuel Roxas, led the Rizal Debating Club. The two captains 
often clashed in friendly debates to the delight of the entire student body. 
One was eloquent and convincing; the other, witty and persuasive. One 
had the gift of Demosthenes; the other, a devastatingly keen sense of humor. 

But Pidiong had one disadvantage: he had to earn his livelihood. His 
time he had to divide between study and work. Thus he joined the bureau 
of lands as junior computer. After a year of doubtful computing, he 
resigned and accepted a clerical position in the office of the principal of his 
school. His new job afforded him more time to study; it also gave him 
an opportunity to meet those "dear delights" who fill youth's dreaming 
heart with poetry and romance. 

Fortunately, his studies exerted greater fascination for him than the 
lure of beauty. His main concern was to be somebody some day To 
insure economic stability, he took the first grade civil service examination. 
He passed. Called to public service, he became property clerk of Manila's 
police department. His new position not only permitted him to live 
comfortably, but also enabled him to help his family substantially. 

hrer\!T-UA T', ^'""^""'"^ ^^^^^^ "^gh School. Four years 

ttor'ncv ?r"f I ^"^/l^^^lv ^^e-^f^" became a fulUedged 

attorney at law. However, he did not practice right away Instead he 
accepted the position of aw clerk in rUr PU,!;. ■ V- msteaa nt 

in rhr Pbilin..;.,. Q,, i . hilippmc Commission and ater 

in the PhihppuK Senate. It was during this period that he caught the fancy 




of the fiery and uiipetuous leader, Senate President Manuel Quezon who 
promptly asked him to be his secretary. When President Quezon left for 
cne United States to ofter one Filipino division to President Wilson 
tor service in Europe after America had cast her lot with the Allies in \\\.rld 
war 1, he took along with him his studious and efiicient secretary. 

Not long after his return from the United States, Quirino plunged into 
politics, hi it he saw his real future. He launched his cajididacy for 
representative in Ilocos Sur with the sanction, if not the blessing, of 
the Senate President. An excellent public speaker with a ready tongue and 
charming personality, he easily won two hearts: the heart of the electorate 
and the heart of a young and pretty girl, Alicia Syquia, whom he married 
two years later. One of his first acts as the youngest member of the 
House of Representatives was to work for the extension of higher education 
throughout the Philippines. His object was to give the poor and the rich 
students the same opportunity of obtaining college or university training. 
As a first step, he sponsored a bill creating a branch of the University of the 
Philippines in Vigan. Charity, he believed, should begin at home, but it 
must never end there. 

With the natural rebelliousness and pugnacity of youth, he defied 
the "unipersonalism" of the then Speaker Sergio Osmeiia, undisputed boss 
of the dominant Nationalist Party. So when President Quezon finally threw 
down the gauntlet and formed the Collectivist Party, Qurino immediately 
sided with him. The Speaker tried to pacify him by sending him to Peking, 
China, as a delegate to the International Bar Conference. But the young 
rebel refused to be pacified. Upon the expiration of his term, he ran for 
senator on the Collectivist ticket. However, he was defeated by Isabelo de 
los Reyes, then the idol of the Ilocanos. In the next election, he ran again. 
This time fortune favored him. He thus had the distinction of being one 
of the first two UP graduates to be elevated to the Senate. Jose P. Laurel 
was the other. Quirino's old chief. Senate President Quezon, made him 
chairman of the committee on accounts and then chairman of the committee 
on public instruction. It was at this time that he renewed his efforts to 
establish the Vigan Junior College of the University of the Philippines. His 
next goal was to master the intricate problems of tariff, taxation, inter-island 
shipping, agriculture and finance. Eventually he was appointed chairman 
of the Special Joint Committee on Taxation. 

He ran for re-election in \9?>\ on the strength of his previous record in 
the Senate. Again he won. He resumed his interest in tarifl" and taxation 
and was largely responsible for the passage of the first Tariff" Act and the 
publication of a book, 'Thilippine Economic Problems", which remains to 



37 



this day as the most authoritative study on Philippine economic probte 
made by Filipino economists and financial experts. 

It was while serving his second senatorial term that country was 
suddenly split into Pros and Antis following the passage of the Hare-Hawes- 
Cutting Act which the then Sen. Sergio Osmei^a and Speaker Manuel Roxas. 
composing the Os-Rox mission, brought home. Having n.duced the kgis^ 
lature to reject the act, Senate President Quezon left for Washington. With 
him was Senator Quirino who had become his trusted lieutenant. The 
result of the trip was the unexpected enactment of the Ty dings- McDuffie 
law a signal and unprecedented tribute to the genius and political strategy 
of Quezon and the able assistance of his former secretary. The new act of 
the American Congress gave the Philippines her independence. 

In 1934 Quirino was appointed Secretary of Finance. He held the 
position without relinquishing his seat in the senate. Meanwhile, his old 
district in Ilocos Sur elected him delegate to the Constitutional Convention 
which drafted the Constitution of the Philippines. Upon the inauguration 
of the Commonwealth, Senator Quirino was appointed Secretary of Finance 
and subsequently Secretary of the Interior, a position which he held from 
1936 to 1938. As Secretary of the Interior, he headed the now defunct 
National Information Board and sponsored the organization of the State 
Police. Sensing that he had aroused or incurred the displeasure of the 
powers-that-be because of his increasing popularity, he ran for the National 
Assembly. For the second time in his political career he was defeated. He 
accepted his defeat with such grace, sportsmanship, and dignity that even 
his powerful critics were disarmed and began to praise him. In 1941, he 
was elected senator-at-large. The new congress, however, never convened 
on account of the war until June, 1945, following the restoration of 
the Commonwealth. 

During the Japanese occupation, he was imprisoned in Fort Santiago. 
When the Japanese resorted to blood and fire purge, early in February, 1945, 
he lost his wife whom the Japs bayoneted to death together with three of 
his five children. 

Upon the liberation of the Philippines, Elpidio Quirino was chosen 
President pro tempore of the Senate. He ran for Vice-President of the 
Philippines on the ticket of the Liberal wing of the Nacionalista party and 
was elected. He assumed office on May 28, 1946. On the same day his 
running mate. President Manuel Roxas, appointed him Secretary of Finance 
and later Secretary of Foreign Affairs, a position which he still holds with 
courage and dignity and honor to his country. 




The President before Congress 
4- 




39 



Gathered In Joint Sesf;w)i To Hear 
The President's Message, June J, 194u 




41 



Congress of the Philippines 
THE SENATE 



Hon. JOSE AVELINO 

PRESIDENT 



Mr. Antonio Zacari.^s Mr. Manuel Eloriaga 

Secretary Sergeant-at^Arms 



Alonto, Alauya Dansalan, Lanao 

Arranz, Melecio Alcala, Cagayan 

BuENDiA, Nicolas Malolos, Bulacan 

Cabili, Tomas Dansalan, Lanao 

Clarin, Olegario B Tagbilaran, Bohol 

Confesor, Tomas - Cabacuan, Iloilo 

Cuenco, Mariano J Cebu City 

DioKNO, Ramon Lemery, Batangas 

Francisco, Vicente J Cavite City 

Garcia, Carlos P Talibon, Bohol 

Hernaez, Pedro C. Bacolod, Negros Occidental 

Imperial, Domingo Daraga, Albay 

Mabanag, Alejo .' Bangar, La Union 

Magalona, Enrique . Negros Occidental 

Pendatun, Salipada .• Cotabato, Cotabato 

Rama, Vicente Cebu City 

Rodriguez, Eulogio, Sr Montalban, Rizal 

Sanidad, Prospero Narvacan, Ilocos Sur 

Sebastian, Proceso E Tuguegarao, Cagayan 

SoTTo, Vicente , Cebu, Cebu 

TiRONA, Emiliano Tria Kawit, Cavite 

Torres Ramon Bacolod. Negros Occidental 

Vera, Jose O : ^H^^y 



44 



- ^ n Bohol 

Garcia, Cosme P. Occidental Negros 

GusTiLO Vicente F Occidental Negros 

HiLADO, LaRLOS ^ 

KlNTANAR, AgUSTIN Y 

Laurel, Jr.. Jose B ^atangas 

Lawenko, EuLOGio V Jl^^^y 

Ledesma, Oscar . °^ ° 

Leuterio, Raul T ■ Mmdoro 

LiM, Pacifico F Sorsogon 

LiMsiACo, Eliseo P Occidental Negros 

Log ART A, Vicente Cebu 

LoMUNTAD, Adriano D Samat 

Lutero, Tiburcio lloilo 

Magsaysay, Ramon Zambales 

Medina, Enrique Oriental Negros 

Mencio, Jose Mountain Province 

MiNDELANO, Manalao Lanao 

Miranda, Juan Q. Camarines Sur 

Moll, Jr., Celestino C Camarines Sur 

Montano, Justiniano S Cavite 

Morato, Tomas B - Quezon 

MuNoz, Pedro P. Batangas 

Navarro, Ricardo Surigao 

Nietes, Emigdio Antique 

Noel, Maximino Cebu 

Nonato, Mateo F lloilo 

Ortega, Francisco La Union 

Paguirigan, Domingo Isabela 

Pajao, Francisco M Leyte 

Paredes, Quintin ... Abra 

Penaflorida, Mariano lloilo 

Perez, Juan R Leyte 

Perez, Toribio P Albay 

Perfecto, Francisco A Catanduanes 

PiANG, Gumbay Cotabato 

Primicias, CiPRiANO P Pangasinan 

Rafols, Nicolas Cebu 

RAf5oLA, Marcial Albay 

Reyes, Jose m ;;;;;;;;;; ^^^.^ 

RicoHERMoso, Timoteo Mariuduque 

Rodriguez, Jose V Cebu 

46 





Congress of the Philippines 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 



Hon. EUGENIO PEREZ 

SPEAKER 

Mr. Narciso PiMENTEL Mr. Narciso Diokno 

Secretary Scrgcant-at-Anns 

Agan, Anastacio Bacanes 

Alano, Juan S Zamboanga 

Albano, Pedro G Hocos Norte 

Allas, CiPRiANo Pangasinan 

Almendras, Jovenal Cebu 

Alonzo, Paulino Cagayan 

Amilbangsa, Ombra Sulu 

Arnaldo, Ramon A Capiz 

Atienza, Hermenegildo B Manila 

Baculio, Pedro Sa ; Oriental Misamis 

Barretto, Eduardo a. Laguna 

Beltran, Pascual Pangasinan 

Borra, Juan V Hoilo 

Cabarroguis, Leon Nueva Vizcaya 

Cabigon, Apolinario Davao 

Calo, Marcos M Agusan 

Camacho, Bonifacio B Bataan 

Cases, Manuel T La Union 

Cinco, Atilano R Leytc 

Clarin, Luis T Bohol 

Clemente, Tomas S. •. Sorsogon 

Crisologo, Floro Ilocos Sur 

Dunuan, Gabriel Mountain Province 

Eco, Esmeraldo Camarines Norte 

Escareal, Agripino P Samar 

EsPANOLA, SoFRONio Palawan 

Espinosa, Emilio B Masbate 

Fernandez, Estanislao A Laguna 

FoRMiLLEZA, MoDESTo Romblon 

FoRTiCH, Remedios O Bukidnon 




45 




Hon. Manuel V. Moran 
Chiej Justice of the Supreme Court 




48 



Rodriguez, Juan de G d • 

Roy, Jose J. ... Pangasinan 

Samonte, Damaso T. ' J^^'^^\^ 

Santos, Alejo S. 

Santos Diaz. Ign^c.o I:::::: 

Serrano, Felixberto Batancr 

SiMPAuco, Alejandro ' TarkT^ 

Singson, Conrado 

SUAREZ, FORTUNATO N. ' OuC"^^^ 

SuMULONG, Lorenzo j^-^J " 

Tait, George K. n,^*" . „ 

Tan Carlos S Mountain Province 

Teves, Lorenzo ^'^^ C^encal Negros 

TizoN, Tito V S^^^^^^ 

lOJONG, LeanDRO a Ql^^ 

ToPACio NuENo. JosE ZZIIZ Manila 

loRiBio, Simeon G Bohol 

Veloso, Domingo L^^^^, 

ViLLANUEVA, F.DEL ZZZZ IlocOS Sur 

Villareal, Cornelio T. Capiz 

ViLLARiN, Poreirio G ZZZ Occidental Misamis 





C/ie Picture of the Year 
July 4,. 1946 to July 4, i947 



Qencrdl Conditions 

T"HE tragic moral and physical frustration into which the Philippines 
^ had sunk when V-J Day came had been considerably relieved by the 
time Independence Day arrived. But the picture on July 4, 1946, was far 
from beautiful. 

Peace and order was still the major problem. Reconstruction had yet 
to be started. There was no money in the coffers of the State. Both 
government and people were in a state of utter demoralization. Ties, 
commercial and cultural, had yet to be forged between the young Republic 
and other nations. Relations between the Filipinos and certain portions of 
the American forces of liberation were not as salutary as they should have 
been. Living conditions were still precarious because of the shortage of 
housing facilities, the scarcity of supplies, and the prohibitive prices of 
clothing material. 

To add to this dismal figure, the Hukbalahaps seemed intent on general 
destruction of the country. Political dissension was so acute that at 
the inauguration of Brigadier General Manuel Roxas as President of the 
Commonwealth on May 28, 1946, Manila appeared as a veritable armed 
camp. Less than two months later, when the President assumed office as 
head of the infant Republic, the Luneta could still have been aptly described 
as a potential battle-ground. 

INITIAL EFFORTS 

Immediately after taking his oath of office on May 28, 1946, as Pres- 
ident of the Commonwealth, President Roxas embarked on an enterprise of 
general reconstruction, devoting his first efforts to the relief of distress and 
suffernig among the poor while formulating long-range plans for the stability 
ot the social and political structure of the nation. 

Education and cultural development had to be attended to. With 
characteristic farsightedness he attacked the vexing moral problem at its 
very roots by ordering an extra appropriation of ^16,715,000 for the 
organization and maintenance of additional elementary school classes to 




Vil£Z'"MZJeTv''Gal^^^^^^ Secretaries Antonio 

^^r. nl I ' ^- ^r^30' Mariano Garchitorena. Speaker Eugenio Perez, Vice President Elni- 

dio Quirmo, President Manuel Roxas, Senate President Jose Avelino. Secretaries Jose C Ziihleta Ro 
man Ozaeta, Ricardo Nepoviuceno, Pedro Magsalin, and Col Ruperto KangleoT ' 




The Cabinet at Work: Secretary of Justice Roman Ozaeta, Secretary of Public Works and Com- 
munications Ricardo Nepomuceno, Secretary of Labor Pedro Magsalin, Secretary of Health and Public 
Welfare Antonio Villarama, Commissioner of Budget Pio Pedrosa, Vice President Elpidio Quirino, Chief 
of the Executive Office Emilio Abello, Secretary of National Defense Ruperto Kangleon, Secretary of 
Instruction Manuel V. Gallego, Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce Mariano Garchitorena, and Sec- 
retary of Interior Jose C. Zulueta. Secretary of Finance Miguel Cuaderno, Sr. is not in the picture. 




49 



FOOD 

1 • J ^ .^,r r.r fnod supply, the Government 
Faced with tlj general ^^^^^^ ,5^'^ drive that took 

planned and pushed through an ^"^^f , To achieve this end. 

in its stride even the remotest corners of the countr>^ . 

home projects, commercial and semi^commercial, for the raising oi poultry 

as well s f;r the production of fast^growing crops. 

Experimental stations distributed seeds and seedlings valued at ?M 8M. 

Hybrid fruit and vegetable plants were produced and the infestation of farms 

by locusts and rats was effectively checked. 

Five stock farms and 14 breeding stations were stocked with 124 head 

of carabao. 171 head of cattle. 39 horses, 18 buffaloes. 247 pigs, 49 dogs. 

seven sheep, 309 chickens, and 29 pigeons. The fishing industry was boosted. 

The production of lumber was stepped up, resulting in a neat reduction in 

the unit price of much-needed lumber. Nationalization of the retail trade 

was intensified. 

With a view to streamlining food distribution, provincial and municipal 
committees in charge of the sale of foodstuffs outside Manila were organized. 
A total of 750 tons of rice and 500 tons of refined sugar for distribution 
among the people was purchased, in addition to 48,000 cases of milk ear- 
marked for destitute children in the slums and schools. Judge Servillano de 
la Cruz, manager of the NARIC. reported on May 14, 1947, that 2,500,000 
sacks of rice were actually in the NARIC warehouses and 500,000 more 
sacks were expected to arrive from Siam in the latter part of the year. The 
production of important staples, such as rice and corn, was given new 
impetus with the extensive mechanization of agriculture through the efforts 
of the Agricultural Machinery and Equipment Corporation (AMEC ). 

SOCIAL JUSTICE 

Social justice, during the year under review, approached nearer con- 
summation with the purchase by the Government of large landed estates 
and haciendas for resale on easy terms to their present tenants. Under this 
arrangement the estates which have been acquired or are under process of 
acquisition are: the Hacienda Dinalupihan with an approximate area of 
41,509,805 square meters; the Hacienda Nuestra Seiiora dc Guia 357 218 7'> 
square meters; the Hacienda Ana Sarmiento. 206. 085.10 square meters- 
the Hacienda Tambobong, 698.970 square meters; the Hacienda Baclaran.' 
326.44D square meters; the Hacienda la Faja del Mar, 26.000 square meters- 
three parcel of parish land in Polo. Bulacan. aggregating 221,881.95 square 
meters; and the Hacienda Longos. 210.586.89 square meters 




Members of the Roxas Cabinet: Chief of the Executive Office Emilio Abello. Secretaries Antonio 
Villarama, Manuel V. Gallego, Mariano Garchitorena, Speaker Eugenia Perez. Vice President Elpi- 
dio Quirino, President Manuel Roxas, Senate President Jose Avelino, Secretaries Jose C. Zulueta, Ro- 
man Ozaeta, Ricardo Nepomuceno, Pedro Magsalin, and Col. RiLperto Kangleon. 




The Cabinet at Work: Secretary of Justice Roman Ozaeta, Secretary of Piiblic Works and Com- 
munications Ricardo Nepomuceno, Secretary of Labor Pedro Magsalin, Secretary of Health and Py^blic 
Welfare Antonio Villarama, Commissioner of Budget Pio Pedrosa, Vice President Elpidio Quirino, Chief 
of the Executive Office Emilio Abello, Secretary of National Defense Ruperto Kangleon, Secretary of 
Instruction Manuel V. Gallego, Secretary of Agriciilture and Commerce Mariano Garchitorena, and Sec- 
retary of Interior Jose C. Zulueta. Secretary of Finance Miguel Cuaderno, Sr. is not in the picture. 




49 



The B„.au of Jus*c, be^dc ,o.a,u,^ ^^^^ 

the invescigadon of *=P°« "7^,^ 22 cit>ze,,ship, and 37 

inal, 303 land regiscrat.on, cadascral^ 41 Induscrial Relations 

habeas corpus cases were actendcd o^ Jte and received a total of 

adjudicated all strikes submitted to its jurisdiction, anu 
55 industrial, four reconstruction, 43 incidental, 48 tenancy, and 18 contempt 

cases. 

LABOR 

Tackling an unusually vexing labor situation, the Department of Labor 
intervened in 48 strikes and 21 other labor disputes involving a total of some 
23,203 workers. Of the 48 strikes, 22 were amicably settled, 16 
were certified to the Court of Industrial Relations, three were brought by 
the parties concerned to the CIR, and seven remained pending. Two hundred 
twenty-five labor organizations all over the country were registered, paying 
a total sum of t*i,125 as registration fees to the government. 

The Eight-Hour Labor Law and the Woman and Child Labor Law 
were rigidly enforced. Workmen's compensation cases were settled ex- 
peditiously. In addition to this, 598 claims for unpaid salaries and wages 
involving 2,655 claimants were filed. The Department of Labor took 
steps to provide the deserving unemployed with relief. Out of 5,718 
registered applicants, 2,736 were given employment in private .firms. 
Through the Bureau of Immigration, the labor department apprehended, 
investigated, and deported or repatriated alien nationals who had entered 
the country illegally. 

Concerning strikes against the Government, the President of the Phil- 
ippines laid down the rule that laborers working in government projects 
such as public utilities and public works should not resort to strike to secure 
their demands. 

NATIONAL SECURITY 

During the year the Department of National Defense weeded out 
undesirable elements from the rank and file of the Philippine Army Radio 
stations were licensed under the supervision of the Department. The 
Philippine Nautical School was rehabilitated, while the Philippine Army 
was reduced to 35,743 officers and men. 

The Philippine Military Academy and the Reserve Officers' Service 
School were reestablished. Central depots and supply points all over the 
Lo i n onr" P^^'^ ---^h was outlined. 

Disabled veterans totalling upwards of 2,000 were administered care and 



54 



o -uZo I f t"" >'^^^^ ^^1--- ^hc enemy 

oaupaaon, had been unduly exposed to unwholesome influences. He 
n posed new restrictions and more ngid supervision over private educational 
imtitutions to the end that these might conform more closely with established 
St ndards of uistruction. Adult education received its generous share of 
attention. The National Library came in for blood transfusion and reopened 
Its branches in Baguio and in San Antonio, Zambales. hi order to 
disseminate cultural and educational information more effectively negotia- 
tions were made for the acquisition of the radio station KZFM, a procedure 
that keeps the Philippines in step with other progressive nations. 

PEACE AND ORDER 

Instead of an indiscriminate use of force in dealing with the so-called 
dissident elements, the Government initiated the policy of attraction. There 
has never been an instance of persecution. The Department of the hiterior, 
as the agency responsible for the restoration of peace and order, meticulously 
avoided unnecessary bloodshed among the innocent population and among 
the discontented people themselves, to a point where the Government was 
even accused many a time of v/eakness and indifference. 

The policy of attraction proved its wisdom. Disturbances, which 
formerly vyere prevalent in large areas, eventually got themselves localized 
in small sections of the countr>'. A total of some 200,000 unlicensed pieces 
of frxearms together with more than 3,000,000 rounds of ammunition have 
been surrendered to the Government and distributed among the police forces 
for their own use. This alone has saved the Government approximately 
^6,000,000. 

The pacification campaign, however, did not mean undue tolerance. 
"Where the use of force was clearly indicated, the Government cracked down 
on dissident elements in whom reason and persuasion had failed to produce 
any cooperative response. This phase of the campaign, consisting of 
vigorous military operations, was designed to do away permanently with 
the persistent forces of sedition and disorder and never to harass peaceful 
citizens. 

Side by side with the pacification drive, the Government instituted 
reforms in the methods of dealing with juvenile delinquency, with stress 
placed on moral rehabilitation rather than on physical punishment. A 
project similar to Father Flanagan's Boys' Tozvn was started as part of this 
reform program. 




51 



CONCLUSION 
, r f ^^.nnlcrp but the general outlines are 
The picture certainly far f^-^-^P^^^^^i/^a if the efforts of the 
there, k has been a year of momentous ^v^^^'^^' ^ ^ 
Government have not yielded startling results it is only because tlie i ew 
government na y cautiously, considering each problem 

administration has had to ^^^'J' ^ J ^ considerable 

with infinite care, planning out its metnoas o ^.,,..^11^ 
patience and thought. It may not be the easiest way, but it is generally 

considered the wisest \v3.y. 




56. 



House rentals were also subjected to strict regulations for the purpose 
ot curbing abuses committed by houseowners. 

A decent living wage for government laborers was further established 
in order to enable the workers to cope with the rising costs of essential conv 
modities. 

FINANCE AND ECONOMICS 

Starting from scratch, the Government negotiated with the U. S. 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation for a budgetary loan of $75,000,000 
with which to cover deficit in the Philippine budget for the year 1947-1948, 
That was distinctly a stop-gap measure, and in line with its long-range plans, 
the Government also created a six-man commission charged with the study 
of the budgetary and financial needs of the country for the next five years. 
Alongside with this, a loan of F4,000,000 was procured from the Recon- 
struction Finance Corporation with which to rehabilitate the hemp industry. 

REHABILITATION AND RECONSTRUCTION 

As a distinct measure to spur urgent reconstruction, the local Rehabil- 
itation Finance Corporation was organized with a capital totalling 
F300,000,000. Specific sums from the War Damage Rehabilitation Funds 
were allocated to various projects, with schools, colleges, a projected new 
capitol and different public buildings damaged by the war receiving generous 
allotments. The Philippine General Hospital alone was the recipient of a 
bounty of more than t*400,000 for its reconstruction. The Government 
sold surplus property that it did not need so that the proceeds could be used 
in the rehabilitation of the country and for the purchase of big estates for 
subdivision among tenants. An appropriation of 1*10,000,000 from 
available funds was made for apportionment among chartered cities and 
provinces for public works. ' 

ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTIC^' 

The Department of Justice had its share of pressing problems when 
independence came. Among other things, it had to take over the responsi- 
bility of accommodating and housing thousands of persons who had been 
accused of political and economic collaboration with the enemy and who 
were turned over to the Republic by the CIC of the United States Army. 
The Anti-Usury Board bore down on usurers and conducted educational 
and propaganda campaigns to combat the evils of usury, particularly in the 
rural areas. The' Public Service Commission disposed of 12,929 applica- 
tions for certificates of public convenience, raising its net income for the 
year to 




SEPTEMBER 

I ^..>;.-.fT rhe President of the Philippines to 
2 —President Roxas s gns act authorizmg the i resiucui. 

I resiuent rvuAa ^ ,,^^nr<: with the U. S. President or with any 
enter into agreement or agreements witn tnc y- ' 
' B . ° rol,r,v« nf rhe U S. Government regarding 

of the agencies or instrumentalities ot tne u. ^. ^ & & 

mihtary assistance to the armed forces of the Republic. 
6.-President Roxas issues a proclamation to the people of Central Luzon 

appealing for support of his program of economic and social reforms and 

for the restoration of peace in the region. 
7 —President Roxas proclaims amnesty to all persons who committed acts 

penalized under the Revised Penal Code in furtherance of the resistance to 

the enemy. 

11.— President Roxas and W. E. Vogelback, of the U. S. State Department, 
sign agreement for the transfer to the Philippine Government of certain 
U. S. surplus property in the Philippines and F25, 000,000 cash for the 
redemption of authorized guerrilla currency issued during the occupation. 

16. — President Roxas issues rules and regulations for the organization and 
operation of the Department of Foreign Affairs and of the Foreign Service 
of the Republic. 

18. — ^Last Congress of the Commonwealth and First Congress of the 
Republic, originally called into session. May 26, 1946, adjourns. Reso- 
lution proposing an amendment to the Constitution to be appended as an 
ordinance thereto adopted by both Houses. 

25. — Congress called in special session to act on the Appropriation Bill and 
on Presidential proposal for the establishment of a F3,000,000,000 
Rehabilitation Finance Corporation. 

30. — President Roxas issues proclamation declaring the period from Oct. 28 to 
Nov. 30 for the national fund campaign of the Philippine Red Cross. 
He also signs an act amending the Philippine Rice Tenancy Act so as to 
provide for crop-sharing on a 70-30 basis and an act providing for 
the compilation of a new Philippine census not later than Jan. 1, 1947. 

OCTOBER • 

2. — President Roxas issues administrative order creating guerrilla amnesty 
commissions. 

3. -President Roxas receives Minister Chin Chih-Ping, of the Republic of 
Lhma, who presents his credentials. 

'^■^^Zdm- ^"'"'"''"^J "'""""'^'^ '° '''''' =he reorganization 

of the d.ftcrcnc executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and other 




hospital treatment. The Coast and Geodetic Survey accomplished recon- 
naissaiice surveys of the Agusan River, Manila Bay, and the Pasig River. 
1 he Bureau of Aeronautics assumed supervision and control of civil aviation 
in the country. 

VETERANS 

Realizing the sorry plight of Filipino war veterans especially those of 
the USAFFE, as a consequence of the Rescission Act passed by the U. S. 
Congress, President Roxas proposed a Missing Persons Bill for Filipino 
veterans. A Philippine G.I. Bill of Rights (Republic Act No. 65) 
provided for the creation of a Veterans Board and appropriated 1*20,000,000 
as initial fund as benefits to be distributed to widows, orphans, and 
dependents of Filipino veterans. He ordered that a list of all war-widows, 
orphans and veterans be prepared in order that deserving beneficiaries entitled 
to some F 120,000 raised by public subscripiton could be determined. 
Financial assistance to disabled veterans in Army hospitals was extended. 
The disputed lands in Davao formerly held by the Japanese or their dummies 
were taken over by the Government for redistribution and sale mostly to 
former guerrillas. 

• ■ ■ GOOD GOVERNMENT 

As the government structure had demonstrated itself since the beginning 
to be faulty in some respects, a committee was appointed to study 
and suggest means to reorganize the various entities of the Republic. Gov- 
erning boards of government corporations and agencies were formed. An 
executive order punishing nepotism was rigidly enforced, while Common- 
wealth laws which had lost their applicability because of the change in status 
of the government, from Commonwealth to Republic, were thoroughly 
revised. 

■ FOREIGN RELATIONS 

As an initial step in developing cordial relations with all nations, the 
Republic of the Philippines lost no time in entering into treaty negotiations 
with the United States, China and France. Foreign policy was enunciated by 
the President himself when he announced that the Philippines, while desiring 
peace and harmony with all the world, would stand side by side with the 
United States and pay allegiance to the high principles for which the United 
Nations Organization stands in any emergency. 

The Government, however, was aware of sinister influences that might 
come from abroad, and accordingly created a Deportation Board to take 
charge of cases involving the so-called undesirable aliens. Eternal vigilance, 
it believes, is the price of national security. 




6 -President Roxas addresses a joint convention of provincial governors 
p and city mayors, division superintendents of schools, and 
municipa a. / ; Representatives, touching on matters 

nrov ncial treasurers at the mouse ui ivcj. ■ ■ \ a ■ ■ , ■ 

^ 111- • ^r.A rprnnsrruction provincial administration, 

concerning rehabilitation and reconstruction, p , 

' , ^ . f nnH nrdpr After his speech he is presented 

and the maintenance of peace and order milli \ ^. 

with a check for T>1,000,000 by Chairman Frank A Waring and 
Commissioner Francisco Delgado, of the Philippine War Damage 
Commission, as an advance payment on a public claim of the Republic 
for P 10,000,000 for the restoration of certain schools, hospitals, and 
other puljifc buildings. 
19.— President Roxas addresses the Manila Rotary Club, tells the businessmen 
to have full faith in the political stability and economic soundness of the 
nation, pictures to them the great economic future of the Philippines, and 
urges them to participate in the task of economic reconstruction and 
development. 

24.— Following a tradition observed by all Chief Executives preceding him, 
President Roxas grants a total of 128 pardons and two commutations of 
sentence to prisoners confined in Muntinglupa. 

The President appoints J. C. Orendain Press Secretary, vice Mr. 
Farolan who was appointed Consul General for Hawaii. He administers 
the oath of office to the new Press Secretary before the Cabinet, enlarges 
his duties by making him sit in Cabinet meetings and appointing him 
Chairman of the Advisory Committee of the Government Radio Station 
KZFM. 

30. — The semi-centennial of the execution of Dr. Jose Rizal is fittingly 
observed with the issuance of commemorative stamps, floral offerings, 
and a civic parade. President Roxas delivers the main address. 

JANUARY 

1. — President Roxas signs the proclamation of the agreement between the 
Republic and the United States concerning trade and related matters 
during the transitional period following independence. 

President Roxas observes the 55th anniversary of his birth. 

2. -President Roxas formally opens the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation at 
a brief ceremony at the Regina Building on the Escolta. 

e.-President Roxas issues a proclamation calling a special election to take 
place on Tuesday, March 11. 1947, for the purpose of electing 
he members who are to fill the unexpired portion of the term of three 
existing vacancies in the House of Representatives. 




60 



ludvc Months of the I{cpublic 



A Qhronology of Events 
JULY . 

■i. — Philippine independence is proclaimed and the Republic of the 
Philippines is inaugurated. Commonwealth President Manuel Roxas and 
Vice President Elpidio Quirino are sworn in as first President and first 
Vice President of the Republic. Ceremonies on the Luneta where, besides 
President Roxas, United States High Commissioner Paul V. McNutt, 
General of the Army Douglas MacArthur and United States Senator 
Millard Tydings deliver addresses. 

Paul V. McNutt, appointed first U. S. Ambassador to the Republic, 
presents his credentials to President Roxas. President Roxas and Ambas- 
sador McNutt sign Executive Agreement between the United States and 
the Republic Concerning Trade and Related Matters During a Transitional 
Period Following the Institution of Philippine Independence and the 
Treaty of General Relations between the United States and the Republic. 

Appointments extended to: Vice President Quirino as Secretary of 
Foreign Affairs, Gen. Carlos P. Romulo as Permanent Representative to 
the United Nations Organization, and Joaquin M. Elizalde as Ambassador 
to the United States. 

12. — ^President Roxas creates Council of State. 

25. — President Roxas issues proclamation declaring July 27 — August 19 as a 
period of national mourning for President Manuel L. Quezon. 

27. — ^The body of President Quezon arrives in Manila aboard the USS Prince- 
ton, accompanied by U. S. Supreme Court Justice Frank Murphy. 

AUGUST 

1. — ^The body of President Quezon buried in the Manila North Cemetery. 

22. — ^Transfer to the Republic by the U. S. Government of approximately 
28,000 hectares of land formerly held in the Philippines by three big 
Japanese development companies. 

25. — "Cry of Balintawak" commemorated with parade and program at the 
foot of Balintawak Monument in Caloocan. 



57 



25 -President Roxas and a party of government officials leave on a trip to the 

Bicol regions. 

MARCH 

8.-President Roxas leaves on a trip to Lucena, Quezon province, and other 
places in Southern Luzon in the interest of ' parity . 

10. -Julio Guillen attempts to assassinate President Roxas by throwing a hand 
grenade on the platform in Plaza Miranda at a rally for parity The 
blast misses the President but hits a number of persons, one of whom 
subsequently died. 

11. — The people of the Philippines in a plebiscite held today ratify 
the constitutional amendment, proposed by the Congress, granting special 
economic rights to Americans. 

14__President Roxas and U. S. Ambassador McNutt sign an agreement be- 
tween the Philippines and the United States which provides for the mutual 
protection of both countries. 

20. — President Roxas creates a Code Commission to revise all existing 
substantive laws of the Philippines and to codify them in conformity 
with the customs, traditions, and idiosyncracies of the Filipino people and 
with modern trends in legislation and the progressive principles of law. 

21. — ^President Roxas and U. S. Ambassador McNutt sign military assistance 
agreement between the Philippines and the United States. 

22. — President Roxas signs the Philippine Red Cross Charter. 

APRIL 

18. — President Roxas, on behalf of the Philippine Government, signs the 
Treaty of Amity between the Republic of the Philippines and the Republic 
of China. 

23. — The Joint Executive Committee for the Inauguration of the Republic 
of the Philippines announces that a memorial to perpetuate the memory 
of the inauguration of the Republic will be erected at the Luneta. 

25.— Vice President Quirino, concurrently Secretary of Foreign Affairs, leaves 
by plane on an official trip to the United States and other countries. 

29.-President Roxas tells the Cabinet in its meeting today that all means in 
accordance with law must be used to stamp out crime and corruption in 
the country and that he has ordered the suspension and investigation of 
persons in the government charged with grave irregularities 




instrumentalities of the Government, pursuant to the provisions of 
Republic Act No. 51. 

21. — Resolution to create the Quezon Service Cross for exemplary service to 
the nation in memory of the bte President Quezon adopted by both 
Houses of Congress. 

22. — Signing of exchange of ratilkations of the Treaty of General Relations 
between the Republic and the United States. 

30.— President Roxas receives Minister Harry Linton Foulds, of the United 
Kingdom, who presents his credentials. 

NOVEMBER 

Armistice Day is commemorated at Malacaiian with a special ceremony 
attended by high officials of the Republic and representatives and heads 
of missions of the Allied countries. 

12.— President Roxas creates a National Advisory Health Council to study 
problems of public health and sanitation and to make such recommenda- 
tions as it may deem necessary for the improvement of public health and 
the promotion of medical research in the Philippines. 

^Vice President Quirino, in his capacity as Secretary of Foreign Affairs, 
and U. S. Ambassador McNutt sign the Treaty of Conciliation between 
the two countries and the Air Agreement. 

19. — ^President Roxas addresses special student convocation at the U. P. on the 
subject of "parity". 

29. — President Roxas creates a committee to conduct negotiations with the 
Archbishop of Manila for the acquisition by the Government of properties 
belonging to the latter. 

30. — President Roxas is main speaker at the solemn commemoration of Na- 
tional Heroes' Day at the Nationd Cemetery in Capas, Tarlac. 

DECEMBER 

3. — President Roxas creates a Rice and Corn Production Commission to 
recommend areas of public and private lands suitable for immediate 
development; to submit plans co bring these areas into immediate 
cultivation for the production of rice, corn, and other food crops; and to 
recommend means and methods for the speedy mechanization of Phil- 
ippine rice and corn culture. 

6. — President Roxas leaves Manila by plane on an inspection trip to the 
provinces of the Visayas and Mindanao, accompanied by members of the 
Cabinet, congressmen, and a staff of government technical officials. 




Public Relations Secretary Orendain and his Staff. — Seated from left to right: Pedro Z. Agiiilar. odministratiDe tit 
Mrs. Demcti-ia C. Asidao, clerk: Pedro Padilla, assistant; Juan C. Orendain, public relations secretary: Dr. Jose M. HcnittiidK, p;. 
lations assistant: Mrs. Isabel Donesa, clerk-typist: Alfredo I. Pasc^ia, a.'ssistant. 

Standing from left to right: Leonardo E. Cortez, stenographer; Manuel de Leon, messenger; Romeo de Guzman, clerk; Uofi 
Yabes, historical conwiler: Jose P. Calip, researcher-writer: Mama Busran, translator; Roman Balajadia. mimeograph operator; ad'r 
Palafox, clipping clerk. 

Below from left to right: Emilio Maglalang, chief photographer: Manuel C. Garcia, public relations assistant and Moiestn'- 
tola, photographer. 




7. — ^President Roxas is presented with a check for ?50,000,000 in payineiit 
of the U. S. War Department's share of American obUgations to the 
PhiUppines for wartime assistance. 

13. — President Roxas creates a Council of National Defense to advise him on 
matters of national defense. He leaves on an inspection trip to Northern 
Mindanao and Eastern Visayas. 

24. — President Roxas and Vice President Quirino emplane for Vigan, 1 locos 
Sur, to address a mammoth crowd from the provinces of Northern Luzon 
on the occasion of the town's fiesta. 

27. — ^The Congress of the Philippines meets for its second regular session. 
In the afternoon President Roxas appeared before a joint session of the 
Senate and the House of Representatives to deliver a message on the 
state of the nation. 

30. — President Roxas receives Minister Teodomiro de Aguilar y Salas of Spain 
who presents his credentials. 

31. — Liberal Party meets in a two-day convention, which is addressed by 
President Roxas. 

FEBRUARY 
\. — Liberal Party adjourns its convention. 

7. — ^President Roxas receives Minister Gaston D. Willoquet of the Republic 
of France, who presents his credentials. 

9. — President Roxas issues an executive order separating the accounting and 
auditing services of the government and turning them over to the 
respective heads of the different offices. 

14. — President Roxas signs the Geneva Red Cross Convention, which prescribes 
international rules for the treatment in war of the sick, the wounded, 
the disabled, and the prisoners of war. 

Secretary Ricardo Nepomuceno and U. S. Ambassador McNutt sign an 

agreement between the Republic and the United States regarding a road, 

street, and bridge program. 
17. — President Roxas and Vice President Quirino address the nation over the 

radio on the occasion of the 75th anniversary of the martyrdom of Fathers 

Burgos, Gomez, and Zamora. 
23. — President Roxas signs an agreement with the Archbishop of Manila 

providing for the acquisition by the Government of eight estates 

aggregating 4,342.16 hectares owned by the Catholic Church on the 

island of Luzon. 




20. Auchori^ndditional apprcpriacion of ri6,715,000 for organization 

and maintenance of additional elementary classes. 

21. Acquired broadcasting radio station of ^S'S^" P'-'^ 

Department of Instruction for dissemination of cultural and educa- 

Clonal information to the public. 

22. Worked for restoration of appropriation of the item for Institute of 

National Language suppressed by the House Cortimittee on Appro- 
priations. ' ' " 

23. Allocated specific lump sums out of $120,000,000 provided for public 

works in the War Damage Act. 

24. Authorized appropriation of P10,000,000 from available funds to be 

apportioned among cities and provinces for public works. 

25. Suggested that a list of all war widows, orphans and veterans who are 

needy and destitute be prepared in order that beneficiaries to some 
P120,000 raised from public subscriptions by a committee be 
determined. 

26. Proclaimed the granting of amnesty to all persons who committed acts 

of violence against persons or property in furtherance of resistance 
to the enemy. 

27. Created Six-man Commission to study budgetary and financial needs 

of country and to consider not only $75,000,000 loan to P. I. but 
also the budgetary and financial needs for the next five years. 

28. Established Rehabilitation Finance Corporation. 

29. Appointed committee of five to study reorganization of the Government. 

30. Extended financial assistance to disabled veterans in Army hospitals. 

31. Organized Maritime Commission or Shipping Commission to take care 

of the receiving of surplus ships. 

32. Appointed delegation of five members to work jointly with SCAP in 

Tokyo. 

33. Created Surplus Property Commission. 

34. Ordered mechanization of farming under National Development Co., 

with 100,000 hectares to be utilized to meet shortage of rice supply. 

35. Created Council of National Defense 

^ "'Tmh-"'"' °^ ^'^"Sed with sole responsibilitv 

o LrltnLr'' ^"-l independent body 

ot prosecutors as principal adjuncts 

Police Command to prevent recurrence of jailbreaks in the provinces. 




MAY 

1.— The first Labor Day under the RepubUc is celebrated officially by the 
Government and by Labor. President Roxas issues a message warning 
the nation to take care "that we do not simply replace one tyranny with 
another— the tyranny of capital with the tyranny of labor." 
18.— The Presidential plane "Lili Marlene", with high officials of the 
National Land Settlement Administration and of the Philippine Army 
on board, crashes on a mountain in Cotabato on its return trip from 
Koronadal to Manila. Ex-Secretary Rafael R. Alunan, Judge Francisco 
Zulueta, and Colonel Edwin Andrews arc among the . 17 unlucky 
passengers. 

22 —The Second Session, First Congress of the Republic, adjourns sine die. 

President Roxas quietly observes the first anniversary of his assumption 
of office. 

30.— Presidant Roxas, in a Memorial Day speech today at the Philippine 
Sea Frontier, calls on all freedom-loving peoples of the world to 
"organize a battle for peace and prosperity." 

JUNE 

21- — President Roxas acts on last of bills passed during the second regular se- 
ssion of the First Congress of the Republic. Of the 119 measures presented 
to him for action, he signed 97, disapproved 12, and allowed 10 to 
become law without his signature. Among the measures enacted into 
law were those amending the Election Code, creating a Patent Office, 
reclassifying the provinces, providing for Presidential succession, appro- 
priating funds for the general expenses of the Government for the fiscal 
year 1948, and creating four new cities, namely, Dagupan, Rizal (formerly 
Pasay ), Lipa and Ormoc. 

23. — President Roxas receives a group of visiting American government 
newspaper and business leaders headed by Roy Howard of the Scripps, 
Howard newspaper syndicate. He expresses the hope that they will 
find Manila "the one bright spot in the East where the American spirit 
and ideal are alive," and tells them how his administration has approached 
the problem of national reconstruction and rehabilitation. 

26. — Vice President Quirino, on behalf of the government of the Republic of 
the Philippines, signs the Treaty of Amity between the Philippines and 
the French Republic. 




63 



Office of the President 

His Excellency 
MANUEL ROXAS 
President of the Philippines 




Emilio Abello 
Chief of the Executive Office 

Executive Office 

Hon. Emilio Adello, Chief nf 

the Executive Office 
Hon. NicANOR RoxAs Assis- 
tant Chief of the Executive 
Offfice 

Hon. Jose P. de Leon, Ass 



ssis- 



tant Secretary to the President 



Public Relations Office 

Juan C. Orendain, l>n}^y. 
Relations Secretary 

The President's Private Offices 

Federico Mangahas, Prtvoi; 
Secretary 

Mariano Ezpeleta, Legisk 
tive Secretary 

Mrs. Geronima T. Pecsox 
Assistant Private Stcrttor^ 

AideS'dc'Camp of the President: 
Lt. Col. Jacobo Zobel 
Major H. J. C. Cor vera 
Captain J. B. Hidalgo 

Provost Office : 

Lc. Col. Jose Tando, Prms. 

Officer and Cojiiiiidiiclflii!, 

Malacanan Qiiards 
Captain Salvador V. Babista 

Executive Officer 
Advisory Staff: 

Hon. Richard P. Butrick, 

Foreign Affairs 
Luther B. Bewley, Educcdor. 
Col. Angel M. Tuason, ?oh 

Matters 

Louis P. Croft, LandPlmiH 

Major C. L. Glazer, V. S 
Ai'my Liaison Officer 

Technical Staff : 

Hon. Pio Pedrosa, TcchnJ 
Assistant to the Presida^ 
Hans Menzi, Technical A^^^--' 
ant 

Col. Marking AGUSTiN,S|)eC''' 
Agent 




A BRIEF RECORD OF THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF PRESIDENT 
ROXAS FROM THE TIME HE TOOK OFFICE ON MAY 28, 

1946 TO MAY 28, 1947 



1. Proposed and approved Missing Persons Bill for Filipino veterans. 

2. Announced opposition to strike against the Government. 

3. Formed governing boards for government corporations and entities. 

4. Laid down uniform policy on matter of granting permits for radio 

stations and all kinds of public utilities. 

5. Issued Executive Order for rigid enforcement of regulation against 

Nepotism. 

6. Created provincial and municipal committees to take charge of sale of 

foodstuffs outside Manila. 

7. Emphasized need for a general policy on questions of lumber concessions. 

8. Created Commission on Site of Capitol. 

9. Suggested a bill on foreign funds control. 

10. Asserted right of government to purchase Buenavista Estate and other 

friar lands. 

11. Created Board of Deportation for undesirable aliens. 

12. Recreated Council of State. 

13. Ordered regulation of house rentals and the curbing of abuses of house 

owners. 

14. Suggested thorough study of question of possible conflicts in jurisdiction 

between U. S. Army and civil authorities, particularly of revision 
of Executive Order No. 51. 

15. Negotiated for the purchase of 3,500,000 yards of cloth, 750 tons of 

rice, and 500 tons of refined sugar to speed up rehabilitation. 

16. Authorized free distribution of 48,000 cases of milk to children in slums 

and schools. 

17. Recommended that government sell away surplus property that it does 

not need so that the proceeds could be used in the rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of the country and for purchase of big estates for sub- 
division and sale to tenants. 

18. Arranged loan of F4, 000, 000 from Reconstruction Finance Corporation 

for the rehabilitation of the hemp industry, NAFCO. 

19. Urged more strict supervision over private educational institutions. 




65 



Office of the President 



The Office of the President is the nerve center of the government. It 
is located at Malacanan Palace, the traditional seat of the governnient of 
the Philippines. Sixteen offices function under the President and are directly 
responsible to him. The following accomplishments have been recorded: 

1. The Bureau of Civil Service: 

(a) Gave various civil service examinations to 13,865 competitors, 
and conducted board examinations in which 2,107 candidates participated. 

(fo) From May 28, 1946 to May 26, 1947, acted upon 161,767 
appointments, retired 487 officers and employees of the government under 
the provisions of Act 2589, as amended. 

(c) Retired and gave retirement gratuities to 21 Americans under 
Act 4151. 

2. The Budget Commission : 

(d) Received for comment and recommendation, from the Office of 
the President, 45 bills and proposed bills. Among those recommended for 
approval, 15 have become laws, and the rest are now pending action by the 
President. 

(6) Prepared two National Budgets for the fiscal years 1947 and 1948. 

(c) Received during the period under review, 546 special budgets 
involving expenditures aggregating F207, 267,794. 88, including the creation 
and-or^^ recreation of 44,042 positions. Of this sum, the amount of 
P199,557,980.95 was recommended for approval, thereby effecting savinss 
ofF7,709,813.93. 

(d) Received 28,339 appointments from the different departnnents, 
bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations 
and enterprises, involving salaries amounting to T16 65^ 250 Of the 
said amount, a saving of TO9,611 was realized as a result of recommenda- 
tions made by the Budget Office. 

3. Philippine General Hospital : 

(a) Served patients whose number had increased by from 30 per cent 
to 4:, per cent, in spite of many handicaps such as shortage of personnel and 

70 





38. Decreed the suspension of all sales of government lots in Quezon City 

until after the Capitol Site has been determined 

39. Ordered the subdivision of all Japanese holdings in Davao now under 

the custody of NAFCO for distribution to tenants. 

40. Authorized school teachers to collect fees for services rendered in 

connection with the filing of war damage claims. 

41. Created public school health service board to administer the health and 

dental funds of the Department of Instruction, raised through 
voluntary contributions. 

42. Authorized appointment of a trade representative from the Department 

of Labor to Guam to take care of the interests of some 4,000 Filipino 
laborers already there and an estimated 2,000 more expected to be 
recruited and shipped there. 

43. Authorized creation of a Real Property Board of three members to gather 

data for all public lands and government-owned lands and to ascertain 
market values and other factors for proper appraisement of lots for 
expropriation or sale. 

44. Ordered the suspension of two chief agents and two assistant agents 

from the Bureau of Internal Revenue because of irregularities in the 
collection of taxes. 

Created a committee of three to investigate the charges against these 
suspended officials. 

45. Instructed Mayor Fugoso, Police Chief Javalera and D-I Chief Pardo de 

Tavera to take immediate action on alleged anomalies against certain 
members of the police force, and requested Sec. Zulueta to order the 
immediate raid on "El Cairo" as a concrete step in pushing through 
a vigorous campaign against gambling in the City. 

46. Urged expeditious handling of the back pay of guerrillas properly 

processed, particularly of Moro guerrillas now in the City. 

47. Cancelled leases at Port Area. 

48. Approved the granting of renewal of Meralco franchise. 

49. Approved the granting of leases to private parties who wish to explore 

and drill oil in P. I. 

50. Ordered general clean-up of the government. 




m Data on economic levels in the Philippines, war mortality and 
damage, and miscellaneous information on local economics for Ambassador 
Romulo. 

6. The Press Relations Office accomplished the following: 
(a) Issued the Official Gazette monthly. 

(5) Operated Station KZFM for the dissemination of government 
information. 

(c) Supervised press conferences given by the President to Manila 
reporters and foreign correspondents. 

(c/) Issued the parity speeches of the President in book form. 

(e) Issued the important messages and speeches of the President in 
book form on May 28, 1947. 

(/) Issued daily press releases on government functions, new orders, 
and important accomplishments. 

(g) Issued a revised edition of the official directory. 

(/i) Recorded in picture all events of national importance. 

(i) Began preparation of a Blue Book embodying the significant 
accomplishments of the Republic of the Philippines in its first year of life. 

7. The Institute of National Language : 

(d) Examined and corrected from the point of view of linguistic forms 
18 books in Tagalog, 10 bulletins, and three magazines. 

(fc) Undertook linguistic researches and studies. 

(c) Conducted a literary contest in the national language. 

(c/) Translated messages, speeches, and letters of national importance. 

8. The National Urban Planning Commission accomplished the 
following : 

W Gathered and analyzed planning information for urban areas such 
as Manila, Cebu, Iloilo, Baguio, Batangas, Tarlac, and other cities. 

(h^ Drew the plans for the downtown areas of Manila, southern part 

9. The Agrarian Commission : 

^—f'^ ^-PPOrtionnunt of che rice harvesc. 

rn nor Le .han P15 a^^t^ for fh tl^Z ''''' '^^ 




Budget Commission 

Hon. Pio Pedrosa, Commissioner 
Bureau of Civil Service 

Hon. Jose Gil, Commissioner 
Amado del Rosario, Deputy 
Commissioner 
Institute of National Lan<riuig.e 

Julian C. Balmaceda, Director 
Leonardo A. Dianzon, Secre- 
tary and Executive Officer 
Philippine Sugar Administration 

Vicente G. Bunuan, Technical 
Assistant and Officer -in- 
Charge 

Qovernment Procurement Commission 
Jose Moreno, Manager 

Agrarian Commission 

Hon. Faustino Aguilar Chair- 
man 

Philippine Qeneral Hospital 

Dr. Antonio G. Sison, Director 
National Council of Education 

Dr. Gabriel R. Manalac, 
Chairman 
Bureau of the Census and Statistics 

Leon Ma. Gonzales, Director 
NationalVrban Planning Commission 

Hon. Ramon Fernandez, Chair- 
man 

Board of Pensions to Veterans of Past 
Philippine I^evolutions 
Mario Balmaceda, Secretary 
National Advisory Health Council 
Hon. Antonio Villarama, 
Chairman 
Surplus Property Commission 

Hon. Placido L. Mapa, Chair- 
man 



J 




Pio Pedrosa 
Cortimissioner of the Budget 



Natio-aal Housing Comraission 

Hon. Bienvenido M. Gonzales, 
Chairman 

Shipping Commission 

Hon. Rafael Corpus, Chairman 



69 



OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER OF THE BUDGET 

of the government is the Budget 
Undoubtedly the nerve center ot^^^^_^^ fe^^^^.^^ ^^^^ ^.^^^j^^^ 

Commission. From it spring ^^e RepubUc. Its functions 

the government to the various raminca ^ PhiUppines 

naturally are multifarious ^"^/^'^'^f ^j^^,, experience and training fit him 

has counted on the ^^^^^'^ ; ''''l^^^^^^ This man is Pio Pedrosa. 
eminently for the service as Budget Commissioner 

, • c-^^^,--,! investigations were conducted by 

During the year under f ^^^^"^^^^^^^^ overtime service from 
the office regarding requests for extra compensation to 
various bureaus and offices of the government. 

One hundred sixty-nine applications fo. retirement w^^^ 
for approval under Act No. 2589 as amended by Act No. 4151. 

Sixty-five positions were reallocated. 

Several positions were recreated. 

Great economies were effected through the efforts of the Budget Office. 

The expenditures of various departments, bureaus and offices of the 
National Government were rigidly investigated and proposals were 
embodied in a special budget. The budget office proposed drafts of the 
following bills: 

1. An Act empowering the President to effect changes in the reorgani- 
zation of the National Government; 

2. An Act appropriating funds for operation of the Commonwealth 
Government and the Republic beginning July 1, 1946, until the General 
Appropriation Act for the fiscal year 1947 is enacted; 

3. An Act to organize the Philippine Naval Patrol Command. 




accommodation for patients, equipment, instruments, food, drugs, linen, and 
the like. 

(5) Increased bed capacity from only 450 on July 16, 1945, to 502 on 
May 12, 1947; admitted 13,927 patients and discharged 13,507 patients. 

(c) Treated in the Dispensary Division a total of 58,952 patients, 
an average of 452 patients daily. 

(dy Performed in the Receiving and Emergency Division, 6,546 
operations and 8,449 laboratory examinations. 

4. The Bureau of Census and Statistics prepared : 

(_a ) Statistical Yearbook of Philippine Statistics for 1946. 

(fo) Economic Survey of 1946. 

(c) Foreign Trade Statistics. 

(d ) Labor Statistics. 

(e ) Demographic Statistics. 

(/) Business Statistics. 

(g) Wage Earner's Cost of Living-indexes issued weekly for use of 
business firms and the Court of Industrial Relations. 

(h') Special studies on Balance of International Payments. 

(0 Special studies on the National Income of the Philippines. 

(/) Preparatory work for the Census. 

(^) War Damage Survey. 

(Z) Survey to determine damage to civil registry records. 

5. In cooperation with other offices, the following were accomplished 
by the Bureau of Census and Statistics : 

(a) A long questionnaire of the UNO calling for complete analysis 
of actual financial and economic conditions in the Philippines; data on war 
mortality and damage; and many other statistical data — through the request 
of the Department of Foreign Affairs. 

(fe) Miscellaneous data on American investments and expenditures in 
the Philippines at the request of the Department of Instruction. 

(c) Statistical data on crops and industries, trades, wages, prices, cost 
of living, national income of the Philippines, and international balance of 
payments at the request of the Joint Philippine- American Finance Commission. 

(d) Data on industrial disputes, wage claims, industrial accidents and 
workmen's compensation, cost of living, etc. 

(e) Data on war mortality and damage for Ambassador Elizalde. 




Department of Foreign Affc 




Dr. Bernabe Africa. 




trade barriers and discriminatory trade provisions. 

The department has sent abroad Joaquin M. Elizalde as Philippine 
Ambassador in Washington, D. C; Carlos P. Romulo as Philippine Rep- 
resentative to the United Nations' General Assembly; Jose P. Melencio as 
Consul General in New York; Roberto Regala as Consul General in San 
Francisco; Modesto Farolan as Consul General in Honolulu, Hawaii; Felino 
Neri as Consul in Amoy, China; and Emilio D. Bejasa as Vice Consul in 
Hongkong, attached to the American Consulate. 

The accomplishments of the Department of Foreign Affairs are as 
follows : 

1. It has succeeded in obtaining the unanimous approval of the Far 
East Council of the UNRRA for additional financial grants to the Philippines 
for the purchase of farm tools, work animals, and livestock for distribution 
in the devastated rural areas. 

2. It has concluded the following treaties, agreements, and conventions: 
(d) The treaty of General Relations with the United States; 

(b) The Agreement for the sale of certain Surplus War Properties 
under which the United States transferred to the Philippines over 600 
million dollars worth of surplus properties from the American Armed 
Forces in the Islands; 

(c) The Agreement between the Philippine and the British govern- 



ments under which the Turtle and Mangsee Islands group will be taken 
over by the Republic on October i, 1947; 

(d) The Philippine Alien Property Agreement; 





76 



(c) Studied 26 cases regarding landed estates, three of which contained 
areas approximately 100 to 18,000 hectares, with a view to government 
purchase and resale to legitimate tenants. 

(d) Received and studied numerous grievances of tenants against 
landlords, and rendered proper recommendations. 

10. The Law Division handled 264 pardons, 101 orders, 26 proclama- 
tions, 18 deportation cases, 92 visa cases, and 95 miscellaneous matters 
during the year under review. 

11. The Division of General Affairs: 

(ci) Maintained liaison services with the general public on miscella- 
neous subjects. 

(Z)) Attended to the needs of government offices for properties admin- 
istered by the Philippine Alien Property Administration. 

(c) Attended to all matters pertaining to real estate owned by the 
national, provincial, and municipal governments. 

12. The Protocol Officer: 

(d) Prepared and distributed invitations and admission tickets to the 
grandstand on the inauguration on May 28, 1946, of President Roxas and 
Vice President Quirino. 

(fo) Prepared invitations to the official State Dinner, reception, and 
dance given at Malacanan by President Roxas on July 4, 1946. 

(c) Completed the Malacaiian Social Register. 

13. The Records Division : 

(d) Received 63,576 articles of correspondence and released 75,663 
articles. 

(6) Sent 795 local telegrams, 768 foreign radiograms, filed 80,557 
articles of correspondence, complied with 375 requests for certified copies of 
records, and compiled recorcb in 616 volumes. 

14. The Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds : 

(a) Made extensive repairs on the Palace and Executive Buildings. 

(6) Restored to pre-war condition the Malacanan concrete annex, 
the garage, the boat house, and the servants' quarters, gymnasium, the swim- 
ming pool, and the Malacaiian stables. 

(c) Made improvements on the lawns of the Palace and Executive 
Buildings, planted new trees, and repaired the street lights and water 
connections. 

(d ) Undertook a poultry raising special project. 

15. The Legislative Secretary's Office: 

(a) Drafted 10 bills and redrafted 76 out of 130 bills received from 
different branches of the government. 

(b ) Drafted two concurrent resolutions. 




73 



Department of the Interior 

City Hall 




Office of the Secretary 

Hon. Jose C. Zulueta, Secre- 
tary 

Hon. Marciano Roque, Under- 
secretary 

Military Police Command, Army of 
the Philippines 

Brig. Gen. Mariano Castaneda, 
Provost Marshal Qeneral 

Col. Alberto Ramos, Chief of 
Staff 

Board of I(evieiu for Moving Pictures 

Dr. Gabriel Manalac, Chair- 
man 

Atcy. Teodoro F. Valencia, 
Secretary 

Board on Traces 

Narciso Pimentel, Chairman 




I 




Jose C. Zulueta 
Secretary oj the Interior 




78 



apartment of Foreign Affairs 

Arlcgui Street 



Office of the Sccrctdry 

Hon. Elpidio Quiring, Secretary 
of Foreign A ffairs 

Hon. Bernade Africa, Under- 
secretary of Foreign Affairs 
Office of the Counselor on Political and 
Economic Aff^airs 

TeODORO EVAXGELISTA, Couw- 

selor 

Office of Legal Affairs, Treaties, 
Intelligence and T(esearch 
Lucas V. Madamba, Law 
Officer 

Office of the Counselor on Adminis- 
tration, Budget and Controls 
Felix L. Lazo, Counselor 




Vice President Elpidio Quiring 
SecreUiry of Foreign Aijairs 





Bernabe Africa 
• Uncler-SecreUiry of Foreign Affairs 

75 



Department of Finance 

Tafc Avenue 



Office of the. Secretaij 

Hon. Miguel Cuaderno, Sr., 

Secretary 
Hon. Crispin Llamado, Under- 
secretary 

Division of Purchase and Supply 
GuiLLERMO Arcebal, Piirc/idsing 
Agent 

Bureau of Internal B^evenuc 

Bibiano L. Meer, Collector of 

Internal Hfivemie 
ALrREDO V. Jacinto, Deputy 
Collector of Internal I{euenue 

Bureau of Customs 

Alfredo de Leon, Insidar Col- 
lector 

Melecio Fabros, Deputy Col- 
lector 

Bureau of Banking and Insiwance 
Commission 
Felix de la Costa, Bank 
Commissioner 
Bureau of Printing 

Pablo Lucas, Director of 
Printing 

Qovernment Service Insurance System 
Dr. Luis R. Salvosa, Qeneral 
Manager and Actuary 
Philippine Charity Siveepstakes Office 
Hon. Jose A. Dorado, Qeneral 
Manager 




Miguel Cuaderno,, Sr. 
Secretary of Finance 



Bureau of the Treasury 

M. Guevara, Treasurer of the 
Philippines 




80 



Infotltln^tvfr'"' Philippines and the United States 

orient ^^^"-^^^'■-"g Radio Station KZFM to the Philippine 

Co^JJc' tancc Pact with the United States and the 

Lonsular Convention and the Fisheries Agreement; 

(g) The Ad Interim Agreement between the Philippines and 
Switzerland; 

1 ? Agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and 

the United States regarding Meteorological facilities and training 
program; and 

(O The Agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and 
the United States regarding air navigation facilities and training program. 

3. It conducted preliminary negotiations for the establishment of Ame- 
rican military, naval and aerial bases in the Philippines. 

4. It concluded arrangements for reciprocal landing rights with the 
United States, and temporary landing privileges for Philippine airline compa- 
nies with China, Hongkong, Spain, Batavia, Siam, India, and Australia. 

5. It sent Bernardo Abrera and Eduardo Quisumhing to Japan to 
take care of Japanese reparations to the Philippines and to help recover looted 
Philippine property. 

6. Under an arrangement with the United States, the Department sent 
and will continue to send periodically Filipino trainees to the United States 
Department of State Foreign Service Officers' Training School. 

7. With the UNESCO it is cooperating in the collection of data 
regarding Philippine culture, Philippine newspapers, moving picture 
companies, and radio broadcasting facilities. 




5. Redemption of treasury warrants issued before January 2, 1942. 

6 Creation of the Committee on Claims, under Administrative Order 
No 6 of the President, which has the function of determining and recom- 
mending ways and means to settle financial claims against the National 
Government, its branches, subdivisions, agencies and instrumentalities, 
outstanding and unpaid prior to the liberation of the Philippines from enemy 
occupation. 

The Bureau of Banking under the Bank and hisurance Commissioner 
of the Philippines supervised the operations of banking institutions in the 
rehabilitation of the country. In June 1946, domestic loans amounted to 
n59,000,000; in March 1947, these rose to 1*595,000,000. Private 
deposits in Philippine banks amounted to 5*543,000,000. 

Four Building and Loan Associations were rehabilitated namely: 
Cebu Mutual Building and Loan Association, Zamboanga Mutual Building 
and Loan Association, Manila Building and Loan Association, El Ahorro 
Insular. 

Insurance companies have registered a volume of business greater 
than at any other time in Philippine history. 




Department of the Interior 



Jose C. Zuliieca, Secretary of the Interior, contributed greatly to the 
amelioration of peace and order of the country during the first year of the 
RepubUc. The following are the accomplishments of his department: 

1. Established a Policy of attraction towards dissident elements. 

2. Secured the surrender of about 200,000 unlicensed firearms to- 
gether with 3,000,000 rounds of ammunition valued approximately 
at P6,000,000.00. 

3. Routed through the military police command dissident elements all 
over Luzon. 

4. Has extended greater protection to barrios and towns especially those 
near wide plantations. 

5. Has reduced criminality in the Philippines which reached its peak 
in August, 1946. 

6. Has extended 36 scholarships to deserving non-Christians for the 
purpose of furthering the agricultural, industrial, and social development of 
the non-Christian inhabitants of the country. 




Department of Justice 



Headed by the Secretary of Justice Roman Ozaeta who rose from judge 
of first instance to Solicitor General to Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, 
this department strengthened the courts by the employment of capable 
prosecutors and judges. 

During the year the Department of Justice through the Bureau of 
Prisons accommodated and housed thousands of men charged with political 
collaboration. These men had been turned over to the Bureau of Prisons 
by the CIC of the United States Army. 

The Anti-Usury Board conducted anti-usury campaigns and issued 
educational propaganda against usurers. Out of 205 complaints, 67 were 
disposed of. 

The Public Service Commission disposed of 12,929 applications for 
certificates of public convenience. It cancelled 446 certificates for failure of 
the parties concerned to pay the supervision and regulation fees. Its net 
income for the year was !P358,343.31. 

• The Bureau of Justice besides prosecuting government cases undertook 
the investigation of numerous deportation cases. During the year the 
Bureau disposed of 614 criminal, 303 land registration, 179 cadastral, 41 
civil, 22 citizenship, and 37 habeas corpus cases. Out of 1,391 writs of 
execution, 1,041 cases were acted upon. 

The Tenancy Law Enforcement Division extended the rice tenancy act 
throughout the country. This division handled 934 cases up to December 
1946. It disposed of 502 cases. From January to May 1947, it received 
808 cases filed with the central office. 

The Court of Industrial Relations has satisfactorily solved all strikes 
brought within its jurisdiction. Since its reorganization after the war, not 
one of Its orders, awards or decisions has been reversed by the Supreme Court, 
And the majority of its decided cases have not been taken by any of 
the parties uivolved to the Supreme Court for review. Durina the fiscal 
year m review (1946-1947), there have been received 55 indultr a ca^ , 
8"con3T"f A""' r'u ""'^""^ ^^^^^ tenancy cases, and 

thus kavril^^^^^^^ A- 'u" '"^'^ ^"^ '''''' ^8 have been decided, 

thus leaving 110 cases pending hearing or decision. 

corportlnsTh^e\o;d Commission has registered 589 stock 

P2T3r2?9.l2^^^^^^^^ to P37,377,934.50, of which 

aggregate subscription of 476 1 10 00 f'^TT ^^^^ an 

i.-i/u, 110.00 of which P565,554.43 has been 




The D epartment of Finance 



Secretary Miguel Cuaderno, after taking over the Department of 
Finance, intensified the collection of unpaid taxes and exerted all elTorts 
toward balancing the budget within the next three years, if possible. 

During the convention of provincial and city treasurers which was 
called by the Secretary of Finance in December, 1946, the attention of these 
ofticials was directed particularly to the need of intensifying the collection of 
taxes. These officials were also enjoined to undertake without loss of time 
a reassessment of real estate properties in order not only to effect an upward 
revision of assessments where such action v/as found to be justified, but also 
to collect land taxes in those cases v^here the assessment records had been 
destroyed during the war. 

Realizing the need of an independent Philippines for more revenues 
owing to the increasing expenditures of the Government for vital and urgent 
public requirements, the department deemed it necessary in the first year of the 
Republic to effect a revision of the tax system of the Philippines in order 
to encourage the development of industries, to promote the foreign trade, to 
achieve essential social objectives, and to rehabilitate, reconstruct and develop 
the national economy. 

This was brought about by : 

1. The creation of a Tax Commission by the President under Admin- 
istrative Order No. 36. 

2. Taking drastic steps to weed out dishonest, inefficient and undesirable 
employees in the various government bureaus and ofiices, insofar as it could 
be done under the civil service law and regulations. A general reorganization 
in the Bureaus of Internal Revenue and Customs is being undertaken, with 
the end in view of making them effective agencies for raising the revenues 
which the Government needs. 

3. Selection and coordination of reliable men in the Bureau of Customs 
in controlling the gem smuggling racket of a group which had been using 
the airlines as a fruitful means of conducting their illegal business between 
Siam and the Philippines. 

Illegal entry of dutiable goods is also being prevented through the 
efficiency of the customs personnel in the outports. 

4. Getting key men of the department busy on the work of the Joint 
Philippine-American Finance Commission which has under study the financial 
position of the Republic of the Philippines. 




Department of Agriculture and Commerce 

Brimo Building, Plaza Binondo 



Office of the Secretary 

Hon. Mariano Garchitorena, 
Secretary 

Hon. Jose S. Camus, Under- 
secretary 

Fiber Inspection Service 

Antonio Lejano, Manager 

Bureau of Forestry 

Florencio Tamesis, Director 

Bureau of Commerce 

S. R. Mendinueto, Director 

Bureau of Fisheries 

DeOGRACIAS V. VlLLADOLID, 

Director 

Weather Bureau 

Casimiro del Rosario, Acting 
Director 

Bureau of hands 

Jose P. Dans, Director 

Bureau of Plant Industry 

Felix D. Maramba, Director 

Bureau of Animal Industry 

Vicente Ferriols, Director 

' Bureau of Science 

A. S. Arguelles, Director 

Bureau of Mines 

Demetrio Andres, Director 





Mariano Garchitorena 
Secretary of Agricultxtre and Commerce 




86 



Department of Justice 

Aduana Street, Walled City 



Of] ice oj the Secretary 

Hon. Roman Ozaeta, Secretary 
oj Justice 

Hon. Felix Angelo Bautista, 
Undersecretary 

Parole Office 

Hon. Roman Ozaeta, Secretary 
of Justice, Chairman 

Anti-Usury Board 

Adolfo N. Feliciano, Executive 
Officer 

Bureau of Justice 

Hon. Lorenzo M. Tanada, 
Solicitor Qeneral 

People's Court 

Hon. Fortunato Borromeo 
Veloso, P^-esiding Judge 

Office of the Special Prosecutors 

Hen. Lorenzo M. Tanad.a, 
Solicitor Qeneral 

Public Service Commission 

Judge Feliciano Ocampo, Com- 
missioner 

Bureau of Prisons 

^ Eriberto B. Misa, Director of 
Prisons 

Qeneral Land 'Registration Office 
Enrique Altav as, Chief of the 
Office 

Securities and Exchange Commission 
Filemon Cosio, Coramissioner 

Court of Industrial Kdatio-ns 

Presiding Judge, (Vacant) 




Roman Ozaeta 
Secretary oj Justice 



Bureau of Investigation 

f- Joaquin Pardo de Tavera, 
Director 

T enancy Law Enforcement Division 

Deogracias E. Lerma, Chief of 
Division, Central Office 




paid; and 408 partnerships with a total capitalization of ?20,889, 131.34, 
aside trom 56 partnerships with a total capital of ^1,354,074.78 registered 
in the provinces. 

The Commission has prevented the issuance and circulation of no less 
than PI, 129, 101.79 worth of watered stocks. It blocked the incorporation 
of 11 companies with stocks aggregating ^175,988.00 for failure to produce 
proofs of the amounts paid. It registered 11 corporations with securities 
aggregating F25,69/, 000.00, and exempted 115 corporations with securities 
amounting to F6, 068,969 from the requirements of registration and/or 
license under the Securities Act. 

From July 11, 1945, to April 30, 1947, 1,120 cases of prisoners for 
parole were received for investigation. Of this number, 839 were finally 
acted upon, of v^hich 86 were granted parole by the President, 320 granted 
parole by the Board of Indeterminate Sentence, 247 denied parole, and 86 
were dropped. 

There were 926 petitions for conditional pardon received during the 
same period. Of this number, 615 were finally acted upon, of which 353 
were recommended to the President for approval, and 262 for denial. There 
were 22 cases of violation of conditional pardon. The violators were 
recommitted to prison to serve the remitted portion of their sentences. 

During the same period, there were 27 cases of prisoners whose 
respective sentences were either reduced or commuted upon the recommenda- 
tion of the Parole Office. 

Of the 281 petitions for absolute pardon received, 209 were acted upon, 
of which 1 19 were recommended for approval and 90 for denial. 




I 




90 



Department of Agriculture and Commerce 



Under the leadership of Secretary Mariano Garchitorena the department 
of Agriculture and Commerce has been able to accomplish the following : 

1. Launched a national food campaign making possible the establish- 
ment of 103,681 home projects, 558 commercial, and 604 semi-commercial 
projects on chickens and ducks, hicreased production of food crops in all 
the provinces. The price of foodstuffs has been reduced considerably. 

2. Operated 18 experimental stations covering 3,295 hectares, 1,705 of 
which are under cultivation. It distributed seeds and plants valued at 
^.54,854. 

3. Conducted plant investigations for the production of hybrid fruits 
and vegetables. It controlled the infestation of farms by locusts and rats 
in tv^elve provinces, effected quarantine work to prevent the entrance into 
the country of the fruit fly, coffee-berry borer and other pests. It conducted 
successful experiments on the utilization of milk soy as a substitute for 
imported wheat flour. Soil conservation projects and agricultural extension 
service were carried on by the department. 

4. Through the bureau of animal industry, five stock farms, 14 breeding 
stations, and four breeding centers were stocked with 124 head of carabao, 
171 head of cattle, 39 horses, 18 buffaloes, 247 pigs, 49 goats, seven sheep, 
309 chickens and 29 pigeons, 100,000 white leghorn and New Hampshire 
chicks. 

5. Gave great impetus to the fishing industry. The sum total of the 
fishery investments in the Philippines is now !P9, 109,500. 

6. Helped in the development of the lumber industry and increased 
the production of lumber, reducing the unit price of lumber in the local mar- 
ket. Reforestation, cinchona plantation, forest research, memorial tree 
planting, land classification, land registration, game and wild life projects 
have been undertaken. 

7. Conducted industrial research, settled claims and disputes concerning 
dummy landholdings in Davao, and undertook cadastral surveys. 

8. Intensified the nationalization of retail trade, fiber inspection, and 
development of mining projects, rendered geological service and canvassed 
for new materials. The successful operation of FlOO worth of meteoro- 
logical and radio technical equipment was undertaken. 

9. Established a national history museum with specimens from various 
parts of the Philippines. Intensified the dissemination of agricultural infor- 
mation and instruction through ofi^cial bulletins and through the press and 
inaugurated the holding of regional conferences of farmers and field men in 
five strategic points. 




Department of Public Works and Communications 



tion projects of the government. 

During the period under consideration, the Department registered 
17,708 motor vehicles, issued 43,124 drivers' licenses, 4,805 student permits, 
and received 1,829 cases of violations of the motor vehicle law. Of these 
1,829 cases, 322 were settled amicably, 58 dropped for lack of merit, 78 
taken to court, and 497 licenses were revoked. 

The Metropolitan Transportation Service (METRAN) provided 
Manila and neighboring provinces with much cheaper land and water 
transportation than might be expected from private companies. It provided 
a means of livelihood to hundreds of people. 

1. The department completed the construction of bridges in Manila, 
Mariquina, Morong, Batangas. 

2. The sum of P2, 000, 000 was distributed for the rehabilitation of hos- 
pitals, dispensaries, and maternity buildings in all the provinces totalling 22 
structures now under process of construction. 

3. Sixteen buildings for use by public officials were repaired in various 
parts of the country. 

4. National buildings were either constructed, maintained, or altered 
in the city of Manila. 

5. Construction and repairs were carried out on ports and harbors in the 
city of Manila. 

6. Irrigation systems were repaired and new ones started, especially 
in the provinces of Rizal, Nueva Ecija, and Bulacan. 

7. River control projects were undertaken. 

8. Artesian wells were constructed or repaired and improved. 



9. A total of 1,042 post offices were reopened throughout the country. 

10. Forty-five radio stations and 133 telegraph offices were reestablished. 

11. More than 425,897 paid telegrams and more than 23,078 incoming 
outgoing telegrams and radiograms were handled by the Bureau of Posts, 





a total balance of 




92 



Department of Instruction 

Philippine Normal School Building 






Office of the Secretary 

Hon. Manuel V. Gallego 
Secretary 

Hon. Prudencio Langcauon 
Undersecretary 

Bureau of Education 

EsTEBAN R. Abada, Director 
Dr. Cecilio Putong, Assistant 
Director 

Office of Private Education 

Dr. Manuel L. Carreon, 
Director 

.National Library 

E. B. Rodriguez, Director 
Luis MoNTiLLA, Assistant Di- 
rector 

Office of Aditlt Education 

Segundo M. Infantado, di- 
rector 

Office of tlie National Physical Di- 
rector 

Dr. Regino R. Ylanan, Director 



Manuel V. Gallego 
Secretary of Instruction 




Department of Public Works and Communications 

Post Office Building, Plaza Lavvcon 



Office of the Secretary 

Hon. R ICARDO NePOMUCENO 

Secretary 

Hon. Sergio Bay.a.n, Under- 
secretary 

Division of Motor Vehicles 

Primo Villar, Superintendent 

Bureau of Public Works 

IsAiAs Fernando, Director 

Bureau of Posts 

Juan Ruiz, Director 

Metropolitan Transportation Service 
Acting Qeneral Manager, (Va- 
cant) 




\ 



RiCARDO NePOMUCENO 

Secretary of Public Works and Communications 





of Education. 

The total enrolment in elementary, secondary, normal and technical 
schools in October, 1946, was 3,075,245 as against 2,027,957 in March, 
1941. 

Equipment and tools were acquu-ed for use m the trade schools with 
the release of 1*100,000 by President Roxas in November, 1946. 

histruction has been concentrated in both elementary and secondary 
schools upon the teaching of social studies, including character and citizenship. 

The Bureau of Education now operates three national schools of arts 
and trade, two vocational high schools, and 22 provincial trade schools, 
hi July, 1946, 23 agricultural and rural high schools were opened. 






96 



13. An aggregate of 37,526 deposits totalling r7,211,410.99 and 25,791 
withdrawals totalling P5, 193,544.28 were registered. 

14. The main portions of the water and sewer systems in the city of 
Manila were restored and surrounding towns like Las Pinas, Guadalupe and 
Antipolo were furnished water service. 

15. A total of 3,280 new water services were installed; 779 water service 
connections were reopened; 522 services were legalized; 282 sanitary sewer 
connections were installed, 36,230 lineal meters of sanitary sewer connections 
were cleaned, and 59 stoppages removed; 483 fire hydrants were reacti\ atcd 
and 4,022 water meters repaired; 133 projects with an estimated cost of 
^4,464,958 were started. 



93 




Bottom- FimJ „ ° ''^^^^^^^nics, Nueva Ecija Trade School 
ottom. Fuimu,re makmg class, Suht Trade School 





98 



Department of Instruction 

Secretary Manuel V. Gallego faced the problem of reconstructina the 
school buildings destroyed by the war and reestablishing classes which had 
been disrupted by the Japanese occupation, with resourcefulness and fortitude. 

Six hundred private schools and colleges of all levels in Manila and 
the provinces were reopened. At the close of the school-year 1945-46 
private schools reached 57 per cent of their pre-war enrolment. Private secon- 
dary school enrolment increased from 63,589 before the war to 63,750 in 1945 
-46. All indications tend to show that pre-war enrolment in all levels of 
instruction in private schools will be exceeded in 1947^48. A partial total 
enrolment of private schools and colleges in Manila and the provinces shows 
that 257,926 are in attendance. 

The adult education program has been stepped up and improved so that 
it now includes not only the teaching of adults on how to read and write 
but the instruction in civic education to save them from being used as tools 
by unscrupulous persons for subversive propaganda. Adults were given the 
opportunity to attend adult education assemblies and public forums. They 
were given information on how to improve their living conditions and in- 
crease their efficiency in their occupation. 

Adult students numbering 32,376 are now in attendance in 915 schools. 
About 90,716 adults attended adult education community assemblies. 

The National Library reopened the Baguio branch and the San Antonio, 
Zambales, Library Deposit Station. 

The National Library recovered practically all major manuscripts ot 
Dr. Jose Rizal lost during the war of liberation. It completed a library 
development and rehabilitation program involving the following: 

1. Establishment in five years of municipal reading rooms in all towns 
and cities; 

2. Operation of a library on wheels to reach the barrios and towns that 
do not possess library facilities; 

3. Establishment of regular branches in all provincial capitals and 
principal towns; 

4. Establishment of libraries in big factories. 

The President allocated F16,000,000 for the rehabilitation of the 
University of the Philippines. 

The President also ordered that there be closer supervision of private 
instruction throughout the islands. 




Department of Labor 

Boston St., Port Area 



Office of the Secretary 

Hon. Pedro Magsalin, Sec- 
retary 

Hon. Juan L. Lanting, Under- 
secretary 

Bureau of Labor 

Director (Vacant ) 

Bureau of Immigration 

Hon. Engracio Fabre, Com- 



missioner 



Hon. Jesus Bautista, First 
Deputy Commissioner 

Hon. Oscar Araneta, Second 
Deputy Commissioner 




Pedro Magsalin 
Secretary of Labor 




Department of National Defense 

879 Lepanto St. 



Office of the Secretary 

Hon. RuPERTO K. Kangleon, 
Secretary 

Army of the Philippines 

Major-General Rafael Jalan- 
DONi, Chief of Staff 

Brig. General Calixto Duque, 
Deputy Chief of Staff 

Philippine J\-aiitical School 

Francisco Castaneda, Superin- 
tendent 

Bureau of Aeronautics 

Col. Jesus A. Villamor, Di- 
rector 

EpiTACio V. SoBEjANA, Assis- 
tant to the Director and Chief 
Aeronautical Engineer 

Bureau of Coast and Qeodetic Survey 
Glenn W. Moore, Director 
Andres O. Hizon, Assistant 
Director 

Philippine Veterans Board 

Brig. General Macario Peralta, 
Jr., Chairman 





RuPERTO K. Kangleon 
Secretary of National Defense 





Kentucky won- 
der beans ..and 
onion s, Trini- 
da d Agricultural 
School, Trinidad, 
Mountain P r o v- 
ince. 





99 



r) 1- rr^,■r^m■^nA although an adjunct of the 
The MFC, Military P°'-;,^°~hc operational control of rhe 
Philrppine Arrny has P'^^^J^^^^^^ Vrshal General 

Department of the Interior. 1 hus tne rrovu:, 

to two different departments. 

The department supervises the 23 Army cemeteries in O'Donnell, 
Bataan and other places. 

The Coast and Geodetic Survey has been actively searching for 
trianaulation data of Northern Luzon and has been conductu.g a Motor 
Vehicle Operators' Course. It has made a reconnaissance survey of the 
mouth of Agusan River, a survey of Bataan, a resurvey of Manila Bay, and a 
reconnaissance survey of Pasig River. 

The Bureau of Aeronautics supervises and controls for civil aviation in 
the Philippines 62 landing fields (which include 16 military airfields). 
Commercial air lines have been registered and licensed. 




Department of Labor 



The Secretary of Labor is the Honorable Pedro MagsaHn. As head of 
the department, the Secretary has been responsible for various projects designed 
CO ameliorate labor and capital relations. Under his guidance the 
Department of Labor has accomplished the following: 

L It has intervened in 48 strikes and 21 other labor disputes in\'olving 
a total of approximately 23,203 laborers. Of the 48 strikes, 22 were 
amicably settled, 16 were certified to the Court of Industrial Relations, 3 
were brought by the parties concerned themselves to the said court, and 7 are 
still pending action and settlement. All the 21 labor disputes were amicably 
settled. 

2. Two hundred twenty- five labor organizations all over the Philippines 
were registered. From these labor organizations, a total sum of f^l, 125.00 
was collected as registration fees. 

3. The 8-hour labor law and the Woman and Child Labor Law were 
enforced rigidly through special sections of the department. 

4. Of the 1,213 cases filed for Workmen's Compensation, 44i were 
closed. For death cases, a total sum of F57, 850.36 was collected, including 
P2,990.75 for burial expenses. The total collection during the period was 
^105,169.27. 

5. A total of 598 claims for unpaid salaries and wages involving 2,655 
claimants were filed. Of this number of claims, 182 were amicably settled, 
158 claims were closed, 61 were withdrawn, and 46 were abandoned by the 
claimants. Seventeen were dismissed for lack of merit, 18 for lack of 
jurisdiction, 13 for lack of information. 

6. Through the Safety Inspection Division, the department investigated 
conditions in industrial and commercial establishments for the purpose of 
determining and correcting hazards to life and limb. 

7. Industrial hygiene activities were undertaken by agents of the 
department to insure enforcement of health and sanitation rules. 

8. Unemployment relief was given by the department to deserving 
unemployed persons. Out of 5,718 registered applicants for work, 2,736 
were employed in private firms. 

9. Through the Bureau of Immigration, the department has appre- 
hended, investigated, deported, or repatriated aliens who had entered the 
country illegally. During the period under consideration 293 Chinese entered 
the country illegally, 37 aliens of different nationalities were repatriated, 
and 26 aliens were excluded. 




101 



, Department of Health and PubUc Welfare 

: rUr Secretary of Health and Public Welfare. 
Or Antonio V Uarama is the secretary . 
The Sparclen. has a long hsc of accon,phshn,e„cs to .s c«d,c. To 

I. Lproven^cK of general sanitation and immun.zat.on wh.ch resulted 
in the prevention of major cpidcnics; (see graph page 10/ 1 

2 Increase of charity clinics and revival of dental serv.ces; 

3. Improvement of hospital service and increase of the per cap.ta expense 
for patients; 

4. Wider campaign against tuberculosis, malaria, leprosy, and venereal 
diseases; 

5. Special studies on typhoid, dysentery, and other gastro-intestinal 
diseases; 

6. Successful prevention of dangerous communicable diseases from 
abroad, such as cholera, plague, and smallpox; (see graph page 108). 

7. Execution of joint program with the U. S. Public Health Service 
on leprosy, malaria, tuberculosis, x-enereal diseases, sanitation, nutrition, 
maternal and child v^'elfare, training grants, and training centers; 

8. Extension of relief and welfare program; 

9. Operation of the War Relief Oflice for war widows and orphans, 
the guerrillas, and other indigent war victims; 

10. Creation and operation of the National Advisory Health Council. 

II. Inspection, through the Bureau of Quarantine, of 873 vessels and 
485 aircraft, detained 24 \'esscls for quarantine, and fumigated 22 vessels. 

12. Supervision, through the Bureau of Health, of the operation of 
7 national hospitals, 14 hospitals in special provinces, 34 provincial hospitals, 
9 leprosaria and leper treatment stations, 18 private hospitals in Manila 
and a considerable number of hospitals in various provinces. 



106 



The Department of National Defense 

During the last year, the Department of National Defense weeded 
out undesirable elements from the rank and file of the Army of the 
Philippines. It has received the loyalty cases of approximately 1634 officers 
and men. Court-martial cases were also passed upon by the department. 

Forty-six trans-oceanic fixed point-to-point licensed commercial radio 
stations have been under its direct supervision and control. Among the 
radio companies falling under government supervision are the RCA 
Communications, hic, McKay Radio and Telegraph Co., hic, Globe 
Wireless, Limited, and the Philippine Press Wireless, Inc. 

Besides the point-to-point stations there are three coastal, eleven ship, 
and four aeronautical, thirty-eight craft and sixty-two amateur radio stations! 
The licensing and inspection of these radio stations -have occupied the 
attention of the department. 

The Philippine Nautical School which in pre-war days had turned out 
some of the best-trained young Filipino naval cadets has been partly 
rehabilitated and is now housed in two buildings. There are at present 75 
first-year students at the School. 

The Philippine Army, renamed Army of the Philippines, is the largest 
entity under the direction and supervision of the department. 

Up to June 30, 1946 the Army was under the administrational control 
of the United States Army through the Commanding General, AFWESPAC. 
Its strength up to January 31, 1947 was 159,000 officers and men. But the 
process of demobilization was started and kept until the strength was pruned 
down to 35,743 officers and men. 

During the year the Philippine Army 

1. Reestablished the Philippine Military Academy; 

2. Reestablished the Reserve Officers Service School; 

3. Prepared plans for cadre training; 

4. Surveyed and mapped out Army camps and sites; 

5. Established central depots and supply points all over the Philippines; 

6. Prepared a 5-year plan for research v/ork; 

7. Continued organization of the ten military districts, the first 
chemical mortar training company, 1st and 2nd infantry training regiments, 

8. Performed logging operations at Lanao forest and Bataan; 

9. Completed 19 wire projects; 

10. Gave care and treatment to 2,000 disabled veterans. 




100 _ 



80 _ 



BUREAU OF QUARANTINE 

NUMBER OF VESSELS ArmAgCRAFTBO ^ AND INSPECTED 




July 46 



Aug 46 Sept -46 Oct '46 Nov '46 Dec. '46 Jan. '47 Feb. '47 Mai 47 




Department of Health and Public Welfare 

San Lazaro Hospital 




Office of the Secretary 

Hon. Antonio Vili.arama, 
Secretary 

Hon. Reg I NO G. Padua, 
Undersecretary 

Bweau of HealtJi 

Dr. Felipe Arenas, Director 

Bureau of Public Welfare 

Mrs. Asuncion A. Perez, 
Di7-ector 

Bureau of Quarantine 

Brig. General H. F. Smith, 
UPHS, Technical Adviser to 
the President of the T^epuhlic 
Oil health and quarantine 
matters. 

Dr. RuFiNO Abriol, Director 



Antonio Villarama 
Secretary oj Health and Public Welfare 




Qovernment^owned andjor Controlled 
Corporations and Agencies 

(Officcr-in-Charge) 



National Development Company 

Hon. Elpidio QuiRiNO, Chair- 
man, Board of Directors 
Vicente Sabalvaro, Assistant 
to the Qeneral Manager 
The National Kice and Corn Corpo- 
ration 

Judge Servillano de la Cruz, 
Chairman, Board of Directors 
Arturo V. Tanco, Manager 

Insular Sugar 'Refining Corporation 
Hon. Mariano Garchitorena, 

Chairman, Board of Directors 
Vicente Sabalvaro, Officer-in- 

Chargc 

National Food Products Corporation 

Hon. Mariano Garchitorena, 
Chaij'man, Board of Directors 

Vicente Sabalvaro, Manazer 
National Footioear Corporation 

Hon. Miguel Cuaderno, Sr., 

Chairman, Board of Directors 

Vicente Sabalvaro, Officer-in- 
Chargc 

People's HomeSite Corporation 

Hon. Mariano Garchitorena, 
Chairman, Board of Directors 

Atty. Faustino Reyes, Acting 
Manager 

National Cooperatives Administration 
Hon. Pedro Magsalin, Chair- 
man, Board of Directors 
Mrs. Felicidad S. Manuel, 
Assistant Manager (^Acting, 
Manager^ ^ 



National Warehousing Corporation 

Hon. Miguel Cuaderno, Sr., 
Chairman, Board of Directors 

Vicente Sabalvaro, Officer-in- 
Charge 

Cehu Portland Cement Company 

Hon. RiCARDo Nepomuceno, 
Chairman, Board of Directors 

Vicente Sabalvaro, Officer-in- 
Charge 

Metropolitan Water District 

Hon. RiCARDo Nepomuceno, 
Chairman, Board of Directors 

Manuel Manosa, Manager 

Manila Railroad Company 

Jose Paez, Acting Chairman, 
Board of Directors 

Fernando E. V. Si son, Qeneral 
Manager 

National Land Settlement Adminis- 
tration 

Hon. Rafael R. Alunan, 
Chairman, Board of Directors 

Hon. Francisco Zulueta, Ma- 



nager 



National Power Corporation 

Hon. R iCARDO Nepomuceno, 
Chairman, Board of Directors 

Filemon C. Rodriguez, Acting 
Assistant Manager 




BUREAU OF QUARANTINE 

GRAPH ON IMMUNIZATIONS 




National Power Corporation 



During the year under review 



the National Power Corporation accom- 



plished the following: 

1. Continued the preliminary surveys and investigations of— 
(a) Agno River Project, Mt. Province 

(fc) Agus River Project, Lake Lanao, Mindanao 

(c) Agus River Project, Infanta, Quezon 

(c/) Lumot River Project, Caliraya, Lumban, Laguna 

(e) Pcfiaranda River Project, Nucva Ecija 

(/) Talavera River Project, Nueva Ecija 

2. Operated Unit No. 1 of the power plant at Caliraya; 

3. Completed rehabilitation of Unit No. 3 at Caliraya; 

4. Rehabilitated Makati sub-station and transmission line from Caliraya 
to Makati sub-station; 

5. Completed sand and gravel backing of east and west dykes up to 
an elevation of 289 meters; 

6. Completed one row of concrete paving at dam up to an elevation 
of 289.75 meters; 

7. Reestablished gauging and weather observations at Agus River 
Infanta, Quezon; 

8. Reestablished rain gauges and water measuring devices at Caliraya; 

9. Rehabilitated living quarters of employees at Caliraya; and 
10. Constructed and repaired NPC roads at dam site, Caliraya. 





112 



Qeneral Auditing Office 

From July 4, 1946 to July 4, 1947, the General Auditing Office 
continued performing the accounting and auditing functions which were 
fused in July, 1938. 

Numerous irregularities were discovered and brought to the attention 
of the office for investigation. 

To coordinate the investigations of all irregularities, two sets of 
investigating committees were created. 

More than 8,000 claims filed by war widows and heirs of deceased 
regular officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Army and the former Phil- 
ippine Constabulary were processed. 

The audit of the transactions of the following entities was undertaken : 

1 . Philippine Tuberculosis Society. 

2. Asociacion de Damas Filipinas. 

3. Charity Horse Races. 

4. Accounts of Disbursing Officers of the Quezon histitute. 

5. Franchise corporations like the RCA Communications, Pan American 
Airways, Philippine Long Distance Telephone Co., and others. 

The pecuniary savings effected out of the audit of the Philippine Tuber- 
culosis Society, the Quezon Institute and the Asociacion de Damas Filipinas 
totalled !P10,656.54. 

The provincial audit department discovered a total of 112 irregularities 
and shortages amounting to PI 26,203.85. From its audit of the accounts 
questioned, pecuniary savings amounting to P623,669.87 were effected. 




109 



J immediately upon the approval of this Act: 
by proclamation designate and fix '^"^l^^'^t be interpreted to mean as in 
Provided however That this section shall not oe ni^^iy <«> m 

an way exen ptmg from such liability any person, without the requis.te 
HcensTfound. within the aforementioned period of time, making use of any 
of ^d articled, except in self-defense, or carrying them on his PJ-n excepc 
for the purpos; of surrendering them as herein required: Provrded, further, 
That this section shall not in any way aflFect any case pending in court o h, 
date of the passage of this Act. for violation of section twenty-six hundred 
and ninety-two of the Revised Administrative Code; And Provided, lastly. 
That the President may authorize any officer or agency of the Government 
to issue to the persons surrendering their firearms temporary licenses therefor 
for periods not exceeding three months at a time. 

Sec 3. This act shall take effect upon its approval. 

Approved. July 19, 1946. 




Philippine Charity S^vccpstakcs 

Hon. Crispin Llamado, Chair- 
man, Board of Directors 

Hon. Jose A. Dorado, Qeneral 
Manager 

J\^ational Coconut Corporation 

Dr. Maximo M. Kalaw, Chair- 
man, Board of Directors 

Dr. Maximo M. Kalaw, 
Qeneral Manager 

Philippine National Bank 

Hon. Roman Ozaeta, Chair- 
man, Board of Directors 
Vicente Carmona, President 

Philippine 'Relief Rehabilitation 
Administration 

Hon. Ildefonso Coscolluela, 
Director Qeneral and Chairman, 
Board oj Directors 



Agricultural Machinery and Equip- 
ment Corporation 
HiLARioN G. Hen.'\res, Acting 
Cliairman, Board of Directors 
HiLARioN G. Henares, Assis- 
tant Manager and Executive 
Officer 

National Abaca and Other Fibers 
■poration 
Cenon S. Cervantes, Chairman 
and Qeneral Manager 
Rehabilitation Finance Corporation 

Hon. Primitivo Lovina, Chair- 
man, Board of Qovernors 
National Trading Corporation 

M. Occena, Officcr-in- Charge 
National Tobacco Co7-poration 

Col. Manuel Nieto, Chairman 
Manila Hotel 

Col. Manuel Nieto, Manager 




n) Any Filipino citizen against whom charges for treason or any other 
^ crime against the national security are pend.ng rn any court „, 

tribunal, civil or military. 
Sec 1 The Foreign Funds Control Office with the approval of the 
otc. 1. X - ^ , _ nrpscribe from time to time further 

President is hereby authorized to prescriot- iiu 

iresiaenc, i y nurnoses of th s Act for any or all of the 

definitions not inconsistent with tne purpuii-i 

term used in this Act. and generally to make such rules and regulat.ons as 
may be deemed necessary or expedient to carry out and enforce the purposes 
of this Act. 

Sec 5 Any person violating any provisions of this Act shall, upon 
conviction, be punished by a fine of not exceeding twenty thousand pesos or 
by imprisonment of not exceeding ten years, or both, in the discretion of the 
court. 

Sec 6. To carry out the purposes of this Act, there is hereby 
appropriated out of any funds in the Treasury of the Philippines not otherwise 
appropriated the sum of fifty thousand pesos, to be expended upon the 
recommendation of the Secretary of Finance with the approval of the 
President. 

Sec. 7. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, August 9, 1946. 




Kcpublic Act No. ^ H. No. 12.5 

SURRENDER OF FIREARMS 

^^N^NFTV T^v^^/l^ TWENTY-SIX HUNDRED AND 

ANH t;.^?.?^ ™^ ^^^^^^^ ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 
SHf? II r?cn^^^Jj; ^^^^ RESPONSIBILITY THOSE WHO 
?^nMc ..^tI^^^^^^^^ firearms UNDER CERTAIN CONDI- 
TIONS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Congress assembled: 

Section 1. Section twenty-six hundred and ninety-two of the Revised 
Administrative Code, as amended by Commonwealth Act Numbered Fifty- 
six, IS hereby further amended to read as follows: 

"Sec. 2692^ Vnlazofu! manufacture, dealing in, acquisition, disposition 
o, possession of firearms, or ammicnition therefor, or instnanent used or 
intended to be used in the manufacture of firearms or ammunition -Any 
person who manufactures, deals in, acquires, disposes, or possesses, any firearm 
parts of firearms, or ammunition therefor, or instrument or implement used 
or intended to be used in the manufacture of firearms or ammunition 
in violation of any provision of sections eight hundred and seventy-seven to 
nine hundred and six, inclusive, of this Code, as amended, shall upon 
conviction, be punished by imprisonment for a period of not less than one 
year and one day nor more than five years, or both such imprisonment and a 
fine of not less than one thousand pesos nor more than five thousand pesos 
m the discretion of the court. If the article illegally possessed is a rifle,' 
carbine, grease gun, bazooka, machine gun, submachine gun, hand grenade,' 
bomb, artillery of any kind or ammunition exclusively intended for such 
weapons, such period of imprisonment shall be not less than five years nor 
more than ten years. A conviction under this section shall carry with it the 
forfeiture of the prohibited article or articles to the Philippine Government. 

"The possession of any instrument or implement which is directly useful 
in the manufacture of firearms or ammunition on the part of any person 
whose business or employment does not deal with such instrument or 
implement shall be prima facie proof that such article is intended to be used 
in the manufacture of firearms or ammunition." 

Sec. 2. The provisions of the foregoing section to the contrary 
notwithstanding, any person in possession of any of the prohibited articles 
therein mentioned, may, without incurring any criminal liability, surrender 
the same to such officer and within such period of time as the President shall 




Republic Act No. if) 

LOANS FOR REHABILITATION 

AN ACT AUTHORIZING ™E PRESIDEN^^^^^ 

TO OBTAIN SUCH LOANS OR INCUR ^^^H INDEBT^^^^^ 
WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STA^^^^ 
AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES AS M^^ 
SARY TO COVER BUDGETARY DEFICITS AND OTHER 
PENDITURES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC 
OF THE PHILIPPINES FOR REHABILITATION AND OTHER 
PURPOSES, AND APPROPRIATING THE NECESSARY FUNDS 
THEREFOR. 

Be It enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Congj-ess assembled: 

Section i. The President of the Phihppines is hereby authorized to 
negotiate such loans or to incur such indebtedness with the Government of 
the United States, its agencies and instrumentalities, as may be necessary to 
cover budgetary deficits and other expenditures of the Government of the 
Repubhc of the Phihppines for rehabilitation purposes, including the purchase 
of necessary equipment or of surplus and other kinds of property from the 
United States, under such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon. 

Sec 2. The authority herein granted to the President shall be deemed 
to include the authority to guarantee loans and credits extended to 
the corporations owned or controlled by the Government of the Republic of 
the Philippines. 

Sec 3. It shall be the duty of the President as soon as a loan is obtained 
or an indebtedness is incurred, to report to the Congress the amount of loan 
obtained and to submit a detailed program of expenditures for its approval. 

Sec. 4. The necessary amount is hereby appropriated out of any funds 
in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated to pay the principal 
and interest on such loan or indebtedness as and when they shall become due. 

Sec 5. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, September 18, 1946. 



118 



Kepublic Act Mo. 7 ' H. No. 464 

FOREIGN FUNDS CONTROL OFFICE 

'"^^OFF^F '^?Mr^^I^^^^^" ™^ PORE^GN FUNDS CONTROL 
OFFICE, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES 

Be enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Longress assembled: 

undef'rirn ^' established a Foreign Funds Control Office 

tl Li ^'P'"'"*^"^ ^T'^' ^i^h authority, during the existence of 
the national emergency resulting from' the war or so long as it may 
be necessary in the public interest, to exercise financial control over, and to 
investigate regulate, direct and compel, nullify, void, prevent or prohibit any 
holding of, or dealing in, or exercising of any right, power or privilege with 
respect to any property within the Philippines or any transaction involving 
such property in which any enemy country or national thereof has any interest 
Sec. 2 The Foreign Funds Control Office is authorized to require anv 
person to keep a full record of and to furnish under oath in the form 
ot reports, or otherwise, complete information relative to any act or 
transaction referred to in this Act either before, during, or after the completion 
thereof, or relative to any property or interest therein in which any enemy 
country or any national thereof has or has had any interest or as may 
be necessary to enforce the provisions of this Act; and in any case in which 
a report could be required, the Foreign Funds Control Office may require the 
production of, or seize any books of account, records, contracts, letters 
memoranda or other papers in the custody or control of such person, and the 
Foreign Funds Control Office may take further measures not inconsistent 
herewith for the enforcement of this Act. 

Sec. 3. For the purpose of this Act, the term "national" of an enemy 
country shall include, but not by way of limitation, 

(1) Any foreigner who directly or indirectly, or who there is reasonable 

cause to believe directly or indirectly, levied war against the 
United States or the Commonwealth of the Philippines, or 
adhered or gave aid or comfort to an enemy country, during 
the war; 

(2) Any foreigner who is or has been, or to the extent that there is 

reasonable cause to believe that such person is or has been, acting 
or purporting to act directly or indirectly for the benefit or on 
behalf of any enemy country or national thereof, and 




H. No. 47 

Republic Act No. zi 

CLAIMS OF MINORS AGAINST 
THE GOVERNMENT 

ACT ATITHOR171NG THE LEGITIMATE FATHER, OR, IN 
nts DeS ™ OF ANY MINOR OR INCGM- 

PETENr^^^ A CLAIM OR SHARE IN A CLAIM 

AGAInIt ™ ^ OF THE PHILIPPINES OR OF 

tSf UNITED STATES TO RECEIVE PAYMENT OF SAID 
CLAIM OR SHARE WHEN THE AMOUNT THEREOF DOES 
NOT EXCEED FIVE HUNDRED PESOS OR ITS EQUIVALENT 
IN DOLLARS. 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Keprcsentatives of the Philippines 
in Congress assembled: 

Section 1. Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the 
legitimate father, or, in his default, the mother, of any minor or incompetent 
person having a claim, or share in a claim, against the government of the 
Philippines or of the United States, is authorized, without need of the court 
appointing him or her as guardian for said minor or incompetent person, to 
receive payment of said claim or share when the amount thereof does not 
exceed five hundred pesos or its equivalent in dollars, except in case said 
father or mother is an imbecile, insane, vagrant or vicious person, or is a 
habitual drunkard or a habitual criminal, or has abandoned, neglected, or 
refused to support said minor or incompetent person, or has caused the same 
to commit offenses against the law. 

Sec 2. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, September 25, 1946. 



* 




Republic Act 7\Jo. ii H. No. 291 

SLAUGHTERING OF CATTLE 

AN ACT TO PROHIBIT THE SLAUGHTERING OF MALE AND 
FEMALE CARABAOS, HORSES, MARES, AND COWS. 

Be It enacted by the Senate and House of Kcprcsentatives of the Pliilipbines 
in Congress assembled: 

Section i. Any provision of existing laws to the contrary notvvitlv 
standuig, slaughtering of male and female carabaos, horses, mares, and cows 
IS hereby prohibited unless authorized by the Secretary of Agriculture and 
Commerce. 

Sec. 2. Any person who violates the provisions of the preceding section 
shall be punished with a fine of not less than two hundred pesos nor more 
than five hundred pesos or by imprisonment of not less than two months 
nor more than six months, or both fine and imprisonment at the discretion 
of the court. 

Sec. 3. The Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce shall promulgate 
such rules and regulations as will effectively carry out the provisions of this 
Act. However, when in the opinion of the Secretary of Agriculture and 
Commerce there exists a sufficient number of work animals for agricultural 
purposes in the Philippines, the President may declare this Act inoperative. 

Sec. 4. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, September 2, 1946. 




117 



H. No. 482 

liepublic Act No. 29 

LIVING BONUS FOR PROVINCIAL 
AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES 

arr AUTHORIZING PROVINCIAL AND MUNICIPAL 

"e\nS™^ chartered cities to grant 
living bonus. 

Be enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 

in Congress assembled: 
' Section 1 The provisions of existing law to the contrary notwith- 
standing, provincial and municipal governments are hereby authonzed to 
arant living bonus to their officers and employees not in excess of the schedule 
or rates fixed by the National government for its officers and employees. 

Chartered cities are also hereby authorized to grant such living bonus as 
may be fixed by city ordinance. 

Sec 2. This Act shall take effect as of July first, nineteen hundred and 
forty-six, and shall lapse on June thirty, nineteen hundred and forty-se\'en. 

Approved, September 25, 1946. 




Republic Act No. 19 H. No. 353 

MATERNITY AND CHILDREN'S 
HOSPITAL 

"^^^x^ST.c ^^^^^^^^'^'^^^^ ™E SUM OF ONE HUNDRED 
THOUSAND PESOS FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE 
MATERNITY AND CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL IN THE CITY OF 
MANILA. 

Be it enacted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Congress assembled: 

Section 1 . Out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated there is hereby appropriated the sum of one hundred thousand 
pesos or so much thereof as may be necessary to be expended by the Director 
of the Bureau of Health upon approval by the Secretary of Health and Public 
Welfare for the construction of a dormitory building and additional wards 
for the Maternity and Children's Hospital in the City of Manila, as well as 
for the purchase of hospital, medical and other necessary equipment and 
supplies for the said hospital. 

Sec. 2. Any sum or sums of the appropriation herein-abo\'e mentioned 
remaining unexpended on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred and 
forty-eight shall revert to the general funds of the National Treasury and 
shall not thereafter be available for expenditure except in pursuance 
of appropriation made by law. 

Sec. 3. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, September 25, 1946. 




H. No. 766 

I(epublic Act No. 33 

APPROVING AGREEMENT WITH 
U. S. A. ON SURPLUS PROPERTY 

AM ArT TO APPROVE THE AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO 
BETWEEN THE G^^^^ OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE 

mP^NEl AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED 
SPATES OF AMERICA. DATED SEPTEMBER ELEVENTH, 
MN^EN HUNDRED FORTY^SIX; TO AUTHORIZE 

THE ACCE^^^^ ADMINISTRATION, SALE, AND DISPOSI- 
TiON OF THE SukPLUS PROPERTY ACQUIRED THEREUN- 
DErV AND TO APPROPRIATE THE NECESSARY FUNDS FOR 

the' purpose. 

Whereas, on the eleventh day of September, nineteen hundred and 
forty-six, the President of the PhiUppines representing the Government of the 
Republic of the Philippines, and the Central Field Commissioner for the 
Pacific and China, Office of the Foreign Liquidation Commission, Department 
of State, representing the Government of the United States of America, 
entered into an Agreement in words and in figures as follows : 

Agreement Between the United States and the Philippines 
FOR THE Sale of Certain Surplus War Property 

This Agreement between the Government of the United States of 
America, hereinafter called "United States", and the Government of the 
Republic of the Philippines, hereinafter called "Philippines", 

WITNESSETH : 

Whereas, the cessation of active military operations in the war with 
Japan has rendered surplus to the needs of the United States quantities of its 
property now situated in the Philippine Islands; and 

Whereas, the Congress of the United States has, by the Surplus Property 
Act of 1944, as amended, authorized the disposal of the surplus property of 
the United States; and the Central Field Commissioner for the Pacific and 
China of the Office of the Foreign Liquidation Commissioner has 
been charged with responsibility for that disposal in the Philippine Islands; and 

Whereas, such surplus property available for sale to the Philippines, 
exclusive of property which is already under contract or firm commitment 
tor sale or transfer, represents an estimated aggregate procurement cost of 
approximately six hundred thirty million dollars in movables and fifty-five 
mil ion dollars in fixed installations, of which over one-half has already been 
declared surplus; and 




124 



Republic Act No. z8 ' H. No. 

AUTHORITY TO MUNICIPALITIES 
TO CONTRACT LOANS 

^^MNS ^VoM ^S^"^ MUNICIPALITIES TO CONTRACT 
B?NK FOP T»J^!^ AGRICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL 

andVaTg^^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^ 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Kqvesentatives of the Philippine'^ 
in L.ongress assembled: 

Section 1 Municipalities are hereby authorized to contract loans from 
the Agricultural and Industrial Bank, said loans to be taken from time to 
time in such amounts as may be needed for the construction of public markets 
and slaughterhouses and for the acquisition of the necessary sites, subject to 
the approval of the President of the Philippines. 

Sec. 2. That said loan shall bear an interest at the rate of not more 
than six per centum. Fifty per centum of the annual net income of 
the operation of the market and slaughterhouse constructed under this Act 
shall be used to pay the loan herein authorized, until such time as such loan 
together with the interest shall have been totally paid. At the end of each 
fiscal year the said sum shall be turned over by the municipal treasurer 
concerned to the Agricultural and Industrial Bank. 

Sec. 3. The construction of such markets and slaughterhouses shall be 
under the supervision of the district engineer. 

Sec. 4. The municipal treasurer shall be charged with the administration, 
operation and maintenance of any project constructed under this Act, and 
shall monthly or as may be required by the Agricultural and Industrial Bank, 
submit to it a report showing the income from the operation of the project. 

Sec. 5. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, September 25, 1946. 




121 



, . , , , T v.rl «;r-ires has extended credit for the purchase of 
PhiUppines to which the United :5tates nas cac 

surplus property. 

Article 1.— Transfer of Possession 

a. That the right to possession of the property sold under Article one 
hereof shall, after declaration to the Foreign Liquidation Commissioner for 
disposal as surplus, pass to the Philippines at the earliest practicable date 
upin either: (1) the surrender by the United States and the acceptance by 
the Philippines of physical or constructive possession, or (2) the passage 
of sixty days' time after notice to the Philippines that specified property is 
available for transfer, whichever shall first occur. That such notice shdl be 
deemed to have been duly given when delivered, in writing, to the Office 
of the Philippine Government Purchasing Commission at Manila, and shall 
be deemed sufficient if it either generally describes the property available or 
generally describes the location thereof. 

b. That until right to possession passes to the Philippines pursuant to 
paragraph a of this Article, the United States shall continue to have custody 
and control of the property sold, and shall give said property the same care 
and protection as is accorded its own property of like character. 

c. That after the right to possession with respect to specified property 
has passed to the Philippines pursuant to paragraph a, all responsibility, risk 
of loss, and liability for the care, custody, protection and maintenance of 
such property shall be upon the Philippines, including rents and liabilities 
for the storage thereof and damages and claims of any nature arising out of 
or incident to the ownership of such property, and the Philippines 
shall indemnify and hold the United States harmless from any such 
responsibilities, risks, liabilities, rents, damages and claims. That the 
Philippines shall promptly enter into such rental and leasing arrangements as 
may be necessary or appropriate to the possession or use of the property 
transferred, and shall assume all obligations under such rental and leasing 
arrangements to v/hich the United States is now a party, without charge to 
the United States other than such charges as shall have rightfully accrued 
prior to the eftective date hereof, and the Philippines shall remove the property 
from land owned by the United States within six months, and from other 
land used or controlled by the United States within twenty-two months 
after passage of right to possession hereunder. 

d. That all crating, conditioning, handling, lading and transportation of 
the property sold shall be arranged and paid for by the Philippines. 

c That the owning agency of the United States shall make property 
available for visual inspection before the transfer of right to possession. 

/. That representatives of the Philippines engaged in guarding, storing, 
or removal of property located on lands owned by the United States and on 




Republic Act A^o. 30 

GRATUITY OF HEIRS OF DECEASFn 
MEMBERS OF POLICE FORCE 



H. No. 359 



AN ACT AUTHORIZING THF pa\/x . 

CONDITIONS. OF T GR™5lTY tA^^L ^^^^^ ^^^^^^^^ 

CHILDREN, And in TH^^^^^ ^^d/or 

HEIRS OF A nprp^irrV ^^^ENCE TO THE OTHER 
?OUck?ORCE oP<^^^m.?^^^^^^ MEMBER OF ANY 

S ENGACFD T^^^ ORGANIZA- 
oSyER ApS of peace AND 

UKUhR, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Longress assembled: 

Section 1. In addition to any right or benefit which, by operation of 
law, accrues to the widow and/or children of a deceased officer or member 
of any police force or similar governmental organization, whether national, 
provincial, city or municipal, engaged in the maintenance of peace and order', 
there is authorized to be paid to such widow and/or children a gratuity 
equivalent to one year salary, but in no case less than the sum of one thousand 
pesos, if the deceased officer or member of the force shall have been killed 
while engaged in the performance of his duties in connection with 
the campaign for the maintenance of peace and order, or as a direct 
consequence of his participation therein. If such deceased has no surviving 
widow or children, such gratuity shall be paid to his other heirs in the order 
of succession established by the Civil Code. 

Sec. 2. The President of the Philippines shall issue such rules and 
regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act. 

Sec. 3. The sum of five hundred thousand pesos, or so much thereof 
as may be necessary, is appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury 
not otherwise appropriated, to carry out the provisions of this Act for the 
current fiscal year. Thereafter, a like amount shall be included in the annual 
General Appropriation Act to meet the payment of the gratuities herein 
authorized for the succeeding years. 

Sec 4. This Act shall take effect as of January first, nineteen hundred 
and forty-six. - = 

Approved, September 25, 1946. 




,s furchcr auchorized co rcdclcgace chis auchor.c, co any officer or c„,plovec 
of the Republic of the Philippines. i pi -i - • , 

CO The issuance in the Philippines of emergency currency, guerrilla 
currency, military scrip or other writing intended to circulate as 
money, the issuance of which was duly authorized, and 
(2) Any unpaid advances, loans, credits and overdrafts by the 
Philippine National Bank, the Commonwealth of the Philippines 
or any corporation, political subdivision or agent thereof, during 
the war with Japan but not after the second day of September 
nineteen hundred and forty-five; and that the Philippines, as 
partial consideration for the property transferred hereunder and 
not identified in Article fivc-a hereof as granted under the 
Philippine Rehabilitation Act of 1946, hereby releases and 
acquits the United States of the unpaid balance of the financial 
obligations and responsibilities aforesaid and shall forever indem- 
nify and hold the United States harmless from all claims and 
demands of every nature arising therefrom by any person or 
persons whomsoever, 
c. That in further consideration for the property transferred hereunder 
and not identified pursuant to Article five-d hereof as granted under the 
Philippine Rehabilitation Act of nineteen hundred and forty-six, the 
Philippines shall make available to the United States the equivalent of five 
million dollars in manner follov/ing: 

(1) The equivalent of three million dollars to be available for the 
purchase of designated real estate and improvements in real 
estate in the Philippines for the use and benefit of the United 
States at prices to be agreed upon by the Governments, and 
(2 ) The equivalent of two million dollars and any unexpended portion 
of the sum set forth in Article five-c (1) above, to be availabk 
for the implementation of agreements to be entered into 
between the Philippines and the United States for cultural, 
research, instruction and other educational activities. 
Article 6. — Miscellaneous Provisions 

a. That certain ships designated by mutual agreement and representing 
an aggregate fair value not in excess of six million dollars shall be included 
in the property transferred hereunder. 

b. That in connection with the fixed installations and the weather 
stations and communication service equipment incident to the operations of 




128 



Pronely Tct to^lr ut T 'I °^ ^'''''^ S^^^"' ^^^1^^*^^ ^^e Surplus 
aZuL^^^^^^ ^° -^-bhsh and develop foreign markets and promote mutually 

comS b th ''''''' '^"^^'^^^ United States and other 

and o disno.. f° " ' disposition of surplus property to other countries, 

monon '"'^^^f P^^^^^P^^^ f^^-ble without fosterin, 

monopoly or rcstramt of trade; and 

Whereas, the prosecution of the war with Japan caused widespread 
damage and loss in the Philippine Islands; and 

Whereas, the Congress of the United States has, by the Philippine 
Rehabilitation Act of 1946, authorized the grant to the Philippines of surplus 
property in the Philippine Islands aggregating not more than one hundred 
million dollars in fair value without reimbursement to the United States; and 

Whereas, a general understanding as to the property to be granted under 
the Philippine Rehabilitation Act of 1946 has been reached between the 
United States and the Philippines, and certain of such property has heretofore 
been transferred to the Philippines in accordance with the terms of Contracts 
Nos. W-ANL(PA-I)-206, W-ANL (PA-I )-1611, and W-ANLCPA-1) 
-3811 on the understanding that if and when said Rehabilitation Act became 
law, the fair value of the property so transferred would be charged as 
a transfer within the contemplation of, and under, said Rehabilitaion Act; and 

Whereas, the United States has a financial obligation to the Philippines 
arising from advances and loans to the United States and the issuance of 
emergency currency and guerrilla currency during the war with Japan, 

Now, therefore, in consideration of the promises and the mutual 
agreements and covenants hereafter stated, it is agreed : 

Article 1. — Property Sold and Qrantcd 

That by these presents the United States sells and grants and the 
Philippines buys and accepts all that property owned by the United States on 
the effective date hereof but surplus to its needs in the Philippine Islands, 
except aircraft, ships (other than as specified in Article six, paragraph a, 
hereof) and non-demilitarized combat material, subject however, to the 
limitations following : 

(1) That the property has been or will be declared surplus by 
the United States owning agency, pursuant to the said Surplus Property Act, and 

(2) That no property is sold hereby which is already under contract 
or firm commitment for sale or transfer, and 

(3) That at the option of the United States, exercised within ninety 
days from the effective date hereof, property having a sales value of ten mil- 
lion dollars, in addition to the property designated in Article one- (2) hereof, 
shall be deemed to be under firm commitment to governments other than the 



► ;,r orlvantaseous to the Philippines, as it 
WHEan^s the said Agreeme- ^ f ^ ,,ds of che 

will keep in ^\^TZ/^^ t^t^r.. and which .ill k necessary 
S~l:^^^th:^^^^ or dbe PhUippnes . which .ay be 
[^[dt "de:" raise funds for such reconstruction and rehabxhtaaon; and 

Whereas, under said Agreement, some pending obhgatioas of the 
United States of America to the Philippines and co our people are settled 
by immediate cash payment and payment m surplus proper^>^. t exeby 
avoiding the uncertainties and the delay which anv other forn. of Uqudation 
would entail; Now, therefore 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Congress assembled: 
Section 1. The Agreement entered into between the Covernn-ccnt of the 
Republic of the Philippines and the Government of the United States of 
America on the eleventh day of September, nineteen huadred and forty-six, 
hereinbefore set forth, is hereby approved. 

Sec 2. The President of the Philippines, or such agcr.cy or i;nstriimeii- 
tality as he may create or designate, is hereby authorized to accept 
and administer the surplus properties acquired under said .Agreement, and to 
sell or dispose of so much of such properties as may not be: needled by the 
Government, its subdivisions and instrumcitalities, incLudincg government- 
owned or controlled corporations, either in die Philippines or abroad, under 
such terms and conditions as may be deemed most advantiagcous, hereby 
appropriating from the proceeds of the sales of such properties the necessary 
amount or amounts for the administration and custody cf such properties 
and for the operating expenses of the office, agency or instrumentality which 
will handle their sale or disposition. 

Sec. 3. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, September 27, 1946. 




130 



agreed upon'by T^vo gowZ:::!^^^"''' °' ^ 

Article ?>.~-Distrihution 

escabUshed comn?"^''r:]'' u"^' ^"^^""^ ^'^^ S-accst extent possible 
hereb W thT U d.scnbution channels for the resale of property sold 
shl l LvA r distributors established in the Philippine Islands 

hall 1 ave an equal opportunity to bid for and to obtain such property. That 
the PhihppuT^ shall recognize normal distribution practices including the 
marketing wherever practicable of same brand products through the 
established agencies for such products. 

Article 4. — Warranties 

That the United States warrants title to the property transferred, and 
that in lieu of any other warranty or undertaking as to the kind, size, weight, 
quantity, quality, character, value, description, condition or fitness for use 
thereof, it is understood that if a material disparity is found to exist between 
the property transferred to the Philippines hereunder and the consideration 
given therefor by the Philippines hereunder, the two Governments will consult 
together to fix an appropriate adjustment in the price paid. 

Article 5. — Consideration 

a. That a portion of the property sold and granted hereby, together 
with the property heretofore sold under Contracts Nos. W-ANL (PA-I )-206, 
W-ANL(PA-I)-i61i, and W-ANL (PA-I )-3Sil, having an agreed fair 
value of one hundred million dollars is accepted by the Philippines in full 
discharge of the grant authorized by Title II of the Philippine Rehabilitation 
Act of 1946 and any and all obligations of both parties hereto arising in any 
manner through or in relation to said contracts, and upon the effective date 
of this contract, the aforesaid three contracts are hereby terminated, and the 
property so accepted shall be identified by methods and procedures to be 
determined by the United States. That the portion so identified or 
the proceeds from any and all sales of any part thereof shall be used by the 
Philippines in accordance with the provisions of section two hundred one of 
said Rehabilitation Act, and there is hereby delegated to the President of the 
Republic of the Philippines authority to control the use and disposition of 
such property and the use of the proceeds of any disposition of any 
part thereof, provided such use and disposition must be in accordance with 
the provisions of section two hundred one of said Rehabilitation Act and 
reports of all activities related thereto will be made available to the Central 
Field Commissioner for the Pacific and China at request, and said President 



127 



* TUc landlord and tenant shall be free to 
"S.C. 7. Freecfom l^^l^^^^Z",:,,^^^^^ as long a. they are no. concra,, 
enter into any or all kinds of ""^"f' ^ guch contract shall be conclusive 
to existing laws, morals and public po V ,o„„acting patties, except 

evidence of what has been uPon b w ^ ^^^^^^^^^ 

as provided in section five of this Act. 

"The following stipulations are hereby declared to be against public 
policy : 

"Ca) If the tenant shall receive less than fifty-five per cent of the net 
produce, in case he furnishes the work animals and the farni impkments, 
and the expenses of planting and cultivation are borne equally by said tenant 
and the landlord. 

"(6) If the rental stipulated to be paid by the tenant to the landlord 
is higher than twenty- five per cent of the estimated normal harvest, in case 
of a contract providing for a fixed rental of the land. 

"(c) If the landlord is the owner of the work animal, and the tenant 
of the farm implements, and the expenses are divided between the landlord 
and the tenant, for the tenant to receive less than fifty per centum of the net 

> » 

crop. 

Sec. 3. Sections eight, nine, and twenty-two of the same Act are 
amended to read as follows : 

"Sec. 8. Share basis. — -In the absence of any written agreement to the 
contrary and when the tenant furnishes the necessary implements and the 
work animals and defrays all the expenses for planting and cultivation of 
the land, the crop shall be divided as follows : the tenant shall receive seventy 
per cent of the net produce of the land and the landlord thirty per cent, for 
first-class land, the normal production of which, based on the average yield 
for the three preceding years, is more than forty cavans of palay per one cavan 
of seeds; seventy- five per cent for the tenant and twenty-five per cent for the 
landlord, in case of land the average normal production of which is more 
than forty cavans of palay per one cavan of seeds. In case the landlord fur- 
nishes the necessary work animals and farm implements and, likewise, bears 
all the expenses of planting and cultivation, the landlord shall receive seventy 
per cent and the tenant thirty per cent of the crop; but if the landlord 
furnishes the necessary work animals and farm implements and bears equally 
with the tenant the expenses of planting and cultivation, the crop shall be 
divided equally between the parties. 




aircraft transferred hereunder mrl jj- • 

the PhiUppines shall undertake U ' additional consideration therefor, 

operate and maintain '^^^^^^^^^^^^^ and ^0^,?/'""""" " """^ 

to an extent and within lim^s toTe ne^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ ' ''''''''''' 

propert/aaLfLfn^^^^^^ '^"l^- ^^d— rs to insure that 

ti e U^, ted S^^^^^^^ 1 '° '^f Agreement shall not be imported into 

the United S ates in the same or substantially the same form, if such property 
was originally produced in the United States and is readiiy identifiable as 
such, unless such property is to be imported into the United States on 
consignment to a person or firm in the United States for the purpose 
of reconditioning for re-export, or by a member of the United States armed 
rorces tor his personal use. 

d. That no duty, tax, excise, or other governmental exaction is included 
in the price, and if any such duty, tax, excise, or governmental exaction is 
levied or found to be payable, the Philippines shall pay such sum in addition 
to the purchase price of the property sold. The United States represents 
that no duties, taxes, excises, or other gevernmental exactions are due to 
the Government of the United States. 

c. That the transfer of title to the fixed installations sold and granted 
hereunder is conditioned upon the approval thereof by appropriate agencies of 
the United States at Washington as required by the Surplus Property Act, 
as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder. 

/. That this Agreement is conditioned upon the ratification or approval 
thereof by the Congress of the Philippines, but upon such ratification 
or approval shall be deemed to have taken effect on the second day 
of September, nineteen hundred and forty-six. 

In witness whereof, the undersigned, duly authorized by their respective 
Governments, have signed the present Agreement at Manila on the eleventh 
day of September, nineteen hundred and forty-six. 

THE GOVERNMENT OF 

THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES: 

By 

(Sgd. ) Manuel Roxas 

President of the Philippines 

THE GOVERNMENT OF 

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: 

By 

(Sgd. ) William E. Vogelback 
Central Field Commissioner 
for the Pacific and China 

Office of the Foreign Liquidation Commissioner 
Department of State 



129 



- H. No. 727 

I(epublic Act No. 35 

INDUSTRIES EXEMPTED FROM 
REVENUE TAXES 

AM Arr AUTHORIZING THE EXEMPTION OF NEW AND 
%ECESsZ ™ ^^OM THE PAYMENT OF INTER. 

NAL REVENUE TAXES. 
Be It enacted lyy the Senate and House of Representatives of the PhtUppincs 

in Congress assembled: 
Section 1 Any person, partnership, company, or corporation who or 
which shall engage in a new and necessary industry shall, for a period of four 
years from the date of the organization of such industry, be entitled 
to exemption from the payment of all internal revenue taxes directly payable 
by such person, partnership, company, or corporation in respect to said 
industry. 

Sec 2. The President of the Philippines, shall, upon recommendation of 
the Secretary of Finance, periodically determine the qualifications that the 
industries should possess to be entitled to the benefits of this Act. 

Sec 3. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 

Approved, September 30, 1946. 




Kcpubltc Act No. 3^ H. No. 692 

AMENDS RICE SHARE TENANCY ACT 

™ Om Ss^'^n^F^^^^^ °'= NUMBERED 

mOWN aI^' Thf ^ AMENDED, OTHERWISE 

KNOWN AS THE PHILIPPINE RICE SHARE TENANCY ACT." 

Be .t enacted by the Senate and House of Rcp,-c.c.,„<„„« of ,l,e Plulipp.nes 
in (congress dsscmhlcd : ' 

Section 1. Sections three and four of Act numbered four thousand 
•and hky-tour are hereby amended to read as- follows: 

"Sec. ?> Landlord and tenant inter prctcd.-~Fov the purpose of this 
Act, the word landlord' shall mean and include either a natural or juridical 
person who is the real owner of the land which is the subject-matter of the 
contract, as well as a lessee, a usufructuary or any other legitimate possessor 
of agricultural land cultivated by another; and the word 'tenant' shall mean 
a farmer or farm laborer who undertakes to work and cultivates land for 
another or a person who furnishes the labor with the consent of the landlord. 

"Sec 4. Form of contract. — The contract on share tenancy, in order to 
be valid and binding, shall be drawn in triplicate in the language or dialect 
known to all the parties thereto, to be signed or thumb-marked both by the 
landlord or his authorized representative and by the tenant, before two 
witnesses, one to be chosen by each party. The party who does not know 
how to write may request one of the witnesses to read the contents of the 
document. Each of the contracting parties shall retain a copy of the contract 
and the third copy shall be filed v/ith, and registered in, the office of 
the municipal treasurer of the municipality, where the land, which is the 
subject-matter of the contract, is located: Provided, however, that in order 
that a contract may be considered registered, both the copy of the landlord 
and that of the tenant shall contain an annotation made by the municipal 
treasurer to the effect that same is registered in his office. 

"The forms of contract shall be uniform and shall be prepared 
and furnished by the Department of Justice. Oath or affirmation by the 
contracting parties before the municipal treasurer concerned shall be sufficient 
for the purpose of acknowledgment. No fees or stamps of any kind shall he 
paid or required." 

Sec 2. Section seven of the same Act, as amended by Commonwealth 
Act numbered one hundred seN-enty-eight, is hereby further amended to 
read as follows: 




H. No. 519 

Republic Act No. 52 

RECREATING COURT OF APPEALS 

AM ArT TO REPEAL EXECUTIVE ORDER NUMBERED THIRTY- 
MtId THE TENTH OF MARCH, NINETEEN 
hSeS AND FORTY^FIVE, AND TO REVIVE, WITH 
CERTAIN AME^^ SECTIONS ONE HUNDRED AND 

FORTY FIVE A ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE-Q 

OF THE REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE CODE AS HEREIN 
AMENDED, SO AS TO RECREATE THE COURT OF APPEALS. 
Be it enacted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the PhiUppmcs 
in Congress assembled: 
Section i. Executive Order numbered thirty-seven, promulgated by 
the President of the Philippines on the tenth day of March, nineteen hundred 
and forty-five, pursuant to Commonwealth Act numbered six hundred and 
seventy-one, and paragraph (1) of the Executive Order numbered three 
hundred and ninety- five, promulgated by the President of the Philippines on 
the twenty-fourth day of December, nineteen hundred and forty-one, are 
hereby repealed. 

Sec 2. Sections one hundred and forty- five-A to one hundred and 
forty-five-Q of the Revised Administrative Code, as inserted therein by 
Commonwealth Act numbered three and as amended by Commonwealth 
Acts numbered two hundred and fifty-nine and four hundred and twenty- 
five are hereby revived with the exception of sections one hundred and 
forty-five-A, one hundred and forty-five-I, one hundred and forty-five-J, 
one hundred and forty- five-K, and one hundred and forty- five-L, which 
are hereby amended so as to read as follows : 

"Sec. 145-A. The Court of Appeals. — ^The Court of Appeals of the 
Philippines shall consist of a Presiding Justice and fourteen Associate Justices 
who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines, with the consent 
of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress. The Presiding Justice 
of the Court of Appeals shall be so designated in his commission, and die 
other Justices of the Court shall have precedence according to the dates of 
their respective commissions, or v/hen the commissions of two or more of 
them shall bear the same date, according to the order in which their 
commissions have been issued by the President of the Philippines. 



m 



'The Court of Appeals shall, as a body, sit in banc, but it may sit i. 
five divisions of three Justices each. The five divisions may sit at the same 
time. 




prodZ.^Tpenttr^^^^^^^^^ ^^^-ed fro. che gross 

respective areas shall be for the , irrigation systems within the 

Che cost of construction of d'e s -anr but amortizations for 

landlord The exnm.^c ^ ^^'^^^ ^""^ "^^^^ account of the 

ir '^^^^^^^^ systems ^^^^^^ b construction and maintenance of privatcly-owncd 

"c seTr^ "T"^ l^^^^l-^ tenant, 

but in case ot disagreement, all expenses for the construction of the system 
shall be or the account o the landlord, provided that the cost ofco tru i^^^ 
the distribution canals shall be for the account of the tenant. 

'The division shall be made in the same place where the crop has been 
threshed and each party shall transport his share to his warehouse, unless the 
contrary is stipulated by the parties. 

"Sec. 9. Auxiliary industry.— \n the absence of any written agreement 
to the contrary, in case the land is planted to a second crop of rice or other 
auxiliary crops, the tenant shall receive eighty per cent and the landlord 
twenty per cent of the net produced, provided all expenses of production are 
borne by the tenant. 

"Auxiliary industry shall not, however, be construed to include the crops 
or products raised from a garden, poultry, and such other industries carried 
on a lot specially provided for the residence of the tenant. 

"Sec 22. Lot for divelling. — ^The tenant shall be entitled to construct 
a dwelling on the land cultivated by him, if he so chooses, and once 
a dwelling is constructed, he shall be entitled to a fixed residential lot of not 
less than six hundred square meters, but not exceeding one thousand square 
meters in area, depending upon the availability of suitable land and the area 
cultivated by the tenant belonging to the landowner, the same to be devoted 
to the purposes of a garden, poultry and such other minor industries as may 
be necessary for his livelihood, the products of which shall accrue to 
the tenant exclusively: Provided, That the tenant shall be given forty- five 
days within which to remove his house from the land of the landlord in the 
event of the cancellation of the contract of tenancy for any reason: Provided, 
further That in case he fails to devote the lot allotted to him for the purposes 
herein mentioned for a period of six months, it shall revert to the cultivation 
of palay." 

Sec 4 This Act shall take effect immediately, provided that when the 
landlord has advanced money, seeds or the like to the tenant, and in the cases 
in which it might be applicable, the landlord shall have a preferential hen 
on the share of the tenant for the payment of such advances made plus six 
per cent interest per annum. 

Approved, September 30, 1946. 

^^^^^ 

133 




A- icons the constitution of such divisions, the 
cases between the different division ^^^.^^ vacancies occurring 

regular rotation of Justices between th , ^^^^ ^^^^ 

therein, and other matters '^^^^^ ,i,ered by it or by the Supreme 

rules shall continue in force until repeaie 



^""^ ■ , 1 f rUc. cnnroval of this Act, all cases which 

Sec. 3. Immed-ately after *e approva 

properly correspond to the Court of Appea^ by ^^^^j^j ^ ^j^j^j, 

f ^r^':! r and which have not yet been heard ol 
illTa uSd for'decsion hy th. Court, shall he certified by the 
clerk of the Supreme Court to the clerk of the Court of Appeals, to be heard 
and decided by the latter in conformity with the provjs.ons of th. 
Act Those cases pending before the Supreme Court m which reference has 
been made to referees or commissioners for the taking of evidence shal not 
be so certified until after such evidence shall have been received in 
the Supreme Court, 

Sec. 4. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, October 4, 1946. 




KepubhcActNo.^i ■ H. No. 496 

GOVERNMENT REORGANIZATION 

^''to\eoI^^^ '^^'^^^^^ OF THE PHILIPPINES 

FXFri mx/p r^J?^ WITHIN ONE YEAR THE DIFFERENT 
AND OTHPr ™ ^^^E^^S- OPP^CES, AGENCIES 

MENT TMriMo^^^^^^^™^^^^ OF ™^ GOVERN^ 
™RO^^^^^^^^^ ™' CORPORATIONS OWNED OR 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Longress assembled: 

Section 1_ In order to meet the exigencies attendant upon the establish- 
ment ot the tree and independent Government of the RepubUc of the 
Ihihppmes, and for the purpose of promoting simphcity, economy and 
etticiency m its operation, the President of the Philippines is authorized to 
eftect by executive order from time to time, for a period not exceeding one 
year from the date of the approval of this Act, and within the limits of the 
total authorized appropriation for the fiscal year nineteen hundred and forty- 
seven, such reforms and changes in the different executive departments, 
bureaus, offices, agencies and other instrumentalities of the Government, 
including the corporations owned or controlled by the Government, as he 
may deem necessary, with the power to diminish, add to or abolish those 
existing and create new ones; consolidate related undertakings; transfer 
functions, appropriations, equipment, property, records, and personnel from 
one department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality to another; eliminate 
duplicated services or authorize new ones not provided for; classify, combine, 
split or abolish positions; standardize salaries; and do whatever is necessary 
and desirable to effect economy and promote efficiency in the government 
service. 

Sec. 2. Officers and employees whose positions are abolished or who 
may be separated from the service as a consequence of the reorganization 
provided in this Act shall not lose their civil service eligibility for a period 
of ten years from the date of their separation from the service. In case an 
office needs the services of additional personnel, preference in the appointment 
shall be given to the officers or employees who may be separated from the 
service as a result of this reorganization and in accordance with the 
recommendation of the Commissioner of Civil Service. 

Sec. 3. Any action taken by the President pursuant to the provisions of 
this Act shall be immediately reported to Congress and shall be valid and 
subsisting until Congress shall provide otherwise. 

Sec. 4. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 

Approved, October 4, 1946. 




^ , H. No. 193 

Republic Act No. 65 

BILL OF RIGHTS FOR MEMBERS 
OF ARMED FORCES, ETC. 



^wrrMfvir- POT? A BILL OF RIGHTS FOR OFFICERS 

^^nd^nl'^s™^ ^^^^ 

pS?nrN^7Fn OR guerrilla ORGANIZA- 

™ InD VE?ERANS of the PHILIPPINE REVOLU- 
? SnS creating THEREFOR A PHILIPPINE VETERANS 
loARD S THE DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE. 
AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Kepresentatives of the Philippmes 
in Congress assembled: 
Section 1. Officers and enlisted men in good standing of the Philippine 
Army and of recognized or deserving guerrilla organizations who took active 
participation in the resistance movement, and/or in the liberation drive 
against the enemy, who, in civilian life, were actually occupying appointive 
positions in any office, instrumentality, branch or agency of the Common- 
v^'calth Government, or in any government-owned or subsidized corporation, 
and who, upon being inactivated or mustered out of the armed forces, desire 
to resume their old positions or employments, are hereby granted the right 
to do so, and, upon proper application, shall be recalled to their respective 
pre-war positions or employments, unless they have committed any act which 
under existing laws would disqualify them from further holding public office. 
For the purpose herein set forth, it shall be the duty of the official who is 
by lav.' authorized to recall and/or make the appointments of officials and 
employees above mentioned to hold open the positions and employments 
referred to in this section until six months after the approval of this Act: 
Provided, hoivever, That if any such positions had already been filled with 
the appointment of any person other than the veteran, the said position is 
automatically declared vacant and open upon the application of the veteran. 

Sec. 2. Officers and enlisted men in good standing of the Philippine 
Army, and of any recognized or deserving guerrilla organization who took 
active participation in the resistance movement and/or in the liberation 
drive against the enemy who desire to study, shall upon certification of the 
Chairman of the Philippine Veterans Board, be admitted to any school, 
college, university, or institute free from tuition or matriculation fees or 
other school fees: Provided, however, That no private school, college 




have its permanent office L th Cifv o T'T'^^f. ^"'^^ '^''^^ 
of the Secretary of Justice w rh ^^^^ recommendation 

Che Court of A^pea s "whe^^^^^^^^^ P^"^^"^^ °f 

Phihppines may authod^e anv d ^^"^^^"^ ^'^^ 

sessions periodiLlir a^s^ch tLc ' ^ ^"'"T ^'^^ ^° ^^^^^ 

the President mav dpr^ r u P^""" ^^'V °f Manila as 

Annplk if Cot.rt.-Nine Justices of the Court of 
consaW a'i ^""^^".^ ^"^^^ --ns in banc three Justices shall 

consatute a Quorum for the sessions of a division. In the absence of a quorum, 
the Court or division shall stand ipso facto adjourned until such time as the 
requisite number shall be present, and a memorandum showing this fact shall 
be inserted by the clerk in the minutes of the Court. The affirmative vote of 
eight Justices is necessary to pass a resolution of the Court in banc The 
unanimous vote of the three Justices of a division shall be necessary for the 
pronouncement of a judgment. In the event that the three Justices do not 
reach a unanimous vote, the Presiding Justice shall designate two Justices 
from among the other members of the Court to sit temporarily with them, 
forming a division of five Justices, and the concurrence of a majority of such 
division shall be necessary for the pronouncement of a judgment. 

"Every decision of the Court of Appeals shall contain complete findings 
of fact on all issues properly raised before it. 

"All cases submitted to a division of the Court of Appeals for decision 
shall be decided or terminated therein within the term in which they were 
heard and submitted for decision: Provided, however, That when a case is 
complicated or otherwise attended with special circumstances which demand 
additional time for its study or consideration, the Court of Appeals, sitting 
in banc, may, upon petition of the division concerned, grant an additional 
period not exceeding three months for its disposition or termination. 

"Sec. 145-K. Distribution of cases between divisions, — ^All the cases of 
the Court of Appeals shall be allotted between the different divisions thereof 
for trial and dicision. Whenever in any criminal case submitted to a division 
the said division should be of the opinion that the penalty of death or life 
imprisonment should be imposed, the said Court shall refrain from entering 
judgment thereon and shall forthwith certify the case to the Supreme Court 
for final determination, as if the case had been brought before it on appeal. 

"Sec. 145-L. Fower of the Court to adopt mZes.— The Court of Appeals, 
sitting in banc, shall make proper orders or rules to govern the allotment of 



. ^ , r .hi, section persons who are buried in military 

For the purposes of f''''" of the Phihppine Army or of deserving 
cemeteries shall be presumed members ot the i n n- H 

guerrilla organizations. . ^, . j r , 

Sec 7 The Board shall be composed of a Chairman and four other 
bEC. /. i ne uua. President with the consent of the 

members CO be/PP°'"^^='^,^^'' „*\Jrg veterans of che Philippine Army 
Commission on Appointments rrom aniuug v ir i j • 

andTf Zgnized or deserving guerrilla organizaaons. If no aUeady ,„ 
Z service of the Government, the Chairman and members of the Board 
shall be entitled to a per diem of fifceea pesos each for every meeting actually 
attended by them. 

The Chairman shall be executive officer of the Board and shall 
be assisted by such officers and employees as may be detailed from the 
Department of National Defense or from any bureau or oftice under said 
Department with the approval of the President: Provided Th^t the 
President, upon recommendation of the Secretary of National Defense, may 
appoint such officers and employees from among veterans of the Philippine 
Army and of recognized or deserving guerrilla organizations who are not 
already in the government service, and fix their compensation: Provided, 
further, That the President may, in his discretion, grant additional compensa- 
tion to the Chairman aside from the per diem to v^hich the latter may be 
entitled. 

The Board shall adopt with the approval of the Secretary of National 
Defense such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out 
the provisions of this Act and is hereby empowered to award appropriate 
medals of honor, diplomas or insignias for distinguished service to persons 
who have patriotically participated in the resistance movement and liberation 
of the Philippines, or have given valuable information, aid, help and comfort 
to those engaged in such resistance movement and liberation not entitled to 
receive pensions and other benefits granted by this law and who in 
the judgment of the Board deserve certain special recognition. 

Sec. 8. For a period of three years from the time of the passage of this 
Act, the persons mentioned in sections one and two hereof shall, all other 
qualifications being equal : 

(1.) Have preference in appointments and promotions in and to any 
Government office, agency, or instrumentality, or in and to any government- 
owned or subsidized corporation, the provisions of law as to civil service 
eligibility notwithstanding; 

(2) Have preference to purchase public lands and government-owned 
or managed agricultural farms or subdivisions, to obtain homesteads, 
concessions and franchises, and other privileges for the exploitation of the 




142 



I(epublic Act No. 53 S. No. 6 

FREEDOM OF THE PRESS 

AN ACT TO EXEMPT THE PUBLISHER EDITOR OR REPORTER 
OF ANY PUBLICATION FROM REVEALING TH^sSSr^^ 

INFORMATliN%™AIN?D^^^ 

Section 1. The publisher, editor or duly accredited reporter of any 
newspaper, magazine or periodical of general circulation cannot be compelled 
to reveal the source of any news-report or information appearing in said 
pubhcation which was related in confidence to such publisher, editor 
or reporter, unless the court or a House or committee of Congress finds that 
such revelation is demanded by the interest of the state. 

Sec^ 2. All provisions of law or rules of court inconsistent with this 
/Vet are hereby repealed or modified accordingly. 

Sec. 3. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, October 5, 1946. 




139 



u vr.^cc hprein set forth. The persons herein 
the Board, is best fitted for the P° J^^^^ p,i,iieges. faciUties, and 

mentioned shall be entitled to the same Denen , f 
help granted by said Act to other settlers. 

Sec 12 The Board shall, if necessary, and if existing laws do not 
bEC. IZ. ine Doa , ^.^^ ^^^^ advantage of the 

provide therefor, advance to the persons wi nreviniKlv 
benefits of the next preceding section, ^^^h^^"^' P'^'^ 
d term ned in consultadon with the National Land Settlement Administra- 
don as may be necessary for their transportation, for building their houses 
for ;he purchase of work animals, farm implements livestock, poultry, and 
seedlings Any amount so advanced shall be paid in ten equal yearly 
installments, or sooner, at the rate of not more than two per centum per 
annum, upon the security of rights acquired by them as settlers on the crops 
raised or improvements made by them. 

Sec. 13. For a period of three years from the passage of this Act the 
Government shall, upon the recommendation of the Board, undertake to 
stand as surety for one-half of any sum not exceeding two thousand pesos 
which any of the persons mentioned in sections one and two thereof may 
obtain as a loan from any bank or other credit institution for the purpose of 
buying or building his house, if he has not taken advantage of the benefits 
of the next preceding section, or for financing any business or productive 
enterprise in which he may desire to engage. 

Sec. 14. The Board shall make arrangements with the Department of 
Health and Public Welfare for the admission free of charge into any hospital 
or health institution maintained by the National, provincial, or city 
governments, of the persons entitled to the benefits of this Act, including 
their widows and immediate descendants or ascendants, or the widows and 
immediate descendants or ascendants of political prisoners who died in prison 
or were killed by the Japanese Armed Forces. 

Sec. 15. Any person who desires to take advantage of the rights and 
privileges provided for in this Act should file his application with the Board: 
Provided, hoiuever, That except as otherwise specifically provided in this 
Act, those suffering from disabilities sustained in line of duty, and widows, 
orphans and parents of persons mentioned in sections one and two hereof 
shall, in the order herein stated, be given priority in the grant or disposition 
of the benefits of this Act: Provided, further, That it shall be unlawful for 
any person to receive any gift, commission or compensation in consideration 
of his services in the filing of any application contemplated by the provisions 
of this Act or in the taking of any action in connection therewith. 

Sec. 16 If and when funds from whatever source are given to or are 
made available for relief and rehabilitation in the Philippines, sufficient sums 




university, or institute can be compelled to accept any number which exceeds 
twenty per centum of its entire enrollment. 

Sec. 3. The benefits of the next preceding section shall be available 

T nL^J "'^"'^^ "^^'^'^ ^^"^y '^o Chairman of 

the Philippine Veterans Board before the end of the year nineteen hundred 
and forty-seven. 

Sec. 4. Applications for enrollment in any school, college, university 
or institute shall be filed with the Philippine Veterans Board, hereunder 
created, which shall make the necessary arrangements for the applicant's 
enrollment. 

Sec. 5. The persons mentioned in sections one and two hereof may 
also be allowed to take promotional examinations to allow them to graduate 
from any school, college, or university, if they would have graduated 
therefrom had they studied without interruption during the war; or to any 
grade or year to which they would now be if they had continued with their 
studies during the whole period of the war: Provided, That the applications 
to take such promotional examinations are filed within one year from the 
date of the approval of this Act. 

Sec. 6. In order to carry into effect the purposes of this Act there is 
hereby created a Philippine Veterans Board in the Department of National 
Defense which shall take charge of effectuating the duties herein or hereinafter 
assigned to it by law. In connection therewith, the Board shall compile a 
permanent list of (1 ) officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Army who 
joined the colors at the start of the war, (2) members in good standing of 
recognized or deserving guerrilla organizations, (3) political prisoners who 
were killed by the Japanese Armed Forces, or were left by them to die in 
prison, and their widows, minor children and other dependents, (4) parents 
of deceased soldiers, (5) officers and enlisted men of deserving guerrilla 
organizations who died in line of duty, and their widows, orphans and other 
dependents, (6) veterans of Philippine revolutions against Spain and the 
United States. 

It shall also be the duty of the Board to pass upon the merits 
and qualifications of persons applying for the rights and/or privileges 
extended by this Act, pursuant to such rules as it may adopt to insure the 
speedy and honest fulfillment of its aims and purposes. 

For the purposes of this section, any officer or enlisted man of 
the Philippine Army or of any recognized or deserving guerrilla organization 
or any political prisoner shall be presumed to have died in line of duty if they 
have not been heard from by the nearest of kin within one year after 
September 2, 1945. 




, T No. 694 

Tiepublic Act No. 73 S. No. 102 

PLEBISCITE ON PARITY 

ACT TO SUBMIT TO THE FILIPINO PEOPLE, FOR APPROVAL 
r4 n^;APPROV THE AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITU- 
?iON of THE PHILIPPINES TO BE APPENDED AS AN 
ORI^NANCE THERETO. PROPOSED BY THE CONGRESS OF 
?Sf PHU^TpPINES in a RESOLUTION OF BOTH HOUSES, 
InOPTED ON SEPTEMBER EIGHTEEN, NINETEEN HUN- 
DRED AND FORTY-SIX, AND TO APPROPRIATE FUNDS 

THEREFOR. 

Be it enacted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Congress assembled: 

Section L The amendment to the Constitution of the PhiHppines to 
be appended as an Ordinance thereto, proposed by the Congress of the 
Phihppines in a Resolution of Both Houses, adopted on September eighteen, 
nineteen hundred and forty-six, shall be submitted to the people, for approval 
or disapproval, at a general election which shall be held on March eleven, 
nineteen hundred and forty-seven, in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act. 

Sec 2. The said amendment shall be published in English and Spanish 
in three consecutive issues of the Official Gazette at least twenty days prior 
to the election. A printed copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous 
place in every municipal, city and provincial government office building and 
in every polling place not later than February eleven, nineteen hundred and 
forty-seven, and shall remain posted therein until after the election. At 
least ten copies of the said amendment shall be kept in each polling place to 
be made available for examination by the qualified electors during election 
day. When practicable, copies in the principal native languages, as may be 
determined by the Commission on Elections, shall also be kept in each 
polling place. 

Sec. 3. The provisions of Commonwealth Act numbered three 
hundred and fifty-seven, otherwise known as the Election Code, and 
Commonwealth Act numbered six hundred and fifty-seven, entitled "An' 
Act to Reorganize the Commission on Elections," in so far as they are not 
inconsistent herewith, are hereby made applicable to the election provided 



for in this Act. 



Sec. 4. On or before February one, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, 
the Commission on Elections, shall, directly or through its authorized 




146 



national resources which are permissible and made available by existing 
law or the like; and ^ 

(3) Have preference to purchase enemy and war surplus properties of 
any nature whatsoever which the Government may sell. 

The rights and privileges provided in paragraphs two and three of this 
section may be extended by the President, upon the recommendation of the 
board to Filipino officers and enlisted men who have served with the Forces 
ot Liberation of the United States Army in the Philippines or who 
have served elsewhere in the Army, Naval or Air Forces of the United States 
or of any allied nation during the war and have established their bona fide 
intention to be repatriated to or established in their homes in the Philippines 
and to veterans of Philippine revolutions against Spain and the United States. 

It shall be the duty of all heads of branches, departments, bureaus 
offices and agencies of the Government, including its political subdivisions,' 
and of government-owned or subsidized corporations to comply with the 
provisions of this section. 

Sec. 9. The persons mentioned in sections one and two hereof who 
are permanently incapacitated from work owing to sickness, disease or 
injuries sustained in line of duty, shall be given a life pension of fifty pesos 
a month unless they are actually receiving a similar pension from other 
Government funds, and shall receive, in addition, the necessary hospitali- 
zation and medical care. 

Sec. 10. Widows and minor children or indigent parents of the persons 
mentioned in sections one and two hereof who died during the war, and of 
political prisoners who died in prison or were killed by the Japanese Armed 
Forces, except those who, for same reason, are actually receiving a similar 
pension from other Government funds, may be given a pension of fifty pesos 
a month for each widow and ten pesos for each minor child below eighteen 
years of age, until the widow remarries or dies, and until the minor child 
dies, marries or reaches the age of eighteen. 

Sec. 11. The provisions of Commonwealth Act numbered four 
hundred forty-one to the contrary notwithstanding, the National Land 
Settlement Administration shall set aside and reserve any of the agricultural 
lands under its administration for the exclusive settlement of the persons 
mentioned in sections one and two hereof, as well as of the persons entitled 
to the benefits of the next preceding section, who desire to own their own 
farms and who apply therefor within three years from the approval of this 
Act, and may for the same purpose and upon the request of the 
Board, arrange for the acquisition, in the manner outlined in the aforesaid 
Act, of any other agricultural land which, in the sound judgment of 




, boj, for valid ballots, and the three copies shall be 
deposited in the ^^^^"^ municipal treasurers, who shall immediately 

delivered to the resp Commission on Elections, one 

chVs^:::t "f th:"se„r; a„d o„e copy » sec.., ..^ 

the House of Representatives. 

Within thirty days after the election, the Senate and House of Represen- 
cativeT shall hold a /oint session, canvass the returns, and certify the resulc 

'^'''sL 7 The sum of one million pesos or so much thereof as may be 
necessary is appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury not 
o Sw se appropriated, for the payment, sul^ect to the approva of t e 
Commission on Elections, of the expenses which may be incurred in the 
holding of each election, including those for the printing, publication, posting, 
and free distribution of copies of the amendment, in English and in Spanish, 
and, whenever practicable, in the principal native languages. 

Sec. 8. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 

Approved, October 21, 1946. 



law'fotn^^ ""'^^ ^"'^h sums as may be appropriated by 

law.^to cover the expenses necessary for carrying into effect the' purposes of 

herebv^^n.^^' '^'^"^ '^'^ P"^P°^^ of ^his Act, there is 

hereby appropriated out of any available funds in the National Treasury no 

bTreleasedT ' ^'^P^"^^^ of ,he Board: Provided, That this sum shall 

be released from tmie to tmie by authority of the President. 

nnr.l^r' Q^' appropriated shall not be released unless and 

2 p . 'L''^ ?^ P"^^"^^ Auditor General shall have certified to 

the President that there are existing available funds in the National Treasury 
in excess ot the sums appropriated in the General Appropriation Law for 
the hscal year ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred forty-seven and any 
other appropriations for which priorities have been established by law. 

Sec. 19. Any person who shall knowingly make any material false 
staternent in any application required by this Act, or who shall connive at 
any false statement made in a certificate required to accompany said 
application, or who shall make any false material statement in any certificate 
to accompany said application, or who shall do any act prohibited by the 
Act, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand pesos, or by 
imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine 
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 

Sec. 20. This Act shall take effect upon its approval: Provided, That 
the President of the Philippines is hereby authorized to suspend the operation 
of any provisions of this Act if and when the Congress of the United States 
approves the pending Gl Bill of Rights applicable to the Philippines the 
provisions of which are identical or similar to the provisions of this Act. 

Approved, October 18, 1946. 




1 -^^ rnnressions existing and in force on January 
inclusive, on "/"^d J/ fo c ™r «e hereby condoned: VrovM. Thai 
first, nineteen hundred and ■ 3„ual production on or 

taxes' rentals and occupation fees for the year, .n wh.ch such actual operation 
was started or resumed. 

Cc/) All unpaid royalties, ad valorem or specific taxes on all rninerals 
mined from mining claims or concessions existing and m force on January 
first nineteen hundred and forty^two, and which mmerals were lost by reason 
of the war or of circumstances arising therefrom, are hereby condoned; 
Provided That if said niinerals had been or shall be recovered, or the value 
thereof received or shall be received, by the miner or producer, such royalties, 
ad valorem or specific taxes on the same shall immediately become due and 
payable. 

Sec. 2. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, October 29, 1946. 




provincial representatives, appoint a board of election inspectors and a poll 
A u "^"i ^"spectors, one of whom shall be the chairman of the board 
and their substitutes, shall be appointed upon the recommendation of the 
Liberal Nationalist Party; one inspector and his substitute shall be 
recommemded by the Nationalist Party (conservative) and/or political 
parties coalesced with it in the last national elections; and the poll clerk and 
his substitute shall be chosen by the Commission on Elections. 

Said boards of election inspectors shall meet, for the revision of this list 
I T'^T J ^^"^ registration of new ones, on February fifteen, nineteen 

hundred and forty-seven. Each election inspector and poll clerk shall receive 
hve pesos for actual service on such day and ten pesos on election day. 

Two watchers may be appointed for each polling place by the national 
directorates of the existing political parties or their duly authorized 
representatives. 

All judicial proceedings for the inclusion or exclusion of voters shall be 
filed not later than February twenty-one, nineteen hundred and forty-seven 
and finally decided not later than March four of the same year. The boards 
of election inspectors shall make a final revision of the list of voters during 
the first hours of election day. 

Sec. 5. The ballots which shall be used in the election for the approval 
or disapproval of said amendment shall be printed in both English 
and Spanish and shall be in the size and form prescribed by the Commission 
on Elections: Provided, however, That at the back of said ballot there shall be 
printed in full the Resolution of Both Houses of Congress adopted on 
September eighteen, nineteen hundred and forty-six, proposing the amendment: 
Provided, further. That the questionnaire appearing on the face of the ballot 
shall be as follows : 



Are you in favor of the proposed amendment 
to our Constitution printed at the back of this 
ballot? 

Esta usted conforme con la enmienda propuesta 
a nuestra Constitucion, que aparecc impresa en cl 
dorso de esta balota? 



To vote for the approval of the proposed amendment, the voter shall 
write the word "Yes" in the blank space after the question; to vote for the 
rejection thereof, he shall write the word "No". 

Sec. 6. The boards of election inspectors shall prepare and sign four 
copies of the returns of the election in their respective polling places on a 
form to be prescribed by the Commission on Elections. One copy shall be 



147 



may 
interest 



eauivalent to one hundred per centum of 
any one time an aggregate amoun 4^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^ obligations shall 
its subscribed capital and surplus. .^^^ before maturity and in 

be redeemable at the op^'^lZ therein and shall bear such rate of interest 
such manner as may be ^^P^^^'^^'^ 3 ^ obligations shall be secured by 

as may be fixed by the ^-P^ ^ding i stoL. bonds, debentures and 
the assets of the Corporation nclud^^ ^^^^^ ^^^.^^^^^^ 

^ :;.ropr.te reserves for the 

this net. iiic V. p obligations. Such obligations may be 

redemotion or retirement ot said oDUgatiun^ , r 

Sued and offered for sale ac sr,ch price or pr.ees a. the Corporar.on 
determine, and shall be exempt frorr, taxafon both as to pr.nc.pal and 
^t The said obligations shall be and ate hereby fully and uncond,- 
fonally guatanreed both as to ptincipal and interest by the Government of 
the Republic of the Philippines and such guaranty shall be expressed on the 
face thereof. 

In the event that the Corporation shall be unable to pay debentures, 
bonds collaterals, notes or other such obligations issued by it, the Secretary 
of Finance shall pay the amount thereof, which is hereby appropriated out 
of any moneys in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated; 
and thereupon, to the extent of the amounts so paid, the Government of the 
Republic of the Philippines shall succeed to all the rights of the holders of 
such bonds, notes, debentures, collaterals, or other obligations. 

Subject to the above provisions, the Corporation is also authorized to 
issue "Rehabilitation bonds" in denominations of not less than fifty pesos 
nor more than one thousand pesos redeemable by the Corporation on demand 
at the option of the holder of said bonds, which may be of the following 
types: (1) rehabilitation bonds at progressive staggered interest with 
cumulative face value: and (2) rehabilitation bonds bearing interest 
as follows: one per cent a year during the first year; two per cent a year during 
the second year; and three per cent a year during the third and succeeding 
years, said interest to become due and payable semi-annually and payment 
thereof to be annotated on the back of each bond certificate. Maturity of 
both types of bonds shall be fixed by the Board of Governors but in no case 
to exceed ten years.. 

The Board of Governors shall have the pov/er to prescribe rules and 
regulations for the registration of the bonds issued by the Corporation at the 
request of the holders of such bonds. 

Cg) To adopt, alter, and use a corporate seal which shall he judicially 
noticed; to make contracts; to borrow money; to lease or own real 
and personal property, and to sell, mortgage or otherwise dispose of the same; 





fi^ 

152 



Kcpublic Act No. 81 

AID TO THE MINING INDUSTRY 



H. No. 661 



XMP I?T^^P ™^ ^^^^^^ INDUSTRY BY PROVIDING FOR 
wV™f ^^i^^^/O^ EXTENSION OF THE PERIOD 

^v S PERFORM, ACCOMPLISH OR COMPLY 

otT^x;^.^^^ CONDITION, OR STIPULATION RE- 

HOLDERS, LESSEES, OR OPERATORS 
OF MINING CLAIMS OR CONCESSIONS, AND OF WATER 
RIGHTS AND TIMBER CONCESSIONS CONNECTED WITH 
THE MINING INDUSTRY, AND THE CONDONATION OF 
MINING, SPECIFIC AND REAL ESTATE TAXES, UNDER 
CERTAIN TERMS AND CONDITIONS. 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Congress assembled: 

Section 1. Any provision of existing law to the contrary notwith- 
standing : 

(d) The enforcement of any term, condition or stipulation required to 
be performed, accomplished or complied with by locators, holders, lessees, 
owners, or operators of mining claims or concessions, or of water rights and 
timber concessions connected with the mining industry, which were existing 
and in force on January first, nineteen hundred and forty-two, as by reason of 
the war and circumstances arising therefrom, could not be performed, 
accomplished or complied with before the approval of this Act, is hereby 
waived for the period from nineteen hundred and forty-one to nineteen 
hundred and forty-seven, inclusive: Provided, That any locator, holder, lessee, 
owner or operator of a mining claim or concession who shall start or resume 
actual production on or before July first, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, 
shall comply with the term, condition, or stipulation herein waived, for the 
year in which such actual operation started or resumed. 

(£)) Locators or holders of mining claims whose right to file their lease 
applications therefor was existing and in force on January first, nineteen 
hundred and forty-two, but by reason of the war and the circumstances arising 
therefrom, could not file the same before the approval of this Act, may file 
the said applications within two years from and after the date of the approval 
of this Act. 

(c) All unpaid real estates taxes, rentals, and occupation fees, and 
penalties that may be imposed thereon, due or which may become due for 
the years nineteen hundred forty-one to nineteen hundred forty-seven. 




149 



T\.r rhairman of the Board shall be the chief 
Sec. 6. The C'^^^'^"!^^ " He shall, on behalf of the Board, have 

executive officer of the Y'^r^'u '"business of the Corporation in all matters 
the direction and control or t ^^^^ Corporation specifically 

which are not by this Act or by th y ^^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^^ 

reserved to be done by tne oodru 

ot tne legai cuu , counsel and the salaries 

Zt^^^^^^^' ^^"-^ ^^^^^ 

the Board of Governors and paid by the Corporation 

Sec 8 Tk Awartor.-The Auditor General shal be ex-officio auditor 
of the Corporation and shall appoint a representative, who shall be the auditor 
in charge of the auditing office of the Corporation. The Auditor General 
shall upon the recommendation of the auditor of the Corporation, appoint 
or remove the personnel of the auditing office. The operating expenses of 
the auditing office and the salaries and traveling expenses of the officers and 
employees thereof shall be fixed by the Board of Governors and paid by the 
Corporation. The representative of the Auditor General shall make a 
quarterly report on the condition of the Corporation to the President of the 
Philippines, to the Senate through its President and the House of Represen- 
tatives through its Speaker, to the Secretary of Finance, to the Auditor 
General and to the Board of Governors of the Corporation. The report 
shall contain, among other things, a statement of the resources and liabilities 
including earnings and expenses, the amount of capital stock, surplus, 
reserve and profits, as well as the losses, bad debts, and suspended 
and overdue paper carried in the books as assets of the Corporation, and a 
plantilla of the Corporation. 

Sec 9. Transfer of Functions, Assets and Liabilities of the Agricultural 
and Industrial Bank,. — ^All the powers vested in and the duties conferred 
upon the Agricultural and Industrial Bank by Commonwealth Act No. 459, 
as amended, the funds and properties heretofore placed under the administra- 
tion of the said Agricultural and Industrial Bank by said Act, and all 
its capital, assets, accounts, contracts and choses in action, are transferred to 
the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation, which shall exercise said powers 
and duties in accordance with the provisions of said Act, except as herein 
otherwise provided, and shall administer, dispose of, handle and execute 
said funds, properties, capital, assets, accounts, contracts, or agreements and 
choses in action in the manner the Corporation may determine in the interest 
of the funds concerned, and the Corporation shall assume all the liabilities of 

154 





0 



Republic Act No. 85 

REHABILITATION FINANCE CORPORATION 



H. No. 778 



AN ACT CREATING THE REHABILITATION FINANCE 

CORPORATION 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philipbines 
m Congress assembled: 

Chapter I. — Establishment and functions 

Section 1. Purposes, name and domicile.-To provide credit facilities 
tor the rehabilitation and development of agriculture, commerce and industry 
Che reconstruction of property damaged by war, and the broadening and 
diversihcation of the national economy, there is hereby created a body 
corporate to be known as the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation, which 
shall have its principal place of business in the City of Manila and shall exist 
tor a period of fifty years. 

Sec. 2. Corporate poivers.-Thc Rehabilitation Finance Corporation 
shall have power : 

W To grant loans for home building and for the rehabilitation 
establishment or development of any agricultural, commercial or industrial 
enterprise, including public utilities; 

(6) To grant loans to provincial, city and municipal governments 
tor the rehabilitation, construction or reconstruction of public markets 
waterworks, toll bridges, slaughterhouses, and other self-liquidating or 
income-producing services; 

(c) To grant loans to agencies and corporations owned or controlled 
by the Government of the Republic of the Philippines for the production and 
distribution of electrical power, for the purchase and subdivision of rural and 
urban estates, for housing projects, for irrigation and waterworks systems, 
and for other essential industrial and agricultural enterprises; 

. (c/ ) To grant loans to cooperative associations to facilitate production, 
the marketing of crops, and the acquisition of essential commodities; 

(e) To underwrite, purchase, own, sell, mortgage or otherwise dispose 
of stocks, bonds, debentures, securities and other evidences of indebtedness 
issued for or in connection with any project or enterprise referred to in the 
preceding paragraphs; 

(O To issue bonds, debentures, securities, collaterals, and other 
obligations with the approval of the President, but in no case to exceed at 




,. , removed by competent authority and said 
this section shall be immediate y -^oj^ment for not less than one year 

officer or employee shall be pumshed by JF^^^^ ^^^^ thousand nor more 
nor exceeding five years and by a fine of not 

Chan five thousand pesos. Corporation to a corporation, 

Shc. 14. No loan shall be g-^^ ^^>^,^^^V J B,,,a of Governors is a 
partnership, or company wheren. .^"^J^^^^^^^^^^^^ by the unanimous 

shareholder, agent or * ^ ^^^^^^ .Eluding the member 

vote of the members of the boara ^ ^ ,,,,^ber of the 

interested, and with approval of he Pres d y^_^ ^^^^^^ ^^^^^ 

^He PhiUppmes and he shall. 



I. as provided m the next preceding sectio. 

Sec 15 No fee, commission, gift, or charge of any kind shal 
be exacted, demanded, or paid, for obtaining loans from the Corporation, and 
any officer, employee, or agent of the Corporation exacting, demanding, or 
receiving any fee for service in obtaining a loan, shall be punished by a fine of 
not less than one thousand nor more than three thousand pesos and imprison- 
ment for not less than one year nor more than three years. 

Sec. 16. Any person who, for the purpose of obtaining, renewing, or 
increasing a loan or the extension of the period thereof in his own or another's 
behalf, should give any false information or cause, through his intrigue or 
machination, the existence and production of any false information with 
regard to the identity, situation, productivity, or value of the security, or 
with regard to a point which would affect the granting or denial of the loan, 
whether the latter has been consummated or not, and every officer or employee 
of the Corporation who, through connivance or negligence, should allow by 
action or omission such false information to pass unnoticed, thereby causing 
damage to the Corporation or exposing the latter to the danger of suffering 
such damage, shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three 
months nor more than three years, and a fine of not less than the amount of 
the loan obtained or applied for, nor more than three times such amount. 

Sec. 17. Any officer or employee of the Corporation who violates, or 
permits any of the officers, agents, or servants of said Corporation or any 
other person to violate any of the provisions of this Act not specifically pun- 
ished in the preceding sections, and any person violating any provision of this 
Act or aiding and abetting the violation thereof, shall be punished with a 
fine not to exceed ten thousand pesos and with imprisonment not to exceed 
five years. 

Sec 18. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, October 29, 1946. 



to sue and be sued; to employ such officers and personnel as may be necessary 
to carry out the business of the Corporation; and otherwise to do and perform 
any and all thuigs that may be necessary or proper to carry out the purposes 
ot the Corporation. 

Sec. 3. Capital stock— The capital stock of the Corporation shall be 
three hundred million pesos divided into three hundred thousand shares having 
a par value of one thousand pesos each. The said capital stock shall be fully 
subscribed by the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and 
payment thereof shall be made by authority of the President from appropria- 
tions provided by law. 

Chapter II. — Officers and employees 

Sec. 4. Board of Qovernors— The affairs and business of the Corporation 
shall be directed, its powers exercised, and its property managed and preserved 
by a Board of Governors consisting of the Chairman and six other members 
to be appointed by the President of the Philippines with the consent of the 
Commission on Appointments. The Chairman and three other members of 
the Board to be designated by the President shall render full time service to 
the Corporation. The term of office of the Chairman and other members of 
the Board shall be seven years, except that of the first members which shall 
be one, two, three, four, five, and seven years and which shall be specified in 
their respective appointments. The compensation of the Chairman and 
other members of the Board of Governors shall be fixed by the President of 
the Philippines, who may remove any of them for cause. 

Sec. 5. Duties and powers of the Board. — -The Board of Governors 
shall have the following powers: 

(d) To prescribe, amend and repeal, with the approval of the President 
of the Philippines, by-laws, rules and regulations governing the manner in 
which the general business of the Corporation may be conducted and the 
powers granted by law to the Corporation may be exercised, including a 
provision for the formation of such committee or committees as the Board 
of Governors may deem necessary to facilitate its business; 

(5) To fix the rates of interest on loans in accordance with the different 
classes of transactions and securities provided in this Act; 

(c) To establish such branches and agencies as may be deemed necessary 
and convenient; 

(d ) To provide for the appointment and removal and to fix reasonable 
compensation of such personnel as may be necessary for the expeditious 
conduct of the business of the Corporation. 




J{cpublic Act No. 9^ 

NEW SCALE OF SALARIES FOR CIVIL SERVICE 
ELIGIBLES 

AM APT PRFSCRIBING A NEW SCALE OF SALARIES ALLOWABLE 
"""^ FOR™AlS C SERVICE EXAMINATIONS 

Be ^t enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Congress assembled : 

Section 1. Any person who shall cncer the Governmenc service after 
having qualified in any examination given by the Bureau of Civil Service 
may be entitled to the new scale of salaries as herein provided for 
the following Civil Service eligibilities : 

Minimum Maximum 

(a) First grade eUgiblcs ^840 No limit 

(fo) Second grade cligiblcs 480 P2,400 

(c) Third grade eligibles 360 1,440 

(c/) Senior stenographers 840 No limit 

(e) Senior typists 480 2,760 

(/) Junior stenographers 480 2,400 

(g) Junior typists — - 480 2,800 

Sec. 2. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, March 24, 1947. 




The m l ' f 't"''"'^ ^^""^ ''''^ «^ case may be. 

mal B nkXirb T'"^"^ ^^^^^^^ ^Sricukural and Indus- 

Rrnublt of PI '° subscription of the Government of the 

Repubhc of the Philippuies to the capital stock of the Corporation The 

CoCadon 111 b'"""^ '''''' "^"^ ^^^l^^'^^^ ^1^^^- -hen th 
«-orporation shall begin its operations. 

Chapter III— Miscellaneous Provisions 
r ^f^^^^^'^^^'«'^ F^^nds for Domestic Banks and Insurance 

S^rnrovM^ ' r '^Tu ^^ministration of the rehabilitation 

funds provided in Commonwealth Act numbered seven hundred twenty-six 
and in Executive Order No. 107 dated April 20, 1946. as amended 
are hereby transferred to the Rehabilitation Finance Corporatiin, which shall 
hereafter be the owner of and have the sole power of disposition and control 
over said funds. Such disposition and control shall be in accordance with 
U llT'^^'u"' Executive Order until the purposes thereof 

shall have been accomplished. All stock heretofore issued to the Government 
in exchange for contributions or subscriptions made out of said funds shall be 
transferred to and issued in the name of the Corporation, and the 
total amount of said funds shall be credited to the subscription of the 
Government of the Republic of the Philippines to the capital stock of the 
Corporation. The powers and functions heretofore conferred upon the 
hinancial Rehabilitation Board shall be assumed and exercised by the Board 
ot Governors of the Corporation. 

L 11 L^""; ^ ^.^^^'S^ti^'^s of the Corpoma-oji.— Obligations of the Corporation 
shall be lawful investments, and may be accepted as security for all fiduciary 
insurance, trust, and public funds the investment or deposit of which are under 
the authority, control, or supervision of the Government or any of its officer 
or officers. 

Sec. 12. Prohibitio-ns and penalties.— No member of the Board of 
Governors, officer, attorney, agent, or employee of the Corporation shall in 
any manner, directly or indirectly, participate in the deliberation upon or the 
determination of any question affecting his personal interests, or the interests 
of any corporation, partnership, or association in which he is directly 
or indirectly interested. Any person violating the provisions of this section 
shall be summarily removed from office and shall upon conviction be 
punished with a fine not to exceed ten thousand pesos and with imprisonment 
not to exceed five years. 

Sec. 13. No officer or employee of the Corporation nor any government 
official who may exercise executive or supervisory authority over the said 
Corporation, either directly or indirectly, for himself or as the representative 
or agent of others, shall borrow money from the Corporation, nor shall he 
become a guarantor, indorser, or surety for loans from the said Corporation 
to others, or in any manner be an obligor for moneys borrowed of the said 
Corporation. Any such officer or employee who violates the provisions of 




155 



'Republic Act No. 8y H. No. 780 

NET PROCEEDS FROM SURPLUS PROPERTY 
SALES FOR RFC 

AN ACT APPROPRIATING THE NET PROCEEDS FROM THE 
SALES OF SURPLUS PROPERTY AND PROPERTIES ACQUIRED 
FROM SUCH PROCEEDS OR EXCHANGES WITH SURPLUS 
PROPERTY TO PAY FOR SUBSCRIPTIONS TO THE CAPITAL 
STOCK OF THE REHABILITATION FINANCE CORPORATION. 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines 
in Congress assembled: 

Section i. The net proceeds from time to time derived from sales of 
surplus property acquired from the United States Government under the 
terms of Title II of the United States Public Law Numbered Three hundred 
and seventy, approved on April third, nineteen hundred and forty-six, are 
hereby appropriated to pay for subscriptions of the Government of 
the Republic of the Philippines to the capital stock of the Rehabilitation 
Fmance Corporation, The President is hereby directed to transfer to the 
Rehabilitaion Finance Corporation all properties acquired by the Government 
of the Republic of the Philippines with funds derived from sales of 
or exchanges with the surplus property referred to above. The fair value of 
such properties shall be determined by the President and the same shall be 
credited to the Government as payment for subscriptions to the capital stock 
of the corporation. 

Sec 2. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 
Approved, October 29, 1946. 



157 



K^public Act No. 100 

AUTHORIZING TEACHERS AND OTHER OFFI- 
CIALS TO ADMINISTER OATHS ON 
WAR DAMAGE CLAIMS 



in^^L™ AUTHORIZE ANY COMMISSIONER OF THE PHIL- 
IPPINE WAR DAMAGE COMMISSION WHO IS A CITIZEN 
PHILIPPINES, AND CERTAIN OFFICERS AND 
• THEREOF, ATTORNEYS OF THE LEGAL AID 

0FFK:E of THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND PUBLIC 
^7^9^^ TEACHERS AND OTHER PUBLIC SCHOOL OFFL 
CIALS, TO ADMINISTER OATHS ON CLAIM PAPERS TO 
BE SUBMITTED TO THE PHILIPPINE WAR DAMAGE 
COMMISSION. 

Be It enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippmes 
in Congress assembled: 

Section i. In addition to the officers and employees of the Government 
authorized by existing law to administer oaths, any Commissioner of the 
Phihppnie War Damage Commission who is a citizen of the Philippines, 
or any officer or employee thereof who is likewise a citizen of the Philippines 
and duly authorized by said Commission, attorneys of the Legal Aid Office 
of the Department of Justice and public school teachers and other public 
school officials, shall have authority to administer oaths on claim forms, 
affidavits, and other documents presented to, or filed with, the Philippine 
War Damage Commission created by Public Law numbered three hundred 
and seventy, seventy-ninth Congress of the United States, approved April 
thirty, nineteen hundred and forty-six : Provided, hoivever, That with the 
exception of the Commissioners, officers or employees of the Philippine War 
Damage Commission, as well as the attorneys of the Legal Aid Office of 
the Department of Justice, who shall not collect any fee for their services, 
such officers and employees of the Government authorized under existing 
law to administer oaths and public school teachers or other public school 
officials herein authorized to administer oaths, may collect for each oath a 
fee of not more than fifty centavos: Provided, further, That no documentary 
stamp shall be required to be affixed to any claim papers, affidavits, or other 
documents to be submitted to, or filed with, the Philippine War Damage 
Commission. 

Sec. 2. The persons herein authorized to administer oaths, shall not 
be required to keep or use a seal or to keep a register of their official acts in 
the performance of the functions hereinabove set forth. 

Sec. 3. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 

Approved, April 1.5, 1947. 




159 



Section 




U. S. High Commissioner Paul V. McNutt 
proclaims the birth of the Republic 



Liberator General Douglas MacArthur 
expresses confidence in tne Success of the 
new Republic 




The handclasp of jriendship 

symholic of Philippine-American relations 
President Mamiel Roxas and General Douglas MacArthur 




The forces of the Repn.blic are passing hy 




Inauguration Medal 
May 28, 1946 



167 





AsALTO on Birthday oj President Roxas at Malacanan 




176 



State Dinner for visiting U. S. Finance-Commission 




Ov hoard the U. S. Carrier Princeton that brought the remains 
of the late President Manuel L. Quezon 
From leit to right ■ President Roxas, Associate Justice Frank Murphy, Mrs. Aurora 
Arnnnn-Oiie^on Maria AiLrora Quezon, Maria Zenaida Quezon, Manuel Quezon, Jr., 
^/ayu ^ .. , ^^^^ Roxas, Col. Manucl Nieto 




173 





The Malacanan Press Association with the President: Felisherto M. Verano Silvino Ca- 
ncuJs ViceTe^^F^ Rodoljo Wa.arena. Onofre Guevara. Press Sea-etary Juan C. 

Zm'XI President, Yu Choncj Keng, Teodoro F Valencia, Ralph G. Hav,kms, Celso 
G. Cabrera. Philip Buencamino UL William Lw C. Lim. 




Malacanan Reporters Get Together 
Left to right: Celso G. Cabrera, Silvino Caparas, Binkij Tan, Spencer Yap. Press Sec- 
retary Juan C. Orendain. Federico Lamarte, Secretary Emilu/ Abello. Philip Buencammo 
in. Commissioner Pio Pedrosa, Manuel Collantes. Jose L. Guevara. Vicente F. Barranco, 
Wilham Lou C. Lim, and Onojre P. Guevara. 





182 




184 



President and Mrs. Roxas and Aides 

Left to right.— CaiJt. Joaquin Hidalgo, Lt. Col. Jacoho Zohel, President Roxas, 
Mrs. Roxas, Maj. Hernando Corvera, and Lt. Jesus Garcia 




181 




194 



President Roxas and Ambassador McNutt placing wreaths at the foot of the Rizal 

monument on the Limeta 





i 




19(3 






Avihassador McNutt speaks at the Veterans' convention held 
at the University of Sto. Tomas 




193 



Citizen i 




President Manuel Roxas 




200 




204 




206 



i?iiby and Gerardito 





210 



On Geravdito's birthday 






209 



912 




Address 



OF 



HIS EXCELLENCY 

Manuel Kp^^^ 

PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

( rl.P Renublic of the Philippines , 

My Countrymen: ^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^^ ^-^^ 

An historic drama has just .^^ ^^.^ ^^^^ ^^^^ 

American Bag has ^een W-^^ but by the voluntary act of 

in defeat, not m surrender, not b> ^ ^^.^^ ^^^^ ^^.^^^ ^^^q^^^ 
the sovereign American Nation 1 he « ^^^^^ 3^^.p^ 

here has been hauled down with eva greater g y 

will no longer Ry over this land, but n the hea ^^^^.^^^ 
and in the eyes of many miUions more in ^^^^^^^ ^^^^ 

flag flies more triumphantly today '^^^^^'^J^^^^^^ ^^e American flag 
hundreds of yards from here at For^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^^ 

was first planted m 1898. As its d completed a full turn, 

the flagstaff a moment ago, the cycle °f ^^^^ /^^^^^^^ p,, A„,erica, 
In the culmination today, America justihed her dcstin). 
today's act of renunciation was the climax of triumph . • • -for f'^^'';"^^ 
for democratic values, for liberty. We mark here today the forward thrusc 
of the frontiers of freedom. 

1 have raised the Philippine flag to wave henceforth alone and 
unshadowed over the entire Philippines. American ^o^'"^!^^,;!^ 
withdrawn. It has been transferred and is now possessed m lull measi 
by the Filipino people. 

We have thus reached the summit of the mighty mountain ^of 
independence toward which we and our fathers have striven during t 
lifetime of our people. 

As the spokesman for America predicted half a century ago, the Filipii|^ 
people now look back with gratitude to the day when God gave victor) 
American arms at Manila Bay, and placed this land under the sovereign 
and protection of the United States. 




218 



tyrant. These events and a thousand more went into the making of the 
American Revolution. The labored thoughts of centuries of scholars, the 
lyrics of a thousand poets, the insurgence of numberless philosophers, all 
contributed to the ferment of ideas which found final form in the America 
of 1776. 

American democracy was established. The miracle was that it 
succeeded. And with its success the eternal search for freedom took new 
heart and courage, hi France the human spirit broke its bonds only to be 
subdued again by military despotism. The Old World was shaken to its 
foundations. Anxious kings and princes took violent steps against the 
doctrines of liberty. But freedom did not die, the struggle for freedom did 
not end. It gained new impetus as the American democratic experiment 
continued to flourish, to give hope to men who loved liberty in every land. 
Gradually democracy moved irresistibly westward across a vast continent 
until it reached the shores of the Pacific. 

Nor did the broad ocean stay the westward surge of the pioneers of 
liberty. They planted its seeds in this land . . . seeds which bear today 
their richest fruit. 

So as we embrace our national freedom, we must see in it, as 
other peoples of the world do, not alone the product of our struggles and 
strivings, not alone the altruism of America, but also the final product of 
the world's age-old quest for liberty. We owe to our ov^n heroes ... to 
Rizal, to Bonifacio, to Mabini, to Quezon, co Del Pilar and to many others 
a gratitude of memory, both deep and abiding. But in this supreme moment 
we must likewise pay tribute to the great apostles of freedom of many lands 
who contributed to our independence and nationhood, just as surely as if they 
had lived and died on our soil. Kosciusko, LaFayette and Simon Bolivar 
were all soldiers of liberty, equally with Washington, Jefferson and Franklin 
D. Roosevelt. 

The origin.s of our liberties reach far back into antiquity, but it 
was America, who, through the past two centuries, incubated the concepts of 
Ireedom and the equality of men, which have now found such firm lodaing 
in the Philippines. 

Long before the coming of America to the Philippines, our aspirations 
for nationhood had been infiuenced by thoughts and doctrines originating in 
the United States. The philosophers of our several revolutions w:;e ins.wd 
by the Declaration of Independence, the Virginia Bill of Rights and 
r'l!'^' Constitution. Ou. patriots of those early days deminded the 
rights of free speech and of free press and of self-government. We well 
recall those who died here on the altar of religious freedom. When the first 




escablished in this quarter of the globe. Freedom has been granted 
our people a freedom requested by peaceful petition and freely granted by 
the American Congress. There are members of that Congress here today 
and among them are men to whom our obligation of gratitude is deep and 
everlasting. We will never forget their long and ardent labors for 
our liberty and welfare. They are heroes of our history and of our people. 
Their place in our hearts is secure. 

And now we must turn our eyes from the past and inspect as well as 
we can the dim and uncertain future. 

From this day forward our international responsibility is absolute. As 
we are the masters of our own destiny, so too we must bear all the conse- 
quences of our actions. If we surmount the difficulties that beset us, if we 
conquer the obstacles which bar our way, our people will grow great in the 
eyes of men. But if we strut with false pride upon the world stage, if we 
berate with bombast our friends and benefactors, if we lend, for reasons of 
political expediency, comfort and encouragement to the enemies of peace and 
freedom, if we invite poverty, chaos and disorder to inhabit our land, we 
will break faith with our noble past and imperil our national future. 

No longer are we protected by the mantle of American sovereignty. 
No longer can we look to America to shield us from follies of excesses. There 
is no redress for our actions beyond the immutable laws of justice among 
nations. Our period of apprenticeship is past. We are an adult in the 
council of nations. Our decisions must be gravely made; they will be gravely 
judged. Our war-time heroism has commanded the respect of the world. 
We dare not sacrifice that respect. 

From this day forward, it is not the leaders of government alone who 
will be judged. By the actions of our Government, the Filipino people will 
be appraised. Our actions in the next years will determine the estimate the 
world will place upon our national character. Heavy is the weight of 
responsibility we bear as we start out upon the dangerous paths of 
independence. The ever-present guide is gone. We must find our own 
way, with the instincts we have inherited, with the wisdom we have acquired. 

Words must cease to be substituted for thoughts and judgments. In a 
troubled world where our alliance with one group of nations or ano- 
ther might help determine the fate of mankind, we cannot afford to hesitate 
or choose capriciously. We cannot be epicures at the international table. 
We must select our fare, and adhere to that selection. Our alliances must 
be firm and unshakeable. Our loyalties must be strong and enduring. 

1 judge that our choice has been made. In the presence of our honored 
guests today, in the presence of the representative of the sovereign American 



l.nnJ I '"'"^^^ ^^^^^y Jignitarics from many 

ands It IS attended by the personal representative of the President of th 
United States by leaders of the Congress and of the armed forces and oth 
high officials of the American Governmc 



lent. 



TUr R UV f f I P^^^^^-^^^d our independence. 

The Republic of the Philippines has now come into being, under a 
constitution providing a government which enthrones the will of the people 
aiid safeguards the rights of men. The historic event has been completed. 
There remains for us only to evaluate the significance of what has occurred. 

There are moments when men should pause in their humbleness and 
look beyond the passing shadow of events to see the towering magnitude of 
the forces which have been brought to bear upon the affairs of current time 
1 judge this such a moment, and 1 am humble before it. 

We who are gathered here personify, but no more than that, the 
act of establishing a new nation. All of us are mere symbols of the millions 
of men, and the hundreds of hopes which are involved in our passing pageant. 

It can be said that the eyes of the world are upon us. But the world is not 
listening especially to the brittle words we say, words which pass quickly 
from hearing and fade soon from even the printed page. The peoples of 
the earth see in this occasion a magnificent flowering of the human spirit, 
an interval of grandeur in an epoch in which the grandeur of unselfishness 
is rare indeed. The peoples of other nations are listening to the words ut- 
tered here not so much as words but as sounds which have echoes 
in the human soul . . . mystic sounds unlimited by time or language 
sounds which ring in intimate harmony with the voices of freedom heard 
now remote . . . now insistent . . . since the dawn of human history. 

This occasion, this event which happened here, responds to a cry which 
is common to all mankind. This cry, the cry for freedom, for liberty, and 
for dignity resounded in ancient times from the hillsides of Greece; in the 
Middle Ages, from the high plateaus of Bohemia and the green countrysides 
of Britain; in the beginning of modern times, from the canals of Venice, 
from the narrow streets of Paris; and finally and most memorably, from 
the bright new world which began on the western shores of the Atlantic. 

The revolutionary doctrines so immemorably phrased and immortally 
achieved by the early Americans had not sprung full-grown from the 
American soil. They were convictions which had been distilled from the 
product of centuries of thought, of struggle and of sacrifice. On the shores 
of the Galilee, 2,000 years before, a people small in numbers had defended 
the dignity of man and the glory of God. In the shadows of the towering 
Alps the heroic Swiss had fought for home and freedom against the ruthless 




our own new-born Republic. In both Asia and Europe, the small nations 
tremble in the shadows of insecurity or are pawns in the insidious politics of 
power. Freedom, if it ever existed in many of those lands, has been erased. 
Famine, actual starvation, stalks the streets of cities and the by-roads 
of countrysides. What help they receive to avert epidemic and hunger must 
wait through the long processes of international consultation, and is subject 
to the moves and counter-moves of conflicting interests. America is the 
source of almost all of the assistance furnished the striken areas of the world; 
and the American Congress, appropriating with troubled and divided con- 
science for the bare relief needs of these lands, looks askance at the political 
complexions of the governments in some of those areas. We of the 
Philippines, are spared that trial. American aid to us is direct and whole- 
hearted. 

In other parts of the world, nations not fastened in the iron control of 
fear are locked in internal chaos, with civil war rampant and governments 
holding power by the tyranny of might. 

The Middle East writhes in ferment. Africa is a political battleground, 
the Iberian Peninsula seethes with unrest . . . only the western hemisphere, 
the lands and peoples of the New World, are relatively free, secure 
and without fear ... the New World and the democratic British Dominions 
overseas. Only these of the small nations of the earth are content in their 
security. And for these nations, through one means or another, the United 
States is the guarantor. Their security is a measure of the unselfish power 
of America. In the western hemisphere, the stability of governments, and 
their freedom from interference and coercion is the result of the Good 
Neighbor Policy and the Monroe Doctrine. The British Dominions, for 
their part, owe a large measure of their security to their geographic position 
v^ithin the American defense sphere. 

Any doubts which may still linger in some quarters of the earth as to the 
benign intentions of America should be resolved by what she has so nobly 
and unselfishly accomplished here. 

Should we in the Philippines disdain the support of this modern 
Colossus whose might is the hope and strength of the world? No free nation 
today can, to its advantage, scoff and snarl at the United States, whose broad 
shoulders bear the awful weight of world peace. Subtract the influence of 
the United States from the rest of the world, and the answer is chaos. Per- 
haps we have not fully understood what has taken place in the past five years. 
There have been withdrawn from the balanced scales of v/orld power the 
might of Japan, in the East and of Germany and Italy in the West. The 
attrition of war has diminished the strength of Britain and broken almost 



224 



Philippine Republic was proclaimed, its Constitution provided for a 
representatu'c democracy. The Philippine Declaration of hidepcndence 
borrowed ex'cn the language of the great American charter of liberty. 

When American troops landed on these shores in 1898, they found in 
tiill cry the yearning for freedom. American control had to be spread by 
force of arms throughout the Islands. But the conquerors spoke strange 
words into Filipino ears. They said that America had come not to exploit 
but to teach, not to tyrannize but to lead, not to own but to liberate. To 
our great surprise and to the wonder of the entire world this promise was 
kept. The benevolent stewardship was discharged with scrupulous regard. 
The successive spokesmen America sent here reiterated and emphasized the 
intentions of the United States to educate the Filipinos for freedom. 

General Arthur MacArthur, the gallant chieftain who led the first 
armies of occupation, early won our confidence, for he spoke to us not as 
the Captain of a conquering host but as a friend and liberator. Americans 
have maintained that role ever since. The presence here today of the great 
son of that first leader adds scope and significance to the present hour. The 
name of MacArthur will be forever emblazoned in the pages of our history. 

Our independence missions to the United States received without 
exception kindly and sympathetic hearings. Our aspirations for independence 
were given consistent support and encouragement, hi 1916 the Jones Act 
promised us freedom as soon as we should be ready for it. hi 1933 and 1934 
that promise of independence became a compact between two peoples. The 
Filipinos, subdued and conquered in 1900, were accepted in 1934 as partners 
in agreement. The mighty nation whose power awed the earth, whose 
wealth and substance had won a great conflict in 1918, offered us 
our independence, promised to restore to us our national birthright and took 
steps to prepare us for our national freedom. 

Then came the war. General Douglas MacArthur directed that heroic 
defense which has become a legend in military history. The Filipino people 
thronged to the colors to do battle for their motherland. They continued to 
resist under the American flag even after that flag was lowered in temporary 
surrender. When General MacArthur at the head of his valiant legions of 
liberation returned in 1944, his forces were swept up in a tidal wave of grat- 
itude and v/ere carried forward on a mighty current of acclaim and support. 
The scattered remnants of his Filipino forces of 1941, their ranks filled out 
with the heroic guerrillas, flocked to his standards and added fury to the 
successful assault upon the enemy. 

The world cannot but wonder today as we become a nation. A new 
era has come to the Orient. The first democratic Republic has been 




I I J ,1,^ Onr economic goods are destroyed and our 
We are a croubled P^«P^^ . i^^^J'^ rebuild a levelled land, 

homes and bund.ngs are ^..ereigncy, we receive 

Againsc a backgro.md „ear..iracles to bring prosperity 

our nanonal her.ag. W mus p ^^^^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^^ 

to tWts, our land. The work ot t ^ ^^^^.^^ ^^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^ 

w^ds her ^.P:lash over us. Delay and 
deay s nd .n u.pacicnt turn at our door. Swift must be our actions lest 
ch dynamics of chaos overtake our efforts. To succeed n. ^hts imperative, 
have the assistance and support of the United States. Without that 
assurance, our prospects would be bleak and grim. 

In all this we will maintain the implacable substance as well as the noble 
foms of democracy. We will stay our progress, if it is necessary, to permit 
time for democratic counsels. We are determined to reflect in the actions of 
aovernment the will of the majority of the people. We will move with 
the speed indicated by the people's wisdom. We will eschew the symbols 
and shibboleths as well as the motives of dictatorship. We cannot avoid 
the process of pause and advance which is the democratic way. Laws and 
institutions are more certain guides than the unchecked will of men, however 
benign their purpose. 

In our economic life, we will continue to embrace, as we have in the 
past, free but guided enterprise. That is our system. We will defend it 
against the deceptive allures of communism, of militarism, and of fascism. 
We will not give comfort or countenance to those anti-democratic creeds. 
Proponents of these views will be protected in their right to hold and openly 
to advocate them. They will not be protected in subversive schemes to 
destroy the structure of this nation or of its free institutions. Alien anti- 
dcn-iocratic "isms" will not be permitted to misuse the priceless privileges of 
freedom for the systematic destruction of liberty. 

We have surveyed at length our relations with the United States and 
with the rest of the world. We have discussed the significance of 
our nationhood in transcendental and in immediate terms. But this nation 
is above all a nation of people. Its Government exists by the consent of 
the governed, and seeks to express the will of the governed. The welfare 
of all the people must be our primary concern. The toil and sacrifice wc 
have laid out for ourselves must be directed not for the exaltation of the 
state, but for the elevation of all our citizens, for their greater happiness, 
for their economic security, for their well-being, for the attainment of greater 
opportunities for their children. The sweat of the toiler's brow must be 
fairly and fully rewarded. The products of enterprise must flow in proper 



i fi-^m convictLon chac we have already subscribed irretriev- 

ably CO the principles of the American Declaration of Independence and the 
American Constitution. Those principles are now embodied in the basic law 
f T!T \^ c the cause and the international program 

of the United States of America. We are pledged to the support of the Four 
rreedoms. 

We are in the atomic age. We cannot stay the swift advance of time 
even if we would. The world shrinks with each passing hour. Wings 
carry men across deserts, oceans and mountains. The wide waters have 
ceased to bar access to our land. The stratosphere is now an avenue for 
swift flight or sv/ift destruction. 

In such a world we cannot retreat within ourselves. We cannot live 
in unconcern for the world's opinion. We cannot bar from our shores the 
products of other lands. We cannot build on principles of isolation. Today 
the affairs of Trieste must be our concern. Today we, too, have an interest 
in the Mediterranean. The problem of Palestine is our problem. The 
Poles and the Czechs are our neighbors; their fate concerns us as intimately 
as the destiny of China, the future of Manchuria or the welfare of Malaya. 
The world today is one. 

While we gain the glorious gift of freedom, it is accompanied 
by a charter of obligations. Today the concept of independence is over- 
shadowed by the dynamic growth of international interdependence. On all 
fronts the doctrine of absolute sovereignty is yielding ground. Heavier and 
heavier grows the pressure of the world's anxiety for peace and security. 
That pressure is directed against the principle of total sovereignty. We have, 
by our membership in the United Nations, already surrendered some of our 
sovereignty. If called upon to help in the enforcement of peace, we must 
supply that help. We have, as have other nations, granted the right of the 
United Nations to utilize our land and our resources, if required for 
the purposes of international security. The cry for a World Federation of 
Nations is again welling from many throats. Should this come to pass, 
our sovereignty would be further curtailed. We cannot obstruct that 
development. In the world of nations we lack the authority of power. We 
must depend on the world's conscience for our protection and salvation. 

But we have yet a greater bulwark today ... the friendship and 
devotion of America. That friendship, which is the greatest ornament of 
our independence, raises us far above the level of our intrinsic power and 
prestige. There are many nations aspiring to world recognition. There are 
many peoples who merit the sympathy and understanding of mankind. 
There are few who are poorer in wealth of goods and economic power than 



233 



Address 



OF THi; 



Hon. Millard Cyclings 

MEMBHK THE SENATE, UNITED STATES CONGRESS 

■ rh.- Renublic of the Philippines on 
On the hmuguration of the ^^P^^'^''^ , 
July 4 1946, at the Luneta, Manila 



Mr. High Commissioner, Mr. President 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 

We are gathered here to participate in one of the most unpreeedented, 
nnost MeaLie, and most far.eaeh.ng events in all recorded history^ Without 
the violence, bloodshed, the rex-olunon which usually attend such happemngs, 
a great people are to attain their complete freedom and independence, and a 
new nation is to be constituted to take its place at the Worlds conference 
table. 

With the beginning of the Republic of the Philippines, a new example 
of human justice, human dignity and friendly relations between great peoples 
will have been established, and an entirely new concept of international re- 
lationships will ha\-e been gi\'en to all mankind. This is a great day for 
the people of the Philippine Islands, but it is also a very great day for the 
people of the United States of America. It is a great day for the friends of 
freedom all over the earth. 

UNIQUE RELATIONSHIP 

The Filipinos and Americans began their unique relationship nearly 
one-half century ago, in a conflict between our two peoples which neither 
of us desired or wanted. Fortunately, soon thereafter misunderstanding began 
to disappear, reason re-asserted itself, and the attributes of justice and 
a common desire for the right cleared the roadway for continued progress. 
From that time on we have labored side by side — in War, in Peace, in good 
times and in bad. More and more the sovereignty and authority of the 
United States were lessened, and the authority and sovereignty of the 
Filipino people increased. In time the Go\-ernment of the Philippine 
Islands was exclusively in the hands of the Filipino people, and in 1934, 
with the passage of the Philippine Independence Act by the United States 




228 



enarc y che authoncy of France. China is in the agonized throes of national 
rebirth. There are only two major poles of power in the world today . . . 
Russia and the United States, both of them bestriding the oceans, facing 
Orient and Occident. Not since the Peace of Rome was broken by the 
onslought of the barbarians twenty centuries ago has there been a comparable 
situation. The mind of man can scarcely conceive of its implications. The 
world may well shudder, contemplating the possible consequences. But men 
of goodwill in many lands, desperately loving peace, have brought forth 
the United Nations, noble in concept, and worthy in purpose, a hopeful an- 
swer to the prayers of the humble peoples of the earth. 

We are members of the United Nations. Even as a Commonwealth, 
we signed the charter of that organization. It was Franklin D. Roosevelt's 
strong desire that we should be considered a nation among nations even be- 
fore our independence, even while our land was in the clutches of the enemy. 
The signature of Manuel Quezon is affixed to the charter of the United Na- 
tions. Today we may well rededicate ourselves to the ideals of the United 
Nations, to the preservation of peace and the promotion of justice among 
men. 

But as we pledge ourselves to this world organization, it is well to bear 
in mind that today the United Nations is no stronger than its strongest pow- 
er, and that it is the leadership of the United States which has given to this 
body its soul and strength. 

The world cannot but have faith in America. For our part, we cannot 
but place our trust in the good intentions of the nation which has been our . 
friend and protector for the past 48 years. To do otherwise would be to 
foreswear all faith in democracy, in our future, and in ourselves. 

As we pursue our career as a nation, as we churn through treacherous 
waters, it is well to have a landfall, that we may know our bearings and 
chart our course. Our safest course, and I firmly believe it true for the rest 
of the world as well, is in the glistening wake of America whose 
sure advance with mighty prow breaks for smaller craft the waves of fear. 

The Philippines aspires to greatness. We seek, along with all other 
nations, for glory. We seek eminence among the peoples of the earth. But 
we will not sacrifice peace to glory. We will not trade the happiness of our 
people for national fame. We will not yield freedom or liberty for economic 
well-being. We will search for, and I trust we will find, that happy 
formula for security, for friendship and for dignity that can be combined 
with the elevation of the economic status of our citizens, and with 
the preservation of our liberties in a world of peace and equal opportunity 
for all nations. 




■ibility upon those who would enjoy and 
same time a tremendous ''"P''"' pohtical institution. To retain it, to 
retain it. It is not a ^fP^'l^'^^l ^opportunities to protect and serve its 
increase its strength and to ^^PJ^'^^^^ ^^^^^^^j .^^rifice. The mission of all 
people requires constant vigi anc ^^^^.^ people the maximum 

independent democratic g^^'^^f"""""'' ' - few burdens and hardships as 

of benefit and protection while mnposmg 

CHOICE OF A STRONG PEOPLE 

„f rhi-se islands have been, your commctce 
Devastated as many of these 

destroyed, your cconom.c t-"^""';^ , /.a „po„ the Filipino pec 
looted and wrecked, the years ah ad a« S^^g ,j ^^i^^ P 

plefor aeontinuatrono thc e h,ghqu^^^ . ^^^^^^^^^ 

rounted so much m helping to win yuui j u i • f 

However, faced with these circumstances, you have made the choice of a 
strong ra her than a weak, people. In effect, you have said you would rather 
be completely free and independent and the masters of your own fate and 
destiny even though it entailed some economic hardship, than to be a subject 
people ' looking to others to govern you, even though in that status 
you might attain a higher plane of prosperity. We admire you for 
this confidence in yourselves, and for the qualities which cause you to put 
freedom and independence as the first principles in your plan for the future. 

ON BEHALF OF US 
So, on behalf of President Truman's view of the Government of the 
United States, whose great legislative body 1 have the honor to represent, 
wc come to this historic hour and to this spot hollowed by the deeds of both 
Filipino and American patriots to thank you for all of your matchless loyalty 
to us, and to wish you well in the high adventure upon which you are just 
beginning. 

THE STARS AND STRIPES 

In a moment the flag of the United States of America, our beloved 
Stars and Stripes, will come down from yonder flagpole and the flag of the 
Republic of the Philippines will rise to the masthead. The flag of 
the United States of America is the sacred and revered emblem of 
my country. It is a symbol of all we ha\'e been and all we hope to be. So, 
while in the physical sense we shall lower that flag for the last time over 
the Philippines, in truth and in fact — by that very act — it will unfurl itself 
at a height it has never reached before, for in symbolizing the consummation 
of Filipino independence, men in all lands will know that the United States 
is seeking to promote the Brotherhood of Man under the Fatherhood of God. 




230 



nieasurc to those who partictrate ,n all the processes of production. There 
must be neither masters nor serfs in our economic system. 

As we stand at this moment, facing the thorny path of the future, trying 
our first unaided steps on the road which leads to tomorrow, let us 
take comfort in our national sturdiness and courage. We are 18 000 000 
strong. Our people bear well the burdens of adversity. The national spirit 
is one of humility, of gentleness, and kindly brotherhood. Stout of heart 
and firm of purpose, prudent and wise in the deep wisdom of nature and of 
God, our people ha^'e great reservoirs. This land, this child of freedom, 
has great responsibilities to America. We are a staging area of democracy 
in this part of the world. But whatever our role in history, of one thing 
we may be sure . . . the Filipino, strong in his faith and steadfast in his 
loyalty, will support his nation, come what may. This daughter land of 
America, sprung from the hardy stock of Asia, will not be awed by 
difficulties. It will live and endure the shocks of time. This is our faith, 
and this is our resolve. With the help of the Divine Providence, our steps 
will be illumined by the shining countenance of truth and of righteousness . . . 
our spirits will be eased from the weariness of toil by the grace of knowledge 
that our people's happiness is our goal. 

Our independence is our pride and our honor. We shall defend our 
nation with our lives and our fortunes. As a poet wrote long ago : 

Let independence be our boast 
Ever mindful what it cost. 
Ever grateful for the prize. 
Let its altar reach the skies. 




227 



Address 

OF 

HIS EXCELLENCY 

Paul V. McNutt 

UNITED STATES HIGH COMMISSIONER 

TO THE PHILIPPINES 
On Che Inauguration of che Republic of the Philippines 
on July 4, 1946 at the Luneta, Manila- 

The Great Seal of the Unked States has been affixed to o.,e of 
the histonc documents of our tn.nes. I am authorized and directed by the 
President of the United States to proclaim the independence of the Philippines 
as a separate and self-governing nation. 

Seldom in the history of the world has one nation proclaimed 
the independence of another. Seldom m history has one nation freely yielded 
to a portion of its territory the prerogatives and privileges ol absolute 
sovereignty, aftectionately, sincerely, and with noble purpose and intent. 

Yet it cannot be said that this independence was earned by the Filipino 
people without struggle or strife. The people of the Philippines have striven 
well, have fought courageously, and have sought tirelessly for their national 
freedom. By petition and persuasion the Filipino people have pursued their 
independence, even while the American Flag was being firmly planted here. 
The people of these Islands have shown by word and deed their deep desire 
for national sovereignty. That desire was understood and appreciated by 
the American people. Liberty is a plant as native to the American soil as 
the towering mountain pine. Freedom flows as irresistably through the 
American spirit as the great rivers of our country to the sea. The Philippine 
desire for freedom and national dignity roused a responsi\'e echo wherever it 
was heard and understood in America. 

A few years ago there were still those in high positions in government 
who did not think that the Filipino people were yet prepared for independ- 
ence, politically or economically. As the standard of living here rose, as 
this land became the pearl and the pride of the Orient, there were those in 
America who feared that should the United States v\'ithdraw its protecting 
power from this place, other nations, eager for plunder, would sweep in. 




232 



c?nturS'wn' Independence for wl.ch the Fihpino people had struggled for 
centuries was designed to become an accomplished fact on this very day. 

AMERICANS PROUD 
Though the political ties which haxc bound us together will today be 
severed, in the larger sense those ties of friendship, regard and respect which 
come trom sacrifice upon the battlefield in the cause of freedom, will endure 
until the very end of time. Every American is proud to have shared the 
hazards ot vvar with such a gallant, loyal and courageous people as 
the Filipinos have proved themselves to he before the peoples of the whole 
world. 

When the clouds of adversity cast their shadows over these lovely 
islands, when the cruel and ruthless invader rode in fleeting victory through 
your cities and towns, when your women and children were tortured, and 
your men wantonly killed in an effort to impose by force what persuasion 
could not win, you never faltered, and though ringed about by overwhelming 
forces, you proved unconquered and unconquerable— ever tended the torch 
of liberty, and ever kept the flag of resistance flying at the mast head! 

RESPECTED NAME 

For all of this the Motherland is grateful. For all of this the word 
'Tilipino" is one of the most respected names in the English language. For all 
of this we thank a kind Providence for imparting to our gON'ernment the 
wisdom to deal with the Filipino people as brothers, to recognize them as 
lovers of justice and democracy, whom we would help to travel the long 
and difficult road to e\'entual independence and nationhood. 

BATAAN, CORREGIDOR 

Though our gox'ernments may sever the political ties which for half a 
century have bound us together, our governments can never alter or repeal 
the history of Bataan and Corregidor, of Leyte, of Lingayen Gulf and 
Manila, when your people and mine, under the matchless leadership of those 
gallant and great Americans, General MacArthur and Admiral Halsey, 
planted the feet of the Filipino people once again on the soil of freedom and 
cleared the way for that independence for which you had waited so patiently 
and so long. 

INDEPENDENCE 

But let us continue our relationship on this historic occasion with the 
candor and frankness which have so successfully brought us to this present 
place. Independence is more than a priceless privilege— it imposes at the 




229 



c c A'.v'^ the eves of the world will have seen 
Within the short space of t^"^ ^^he atom bomb and the gentle gift of 
in the Pacific the renduig impact ^^^^^ ^^^.^^^^ ^^^^^^ 

freedom to a dependent people do ^y^^^ ^ manifestation of infinite 
expression of liniitless power ^^-^^^^^^^ of the forthcoming 

understanding. This contrast tn ^ j 1 know, comprehend 

n.oment. The world wh.ch sees thes ^P-^^^^^^^^ ^ ^he 
their significance. I have never been prouder t 

18,000,000 people of these Island, wh^-^^^- '^^^ ,hare .n our'glory. 
still American nationals, are proud of us, too. y 

The United States has here discharged a titanic obligation. Its reward 
I ne unitcQ -^uau^ fru-nashio and devotion of the millions 

is equally ,™gn,hcc,K-thc ^P:^"' f '^7^,^? „f ,hc world. Wc will 
of fecmcn hcrc-and *c ^'^T^^ lo —"^ and multiply the 

continue so to conduct our relations here as 
honds between our two peoples. ^ 

What is the paltry pittance which could induce the United States to 
abandon this program? What consideration could weigh in the balance 
against this lofty purpose? The American people know in their hearts that 
the Filipino people have earned, as if by revolution but more surely, the right 
of independence. But wc know that independence, of itself, will not solve 
the many complex problems perplexing the Philippines today. Ihe Amer- 
ican people know that in this land there must occur one of the great crises ot 
our times. Will this people, physically wounded and crushed by war, be 
able to surmount their obstacles, overcome their difficulties, withstand the 
lures and dangers of dictatorship and demagogucry and emerge from their 
trials as a citadel of freedom? America will help. The sympathies and 
hopes of the freedom-seeking peoples of the world ride on your greac 
adventure here. Your responsibilities and burdens are great. Your goal is 
even greater. 

Since the beginning of our political association with the Philippines in 
1898, American statesmen and leaders have seen in our sovereign respon- 
sibilities the mandate to educate and prepare the Filipino people for 
self-government. Within a few years after ovir flag had been planted here, 
that mandate became crystallized into one for the preparation of the 
Philippines for complete independence. 

From the date of the earliest American commissions down through the 
years, that has been the underlying theme of American policy in the 
Philippines. William Howard Taft in 1904 laid down the line of "the 
Philippines for the Filipinos." That policy has been carefully and diligently 
pursued. Meanwhile extensive precautions were taken to protect the greac 



Henceforth wherever the Stars and Stripes catch the passing zenhyr-on 

ustre . H 1 "^^^^"^^ P'^^liPPi"^ Independence, will take on a new 

kistre and become, I am sure, a symbol of hope for the Peace, Progress a^.d 
Human.t.es between nations, which on the occasion of Filipino h.dependence 
It has so abundantly proven itself to be. t^nuuicc, 

"GODSPEED" 

The Congress of the United States of America, which I have the honor 
o epresent m part extends to the Filipinos when they go forth to meet th 
h gh challenge of th. historic hour "Godspeed." The story that began ii^ 
1898 has now come to a glorious close. We have kept the faith-we have 
helped you to erect the institutions of democratic government and to build 
in the new nation the ideal that government shall be the servant and not 
the master of the people. We look forward to the hour in the not 
tar distant future when the representative of the free and independent 
Republic of the Philippines will sit with the representative of the United 
States of America at the council table of nations and there we two together 
shall continue our great work in these larger fields. The friendships we 
have built the labors we have performed together, the sacrifices we have 
shared and the great ideals we have in common, make certain that in the 
United Nations Councils two strong peoples will continue to stand on the 
frontiers of civilization and keep a good fight for the rights of all mankind. 

Long live the Republic of the Philippines; Long live the United States 
of America. 




those of goodness, we must warn the 

takes many forms and shapes, '^^^^ prosperity based on methods 

Filipino people against shining panac ^f mankind. Men 

which violate the co-cience and he I ^^^^ ^^^^^ 

n.ust he secure in their l^^^^'""^^;, ^'^i./^.ell^being but which tolerate 
Philosophies of government -h-h promise g ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ 

violence and sanction dictatorship - -^f^^/ ^ ^,,,a exchange it 

Uved in freedom but who "^^J^"^",^^ , hey have made a bitter 
for the promise of economic equality soon hna tnat y 
Iradc Necessity is a tyrant's plea for the abolition of liberty. 

But the freedom to speak and to think and to worship are not the only 
freedoms There is freedom to work and to inquire - criticize^ There 
the f eedom to develop and fulfill the promise of ability. And hnally 
Ltis the essential freedom from fear and hate based on nationality or creed. 
These are vital freedoms. Safeguard them well. 

There are those in this land as in others who confuse national licence 
with liberty, false dignity with worth. There are those who hold up the 
shining word of freedom to lure this people toward the swamps of disaster. 
They would wrap themselves in the threadbare cloak of national isolation 
and wait blindly for the storms of economic catastrophe. That way is the 
way to chaos and dictatorship. The one inherits the reign of the other. 
There can be no freedom in a land of hunger and despair. There can be no 
democracy in a land roamed by the wolves of false pride and hatred. 

The values of democracy are proved beyond question. The might and 
strength of the United States shine out upon the world with reassuring light. 
The Philippines, in leaning upon this power and strength, is no more than 
asserting a well-earned right. Until the Philippines can stand alone on its 
own economy and power, America, a sister democracy, offers comfort. This 
involves no decrease in sovereignty, no compromise with national dignity. 
America would not have it so. No day v^ill more gladden the heart of 
America than the day when the Philippines can stand alone economically as 
well as politically and contribute in full measure to the economic well-being 
of the peoples of the earth. But until that day, the United States stands 
ready to furnish essential economic support so that the political independence 
to be bestowed upon this nation and its Government may be preserved so 
that this democracy wrought here by a half century of effort may continue 
to point a way to the peoples of the East. 

hi proclaiming the independence of the Philippines, we attach no 
reservations or exceptions. None is asked. None is needed. There will 
be proclaimed the full, complete and absolute independence of the Philippine- 
But those words, themselves, are relative to the new conditions we face in 




236 



I An T"" ? ^"'^^^^ States who feared that with 

he Amencan market suddenly closed to Philippine export produJ 
economic disaster and chaos would invest this land. 

Phihn ''^"'"S cry for independence which continued to rise from the 

Phihppines fina ly overcame all objections, and the American Congress, 

date, July 4, 1946, for that unprecedented grant of sovereignty. 

The war intervened. The war resolved the doubts, the fears and the 
misgivings. While the effects of war multiplied the problems of the 
Philippines, while destruction and devastation heaped up to towering heiahts 
the economic dangers facing the Filipino people, the heroism and dog^ged 
devotion to democratic ideals demonstrated unmistakably by the people 
wrung the heart of America and convinced the American people and govern ' 
ment leaders that this nation, the Philippine nation, had earned its right to 
independence, whatever the difficulties ahead. 

The United States determined a policy toward the Philippines new to 
the world, a policy revolutionary in many of its aspects, startling in 
ICS implications, hidependence was to be freely, gladly given. The military 
security of the Philippines against foreign aggression of any kind was to be 
guaranteed. And finally the economic needs for reconstruction, rehabilita- 
tion and support were to be met, at whatever cost. 

This decision was not arrived at easily. It involved severe re-definitions 
of many American policies. But the American Congress and the American 
President saw clearly that the fate of these 18,000,000 was the fate 
of democracy in the Pacific, and that the successful establishment of 
a prosperous realm of freedom in the Orient would raise the hopes 
of millions in the Far East. 

This is the result. Today is the climax of that gathering of hopes and 
aspirations and convictions. In a few moments this will be an independent 
republic, like our very own, conceived in liberty, with a government like 
our own, of the people, by the people and for the people. Just as 
the Magna Carta came to us from our British forbears, our Declaration of 
Independence, our Constitution, and our Bill of Rights have become the 
priceless heritage of the Filipino people. 

The American flag which waves above us is a world emblem of 
freedom, of justice, of equality among men. In a few moments the flag 
we raised here 48 years ago will be reverently lowered. Americans and 
Filipinos alike will feel the sharp pangs of sorrow. -But the moment will be 
one of highest glory. 




1 in rhe expectation of reward or concession. 
Republic. This . noc ^^'.^J^^^,^,,^ in ch,s pare of Ae world. 
This is not done because of »"P"'^ „f ^he Pac.fic, and the safe- 

and security, in freedom and dignity. 

We have taken the unparalleled action of transferring soverergnty over 
chis b, d to the Phrlippine RepubHc because we recognize the rnalrenable 
ri^ht o al peoples to be the masters of their own fate. The only condition 
that there must be a desire and a readiness on the part of he peop e ■„ 
quesxfon to imnage their own destinies and to maintain the welfare and the 
TuX of the inhabitants of the land. This readiness and wi lingness have 
Sen demonstrated by the people of the Philippines beyond all shadow of 
doubt. 

America has a mighty stake .n the PhiUppines. It is not an economic 
stake in the sense that we have an expectation of economic privilege in this 
land As a nation the United States expects no profit from ^his pitifully 
devastated area. Our stake is our belief in democracy as a way of h e. The 
Philippines are a democracy in our own pattern and design. We planted it 
chat way. We made it that way. Now the chance is afforded us to set 
an independent and democratic Republic on the highroad to national success. 
Whatever effort is required on the part of the United States must 
not be spared. 

This is the first democratic Republic of western mold to be established 
in the Orient. All the races and peoples of the Far East will watch the 
progress of the Philippine nation. Today, with the representatives of many 
lands in attendance, we proclaim complete confidence in the success of this 
venture. 

And now there approaches a moment that v^'ill stand apart in history, 
in your history and ours. The United States, so long sovereign here, is 
about to renounce the prerogatives of sovereignty. Forty-eight years of 
history will end. The spirits of the ancients will look down with wonder 
at what we are about to do. Those noble souls of Philippine history who 
struggled and dreamed for this moment may well look down and take joy 
in what we are doing. The aspirations of Jose Rizal and of Manuel Quezon 
and of many another Filipino patriots are hereby realized. They are here 
with us now, weeping such tears as angels weep, as we capture this priceless, 
immemorial moment for our deeds and words. 1 read now the proclama- 
tion of the independence of the Philippines: (See page 2) 



A nation is born. Long live the Republic of the Philippines! May 
God bless and prosper the Filipino People, keep them safe and free. 




238 



natural riches of rhi<i n-^^rU , • i . 

conservation ^^Ls trc — ^-mutable 

government of rhf T 1 T r "^''"'^ '^'^ ^'^S^"^*^ 

government of the Islands. It is a fact that those riches have been 

successfully preserved for the people. 

Philippine self-government grew organically, step by step, through the 
natural processes o development. Nowhere has a people been similarly 
trauKd n. the school of enlightened experience. TodaJ there is a vast bod>' 
of men and women here who are ready to assume the final burden 
ot sovereignty. 

But the 48 years is but a moment in the historical development of a 
nation. The swift strides of science and technology and of cataclysmic 
concepts of world relations have been enough to bewilder the most 
ctihghtened of peoples, and to puzzle the most advanced of governments 
The Philippine nation faced the double necessity of educating its people to 
literacy and to an awareness of their democratic privileges and responsibilities 
and of keeping step with the changing pattern of world thought and 
economic technique. Only in the past four years, there has emerged from 
war a new understanding of the interdependence of peoples. Man has 
learned that peace and prosperity are indivisible, and that no man can be safely 
free or content, while another lives in slavery or suffers in misery. Slavery 
and poverty are contagions which spread their toxins wide over the earth. 
The insidious poisons of subjugation and want speed through the arteries of 
modern communications and bring the illness of war to all mankind. 

In the Philippines there is much to be done to eradicate poverty, 
to banish economic injustice. But the weapons of attack upon these 
problems are at hand. Democracy, with all its defects, is an efficient tool 
for the elevation of the economic status of men. The will of the people, 
freely expressed, can move mountains. But that will must be intelligently 
expressed and constantly exposed to the healing light of truth and tolerance 
and understanding. Democracy cannot flourish side by side with ignorance, 
bitterness, and prejudice. It does not thrive in the darkness of fear. 

The ravages of war which have been visited upon the Philippines are 
passing wounds. They can and will be healed. The healing power is here 
in the courage and determination of the people. Help is being extended 
from the United States, not out of compassion, but out of friendship and 
understanding, a bond sealed in blood. There are few in the world today 
who wish the Filipino people ill. There are few souls so black with evil 
as would rob this land of its birthright or of its richly-deserved opportunity 
to succeed in its historic venture. But those few do exist. And as evil 




235 



r 1 I • „l,!n has been welded which will not yield to 
of peace, a purposeful „or to artificial political 

sovereignty, nor to any man-made convention, 
distinction!, relationship which will last forever. 

For forty-eight years since my father first led our army down Singalong 

Roa/:: lrate^h.:great c.ty of ^'^^^:^i't:::'-^r:s. 

heen my personal prn. eg. T r^g ' Llf-st.ffKiencv and your long, 
::;;iITa's;:::ion ?or independence. Through those ,.a. of 
s eTd and advancing preparation, by your resolute perseveranc m holding 
firmly 0 the course long charted by the architects of your pohfcal future 
d rpi e seeming unsurmountabic obstacles which barred the way, the world 
must bear witness that you have earned the right that this day of destrny 
might be. 

NEW HEIGHT OF NOBILITY 

Let history record this event in flaming letters as depicting a new height 
of nobihty in the relationship between two separate and distinct peoples of 
the earth-peoples of the East and peoples of the West. Despite racial, 
cultural and language differences and great distances of geographical separa- 
tion they forged an afi^nity of understanding which survived both the 
vagaries of peace and the shock of war. They shattered for all time the 
deceptive philosophy that "East is East and West is West and Never 
the Twain shall Meet" by demonstrating through complete and effective 
cohesion, that peoples of the East and peoples of the West had common 
cause in human progress— and can live together and work together 
and strive together toward a common destiny. 

Let history record this c\'ent in the sweep of democracy through the 
earth as foretelling the end of mastery over peoples by power of force alone 
— the end of empire as the political chain which binds the unwilling weak 
to the unyielding strong. Let it be recorded as one of the great turning 
points in the advance of civilization in the age-long struggle of man for 
liberty, for dignity, and for human betterment. 

COURAGE AND WISDOM 

As this infant republic stands at the threshold of an adventure in the 
society of other nations upon an identical sovereign plane, its political destiny 
depends upon the courage and wisdom of its leadership and the unity of its 
people. 

Never in history have more vital and complex issues stirred mankind 
than today. Never have issues weighed more heavily upon the destiny of 




240 



nation n I li ^l";'^^^""^^"-' "--^ non-dcpcndcncc, there is no 
on c o rh "i'^^'^' " independent today. All natrons have yielded 

h rad o a?a 't^'^'^^'^'u' ^^^^'"^^ independence, to the a/rplane. 

the rad o and the atom bomb. There can be no absolute sovereignty, if 
by absolute sovereignty we mean absolute freedom of action. In 1914 a 
single shot set oft a world explosion. In 1939 the refusal by a single nation 
to compromise a corridor of its territory shook the very structure of civiliza- 
tion and brought death and ruin to millions. When a Japanese force 
engaged in warlike maneuvers at Loukouchiao in northern China, on July 7, 
yyi7, and launched an attack against a small Chinese garrison in the city of 
Wanping, Manila, 3,000 miles away, was already in danger. We did not 
hilly understand it then. We know it now. 

And so the nations of the earth have come to recognize that there arc 
lin-iits to freedom of action. A great and wise American jurist, Justice 
Oliver Wendell Holmes, once said that freedom of speech docs not include 
the freedom of an individual to shout "Fire" in a crowded theater. So 
nations today realize that freedom does not mean the freedom of irresponsi- 
bility. Today we know that all nations have a common responsibility to 
one another, the responsibility to consult, to discuss, and to arrive at decisions 
by the methods of deliberation, the responsibility to help one another 
in distress and against dangers, the responsibility to permit equal access to 
resources and products in all the areas of the earth. In practice that means 
a mutual system of defense and consultation, a forum for discussion and 
deliberation, a machinery for enforcing the general authority of mankind — 
ft means in short the institution of community government among nations 
as well as among individuals. Law and order must prevail among nations 
as well as among people. 

In such a system, the new relationship between the United States and 
the Philippines sounds a harmonious note. The Philippines and the United 
States undertake to give comfort and security to one another, and to the 
other nations of the earth. In the special ties between our two countries 
there is no exclusiveness, but rather the willingness of one neighbor to help 
another. The existence of American military bases in the Philippines is 
part of a world system of security. It recognizes a mutuality of defense 
interests, a community of common principles to be upheld. The United 
States fears no nation. The United States threatens no nation. The United 
States has designs on no nation and asks nothing in selfishness from 
any nation. We recognize a special obligation to the Philippines. That 
obligation will be discharged. 

The United States, mighty in its new consciousness of power, 
but humble in its exercise, has underwritten the security of the Philippine 




SYMBOL OF THE NATION 

By Galo B. Ocampo 
Member and Secretary 
Philirpine Heraldry Committee 
The Coat of Arms of a country is the pohtical symbol of the State 
k is emblematic of the form of government and illustratu'e of the political 
ideology of the people. 

Thus the various coats of arms used m the Philippines summarize our 
historical development; indicate the political changes in our country since 
rhe 16th century. The first coat of arms was that of the City of Manila 
btowed by the Royal Grant of King Philip II on March 20, 1596; 
the second that of the erstwhile Philippine Republic, known as Aguinaldos 
seal used in his manifestos since October 31. 1896; the third, that adopted 
by the Philippine Commission in 1905; the fourth, that of the Commonwealth 
government approved on November 6, 1935; and the last, is that of the 
Republic which was approved by the Congress of the Philippines and by 
President Manuel Roxas on July 3, 1946. 

Among the heraldic blazons common to our various coats of arms are 
the eight-rayed Philippine sun, and the three stars of the Philippine National 
Fla*'. The eight rays of the Philippine Sun represent the eight provinces 
of Manila, Bulacan, Pampanga, Nueva Ecija, Morong, Laguna, Batangas, 
and Cavite which were declared under martial law by a decree of the Spanish 
goN'crnment during the re\'olution of 1896. The three five-pointed stars 
indicate the solidarity of Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. The Sun and 
Three Stars are one and inseparable. They are the distinctive and exclusive 
emblem of the Philippines as sanctioned by the Constitution, the Flag Law 
and ExecutiN'c Order No. 23. The Special Committee on the Coat of Arms 
created by the late President Manuel L. Quezon on December 15, 1938, 
under the chairmanship of the late Hon. Teodoro Kalav.', Director of the 
National Library and Museum, to study and recommend certain modifica- 
tions needed in the coat of arms of the Commonwealth of the Philippines 
recognized the importance of the Sun and Three Stars and recommended 
that they occupy an important place in our coat of arms. The recommend- 
ations submitted by this Committee were used as the basic pattern for the 
coat of arms of the Republic. 

As a symbol of the state, the coat of arms of the Republic represents 
three historical phases Philippine, Spanish, and American. 

The Philippine symbols are the three mullets (fi\-c-pointed stars) on 
the chief argent (upper part of the escutcheon proper in white), the eight- 




Address 



OF 



Qen. Douglas MacArthur 

SUPREME COMMANDER Ol- THE ALLIED POWERS 

On Che huuguracion of the Republic of che Philippines on July 4, 1946, 

ac the Luneta, Manila 

Mr. High Commissioner, Mr, President 
Ladies and Gentlemen : 

With this ceremony a new nation is born-a nation conceived in the 
centuries-old struggle of a people to attain the political liberty to embark 
upon Its own national destiny— a nation dedicated to the furtherance of 
those rights and those principles which serve to compose and advance man's 
dignity upon the earth— a nation upon whom the eyes of all oppressed peo- 
ples are today cast with the burning light of new faith. 

Forty-eight years ago, the mantle of American sovereignty fell over this 
land and this people. It was the beneficent sovereignty of a liberator 
pledged to be withdrawn as soon as the well-being of the people 
would safely permit. America never wavered in that purpose— America 
today redeems that pledge. 

ARMY OF FREEMEN 

For forty-eight years our Army has stood on these shores. An army of 
freemen dedicated to humanity's higher service, its role has never been to 
rule, never been to subjugate, never been to oppress. These years have seen 
many men come and many men go — men truly representing a cross section 
of that land beyond the seas who brought with them a better understanding 
of the West and carried back with them a better understanding of the East 
— and through it all helped develop a relationship of mutual understanding, 
mutual respect and mutual affection. The qualities which now bind our 
two peoples together, founded upon a community of interest and dedication 
to common purposes and common ideals, will not diminish with the 
sovereign change this day has wrought. For forty-eight years, as our two 
peoples have marched forward shoulder to shoulder toward a common 
destiny, through the bitterness of war and the oft' times onerous adversities 




History of 



of the Arms and Qreat Seal of the Repuhlu: 




Coat-oj-arms of the City oj Manila 
cjiven in the form of a royal grant by 
king Philip II in 1596. 






Coat-of-Arvis adopted by the Phil- 
ippine Executive Covimission {Act 
1365) in 1905. designed by GidUard 
Hunt. Chief of the Manuscript Division. 
Library of Congress. 



The Coat-of-Arnis of the erstwhile Philippine EepuHic 
tmder General Emilio Aguinaldo used in 1896 




The Coat-of-Arms of the Common- 
icealth of the Philippines adopted i« 
J. 935. 





244 



l'rs^:„r God tttaf;:' "™ '^'-'''^ "'".t- » 

, Sf^"'^ '^'^^'^ may raise its voice firmly and fearless y 
al gnment with those great forces of right which seek to avoid 

world ^""P^^^ P^^^ ^^^11 1^"^^^ ^^^^ 

I rejoice with you that your great poHtical goal has this day 
been reached, and shall watch your forward march under the banner of your 
own sovereignty with deep pride in the achievements of your past and with 
abiding conhdence in those of your future. In behalf of the great Army 
which 1 here represent, I stand at salute to the Republic and the people who 
proudly compose it— this land, this people that 1 have known so long and 
loved so well. 



EVOLUTION OF THE FILIPINO FLAG 

A nf a common flag among the Fihpmos before 
There is no known recora oi ^^^^^^^ indicate, however, that long before 
the Spanish colonization. Eady ^^'^^JJ . r^^^j^^ ^^d been using pennants and 
the coming of Magellan, Fihpmo ^^^^^^^^^^^ |^ ^^s also evident at the 
symbols to represent their local 8°)'^^" ' , pijipinos knew the heraldic 
taking of Manila by the Spaniards that th V ^ 
significance of red and white flags, to mean w , , ^ , 

7Z cTc^t "^:"rcHltolSa. ..n,fica„ce « see of 
trom eacn otncr. \ . , sentiments. These Hags assumed 

them were associated with varied national ^^"'^"^^ of Dolitical values 

a national character and began to express a new sense ot political values 

toward the end of the 19th century. 

The organization of the Katipunan gave an impetus to the adoption of 
a national flag to symbolize definite political motives. Thus the evolution 
of the Filipino flag was closely entwined with the foundation and progress 
of this patriotic society. Secrecy prevented the Katipuneros from displaying 
openly any distinctive flag, but in their meetings they used black, white, and 
red pennants with Masonic devices and emblems. 

The Katipuneros adopted for their symbols the letters K. K. K. somC' 
times abbreviated to one big K and this symbol . * . The society's coat-of- 
af,i^5_the white equilateral triangle of the Katipunan first degree with one K 
at each angle or one big K and this symbol again . * . in the center- 
was generally used on seals, emblems, and devices. Red, the color of the 
hood of a full-fledged member, was selected for the Katipunan flag. 

The Katipunan War Standard, a rectangular field of red with the 
symbolic K. K. K. in a row and sometimes arranged to form the corners of 
an equilateral triangle, appeared with modifications in different provinces to 
identify, differentiate, or designate battalions. In some localities, the flag had 
only one big K . ' . ; 

The first change in the Katipunan War Standard was made as a result 
of the declaration of martial law on August 30, 1896, in Manila, Bulacan, 
Nueva Ecija, Pampanga, Tarlac, Laguna, Cavite and Batangas. The three 
K's on the red field were replaced by the Tagalog character ^ with 
eight lines radiating to form a circle around the character. This character 
stood for the original meaning of K, Katipunan, and the eight rays were 
emblematic of the first eight provinces to revolt. This flag was consecrated 
as the flag of the people in a proclamation of General Aguinaldo in Imus, 



^i^'t^^ ;2::i'^' j::^'-"'' ^p'^-d™....,. 

whiter The N.rZ ?V , ' °f ^l^*^ escutcheon proper in 

(ch ef and heraM " T ^^"""^^ ^'^ ^'^^ such as whue 

wtfrfj^^^^^^^^^^^^ -^-0. red and blue (n. che pale^ 

fields of the escutchcorO ' °" " """" 

sidJ^lwT^' T^^^ ^^'"f^^"^ °" ^l^'^ base (right 

/^l?;. Th ITrl quartered flagofCastUe a'nd 

Aragon This is the national ensign of Spain used by Legaspi in the actual 
occupation and colonization of the Islands in the la'tter w o 
16th century as differentiated from the Pcndon dc Castdla or the Royal 
Standard, the flag brought by Magellan in 1521. During the Philippn'e 
Lommission and Commonwealth eras the coat of arms of the City of Manila 
occupied the point of honor in our coat of arms. This was a mistake The 
coat of arms of the City of Manila showing the castle and sea lion 
, T:'"^ ^' ^"'^ Philip II e-vpressZy for the "Ever Loyal and Noble City 
ot Manila in the first Royal Decree assigning a device for flags, banners 
shields and seals for the said City, given at Aranjuez on che 20th day 
ot March, 1596. Another error is the fact that a Spanish symbol occupied 
the heraldic point of honor, which should have been reserved for a Philippine 
symbol. 

The American symbol is the American bald-headed eagle displayed properly 
on the dexter base (left side), looking towards the dexter side which is the 
peace side or the olive side. On the dexter claw is an olive branch with 
eight leaves and eight fruits in verte (green ) and gules (red ) respectively. 
On the sinister claw are three spears in alert in peace or in war. 

Below the escutcheon proper is a scroll with the inscription "Republic 
of the Philippines". 

The coat of arms of the Republic is just the first of a series of coat of 
arms that the Philippine Hcraldrv Committe will create. The demands of 
protocol and official ceremonial functions in the life of a young Republic 
call for appropriate symbols in accordance with established heraldic laws 
and traditions. 




243 



THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL HYMN* 



Land of the morning, 
Child of the sun returning, 
With fervor burning, 

Thee do our souls adore. 
Land dear and holy, 
Cradle of noble heroes, 
Ne'er shall invaders 

Trample thy sacred shore. 



Ever within thy skies and through thy clouds 

And o'er thy hills and sea 
Do we behold the radiance, feel the throb, 

Of glorious liberty. 
Thy banner, dear to all our hearts, 

Its sun and stars alight, — 
Oh, never shall its shining field 

Be dimmed by tyrant's might! 

Beautiful land of love, O land of light, 
In thine embrace 'tis rapture to lie. 

But it is glory ever, when thou art wronged. 
For us, thy sons, to suffer and die. 



* Lyrics by Jose Palma (in Spanish). Translation in English by M. A. L. Lane and 
Camilo Osias. Music by I. Felipe. 




248 



, . L- f it he exclaims, why yes, this country is like 
is really puL to it to thinking <> therefore when he finds it here 

M h.ne he has -^^^ InVt^^^^^^^^^ things 4 latter 
too, he again * /'^^^^""^^^,./;;,7;. at other country has had stable 
two xcntil he begins coinpansons like Jf'' , r^^, ^he United States in 
currency after only eight rnonths of r^^^^^^^ ^^^^ 

^^:2iest^l^^^^^^^ «n.,o.,.,. 
^nonths old, doesnt fear it. That is important. 

Another thing Americans think of, the ovcrwhelnung majority of Filipinos 
that ZTEndi^h makn, nitercourse simple. Many customs and manners 
t s nlrtf sal J have seen many Americans after just coming to 
tiic Zlippines agreeably srirprised at often finding Fihprnos knowing more 
about parts of the United States than they do. 

Of course there are many gripes, but 7 think with open^mi^^dedness on 
both sides these can be understood. Q. Vs dont like the roay they are over- 
charaed and gypped in transactions. However, they should remember that 
they^do the same often and it is human nature to make as nmch as you can 
off of a sucker Q. J.'s also fear entanglements zvith Manila Police because 
they fear discrimination. Many, unfortunately, have an arrogant attitude 
ivhich often leads to discourteousness to Filipinos xvhich hurts me very much 
to ivitness but ivhich I can understand as being not meayit badly but just an 
example of the common happy-go-lucky American fooling around. Of course 
that does not excuse it but when you have tivo peoples xoith different customs 
and mores, it cant he avoided. „ 

There too is the difference betiueen the campaign veterans luho have fought 
and died ivith Filipinos and have seen and felt the inter-comradeship, and the 
young troops xuho were in the States during the ivar, many then in school, and 
u)ho are coming to the Philippines not in zvar hut to guard United States eqidp- 
ment and mostly to have good time. They very often don't think of anyone but 
themselves ivhen going around having this good time (ivhich is incidentally, 
human nature^ and tread on peoples' toes. These men have caused Filipino 
opinion of Americans to take a turn doivmvard and under standingly so. Thus 
many have taken to giving the Q. J.'s the cold shoulder which they 
cant understand. I myself, am one of these younger men and 1 certainly 
don't defend their actions but I do hope the Filipinos luont forget the others 
and those of us who do try. When I return home, 1 will certainly do all I 
can to aid the Philippines. Most Americans like the Filipinos and relations 
are very cordial there. The struggle of your people against the Japanese was 
ivatched ivith sympathy and clenched fists hy us, and ive longed to see the 
Japanese atrocities avenged. 



250 



Cavtte, on December 31, 1896, "It stands for Liberty, Equality, and 
Fraternity", according to the proclamation. 

A further modification in the flag was authorized by the Naic Conference 
of revolutionary leaders on March 17, 1897. In the middle of the red field 
a sun with eight rays replaced the Tagalog character. This change was 
influenced by two things: by the Katipunan ritual, which mentions the sun 
as the symbol of liberty and by the allegory of the eight lines radiating from 
the Tagalog character . Some of the reformed flags retained the 
letter K, while the great majority represented the sun as in mythology, with 
two eyes, nose, and mouth. 

This Filipino revolutionary flag failed to become the national colors 
when the first Republic was born in 1898, not for lack of symbolism, but 
because historical events created another which interprets in a better allegor- 
ical manner the new political thought and the newly conceived idealism of 
the people. The present flag was conceived by the revolutionary leaders 
who were in exile as a result of the Treaty of Biak-na-bato in 1897. The 
first flag of the present design was made by Mrs. Marcela de Agoncillo in 
Hong Kong. This design was not conceived by one individual. It was 
rather the creation of the public mind. It was a correct interpretation of 
the political ideas of the framers of the Malolos Constitution according to 
General Aguinaldo. 

In designing this flag, several symbolisms were considered: first the 
white equilateral triangle of the Katipunan; second, the golden sun with 
eight rays, symbolizing liberty, championed by the first eight provinces to 
revolt; third, the general outline of the Cuban flag, as anticipated and inter- 
preted by General Gregorio H. del Pilar; and fourth, the three five-pointed 
stars to represent the three geographical divisions of the Philippines; namely, 
Luzon, the Visayas, and Mindanao. The red in our flag stands for courage 
bravery, and heroism; the blue, for high political purposes and noble ideals; 
and the white, for purity and peace. The mythological representation of the 
sun has fallen into disuse. It now appears in plain bright gold like the three 
stars. 

In this final evolution the part played by Gregorio del Pilar 's tricolor 
flag, which was neither a Katipunan War Standard nor a mere modification 
of the first Filipino flag, was significant. It advanced the evolution one 
degree further by being the intermediate step between the first Filipino flag 
and the present national colors. It preserved the red of the Katipunan War 
Standard and the black of Llanera's Skull Flag. It adapted the blue from 
the Cuban flag and anticipated the use of the triangle, the two horizontal 
bars and perhaps also of the star. 




247 



TRFATY OF GENERAL RELATIONS BETWEEN THE 
I^PUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES AND THE 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

■ The Republic of the PhUippines and the United States of America^ 
being animated by the desire to cement the relanons of close and 
long friendship existing between the two countr^s, and to provjde for the 
recognition of the independence of the Republic of the Philippines as 
of July 4, 1946 and the relinquishment of American sovereignty over the 
Philippine Islands, have agreed upon the following articles: 

Article I 

The United States of America agrees to withdraw and surrender, and 
does hereby withdraw and surrender, all right of possession, supervision 
jurisdiction, control or sovereignty existing and exercised by the United 
States of America in and over the territory and the people of the Philippine 
Islands, except the use of such bases, necessary appurtenances to such bases, 
and the rights incident thereto, as the United States of America, by agreement 
with the Republic of the Philippines, may deem necessary to retain for the 
mutual protection of the Republic of the Philippines and of the United States 
of America. The United States of America further agrees to recognize, 
and does hereby recognize, the independence of the Republic of the 
Philippines as a separate self-governing nation and to acknowledge, and does 
hereby acknowledge, the authority and control over the same of the 
Government instituted by the people thereof, under the Constitution of the 
Republic of the Philippines. 

Article II 

The diplomatic representatives of each country shall enjoy in the 
territories of the other the privileges and immunities derived from generally 
recognized international law and usage. The consular representatives of 
each country, duly provided with exequatur, will be permitted to reside in 
the territories of the other in the places wherein consular representatives are 
by local laws permitted to reside; they shall enjoy the honorary privileges 
and the immunities accorded to such officers by general international usage; 
and they shall not be treated in a manner less favorable than similar officers of 
any other foreign country. 

Article III 

Pending the final establishment of the requisite Philippine Foreign 
Service establishments abroad, the Republic of the Philippines and the 



A GI WRITES TO THE PRESIDENT 

Philippine-American friendly relations have always been of great concern 
to both Americans and Filipinos. A highly illuminating letter sent to 
President Roxas by Pfc Brook B. Ballard, Jr. of the Military Police, U. S. 
Army, has contributed to the formation of amicable understanding between 
the two peoples. The letter was sent as an expression of sympathy for the 
tragic incident on Plaza Miranda on the eve of the national plebiscite on 
parity, which threatened the life not only of the Chief Executive but also of 
the young Republic. 

March 1^, ig4j 

Dear Mr. President: 

/ wish to take it upon myself to extend my sympathy and that of 
my enlisted men associates in the United States Army to you for the tragic 
incident which occurred in Plaza Miranda, Quiapo, on Monday evening, 
March loth, threatening your life and that of the Philippine natioii, and share 
ivith you the thankfulness to Almighty Qod for your protection. I was present 
at Plaza Miranda that evening in order that I might learn a little more about 
the nation in which I am stationed and also be present at the historic rally. 
I certainly gained a great deal from the meeting and am very grateful to the 
kindness of the people around me who aided me in understanding the Tagalog. 

For some time I have been interested in the Far East and, as many other 
Americans, read sympathetically of nationalist struggles in many of her lands 
against colonialism. I took every opportunity while in high school and college 
to increase my knowledge of this part of the world seeing hoiv it is rising in 
world importance. I have been fortunate to become stationed in the most out- 
standing example of democracy in the Far East, the Philippine P^epublic. I 
have been striving to learn more about this country through contacts with the 
people, through study, and my many friends here in Manila. 

The opinion of the country in the eyes of the American enlisted man is 
probably rather difficult to get, and I thoicght that you might be interested in 
some opinions he has which I hope can be beneficial. It could aid in better 
understanding between our troops and the Filipinos. I realize that I cannot 
speak for (ill Q- J 's but I can only say what I have seen and think- I <i»i 
keenly interested in the maintenance of best possible relations between 
Americans and Filipinos, and this is my reason for attempting to help in my 
small way towards this end. 

The Ainerican naturally judges a place from his own standards and 
thus takes much for granted. Therefore the freedom of speech and press over 
here is not thought of, as it is present like in the United States, but when he 



1 .r.-^.-..: of rhe United States of America in 

America and of cozens and corporaf o "f '!^ j^^^.^j d_ j 

the Republic of the Phil.pp.n-J^^>» b -^^^^ 

safeguarded ro the same extent as P"!^""^ .f^'^ yjc of the Phihppines re- 
„f rhe United States of Amenca - Vfc gna« representatives who n,a, 
spectively. Both Government sha tog P ^ 

in concert agree on measures ^> ^""f ^e covered by existing 

and expeditious disposal of such claims as may 

legislation. 

Article Vll 

The Republic of the Philippines agrees to assume all continuing 
oblig ions a sumed by the United States of America under the Treaty of 
Peace between the United States of America and Spam concluded at Parrs 
on the 10th day of December, 1898, by which the Phihppme Islands were 
ceded to the United States of America, and under the Treaty between tk 
United States of America and Spain concluded at Washington on the 7th 
day of November, 1900. 

Article VIll 

This Treaty shall enter into force on the exchange of instruments of 
ratifications. 

This Treaty shall be submitted for ratification in accordance with the 
constitutional procedures of the Republic of the Philippines and of the United 
States of America and instruments of ratification shall be exchanged and 
deposited at Manila. 

Signed at Manila this fourth day of July, one thousand nine hundred 
and forty-six. 

For the Government or the Republic of the Philippines: 

(Signed) MANUEL ROXAS 
For the Government of the United States of America: 

(Signed) PAUL V. McNUTT 




Probably the greatest cause of mistrust betiveen our Livo /K'op/c5 is that 
ive expect everyone to he just like ive are, as quick, as educated. We 
Americans often fail to make allowances and just say that the Filipinos arc 
stupid. (Excuse me if I speak too bluntly. ) We forget that ive have had 
one hundred-sixty years of development behind us and ought to have more 
while the Philippines have had three hundred- fifty years of Spanish domination 
and forty-seven of American. 

I am glad that the parity amendment has been approved by the Philippines 
and I hope it will lead to quick rehabilitation. One thing that has caused me 
pain every time I see it is the destruction of Manila particularly that of her 
once magnificent government buildings, the beautiful Intramuros, etc. I 
indeed hope that these can be rebuilt soon. 

I have been xvatching ivith interest the activities of the Philippine United 
Nations T(epresentative, Brig. Qen. Carlos P. 'Rpmido, and admire his brave 
stand as sole representative of this part of the luorld. He is indeed a popular 
figure among Americans and we hold highest respect for him. His speech the 
other evening in Plaza Miranda xvas historic. Some of his praise of America 
made me blush and wonder if ive deserved it. , j 

I have heard the opinion expressed that revolution is inevitable here and 
that there is only democracy on the surface. I think deeds speak best against 
these opinions. When we compare the di^erence in democracy and stability 
of the Philippine l^epublic after eight months of independence and that of the 
United States after the same amount of time, the former has more to go on, 
and the latter hasnt fallen yet. I personally share the opinion of a prominent 
American in Manila in that I have no fears for the future of the T{epublic of 
the Philippines. 

I hope that I have achieved my purpose in frankly gii'i'>^g to you some of 
my ideas. 

Very sincerely yours, 

(Sgd. ) Brook B. Ballard, Jr. 
PFC. Military Police 
Co. B, J38 M. P. Bn. 
APO yoy 




BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

A Proclamation 

the Philippine, approved July 3 1946 ac P t ^^^^.^^^^ 

Agreement set forth rn said " °' Cj^^.^ America and authorized 
Philippines and the President of the United ^^'^^ °' ( ^ on or after 
Che Resident of the Philippines to execute the same tormally 

^"'''wlts the President of ^he PW''PP■"«^;"X"e', ^'o'tS L'red 

provisions of the said section ' ° Co,.,™nwe,^h A t N^^ 

into said Executive Agreement on July % lyto, w , , 

United States of America through Ms duly ^'^P^^^'^^^. ^ f'XTT^^^^ fiTurt 
Agreement including a Protocol and Annexes thereto, is in words and hgures 

as follows : 

AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
AND THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES CONCERNING 
TRADE AND RELATED MATTERS DURING A TRANSITION- 
AL PERIOD FOLLOWING THE INSTITUTION OF PHILIPPINE 
INDEPENDENCE. 

The President of the Philippines and the President of the United States 
of America, recalling the close economic ties between the people ot 
the Philippines and the people of the United States during many years o 
intimate political relations, mindful of the great physical destruction and 
social disturbances suffered by the Philippines as a result of their valiant sup- 
port of the cause of the United Nations in the war against Japan, and desiring 
to enter into an agreement accepting on the part of each country the provisions 
of Title II and Title III (except Part I) of the Philippine Trade Act of 1946 
of the United States of America, have agreed to the following Articles: 

Article I 

1. During the period from the date of the entry into force of 
this Agreement to July 3, 1954, both dates inclusive. United States articles 
as defined in subparagraph (c) of paragraph 1 of the Protocol to 
this Agreement entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, in the Philippines 
for consumption, and Philippine articles as defined in subparagraph (/) of 
paragraph 1 of the Protocol entered, or v^'ithdrawn from warehouse, in the 
United States for consumption, shall be admitted into the Philippines and the 
United States, respectively, free of ordinary customs duty. 

2. The ordinary customs duty to be collected on United States articles 
as defined in subparagraph (c) of paragraph I of the Protocol, which during 
the following portions of the period from July 4, 1954, to July 3, 1974, both 




United States of America agree that at the request of the Repubhc of the 
Phihppines the United States of America will endeavor, in so far as it may 
be practicable, to represent through its Foreign Service the interests of the 
Republic of the Philippines in countries where there is no Philippine 
representation. The two countries further agree that any such arrangements 
are to be subject to termination when in the judgment of either country such 
arrangements are no longer necessary. 

Article IV ~ -; .--* 

The Republic of the Philippines agrees to assume, and does hereby 
assume, all the debts and liabilities of the Philippine Islands, its provinces, 
cities, municipalities and instrumentalities, which shall be valid and 
subsisting on the date hereof. The Republic of the Philippines will make 
adequate provision for the necessary funds for the payment of interest on and 
principal of bonds issued prior to May 1, 1934 under authority of an Act of 
Congress of the United States of America by the Philippine Islands, or any 
province, city or municipality therein, and such obligations shall be a first 
lien on the taxes collected in the Philippines. 

Article V 

The Republic of the Philippines and the United States of America agree 
that all cases at law concerning the Government and people of the 
Philippines which, in accordance with section 7 (6) of the Independence 
Act of 1934, are pending before the Supreme Court of the United States of 
America at the date of the granting of the independence of the Republic of 
the Philippines shall continue to be subject to the review of the Supreme 
Court of the United States of America for such period of time after 
independence as may be necessary to effectuate the disposition of the cases at 
hand. The contracting parties also agree that following the disposition of 
such cases the Supreme Court of the United States of America will cease to 
have the right of review of cases originating in the Philippine Islands. 

Article VI 

In so far as they are not covered by existing legislation, all claims of the 
Government of the United States of America or its national against the 
Government of the Republic of the Philippines and all claims of the 
Government of the Republic of the Philippines and its nationals against the 
Government of the United States of America shall be promptly adjusted and 
settled. The property rights of the Republic of the Philippines and 
the United States of America shall be promptly adjusted and settled 
by mutual agreement, and all existing property rights of citizens and 
corporations of the Republic of the Philippines in the United States of 



connection with nnportation; but does not inciu 

J ^rc r>f rhp Philippines, which do not come 
6. With respect to products of the ^^^^^PP United States. 

within the definition ot ^^^'^PP"^^^^l^:^!::'.;;-u;u be collected or paid in an 
no duty on ot in J"^ to like articles which 

rtr^^dTcf^f : ;o*erLtS^rcou„tty C.Z,^ Cuba), ot co,,ected „t 
paid in aiy amount if the duty is not imposed with tespect to such Uke atfcles 
whth ate the ptoduct of any other foreign countty (except Cuba). As 
med in this patagraph the term "duty" includes taxes, fees chatges, 
"rexactions. impored on or in connection wth .mpottation; but does not 
include internal taxes. 

Article 11 

1. During the period from January 1, 1946 to December 31, 1973 
both dates inclusive, the total amount of the articles falling within one of 
the classes specified in Items A and A-1, and C to G, both inclusive of the 
schedule to this Article which are Philippine articles as defined in subparag- 
raph (/) of paragraph 1 of the Protocol, and which, in any calendar year, 
may be entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, in the United States for 
consumption shall not exceed the amounts specified in such schedule as to 
each class of articles. During the period from January 1, 1946, to 
December 31, 1973, both dates inclusive, the total amount of the articles 
falling within the class specified in Item B of the schedule to this Article 
which are the product of the Philippines, and which, in any calendar year, 
may be entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, in the United States for 
consumption, shall not exceed the amounts specified in such schedule as to 
such class of articles. During the period from January 1, 1974, to July 3, 
1974, both dates inclusive, the total amounts referred to in the preceding 
sentences of this paragraph shall not exceed one-half of the amount specified 
in such schedule with respect to each class of articles, respectively. 

2. Philippine articles as defined in subparagraph (/) of paragraph 1 of 
the Protocol falling within one of the classes specified in Items D to G, both 
inclusive, of the schedule to this Article, which during the following portions 
of the period from January 1, 1946, to December 31, 1973, both 
dates inclusive, are entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, in the United 
States for consumption, shall be free of ordinary customs duty, in quantities 
determined by applying the following percentages of the amounts speci&ed 
. in such schedule as to each class of articles : 

(a) During each of the calendar years 1946 to 1954, one hundred 
per centum. 

(6) During the calendar year 1955, ninety-five per centum. 
(c) During each calendar year after the calendar year 1955 until 
and including the calendar year 1973, a percentage equal to the per- 



Protocol 

TO ACCOMPANY THE TREATY OF GENERAL RELATIONS 
BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES AND THE 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, SIGNED AT MANILA ON 
THE FOURTH DAY OF JULY, 1946. 

It is understood and agreed by the High Contracting Parties that this 
Treaty is for the purpose of recognizing the independence of the Republic of 
the Philippines and for the maintenance of close and harmonious relations 
between the two Governments. 

It is understood and agreed that this Treaty does not attempt to regulate 
the details of arrangements between the two Governments for their mutual 
defense; for the establishment, termination or regulation of the rights and 
duties of the two countries, each with respect to the other, in the settlement 
of claims, as to the ownership or control of real or personal property, or as to 
the carrying out of provisions of law of either country; or for the settlement 
of rights or claims of citizens or corporations of either country with respect 
to or against the other. 

It is understood and agreed that the conclusion and entrance into force 
of this Treaty is not exclusive of further treaties and executive agreements 
providing for the specific regulations of matters broadly covered herein. 

It is understood and agreed that pending final ratification of this Treaty, 
the provisions of Articles II and III shall be observed by executive agreement. 

Signed at Manila this fourth day of July, one thousand nine hundred 
forty-six. 

For the Government of the Republic of the Philippines: 

(Sgd. ) MANUEL ROXAS 

For the Government of the United States of America: 

(Sgd. ) PAUL V. McNUTT 



^^^^^^^ 

255 



J .nr<>nre is or will be unable for any reason 
quotas referred to in the preceding sentu • .^^ ^.^^ f^jfiu quota 

to export to the United States all ot his ^^^^^^^^^^ ^^.^^ established by 
for that year, that amount ot sue remainder of the calendar 

sufficient evidence cannot be expo^^^^^ Government to other holders of 
year may be apportioned by the nii pi ^^^^^ ^^^^^^^ ^.^j .^^^^^ 

allotments under the same q^°^^' .^^^ ^hat no transfer or assign- 

fulfillment of the quota for that y^^', J ^ paragraph shall diminish 

nnent or reallocation l-^f^X' .lThccn^^^^^^ 

the allotment to which the holder may be entitled y 

year. . , 

The following schedule to Article II shall constitute an integral part 

thereof : - 



Numerical 
item 



A 

A-1 



B 



n 

Commodity description 



C 
D 



F 
G 



Sugars. . 

May be refined sugars, meaning -direct-con- 
sumption sugar" as defined in Section 101 of the 
Sugar Act of 1937 of the United States which is 
set forth in part as Annex I to this Agreement. 

Cordage, including yarns, twines (including 
binding twines described in Paragraph 1622 of 
the Tariff Act of 1930 of the United States, as 
amended, which is set forth as Annex II to this 
Agreement) cords, cordage, rope, and cable, 
tarred or untarred, wholly or in chief value of 
Manila (abaca) or other hard fiber. 

Rice, including rice meal, flour, polished, and 
bran. 

Cigars (exclusive of cigarettes, cheroots of all 
kinds, and paper cigars and cigarettes, including 
wrappers) . 

Scrap tobacco, and stemmed and unstemmed 
filler tobacco described in Paragraph 602 of the 
Tariff Act of 1930 of the United States, as amend- 
ed, which is set forth as Annex III to this Agree- 
ment. 

Coconut oil. 

Buttons of pearl or shell. 



Ill 

All quantities 



952,000 short tons. 

Not to exceed 56,000 short tons. 



6,000,000 lbs. 



1,040,000 lbs. 



200,000.000 cigars. 



6,500,000 lbs. 



200,000 long tons. 
850,000 gross. 



Article HI 

i. With respect to quotas on Philippine articles as defined in 
subparagraph (/) of paragraph 1 of the Protocol (other than the quotas 




dates inclusive, are entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, in the Philippine, 
for consumption, and on PhiUppine articles as defined in subparagraph (H 
of paragraph 1 of the Protocol, other than those specified in Items D to G 
both inclusive, of the schedule to Article II, which during such portions of 
such period are entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, in the United States 
for consumption, shall be determined by applying the following percentages 
ot the Philippine duty as defined in subparagraph (/i) of paragraph 1 of the 
Protocol, and of the United States duty as defined in subparagraph (g) of 
paragraph i of the Protocol, respectively: 

(d) During the period from July 4, 1954, to December 31, 1954, 
both dates inclusive, five per centum. 

(6) During the calendar year 1955, ten per centum. 

(c) During each calendar year after the calendar year 1955 until 
and including the calendar year 1972, a percentage equal to the 
percentage for the preceding calendar year increased by five per centum 
of the Philippine duty and the United States duty, respectively, as so 
defined. 

(ci) During the period from January 1, 1973, to July 3, 1974, 
both dates inclusive, one hundred per centum. 

3. Customs duties on United States articles, and on Philippine articles, 
other than ordinary customs duties, shall be determined without regard to 
the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, but shall be subject to 
the provisions of paragraph 4 of this Article. 

4. With respect to United States articles imported into the Philippines, 
and with respect to Philippine articles imported into the United States, no 
duty on or in connection with importation shall be collected or paid in an 
amount in excess of the duty imposed with respect to like articles which are 
the product of any other foreign country, or collected or paid in any amount 
if the duty is not imposed with respect to such like articles. As used in this 
paragraph the term "duty" includes taxes, fees, charges, or exactions, 
imposed on or in connection with importation; but does not include internal 
taxes or ordinary customs duties. 

5. With respect to products of the United States which do not come 
within the definition of United States articles, imported into the Philippines, 
no duty on or in connection with importation shall be collected or paid in an 
amount in excess of the duty imposed with respect to like articles which are 
the product of any other foreign country, or collected or paid in any amount 
if the duty is not imposed with respect to such like articles which are the 
product of any other foreign country. As used in this paragraph the term 




. 1 • ^.-r,rMinr in excess of the internal tax 
rh^ rnllerred or pa d ui an amount in excc:>5 . r . 
(b) °; P . i^ies which are the product of any other 

imposed with respect to hke articles .^^^^^^^ 

foreign country, or collected or P^f^/;^7, 

is not imposed with respect to such like articles. 

. • ,x,irVi resDCCt to an article which is 

Where an internal tax .s "^P°^\^'^^^l^^Zr an internal tax imposed 
the product of a foreign country /^""Pf^^f Xt of the PhilippinL, or 

(1) with respect to a ^^^ntn of a like article which 

(2) with respect to the internal tax which is 
is the product of the Phdrppmes .f the amo™^ 

rollerred and paid with respect to tne arcicic w i . /'L^ r 

h UnLd St^^^^ is not in excess of that permitted by paragraph 1 (fc) of 
Article IV such collection and payment shall not be regarded as m v.olafon 
of the first sentence of this paragraph. 

2 With respect to articles which are products of the Philippines coming 
into the United States, or with respect to articles manufactured in the United 
States wholly or in part from such articles, no internal tax shall be— 

(d) Collected or paid in an amount in excess of the internal tax 

imposed with respect to like articles which are the product of the United 

States, or collected or paid in any amount if the internal tax is 

not imposed with respect to such like articles; 

(b) Collected or paid in an amount in excess of the internal tax 

imposed with respect to like articles which are the product of any other 

foreign country, or collected or paid in any amount if the internal tax 

is not imposed with respect to such like articles. 

Where an internal tax is impo.sed with respect to an article which is 
the product of a foreign country to compensate for an internal tax imposed 
(1 ) with respect to a like article which is the product of the United States, 
or (2 ) with respect to materials used in the production of a like article which 
is the product of the United States, if the amount of the internal tax which is 
collected and paid with respect to the article which is the product of the 
Philippines is not in excess of that permitted by paragraph 2 (t) of Article 
IV, such collection and payment shall not be regarded as in violation of the 
first sentence of this paragraph. This paragraph shall not apply to the taxes 
imposed under sections 2306, 2327, or 2356 of the Internal Revenue Code 
of the United States which are set forth in part as Annexes IV, V, and VI 
to this Agreement. 

3. No export tax shall be imposed or collected by the United States on 
articles exported to the Philippines, or by the Philippines on articles exported 
to the United States. 




262 



centage for the preceding calendar year decreased by five per centum of 
such specified amounts. 

Any such Philippine article so entered or withdrawn from warehouse in excess 
of the duty-free quota provided in this paragraph shall be subject to one 
hundred per centum of the United States duty as defined in subparagraph (g) 
of paragraph 1 of the Protocol. 

3. Each of the quotas provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article 
for articles falling within one of the classes specified in Items A-1 and B, 
and D to G, each inclusive, of the schedule to this Article shall be allocated 
annually by the Philippines to the manufacturers in the Philippines in the 
calendar year 1940 of products of a class for which such quota is established, 
and whose products of such class were exported to the United States during 
such calendar year, or their successors in interest, proportionately on the basis 
of the amount of the products of such class produced by each such manufacturer 
(or in the case of such successor in interest, the amount of the products of such 
class produced by his predecessor in interest) which was exported to the 
United States during the following period: (a) In the case of Items A-1 
and D to G, each inclusive, the calendar year 1940, and (Z)) in the case of 
Item B, the twelve months immediately preceding the inauguration of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines. The quota provided for in paragraph 
1 of this Article for unrefined sugar specified in Item A of such schedule, 
including that required to manufacture the refined sugar specified in Item 
A-1 of the schedule, shall be allotted annually by the Philippines to the sugar- 
producing mills and plantation owners in the Philippines in the calendar 
year 1940 whose sugars were exported to the United States during 
such calendar year, or their successors in interest, proportionately on the basis 
of their average annual production (or in the case of such a successor in 
interest, the average annual production of his predecessor in interest) for 
the calendar years 1931, 1932, and 1933, and the amount of sugars which 
may be so exported shall be allocated in each year between each mill and the 
plantation owners on the basis of the proportion of sugars to which each 
mill and the plantation owners are respectively entitled, in accordance with 
any milling agreements between them, or any extension, modification, or 
renewal thereof. 

4. The holder of any allotment under law existing on April 29, 1946, 
including his successor in interest, and the holder of any allotment under any 
of the quotas which are provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article 
the allocation of which is provided for in paragraph 3 of this Article, may 
transfer or assign all or any amount of such allotment on such terms as may 
be agreeable to the parties in interest. If, after the first nine months of any 
calendar year, the holder of any allotment, for that year, under any of the 




c ,„„ if Q.irh wife or children of such citizen 
children under eighteen years of age, it sucn accompanying or 

of the United States or of such "C-e" of the ™ PP^^ ^JJ^ 
following to join him during such period. Jh^' P« « P ^.^^ 
to a citizen of the PhilipP-s a mi » „f 
~r("Hrr of Schl, 1934^ of the United States which is 
set forth as Annex VIII to this Agreement. 

2 There shall be permitted to enter the Phili,,pines without regard to 
any nun e cal limitations under the laws of the Philippines, each of the 
calendar years 1946 to 1951, both inclusive, 1,200 citizens of the United 
Sta'es, each of whom shall be entitled to remain in the Philippines for D years. 

Article VII 

1 The disposition, exploitation, development, and utilization of all 
agricultural, timber, and mineral lands of the public domain, waters 
nninerals, coal, petroleum, and other mineral oils all forces and sources of 
potential energy, and other natural resources of the Philippines, and the 
operation of public utilities, shall, if open to any person, be open to citizens 
of the United States and to all forms of business enterprise owned or 
controlled, directly or indirectly, by United States citizens, except that (for 
the period prioi to the amendment of the Constitution of the Philippines 
referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article) the Philippines shall not be 
required to comply with such part of the foregoing provisions of this sentence 
as are in conflict with such Constitution. 

2. The Go\'ernment of the Philippines will promptly take such steps as 
are necessary to secure the amendment of the Constitution of the Philippines 
so as to permit the taking effect as laws of the Philippines of such part of 
the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article as is in conflict with such Con- 
stitution before such amendment. 

Article Vlll 

1. Upon the taking eftect of this Agreement the provisions thereof 
placing obligations on the United States: (d) if in effect as laws of 
the United States at the time this Agreement takes effect, shall continue in 
effect as laws of the United States during the effectiveness of the Agreement; 
or (fe) if not so in effect at the time the Agreement takes effect, shall take 
effect and continue in effect as laws of the United States during the effective- 
ness of the Agreement. The Philippines will continue in effect as laws of the 
Philippines, during the effectiveness of this Agreement, the provisions thereof 
placing obligations on the Philippines, except as is otherwise provided in 
paragraph i of Article VII, 




provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article II, and other than 
quotas established in conjuction-vvith quantitative limitations, applicable to 
products of all foreign countries, on imports of like articles), the United 
States will not establish any such quota for any period before January 1, 1948, 
and for any part of the period from January 1, 1948, to July 3, 1974, both 
dates inclusive, it will establish such a quota only if— 

(a) The President of the United States, after investigation, finds 
and proclaims that such Philippine articles are coming, or are likely to 
come, into substantial competition with like articles the product of the 
United States; 

(£») The quota for any Philippine article as so defined for any 
twelve-month period is not less than the amount determined by the 
President as the total amount of Philippine articles of such class which 
(during the twelve months ended on the last day of the month preceding 
the month in which occurred the date proclaimed by the President as the 
date of the beginning of the investigation ) was entered, or withdrawn for 
warehouse, in the United States for consumption; or, if the quota is 
established for any period other than a twelve-month period, is not less 
than a proportionate amount. 

Any quota established pursuant to this paragraph shall not continue in effect 
after the President, following investigation, finds and proclaims that the 
conditions which gave rise to the establishment of such quota no longer exist. 

2. If the President of the United States finds that the allocation of any 
quota established pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article is necessary to make 
the application of the quota just and reasonable between the United States 
and the Philippines, he shall, in such proclamation or a subsequent 
proclamation, provide the basis for such allocation, and if he exercises such 
right, the Philippines will promptly put and keep in effect, on the 
basis proclaimed by the President of the United States, the allocation of such 
quota. 

Article IV 

1. With respect to articles which are products of the United States 
coming into the Philippines, or with respect to articles manufactured in the 
Philippines wholly or in part from such articles, no internal tax shall be — 

(a) Collected or paid in an amount in excess of the internal tax 
imposed with respect to like articles which are the product of the Phil- 
ippines, or collected or paid in any amount if the internal tax is not 
imposed with respect to such like articles; 




;., ^^■rf-i'i nf five her centum of the compeiv 
such Tide any D^Lge Con—n of the United 

. sation pa,d by the Ph, .ppmc ^a' ^a, g ^^^^^^ ^ 

States on account or such ciaim, ^n* o 

states on ^^^^ ^.^j, equivalent, in the 

m,sdemeaj ana shaU be to ^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^^^ ^^^.^^^ ^^^^^^ 

c:::: - 'prf— ffor „ot mote than twelve ..onths, ot both, 
a"d " iny such payment or benefit shall have been made ot granted, 
such Commission shall take such action as rnay be necessary to recover 
the same, and, in addition thereto, any such claimant shall forfeit all 
rights under such Title. 

Article IX 

The United States and the Phihppines agree to consult with each other 
with respect to any questions as to the interpretation or the application of 
this Agreement, concerning which either Government may make representa- 
tions to the other. 

Article X 

1. The Philippine Trade Act of 1946 of the United States having 
authorized the President of the United States to enter into this Agreement, and 
the Congress of the United States having enacted such legislation as may be 
necessary to make the provisions thereof placing obligations on the United 
States take effect as laws of the United States, this Agreement shall not take 
effect unless and until the Congress of the Philippines accepts it by law and 
has enacted such legislation as may be necessary to make all provisions hereof 
placing obligations on the Philippines take effect as laws of the Philippines, 
except as is otherwise provided in paragraph 1 of Article VII. This 
Agreement shall then be proclaimed by the President of the United States 
and by the President of the Philippines, and shall enter into force on the day 
following the date of such proclamations, or, if they are issued on different 
dates, on the day following the later in date. 

2. This Agreement shall have no effect after July 3, 1974. It may be 
terminated by either the United States or the Philippines at any time, upon 
not less than five years' written notice. If the President of the United States 
or the President of the Philippines determines and proclaims that the other 
country has adopted or applied measures or practices which would operate to 
nullify or impair any right or obligation provided for in this Agreement, 
then the Agreement may be terminated upon not less than six months' written 



notice. 



3. If the President of the United States determines that a reasonable 
time for the making of the amendment to the Constitution of the Philippines 
referred to in paragraph 2 of Article VII has elapsed, but that such 



in rU Other internal tax shall be imposed or collected 

in the United States or in the Philippines with respect to articles coming 
into such country for the official use of the Government of the Philippines 
or ot the United States, respectively, or any department or agency thereof. 

5. No processing tax or other internal tax shall be imposed or collected 
in the United States with respect to Manila (abaca) fiber not dressed or 
manufactured in any manner. 

6. The United States will not reduce the preference of two cents per 
pound provided in section 2470 of the Internal Revenue Code of the United 
i>cates (relating to processing taxes on coconut oil, etc.), which is set forth 
as Annex VII to this Agreement, with respect to articles "wholly the prod- 
uction of the Philippine Islands" or articles "produced wholly from materials 
the growth or production of the Philippine Islands"; except that it 
may suspend the provisions of subsection (a) (2) of such section during 
any period as to which the President of the United States, after consultation 
with the President of the Philippines, finds that adequate supplies of neither 
copra nor coconut oil, the product of the Philippines, are readily available 
tor processing in the United States. 

Article V 

The value of Philippine currency in relation to the United States dollar 
shall not be changed, the convertibility of Philippine pesos into the United 
States dollars shall not be suspended, and no restriction shall be imposed on 
the transfer of funds from the Philippines to the United States except by 
agreement with the President of the United States. 

Article VI 

1. Any citizen of the United States who actually resided in the 
Philippines, and any citizen of the Philippines who actually resided in the 
United States, for a continuous period of three years during the period of 
forty-two months ending November 30, 1941, if entering the country of 
such former residence during the period from July 4, 1946, to July 3, 1951, 
both dates inclusive, for the purpose of resuming residence therein, shall for 
the purposes of the immigration laws, be considered a non-quota immigrant. 
After such admission as a non-quota immigrant he shall, for the purposes of 
the immigration and naturalization laws, be considered as lawfully admitted 
to such country for permanent residence. The benefits of this paragraph 
shall also apply to the wife of any such citizen of the United States, if she is 
also a citizen thereof, and to his unmarried children under eighteen years of 
age, and to the wife of any such citizen of the Philippines, if she is also a 
citizen thereof or is eligible for United States citizenship, and to his unmarried 




263 



flrrr-,MPANY THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN 
'^""^HE UNITED STATEfoF'^lMERlCA AND THE REPUBLIC 
OF -SI PHILipn CONCERNING TRADE AND 
RELA^D ma™ during A TRANSITIONAL 
PErToD following the INSTITUTION OF 
PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



The undersigned duly empowered Plenipotenmnes have agreed to the 
following Protocol to this Agreement between the United States of Amenca 
and the Republic of the Philippines concerning trade and related matters 
during a transitional period following the institution of Philippine Independ- 
ence, signed this day, which shall constitute an integral part of the Agreement: 

1 . For the purpose of the Agreement— 

(a) The term "person" includes partnerships, corporations, and 
associations. 

(/i) The term "United States" means the United States of America 
and, when used in a geographical sense, means the States, 
the District of Columbia, the Territories of Alaska and 
Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. 

(c) The term "Philippines" means the Republic of the Philippines 

and, when used in a geographical sense, means the territories 
of the Republic of the Philippines, whether a particular act 
in question took place, or a particular situation in question 
existed, within such territories before or after the institution 
of the Republic of the Philippines. As used herein the 
territories of the Republic of the Philippines comprise all 
the territories specified in section 1 of Article I of 
the Constitution of the Philippines which is set forth as 
Annex XI to this Agreement. 

(d) The term "ordinary customs duty" means a customs duty 

based on the article as such (whether or not such duty is 
also based in any manner on the use, value, or method of 
production of the article, or on the amount of like articles 
imported, or on any other factor); but does not include— 

( I ) A customs duty based on an act or omission of 
any person with respect to the importation oi 
the article, or of the country from which the 
article is exported, or from which it comes; or 




268 



1 The United States and the PhiUppines will promptly enact, and 
shall keep in effect dtmng the effectiveness of this Agreement, such legislation 
as may be necessary to supplement the laws of the United States and 
the Phi ippmes, respectively, referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, and 
to implement the provisions of such laws and the provisions of this 
Agreement placing obligations on the United States and the Philippines 
respectively^ Moreover, the Philippines will promptly enact, and keep in 
force and effect during the effectiveness of this Agreement, such legislation as 
may be necessary to put and keep in effect during the effectiveness of this 
Agreement, the allocation, reallocation, transfer, and assignment of quotas 
on the basis provided for in paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article II; and 
if the United States exercises the right to establish quotas pursuant to 
paragraph 1 of Article III and to provide for the allocation thereof pursuant 
to paragraph 2 of the same Article, the Philippines will promptly enact, and 
keep in force during the period for which each such quota is established,' such 
legislation as is necessary to put and keep in effect, on the basis provided by 
the United States, the allocation of such quotas. 

3. The Philippines agree to assist the United States in carrying out 
Title I of the Philippine Rehabilitation Act of 1946 of the United States by 
providing that the following acts relative to such Title shall be offenses under 
the laws of the Philippines, and that, upon conviction thereof, the penalties 
attached to such offenses shall be enforced : 

(a) Whoever, in the Philippines or elsewhere, makes any 
statement or representation knowing it to be false, or whoever willfully 
and fraudulently overvalues loss of or damage to property for the 
purpose of obtaining for himself or for any claimant any compensation 
pursuant to such Title, or for the purpose of influencing in any way the 
action of the Philippine War Damage Commission of the United States 
with respect to any claim for compensation pursuant to such Title, or 
for the purpose of obtaining money, property, or anything of value 
under such Title, shall be punished by a fine of not more than 
the equivalent, in the currency of the Philippines, of five thousand 
dollars. United States currency, or by imprisonment for not more than 
two years, or both, and shall not receive any payments or other benefits 
under such Title and, if any payment or benefit shall have been made or 
granted, such Commission shall take such action as may be necessary to 
recover the same. 

(b) Whoever, in the Philippines or elsewhere, pays or offers to 
pay, or promises to pay, or receives, on account of services rendered or 
to be rendered in connection with any claim for compensation under 




of bringing the material to the United States, but does not 
include the cost of landing it at the port of importation, or 
customs duties collected in the United States. For the 
purposes of this subparagraph any imported material, used 
in the production of an article in the United States, shall be 
considered as having been used in the production of an 
article subsequently produced in the United States which 
is the product of a chain of production in the United States 
in the course of which an article, which is the product of 
one stage of the chain, is used by its producer or another 
person, in a subsequent stage of the chain, as a material in 
the production of another article. 
(J) The term "Philippine article" means an article which is the 
product of the Philippines, unless, in the case of an article 
produced with the use of materials imported into the 
Philippines from any foreign country (except the United 
States) the aggregate value of such imported materials at 
the time of importation into the Philippines was more than 
twenty per centum of the value of the article imported into 
the United States, the value of such article to be determined 
in accordance with, and as of the time provided by, the 
customs laws of the United States in effect at the time of 
importation of such article. As used in this subparagraph 
the term "value," when used in reference to a material 
imported into the Philippines, includes the value of the 
material ascertained under the customs laws of the 
Philippines in effect at the time of importation into the 
Philippines, and, if not included in such value, the cost of 
bringing the material to the Philippines, but does not 
include the cost of landing it at the port of importation, 
or customs duties collected in the Philippines. For the 
purposes of this subparagraph any imported material, used 
in the production of an article in the Philippines, shall be 
considered as having been used in the production of an 
article subsequently produced in the Philippines, which is 
the product of a chain of production in the Philippines in 
the course of which an article, which is the product of one 
stage of the chain, is used by its producer or another person, 
in a subsequent stage of the chain, as a material in the 
production of another article. 

270 




amendment has not been made, he shall so proclaim and this Agreement 
shall have no effect after the date of such proclamation. 

• 4. If the President of the United States determines and proclaims after 
consultation with the President of the Philippines, that the Philippines or any 
ot Its political subdivisions or the Philippine Government is in any manner 
discriminating against citizens of the United States or any form of United 
States business enterprise, then the President of the United States shall have 
the right to suspend the effectiveness of the whole or any portion of 
this Agreement. If the President of the United States subsequently 
determines and proclaims, after consultation with the President of the 
Philippines, that the discrimination which was the basis for such suspension 
(a) has ceased, such suspension shall end; or (fo) has not ceased after the 
lapse of a time determined by the President of the United States to 
be reasonable, then the President of the United States shall have the right to 
terminate this Agreement upon not less than six months' written notice. 

In witness whereof the President of the Philippines and the Plenipoten- 
tiary of the President of the United States have signed this Agreement and 
have affixed hereunto their seals. 

Done in duplicate in the English language at Manila, this fourth day of 
July, one thousand nine hundred and forty-six. 



(Sgd. ) Manuel Roxas 
President of the Philippines 

For the President of the United States of America : 



(Sgd.) Paul V. McNutt 




A reduction in ordinary customs duty granted any councry, 
hv kw treaty, trade agreement, or otherwise with respect 
L aT; artick, shall be converted into the equivalent 
reduction in the rate of ordinary customs duty otherwise 
applicable to such article. 

f ...-.arnnhs 1 and 2 of Article IV, any material 

3 For the purposes of paragrapns i aiiu . • i 

used in Z produccion of an article, shall be cons.dered as havmg been «d 
n A prod 'ction of an article subsequently produced, wh.ch ■ the produa 
of a chain of production in the course of wh.ch an article, wh,ch 
the product of one stage of the chain, is used by .ts producer or another per. 
son, in a subsequent stage of the chain, as a material in the production of 
another article. 

4 The terms "includes" and "including" when used in a definition 
contained in this Agreement shall not be deemed to exclude other things 
otherwise within the meaning of the term defined. 

hi witness whereof the President of the Philippines and the Plenipoten- 
tiary of the President of the United States have signed this Protocol and have 
affixed hereunto their seals. 

Done in duplicate in the English language at Manila, this fourth day of 
July, one thousand nine hundred forty-six. ■ 

(Sgd. ) Manuel Roxas 
President of the Philippines 

For the President of the United States of America : 



(Sgd. ) Paul V. McNutt 



272 



(2 ) A countervailing duty imposed to offset a subsidy, 
bounty, or grant; or 

(3) An anti-dumping duty imposed to offset the 

selling of merchandise for exportation at a price 
less than the prevailing price in the country of 
export; or 

(4) Any tax, fee, charge, or exaction, imposed on 

or in connection with importation unless the 
law of the country imposing it designates or 
imposes it as a customs duty or contains a 
provision to the effect that it shall be treated as 
a duty imposed under the customs laws; or 

(5) The tax imposed by section 2491 (c) of the 

Internal Revenue Code of the United States, 
which is set forth as Annex IX to this Agree- 
ment, with respect to an article, merchandise, 
or combination, ten per centum or more of the 
quantity by weight or which consists of, or is 
derived directly or indirectly from, one or more 
of the oils, fatty acids, or salts specified in 
section 2470 of such Code which is set forth 
as Annex VII to this Agreement; or the tax 
imposed by section 3500 of such Code which 
is set forth as Annex X to this Agreement. 
The term "United States article" means an article which is 
the product of the United States, unless, in the case of an 
article produced with the use of materials imported into 
the United States from any foreign country (except the 
Philippines ) the aggregate value of such imported materials 
at the time of importation into the United States was more 
than twenty per centum of the value of the article imported 
into the Philippines, the value of such article to be 
determined in accordance with, and as of the time provided 
by, the customs laws of the Philippines in effect at the time 
of importation of such article. As used in this subpar- 
agraph the term "value", when used in reference to a 
material imported into the United States, includes the value 
of the material ascertained under the customs laws of the 
United States in effect at the time of importation into the 
United States, and, if not included in such value, the cost 




269 



oleo, oleon..gaHne oil. buctcHnc. lard.ne. ^-^^:r^':llJ:'::^Z 
and callow exaacts; and all ^J^^^^"^^^^^^^ annacco, and 

suet, lard, lard oil, fish oi or fish ' J^f "^ .^^je in imitation 
other coloring matter, intestinal fat, °ftal tat i ^ J 
or semblance of butter, or (2) calculated or mtended to be so 
for butter, or (3) churned, emulsified or rn.xed m ^^^^^^^^^Z 
other liquid, and containing ^rv h^^^ not churned or 

salt. This section shall not apply to putt-pastry ^"""'^^l" J hundred and 
emulsified in milk, or cream, and having a meltmg pomt of one hundred and 
e^h erdegrees Fahrenheit or more, nor to any of the following contannng 
condiments'and spices; salad dressings, mayonnaise dressings or mayonnaise 
products nor to liquid emulsion, pharmaceutical preparations, oil meals, liquid 
preservatives, illuminating oils, cleansing compounds, or flavoring compounds. 
(53 Stat.) 247 and 248." 

Annex V 

Internal Revenue Code of the United States, as amended to May i, 1946. 
"Sec. 2306. hnportation. 

"All oleomargarine imported from foreign countries shall, in addition 
to any import duty imposed on the same, pay an internal revenue tax of 
fifteen cents per pound, such tax to be represented by coupon scamps as in 
the case of oleomargarine manufactured in the United States . . 

"Sec. 2320. Definitions. 

"(d) Butter. — For the purpose of this chapter and sections 3206 and 
3207, the word 'butter' shall be understood to mean the food product usually 
known as butter, and which is made exclusively from milk or cream, or both, 
with or without common salt and with or withouc addicional coloring maccer. 

"(6) Adulterated fouKe?-.— 'Adulceraced buccer' is defined co mean a 
grade of butcer produced by mixing, reworking, rechurning in milk or cream, 
refining, or in any way producing a uniform, purified, or improved produce 
from differenc Iocs or parcels of melced or unmelced buccer or buccer fac, in 
which any acid, alkali, chemical, or any subscance whacever is incroduced or 
used for che purpose wich che eftecc of deodorizing or removing cherefrom 
rancidicy. or any buccer or buccer fac wich which chere is mixed any subcance 
foreign co buccer as defined in subseccion (d), wich incenc or effecc of cheap- 
ening in cose che produce, or any buccer in che manufaccure or manipulacion 
of which any process or macerial is used wich incenc or effecc of causing che 
absorpcion of abnormal quancicies of wacer, milk, or cream. 53 Scac. 252 
and 253." 



Cg) The term United States duty" means the rate or rates of 
ordmary customs duty which (at the time and place of 
entry, or withdrawal from warehouse, in the United States 
tor consumption, of the Philippine article) would be 
apphcable to a like article if imported from that foreign 
country which is entitled to the lowest rate, or the lowest 
aggregate of rates, of ordinary customs duty with respect 
to such like article. 

a) The term "Philippine duty" means the rate or rates of ordinary 
customs duty which (at the time and place of entry, or 
withdrawal from warehouse, in the Philippines for 
consumption, of the United States article) would be 
applicable to a like article if imported from that foreign 
country which is entitled to the lowest rate, or the lowest 
aggregate of rates, of ordinary customs duty with respect 
to such like article. 

CO The term "internal tax" includes an internal fee, charge, or 
exaction, and includes — 

(1) The tax imposed by section 2491 (c) of the Internal 

Revenue Code of the United States which is set forth 
as Annex IX to this Agreement, with respect to an 
article, merchandise, or combination, ten per centum 
or more of the quantity by weight of which consists 
of, or is derived directly or indirectly from, one or 
more of the oils, fatty acids, or salt specified in section 
2470 of such Code which is set forth as Annex VII 
to this Agreement; and the tax imposed by section 
3500 of such Code which is set forth as Annex X to 
this Agreement; and 

(2) Any other tax, fee, charge, or exaction, imposed on or 

in connection with importation unless the law of the 
country imposing it designates or imposes it as a 
customs duty or contains a provision to the effect 
that it shall be treated as a duty imposed under the 
customs laws. 

2. For the purposes of subparagraphs (g) and (/i) of paragraph 1 of 
this Protocol — 

(a) If an article is entitled to be imported from a foreign country 
free of ordinary customs duty, that country shall be 
considered as the country entitled to the lowest rate of 
ordinary customs duty with respect to such article; and 




271 



Annex VII 

, , n > / ^tntcs as amended to May i, 194^. 
Internal Revenue Code oj the United States, as 



•'Sec. 2470. Tax. 
"(d) Rate. 
(I) 1-/1 gencr 



.,-^hete shall be n.poscd .^n ^c^^^^^ 

processing of coconut oil. palm oil. f^^'^^f^.^^^^^^^ or not such 

any of the foregoing oils, salts of any of the o«^§°»^S sulphated, hydrogen- 
ol fatty acids, or salts ^a- be^n rehnec^^^^^^ ^J^.J^ ^ 

ated, or otherwise processed), or any comtDinat ^ 
substantial quantity of any one or more of such o^ls- tatty 
tax of three cents per pound to be paid by the processor. 

^^(1^ Additional rate on coconut o.7.-There shall be Jj^sed (in 
addition to the tax imposed by the preceding paragraph) a tax of two cjnt 
per pound, to be paid by the processor, upon the first domestic processing o 
co onut oil or of any combination or mixture containing a substantial 
quantity of coconut oil with respect to which oil there has been no previous 
first domestic processing, except that the tax imposed by this sentence shall 
not apply when it is established, in accordance with regulations prescribed 
by the Commissioner with the approval of the Secretary, that such coconut 
oil (whether or not contained in such a combination or mixture), (A) is 
wholly the production of the Philippine Islands or any possession of 
the United States, or (B) was produced wholly from materials the 
growth or production of the Philippine Islands or any possession of 
the United States, or (C) was brought into the United States on or before 
June 9, 1934. or produced from materials brought into the United States on or 
before June 9. 1934. or (D) v/as purchased under a bona fide contract entered 
into prior to April 26, 1934, or produced from materials purchased under a bona 
fide contract entered into prior to April 26, 1934. The tax imposed by this 
paragraph shall not apply to any domestic processing after July 3, 1974. 

"(b) Exemption. — ^The tax under subsection (a) shall not apply (1) 
with respect to any fatty acid or salt resulting from a previous first domestic 
processing taxed under this section or upon which an import tax has been 
paid under Chapter 22, or (2) with respect to any combination or mixture 
by reason of its containing an oil, fatty acid, or salt with respect to which 
there has been a previous first domestic processing or upon which an import 
tax has been paid under Chapter 22. 

"(c) Importation prior to August 2.1, 1936.— Notwithstanding the 
provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the first domestic 
processing of sunflower oil or sesame oil (or any combination or mixture 
containing a substantial quantity of sunflower oil or sesame oil), if such oil 



^^^n^? STATUTORY PROVISIONS REFERRED TO IN THF 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STAGES OF AMERICA 
AND THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES CONCERN 
ING TRADE AND RELATED MATTERS DURING A 
TRANSITIONAL PERIOD FOLLOWING THE 7S 
STITUTION OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



Annex I 

^ Sugar Act of ig^y of the United States, as amended to May i 1046 
^Section lOi. For the purposes of this Act, except Title IV— 
"(e) The term 'direct-consumption sugar" means any sugars which are 
principally of crystalline structure and which are not to be further refined or 
otherwise improved in quality." (50 Stat. ) Pt. 1 (903, Ch. 898) 

Annex II 

Tariff Act of ig^o of the United States, as amended to May 1, ig^S. 
'Tar. 1622. All binding twine manufactured from New Zealand 
hemp, henequen, Manila, istle or Tampico fibre, sisalgrass, or sunn, or a 
mixture of any two or more of them, of single ply and measuring 
not exceeding seven hundred and fifty feet to the pound " ('46 Stat ^ Pt 
1 (675, Ch. 497) ^ • 

Annex III 

Tariff Act of ig^o of the United States, as amended to May 1, ig^S. 
"Par. 602. The term 'wrapper tobacco' as used in this title means 
that quality of leaf tobacco which has the requisite color, texture, and burn, 
and is of sufficient size for cigar wrappers, and the term 'filler tobacco' means 
all other leaf tobacco . . ." (46 Stat. ) Pt. 1 (631, Ch. 497) 

Annex IV 

Internal B^evenue Code of the United States, as amended to May 1, ig^B. 
Chapter 16 — Oleomargarine, adulterated butter, and process or ren- 
ovated butter. 

"Sec. 2300. Oleomargarine defined. 

"For the purpose of this chapter, and of sections 3200 and 3201, certain 
manufactured substances, certain extracts, and certain mixtures and 
compounds, including such mixtures and compounds with butter, shall be 
known and designated as 'oleomargarine,' namely: All substances known 
prior to August 2, 1886, as oleomargarine, oleo, oleomargarine oil, butterinc, 
lardine, suine, and neutral; all mixtures and compounds of oleomargarine, 




273 



Annex IX , r 

"Sec. 2490. Imposition of tax. 

... addition to any other tax or duty ^^^P^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 
imposed upon the following articles "^^P°/^^j. f ° '^ae a tax at the rates 
treaty provisions of the United States otherwise provide a 
set forth in section 2491, to be paid by the importer. -.3 Stat. 25/ . 

"Sec. 2491. Rate of Tax. 

"(c) Any article, merchandise, or combination (except oils specified 
in section 2470) 10 per ccntu.r or more of the quantity by weight of which 
~o o^^^ derived directly or indirectly ^ ^ ^ ° 

the products specified above in this paragraph or of the oils, tatty acids or 
sa ts specified in section 2470. a tax at the rate or rates per pound equal to 
ha proportion of the rate or rates prescribed in this paragraph or such section 
2470 in respect of such product or products which the quantity by weight 
of the imported article, merchandise, or combination, consisting of or derived 
from such produce or products, bears to the total weight of the imported 
article, merchandise, or combination; but there shall not be taxable under 
this subparagraph any article, merchandise, or combination (other than an 
oil, fat, or grease, and other than products resulting from processing seeds 
without full commercial extraction of the oil content), by reason of the 
presence therein of an oil, fat, or grease which is a natural component of such 
article, merchandise, or combination and has never had a separate existence 
as an 'oil, fat, or grease. 53 Stat. 267 and 268." (53 Stat.) Pt. 1 (267 
and 268, Ch. 2) 

Annex X 

Internal I^euenue Code of the United States, as amended to May i, 1946. 
"Chapter 32. Sugar. 
"Sec. .3500. Rate of Tax. 

"hi addition to any other tax or duty imposed by law, there shall be 
imposed, under such regulations as the Commissioner of Customs shall 
prescribe, with the approval of the Secretary, a tax upon articles imported or 
brought into the United States as follows : 

"(1) On all manufactured sugar testing by the polariscopc ninety-two 
sugar degrees, 0.465 cent per pound, and for each additional sugar degree 
shown by the polar iscopic test, 0.00875 cent per pound additional, 
and fractions of a degree in proportion; 




"Sec. 2327. Other laws applicable. 

" (d) O/eoHuirgarmc.-The provisions of sections 2301 (c) (2) 2305 
to 2311, UKlusive (except subsections (ct). (6) and (A) of section 2308), 
and section 3/91 (a) (1), shall apply to the manufacturers of adulterated 
butter to an extent necessary to enforce the marking, branding, identification, 
and regulation of the exportation and importation of adulterated butter. 
d3 Stat. 255. (:,3 Stat. ) Pt. 1 (247, 250, 252, 253, and 255, Ch. 2) 



Annex VI 

Internal Kcvcnuc Code of the United States, as amended to May i, 1946. 
"Sec. 2350. Definitions. 

"For the purpose of this chapter and sections 3210 and 3211— 

"(ci) Cheese.— The word 'cheese' shall be understood to mean the 
food product known as cheese, and which is made from milk or cream and 
without the addition of butter, or any animal, vegetable, or other oils or fats 
foreign to such milk or cream, with or without additional coloring matter. 

"(fe) Filled cheese. — Certain substances and compounds shall be known 
and designated as 'filled cheese,' namely: all substances made of milk or 
skimmed milk, with the admixture of butter, animal oils or fats, vegetable 
or any other oils, or compounds foreign to such milk, and made in imitation 
or semblance of cheese. Substances and compounds, consisting principally 
of cheese with added edible oils, which are not sold as cheese or as substitutes 
for cheese but are primarily useful for imparting a natural cheese flavor to 
other foods shall not be considered 'filled cheese' within the meaning of this 
chapter. 53 Stat. 256." 

"Sec. 2356. Importation. 

"All filled cheese as defined in section 2350 (fe) imported from foreign 
countries shall, in addition to any import duty imposed on the same, pay an 
internal revenue tax of 8 cents per pound, such tax to be represented 
by coupon stamps; and such imported filled cheese and the packages containing 
the same shall be stamped, marked, and branded, as in the case of 
filled cheese manufactured in the United States. 53 Stat. 258." (53 Stat.) 
Pt. 1 (256 and 258, Ch. 2) 



275 



W„«..s Che Weary of Foreign Affairs of ^h^/^Pf "[.^R^^i^^^^ 
pines and rhe Ambassador of the Unired Scares o 

of the Philippines have exchanged notes making certain ciariry g 

to. the said Agreement which notes are in words and figures as follows. 

(the united states ambassador to the secretary) 

Embassy of the United States of America 

October 22, 1946 



Excellency : 

I have the honor to make the following statement of my Govemnncn^c's 
understanding of recent conversations held at Manila relative co che 
correction of certain typographical errors in the Agreement bet^vcen 
the United States of America and the Republic of the Philippines conccmmg 
Trade and Related Matters during a Transitional Period following 
the Institution of Philippine Independence, signed at Manila on July 4, 1946, 
and in the Protocol and the Annexes to that Agreement, and relative to die 
making of certain clarifying amendments therein. 

1. In Article II, Paragraph 3, second sentence, (d) the phrase 
"unrefined sugar specified in Item A" shall be changed to read "unrdnjed 
sugars specified in Item A", (6) the phrase "refined sugar specified in Item 
A-1" shall be changed to read "refined sugars specified in Item A-1", amd 
(c) the phrase "shall be allotted annually by the Philippines" shall 
be changed to read "shall be allocated annually by the Philippines". 

2. The column headings of the schedule to Article II and Items A and 
A-i of such schedule shall be changed to read as follows : 



"Items 


Classes of articles 


Amounts 


A 


Sugars 


952,000 short tons 


A-1 


of which not to exceed 


56,000 short tons 




may be refined sugars, meaning 'direct-consump- 
tion sugar' as defined in Section 101 of the Su- 
gar Act of 1937 of the United States which is set 
forth in part as Annex I to this Agreement." 



3. In Item B of the schedule to Article II the phrase "including binding 
twines described" shall be changed to read "including binding twtne 
described," and the word "Manila" shall be changed to read "manth". 

4. In Item G of the schedule to Article II the word "Buttoms" shoM 
be changed to read Buttons". 



or such combmauon or mixture or such oil contained therein was imported 
prior August 21 1936, shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of 
77 "?qS^ « c ' ^""''""^ ^9^^' ^8 Stat. 763, in force on June 

^l^f- 41?^^''- ^'^'-^ ^ C264 and 265, Ch. 2; Pub. 

Law 3/1 — /9th Cong.) 

AN ACT OF THE UNITED STATES TO SUSPEND IN PART THE PROCESSING TAX ON 
COCONUT OIL, AS AMENDED TO MAY 1, 1946. 

"Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of Representatives of 
the United States of America in Congress assembled, That section 2470 
(a) (2) of the Internal Revenue Code is hereby suspended: Provided, That 
if the President after receipt by him of a request from the Government of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands that the suspension of section 
2470 (a) (2 ) be terminated, shall find that adequate supplies of copra, coconut 
oil, or both, the product of the Philippine Islands, are readily available for 
processing in the United States, he shall so proclaim; and thirty days after 
such proclamation, the suspension of section 2470 (d) (2) of the Internal 
Revenue Code, shall terminate. 

"Sec. 2. This Act shall become effective the day following its 
enactment, and shall terminate on May 30, 1946." (56 Stat.) Pt. 1 (752 
and 753, Ch. 560); (58 Stat.) Pt. 1 (647. Ch. 332) 

Annex VIII 

Act of March 24, ig^^ of the United States, as amended to May 1, 
1946. 

"Sec 8. (a) Effective upon the acceptance of this Act by concurrent 
resolution of the Philippine Legislature or by a convention called for that 
purpose, as provided in section 17 — 

"(1) For the purposes of the Immigration Act of 1917, the 
Immigration Act of 1924 (except section 13 (c), this section, and all other 
laws of the United States relating to the immigration, exclusion, or expulsion 
of aliens, citizens of the Philippine Islands who are not citizens of the United 
States shall be considered as if they were aliens. For such purposes the Phil- 
ippine Islands shall be considered as a separate country and shall have for 
each fiscal year a quota of fifty. This paragraph shall not apply to a per- 
son coming or seeking to come to the Territory of Hawaii who does not 
apply for and secure an immigration or passport visa, but such immigration 
shall be determined by the Department of the Interior on the basis of the 
needs of industries in the Territory of Hawaii. 48 Stat. 462." (48 Stat.) 
Pt. 1 (462, Ch. 84) . 




errors in said Agreement of July 4, 1946, the rresent exchange of notes shall 
supersede such earlier exchange of notes. 

If the above provisions are acceptable to the Government of the 
Republic of the Philippines this note and the reply signifying assent thereto 
shall, if agreeable to that Government be regarded as amending the said 
Agreement of July 4, 1946, and the Protocol and Annexes thereto, and as 
constituting an integral part thereof. 

Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my most distinguished consideration. 

(Sgd. ) PAUL V. McNUTT 

His Excellency 

ELPIDIO QUIRING 

Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the 
T^epuhlic of the Philippines 

(The Secretary to the United States Ambassador) 

Manila, October 22, 19^6 



IXCELLENCY : 



I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency's note 
of today's date recording your Government's understanding of recent con- 
versations held at Manila relative to the correction of certain typographical 
errors in the Agreement between the United States of America and 
the Republic of the Philippines concerning trade and related matters during 
a transitional period following the institution of Philippine Independence, 
signed at Manila on July 4, 1946, and in the Protocol and the Annexes to 
that Agreement, and relative to the making of certain clarifying amendments 
therein. 

I have the honor to confirm your Excellency's statement with regard 
to this matter and to state that my Government is agreeable that your note 
and this reply signifying assent thereto shall be regarded as amending the 
said Agreement of July 4, 1946, and the Protocol and the Annexes thereto, 
and as constituting an integral part thereof. 



Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my most distinguished conside 



ration. 



(Sgd. ) ELPIDIO QUIRING 

Vice President and concurrently 

Secretary of Foreign Affairs 




282 



"(2) On all manufactured sugar testing by the polariscope less than 
ninety-two sugar degrees 0.5144 cent per pound of the total sugars therein; 

a^^y^ articles composed in chief value of manufactured sugar 

0.M44 cent per pound of the total sugars therein. 53 Stat. 428." 

"Sec. 3507. Definitions. 

"Cb) Mamifactrcrcd sugar.~Thc term 'manufactured sugar' means 
any sugar derived from sugar beets or sugar cane, which is not to be, and 
which shall not be, further refined or otherwise improved in quality; except 
sugar in liquid form which contains nonsugar solids (excluding any foreign 
substance that m^y have been added) equal to more than 6 per centum of the 
total soluble solids, and except also sirup of cane juice produced from sugar 
cane grown in continental United States. 

"The grades or types of sugar within the meaning of this definition 
shall include, but shall not be limited to, granulated sugar, lump sugar, cube 
sugar, powdered sugar, sugar in the form of blocks, cones, or molded shapes, 
confectioners' sugar, washed sugar, centrifugal sugar, clarified sugar, 
turbinado sugar, plantation white sugar, moscovado sugar, refiners' soft 
sugar, invert sugar mush, raw sugar, sirups, molasses, and sugar mixtures. 

"(c) Total sugars— Thz term 'total sugars' means the total amount 
of the sucrose (Clerget) and of the reducing or invert sugars. The total 
sugars contained in any grade or type of manufactured sugar shall be 
ascertained in the manner prescribed in paragraphs 758, 759, 762, and 763 
of the United States Customs Regulations (1931 edition). 53 Stat 428 
and 429." (53 Stat. ) Pt. 1 (426, 428, and 429, Ch. 2) 

Annex XI 

Constitution of the Philippines as amended to May i, 1946. 
"Article I. — ^The national territory. 

"Section i. The Philippines comprises all the territory ceded to the 
United States by the Treaty of Paris concluded between the United States 
and Spain on the tenth day of December, eighteen hundred and ninety-eight, 
the limits of which are set forth in Article III of said treaty, together with 
all the islands embraced in the treaty concluded at Washington, between 
the United States and Spain on the seventh day of November, nineteen 
hundred, and in the treaty concluded between the United States and Great 
Britain on the second day of January, nineteen hundred and thirty, and all 
territory over which the present Government of the Philippine Islands 
exercises jurisdiction." 



Vhmpprnc Ahaca F^ber Agrcemene 

g ^946, by and between 
This Agreement, made as of ^"f"*''^^^ 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation a cop ^_^ Philippines., herein- 

of the United States of America, and the t^q 
after called the Republic, 

WITNESSETH: 

. • f rhe mutual agreements herein contanied the 
That in consideration of the mutual aj, 

parties hereto agree as follows: r .u^ neriod August 8. 1946 to 

1 This Agreement shall be effective for the period nug 

June 30. 1947. both dates inclusive Reconstruction Finance 

2. During the period of this Agreem-t ^^^^ ^^^^^^ 

Corporation or any other agency o the Governm nt 
of America will purchase, and will have jcluswe g P 
Che entire exportable surplus of abaca fiber (fibe o M | 
prades described in Paragraph 3 hereof, from all sellers . u 

f ct pri«s and upon che ccrms and conditions hcremafcer set forch^ 

3 The prices for the respective grades of abaca fiber in cents per pound 
United States Currency, free on board ocean carrier, Philippine ports, shall 
be as follows : 

DAVAO NON-DAVAO 



CD 
E 
F 
I 

S-2 

S-3 

G 

H 

k-^ 

L-1 
L-2 
M-1 
M-2 
OTYW 
Decco I 
Decco 2 
Decco 3 
Decco 4 
Decco T 



15-3/4 
14-3/8 
13-1/2 
13-1/8 
12-1/4 
12 
9 

10-1/2 
7 
9 

6-7/8 

4-1/2 

4-1/8 

3-3/4 

3-1/2 

3-3/8 
12-5/8 
11 1/4 

9 

7 

3 3 /8 

Terminated Decembei' 3, 1946 



15-3/4 
14-3/8 
13-1/2 
12-1/8 
10-3/4 
10 
8 

18-3/8 



5 

3-5/8 
3-1/4 
2-7/8 
2-1/2 
2-3/8 




5. In article III, paragraph 1 the word "and" shall be inserted' after 
the semicolon at the end of indented subparagraph (a). 

6. Article III, paragraph 2, shall be changed to read as follows: 

"2. If the President of the United States finds that the allocation of 
any quota established pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article is necessary 
to make the application of the quota just and reasonable between the 
United States and the Philippines, the United States shall have the right 
to provide the basis for the allocation of such quota, and, if the United 
States exercises such right, the Philippines will promptly put and keep 
in effect, on the basis provided by the United States, the allocation of 
such quota." 

7. In the last sentence of Article IV, paragraph 2, the word "Sections" 
shall be changed to read "Section". 

8. In Article IV, paragraph 5, the word "Manila" shall be changed to 
read manila . 

9. In Article V the phrase "into the United States dollars" shall 
be changed to read "into United States dollars". 

10. In clause (6) of the first sentence of Article VIII, paragraph 1 the 
phrase "and continue in effect" shall be changed to read "and continue in 
effect". 

11. At the end of Article X, paragraph 2, the phrase "six months' 
nocice," shall be changed to read "six months' written notice". 

12. In clause (5) of subparagraph (d) of paragraph i of the Protocol, 
the phrase "weight or which consists of" shall be changed to read "weight 
of which consists of " . 

13. In Annex II the word "Manila" shall be changed to read "manila". 

14. In the last sentence of Annex IV, section 2300 delete the comma 
after the word "milk". 

15. In Annex V, section 2320, subsection (/j), che phrase "used for 
the purpose with the effect of" shall be changed to read "used for the purpose 
or with the effect of". 

16. At the end of Annex VII the date "May 30, 1946," shall 
be changed to read "June 30, 1946". 

17. In Annex X, section 3507, subsection (/>), the phrase, "sugar beets 
or sugar cane" shall be changed to "sugar beets or sugarcane". 

Since this note includes the matters covered by the notes exchanged on 
July 5, 1946 and July 16, 1946 relative to the correction of two typographical 




Finanre Corporation and 
and prices shall be made between ^^--^^//".^. rd herein 
the seller on the basis of the free on board pnces stipulate 

J- 1 r,. .'«;rablish and maintain during 

8. The Republic agrees immediately - ^^^^^ ^^aca, limiting 
the term of this Agreement an export "^^^"^^^ ^^^^^^^^^tion Finance 
the export of this product to the United State to^ ^^^^^ 
Corporation, or to its designees and consignees in the Unit 

countries. 

•II irv hpst efforts to cause 

9. The Republic agree, f ^ fib« wW ch R^L™ Finance 
Che maximum quanccy of abaca f.bet, ^^'^^J^ „ ^e produced 
Corporarron has agreed ro tcmtt 'end rhe Republic 
TnH pxnnrced under the terms or this ngreemuuL. . r \ 

eeT haTfr will nor impose any resrricrion, upon rhe -P""-- ° 

L ro rhe Un.red Srares for '^^-^^^::Z^Z:^'Z 
CO its designees and consignees in the United States or olu . , 

chat it will render to Reconstruction Finance Corporation all reasonable 
cooperation and assistance. 

10 The Republic agrees that if the Republic finds it advisable, during 
the period of this Agreement, it will establish and enforce price ceilings cov- 
ering the sale of abaca fiber to local manufacturers, which price ceilings shall 
not be higher than the free on board prices for the various grades stipulated 
herein, subject co proper adjustment for other terms of delivery. The 
Republic further agrees that it will use its best efforts to prevent the cordage 
mills in the Philippines from accumulating a supply of abaca fiber in excess 
of three times their current monthly consumption of fiber and that it will 
require the mills to report on the first day of each calendar month beginning 
September I, 1945, their inventories at the beginning of the preceding 
month, their purchases and consumption of fiber during such preceding month 
and their inventories at the end of the month. 

11. The Republic agrees that during the period of this Agreement, 
National Abaca and Other Fibers Corporations (hereinafter called NAFCO), 
a corporate agency of the Republic, will enter into a contract with 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation whcreunder NAFCO will agree that 
it will sell and will cause to be sold to Reconstruction Finance Corporation, 
through NAFCO or any exporter under contract to sell abaca fiber 
CO Reconstruction Finance Corporation, upon the terms and conditions 
stipulated herein, all of the abaca fiber derived from the following sources: 

(ii) Produced upon lands formerly owned, leased or otherwise 
operated or controlled by Japanese individually or through corporations 
the majority of the issued and outstanding stock of which was owned 



286 



not 

vv 



His Excellency 

PAUL V. McNUTT 

American Ambassador to the P/n/i/ipnics 
Manila 

' Whereas Article X of the said Agreement provides that it shall n. 
take effect unless and until the Congress of the Philippines accepts it by law 
and except as otherwise expressly provided in the Agreement has enacted 
such legislation as may be necessary to bring into effect the provisions of 
the Agreement as laws of the Philippines, and that the Agreement shall then 
be proclaimed by the President of the Philippines and by the President of the 
United States of America; and 

Whereas sections 2, 3, and 4 of the said Commonwealth Act No. 733 
constitute such legislation as is required by said Article X of the Agreement; 

Now, therefore, be it known that I, Manuel Roxas, President of the 
Philippines, do proclaim the said Agreement and the said notes to the end 
that the same and every part thereof may be observed and fulfilled 
with good faith by the Republic of the Philippines, the citizens of 
the Republic of the Philippines and all other persons subject to the jurisdiction 
thereof. 

In WITNESS WHEREOF, I havc hcreunto set my hand and caused the seal 
of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Manila this first day of January, in the year of our 
Lord one thousand nine hundred and forty-seven, and of the Republic of 
the Philippines, the first. 

(Sgd. ) MANUEL ROXAS 

By the President : 

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO 

Vice President and concurrently 
Secretary of Foreign Affairs 




any 



, , f ,„rh postponement, Reconstruction 

part thereof. 1" f ,,^7^ ^^^he Hght, during the period of 
Finance Corporation shall have tne ^ ^^^^ j^^^^^a f^om the 

postponement to contniue ^'l^.'^^'J^ at prices generally prevailing 
sources described m Paragraph 11 h^'^^^^j Philippine abaca fiber 

at the time of such purchases on sa es o Ft 

CO purchasers u. the Un.ted States; -^^^ J^^^ J^^^^^^^^ ,o deduct'and 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation sha have th g ^^^^^^^^^ 

retain, as partial payment of the advance, lU /o ^ 

of all such abaca fiber sold to Reconstruction Funancc Corporation. 

(e) Prior to July 1, 1947, no interest will ^e charged on 
said advance, but thereafter, interest at 3% per annum will be payable 
on any unliquidated balances. 

13. All doubts and difficulties under this Agreement will be settled 
between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the 
Governmnet of the United States of America. Provisions respecting prices 
are subject to review on the initiative of either Government at any time 
during the life of this Agreement. 

In witness whereof, each of the parties has caused this instrument to 
be executed by a duly authorized representative as of August 8, 1946. 

The Republic of the Philippines 
By 

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO 



Reconstruction Finance Corforation 
By 

(Sgd.) PAUL R. HARMEL 




In the event that existing freight rates be changed materially, either 
party to this Agreement may request a reconsideration of the free on board 
prices stipulated herein, for such modification of these prices as may be agreed 
upon between the contracting parties. 

4. All of said grades of abaca fiber shall be as defined in Fiber Inspection 
Administrative Order No. 4 (Revised Dec. 1, 1939) of the Fiber Inspection 
Service of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines entitled "Determination and description of the 
official standards for the various commercial grades of certain Philippine 
fibers , and shall otherwise conform to the quality and standards set forth 
in said Order. The fiber shall be marked and baled for export in a careful 
manner in accordance with standard commercial practice, in bales weighing 
approximately 126.5 kilograms (278.88 pounds) net, and of cubic 
measurement not exceeding 13 cubic feet, or as otherwise acceptable 
to Reconstruction Finance Corporation. 

5. The terms of payment shall be arranged with the individual sellers 
generally according to the following pattern. Reconstruction Finance 
Corporation will pay no less than eighty per cent of the purchase price by 
means of letters of credit opened by Reconstruction Finance Corporation in 
favor of the seller authorizing sight drafts on a New York bank when ac- 
companied by commercial invoices, clean on board bills of lading drawn to 
the order of Reconstruction Finance Corporation, and other customary 
documents as directed by Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Settlement 
of the balance of the purchase price or any adjustment thereof shall be made 
to the seller after the fiber has arrived at United States port of entry and has 
been weighed and inspected. The fiber shall be invoiced on the basis of 
273 pound bales, when baled in accordance with standard commercial 
practice, or net shipping weights less 2% when otherwise baled; but the 
price of all fiber, however baled, shall be based on net landed weights. 

6. The seller shall pay all inspection fees, lighterage fees, wharfage 
taxes, internal revenue taxes, export taxes and all other taxes, fees 
and charges of whatsoever nature imposed on the fiber or in connection with 
the exportation thereof from the Philippines; and the Republic agrees that 
no such taxes, fees or charges shall be collected from Reconstruction Finance 
Corporation. The seller shall bear all risk, costs and liability incurred in 
connection with the fiber up to the time it has been loaded on board 
the ocean carrier. 

7. Reconstruction Finance Corporation shall have the right to purchase 
abaca fiber from any seller upon a delivery basis other than free on board 
ocean carrier Philippine ports, in which event proper adjustment of the terms 




(fe) W.,kt and Analyses I" -ordance wkh cuscomary^ XLTsalpt 
trade, certified net 1^"^^^^ ^^^^hts and ana y 
taken on arrival at United States ports shall be j 
to the United States; certified net shipping weights and analysis ot 
to tne uniteu , ^^^namVed chem st or surveyor in the 

officia shiDoins samp es by a recognizea luch i .t 

omciai snipping f . onrl ^pller or by approved Mam a 
United States, agreeable to buyer and seller, or uy 
, , ' „^ , r„ , shipments to other destinations; 

laboratory shall be final on snipmeuLs . • 

on shipments of copra to other than United States destinations an 
allowance of two (2) per cent on certified net shipping weights 
'Wada basis" shall be made by seller and the remainder to be 
considered final as to weight. 

(c) Payment: Payment shall be made by letter of credit for ninety- five (95) 
per cent of the purchase price against sight drafts accompanied by 
seller's invoice, on-board bills of lading, certificate of weights, 
consular invoice, and other customary shipping documents. Final 
settlement shall be made promptly after determination of final 
weights and analysis in accordance with paragraph 2 (5 ) above. 

(J) Taxes: The seller shall pay all taxes including export taxes or other 
fees and charges, imposed on the products while in the Philippines, 
or imposed bacause of the exportation of the products from the 
Philippines; and the Republic agrees that no such taxes, fees or 
charges will be collected from the Commodity Credit Corporation 
or its designees. 

(e) l^uZes Qovcrning: hidividual contracts covering copra or coconut oil 
purchased or sold pursuant to this Agreement shall be governed by 
the Rules of the National Institute of Oilseed Products, except to 
the extent they may conflict with the terms of this Agreement. 

3. Commodity Credit Corporation agrees that it will use its best efforts 
to expedite the purchase and exportation of copra and coconut oil which it 
has agreed to purchase under this Agreement; and that, in returning 
to private hands the importation of copra and coconut oil into the United 
States, it will use its best efforts to expedite the movement by private 
importers acting as agents or designees of the Commodity Credit Corporation. 

4. Commodity Credit Corporation agrees to continue using its best 
efforts to make available and facilitate the procurement of copra bags, 
mdustrial supplies and other material required for the rehabilitation of th 
Philippine copra industry, and to provide shipping space and faci itate 
the transportation of copra from the Philippines t^th^ Uni^^ Ws « 

5. The Republic agrees immcdiatelv to r«;raKl,ck j .... 
the term of this Agreement an exDorr rL. ""^ maintain during 

g an export restriction on copra and coconut oil, 




or controlled by Japanese and over which lands NAFCO, the Republic 
or any of us subduMstons, agencies or instrumentalities are now 
exercising or may hereafter exercise control through the appointment 
ot administrators or otherwise; 

(b) Produced upon lands now or hereafter owned, leased 
or otherwise operated or controlled by NAFCO, the Republic and any 
ot Its subdivisions, agencies and instrumentalities; 

(c) Produced upon lands owned, leased or otherwise operated or 
controlled by corporations, the majority of whose issued and outstanding 
stock is now owned or controlled or which may hereafter be owned 
or controlled by NAFCO, the Republic and any of its subdivisions 
agencies and instrumentalities; ' 

(d) Acquired from any sellers in the Philippines by NAFCO 
the Republic and by any of its subdivisions, agencies and instrument- 
alities authorized to purchase abaca fiber. 

All of such fiber will be clearly marked by an appropriate symbol 
identifying it as fiber derived from the aforesaid sources. 

12. Reconstruction Finance Corporation agrees that upon entering 
into the purchase contract with NAFCO, it will advance to NAFCO, for 
the purpose of rehabilitating the abaca plantations in Davao formerly owned, 
leased or otherwise operated or controlled by Japanese individually or through 
corporations the majority of the issued and outstanding stock of which was 
controlled by Japanese, the sum of $2,000,000, upon the following terms 
and conditions to which the Republic agrees: 

(d) The Republic will guarantee the repayment of the advance 
in full upon the terms stipulated herein. 

(b) Until the advance is fully repaid, Reconstruction Finance 
Corporation may deduct and retain, as partial payment of said advance, 
10% of the purchase price of all abaca fiber sold to Reconstruction 
Finance Corporation pursuant to the aforesaid contract with NAFCO. 

(c) The unliquidated balance of the advance will be paid by 
NAFCO or the Republic at the earlier of the two following dates: 
July i, 1947, or at the time that the U. S. Government or any of its 
agencies extends a loan to the Republic or any of its agencies, partly 
or wholly for the purpose of repaying the advance. 

(ci) In the event that the advance is not fully liquidated by July 1, 
1947, Reconstruction Finance Corporation will have the option to 
demand from NAFCO and the Republic, the payment, in cash, of the 
• unliquidated balance of the advance or to postpone payment of all or 




Major Provr^ons of E.clus^ve Purchase Agreements 

COPRA AND COCONUT OIL 

.A 10^0 ner cent over prevailing level, 63.45 

1. Price of copra increased lUoU per ccul t- 

per cerot over level of May 12. 

2. Price of coconuc oil established on basis of copra price, with adequate 

pTTocection for domestic industry. 

3. Basts of sale changed to Free on Board (FOB ), placing responsibility 
fcDr shipmenc on purchaser. 

4. In case of modification of freight rates, cither party may request 
imodification of FOB prices. 

5. Provisions respecting prices are subject to review at any time on the 
initiative of either government. 

ABACA 

1. Price of abaca increased on all grades generally approximately 70 
p*er ccmc. 

2. RFC agrees to extend loan of 4 million pesos for rehabilitation of 
.jJbaca lands, loan to be repaid from sale of abaca or by Philippine 
GovernmenE from other proceeds. Loan guaranteed by Philippine 
GovemmenE. 

3. Local cordage industry adequately protected, and authorized to build 
u^) its imvencories. 

4. No restrictions on export of cordage. 

TRADE GOODS 

Tlhc U- S. Commercial Co., a subsidiary of the RFC, has agreed to 
trransfer to the Philippine Government, at cost, approximately 7 million 
peesos worth of trade goods, including textiles, rice, and sugar, formerly used 
ilny the U. S. Commercial Company in its transactions. 



J^fSdy 13 price 

per long ton FOB 




PRICE PROVISIONS 

COPRA 

May 13 price 
^186.00 



New price 

?207.00 equi\-al6nt to 
F20.37 per kilo 




292 



Philippine Qopra and Coconut Oil Agreement* 



This Agreement made as of August 8, 1946, by and between 
Commodity Credit Corporation, an Agency of the Government of the 
United States of America, and the Republic of the Philippines, hereinafter 
c^ed the Republic, 

WITNESSETH: 

That in consideration of the mutual agreements herein contained the 
parties hereto agree as follows : 

1. This Agreement shall be effective during the period August 8, 1946, 
to June 30, 1947, both dates inclusive. 

2. During the term of this Agreement, Commodity Credit Corporation, 
or any persons, firms or corporations designated by Commodity Credit 
Corporation (hereinafter called designees) will purchase and will have the 
exclusive right to purchase the entire exportable surplus of Philippine copra 
and coconut oil from all sellers in the Philippines, at the prices and upon the 
terms and conditions hereinafter set forth. 

(d) Price: 

Copra, fair merchantable, basis six per cent free fatty acid, one 
hundred and three dollars and fifty cents U. S. Currency ($103.50), 
per long ton of 2,240 pounds in bulk, free on board ocean carrier, Phil- 
ippine ports. Premium for copra in bags, if required by buyer, to be 
agreed upon between buyer and seller. 

Cocmut oil, basis six per cent free fatty acid, one per cent moisture 
and impurities, seven and one eighth cents U. S. Currency ($0.07-1/8) 
per pound, free on board ocean carrier, Philippine ports. 

Commodity Credit Corporation and its designees shall have the 
right to purchase such copra and coconut oil from any seller upon a 
delivery basis other than free on board ocean carrier, Philippine ports, 
in which event proper adjustment of the terms and prices shall be made 
between Commodity Credit Corporation or its designees and the seller 
on the basis of the free on board prices stipulated herein. 

In the event that existing freight rates be changed materially, either 
party to this Agreement may request a reconsideration of the free on 
board prices of copra and coconut oil stipulated herein, for such 
modification of these prices as may be agreed upon by the contracting 
parties. 

* Terminated December 6, 1946 




289 



Zrtaty of Conciliation 

J u„ 1 inirrfl States of America, being 
The Republic of chc Philipp.ncs and Um' f/^^^^ her and also 
desirous ro scrcngrhen rhe bonds of ---V ^ha^ bu d he ^ 
to advance the cause of general peace, decided 
conciliation and for that purpose have appointed as rhetr pie p 
The President of the Republic of the Philippines: 

His Excellency Elpidio Quirino, Vice President and concurrendy 
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of rhe Philippines; 
and 

The President of the United States of America : 

His Excellency Paul V. McNutt, Ambassador Extraordinary and 
Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to the Republic 
of the Philippines: 

Who, having communicated to each other their respective full powers, 
found to be in good and due form, have agreed as follows : 

Article I 

Any disputes arising between the Government of the Republic of the 
Philippines, and the Government of the United States of America, 
of whatever nature they may be, shall, when ordinary diplomatic proceedings 
have failed and the High Contracting Parties do not have recourse to ad- 
judication by a competent tribunal, be submitted for investigation and report 
to a permanent International Commission of Conciliation constituted in the 
manner prescribed in the next succeeding article. 

Article II 

The International Commission shall be composed of five members to 
be appointed as follows: One member shall be chosen from each country 
by the Government thereof; one member shall be chosen by each Government 
from some third country; the fifth member shall be chosen by common agree- 
ment between the two Governments, it being understood that he shall not 
be a citizen of either country. The expenses of the Commission shall be 
paid by the two Governments in equal proportions. 

The International Commission shall be constituted within six months 
alter the exchange of ratifications of this Treaty; and vacancies shall be filled 
accordmg to the manner of the original agreement. 




294 



limiting the export of these products to the United States for the Commodity 
Credit Corporation, or to its designees and consignees in the United States 
or other countries. 

6. The Republic agrees that it will use its best efforts to cause 
the maximum quantity of copra and coconut oil which Commodity Credit 
Corporation has agreed to purchase under this Agreement, to be produced 
and exported under the terms of this Agreement. To this end the Republic 
agrees that it will not impose any restrictions upon the exportation of copra 
or coconut oil to the United States for the Commodity Credit Corporation, 
or to its designees and consignees in the United States or other countries; and 
that it will render to Commodity Credit Corporation all reasonable coopera- 
tion and assistance. 

7. The Republic agrees that it will use its best efforts to insure that the 
exporters will fully comply with all the terms and conditions of this 
Agreement, and that the exporters will deliver copra and coconut oil of the 
quality stipulated herein. 

8. All doubts and difficulties under this Agreement will be settled 
between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the 
Government of the United States of America. Provisions respecting prices 
are subject to review on the initiative of either Government at any time 
during the life of this Agreement. 

In witness whereof, each of the parties hereto has caused this 
instrument to be executed by a duly authorized representative as of 
August 8, 1946. 

The Republic of the Philippines 
By 

(Sgd. ) EMILIO ABELLO 
Commodity Credit Corporation 
By 

(Sgd.) PAUL R. HARMEL 




our 



. -1 U c lfirh day of November in the year of 
Done in duplicate at Manila this l^'f ' . of the independence 

Lord one thousand nine hundred and torty 



of the PhiUppines, the first. 



For die Governmenr of the RepubUc of the Philippines : 

(SEAL) 



(Sgd. ) ELPIDIO QUIRINO 
For the Government of the United States of America : 

(SEAL) 
CSgd.) PAUL V. MgNUTT 




296 



COCONUT OIL 

No previous price quotations in P. I. F. 14-1/4 per lb. equivalent to F.31 

42/100 per picul. 

ABACA 

^^'^ ^"'^^ l^cw Price 

Davao Grade I 17 centavos per lb. 26-1/4 ctvos. per lb. equivalent to 

vT /-IT P36.60 per picul 

Non-Davao Grade I 15 centavos per lb. 24-1/4 ctvos. per lb. equivalent 

to P33.81 per picul. 




^1 



293 



, ^ivlinp designated under Article 
operating rights which would prevent any airhne dcsig 
II above from operating under this Agreement. 

Article IV 

1- • • t^rarrices and to assure equality of 

In order to prevent discrunuiatory practices auu 

treatment, both contracting parties agree that : 

(.) Each of the contracting parties may impose or permit to be 
imposed iust and reasonable charges for the use of pubhc airports and other 
facilities under its control. Each of the contracting parties agrees, however^ 
that these charges shall not be higher than would be paid for the use of such 
airports and facilities by its national aircraft engaged in similar international 
services. 

(fo) Fuel, lubricating oils and spare parts introduced into the territory 
of one contracting party by the other contracting party or its nationals, and 
intended solely for use by aircraft of such other contracting party shall, with 
respect to the imposition of customs duties, inspection fees or other national 
duties or charges by the contracting party whose territory is entered, 
be accorded the same treatment as that applying to national airlines and to 
airlines of the most-favored-nation. 

(c) The fuel, lubricating oils, spare parts, regular equipment and 
aircraft stores retained on board civil aircraft of the airlines of one contracting 
party authorized to operate the routes and services described in the Annex 
shall, upon arriving in or leaving the territory of the other contracting party, 
be exempt from customs, inspection fees or similar duties or charges, even 
chough such supplies be used or consumed by such aircraft on flights in that 
territory. 

Article V 

Certificates of airworthiness, certificates of competency and licenses 
issued or rendered valid by one contracting party shall be recognized as valid 
by the other contracting party for the purpose of operating the routes and 
services described in the Annex. Each contracting party reserves the right, 
however, to refuse to recognize, for the purpose of flight above its 
own territory, certificates of competency and licenses granted to its own 
nationals by another state. 

Article VI 

(a) The laws and regulations of one contracting party relating to the 

admission to or departure from ir<; r<-rr.r-^^., • r j • 

t iruin ICS territory ot aircraft engaged in 

international air navigation, or to the operation and navigation of 
such aircraft while within its territory, shall be applied to the aircraft of the 




298 



Article III 



In case the High Contracting Parties shall have failed to adjust a dispute 
by diplomatic methods, and they do not have recourse to adjudication by a 
competent tribunal, they shall at once refer it to the International 
Comniission for investigation and report. The International Commission 
may, however, spontaneously by unanimous agreement offer its services to 
that effect, and in such case it shall notify both Governments and request 
their cooperation in the investigation. 

The High Contracting Parties agree to furnish the International 
Commission with all the means and facilities required for its investigation 
and report. 

The report of the Commission shall be completed within one year after 
the date on which it shall declare its investigation to have begun, unless the 
High Contracting Parties shall limit or extend the time by mutual agreement. 
The report shall be prepared in triplicate; one copy shall be presented to each 
Government, and the third shall be retained by the Commission for its files. 

The International Commission shall, together with its report, submit 
its recommendations for the settlement of the matter in dispute. 

Should no definite settlement be reached, notwithstanding the report and 
recommendations of the International Commission on the matter in dispute, the 
High Contracting Parties agree to submit the dispute to the jurisdiction 
of the International Court of Justice comformably with Article 36 of its 
Statute, and further agree to be bound without need of special agree- 
ment by the decision of the Court. 

Article IV 

The present Treaty shall be ratified by the Republic of the Philippines 
in accordance with its constitutional laws and by the President of the United 
States of America by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof. 

The ratifications shall be exchanged at Manila as soon as possible, and 
the Treaty shall take effect on the date of the exchange of the ratifications. 
It shall thereafter remain in force continuously unless and until terminated 
by one year's written notice given by either High Contracting Party to the 
other. 

In faith whereof the above named plenipotentiaries have signed the 
present Treaty and have affixed thereto their seals. 




295 



I. w.™hss WHHK.O., Che undersigned, being duly authorized by cheir 
respective Governments, have signed the present Agreement. 

Done in duplicate this 16th day of November, 1946, at Manila. 

For the Government of the United States of America : 

(Sgd.) NATHANIEL P. DAVIS 
For the Government of the Republic of the Philippines : 

(Sgd.) RUPERTO K. KANGLEON 




AIR TRANSPORT AGREEMENT BETWEEN 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

AND 

THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Having in mind the resolution signed under date of December 7 1944 
at the International Civil Aviation Conference in Chicago, for the adoption 
of a standard form of agreement for air routes and services, and the 
desirabdity of mutually stimulating and promoting the further development 
of air transportation between the United States of America and the Republic 
of the Philippines, the two Governments parties to this arrangement agree 
that the establishment and development of air transport services between 
their respective territories shall be governed by the following provisions; 

Article I 

Each contracting party grants to the other contracting party the rights 
as specified in the Annex hereto necessary for establishing the international 
civil air routes and services therein described, whether such services be 
inaugurated immediately or at a later date at the option of the contracting 
party to whom the rights are granted. 

Article II 

Each of the air services so described shall be placed in operation as soon 
as the contracting party to whom the rights have been granted by Article 1 
to designate an airline or airlines for the route concerned has authorized an 
airline for such route, and the contracting party granting the rights shall, 
subject to Article VII hereof, be bound to give the appropriate operating 
permission to the airline or airlines concerned; provided that any airline so 
designated may be required to qualify before the competent aeronautical 
authorities of the contracting party granting the rights under the laws 
and regulations normally applied by these authorities before being permitted 
to engage in the operations contemplated by the Agreement; and provided 
that in areas of hostilities or of military occupation, or in areas affected there- 
by, such inauguration shall be subject to the approval of the competent 
military authorities. 

Article III 

Operating rights which the Philippine Government may have heretofore 
granted to any United States air transport enterprise shall continue in force 
in accordance with their terms, except for any provisions included in such 




297 



AGREEMENT BETWEEN 

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND ™E ™LIC 

np THF PHH IPPINES CONCERNINO A ri^>nLE:rv i 

PROGRAM AND A FISHERY TRAIN- 
ING PROGRAM 

Whereas the Government of the United States has enacted Public 
Law Nr370-79th Congress, approved April ^0 ^^946. known as the 
PhiUppine RehabiUtation Act of 1946, whereof section 309, entitled Philippine 
Fisheries," provides: 

Section 309. (d) The Fish and Wildlife Service of the Department 
of the Interior is authorized to cooperate with the Government of the 
Philippines, and with other appropriate agencies or organizations, in 
the rehabilitation and development of the fishing industry, and in the 
investigation and conservation of the fishery resources of the Philippines 
and adjacent waters. 

(fo) To accomplish such purposes the Fish and Wildlife Service 
shall conduct oceanographic, biological, fish cultural, technological, 
engineering, statistical, economic, and market development studies and 
demonstrations and fishery explorations, and in conjunction therewith 
may establish and maintain a vocational school or schools of fisheries 
in the Philippines for the purpose of providing practical instruction and 
training in the fisheries; and may, at any time prior to July 1, 1950, 
provide one year of training to not more than one hundred and twenty- 
five Filipinos, to be designated by the President of the Philippines 
subject to the provisions of section 311 (c), in methods of deep-sea 
fishing and in other techniques necessary to the development of fisheries. 

(c) The Fish and Wildlife Service is authorized to acquire, 
construct, maintain, equip, and operate such research and experimental 
stations, schools, research and exploratory fishing vessels, or any other 
facilities in the Philippines that may be necessary to carry out 
the purposes of this section. 

(cf) The United States Maritime Commission is authorized, 
upon recommendation of the Fish and Wildlife Service of the 
Department of the Interior, to make arrangements for the transfer by 
sale or charter of small vessels, considered by the United States 
Maritime Commission to be satisfactory for the purpose, to be used 
in the establishment and continuance of a fishing industry to be operated 
in or near the Philippines. Such transfers may be made on such terms 




302 



other contracting party, and shall be complied with by such aircraft upon 
entering or departing from or while within the territory of the first party 

(fe) The laws and regulations of one contracting party as to the 
admission to or departure from its territory of passengers, crew, or cargo 
of aircraft, such as regulations relating to entry, clearance, immigration 
passports, customs, and quarantine shall be complied with by or on behalf of 
such passengers, crew or cargo of the other contracting party upon entrance 
into or departure from, or while within the territory of the first party. 

Article VII 

Each contracting party reserves the right to withhold or revoke the 
certificate or permit of any airline of the other party in case it is not satisfied 
that substantial ownership and effective control of airlines of the first party 
are vested in nationals of that party, or in case of failure of such airline to 
comply with the laws of the State over which it operates, as described in 
Article VI hereof, or otherwise to fulfill the conditions under which the rights 
are granted in accordance with this Agreement and its Annexes. 

Article VIII 

This Agreement and all contracts connected therewith shall be registered 
with the Provisional International Civil Aviation Organization. 

Article IX 

This Agreement or any of the rights for air transport services granted 
thereunder may be terminated by either contracting party upon giving one 
year's written notice to the other contracting party. 

i Article X 

In the event either of the contracting parties considers it desirable to 
modify the routes or conditions set forth in the attached Annex, it 
may request consultation between the competent authorities of both 
contracting parties, such consultation to begin within a period of sixty days 
from the date of the request. When these authorities mutually agree on new 
or revised conditions affecting the Annex, their recommendations on the 
matter will come into effect after they have been confirmed by an exchange 
of diplomatic notes. 

Article XI 

This Agreement, including the provisions of the Annex thereto, will 
come into force on the day it is signed. 



n,av negocacc and conclude ^ ^ 

representative of the Chief, any workmg agreement necessary 
out of this Agreement. 

Article III 

The fishery rehabilitation, improvement and development program to 
he coILed pLant to this ^^^^^^^^^^ ^ 

-pL=v %frr^e^r ^r::p~^^e:^C.) Oce„V 
of the waters in which fisheries are conducted or may be developed 
to determine the nature of physical factors such as currents, sahmty^ 
temperature, plankton abundance, et cetera, affecting such fisheries, which 
will be correlated with (fe) studies of the kinds, abundance distribution, 
seasonal and periodic migration, life history and ecology of the various 
species that comprise the fishery resources, and their management on 
a sustained yield basis, which studies are fundamental to (c) exploratory 
fishing to determine the commercial practicability of conducting operations 
in various areas; the optimum types of gear suitable for exploitation of the 
resources in such areas; and modifications or improvements in existing 
fishing practices in order to provide for better utilization of the resources. 
As an adjunct to the foregoing there also may be conducted (c/) studies of 
handling, dressing, and storing catches on shipboard and at shore fishery 
establishments in order to improve the quality of the product, to prevent 
waste, and to promote efliciency of operations; (e) experiments in 
the freezing, smoking, salting, canning, and other processing of fishery 
products to promote efficiency and quality of the product as well as to devise 
methods that are the most economical and efficient; (/) studies and 
pilot-plant experiments in the preparation of fishery by-products such as 
industrial and vitamin oils, fish meal, glue, pearl essence, hides for leather, 
and other items, so as to utilize species, portions of the catch, and offal, that 
cannot be utilized for human food; (g) studies of the management 
of brackish and fresh water fish ponds, with a view toward promoting greater 
production and efficiency through fertilization, the introduction of sanitary 
measures and control of parasites and diseases; (/i) the collection, analysis, 
and dissemination of current and annual statistics on fishery production as 
business indices and as an aid in biological assessment of the condition of 
the fishery stocks and fluctuations in abundance; (i) economic studies of 
employment, production, distribution, and marketing including cost analyses 
and business consultant services and all segments of the fishing industry to 
aid in its development and promote its efiiciency; (j ) studies of distribution 
and marketing of fishery products in order that supplies may be diverted to 
deficiency areas, thus axoiding the unprofitable and wasteful accumulation 




ANNEX TO AIR TRANSPORT AGREEMENT BETWEEN 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 



AND 



THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

A. Airlines of the United States of America authorized under the present 
Agreement are accorded the rights of transit and non-traffic stop in Philippine 
territory, as well as the right to pick up and discharge international traffic 
in passengers, cargo and mail at Manila, on the route or routes indicated 
below : 

From the United States, via intermediate points to Manila and thence 
to points beyond in both directions. 

B. Airlines of the Republic of the Philippines authorized under the 
present Agreement are accorded the rights of transit and non-traffic stop 
in the United States territory, as well as the right to pick up and discharge 
international commercial traffic in passengers, cargo, and mail at Honolulu 
and San Francisco, on the route indicated below : 

From the Philippines to San Francisco and thence to points beyond 
over a reasonably direct route via intermediate points in the Pacific 
which are United States territory, including Honolulu, in both 
directions. 

C. In the operation of the air services authorized under this Agreement, 
both contracting parties agree to the following principles and objectives: 

1. Fair and equal opportunity for the airlines of each contracting party 
to operate air services on international routes, and the creation of machinery 
to obviate unfair competition by unjustifiable increases of frequencies or 
capacity. 

2. The adjustment of fifth freedom traffic with regard to : 

(d) Traffic requirements between the country of origin and the 

countries of destination. 
(b ) The requirements of through airline operation, and 
(c) The traffic requirements of the area through which the airline 

passes after taking account of local and regional services. 




301 



. rVip nroaram carried out 
Unted States Department of Che Intcnor as P^^^^^^^^ 

pursuant to this Agreement shall be P""^'" and sail from 

territorial waters of the Republic of the Ph'I'PP"-; He n ssity of formal 
the several ports with or without pilots and 
entrance or clearance that may ord.nar.ly °^ communications 

other vessels and to estabhsh or ut.hze such -^^^ ° ^^^^^^ 
between such vessels and shore facihc.es as may be J q 

administration of the programs contemplated by this ^8"^ J^" 
antine procedures and inspections shall be required only at che firsc Ph.l.ppnK 
port of call on original entry. 

Vessels of the Government of the United States of America used in the 
fishery program (including small boats), their equipment, tackle, and 
appurtenances shall be immune from seizure under Admiralty or other legal 
process. 

Vessels owned by the Government of the United States of America 
(including small boats) used in the fishery program shall be exempt from 
all requirements of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines 
relating to inspection, registry, manning or licensing of vessels or marine 
personnel. 

Where suitable public wharves or facilities for moorage are available, 
such vessels shall be furnished wharfage or moorage without cost. 

Article VIII 

The Government of the Republic of the Philippines will cooperate with 
the Fish and Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the 
Interior in providing such temporary or permanent office, laboratory, or other 
space as may be required and shall render all practicable assistance in securing 
housing accommodations, at reasonable rental rates, for personnel of the 
Fish and Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the Interior 
who are engaged in effectuating this program, and their families. 

Article IX 

The Government of the Republic of the Philippines will save harmless 
all officers and employees of the Fish and Wildlife Service of the United 
States Department of the Interior who are citizens of the United States from 
damage suits or other civil actions arising out of their performance of their 
duties under this Agreement. 

Article X 

Officers, employees and agents of the Government of the United States 
of America who are citizens of the United States and who are on duty or 
who may be assigned to duty in the Republic of the Philippines under the 




and cond,t,ons „Kl„di„g transfer for a nominal consideration as the 
U„,ted States Marjtime Commission may approve, but only "f I Z 
oprmon of the F,sh and Wildlife Service, such small vessel to b 

jifunitef itt ^ zr-' 

L^Lvc, lerritories, and possessions; and 
Whereas, the Government of the Republic of the PhiUppines is desirous 
of avaihng itself of the benefits, facilities and services which arc authorized 
by the above-quoted section 309 of the said Public Law No. 370-79th 
Longress; 

Therefore the Government of the United States of America and the 
Government of the Republic of the Philippines have decided to conclude 
an agreement for the foregoing purposes and have agreed mutually 
as rollows : 

Article I 

The responsible agent of the Government of the United States of 
America for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement shall be the Director 
of the Fish and Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the 
Interior, hereinafter called the Director. The Director may delegate to a 
duly authorized representative all or any part of his authority and responsi- 
bility for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement. The duties, 
functions, and powers exercised in the Republic of the Philippines under the 
terms of this Agreement by the Director or his duly authorized representative 
shall be under the general supervision of the Ambassador of the United States 
of America accredited to the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, 
or, in the absence of the Ambassador, of the Charge d' Affaires ad interim 
of the United States of America. 

Article II 

The responsible agent of the Government of the Republic of the 
Philippines for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement shall be the 
Chief of the Bureau of Fisheries of the Department of Agriculture 
and Commerce, hereinafter called the Chief. The Chief may delegate to 
a duly authorized representative all or any part of his authority and 
responsibility for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement. The Chief, 
or his authorized representative, shall cooperate with the Director, or the 
authorized representative of the Director, in planning the programs of work 
to be conducted pursuant to this Agreement and in effectuating close 
cooperation and integration with the programs, functions and responsibilities 
of the Bureau of Fisheries of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce 
of the Government of the Philippines. The Director, or his authorized 




, ■ ■ n rn rhe other party ninety days notice 
may terminate this Agreement by giving to the ottte p y 
in writing through diplomatic channels. ^ ^^^^ 

I. WITNESS WHHaHOP, the undesigned V ^^^.^ f^^^,,,,,^ day of 
signed the present Agreement in duplicate at JVlamia tn 

March, 1947. 

For the Government of the United States of America: 

Ambassador Extraordinary and Plaupota^y of the Vmted 
States of America to the Republic of the Philippines 

For the Government of the Republic of the Philippines: 

Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce 




of surpluses in other areas; and efforts to provide such aids as 

Che industry may require m acquiring equipment and facilities 

Article IV 

The Governmeiu of the Republic of the Philippines agrees to provide 
free of cost to the Government of the United States' of Amfrica such lan J 
nghts-of-way and easements as may be necessary for carrying out the te^m^ 
of this Agreement. Furthermore, the Government of the Republic of th 
Philippines shall furnish such equipment, facilities and qualified personne 
necessary to carry out the purposes of this Agreement as may be available 
Z^Alf ^r'"""^^"^, R'^P/blic of the Philippines. The Fisk and 

Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the Interior is 
authorized to accept and utilize for the performance of the terms of this 
Agreement contributions of labor, materials, equipment and money from the 
Government of the Republic of the Philippines and its political subdivisions. 

Article V 

The Fish and Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the 
Interior shall provide training during the period of this Agreement for not 
to exceed one hundred and twenty- five citizens of the Republic of the 
Philippines in methods of deep-sea fishing and other techniques necessary to 
the development of the fisheries. The Fish and Wildlife Service of 
the United States Department of the Interior shall provide for the payment 
of all expenses incidental to such training, including, but not necessarily 
limited to, actual transportation expenses to and from and in the United 
States of America, allowances for tuition, educational fees and subsistence. 

In accordance with the procedure set forth in section 311 (c) of the 
said Public Law No. 370-79th Congress, the President of the Republic shall 
designate trainees selected in accordance with procedures and standards 
established by the Director, and the Government of the Republic of the Phil- 
ippines shall furnish to the United States Embassy at Manila the names and 
necessary supporting documents of trainees so designated. 

Article VI 

This Fish and Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the 
Interior may construct a fishery research laboratory in the Republic of the 
Philippines at such place and in accordance with such specifications as may 
be agreed upon pursuant to Article II of this Agreement. 

Article VII 

Vessels owned by the Government of the United States of America 
(including small boats) operated by the Fish and Wildlife Service of the 




... privileges exemptions and 
favorable in any respect than the "S*"'"' ^ r .^e' same grade of any 
immunities which are enjoyed by consular omcers .^^^^^^^^.^^^j ^^^^^ 
third country and in conformity ^^^^ moa consideration of all 

official agents, such officers shall be f ^^^^ ^.h whom they have 
officials, national, state prov.ncia or ^""^ f ?^ ' c„^,,,,,,i„g Party which 

official intercourse in the ^^^^^^^^f 'consular officers", as used 
receives them. It is understood that the term ^^^^^^^^ 
in the present Convention, includes consuls general, consuls 
who are not honorary. 

3. Upon the death, uncapacity, or absence of a consular officer having no 
subordinate consular officer at his post, any secretary, chancellor or assistant, 
whose official character as an employee m the consubte may previously have 
been made known to the Government of the High Contracting Par y 
in whose territories the consular function was exercised, may temporarily 
exercise the consular functions of the deceased or incapacitated or absent 
consular officer; and while so acting shall enjoy all the rights privileges, 
exemptions and immunities that were granted to the consular officer. 

4. A consular officer or a diplomatic officer of either High Contracting 
Party, a national of the country by which he is appointed and duly 
commissioned or accredited, may. in the territories of the other High 
Contracting Party, have the rank also of a diplomatic officer or consular 
officer, as the case may be, it being understood that permission for him to 
exercise such dual functions shall have been duly granted by the Government 
of the High Contracting Party in the territories of which he exercises his 
functions. 



Article II 

1. Consular officers, nationals of the High Contracting Party by which 
they are appointed, and not engaged in any private occupations for gain 
within the territories of the country in which they exercise their functions, 
shall be exempt from arrest in such territories except when charged with 
the commission of an offense designated by local legislation as a crime other 
than a misdemeanor and subjecting the individual guilty thereof to 
punishment by imprisonment. Such officers shall be exempt from military 
billetings, and from service of any military or naval, administrative or police 
character whatsoever, and the exemptions provided for by this sentence shall 
apply equally to employees in a consulate who are nationals of the High 
Contracting Party by which they arc employed, and not engaged in 
any private occupation for gain. 




provisions of the present Agreement, and their famiUes, shall be permitted 
to move freely nuo and out of the Republic of the Philippines, subj^ o 
existing visa and passport regulations. Gratis transit shall be Extended to 
all officers, employees, or agents of the Fish and Wildlife Service over all 
bridges femes, roads and other facilities of the highways where tolls are 
collected tor passage of vehicles or occupants. 

Article XI 

Pending the conclusion of negotiations now being considered by the 
United States of America and the Republic of the Philippines, no import, 
excise, consumption, or other tax, duty or impost shall be levied on funds 
or property in the Republic of the Philippines which is owned by the Fish 
and Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the Interior and 
used for purposes under the present Agreement or on funds, materials, 
supplies, and equipment imported into the Republic of the Philippines for 
use in connection with such purposes; nor shall any such tax, duty or impost 
be levied on personal funds or property, not intended for resale, imported 
into the Republic of the Philippines for the use or consumption of Fish and 
Wildlife Service personnel who are United States citizens; nor shall 
any export or other tax be placed on any such funds or property, including 
United States Government property, in the event of its removal from the 
Republic of the Philippines. 

Article XII 

Each Government reserves the right to remove any personnel paid by 
it and involved in carrying out the provisions of this Agreement with the 
understanding that each Government shall maintain an adequate force to 
carry out the provisions and requirements of this Agreement so long as the 
Agreement is in effect. 

Article XIII 

All commitments made in this Agreement on the part of the 
Government of the United States of America shall be subject to the avail- 
ability of appropriated funds by the Government of the United States of 
America. 

Article XIV 

This Agreement shall become effective on the date of its signature, 
and shall continue in effect until completely executed on both sides, but in 
no event later than June 30, 1950; Provided, however, That this Agreement 
may be revised, amended, or changed in whole or in part with the approval 
of both parties' as indicated and affected by an exchange of notes between 
the two contracting parties; And provided further, That either Government 



chev exerose che. funa.on. shall be excn.pc from ^^^^' ^^ 
provincial and municipal, levied on cheir persons 

levied on account of the possession or ownership of "™ P °P™V 

situated within the territories in which they exerose ft mcfons o tax^ 

levied on account of income derived from property of any kind situated 
within such territories. Consular officers and eniployees ™ 
nationals of the High Contracting Party by which they are ^PP° »«d °; 
employed, shall be exempt from the payment of all taxes, national, state 
provincial and municipal, on the salaries, allowances, fees or wages received 
by them in compensation for consular services. 

Article V 

1. All furniture, equipment and supplies intended for official use in the 
consular offices and official consular residences of either High Contracting 
Party in the territories of the other High Contracting Party shall be permitted 
entry into such territories free of all duty. 

2. Consular officers of either High Contracting Party and members of 
their families and suites, including employees in a consulate and their 
families, shall be exempt from the payment of any duty in respect of the 
entry into the territories of the other High Contracting Party of their baggage 
and all other personal property, whether preceding or accompanying them 
to a consular post, either upon first arrival or upon subsequent arrivals, or 
imported at any time while assigned to or employed at such post. 

3. It is understood, hovk/ever, 

(ti) that the exemptions provided in paragraph 2 of this Article shall 
not be extended to consular officers and members of their suites, including 
employees in a consulate, who are not nationals of the High Contracting 
Party by which they are appointed or employed, or who are engaged in any 
private occupation for gain within the territories of the other High 
Contracting Party; 

(fc) that in the case of each consignment of articles imported 
for the personal use of consular officers or members of their families or suites 
including employees in a consulate and their families, at any time during 
their official residence within the territories in which they exercise 
their functions, a request for entry free of duty shall be made through 
diplomatic channels; and 

(c) that nothmg herein shall be construed to permit the entry into the 
territory of either High Contracting Party of any article the impo tation of 
which is specifically prohibited by law. 




Consular Convention 



^^^^N^^'ri^^l^^^^r^^''' ™E PHILIPPINES 
AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

The President of the Philippines, and the President of the United States 
of America, being desirous of defining the rights, privileges, exemptions 
and immunities of consular officers of each country in the territories of the 
other country, have decided to conclude a convention for that purpose and 
have appointed as their plenipotentiaries : 

The President of the Philippines : 

His Excellency Elpidio Quirino, Vice President and cmcurrently 
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the Philippines, 
and 

The President of the United States of America : 

His Excellency Paul V. McNutt, Ambassador of the United 
States of America 

Who, having communicated to each other their respective full powers, 
found to be in good and due form, have agreed on the following Articles: 

Article I 

1. The Government of each High Contracting Party shall, in respect 
of any consular officer duly commissioned by it to exercise consular functions 
in the territories of the other High Contracting Party, give written notice 
to the Government of such other High Contracting Party of the appointment 
of such consular officer and shall request that recognition be accorded to such 
consular officer. The Government of each High Contracting Party shall 
furnish free of charge the necessary exequatur of any consular officer of the 
other High Contracting Party who presents a regular commission signed by 
the Chief Executive of the appointing country and under its great seal, and 
shall issue to a subordinate or substitute consular officer who is duly 
appointed by an accepted superior consular officer or by any other competent 
officer of his Government, such documents as according to the laws of the 
respective High Contracting Parties shall be requisite for the exercise by the 
appointee of the consular function; provided in either case that the person 
applying for an exequatur or other document is found acceptable. 

2. Consular officers of each High Contracting Party shall, after entering 
upon their duties, enjoy reciprocally in the territories of the other High 
Contracting Party rights, privileges, exemptions and immunities no less 

309 




r Ur officers of either High Contracting 
other High Contracting Party. ^^"'f^'^^Hl .^^^.-^nals of their country 
Party shall be informed immediately whenever nat.ona ^^^^^^ ^^.^^ 

are under detention or arrest or ui P''^^ . • the appropriate 

their consular districts and they sha 1, ^^P°^ "^"f^f "^^^^^.i^ate 
authorities, be permitted without delay to visit and communic 

such national. 

3 Nationals of either High Contracting Party in the territories of the 
.-i. LNationais oi cilu^i & rimes to communicate 

other High Contracting Party s al have th^^ 

with the consular officers of their /^^unt y^ Contracting Party who are 
consular officers from nationals of either High " § the territories 

under detention or arrest or in prison or are awaiting trial ^^e ^""^^'^^^ 
of the other High Contracting Party shall be forwarded without delay to 
such consular officers by the local authorities. 

Article VIII 

1. Consular officers in pursuance of the laws of their respective countries 
shall have the right, within their respective consular districts: 

(d) To take and attest the oaths, affirmations or depositions of any 
occupant of a vessel of their country, or of any national of their country, or 
of any person having permanent residence within the territories of 
their country; 

(/)) To authenticate signatures; 

(c) To draw up, attest, certify and authenticate unilateral acts, 
translations, deeds, testamentary dispositions and contracts of the nationals 
of the High Contracting Party by which the consular officers are appointed; 
and 

(J) To draw up, attest, certify, and authenticate unilateral acts, deeds, 
contracts, testamentary dispositions and written instruments of any kind, 
which are intended to have application, execution and legal effect principally 
in the territories of the High Contracting Party by which the consular officers 
are appointed. 

2. Instruments and documents thus executed and copies and translations 
thereof, when duly authenticated by the consular officer, under his official 
seal, shall be received as evidence in the territories of either High Contracting 
Party as original documents or authenticated copies, as the case may be, and 
shall have the same force and effect as if drawn by or executed before 
a notary or other public officer duly authorized in the territories of the High 
Contracting Party by which the consular officer was appointed; provided, 

314 




2 In cnmmal cases the attendance at court by a consular officer 
as witness may be demanded by the plaintiff, the defense or the court. The 
demand shall be made with all possible respect for the consular dignity and 
the duties of the office, and when so made there shall be compliance on the 
part or the consular officer. 

3. hi civil cases, consular officers shall be subject to the jurisdiction of 
the courts in the territories of the High Contracting Party which receives 
them. When the testimony of a consular officer who is a national of the 
High Contracting Party which appoints him and who is not engaged in any 
private occupation for gain is taken in civil cases, it shall be taken orally or 
in writing at his residence or office and with due regard for his convenience. 
The officer should, however, voluntarily give his testimony at court 
whenever it is possible to do so without serious interference with his official 
duties. 

4. Consular officers and employees in a consulate shall not be required 
to testify in criminal or civil cases, regarding acts performed by them in their 
official capacity. 

Article III 

1. The Government of each High Contracting Party shall have the 
right to acquire and hold, lease and occupy land and buildings required for 
diplomatic or consular purposes in the territories of the other High 
Contracting Party, and shall have the right to erect buildings on land which 
is held by or on behalf of such Government in the territories of the other 
High Contracting Party for diplomatic or consular purposes, subject to local 
building regulations. 

2. No tax of any kind, national, state, provincial or municipal, shall 
be levied in the territories of either High Contracting Party on the Govern- 
ment of the other High Contracting Party, or on any officer or employee 
of such other High Contracting Party, in respect of land or buildings 
acquired, leased, or occupied by such other High Contracting Party and used 
exclusively for the conduct of official business, except assessments levied 
for services or local public improvements by which the premises are 
benefited, provided the right of each High Contracting Party to tax 
the owner of property leased to the other High Contracting Party is 
not hereby abridged. 

Article IV 

Consular officers and employees in a consulate, nationals of the High 
Contracting Party by which they are appointed or employed, and not engaged 
in any private occupation for gain within the territories in which 

311 




1 w . -.r^A rpreint for their distributive shares 
by which he was appointed, to collect and receipt ror tn 

derived from estates in process of probate or accrunng under the provisions 
of workmen's compensation laws or other like statutes, for transmission 
through channels prescribed by his Government to the proper distributees, 
provided that the court or other agency making distribution through him 
may require him to furnish reasonable evidence of the remission of the funds 
to the distributees, it being understood that his responsibility with respect 
to remission of such funds shall cease when such evidence has been furnished 
by him to and accepted by such court or other agency. 

Article XI 

1. A consular officer of either High Contracting Party shall have 
exclusive jurisdiction over controversies arising out of the internal order of 
private vessels of his country and shall alone exercise jurisdiction in situations, 
wherever arising, between officers and crews, pertaining to the enforcement 
of discipline on board, provided the vessel and the persons charged with 
wrong-doing shall have entered the territorial waters or territories within 
his consular district. Consular officers shall also have jurisdiction over issues 
concerning the adjustment of wages of the crews and the execution of 
contracts relating to their wages or conditions of employment, provided the 
local laws so permit. 

2. When acts committed on board private vessels of the country by 
which the consular officer has been appointed and within the territories or the 
territorial waters of the High Contracting Party by which he has been 
received, constitute crimes according to the laws of the receiving country, 
subjecting the persons guilty thereof to punishment by a sentence of death 
or of imprisonment for a period of at least one year, the consular officer shall 
not exercise jurisdiction except in so far as he is permitted to do so by the 
laws of the receiving country. 

3. A consular officer shall have the right freely to invoke the assistance 
of the local police authorities in all matters pertaining to the maintenance 
of internal order on board vessels of his country within the territories or the 
territorial waters of the country by which he has been received, and upon 
such request the requisite assistance shall be given promptly. 

4. A consular officer shall have the right to appear with the officers and 
crews of vessels of his country before the judicial authorities of the country 
by which he has been received for the purpose of observing proceedings or of 
rendering assistance as an interpreter or agent. 




Article VI 

the oL?lt'oftrle:?v:offi* 't''""-""^/-' °™ 
^nnmnr,-.r. " respective officcs the arms of their country with an 

TceT ^"'^"P^^°" designating the nature of the office, and they may 
p ace the coat of arms and fly the flag of their country on automobiles env 
ployed by them in the exercise of their consular functions. Such officers 
may also Hy the flag of their country on their offices, including those situated 
m the capitals of the respective countries. They may likewise fly such flag 
over any boat, vessel, or aircraft employed in the exercise of their consular 
runctions. 

2. The quarters where consular business is conducted, all consular 
correspondence in transit under official seal, and all papers, records 
and corresporidence comprising the consular archives shall at all times be 
inviolable and under no pretext shall any authorities of any character of the 
country in which such quarters or archives are located invade such premises 
or make any examination or seizure of papers or other property in 
such quarters or of such archives. When the consular officers are engaged 
in business within the territories in which they exfercise their functions, the 
consular hies and documents shall be kept in a place entirely separate from 
the place where private or business papers are kept. Consular offices shall 
not be used as places of asylum. No consular officer shall be required to 
produce official archives in court or to testify as to their contents. 

Article VII 

1. Consular officers of either High Contracting Party shall have the 
right, within their respective consular districts, to apply to or address the 
authorities, national, state, provincial, or municipal, for the purpose of 
protecting the nationals of the High Contracting Party by which they were 
appointed in the enjoyment of rights accruing by treaty or otherwise. Com- 
plaint may be made for the infraction of those rights. Failure upon the part 
of the proper authorities to grant redress or to accord protection shall justify 
interposition through the diplomatic channel, and in the absence of a 
diplomatic representative, a consul general or the consular officer stationed 
at the capital shall have the right to apply directly to the Government of 
the country. 

2. Consular officers of either High Contracting Party shall, within their 
respective districts, have the right to interview, to communicate with, and 
to advise nationals of their country; to inquire into any incidents which have 
occurred affecting the interest of such nationals; and to assist such nationals 
in proceedings before or relations with authorities in the territories of the 

313 




^ TL ■ ■ ,f Inr-il authorities shall occasion no expense 

4. The nitervention of the local author ^^^^^ 

of any kind to the owners or operators of the w ecKea vess , J 
expenses as may be caused by the operations o salvage and the V^^^^-^^^ 
of the merchandise and equipment saved, together with expenses that would 
be incurred under similar circumstances by vessels of the country. 

Article XIV 

Honorary consuls or vice consuls of either High Contracting Party, 
as the case may be, shall enjoy those rights, privileges, exemptions 
and immunities provided for in Article I, paragraph 1, Article II, paragraph 
1, Articles VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, and XIV of the present 
Convention, for which they have received authority in conformity with the 
laws of the High Contracting Party by which they are appointed; and they 
shall enjoy in any case all the rights, privileges, exemptions and immunities 
enjoyed by honorary consular officers of the same rank of any third country. 

Article XV 

A consular officer shall cease to discharge his functions (1) by virtue 
of an official communication from the Government of the High Contracting 
Party by which appointed addressed to the Government of the High 
Contracting Party by which he has been received advising that his functions 
have ceased, or (2) by virtue of a request from the Government of the High 
Contracting Party by which appointed that an exequatur be issued to 
a successor, or (3) by withdrawal of the exequatur granted him by 
the Government of the High Contracting Party in whose territory he has 
been discharging his duties. 

Article XVI 

1. The present Convention shall be ratified and the ratification thereof 
shall be exchanged at Manila. The Convention shall take effect in all its 
provisions immediately upon the exchange of ratifications and shall continue 
in force for the term of ten years. 

2. If, six months before the expiration of the aforesaid period of ten 
years, the Government of neither High Contracting Party shall have given 
notice to the Government of the other High Contracting Party of an 
intention to terminate the Convention upon the expiration of the aforesaid 
period of ten years, the Convention shall continue in effect after the aforesaid 
period and until six months from the date on which the Government 
of either High Contracting Party shall have notified to the Government of 
the other High Contracting Party an intention to terminate the Convention. 




318 



always, that such documents shall have been drawn and executed in 
conformity with the laws and regulations of the country where they 
are designed to take effect. 

Article IX 

1. In case of the death of a national of either High Contracting Party 
in the territories of the other High Contracting Party, without having in 
the locality of his decease any known heirs or testamentary executors by him 
appointed, the competent local authorities shall at once inform the nearest 
consular officer of the High Contracting Party of which the deceased was a 
national of the fact of his death, in order that necessary information may 
be forwarded to the persons concerned. 

2. In case of the death of a national of either High Contracting Party in 
the territories of the other High Contracting Party, without will or testament 
whereby he has appointed a testamentary executor, the consular officer of 
the High Contracting Party of which the deceased was a national 
and within whose district the deceased made his home at the time of death, 
shall, so far as the laws of the country permit and pending the appointment 
of an administrator and until letters of administration have been granted, 
be deemed qualified to take charge of the property left by the decedent for 
the preservation and protection of such property. Such consular officer shall 
have the right to be appointed as administrator within the discretion of a 
court or other agency controlling the administration of estates, provided the 
laws governing administration of the estate so permit. 

3. Whenever a consular officer accepts the office of administrator of the 
estate of a deceased countryman, he subjects himself in that capacity to the 
jurisdiction of the court or other agency making the appointment for all 
necessary purposes to the same extent as if he were a national of the High 
Contracting Party by which he has been received. 

Article X 

1. A consular officer of either High Contracting Party shall within 
his district have the right to appear personally or by authorized representative 
in all matters concerning the administration and distribution of the estate 
of a deceased person under the jurisdiction of the local authorities, for all 
such heirs or legatees in the estate, either minors or adults, as may 
be non-residents of the country and nationals of the High Contracting Party 
by which the consular officer was appointed, unless such heirs or legatees 
have appeared, either in person or by duly authorized representatives. 

2. A consular officer of either High Contracting Party shall have the 
right, on behalf of the non-resident nationals of the High Contracting Party 




AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE ^EP^^^^LIC OF THE PHILIPPI^^^ 
AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
CONCERNING MILITARY BASES 

Whereas, the war in the Pacific has confirmed the mutuality of interest 
of the Republic of the Philippines and of the United States of America in 
matters relating to the defense of their respective territories and that 
mutuality of interest demands that the Governments of the two countries 
take the necessary measures to promote their mutual security and to defend 
their territories and areas; 

Whereas, the Governments of the Republic of the Philippines and of 
the United States of America are desirous of cooperating in the common 
defense of their two countries through arrangements consonant with the 
procedures and objectives of the United Nations, and particularly through 
a grant to the United States of America by the Republic of the Philippines 
in the exercise of its title and sovereignty, of the use, free of rent, 
in furtherance of the mutual interest of both countries, of certain lands of 
the public domain; ~ 

Whereas, the Government of the Republic of the Philippines has re- 
quested United States assistance in providing for the defense of the Philippines 
and in developing for such defense effective Philippine armed forces; 

Whereas, pursuant to this request the Government of the United States 
of America has, in view of its interest in the welfare of the Philippines, in- 
dicated its intention of dispatching a military mission to the Philippines and 
of extending to her appropriate assistance in the development of the 
Philippine defense forces; 

Whereas, a Joint Resolution of the Congress of the United States of 
America of June 29, 1944, authorized the President of the United States of 
America to acquire bases for the mutual protection of the Philippines and 
of the United States of America; and 

Whereas, Joint Resolution No. 4 of the Congress of the Philippines, 
approved July 28, 1945, authorized the President of the Philippines to 
negotiate with the President of the United States of America for the establish- 
ment of bases provided for in the Joint Resolution of the Congress of the 
United States of America of June 29, 1944, with a view to insuring 
the territorial integrity of the Philippines, the mutual protection of the 
Philippines and the United States of America, and the maintenance of peace 
in the Pacinc; 




Article XII 

L A consular officer of either High Contracting Party shall have the 
right to inspect within the ports of the other High Contracting Party within 
his consular district, the private vessels of any flag destined to and about to 
clear for the ports of his country, for the sole purpose of observing 
the sanitary conditions and measures taken on board such vessels, in order 
that he may be enabled thereby to execute intelligently bills of health and other 
documents required by the laws of his country, and to inform his Government 
concerning the extent to which its sanitary regulations have been observed 
at ports of departure by vessels destined to its ports, with a view to 
facilitating entry of such vessels. 

2. In exercising the right conferred upon them by this Article, consular 
officers shall act with all possible dispatch and without unnecessary delay. 

Article XIII ' 

1. All proceedings relative to the salvage of vessels of either 
High Contracting Party v^recked upon the coasts of the other High 
Contracting Party shall be directed by the consular officer of the country to 
which the vessel belongs and within whose district the wreck may 
have occurred, or by some other person authorized for such purpose by the 
law of such country and whose identity and authority shall be made known 
to the local authorities by the consular officer. 

2. The local authorities of the country where the wreck has occurred 
shall immediately inform the consular officer, or such authorized person, of 
the occurrence. Pending the arrival of the consular officer or such other 
authorized person, the local authorities shall take all necessary measures for 
the protection of persons and the preservation of the wrecked property. The 
local authorities shall intervene only to maintain order, to protect the interests 
of the salvors, if the salvors do not belong to the crew of the wrecked vessel, 
and to ensure the execution of the arrangements which shall be made for the 
entry and exportation of the salvaged merchandise and equipment. It 
is understood that such merchandise and equipment shall not be subjected to 
any customs or customhouse charges unless intended for consumption in 
the country where the wreck has occurred. 

3. When the wreck occurs within a port, there shall be observed also 

L , ,.,u;rU mav he ordered by the local authorities with a 

those arrangements wnicn may oe urucicu uy <. 

■A- ^ r^1r.^-1ap chat might otherwise be caused thereby to 
view to avoiding any damage tn^L migni- 

the port and to other ships. 




317 



3. In the interest of international security any bases listed h, Annexes 
A and B ™ay be made available to the Sccur,ty Cou e 1 °f "mted^Na^ 

tions on its call by prior mutual agreement between tne ri m 
United States. 

Articlu III 
DESCRIPTION OF RIGHTS 

1. It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the rights, 
rower and authority within the bases which are necessary for the establislv 
ment use, operation and defense thereof or appropriate for the contro thereof 
and all the rights, power and authority within the limits of territorial waters 
and air space adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, the bases which are necessary 
to provide access to them, or appropriate for their control. 

2. Such rights, power and authority shall include, inter alia, the right, 
power and authority : 

(d) to construct (including dredging and filling), operate, maintain, 
utilize, occupy, garrison and control the bases; 

(b^ to improve and deepen the harbors, channels, entrances and 
anchorages, and to construct or maintain necessary roads and bridges 
affording access to the bases; 

(c) to control (including the right to prohibit) in so far as may be 
required for the efficient operation and safety of the bases, and within the 
limits of military necessity, anchorages, moorings, landings, takeoffs, 
movements and operation of ships and water-borne craft, aircraft and other 
vehicles on water, in the air or on land comprising or in the vicinity of the 
bases; 

(J) the right to acquire, as may be agreed between the two 
Governments, such rights of way, and to construct thereon, as may 
be required for military purposes, wire and radio communications facilities, 
including submarine and subterranean cables, pipe lines and spur tracb from 
railroads to bases, and the right, as may be agreed upon between the two 
Governments to construct the necessary facilities; 

(c) to construct, install, maintain, and employ on any base any type 
of facilities, weapons, substance, device, vessel or vehicle on or under the 
ground, in the air or on or under the water that may be requisite 
or appropriate, including meteorological systems, aerial and water navigation 
lights, radio and radar apparatus and electronic devices, of any desired power, 
type of emission and frequency. 



In faith whereof the ahovc nin-.,.,^ ■ • • i ... 

LUC aoovL named plenipotentiaries have signed the 

present Convention and have affixed thereto their seals. 

Done in duplicate at Manila, this fourteenth day of March in the year 
of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and forty-seven, and of the 
Independence of the Republic of the Philippines, the first. 



For the Government of the Republic of the Philipi: 



Dines : 



(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRING 



For the Government of the United States of America : 



(Sgd.) PAUL V. McNUTT 




cio.hi„g, fo. exclusive use in che cons.uc.o. ^a^ncenance op^^^^^^ 
defense of the bases, consigned to. or destined tor, 
authorities and certified by them to be for such purposes. 

Article VI 
MANEUVER AND OTHER AREAS 
The United States shall, subject to previous agreement with the 
Philippines, have the right to use land and coastal sea areas of appropriate 
size and location for periodic maneuvers, for additional staging areas, 
bombing and gunnery ranges, and for such intermediate airfields as may be 
required for safe and efficient air operations. Operations in such areas shall 
be carried on with due regard and safeguards for the public safety. 

Article VII 
USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES 

It is mutually agreed that the United States may employ and use for 
United States military forces any and all public utilities, other services and 
facilities, airfields, ports, harbors, roads, highways, railroads, bridges, viaducts, 
canals, lakes, rivers and streams in the Philippines under conditions no less 
favorable than those that may be applicable from time to time to the military 
forces of the Philippines. 

Article VIII 
HEALTH MEASURES OUTSIDE BASES 

It is mutually agreed that the United States may construct, subject to 
agreement by the appropriate Philippine authorities, wells, water catchment 
areas or dams to insure an ample supply of water for all base operations and 
personnel. The United States shall likewise have the right, in cooperation 
with the appropriate authorities of the Philippines, to take such steps as may 
be mutually agreed upon to be necessary to improve health and sanitation in 
areas contiguous to the bases, including the right, under such conditions as 
may be mutually agreed upon, to enter and inspect any privately owned 
property. The United States shall pay just compensation for any injury to 
persons or damage to property that may result from action taken in 
connection with this Article. 

Article IX 
SURVEYS 

It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right, aftet 
appropriate notification has been given to the Philippines, to make topo- 




324 



Therefore, che Governments of the Republic of the Philippines and of 
the United States of America agree upon the following terms for th 

Article I 
GRANT OF BASES 

1^ The Government of the Republic of the Philippines (hereinafter 
referred to as the Philippines) grant to the Government of the United States 
of America (hereinafter referred to as the United States) the right to retain 
the use of the bases in the Philippines listed in Annex A attached hereto. 

2. The Philippines agrees to permit the United States, upon notice to 
the Philippines, to use such of those bases listed in Annex B as the United 
States determines to be required by military necessity. 

3. The Philippines agrees to enter into negotiations with the United 
States at the latter's request, to permit the United States to expand 
such bases, to exchange such bases for other bases, to acquire additional bases, 
or relinquish rights to bases, as any of such exigencies may be required by 
military necessity. 

4. A narrative description of the boundaries of the bases to which this 
Agreement relates is given in Annex A and Annex B. . An exact description 
of the bases listed in Annex A, with metes and bounds, in conformity with 
the narrative descriptions, will be agreed upon between the appropriate 
authorities of the two Governments as soon as possible. With respect to 
any of the bases listed in Annex B, an exact description with metes 
and bounds, in conformity with the narrative description of such bases, will 
be agreed upon if and when such bases are acquired by the United States. 



Article II 
MUTUAL COOPERATION 

1. It is mutually agreed that the armed forces of the Philippines may 
serve on United States bases and that the armed forces of the United 
States may serve on Philippine military establishments whenever such 
conditions appear beneficial as mutually determined by the armed forces of 
both countries. 

2. Joint outlined plans for the development of military bases in the 
Philippines may be prepared by military authorities of the two Governments. 




321 



Article XII 



INTERNAL REVENUE TAX EXEMPTION 

1 No number of che United States armed forces except Filipino 
ctizens, serving in the PhrUppines in connection with the bases and res.d.ng 
in the Philippines by reason only of such service, or h,s dependents, shall be 
liable to pay income tax in the Philippines except rn respect of n,come der.ved 
from Philippine sources. . 

2 No national of the United States serving in or employed in 
the Philippines in connection with the construction, maintenance, operation 
or defense of the bases and residing in the Philippines by reason only of such 
employment, or his spouse and minor children and dependent parents of 
either spouse, shall be liable to pay income tax in the Philippines except in 
respect of income derived from Philippine sources or sources other than the 
United States sources. 

3. No person referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be 
liable to pay to the Government or local authorities of the Philippines any 
poll or residence tax, or any import or export duty, or any other tax 
on personal property imported for his own use; provided that privately 
owned vehicles shall be subject to payment of the following only: when 
certified as being used for military purposes by appropriate United States 
authorities, the normal license plate fee; otherwise, the normal license plate 
and registration fees. 

4. No national of the United States, or corporation organized under the 
laws of the United States, resident in the United States, shall be liable to pay 
income tax in the Philippines in respect of any profits derived under a contract 
made in the United States with the Government of the United States 
in connection with the construction, maintenance, operation and defense of 
the bases, or any tax in the nature of a license in respect of any service or 
work for the United States in connection with the construction, maintenance, 
operation and defense of the bases. 

Article XIII 

JURISDICTION 

1. The Philippines consents that the United States shall have the right 
to exercise jurisdiction over the following oflfenses : 

OO Any oftense committed by any person within any base except 
where the offender and offended parties are both Philippine citizens (not 
members of the armed forces of the United States on active duty) or the 
offense is against the security of the Philippines; 




326 



X In the excrete of the above-mentioned rights, power and authority 
the United States agrees that the powers granted to it will no" 1^ 

used unreasonably or, un ess rcauircrl ,-.,;i.v^ i . ■ . . 

> , L lULib rtquirca by military necessity determined by the 

two Uovernments, so as to inrrrfprc ^mVU • i r 

, ^ aj> CO intcrtere with the necessary rights of navigation, 

aviation, communication, or land travel within the territories of th^ 

Philippines. In the practical application outside the bases of the rights 

power and authority granted in this Article there shall be, as the occasion 

requires, consultation between the two Governments. 

Article IV 
SHIPPING AND NAVIGATION 

1. It is mutually agreed that United States public vessels operated by 
or for the War or Navy Departments, the Coast Guard or the Coast 
and Geodetic Survey, and the military forces of the United States, military 
and naval aircraft and Government-owned vehicles, including armor, shall 
be accorded free access to and movement between ports and United States 
bases throughout the Philippines, including territorial waters, by land, air 
and sea. This right shall include freedom from compulsory pilotage and 
all toll charges. If, however, a pilot is taken, pilotage shall be paid for at 
appropriate rates. In connection with entrance into Philippine ports by 
United States public vessels appropriate notification under normal conditions 
shall be made to the Philippine authorities. 

2. Lights and other aids to navigation of vessels and aircraft placed or 
established in the bases and territorial waters adjacent thereto or in the 
vicinity of such bases shall conform to the system in use in the Philippines. 
The position, characteristics and any alteration in the lights or other aids 
shall be communicated in advance to the appropriate authorities of the 
Philippines. 

3. Philippine commercial vessels may use the bases on the same terms 
and conditions as United States commercial vessels. 

4. It is understood that a base is not a part of the territory of 
the United States for the purpose of coastwise shipping laws so as to exclude 
Philippine vessels from trade between the United States and the bases. 

Article V 

EXEMPTION FROM CUSTOMS AND OTHER DUTIES 
No import, excise, consumption or other tax, duty or impost shall be 
charged on material, equipment, supplies or goods, including food stores and 



.,u.ed . The co„.a„d.„, of^/X— ttc^ch™^^ 
(prosecuting attorney) with a copy of the information g 
upon the fihng of the original in the competent court. 

6 Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, it is mutually agreed that 
D. iNutwiLUbL^im 5 f , . , exercise exclusive 

in time of war the United States shall have the r^g"'^ 

jurisdiction over any offenses which may be committed by members of the 

armed forces of the United States in the Philippines. 

7. The United States agrees that it will not grant asylum in any of the 
bases to any person fleeing from the lawful jurisdiction of the Philippines^ 
Should any such person be found in any base, he will be surrendered 
on demand to the competent authorities of the Philippines. 

8. In every case in which jurisdiction over an offense is exercised by the 
United States, the offended party may institute a separate civil action against 
the offender in the proper court of the Philippines to enforce the civil liability 
which under the laws of the Philippines may arise from the offense. 

Article XIV 
ARREST AND SERVICE OF PROCESS 

1. No arrest shall be made and no process, civil or criminal, shall be 
served within any base except with the permission of the commanding officer 
of such base; but should the commanding officer refuse to grant such 
permission he shall (except in cases of arrest where the United States has 
jurisdiction under Article XIII ) forthwith take the necessary steps to arrest 
the person charged and surrender him to the appropriate authorities of the 
Philippines or to serve such process, as the case may be, and to provide the 
attendance of the server of such process before the appropriate court in the 
Philippines or procure such server to make the necessary affidavit or 
declaration to prove such service as the case may require. 

2. In cases where the service courts of the United States have jurisdiction 
under Article XIII, the appropriate authorities of the Philippines will, on 
request, give reciprocal facilities as regards the service of process and the 
arrest and surrender of alleged offenders. 

Article XV 

SECURITY LEGISLATION 

The Philippines agrees to take such steps as may from time to time be 
agreed to be necessary with a view to the enactment of legislation to insure 
the adequate security and protection of the United States bases, equipment 
and other property and the operations of the United States under this Agree- 




graphic, hydrographic and coast and geodccic surveys and aerial photographs 
,„ any part of the Ph.l ppines and waters adjacent thereto. Cop es' with 
tide and tnangulacion data of anv «:.irwpvc r. u pi^i wiui 

Dui- • L II L f ., , ^ surveys or photomaps made of the 
Philippines shall be furnished to the Philippines. 

Article X 

CEMETERIES AND HISTORICAL SITES 
L The United States shall have the right to retain and maintain such 
United States military cemeteries and such sites of historical significance to 
the United Stat^ as may be agreed upon by the two Governments. All 
rights power and authority in relation to bases granted under this Agreement 
shall be applicable, in so far as appropriate, to the cemeteries and 
sites mentioned in this Article. 

2. Furthermore, it is recognized that there are certain cemeteries and 
historical sites in the Philippines revered in the memory of the People of the 
Philippines and of the United States, and it is therefore fitting that 
the maintenance and improvement of such memorials be the common 
concern of the two countries. 

Article XI 

IMMIGRATION 

1. It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right to 
bring into the Philippines members of the United States military forces and 
the United States nationals employed by or under a contract with the United 
States together with their families, and technical personnel of other 
nationalities (not being persons excluded by the laws of the Philippines) 
in connection with the construction, maintenance, or operation of the bases. 
The United States shall make suitable arrangements so that such persons 
may be readily identified and their status established when necessary by the 
Philippine authorities. Such persons, other than members of the United 
States armed forces in uniform, shall present their travel documents to the 
appropriate Philippine authorities for visas, it being understood that no 
objection will be made to their travel to the Philippines as non-immigrants. 

2. If the status of any person within the Philippines and admitted 
thereto under the foregoing paragraph shall be altered so that he would no 
longer be entitled to such admission, the United States shall notify the 
Philippines and shall, if such person be required to leave the Philippines by 
the latter Government, be responsible for providing him with a passage from 
the Philippines within a reasonable time, and shall in the meantime prevent 
his becoming a public responsibility of the Philippines. 



Article XVI H 



SALES AND SERVICES WITHIN THE BASES 

1. , is mucually agreed chac che Un.ed Scates ^^^^^^ ^^^^^^ ^ 
escabHsh on bases, free of all 

imposes Government agencies. ^^^^ ,he exclusive use of 

saries and pose exchanges, messes 'f ^?^^^^^^^^ ,„el and their 

the United States military forces and authorized civilian pc 
families. The merchandise or services sold or dispensed by such agencies 
shall be free of all taxes, duties and inspection by the Philippine authoriti^. 
Administrative measures shall be taken by the appropriate authorities of the 
United States to prevent the resale of goods which are sold under 
the provisions of this Article to persons not entitled to buy goods at such 
agencies and, generally, to prevent abuse of the privileges granted under 
this Article. There shall be cooperation between such authorities and the 
Philippines to this end. 

2. Except as may be provided in any other agreements, no person shall 
habitually render any professional services in a base except to or for 
the United States or to or for the persons mentioned in the preceding 
paragraph. No business shall be established in a base, it being understood 
that the Government agencies mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall 
not be regarded as business for the purposes of this Article. 

Article XIX 



COMMERCIAL CONCERNS 

It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right, with 
the consent of the Philippines, to grant to commercial concerns owned or 
controlled by citizens of the Philippines or of the United States such rights 
to the use of any base or facility retained or acquired by the United States 
as may be deemed appropriate by both Governments to insure the develop- 
ment and maintenance for defense purposes of such bases and facilities. 

Article XX 

MILITARY OR NAVAL POLICE 

It is mutually agreed that there shall be close cooperation on a reciprocal 
basis between the military and naval police forces of the United States and 
the police forces of the Philippines for the purpose of preserving order and 
discipline among United States military and naval personnel. 




330 



(c) Any offense committed outside the bases by any membet of the 
armed forces of the United States against the security of the United States 

2. The Philippines shall have the right to exercise jurisdiaion over all 
other offenses committed outside the bases by any member of the armed 
forces ot the United States. 

3. Whenever for special reasons the United States may desire not to 
exercise the jurisdiction reserved to it in paragraphs 1 and 6 of this Article, 
the othcer holding the offender in custody shall so notify the fiscal 
(prosecuting attorney ) of the city or province in which the offense has been 
committed within ten days after his arrest, and in such a case the Philippines 
shall exercise jurisdiction. 

4. Whenever for special reasons the Philippines may desire not to 
exercise the jurisdiction reserved to it in paragraph 2 of this Article, the fiscal 
(prosecuting attorney) of the city or province where the offense has been 
committed shall so notify the officer holding the offender in custody within 
ten days after his arrest, and in such a case the United States shall be free to 
exercise jurisdiction. If any offense falling under paragraph 2 of this Article 
is committed by any member of the armed forces of the United States 

(a) while engaged in the actual performance of a specific military 
duty, or 

(6) during a period of national emergency declared by either 
Government and the fiscal (prosecuting attorney) so finds from the 
evidence, he shall immediately notify the officer holding the offender 
in custody that the United States is free to exercise jurisdiction. In the 
event the fiscal (prosecuting attorney) finds that the offense was not 
committed in the actual performance of a specific military duty, the offen- 
der's commanding officer shall have the right to appeal from such finding 
to the Secretary of Justice within ten days from the receipt of the deci- 
sion of the fiscal and the decision of the Secretary of Justice shall be final. 

5. In all cases over which the Philippines exercises jurisdiction the 
custody of the accused, pending trial and final judgment, shall be entrusted 
without delay to the commanding ofhcer o the nearest base, who 
shall acknowledge in writing that such accused has been delivered to him 

f J J • 1 ■ o ^r^riinprpHr court of the Philippines and that he 

for custody pending trial in a competent couil w ^ . , , 

•n I 1 I I . ^,^A xxnW be produced before said court when 

wi I be he d ready to appear and will oe pruuu 




1 „,,^nr of the two Governments, the 
In adduion, subjecc .o che mutual .asonable costs of 

United States will reimburse the Ph.hpP"«s tor j ^^^^^ 
transportation and removal of any occupants displacea or j 
the condemnation or expropriation. 

2 Prior to the completion of such condemnation or ^"P'opriation 
proceedingr in cases of military necessity the United States shall have the 
P." . „ „f ,,,^1, nrooertv required for military purposes as 
r ght to take possession ot sucn property ichu f„i(;iuj 
soon as the legal requisites for obtaining possession have been fulfilled. 

3 The properties acquired under this Article shall be turned over to 
the Philippines upon the expiration of this Agreement, or the earlier relin- 
quishment of such properties, under such terms and conditions as may be 
agreed upon by the two Governments. 

Article XXIII 

CIVIL LIABILITY 

For the purpose of promoting and maintaining friendly relations by the 
prompt settlement of meritorious claims, the United States shall pay just 
and reasonable compensation, when accepted by claimants in full satisfaction 
and in final settlement, for claims, including claims of insured but excluding 
claims of subrogees, on account of damage to or loss or destruction 
of private property, both real and personal, or personal injury or death of 
inhabitants of the Philippines, when such damage, loss, destruction or injury 
is caused by the armed forces of the United States, or individual members 
thereof, including military or civilian employees thereof, or otherwise incident 
to non-combat activities of such forces; provided that no claim shall be 
considered unless presented within one year after the occurrence of the accident 
or incident out of which such claim arises. 

. Article XXIV 

MINERAL RESOURCES 

All minerals (including oil), and antiquities and all rights relating 
thereto and to treasure trove, under, upon, or connected with the land and 
water comprised in the bases or otherwise used or occupied by the United 
States by virtue of this Agreement, are reserved to the Government and 
inhabitants of the Philippines; but no rights so reserved shall be transferred 
to third parties, or exercised with the bases, without the consent of the United 
States. The United States shall negotiate with the proper Philippine author- 
ities for the quarrying of rock and gravel necessary for construction work on 
the bases. -J 




ment, and the punishment of persons who may contravene such legislation 
It IS mutually agreed that appropriate authorities of the two Governments 
will also consult from time to time in order to insure that laws and 
regulations of the Philippines and of the United States in relation to such 
matters shall, so far as may be possible, be uniform in character. 

Article XVI 

POSTAL FACILITIES 

it is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right 
to establish and maintain United States post offices in the bases for 
the exclusive use of the United States armed forces, and civilian personnel 
who are nationals of the United States and employed in connection with the 
construction, maintenance, and operation of the bases, and the families of 
such persons, for domestic use between United States post offices in the bases 
and between such post offices and other United States post offices. The 
United States shall have the right to regulate and control within the bases 
all communications within, to and from such bases. 

Article XVII 
REMOVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS 

1. It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right to 
remove or dispose of any or all removable improvements, equipment or 
facilities located at or on any base and paid for with funds of the United 
States. No export tax shall be charged on any material or equipment so 
removed from the Philippines. 

2. AH buildings and structures which are erected by the United States 
in the bases shall be the property of the United States and may be removed 
by it before the expiration of this Agreement or the earlier relinquishment of 
the base on which the structures are situated. There shall be no obligation 
on the part of the Philippines or of the United States to rebuild or repair any 
destruction or damage inflicted from any cause whatsoever on any of the 
said buildings or structures owned or used by the United States in the bases. 
The United States is not obligated to turn over the bases to the Philippines 
at the expiration of this Agreement or the earlier relinquishment of any bases 
in the condition in which they were at the time of their occupation, nor is 
the Philippines obliged to make any compensation to the United States for 
the improvements made in the bases or for the buildings or structures left 
thereon, all of which shall become the property of the Philippines upon the 
termination of the Agreement or the earlier relinquishment by the United 
States of the bases where the structures have been built. 

329 




Signed in Manila. Philippines, in JupH 



this fourteench day of March, 



nineteen hundred and forty-seven. 



On behalf of the Government of the Repu 



of the Philippines : 



MANUEL ROXAS 
President of the Philippines 



On behalf of the Government of the United 
States of America : 



PAUL V. MCNUTT 
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary 
of the United States of America to the 
Republic of the Philippines. 





334 



Article XXI 



TEMPORARY INSTALLATIONS 

1. k is mutually agreed that the United States sh 11 

occupy temporary quarters and installations now exi.r , '° 

mentioned in Annex A and Annex B, for such reasonahl"'^- ^ 

two years, as may be necessary to develop adequate (-.J- '""'^'."^'^ exceeding 

for the United States armed forces. If circumstances r ^"" " 

trme, such a period will be fixed by mutual agreenlt\Trh>"" 

Governments; but such extension shall not apply to the ' ' "^^^ 

quarters and installations within the limits of the City of Marda^rnrshaU 

in no case exceed a period ot three years. 

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the Port 
of Manila reservation with boundaries as of 1941 will be available for use 
to the United States armed forces until such time as other arrangements can be 
made for supply of the bases by mutual agreement of the two Governments. 

3. The terms of this Agreement pertaining to bases shall be applicable 
to temporary quarters and installations referred to in paragraph 1 of this 
Article while they are so occupied by the armed forces of the United States- 
provided, that offenses committed within the temporary quarters and 
installations located within the present limits of the City of Manila shall 
not be considered as offenses within the bases but shall be governed by the 
provisions of Article XIII, paragraphs 2 and 4, except that the election not 
to exercise the jurisdiction reserved to the Philippines shall be made by the 
Secretary of Jusdce. It is agreed that the United States shall have full use 
and full control of all these quarters and installations while they are occupied 
by the armed forces of the United States, including the exercise of 
such measures as may be necessary to police said quarters for the security of 
the personnel and property therein. 

Article XXII 

CONDEMNATION OR EXPROPRIATION 

1 . Whenever it is necessary to acquire by condemnation or expropriation 
proceedings real property belonging to any private persons, associations or 
corporations located in bases named in Annex A and Annex B in order to 
carry out the purposes of this Agreement, the Philippines will institute and 
prosecute such condemnation or expropriation proceedings in accordance with 
the laws of the Philippines. The United States agrees to reimburse the 
Philippines for all the reasonable expenses, dannages and costs thereby 
incurred, including the value of the property as determined by the Court. 




AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERN M^^^^^ 

ASSISTANCE TO THE PHlLlFFinc^ 

the Agreement between the Repubhc ot ''^'' '-'^^1 ^ , . • f 

of America concerning miUtary bases, signed I^^^^^^^'^^^^.^^^;^^"^^^^ ™ 
the mutual interest of the two Governments m matters of comrnon detense, 
h Pr ident of the United States of America has authorized the rendering 
of mi itary assistance to the Republic of the Philippines towards establishing 
and maintaining national security and towards formmg a basis for partici- 
pation by that Government in such defensive military operations as the future 
may require, and to attain these ends the Governments of the Republic of the 
Philippines and the United States of America have agreed as follows: 

Title I 

PURPOSE AND DURATION 

Article 1.— Subject to mutual agreements, the Government of the 
United States of America will furnish military assistance to the Government 
of the Republic of the Philippines in the training and development of armed 
forces and in the performance of other services essential to the fulfillment of 
those obligations which may devolve upon the Republic of the Philippines 
under its international agreements including commitments assumed under 
the United Nations and to the maintenance of the peace and security of the 
Philippines, as provided in Title II, Article 6, hereof. 

Article 2. — ^This Agreement shall continue for a period of five years 
from July 4, 1946, unless previously terminated or extended as hereinafter 
provided. 

Article 3. — If the Government of the Republic of the Philippines 
should desire that this Agreement be extended beyond the stipulated period, 
it shall make a written proposal to that effect at least one year before the 
expiration of this Agreement. 

Article 4. — ^This Agreement may be terminated before the expiration 
of the period of five years prescribed in Article 2, or before the expiration of 




Article XXV 
GRANT OF BASES TO A THIRD POWER 

ot the United States, any bases or any rights, power, or authority whatsoever 
in or relating to bases, to any third power. wnatsoever, 

^" WZtv ^^'"""^ ^"^^^^ States shall not, without the 

consent of the Philippines, assign, or underlet, or part with th possession of 
the who^e or any part of any base, or of any right, power or authority granted 
by this Agreement, to any third power. 

Article XXVI 
DEFINITION OF BASES 
For the purposes of this Agreement, bases are those areas named 
m Annex A and Annex B and such additional areas as may be acquired for 
military purposes pursuant to the terms of this Agreement. 

Article XXVII 

VOLUNTARY ENLISTMENT OF PHILIPPINE CITIZENS 
It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right 
to recruit citizens of the Philippines for voluntary enlistment into the United 
States armed forces for a fixed term of years, and to train them and 
to exercise the same degree of control and discipline over them as is exercised 
in the case of other members of the United States armed forces. The number 
of such enlistments to be accepted by the armed forces of the United States 
may from time to time be limited by agreement between the two 
Governments. 

Article XXVIII 

UNITED STATES RESERVE ORGANIZATIONS 

It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right to enroll 
and train all eligible United States citizens residing in the Philippines in the 
Reserve organizations of the armed forces of the United States, which include 
the Officers Reserve Corps and the Enlisted Reserve Corps, except that prior 
consent of the Philippines shall be obtained in the case of such persons who 
are employed by the Philippines or any Municipal or Provincial Government 
thereof 

Article XXIX 
TERM OF AGREEMENT 
The present Agreement shall enter into force upon its acceptance by the 
two Governments and shall remain in force for a period of ninety-nine years 
subject to extension thereafter as agreed by the two Governments. 



Akticle 9.-Each member of the Military Advisory Group shall 
continue as a member of the branch of the armed forces of the United States 
to which he belongs and serve with that group in the rank, grade or rating 
he holds in the armed forces of the United States and shall wear the uniform 
thereof, as provided in current regulations. Officers and enlisted rnen so 
detailed are authorized to accept from the Government of the Republic of 
the Philippines offices and such pay and emoluments thereunto appertaining 
as may be offered by that Government and approved by the appropriate 
authorities of the United States, such compensation to be accepted by the 
United States Government for remittance to the individual if in the opinion 
of the appropriate authorities of the United States such course appears 
desirable. 

Article 10.— Members of the Military Advisory Group shall serve 
under the direction of the authorities of the United States of America. 

Article 11.— All members of the Group shall be on active duty and 
shall be paid regularly authorized pay and allowances by the Government of 
the United States of America, plus a special allowance to compensate for 
increased costs of living. This special allowance shall be based upon a scale 
agreed upon by the Governments of the Republic of the Philippines and the 
United States of America and shall be revised periodically. The Government 
of the Republic of the Philippines shall reimburse the Government of the 
United States of America for the special allowances provided for in this 
Article. The special allowance shall be applicable for the entire period 
each member of the group resides in the Philippines on duty with the Group, 
except as specified elsewhere in this Agreement. 

Article 12. — ^The Government of the Republic of the Philippines 
agrees to extend to the Military Advisory Group the same exemptions and 
privileges granted by Articles V, XII and XVIII of the Agreement Between 
the Republic of the Philippines and the United States of America Concerning 
Military Bases, signed March 14, 1947. 

Article 13. — ^Except as may be otherwise subsequently agreed by the 
two Governments, the expense of the cost of transportation of each member 
of the Military Advisory Group, his dependents, household effects, and 
belongings to and from the Philippines shall be borne by the Government of 
the United States of America to the extent authorized by law. Members of 
the Group shall be entitled to compensation for expenses incurred in travel 
in the Republic of the Philippines on official business of the Group and such 
expenses shall be reimbursed to the Government of the United States of 




ANNEX A 




Clark Field Air Base, Pampan 
Fore Stotsenberg, Pampanga. 



:rvacio„, POL Terminal and Training Area. Bataan, 
md Recreation Center, Baguio. 

System with the deletion of all stations in the Pore 




Tawi Tawi Naval Anchorage and small adjacent land areas. 
Canacao-Sangley Point Navy Base, Cavite Province. 
Bagobantay Transmitter Area, Quezon City, and associated radio 
control sites, Manila Area. 

Tarumpicao Point (Loran Master Transmitter Station ), Palawan. 
Talampulan Island, Coast Guard # 354 (Loran ), Palawan. 
Naule Point (Loran Station ), Zambales. 
Castillejos, Coast Guard # 356, Zambales. 



Maccan Island Army and Navy Air Base. 
Florida Blanca Air Base, Pampanga. 
Aircraft Service Warning Net. 
Camp Wallace, San Fernando, La Union. 

Puerto Princesa Army and Navy Air Base, including Navy Section Base and 
Air Warning Sites, Palawan. 

Tawi Tawi Naval Base, Sulu Archipelago. 
Aparri Na\-al Air Base. 



ANNEX B 



availed a„ange™e„cs CO be .ucua.jv agreed upo. ^^^'^J^ 
and supplies other than those surplus to the "^^f ' , , , , 
required in the furtherance of military assistance shal be [--'^^^^^^ 
United States subject to reimbursement by the Republic of the Philippines 
on terms to be mutually agreed upon. All items of arms munitions, equip- 
ment and supplies originating from sources other than those surplus to the 
needs of the United States shall be furnished only when the requisite funds 
have been specifically appropriated by the Congress of the United States. 

Article 19.-The Government of the Republic of the Philippines 
agrees that it will not relinquish physical possession or pass the title to any 
and all arms, munitions, equipment, supplies, naval vessels and aircraft 
furnished under this Agreement without the specific consent of the Govern- 
ment of the United States. 

Article 20.— Military equipment, supplies and naval vessels necessary 
in connection with the carrying out of the full program of military assistance 
to the Republic of the Philippines shall be provided from Philippines and 
United States sources in so far as practicable and the Government of the 
Republic of the Philippines shall procure arms, ammunition, military 
equipment and naval vessels from governments or agencies other than the 
United States of America only on the basis of mutual agreement between 
the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the Government of 
the United States of America. The Government of the Republic of the 
Philippines shall procure United States military equipment, supplies and 
naval vessels only as mutually agreed upon. 

Title V 

TRAINING ASSISTANCE 

Article 21. — As part of the program of military assistance' the 
Government of the Republic of the Philippines shall be permitted to send 
selected students to designated technical and service schools of the ground, 
naval and air services of the United States. Such students shall be subject 
to the same regulations as are United States students and may be returned 
to the Philippines, without substitution, for violation of such regulations. 
Numbers of students and detailed arrangements shall be mutually agreed 
upon and shall be kept at a minimum for essential requirements All Phil- 
ippine requests for military training of Filipino personnel shall be made 
to the Government of the United States through' the Military Advisory 



an extension authorized in Arrirlr ^ u„ • l 

monchs- wnccen notice to che ^t/cove™';::, t^""'""^"'' '° 

and supplies, cxpendab c to.s ex Ld H "'^^f^' =1"'P™™ 

a t-i- ' ^ Items excepted, that are furn shed under this 

Agr nunc o„ a non-re.mbursable basis shall tea,ai„ i„ the United sVaces of 



America. 

Title II 

GENERAL 



Article 6^-For the purposes of this Agreement the miUtary assistance 
authorized m Article 1 hereof is defined as the furnishing of arms, ammuni- 
tion, equipment and supplies; certain aircraft and naval vessels and 
instruction and training assistance by the Army and Navy of the United 
States and shall include the following : 

(d) Establishing in the Philippines of a United States Military Advisory 
Group composed of an Army group, a Navy group and an Air group to 
assist and advise the Republic of the Philippines on military and naval 
matters; 

(ib) Furnishing from United States sources equipment and technical 
supplies for training, operations and certain maintenance of Philippine armed 
forces of such strength and composition as mutually agreed upon; 

(c) Facilitating the procurement by the Government of the Republic 
of the Philippines of a military reserve of United States equipment 
and supplies, in such amounts as may be subsequently agreed upon; 

(J) Making available selected facilities of United States Army and 
Navy training establishments to provide training for key personnel of the 
Philippine armed forces, under the conditions hereinafter described. 

Title III 

MILITARY ADVISORY GROUP 

Article 7.— The Military Advisory Group shall consist of such number 
of United States military personnel as may be agreed upon by the Govern- 
ments of the Republic of the Philippines and the United States of America. 

Article S —The functions of the Military Advisory Group shall be to 
provide such advice and assistance to the Republic of the Philippines as has 
been authorized by the Congress of the United States of America and as is 
necessary to accomplish the purposes set forth in Article 1 of this Agreement. 




AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 
AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA REGARDING 
METEOROLOGICAL FACILITIES AND 
TRAINING PROGRAM 



Whereas, the Government of the United States of America has enacted 
Public Law 370-79th Congress, approved April 30. 1946, known as the 
Philippine Rehabilitation Act of 1946, whereof section 308, entitled 
"■Weather Information", provides: 

"(a) The Chief of the Weather Bureau of the Department of 
Commerce is authorized to establish meteorological facilities in the 
Philippines as may be required to provide weather information, warn- 
ings, and forecasts for general agricultural and commercial activities, 
including meteorological service for the air routes on which air- 
navigation facilities are operated by the Civil Aeronautics Administration, 
and to maintain such meteorological offices until the Philippine Weather 
Bureau is reestablished and in position to assume responsibility for the 



service. 



The Chief of the Weather Bureau of the Department of 
Commerce is authorized, under such regulations as he may adopt, to 
train not to exceed fifty Filipinos in the first year and not to exceed 
twenty-five Filipinos in each succeeding year prior to July 1, 1950, the 
trainees to be designated by the President of the Philippines subject to 
the provisions of section 311 (c), and the training to include mete- 
orological observations, analyses, forecasting, briefing of pilots, and 
such other meteorological duties as are deemed necessary in maintenance 
of general weather service, including weather information required for 
air navigation and the safe operation of air traffic. The training of 
these employees shall be in addition to and not in lieu of Weather Bureau 
employees to be trained under current Weather Bureau appropriations." 
and 

Whereas, the Government of the Republic of the Philippines is desirous 
of availing itself of the benefits, facilities and services which are authorized 
by the above-quoted section 308 of the said Public Law 370-79th Congress; 

Therefore the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the 
Government of the United States of America have decided to conclude an 
agreement for the foregoing purposes and have agreed mutually as follows- 




America by the Government of the RemiWiV r u ™ ., 
expenses of travel by the transportation fadlilfes of t Sot'"" 

provitTnd iVche 00"^- ^^^^ ^^^"^^^^ °f ^ «ippines shall 
Military Advisory Group and theTr fa^"? '^"r^-'u ^T^""^^ 
o^ce space for use in the^onduc^oft^^^^^^^^^ 

p^es^rdX^the'^tet^^^^^^ 

OfHcial supplies and equipment 0^^^!^^^^ 
the Group shall be umished by the Government of the United Ltes of 
America which shall be reimbursed for the cost thereof by the Government 
of the Republic of the Philipphaes Official supplies and equipment of other 
than American manufacture shall be provided without cost by the Gov- 
ernment of the Republic of the Philippines. The cost of all services required 
by the Group, including compensation of locally employed interpreters, 
clerks, laborers, and other personnel, except personal servants, shall be 
borne by the Government of the Republic of the Philippines. 

Article 15.— All communications between the Military Advisory 
Group and the Republic of the Philippines involving matters of policy shall 
be through the Ambassador of the United States of America to the Philip- 
pines or the Charge d'Aff'aires. 

Article 16 (d).— The provisions of Articles XIII and XXI of the 
Agreement of March 14, 1947 between the Republic of the Philippines and 
the United States of America Concerning Military Bases are applicable to 
the Military Advisory Group, it being agreed that the Headquarters of the 
Military Advisory Group will be considered a temporary installation under 
the provisions of Article XXI of the Agreement aforementioned. 

(b^ The Chief of the Military Advisory Group, and not to exceed 
six (6) other senior members of the group to be designated by him, will 
be accorded diplomatic immunity. 

Title IV 
LOGISTICAL ASSISTANCE 

Article 17.— The decision as to what supplies, services, facilities, 
equipment and naval vessels are necessary for military assistance shall be 
made by agreement between the appropriate authorities of the Republic of 
the Philippines and the United States. 

Article 18.— Certain initial equipment, supplies and maintenance items 
shall be furnished gratuitously by the United States in accordance with 



339 



The Chief shall assign co che Republic of che Phihppines for the purpose 
of carrying out the provisions of this Agreement a representative and assist- 
ants, including instructors and administrative personnel, the salaries and 
expenses of all such personnel to be paid directly by the United States Weather 
Bureau of the Department of Commerce. 

The Chief, or his duly authorized representative, shall analyze the plans 
submitted by the Government of the Republic of the Philippines within the 
terms of this Agreement involving the expenditure of funds by the Govern- 
ment of the United States of America and after consultation with the 
Director shall approve, disapprove, or modify such plans. The Chief, or 
his authorized representative, upon his approval of operational plans and 
program shall enter into contracts with the Government of the Republic of 
the Philippines when necessary for the carrying out of such program. 

Article 111 

The Chief shall provide for the training during the period of this 
Agreement of not to exceed fifty (50 ) citizens of the Republic of the Phil- 
ippines in the first year and not to exceed twenty- five (25) citizens of the 
Republic of the Philippines in each succeeding year. This training will 
include meteorological observations, analyses, forecasting, briefing of pilots, 
and such other duties as deemed necessary in the maintenance of a general 
weather service, including weather information required for air navigation 
and the safe operation of air traffic. The Chief shall provide for the payment 
of all expenses incidental to such training, including, but not necessarily 
limited to, transportation to and from and in the United States of America, 
allowances for tuition, educational fees and subsistence. 

Subject to the provisions of section 311 (c) of the said Public Law 
370-79th Congress, the trainees referred to in the preceding paragraph of 
this Article shall be designated by the President of the Philippines in accord- 
ance with procedures and standards established by the Chief. The 
Government of the Republic of the Philippines shall furnish to the United 
States Embassy at Manila the names and necessary supporting documents 
of the trainees so designated. • 

Article IV 

• The Government of the Republic "S'Ae Philippines agrees to provide 
free of cost to the Government of the United States of America such lands, 
rights-of-way and easements necessary for carrying out the terms of this 
Agreement. Furthermore the Government of the Republic of the Phil- 
ippines shall furnish such equipment, facilities, and qualified personnel. 




Article XI 

rJ^ZZ:SlZ%1^^^ P- of cKe Gove™. 

.pp.pr.«d funds W .he Gove^^Tof^rUn^eS-tf^r!^^^^^^^^ °' 

Article XII 

The Agreement shall become effective on the date of its signature and 
shall continue in effect until completely executed on both sides but L no 
event later than June 30, 1950; ProM, ho^..ver, That this Ag„ray 
be revised, amended, or changed in whole or in part with th? approval of 
both parties as indicated and effected by an exchange of notes between the 
two contracting parties; And provided fxcrthcr, That either Government may 
terminate this Agreement by giving to the other party ninety days' notice in 
writing through diplomatic channels. 

In witness whereof, the undersigned, duly authorized thereto, have 
signed the present Agreement in duplicate at Manila this 12th day of' Mav 
1947. ^' 

For the Government of the Republic of the Philippines: 

(Sgd.) MARIANO GARCHITORENA 
Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce 

For the Government of the United States of America: 

(Sgd.) NATHANIEL P. DAVIS 

Charge d' Affaires ad interim of the 
United States of America at Manila 




Title VI 



SECURITY 

of America wU be wuh the mutual understanding that the equipment and 
information will be safeguarded in accordance with the requireVnts of the 
mihtary security classification estabUshed thereon by the originating Govern- 
ment and that no redisclosure by the recipient Government of such equipment 
and information to third governments or unauthorized personnel will be 
made without specific approval of the originating Government. 

Article 23.— So long as this Agreement, or any extension thereof, is 
in effect the Government of the Republic of the Philippines shall not engage 
or accept the services of any personnel of any Government other than the 
United States of America for duties of any nature connected with the 
Philippine armed forces, except by mutual agreement between the Govern- 
ment of the Republic of the Philippines and the Government of the United 
States of America. 

Title VII 

In witness whereof, the Undersigned, duly authorized thereto, have 
signed this Agreement in duplicate, in the City of Manila, this twenty-first 
day of March, 1947. 

For the Government of the Republic of the Philippines: 



MANUEL ROXAS 
President of the Philippines 

For the Government of the United States of America : 



PAUL V. McNUTT 

Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary 
of the United States of America to the Republic 
of the Philippines 




Article VII 

The Government of the Republic of the Philippines will save harmless 
all officers and employees of the United States Weather Bureau of the 
Department of Commerce who are citizens of the United States of America 
from damage suits or other civil actions arising out of their performance of 
their official duties under this Agreement. 

Article VIII 

Officers, employees and agents of the Government of the United States 
of America who are citizens of the United States and who are on duty or 
who may be assigned to duty in the Republic of the Philippines under the 
provisions of the present Agreement, and their families, shall be permitted 
to move freely into and out of the Republic of the Philippines, subject to 
existing visa and passport regulations. Gratis transit shall be extended to 
all officers, employees, or agents of the United States Weather Bureau of the 
Department of Commerce over all bridges, ferries, roads and other facilities 
of the highways where tolls are collected for passage of vehicles or occupants. 

Article IX 

Pending the conclusion of negotiations now being considered by the 
Government of the United States of America and the Government of the 
Republic of the Philippines, no import, excise, consumption, or other tax, 
duty, or impost shall be levied on funds or property in the Republic of the 
Philippines which are owned by the United States Weather Bureau of the 
Department of Commerce and used for purposes under the present Agreement 
or on funds, materials, supplies, and equipment imported into the Republic of 
the Philippines for use in connection with such purposes; nor shall any such 
tax, duty, or impost be levied on the personal funds or property, not intended 
for resale, imported into the Republic of the Philippines for the use of or 
consumption of the United States Weather Bureau personnel who are United 
States citizens; nor shall any export or other tax be placed on any such funds 
or property, including United States Government property, in the event of 
its removal from the Republic of the Philippines. 

Article X 

Each Government reserves the right to remove any personnel paid by it 
and involved in carrying out the provisions of this Agreement with the un- 
derstanding that each Government shall maintain an adequate force to carry 
out the provisions and requirements of this Agreement so long as the 
Agreement is in effect. 



Article I 



United States Weath'er Bu'a. ol lt:D,tZZ ^ r 

referred to as the Chief. The Chief n.av Xr. ^7^"''; ^"^^"^^^^ 

resentative all or part of his autho L Z 1T '° ' u"^' "'^^^"^'^ "P' 
fl . TU J • r *or ettectuating the provisions of this 

Agreement. The duties, functions, and powers exercised in the Republ 
of the Philippines under the terms of this Agreement by the Chief, or h^s 
duly authorized representative, shall be under the general supervision of the 
United States Ambassador accredited to the Government of the Republic 
of the Philippines, or, in the absence of the Ambassador, of the Charge 
d Affaires ad interim of the United States of America. The Chief or his 
duly authorized representative, may negotiate and conclude working agree- 
ments and contracts necessary for carrying out the provisions of this 
Agreement. 

The responsible agent of the Government of the Republic of the 
Philippines for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement shall be the 
Director of the Weather Bureau of the Department of Agriculture and 
Commerce, hereinafter referred to as the Director. The Director may 
delegate to an officer or employee of the Weather Bureau of the Philippine 
Department of Agriculture and Commerce all or part of his authority for 
effectuating the provisions of the Agreement. The Director, or his duly 
authorized representative, shall be the representative of the Government of 
the Republic of the Philippines in the negotiation and conclusion of all work- 
ing agreements and contracts necessary for carrying out the provisions of 
this Agreement. 

The Chief and the Director shall cooperate in every way possible to 
carry out the spirit and purpose of this Agreement. 



Article II 

The Chief, or his authorized representative, shall, with the consent of 
and in cooperation with the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, 
establish, maintain, and operate such meteorological facilities in the Republic 
of the Philippines as may be required to provide weather information, 
warnings, and forecasts for general agricultural and commercial activities, 
including meteorological service for the air routes on which air-navigation 
facilities are operated, all such meteorological facilities to be operated insofar 
as possible in conformance with recognized 
meteorological observations and procedures. 



international standards for 




AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUI^^I^, THE PHI^^^^^^ 
AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA REGARDING 
AIR-NAVIGATION FACILITIES AND 
TRAINING PROGRAM 



Whfreas the Government of the United States of America has enacted 
Public Law 370 79th Congress, approved April 30, 1946, known as the 
Philippine Rehabilitation Act of 1946, whereof section 307, entitled "Inter- 
Island Air Navigation," provides: 

"(d) The Administrator of Civil Aeronautics of the Department 
of Commerce is authorized to acquire, establish, operate, and to 
maintain a system of air-navigation facilities and associated airways 
communications services in the Philippines for inter-island airways 
operation and to connect the Philippine airways with international and 
interoceanic routes. 

"(/)) The Administrator of Civil Aeronautics is authorized, under 
such regulations as he may adopt, to train not exceeding fifty Filipinos 
each year prior to July 1, 1950, to be designated by the President of the 
Philippines subject to the provisions of section 311 (c), in air-traffic 
control, aircraft communications, maintenance of air-navigation facili- 
ties, and such other airman functions as are deemed necessary for the 
maintenance and operation of aids to air navigation and other services 
essential to the orderly and safe operation of air traffic." and 

Whereas, the Government of the Republic of the Philippines is 
desirous of availing itself of the benefits, facilities and services which are 
authorized by the above-quoted section 307 of the said Public Law 370-79th 
Congress; 

Therefore, the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the 
Government of the United States of America have decided to conclude an 
agreement for the foregoing purposes and have agreed mutually as follows: 

Article I 

The responsible agent of the Government of the United States of 
America for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement shall be the 
Administrator of Civil Aeronautics of the Department of Commerce, 
hereniafter referred to as the Administrator. The Administrator may 
delegate to a duly authorized representative of the Civil Aeronautics Ad- 
munstration all or any part of his authority for effectuating the provisions 
of this Agreement. The duties, functions, and powers exercised in the 




including technicians, administrative personnel anH KurU ^rU ■ , 
pessary to carry ouc chc purposes If chis Ag ri"t : t.'X TuT 
„ Che Governnnenc of rhe Republic of rhe Phm pL^Vht Chief is 
„honzcd ro accept and utilize for the performance of rhe tern s o 
,h,s Agreement co,ur,but,o,,s of labor, materials, equipment, and money 

Article V 

The responsible agent of the Government of the Republic of the 
Philippines shall submit to the Chief, or his duly authorized representative 
plans for : 

(1 ) The establishment and maintenance of a suitable network of basic 

weather observing and reporting stations including a suitable 
number of stations at which upper air observations will be 
made; 

(2) The prompt collection of weather observations at one or more 

central forecasting offices and the development of weather 
analysis and forecasting procedures designed to furnish general 
weather service as well as meeting the economic requirements 
of domestic and international aviation and maritime commerce; 

(3) The establishment of international exchanges of weather informa- 

tion in accordance with recognized international standards; 

(4) The compilation and publication of weather records and reports 

including the results of meteorological investigations; 

(5) The training of technical and professional personnel required to 

maintain a modern weather service; 

(6) Fiscal requirements for the inauguration, maintenance, and oper- 

ation of the foregoing programs. 

Article VI 

The Government of the Republic of the Philippines will co5perate 
with the Chief, or his duly authorized representative, in providing such 
temporary or permanent office and other space and facilities as may 
be required and shall render all practicable assistance in securing adequate 
housing accommodations, at reasonable rental rates, for P"^°""^l 
United States Weather Bureau of the Department of Commerce engaged 
in effectuating this program, and their families. 



c '.^A <urh other airman functions 

maintenance of air-navigation facilities, and ^^^^ , ,, 

as he deems necessary for the maintenance and operation of aids to 
1 navig fon and other services essential to the orderly and safe operation 
of air traffic. The Administrator shall provide for the paym nt of 
all expenses incidental to such "^'^^g includmg h^^^^ 
CO, actual transportation expenses to and trom ana in luc 
America, allowances for tuition, educational fees, and subsistence. 

Subject to the provisions of section 311 (c) of the said Public Law 
370-79th Congress, the trainees referred to in the preceding paragraph of 
this Article shall be designated by the President of the Philippines in accord- 
ance with procedures and standards established by the Administrator. The 
Government of the Republic of the Philippines shall furnish to the United 
States Embassy at Manila the names and necessary supporting documents 
of the trainees so designated. 

Article IV 

The Government of the Republic of the Philippines agrees to provide 
free of cost to the Government of the United States of America such lands, 
rights-of-way, and easements necessary for carrying out the terms of this 
Agreement. The Administrator is authorized to accept and utilize for the 
performance of the terms of this Agreement contributions of labor, materials, 
equipment and money from the Government of the Republic of the Phil- 
ippines and its political subdivisions. 

Article V 

The Director of Aeronautics shall assist the representative of the 
Administrator in carrying out the objectives of this Agreement by providing: 

(1) Recommendations relative to locations for the establishment of 

air-navigation facilities and the type of facilities and services 
required for each location; 

(2) Advice as to the specific radio frequency assignments which may 

be used and as to materials and equipment owned by the Gov- 
ernment of the Republic of the Philippines which can be made 
available for use in carrying out this Agreement; and 

(3) Suggestions for the accomplishment of all phases of the Agree- 

ment, including suggestions for the accomplishment of the 
physical work involved and for the maintenance and operation 
of completed facilities. 

The Government of the Republic of the Philippines shall furnish such 
equipment, facilities, and qualified personnel, including technicians, admin- 



Article XI 

.pp„p.a.d funds bv the Oo...:!:: of 

Article XII 

The Agreement shall become effective on the date of its signature and 
shall contmue m effect until completely executed on both sides but n no 
event later than June 30, 1950; ProM, ho^^^.r, That this Ag„ray 
be revised, amended, or changed in whole or in part with th? approval of 
both parties as indicated and effected by an exchange of notes between the 
two contracting parties; And provided fxcrthcr, That either Government may 
terminate this Agreement by giving to the other party ninety days' notice in 
writing through diplomatic channels. 

In witness whereof, the undersigned, duly authorized thereto, have 
signed the present Agreement in duplicate at Manila this 12th day of Mav 
1947. ^' 

For the Government of the Republic of the Philippines : 

(Sgd.) MARIANO GARCHITORENA 

Secretary of A.gricidture and Commerce 

For the Government of the United States of America: 

(Sgd.) NATHANIEL P. DAVIS 
Charge d' Affaires ad interim of the 
United States of America at Manila 




..0 Che RepubUc of .he PHUpp.es ^-^^^ft,- ^^^^^^ 
Aeronautics Administra.on P-onne who are Un 

shall any export or other tax be placed .^moval 
eluding United States Government property, in the exenc 
from the Republic of the Philippines. 

Article X 

Each Government reserves the right to remove any personnel paid by 
it an? nvolved in carrying out the provisions of this Agreet^ent w,t c e 
understanding that each Government shall maintain an adequa e force to 
carry out the provisions and requirements of this Agreement so long as the 
Agreement is in effect. 

Article XI 

All commitments made in this Agreement on the part of the Govern- 
ment of the United States of America shall be subject to the availability of 
appropriated funds made by the Government of the United States of 
America. 

Article XII 

This Agreement shall become effective on the date of its signature, and 
shall continue in effect until completely executed on both sides but in no 
event later than June 30, 1950; Provided, hozvcver, That this Agreement may 
be revised, amended, or changed in whole or in part with the approval of 
both parties as indicated and effected by an exchange of notes between the 
two contracting parties; And provided further, That either Government may 
terminate this Agreement by giving to the other party ninety days' notice 
in writing through diplomatic channels. 

In witness whereof, the Undersigned, duly authorized thereto, have 
signed the present Agreement in duplicate at Manila this 12th day of May, 
1947. "I.V 

For the Government of the Republic of the Philippines: 

(Sgd.) RUPERTO K. KANGLEON 
Secretat-y of National Defense 

For the Government or the United States of America: 

(Sgd. ) NATHANIEL P. DAVIS 

Charge d' A ffaires ad interim of the 
United States of America at Manila 



Republic of the Philippines under the terms f U- 

Administrator or his duly authorized repre.pnr.r- . n, ^8"^^^"^^"^ by the 

supervision of the United States Ambassador . J ' ""^''^ §^"^^^1 

of the Republic of the Philippines ofin 1^ f ^? Government 

of the Charge d'Aftaires ad h Lim of e UniLdlL f^A 

Administrator, or his duly authorized representadve n 

^o.... agreements, necessary L c::--^ ^ 

The responsible agent of the Government of the Republic of the 
Phdippmes for effectuatmg the provisions of this Agreement shall be th 
Director o Aeronautics of the Bureau of Aeronautics of the Departm n 
of National Defense, hereinafter referred to as the Director of Aeronautics 
The Director of Aeronautics may delegate to an officer or employee of the 
Bureau of Aeronautics of the Department of National Defense all or part 
of his authority for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement The 
Director of Aeronautics, or his duly authorized representative, shall be the 
representative of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines in the 
negotiation and conclusion of all working agreements necessary for carrying 
out the provisions of this Agreement. 



in 



The Administrator and the Director of Aeronautics shall cooperate 
every way possible to carry out the spirit and purposes of this Agreement. 



Article II 

The Administrator shall acquire and establish, and shall maintain and 
operate during the period required for the training of citizens of the Republic 
of the Philippines for such operation, a system of air-navigation facilities 
and associated airway communications services in the Philippines for inter- 
island airu'ays operations and to connect the Philippine airways with 
international and interoceanic routes. 

The Administrator, or his duly authorized representative, shall analyze 
the plans submitted by the Government of the Republic of the Philippines 
within the terms of this Agreement involving the expenditure of funds by 
the Government of the United States of America and after consultation 
with the Director of Aeronautics shall approve, disapprove, or modify such 
plans. 

Article III 

The Administrator shall provide for the training during the period of 
this Agreement of not to exceed fifty citizens of the Republic of the Ph - 
ippines each year in the duties of air traffic control, aircraft communication, 




working agreements necessary for carrying out the provisions of this 
Agreement. 

The responsible agent of the Government of the Republic of the 
Philippines for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement shall be the 
Director of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey of the Department 
of National Defense, hereinafter referred to as the Philippine Director. The 
Philippine Director may delegate to an officer or employee of the Bureau of 
Coast and Geodetic Survey of the Department of National Defense all or 
any part of his authority for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement. 
The Philippine Director, or his authorized representative, shall be the 
representative of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines in the 
negotiation and conclusion of all working agreements necessary for carrying 
out the provisions of this Agreement. 

The United States Director and the Philippine Director shall cooperate 
in every way possible to carry out the spirit and purpose of this Agreement. 

Article II 

The United States Director shall assign one commissioned officer of the 
United States Coast and Geodetic Survey of the Department of Commerce 
who shall perform the duties of Director of Coast Surveys, Manila Field 
Station, United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. 

The Director of Coast Surveys, Manila Field Station, shall act as 
adviser on Coast and Geodetic Surveys to the President of the Republic of the 
Philippines and shall also direct the ofhce and field operations of all personnel 
paid with United States Government funds. Other Coast and Geodetic 
Survey commissioned officers and Civil Service personnel may, pursuant to 
the purposes of this Agreement, be assigned to duty in the Republic of the 
Philippines and shall serve under the Director of Coast Surveys, Manila Field 
Station. The organization of the Philippine Bureau of Coast and Geodetic 
Survey is to be determined entirely by the Republic of the Philippines. 

The United States Coast and Geodetic Survey of the Department of 
Commerce shall assume financial responsibilities for manning, repairing and 
operating one survey vessel, the "TULIP." 

The United States Coast and Geodetic Survey shall conduct surveying 
operations the Repub ic of the Philippines and instruct Philippine personnel 
in the Republic of the Philippines in United States Coast and Geodetic Survey 
techniques ot surveying, mapping and charting. 

Original hydrographic, topographic, triangulation and leveling records 
and accompanying surveys and reports made by the United States Coast and 




istrative personnel, and other personnel u 

available to the Government of the RepSirof tLThT' ^ "^^^^ 
the purpose and intent of this Agreement. Philippines to carry out 



Article VI 



The Government of the RemiMiV ni -i. 

..h Che Ad™.<s„«o. o. ^iXt^^:;^:i 

such temporary or permanent office and other sr^cT^Z r , ■ P'°'"*"8 
be required, and shall render all P«ct.abletSaTce t s^^i^^^? 
housmg accommodaaons at reasonable rental rates, for persomel of X 



and their families 

Article VII 

The Government of the Republic of the Philippines will save harmless 
all officers and employees of the Civil Aeronautics Administration of the 
Department of Commerce who are citizens of the United States from damage 
suits or other civil actions arising out of their performance of their duties 
under this Agreement. 

Article VIII 

Officers, employees, and agents of the Government of the United States 
of America who are citizens of the United States and who are on duty or 
who may be assigned to duty in the Republic of the Philippines under the 
provisions of the present Agreement, and their families, shall be permitted 
to move freely into and out of the Republic of the Philippines, subject to 
existing visa and passport regulations. Gratis transit shall be extended to 
all officers, employees or agents of the Civil Aeronautics Administration of 
the Department of Commerce over all bridges, ferries, roads and other 
facil ities of the highways where tolls are collected for passage of vehicles or 
occupants. 

Article IX 

Pending the conclusion of negotiations now being considered by the 
Government of the United States of America and the Government of the 
Republic of the Philippines, no import, excise, consumption, or other tax, 
duty or impost shall be levied on funds or property in the Republic of the 
Philippines which are owned by the Civil Aeronautics Administration and 
used for purposes under the present Agreement or on funds, materials, 
supplies, and equipment imported into the Republic of the Philippines for 
use in connection with such purposes; nor shall any such tax, duty, or impost 
be levied on the personal funds or property, not intended for resale, imported 



and inspections shall be required only at the first Philippine port of call on 
original entry. 

Vessels of the Government of the United States of America used in the 
Coast and Geodetic Survey program (including small boats), their equip- 
ment, tackle, and appurtenances shall be immune from seizure under 
Admiralty or other legal process. 

Vessels owned by the Government of the United States of America 
(including small boats) used in the Coast and Geodetic Survey program 
shall be exempt from all requirements of the Government of the Republic 
of the Philippines relating to inspection, registry, manning or licensing of 
vessels or marine personnel. 

Where suitable public wharves or facilities for moorage are available, 
such vessels shall be furnished wharfage or moorage without cost. 

Article V 

The Government of the Republic of the Philippines agrees to provide 
free of cost to the Government of the United States of America such lands, 
rights-of-way and easements as may be necessary for carrying out the terms 
of this Agreement. The United States Director is authorized to accept and 
utilize for the performance of the terms of this Agreement contributions of 
labor, materials, equipment and money from the Government of the Republic 
of the Philippines and its political subdivisions. 

Article VI 

The Go\'ernment of the Republic of the Philippines agrees to provide 
such equipment and facilities, including such satisfactory ships and small 
boats for survey work as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this 
Agreement and as may be available to the Government of the Republic of 
the Philippines. 

The Government of the Republic of the Philippines shall provide and 
pay qualified personnel (except officers and employees referred to in Articles 
n and III of this Agreement) necessary to conduct surveying, mapping and 
charting operations in the Republic of the Philippines, and shall defray all 
expenses necessary for the operation of the Philippine Bureau of the Coast 
and Geodetic Survey except as specifically provided for elsewhere in this 
Agreement. 

Article VII 

The Government of the Republic of the Philippines will cooperate with 
the United States Director, or his duly authorized representative, in providing 




356 



AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPI mi ir ^, 

AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMFp?Al"^ PHILIPPINES 
COAST AND GEODjTfc°m^:fY^'^VORf A^5S'^^ 
TRAINING PROGRAM ° 

Whereas, the Governmcnc of the United Starps nf A™ • l 
Public Law 370-79th Congress, approved Apr V iMs T " ""f 
PMippine Rehabilitation Act of fZ/e, whereo^f"L!l 3«,' c' Z Xot 

and Geodetic burveys provides : 'iX^/ ;v,M|:'.);.'iV,', 

'The Coast and Geodetic Survey of the Department of ComSill 
IS authorized to continue, until June 30, 1950, the survey work which 
was being conducted by it in the PhiUppines prior to December 7 1941 
The Director of the Coast and Geodetic Survey is authorized to train 
not exceeding twenty Filipinos each year prior to July 1, 1950, to be 
designated by the President of the Philippines subject to the provisions 
of section 311 (c), in order that they may become qualified to take 
over and continue such survey work on and after July 1, 1950, and to 
pay all expenses incident to their temporary employment and training." 
and 

Whereas, the Government of the Republic of the Philippines is desirous 
of availing itself of the benefits, facilities and services which are authorized 
by the above-quoted section 310 of the said Public Law 370-79th Congress; . 

Therefore, the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the 
Government of the United States of America have decided to conclude an 
agreement for the foregoing purposes and have mutually agreed as follows : 



Article I 



The responsible agent of the Government of the United States of 
America for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement shall be the director 
of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey of the Department of 
Commerce, hereinafter referred to as the United States Director. The United 
States Director may delegate to a duly authorized representative all or any 
part of his authority for effectuating the provisions of this Agreement. Ihe 
duties, functions and powers exercised in the Republic of the PhiUppines . 
under the terms of this Agreement by the United States Director or his duly 
authorized representative, shall be under the general supervision of the Urn ed 
States Ambassador accredited to the Government of f'^'P^^^^'^'L^^ 
Philippines or, in the absence of "^^^^^^^^^^^^ 
ad interim of the United States of America. ihe ^'^'^^ conclude any 
or his duly authorized representative, may negotiate and conclude any 





353 



Article XI 

Each Government reserves the right to remove any personnel paid by 
it and involved in carrying out the provisions of this Agreement with the 
understanding that each Government shall maintain an adequate force to 
carry out the provisions and requirements of this Agreement so long as the 
Agreement is in effect. 

Article XII 

All commitments made in this Agreement on the part of the Govern- 
ment of the United States of America shall be subject to the availability of 
appropriated funds by the Government of the United States of America. 

Article XIII 

This Agreement shall become effective on the date of its signature and 
shall continue in effect until completely executed on both sides, but in no 
event later than June 30, 1950; provided, however, that this Agreement may 
be revised, amended, or changed in whole or in part with the approval of 
both parties as indicated and effected by an exchange of notes between the 
two contracting parties; and provided further that either Government may 
terminate this Agreement by giving to the other party ninety days notice in 
writing through diplomatic channels. 

In witness whereof, the Undersigned, duly authorized thereto, have 
signed the present Agreement in duplicate at Manila this twelfth day of 
May, 1947. 

For the Government of the Republic of the Philippines: 

(Sgd.) RUPERTO K. KANGLEON 

Secretary of National Defense 

For the Government of the United States of America: 

(Sgd. ) NATHANIEL P. DAVIS 

Charge d' Affaires ad interim of the 
United States of America at Manila 




Geodetic Survey under the terms of this Ag 

of the Government of the Republic of the PhiKn"' P'^°P"ty 
Coast and Geodetic Survey will retain or United States 

lichographic copies of all trianguTad^n a . Tr ' '""^ P^^- 

magnetic, photogrammetric, leveling hydrogranl.,> J' '°P°Sraphic, tidal, 
copy of each descriptive report. '^>'^'^°g'^^Phic and other surveys and one 

The United States Coast and Gpnrlpnv -ti 
RepuBHc of .He P.Upp.. To. .K^pXtlJ:! T^nf Co^f 
Geodecc Survey unfl the latter ,s in position to assume responsibilL for 

the operation. ^ ^' ^'^^ 

Article 111 

The United States Director shall provide for the temporary employment 
and training during the period of this Agreement of not to exceed twenty 
(20) citizens of the Republic of the Philippines each year in surveying, 
mapping, charting and related activities. The United States Director shall 
provide for the payment of all expenses incidental to such temporary employ- 
ment and training, including, but not necessarily limited to, actual 
transportation expenses to and from and in the United States of America, 
allowances for tuition, educational fees and subsistence. 

Subject to the provisions of section 311 (c) of the said Public Law 
370-79th Congress, the trainees referred to in the preceding paragraph of 
this Article shall be designated by the President of the Philippines in 
accordance with procedures and standards established by the United States 
Director. The Government of the Republic of the Philippines shall furnish 
to the United States Embassy at Manila the names and necessary supporting 
documents of the trainees so designated. 

Article IV 

Vessels owned by the Government of the United States of America 
(including small boats) operated by the Coast and Geodetic Survey of the 
United States Department of Commerce as part of the program carried out 
pursuant to this Agreement shall be permitted to move freely in the territorial 
waters of the Republic of the Philippines, to enter and sail from the several 
ports with or without pilots and without the necessity of forrnal entrance or 
clearance that may ordinarily be required of commercial and other vessels 
and to establish or utilize such means of communications between such 
vessels and shore facilities as may be necessary to the effective ^^m— 
of the program contemplated by this Agreement. Quarantine procedures 




355 




Article V 



The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall be at liberty 
to enter or leave, to travel or reside in the territories of the Other upon the 
same terms as the nationals of any third country in accordance with the laws 
and regulations of the Other. 

Article VI 

The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall be accorded, 
in the territories of the Other, the liberty to establish schools for the education 
of their children, and shall enjoy freedom of peaceful assembly and associa- 
tion, of publication, of worship and religion, of burial and building 
cemeteries, upon the same terms as the nationals of any third country 
in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Other. 

The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall have the 
right to acquire, inherit, possess, lease, occupy and dispose of by sale, 
testament, donation or otherwise, any kind of movable or immovable 
property and to engage in trade and other peaceful and lawful pursuits 
throughout the whole extent of the territories of the Other upon the same 
terms as the nationals of any third country in accordance with the constitu- 
tion, laws and regulations of the Other. 

Article VII 

The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall be accorded, 
in the territories of the Other, the same treatment with respect to the 
protection and security of their persons and property as is accorded to the 
nationals of the Other. 

The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall receive in 
the territories of the Other in regard to all legal proceedings and in matters 
relating to the administration of justice and the levying of taxes treatment 
no less favorable than that accorded to the nationals of the Other. 

Article VIII 

The High Contracting Parties agree to conclude as soon as practicable 
a Treaty of Commerce and Navigation. 

Article IX 

The stipulations of this Treaty do not extend to advantages which are 
now accorded or which may hereafter be accorded by the Republic of the 
Philippines to the United States of America or its nationals 




such temporary or permanent office and other smc^ .n^ f ■^■ ■ 

required and shall render all practical assistance^n s ""^^ 

accommodations, at reasonable rental rarp<= ^^curing adequate housing 

States Coast and Geodetic Survey ^.ho are engasX'r' °' 

gram, and their families. ^^^'"^ effectuating this pro- 



Article VIII 

The Government of the Republic of the Ph.l;..^- -n 
.1 oncers and employees of tbe Lited St^l^ C^^^ 
Che Department of Cor..merce who are citizens of the United State 
of Amenca from damage suit or other civil actions arising out of 
their performance of their duties under this Agreement. 

Article IX 

Officers, employees and agents of the Government of the United States 
of America who are citizens of the United States and who are on duty 
or who may be assigned to duty in the Republic of the Philippines under the 
provisions of the present Agreement, and their families, shall be permitted 
to move freely into and out of the Republic of the Philippines, subject to 
existing visa and passport regulations. Gratis transit shall be extended to 
all officers, employees, or agents of the United States Coast and Geodetic 
Survey over all bridges, ferries, roads and other facilities of the highways 
where tolls are collected for passage of vehicles or occupants. 

Article X 

Pending the conclusion of negotiations now being considered by the 
United States of America and the Republic of the Philippines, no import, 
excise, consumption, or other tax, duty, or impost shall be levied on funds 
or property in the Republic of the Philippines which is owned by the United 
States Coast and Geodetic Survey of the Department of Commerce and used 
for purposes under the present Agreement or on funds, materials, supplies, 
and equipment imported into the Republic of the Philippines for use 
in connection with such purposes; nor shall any such tax, duty or impost be 
levied on personal funds or property, not intended for resale, imported into 
the Republic of the Philippines for the use or consumption of United States 
Coast and Geodetic Survey personnel who are United States citizens; and 
shall any export or other tax be placed on any such funds or property, includ- 
ing United States Government property, in the event of its removal from 
the Republic of the Philippines. 



TREATY OF FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC 
OF THE PHILIPPINES AND THE 
FRENCH REPUBLIC 



Article I —There shall be between the Republic of the Philippines 
and the French Republic constant peace and perpetual friendship. 

Article II.— Each of the High Contracting Parties shall accredit to 
the other, subject to its approval, diplomatic representatives who, during 
the period of their mission shall enjoy the rights, privileges and immunities 
generally recognized under international law and usage. 

Article III.— Each of the High Contracting Parties may appoint 
consuls general, consuls, vice consuls or consular agents, in place designated 
by mutual agreement, in the territory of the other. 

Such consuls general, consuls, vice consuls or consular agents, duly 
provided with exequatur, shall exercise their functions under conditions :o 
be determined by Consular Convention which shall be concluded by the 
Parties at the earliest possible date. 

Article IV.— The High Contracting Parties agree to conclude, as soon 
as practicable, a treaty of establishment, commerce and navigation. 

Article V. — Pending the conclusion of the Treaty provided for in 
Article IV above, and subject to the respective police and security laws and 
the other laws and regulations of each of the High Contracting Parties in- 
cluding the restrictions imposed by such laws and regulations on nationals 
of other countries, Philippine nationals, French nationals and nationals of the 
French Union shall enjoy, on condition of reciprocity, in the whole of the 
territory, of the French Republic and the French Union on the one hand, and 
on the other of the Republic of the Philippines, the right to acquire, possess 
and dispose of every kind of personal or real property as well as the liberty 
to reside, travel and engage in trade or industry. 

Article VI. — ^The High Contracting Parties undertake to recognize 
as compulsory, ipso facto and without a special convention, the jurisdiction 
of the International Court of Justice in accordance with Article XXXVl, 
paragraph 2, of the Statute of the Court, over any dispute subsequent to the 
ratification of this Treaty, which it shall not have been possible to adjust 
by negotiation, except those for which the Parties shall agree to resort to 
another form of pacific settlement. 

This undertaking shall not apply to disputes relating to matters con- 
sidered by the Republic of the Philippines and the French Republic as being 
essentially of their national competence. 

""^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^^ 

362 



treaty of Amity 



BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 
AND THE REPUBLIC OF CHINA 



Th Republic of the Phihppmes and the Republic of China, animated 
by the desire to strengthen and perpetuate the friendly relations so happily 
existing between them have resolved to conclude a Treaty of Amity and 
to that end have agreed upon the following articles : 



Article I 



There shall be perpetual peace and everlasting amity between the 
Republic of the Philippines and the Republic of China and their peoples. 

Article II 

Should any dispute arise between the two High Contracting Parties 
which cannot satisfactorily be adjusted by diplomacy, or through mediation 
or arbitration, the Parties shall not use force for settlement, but shall refer 
the dispute to the International Court of Justice for final adjudication. 

Article III 

Each of the High Contracting Parties shall have the right to send to, 
and receive from, the Other, diplomatic representatives. Such diplomatic 
representatives shall enjoy in the territories of the Other the rights, privileges 
exemptions and immunities accorded under generally recognized principles 
of international law and usage. 

Article IV 

Each of the High Contracting Parties shall have the right to send to 
and receive from, the Other, Consuls-General. Consuls, Vice-Consuls and 
Consular Agents, who, being duly provided with exequatur, shall be 
permitted to reside in the territories of the Other in such places as may be 
agreed upon by the High Contracting Parties. Such consular ^eP™-- 
shall exercise their functions and enjoy the privileges -"/i — ^ ; 
accorded to officers of their status and rank in accordance with the generally 
accepted principles of international law and usage. 




Constitution of the Philippines 



The Filipino people, imploring the 
aid of Divine Providence, in order to 
establish a government that shall 
embody their ideals, conserve and 
develop the patrimony of the nation, 
promote the general luelfare, and secure 
to themselves and their posterity the 
blessings of independence under a 
regime of justice, liberty, and democracy, 
do ordain and promulgate this 
Constitution. 

Article I 
THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 

Section 1. The Philippines comprises 
all the territory ceded to the United 
States by the Treaty of Paris concluded 
between the United States and Spain on 
the tenth day of December, eighteen 
hundred and ninety-eight, the limits of 
which are set forth in Article III of said 
treaty, together with all the islands 
embraced in the treaty concluded at 
Washington, between the United States 
and Spain on the seventh day of 
November, nineteen hundred, and in 
the treaty concluded between the United 
States and Great Britain on the second 
day of January, nineteen hundred and 
thirty, and all territory over which the 
present Government of the Philippine 
Islands exercises jurisdiction. 

Article II 
DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 

Section 1. The Philippines is a 
republican state. Sovereignty resides 
in the people and all government 
authority emanates from them. 



Sec. 2. The defense of the State is a 
prime duty of government, and in the 
fulfillment of this duty all citizens may 
be required by law to render personal 
military or civil service. 

Sec. 3. The Philippines renounces 
war as an instrument of national policy, 
and adopts the generally accepted prin- 
ciples of international law as part of 
the law of the Nation. 

Sec 4. The natural right and duty of 
parents in the rearing of the youth for 
civic efficiency should receive the aid 
and support of the government. 

Sec 5. The promotion of social 
justice to insure the well-being and 
economic security of all the people 
should be the concern of the State. 

Article III 
BILL OF RIGHTS 

Section i. (i) No person shall be ■ 
deprived of life, liberty, or property 
without due process of law, nor shall 
any person be denied the equal 
protection of the laws. 

(2) Private property shall not be 
taken for public use without just 
compensation. 

(3) The right of the people to be 
secure in their persons, houses, papers, 
and effects against unreasonable searches 
and seizures shall not be violated, and 
no warrants shall issue but upon 
probable cause, to be determined by the 
judge after examination under oath or 
affirmation of the complainant and the 



Article X 

The High Contracting Parties shall ratify this rr^.r ■ 
their respective constitutional procedures an/ ■ i n conformity with 

day on which the exchange of ratifications takes nk '"%^"'° 
ratification shall be exchanged in the City of Manit PhUi^,;:"""""" °' 



In faith whereof, the Plenipoten- 
mnes of the High Contracting Parties 
have signed this present Treaty and 
have hereunto affixed their seals. 

Done in duplicate in the English 
and Chinese languages, both texts 
being authoritative, in the City of 
Manila, Republic of the Philippines, 
this 18th day of April in the year one 
thousand nine hundred and forty-seven, 
Anno Domini, and of the Independence 
of the Philippines the first, correspond- 
ing to the 18th day of the fourth month 
of the thirty-sixth year of the Republic 
of China. 



For the Republic of the Philippines: 

(Sgd. ) MANUEL ROXAS 

For the Republic of Chine: 

(Sgd. ) CHEN CHIH-PING 



offense. If an act is punished by a law 
and an ordinance, conviction or 
acquittal under either shall constitute 
a bar to another prosecution for the 
same act. 

(21) Free access to the courts shall 
not be denied to any person by reason 
of poverty. 

Article IV 
CITIZENSHIP 

Section 1. The following are citizens 
of the Philippines : 

(1) Those who are citizens of the 
Philippine Islands at the time of the 
adoption of this Constitution. 

(2) Those born in the Philippine 
Islands of foreign parents who, before 
the adoption of this Constitution, had 
been elected to public office in the 
Philippine Islands. 

(3 ) Those whose fathers are citizens 
of the Philippines. 

(4) Those whose mothers arc 
citizens of the Philippines and, upon 
reaching the age of majority, elect 
Philippine citizenship. 

(5) Those who are naturalized in 
accordance with law. 

Sec. 2. Philippine citizenship may be 
lost or reacquired in the manner 
provided by law. 

Article V 
SUFFRAGE 
Section 1 . Suffrage may be exercised 
by male citizens of the Philippines not 
otherwise disqualified by law, who 
are twenty-one years of age or over 
and are able to read and write, and who 
shall have resided in the Philippines for 
one year and in the municipality wherein 



they propose to vote for at least six 
months preceding the election. The 
National Assembly shall extend the 
right of suffrage to women, if in a 
plebiscite which shall be held for that 
purpose within two years after the 
adoption of this Constitution, not less 
than three hundred thousand women 
possessing the necessary qualifications 
shall vote affirmatively on the question. 
Article VI 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
Section 1. The Legislative power 
shall be vested in a Congress of the 
Philippines, which shall consist of a 
Senate and a House of Representatives. 

Sec. 2. The Senate shall be composed 
of twenty-four Senators who shall be 
chosen at large by the qualified electors 
of the Philippines, as may be provided 
by law. 

Sec. 3. The term of office of Senators 
shall be six years and shall begin on 
the thirtieth day of December next 
following their election. The first 
Senators elected under this Constitution 
shall, in the manner provided by law, 
be divided equally into three groups, 
the Senators of the first group to serve 
for a term of six years; those of the 
second group, for four years; and those 
of the third group, for two years. 

Sec. 4. No person shall be a Senator 
unless he be a natural-born citizen of 
the Philippines and, at the time of his 
election, is at least thirty- five years of 
age, a qualified elector, and a resident 
of the Philippines for not less than two 
years immediately prior to his election. 

Sec. 5. The House of Representatives 
shall be composed of not more than 





Article VII.-The High Contracting Parties sh.ll r . 
Treaty according to the procedure of their resnr> • ^^^^ ^ P'^^^'^"'^ 

enter into force on the date of the exchange of r] constitutions; it shall 

which shall take place at Manila. instruments of ratification, 

Signed in Quai D'Orsay, France, in dunhV^ro ^l • 
June, nineteen hundred forty-seven. ^ twenty-sixth day of 

On behalf of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines: 

ELPIDIO QUIRING 

Secretary of Foreign Affairs 

On behalf of the Government of the French Republic: 

GEORGES BIDAULT 
Foreign Minister 





(5) Neither House during the 
sessions of the Congress shall, without 
the consent of the other, adjourn for 
more than three days, 'nor to any other 
place than that in which the two 
Houses shall be sitting. 

Sec. 11. The Senate and the House of 
Representatives shall each have an 
Electoral Tribunal which shall be the 
sole judge of all contests relating to 
the election, returns, and qualifications 
of their respective Members. Each 
Electoral Tribunal shall be composed 
of nine Members, three of whom shall 
be Justices of the Supreme Court to be 
designated by the Chief Justice, and the 
remaining six shall be Members of the 
Senate or of the House of Representa- 
tives, as the case may be, who shall be 
chosen by each House, three upon 
nomination of the party having the 
largest number of votes and three of 
the party hax'ing the second largest 
number of votes therein. The senior 
Justice in each Electoral Tribunal shall 
be its Chairman. 

Sec. 12. There shall be a Commission 
on Appointments consisting of twelve 
Senators and twelve Members of the 
House of Representatives, elected by 
each House, respectively, on the basis 
of proportional representation of the 
political parties therein. The President 
of the Senate shall be the Chairman 
ex officio of the Commission, but shall 
not vote, except in case of tic. 

Sec. 13. The Electoral Tribunals 
and the Commission on Appointments 
shall be constituted within thirty days 
after the Senate and the House of 




Representatives shall have been 
organized with the election of their 
President and Speaker, respectively. 
The Commission on Appointments 
shall meet only while the Congress is 
in session, at the call of its Chairman 
or a majority of its Members, to 
discharge such powers and functions as 
are herein conferred upon it. 

Sec. 14. The Senators and the 
Members of the House of Representa- 
tives shall, unless otherwise provided 
by law, receive an annual compensation 
of seven thousand two hundred pesos 
each, including per diems and other 
emoluments or allowances, and ex- 
clusive only of traveling expenses to 
and from their respective districts in 
the case of Members of the House of 
Representatives, and to and from their 
places of residence in the case of 
Senators, when attending sessions of the 
Congress. No increase in said com- 
pensation shall take effect until after 
the expiration of the full term of all 
the Members of the Senate and of the 
House of Representatives appro\'ing 
such increase. Until otherwise pro- 
\aded by law, the President of the 
Senate and the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives shall each receive an 
annual compensation of sixteen 
thousand pesos. 

Sec. 15. The Senators and Members 
of the House of Representatives shall 
in all cases except treason, felony, and 
breach of the peace, be privileged from 
arrest during their attendance at the 
sessions of the Congress, and in going 
to and returning from the same; and 
for any speech or debate therein, they 




368 



witnesses he may produce, and 
particularly describing the place to be 
searched, and the persons or things to 
be seized. 

(4) The liberty of abode and of 
changing the same whithin the limits 
prescribed by law shall not be impaired. 

(5) The privacy of communication 
and correspondence shall be inviolable 
except upon lawful order of the court 
or when public safety and order require 
otherwise. 

(6) The right to form associations 
or societies for purposes not contrary to 
law shall not be abridged. 

(7) No law shall be made respecting 
an establishment of religion, or 
prohibiting the free exercise thereof, 
and the free exercise and enjoyment of 
religious profession and worship, 
without discrimination or preference, 
shall forever be allowed. No religious 
test shall be required for the exercise of 
civil or political rights. 

(8) No law shall be passed 
abridging the freedom of speech, or of 
the press, or the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble and petition the 
Government for redress of grievances. 

(9) No law granting a title of 
nobility shall be enacted, and no person 
holding any office of profit or trust 
shall, without the consent of the 
Congress of the Philippines, accept any 
present, emolument, office, or title of 

kind whatever from any foreign 

state. 

(10) No law impairing the 
oWigation of contracts shall be passed. 

(11) No ex post facto law or bill 
attainder shall be enacted. 



for debr '^'^^ imprisoned 

tor debt or nonpayment of a poll tax. 

anv f Involuntary servitude in 

any form shall exist except as a 

pumshment forcrime whereof the party 
shall have been duly convicted. 

(14) The privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus shall not be suspended 
except in cases of invasion, insurrection 
or rebellion, when the public safety re- 
quires It. in any of which events the same 
may be suspended wherever during such 
period the necessity for such suspension 
shall exist. 

(15) No person shall be held to 
answer for a criminal offense without 
due process of law. 

(16) All persons shall before 
conviction be bailable by sufficient 
sureties, except those charged with 
capital offenses when evidence of guilt 
is strong. Excessive bail shall not be 
required. 

(17) In all criminal prosecutions 
the accused shall be presumed to be 
innocent until the contrary is proved, 
and shall enjoy the right to be heard by 
himself and counsel, to be informed of 
the nature and cause of the accusation 
against him, to have a speedy and 
public trial, to meet the witnesses face 
to face, and to have compulsory process 
to secure the attendance of witnesses in 
his behalf. 

(18) No person shall be compelled 
to be a witness against himself. 

(19) Excessive fines shall not be 
imposed, nor cruel and unusual 
punishment inflicted. 

(20 ) No person shall be twice put 
in jeopardy of punishment for the same 




365 




two-thirds of all the Members of that 
House, it shall become a law. In all 
such cases, the votes of each House 
shall be determined by yeas and nays, 
and the names of the Members voting 
for and against shall be entered on its 
Journal. If any bill shall not be 
returned by the President as herein 
provided within twenty days (Sundays 
excepted) after it shall have been 
presented to him, the same shall become 
a law in like manner as if he had signed 
it, unless the Congress by adjournment 
prevent its return, in which case it shall 
become a law unless vetoed by the 
President within thirty days after 
adjournment. 

(2) The President shall have the 
power to veto any particular item or 
items of an appropriation bill, but the 
veto shall not affect the item or items to 
which he does not object. When a pro- 
vision of an appropriation bill affects one 
or more items of the same, the President 
cannot veto the provision without at 
the same time vetoing the particular 
item or items to which it relates. The 
item or items objected to shall not 
take effect except in the manner hereto- 
fore provided as to bills returned to the 
Congress without the approval of the 
President. If the veto refers to a bill or 
any item of an appropriation bill which 
appropriates a sum in excess of ten per 
centum of the total amount voted in 
the appropriation bill for the general 
expenses of the Government for the 
preceding year, or if it should refer to 
a bill authorizing an increase of the 
public debt, the same shall not become 
a law unless approved by three-fourths 
of all the Members of each House. 




(3) The President shall have the 
power to veto any separate item or 
items in a revenue or tariff bill, and the 
item or items vetoed shall not take 
effect except in the manner provided 
as to bills vetoed by the President. 

Sec. 21. (1) No bill which may be 
enacted into law shall embrace more 
than one subject which shall be 
expressed in the title of the bill. 

(2 ) No bill shall be passed by either 
House unless it shall have been printed 
and copies thereof in its final form 
furnished its Members at least three 
calendar days prior to its passage, 
except when the President shall have 
certified to the necessity of its 
immediate enactment. Upon the last 
reading of a bill no amendment thereof 
shall be allowed, and the question 
upon its passage shall be taken imme- 
diately thereafter, and the yeas and nays 
entered on the Journal. 

Sec. 22. (I) The rule of taxation 
shall be uniform. 

(2) The Congress may by law 
authorize the President, subject to such 
limitations and restrictions as it may 
impose, to fix, within specified limits, 
tariff rates, import or export quotas, 
and tonnage and wharfage dues. 

(3) Cemeteries, churches, and par- 
sonages or convents appurtenant 
thereto, and all lands, buildings, and 
improvements used exclusively for 
religious, charitable, or educational 
purposes shall be exempt from taxation. 

Sec. 23. (1) All money collected 
on any tax levied for a special purpose 
shall he treated as a special fund and 
paid out for such purpose only. If the 




one hundred and twenty Members who 
shall be apportioned among the several 
provinces as nearly as may be according 
to the number of their respective 
inhabitants, but each province shall 
have at least one Member. The 
Congress shall by law make an appor- 
tionment within three years after the 
return of every enumeration, and not 
otherwise. Until such apportionment 
shall have been made, the House of 
Representatives shall have the same 
number of Members as that fixed by 
law for the National Assembly, who 
shall be elected by the qualified electors 
from the present Assembly districts. 
Each representative district shall 
comprise, as far as practicable, 
contiguous and compact territory. 

Sec 6. The term of office of the 
Members of the House of Representa- 
tives shall be four years and shall begin 
on the thirtieth day of December next 
following their election. 

Sec 7. No person shall be a Member 
of the House of Representatives unless 
he be a natural-born citizen of the 
Philippines and, at the time of his 
election, is at least twenty- five years 
of age, a qualified elector, and a resident 
of the province in which he is chosen 
for not less than one year immediately 
prior to his election. 

Sec 8. (1 ) Elections for Senators and 
Members of the House of Representa- 
tives shall be held in the manner and 
on the dates fixed by law. 

(2) In case of vacancy in the Senate 
in the House of Representatives, 
* special election may be called to fill 
^"ch vacancy in the manner prescribed 



Hout tf - °f 

elected ZTl ^^f'^^entatives thus 

Ueaed shall serve only for the unexpired 

Sec. 9. The Congress shall convene 

the fourth Monday of January, unless 
a different date is fixed by law It 
may be called in special session at any 
time by the President to consider 
general legislation or only such subjects 
as he may designate. No special 
session shall continue longer than thirty 
days and no regular session longer than 
one hundred days, exclusive of Sundays. 

Sec. 10. (1 ) The Senate shall elect 
its President and the House of Repre- 
sentatives, its Speaker. 

Each House shall choose such other 
officers as may be required. 

(2) A majority of each House shall 
constitute a quorum to do business, but 
a smaller number may adjourn from 
day to day and may compel the 
attendance of absent Members in such 
manner and under such penalties as 
such House may provide. 

(3 ) Each House may determine the 
rules of its proceedings, punish its 
Members for disorderly behavior, and, 
with the concurrence of two-thirds of 
all its Members, expel a Member. 

(4 ) Each House shall keep a Journal 
of its proceedings, and from time to 
time publish the same, excepting such 
parts as may in its judgment require 
secrecy; and the yeas and nays on any 
question shall, at the request of one-fifth 
of the Members present, be entered in 

the Journal. 



The terms of the President and 
Vice-President shall end at noon on 
the thirtieth day of December following 
the expiration of four years after their 
election, and the terms of their 
successors shall begin from such time. 

Sec. 5. No person shall serve as 
President for more than eight consecu- 
tive years. The period of such service 
shall be counted from the date he shall 
have commenced to act as President. 
Voluntary renunciation of the office 
for any length of time shall not be 
considered as an interruption in the 
continuity of the service of the 
incumbent for the full term for which 
he was elected. 

Sec. 6. If, at the time fixed for the 
beginning of the term of the President, 
the President-elect shall have died, the 
Vice-President-elect shall become Pres- 
ident. If a President shall not have 
been chosen before the time fixed for 
the beginning of his term, or if the 
President-elect shall have failed to 
qualify, then the Vice-President shall 
act as President until a President shall 
have qualified, and the Congress may 
by law provide for the case wherein 
neither a President-elect nor a Vice- 
President-elect shall have qualified, 
declaring who shall then act as 
President, or the manner in which one 
who is to act shall be selected, and such 
person shall act accordingly until a 
President or Vice-President shall have 
qualified. 

Sec. 7. Before he enter on the 
execution of his office, the President 
shall take the following oath or 
affirmation : 



" 1 do solemnly swear (or affirm^ 
that I will faithfully and conscientiously 
fulfill my duties as President of the 
Philippines, preserve and defend its 
Constitution, execute its laws, do justice 
to every man, and consecrate myself to 
the service of the Nation. So help 
ME God." 

(In case of affirmation, last sentence 
will be omitted. ) 

Sec. 8. In the event of the removal 
of the President from office, or of his 
death, resignation, or inability to 
discharge the powers and duties of the 
said office, the same shall devolve on 
the Vice-President, and the Congress 
shall by law provide for the case of 
removal, death, resignation, or ina- 
bility, both of the President and 
Vice-President, declaring what officer 
shall then act as President, and such 
officer shall act accordingly until the 
disability be removed, or a President 
shall be elected. 

Sec. 9. The President shall have an 
official residence and receive a compen- 
sation to be ascertained by law which 
shall be neither increased nor diminished 
during the period for which he shall 
have been elected, and he shall not 
receive within that period any other 
emolument from the Government or 
any of its subdivisions or instrumen- 
talities. Until the Congress shall 
provide otherwise, the President shall 
receive an annual salary of thirty 
thousand pesos. The Vice-President, 
when not acting as President, shall 
receive an annual compensation of 
fifteen thousand pesos until otherwise 
provided by law. 





er 



shall not be questioned in any oth 
place. 

Sec. 16. No Senator or Member of 
the House of Representatives may hold 
any other office or employment in the 
Government without forfeiting his seat, 
nor shall any Senator or Member of the 
House of Representatives, during the 
time for which he was elected, be ap- 
pointed to any civil office which may 
have been created or the emoluments 
whereof shall have been increased while 
he was a Member of the Congress. 

Sec 17. No Senator or Member 
of the House of Representatives shall 
directly or indirectly be financially 
interested in any contract with the 
Government or any subdivision or 
instrumentality thereof, or in any 
franchise or special privilege granted 
by the Congress during his term of 
office. He shall not appear as counsel 
before the Electoral Tribunals or before 
any court in any civil case wherein the 
Government or any subdivision or 
instrumentality thereof is the adverse 
party, or in any criminal case wherein 
an officer or employee of the Govern- 
ment is accused of an offense committed 
in relation to his office, or collect any 
fee for his appearance in any adminis- 
trative proceedings, or accept employ- 
ment to intervene in any cause or 
matter where he may be called upon 
to act on account of his office. No 
Member of the Commission on 
Appointments shall appear as counsel 
before any court inferior to a collegiate 
court of appellate jurisdiction. 

Sec. 18. All appropriation, revenue 
or tariff bills, bills authorizing increase 



f ^he public debt, bill's of local 
application, and private bills, ha 
ongmate exclusively the House o 
Representatives, but the Senate may 
propose or concur with amendments 

Sec. 19. (1) The President shall 
submit within fifteen days of the 
opening of each regular session of the 
Congress a budget of receipts and 
expenditures, which shall be the basis 
of the general appropriation bill. The 
Congress may not increase the appro- 
priations recommended by the President 
for the operation of the Government as 
specified in the Budget, except the appro- 
priations for the Congress and the Judicial 
Department. The form of the Budget 
and the information that it should 
contain shall be prescribed by law. 

(2) No provision or enactment 
shall be embraced in the general 
appropriation bill unless it relates 
specifically to some particular appro- 
priation therein; and any such provision 
or enactment shall be limited in its 
operation to such appropriation. 

Sec. 20. (1 ) Every bill passed by 
the Congress shall, before it becomes 
a law, be presented to the President. 
If he approves the same, he shall sign 
it; but if not, he shall return it with 
his objections to the House where 
it originated, which shall enter the 
objections at large on its Journal and 
proceed to reconsider it. If, after 
such reconsideration, two-thirds of all 
the Members of such House shall 
agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, 
together with the objections, to the 
other House by which it shall likewise 
be reconsidered, and if approved by 



in any way may be affected by the 
functions of their office, nor shall they, 
directly or indirectly, be financially 
interested in any contract with the 
Government, or any subdivision or 
instrumentality thereof. 

(3) The President may appoint the 
Vice-President as a member of his 
cabinet and also as head of an executive 
department. 

Article VIII 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Section 1. The Judicial power shall 
be vested in one Supreme Court and in 
such inferior courts as may be estab- 
lished by law. 

Sec 2. The Congress shall have the 
povv'er to define, prescribe, and 
apportion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts, but may not deprive the Supreme 
Court of its original jurisdiction over 
cases aftecting ambassadors, other public 
ministers, and consuls, nor of its 
jurisdiction to review, revise, reverse, 
modify, or affirm on appeal, certiorari, 
or writ of error, as the law or the rules of 
court may provide, final judgments and 
decrees of inferior courts in — 

(i ) All cases in which the constitu- 
tionality or validity of any treaty, law, 
ordinance, or executive order or regula- 
tions is in question. 

(2) All cases involving the legality 
of any tax, impost, assessment, or toll, 
or any penalty imposed in relation 
thereto. 

(3) All cases in vv'hich the juris- 
diction of any trial court is in issue. 

(4) All criminal cases in which the 
penalty imposed is death or life 
imprisonment. 




(5) All cases in which an error or 
question of law is involved. 

Sec. 3. Until the Congress shall 
provide otherwise, the Supreme Court 
shall have such original and appellate 
jurisdiction as may be possessed and 
exercised by the Supreme Court of the 
Philippine Islands at the time of the 
adoption of this Constitution. The 
original jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court shall include all cases affecting 
ambassadors, other public ministers, 
and consuls. 

Sec. 4. The Supreme Court shall be 
composed of a Chief Justice and ten 
Associate Justices and may sit either 
in banc or in two divisions unless 
otherwise provided by law. 

Sec. 5. The members of the Supreme 
Court and all judges of inferior courts 
shall be appointed by the President with 
the consent of the Commission on 
Appointments. 

Sec. 6. No person may be appointed 
member of the Supreme Court unless 
he has been five years a citizen of the 
Philippines, is at least forty years of 
age, and has for ten years or more been 
a judge of a court of record or engaged 
in the practice of law in the Philippines. 

Sec. 7. No judge appointed for a 
particular district shall be designated 
or transferred to another district without 
the approval of the Supreme Court. 
The Congress shall by law determine 
the residence of judges of inferior courts. 

Sec. 8. The Congress shall prescribe 
the qualifications of judges of inferior 
courts, but no person may be appointed 
judge of any such courts unless he is a 




purpose for which a special fund was 
created has been fulfilled or abandoned, 
the balance, if any, shall be transferred 
to the general funds of the Government 

(2) No money shall be paid out of 
the Treasury except in pursuance of an 
appropriation made by law. 

(3) No public money or property 
shall ever be appropriated, applied, or 
used, directly or indirectly, for the use, 
benefit, or support of any sect, church, 
denomination, sectarian institution, or 
system of religion, or for the use, 
benefit, or support of any priest, 
preacher, minister, or other religious 
teacher or dignitary as such, except 
when such priest, preacher, minister, 
or dignitary is assigned to the armed 
forces or to any penal institution, 
orphanage, or leprosarium. 

Sec 24. The heads of departments 
upon their own initiative or upon the 
request of either House may appear 
before and be heard by such House on 
any matter pertaining to their depart- 
ments, unless the public interest shall 
require otherwise and the President 
shall so state in writing. 

Sec 25. The Congress shall, with 
the concurrence of two-thirds of all 
the Members of each House, have the 
sole power to declare war. 

Sec 26. In times of war or other 
national emergency, the Congress may 
hy law authorize the President, for a 
''"^ited period and subject to such 
restrictions as it may prescribe, to 
Ptomulgate rules and regulations to 
^5i"ry out a declared national policy. 



Article VII 
EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 

Spp- ^" ^ P-^^- of the 

Sec. 2. The President shall hold his 
ofhcc duruig a term of four years and 

together with the Vice-President ch'en 
tor the same term, shall be elected by 

direct vote of the people. The returni 
of every election for President and 
Vice-President, duly certified by the 
board of canvassers of each province or 
city shall be transmitted to the seat 
ot the National Government, directed 
to the President of the Senate, who 
shall, in the presence of the Senate and 
the House of Representatives, open all 
the certificates, and the votes shall then 
be counted. The persons respectively 
having the highest number of votes 
for President and Vice-President shall 
be declared elected; but in case two or 
more shall have an equal and the 
highest number of votes for either 
office, one of them shall be chosen 
President or Vice-President, as the case 
may be, by a majority vote of the Mem- 
bers of the Congress in joint session 
assembled. 

Sec. 3. No person may be elected 
to the office of President or Vice- 
President unless he be a natural-born 
citizen of the Philippines, a qualified 
voter, forty years of age or over, and 
has been a resident of the Philippines 
for at least ten years immediately 
preceding the election. 

Sf-C. 4. Elections for President and 
Vice-President shall be held once every 
four years on a date to be fixed by law. 




371 




chan to removal from office and 
disqualification to hold and enjoy any 
office of honor, trust, or profit under 
the Government of the Philippines, 
but the party convicted shall neverthe- 
less be liable and subject to prosecution, 
trial, and punishment, according to law. 

Article X 
COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS 
Section 1. There shall be an inde- 
pendent Commission on Elections 
composed of a Chairman and two other 
Members to be appointed by the 
President with the consent of the 
Commission on Appointments, who 
shall hold office for a term of nine 
years and may not be reappointed. 
Of the Members of the Commission 
first appointed, one shall hold office 
for nine years, another for six years, 
and the third for three years. The 
Chairman and the other Members of 
the Commission on Elections may be 
removed from office only by impeach- 
ment in the manner provided in this 
Constitution. 

Until the Congress shall provide 
otherwise, the Chairman of the 
Commission shall receive an annual 
salary of twelve thousand pesos, and 
the other Members, ten thousand pesos 
each. Their salaries shall be neither 
increased nor diminished during their 
I term of office. 

Sec 2. The Commission on Elec- 
tions shall have exclusive charge of 
the enforcement and administration of 
all laws relative to the conduct of 
elections and shall exercise all other 
functions which may be conferred upon 
it by law. It shall decide, save those 




involving the right to vote, all 
administrative questions, affecting elec- 
tions, including the determination of 
the number and location of polling 
places, and the appointment of election 
inspectors and of other election officials. 
All law enforcement agencies and 
instrumentalities of the Government, 
when so required by the Commission, 
shall act as its deputies for the purpose 
of insuring free, orderly, and honest 
elections. The decisions, orders, and 
rulings of the Commission shall be 
subject to review by the Supreme Court. 

No pardon, parole, or suspension of 
sentence for the violation of any election 
law may be granted without the 
favorable recommendation of the 
Commission. 

Sec 3. The Chairman and Members 
of the Commission on Elections shall 
not, during their continuance in office, 
engage in the practice of any profession, 
or intervene, directly or indirectly, in 
the management or control of any 
private enterprise which in any way 
may be affected by the functions of their 
office; nor shall they, directly or 
indirectly, be financially interested in 
any contract with the Government or 
any subdivision or instrumentality 
thereof. 

Sec. 4. The Commission on Elec- 
tions shall submit to the President and 
the Congress, following each election, 
a report on the manner in which such 
election was conducted. 

Article XI 
GENERAL AUDITING OFFICE 
Section 1 . There shall be a General 
Auditing Office under the direction 




376 



Sec. 10. (1) The President shall 
have control of all the executive 
departments, bureaus, or offices, exercise 
general supervision over all local 
governments as may be provided by 
law, and take care that the laws be 
faithfully executed. 

(2) The President shall be com- 
mander-in-chief of all armed forces of 
the Philippines and, whenever it 
becomes necessary, he may call out 
such armed forces to prevent or suppress 
lawless violence, invasion, insurrection 
or rebellion. In case of invasion, 
insurrection, or rebellion, or imminent 
danger thereof, when the public safety 
requires it, he may suspend the privileges 
of the writ of habeas corpus, or place 
the Philippines or any part thereof 
under martial law. 

(3) The President shall nominate 
and with the consent of the Commission 
on Appointments, shall appoint the 
heads of the executive departments 
and bureaus, officers of the Army from 
the rank of colonel, of the Navy and 
air forces from the rank of captain or 
commander, and all other officers of 
the Government whose appointments 
are not herein otherwise provided for, 
and those whom he may be authorized 
by law to appoint; but the Congress 
may by law vest the appointment of 
inferior officers, in the President alone, 
in the courts, or in the heads of de- 
partments. 

(4) The President shall have the 
power to make appointments during 
the recess of the Congress, but such 
appointments shall be effective only 
until disapproval by the Commission 



on Appointments or until the next 
adjournment of the Congress. 

(5) The President shall from time 
CO time give to the Congress informa- 
tion of the state of the Nation, and 
recommend to its consideration such 
measures as he shall judge necessary 
and expedient. 

(6) The President shall have the 
power to grant reprieves, commuta- 
tions, and pardons, and remit fines and 
forfeitures, after conviction, for all 
offenses, except in cases of impeach- 
ment, upon such conditions and with 
such restrictions and limitations as 
he may deem proper to impose. He 
shall have the power to grant amnesty 
with the concurrence of the Congress. 

(7) The President shall have the 
power, with the concurrence of two- 
thirds of all the Members of the Senate, 
to make treaties, and with the consent 
of the Commission on Appointments, 
he shall appoint ambassadors, other 
public ministers, and consuls. He shall 
receive ambassadors and other public 
ministers duly accredited to the Govern- 
ment of the Philippines. 

Sec. 11. (1 ) The executive depart- 
ments of the present Government of 
the Philippine Islands shall continue as 
now authorized by law until the 
Congress shall provide otherwise. 

(2) The heads of departments and 
chiefs of bureaus or offices and their 
assistants shall not, during their con- 
tinuance in office, engage in the practice 
of any profession, or intervene, directly 
or indirectly, in the management or 
control of any private enterprise which 




373 




waters, minerals, coal, petroleum, and 
other mineral oils, all forces of potential 
energy, and other natural resources of 
the Philippines belong to the State, and 
their disposition, exploitation, develop- 
ment, or utilization shall be limited to 
citizens of the Philippines, or to 
corporations or associations at least 
sixty per centum of the capital of which 
is owned by such citizens, subject to any 
existing right, grant, lease, or concession 
at the time of the inauguration of the 
Government established under this 
Constitution. Natural resources, with 
the exception of public agricultural 
land, shall not be alienated, and no 
license, concession, or lease for the 
exploitation, development, or utiliza- 
tion of any of the natural resources shall 
be granted for a period exceeding 
twenty- five years, renewable for another 
twenty- five years, except as to water 
rights for irrigation, water supply, 
fisheries, or industrial uses other than 
the development of v/atcr power, in 
which cases beneficial use may be the 
measure and the limit of the "rant. 

Sec. 2. No private corporation or 
association may acquire, lease, or hold 
public agricultural lands in excess of 
one thousand and twenty-four hectares, 
nor may any individual acquire such 
lands by purchase in excess of one 
hundred and forty-four hectares, or by 
lease in excess of one thousand and 
cwenty-four hectares, or by homestead 
in excess of twenty-four hectares. 
Lands adapted to grazing, not exceeding 
tv^o thousand hectares, may be leased 
to an individual, private corporation, 
or association. 




378 



Sf.c. 3. The Congress may determine 
by law the size of private agricultural 
land which individuals, corporations, 
or associations may acquire and hold, 
subject to rights existing prior to the 
enactment of such law. 

Sec. 4. The Congress may authorize, 
upon payment of just compensation, 
the expropriation of lands to be 
subdivided into small lots and conveyed 
at cost to individuals. 

Sec. 5. Save in cases of hereditary 
succession, no private agricultural land 
shall be transferred or assigned except 
to individuals, corporations, or associa- 
tions qualified to acquire or hold lands 
of the public domain in the Philippines. 

Sec. 6. The State may, in the interest 
of national welfare and defense, 
establish and operate industries and 
means of transportation and communi- 
cation, and, upon payment of just 
compensation, transfer to public 
ownership utilities and other private 
enterprises to be operated by the 
Government. 

Article XIV 

GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1. The flag of the Philip- 
pines shall be red, white, and blue, 
with a sun and three stars, as consecrated 
and honored by the people and recog- 
nized by law. 

Sec. 2. All public otftcers and 
members of the armed forces shall take 
an oath to support and defend the 
Constitution. 

Sec. 3. The Congress shall take steps 
toward the development and adoption 
of a common national language based 




citizen of the Philippines and has been 
admitted to the practice of law in the 
Philippines. 

Sec. 9. The members of the Supreme 
Court and all judges of inferior courts 
shall hold office during good behavior, 
until they reach the age of seventy years, 
or become incapacitated to discharge 
the duties of their office. They shall 
receive such compensation as may be 
fixed by law, which shall not be 
diminished during their continuance in 
office. Until the Congress shall 
provide otherwise, the Chief Justice of 
the Supreme Court shall receive an 
annual compensation of sixteen 
thousand pesos, and each Associate 
Justice, fifteen thousand pesos. 

Sec 10. All cases involving the 
constitutionality of a treaty or law shall 
be heard and decided by the Supreme 
Court in banc, and no treaty or lav/ 
may be declared unconstitutional 
without the concurrence of two-thirds 
of all the members of the Court. 

Sec 11. The conclusions of the 
Supreme Court in any case submitted to 
it for decision shall be reached in 
consultation before the case is assgined 
to a Justice for the writing of the 
opinion of the Court. Any Justice 
dissenting from a decision shall state 
the reasons for his dissent. 

Sec. 12. No decision shall be 
rendered by any court of record without 
expressing therein clearly and distinctly 
the facts and the law on which it is 
based. 

Sec 13. The Supreme Court shall 
•lave the power to promulgate rules 
concerning pleading, practice, and 



sTa l L Said rules 

same grade and shall not diminish 
increase, or modify substantive rights' 
rhe existing laws on pleading, practice! 
and procedure are hereby repealed as 
statutes, and are declared Rules of 
^ourts, subject to the power of the 
Supreme Court to alter and modify the 
same. The Congress shall have the 
power to repeal, alter, or supplement 
the rules concerning pleading, practice, 
and procedure, and the admission to 
the practice of law in the Philippines. 
Article IX 
IMPEACHMENT 

Section 1. The President, the Vice- 
President, the Justices of the Supreme 
Court, and the Auditor General, shall 
be removed from office on impeachment 
for, and conviction of, culpable 
violation of the Constitution, treason, 
bribery, or other high crimes. 

Sec. 2. The House of Representa- 
tives, by a vote of two-thirds of all its 
members, shall have the sole power of 
impeachment. 

Sec. 3. The Senate shall have the 
sole power to try all impeachments. 
When sitting for that purpose, the 
Senators shall be on oath or affirmation. 
When the President of the Philippines 
is on trial, the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court shall preside. No 
person shall be convicted without the 
concurrence of three-fourths of all the 
Members of the Senate. 

Sec 4 Judgment in cases of im- 
peachment shall not extend further 




375 




at which the amendments are submitted 
to the people for their ratification. 

Article XVI 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS 

Section 1. The first election of the 
officers provided in this Constitution 
and the inauguration of the Govern- 
ment of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines shall take place as provided 
in Public Act Numbered One hundred 
and twenty-seven of the Congress of 
the United States, approved March 
twenty-four, nineteen hundred and 
thirty-four. 

Sec 2. All laws of the Philippine 
Islands shall continue in force until the 
inauguration of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines; thereafter, such laws 
shall remain operative, unless inconsis- 
tent with this Constitution, until 
amended, altered, modified, or repealed 
by the Congress of the Philippines, and 
all references in such laws to the 
Government or officials of the Phil- 
ippine Islands shall be construed, in so 
far as applicable, to refer to the 
Government and corresponding officials 
under this Constitution. 

Sec. 3. All courts existing at the 
time of the adoption of this Constitu- 
tion shall continue and exercise their 
jurisdiction, until otherwise provided 
by law in accordance with this Consti- 
tution, and all cases, civil and criminal, 
pending in said courts, shall be heard, 
tried, and determined under the laws 
then in force. 

Sec. 4. All officers and employees in 
the existing Government of the 
Philippine Islands shall continue in 
office until the Congress shall provide 
otherwise, but all officers whose 
appointments are by this Constitution 
x'csted in the President shall vacate 




their respective offices upon the ap- 
pointment and qualification of their 
successors, if such appointment is made 
within a period of one year from the 
date of the inauguration of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines. 

Sec 5. The members of the House 
of Representatives for the Mountain 
Province shall be elected as may be 
provided by law. The voters of 
municipalities and municipal districts 
formerly belonging to a special province 
and now forming part of regular 
provinces shall vote in the election for 
Members of the House of Representa- 
tives in such districts as may be provided 
by law. 

Sec 6. The provisions of this 
Constitution, except those contained 
in this article and in Article V, and 
those which refer to the election and 
qualifications of officers to be elected 
under this Constitution, shall not take 
effect until the inauguration of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines. 

Article XVII 

SPECIAL PROVISIONS EFFEC- 
TIVE UPON THE PROCLAMA- 
TION OF THE INDEPEND- 
ENCE OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Section i. Upon the proclamation 
of the President of the United States 
recognizing the independence of the 
Philippines — 

(1 ) The property rights of the 
United States and the Philippines shall 
be promptly adjusted and settled, and 
all existing property rights of citizens 
or corporations of the United States 
shall be acknowledged, respected, and 
safeguarded to the same extent as 
property rights of citizens of the 
Philippines. 




380 



and concrol of an Auditor General, 
who shall hold office for a term of ten 
years and may not be reappointed. 
The Auditor General shall be appointed 
by the President with the consent of the 
Commission on Appointments, and 
shall receive an annual compensation 
CO be fixed by law which shall not be 
diminished during his continuance in 
office. Until the Congress shall 
provide otherwise, the Auditor General 
shall receive an annual compensation of 
cvvelve thousand pesos. 

Sec. 2. The Auditor General shall 
examine, audit, and settle all accounts 
pertaining to the revenues and receipts 
from whatever source, including trust 
funds derived from bond issues; and 
audit, in accordance with law and 
administrative regulations, all expendi- 
tures of funds or property pertaining 
to or held in trust by the Government or 
the provinces or municipalities thereof. 
He shall keep the general accounts of 
the Government and preserve the 
vouchers pertaining thereto. It shall 
be the duty of the Auditor General to 
bring to the attention of the proper 
administrative officer expenditures of 
funds or property which, in his opinion, 
we irregular, unnecessary, excessive, 
or extravagant. He shall also perform 
such other functions as may be pre- 
scribed by law. 

Sec 3. The decisions of the Auditor 
General shall be rendered within the 
time fixed by law, and the same may 
be appealed to the President whose 
action shall be final. When the 
aggrieved party is a private person or 
entity, an appeal from the decision of 



'V- 

as 



directtt" """""^ "^^^ -^-^ 
'^I'-eccly to a court of record in the 

manner provided by law. 

Sec. 4. The Auditor General shall 

submit to the President and the Congress 
an annual report covering the financial 
condition and operations of the Go 
ernment, and such other reports 
may be required. 

Article XII 
CIVIL SERVICE 

Section 1. A Civil Service embrac- 
ing all branches and subdivisions of 
the Government shall be provided by 
law. Appointments in the Civil 
Service, except as to those which arc 
policy-determining, primarily confiden- 
tial or highly technical in nature, shall 
be made only according to merit and 
fitness, to be determined as far as 
practicable by competitive examination. 

Sec. 2. Officers and employees in 
the Civil Service, including members 
of the armed forces, shall not engage 
directly or indirectly in partisan political 
activities or take part in any election 
except to vote. 

Sec. 3. No officer or employee of 
the Government shall receive additional 
or double compensation unless speci- 
fically authorized by law. 

Sec. 4. No officer or employee in 
the Civil Service shall be removed or 
suspended except for cause as provided 
by law. 

Article XllI 
CONSERVATION AND UTILIZA- 
TION OF NATURAL 
RESOURCES 
Section 1. All agricultural, timber, 
and mineral lands of the public domain, 



on one of the existing native languages. 
Until otherwise provided by law, 
English and Spanish shall continue as 
official languages. 

Sec. 4. The State shall promote 
scientific research and invention. Arts 
and letters shall be under its patronage. 
The exclusive right to writings and 
inventions shall be secured to authors 
and inventors for a limited period. 

Sec. 5. AH educational institutions 
shall be under the supervision of and 
subject to regulation by the State. 
The Government shall establish and 
maintain a complete and adequate 
system of public education, and shall 
provide at least free public primary 
instruction, and citizenship training to 
adult citizens. All schools shall aim 
to develop moral character, personal 
discipline, civic conscience, and voca- 
tional efficiency, and to teach the duties 
of citizenship. Optional religious 
instruction shall be maintained in the 
public schools as now authorized by 
law. Universities established by the 
State shall enjoy academic freedom. 
The State shall create scholarships in 
arts, science, and letters for specially 
gifted citizens. 

Sec 6. The State shall afford 
protection to labor, especially to 
working women and minors, and shall 
regulate the relations between land- 
owner and tenant, and between labor 
and capital in industry and in agriculture. 
The State may provide for compulsory 
arbitration. 

Sec. 7. The Congress shall not, 
except by general law, provide for the 
ormation, organization, or regulation 



corno ^"'•P^'^^^^ns, unless such 

by hi Go" —11^^ 
^ .the Government or any subdivision 

or instrumentality thereof 

Sec. 8. No franchise, certificate or 

any other form of authorization for th 
operation of a public utility shall be 
granted except to citizens of the 
t^hilippines or to corporations or other 
entities organized under the laws of the 
t'hihppines, sixty per centwn of the 
capital of which is owned by citizens 
of the Philippines, nor shall such 
franchise, certificate, or authorization 
be exclusive in character or for a longer 
period than fifty years. No franchise 
or right shall be granted to any indi- 
vidual, firm, or corporation, except 
under the condition that it shall be 
subject to amendment, alteration, or 
repeal by the Congress when the public 
interest so requires. 

Sec. 9. The Government shall or- 
ganize and maintain a national police 
force to preserve public order and 
enforce the law. 

Sec. 10. This Constitution shall be 
officially promulgated in English and 
Spanish, but in case of conflict the 
English text shall prevail. 

Article XV 
AMENDMENTS 

Section 1. The Congress in joint 
session assembled, by a vote of three- 
fourths of all the Members of the 
Senate and of the House of Representa- 
tives voting separately, may propose 
amendments to this Constitution or call 
a convention for that purpose. Such 
amendments shall be valid as part of 
this Constitution when approved by a 
majority of the votes cast at an election 




379 




Concert 

by 

The Philippine Army Band 
In connection with 
The Celebration of the First Anniversary of the 
Republic of the Philippines 
Thursday, July 3, 1947 at 6:00 p. m. 
at the 
LuNETA Park 
Capt. Antonino Buenaventura, Conducting 



PROGRAM 
Part I 

1. Overture — Oberon Weber 

II. American Plantation Dances Arnold 

(In four movements ) 

III. Kundiman — Madaling Araw Santiago 

(Transcribed for Symphonic Band by 
Lt. Alejandro Romano, Associate Conductor 
Philippine Army Band) 

IV. Pasodoble — Aguero France 

Part II 

I. Unfinished Symphony Schubert 

(Allegro- Moderato ) 

II. Intermezzo— I Hear You Calling Me Marshal 

III. Selection — 

Echoes from the Philippines Buenaventura 

(Based on Philippine Folk Song) 

IV. March— American Ideals Qoldman 




384 



On the Eve of the First Anniversary 
of the Kepublic of the Philippines 

WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1947 
Decoration of public and private hiiiM,-,,rTo j • 1 
and other pubUc places, vessels " pof "^ " 
the Luneta, including the Rizal Monument. ' Inauguration site at 

THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1947 

1. Motorized brass bands will parade through the streets of the City of 

Manila from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. ^ 

2. Floral offerings at the monuments of national heroes all over the Phil 

ippines. 

3. Literary-musical programs or convocations commemorating the first 

anniversary of the Republic to be held in all universities, colleges and 
schools in Manila and in the provinces. 

4. Special issues of magazines and newspapers on this day. 

5. Native games in municipal, school and neighborhood playgrounds. 

6. Tilbury contest from 3:00 to 5:00 p.m. at the Luneta under the charge 

of Hon. Jose P. de Leon, Assistant Secretary to the President, assisted 
by the Mayors of Malabon, Caloocan, Las Piiias, and Paraiiaque. 
Prizes will be awarded to the winners of the three races. 

7. Boy Scout bands will parade through the different districts of the City 

of Manila from 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. 

8. Band concerts in the plazas and public places in towns and cities. 

Popular concert at the Luneta by the Philippine Army Band from 6:00 
to 7:00 p.m., Capt. Antonino Buenaventura conducting. (See Program 
on page 17). 

9. Selection of a Model Employee in each department, bureau and ofHce 

and in every government-owned corporation under the sponsorship 
of the Model Employee's Committee. 

10. Radio Program at 7:00 p.m. (See page 18). 

11. Band contest on Plaza Miranda. Quiapo, from 8:00 p.m. Prizes will 

be awarded to the winners. 



^^^^^^^^ 

383 



Schedule of Events 

FRIDAY, JULY 4, 1947 



6:00 to 7 -.00 ddnck a.?5i.— Thanksgiving Masses in churches and chapels 
all over the country. 

7:30 o'clock a. )».— -Participants in the parade will assemble at their desig- 
nated places of formation. 

(S:3o o'clock a m. — Start of Military Parade. 

9:15 o'clock a.m. — Time of the Proclamation of the Independence of the 
Philippines on July 4, 1946. 

9:20 o'clock a.m. — Start of the Civic Parade. 

1 1 -.00 o'clock a.m. — Program at the Grandstand. 

/ :oo o'clock p.m. — Baseball — All Filipinos vs. All Americans, at Rizal 
Memorial Stadium. 

2:00 o'clockp-m. — Soft ball in diflerent City playgrounds. 

3:00 o'clock p-in. — Football at Rizal Memorial Stadium. 

Sipa at San Lazaro Sipa Courts. 

3:00 to 4:00 o'clock p m. — Mass exhibition and games of boy scouts of the 
Philippines at the Luneta. 

4:00 to 5:00 o'clock p.m. — Mass exhibition and games of girl scouts of the 
Philippines at the Luneta, and volleyball at San Lazaro Playground. 

5 :oo o'clock p '"- — Basketball at City playgrounds and Rizal Coliseum. 

6:00 o'clock p ni. — Concert at the Luneta Grandstand — By the Municipal 
Symphony Orchestra. Conductor — Director Ramon Tapales. Com- 
plete program on page 31. 

7:00 to 11:00 o'clock p-in. — Fireworks display at the Wallace Field. 




386 



Radio Program 

JULY 3. 1947 

y:oo o'clock p.m.-To be broadcast by rad.o stations ,„ the PhiHppines. 

1. Opening Rcmarks-^Major Jose M. Hernandez 

2. (ii) Drink To Me Only With Thine Eyes Po,-/,o„ 

(^)) The Mill ptfD, 

,r p ^ ^ Raff-Pochon 

U. eonserx'atory String Quartette 

3. Declamation in Tagalog— Prof. J. V. Pafiganiban 

4. If I Were A Bird fjensch 

Fiel Matias, Pianist 
U. P. Conservatory of Music 

5. Declamation in Tagalog — Mr. Baltazar M. Villanueva 

6. Largo Chopin 

Martiniano Esguerra, Cellist 
U. P. Conservatory of Music 

7. Declamation in Spanish — Mrs. Emilio Abello 

8. Id Son Titania Thomas 

(From Mignon ) 
Mrs. Consuelo Salazar-Perez 
Miss Laura Nazareno, Accompanist 

9. Address by the Hon. Jose C Zulueta, Chairman 

of the National Anniversary Committee 




Military Parade 



Place of Assembly 

y.^o clock d.m. — 

1. Participants in the Grand Military and Civic Parade will assemble 
at the places assigned to them. 

2. The Anniversary Grandstand and Sections A and B will be opened 
to the guests with admission cards. 

^. The general public will assemble at the places designated for them. 

H:^o o'clock <^-i^^- — 

A bugle call will be sounded to indicate the start of the parade to be 
reviewed by the President of the Philippines. 

• ORDER OF UNITS 

GRAND MARSHAL 

Maj. Gen. Rafael Jalandoni 
Chief of Staff, Philippine Army 

Grand Marshal Massed Colors 

U. S. Army Composite Bn., MPC 

U. S. Navy MPC Band 

Scout Cars Off-Shore Patrol 

Troop Commander and StafI Light Tank Co., MPC 

Philippine Army Band 1st FA Bn.( Mtzd ) 

Nurses, VLGH 2nd Army Band 

Service Schools ROTC Units 

Prov. Regt., 1st Inf. Legion de Veteranos de la Revolucion 

9:15 o'clock ii-'"- — 

In the City of Manila the sounding of siren from the Post Office Building 
will announce the exact time of the Proclamation of the Independence of the 
Republic of the Philippines one year ago this day. Church bells will ring in 
the cities and towns all over the Philippines. 

Gun salute to the Republic. 

(T/ic [mhlic ivill rise and will remcun standing witd after the oiai 
salute. ) ^ « 



388 



Literary^Musical Contests 

'-""""^^^'O" the Frrst Anniversary 

of the Republic 



I. Bonifacio Biozratihy Contat A.i,r ■ . 

IQ47 -I I I, IT' ^ """^y participate. Opens July 4 
194/ and closes May 30 1Q4S R.,c,,i.-c -ii u juiy t, 

1943 ' Results will be announced on July 4, 

II. £s5iiy Confesi. — Any one may participate. 

III. Poetry Contest. — Any one may participate. 

IV. Essay Contest.— Open only to students of universities and colleges. 

V. Essay Contest.— Open only to students of high schools. * 
VI. March of the Republic Contest. — Open to all. 

SATURDAY, JULY 5, 1947 

2:30 o'clock p-ni- — Women's Civic Assembly at the Arellano Hall, Far 
Eastern University. 

5:00 o'clock p-m. — Tea party given by Mrs. Trinidad de Leon-Roxas in 
honor of the Delegates to the Women's Civic Assembly at Malacaiian 
Palace. 

I 1 f 1''.' 'iV.'i'" 

SUNDAY, JULY 6, 1947i''(j'!,;. 

8:00 o'clock a.m. — Religious services in all churches and chapels sponsored 
by the Women. li.. ,li..,i,.:.„i 



NoTE.-Contests II to V will open on July 4, 1947 and close on October 31, 1947. 

Contest VI for lyrics will open on July 4, 1947 and close on August 10, 1947. After the 
selection of the winning lyrics, the contest on the musical composition will ''"'"^f f*^'^ 

to close on October 31, 1947. The results of contests II to VI w>ll be announced on National 
Heroes Day, November 30, 1947. 

Appropriate cash prizes will be awarded to the winners in the foregoing contests. 

For further information as to rules, please contact Dr. ^^^^dnio Valenzue a. cha.rman 
the sub-committee on literary-musical contests. University of the Ph.hppmes. 



Ceremonies at the 
Qrcindstand 

Arrn-al at the Anniversary Qrandstand 

His Excellency, the Prcsidenc of Ac PhiUppines, will leave N^l»<=^";" 
Pala "preceded by a ..ilicary e.ort of .he PhiUppi.e Army and w.U proceed 

CO the Grandstand. 

8:25 o'clock cL.m. — 

The arrival at the Anniversary Grandstand of the President of the 
Philippines will be announced by a bugle call wh,ch will be the signal for the 
publlic to rise. 

11:00 o^clock <3.m. — 

Unveiling of four tablets comir.emorating the Inauguration of the 
Rcp^iblic of the Phihppines on July 4 1946-By Mrs. Trir^idad de Leon- 
Rox.is. 

Overcure-By the Philippine Arm:^ Band, Cape. Antonino Buenaventura 
conducting. 

Inv ocation by His Grace, the Mo« Reverend Mariano Madriaga. D.D., 
Bishop of Lingayen. 

Introductory remarks by the Hoc, Jose C Zulueta, Chairman of the 
Natiional Anniversary Committee of th'C Republic of the Philippines. 

Address by His Excellency, Manuid Roxas, President of the Philippines. 

Philippine Independence Hymn- Bv the Chorus of the Conservatory 
of Music, University of the Philippines. 

Philippine National Hymn (See page 248). 

Counselor Teoi>-oro Evanceusta 
Master of Ceremonies 



Admssion hy Invitation only — Vehicles 

Admission to the Anniversary Griudscand will be by invitation. 

Only \ehicles bearing a special automobile pass will be permitted to 
enter the Anniversary Grounds. All onher vehicles will be excluded therefrom 
unt ,1 after the conclusion of the ceremi nies. 



Civic Parade 



9:20 o'clock, ci.m. — 

Scare of the Civic Parade 

GRAND MARSHAL 

Hon. Eustaquio Balagcas 

Participants — 

Groups representing government deparcmenr. K.. 
ment-owned or controlled corporation, n ' 8°^""- 

companies, factories, and firms Tabor o ^ '^^"^n.ercial corporations, 

schools, colleges, and un.ve^^. ^Il^^ ~ ^^^^ 



FLOATS 

1. Philippine Charity Sweepstakes 

2. National Cooperative Administration 

3. Tuberculosis Society 

4. National Coconut Corporation 

5. Philippine Relief and Rehabilitation Administration 

6. National Philippine Red Cross 

7. National Development Company 

8. Women's Participation 

9. San Miguel Brewery 

10. Philippine Air Lines 

11. Elizalde and Company 

12. MGM Pictures 

13. Nolasco Bros. Pictures 

14. Philippine Racing Club 

15. Rehabil itation Finance Corporation 

16. Filipino Construction Supply 

17. AMEC 

18. Pepsi-Cola 

19. Heacock's 

20. City of Manila 




389 



NATIONAL ANNIVERSARY COMMITTEE OF THE 
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 
Hon. Jose C. Zulueta, Chairman 



MEMBEKS 



Hon. Jose Yulo Hon. Manuel Lim 

Major-General Rafael Jalandoni Mr. Toribio Teodoro 

Hon Valeriano E. Fugoso Mr. Antonio D. Paguia 

Hon. Sergio Bayan Dr. Patrocinio Valenzuela 

Commissioner Arsenio N. Luz 

Mr. Vicente Lontok, Executive Secretary 



SUB'COMMITTEES 



FINANCE 
Hon. Jose Yulo, Chairman 



Mr. Vicente Carmona 
Mr. Primitix'O Lovina 
Commissioner Arsenio N. Luz 
Mr. Bibiano L. Meer 



MEMBERS 

Mr. Angel Elizalde 
Mr. Toribio Teodoro 
Mr. Vicente Rufino 
Mr. Vicente Lontok 



GRANDSTAND 
Hon. Sergio Bayan, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Director Isaias Fernando Mr. Antonio Toledo 

City Engineer Alejo Aquino Mr. Silvestre Tan Chauco 

INVITATION AND PROGRAM 
Dr. Jose A. de Jesus, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Director Pablo Lucas Mr. Manuel G. Zamora 

Dr. Patrocinio Valenzuela Mr. Vicente Singian 




Inaugural Concert Program 

Municipal Symphony OrcheLa 
D.«a„,o„ TapaUs, CoXl, 
o:UU p. m., July 4_ ^g^-^ 
at che Luneta Grandstand 



I 

Wagner 

'''''' Overture to Meistersingers 
II 

Beethoven c i 

Allegro ma non troppo ' ' ' ' ^J^P'^^"^ ^o- 6 (Pastoral ) 

Cheerful impressions received on 

Andan. n,olco ™oss.o ^X^^ 

Peasants' merry-making 
Tempest and Storm 
The Shepherds' Hymn-Thanks- 
giving after the storm 

III 

GO Catalan. La Wally 

^'^^^ Michaeia's Aria from Carmen 

(O Puccini Si, Mi Chiamano Mimi from 

La Boheme 

Lourdes C. Razon, Soprano 
INTERMISSION 

IV 

Buenaventura By The Hillside 

V 

Bizet - Suite from Carmen 

Prelude 

Aragonaisc 

Intermesso 

Les Dragons D'alcala 

Final (Les Toreadors ) 

^^^^^^^^^^ ^ ~^=^^^^ 

391 




PEACE AND ORDER 
Brig. Gen. Mariano N. Cascaneda, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Col. Alberto Ramos Lc. Col. Jose Tando 

Col. Manuel de la Fuencc Mr. James Keefe 

WOMEN PARTICIPATION 
Mrs. Francisca T. Benicez, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Mrs. Lutgarda Langcauon Mrs. Josefa J. Martinez 

Mrs. Gertrudis G. Carreon Miss Josefina Phodaca 

Mrs. Paz Cuerpocruz Mrs. Belen Gutierrez 

Mrs. Felicidad Silva Mrs. Concepcion Gonzalez 



DECORATIONS 
City Engineer Alejo Aquino, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Mr. Antonio C. Kayanan Mr. A. D. San Pedro 

Mr. J. J. Marquez Mr. Silvestre Torres 



MILITARY PARADE 
Major Gen. Rafael Jalandoni, Chairma)i 

MEMBERS 

Col. Claro B. Lizardo Major Manuel T. Flores 

Lt. Col. Diosdado Rodriguez Major Manuel Q. Salientes 

CIVIC PARADE 
Hon. Manuel Lim, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Hon. Juan T. Laming Mr. Pedro J. Ocampo 

Mrs. Flora A. Ylagan Mr. Manuel CoUas 

Hon. Eustaquio Balagtas Mr. Timoteo Cerceza 




394 



MUSICAU LITERARY AND RADIO PROGRAMS 

Dr. Patrocinio Valcn..,.>U ... 



Valcnzucla, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Major Jose M. Hernandez \a c 

Prof, Cristmo Jamias Direrrn. Ro , 

. . LJirector Ramon Tapales 

Mrs. Greronima T. Pecson 

BAND PARADES AND CONCERTS 
Hon. Segundo Agustin, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Mr. Silvescre Torres Mr. Alejandro T. Santos 

Mr. Jesus Lapuz Mr. Aguscin Pineda 

GAMES AND ATHLETICS 
Mr. Silvescre Torres, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Dr. Manuel L. Carreon Mr. Exequiel Villacorta 

Mr. Venancio Trinidad Mr. Sera fin Aquino 

FIREWORKS 

Col. Manuel de la Fuence, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

City Engineer Alejo Aquino Cape. Cipriano Cruz 

Capt. Amadeo M. Cabe 

GOVERNMENT PARTICIPATION 
Hon. Nicanor Roxas, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Commissioner Jose Gil Counselor Teodoro Evangelista 

Undersecretary Prudencio Langcauon Mr. Fernando E. V. Sison 
Undersecretary Regino G. Padua Mr. Vicente Sabalvaro 

PROVINCIAL AND CITY PARTICIPATION 
Hon. Marciano Roquc, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

r^l AIL D Mr. Filcmon Poblador 

'-ol. Alberto Ramos ' 



CITY OF MANILA PARTICIPATION 
Hon. Valeriano E. Fugoso, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Hon. Pedro Arenas r>r ■ n ^ ■ 

,. c L-'r- Mariano C. Icasiano 

Mr. Marcelmo Sarmiento Mr. Venancio Trinidad 

EDUCATIONAL PARTICIPATION 
Dr. Bienvenido M. Gonzalez, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Dr. Manuel L. Carreon Dr. Paterno Santos 

Dr. Cecil io Pucong 

LABOR PARTICIPATION 
Mr. Antonio D. Paguia, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Hon. Juan T. Lanting Miss Pilar Balmori 

Atty. Baltazar M, Villanueva Mr. Pedro Fernandez 

Mr. Cipriano Cid 

COMMERCIAL PARTICIPATION 
Dr. Salvador Araneta, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Mr. Jose Penalba Mr. Eugenio Padua 

Dr. Felipe T. Adriano 

FLORAL OFFERINGS 
Mrs. Trinidad F. Legarda, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

, ,^ Mrs. losefa Jara Martinez 

Miss Manuela Gav " n a.^ 

u 1 -7 a v.- Mrs. Paz P. Mendez 

Miss Helen Z. Benitez 

WELFARE 
Mrs. Asuncion A. Perez, Ouurmau 

MEMBERS 

, Mrs Geronima T. Pecson 

Mrs. Trinidad F. Legarda ^^^^^^ j^^^ Martinez 

Miss Manuela Gay 



Address 

OF 



Hi5 Excellency 

Manuel Bfixas 

President of the Philippines 



REPUBLIC ON JULY 4, 1947, AT THE 
LUNETA, MANILA 

My Countrymen and Friends: 

One year ago coday wc achieved our national independence and estab- 
lished the Republic of the Philippines. On this same spot, hollowed by 
the blood of Rizai and consecrated to his memory, the American flag was 
lowHcd and our ikg, that glorious flag of our forefathers was raised upon 
yonder masthead to wave thenceforth alptie and unshadowed over all this 
land we love. (Applause) 

It is well that on each aqnivexsary of diat historic event wc r^ll the 

significance of that symbolic ceremony, to remind us of the magnanimltjf 
of America and to awaken in our hearts a renewed devotion to freedom, a 
fresh determination to defend it with our Hves. 

We won our independence through the processes ol Jcmocrac)', by the 
will of a free people. We will scan the pages of history in vain for another 
sudi example. In dbe past no star ever fell from an impma\ diadem except 
throuj^ fottse and at the cost of totrcncs of human blood. It is to the undfing 
credit of Americans and Filipinos tfcat by trusting each other and having 
faith in one another, they cleared the way for the fullest cooperation in the 
consummation of the historic act we now commemorate — a priceless flower- 
ing of Christian civilization. 

A new morality in the dealings of nations, particularly between 
dominant and subject peoples, was thus inaugurated. Liberty fl«ttcted her 
wings and spread the glad tidings throughout the earth, k shook the foun- 
dations of empires and brought new hope to the benighted millions, seeking 
to be free. 

Now ^ may discern die effects of that transcendental ^^-J ^ ^^f "'.^'^ 
ism crumbling rapidly everywhere. The right to independence is ben.g 





397 



recognized by all free and enlightened powers. The indivisibility of peace 
and liberty is being accepted. We know now that the world cannot long 
live at peace half slave and half free. Within a few months following 
the pattern that we established, India will attain her freedom, Indonesia will 
gain her independence, Burma will be granted full sovereignty, and other 
subject nations will reach the same cherished goals. 

It is true that there are forces at large in the world today striving to 
turn back the surging tide of freedom. But they will be of no avail, for the 
mighty concepts of liberty and justice that raised the victorious hosts in the 
last war are irresistible forces that no power however strong can permanently 
stem or subdue. The time is past when military might was the decisive 
factor in human struggles. Today the aroused conscience of free men, capable 
in time of need of creating overpowering instruments of war, is the mightiest 
force on earth. The Age of Reason has dawned! 

We can feel proud that we were actors in that historic drama 
that ushered in this new age. We are grateful to America for having kept 
faith with us and for pointing the way for other nations to follow in the 
trusteeship of the peoples under their flags. 

In many quarters our independence was greeted with dark forebodings 
for our future. These predictions were not entirely unjustified. We had 
just emerged from a cruel war. Tens of thousands among the best of our 
youth were lost in the conflict. Our country was devastated, our economic 
system was destroyed, billions of our money had become worthless, social 
values had been dislocated, and even the morals of a large portion of our 
people had decayed through contact with a ruthless and Godless foe. 
During the three years of enemy occupation hundreds of thousands of Fili- 
pinos lived in defiance of the government and had lost respect for law. New 
ideologies had found lodgement in the minds of many of our countrymen 
as a revolt against the then prevailing economic and social conditions. Some 
had seemingly forgotten the virtues of democracy and had embraced the 
doctrine of class supremacy to be achieved through force. Our heroic 
veterans had returned to their homes in rags and were demanding the fulfill- 
ment of promises. Most of our people were bewildered and in want. There 
was general confusion; threats of revolution were whispered and even \'oiced 
openly from the public platform. 

There was little to sustain us in our difficulties except our faith 
in ourselves. We promptly laid solid foundations for our Republic. We 
resolutely seized the instruments of sovereignty and quickly started to put 
our house in order. We fought a rear-guard action against the elements of 




chaos and disintegration and at the same tim - \ A c 

shattered economy and institutions. Pushed forward to repair our 

Now, look around you. Consider rl-.,- , 4 r 
Recall the painful experience of other n!ri^ f'T '^^^ 

problems such as ours at the in ept ion of th.T T '"f '° ^""""^ ^'^'^ 
Ltion in modern history, not eve^I U Jita S r " 

years of independence, could con pat us r^h^ " '''' 'T'' 

achieved in the first year of our RepublL- rAn, l" . 'T^'"'' 

u- • ■ • 1 . (-.Applause) Let no one sneer 

at this comparison u is based on recorded facts. And the circum tan 
areessentially ahke for we are dealing with practical human problems wh d 
are altered neither by the epoch nor the age in which they occurred. The 
relative values of all the factors involved are the same in every case. 

It will also profit us to compare our situation with that which obtains 
today in all the countries of the world which had been occupied by the enemy 
during the last war. In those countries political and social unrest prevails. 
There is shortage of food and of other minimum requirements for decent 
existence. They are prostrate and in ruins. They are in the midstream of 
world events and are carried by the currents of power politics without capacity 
to hold fast to moorings of their choice. The Philippines, on the other 
hand, is truly master of its own destiny, is free from fear and want, and is 
actually solving satisfactorily its basic economic and social problems. 

There is no desire on my part, 1 assure you, to indulge in self-adulation. 
Neither do I wish to induce you to believe that all that need be done has 
been done. But the truth is that we have made great progress in the face 
of tremendous odds. 

The Government of the Republic has been fully organized. Its authority 
has been extended to the remotest nook and cranny of our land. We have 
been welcomed by the family of nations; we have been recognized by 
practically every government on earth. Our voice is heard in the United 
Nations and in many conferences on world affairs. We are participating 
financially and otherwise in the international instrumentalities created to 
restore rapidly the productive economy of the world. We are taking an 
active part in the efforts to build a new world order based on the freedom 
and equality of all nations, to insure a just and permanent peace and the wel- 
fare of all peoples. 

Constitutional guarantees and the processes of a fr^^g^-",^;"^^^;^ 
firmly rooted in our soil. Our democracy is not a name but a f ^ 
free institutions are in full operation. Human rights ^ ^-r^g 
and safeguarded. We have established an independent jud.ciar> 



399 



scncnel for che prcscr^a.on of chose righcs. Our people en,oy freedom of 
sp h and of rhc press, in a measure unsurpassed m any other country of the 
world. Here, the press or any n.d,v.dual may mdu ge m the bitterest 
criticisms against the government and its highest officials, without fear and 
without sanction. We uphold the right of every man to worship God as 
he pleases We impose no limitations on the freedom of thought or of 
conscience. The right of petition and the prix'ilegc of the people to gather 
and to exert efforts for the redress of griev'anccs are never impugned. The 
sanctity of the home and the freedom from search and seizure are scrupulously 
defended. Free elections are guaranteed. But we also guarantee to suppress 
any and all attempts to gain through force or other illegal means any change 
in our system of government, or in the social order, or in the laws enacted 
by the representatives of the people. We adhere strictly to our democratic 
creed. We respect the sovereignty and the will of the people. We believe 
in a government by popular consent. Wc stand for liberty regulated by law. 
Wc abhor fascism and the methods employed by dictators, whether of the 
military or of a class. We have built a truly popular go\'ernment subservient 
only to the popular will. A syndicalistic government, or a communistic 
government, or a fascistic gox-ernment — whatever its name — is contrary to 
our Constitution and our ideals, and will not be permitted to gain foothold 
on this free land. (Long applause) 

The national economy is being gradually rehabilitated. In one year wc 
have greatly increased the \-olume of our production. Although it has not 
yet reached pre-war levels, its monetary \'alue today is more than three times 
the value of our total production income before the war. Government 
revenues have also greatly increased during the first year of our independence. 

When the Republic was inaugurated, our revenues were barely ten per 
cent of our government expenditures. Now, they are six times greater, and 
at the present rate of collections, our rex'enues will cover about seventy per 
cent of our expenditures. I have great hopes that in the current fiscal year 
we shall be able approximately to balance the expenses of government with 
revenues trom taxation. (Applause) 

In this first year we have succeeded in reducing the cost of living by 

thirty per cent, notwithstanding a material inrrn^r rU. ■ 

r „, ft "lULcriai increase in the money income 

ot wage earners. We are eniovina t rrlir,,-^ a, c ■ t , 

1- • J , r 1 Y'J^')'"^ a rclatuc degree of prosperity, and the 

living standards of the people arc higher. > . 'i' u >- 

More public schools ha\'e been onrnrd- ^x,^ j -n. 

1 u 11 , . opened, we hax'c today over one m ion 

more children enrolled in the schools rhm U^f i , "i'"'"'' 

Mil . ^^'-"'^'^'•^ Chan before the war. Institutions of 

ler learning have increased in number md rhnV .rr^.,^ n.t,cutions or 

'^""-^ '^'^'-'r attendance has more than 




We have commenced the execution of 
of land in congested areas. This is the initia^st^'^ N '"^distribution 
abolition of an archaic tenancy system whirl, r; ? ^^^'^^^E to the ultimate 
bondage on the land thac they work and wl ch Z^'hrT'^'u", ' "^f °^ 
had tilled, with little hope of social impro ' n cnt 1, he" 
have granted to tenants a larger participation , he . ot "T""7 T 
We are rapidly gettnrg bacW the valnab.^ he^p'-ctrtdM^r ut 
aeons owned by enemy natronals and we have laid plans for the distribution 
of these lands among the veterans of the last war. 

Our export trade is rapidly increasing, and in money value is now much 
larger than before the war. Our destroyed industries are being reopened as 
fast as needed equipment can be procured. We have established a govern- 
ment institution to provide credit for speeding up the rehabilitation program. 
We have introduced more efficiency in the government service, and wc are 
firmly eradicating corruption and dishonesty among government officials. 
(Applause ) 

Peace and order has been restored in practically every province and every 
town of our country. For the last three months no important disturbance 
of the peace by organized bands has occurred. The people have returned 
to their homes in the remotest barrios and are peacefully cultivating their 
lands. Common crimes are still frequent in a few localities, but these are 
being effectively dealt with, a fact which has resulted in a marked reduction 
of such crimes. 

Our monetary situation is excellent. Inflation has been arrested and is 
under control. No country on earth, except the United States, has a more 
stable currency than ours. We maintam a hundred per cent reserve for our 
outstanding circulation. Because of the guaranteed convertibility of Phdip- 
pine pesos in American dollars, our money is expendable anywhere u. the 
world. 

The public health is being duly safeguarded. We have prevented 
Ihe public neaitn b government hospitals 

cp.dem.cs durmg the past^ ear. A large ^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

are now m operation, e are ngiiLu ^ 

with the newest weapons to the limit of our resources. 

underway We arc rebuilding 
A large public works program is no ^^^^ ^^^^^^ government 

bridges, roads, portworks, schools, ^^'^ J including the 

facilities. We have started the ^f-^^f'^'^^^l .".Her mines are being 
development of water power. d; encouraged, 
reopened. New industries are being planned ai 




401 




We have not neglected our obligations to our hghting men, nor those 
which we owe their widows and orphans. We are now assisting the crippled 
and the sick and the dependents of our dead soldiers. The President of the 
United States has already urged the American Congress to pass suitable 
legislation granting to Filipino veterans the same privileges and gratuities 
accorded to American soldiers. Meantime we have approved a Bill of 
Rights for needy veterans and for the widows and orphans of our 
dead soldiers assuring them subsistence, educational and other benefits. 

Despite the prophecies made before the elections that we would become 
a hopelessly divided people, we find today that the nation is more united 
than ever before in its history. Flushed with a noble pride in our 
so\'ereignty, our citizens are supporting the Republic and are cooperating in 
the rebuilding of our country without distinction of creed or section. We 
are loyal to one flag, one nation and one government. 

By concluding a trade agreement with America, we have practically a 
free market for all our products in the largest and most attractive market 
in the world. No nation enjoys that privilege except ours. But despite 
this trade agreement, we are completely free to sell our products anywhere 
and to buy what we need from anywhere. 

One of the first concerns of our Republic was our security. This we 
ha\'e met by entering into a military alliance with the United States for the 
mutual protection of America and the Philippines. During the present 
period of confusion and chaos in the world, when dark clouds are again 
ho\'ering over the horizon and an early war is being predicted by statesmen 
of many countries, we have every reason to rejoice that we have locked our 
destiny with the strongest and noblest nation of the earth. We must not 
risk another experience such as we had in the last war. We must insure 
ourselves against that danger. Our armed forces are being properly organized 
and equipped, and we have completed plans for the training of a citizen 
army on which we can rely in time of stress. The conclusion of a treaty 
allowing the United States to establish military and naval bases here is a 
signal achievement of our Republic. 

Organized resistance to the government has practically ceased. The 
recalcitrant elements that instigated this treacherous movement have been 
dispersed. Their leaders are in hiding. I trust that by this time they have 
convinced themselves of the futility and the destructive effects of their 
undertaking. 1 hope that they will understand that my every attempt to 
dissuade them from pursuing their course is not to depri\'c them either of 
their rights or of their political influence, but rather to win their acceptance 




402 



of Che authority of the governmenc estabHshed by their own countrymen 
With tht mm^ Cbt their rights to seek reforms in accordanrS o^; 
d.moc^ .p,Omi^m Umh^^d and unchecked. On this sL^d 
day when every true patriot is cclebtatrng ^ anniversary of the birch of 
our nation I ask these dissidents again t<^.|^tticAv«^.«hfrfoM,#it* 
to en^oy the protection of gp^iS^^tic^. - • 

I have recited in broad Unes the highlights of , the achievements of our 
people and our RepubHc during the first year of its While many other 
nations are wasting their substance in the struggle over new ideologies and 
the very problems of human existence, we are today well on the road of 
itoovety and progress. While many other nations face revolutions and civil 
war, purges and military coups, we in eke Philippiitts* tttve left the causes 
of such conflicts far behind vs. We are no longer disturbed by them. While 
in many other countries living conditions are still being regimented becau*^ 
of food and other shortages, here we have a free economy in actual operation. 
mi WC ate not lacking in food or clothing, and our housing difficulties ace 

""ftie dire circumstances under which the people of other nations live 
today exist not only in the erstwhile enemy- occupied countries but even in 
many of the natid^ cHu took part in ^Winning;, tie mt. Ask the world 
traveler who has visited these countries to compait ifct condition* fcte w^ilh. 
the conditions prevailing here, and he will tell you without hesitation that 
our people should feci fortunate because of the freedom and prosperity that 
they enjoy and because of the government under which they live and work. 
I'ittiBK i^'SHaU 'bril1»le eo^ miiatain these conditions and continue to improve 
them. We should work towards the establishment of an economic 
democracy in which all the people take part and every citizen derives a just 
and fair share of the fruits of the common effort. I have great faith that 
through intelligent and unremitting toil, free enterprise, and strong adherence 
to a democratic way of life, we shall succeed in making this Republic one of 
IeI^ ^ garden spots dF'thtitilMhi 

On this day sacred to us all, we should, as free men and true patriots, 
^ettevv our pledge to serve our Republic and to labor for the enduring welfare 
and luipipiness of out people. 'W» full iovereignty which Wft tctained a 
year ago is still intact. We have not bartered away the smallest particle of 
that sovereignty for any material or other consideration. We should resolve 
to maintain that sovereignty in all its integrity, whatever the cost, so that 
we may continue to enjoy it to the fullest measure and bequeath it to our 
liilldcen, undimini^ and unsullied. In this resolve and in the task ahead 
tditH^ieve the enduring happiness of the Filipino people, I cal^l)tp9Q tliC WMe 




nation to lend mc its continued confidence and support. Given that, with 
the help of Almighty God, this Republic will, I am sure, rapidly grow in 
stature, wealth and power, loved and revered by its citizens, honored and 
respected abroad, the haven of liberty and justice, the cherished home ot 
contented free men. (Long applause) 





On this spot. AT-5XACTL' 

9:15 0 CLOCK IN THE MOR'- 

THURSDAY, JULY FOURTH 



INAMCJJRA- 
Oft 

,STA 
TRU 
REPR . 



NES WAS 
iMAtiON 
UNITED 

nBamtoRizED 

UNITED! 



'STAT ES^HfCH (^OlflllWbN^R TO 
THE'PHILIPPINES. PAU'LV.'McNUTT. 








Bronze Tablets Commemorating the Inauguration of flic Republic of the Philippines 
at the Lnneta on July 4, 1946 



405 



