
Ships and Sugar 

By George H. Fairchild 



Philippine* Bdueation 
and literacy 




No. 1 M arket f or U.S. Flour 



Oil in the Philippines 



Vol.1 No. 7 




The Philosophy of Leaving Home 

An Editorial 



In days stall as these, when the lives of small nations, 
arc frequently snuffed out between sunset and sunrise, 
particular hardihood is necessary to discuss such a sub- 
ject as independence for the Philippines. The tragic his- 
tory of the past two years shows all too well what can 
happen h> even the proud and strong. Neither courage 
nor peaceful intentions nor a passion for human prog- 
ress is insurance against armed might, loosed without 
provocation. What, therefore, can he said about a nation 
of ] 6,000,000 preparing to make its own way in the 
modern world? 

The Philippine independence movement has been the 
cause of a great deal of misunderstanding in the United 
States, This movement has often been misrepresented 
as one based on ingratitude and unfriendliness toward 
the American people. It is occasionally described as a 
political maneuver, with Utile popular backing. Fre- 
quently the situation is held to be the result of agitation 
by certain American interests, who feared the competi- 
tion of Philippine products. None of these theses is accu- 
rate. Certainly, ingratitude has no place in our hearts. 

An easy way to understand the Philippine desire for 
independence is by analogy. The youth who reaches 
maturity and longs to leave ihe family home for a life 
in which he must depend on himself is a close parallel 
to our situation. In his father's house, the boy may enjoy 
great comfort and protection from want; going out into 
the world may be uncertain and fraught with terrible 
hardships. From the standpoint of his immediate well- 
being, the son would be well advised to stay close to 
the family table. Nevertheless, he is ready — even deter- 
mined — to take all the knocks and setbacks necessary to 
make him finally an upstanding citizen. 

The Filipinos are that youth. They have been taught 
by their parent country, the United States, the virtue 
and desirability of freedom and self-determination. The 
lessons of the American revolution- -in which the 1$ 
colonies embarked on an independent course under cir- 
cumstances not a shade more favorable than those facing 
the Philippines today — were not lost on them. The 
Filipino people would he unworthy in their own minds, 
and certainly by the measure of American standards, 
if they did not have that urge toward self-government. 
Americans should have no difficulty understanding — and 
appreciating— a determination that is so characteristically 
American. Far from inferring disloyalty or ingratitude, 
the Philippine independence movement signifies an un- 
swerving belief in the ideals taught by the United States. 

No responsible Filipino denies the immeasurable value 
uf the spiritual ami material blessings heaped on the 



Philippines during the past four decades of American 
rule. Our Commonwealth status today is concrete evi- 
dence of the advancement we have made in these years. 
We know that we enjoy far more freedom than do many 
supposedly independent States. It is because we have 
made this great progress that we desire to push forward 
to complete independence. 

To understand thai feeling, think again of the youth 
who wants to leave home. Under his parents' roof- this 
boy has things very much as he wants them. He is 
assured of protection: he is assisted in preparing him- 
self for the future. But. at the same time, he is subject 
to many humil Hating restrictions. His companions are 
chosen for him; important decisions in his life are made 
over his head; and his daily activities are forever subject 
to shifting family circumstances. All these are perfectly 
natural to expect when the lad is in his 'teens. They 
become less bearable as the boy matures. Eventually, 
they become intolerable. The youth — if he has any 
spirit — longs for complete independence. He insists on 
the right to he master of his own fate, regardless of 
whether his decisions are wise or foolish. 

The parallel between the home-bound youth and the 
Filipinos is obvious. Who can blame the 16,000,000 
Filipinos if they desire independence? To a spirited race 
the feeling is as natural as the urge to breathe. 

No believer in democracy can find fault with these 
objectives. The only point open for discussion is whether 
the youth of our analogy has obtained the maturity 
necessary for a successful independent career in a preda- 
tory world. Inevitably, there is disagreement on this. 
But what young man of spirit is willing to watch from 
the window of his parental home until everyone agrees 
that he is strong enough to fend for himself? 

There is honest doubt as to what will happen to the 
Philippines once the Stars and Stripes are hauled down. 
Many Americans are convinced that the new-found free- 
dom will speedily be lost again. Students of economy 
see an even greater danger in the probable dislocation 
of Philippine commerce once the present modified free- 
trade ties with the United Stales arc cut. Naturally, 
informed Filipinos see these hazards and share these 
misgivings. But it is significant that— despite the obvious 
disadvantages and dangers— there is no important bodv 
of opinion in the Philippine Commonwealth today that 
opposes independence. The parallel with the ambitious 
youth still holds true. The prospect of hardship and 
privation is not enough to discern rage a rial ion deter- 
mined to establish itself as an upstanding member oT 
the world eonimunity. ^ 



Manuel L. Quezon, President of 
the Philippine Commonwealth 
(right}, accepts the congratula- 
tions of Nationalista Party leaders 
on his nomination to serve a 
second term. Manuel Roxas, for- 
mer Secretary of Finance (center), 
Assemblyman Sotto of Davao. 




Delegates to the Nationalista Party convention in 
Manila hear their leaders pledge loyalty to the 
United States. 



Filipino women were well represented at the Nationalista 
convention. The Philippines is the only nation in the 
entire Far East enjoying feminine suffrage. 




Commonwealth labor leaders pledge their support to 
Lieut. Gen. Douglas MacArthur on his appointment as 
commander of all U. S. Army Forces in the Far East, 




Planes and personnel of the Philippine Army Air Force 
being inducted into the service of the United States on 
an army air field outside Manila. 



The Philosophy of Leaving Home 



An Editorial 



I 



N days such as these, when the live? of small nations, 
arc frequently snuffed out between sunset and sunrise, 
particular hardihood is necessary lo discuss such a sub- 
jeet as independence for the Philippines. The tragic his- 
lory of the past twu years shows all too well what can 
happen to even the proud and strong- Neither courage 
nor peaceful intentions nor a passion for human prog- 
ress is insurance against armed might, loosed without 
provocation. What, therefore, can he said about a nation 
of 16,000,000 preparing to make its own way in the 
modern world? 

The Philippine independence movement lias been the 
i a use of a great tleal of misunderstanding in the Luited 
Slates. This movement has often been misrepresented 
as one based on ingratitude and unfriendliness toward 
the A me man people. It is occasionally described as a 
political maneuver, with 111 tie popular backing. Fre- 
quently the situation is held In he the result of agitation 
by certain American interests, who feared the competi- 
tion of Philippine products, None of these theses is accu- 
rate. Certainly, ingratitude has no place in our hearts. 

An easy way to understand the Philippine desire for 
independence is by analogy. The youth who reaches 
maturity and longs to leave the family home for a life 
in which he must depend on himself is a close parallel 
to our situation. In his father's house, the boy may enjoy 
great comfort and protection from want: going out into 
the world may be uncertain and fraught with terrible 
hardships. From the standpoint of his immediate well- 
being, the son would be well advised to stay close to 
the family table. Nevertheless, he is ready — even deter* 
mined— to take all the knocks and setbacks necessary to 
make him finally an upstanding citizen. 

The Filipinos are that youth. They have been taught 
by their parent country, the United States, the virtue 
and desirability of freedom and self-determination. The 
lessons of the American revolution- -in which the 13 
colonies embarked on an independent course under cir- 
cumstances not a shade more favorable than those facing 
the Philippines today — were not lost on them. The 
Filipino people would be unworthy in their own minds, 
and certainly by the measure of American standards, 
if they did not have that urge toward self-government, 
Americans should have no difficulty understanding— and 
appreciating — a detenu mat ion that is so characteristically 
American, Far from inferring disloyalty or ingratitude, 
the Philippine independence movement signifies an mi 
swerving belief in the ideals taught by the United Slates. 

No responsible Filipino denies the i in measurable value 
of the spiritual and material blessings heaped on the 



Philippines during the past four decades of American 
rule. Our Commonwealth status today is concrete evi- 
dence of the advancement we have made in these years. 
We know that we enjoy far more freedom than do many 
supposedly independent States, It is because we have 
made this great progress that we desire to push forward 
to complete independence. 

To understand Hi at feeling- think again of the youth 
who wants to leave home. Under his parents* roof, this 
boy has things very much us he wants them. He is 
assured of protection: he is assisted in preparing him- 
self for the future. But, at the same time, he is subject 
to many humiliating restrictions. His companions are 
chosen for him; important decisions in his life are made 
over his head: and his daily activities are forever subject 
to shifting familv circumstances. All these are perfectly 
natural to expect when the lad is in his 'teens. They 
become less bearable as the boy matures. Eventually, 
thev become intolerable. The youth— if he has any 
spirit— longs for complete independence. He insists on 
the right to be master of his own fate, regardless of 
whether his decisions are wise or foolish. 

The parallel between the home-bound youth and the 
Filipinos is obvious. Who can blame the 16.000,000 
Filipinos if they desire independence? To a spirited race 
the feeling is as natural as the urge to breathe. 

No believer in democracy can find fault with these 
objectives. The only point open for discussion is whether 
the youth of our analogy has obtained the maturity 
necessary for a successful independent career in a preda- 
tory world. Inevitably, there is disagreement on this. 
But vhal young man of spirit is willing to watch from 
the window of his parental home until everyone agrees 
that he is strong enough to fend for himself . 

There is honest doubt as to what will happen to the 
Philippines once the Stars and Stripes are hauled down. 
Many Americans are convinced that the new-found free* 
dom will speedily be lost again. Students of cconom } 
see an even greater danger in the probable dislocation 
of Philippine commerce once the present modified free- 
trade ties with the United States are cut. Naturallv. 
informed Filipinos see these hazards and share these 
mis-iviugs. But it is significant that— despite the obvious 
disadvantages and dangers-there is no important bod) 
of opinion in the Philippine Commonwealth today thai 
opposes independence. The parallel with the ambitious 
youth still holds true. The prospect of hardship and 
privation is not enough to discourage a nation deter- 
mined lo establish itself as an upstanding member of 
the world community. ^ 



Philippines 



Vol. 1 



[October, 194!) 



No. 7 



On the Air — _ 3 

Ships and Your Sugar Bowl, George R. Fair child 4 

Prize Pupil, Dr. Camilo Osias 6 

Jose Yulo s P. C. MoranUe 8 

Union for Democracy, Walter Brooks F oley _ 9 

Philippine Literacy, Cesar WL Lorenzo 10 

Oil Is Where We Find It, H. Foster Bain . . __ 11 

The Forgotten Boundary, James K. Eyre 7 Jr. _ . 14 

Guy Swope, Julias C. Edelstein,- — -- 1^ 

No. 1 Market, Herman Fakler „ — 16 

Philippine- American Trade, Tranquilino B. Aquino 18 

Luzon, Ernesto D. I lustre 20 

Hands Across the China Sea, Randall Gould 24 



Photo Credit: Photo Finishing Corp., Manila; 
Palmer Pictures: Fen no Jacobs from Three 
Lions; Department of Agriculture: Department 
of the Interior; Harris & Ewing: U. S. Maritime 
Commission : Bureau of Education, Manila. 



Rack Cover: Play Day at the University of the Philippines, Manila 



IVrmi^inii tft reprint material appt'nrim: 
in FJJ Ifill'I'IMKS in pladly granted except in 
eases where? use is Rp<rcidcul[y rentriclrcl. Prupi-r 
crtrJil lit- apprcrintcd. 




Universit) of ill"- Philippines co-eds, harrying 
to class in the heart of Manila, symbolize 
the <n'eat strides education has made in the 
Philippines during IU years of American ride. 



In This Issue 

GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD, doyen of sugar men 
in the Common wealth and head of the im- 
portant Philippine Su^ar Association, is at 
present in the United States seeking ships to 
transport crude sugar across the Pacific* 

DR. CAMILO OSIAS, prominent as an author 
and educator, is chairman of the Philippine 
National Educational Council. 

HERMAN FAKLER, vice-president of the Mill- 
ers' National Fee Icrat ion. is the chief repre- 
sentative in Washington of the American flour 
milling industry. 

RANDALL GOULD was for nearly two decade© 
an American newspaper editor and corres- 
pondent in the Far East. Today he is a mem- 
ber of the firm of Starr. Park & Co.. New 
York City. 

WALTER BROOKS FOLEY, besides being a 
prominent Manila clergyman, is executive sec- 
retary of the Committee for Philippine Ameri- 
can Cultural Relations. 

TRANQUILINO B. AQUINO is a junior busi- 
ness research economist for the Works Prog- 
ress Administration. He obtained the figures 
for hrs article on Philippine-American trade 
directly from the preliminary reports of the 
Department of Commerce. 

CESAR M. LORENZO recently returned to 
Manila after completing a course in business 
statistics in the 1 nilod Slates at the direc- 
tion of the Commonwealth Government. 

H- FOSTER BAIN, ad\ iscr to President Quezon 
on mining problems, is an authority on the 
mineral resources of Far East. 



PHILIPPINES Eh paMinWl by iTin <iflic-« ul flic Philippine Hr*Mlc?ni Oonimi*am iwr to the United Slate*. 
E-'ililorinL ami *-ireu f ;it iori riffi***'* ill ^1 n *h ilHni srt A»i'tiifc %nrl i'*t , Vl Ht-U i n^t 015 . |(, C I M-lri l>u Irtl 

^itlliPtit i-hnr»c, Kntrrtiil .in thinl rhl&S UialUT in the \Yti*IriugLon p^l itiVn-r. (Ill Drvrnilur I. ]'>Ht, TV rintt 
.101 rS + Prinliul in U. S, A. Sinnrt Lillieri. ^flilur. 




High Philippine and Am* 



High Philippine and American 
Officials Discuss Mutual Relations 



PRESIDENT QUEZON of the Philippine 
Co mm on wealth addressing American radio 
listeners on August 19, 1941 : 

Mr. Vice-President Wallace ami peo- 
ple of t lit- United States: 

I welcome the opporl unity In testate 
iho stand **f the Filipino people in 
this grave national emergency, Wl i owe 
loyalty In America and we ate bound 
to her by bonds nf everlasting gratitude. 
Shun Id the United Slates enter the 
war, the Philippines would follow her 
and fight by her side, placing at her 
disposal all our manpower and mate- 
rial resources, for the cause for which 
America won hi Eight is our own cause. 

The United Slates seeks to defend 
the principles which we cherish and 
without which we could not live as a 
free nation. She is striving to preserve 
liherly and democracy anil individual 
freedom. These are things for which, 
we* loo. would strive and die. The 
United Stales is struggling to prevent 
the domination of 1 he world by dicta- 
tors and we* too, would strive and 
die against such masters. The United 
States wauls to uphold the rule of 
right and jus lice in international re- 
lations and safeguard the independence 
of small nations, to free them from 
the fear of aggression and subjugation 
by militant powers, and we. too. would 
strive 1 and die to save our country 
from such threats and perils. So. if 
tile. United Stales decides to enter tins 
war, it will he our war as much as 
the war of the United Stales and her 
decision will he our own decision, In 
such event she will find all the people 
of my country, to ihe last man. on her 
side fighting under her banner and 
praying to Almighty Coil for the vic- 
tory of her arms. 

Mr, Vice-President, I wish to assure 
you ami the people of America that we 
0fQ wifll 'he United Si ales in life and 
in dealh. ^ 



J, M. EUZALDE, Resident Commissioner of 
the Philippines to the United States, 
observing the 43rd anniversary of the 
occupation of Manila by the U. S. Army, 
Aug, 13, 1941 




lu the Southwestern Pacific lie a 
group of small countries encircling the 
China Sea, Today that area is of tre- 
mendous importance to American 
icy and to the future of the American 
people. Surrender of this area to con- 
trol hy imperialistic powers, by ap- 
peasement or as the result of war, 
would have a permanently crippling 
effect upon the efforts of the United 
States and other democracies to pre- 
serve a free world. Freedom of trade 
routes in every part of the world and 
the accessibility of essential raw ma- 
terials for American industry arc 
among the immediate interests at 
stake. . . . 

The four decades which have fol- 
lowed [the American occupation in 
1898] have been full of spiritual and 
material blessings for the Philippines. 
We have made astounding progress in 
every Held. The years of the United 
Stales luielage in our country are rec- 
ognized by all today as a blessing to 
our people. 

Surely it was inevitable that in the 
years intervening there should have 
been some dissensions and difficulties 
be I ween two progressive peoples* 111 
the process of development and adjust- 
ment there were many plans, policies 
and ideals which ban 1 to be reconciled. 
This collection of differences in the past 
is now popularly referred to as the 
"Philippine problem." 

Actually, there have been no con- 
troversies of importance, In the long 
run we have been able to meet each 
(it-fact half-way. It is true, of course, 
that in the past 40 years we have had 
In adjust a great many problems. There 
was, for instance. I he political matter 
uj Independence aspirations- the desire 
of the Filipinos to run their own local 
I Turn to Page 22 ) 



VICE PRESIDENT WALLACE felicitating 
President Quezon on his 63rd birthday, 
August 19 f 194T: 

Tt is with real pleasure. Mr, Presi- 
dent, that I join with the people of the 
Philippine Commonwealth in felicitat- 
ing you on your birthday. The 63 years 
of your eventful life have been marked 
by the rise of the Filipinos as a na- 
tion from a condition of utter servi- 
tude, and that rise has been In great 
part due to your own efforts. 

Despite the growing national con- 
sciousness of the Filipinos and despite 
the passage in 1934 of the Philippine 
Independence Act. the Philippine Com- 
monwealth is still an integral pail of 
the United States, It will continue as a 
unit of our country at least until July 
4. 1946, when the present law provides 
that an independent Philippine Repub- 
lic shall be inaugurated. Until that 
day, Filipinos owe the same allegiance 
to the Stars and Stripes that we do 
here. And. Mr, President. I am happy 
to note that they are proving their 
loyalty just as convincingly. The en- 
thusiaslic response of the great mass 
of Filipinos to President Roosevelt's 
order Federalizing I lie Philippine Army 
has been a sou ret* of profound gratifi- 
cation to us in Washington. It is proof 
that the Philippine Com mon wealth 
stands with us, shoulder to shoulder, 
in the world wide defense of democracy. 

We here in Washington are well 
aware of the crisis facing Philippine 
economy as the result of your willing- 
ness to cooperate with us. Your crops 
cannot be marketed unless ships are 
available to carry them to market, 
The urgenl necessity of winning I he 
Battle of the Atlantic before anything 
else means thai your needs must in 
many cases take second place. Bui 
keep this in mind also. The moment 
I 7 urn / o Page 22 ) 




/?Li$4 flRD YOUR SUGAR BOUJL jgg 

^^fc M&^M George If. fair child ^^KJBP 



By George H* Fair child 

P r es I dcnl\ Phil i p pin e S agar A ss a ci at ion 




Imp: American housewife may not know iL but she 

has a direct interest in Administration efforts to main- 
tain enough cargo ships on the Pacific to move a million 
tons of Philippine sugar every year. The reason for this 
is simple: that million tons i approximately 15 per cent 
of the Lnited States" annual consumption) is the differ- 
ence between ample sugar for all and a system of ra- 
tioning. The housewife must pay — not in cash, hut in 
sugar — for every ship that is transferred from the Pa- 
cific Ocean to the Atlantic. 

Do not infer from this that I — or the Philippine Sugar 
Association which 1 represent — oppose American efforts 
lo aid Great Britain. Quite the contrary. The Battle of the 
Atlantic must be won, even if it means further drastic 
curtailment of Philippine sugar exports and an actual 
shortage of su^ar on the American market. What I do 
mam tain is that the national emergency must not be used 
as an excuse to cut our share of the American sugar mar- 
ket, a step that would bring economic chaos to a vital 
out | lost of democratic defense and real hardship to every 
consumer in the United States. 

1 infer conditions that have come to be accepted as 
normal during the past decade, sugar production, distri- 
bution and consumption throughout the world base been 
placed under control through a delicately balanced In- 
ternational Sugar Agreement, to which the United States 
and I he Phili ppines subscribed in 1937. Thus, as an exam- 
pi* 1 . I lie Philippine undertook to sell its sugar only lo 
tile \ niled Slates, abandoning its markets in China. I Jus- 




Sacks of raw sugar are piling up in Philippine ware- 
houses for lack of transportation to the United States. 

sia and other parts of the Far East. In return, it was 
assured of a stable market for a million tons of raw 
sugar a year, although the Philippines has grown as 
much as 1,500,000 tons in its best years. This figure 
f oSO.OOO long tons) was included in the Philippine In- 
dependence Act and the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 
1937. 

Kvcr\ sludenl of economics knows that, since the war. 
this delicately balanced distribution system has been 
entirely upset. Whole continents are now cut aflt from 



• 4 • 



their sources of supph. Important producing areas 
have been devastated I the Ukraine, for instance, grows 
su<rur heels for half of Russia I. Shipping shortages make 
it impossible for ofT-shore producers to deliver their full 
quotas. To eajj the eon fusion, consumption is rising 
steadily. 

AH this upheaval moans increasingly more serious 
shortages in the I nited Slates. Rationing is the inevitable 
ouleome, unless supplies ran bo assured and increased 
i mined iately. 

I I h ' L niled Stairs Govertimenl has In-m active ill tSf* 
i rii?; to meet these dangers. Its first step was to increase 
by l.OfHMHH) tons the amount of sugar that could be 
marketed in ibis country under the Agricultural Adjust- 
ment A el. More recently, it established a price "ceiling" 
of ill roe and a half cents a pound for ran suiiar reach- 
ing the refiners. This has prevented for I he time being 
any further general rise in prices* But. even with the 
increased marketing quotas, the American housewife — the 
ultimate user of the sugar — soon will be unable to bu\ 
the amount of sugar she wants. 

This is whore the Philippines comes into the domestic 
sugar picture. The million tuns a year from the Common- 
wealth, produced and controlled under the sovereignty 
of the United States, may be the difference between fam- 
ine and sufficiency , It is essential to the well-being of 
every American housewife, therefore, that the flow of 
sugar across the Pacific not bo impeded. 

It is no secret that we are now having difficulty get- 
ting the Philippine sugar crop delivered to Inited States 
refineries. The indications are that the year will end 



with between 70.000 and 100,000 tons of our quota lying 
on the doeks at Manila, Ihulo and CebiL due lo the 
alarming lack of ships available on the Pacific to carry 
crude sugar. Unless next year brings a drastic improve- 
ment, sugar receipts in the I nked States from the Philip- 
pines will fall short of requirements by 750.000 tons. 

The only remedv for this dangerous situation is posi- 
tive action bv the I nited States Maritime Commission 
in assigning additional ships to the Philippine service. 
New cargo vessels are beginning to come off the ways: 
even one that can possibly be spared from the Atlantic 
should be turned over to a company operating in the 
trans-Pacific trade. Resolute steps are necessar> if sugar 
rationing is to be avoided. 

1 repeat: Do not interpret this as evidence that Philip- 
pine sugar producers insist that their interests he put 
ahead of those of the nation. Far from it. Members of 
my association. Americans and Filipinos alike, are united 
in the conviction that the Administration"? foreign policy 
must have absolute precedence over private desires. 
What we do object to is the tendency to use the war-time 
shortage of shipping as an excuse to bar Philippine sugar 
from the American market. If a sacrifice h necessary, it 
must be general — not limited to the Filipinos. 

W o feel that any diversion of cargo vessels from the 
Pacific that is not absolutely essential to winning the war 
is an unjustifiable disruption of a mutualK profitable 
trade involving millions of American and Filipino farm- 
ers and factory workers, Furthermore— and this touches 
every American — it is an action that will inevitably 
result in an acute shortage of sugar — with rationing the 
inevitable result. ^ 




Two million Filipinos earn a living from Center: Sugar is the moat important Modern steam tractors speed the planting 

the sugar industry. cargo of ships and railways. of the cane fields. 



America's ftrente»l >foiniiiM*ni 
in I In* IMiili|»|Hiios is the 
Eflu«*alioiial Svslcrti 




AT is a favorite sport among laymen and educators, 
American as well as Filipino, to discuss the progress of 
education in the Philippines. Even as critical a group as 
the Monroe Survey Board of 1925 had this to say about 
the Philippine educational system 15 years ago: 

"One of the most remarkable chapters in the history 
of education has been written since the opening of the 
twentieth century in the Philippine Islands. The stu- 
dent will scan the pages of history long before he will 
read of an adventure in human enlightenment more hold 
than that which has been undertaken in this oriental 
setting. Attribute it to the naive faith of America in her 
mvn institutions and ideals, or to the wisdom of far- 
seeing statesmanship, the result remains the same. For 
25 years these Islands have served as a laboratory for 
an educational experiment of enormous magnitude and 
complexity. To any one interested in the technical prob- 
lems of classroom instruction, in the general admin- 
istration of education, in the relation of the school to 
social conditions, in the effects flowing from the con- 
tacts of diverse culture, in the more abstruse problems 
of the ethnologist, or in the wider human problems of 
the adjustment of races this experiment will have deep 
significance/" 

Everything else considered, education will remain as 
America's greatest contribution to Philippine civiliza- 
tion. As a matter of fact, her achievements in business, 
government, hygiene and sanitation, social relations, 
and even in the fields of religion, science and technology 
were made possible largely because of an effective eoV 
cational system. This fact assumes still greater signifi- 
cance when one remembers the tremendous handicaps 
that the system had to face from the beginning. The lan- 
guage difficulty was only one of these, 

Filipinos have always had an enthusiastic belief in 
the efficacy of education in promoting the welfare of 
I he pcoplr. In the United Slates it is necessary to pass 



n B y Cam Ho Osias 

Chairman AA v - 

' m *m**e Mm&tal Council of Education 

PWlf^nff * I'igid compulses attendance laws. In the 
to ni V rT ! '"'""pulsion is u|,,u the Government 

prov.de more and more educational facilities. Year 

Lhr/sl?r ar i° UL Wl BuU ""'* ! » North to SuJti in 
Cover, * i]e ° j,le nmkp tffcWtah* demands upon the 

i e X T (> [ mwre m <™->- ^««ls. The Philip- 

I - AaUonal Assembly has an invariable annual head- 

£ S" ** Edueation certifies each June. 

*<hL\ I u 1>en " thaL lh «w*"d B «' ^ildren of 

that 1 If ? annot be ac fommodated. Without exception 
ohh, r to a Ppr«|>riate an additional amount. 

«J« from ita reaerve hmd ^ h rurXaiU other aclivi ; 

3S ? ° nIer l ° the ^mands of parents for 

scnool money. 

Even then, these provisions often h £ 



more 



mented by contributions from the people. Every year 
every provuice, the peopfe, yearning for the educat 

Ot the.r children and convinced that the resources of 



Gove 
hav 



ave to toe supple- 
ear in 
at ion 

* .... . the 

rnment have been exhausted, give everything thev 
te t even to the posts that are needed to strengthen their 
^nes agamst the annual typhoon, m order, themselves. 

r " ^ U1 j i M>lh<)USeS: and ™ he » the buildings are 
lumhed by voluntary labor, thev hire a teacher with 

at „ mtle money they have or with its equivalent in 
nee, fuel, fish, and coconuts, or board and lodging, or 
a promissory note until the Government can send them 
a teacher or certify to the availability of funds. 

I he children, in turn, are eager to go to school. Thev 
consider it unfair punishment to be kept out of school 
for any length of time. From the first grade up, they 
manage in a most remarkable manner to learn— in the 
borrowed English language— their three R's. to say 
nothing of finding out what took place at the Boston 
Tea Party and whether George Washington really cut 
down the cherry tree. If a) times they memorize 'their 
mathematics or geograph> or history' lessons without 
understanding, forgive them. Remember how few of 



• 6 • 



their childhood experiences have been associated ivilli 
the English language. 

But in Spite of these and Other handicaps, if we look 
al the aehie\ e merits of l lie schools in the past four short 
decades, even the most pessimistic of us has every reason 
to glorify America's genius in establishing an eduea- 
tional system that in many ways surpasses some of the 
best in the t nited States, and to extol the Filipinos* cor- 
responding: aptitude for " k readin\ "ril in", and Vilhme- 
tic " 

Let us enumerate a fen uf these achievements : 

1. Through this school system, patterned after the 
American plan and using English as its medium of in- 
struction, a MaUn people, who for more Mian three 
ecu Lu ties lived under Spanish rule, with schools avail- 
able for only the privileged few. has been introduced 
to Anglo-Saxon institutions and civilization. Through 
this system an effort has been made to give a common 
language to more than 16 million people. One now can 
travel to the far corners of the archipelago and be under- 
stood in the English language, 

2. Through this system the teachers have sought to 
bring to the Orient the products of science and tech- 
nology. In 10 years the dreaded cholera and smallpox 
ha\ c been nearly eradicated, and other diseases arc now 
under control. Agriculture, transportation, and commu- 
nication show a record of substantial progress, 

3. Through this system literacy has increased from 
5 per cent at the time of the American occupation to 70 
per cent at the present. The right to vote and to hold office 
is given to women, and the latest figures show that our 



election records are. in general, free from serious irregu- 
larities and that the percentage of those voting compares 
favorablv with the best records in the American states 
and in national elections in the United States, 

4, Through this system the people have learned to 
exploit their resources — lands, mines, forests, and 
waters. There are no breadlines in the Islands. During 
the depression the national budget was balanced. \\ e 
have never failed to meet our financial obligations and 
our country has one of the lowest per capita debts today, 

5, Foremost of the achievements of the educational 
system is its success in preparing the people for demo- 
cratic self-government. Among the leaders in the Govern- 
ment service today are graduates of our educational 
institutions. The fight for Philippine independence and 
its successful consummation are partly a product of our 
study of American history. One reason why we today have 
a successful republican form of government is the fact 
that the schools, themselves, were the training ground 
for democratic citizenship, 

If we compare the conditions in the Philippines today 
to those in Europe. South America. Asia, and even North 
America, we find that there are few ways in which the 
Filipinos are inferior with respect to internal peace, 
material comforts, economic stability, or religion. The 
unity of our people under wise leadership can be attrib- 
uted in large part to wise guidance by America through 
a modern, effective system of education. We learned our 
lessons well because America has been a good I albeit 
exacting) teacher. ^ 



lessons in the care of live- 
stock are part of the curricu- 




7 




LAWYER 

FOR THE PEOPLE 



By P. C. Morantte 




HE.\ in 1 92 1 General Leonard Wood was Gov- 
ernor-General of the Philippines, he undertook to abolish 
the "Board of Control" which the previous Governor- 
General. F. EL Harrison, had established in the Insular 
Government. Wood claimed the Board had no standing 
in law and was usurping the powers of the Governor- 
GeneraL He found formidable opposition in a youthful 
lawyer named Jose Yulo y Yulo- who fought the move all 
the way to the Supreme Court of the United States, Yulo 
lost the case, but his action brought him to the forefront 
of Philippine lawyers* A little later. Manuel L. Quezon, 
today President of the Commonwealth, admitted to 
friends; "Yulo is the equivalent of any three other legal 
minds in the Philippines/ 3 

That legal brilliance has taken Jose Yulo a long way. 
Still comparatively young, the ex-Speaker of the .National 
Assembly is president of the National ista Party and one 
of the men to whom Filipinos look for future leadership. 

Even as early as 1921. Yulo was already recognized 
as the foremost corporation lawyer in the Islands. As 
attorney for the Philippine sugar industry, he had one 
of the most impressive incomes in Manila. This lucrative 
private practice continued until 1934. when Gov ernor- 
General Frank Murphy and Senate President Quezon 
prevailed upon Yulo to accept the post of Secretary of 
Justice. The step, his friends declare, meant accepting a 
salary about one-fourth of his previous income. 

As Secretary of Justice. Jose Yulo instituted a whole 
series of judicial reforms. The entire Department of 
J us Lice was reorganized. An improved standard of ju- 
dicial learning was achieved; the machinery was more 
efficient, and public respect for the courts was increased. 

As iegal adviser to the President of the Philippines, 
Serrctar\ of Justice Yulo was instrumental in obtain- 
ing <■ < nconut oil excise tax refund of S50 7 000 ? 000 for 
the Commonwealth from the United States Treasury. The 
legality of the refund had been seriously questioned by 
some American interests: Filipinos, on the other hand, 
believed that the excise collected on Philippine coconut 
nil under ihe Agricultural Adjustment Act legally be- 
longed to the Philippines. Yulo took charge of the case for 
the Commonwealth: after a brilliant fight in the United 
States courts, he established the legality of the refund. 



From I9M1 t<. 1938, con- 
currently with his position as 
Scnvlary nf Justice. Yulo 
was also rhairman nf the 
board nf directors nf the 
Philippine Vuinnal Bank, 
ffis tmnrr was marked by a 
general improvement of the 
institution's condition. Bank- 
in g facilities were aug* 
mcntcth provincial branches 
were established, and invest- 
ments put on a much more 
solidjjasis. The result of his 
work was a net profit of S-L75O.O0U — the most im- 
pressive ever realized h\ the Philippine National Bank, 

Not until 1938 did Jose Yulo enter politics. He was 
shy and lacking in political experience: even his most 
influential friends were a little bit dubious about his 
future. But his decision to resign his Justice portfolio 
and run for an elective oflire was wise. Seeking a seat in 
the National Assembly frnm the third district nf Occi- 
dental Negros Province. Yulo was elected by the largest 
majority ever polled under the Commonwealth. 

When the Assembly convened. President Quezon 
backed Assemblyman Yulo fnr the Speaker's chair. The 
former Secretary of Justice was elected without serious 
opposition, and held the position until this Fa lb when he 
resigned to run for the newly created Philippine Senate. 

One of the most easily visible results of YinVs leader- 
ship in the Assembly can be seen in the Constitution, He 
was a leading exponent of an amendment to reduce the 
age qualification of Assemblymen to 25 and of Senators 
to 35. And as president of the dominant Nationalist a 
Party, he managed the national plebiscite on amending 
the Constitution to permit revival of the two-house legis- 
lature and to permit the President of the Philippines to 
serve two four-year terms rather than one of six years. 

When the Filipino people showed in the plebiscite that 
they approved of these changes in their charter, Yulo 
came to the United States to explain the Assembly's stand 
to the President of the United States. Many of his coun- 
trymen give Yulo credit for the fact that these amend- 
ments were accepted by President Roosevelt. 

On his return to the Philippines early this year. 
Speaker Yulo was hailed by the people of Manila. Speak- 
ing to a great rally on the green Luneta. facing Manila 
Bay. he told them: 

'These amendments are now part of our Constitution, 
and it is for us all to work them out as intelligently and 
speedily as we can. in order to con veil them into a living 
portion of the fundamental law of the land, . . , My 
little task h done, but the much bigger task which is 
ours— yours and mine— has only begun. May we. each 
and all of us. be equal tn the task which remains." ^ 



• 8 • 



UNION for DEMOCRACY 



Olijci'lives off I lie Cm mm if lee 
for Philippine Ameriean 
tu 1 I iiral It el at ions 

By II I alter Brooks Foley 
★ ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ 



JLF we bungle, we re sunk ! Thai is not high-grade Shake- 
Spear ian English, Km even that great dramatist used 
slang that still sounds modem; W e Americans bungled 
20 years ago when the opportunity came for world leader- 
shit). W$ missed the boat, the bus and a better order of 
civilization For that bit ill bungling w€ arc now paying 
tlie highest price? in flesh and blood and finance, However 
we are being given a ehanee to sit in again on the game 
being played around the world table. We need all our 
wit and wisdom. We can't a fiord to make anv mistakes 
III judgment this time. 

One way to avoid playing the wrong kind of game is 
to check up on the actual cards we hold, particularly the 
strong cards, One is die fact of a great base of funda- 
mental democracy in the Philippines, This is not always 
readily observable in government forms and formulas- 
in tactics of political parties, or in measures of economic 
procedure. It is essential that we look back over the past 
bin id red years and see the reiterated struggle of manv 
individuals to find safety in freedom, and life satisfaction 
in release from grinding restrictions. 

The resistance to arbitrary controls was more clearlv 
evidenced in the Philippines, and more consistently 
declared, than in any other Oriental country. When In- 
dia was acquiescing in domination by England, with 
scarcely more than a ripple id' resentment, when the 
Netherlands Indies lav quiet, with scarcely a struggle 
against Holland, when China was sub-divided by pro- 
vincial war lords and the people crushed, when Japan 
was destroying individual rights in favor of government 
control, in the Philippines the fires of freedom flamed 
again and again. 

That flame has become the throbbing heart -heat of 
democracy in Asia, Not yet has the Philippine place in 
this advance been accurately estimated. In Manila, the 
Committee for Philippine American Cultural Relations, 
of which I am executive secretary, is assessing its value 
and presenting the refined gold of democratic enterprise. 
Like other social procedures, we know that democracy 
cannot be grown unless it finds itself in satisfactory soil 
and is assisted by att adecfuate climate. It is a common- 
place to say that doctrines like communism e an not he 
transplanted from original seed -beds and be expected to 
grow unless the new fields have been found suitable for 
the reception of the plants. Thai statement is based on the 
truism that people of ever J locality produce the results 
I hat occur. What people desire, that they eventually 



secure. Democracy has developed in the Philippines be* 
cause the people resented the political- economic and 
cultural restrictions* and they revolted against tyranny. 
This made it possible to add to the soil and climate of 
Philippine life the seeds of democracy discovered by the 
United States in its adventurous social advance. 

The members of our Committee- both Americans and 
Filipinos, recognize that nations have now reached a 
new period in the world history. Without hesitation- and 
without surrender of national loyalties, we feel that our 
loyalty to freedom and democracy requires mingling our 
beliefs and efforts with those in other sections of the 
world, who believe and work as we do. in order to pro- 
ceed any further. It seems to us thai democracy has gone 
as far as it can nationally. Its only hope for survival is 
on a world scale. We arc not willing to be stalemated. 
We arc insistent on expansion through union. 

The challenge is for "union now" rapidh and cer- 
tainh. without* the traditional bungling. That requires 

genius the genius of common humanity in its search 

for the grail of worthful living. The country that 
tries to Save its own soul these days by staying within 
its own borders will surely lose. The nation that seems 
superficial I v to lose its national soul for the sake of the 
gospel of building a more decent world order will surely 
find it. It is not sufficient to defend our borders, we must 
extend them. We urge that this is the pot of gold at the 
foot of the international rainbow, where clouds seem to 
have blotted out the sun. Democracy is not charity: it is 
our only chance. That is why we must not bungle. That is 
why a group of us. liv ing in the Philippines and seeing 
world life in perspective, believe fundamentally in the 
future advance of Philippine American cultural relations. 

It is our ambition to see that these relations are not 
roncerned alone with the loyalty of North Americans 
and Philippine Americans to a common democratic ideal. 
We can have, m other words, no hyphenated loyalty. We 
are after a dedication of ourselves to a world praetrce of 
democratic principles. We start only, where we are, using 
our individual tasks as the platform from which we pro- 
claim the doctrine of world freedom and democracy. 
We have no hyphen in the title of our Committee. 1 here 
is no point of' hesitation in our common belief. 

We cannot afford to bungle at this point. Tins is no 
lime for "muddling through," We need to promote pre- 
cision in democratic precedure. We must exchange our 
values until thev flow together. We must destroy our dis- 
agreements. We must base our program on our nmiimm 
democratic desire. Trade must be in the interest of as 
manv people as possible. Polities must be of. by. and for 
as many citizens as will cooperate. Education must set 
minds free in an atmosphere fit willingness to cooperate. 
Spiritual techniques must be used in collaboration, not 

division. „ 

Out of this spirit of acKenture will come a greater 
Asia not huilt on battleships. Out of this will come a 
new world order got founded oti futilities or antago- 
nism. Mutual mingling interests .-an he made to keep ns 
from muddling. + 



• 9 • 



PHILIPPINE LITERACY: 



By Cesar M. Lorenzo 

great asset in the social, economic and political 
progress of a country is her literate population. Indeed. 
President Manuel L. Quezon took cognizance of this fact 
when he said: £ "Our country must have a wholly liter- 
ate population, because only on the foundation of m 
intelligent public opinion can we build the structure 
of liberty and sound government.' 7 

The National Assembly, aware of the necessity of 
eradicating illiteracy, several years ago created the Office 
of Adult Education. This agency started to function 
within two years of the inauguration of the Common- 
wealth Government. Almost simultaneously, the Bureau 
of Education expanded tremendously its work in primary 
education. In fact, the increase in public school enroll- 
ment during the first three years of the Commonwealth 
equaled that of any previous ten -year period. The com- 
bined efforts of the Bureau of Education today seem 
to promise the practical elimination of illiteracy in a few 
more decades. 

Let us now examine the state of Philippine literacy as 
reported by the Philippine Censuses of 1939 ? 1918, and 
1903. Census practice considers only persons 10 years 
old or over and able to read and write as literates. 

In 1903 about one-fifth of the total Christian popu- 
lation could read and write. The proportion of literate 
men was nearly double that of women. The census 
of 1918 also collected information on literacy, but the 
tabulated data are not comparable with the 1903 or 
1939 figures because of a different definition used. In 
the census of 1939, about one^half of the total popula- 
tion (including non-Christians) could read and write. 

The percentage of literacy, therefore, had more than 
doubled in about 36 years. Among the women the 1939 
figure was more than four times greater than that for 
1903, The general increase in the percentage of literacy 
reflected the progress made by Lhe Philippine public 
schools during the same period. The enormous increase 
m literate women was primarily a reflection of the fact 
that the same educational opportunities are now open 
tu them as to men. 

Although the figures are not strictly comparable, the 
percentage of literacy in the Philippines in 1939 was 
very much higher than that for British India in 1931. 
Moreover, it compared favorably with Mexico, Portugal 
and Spain in 1930. Literacy in the Philippines was much 
inferior to that of Japan, Canada and the United States, 

The prevalence of literacy in the Philippines in 1939 

\ Turn to Page 22) 



■4 £\ f\ 

190.3 





1939^ 




BOTH 
SEXES 




V 1 V 


MALE 


■ ■■■■II 54-3% 24.6V. 




FEMALE 


^ ^ ^ ^ 1 43.2% 32.5% 


EACH 


COMPLETE 


SYMBOL = 10% LITERACY 



PERCENTAGE OF LITERACY IN THE PHILIPPINES 
IN THE DIFFERENT OCCUPATIONAL GR0UPS-I939 



% 100 80 SO 40 2.0 



20 AO GO 70 % 



CLERICAL 
99,7 % 



PROFE3 SIGNAL 

97. a 



PUBLIC SERVICE 
95 J % 



TRANSPORTATION AND 
y\ COMMUNICATION 



77.Z % 



MINING AND 
QUARRYING 
75-1 % 



TRADE 
68 4 % 



rig* 

MANUFACTURING 




FISHING 
49.4 % 



DOMESTIC 
48 .2 % 



AGRICULTURE 
40-9 % 



FORESTRY AND 
HUNTING 
36.3% 




PERCENTAGE OF LITERACY OF THE 
PHILIPPINES AND OTHER COUNTRIES 



titnwitnnH, 



UNITED STATES- 95.7% 

millllnn 



CANADA- 



-95,7 % 




J ARAN - 



-90.0 % 




PNILtRPINES 
4B 8 % 



SPAIN-- 4 7.2 •/. 




i 



MEXICO 407 % 



PORTUGAL 32 2% 

BRITISH INDIA 
9.5% 



EACH COMPLETE SYMBOL m 10% LITERACY 



* SO 



IS WHERE WE FIO 

By H. Foster Bain 

Advisor. Philippine Bureau of Mines 

active campaign of exploration tor 
petroleum is under wa\ in the I^liilippi 
Whether or not commercial oil fields will 
he found cannot, of course, be foretold. 
However, competent oil men From the 
United States feel that indications warrant 
drilling at a number of points. 

Although expectations of finding oil 
fields in the Philippines go hack to Span- 
ish times, actual development has lagged, 
despite the well-known presence of gas 
escapes, oil seeps, bituminous residues, 
and good-looking geological structures. A 
few shallow holes have indeed been drilled: 
some have even produced oil. but in terms 
of gallons per day rather than barrels per 
hour. Until recently, only one serious at- 
tempt had been made with modern tools 
and skill to find production. That was in 
the early 20"s when the Standard Oil Co. 
of California drilled on Bondoe Peninsula 
in Southern Luzon. Five holes were 
started, and one was continued to a depth 
of slightly more than a mile. Drillers 
found gas and showings of oil. but nothing 
commercial* The venture was abandoned after a re- 
ported expenditure of some SI .500.000. 

Standard Oil officials stated that that sum was as 
much as they felt justified in spending on a single wild- 
eat venture. They were also careful to point out that 
while they felt the particular structure drilled had been 
adequately tested without favorable result, this did not 
necessarily condemn the Islands as a whole or. in fact, 
anything but the area drilled. 

After this, several other American companies went 
into the field. While some apparently were willing to 
spend considerable sums on the venture, no tangible 
results were obtained. 

Thorough-going investigation of Philippine oil pros- 
pects has consistently been hampered bj the land laws. 
Holdings are strictly limited in size, and inter-locking 
ownership is prohibited. The difficulties were compounded 
by an epidemic of unwholesome speculation, which re- 
sulted in a public scandal a few years ago. The sub- 
sequent cancellation of all oil prospecting permits 
brought an end t<> private enterprise in this field. 




Shortly after the outbreak 
of the war. the Philippine 
Government ordered the Na- 
tional Development Com- 
pany, in cooperation with 

the Bureau of Mines, to 
make a comprehensive geo- 
logical survey ot all pros- 
pective oil fields. 

The National Develop* 
ment Company is a govern- 
ment-owned corporation or- 
ganized under special law. 
As a corporation, it is able 
in main wa\s to act more 
directly and quickly than 



* 



Three scenes 
from the oil 
prospecting 
operations re- 
cently under- 
taken in the 
Philippines by 
the National 
Development 
Company. 
Two rigs are 
now wildcat- 
ting on the is- 
land of Cebu. 




even the best official bureau. It has the further advantage 
that it is exempt from limitations on land holdings. It 
docs, however, pa) taxes comparable to those Faced b\ 
private companies, and it has been steadil) administered 
frpm the point of \ie\\ of supplementing rather than 

supplanting private initiative in development. In the 
matter of petroleum, it seemed to be the onl) agencj 
capable of moving ahead under the actual conditions. 

Work on the geological sur\e\ was according!) begun 
in the Spring of 1939. A seven-volume confidential re- 
port covering all but the southern islands was tiled with 

i Turn to Page 23 \ 



• 11 • 





fc- 





A — University of Santo Tomas, 
Manila, established by Span- 
ish friars 25 years before Har- 
vard was founded, 

B — -University of the Philip- 
pines co-eds pause on their 
way to class, 

C — Monument to the Filipino 
farmer at the Central Luzon 
Agricultural School. 

D — Typical dental and health 
clinic in a Philippine primary 
school. 

E — Students at work in a 
Manila trade school. 







\ ,.>j 




:r. 







Hi 








IT V** By J nines K. Eyre, Jr. 



.OST Americans realize that the Philippine Islands 
occupy a strategic position in the Far East. Y<$t it is 
probably true that little is known about their exact geo- 
graphical boundaries. The process of fixing those boun- 
daries imolved many interesting historical forces, A 
comparatively narrow strip of water, for instance, sepa- 
rates the Japanese possession of Formosa from the north- 
ern end of the Philippines* Definition of the exact line 
between Japan and the Philippines, which took place 
during the waning years of Spanish sovereignty in the 
Islands- is still of considerable importance, 

In 18944895, Japan decisively defeated Imperial 
China upon the battlefield. In the peace settlement which 
follower! the victors were ceded the island of Formosa, 
contiguous to the northern part of the Philippine Archi- 
pelago. Japan's growing strength was in direct contrast 
to the decadence of Spain's colonial administration, Not 
unnaturally, Madrid feared that Japan's southward ex- 
pansion might create serious difficulty. Rumors were cur* 
rent that the Japanese coveted the Philippines. Although 
these reports were of little validity, the seriousness with 
which they were treated indicated the Spanish feeling 
of insecurity. 

Spain sought to secure an understanding with Japan 
which would clarify future relations between the two 
coim tries. Accordingly, on August 7, 1895, a treaty was 
signed at Tokyo by the accredited representatives of the 
Spanish and Japanese Governments, There was much 
rejoicing at Madrid, since it was believed that Spain s 
hold on the Philippines had been made more secure. 
Buried among the events of the past, this little treaty 
has received scant attention from American observers* 
Its text, printed in both French and Spanish, may be 
found in the official set of treaties published by the Span- 
ish monarchy shortly after the beginning of the present 
century. The agreement was brief and to the point, 

Don Jose de la Rica y Calvo, the Spanish Minister at 
Tokyo, acted in behalf of his Government, Japan was 
represented by Marquis Saionji, Minister of Public In- 
struction, who later became one of his country's most 
honored statesmen. In the opening statement, it was 
asserted that Japan and Spain, in the spirit of friend- 
ship v.hieh existed between them, wished to determine the 
line of demarcation between their respective possessions 
in the western Pacific It was agreed by the two con- 
tracting parties that I lie degree of latitude which passes 



through the Bachi [or Bashi] Channel represented the 
boundary line between Japanese and Spanish territory. 
The channel referred to lies between Formosa and the 
Batancs Islands off the northern coast of Luzon. Japan 
also announced that it did not have any claims upon the 
islands to the south and southeast of this line, Spain 
made a similar assertion concern i Jig tile islands to the 
north and northeast. 

Following Spain's defeat by the L ni ted States in 1898. 
a peace conference was held at Paris. It was decided that 
the Philippines in its entirety should be ceded to the 
United States- Therefore it became necessary to define 
clearly the territorial limits of the Islands, In the nego- 
tiations which followed, the agreement which had been 
signed in 1895 by Japan and Spain was utilize* I by the 
peace commissioners. Article III of the Treaty of Paris 
outlined the northern boundary of the Philippines as 
follows: U A line running from west to east along or near 
the twentieth parallel of north latitude, and through the 
middle of the navigable channel of Bachi. from the one 
hundred and eighteenth I 118th) to the one hundred and 
twenty seventh (127th I degree meridian of longitude 
east of Greenwich, . , 

In 1900 the question was raised whether the Batancs 
and Calayan Islands were Philippine territory. Ameri- 
can troops occupied them, and the Spanish Ministry for 
Foreign Affairs took cognizance of this action. It was 
acknowledged that, according to the terms of both the 
Treaty of Paris and the earlier agreement between Spain 
and Japan, these islands properly belonged to the Philip- 
pine Archipelago and that they legally had passed into the 
possession of the United States. ^ 



SPAIN'S JAFAM-4895 





FORMOSA 
3 (JAPAN) 



FRENCH 



Saigon 



jAPAtt 



KCRTK DANQER 

HALF MOON 
SHOAL 
W • * 

-5 SPRATLY /. 

SWALLOW 1, 




BRITISH; 

gig ^kf&f y 



14 • 



Tlit* i»w IHriM'tor of llio 
Hi vision of TVrrilorios 
and Island Possessions 
I'litlersiaiiiis lloili l»ofiM<»s 
and Diplomacy 



\j LY J, SWOPE set many tongues tp wagging in \\ ash- 
inglon last summer when he voluntarily resigned his 
$15.000-plus job as Governor of Puerto Rieo lo accept 
an $8,000 position as Director of the Division of Terri- 
tories and Island Possessions in the Interior Department. 

Jo politics such an action is virtually without prece- 
dent- unless the subject is under extreme duress, and, as 
far as can be determined, no d ureases were involved in 
Governor Swope's decision. In fact, both Secretary of the 
Interior Harold L, [ekes and the vast majority of the 
Puerto Rican people considered him highly satisfaetory 
as Governor. Such an accord regarding a Governor of 
Puerto Rico is so unusual as to be historical ; in the 
past Secretary [ekes, as the Cabinet officer in charge 
of Federal administration in Puerto Rico, has often 
formed one apex of a restless and unhappy triangle, 
with the Governor and the people of Puerto Rico at the 
other points. 

But Swope chose to resign the governorship. While 
his action mystified many, and gave rise lo any number 
of extravagant explanations, the reasons which Swope 
himself acknowledged were both logical and simple. He 
felt the portfolio of the Director of Territories was one 
which he could competently handle; at the same time 
the shift would bring him closer to his political origins 
In Pennsylvania. He believed in the simple philosophy 
of giving up sweets while the taste is still pleasant. 

Director Swope surprised cynical observers by taking 
an immediate interest in his new job. He tack Ice! Phil- 
ippine affairs as if they had always been his primary 
concern in life. He show r ed similar enterprise in study- 
ing Alaska, Hawaii and the Virgin Islands, Territorial 
officials were agreeably surprised at Swope's genuine in- 
terest in their problems*. Realists, they had expected him 
to use the Territories post as a "breather" while await- 
ing political developments in Pennsylvania. They were 
mistaken* 

Undeniably, Swope's talents lean toward politics, but 
he is also a much-hellcr-lhan-average administrator. Ob- 
servers believe his tenure in the Territories post will be 




By Julius C. Edel stein 



about as long as he chooses. His shrewd amiability should 
make it possible for him to get along with his superiors, 
with his subordinates, and with the public whom he must 
serve. Swope owes this talent to his political training. 
Or it may be that he owes his success in polities to this 
talent. 

To Guy Swope. politics is a method of getting things 
done in a way that will disgruntle the least possible 
number of those to and for whom they are being done. 
In Puerto Rico, for instance, politics is about as in- 
volved as anywhere on earth; Swope sat on the political 
lid there, dispensed patronage, and saw through a revo- 
lutionary program of social and economic legislation- 
all without making any considerable number of per- 
sonal enemies. 

On an island where Governors from Washington oc- 
casionally arouse an all-too-active native opposition. 
Swope was conspicuously not shot at. There were other 
factors, of course, but during Swope 's brief term Puerto 
Rico enjoyed its first political armistice in years. 

Following his appointment. Swope delighted Puerto 
Ricans by delivering part of his inaugural address 
in carefully rehearsed Spanish, Laboriously he has ac- 
quired since then a fair speaking knowledge of Spanish: 
he reads it readily, too. Today, he has a working ac- 
quaintance with Latin-American psychology and polit- 
ical techniques, which should be of real value in his 
new job. 

Personally, Sw r ope is of a type usually described as 
"having a pleasing personality."' He is above medium 
height and well-built, with a good head of light curly 
hair. He wears rimless glasses, and is inclined to thrust 
out his jaw lo show purpose and determination, Swope. 
whose voice has a pleasing rasp, has a tendency lo roll 
his rrr's like a Fourth of July orator, 

A Pennsylvania Dutchman, as he will tell you upon 
slight provocation. Guy Swope is the kind of self-made 
man who doesn't burst with il. He was born in a legiti- 
mate log cabin in Mcrkville. Berks County. Pennsyl- 

I Turn lo Page 21) 



• 15 • 



Si. 1 MARKET 



AMERICAN W 



FARMERS AND 



RS LOOK AT 



THE PHILIPPINES 



By Herman Fakler 

Vi cc - Preside n t , Mil te r.s f 
Na t i on at F ed e ra I i o n 



A sling full of Ameri- 
can flour is loaded for 
the Philippines. 



■ even 
great 



Ml EW Americans - 
those living in the 
wheat belts of the Middle 
West and the Pacific North- 
west - — realize the import- 
ance of the Philippine mar- 
ket to the producers of 
American flour. Neverthe- 
less, it is a fact that one sack 
out of every five exported by 
the United States is con- 
sumed in the Philippine 
Commonwealth, Filipino 
purchases during the past 
decade have averaged S2.203.476 a year. 

In other words, between 1931 and 1940, American 
wheat farmers, millers and shippers alone received more 
trom sales of Hour to the Philippines than the United 
Mates Government paid to Spam following the cession 
<>t the Islands to this country after the Spanish-American 
War. 

This fact is important today, because the Philippines 
i* one of the few rich overseas markets remaining to 
^neriean farmers and processors. Furthermore. it\as 
peetl in increasing jeopardy during the past two years 
m the wake of the stringent shortage of cargo ships in 
the Pacific. Unless this situation is corrected, we may 
tase the bulk of our most important export market. 

Some features of our flour shipments to the Philip- 
pines are interesting. For instance, American flour enjoys 





Herman Fakler 

the protection of the Insular 
tariff walL through which 
United Stales products pass 
without payment. At present, 
this advantage amounts to 
42 cents a barrel. For another 
thing, our trade is on a strict- 
ly f ash basis; commerce has 
never been dependent on 
loans from American banks 
or government agencies. 
Neither has this business 
been complicated by the fi- 
nancial restrictions, frozen 
credits, quotas or barter arrangements that prevail in 
many other markets. American wheat farmers and mil- 
lers have always found their business with the Philippines 
a source of mutual satisfaction. 

Our flour exports to the Islands originate in the great 
wheat fields of Oregon. YX ashmgton and Idaho, where 
annually more than 110.000,000 bushels are harvested. 
Since these States utilize only 27.000.000 bushels locally 
for seed , feed or human consumption, approximately 
83,000.000 bushels must be disposed of in outside mar- 
kets. Remember that from 85 to 95 per cent of the farm 
land in the Pacific Northwest wheat belt is devoted to 
this one crop (53,000 individual fauns are involved], 
and you will understand the importance of the export 
market to these States, 

During the past decade, the Philippines, which has 



• 16 * 



a steadily rising standard of living and a rapidly increas- 
ing population, ha? imported an average of 925.000 bar- 
rels of flour a year. Approximately 60 per cent of this 
has come from the United States. Australia has supplied 
about 25 per cent and Canada some 13 per cent. 

Australian flour, ground from the same type of soft 
Wheat l hat the American prod net is T is the principal 
competitor of United Stales flour. Canadian flour, ground 
from hard wheat, is less popular. It is interesting to note 
that, during the decade ending December 30, 1910, 
American Hour unloaded at Manila bad an average 
value of S-L08 per barrel, against 81.10 for Canadian 
flour and S3. 26 for Australian. 

American millers bad no difficulty holding the Imlk 
of the Philippine market against Canada and Australia 
until 1935. The Philippine tariff of 12 cents per 196- 
pound barrel, which did not apply to our products as 
it did to the others, gave us an important advantage. 
Our exports began to decline in 1935- however, in con- 
sequence of lower prices and stiller competition from 
Australia. Adoption by the Federal government of a 
system of export subsidies reversed the trend in 1936. 
That subsidy today amounts to 60 cents per barrel. 
American flour, therefore, enjoys a $1.02 advantage (42 
cents Philippine tariff and 60 cents export subsidy). 

The Philippine market for flour — as for many other 
American products — has increased steadily in import- 
ance. In 1900. the Islands imported 90,000 barrels. Ten 
years later the figure was 285.000 and this was nearly 
doubled { 500,000 barrels \ hv 1920. Imports approxi- 
mated 800,000 barrels in 1930, Dining both 1939 and 
1910, Philippine purchases of foreign flour materially 
exceeded 1,000,000 barrels. 

One effect of the wars in 
Europe and Asia has been 
a substantial increase in the 
Commonwealth demand for 
American and Canadian 
flour. Imports from the 
United States rose 200.000 
barrels in 1940, and those 



from Canada were 
proximately 20,000. 



up aj>- 
Lareel v 




because of the serious shortage of shipping space fol- 
lowing wholesale withdrawal of British tonnage from 
the Pacific. Australia's share of the Philippine flour 
market dropped nearly 150.000 barrels in 1940. 

Figures gathered by the Insular Collector of Customs 
show that ibis tendency was reversed in the first four 
months of 1941. Canada. Australia and the United 
States all show substantial increases. Total imports 
rose from 357,000 barrels in the first four months of 
1940 to 399.000 in the same period of this year. 

Since September, 1939- flour prices have doubled in 
the Philippines. Quotations in August. 1939 fluctuated 
from S2.95 to S3. 15 a barrel for American flour. The 
current price level is between 86.29 and S6.95. In recent 
mouths, Australian quotations have been slightly under 
those of American flour, while the Canadian product has 
equalled or slightly exceeded our quotations. 

These remarkable increases have been largely due to 
a disproportionate rise in shipping costs. Freight rates 
have risen from an average §5,50 a ton in early 1939 
to $22,50 or more today. Not only do these higher retail 
prices in Manila mean a decline in consumption: they 
presage the day when there will not be enough shipping 
space available to supply the Philippine market. The 
result will be either a falling off of Filipino flour eon- 
sumption or a loss of the market to other producers 
better able to deliver their good?. 

Recent I v die Maritime Commission lias indicated that 
enough ships will be left on the Pacific to care for all 
legitimate Philippine needs. Obviously, this will relax 
some of the pressure on American flour men. It is im- 
however. to keep this vital trade between the 
Pacific Northwest and the 
Philippine Commonwealth 
flourishing. Not only is flour 
an essentia] part of the 
Islands' food supply, hut the 
maintenance of our No. 1 
overseas market is an ex- 
tremely serious matter for 
the many thousands of 
Americans engaged in rais- 
ing wheat and milling it- ^ 



port ant, however. 




A shipping shortage 
threatens to stifle the 
United States' profit- 
able flour trade with 
the Commonwealth. 



• 17 • 



Philippine- American Trade 1939-1940-1941 



By Trtinqnilino B. Aquino 



War and the national defense program have 
caused a persistent decline in United States ex- 
ports to the Philippines since 1939, The value fell 
from 899,800,000 in 1939 to §93,200,000 in 1940 
— a decrease of 7 per cent. The downward ten- 
dency continued in 1941; exports for the first 
quarter amounted to 823.700,000 as compared 
with 826.500,000 in January-March, 1940. This 
was a loss of 11 per cent. 

The figures on which the accompanying charts 
are hased are the last likely to he available until 
the termination of the emergency. The Depart- 



ment of Commerce has ceased publication of trade 
data. 

Actual causes of the decline are clear. The trans- 
fer of shipping to the Atlantic has left the Pacific 
without adequate tonnagr for its normal trade. 
Furthermore, tin* 1939 trade was above normal 
due to efforts of Filipino importers to lay in stocks 
in anticipation of such a stringency. While signi- 
ficant of world conditions, therefore, the drop in 
American exports to the Philippines does not mean 
permanent loss of the market. Buying will un- 
doubtedly revive with the return to normal. 



U.S. EXPORTS OF DOMESTIC PRODUCTS TO THE PHILIPPINES, 
BY IMPORTANT COMMODITIES 



1939 

THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS W 
987654321 




LEADING IRON AND 
STEEL-MILL PRODUCTS 

BARS AND RODS 

GALVANIZED STEEL SHEET 

TIN PLATE AND TAGGERS' 
TIN 

TUBULAR PRODUCTS AND 
FITTINGS 



AUTOMOBILES, PARTS 
AND ACCESSORIES 

AUTOMOBILE TIRES AND 
INNER TUBES 

GASOLINE 
ILLUMINATING OIL 
GAS OIL AND FUEL OIL 

RADIO APPARATUS 

MEDICALS AND 
PHARMACEUTICALS 

CIGARETTES 

COTTON CLOTH, FINISHED 
AND YARN-DYED 

RAYON PIECE GOODS OTHER 
THAN PILE 

MEAT PRODUCTS 
DAIRY PRODUCTS 
WHEAT FLOUR 



FIRST QUARTER 

1940 1941 PERCENT 

2 10 12 CHANGE 



ALL OTHER COMMODITIES 




99,758 



TOTAL 



93,176 -6.6 26,537 23,668 -10.8 



SOURCE: U S DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE. THE FIGURES FOR 1940 AND THE FIRST QUARTER OF 1941 WERE TAKEN DIRECTLY FROM WORK 
SHEETS OF THE DEPARTMENT AND HAVE NOT BEEN PUBLISHED AS YET. THEY ARE SUBJECT TO REVISION. 



• 18 • 




• 19 • 



LUZON 



Where History and Progress Meel 



By Ernesto D. Ilustre 



T 

X HE largest of the more than 7.000 islands which com- 
pose the Philippine archipelago is Luzon Island or La- 
~ong, which means "mortar" in Tagalog, one of the native 
Filipino dialects. With a land area of 40_8 14 square miles. 
Luzon is only a little smaller than the whole State of 
West Virginia- and. besides, a tropical treasure house. 

The first to become aware of this fact were the Chinese 
who arrived at various Luzon ports in their colorful 
junks and who traded with the islanders nearly 10 cen- 
turies ago. Later, Arabs arrived from Malaya and the 
Xear East, bringing with them in their praus not only the 
wealth of the Indies to exchange for Philippine products 
and gold, but also their Mohammedan faith, which they 
assiduously propagated among the Filipinos. All this 
took place many years before the Spanish conquest of 
the Islands began in 152 L 

After Spain had occupied the Islands and its conquis- 
tadores had made Manila their headquarters, the Span- 
iards thoroughly exploited the resources of the country. 
Annually, galleon after galleon laden with the products 
Of the Islands, mostiy those found or grown in Luzon, 
crossed the Pacific en route home. In spite of this system- 
atic exploitation, however, Luzon's resources remain 
barely touched: its soil is still unbelievably fertile and 
its mineral deposits are almost untapped. 

Except for the Cordillera mountain chain, which runs 
down the whole Pacific Ocean side of the island and 
uill, 'J < uts lt ™ h * if JList north of Cabanatuan, Luzon 
is a lowland traversed by rivers that regularlv inundate 
Uieir banks. Its perpetually fertile alluvial and coastal 
plains are naturally ideal for the cultivation of rice- to- 
bacco, abaca (hempL sugar, coconuts, timber, and manv 
other tropical products. The sub-soil, too, is rich in gold, 
chromite, manganese, asbestos, and manv other essential 
minerals. 

Manila, the largest city in the Philippines and the 
jupilal of the country, is located on the estuary of the 
ff f R,ver - whir * Rows into Manila Bay, the scene 
-1 Admiral Dewey's victory over the Spanish fleet in 
Wm* Founded in 1571 by Miguel Lopez de LegaspL 
-vtaniJa is now a modern city with a land-locked harbor 
^apable of sheltering the whole world's fleets at once. 

I he rapual is defended by the most modern fortifica- 
l nn ; .'he Philippines. Cavite, across the bay from 
'VI an j J a, is the site of a rapidly growing United States 
naval air base and is the headquarters of the United 
ajates Asiatic fleet. Olongapo. in Subic Bay, due west of 
Manila, 1B a United Stales naval base with dockyard facili- 
Ut * h,r smail ™»l <'raft. Corregidor, the rocky island 

• 20 • 



guarding the mouth of Manila Bay. is one of the most 
heavily fortified spots the Far East Like Singapore, 
il is capable of withstanding sustained naval and air 
attacks and a long siege. 

Bagnio, rool and colorful summer capital <>f lhe lJ]ni * 
ippines. is perched on (he Hrngucl plateau approximately 
5 : 000 feet above sea leveL With a temperature that seldom 
goes above 85 degrees Fahrenheit. Baguio has gardens 
lush with such temperate zone vegetal ion as asparagus and 
strawberries. Nearby forests include dense stands of 
pine— within a few degrees of the equator. 

Luoag. <apita[ of J locos Norte Province, is the cultural 
as well as the textile (enter of Northern Luzon. Within 
a hundred mile radius are grown tobacco that is noted 
for its aromatic quality, and long-staple cotton to feed 
Laoag's vast and growing hand loom industry. 

Aparri and I lagan, provincial towns in Northern Lu- 
zon, are located in the fertile Cagayan and Isabela val- 
leys. The two are the centers and chief markets of the 
principal tobacco producing areas of the Philippines. 
Cagayan and Isabela tobaccos are famous throughout I he 
world and are the basis of the finest Manila cigars. 

Around Lucena and the other towns of Tayabas and 
Lagan a Provinces are miles and miles of coconut trees. 
From the coconuts, farmers extract an oil that is invalu- 
able in making soap, explosive?, plastics and stainless 
steel. Thousands of tons of copra cake and coconut oil 
are exported annually from this region to the United 
States. 

Daet and Naga are the twin centers of the abaca or 
hemp industry in southern Luzon. Ahaca. distantly re- 
lated to the banana plant, grows only in the Philippines 
and is universally known under its trade name. "Manila 
hemp," derived from the port from which it was origi- 
nally shipped* No other natural fiber can compare with 
it in tensile strength nor can any known fiber readily 
take its place for naval use. Classed by the United States 
as one of its strategic materials, ahaca or hemp is indis- 
pensable to the merchant marines and navies of the 
world. 



The map of Luzon on page 19 is I he first of three 
drawn specially for PmtuppIiSes by Frank Manning. 
\ When completed, the series w ill be available as a \ 
single sheet. 



Philippine Veterans 
Are Proud of Record 

A. MOM' war \ctcrans* organizations, the National So* 
fitly* Army of the Philippines is probably unique. There 
are other groups < ► f men who fought in the Spanish- 
American War, and ihere is an "Order 77 of officers who 
served in the Philjpjiine&j but the National Society- Army 
of ihe Philippines is the sole body whose membership 
rules are framed to include only the men who planted 
the Stars and Stripes on the far shore of ihe Paeifie 
Ocean in 1898, 

Organized in Denver on August 13. 1900 by Brigadier- 
General Irving Hale, the National Society- Army of the 
Philippines today is active in securing protection for all 
veterans of the Philippine campaign. Specifically, it is 
now barking PL R. 5236. a hill In extend government 
relief It i men who served in the Islands suhsequent to 
July 16, 1903. the 1 official termination of the Philippine 
Insurrection. 

'"We maintain that we carried the American flag a 
greater distance from our homeland than arty other army 
in the history of the world has ever done."' declares 
Charles V. Stevens, secretary of the Jolo Outpost in Min- 
neapolis. "We also believe that our organization fur- 
nished more of the ranking officers of the Army and 
Navy in the World War than did any other veterans' 
group. 

"The National-Society- Army of the Philippines is 
not an offshoot of any other organization- We are the 
oldest veterans' group organized in the Spanish-Ameri- 
can War per it id and are now recognized as a major body 
hy the United States Government. The Society repre- 
sents a definite group of men. and a definite idealism 
born during that period of unusual, perilous service. 
By our sacrifice, the United States was raised from a 
fifth- rate power to a position today second to no other 
nation, 7 

Colonel Alexander Greig. of St. Petersburg, Florida, 
is national commander of ihe Society. National head- 
quarters is maintained in Posit jo, where Major Joseph 
5. Wood, the national secretary -treasurer, has hi? office.^ 

R. ECENT* books dealing with the Philippines have 
in eluded : 

War and Diplomacy in Eastern Asia. By Claude A, 
Buss. New York; The Maemillan Company. 

Cross Winds of Empire. By Wnodhern E. Remington, 
New r York: John Day, 

The Armed Forces of tJie Pacific. By Capt. W. D. Pul- 
eston. Hartford: Yale 1 niversity Press. 

The Fight fur the Pacific. By Mark J, Gayu. New York: 
Morrow* 

Piatig. the Moro Chieftain. By F. P. Smart. New York: 
A book about Philippine jungles for jmcnilcs. 



Guy Swope (from Page 15) 

vania. the son of hard-working Germ an -speaking iolk. 
Although his forebears came here 200 years ago. Eng- 
lish was a foreign tongue to young Swope when he en- 
tered the little country school of his neighborhood. 
He learned the language and whatever else was taught, 
eventually becoming a school teacher at the princely 
salary of S2i>0 per year. Subsequently a government 
revenue agent, he finally turned to commerce, became 
a public accountant, and was the controller of a large 
department store and vice-president of a bank when he 
found himself in politics, 

Swope worked for Roosevelt in 1932. and for Gov- 
ernor Earle for governor of Pennsylvania in 1934. Earle. 
elected, named Swope director of the budget, with a seat 
in the state cabinet. In 1936, Swope ran for Congress 
in a district which had not gone Democratic since the 
Civil War. He won. In 1938, when the district returned 
to its normal Republican complexion. Swope received 
his biggest break, I pon the recommendation of Senator 
Joseph Gu Hey ? President Roosevelt appointed Swope 
Auditor of Puerto Rico* 

When Admiral William D. Leahy, the Governor, left 
San Juan last winter to become Ambassador to France, 
Swope was named his successor. More than anything 
else. Swope wanted to be liked by the Puerto R Scans, 
He, himself, like them socially: he did not look upon 
them as ""natives.'* He walked down into the public 
square, stood on the street corner, and read a news- 
paper while a ragged muchacho polished his shoes. That 
made the Puerto Ricans feel they really had a neighbor in 
the Governors mansion. 

In Washington. Swope is still a "neighbor"" to all of 
Uncle Sam's off-shore dependencies. That's why the 
Philippines is lucky in the selection of its new "boss/" ^ 



Philippine Resident Commissioner 

Washington, D. C. 

Sir: 

I was introduced to your magazine. Philippics, in 
July through 'The Military Engineer/" When | received 
my first copy, 1 read it all in one day. I must say I 
learned more about the Philippine Islands from your 
publication than I ever learned in school. 1 was so 
thrilled willi it, thai I loaned the copy to a friend. He 
loaned it to a friend, who burned it to someone else, and 
so on, until it passed through the hands of 34 people in 
about five weeks. It was returned in a ven dilapidated 
condition. 

I should like to add rm thanks to I hose of m\ friends 
that my one July issue reached for introducing us lo 
your fine publication. It has made us more Philippines 
conscious, and proved to us I hat the Philippines is cap- 
able of self-government. 

Gordon P. Fisuku 
Baltimore. Mary lam I 



• 21 • 



Vice-President Wallace (from Page 3) 

we have ships to spare, the Philippines will receive full 
consideration. . . . 

Because we know you so well, President Quezon, and 
admire you for what you have done for your people. 
w r e Americans have confidence in you as the leader of a 
nation that is standing with us in defense of the demo- 
cratic way of life, . . . 

To the great task of assuring a better world of the 
future, the Filipino people, under your able leadership, 
have dedicated themselves with their whole spirit, their 
full manpower and all their resources. Under the di- 
rection of that brilliant American soldier, General Doug- 
las Mac-Arthur, you have undertaken the training of a 
fine citizens' army, Those forces today are a loyal, valu- 
able and welcome addition to our own military strength 
in the Far East. . . . 

I Vice-President Wallace then spoke in Spanish. The 
following is an unofficial translation:] 

Bonds of history, culture and idiom make the Phil- 
ippines a spiritual sister to the Latin American Repub- 
lics, And on this occasion it gives me pleasure to stale 
that in these critical moments, the Philippines, as well 
as the American Spanish-speaking countries, together 
with the United States- are giving the world an in- 
spiring example of unbreakable solidarity in their united 
struggle to preserve liberty and democracy. Together we 
fight for the same ideals, the same aspirations. Together 
we fight for a better world, and it is our hope that when 
the world is normal once more, the existence of small 
countries will have been secured, -fc 

J* M* Elizalde Speech (from Page 3) 

a flairs. The regulation of our trade with the United 
States was another. , . . 

Today, all of us arc involved in a titanic world strug- 
gle to uphold freedom, liberty and tolerance. This is a 
Struggle in which none can stand aside. The whole 
world is in its grip, divided into two hostile camps. In 
this division we in the Philippines have unstintingly 
pledged our whole support and loyalty to the democratic 
cause proclaimed by the United States. 

1 have the most solid conviction that unless demo- 
cratic ideals survive in this world struggle, and unless 
individual freedom is finally triumphant, there will be 
no possible life for small roun tries, nor place for them 
in the world of the future. 

Our own interests involved in the victory of democracy 
are twofold: 

First, to uphold the ideals which we share with Amer- 
ica, and 

Second, to help make possible a world in which our 
aspirations may be realized. 

To this great I ask the Filipino people, under I he 
baric? ship of President Manuel Quezon, have dedicated 
themselves with their whole spirit, their full manpower 
and all their resources. . , . ^ 



P h it i p p i n e L it era vy 



( from Page 10) 



varied widely by provinces, ranging from t8;S per cent 
in Snlu to 12M per cent En flarnarines Matte. In the eitv 
of Manila, the lilcrac) rate was \)l\.7 per cent. In poorly 
organized communities and in rural areas, the lite ran 
was low. Transportation* communications and adequate 
educational facilities were the chief causes of the large 
differences between geographic areas. For example, in 
the scattered Visayan Islands and in the Mountain Prov- 
ince the percentage oT literacy was much lower than il 
was in the Tngalog regions in Luzon. 

Among various occupational groups, literacy rates 
revealed some interesting fealu res. Forestry arid hunting 
bad I he poorest record. per cent. In the agricultural 

pursuits, ihe literacy rale was about II per cent. Ibis 
occupational group consisted largely of small farmers, 
farm managers, and farm laborers. 

On January 3- 1939. all persons who were actually 
working at their occupations were considered as em- 
ployed. On this basis- investigators found 50.2 per cent 
of literacy among the employed and only 16 per cent 
among the unemployed. This fad would seem to indicate 
that a literate person has a better chance to gel a job 
than an illiterate one. In fact, an illiterate has prac- 
tically no chance of getting a government job. as in 
many cases the ability to read and write is required. 

The census of 1939 also reported the number of lit- 
crate persons of voting age (21 years old or over). Ex- 
actly 44 per cent were found literate. Since this was 4 
per cent less than the Figure for persons 10 y ears old or 
over, obviously the literacy rate for persons between 
the ages of 10 and 20 was considerably above 50 per cent. 

The literacy of men of voting age was 51.7 per cent, 
against 36,3 per cent for the women in 1939. In 191il, 
only 4-0,4 per cenL of such men wore literate, and 24.1 
per cent of the women. 

A better picture of the growth of literacy in the 
Philippines may be shown by the figures on men of 
voting age. In 1903, the percentage was 31.1. We have 
already seen that the return in 1918 was 10.4 per cent, 
and in 1939 it was 51.7 per cenl. In all categories, men 
showed a better literary record than women, 

A study revealed thai literacy had a close association 
whh school aUendanee. family income, and newspaper 
reading. Provinces boasting of a high percentage of 
school attendance, invariably had a high percentage of 
literacy. A high degree of eorr elation between literacy 
and family income was also noted. Generally- there wa? 
a larger proportion of literacy in provinces where the 
percentage of moderate income families was also high. 

The census of 1939 also revealed that only 15 per 
cent of all persons 10 years old or over were reading 
newspapers and magazines regularly. As the general 
literacy rate of the Philippines uas about 19 per cent, 
more than I wo -thirds of ihc literate were not reading 
any newspaper or magazine regularly, 



• 22 • 



Oil Is Ji h<>re We Find it (from Page 11) 

President Our/on early this year. The stall included a 
dozen widely experienced geologists and paleontologists 
drawn FfPltl the leading Anieriean petroleum companies, 
with a targe corps of l^i L 1 ] lino engineers and geologists 
who had been I rained in the I niled Stales or lot-all v. 
Direction was al first in the hands jointly of H. Norton 
Johnson, formerly with General Pet role uni Corporation, 
and Grant \V. Corhy. whose early career was with the 
Mail and companies. After Mr. Johnson's return to the 
United States, Mr* Corby took full charge of the work 
and pushed it through. From the lirsl. Director Ahadilla. 
of the Bnrean of Mines, acted as adviser, fur which po- 
sition his years in Mexico. Pern, and Brazil as geologist 
for various Anieriean petroleum companies, as well as 
his extensive knowledge of the Philippines, peculiarly 
fitted him. 

The work was organized and conducted on the broad- 
est and most scientific lines and was pushed with great 
vigor. For the first lime, a complete section of the strata 
involved, mainly Miocene in age. has heen made, and 
positive correlations can he made not only within the 
Islands hut with the rocks in neigh ho ring countries. 
The principal oil -hearing horizons in the .Netherlands 
Indies have been recognized; sections of possible oil- 
bearing sediments up to 17.000 feet thick have been 
found. By means of topograph ic and geological mapping, 
a number of structures have been determined and out- 
lined, The geological work in doubtful areas is being 
checked by geophysical surveys conducted by the Geo- 
physical Engineering Corporation of Pasadena, A con- 
servative number of drilling sites have been selected, 
and preparations are now under way to lest the first of 
these. 

Meanwhile, acting under general law, President Que- 
zon had reserved for I he Commonwealth Government 
the petroleum lands in a number of provinces. By au- 
thority of a special law. he recently gave the National 
Development Company a permit to enter these lands for 
exploration, development, and production. This com- 
pany has. therefore, an almost complete monopoly on 
Philippine petroleum lands. The exception is in a few 
very small leases of long standing, and two areas held 
on lease under the general law by the Far East Oil De- 
velopment Co, This corporation, the only no n -govern- 
ment company now active in the oil field, is now owned 
by Philippine, American and Spanish capital. 

After drilling a few shallow' holes on Bonrloe Penin- 
sula not far from where Standard Oil of California tried 
to find oil 15 years before. Far East Oil in 1910 moved 
its rig to the Daanbantayan structure in Northern Cebu. 
This is a large dome with good closure, considered to he 
very favorable. Here, with great skill and good fortune, 
a lode was carried to a depth of 6.010 feet with a rig 
and tools designed lo gn nnl\ to I .(100 feel. Hut. despite 
this technical success, the hole pm\ed dn lo the depth 



tested. However, the most favorable horizons, which 
show seepage on outcrop and which are oil-bearing in 
the Netherlands Indies, lie still deepen The overlying 
beds had thickened here to an unexpected degree. 

Not discouraged by the results of this first deep test 
Far East Oil ordered from the t nited States a rig and 
equipment permitting it to go down to the Basement 
Complex, estimated to be some 1 0.000 feet from the 
surface. 

The rig which Far East had been using and which 
had so signallv proved its sturdy worth was sold to 
the National Development Company. It has been moved 
to the Barili anticline farther south in Cebu. On this 
structure, the beds at the surface are the geological 
equivalents of those at the bottom of the Da an bant a van 
hole. Drilling to 1.000 feet should test all the probably 
favorable strata. 

This Spring, Mr. Corhy left for California by .Clipper 
to enlist a drilling crew and make certain supplementary 
purchases of equipment, In his absence, and pending 
arrival of Far East's own new drill, its superintendent. 
A. E. Ireland, and crew, built roads and camps and 
moved the old drill to its new location. By the time 
til is article appears two modern mil fits will be busy wild- 
ratting on the island of Cebu in the Middle Philippines. 

The economic importance of the discovery of oil- if 
it is present in l he Philippines, is so evident as hardly 
to require mention. The Islands have only limited coal 
fields and industrialization requires fuel first of alb To 
the Far East as a whole, also, an additional petroleum 
supply is important. In Sakhalin, far to the north, devel- 
opments ha\ e been much less satisfactory to date than 
were anticipated, though whether this is due to natural 
or artificial conditions is not entirely clear. In Japan, 
despite long and earnest effort, only a small supply has 
been found, and on Formosa, aside from large volumes 
of gas. exploration has yielded even less. 

Known oil fields in China are small and discovery 
of oil in the Jurassic beds in Manchuria is too recent to 
permit any sound judgment as to its extent, The fields 
in the Netherlands Indies have been important for more 
than a generation, but there is a growing conviction that 
sound management and excellent conservation methods 
have been at least as important as natural richness. 
What New Guinea and other areas now hcin^ explored 
will yield remains to be seen, 

In all ihis search for oil. the Philippine venture evi- 
dently has a legitimate place. Il ma> prove, as has fre- 
quently happened elsewhere in the world, that pools of 
commercial importance are absent, or that such pools 
as are present, though commercial, are small and sial- 
ic red, Even so. it is of great national importance to 
know what is and uliat is not present. Even a negative 
result has a value. Meanwhile, the venture is based on 
careful studies and sound evidence, and is being eftn> 
ducted by experienced men along well established lines. 
It is a venture- yes. bul so was Magellan's \ovage. ^ 



• 23 • 



HANDS ACROSS THE CHINA SEA 



By Randall Gould 




Randall Gould 



The geographic proxim- 
ity of China and the Philip- 
pines is obvious, Their com* 
nion ties and Interests have 
not always been so easy to 
perceive. Political and other 
considerations have often, 
and over long periods, ten- 
ded to sweep them in differ- 
ent directions and at times to 
make them seem almost parts 
of different hemispheres. Yet 
there have always been factors tending to overwhelm such 
artificial separations. Today it is these factors, operat- 
ing in a troubled world where many men's hands are 
against their neighbors, which are strongest in reviving 
and strengthening the natural feeling of kinship between 
continent and archipelago, 

China certainly has progressed during recent years 
under a spur of urgent necessity. I think the same" may 
be said for the Philippines. There has been a difference 
between the terms of necessity. China's problem for years 
has been one of trying to grow up before being dismem- 
bered. Of late this has taken a particularly acute form, 
yet essentially it remains a problem to which China is 
relatively accustomed. The aggravated crisis has been 
countered by a phenomenal advance in leadership and 
national unity. 

The Philippines has fortunately been spared the test 
of bloodshed. Nevertheless, there has been an invisible 
crisis hardly less acute m the necessary trend toward 
gre&tter self-government and eventual freedom, and in 
the resultant problems of maintaining an independent 
political and economic life. 

Facing these tests of not merely capacity for self* 
development, but of actual national survival, both China 
and the Philippines have disclosed latent strengths hardly 
suspected by even their warmest friends. Each has moved 
m new di regions— and many of their paths have been 
common ones. In each ease, the example of the United 
Stales and the personal guidance of American citizens 
have played a most important part in directing the 
courses adopted. 

A striking fact in each of these essentially Oriental 
lands has been the democratic urge. Until the present 
world crisis this choice may not have been so significant: 
loday. however, every country must deride between 
dcmtn racy and totalitarian dictatorship. There seems no 
doubt that the present desire of both people in China and 
the Philippines is to "go democratic" in spite of all ob- 

m 21 • 



stacles. Such a choice, in this era of pV&SUVe politics, 
inevitably draws China and the Philippic'* together in 
a bond of common purpose. 

There are other ties, of course. Proximity can pro- 
duce strange reactions: in the case of China and the 
Philippines it has worked for greater friendship. Neither 
has ever displayed an aggressive attitude toward the 
other. Their national courses have been peaceful and 
harmonious. True, neither have they had the close eco- 
nomic relations their proximity would appear to war* 
ranL but that was due lo special circumstances which are 
now rapidly changing. 

In the case of China, there was an innate conservatism 
and isolationism. As a nation. China has done little in 
promoting her foreign trade, even with lands as near as 
the Philippines. The Islands, on the other hand, have been 
inhibited by an economic development based on political 
ties with the United States. With Philippi»^^ nic,rican 
relations changing as they arc today- there is every reason 
to expect economic and other tics with China will be 
strengthened. This seems inevitable, even though Wash- 
ington and Manila succeed in separating political inde- 
pendence from a complete economic severance which 
might be disastrous. 

The question of blood relationships between the Chi- 
nese and the Filipinos is most interesting. In a conver- 
sation at Manila last year, Chinese Consul-General C. 
Kwangson Young remarked to me that it was difficult to 
estimate the precise number of Chinese in the Philip- 
pines because of the intermingling of Chinese emigrants 
with the Filipinos, ft is part of this easy assimilability 
that the part-Chinese always consider them selves natives 
of the country in which they were horn I although always 
remembering, and taking pride in, their Chinese blood). 
Although the 1939 census counted 130.000 Chinese, the 
actual number, including those of mixed blood, undoubt- 
edly approached 400,00(X 

The example of the Philippines, progressing along 
political, economic, social and military lines, has been 
an inspiration to the people of China, There have been 
many points of resemblance between the problems of 
the two countries as they advance in world position. Not 
only China, but the Far East and the entire world, has 
been moved to admiration at the rapid progress of the 
Philippines under American tutelage. Themselves striv- 
ing for freedom the Chinese have seen in the Filipino 
aspiration for independence a spiritual bond and a hope 
for their own success. 

Given restored peace in China and a continuation of 
the peace enjoyed by the Philippines, the knitting of 
ties between the two countries will certainly proceed 
apace. Meanwhile troubled world conditions at least 
accentuate some of the elements of spiritual harmony 
between these two outposts uf democrat). Such develop- 
ment is a by-no-means negligible basis for a rapidly pro* 
grossing entente when world conditions perm it. -fa 




These colorful PHILIPPINE Hand Made NOVELTIES fashioned from the famous 

MANILA HEMP — the Strongest Fiber in the World. 




