
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 



COMMISSION OF THE CENSUS 


MANILA 


Aug. 23, 1939 


Dr. Basilio Valdez 
163 San Rafael, Manila 

Sir: 


For the purpose of carrying out effectively the provisions of Commonwealth 
Act Ho. 170, pursuant to which a population census with classified social and 
economic information shall be taken on January 1, 1939, which has been fixed as 
Census Day by Proclamation Ho. 330, dated October 11, 1938, by His Excellency, 
the President of the Philippines, there is enclosed herewith a schedule for the 
"Census of Professions - 1939" (Census Form No. 153), which you are requested 
to fill out and certify to the accuracy of the information furnished. 

The answer to each question asked will be held strictly confidential and 
the information furnished cannot be used for assessment or taxation purposes nor 
as evidence in any court or public office for or against you. Likewise all ans- 
wers will be compiled and publishod without reference to names and sources. 
Section 17 of the Census Act reads in part as follows: 

"No information obtained during the taking of the Census from 
any corporation, association, partnership, institution, business en- 
terprise', or group of persons having, a joint or common interest- 1 , how- 
soever established or constituted, shall bo used in any court or in 
any public office, either as evidence for or against the corporation, 
association, partnership, institution, enterprise, or group, from 
which such information eraanates, or for the purpose of basing there- 
on any assessment or collection of taxes or public corrributions ; nor 
shall any such information be divulged to any person, except to author-' 
ized Census officers acting in the performance of their duties; and no • 
Census officer or employee of the Government shall make known to any 
other person- hot properly authorized any information x x x; nor shall 
. -any report or publication issued under the provisions of this Act con- 
tain any information indicated in this section which would serve to 
identify the corporation, association, partnership, institution, en- 
terprise, group, or property, from which it was secured x x x x." 

The schedule should be returned duly accomplished and certified as to its 
correctness wi thin 30 days after its. receipt. For this purpose there is en^ 
closed herewith a self -addressed return envelope which requires no postage. 


Very respectfully 


Assistant Commissioner 




Enel. 


