* - 




LADIES AND GENTLEMEN 
DEAR COLLEAGUES 



ep^oy 




We are gathered here tonight to honor the memory of 
several distinguished colleagues who have, in the short 
space of a few months, crossed the great divide, leaving 
empty places in our ranks that will be most difficult to 
fill for some years to come. 







I have been assigned the task of refreshing in your 
minds the memory of four of them, namely Dr. William B. 
Burke, Dr. Jose S. Hilario, Dr. Enrique Lopez and Dr. 

Teofilo Villonco. This is indeed an unpleasant task, I 
must say, because when we mourn deeply the loss of some- 
one dear to us, a lump clogs our thr9at and benumbs our 
senses. Fortunately, however, men of their type, physicians 
of their caliber do not need the services of propagandists 
and incense burners. Their useful lives, replete with 
good deeds, have left a wake that will never be effaced 
from the vast ocean of friendship. 

» 

Let us not talk of their ages, for to us they were 
young, much too young to die. Great men always remain 
young even with the passing of the years, because their 
richly endowed minds never age. Seldom is our sadness 






- 2 - 

deeper than when we speak of brother physicians gone 
to the life beyond. The medical profession, born from 
the first cry of pain of mankind, has grown and advanced 
constantly through the untiring efforts and endless devo- 
tion of physicians like these whose memory we honor today. 

Dr. William B. Burke for many years Professor of 
Clinical Medicine in the College of Medicine of the Univer- 
sity of Santo Tomas, came to the Philippines as a young 
man, freshly graduated from the University of Edinburgh. 

In a few years he had built an enviable reputation as a 
thorough and conscientious clinician. His interesting 
lectures, his methodical procedure in the examination of 
patients and his unerring diagnoses constituted for his 
medical students a gres,t source of inspiration and a rich 
fountain of learning. I was one of hundreds of students 
who were privileged to drink from that fountain. I shall 
always remember with manly pride and grateful satisfaction 
his vinder standing kindness and his readiness to help when- 
ever his professional services were needed. In 1935 when 
my late father became bed-ridden. Dr. Burke was called 
to attend to him. During those trying days he kept vigil 



with us and he suffered with us the bitter fact of his 
impending death. Those of us who knev; him at close 
range still feel the benign influence of his pleasing 
personality which won for him the esteem and affection 
of all. In the natural unconsciousness of youth which 
is brimful of optimism, we do not realize the value of 
the benevolent guidance of our professors. Only when 
age and experience have impregnated our hearts with the 
inevitable disappointments and that we suffer in our 
daily struggle for existence, do we feel the emotiness 
left by them when the grim Reaper takes them away from 
our side. I can write an epitome of his life by saying 
that he was a devout Catholic, a conscientious professor, 
and a sincere friend. 

0O0 

Dr. Jose S. Hilario left us in the full plenitude 
of his useful life. Kis death came so suddenly that even 
those of us who were intimate with him were caught by 
surprise. 

The eminent Spanish physician and world-renowned 
scientist. Dr. Ramon Y. Cajal, wrote that "Memory is the 
archive of the past, the light of the present and the 
only consolation in old age." As I reexamine mentally 



the archives of my past I find pages replete with pleasant 
data regarding our beloved friend and colleague. Dr. Hila- 
rio. intimate and long-standing friendship that united 

me to Dr. Hllario was the product of many years of close 
association. I am the Godfather of one of his sons. 

A funeral oration made for a deserving man is an act 
of justice and an appropriate reward, but if it is intended 
to honor the memory of a friend and comrade then it becomes 
an affectionate gesture of sincere appreciation. It is im- 
possible to mention Dr. Hilario* s name without praising his 
kind manners and his Inborn gentility. Never did I see him 
in an angry mood. His modest personality devoid completely 
of pride and pedantry brought him closer to his friends and 
to his patients who considered him infallible in his chosen 
specialty. When President Osmena needed a man of unimpeach' 
able integrity to handle his campaign funds, he selected 
Dr. Hilario. 

Stupefied beyond expression by the Inexorable force of 
destiny, I join his distinguished family in their bereave- 
ment. 

0O0 

Dr. Enrique Lopez 

As I try to bring to your memory the magnificent 
qualities of our beloved friend and colleague. Dr. Enrique 



% 



• • 

- 5 - 

i 

Lopez, I feel dwarfed by the magnitude of the task. Ever 
since he was forced to he confined to his room sick with 
an incurable disease I heard nothing but praises from his 
many friends and admirers. 

In spite of our Christian resignation to accept the 
supreme will of our Almighty, we cannot cease to lament 
his deoarture having been deprived so early of his agree- 
able companionship, his vast surgical experience, and his 
kind frlendshio. 

Thirty-three years of professional life taught Dr. 

Lopez not only the secrets of the medical profession, but 
also the tragedy that germinates in the bottom of human 
sufferings, and this gave our dear friend that kindness 
and softness of manner so characteristic of him. When 
our unfortunate colleague realized the seriousness of his 
illness and the futility of treatment, he cried, but he 
cried in silence as only men can cry. It was on February, 
1945 shortly after I had met him for the first time after 
the liberation of Manila, that he noticed the first symptoms 
of the disease that was to carry him to his grave,. He found 
on his garments a piece of the neoplasm and under a ficti- 
tious name, he had it examined. The report was bitterly 
cruel, but he kept the secret to himself. His properties 
and his personal belongings had all been destroyed or lost 



during the battle of Manila, and he felt that it was his 
sacred duty to sacrifice his life so that his family could 
continue to live in peace and moderate comfort. It was 
a hard and painful decision, but he was the man who could 
make it. He continued to attend to his classes and per- 
form his daily operations. His patients and his associates 
found in him always the same kind and amiable physician, 
but beneath that rosy mask full of comforting smiles was 
hidden the black tragedy of death. 

When I learned of his illness, I rushed to see him 
and when we were alone in his room I asked him why he had 
deliberately deprived himself of an early treatment. With 
tears in his eyes he replied; "Basllio, I was practically 
a poor man. I had to continue working and earn sufficient 
money to rehabilitate my family." He preferred to die 
working rather than take advantage of early medical care. 

He accepted the will of God with a heart of steel and a 
Christian obedience worthy of emulation. 

— -0O0 — - 

Dr. Teofllo Vlllonco 

I had hardly finished the draft of this necrological 
oration when the sad news of Dr. Teofilo Villonco's death 
reached me. What a pathetic irony of life indeed! Only 
the Sunday before I had talked to Dr. Villonco at the 
funeral of another distinguished member of the medical 



■* 



t m 

* 



- 7 - 



profession -- Dr. Ramon J. Cngslako. On that occasion 
he was still full of life and vigor.. Little did we 
suspect at that time that Death was just around the 
corner and waiting to snatch him away from us forever. 

Son of a well-to-do family, he travelled extensively 
in the United States and Europe shortly after his gradua- 
tion in 1914. He accummulated a vast fund of knowledge 
abroad so that upon his return to the Philippines, he 
continued in the practice of medicine up to the year 1921. 
His large business interests, in the meantime, had grown 
so vast that he had to set aside his medical practice to 
devote all his time and energy to their management. 

It is a well-known fact that as a rule, physicians 
do not make good businessmen. But in the case of Dr. 
Villonco this dictum was proven fallacious, inasmuch as 
he was both a good physician and a good businessman. He 
had a wide circle of friends in the medical as well as in 
the business world. 

In his lifetime. Dr. Villonco was the very personifi- 
cation of good cheer. Wherever he went he radiated happi- 
ness to those around him and he always had a kind word 
for the poor and the - unfortunate. A lover of home and 
the family circle, a good father, an excellent friend — 
that was Dr. Villonco. 



- 8 - 




Silence is golden and when tribute is paid to great 
men, words are superfluous. Let me end, then, this brief 
oration with the humble request that when your day's work 
is over and you are enjoying a well-earned rest at home, 
you say a prayer quietly for the eternal rest of these, 
our comrades. Paraphrasing Lord Tennyson, I will say, 
"Pray for their souls. More things are wrought 
by prayer 

Than this world dreams of. Wherefore let 
thy voice 

Rise like a fountain for me night and day. 

For what are men better than sheep or goats 
That nourish a blind life within the brain. 

If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer 
Both for themselves and those who call them friends? 
For so the whole round earth is every way 
Bound by gold chains about the feet of God." 




**** 







