



ililARCIAL P. LICUAUCO 




MANUEL ROXAS 
1891-1948 

First President of the Republic 



ROX AS 

By 

MARCIAL P. LICHAUCO 



THE STORY OF A GREAT FILIPINO AND 
OF THE POLITICAL ERA IN 
WHICH HE LIVED 



MANILA. PHILIPPINES 



Copyright, 1952 



by 



Marcial P. Lichauco 



All Hghts reserved 



PRINTED BY KIKO PRINTING PRESS 



FOREWORD 



I had occasion to know President Manuel Roxas suf- 
ficiently well because we were contemporaries in the Manila 
Hi);h School and classmates in the College of Law of the 
University of the Philippines. Our acquaintance during 
school and college days was supplemented by our contacts in 
the course of our respective careers in and out of the govern- 
ment. Kven so, after reading this manuscript of his bio- 
graphy, 1 was amazed to discover many and varied incidents 
and aspects of the life of our late President that show his 
greatness and brilliance. 

Mr. Marcial Lichauco, Harvard alumnus and a very pro- 
minent and successful lawyer, who himself has occupied vari- 
ous important positions in the Government, is eminently quali- 
fied to write the life story of Roxas because of their long 
and intimate association. Indeed, their closeness is evidenced 
by the fact that they were law partners for several y6ars. 

The portrayal of Roxas in this volume is made more 
valuable and interesting because his life is linked by the 
author — and necessarily — with the political historj'^ of the 
Philippines. This is accomplished in such a clear and easy 
fashion and with such detail and information as to make this 
not only an inspiring biography but a book rich m historical 
facts about our political evolution 

The greatness of Roxas is equalled by the aWjlty Mr. 
Lichauco to write in a masterly style and with finesse the 
life story of his friend. 




Supreme Court of the Philippines 



Manila, August 12, 1952. 






V ' h. '' -'iii , _ 
1 , . ^ 




•sk 

« i: r J 



liP.' 

>«<^V kite.* H^l 






“ifctJlwlf IJJ«UU*S’I 

Ml «tl • = *« * 



U ►ih' W^Kl *iM ♦ . <• ,1 



|fll%4ll**0 V>w ♦•• '< i|(|« 

. ‘I* "♦•**ikTM^*** «<> "jn 
IVfl * i if» ;Ar, 

i rnmti pitt «H 4 r ^ ii 

i 4 , >w, Ti,..,/. .;, 

♦tWliit‘4 'll- d 4i( j 

vl,*i i> .1 ■ ' * 

^ -. .i ,.<>. I .t. 









#1 



^fl» 



■ » f 






I 






■j;,i lb'll** »4 «Hi4l*-r IT ft -f Wfllh ll ^ 

V 10 ^ ♦^U - w,*' '#i* i 

lll.r V • ' 

I* f./l '^f**** ^ ^ypn 'll i‘ , ilj1 1 ,,*>•■ V . 

>.l ., , *ur*ir.*.a ,} U*. .ni.y ^ 

lW*»l“*«M •. 4 -,», ,V.,„t , > * 






>><V- 



i,l 



I# tflllifjl •*<•! fs ' 

l‘.-,' »l^ |i» ft If 

f»r J 






4 ^# 



i i^K 



*i|'i M, 

I li ^ 



m 






. ‘II V ^ 









« * i 



I >11 



tkr^r 






-fii 









V 








AUTHOR’S PREFACE 



When Manuel Roxas met his untimely end in Clark Field 
that tragic afternoon of April 15, 1948, he had already oc- 
cupied more important positions in our government than any 
other Filipino had ever held before him. Nor is it likely 
that anyone in the future will ever exercise the authority 
which Roxas wielded during the thirty odd years of his public 
career. For besides having been Governor of his province, 
Roxas was Speaker of the House of Representatives for 
twelve consecutive years, a member of the Constitutional Con- 
vention, Secretary of Finance, Chairman of the National Eco- 
nomic Council, Chairman of the National Development Com- 
pany and many other government corporations and agencies, 
Brigadier General in the USAFFE, President of the Philip- 
pine Senate, President of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines, and first President of the Republic. 

It was my good fortune to be closely associated w’ith Ro- 
xas during the last eighteen years of his political career. I 
feel, therefore, that I am in a position to describe the life 
story of a great man whose one consuming desire was to 
serve his country and his people. I fully realize that the 
contents of this volume will not please all my readers. For 
here are also narrated stories of intrigue, cowardice, betrayal, 
and cruel and inhuman treatment. But it must be remembered 
that I have not written this biography for the purpose of 
pleasing the public, the friends or political enemies of Roxas, 
or, for that matter, any particular member of his family. My 
object in publishing the story of Manuel Roxas and the poli- 
tical era in which he lived is to make known what kind of a 
man Roxas was, his devotion to truth and justice, his strength 
and his weaknesses, his trials and tribulations, and some of 
the important problems that confronted him during his long 
period of service and how he tried to solve them for the bene- 
fit of his countrymen. 



Curiously enough the greatest compliment ever paid Ro- 
xas during his lifetime did not emanate from a Filipino or 
an American. It came from an officer of the enemy forces 
during the Japanese occupation of the Philippines. He was 
Colonel Nobuhiko Jimbo, Chief of Staff of the Japanese Min- 
danao Command, upon whom had befallen the difficult task 
of convincing Roxas to cooperate with the Japanese admin- 
istration and, if he refused, to have him executed. Jimbo 
failed to win Roxas over but he could not bring himself to 
liquidate his Filipino prisoner. Defying the orders which he 
had received from the Chief of the Japanese Military Admin- 
istration in Manila, Jimbo took it upon himself to try to save 
Roxas by appealing directly to General Homma. He was suc- 
cessful and, for the time being, Roxas’ life was spared. Dur- 
ing one of Jimbo’s many visits to the Malaybalay prison camp 
where Roxas was confined, and in broken halting English, 
Colonel Jimbo told Roxas’ Filipino aides, ’‘Your General Ro- 
xas one man only one time in one thousand years in any 
country.” 

Such indeed was Manuel Roxas, “soldier, statesman, pa- 
triot, friend of the common man, champion of democracy, 
architect and builder of the nation.” 

Here, briefly told, is his story. 



MARCIAL P. LICHAUCO 






I 



mv LelovoJ tvife 



i 



i 






\ 

d 



napi er 1 



C\T was in Capiz, the year 1891. The spirit of rebellion 

was seething throughout the Philippines. For genera- 
tions past the Spaniards had been governing our country 
with an iron hand and, as must happen always where power 
is lodged in the hands of a gi'oup of persons who are re- 
sponsible only to themselves, frequent abuses were com- 
mitted against a people unable to defend themselves. 
Ostensibly the affairs of our country wei’e directed by 
Spanish civil officials appointed from Madrid, but actually 
the Spanish clergy and, particulaidy, the Spanish friars 
in Manila played an important part if not a decisive i*ole 
in the government. It is difficult for us living in the middle 
of the twentieth century to realize the extent to which these 
ministers of God were able to intervene in the smallest 
details in the administrative circles of the government. 
A few Filipino patidots rose to shout their protests against 
the injustices that were frequently committed against a 
defenseless people but their protests were in vain and, 
more often than not, they ended their days in solitary 
confinement in the dungeons of Fort Santiago. It was 
c^sy to trump up charges of sedition against them. 

Relations between Filipinos and Spaniards were even 
nioi'e acute because of the feeling of superioiity shown 
by those members of the Castilian race who happened to be 
in the Philippines. The Filipino was not knmvn as a 
Filipino. They called him “Indio,” a term which in the 
language of that day referred to the savages or uncivilized 
inhabitants of the hinterland. There was little of the 
fraternizing between the natives of the country and the 
members of the sovereign power such as we Filipinos of 



[ 1 ] 



today know and enjoy with our American and Spanish 
friends who reside in our young Republic. The most op- 
pressive and harsh among the Spanish civil officials were 
undoubtedly the so-called “guardias civiles” or civil guai'ds. 
There were a number of them in most towns and munici- 
palities of the Philippines and they fii’mly believed that 
they represented the might and the power of the Spanish 
Crown. 

Among the countless Filipinos who deeply resented 
the haughtiness and the manner in which these repi*esenta- 
tives of the Spanish government carried on their duties 
was Gerardo Roxas of Capiz. Time and again he had 
seen these uniformed Spaniards wield their sceptre of 
authority without the slightest regard for human rights. 
Filipinos were ai*rested, beaten, imprisoned, and sometimes 
shot on the slightest provocation, klany times Gerardo 
had spoken his mind aloud against such misuse of author- 
ity. The “guardia civil” in Capiz knew it and bided their 
time for an opportunity to settle scores with him. It 
came late in the evening of April 21, 1891. There was a 
small dancing party being held in the municipality of 
Panay, Capiz, where the Roxas family were then residing, 
and Gerardo’s two younger brothers were among the guests 
present. While the dance was in pi*ogress two “guardia 
civiles” entered the dance hall. They wei’e slightly under 
the influence of liquor and they proceeded to make 
nuisances of themselves. Gerardo’s two brothers ordered 
these obnoxious officers to leave the premises and, when 
they refused, an altercation followed. Someone ran off 
to Gerardo’s house and advised him that his younger 
brothers were having a fight with the “guardia civil.” 
Without the slightest hesitation Gerai’do hurried to the 
pavilion where the party was being held and succeeded 
in calming down his brothers who, it appeared, were get- 
ting the best of the fight. He told the two hated “guardias” 
to leave the premises and they meekly obeyed him. “Tomor- 



[ 2 ] 



row morning,” Gerardo added, “I shall repoi*t your conduct 
to your superior officers.” 

A few minutes later Gerardo left the pavilion to re- 
turn to his house, not realizing that the two “guardia 
civiles” were waiting for him ai*ound the corner. As he 
passed by them, a rifle shot broke the stillness of the night. 
Gerardo fell to the ground mortally wounded with a bullet 
hole in his back. Eight months later, or on January 1, 
1892, his widow delivered her second child — a boy who was 
christened Manuel Roxas y Acuna. 

The Roxas family were from Manila but they had left 
the capital city when Gerardo’s father, Don Antonio Roxas, 
went to Capiz to engage in the business of distilling alco- 
hol from nipa palm. The business flourished and Gerardo 
and his younger brothers were brought up in a home that 
enjoyed most of the luxuries available in those days. Old 
Don Antonio was still in Capiz on that fateful night in 
April, 1891. But the tragic death of his son Gerardo 
proved too much for the old man. He died heart-broken 
three months later. 

Manuel’s mother, Rosario Acuna, was the daughter of 
Eleuterio Acuna, also a native of Manila, employed in the 
insular government service, who had been sent to Capiz to 
supervise the construction of roads in that province. 
There Eleuterio met and wooed Ramona Villaruz, a native 
Capiceha. It proved to be a very happy marriage and the 
couple were blessed with eleven children. Their first born 
was Rosario. 

After her husband died, the widow of Gerardo Roxas 
returned to her father’s home. She was still quite young, 
being then only twenty-two years of age. Despite his 
numerous responsibilities old Don Eleutei’io Acuna devoted 
considerable attention to the upbringing of his two father- 
less grandchildren, Mamerto and Manuel. Mamerto was 
only a year and a half older than Manuel. The boys grew 



[ 3 ] 



up in a home where filial devotion was taken for gi^anted 
by everyone. Don Eleuterio was a firm but just father 
and his children and grandchildren loved and respected him 
to a degree seldom found even in the homes of those days. 

Dona Rosario, of course, gave most of her time to her 
two boys. When they were old enough to understand, she 
told them of their father and how he had been murdered 
by the hated ^'guardia civil" because he had dared voice 
what was in the hearts of all Filipinos. But it was not 
only from his mother that Manuel learned of his father^s 
martyrdom. Throughout the Philippines in those days 
there were traveling minstrels who, with a guitar in one 
band and a bundle of clothes slung on their backs, went 
from town to town recounting in verse and song the lives 
of Filipino patriots. Young Manuel was six years old 
when, sitting on the front steps of his town church, he 
heard one of these minstrels sing of his father, Gerardo, 
and of how he had paid the supreme penalty because he 
had had the courage to denounce the Spanish officials who 
were so thoroughly disliked throughout the country. The 
song made a deep impression on him. Young as he 'was 
it imbued him with a passionate desire and a deep-i*ooted 
determination to see his country some day freed from the 
domination of an alien race. 

^ Manuel attended a parochial school to learn his three 
R s. As in all Spanish schools of those days, discipline 
was unusually strict. One day Manuel arrived late for his 
classes. His teacher, a certain Rafael Lozada, spanked 
him severely and, apparently not satisfied with this punish- 
ment, proceeded to pinch the young boy’s ears so hard 
that he drew blood. Manuel screamed with pain and, as 
the teacher released his hold, he turned and fled from the 
classroom. He hid first in a banana grove and there 
nursed his wound rebelling against the severe punishment 
he had received, for he felt that his failure to arrive in 



[ 4 ] 



time for classes did not wari’ant so painful a beating. 
Yet when he returned home he said nothing about it to 
his mother. 

During the next few weeks Manuel did not report to 
school. He would leave his home apparently bound for the 
classroom but, instead of going there, he would proceed 
towards a small grove in the outskirts of the town where 
he met other boys and there they spent the morning toge- 
ther talking and playing games. Sooner or later, of 
course, old Don Eleuterio was to learn of the incident. 
He was indignant at the punishment which the teacher 
had inflicted on young Manuel and he did not blame the 
boy for staying away from the schoolhouse. As a result 
of the incident he removed both Manuel and his older bro- 
ther Mamerto from the parochial school and transferred 
them to an academy conducted by a Spaniard named Antonio 
Lara where the boys continued their elementary instruction. 

Unlike Luzon the province of Capiz did not become a 
battleground during the Spanish-American war nor during 
the tlu’ee years of fighting that followed between General 
Aguinaldo’s forces and the American army of occupation 
in the Philippines. The American soldiers who entered 
Capiz in December, 1899, were soon fraternizing with 
P'ilipino civilians. Among these Americans was a certain 
George Shoens who took an immediate liking to the Roxas 
family. He called at Don Eleuterio’s house frequently 
saying that he was anxious to learn Spanish. His friend- 
ly, sympathetic attitude earned him the hospitality of that 
home. He was warmly welcomed whenever he appeared 
and he, in turn, did his best to teach the children in the 
household a few words of English. Young Shoens be- 
came so closely attached to the people of Capiz that when 
the American civilian administrators in Manila outlined 
their plans to open public schools throughout the Islands 
as fast as possible. First Class Private George Shoens 



[ 5 ] 



volunteered his services as a teacher. It was he, there- 
fore, who conducted the first public school in Capiz and 
young Manuel Roxas was one of his pupils. 

When Manuel was ten years old, he got hold of his 
first American magazine. It belonged to one of the sol- 
diers quartered in Capiz and Manuel read it avidly. The 
contents of the periodical inspired the young reader and 
he thought of America as the land of opportunity. He 
told his grandfather that he wanted very much to go there 
to study but, much as Don Eleuterio wished to satisfy 
the young boy’s ambition, the old man was forced to say 
that the trip would be too expensive and that he could 
not afford it. But Manuel was determined to go. Sm*ely 
in a country that was so rich and whei'c there were so 
many kindhearted, philanthropic people he would find 
someone who would take an interest in him and help him 
get an education. 

One afternoon, with only eleven pesos in his pocket 
and a bundle of clothes tucked under his arm, Manuel 
quietly boarded a small vessel bound for Manila whei'e he 
expected to find another ship that would take him to 
A.merica. Before sailing hour, however, his absence was 
noticed and numerous relatives and friends began to search 
the town for him. It occurred to one of his uncles to visit 
the ship that was about to sail for Manila. With the aid 
of a couple of deck hands he found the boy hiding as a 
stowaway in one of the lifeboats. 

Young Manuel politely explained to his grandfather 
why he had left his home. He said that he was not satis- 
fied with the school facilities available in the Philippines 
and that he wanted to get a better education in other 
countries. Don Eleuterio was deeply impressed. Instead 
of reprimanding his gi’andson he sympathized with him 
and resolved to do what he could to satisfy the young 
boy’s yearning. At that time the Ateneo de Manila was 



[ 6 ] 



reputed to be the best school in the Philippines and in this 
Jesuit institution Manuel’s older brother, Mamerto, had 
already been enrolled two years previously. Manuel, how- 
ever, did not want to follow his brother for the simple 
reason that he wanted something different. His gi*and- 
father, furthermore, was beginning to foresee the import- 
ance of the English language and, in the Catholic schools 
of Manila in those days, the medium of instruction was 
still entii’ely in Spanish. He, therefore, decided to send 
Manuel to Hongkong not only because there were very 
good schools there but also because English was spoken 
extensively in that British colony. This, of course, was 
more expensive than a Manila education and the income 
from the few properties left by Manuel’s father, out of 
which Mamerto’s education in Manila was being defrayed, 
would have been severely strained. Nevertheless, not only 
did old Don Eleuterio decide to send Manuel to Hongkong 
but he took it upon himself to assume all the expenses 
necessaiy for that purpose. In fact, the old man decided 
then and there personally to defray the entire education 
of this particular gi’andchild. Through the years that fol- 
lowed, even up to and including Manuel’s legal education, 
the old man paid Manuel’s expenses, for he loved the boy 
dearly and he held great hopes for him in the future. 

There was perhaps also another reason which induced 
the old man to make this financial sacrifice. Shortly be- 
fore Manuel ran away his mother had become engaged 
to marry Don Eugenio Picazo, a member of the Capiz 
Provincial Board. She did not think that her boys were 
old enough to understand her situation so she told them 
nothing about it, intending to break the news a day or 
two before the wedding. But one day Manuel overheai'd 
a conversation between his mother and one of his aunts 
and thus learned of the impending marriage. The boy 
was very much attached to his mother and the realization 
that he might lose her touched him deeply and he broke 



[ 7 ] 



into tears. His grandfather tried to assuage his feelings, 
but it seemed to be all in vain. The boy told his gi'and- 
father that he would kill anyone who tried to take his 
mother away from him. 

Eventually, of course, Don Eleuterio and Dona Rosa- 
rio succeeded in calming Manuel's resentment. The mai*- 
riage took place a few months later as scheduled, but short- 
ly afterwards Manuel was on board a vessel bound for 
Hongkong. 



[ 8 ] 



(^liapler 2 



C\N Hongkong, Manuel then 12 years old, was admitted to 
St. Joseph’s Academy. But life for the young Filipino 
proved to be unpleasant in that British colony. His school- 
mates, most of whom were Portuguese and who were big- 
ger and taller than he was, made things miserable for him. 
They ridiculed his Filipino manners, they laughed at his 
clothes, and they made fun of his accent whenever he 
spoke English. At first Manuel ignored their jibes, devot- 
ing his whole attention instead to school studies where he 
soon excelled in every subject. One day, however, an 
older classmate was unusually harsh. An exchange of 
blows took place but Manuel was too small to fight on 
equal terms. Realizing that his opponent was detei*mined 
to take advantage of his stature and size, Manuel di*ew 
his penknife and threw himself upon his opponent, in- 
flicting a flesh wound on him. The victim screamed with 
pain and Manuel, realizing the seriousness of what he 
had done, relinquished his hold and ran away. 

For hours the young Filipino wandered along the 
streets of Hongkong unable to make up his mind what to 
do next. Darkness descended and, having no other place 
to go to, he sought refuge in one of the public parks. 
There a Hindu policeman found him on a bench shivering 
with cold and trying hard to suppress his tears. But he 
stubbornly refused to give his name so the policeman took 
him to the nearest station where a British officer con- 
tinued the interrogation. It was in this police station that 
Manuel first realized how cruelly Chinese coolies were 
being punished in those days for infractions of the law. 
He saw several of these unfortunate men shackled to 



[ 9 ] 



wooden pillories. Years later, when the boy had grown 
to manhood, he told his friends that the sights he wit- 
nessed that evening in a Hongkong police station aroused 
in him a sincere sympathy for the lot of these unfortunate 
victims of imperialism. He knew that prisoners in the 
Philippines were never handled that way and the boy 
could not help but contrast the treatment of the natives 
in Hongkong by their British masters and the relations 
existing in Manila between Americans and Filipinos which, 
though still not quite satisfactory, were, at least, much 
better than those prevailing in that British colony. 

After prolonged questioning Manuel finally broke 
down and confided to the British officer who he was and 
where he came from. He was taken back to St. Joseph’s 
Academy where a kindheai*ted priest received him sympa- 
thetically and listened to his story. Instead of being pu- 
nished, as Manuel had feared, the priest assured the boy 
that he would personally see to it that his bigger compa- 
nions would not molest him in the future. Whether the 
priest really warned the older boys not to annoy the young 
Filipino, or whether the boys themselves realized that it 
was dangerous to incur Manuel’s enmity, we shall never 
know. The fact remains that, for the remainder of the 
school term, Manuel was left in peace. 

When the school sessions dx'ew to a close that year, 
Manuel decided to return to the Philippines. He was 
lonely in Hongkong. He did not like the food served in 
school for it was too spicy and he longed for the more 
familiar Filipino dishes that he had enjoyed so much in 
Capiz. He, therefore, wrote to his grandfather saying that 
he wished to return home. As soon as classes were over 
and without even waiting for a reply, Manuel boarded 
the first steamer for the Philippines. 

The only public school in Capiz in those days, was 
up to the second year high school so, after completing 

[ 10 ] 



the prescribed course of study there, Manuel had to go to 
Manila where he enrolled at the Manila High School (now 
known as Ai’aullo High School). His brother Mamerto 
had just graduated from the Ateneo and had enrolled in 
Santo Tomas University to study law. Both the Manila 
High School and Santo Tomas were then located in Intra- 
muros so the two brothers decided to share a room together 
in a boarding house. 

Thinking back over those years, Mamerto has related 
an incident which, he says, shows how quick and fast 
Manuel’s mind functioned even during those early student 
days. There was a small table in the middle of the room 
which the two brothers were occupying on which were 
strewn papers, books, pencils, and a small bottle of ink. 
On this table also the boys usually placed their pocket 
watches which, at that time, were considered a young 
man’s most valued possession. One afternoon Mamerto 
arrived to find Manuel lying in bed reading a book. Be- 
fore undressing Mamerto placed his pocket watch on the 
table. As he turned around he accidentally knocked the 
table down as a result of which the books, the papers, the 
bottle of ink, and the watch fell on the floor. Instinc- 
tively and hurriedly Mamerto stooped down to pick up 
his watch but Manuel, who was on the other side of the 
room, shouted, “Never mind the watch. Pick up the bottle 
of ink.’’ Mamerto could not at first understand the reason 
for his younger brother’s request but so authoritatively 
had Manuel given his instructions that Mamerto did as 
ordered. It was after Mamerto began to pick up the 
remaining articles on the floor that his brother said, 
“When your watch fell on the floor the damage, if any, 
was done. No matter how hastily you picked it up there 
was nothing you could do about it. The bottle of ink, 
however, was leaking and the longer you allowed it to 
remain on the floor the moi’e ink would spill fi’om it.” 



[Ill 



Young Manuel Roxas graduated from the Manila High 
School with highest honors in 1909. He was then 18 
years old. Strangely enough, it was the medical profes- 
sion that first attracted Roxas. He confided to some of 
his friends that he wanted to be a doctor and, if possible, 
a surgeon. But he later changed his plans and decided 
instead to become a lawyer. Admission requirements for 
the study of law were then not as strict as they are today. 
A high school diploma was all that was required. It so 
happened also that there was a young American lawyer in 
Manila of whom the Filipino people were to hear a great 
deal in the future. His name was George A. Malcolm. 
He had come to the Philippines in search of work and, 
soon after his arrival, was appointed an assistant attorney 
in the office of the Attorney General. 

There were only two law schools in the Philippines in 
1909, namely, the centuries-old University of Santo Tomas 
and the Escuela de Dei’echo de Manila, the latter being a 
private school founded by local capitalists. But in both 
colleges of law the medium of instruction was Spanish. 
Malcolm saw the need for a school conducted entirely in 
English and which placed great stress on the principles of 
common law which were being gradually introduced into 
Philippine jurisprudence by the Supreme Court of the 
Philippines, the majority of whose members were Amer- 
icans. He, therefore, recommended to the government 
authoidties that a college of law be organized in the newly 
created Univei'sity of the Philippines, but his recommenda- 
tion fell on deaf ears. Undaunted, and with the assistance 
of the YMCA, the young American proceeded to set up a 
private law school of his own and Manuel was among the 
first to enroll as a student. The following year, however, 
the University’s Board of Regents realized their mistake 
in ignoring Malcolm’s original suggestion. They author- 
ized the organization of a college of law in the University 
and they offered the position of dean to George Malcolm. 



[ 12 ] 



The young American accepted it gladly and brought along 
with him to the new college all the members of his pri- 
vate law school. 

Roxas was elected president of his class although 
among his classmates there were a number of more mature 
students. He was also elected pi*esident of the student 
council, foi’ even at that early stage of his career every- 
one was beginning to recognize that he was a born leader 
and the coming man. Malcolm, who later became Asso- 
ciate Justice of the Philippine Supreme Court, has distinct 
recollections of those early days. Writing about them to- 
day he has this to say: “In class Roxas was a brilliant 

student and also one of those who could 'bluff' if necessary. 
However, he was usually well prepared, having briefed 
the assigned cases. Without my knowledge, he also sold 
copies of his notes to his classmates. In the first orator- 
ical contest held under the auspices of the new College of 
Law, however, Roxas lost to Eulogio Benitez who received 
first honor, to Victoriano Yamzon who received second 
honor, and to Serafin Hilado who received third honor. 
As regards his studies, Roxas was also among the best 
students. He graduated near the top of his class and, in 
the bar examinations of that year (1913), he received the 
highest grades among the candidates who were summoned 
to the bar.” 

Life in Manila during the years that followed was 
gay and romantic. Unlike today when private parties are 
usually given in hotels and night clubs, the dances and re- 
ceptions of those days were held in the homes of Manila’s 
leading social families. Young Roxas, being an eligible, 
charming bachelor, was a frequent guest in these affairs. 
Though there was gaiety and laughter in the evening, the 
next morning usually found the young lawyer hard at work. 
The greatest legal authority in the Philippines at that 
time and perhaps the most brilliant mind that the Philip- 



[ 13 ] 



pine judiciary has ever developed was Don Cayetano 
Ai’ellano, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. Needing a 
young, able assistant in his legal researches, he examined 
the roster of the College of Law in the University of the 
Philippines. He was immediately impressed by Roxas’ re- 
cord and he, therefore, offered Manuel a position as his 
private secretary, an offer which the young attorney was 
delighted to accept. To augment his salary as secretary, 
however, Manuel spread the word around among the law 
students in Manila that, for a certain stipend, he would be 
glad to give them private lessons. Many students took 
advantage of his offer and his reputation as a teacher who 
could explain and make clear the most intricate questions 
of law spread rapidly. Within a few months he had as 
many as 200 young men under his tutelage. 

Roxas never forgot Arellano. Many yeai's later when 
he was at the height of his political career, he frequently 
spoke to his friends of those early apprenticeship days. 
And whenever he reminisced about his experiences with 
the Chief Justice he never failed to say that Arellano 
was the most perfect and considerate of gentlemen. “For 
example,” Roxas related to me, “Chief Justice Arellano’s 
chambers were about thirty meters from the room that 
had been assigned to me. I was, of course, always ready 
and eager to answer his summons. But whenever the old 
man needed me he would walk to my room to say that 
he wanted me to join him for a conference. And never 
during my apprenticeship did he so much as raise his voice, 
show impatience, or become irritated at anything done by 
bis subordinates including not only myself and his pri- 
vate stenogi'apher but even the janitors and messenger 
boys in the courthouse.” 

After serving a year with the Chief Justice, Roxas 
decided that he needed trial work. He found employment 
with the law firm of Don Juan Sumulong. In 1923 these 



[ 14 ] 



1 



tvvo men — one much older than the other — were to clash 
in many a political debate. But in 1915 the Sumulong law 
office was one of the I'anking firms in the city. Many 
years later, after Sumulong had retired fi*om politics and 
when he was facing the twilight of his career, he confided 
to one of his closest friends that it did not take him long 
to size up young lawyer Roxas. He said that he considex'ed 
Roxas a genius and that, during the years tliat followed, 
when Roxas’ rise to political power proved to be meteoric, 
he became more and more convinced that Roxas was even 
more brilliant and talented than the great and mighty 
Quezon himself. 



[ 15 ] 



L 




CNN 1917 old Don Eleuterio Acuna died suddenly. It was 
a great shock to Manuel, to whom the old man had 
been both father and grandfather. But it was destined 
to change his career and to push him inevitably into a 
life of politics and statesmanship. For as soon as Don 
Eleuterio died, Roxas resigned his position in Manila. 
His presence in Capiz was considered necessary in order 
to help settle the old man’s estate, for Don Eleuterio, who 
was survived by eleven sons and daughters, had died 
without leaving a will. Capiz, furthermore, offered an 
attractive field for legal practice. There were at the time 
relatively few lawyers in that province and young Roxas 
decided it was time to hang out his own shingle. 

Don Eleuterio’s eleven heirs, namely, Manuel’s mo- 
ther and her brothers and sister§, were all of legal age 
and Roxas believed he could get them to agi*ee on an extra- 
judicial partition of the estate. For that purpose Manuel 
and his brother Mamerto prepared a document embodying 
what they considered to be the most fair and equitable 
way of dividing their grandfather’s real and personal pi*o- 
perties. Then they summoned the heirs of the deceased 
to the living room in the family mansion where the old 
man’s remains lay awaiting burial. The two brothers 
explained to their mother, to their uncles and to their 
aunts how they proposed to divide the estate and why the 
division suggested by them was fair to everyone concerned. 
It is a tribute to the two young lawyers that their pro- 
posal was approved in its entirety and, there and then. 



[ 16 ] 



the eleven heirs appended their respective signatures to 
the document. When this was accomplished Don Eleu- 
terio was carried to the funeral car which had been wait- 
ing outside and the cortege proceeded to the burial grounds. 

Not long after Don Eleuterio’s death Manuel was pre- 
vailed upon to accept an appointment for the position of 
municipal councilor. A vacancy had occurred as a result 
of the death of a member and the provincial governor 
offei'ed the position to Attorney Roxas. Roxas took his 
new responsibility quite seriously. He gave much thought 
and attention to the needs of his community, and his per- 
sonality and energy were soon felt by the other members 
of the council. Although only an appointive member, 
Manuel was soon recognized by his associates as the leader 
of the council for he easily dominated its meetings with 
his timely and practical observations on the matters that 
were brought to the attention of the members. 

When the year 1919 rolled around, Roxas felt that 
he was sufficiently well known and able to try for the 
chief executive position of Capiz province. At that time 
the organic law of the Philippines was the Jones Law which 
had been enacted by the United States Congp*ess in 1916. 
We had a house of representatives Avith 89 members and a 
Senate of 24 senators. Each province elected a governor 
of its own. We also had two Filipinos in Washington 
to represent our interests in the American Congress. They 
were known as Resident Commissioners and they had the 
privilege of the floor but they could not vote. Our Chief 
Executive, of course, was an American Governor General 
appointed by the President of the United States. He had 
the power to veto laws passed by our Legislature. The 
two principal political parties in the country were the 
Nacionalistas headed by Sergio Osmena and the Democra- 
tas headed by the late Don Juan Sumulong. The Na- 
cionalistas were firmly in control of the Legislature but 



[ 17 ] 






the Democratas constituted a fonnidable minority and, in 
many provinces and municipalities, they had the upper 
hand. 

Capiz promised to be a battleground for the candidates 
of the two opposing parties. Young Roxas had early 
aligned himself with the Nacionalista Party and he, there- 
fore, launched his candidacy for nomination at the con- 
vention which was to be held in the provincial capital. 
There was a hard fight ahead of him because his opponent 
was no other than Judge Coni'ado Barrios, a member of 
the old order and certainly a more experienced and bet- 
ter-known politician. The convention finally nominated 
Roxas but Judge Barrios, who curiously enough was an 
uncle of the young candidate, was not satisfied with his 
party’s choice. 

The Democratas held their convention a few days later 
and it occurred to its leaders that if Judge Barrios could 
be prevailed upon to be their candidate the party would 
have a strong possibility of winning because he could 
count not only upon the votes of all the members of the 
Democrata Party in the province but also on a large per- 
sonal following among the Nacionalistas themselves. They, 
therefore, approached Judge Barrios and offered him the 
Democratic nomination and the judge accepted it. 

It proved to be a bitter and very hard-fought campaign. 
Barrios, at the time of his nomination, was a judge of the 
Court of First Instance and, as the Democrata leaders had 
so adroitly forecast, it was evident that he was well known 
throughout Capiz and that he could count upon the support 
of many of the conservative elements from among the 
members of the Nacionalista Party. Roxas, on the other 
hand, was only 27 years old. It was the first time he 
was running for public office and, already in his early 
career, he had shoAvn that he was inclined to be a liberal. 
But when the election returns were all in it was found 



• i 



[ 18 ] 



that Roxas had won in every municipality except one where 
his opponent led by only 60 votes. 

The two years that followed were busy ones for the 
new governor. Many old residents of the province who 
had admired his courage and talent doubted whether so 
young a man could solve the daily problems which con- 
fronted the executive of a flourishing province. But it 
did not take Roxas long to prove himself to his consti- 
tuents. The man was energetic and, at the same time, 
tactful, persuasive, and yet not easily persuaded once he 
thought the right course was determined. It was inevit- 
able that Manuel Quezon, then President of the Senate, 
should sooner or later take notice of the young governor 
of Capiz. 

The year 1921 was Roxas’ first opportunity to gain 
national recognition. A convention of provincial gover- 
nors was due to be held in Manila to enable the chief 
executives of the Islands’ 39 provinces to meet and discuss 
problems common to them all. Sometime before the con- 
vention Roxas sent to the Secretary of the Interior in 
Manila a report covering the activities and problems of 
his province and his recommendations as to the way these 
problems could be settled. The report proved to be so 
brilliantly written and his suggestions so valuable that the 
Secretary of the Interior ordered mimeographed copies 
made and these were circulated to all the other provincial 
governors in the Philippines as an example of what a 
governor’s report should be like. Thus it is that, when 
the governors finally convened in Manila, every one of 
them had already heard of Manuel Roxas, the new and 
youthful governor of Capiz. 

Roxas mingled freely with his colleagues and, good 
mixer that he was, soon won their friendship. To the 
great surprise of Manilans who then knew little about 
the chief executive of Capiz, the assembled governors. 



[ 19 ] 



1 



many of whom were serving their second or third tei'ms 
in office, elected the youngest among them all as president 
of the convention. For the first time Roxas’ name ap- 
peared in the headlines of Manila’s newspapers. People 
began to sit up and ask questions as to what this man 
from Capiz was like. 

It was then also carnival time in Manila and the audi- 
torium was the focal point of Manila’s 400. Prominent 
dowagers and their daughters occupied the gaily decorated 
boxes around the dancing pavilion and young men vied 
with each other for invitations to sit in these boxes from 
where they could watch the pageants which were held 
nightly on -the ballroom floor. Among those who had a 
box for the season were Mr. and Mrs. Julian Salgado, a 
prominent family from Bulacan. With them frequently 
appeared Trinidad de Leon. She was the only daughter 
of Senator Ceferino de Leon, then one of the stalwax't 
leaders of the Nacionalista Party. Trining, as she was 
better known to her intimate friends, was then only eighteen 
years old, fresh from two years of schooling in Amer- 
ica and decidedly pretty. From the first day of their 
meeting the young governor was completely attracted to 
her and, apparently, his feelings found warm reception. 
A whirlwind courtship resulted in the young lady agi’eeing 
to become his wife and, after the carnival, Manuel hurried 
back to Capiz to tell his mother that he wanted very much 
to marry a girl he had just met in Manila. 

Old Dona Rosario was, of course, completely taken by 
surprise. Much as she would have wanted personally to 
know the girl that her son had chosen, she told Manuel 
that she had full faith in the wisdom of his choice and 
that she gave them both her blessings. Returning to Ma- 
nila to claim his bride, Manuel, however, found that old 
Senator De Leon disapproved of his daughter’s mai'rying 
a man whom she had known only for a few weeks. But 

[ 20 ] 






the enamored couple were determined to go tlu-ough with 
their plans, and ways and means were found to enable 
them to meet elsewhere where they could be quietly mar- 
ried. The future bride, whose mother had died several 
years before, chose a small church in Sibul Springs as the 
chapel where she preferred to be married. Her mother 
had built this church for the town and Trining wanted to 
feel that she was as close as possible to her on this mo- 
mentous occasion. 

Roxas had, by that time, already become quite a 
friend of Senate President Quezon. He asked Quezon to 
be his sponsor at the wedding and the Senate President 
agi'eed to meet the young couple in Sibul Springs on the 
appointed day and hour. Like all men planning an elope- 
ment, however, Manuel was pretty neiwous when he left 
Manila. Halfway to his destination he discovered to his 
horror that he had left the wedding ring in his bureau 
drawer. Turning his car around he drove as fast as he 
could to the city to retrieve this all-important article. 
Meaiatime, the young bride waiting in Sibul Springs for 
her futui'e husband who was long overdue feared that some- 
thing had happened to him. Almost in tears she started 
in her car towards Manila. In Baliuag the two automo- 
biles almost ci’ashed into each other. Reunited the couple 
proceeded to Sibul, where they were manned in a simple 
ceremony before the parish priest. Returning to Manila, 
Roxas and his wife boarded a steamer for Capiz, for Mrs. 
Roxas was, of course, very anxious to meet her mother- 
in-law and the other members of her husband's family. 

Senator De Leon could not at first forgive the young 
couple for what they had done. He refused to see either 
of them. It was not until almost a year later that the 
old man finally forgave his daughter and the man whom 
she had married. One day he saw Manuel and Trining 
in one of his relatives' home. The senator approached his 



[ 21 ] 



son-in-law, shook hands with him and then proceeded to 
talk about the latest events of the day as if nothing un- 
pleasant had ever occurred between them. 

Two children were born out of the union — Rosario, 
named after Roxas’ mother and better known today as 
Ruby, and Gerardo, more popularly known as Jerry. No 
finer children could the Roxases have had. From early 
childhood Ruby and Jerry developed into obedient, well 
behaved children and, as they gp'ew up, they were fully 
conscious of their filial duties to their parents. They 
were a source of great comfort to Roxas. He wanted 
very much to devote more time to his children but his 
public duties frequently prevented him from doing so. 
I remember an occasion when Roxas, commenting on his 
children, said: “I really cannot ask for a better son and 
daughter. In fact, they are so good that I sometimes 
wonder if something is wrong with them. I do not recall 
either of them ever asking me for anything. Whatever I 
am able to do for them they are quick to acknowledge 
with appreciation and gratitude.” 



[ 22 ] 







HE years 1921-1922 were also crucial years in Philip- 



pine political life. Behind the split of the Nacionalista 
Party which occurred in 1922 lay a complex story. Manuel 
L. Quezon was Pi*esident of the Senate, while the Speaker 
of the House of Representatives was Sergio Osmena. 
Osmena had been Speaker since 1907, when for the first 
time Filipinos were allowed to have an elected assembly 
of their own. As presiding officer of that chamber, 
Osmena was naturally the recognized leader and head of 
the Nacionalista Party. Quezon, on the other hand, be- 
came Senate President only in 1916, the year that cham- 
ber was organized under the provisions of the Philippine 
Autonomy Law, better known as the Jones Law because 
it had been sponsored by Congressman Jones in the United 
States Congi'ess. 

Who was to be the titular head of the Philippine 
pai’ticipation in our government — Osmena or Quezon? That 
question had come up in the minds of many since the year 
1916, but no one had dared raise it publicly. Nor had the 
interested persons themselves bi'ought the issue before the 
membei’s of their party when Quezon was elected to pre- 
side over the Senate. Osmena continued as President of 
the Nacionalista Party so that, ostensibly, he was still 
leader of the party which had been in power continuously 
since 1907. But every now and then ticklish situations 
arose which clearly indicated that the storm, though slow 
in brewing, was bound to break out some day. For exam- 
ple, whenever Osmena and Quezon were guest speakers on 
the same occasion, who should speak first? If they were 
attending a dinner in the same household, who was to sit 




[ 23 ] 



on the right hand of their host? If their names were to 
be mentioned in the same sentence, who should be given 
precedence ? 

To Juan de la Cruz, tilling his small parcel of land 
in the provinces, these questions did not seem important; 
but to the two men who could confidently look forward to 
a long and uninterrupted career as party leaders, the is- 
sue was a vital one. The House of Representatives was, 
of course, the more popular chamber. It had 89 members 
from every corner of the archipelago and, with the excep- 
tion of the six men then appointed by the American Gov- 
ernor General to represent the non-Christian Filipinos in 
Mindanao and the Mountain Provinces, the members of 
this chamber received the people’s mandate at the polls 
every three yeai's. Osmena, furthermore, had been the 
number one Filipino in the government since 1907. For 
more than a decade the American governors general had 
considered him the spokesman of his people. There was 
a lot of dignity and tradition attached to the post. And 
Osmena was certainly better known throughout the Philip- 
pines for he had traveled widely since he assumed office. 
As undisputed head of the party since 1907 he had a great 
advantage over anyone trying to displace him. 

But although the members of the Senate came up for 
election only once every six years, there was no doubt in 
the minds of the people that, with few exceptions, the 
Senate was made up of men who were maturer and more 
experienced and who wielded greater influence in their 
respective districts than the representatives in the lower 
house. And it was well known that nearly every member 
of the House of Representatives toyed with the hope that 
someday he might become a senator. It was also true 
that Quezon had a more striking personality than Speaker 
Osmena. Whenever Quezon entered a room everyone be- 
came conscious of it. When he spoke everyone listened 



[ 24 ] 



ill rapt attention. As an orator Quezon was head and 
shoulders over everyone else, Speaker Osmena included. 
Being a moi*e aggressive man, he made friends more 
easily, for Osmena was reserved and dignified. In the 
event of a clash with foreign or American representatives, 
Quezon would probably be the more courageous though 
perhaps reckless spokesman. 

In 1921 General Leonard Wood became Governor of 
the Philippines I’eplacing Francis Burton Harrison who 
for several years had permitted the Filipinos to have 
pretty much their own way. Wood had never been a 
political mixer. He wanted certain things done in a cer- 
tain way and he was determined to have them fulfilled. 
Friction with the representatives of the Filipino people 
was bound to come and, with it, the question as to who 
was the Number One leader of the people became more 
acute. 

Of course, Quezon and Osmena would not state the 
issue as bluntly as that. Quezon, for example, explained 
to his friends and followei's that Osmena seemed to favor 
the British system of government to the extent that re- 
sponsibility should be lodged principally in the Prime 
Minister or, in the case of the Philippines, in the Speaker 
of the House of Representatives, that being the more pop- 
ular chamber. Hence, Osmena was a unipersonalist. 
Quezon further said that he was a Colectivista, for he 
believed that the leader of the Filipino participation in 
the government should act with the concurrence of the 
members of his entire party. He charged, for example, 
that Osmena, in his capacity as Speaker, made recommen- 
dations to the Governor General without previously con- 
sulting the President of the Senate who was also a Na- 
cionalista. 

Late in 1921 the Nacionalistas held a convention in 
Manila to revise their party platform and have it ready 



[ 25 ] 



for submission to the electorate in the elections that were 
to be held the following year. The Nacionalista pi’ovin- 
cial governors were, of course, members of the convention 
and, although they were not directly affected by the rela- 
tions between Osmena and Quezon, they were greatly con- 
cerned over the possibility of a split in the party. Such 
a split was evei-y day becoming more and more evident 
as Osmena and Quezon conferred with their closest fol- 
lowers and attempted to strengthen their respective poli- 
tical fences. 

In an informal gathering of provincial governors dur- 
ing the Nacionalista convention in Manila, Roxas was 
asked by his colleagues to act as a peacemaker between 
Quezon and Osmena. The young governor consented to 
assume that delicate job and conferences soon followed, 
first with Quezon, then with Osmena, then with Quezon, 
then back with Osmena again. Roxas seemed to be mak- 
ing good progi'ess. At the conclusion of his meetings with 
both leaders he felt so convinced that he had reached a 
woi’kable agreement between them that he made a report 
to that effect to the convention and then delivered a 
rousing speech urging party unity, flis report was un- 
animously approved and every one was happy for they 
believed that the growing rift between the two national 
leaders had, at last, been permanently repaired. 

Half an hour after Roxas left the platform, however, 
Osmena appeared, dignified and solemn as ever. Those 
present wondered what he was up to for he gave the 
impression of having something important to say. So 
they sat quietly in their seats eagerly awaiting Osniena’s 
speech. At that time Osmena spoke very little English 
and so had to address his colleagues in Spanish. He began 
in a moderate tone of voice apparently reconciled to the 
v/orking agreement which the young governor from Capiz 
had previously announced to the members of the conven- 



tion. But suddenly and unexpectedly he made a biting 
remark which Quezon’s followers could not help but feel 
was directed against the Senate Pr-esident — “Hay perso- 
nas,” said Osmena, “que quieren apoderarse del poder 
pasando por la ventana y no por la puerta del partido.” 
Freely translated into English, it meant, “Tlujre are mem- 
bers of our party who want to seize power by coming in 
through the wndow instead of entering through the door.” 

As everyone knew then, Quezon was a man of ex- 
treme temper. He could be as quiet and as docile as a 
lamb but once his ire was roused he could be as fiery 
and violent as the most temperamental of Spaniards. When 
the context of Osmena’s speech, and particularly the sen- 
tence just quoted, was relayed to him in his home, he 
jumped to his feet in anger. He sent word out to his 
friends and followers summoning them to the convention 
hall and there he delivered a speech which made impos- 
sible any further settlement with Osmena. A split in the 
Nacionalista Party became inevitable. 

Roxas was among the first to make his position clear 
in the new crisis. He had hoped and he had done his 
best to avert a split in the party but, when that split did 
come, he considered it his duty to align himself with the 
man whom he believed could more capably represent the 
interests of the Filipino people. That man, he said, was 
Quezon. The Senate President was quick to grasp the 
hand of one of his youngest followers and to recognize 
in him a leader in his own name. The die was cast; the 
old Osmena-Quezon team was broken up ; the country must 
decide who, as between these two men, should be the spokes- 
man of the Filipino people. 

The elections of 1922 were the most bitter which our 
country had ever experienced up to that time. Three 
political pai’ties were represented at the polls, namely, the 
so-called Colecti vista wing of the Nacionalista headed by 

[27] 



L 



Quezon, the Unipersonalist wing headed by Osmena and 
which retained the name of Nacionalista Party, and, final- 
ly, the Democratas of which old Don Juan Sumulong was 
the leader ably assisted by Claro Recto who, though much 
younger and not yet well known was already making a 
name for himself as a lawyer and a parliamentarian. Roxas 
was the Colectivista candidate for representative in the 
first district of Capiz. Although it was the first time 
that he was running for the House of Representatives, 
no one doubted that he would win as he, in fact, did by a 
large majority. Osmena decided to run for the Senate. 
In those days our country was divided into twelve sena- 
torial districts. Each district elected two senators for a 
six-year term but only one senator came up for election 
every three years. In other words, for the 1922 senato- 
rial election one senator was up for re-election in each 
senatorial district. The thickly populated province of Cebu 
constituted one district and it was taken for gi'anted that 
the people of Cebu would send their favorite son to the 
Senate. 

The campaign proved to be, like other campaigns in 
the past, a great political show, for we Filipinos seem to 
enjoy the battle of wits and the oratorical jousts that go 
with every national election. Quezon and Osmena and their 
respective followers tried to draw fine distinctions between 
the political doctrines for which their respective parties 
stood. Probably the “inteligencia” were able to under- 
stand and appreciate the hairline distinctions being made 
between Colectivism and Unipersonalism but, to the great 
majority of the electors, it was really a struggle for leader- 
ship by the two most prominent men in the country 

Quezon and Osmena. The Democratas in turn attacked 
both factions of the Nacionalista Party alleging that the 
Nacionalista regime since 1907 had been corrupt and in- 
efficient. 



[ 28 ] 



When the returns were finally in, it was found that, 
among the senators the Colectivistas and the Unipersonal- 
istas had elected an equal number but, since most of the 
hold-over Nacionalista senators wei'e partisans of Quezon, 
the Colectivistas in the Senate commanded a clear major- 
ity and the re-election of Quezon as Senate President was 
thus assured. In the House of Representatives, however, 
the Colectivistas elected 32 membei’s, the Democratas 26, 
and the followers of Osmena 21. Thus no one had a clear 
majority. 

When the House convened the candidate for speaker- 
ship of the Osmeiia faction was Mariano Cuenco, his pi’ov- 
ince mate from Cebu. The Democratas’ choice was Claro 
Recto. Quezon made a decision which indicated that his 
careful scrutiny of the young representative and erstwhile 
governor of Capiz had impressed him very favorably, for 
he chose Roxas to represent his party in the lower chamber. 
Several times the roll was called. Although Roxas was 
always ahead in the balloting, no one among the three men 
could muster the necessary majority vote for election to 
the speakership. It became clear that, in order for any one 
group to be able to organize the newly elected House of 
Representatives, it would be necessary for two of the three 
political parties to combine or, at least, to come to some 
suitable working agreement. Since there was much simi- 
larity between the party platfoi-ms of the Colectivistas and 
the Democratas, many political writers of the day believed 
that these two more liberal groups would eventually get 
together. But Quezon preferred to do business with Os- 
mena’s Nacionalistas. Under the working arrangement 
finally agreed upon between them, the name of the coali- 
tion became known as the Nacionalista-Colectivista Party, 
but Quezon’s Colectivistas were given the power and the 
responsibility of directing the government. Thus, although 
subsequent appointments to important positions in the gov- 



eminent were men belonging to one or the other pai*ty, 
the followers of Quezon were always given the majority 
of the appointments. Cuenco never forgave Osmena for 
having abandoned him. Thus began the Osmeha-Cuenco 
feud which has lasted to this day. 

The detractors of the Quezon-Osmeha leadership, pai- 
ticularly the Democratas, denounced the new alliance as a 
betrayal of the people’s trust. But events have since 
shown that the union of these two wings of the old party 
was logical. For despite the differences in the political 
doctrines which each group was advocating, the leaders 
of the Nacionalista and Colectivista Parties were closer to 
each other than they Avere to the leaders of the Democratas 
and it is doubtful whether the harmonious I’elationship 
which subsequently followed could have been established 
betAveen the Colectivistas and the Democratas if these tA\’’o 
had tried to Avork together. 

Like Osmena, AA’’ho Avas in his late tAventies when he 
became Speaker of the House in 1907, Roxas Avas extreme- 
ly young for this key position. Once more the name of 
Capiz’s favorite son appeared in the headlines of Manila’s 
newspapers. But unlike the year 1907, Avhen Osmena 
assumed office, 1922 gave every indication of being a 
tioublesome period. In 1907 relations between American 
officialdom and Filipino leaders AA'^ere as smooth and un- 
ruffled as they could possibly be. Secretary of War Taft 
had just come all the Avay from Washington that year to 
witness the inaugural ceremonies of the Philippine As- 
sembly and everyone Avas beaming Avith smiles and good 
humor. Not so in 1922. Our country Avas in the throes 
of a post-Avorld-Avar depression. Relations between Gov- 
einoi General Wood and the Filipinos Avere nearing a 
breaking point. Hoav Avould the neAv, inexperienced leader 
of the House of Representatives conduct himself? People 
had stopped asking who Avas this man Roxas. Noav they 

[30] 



wanted to know how good a man he really would prove to 
be for the difficult job that confronted him. 

Roxas’ first year as Speaker of the new House of 
Representatives pi'oved to be a difficult one. The Demo- 
cratas constituted a powerful opposition and they were 
bent on waging violent warfare against every bill proposed 
by the Nacionalista-Colectivista Party. Furthermore, 
there were a few rebellious Colectivistas who were not 
entirely satisfied with the reunion which Quezon had made 
with Osmena’s supporters and these Colectivista rebels 
sometimes sided with the Democratas. The sessions of the 
House that year wei'e tumultuous and there were occa- 
sions when members not only hurled personal invectives 
against each other but even went to the e.xtent of throw- 
ing books and other missiles across the floor of the cham- 
ber. When the hundred-day session was over, and despite 
a sine die session on the last day, very few important bills 
had been approved. A special four-day session was, there- 
upon, immediately called by the Governor General. This 
also ended in an all-night sitting but, when it tei*minated, 
thei'e were still important bills remaining unacted upon. 
Governor Wood suggested the calling of a second special 
session but both Quezon and Roxas urged him not to do it. 
The two leaders wanted more time to rest and to whip 
their followers into a more ordered discipline. 



[ 31 ] 




(7^ HE role of Governor Leonard Wood in the Philippine 
political saga is not an easy one to analyze. Wood 
was an able but arbitrary man who administered with a 
firm hand and a blunt manner. The Manila Americans 
of the 1920’s found in him a man whose attitudes and in- 
terests were similar to their own. On the other hand, 
General Wood was unable to get along with most of the 
elected representatives of the Filipino people. To know 
the reason why, we must also understand the status of 
American-Filipino relations then prevailing throughout 
our country. 

In the 1919 presidential elections of the United States 
the Republicans not only elected their candidate, Calvin 
Coolidge, but they also obtained an overwhelming major- 
ity in both Houses of Congress. One of the first things 
the new administration did as regards the Philippines was 
to send a so-called mission to Manila to study conditions 
here and to report its findings to Washing^ton. The mem- 
bers of the mission were General Leonard Wood and for- 
mer Governor W. Cameron Forbes, two eminent Repub- 
licans, and both of whom were well known to be opposed 
to the granting of independence to the Philippines. Forbes, 
it should be added furthermore, had been govei'nor of the 
Philippines in 1912 when the Democrats came into power 
in the United States. The circumstances under which he 
was curtly removed from office and replaced by Francis 
Burton Harrison still rankled in his mind. It might pro- 
perly have occurred to President Coolidge that impartial 
men should have been sent to the Philippines, or that, at 
least, one member of the mission should have been in favor 



[ 32 ] 



of early independence. No one need question the honest 
purposes of Wood and Forbes for they stood high in the 
estimation of their own fellow citizens, but men are human 
and when they have for years maintained a certain point 
of view they cannot approach the subject anew with an 
open or judicial mind. 

The Wood-Forbes Mission spent several months in the 
Philippines and, shortly after their return to America, it 
submitted their findings to President Coolidge. Their 
report was couched in a very dignified language but it 
did not mince words in denouncing Avhat the missionex's 
considered to be unsatisfactoi'y conditions prevailing in 
the Philippines, which conditions were attributed in lai'ge 
part to the fact that the pi-evious governor i.e., Francis 
P.urton Harrison, had overextended himself in pei'mitting 
the Filipinos to play a large part in the affairs of their 
government. The Mission recommended the continuation 
of the status of the Philippines until such time as the Fili- 
pinos could absorb and thoroughly master the powers al- 
ready in their hands. This, obviously, meant an indefinite 
postponement of independence. In addition, the Mission 
also recommended that the United States Congress declare 
null and void all laws which the Philippine Legislature 
had passed during the Harrison regime which in any way 
diminished, limited, or divided the authority granted to 
the Governor General under the provisions of the Jones 
Law. It further recommended that in case of a deadlock 
between the Governor General and the Philippine Senate 
in the confirmation of appointments, the President of the 
United States should be authorized to make and render 
the final decision. 

The Wood-Forbes Report was, of course, acclaimed by 
the American community in Manila. There were, at that 
time, three American-oxvned daily newspapers, here, name- 
ly, the Manila Daily Bulletin, the Manila Times, and the 



[ 33 ] 



Cablenews American. They vied with each other in prais- 
ing the findings of the Wood-Forbes Mission and sarcastic 
editorials appeared in their columns concerning the incapa- 
city of our people to diz'ect the affairs of our government. 
Obviously, the sentiments thus stirred up by these news- 
papers were not conducive to the maintenance of friendly 
and cordial relations between Filipinos and Americans. 
Tlie editorials of the Cablenews American and the then 
American-o\vned Manila Times were so vitriolic and of- 
fensive that Filipino newsboys refused to sell or distribute 
the papers and the Filipino employees of both journals 
declared a general strike. Due apologies were eventually 
forthcoming but the two papers never quite recovered from 
the blow. The Cablenews American closed permanently 
and the Manila Times followed not long afterwards. 

The attitude of the American community towards the 
Philippines in the early 1920’s can best be described by 
an article which the American Chamber of Commerce of 
Manila published and circulated to the people of the United 
States. After describing the wealth and beauty of the 
Philippine Archipelago, its sti’ategic location and possible 
future value to the United States, the article concluded 
with the following remarks: 

“We are here by right, we are here by conquest 
and we have a title by conquest and a title by pur- 
chase. 

“We are here as possessors, and we are here as 
sovereigns; we are here as ownex’s and controllei's of 
absolute sovei’eignty. 

“The Philippines are lax'ger than New England 
and Pennsylvania combined . . . They ai'e United 
States territory . . . and ai*e inalienable by Congi'ess. 

“The American people own 63,000,000 acres of 
public domain in this teri'itoi'y. 



[ 34 ] 



“Your Philippine territory is the base for your 
trade with China. 

“This portion of the world is the great arena of 
future commerce. 

“Think about this territory; learn about this ter- 
ritory; tell your Congressmen to lay off of this terri- 
tory as to base attempts to withdraw or curtail your 
sovereignty !” 

Reading these lines today it seems incredible that they 
should have ever been written by responsible American 
citizens. And yet most Americans residing in the Philip- 
pines in the 1920’s shared these views. They considei'ed 
the Philippines as much a part of the United States as 
Alaska and Hawaii and they thought it sheer stupidity on 
the part of American Congressmen in Washington to con- 
template the alienation of the Islands through the granting 
of independence to the Filipino people. To make matters 
w’orse, social relations between Filipinos and Americans, 
particularly in Manila, wei*e practically nil. Filipinos, 
and by this term I am referring to Malay Filipinos, were 
not admitted as members of those clubs founded or con- 
trolled by Americans, such as the Manila Polo Club, the 
Army and Navy Club, and the Manila Golf Club. Even 
the Bishop Brent School in Baguio which had been founded 
by a prominent Protestant missionary did not admit Ma- 
lay Filipinos as students. I stress the word “Malay” be- 
cause Europeans who had acquired Filipino citizenship by 
naturalization were not barred from these schools or social 
institutions. It was the color of one’s skin that proved 
to be the controlling factor, and a Malay was not light 
enough to satisfy them. 

When General Wood, therefore, returned to Manila 
after submitting the Mission’s report to President Coo- 
lidge and to assume the position of Chief Executive of our 
country, relations between Americans and Filipinos were 



[ 35 ] 



at a low ebb. He had indeed a very difficult problem 
before him. 

Perhaps General Wood did not share the imperialist 
and racist views voiced and practiced by most of his 
countiymen here but he was surrounded and influenced by 
many Americans who did. Undoubtedly, he came to the 
Islands imbued with the desire to serve the United States 
Government and the Filipino people who also owed alle- 
giance to that government. But Wood w'as not and never 
had been a politician. He did not have the persuasive 
manner so necessary to one who is to govern people of an 
alien race. It was also inevitable that he should associate 
almost exclusively with Americans in Manila. And, being 
an army man, it was natural that he should surround him- 
self with army officers for advice and counsel. Thus, al- 
though under the law he had a Filipino cabinet and a 
Filipino Council of State whose opinions should have been 
given due weight by him. Wood frequently ignored them. 
It appeared that the Goveimor attached more importance 
to the opinions of his own countiymen, especially army 
officers, than to the suggestions and counsel of the elected 
representatives of the Filipino people. 

The “Cavali'y Cabinet” Avas the derisive name giA^en 
by the Filipinos to the American officers Avho surrounded 
General Wood and Avhom he frequently consulted. There 
was no doubt that these officers took their duties and 
responsibilities in the Philippines seriously and that they 
tried their best to understand the problems of the Filipino 
people. But aside from the fact that a free nation can- 
not govern a subject people satisfactorily, one must re- 
member that these army officers did not mix freely with 
our people, did not speak our language, did not understand 
our customs and our traditions and, consequently, Avere 
not in a position to interpret correctly the sentiments of 
our people. 



[ 36 ] 



General Wood was himself a kindly gentleman of the 
old order. A few Filipinos who got to know him well liked 
and admired him. It was unfortunate that, among his 
assistants in Malacafian there were tactless American of- 
ficers who invariably aroused antagonism and antipathy 
among the Filipinos with whom they dealt. An incident 
which I personally had with one of these officers will ex- 
plain what I mean. At that time I was a student in the 
United States and, among my classmates, was a certain 
Robert F. Bradford. Bradford has since then made a 
brilliant political career, having been elected Governor of 
Massachusetts. Bradford’s father was Dean of the Har- 
vard Medical School where General Wood had studied as 
a young man. After I graduated from Harvard eaily in 
1923 I came to Manila for a visit and, since Dr. Bradford 
knew General Wood intimately, he took advantage of my 
return to request me to convey personal regards to his old 
friend. He furnished me with a very cordial letter of in- 
troduction in order to facilitate my seeing General Wood. 

When I called at Malacanan to present my letter of 
introduction, I was received by a thin-lipped, lanky Amei- 
ican major who was then acting as aide to General Wood. 
He read my letter of introduction hastily and, in leply to 
my request for an appointment with the Goveinoi, said 
curtly: “What do you want to see General Wood about. 

The General is a very busy man and cannot be disturbed 
by letters of introduction. How do I know that this man 
who signs himself as Dr. Bradford really knows Geneia 
Wood?” 

I replied that if he would only advise Governor Wood 
that I had a letter from Dr. Bradford of Boston, I was 
sure the Governor would receive me immediately because 
Dr. Bradford was his intimate friend. But the majoi 
remained adamant. He was about to dismiss me when 
Governor Wood passed by on his way to his office. Ignoi- 

[37] 



ing the American major, I turned toward Governor Wood 
M^ho was about twenty feet away and shouted, “Governor, 
I have a letter of introduction from your friend. Dr. Robert 
Bradford of Boston!” General Wood turned towards me 
beaming with pleasure. “Come in, young man,” he said, 
“by all means I want to hear about my good friend. Dr. 
Bradford.” We spent an enjoyable quarter hour together, 
following which he invited me to luncheon at Malacanan. 

It is needless to say that when I left the Governor’s 
office I had good reasons to thumb my nose at the major. 
But had not Governor Wood passed l:)iy at the right mo- 
ment, I would undoubtedly have left Malacanan Palace 
that day harboring bitterness toward America’s highest 
representative in the Philippines. And yet it is not un- 
likely that the reception which I received from the Gov- 
ernor’s aide was typical of the way Filipinos were received 
by this same officer and others like him during those criti- 
cal days in the early twenties. 

The first discordant notes between Governor Wood 
and the Filipino leaders were struck when the Governor 
appointed some minor executive officials without first con- 
sulting the Filipino leaders in the government or in dis- 
legai’d of theii* views on the proposed appointments. What 
finally resulted in an open break between him and the 
Filipino leaders, however, was the celebrated Conley case. 
Ray Conley was an American detective in the service of 
the Manila police force. Following an investigation of 
charges filed against him for misconduct in office, Conley 
was dismissed from the force by the Mayor of Manila 
who, at that time, was Don Ramon Fernandez. The Amer- 
ican appealed to the Secretary of the Department of the 
Interior, also a Filipino and who was no other than Jose 
P. Lauiel, then a young man only 30 years old whose gi’eat 
talent had early attracted Governor Wood. Laurel was 
the youngest member of the Wood Cabinet. After study- 



[ 38 ] 



ing the case, Secretary Laurel confirmed the decision of 
Mayor Fernandez. The American community flocked to 
Conley’s support, thereby inflating the incident into a lar- 
ger issue. Conley appealed Secretary Laurel’s decision to 
the American Governor. Wood upheld Conley’s appeal 
and ordered his reinstatement to the police force. Then, 
immediately afterwards, Conley tendered his resignation 
directly to the Governor General himself — and Genei'al 
Wood accepted it. 

It was too much for our people to swallow. If neither 
the Mayor of the City of Manila nor the Secretary of 
the Department of the Interior could determine the fit- 
ness of a man, be he white, yellow, or brown, to occupy 
a position in the city detective force, to what extent could 
the Filipinos be said to be enjoying self-government? The 
die was cast. The issue of self-government, said Quezon 
and his associates, was challenged by General Wood’s ac- 
tion. At ten o’clock in the evening of July 17, 1923, the 
• members of the Cabinet accompanied by Senate President 
Quezon and Speaker Roxas gathei'ed in the office of the 
Governor General. Quezon was the spokesman of the party 
and, with his usual directness, he proceeded to read to 
Governor Wood the document which they had brought 
along. Carefully and with measured emphasis. Senate 
Px-esident Quezon said : 

“Sir: 

“We have observed for some time past that it is 
your policy and desire as Governor Genei'al to intei*- 
.vene iix, and control, even to the smallest details, 
the af fail's of our government, both insular and local, 
in uttex' disx'egard of the authority and x'esponsibility 
of the department heads and other officials concexmed. 
This policy x’ecently culminated in an unfox'tunate in- 
cident which shook to its foundation the public opinion 
of the countx'y, when you, by undue intex'fex'ence with 
the powers of the Mayor of the City of Manila, x’e- 
instated a member of the secx'et sex’vice of the city who 



[ 39 ] 



had been legally suspended from office, and, subse- 
quently, upon your own initiative, accepted his i*e- 
signation, and, to make matters worse, you took this 
action without hearing the proper officials. This 
series of acts constitutes a clear violation of the fun- 
damental law of the land and other local provisions, 
especially those of Act No. 2803 and of Section 2447 
of the Administrative Code, and at the same time is 
a backward step and a curtailment of Filipino auto- 
nomy guaranteed by the organic act and enjoyed by 
the Filipino people continuously since the operation 
of the Jones Law. 

“Having followed this course of conduct in your 
relations with the executive depai-tments and other 
offices of the insular and local government, thereby 
violating the sacred pledge of the people and govern- 
ment of the United States to guarantee to the Filipino 
people the exercise of the greatest possible measure of 
self-government pending the recognition of their in- 
dependence, we beg, with the deepest regret, frankly 
0 state that we are unable to assume responsibility 
with you in the execution of this policy, and, therefore, 
we have decided to, and hereby do, tender our resigna- 
tions jointly, the members of the Council of State 
and, individually, the secretaries of departments.” 

General Wood listened intently. He was cool under 
the cii cumstances, as he had always been cool when under 
fire, and he accepted the challenge. 

Your action,” he said, “is in the character of a chal- 
lenge and a threat which I cannot ignore. I regret ex- 
ceedingly this occurrence. It can only be productive of 
unfortunate results prejudicial to the cause in which we 
are both interested. It means an abandonment of your 
posts and obligations at a time of gi'eat responsibility on 
alleged issues unsupported by evidence and unworthy of 
the attention of serious-minded men.” 

But the Cabinet and the Council of State resigned and 
the tension increased. 

[40] 



Soon after the Conley incident a senatorial seat in 
Manila became vacant because of the designation of Sena- 
tor Pedro Guevara to the position of Resident Commis- 
sioner to Washington. It became necessary to hold a special 
election for the seat thus vacated by him, and the Naciona- 
lista-Colectivista Painty nominated as candidate the fox'mer 
Mayor of Manila, Don Ramon Fernandez, who had re- 
signed his office soon after Genex'al Wood x’einstated Con- 
ley. 

It was during this bitter campaign also that Quezon 
indicated how highly he x*egax*ded Roxas. One day, he, 
Osmena, and Don Ramoix Fernaixdez wex*e dxuving in Que- 
zon’s car to an important political meeting. During their 
convex'sation the name of Roxas was mentioned. “Watch 
Roxas cax'efully,” said Quezon to Don Ramon, “he is goiixg 
to be our successor.” 

The Democratas nominated Judge Sumuloixg. Sumu- 
long undoubtedly had a larger appeal to the public. He 
had been iix the public eye for many yeax's and his talent 
and patriotism wex*e beyond question. His x'ecox’d fully 
qualified him for the position. In contrast to his qualifi- 
cations wex’e those of Don Ramon Fexmandez, a business- 
man who had been px’evailed upon by Quezon to become 
mayor of Manila and who had accepted the nomination for 
Senator with gx*eat reluctance since he had no particular 
fondxxess for a politician's life. 

But Quezon, ever an adx'oit campaign strategist, suc- 
ceeded in inculcating in the minds of our people the idea 
that the election of Fernandez would vindicate the Filipino 
leaders in their attitude towards Genex'al Wood. Once 
that idea was put across to the electorate, the election of 
Mr. FexTxandez was never in doubt. He won, and the rift 
with Governor General Wood widened more thaix ever. 
Quezon and Roxas knew now, however, that they had the 

4 

people’s support. 



[ 41 ] 



Early the following year Speaker Roxas left for Wash- 
ington. It was his first trip to America and yet to him 
was entrusted the most delicate assignment that could have 
been wished upon any man — much less a Filipino. The 
Nacionalista-Colectivista Pai'ty had instructed Roxas to 
ask the President of the United States to remove Governor 
General Wood from office. 



[ 42 ] 



^liapler 6 



Speaker Roxas left for Washington late in 1923 
he carried along not onlj’^ specific instructions to 
request the recall of Governor General Wood but he had 
with him also a letter which had been prepared by the 
best minds from among the men who belonged to the Na- 
cionalista-Consolidado Party. The President and Vice- 
President of the Senate, the Secretaiy of Justice, the Secre- 
tary of the Interior, and even one or two Filipino members 
of the Supreme Court had had a hand in it, to mention 
only a few. This letter which was addressed to President 
Coolidge not only stated that Governor General Wood had 
been guilty of illegal and arbitrary acts and that the irri- 
tation caused by his conduct had led Filipino leaders to 
resign their official positions, but added also that this 
event, grave and serious as it was, once more demonstrated 
that the immediate and absolute independence of the Phil- 
ippines, which the whole country demanded, was the only 
complete and satisfactory settlement of the Philippine 
problem. Though the letter had been carefully prepared, 
it was up to Roxas to decide after he reached Washington 
what was really to be done with it. 

It was, as I have said before, Roxas’ fii’st trip to 
America. He was only 32 years old. It was certainly a 
tremendous responsibility. The young Speaker departed 
from Manila with mingled feelings of hope, although he 
was personally convinced that it was extremely doubtful 
that the President of the United States would recall a 
man like General Wood who, himself, almost became Pres- 
ident of the United States and who enjoyed tremendous 
popularity throughout America. But at that time the 



[ 43 ] 



American people themselves had been shocked by news of 
administration scandals in Washington. Roxas and the 
other leaders of his party hoped that their petition would 
receive the support of a sympathetic press and of those 
Americans who, disgusted with the way their own leaders 
were running their country, might feel that the Filipinos 
were entitled to run their affairs in their own way with- 
out the constant supervision and control of an American 
representative. 

In Washington Roxas was received very cordially by 
President Coolidge. His first visit to the White House, 
however, was in the nature of a social call and the all- 
important letter remained in his portfolio in a hotel room. 
Roxas wanted more time to size up the political situation. 
There were, furthermore, other important matters to be 
taken up. Congressman Bacon of Massachusetts, for 
example, had recently introduced a bill in Congress provid- 
ing for the segi’egation of Mindanao from the Philippines 
so that, in the event of independence, only Luzon and the 
Visayan Islands would be freed of American control while 
the rich lands farther to the south would remain inde- 
finitely under the United States. Such a proposition, of 
course, sounds ridiculous today and it was considered ab- 
surd by the Filipinos twenty-eight years ago, but to the 
American public so long misinformed about conditions in 
the Philippines, it was making an impression. The Moros, 
said the supporters of the bill, strongly oppose independ- 
ence and they are the traditional enemies of the Christian 
Filipinos. Many a supposedly intelligent American was 
swayed by this line of argument and they, therefoi’e, be- 
lieved that Mr. Bacon's proposal should not be lightly cast 
aside. 

Evidently, however, the Republican administration, 
which in the past had never openly favored early Philip- 
pine independence, now began to take the matter seriously. 



[ 44 ] 



At that time Philippine affaii's were conducted from Wash- 
ington through the Depai'tment of War. Secretary of 
War Weeks summoned Speaker Roxas to an important 
meeting. “Would the Filipino people,” said Secretary 
Weeks, “be willing to support a Philippine independence 
bill under the terms of which a transition period of twenty 
years would be provided for, after which a plebiscite would 
be held in the Philippines and, if the Filipino people then 
desired independence, the Republic of the Philippines would 
be proclaimed?” It was the first time that a Republican 
administration in Washington had taken the Philippine 
issue seriously. Secretary of War Weeks admitted that 
the exact provisions of the bill embodying his suggestions 
had not yet been formally drafted but he said that he 
wanted to sound the opinion of the Filipino representa- 
tives on the matter. 

Roxas replied that he could not commit himself with- 
out consulting the other members of his party in Manila. 
But the Nacionalista leaders in the Philippines seemed 
to be unable to make up their minds. Instead of answering 
the question squarely, Quezon and Osmena said that they 
would go to Washington to discuss the matter further. 
Claro Recto, then spokesman for the Democrata Party, 
was very much against Secretary Weeks’ proposal and, 
political strategist that he was, he hurled broadsides 
against the Nacionalistas saying that to support the inde- 
pendence bill which Secretary Weeks was offering would 
be tantamount to an abandonment of the Filipinos’ desire 
for early independence. 

Secretary of War Weeks’ proposal was finally embo- 
died in a bill sponsored by Congressman Fairfield. But 
Quezon and Osmena never came to Washington and, lack- 
ing the support of the Filipinos, the measure was not re- 
ported favorably to Congress. 



[ 45 ] 



Meantime, there remained the question as to how Ro- 
xas was to discharge the delicate mission that had been 
entrusted to him. After surveying the situation in Wash- 
ington, Roxas was of the opinion that his chances of 
achieving success wei'e exceedingly remote. He so ex- 
pressed his doubts to the two resident commissioners then 
in the capital, namely, Isauro Gabaldon and Pedi'o Gue- 
vara. Guevara, the Junior Commissioner, was noncom- 
mittal, but Don Isauro was very much in favor of sub- 
mitting the letter. He urged Roxas to present it to the 
Pi'esident, reminding him that the main object of his trip 
to Washington was to work for the recall of General Wood. 

Full of misgivings Roxas sigmed the letter and dis- 
patched it to the White House. As he had feared. Pres- 
ident Coolidge supported the American Goveimor General 
one hundred per cent. The silent man of the White House 
sent our Filipino representative a stinging reply in which 
he made it clear that General Wood counted with the sup- 
port of the American administration and that the Filipinos 
must get along with him. “Furthermore,” said the Pres- 
ident of the United States, “the extent to which the griev- 
ances which you suggest are shared by the Filipino people 
has been a subject of some disagreement. The American 
Government has information which justifies its belief that 
a very large proportion at any rate, and possibly a majority 
of the substantial citizenry of the Islands, does not sup- 
port the claim that there are grounds for serious grie- 
vances.” “A considerable section of the Filipino people,” 
continued the President, “is further of the opinion that, 
at this time, any change which would weaken the tie be- 
tween the Filipinos and the American nation would be a 
misfortune to the Islands.” 

Coolidge was thus harping again on the proposition 
which so many other anti-independence Americans in 
those days were making, namely, that the majority of the 



[ 46 ] 



Filipino people did not want independence and that only 
Filipino politicians and other demagogues like them fa- 
vored the severance of political ties with the United States. 
The American President, in other words, preferred to be 
blind to the fact that ever since the Filipino people wex*e 
granted the right to elect their own representatives to a 
legislative assembly, not only were all political parties in 
the Islands in favor of severing political ties with the 
United States but that there was not a single man in our 
country who could be elected to public office if he did not 
advocate independence. 

Although Roxas had failed in his mission, his letter 
was given considerable publicity in America which was 
exactly what the Filipino cause needed. Leaders of the 
Democratic Party in the United States rejoiced at seeing 
a Filipino spokesman spunky and courageous enough to 
challenge such a well-known Republican, while many an 
American with little interest in political life could not help 
but sympathize with the Filipino people who, against their 
consent, continued to be governed by representatives of 
another country more than ten thousand miles away. 

While Roxas was in the United States he received 
frequent invitations to speak before civic organizations. 
At that time it must be remembered that immediate in- 
dependence for the Philippines was a dormant issue in- 
sofar as the greater part of the American public was con- 
cerned. Even the filing of the Fairfield Bill in Congress 
had not aroused any interest in the press and most Amer- 
icans had not heard of it. If the American electorate had 
been asked if they were in favor of granting independence 
to the Philippines, the answer would probably have been 
in the affirmative but, unfortunately, the American public 
can not be easily roused to take an interest in a question 
unless the issues involved affect them closely. The aver- 
age American of those days, furthermore, was an easy- 



[ 47 ] 






going, congenial individual. Of course, he was in favor 
cf Philippine independence, but the idea had been drilled 
into his mind by those who opposed the alienation of the 
Philippines that the Filipino people were not yet quite 
ready for political freedom. It was possible to put this 
thought across because it is easy to point out the faults 
and shortcomings of an alien race. The general consen- 
sus of opinion throughout the United States in 1924, there- 
fore, was that when the proper time came and after the 
Filipino people had fully digested the principles of self- 
government, America would gladly withdi*aw her sover- 
eignty over the Philippines. The Wood-Forbes Mission, 
it will be recalled, had recommended in their report the 
continuation of the status of the Philippines until such 
time as the Filipinos could thoroughly master the powers 
ah'eady in their hands. To many well-meaning Amer- 
icans that sounded reasonable. It never occurred to them 
that no people have as yet thoroughly mastered the art 
of self-government. What the Philippine independence 
campaign in the United States needed, therefore, more 
than anything else, was something that would dramatize 
it and bring it to the attention of the American public 
and their representatives in Congress. We Filipinos did 
not know it then but, as events later proved, it was the 
severe business depression of 1929-1930 that finally was 
to bring the Philippine question to the forefront and com- 
pel the American Congress to act on the representations 
of our Filipino leaders. 

In the early twenties, therefore, whenever a Filipino 
was invited to speak before an American audience, he 
availed himself of that opportunity to bring up the Phil- 
ippine independence question, and Speaker Roxas was 
among those who were eager to participate in discussions 
cf this nature. One of Roxas’ appearances before a civic 
organization, in particular, proved to be quite memorable 
because of the contrast between the young Filipino repre- 



[ 48 ] 



sentative, who was then only 32 yeai's old, and the Amer- 
ican speaker who opposed him. That was the occasion 
when Roxas addressed the Massachusetts League of Wo- 
men Voters. 

Former Governor W. Cameron Forbes, whose family 
had lived in Massachusetts for generations, also appeared 
on the same platform and he agreed to be the first speaker. 
Forbes was, of course, very much older than Roxas and 
his speech was entirely devoid of humor or eloquence. 
He narrated the usual story which Americans opposed 
to early Philippine independence in those days often told, 
namely, that America’s responsibility in the Philippines 
came unsought to the American people; that it was the 
fortunes of the Spanish War which brought American 
power to the Philippines playing the part of an unex- 
pected and welcome deliverer; that the Filipino people 
were making marked pi'ogress in education, in cultural 
advancement, in political conceptions and institutional 
development and that they had demonstrated a capacity 
which could not but justify high hopes for their future, 
hut that the Filipinos were, nevertheless, not yet ready 
for independence and that they should, therefore, be pa- 
tient and wait many years more before pressing for the 
severance of their political ties with the United States. 
He received a polite applause at the end of his speech. 
In contrast to Forbes, the youthful Speaker of the Philip- 
pine House of Representatives electrified his audience with 
his personality, with the soundness of his plea, with the 
magic of his words and the eloquence with which he deli- 
vered them. Many women were in tears by the time he 
finished his speech and the historic walls of Sanders Thea- 
ter at Harvard University where the meeting was held 
seldom heard such rousing cheers and deafening applause 
as greeted Roxas when he had concluded his address. Mas- 
sachusetts women were certainly firmly convinced that 
day that the Filipino people were worthy of independence 



[ 49 ] 



and that our country would be safe under the leadership 
of such a brilliant man. I can never forget the occasion 
myself because I was then a student at the Harvard Law 
School and had been invited to sit in the rostrum beside 
our Filipino representative. It was the beginning of my 
acquaintanceship with Roxas which, in the years that fol- 
lowed, ripened into a warm and intimate friendship. 

Roxas returned to the Philippines richer by his Amex*- 
ican experiences. Many more trips to Washington wei*e 
to follow and, observant as he had always shown himself 
to be, these visits did much to give him a better and cleai'cr 
insight into the American mind. 

The next three yeax's wex*e busy ones. When Roxas’ 
term of office expired in 1925 his constituents x'etui'ned 
him to the House with unprecedented i*ecord votes and no 
one among his colleagues in that chamber seriously chal- 
lenged his right to continue in office as px'esiding officer. 
Though desirous of getting along with the American Gov- 
ernor General, clashes between Genex'al Wood on the one 
hand and Px'esident Quezon and Speaker Roxas on the 
ether, were frequent and bitter. General Wood, for 
example, was Chairman of the so-called Board of Contx'ol. 
This Board voted the government’s contx'olling sharehold- 
ings in various big government-owned corpox’ations like 
the Manila Railx'oad Company, the Cebu Poi’tland Cement 
Company, and several sugar centrals then being finaixced 
by the Philippine National Bank. Quezon and Roxas wex*e 
the other two members of this Board. Genex’al Wood 
favored the sale of some of these government-controlled 
cox’porations to private intex'ests, and although it was well 
known that, if these coneexms were put up for sale, they 
v/ould all fall into Amex'ican hands because American cap- 
italists were the only ones who then had enough money 
available to acquire these properties. Roxas fought hard 
against Wood’s proposals and succeeded, at least, in pre- 



[ 50 ] 



venting the Governor General from insisting on going 
ttirough with his pet measure. But other disagreements 
were frequent and the whole problem finally came to a 
head when the Governor General refused to recognize the 
Speaker of the House and the President of the Senate 
as entitled to sit on the Board of Control. Wood adopted 
the view that the original act passed by the Philippine 
Legislature creating the Board of Control was unconsti- 
tutional because it delegated administrative powers to 
members of the Legislature. Only he, the Governor Gen- 
eral, said Wood, could vote the government’s stock. This 
attitude of the Governor General resulted in the famous 
Board of Control cases, which were finally decided by 
6 to 3 vote of the Supreme Court of the United States in 
favor of the Governor General. 

In 1927, General Wood returned to America for a 
visit. His health had been seriously impaired as a result 
of the protracted fights which he had been having con- 
tinually with our Filipino leaders. Since the wholesale 
resignation of his Filipino Cabinet and the Council of 
State in 1923, Wood’s position had indeed been difficult 
for no responsible Filipino would accept a cabinet ap- 
pointment under him. During the years that followed 
the Governor had to get along by himself assisted only 
by the under-secretaries of the departments. What were 
Wood’s last thoughts as the Manila skyline faded from 
view? Did the aging General feel that, in many respects, 
his administration had been a failure? He had come to 
the Philippines firmly believing that he was going to ful- 
fil an important mission. He had sincerely hoped that 
the Filipino people would appreciate his efforts and that 
he would earn their respect and their gratitude. Instead 
he had relatively few Filipino friends. Right or wrong, 
Filipino public opinion was decidedly against him. Even 
the six Filipino members in our House of Representatives 
who represented Mindanao and the Mountain Provinces 



[ 51 ] 



and who, under the law at that time, were appointed by 
the American Governor General, were ridiculed by their 
colleagues in that chamber. They were openly and deri- 
sively referred to as “representatives from Malacanan.” 
It was getting to be so that no Filipino of attainment or 
repute would accept an appointment from General Wood 
because those who did were looked down upon by most 
of their countrymen. Tired, haggard-looking, and disap- 
pointed, the General went back home ostensibly for a well- 
deserved vacation but, in reality, never to return. Leo- 
nard Wood died in Massachusetts not many months after 
leaving the Philippines. 



[ 52 ] 




5 H0RTLY after Governor Wood died, Quezon accom- 
panied by Osmeiia went to the United States. It 
seems that many years before, during Quezon’s incum- 
bency as Resident Commissioner in Washington, he had 
met Heni’y L. Stimson who was then Secretary of War 
in President Taft’s Cabinet. Stimson was thus quite fa- 
miliar with the Philippine problem. Quezon’s main ob- 
ject in going to America was to interview President Coo- 
lidge and urge him to designate Stimson who was, at 
that time, practicing law in New York, as the successor of 
General Wood. 

Upon reaching Washington the Filipino leaders were 
received by President Coolidge. Quezon told the Pres- 
ident how important it was that the policy of cooperation 
between Filipinos and Americans which had been tempo- 
rarily suspended during the administration of General 
Wood should be resumed. He suggested that Stimson was 
the right man to succeed Wood. Coolidge, however, was 
noncommittal. Quezon and Osmena next called on Wil- 
liam Howard Taft, the fii'st civil governor of the Philip- 
pines, who was then Chief Jugtice of the Supreme Court 
in Washington. Although many years had elapsed since 
Taft was in the Philippines he had never lost interest 
in the welfare of the Filipino people. Quezon explained 
to him why he believed Stimson was the right man to 
succeed Wood. He expressed the belief that if Stimson 
came to Manila it would be possible for the Filipinos to 
cooperate again with the American administration. 

“I am no longer in politics,” replied the aging Chief 
Justice, “and I do not, as a rule, talk to the President of 



[531 



the United States concerning appointments. However, 
the well-being of the Filipino people has always been close 
to my heart and, in this particular case, I shall be glad 
to see President Coolidge and recommend the appoint- 
ment of Stimson if Stimson can be prevailed upon to 
accept the governorship.” 

Thus encouraged, Quezon and Osmena visited Colonel 
Stimson in New York. At first Stimson would not give 
serious thought to the governorship of the Philippines but 
Quezon, in his own convincing way, succeeded in impress- 
ing upon him the importance of Philippine-American re- 
lations. A fortnight later the White House announced 
the appointment of Stimson as Governor General of the 
Philippines. 

Quezon could not return to the Philippines imme- 
diately because he had to proceed to Monrovia, California, 
for confinement in a sanitarium specializing in the treat- 
ment of tuberculosis. This dreaded disease was making 
serious inroads on Quezon’s health. Osmena, therefore, 
hurried back to Manila and conveyed to the members of 
the Nacionalista Consolidado Party Quezon’s wishes to 
the effect that the new American Governor General be 
given every possible cooperation and assistance. 

The choice of Stimson as Governor General proved to 
be a wise one for the new American representative was 
tactful, wise, and careful in his relations with our people. 
One of the fii’st things he did soon after his arrival here 
v/as to hold a magnificent reception in Malacanan. To the 
great surprise of the Filipinos who attended that historic 
party, Mrs. Stimson received her husband’s guests attired 
in a Filipino mestiza dress. It made a tremendous im- 
pression. It convinced our leaders also that the new gov- 
ernor really wanted to maintain the most cordial relations 
with the Filipino people. Perhaps that little incident did 



[ 54 ] 



more than anything else to help patch up the many dif- 
ferences which we had had in the past with General Wood. 

When Stimson first assumed office as Governor Gen- 
eral he did not have a very high regard for Roxas. We 
shall never know exactly why, but it is most likely that 
he considered Roxas a young, brash, hotheaded politician 
who had been elevated to high office because of his elo- 
quence and personality rather than because he was a 
brilliant thinker and a statesman. Stimson’s coolness and 
indifference towards Roxas became apparent to Quezon 
when our Senate President returned from California. So 
one day during a friendly chat between them, Quezon told 
Stimson, “Governor, we have a very great man here in 
the Philippines whom you have not properly judged as 
yet. I refer to Speaker Roxas. I want you to do me the 
favor of making an effort to know him better. I am con- 
fident that, as you get to understand Roxas, you will realize 
that he is a genius and a statesman of the highest caliber.” 

An occasion soon arose which convinced Stimson that 
Roxas was indeed an exceptionally talented leader. The 
Governor had recommended to the Philippine Legislature 
the approval of a bill substantially amending the banking 
laws of the Philippines. Stimson’s adviser on these mat- 
ters was an American by the name of Earl Schwulst, a 
graduate of the Harvard Business School, who had special- 
ized in banking and finance. Stimson invited all the 
cipal officials of the banks doing business in the Philip- 
pines to Malacanan for the purpose of discussing with 
them the merits of his proposed measure. Our legislative 
leaders were also requested to attend and, soon after the 
meeting convened, Roxas appeared. Each of the bank 
managers commented on the bill but the meeting seemed 
to be getting nowhere. Roxas, who in the meantime had 
said nothing, I'ose from his seat and approached Schwulst. 
The two men left the room for a few minutes. Roxas 



[ 65 ] 



asked Schwulst two or three questions regarding certain 
provisions of the bill after which they immediately re- 
turned to the meeting. Roxas then took the floor and pro- 
ceeded to analyze the provisions of the pi*oposed measure, 
making comments as he went along. From then on he 
dominated the conference for it was apparent to all that 
he had a more thorough understanding of the significance 
ot the provisions of the bill than the bankers present at 
the meeting. Many years later, in New York, Mr. Schwulst 
nai’rated this incident to me, adding that, after the meet- 
ing was over and the visitors had left, Stimson turned to 
him (Schwulst) and said that he was perfectly amazed 
how quickly Roxas had grasped the significance of his pro- 
posed measure and how well he had mastered the subject. 

It was during Governor Stimson’s brief administra- 
tion that the rehabilitation of the Philippine National Bank 
was consummated. He also revived the Council of State 
which had ceased to function during General Wood’s ad- 
ministration. Not long after he assumed office as Gov- 
ernor General, however, selfish sugar interests in the 
United States began a campaign in Washington to obtain 
legislation which would put a limit to the free exportation 
of sugar from the Philippines to the United States. The 
pioposed legislation was embodied in the so-called Timber- 
kike Bill introduced in Congress in 1929. In other words, 
ongressman Timberlake and those who represented the 
cane and beet sugar interests in America and who were 
afraid of Philippine competition, wanted to limit the 
amount of duty-free sugar that the Philippines could send 
to the United States without, however, putting any limit 
to the quantity of American goods and agricultural pro- 
ucts that could enter the Philippines free of duty. Quezon 
was indignant, as he and other Filipinos had reason to be. 
He did not mince words in explaining his position to Gov- 
ernor Stimson. “If the United States will tax Philippine 
products entering America while keeping open the Philip- 



[ 56 ] 



pines for the free entrance of American goods,” he said, 
“I will start a revolution against America.” To which 
Governor Stimson properly replied, “I would not blame 
you for doing so, but I cannot believe that the American 
people would ever tolerate such a tax on Philippine pro- 
ducts and I will fight it to the end.” 

A Philippine mission was immediately organized to 
go to the United States and fight the Timberlake Bill. 
Eoxas was chosen to head it. He was accompanied by 
Osmena and Rafael Alunan, the latter being at that time 
head of the Philippine Sugar Association. The Mission 
received full support from the Republican administration 
in Washington and the Timberlake Bill was shelved. The 
missioners lost no time in returning to the Philippines 
but, while they were on the way. Senator William King 
of Colorado introduced a resolution in the Senate provid- 
ing that independence be granted to the Philippines with- 
in two years. The news electrified Philippine public 
opinion. No one of our three top leaders was in the Phil- 
ippines at the time, for Roxas and Osmena had not yet 
arrived from the United States, while Quezon was vaca- 
tioning in Japan. But other party leaders in Manila and 
the local press were all of the opinion that a Philippine 
independence mission should immediately go to Washing- 
ton and support Senator King’s resolution. 

At that time, the United States Senate was still con- 
trolled by the Republicans. Senator King, though a De- 
mocrat, was however one of the most prominent members 
of that body. It had been quite some time, furthermore, 
since the independence issue had been raised in Congress 
and our leaders in Manila decided that it was time to 
renew our drive for independence. The Philippine Legis- 
lature forthwith approved a resolution creating the Phil- 
ippine Independence Mission with Quezon and Roxas as 
joint chairmen and Senator Briones, who was then floor 
leader of the Nacionalista Consolidado Party, and Senator 



[ 57 ] 



Sumulong and Congi’essman Pedro Gil of the Democrata 
Party as members. 

Soon after Quezon arrived in Manila, however, and 
following the announcement of his designation as one of 
the joint chairmen of the Mission, his physician. Dr. An- 
tonio Sison, announced that it would be suicidal for our 
Senate President to go to Washington. It was then Nov- 
ember, 1929, and Dr. Sison explained that the cold, damp 
weather in the American capital would do considerable 
harm to President Quezon who was not yet fully cured 
despite his long confinement in a California sanitarium. 

Following Dr. Sison’s announcement, Quezon sum- 
moned me to his house. I had known our Senate Pi*es- 
ident for sometime. He and my father were friends of 
long standing and he had always taken a kindly interest 
in my career. When, in answer to his summons, I ap- 
peared before him, he said : “Lichauco, it was my plan to 
have you accompany me to Washington but Dr. Sison 
will not let me go. However, I will I’ecommend you to 
Speaker Roxas. I think you can be of great sei’vdce to 
the Mission and I know Roxas will be glad to take you.” 

Roxas arrived in Manila a few days later and im- 
mediately began preparations for his return to Washing- 
ton. Calling me to his office, he informed me that I 
had been highly recommended to him by President Que- 
zon and that he would be very glad to have me join his 
party as secretary to the Mission. I was at that time a 
young assistant attorney in the office of the Attorney 
General and it is needless to say that I welcomed the op- 
portunity to go with Roxas. It was to be the beginning 
of an association lasting many years and was not to ter- 
minate until April, 1948, when Roxas, then President of 
the Republic, suffered a heart attack after addressing 
America’s armed forces in Clark Field and died a few 
hours later. 



[ 58 ] 



(Chapter 8 



S Chairman of the Mission ci'eated by joint resolu- 



tion of the Philippine Legislature, Roxas left Manila 
late in November, 1929. His wife was then spending a 
short vacation in Europe but she advised her husband 
that she would meet him in Washington. Their two chil- 
dren remained in Manila. The only other member of the 
Philippine Legislature accompanying Roxas was Pedro 
Gil, Democrata minority floor leader of the House. A 
few months later we were joined in Washington by Ma- 
nuel Briones, then majority floor leader of the Senate, 
and Senator Juan Sumulong, minority floor leader, ac- 
companied by his secretary young Lorenzo Sumulong who 
had just been admitted to the bar and who was going to 
enter Harvard Law School to try for a master’s degree. 
Briones and Sumulong, however, remained in Washington 
for only a very brief period. 

In Honolulu and San Francisco, as was to be ex- 
pected, we were met by many Filipinos desirous of enter- 
taining us and it was then that I began to understand 
why, to many members of the younger generation in those 
days, Roxas had appeared haughty and inaccessible. In 
reality, Roxas. was merely impatient. He found it hard 
to show interest in people who had little of importance 
01 value to talk about at a time when so many difficult 
problems demanded his attention. He was eager to get 
down to business and hard work. The delays that re- 
sulted from meeting large numbers of Filipino residents 
in Honolulu and in the United States irritated Roxas and 
put him in a bad humor. 




[ 59 ] 






I 



I 



i 

j When the hearing ended Chaii*man Bingham politely 

thanked Roxas and then announced that the next meeting 
of the Committee would be held two weeks later. It thus 
became vex'y apparent that Bingham was going to prolong 
the hearings as much as possible. Congress was due to 
adjourn late in the spring and, if his Committee failed 
to report a bill before adjournment, independence legis- 
lation would be out of the question until after the next 
Congressional elections. 

A day or two following the first meeting of the 
Senate Committee, Senator Hawes invited the Filipino 
delegation to his office. We presented ourselves at the 
appointed hour and the American senator proceeded to ad- 
dress us bluntly and directly. As closely as I can remem- 
ber it, this is what he said: 

“Gentlemen, my name is Harry B. Hawes. I am a 
Democrat from Missouri. I have been in politics many 
yeai's. At one time 1 was even Commissioner of Police 
in St. Louis. I have served a couple of terms in the House 
and I will soon reach the end of my term in the Senate. 
I am getting to be a pretty old man. All my life I have 
had a lot to do with legislation concerning railroads, in- 
surance companies, and other forms of big business. Be- 
fore I retire from public life I should like to feel that I 
have contributed something towards the happiness of a 
large section of mankind. 

“It seems to me that the Philippine independence 
question offers that opportunity. I want to study your 
problem and if you can convince me that you are ready for 
independence, believe me, gentlemen, you shall have my 
wholehearted support. But before I take another step 
in that direction I am going to be blunt enough to tell 
you something.” 

The man from Missouri leaned forward and pointed 
an accusing finger at us. 



[ 61 ] 



“Gentlemen,” he continued, “I have been told by some 
very reliable people that the majority of Filipinos do not 
want independence. What is worse, it is being whispered 
about that even you Filipino leaders do not want inde- 
pendence because you fear its consequences. The first 
question, therefore, that I want to ask you is, ‘Do you 
and your people honestly and truly want independence?’ ” 

Roxas, Osias, and Guevara almost stumbled over each 
other in their haste to assure Senator Hawes that the 
desire for independence throughout the Islands was gen- 
uine and real, that our people were overwhelmingly in 
favor of it, and that the leaders of the country were equal- 
ly as sincere in advocating it. 

“Senator,” Roxas finally concluded, “there is perhaps 
only one way by which you can really satisfy yourself on 
this matter, and that is by coming to the Philippines and 
seeing and hearing for yourself the sentiments of our 
people.” Hawes assured us that he would pay the Philip- 
pines a visit soon. Events later proved that he was vei'y 
much satisfied with this meeting. We were also deeply 
impressed by Hawes’ sincerity. We felt that we had found 
a real friend who would give his time and his whole- 
hearted attention to our problem. 

A few days later Senator Hawes again summoned the 
Mission to another conference in his office. Americans 
in general are known for their bluntness and their ten- 
dency to get directly to the point they have in mind with- 
out mincing unnecessary words. Hawes certainly typi- 
fied this American trait. “Gentlemen,” he said, “I am 
going to talk turkey. You Filipinos must abandon all 
opes for an immediate independence bill because no one 
of importance in Congress will take such a proposal se- 
riously. You must instead concentrate your efforts on a 
bill pioviding for independence after a reasonable period 
of preparation say fifteen to twenty years. Furthei*- 

[ 62 ] 



more, I am convinced that it will be impossible to obtain 
the support of the present Republican administration to 
any form of independence legislation. The best we can 
do is to make our independence bill as non-partisan as 
possible. For that purpose, it is imperative that a Re- 
publican senator be found willing to lend his name to such 
a measure. I have been canvassing the membership of 
the Senate carefully and I think Bronson Cutting of New 
Mexico is just the man we need. He is a libei*al Re- 
publican. He has always been held in the highest regard 
by his colleagues, and I am confident that he will be glad 
to join us.” 

The subject of this conversation, of course, was im- 
mediately communicated by Roxas to Quezon and Osmena 
who were then in Manila. But even before waiting for 
their favorable reply, Roxas lost no time in preparing 
a draft of the proposed measure. Briefly stated, the bill 
would authorize the Filipino people to call a constitutional 
convention and adopt a constitution for the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines, the Chief Executive of which 
would be a Filipino president elected by the people at 
large. United States sovereignty in the Philippines would 
continue but her representative in Manila would be known 
as the American Commissioner. The Filipino people would 
enjoy considerable autonomy of their own, the only limi- 
tations to be placed on their legislative powers being those 
referring to trade, currency, and foi*eign relations. The 
most controversial problem related to the amount and kind 
of duty-free Philippine goods and produce that could be 
sent to the United States during the period of transition 
leading to complete independence. Speaker Roxas and Sen- 
ators Hawes and Cutting knew that the American cane 
and beet sugar producers would try to bring down the 
figure as low as possible. There were also the tobacco, 
cordage, and coconut oil interests that had to be reckoned 






[ 63 ] 



with. Filipino immigration constituted another serious 
problem, for Roxas knew that American labor leaders 
would oppose the bill unless it safeguarded American 
workmen against cheap labor from the Philippines. Sen- 
ator Cutting also insisted that a plebiscite should be held 
after the transition period in order to give the Filipino 
people the opportunity to decide for themselves if, after 
the Commonwealth, they still wanted independence. 

The new bill thus sponsored by a Democrat and a 
Republican and known as the Hawes-Cutting Independence 
Bill was introduced in the Senate and immediately re- 
ferred to Senator Bingham's committee for consideration. 
The days and the weeks dragged slowly on. Chairman 
Bingham allowed every Tom, Dick, and Harry who be- 
lieved he had anything of importance to say about Philip- 
pine independence to appear before his committee. It be- 
came apparent more than ever that the senator from Con- 
necticut was trying to kill the independence measure 
through delay and inaction. 

Roxas realized that the support of friends of inde- 
pendence in Congress was not enough to assure the ap- 
proval of the Hawes-Cutting Bill even by a Senate com- 
mittee. It was necessary that those who might be af- 
fected by inaction on the Philippine independence question 
be likewise urged actively to support the bill. For example, 
the number of Filipino immigrants freely entering the 
United States had been increasing considerably from year 
to year. American labor unions, particularly those from 
California, were complaining that these Filipinos were 
willing to work for very low salaries. True enough, any- 
one visiting Pacific Coast cities in those days could not help 
but be impressed by the number of Filipinos working as 
janitors, elevator boys, and waiters. Thousands of them 
were also to be found in the farms during the planting and 
haiwesting seasons, and it was apparent that, unless Philip- 



[ 64 ] 



pine immiffi-ation to the United States was restricted, 
many more thousands of Filipinos would soon be supplant- 
ing American laborei's. And yet as long as the Philippines 
was a possession of the United States, the American Con- 
gress could not properly enact legislation barring the free 
entry of Filipinos into the country to which they owed al- 
legiance. 

The Louisiana cane sugar interests and the beet sugar 
planters of Colorado also believed that the unrestricted en- 
try of duty-free Philippine sugar into the United States 
would lower the price of that commodity and, since costs 
of production in America were higher than those prevail- 
ing in the Philippines, the situation was indeed alarming 
to them. Although Cuba was a foreign country so that its 
produce exported to America had to pay a duty, much of 
the cane sugar grown on that island is capitalized by Wall 
Street and these American interests likewise did not want 
to see any further increases in the amount of Philippine 
duty-free sugar entering the United States. American 
cordage manufacturers needed Philippine abaca and were 
glad to have this famous Philippine fiber enter the United 
States duty-free in unlimited quantities but they did not 
want to see too much rope manufactured in the Philippines 
also entering America without paying customs duty. Ro- 
xas wanted the support of all those people. He felt, and 
he was undoubtedly right, that although sentiment as a 
whole was friendly and sympathetic to the aspirations of 
the Filipino people. Congress could not be induced to en- 
act the necessary legislation unless those who wanted to 
get rid of Philippine competition joined hands with the 
Congressmen who were glad to support independence legis- 
lation because they firmly believed that it was America s 
duty to gi'ant independence to the Philippines as soon as 
possible. 



[ 65 ] 



Roxas and the other members of the Independence 
mission therefore maintained the most cordial relations 
with the representatives of the American Farm Bureau, 
the American Federation of Labor (the CIO had not j'et 
been organized), and the Cordage Institute, It was also 
essential to have the support of the press associations, such 
as the Associated Press and the United Press, as well as 
the reporters and editors of Washington and New York 
dailies. Roxas was extremely popular with the Americans 
with whom he came in contact. They could not help but 
admire his personality, his brilliant conversation, and his 
^asp of the current problems then confronting the Amer- 
ican people. Sometimes when he called on members of the 
Senate or the House he found these gentlemen discussing 
legislative problems of their own. They welcomed his com- 
pany and, since Roxas had already won their confidence, 
he did not hesitate to take an informal part in the subject 
under discussion. It amazed these Congressmen to see 
how much Roxas knew about America’s problems. “Roxas 
would make an excellent U. S. senator,” one of them said 
to me, for he knows as much about America as most of 
our own senators do.” 

Although the Philippine Independence Mission and its 
friends were doing their utmost to press favorable action 
on the independence bill, a Republican Congressman from 
alifomia, who was desirous of courting the labor vote, 
apparently felt that he could not wait any longer for the 
relief which the Philippine independence measure would 
eventually give American labor unions. This congi'essman, 
w ose name was Welch, thereupon introduced a bill which, 
IX enacted into law, would have brought shame and igno- 
rnity to the American Congress. His bill proposed imme- 
diately to prohibit Filipinos from entering the United 
States. In other words, even before Congress had taken 
action assuring the Filipinos of their independence, and 

[ 66 ] 



even though the Filipino people could be called upon at 
any time by Amei'ica to fight and die for that counti’y, 
Congressman Welch would deny us the right freely to enter 
the country to whom we owed allegiance. It is needless 
to say that Roxas was indignant — not because he believed 
it was beneficial for Filipinos to emigrate to America, but 
because he considei'ed Congressman Welch’s measure an 
affront to the dignity of the Filipino race. There was 
also a very practical reason why it was necessary that the 
Welch bill should be defeated. For if enacted into law it 
would mean that American labor leaders would have no 
further reason to support the passage of an independence 
bill and we would thus lose a valuable though selfish ally. 

The members of the Philippine Mission in Washington 
immediately requested that they be given the opportunity 
to appear before the House Committee on Immigi'ation to 
which the Welch Bill had been referred, but it was again 
agreed among the Filipino leaders that Roxas alone would 
pi'esent the case for the Filipinos. The first thing Roxas 
did in preparation for his address was to instruct me to 
interview officials in the British, French, Italian, and 
Dutch embassies for the pui’pose of finding out if, in any 
of their respective countries, there was a law pi'ohibiting 
the natives of their colonies from freely entering the mo- 
ther countiy. We thus learned that in England there was 
no law which prohibited Hindus and Burmese from enter- 
ing the United Kingdom in unlimited numbers. Neither 
was there a law in France prohibiting natives of Indo- 
China and French Morocco from freely entering French 
soil for the purpose of working there. Neither did the 
Italians nor the Dutch prohibit the natives of the colonies 
under their sovereignty from going to Italy or to Holland 
to work there and thus compete with Italian and Dutch 
labor. 



[ 67 ] 



Roxas made an impassioned plea and reminded the 
members of the House Committee on Immigi*ation that if 
they approved the proposal of the Congressman from Cali- 
fornia, America would be the first nation in the world to 
adopt a law that would prohibit her subjects from whom 
she demanded fidelity and devotion, from freely entering 
the mother country to whom they owed allegiance. So elo- 
quent and touching was Roxas’ address that the eyes of 
many of those who were in the committee room were soon 
moist with tears. Welch himself who was a member of the 
Committee, hardly dared raise his head, for he realized that 
what he had proposed to Congi’ess could hardly be consi- 
dered fair and decent. After Roxas concluded his speech 
there were no questions put to him by the members of the 
Committee. It was apparent to everyone that the bill had 
been killed then and there. 

America is so big a country and its interests are so 
varied in character that it is difficult to enact legislation 
that will please everj'^one. The Philippine independence 
bill should have been noncontroversial because the Amer- 
ican people as a whole were sympathetic to independence 
legislation. And yet we soon learned that there were many 
conflicting interests involved in the independence mea- 
sure. Take the labor element again. American labor lead- 
ers were unwilling to support the Independence Bill if, 
uiing the transition or Commonwealth period, Filipinos 
were to be allowed freely to enter the United States as had 
een heir right in the past. They insisted that Filipino 
immigration be immediately restricted upon the approval 
o e Hawes-Cutting Bill. This attitude was obviously 
unreasonable because, during the period of transition, we 
1 ipinos were to continue owing allegiance to the United 
^ a^es ^^d,^ therefore, Filipinos should not be denied the 
rig t to enter America. However, our leaders were will- 
ing to have such a provision inserted in the bill because 

[ 68 ] 



\ve could not afford to lose the support of American labor. 
Furthermore, we did not want Filipinos to leave the Phil- 
ippines in great numbers anyway. Hence Roxas’ conform- 
ity to a clause appearing in the bill to the effect that dur- 
ing the transition period leading to independence only a 
nominal number, or fiftj^ Filipino laborers, could enter the 
United States each year. However, although Filipino 
laborers were not welcomed in the United States, there 
was great demand for them in Hawaii because sugar plant- 
ers in that American territory needed Filipinos to culti- 
vate the islands’ cane fields. The Hawaiian sugar interests 
therefore did not want to see the Hawes-Cutting Bill con- 
tain a provision that would restrict Filipino immigration 
to only fifty a year. On the other hand, if Filipino lab- 
orers were allowed to enter Hawaii, what was to prevent 
them later on from continuing to the United States? Ha- 
waii is an incorporated territory of the United States. It 
is as much a part of the United States as is California and 
Masssachusetts. And a man who is a legal resident of 
Hawaii, be he yellow, black, or brown, surely has the right 
to move freely from Hawaii to California. The Philip- 
pine independence bill could not apparently satisfy the la- 
bor interests in the continental United States without jeo- 
pardizing American interests in Hawaii. 

The upshot of the whole thing was the inclusion of a 
provision in the Hawes-Cutting Bill permitting Filipinos 
to enter Hawaii in lai'ge numbers dui'ing the transition 
period prior to independence, but pi’ohibiting these same 
Filipinos from proceeding to the continental United States 
later on. It is doubtful if such a provision of law could 
have withstood the scrutiny of a court inquiry regarding 
its constitutionality. But Roxas and his associates real- 
ized that, to obtain the passage of an independence bill, 
we had to have the support not only of those Congressmen 
who believed in independence, but we also had to play ball 



[ 69 ] 



with selfish American interests since the support of both 
groups was necessary to insure favorable action in Con- 
gress. 

Senator Bingham’s dilatory tactics and his attempts 
to block committee action on the Hawes-Cutting Bill even- 
tually had to end. When finally put to a vote late that 
spring the bill was approved by his committee thanks to 
the fact that several Republican members joined the Demo- 
crats in suppox’ting the measure. It was, however, an 
empty victory. For it was already May, 1930, and Con- 
gress was due to adjourn within a few weeks. In Novem- 
ber a congressional election was to take place. The follow- 
ing month, December, the old Congress would hold a short 
so-called “lame duck’’ session and then go out of existence. 
The new Congress elected in November, 1930, would not 
meet until October of the following year, 1931. It was 
evident to Roxas and his associates that it would be im- 
possible to have the Hawes-Cutting Bill enacted into law 
by the 71st Congi'ess, and preparations were therefore 
made by us to return home. But the Roxas Mission had 
achieved something of great importance. It had succeeded 
in obtaining from the Senate Committee on Territories and 
Insular Affairs, the majority of whose members were Re- 
publicans, a bill that would create the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines and would grant independence to our coun- 
try ten years later. It had aroused sufficient interest 
among other members of Congress to assure the Filipino 
people that the support of important leaders of Congi’ess 
could be counted upon if and when the measure was again 
reintroduced. 

Shortly before Congress adjourned that late spring of 
1930 two incidents occurred which would seem to prove 
that although the Washington administration had time and 
again announced that it was governing the Philippines 
solely for the good and the happiness of the Filipino peo- 



[ 70 ] 



pie, very often it was political expediency or the whims 
and caprices of an American President or Congressman 
which determined appointments to important positions in 
the Philippine government. The first incident to which I 
refer was the proposed appointment by Px*esident Hoover 
of Nicholas Roosevelt as Vice-Governor of the Philippines 
to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of Vice-Gov- 
ernor Gilmore. President Hoover knew that Speaker Ro- 
xas of the Philippine House of Representatives was in 
Washington. He also knew that there were two perman- 
ent Filipino Resident Commissioners in Congress. The 
least he could have done was to summon these officials to 
the White House and inform them of his desire to appoint 
Nicholas Roosevelt to the position of vice-governor of the 
Philippines. If the Filipino representatives offered objec- 
tions to the appointment, the President could have tried to 
assuage their feelings. Even if he failed he could not, 
later on, be accused of having ignored the vie\ys of the Fili- 
pino people. And yet, without consulting or even advising 
any of our Filipino leaders. Hoover sent a message to the 
Senate recommending the appointment in question. 

It was a distinct shock to Roxas and his associates. And 
with good reason too, for Nicholas Roosevelt, at that time, 
was bitterly hated by the Filipino people. He was a New 
York journalist who, a few years previous, had gone to 
Manila for a visit, following which he had written a book 
entitled “The Philippines — A Treasure and a Problem." 
It was filled with offensive remarks about the Filipino 
people, their character, their habits, and their traditions. 
No man in his right mind should have proposed the author 
of this volume for the position of Vice-Governor of the Phil- 
ippines, specially without first consulting Filipino leaders. 
The entire Filipino press in Manila denounced the pro- 
posed appointment and, of course, our leaders did not 
mince words in saying what they thought of the nominee. 



[ 71 ] 



One of the duties of the Vice-Govei’nor of the Philippines 
at that time was to preside at the meetings of the Univei-- 
sity of the Philippines Board of Regents, the members of 
which board were Filipinos. When these gentlemen learn- 
ed of Hoover’s proposed appointment they publicly an- 
nounced that they would refuse to sit in the same room 
v/ith an American who had so grossly insulted the Filipino 
people. 

From far away Manila Quezon telegraphed Roxas in- 
structing him to do everything possible to block the con- 
firmation of Nicholas Roosevelt’s appointment by the 
United States Senate. But Roxas needed no such instruc- 
tions because the moment he learned of what Pi’esident 
Hoover proposed to do, he instructed me to sit up all night 
and read Roosevelt’s book again and note down the most 
offensive words, sentences, and paragraphs which the 
author had written about our people. Roxas then prepared 
an open letter to every member of the Senate in the course 
of which he quoted Nicholas Roosevelt’s offensive lang- 
uage. “This is the man,” said Roxas, “whom the President 
of the United States proposes to send to the Philippines 
as Vice-Governor. Surely you will understand why it is 
not possible for the Filipino people to welcome him — much 
less to cooperate with him while he is in our country.” 

Although Roxas’ activities against Nicholas Roosevelt 
were being given publicity in the United States, and while 
American correspondents in Manila were also conveying 
to the press associations on the other side of the Pacific 
the attitude of Filipino leaders in the Philippines, it was a 
relatively unknown Filipino by the name of Narciso Lapus 
who really stole the show. Lapus wrote a letter to Nicholas 
Roosevelt advising him that, in his opinion, the New York 
journalist through his writings had insulted the Filipino 
people and that such an offense could only be erased with 
blood. He, thei’efore, challenged Roosevelt to a duel to 



[ 72 ] 



the death, but because duelling is prohibited in the Phil- 
ippines as well as in the United States, he proposed an is- 
land in the Southwest Pacific. “Name the date and the 
hour,” he said, “I shall meet you there and will fight you 
with any kind of weapon that you may designate.” The 
Filipino challenger then sent a copy of his letter to the 
American newspaper correspondents in Manila. Always 
eager to find a human-interest story, the Associated Press 
and United Press services relayed the contents of the let- 
ter to their offices in the United States. When this news 
item was in turn passed on to American newspapers, every- 
one of them had a field holiday giving considerable publi- 
city to this interesting incident. It is needless to state that 
the duel never took place because Roosevelt ignored the 
challenge, but the Philippine cause received plenty of free 
publicity. 

Just exactly how effective Roxas’ activities were, as 
compared with those of Quezon and other Filipinos, Nar- 
ciso Lapus included, we shall never know. Suffice it to 
say that President Hoover finally realized he had pulled 
a boner. He hastily withdrew Nicholas Roosevelt’s pro- 
posed appointment and instead gave the New York joux'- 
nalist a diplomatic post in Centi’al Europe. 

The second incident I am I’efei'ring to was in connec- 
tion with cex'tain proposed appointments to the Supi'eme 
Court of the Philippines. At that time we did not have 
a Coiu't of Appeals and our Supreme Coui't was gx’eatly 
overloaded with appeals fi’om decisions of the Courts of 
First Instance. Our Legislatui’e, thei'efoi’e, passed a law 
increasing the membership of our Supi'eme Court from 
nine to fifteen. The Govei'nor Genei’al of the Philippines 
was then Dwight W. Davis. He had succeeded Stimson in 
1929 when the latter was appointed Seci'etax’y of State in 
Pi'esident Hoover’s cabinet. Davis duly appi'oved this bill 
but, under the pi'ovisions of the Jones Act, which was still 



[ 73 ] 



the organic law in force in the Philippines, the justices of 
our Supreme Court had to be appointed by the President 
of the United States and approved by the American Sen- 
ate. To fill the six new positions thus made available, 
Governor General Davis, after consulting Filipino leaders, 
I'ecommended to President Hoover two judges of the Ma- 
nila Court of First Instance and the then attorney general 
of the Philippines. It was known that the remaining three 
men would be chosen by the President of the United States 
himself from among those proposed by membei*s of his 
party in Washington. The three men whom the Governor 
General had recommended were very distinguished mem- 
bers of the Philippine bar who had served our govexmment 
faithfully and efficiently for many years. In the United 
States two federal district judges wei’e proposed for ap- 
pointment and they no doubt also would have done credit to 
the important positions to which they aspired. But Sen- 
ator Bingham had a friend whom he wished to have ap- 
pointed to the sixth and last position available. That friend 
was no other than a municipal judge from Connecticut and, 
acceding to Bingham’s request. President Hoover nomin- 
ated him for the position of Associate Justice of the Su- 
preme Court of the Philippines. 

Imagine having a municipal court judge sitting in our 
highest tribunal! Although ordinarily our Filipino lead- 
ers did not intervene in pi’esidential appointments from 
Washington, they could not help but feel that a municipal 
judge hardly had the experience and the qualifications 
necessary to exercise the duties of a Supreme Court Jus- 
tice. When the proposed appointments therefore reached 
the United States Senate Judiciary Committee, Roxas called 
on various members for the purpose of drawing their at- 
tention to the doubtful qualifications of the municipal judge 
from Connecticut. It was not difficult to convince them 



[ 74 ] 



that Bingham’s friend lacked the experience necessary to 
entitle him to sit in the highest tribunal in the Philippines. 

Bingham was indignant. He felt that the Filipino 
people had no business intermeddling with his choice. 
Since he idealized, however, that the Senate Judiciary 
Committee was determined to disapprove the appointment, 
he decided to block the confirmation of the appointments 
of all the other five men who were highly qualified to sit 
in our Supreme Court and where their services were soi*eIy 
needed. Thus it was that, when Congress finally adjourn- 
ed in June, none of the six appointees had been confirmed. 
In other words, thi’ough the whim and caprice of an Amer- 
ican senator who should have known better, our countxy 
was denied the services of five men who would have been 
able to do a gi'eat deal to I'elieve our Supi’eme Court of 
the many thousands of cases which were pending decision. 

Roxas left Washington for Manila in September of 
that year (1930). He proceeded to Seattle first to meet 
Quezon who was going to the United States to continue his 
treatments for tuberculosis in a California sanitai'ium. 
The two Filipino leaders enjoyed a day’s conference in a 
Seattle hotel, following which Roxas, his wife, and I board- 
ed an American President liner for the Philippines. 

A great welcome awaited Roxas in Manila. A parade 
of gaily decorated boats met his vessel in the Bay and 
numerous popular banquets were subsequently held in his 
honor. His position as second only to Quezon remained 
unchallenged and, from all appearances, his hold on the 
public masses was stronger than ever. 

Soon after Roxas resumed his duties as Speaker of 
the House he proposed the organization of an association 
to be known as “Ang Bagong Katipunan.” For quite some 
time Roxas had bewailed the tendency of most Filipinos to 
use imported articles even though it was possible to manu- 



[ 75 ] 



facture or produce locally some commodities which, though 
not as elegant, would nevertheless serve the same purpose. 
He also saw no reason, for example, why Filipinos should 
dress in imported linen or sharkskin suits when the “ba- 
rong tagalog” made of jusi or pina was cooler, more com- 
fortable, and in every respect more appropriate for tro- 
pical wear. And why should Filipinos eat imported foods 
and vegetables when our country is so fertile that it can 
grow everything we need to nourish our people adequate- 
ly? Roxas believed that the Filipinos should become cons- 
cious of the fact that they are Malays and should live as 
such, adopting only those things from the American way 
of life which would improve the social and living condi- 
tions of the people. 

But Roxas was way ahead of his times. Although 
many friends and followers were willing to support him, 
most Filipinos were unprepared to understand the signific- 
ance of his message. It was not until several years later, 
after the Philippines had become a Commonwealth, that 
our government exerted greater efforts to launch a simi- 
lar campaign under the name of NEPA, or National Eco- 
nomic Protective Association. “Cherish’ Your Own !" was 
the slogan which the NEPA adopted. Now that we are in- 
dependent we can more properly appreciate what Roxas 
tried to advocate more than twenty years ago. 

In May, 1931, Senator Hawes accompanied by his wife, 
his daughter Peyton, and his trusted secretary. Bon Geas- 
in, arrived in Manila. Hawes wanted to see for himself 
1 t e Filipino people really wanted independence. They 
were received with tremendous enthusiasm. Roxas ar- 
ranged to have a government vessel, the “Bustamante,” 
p aced at Senator Hawes’ disposal so that the latter could 
take a twelve-day cruise to the southern islands and judge 
for himself the sentiment of the Filipino people residing 
in that section of the archipelago. At the last moment Ro- 



[ 76 ] 



xas and I were able to join Hawes for the trip. It was most 
fortunate that Roxas could get away for it was only on 
such occasions that he could really relax and enjoy a well- 
deserved rest. It was very well known, even at that time, 
that Roxas’ domestic life was a very hard one. His wife 
was a strict disciplinarian and there was very little peace 
in the Roxas household. Intimate friends who knew the 
terrific strain under which Roxas lived could not under- 
stand how he was able to withstand such tension. But 
somehow Roxas managed to maintain his composure. Per- 
haps his endurance can be explained by what he told me 
several years later when the question of enacting a liberal 
divorce law came up before the Philippine Legislature. 
“My attitude on divorce,” said Roxas, “is that we should 
not make it so strict as to deprive offended spouses from 
obtaining the relief which they want so badly. But as for 
me, I believe that after a man has made his nest he must 
lie in it no matter how much it hm-ts, particularly so if 
there are children involved.” 

On the “Bustamante” many miles away from home 
Roxas was able to relax like a child. We requested the 
ship’s captain to drop anchor wherever fishing was re- 
puted to be good, for Senator Hawes was quite an author- 
ity on this sport and Roxas also enjoyed it immensely. Our 
party visited Puerto Princesa, Zamboanga, Dansalan, Ilo- 
ilo, and Cebu. Enthusiastic crowds met the ship at every 
poi*t of call. The receptions which Senator Hawes re- 
ceived there and his subsequent visits to several to^vns in 
Central Luzon erased any doubts in his mind as to the true 
sentiments of our people. 

Shortly before Hawes returned to the United States in 
July of that year, the biggest independence demonstration 
ever held in the Philippines took place in Manila. Never 
before had such vast numbers of people assembled together. 
Senator Hawes viewed the spectacle from the Legislative 



[ 77 ] 



Building. It was truly inspiring. Fortunately also, Sen- 
ator Key Pittman, one of the most prominent Democratic 
members of the Senate, was in Manila for a short visit 
when this parade took place. The two American senators 
were deeply moved at the demonstration which they wit- 
nessed. Both men returned to the United States firmly 
convinced that the Filipino people were sincere in their 
desire for independence and that they were entitled to 
get it. 



[78] 



i 



(^Ixapier 9 



HE 72nd Amei-ican Congress was due to convene in 



Washingfton early in December 1931. It was to re- 
main in session until the following June, after which it 
was to recess and then resume its session in December. 
Thus there was plenty of time to work for independence 
legislation again. It was true that the Republicans were 
still in control of the Senate and Pi-esident Hoover’s term 
was not to expire until March of 1933. But the Filipino 
people could not afford to relax their efforts. The Phil- 
ippine Legislature, therefore, unanimously approved a reso- 
lution creating another Mission to go to Washington and 
work for the approval of an independence measure more 
or less similar to the Hawes-Cutting Bill which the Senate 
Committee on Territories and Insular Affairs had ap- 
proved in June of 1930 but which measure had automa- 
tically lapsed or died when the 71st Congress ended. 

The membership of the new Mission consisted of Ro- 
xas, Osmena, and Pedro Sabido representing the Naciona- 
lista Consolidado or majority pax’ty, and the late Senator 
Rupei'to Montinola and Senator Emiliano Tirona repre- 
senting the Democrata Party. Roxas again told the Secre- 
tary of Justice that he needed my services and so I was 
once more detailed to accompany the Mission to Washing- 
ton. Mrs. Roxas announced that she would again join her 
husband on this trip. Just before our scheduled sailing 
time, however, Roxas appeared alone, his wife having de- 
cided at the last moment not to go to Washington. Her 
change of mind was as unexpected as it was welcomed by 
the members of the Mission, for we all knew that Roxas, 




[ 79 ] 



traveling alone, would be able to devote more time and ef- 
fort to the difficult job that lay ahead of us. 

Soon after we reached Washington in January, 1932, 
the Hawes-Cutting Bill was again introduced in the Sen- 
ate. A similar bill was filed in the House by Congressman 
Hare of North Carolina and hearings before the corre- 
sponding Senate and House Committees to which the bills 
were referred were duly announced. The hearings before 
the Senate Committee, of which Senator Bingham was still 
Chairman, again proved to be long drawn out, Bingham 
having decided to follow the same dilatory tactics which 
he had employed in 1930. Probably the two most import- 
ant witnesses before his committee who opposed the ap- 
proval of the Hawes-Cutting Bill were Secretary of War 
Patrick J. Hurley and Secretary of State Henry L. Stim- 
son. Stimson, it will be recalled, had been Governor of 
the Philippines in 1928. 

In 1932 the administration of the Philippines was still 
under the Department of War and it was, therefore, but 
proper that the head of that department, namely. Secre- 
tary Hurley, should appear before the Senate Committee 
which was considering a Philippine independence bill. 
Hurley’s appearance proved to be quite dramatic because 
he was a man of violent temper who also had an exagger- 
ated feeling of importance. Senators Hawes, King and 
other members of the Committee needled Hurley with 
many questions, some of which he found extremely diffi- 
cult to answer. Towards the end of his testimony Hiudey 
completely lost his temper. “I resent very much,” he said, 
“the manner in which I am being questioned. I did not 
come here to be insulted, so I am going to get out.” And, 
then and there, he strode haughtily out of the room much 
to the amusement of the senators, newspaper reporters and 
members of the public who were gathered there. 



[ 80 ] 



Secretai'y Stimson did not appear personally before 
the Senate Committee. Instead he sent a long letter which 
Bingham read to his fellow members. In this letter Stim- 
son said that ordinarily it would be unnecessary for him, 
as Secretary of State, to express his views because the 
Philippines are under the jurisdiction of the Depai'tment 
of War and it is, therefore, the Secretai'y of War who 
should testify regarding legislation affecting the Philip- 
pines. Evidently when Stimson prepared this letter he did 
not foresee the melodrama that was going to take place 
before the Committee when Secretary of War Hurley made 
his appearance. Stimson then went on to explain however, 
that in his capacity as Secretai*y of State he wished to 
express his views on the effect which the proposed inde- 
pendence legislation would have on American foreign rela- 
tions. After lauding the progi’ess and the development 
which had been made in the Philippines since American 
occupation, Stimson concluded: 

“This progress, however, has depended upon two 
things: first, the American leadership and guidance 
which has been constantly and intelligently exercised 
and without which this progi'ess would have been im- 
possible ; and second, the material assistance of a free 
market with the United States. If those two agencies 
should be at present Avithdrawm, it is the practically 
unanimous consensus of all responsible obsei'vers that 
economic chaos and political social anarchy would re- 
sult, followed ultimately by domination of the Philip- 
pines by some foreign power, pi'obably either China 
or Japan. 

“It needs no imagination tCL^rasp the effect which 
such a result would have upon me moraj prestige and 
material influence of the United States in the Far 
East. To every foreign eye it would be a demonstra- 
tion of selfish cowardice and futility on our part. No 
matter under what verbal professions the act of with- 
drawal were clothed, to the realist observers of that 
part of the world it would inevitably assume the as- 



[ 81 ] 



pect of abandonment of the wards we had undertaken 
to protect. In the Orient, far more even than in the 
Occident, prestige is the measuring rod of success. 
Such a change would be an inseparable blow to Amer- 
ican influence. 

“Again, our presence in the Philippine Islands 
has already contributed to the development of a new 
base of political equilibrium throughout the area of 
the Western Pacific and Eastern Asia. At present, 
or within any definite future, withdrawal of Amer- 
ican sovereignty from the Philippines and the termina- 
tion of American responsibility in and for the Islands 
would profoundly distui’b that equilibrium. It would 
inevitably have an unsettling effect in the relations to 
political thought of the various races, or nations, in 
the Far East, and in relation to the contacts of those 
races, or nations, among themselves and with the rest 
of the world. It would not be in the interest of world 
peace, but to the contrary. It would not be to the po- 
litical, economic, social, or moral advantage of the 
United States or to that of the people of the Philip- 
pine Islands, or to that of any other country or peo- 
ple. It would throw additional burden upon the sta- 
bility of practically all other governments in that vi- 
cinity; and it would render more difficult the safe- 
guarding of our own interests both in the Far East 
and throughout the world.” 

The hearings befoi'e the House Committee proved to 
be less troublesome because no one among the Republican 
members of that Committee proved to be as stubborn as 
Bingham was in the Senate. Before Congress adjourned 
m June, 1932, the Committees of both the House and the 
Senate had rendered favorable reports and we had every 
reason to be confident that the Hawes-Cutting Independ- 
ence Bill in the Senate and the Hare Independence Bill in 
the House would be taken up by Congress soon after it re- 
sumed its sessions in December. 

Throughout the hearings in Washington, Roxas and 
Osmena were, of course, in constant communication by 

[82] 




1 

I 

n 



1932— OSROX Mission; seated 1. to r.: Senator Montinola, Senator Osmena, Speaker Roxas, Represen- 
tative Tirona; standing 1. to r.: Representative Sabido, Resident Commissioner Osias, Secretary of 
the Mission Marcial P. Lichauco. 




n 



t 



telegraph with Quezon in Manila. Cables from Washing- 
ton were signed OSROX, meaning Osmena-Roxas, while 
those from Manila were signed QUAQUAL, meaning Que- 
zon-Aquino and Alas, Benigno S. Aquino being then ma- 
jority floor leader in the Senate and Antonio Alas the Act- 
ing Speaker of the House in the absence of Roxas. 

It was while we were in Washington during this Mis- 
sion that Roxas revealed to me his attitude towards Os- 
mena. What he told me then explains in large part the 
position that he took in 1946 when these two leaders clash- 
ed for the presidency of the Philippines. I had noticed 
that, although Roxas was Speaker of the House and that 
he, therefore, outranked Osmena who was only a member 
of the Senate, Roxas invariably showed considerable de- 
ference towards his elder colleague. He would, for exam- 
ple, seldom take an important step without consulting Os- 
mena even though he already had reason to feel that Os- 
mena would agree with him. In social functions Roxas 
always gave Osmena the place of honor. Don Sergio was 
very appreciative of such attentions. One day while Ro-' 
xas and I were returning to our hotel from a movie he 
spoke of his plans for the futui’e. “The reason I get along 
so well with Quezon and Osmena,” he said, “is because I 
make them understand that I consider them my seniors. I 
know, however, that they are much older than I am and, 
someday, my turn will come.” “But suppose,” I answered, 
“that one or the other should prove to be physically strong 
enough to continue in public life for many years and should 
i-efuse to give way to you when you believe it is your turn 
to take the helm. What will you do?” We were talking 
in Spanish, and Roxas replied, “Veremos entonces” (we 
shall see about that then). 

While the members of the OSROX Mission were jubi- 
lant and happy in Washington because of what they had 
so far accomplished, Quezon in Manila expressed dissatis- 



[ 83 ] 



faction over some of the contents of the independence bill. 
He was particularly opposed to the provision which would 
authorize the American Goverament to maintain military 
reservations in the Philippines after independence. He 
claimed that as long as American troops were on Philip- 
pine soil the Filipino people could not consider themselves 
truly independent. Was Quezon sincere? Did he really 
believe that the presence of American troops in certain 
restricted areas would deny to the Filipino people true in- 
dependence? Or did he want the Hare-Hawes-Cutting In- 
dependence Bill pigeonholed so that he could later go to 
the United States and obtain a bill for which he could 
claim principal credit? 

The numerous cablegi'ams that were exchanged during 
this critical period between OSROX and QUAQUAL are, 
of course, open for the inspection of future students of 
history. Perhaps it was because these messages were in 
writing, however, that each group particulaidy Quezon’s in 
Manila, did not feel free clearly and unequivocably to put 
down in writing what they wished to convey to the other. 
It is unfortunate that in 1932 there were no overseas tele- 
phone communications or trans-Pacific air flights between 
the United States and the Philippines. Had it been pos- 
sible for Quezon to converse privately with Roxas and Os- 
mena, or if Osmena and Roxas could have flown to Manila 
for a brief exchange of views, whatever differences of 
opinion there might have been at the time could probably 
have been ironed out. Instead each group held on firmly 
to its views. Quezon did, in fact, urge Osmena to return 
to Manila for a conference but, in those days, the trip 
from Washington to Manila and return could not be done 
comfortably in less than sixty days. Roxas and Osmena 
felt that neither of them could afford to be away from 
Washington so long, especially because the Democrats and 
the Republicans were about to hold their respective presi- 



[ 84 ] 



dential conventions. It was advisable for the two Filipino 
leaders to attend these conventions. The Democrats had 
to be urged to include in their party platform a pledge of 
independence for the Philippines. Insofar as the Repub- 
lican Party was concerned, the Filipino leaders wanted to 
make sure that its party platform did not contain anything 
that might be interpreted as opposition to Philippine inde- 
pendence for, if such a provision were included and the Re- 
publicans should win the 1932 presidential election, inde- 
pendence legislation would be set back several years. It 
cannot be denied also that the OSROX Mission was becom- 
ing suspicious of the Manila gi’oup. They had reason to 
bo proud of what they had accomplished and they feared 
that, if they returned to Manila, Quezon would himself la- 
ter go to Washington and the OSROX gi'oup would lose 
most of the glory to which its members were entitled. 

In reply, therefore, to a cable from President Quezon 
urging the OSROX Mission to return to Manila not only 
for conferences but also because the funds being used for 
the maintenance of the Mission in Washington were run- 
ning low, Roxas and his colleagues cabled Manila to the 
effect that the campaign which they were conducting in 
Washington should continue unabated and that it was ab- 
solutely necessary to maintain close contact with all those 
groups, such as the labor and agricultural interests, who 
were helping press for the approval of the Independence 
Bill. “We consider it our duty to remain here,” they said. 
“Any other course, we are convinced, will be misunder- 
stood in America and will set back our campaign. Our 
friends in Congress have been giving personal interest to 
our fight, placing their pi’estige at stake, and our depar- 
ture at this time would be construed by them as running 
away from the fight and leaving them alone with the bur- 
den. We realize the financial straits of our government 
in our country. If no funds are available for the mainten- 

[ 85 ] 



1 



ance of our Independence Mission, we will continue serving 
here as long as we can, trying to adjust ourselves to cir- 
cumstances. But we trust no sacrifice will be spared to 
maintain the work we are doing here.” 

During the many years that I knew Roxas before his 
untimely death in 1948, I never saw him as happy and con- 
tented as he was in Washington. Although he was work- 
ing very hard, although he was daily beset by important 
problems, he could, at least, return to our hotel at the end 
of the day and enjoy a well-deseiwed rest. He played a 
little golf, went to the movies often, and occasionally en- 
joyed a game of cards with Sabido, Montinola, Guevara, 
and Osias. He missed the company of his children and he 
spoke frequently about them, but he realized that it was 
impossible to have them join him in Washington. It is 
important to remember also that Roxas never had much 
money at his disposal. When he was in Manila most of his 
salary as Speaker of the House was spent for the main- 
tenance of his household. In fact, he seldom saw any of 
that money because one of his trusted employees collected 
his salary on the 15th and 30th of every month and duti- 
fully turned it over to Roxas’ aunt, Maria Andrada, better 
known as Aunt Bibi, who lived in the Roxas household. It 
was Aunt Bibi who handled marketing expenses and paid 
the salaries of the household help. Mrs. Roxas took no 
part whatsoever in the running of her household other 
than to discipline those who lived there. During his stay 
in Washington the salary to which Roxas was entitled as 
Speaker of the House of Representatives was, of course, 
collected by his clerk in Manila and dutifully turned over 
to his Aunt Bibi. But, as Chairman of the Legislative Mis- 
sion, Roxas received in Washington a per diem which en- 
abled him to live comfortably in a hotel. 

Senator Hawes proved to be a man of unbounded en- 
ergy despite his advancing years. He was enthusiastic 

C86] 



about the progi’ess of the independence measure. Hardly a 
day went by that he did not have some new idea or plan 
to help obtain more support for the bill. On his way home 
from the Senate he frequently stopped at our hotel for a 
brief chat with Roxas and Osmena and for a well-deserved 
drink. For although prohibition was still in force in those 
days, we usually managed to have a limited supply of li- 
quor on hand which we dispensed to members of the press 
and other friends who dropped in. 

The presidential elections in November of 1932, in 
which Hoover ran for re-election as the Republican no- 
minee while Franklin Delano Roosevelt, then governor of 
New York, was the Democratic Party’s candidate, proved 
to be one of the greatest upsets in American history. 
Roosevelt was elected by a tremendous majority and the 
Republicans also lost control of Congress. However, un- 
der the law then prevailing in the United States, the new 
president and the new Congress were not to assume office 
until the following March, 1933. Thus when, early in Dec- 
ember, 1932, Congress convened for its so-called “lame 
duck” sessions, the Republicans were still in control and 
Hoover continued to sit in the White House. 

Since the Democratic Party had traditionally been in 
favor of independence, the Filipino people had every rea- 
son to believe that, after Roosevelt assumed office, we 
would be dealing with an American administration that 
would be very sympathetic towards the enactment of inde- 
pendence legislation. Quezon in Manila thus had further 
reason to suggest to the OSROX Mission that the independ- 
ence bill which was scheduled for debate in December 
should be abandoned as the Filipinos would soon have an 
opportunity to obtain a better bill. What should the OS- 
ROX Mission do? It was a difficult decision to reach. 

Were Roxas, Osmena, and the other members of their 
Mission disinclined to abandon the Hare-Hawes-Cutting 



[ 87 ] 



Bill because they feared that, if they did, they would be 
robbed of the credit that properly pertained to them? In 
urging OSROX to give up the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill, 
was Quezon actuated by a desire to go to Washington later 
on and thus reap the glory of being the one to obtain an 
independence measure? Having been attached to the OS- 
ROX Mission myself, it is not for me to pass judgment on 
these questions today. But it is a fact that Roxas and Os- 
mena held lengthy conferences with leaders of the Demo- 
cratic Party in both the Senate and the House. Everyone 
of them assured the Filipino leaders that the Hare-Hawes- 
Cutting Bill was the very best bill that could possibly be 
obtained from any Congi’ess, be it Republican or Democrat. 
They said that the new Congress that would take office in 
March, 1933, would be so busy with many domestic prob- 
lems that it would have neither the time nor the patience 
to entertain another Philippine independence bill. They, 
furthermore, added that if the Filipino leaders were to 
abandon their efforts to obtain the enactment of the Hare- 
Hawes-Cutting Bill when the passage of that measure was 
so bright, it would reflect on the sincerity of the Filipino 
leaders and would cast doubts in the minds of the Amer- 
ican people and their representatives in Congress as to 
whether the Filipinos really wanted independence. 

Despite Quezon’s insistent recommendations that the 
Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill be abandoned, the OSROX Mis- 
sion, therefore, decided to press for its approval. The Sen- 
ate was the first to take it up on December 8, 1932. Roxas 
sat in the gallery throughout the debate, for it was indeed 
inspiring to hear our American friends speak so dispas- 
sionately and yet so convincingly about the worthiness of 
our cause and our right and privilege to assume the res- 
ponsibilities of a free and independent nation. When put 
to a vote the bill was approved by a large majority, many 
Republicans joining the entire Democratic membership in 



[ 88 ] 



voting for the bill. In the House of Representatives, which 
the Democrats controlled and where we had two popular 
Commissioners to represent our interests, the passage of 
the measure was a foregone conclusion. 

The approval by Congi'ess of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting 
Independence Bill was the signal for a nation-wide attack 
against it by large numbers of newspapers from different 
parts of the United States, including practically all of the 
great metropolitan dailies. The barrage of editorial op- 
position was so widespread and so well timed that it looked 
as if there existed a concerted plan to bring about a presi- 
dential veto and thus defeat the bill. Curiously enough 
however, the newspaper editors could not agree among 
themselves as to the reasons for condemning the bill. Many 
of them attacked the motives of Congress in passing the 
bill charging that Congress had been actuated mainly by 
selfish motives, that is, a desire to free American agi’icul- 
ture from the alleged injurious competition by Philippine 
duty-free imports into the United States. Another group 
of editors charged Congress with sacrificing vital interests 
of American agriculture in favor of the Filipino people 
whom they denounced as ungi’ateful and unappreciative. 
They claimed that the Independence Bill, instead of pro- 
tecting American agriculture from Philippine competition, 
would only prolong the continuance of said competition for 
ten years moi'e, precisely at a time when American agri- 
culture was in most need of the exclusive benefits afforded 
by the American market. Another group of newspapers al- 
leged, among other things, that the Independence Bill was 
the work of the American Federation of Labor who wished 
to exclude Filipino labor from the United States. Still 
others criticized the bill because, under its provisions, the 
exclusion of Philippine labor as pi'ovided for in the bill 
would not become effective until after the Filipino people 
accepted the independence act, whereas what American 



[ 89 ] 



labor wanted was immediate exclusion of Filipinos. Some 
newspapers argued that the Filipino people were entitled 
to immediate independence and that the Hawes-Cutting 
Bill would delay it unnecessarily. But another much larger 
group, comprising practically the entire Republican press, 
asserted either that it was unwise to gi'ant independence 
at all, or that the transition period provided in the bill 
was altogether too short to pei*mit the Filipinos adequately 
to prepare themselves for the changes and responsibili- 
ties of independence. The question of the effect of Phil- 
ippine independence on international relations also figured 
in these discussions. Many editoidals cited with approval 
Secretary Stimson’s opinion against the passage of any 
independence legislation because of the then unsettled con- 
ditions in the Far East. It was advanced that enactment 
of such legislation would weaken the position of America 
in her efforts to aid in the stabilization of the Far Eastern 
situation. Lastly, there were a number of newspaper edi- 
torials which opposed the bill on the ground that the Fili- 
pino people were not ready for independent nationhood. 

In its efforts to forestall the possibility of a presiden- 
tial veto the OSROX Mission held a conference with the 
Secretary of War urging him to recommend to the Pres- 
ident the approval of the bill. The Secretary of War re- 
plied that President Hoover would welcome a formal state- 
ment by the Independence Mission regarding the bill. Os- 
mena, Roxas and their colleagues, therefore, lost no time 
in addressing a letter to the Secretary of War. In this let- 
ter, dated December 22, 1932, they said : 

“The bill harmonizes as fairly as possible the 
many divergent views on the Philippine independence 
problem. Its provisions are satisfactory to the Fili- 
pino people, and we earnestly desire that it receive the 
approval of the President.. 



[ 90 ] 



“Knowing your concern for the welfare of the 
Philippine people, we make bold to appeal for your 
valuable support in this regard.” 

This letter was signed not only by Osmena and Roxas but 
also by Benigno S. Aquino, Ruperto Montinola, Pedro Sa- 
bido, Emiliano T. Tirona, Pedro Guevara, and Camilo Osias. 

With repeated indications that President Hoover was 
inclined to veto the bill and with persistent newspaper 
forecasts that he would take such action, the OSROX Mis- 
sion also appealed not only to leading members of both 
Houses of Congress but to prominent American citizens 
as well who possessed knowledge of Philippine conditions, 
to urge the President to approve the bill. The Mission also 
again appealed to the various organizations interested in 
our independence for further support, particularly the 
American Federation of Labor, and the president of this 
group, representing millions of American laborers, there- 
upon wrote to President Hoover the following letter: 

“To the President, 

The White House 
Washington, D.C. 

“Dear Mr. President: 

“I am taking the liberty of writing you to advise 
you of the attitude of the American Federation of 
Labor towards H.R. 7233, providing for Philippine 
independence. 

“When the bill was pending in Congress, the of- 
ficers of the American Federation of Labor gave spe- 
cial attention to its provisions, and particularly to the 
section of the act relating to immigration. We have 
found from an examination of the bill that it is rea- 
sonably satisfactory to labor, and for that reason the 
American Federation of Labor extends to the mea- 
sure its official approval. 

“The Officers and members of the American Fed- 
eration of Labor will be pleased if you can find it 



[ 91 ] 



possible to give to this measure, providing for Philip- 
pine independence, your Executive approval. 

“Very sincerely yours, 

“(Sgd.) Wm. Green 

“President 

“American F ederation of Labor” 

Finally, the Mission itself requested an audience with 
the President, and Hoover granted them an intex'view. A 
very carefully worded statement was prepared by Roxas 
explaining why the Filipinos believed the bill should be 
approved. In deference to his elder colleague Osmena how- 
ever, Roxas suggested that it would be moi'e appropi'iate 
for Osmena to read the statement. At the appointed hour 
we called on Pi'esident Hoover. The President greeted us 
cordially. After taking our seats around the President’s 
desk, Osmena stood up and very solemnly read the state- 
ment which Roxas had previously prepared urging the 
President of the United States to approve the bill. 

After Osmena finished reading the statement he de- 
livered it to President Hoover, then he sat down. Hoover 
moved a little uneasily in his seat as he prepai'ed to give 
his reply. “I will study the bill carefully,” he said, “but 
the reports which I have received so far from my advisers 
are to the effect that the time is not propitious for the 
granting of independence to your people — even ten years 
from today. However, I assure you that I shall give the 
matter my very careful consideration.” 

It was all Roxas could do to restrain his tears, for he 
realized that the Pi’esident had already made up his mind 
to disapprove the bill. Sure enough, a few days later the 
White House announced that the President had vetoed the 
measure for which we had all worked so hard. 

This particular ex-President of the United States 
has recently written his so-called memoirs and in it ap- 

[ 92 ] 



pears a narrative of the part which he is supposed to have 
played in connection with the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Inde- 
pendence Bill. His story is so false and libelous on our Fi- 
lipino leaders, and yet it can be so easily disproved, that I 
must discuss it here. 

Hoover, it should be first recalled, was President of 
the United States from March 4, 1929 to March 4, 1933. 
This was the critical period during which, as a result prin- 
cipally of his bungling administration, America lay pi*os- 
trate economically apparently unable to solve the crisis 
v/hich she was facing. There were 11,000,000 people un- 
employed walking the streets searching for work and un- 
able to find any. By November of 1932 the American 
electorate had had enough of Hoover and at the presiden- 
tial elections held that month they ousted him from the 
White House by the biggest majority of voters ever re- 
corded in an American election. Under the law then in 
force however, the newly elected President, Franklin De- 
lano Roosevelt, was not to assume office until the fohow- 
ing March. And now this is what this aging ex-President 
has to say about an incident in which he claims to have 
played a part in December, 1932, or one month after the 
American people had repudiated him: 

“In December, 1932, the Democratic Congress, 
mostly under pressure from our sugar producers, 
passed a Philippine bill that pi*etended to independ- 
ence ... I vetoed the bill, stating . . • that the pe- 
riod of intermediate government prior to complete 
independence ... in this act is too short, too vio- 
lent . . ” 

Then Hoover continues: 

“A sidelight on this whole transaction is shown 
by the real views of Quezon and Osmena, the Philip- 
pine independence leaders. They came to see me at 
the White House while this bill was being debated in 
Congress, and stated that they hoped I would veto it; 



[ 93 ] 



they said that the Philippines were not economically 
prepared for independence, and if they stood alone 
they would be in jeopardy from either China or Japan. 

“I was utterly astonished and said so. I asked 
why they were lobbying with Congress to pass the bill 
and why they were carrying on propaganda to that 
end in the United States in cooperation with our su- 
gar producers. They replied that independence was 
their political issue in the Philippines, and that unless 
they promoted it their leadership would be lost to 
more dangerous elements. 

“I was disgusted and said that I would call in the 
entire press at once and repeat their statements. To 
which they replied blandly that they would say that 
I had entirely misunderstood their remarks. I told 
them I hoped they would never come into the White 
House again ...” 

To begin with. Hoover has forgotten that the Inde- 
pendence Bill was nonpartisan in character. It was intro- 
duced by a Republican and a Democrat and it was passed 
by a Senate controlled by Republicans and a House in 
which the Democrats were in the majority. 

That Hoover’s story, furthermore, is an absolute false- 
hood can be shown from the following undisputable facts: 

(a) From the time the Independence Bill was intro- 
duced in Congi'ess early in January, 1932, until both 
Houses of Congress passed it in December, 1932, President 
Quezon did not leave Philippine soil. He was, in other 
words, ten thousand miles away from Washington and 
could never have had the interview described by Hoover. 
As a matter of fact, Quezon did not go to Washington until 
April, 1933, or after Roosevelt had assumed the presidency 
and Hoover had been retired. 

(b) After the Independence Bill was passed by Con- 
gress in December, 1932, Osmena, Roxas, and the other 
members of their Mission did in fact, as already related 



[ 94 ] 



by me, call on President Hoover. Their object, however, 
was not to urge Hoover to veto the bill but, on the con- 
trary, to beg him to approve it. Not only did Osmena 
make that plain to Hoover but he delivered to him also a 
written statement to the same effect signed by the mem- 
bers of the Mission. 

(c) If it were true, as Hoover w'ould -want his readers 
to believe, that the Filipino leaders were opposed to the 
Hare-Hawes-Cutting Independence Bill, they could have 
packed up after Hoover vetoed it and returned to Manila 
with plenty of honors for having succeeded, at least, in ob- 
taining an independence bill from Congi’ess. And yet, not 
only did Osmena and Roxas remain in Washington but 
they challenged Hoover’s action by doing their best to 
have Congress pass the bill over his veto. 

I turn now to Hoover’s veto message of December, 
1932 : “The Philippine people,” said Hoover’s veto mes- 
sage, “are already enjoying as great a substance of or- 
dered liberty and human freedom as any people in the 
world, and although they still lack the form of separate 
nationality which is, indeed their rightful spiritual aspira- 
tion, the time is not ripe for the withdi'awal of American 
sovereignty over the Philippine Islands.” Hoover also cri- 
ticized certain provisions of the bill, in pai’ticular those re- 
garding the position of the American High Commissioner 
in the Philippines. He said that the civil authority of the 
United States in the Philippines during the period of the 
Commonwealth would be weakened to a point of practical 
impotence despite the fact that the United States would 
continue the moi'al responsibility to maintain a stable gov- 
ernment. Then the President harped on that old but ridi- 
culous line of argument to the effect that the non-Christian 
population of the Philippines is particularly opposed to the 
Christian group which controls the destinies of their coun- 
try and that this non-Christian population constitutes the 



[ 95 ] 



majority of the people in nine provinces of the Philippines, 
occupying about 40% of the total land area of the Islands. 
He raised once more the bugaboo of the infiltration into 
the Philippines of people from Asia whose standards of 
living are much lower than the Philippines. “After the 
establishment of independence,” said President Hoover, 
“the Filipino people will be helpless to prevent such infil- 
tration or invasion.” The President’s concluding wox’ds 
were unusually strong: 

“* * * If the American people consider that they 
have discharged their responsibilities to the Philip- 
pine people, have carried out the altruistic mission 
which we undertook, if we have no further national 
stake in the islands, if the Philippine people ai*e now 
prepared for self-government, if they can maintain 
order in their institutions, if they can now defend 
their independence, we should say so frankly on both 
sides. I hold that this is not the case. Informed per- 
sons on neither side have made such declarations 
without many reservations. Nor can these conditions 
be solved by the evasions and proposals of this bill 
without national dishonor.” 

Quezon thus had another good reason to urge Roxas 
and Osmena to give up any intention of trying to over-ride 
the President’s veto. He reiterated his opinion that Roxas 
and his colleagues should return to Manila and wait for 
Franklin Roosevelt and the Democratic Party to take over 
the reins of government the following March. This Avas 
indeed a critical period. The OSROX Mission could have 
returned to Manila fully meriting the gratitude of the Fili- 
pino people. They obviously could not be blamed for the 
presidential veto. But the American friends of Philippine 
independence in both Houses of Congress assured Roxas 
and Osmena that there were enough favorable votes to over- 
ride the veto, and that it was the Filipinos’ duty to fight 
for the enactment of the bill. 



[ 96 ] 




The OSROX Mission and the American Congressmen who helped obtain enactment of Philippine 
Independence Bill. Sitting 1. to r.: Senator Cutting, Senator Hawes, Congressman Hare, Senator 
Pittman; standing I. to r.: Marcial P. Lichauco, Representative Tirona, Senator Montinola, Senator 
Osmena, Speaker Roxas, Resident Commissioner Guevara, Senator Aquino, Resident Commissioner 
Osias, Representative Sabido. Taken on January 13, 1933, Washington, D.C. 




i 






i 
















Shortly before the independence bill was approved by 
Congress, President Quezon sent his most trusted emissary 
to Washington in the hope that the latter would be able to 
explain more fully and convincingly to the OSROX group 
the reasons why he (Quezon) was unable to give his un- 
qualified support to the bill. This emissary was no other 
than Benigno Aquino, Senate majority floor leader. There 
was no airplane service across the Pacific in those days 
and it took the fastest ship eighteen days to cross that vast 
ocean. Aquino arrived in Washington shortly before the 
bill was put to a vote. He had enough time, however, to 
confer with the Democratic House and Senate leaders and 
to size up the situation pi*evailing in the American capital. 
It did not take him long to become convinced that the Hare- 
Hawes-Cutting Bill was indeed the best measure that the 
Filipino people could get, not only from the Congi*ess then 
holding sessions but also from the new Congi-ess that would 
convene the following March and which would be controlled 
by the Democratic Party. He, therefore, so advised Que- 
zon in Manila. 

When President Hoover vetoed the bill, Aquino accom- 
panied Osmena and Roxas to the numei'ous conferences 
which the Mission held with the Democratic leaders of both 
Houses of Congress. They discussed what attitude the 
Philippine Independence Mission in Washington should 
take. 



It is difficult to describe today, so many years after 
this decisive incident took place, exactly what the condi- 
tions prevailing in Washington were, particularly the tem- 
per and the mood of the Democratic leaders. Senator 
Joseph Robinson from Arkansas, for example, was the 
Democratic floor leader in the Senate. He would become 
the majority leader after his party took over the reins 
of government the following March. Senator Pittman of 
Nevada, also a Democrat, was a member of the Senate 



[ 97 ] 



Committee on Territories and Insular Affairs. He had 
worked very hard for the approval of the bill. It was well 
known that he would become chairman of the Foreign Re- 
lations Committee, one of the most influential commit- 
tees of the Senate. It was assumed also that Senator 
Tydings would replace Senator Bingham as Chairman of 
the Senate Committee on Territories and Insular Affairs. 
And yet these three Democratic leaders, to mention only 
a few, told the members of the Mission that if the Filipino 
leaders desisted from making an effort to override Pres- 
ident Hoover’s veto, such inaction would be interpreted as 
a betrayal of the independence cause. They insisted that 
the next session of Congi*ess, although controlled by Demo- 
crats, would have so many difficult and more important 
problems to resolve that its members would have no time 
to consider again the Philippine question. “If you abandon 
this bill now,” they added, “it will mean to us that you 
do not really want independence.” And so, after nume- 
rous meetings among members of the OSROX Mission and 
frequent discussions with prominent Democratic leaders of 
both the Senate and the House, Roxas and Osmena decided 
to try and override the President’s veto. 

The House of Representatives was the first to take 
up Hoover’s veto message. The occasion enabled Commis- 
sioner Osias to deliver what was probably the most bril- 
liant speech of his career as Resident Commissioner. Roxas 
and the other members of the Mission did their best to 
urge as many Congressmen as possible who were friendly 
to independence to attend this momentous session. Among 
those whom Roxas personally appealed to was the fiei*y 
Congx’essman from New York, Fiorello LaGuardia. La- 
Guar dia had gone to New York a few days before so Roxas 
sent him a telegram pleading that he return to Washington 
not only to vote for the bill but to urge others to do so. 
The message must have impressed LaGuardia deeply for 
he hunded back to Washington and delivered a fiery speech 

[ 98 ] 



in favor of independence. When finally put to a vote 
the result was; yeas, 274; nays, 94; not voting, 57 — and 
so two-thirds having voted in favor, the bill was passed 
the President’s objections to the contrary notwithstanding. 

On the morning of January 14, 1933, the Senate took 
up the President’s veto message. The debate that followed 
was even more brilliant than the discussions that took place 
early in December when the bill was originally submitted 
to the Senate for approval. Every Filipino student of 
constitutional government would do well to read the 
speeches of the senators w'ho spoke in favor of overriding 
the President’s veto. Senator Borah’s speech was pi'obably 
the most brilliant and convincing. I quote below the last 
three paragraphs because his inspiring message to the Fili- 
pino people is as timely today as it was when delivered 
in January of 1933: 

“There is another very important fact which 
seems to me well worthy of attention. It is one we 
are natiu'ally inclined to overlook. The extent to 
which the United States may assist in preparing the 
people of the Philippines for self-government is gi*eat- 
ly overestimated. The most important part of that 
preparation the people of the Philippines must work 
out through experience, and I ventui'e to say, in the 
light of all history, through bitter experience. The 
path to power for any people is in a Ip.rge way not 
only a difficult but a lonely one. It is not what you 
give or can give a people that counts in the making 
of a nation. It is test and trial that fit them for this 
task. It is the wisdom gained when a people are 
forced to rely upon their o^vn efforts. This is the 
preparation that counts. Character, self-reliance, dis- 
cipline — these are the virtues which come through 
arduous living. What people ever acquired the capa- 
city for self-government save through years of ad- 
vei’sity, of struggle, of much suffering, and of gi’eat 
sacrifice? Liberty and independence are costly pos- 
sessions. You may inspire the one and bestow the 
other, but in the last analysis they must be paid for, 

[99] 



by all who would possess them, with their own blood, 
their own toil and struggle, their own Gethsemane. 
There is no royal road to national freedom and power. 
For all these things, those who would enjoy them 
must pay the price. 

“If we should remain in the Philippines for a cen- 
tury and then depart, the Filipino people would still 
have to learn the lesson of self-government. They 
would still have to learn how to stand alone. They 
might have acquired some wealth, they might have 
acquired great culture, but the lesson of self-govern- 
ment they would still have to learn. This idea that 
you can by tutelage, by domination prepare a people 
for self-government is in the face of all human ex- 
perience. If there is an exception to this ii’on rule 
of progress and freedom, it has escaped my reading. 

“I know, Mr. President, that whenever independ- 
ence is granted there will be a risk. I am aware 
that the Filipino people may stumble and fall. But 
knowing full well that whenever indepedence is given 
these same things may — I should almost say must — 
happen, I am not willing longer to deny them a chance 
to work out their own salvation. Brave, gallant, and 
patriotic, they are entitled to win. I believe they will 
win. I shall evidence my faith in them by my vote." 

When put to a vote, the result v/as: yeas, 66; nays, 
26, and so the Vice-President of the United States, him- 
self a Republican, as presiding officer was forced solemnly 
to announce, “More than two-thirds having voted in the 
affirmative, the bill is passed, the objections of the Pres- 
ident to the contrary notwithstanding.” The Filipino peo- 
ple at last had an independence measure of their own. 

Although there were honors enough for all the mem- 
bers of the Mission and their friends who had helped 
obtain the passage of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill, it was 
to Senator Harry B. Hawes to whom the Filipino people 
owed the most for what had been accomplished. This is 
what Roxas wrote to Senator Hawes: 



[ 100 ] 



“You have rendered more than yeoman service 
to the Philippines. Had you died in battle for Phil- 
ippine freedom your deed would be no more worthy 
of immortality. You valiantly and disinterestedly 
fought for our cause and, more than any other man, 
you won it for us. You were the leader, the tactician 
and the battering ram. If we ax*e to confer the title 
of ‘Liberator’ upon any American, justice would claim 
it foi* you. You deserve and I know you have the 
grateful affection of the Filipino people. 

“In that fight your help to me personally was 
invaluable. You gave me counsel and needed assist- 
ance when the going was rough and the prospect of 
victoiy the darkest. 

“You have always felt justifiable pride in your 
ancestors. Among them j'ou count soldiers and of- 
ficers in Washington’s Army, sigfners of the Declara- 
tion of Independence, Governors of States and Pio- 
neers. Wherever they may be, I am sure they ax*e 
happy because you have carried on the noble tradition 
of love for liberty and service to your fellowmen. You 
have given added glory and new luster to their escut- 
cheon.” 

The OSROX Mission was ready to sail for home but 
v/e had to remain in W’ashington several months more be- 
cause Quezon cabled that he was coming to America and 
that the Mission should wait for him. It was perhaps 
just as well that the Mission had to prolong its stay be- 
cause it afforded Roxas the opportunity to call on the newly 
elected Democratic President, Franklin Delano Roosevelt. 
He went to Hyde Park where he was wai’mly greeted by 
the President-elect. Roosevelt informed him that he had 
offered to his good friend, Homer Cummings, the position 
of either Governor General of the Philippines or Solicitor 
General of the United States and that it was up to Cum- 
mings to decide which of those two posts he preferred to 
take. Cummings was a prominent lawyer from Connec- 
ticut who, earlier in his career, had also held impoi'tant 



[ 101 ] 



positions in the government. When Roxas returned to 
Washing^ton he told his colleagues that he had never met 
a man with the chai'm and the personality of Roosevelt. 

Thus forewarned, Roxas and Osmena sought an op- 
portunity to meet Homer Cummings. The latter gi*acious- 
ly accepted an invitation from the Mission to a luncheon 
in Washington. He came to the capital shortly before the 
presidential inaugural ceremonies of March 4th. During 
the luncheon which we tendered him, Cummings told Roxas 
that he had carefully read the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Inde- 
pendence Bill and that he hoped the Filipino people would 
accept it. He added that he had made up his mind to go 
to Manila as Governor General of the Philippines, 

Just before the luncheon ended, however, young Ma- 
nuel Zamora, then Private Secretary to Resident Commis- 
sioner Guevara, come to our room to inform us of a very 
important happening which the Associated Press had re- 
layed to him. Senator Thomas Walsh had just died. Walsh, 
one of the most prominent Democrats in the Senate, was 
President Roosevelt’s choice for the position of Attorney 
General of the United States. He was a widower in his 
early seventies but he did not think he was too old to 
remarry and he had gone to Havana to wed a comely 
Cuban widow. They were on their way to Washington 
when he suffered a heart attack and he passed away on 
the train that was bringing him and his bride to the Amer- 
ican capital. 

When Homer Cummings heard of Senator Walsh’s 
untimely death, he turned to us and said, “Gentlemen, I 
am afraid this changes everything. I believe that Pres- 
ident Roosevelt will instead appoint me Attorney General.” 
Sure enough, when Roosevelt arrived in Washington a day 
or two later Cummings sent word to us to the effect that 
the President had summoned him and told him that he 



[ 102 ] 



must remain in Washington and assume the portfolio which 
had been intended for the late Senator Walsh. 

President Roosevelt’s inauguration was one of the 
most colorful spectacles witnessed by the members of the 
OSROX Mission during their Washington visit. It was 
on this occasion that Roosevelt delivered those fighting 
words which we here in the Philippines would do well to 
remember today. The President was assuming office diu'- 
ing one of the most critical moments in the history of the 
United States and he needed plenty of cooperation and 
coux'age from the Arperican people. “The only thing we 
have to fear,’’ he said, “is fear itself.’’ 

Shortly after Roosevelt was sworn in as President 
of the United States, he advised Roxas and Osmena that, 
after canvassing the field carefully, it was his intention 
to recommend Frank Murphy, Mayor of Detroit, for the 
position of Governor General of the Philippines. Murphy 
came to Washington and the OSROX Mission tendered him 
a luncheon at the Willard Hotel. Unlike Homer Cum- 
mings, who did not hesitate to express his opinion to the 
effect that he was in full conformity with the House and 
Senate Democratic leaders as regards the Hare-Hawes- 
Cutting Bill and that he believed it was the best bill that 
the Filipinos could obtain Horn Congress, Murphy was 
noncommittal. Probably he already foresaw the possibili- 
ties of a split within the ranks of the Nacionalista Party 
concerning this bill and he wished to take no part in it. 



[ 103 ] 



(^liapier 1 0 



5 ENATE Pi*esident Quezon, accompanied by several 
members of the Philippine Legislature, arrived in Wash- 
ington early in April. He received a very chilly recep- 
tion from the Democratic leaders of both Houses of Con- 
gress. I I’emember in particular a luncheon tendered by 
the OSROX Mission at which prominent Democratic leaders 
were present including Senator Joseph Robinson who was 
slated to become, as he did in fact later become, majority 
floor leader of the Senate. In the course of the after 
dinner speech which he delivered, Robinson bluntly told 
Quezon that if the Independence Bill which Congress had 
just enacted over President Hoover’s veto was rejected 
by the Philippine Legislature, it would be interpreted 
by the Democratic Party to mean that the Filipino people 
were not sincei’e in their desire for independence. But 
Quezon stood his ground firmly and announced that he 
was determined to go back to Manila and fight for the 
rejection of the Bill. 

Quezon and his entourage sailed for Europe late that 
same month. Osmena left a day later also bound for 
Europe, while Roxas, accompanied by Osias, Sabido, Fran- 
cisco Varona, Don Ramon Fernandez and I, sailed from 
New York on May 4th bound for Genoa on board the 
S.S. “Conte de Savoia’’ flagship of the Italian line. Roxas, 
Sabido and I disembarked at Villefranche, a small seaport 
on the French Riviera where we hired a car and drove 
along the shores of the blue Mediterranean, stopping for 
an hour’s visit at Monte Carlo and lunching at San Remo 
before proceeding to Genoa. We continued by train to 
Rome where we met President Quezon and his family and. 



[ 104 ] 



together we went on to Brindisi in southern Italy whei*e we 
boarded the S.S. “Conte Rosso”. This vessel had left 
Venice the day before with Senator Osmena and other mem- 
bers of the mission on board. Thus, counting also the 
members of Quezon’s entourage and their families, there 
were no less than fifty of us Filipinos on board ship for 
the long journey back to Manila. 

On the surface, the most cordial relations between 
the members of the OSROX and Quezon gi'oups seemed to 
prevail. Roxas busied himself every day preparing the 
very lengthy report which he intended to submit to the 
Philippine Legislature. Quezon spent most of the even- 
ings playing bridge and poker and, occasionally, Roxas 
found time to join him. Despite these amenities however 
it was apparent to most of us that a break was imminent. 
Even before our arrival in Manila public opinion through- 
out the Philippines was being sharply divided between 
the “Pros” and the “Antis.” Under Section 17 of the 
Hare-Hawes-Cutting Independence Law, it was provided 
that said act “shall not take effect until accepted by con- 
current resolution of the Philippine Legislature, or by 
convention called for the purpose.” The “Pros” were those 
who believed that the Philippine Legislature should accept 
the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Independence Bill, while the 
“Antis” would reject it in the belief that a better bill could 
be obtained from the new Congi’ess controlled by the De- 
mocratic Party which was soon to convehe in Washington. 

During the first few weeks following our arrival in 
Manila, Roxas and Osmena delivered many speeches ex- 
pounding the provisions of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill. 
Quezon and his henchmen, however, were working quietly 
behind the scenes and, when the Legislature finally con- 
vened, it was a foregone conclusion that the Independence 
Bill would be rejected. Quezon was simply too strong a 
leader to be ignored. He had too many followers not only 



[ 105 ] 



in the Senate but also in the lower house who were ready 
to do his bidding. 

Not satisfied with his plans to reject the bill however, 
Quezon went one step farther. He determined to destroy, 
for the time being at least, the man for whom he had al- 
ways shown such high regard. In accordance with his 
instructions a resolution was introduced in the lower House 
declaring the Speakership vacant. It was well known that 
Quezon commanded enough votes in the House to approve 
the resolution. But the masses and, pai*ticularly, the stu- 
dents in Manila were unequivocally for Roxas. They storm- 
ed the Legislative Building to demonstrate their belief in 
and their support of its Speaker. The police feared that 
there might be disorder and rioting as a protest against 
Quezon’s plan of action. On the momentous day when the 
vote was to be taken, a huge crowd thronged the session 
hall. The Chief of Police sent fifty policemen to help 
maintain order, but even they could do nothing to quell 
the murmuring crowd. Into this arena Roxas appeared. 
He mounted the rostrum amid cheers and applause. Turn- 
ing to the crowd he said : “I am still responsible for the 

maintenance of order in this House, and I am going to main- 
tain it.” Turning to the policemen, he added, “Policemen, 
please step out of this chamber.” His voice rang out and 
the crowd suddenly became silent. Then he paused and, 
facing the crowded galleries, went on to say : “I am very 

happy at the expression of goodwill from the gallery, and 
the sadness I may feel at presiding over a session for the 
last time is erased. But I have to maintain order, as I am 
still responsible.” 

Quezon and his henchmen had 54 votes to Roxas’ 35, 
and so Roxas was deprived of the speakership and replaced 
by Paredes. The next step was the rejection of the Inde- 
pendence Bill and this was also handily accomplished by 
Quezon and those who were ready to do his bidding. “Que- 



[ 106 ] 



zon is playing with our independence,” wei*e Roxas’ parting 
words. "Our people and not Mr. Quezon must judge me 
in history.” 

As Roxas left the Legislative Building on that mo- 
mentous day, an admiring crowd waiting outside hoisted him 
to their shoulders and, with shouts of “Mabuhay, Roxas!” 
carried him all the way back to his home on Taft Avenue. 

Quezon immediately announced that he would return 
to the United States for the purpose of obtaining another 
independence measure. He invited Osmena to join him 
but the latter, after consulting Roxas and the other leaders 
of the “Pro” faction, declined the invitation. The “Pi*os” 
felt that since the "Antis” had rejected the Hare-Hawes- 
Cutting Bill they must assume sole responsibility for try- 
ing to get a better one. 

January 1 was Roxas’ birthday. In years pi*evious 
the Roxas home on Taft Avenue w'as thronged with people 
who claimed to be his friends and who vied with each 
other trying to be seen in the company of such a distin- 
guished personage. But on Januaxy 1, 1934, the man who 
had held the speakei’ship for twelve uninteiTupted yeai's 
was a mei'e Representative and a gi*eat many of those who 
in the past had pledged allegiance and devotion to him failed 
to show up. Even many who were known to be in sym- 
pathy with Roxas seemed to be afi'aid of making an appeai’- 
ance for fear that they might fall out of favor with the 
mighty Quezon and those who now contx'olled the lower 
chamber. Such is politics and the ingi’atitude of men! 

What happened in Washington when Quezon aiTived 
thei'e is best i^elated by Quezon himself. This is what Que- 
zon told me after his I’eturn to Manila. “Although the 
Democratic Pai’ty was in power I knew that its leaders wei'e 
not particularly friendly to me because I had x'ejected the 
Hai*e-Hawes-Cutting Bill which they considei’ed to be a 



[ 107 ] 



satisfactory measure. Therefore, when I arrived in Wash- 
ington I decided to bide my time. I took up my quarters 
in a comfortable hotel and proceeded to relax. The new 
Chairman of the Senate Committee on Territories and In- 
sular Affairs was Senator Tydings, a Democrat. He had 
I’eplaced Senator Bingham. The days passed into weeks 
and I was beginning to get a little restless. But, sure 
enough as I had anticipated, the Democratic leaders who 
found themselves with the responsibility of settling the 
Philippine question eventually realized that they had to 
deal with me if they wanted a successful administi’ation 
in the Philippines. One day I received a telephone call 
from Tydings. He asked me if I would be good enough 
to see him. It was, of coiu'se, just what I was waiting 
for. I called on Tydings and we had a friendly chat. I 
bluntly told him that the new administi’ation in Washing- 
ton must deal with me in connection with the Philippines. 
I reminded him that I was still the undisputed leader 
of the Filipino participation in our government, and that 
if the Americans thought they could handle the Philip- 
pine question without counting on me, they were welcome 
to try it, but I assured them that they would fail.” 

Various conferences followed not only with Tydings 
but with Congressman McDuffie, also a Democrat, and the 
upshot of it all was that these two gentlemen agreed to 
sponsor a new bill, to which we now refer as the “Tydings- 
McDuffie Independence Bill.” In view of the fact that 
it was an administration measure this bill had an easy 
sailing through Congress. It was the same old Hare- 
Hawes-Cutting Bill with a new name and a few insignific- 
ant changes or additions, but Quezon had asserted his 
leadership after all. He had not obtained a better inde- 
pendence measure but he had succeeded in winning the 
confidence of President Roosevelt and the respect of Sena- 
tor Tydings, both of whom realized that the Filipino peo- 
ple were ready to follow Quezon whei’ever he chose to 



[ 108 ] 



lead them. President Roosevelt also assured Quezon that 
if after the bill went into effect, it should be found that 
there were imperfections and inequalities among its pro- 
visions, he would be glad to recommend to Congress such 
changes as might be necessary in order to do full justice 
to the Filipino people. 

Quezon returned to Manila in April, 1934 Avith the 
Tydings-McDuffie Independence Bill. Its acceptance by 
the Philippine Legislature was, of course, a foregone con- 
clusion. The year 1934 was also election year. The en- 
tire House membership was up for re-election. The old 
Nacionalista Party which had split in 1922 into the Uni- 
personalistas and Colectivistas only to be reunited soon 
thereafter, again was divided — this time, into the Naciona- 
lista “Pros” and the Nacionalista “Antis.” The old De- 
mocrata Party which at one time had offered strong oppo- 
sition to the Nacionalistas did not participate in this elec- 
tion for the simple reason that, early in 1932, its leaders 
had dissolved the party. They considered it futile to op- 
pose the Nacionalistas Avho had been in power continuously 
since 1907 and who apparently could never be dislodged. 
Quezon and his “Antis” did their utmost to defeat Roxas 
from being re-elected in Capiz but the people of his dis- 
trict stood by their favorite son and he won by a large 
majority. When the House of Representatives convened, 
however, the “Antis” remained in control. 

Soon after the Tydings-McDuffie Independence Bill 
was approved by the Philippine Legislature, and in ac- 
cordance with its requirements, an election was held for 
delegates to the Constitutional Convention which would 
draft the Constitution for the new Commonwealth. The 
elections were supposed to be non-partisan in character. 
Quezon and Osmena preferred not to be candidates but 
Roxas announced that he would run for election along 
with such stalwart leaders as Laurel, Recto, Briones, Cuen- 



[ 109 ] 



CO, Quirino, Montinola, Palma and Osias, all of whom were 
easily elected. When the Convention met in Manila a 
committee of seven members was chosen to prepare a 
draft of the Constitution. Roxas was among those in- 
cluded in this committee and his influence in the prepara- 
tion of the draft soon became vei^ appai’ent. Claro Recto 
was presiding officer of the Convention and he leaned 
heavily on Capiz’ favorite son. Although these two lead- 
ers had previously faced each other in many political bat- 
tles, they soon became fast friends. 

Roxas’ great admiration for American political in- 
stitutions and the American way of life appears very 
clearly in the Philippine Commonwealth Constitution, in 
the drafting of which he played so important a part. He 
was, of course, also influenced by that provision of the 
Independence Act which required that the Constitution to 
be adopted by the Filipino people should be submitted to 
the President of the United States for his approval or dis- 
approval. Roxas believed that to forestall any possibility 
of a veto, which would then require the convening of the 
Convention again to correct the provisions which the Amer- 
ican President might have found objectionable, the Filipino 
delegates should adopt a constitution so similar to that 
of the United States that no American president would 
find any reason to reject it. Roxas was furthermore de- 
sirous of avoiding as many questions and controversies in 
the future as it was possible to foresee and resolve. This 
could be achieved largely by incorporating into the Philip- 
pine Constitution those provisions of the American consti- 
tution which had already been given clear and long-stand- 
ing interpretations by America’s highest tribunals. 

On February 8, 1935 the Commonwealth Constitution 
was finally adopted. Roxas was among those designated 
to go to the United States for the purpose of presenting 
this all-important document to President Roosevelt for 



[ 110 ] 



approval. The President of the United States promptly 
signed it on I\Iarch 23, 1935 and the stage was thus set 
for the inauguration of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines. By this time, although strictly speaking the “Pi'os” 
and the “Antis” were still aligned against each other, 
there was no longer an issue between them. Everyone 
took it for granted that it was just a matter of time be- 
fore Roxas, Osmeiia, and Quezon, each of whom had al- 
ways professed great admiration and friendship for the 
other two, would again join forces. 

One of the important provisions of the new Consti- 
tution was that relating to the legislative branch of the 
government. Instead of providing for two chambers, name- 
ly, a House and a Senate, thei'e was to be only one cham- 
ber to be known as the National Assembly whose members 
would hold office for three years. Roxas, of course, was 
easily elected Assemblyman by his district in Capiz. 

Quezon was the principal candidate for the presidency 
with Osmeiia as his running mate for the vice-presidency. 
General Aguinaldo as well as the late Bishop Aglipay 
also launched their respective candidacies for the highest 
position to which a Filipino could aspii*e. Since neither 
of these two men had ever run for public office before, 
it was evident from the beginning of the campaign that 
they had not the slightest chance of winning over Quezon. 
Aguinaldo and Aglipay limited themselves to attacking the 
Quezon-Osmena administi'ation, accusing these leaders of 
having betrayed the cause of independence because they 
accepted a law from the United States Congress that would 
not grant complete independence to the Philippines until 
ten years later. 

Quezon decisively beat his two opponents by a tre- 
mendous majority. He received more than twice as many 
votes as Aguinaldo and Aglipay combined. Osmena’s vic- 
tory over those who teamed up with Aguinaldo and Agli- 



[ 111 ] 



pay for the vice-presidential post was even more impres- 
sive. Aguinaldo and Aglipay only won in three provinces. 
The remaining 46 provinces of our archipelago voted in 
favor of the Quezon-Osmeha ticket. It was a sad day for 
the leader of our 1896 revolution against Spain. History 
must also record the unfortunate fact that despite Que- 
zon’s victory by an overwhelming vote, the aging Filipino 
general declined to extend his congratulations to his op- 
ponent. Aguinaldo insisted that Quezon had won through 
fraud and coercion. He did not, however, offer any proof 
in support of his accusations before the Commission on 
Elections. 

It was a distinguished gi'oup from Washington that 
came to Manila in 1935 for the Commonwealth inaugural 
ceremonies scheduled for November 15th of that year. 
Among them were the Vice-President of the United States, 
the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Secre- 
tary of War, the majority leaders of the Senate and the 
House, and other prominent Congressmen from both par- 
ties. But the most enthusiastic member of the visiting 
party was former Senator Hawes whose term as Senatoi* 
had already expired and who was, at that time, practicing 
law in Washington. Late one afternoon while Hawes was 
chatting with Quezon in the lobby of the Manila Hotel, 
Roxas passed by. Quezon turned to Hawes and said, 
“There goes the man who will eventually become President 
of the Philippines.” 

Although Roxas had been elected to the Assembly 
rumors soon spread in the highest political circles that 
Quezon would appoint him Secretary of Finance. Every- 
one was very much surprised, therefore when, just before 
the inaugural ceremonies, it was announced that Roxas 
had declined the proposed appointment. Just exactly why 
he chose to do so has never been clearly explained but the 
impression I got at the time was that Roxas did not con- 
sider as satisfactory the tenor of the letter which he re- 



[ 112 ] 



ceived from Quezon offering him the portfolio in ques- 
tion. Theoretically, as I have already said, the “Antis” 
and the “Pros” were still aligned against each other and 
probably that is why Quezon, in offering the Secretary- 
ship to Roxas, felt that he could not use the same lang- 
uage that he might have employed if Roxas had been a 
regular member of his party. I have unfortunately been 
unable to preserve a copy of Quezon’s letter, but I re- 
member at the time I read it that I also was not favor- 
ably impressed by its language. It sounded more like a 
“take it” or “leave it” proposition and Roxas chose the 
latter. He wanted to show Quezon that he was not' neces- 
sarily dependent on him and that he could take cai'e of 
himself without the support of the Commonwealth Pres- 
ident. 

About a month or two after the inauguration of the 
Commonwealth I was sitting in my small law office at the 
Brias Building on the Escolta when Roxas unexpectedly 
dropped in. “Marcial,” he said, “I have decided to practice 
law. Let us join forces if that is agreeable to you.” Of 
course I welcomed the opportunity to go into partnership 
with him and I immediately proceeded to discuss plans as 
to how to enlarge our office space and acquire moi’e books 
and equipment. Roxas was just as enthusiastic but he 
added, “The trouble, Marcial, is that I have no money 
whatsoever. I would like to borrow say three thousand 
pesos from the Philippine National Bank but I have no 
security to offer. Will you guarantee my loan?” I tele- 
phoned Rafael Corpus who was then Pi’esident of the bank 
to ask for a loan for Roxas which I agreed to guarantee 
and Corpus gave Roxas the money which he so badly 
needed. I am relating this particular incident in detail 
because it is, in my opinion, noteworthy that Roxas, after 
having occupied the Speakership of the lower house for 
twelve years was as poor as the day he had been first 
elected to that office. The salary and the allowances which 



[ 113 ] 



he had received as Speaker during his long incumbency 
were just barely enough to meet his household and other 
day to day expenses. It is in striking contrast to the 
cases of many other government officials who have not 
hesitated to take advantage of their respective positions 
in order to enrich themselves. 

There was much business activity in Manila in 1936. 
Owing to the devaluation of the American dollar the price 
of gold had increased considerably and there was a boom 
in gold mining. Sugar planters in the Philippines were 
also lush with money not only because the price of sugar 
was good but because Filipino planters were the recipients 
of certain benefit payments authorized by an act of Con- 
gress in the United States in favor of those engaged in 
agriculture. Our law office had plenty of work to do 
organizing new corporations and reorganizing old ones 
which needed refinancing. Whenever possible we pre- 
ferred to be paid for our services in shares of stock and, 
because the securities market was quite active we could 
make a profit by selling our shares at a higher price. Un- 
fortunately, Roxas could not be prevailed upon to dispose 
of his holdings even when they rose in value. He did 
not consider it fair to sell out for he believed that it 
would be interpreted by others as a lack of confidence 
on his part in the very companies which he had helped to 
organize. The result was that when the boom collapsed 
all of his stockholdings declined in value and he failed 
to realize the profits which he might otherwise have reaped. 

The first law enacted by the new Commonwealth As- 
sembly was the measure providing for compulsory mili- 
tary training. In order that our country might have a 
capable core of military officers, the government also 
immediately set up a reserve officers’ training school in 
Baguio. Roxas was among the first to enroll. Trying 
to practice law and, at the same time, keep up with his 
studies in the officers’ training school was quite a stunt. 



[ 114 ] 



It meant making many a fast automobile trip between. 
Baguio and Manila. Our long-distance telephone bills also 
proved to be unusually large because of numerous calls 
between Roxas and the membei’s of our staff in Manila, 
but Roxas managed to complete the training schedule and, 
when his military training period was over, he received a 
commission in the Reserves. 

Early in 1937 President Quezon told Roxas that he 
wanted to appoint him a member of the Joint Preparatory 
Committee on Philippine Affairs. This committee had 
been created on April 14, 1937 pursuant to an arrangement 
between the President of the United States and the Pres- 
ident of the Philippine Commonwealth. The governments 
of both countries realized that the advent of independence 
in 1946 would mean serious economic and financial prob- 
lems for the Philippines, and it was deemed advisable that 
studies be initiated as soon as possible looking towards an 
early solution of those problems. In a joint statement is- 
sued by President Quezon and the then Assistant Secretary 
of State Francis B. Sayre, it was announced that the Com- 
mittee would study trade relations between the United 
States and the Philippines and would then recommend a 
program for the adjustment of the Philippine national 
economy, having in mind the advisability that preferential 
trade relations between the United States and the Philip- 
pines should be terminated at the earliest practicable time 
consistent with affording the Philippines a reasonable op- 
portunity to adjust their national economy. Thereafter, 
it was contemplated that trade relations between the two 
countries would be regulated in accordance with a recipro- 
cal trade agreement on a nonpreferential basis. 

The American members of the Committee were to be 
appointed by the President of the United States while the 
Philippine members were to be selected by the President 
of the Commonwealth. Roxas was at first reluctant to 
accept a position in this committee for he did not wish 



[ 115 ] 



to give up the law practice which he was finding quite 
lucrative. He called on the late Don Alejandro Roces for 
advice. Don Alejandro was then the controlling stock- 
holder of the company publishing the “Tribune,” “La Van- 
guardia,” and “Taliba” newspapers. For quite sometime 
in the past and although he had never run for public of- 
fice, he had been looked upon by Filipino leaders as an 
elder statesman. I was present at their meeting and I 
recall that old Don Alejandro strongly urged Roxas to 
accept the appointment. “Your services,” he said, “are 
very much needed. Do not hesitate to serve your country 
whenever she needs you.” So Roxas reluctantly left our 
law office and prepared to fly to Washington where the 
Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs, or 
JPCPA, was to conduct its first public hearings. 

Pan-American Airways using large ungainly seaplanes 
had only recently inaugurated its service between San 
Francisco and Manila by way of Midway, Honolulu, Wake 
and Guam. The trip was supposed to take six days for 
the planes flew only in the daytime. Passengers spent 
the night on each of the islands where the machines were 
also refueled. Furthex’more, because the efficiency of en- 
gines in those days was not as good as they are now, break- 
downs were frequent and passengers sometimes were re- 
quired to lay-off for as long as a week in one of the is- 
lands enroute. Roxas’ trip was significant not because 
it was his first flight across the Pacific, but rather be- 
cause, among his fellow passengers, was Andi*es Soriano, 
probably the best known businessman and industrialist in 
our country. Until then Roxas and Soriano merely had a 
bowing acquaintanceship with each other but the six-day 
flight to America enabled them to get to know one another 
well. They discussed at great length the current problems 
of the day, and Roxas later confided to me that he was 
very much impressed by Soriano’s grasp of our most 



[ 116 ] 



difficult problems. Soriano was just as enthusiastic about 
Roxas. 

After Roxas became President in 1946, some of his 
detractors often said that Soriano had been one of Roxas' 
prewar clients from whom he received large fees and that 
this explained why Roxas was always glad to receive So- 
riano in Malacanan. This is not true. I was associated 
with Roxas during the years that he practiced law in 
1936-37 and later again in 1941. It is true that Soriano 
occasionally availed himself of Roxas’ legal services, but 
I can positively state that the total amount of fees re- 
ceived by Roxas, not only from Soriano but also from 
the various companies controlled and managed by the lat- 
ter, did not exceed P20,000, of which sum I got a reason- 
able share. The friendship that developed between these 
two men, each of whom was a leader in his particular 
field of activity, was due to the fact that each admired 
the other’s integrity, intelligence and civic spirit. Roxas 
was ready to listen to whatever Soi'iano had to suggest 
for he knew that the latter’s motives were always of the 
highest order. 

Public hearings in Washington were held by the Joint 
Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs in June and 
July of that year, 1937. Briefs were filed not only by 
those who appeared at the hearings but by other interested 
parties who preferred to submit written memoranda. Af- 
ter the close of the Washington conferences Roxas returned 
to the Philippines accompanied by most of the members 
of the Committee for the purpose of holding hearings in 
Manila as well as other parts of the Philippines. 

In January, 1938, Roxas was again off to Washington 
to continue with the work of the Committee. The report 
which its members finally submitted to the President of 
the United States and the President of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth has since proved to be of considerable value 



[ 117 ] 



to all those interested in the economic welfare of the Phil- 
ippines. 

Roxas sailed back for Manila in May, 1938 on board 
the Canadian Pacific liner “Empress of Japan”. By coin- 
cidence it so happened that President Quezon was vaca- 
tioning in Tokyo. When the “Empress” stopped at Yoko- 
hama, Quezon boarded the ship for his return journey to 
Manila. Soon after the vessel got under way Quezon told 
Roxas that he wanted to appoint him Secretary of Finance 
and assured him that his services were very much needed. 

I had gone to Hongkong to meet Roxas and I, of course, 
sailed back to Manila with him. He explained to me that 
his first reaction to Quezon’s offer was to decline the 
appointment because he needed money and wished to con- 
tinue practicing law but since Quezon was very insistent 
and as this was a good opportunity to show what he could 
accomplish in an executive position, he had finally decided 
to accept it. 

The year 1938 was also election year for the members 
of the National Assembly. It was quite uneventful. There 
was practically no opposition and the Nacionalistas made 
another clean sweep. Our government' then was in reality 
a one party government, not because Quezon was a dictator 
and was suppressing the minority, but simply because no 
one else was strong or influential enough to lead a party 
in opposition to Quezon’s leadership. 

Soon after Roxas assumed the position of Secretary 
of Finance he drafted my services and gave me a desk in 
the same room with him in the old Intendencia Building, 
now the Central Bank of the Philippines. I thus had 
plenty of opportunity to see him in action. His job proved 
to be exhausting. Besides being Secretary of Finance 
which, in itself, is a full-time job, Roxas was Chairman 
of the National Development Co., Chairman of the Na- 



[ 118 ] 



tional Economic Council, Chairman of the National Food 
Products Corporation, Chairman of the National Rice and 
Com Corporation, Chairman of the Insular Sugar Refin- 
ing Co., Chairman of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes 
Office, and a member of the University of the Philippines 
Board of Regents. He was also constantly at Quezon’s 
beck and call for the President consulted him on every 
conceivable subject. Even Quezon’s important speeches 
and messages were referred to Roxas for preparation or 
revision. 

It was at this stage of our association that I first 
noticed the very peculiar attitude which Roxas exliibited 
towards his friends on the one hand and his political ene- 
mies on the other. As Secretary of Finance and Chair- 
man of many important government corporations, Roxas 
was so afraid of being accused of favoritism that he was 
reluctant to help a friend if the latter was interested in 
any one of the hundreds of cases or business transactions 
coming under his supervision. Because of his nunierous 
responsibilities he was even niggardly in granting audiences 
to his closest associates of the past. In sharp contrast, 
he was very generous to his political enemies and even 
to those who had defiled him in the past. His attitude 
was certainly the exact opposite of the tactics which Que- 
zon had adopted so successfully during the latter s long 
political career. Quezon believed in rewarding his friends 
and supporters whenever possible. Thus, not only did he 
assure himself of their continuing devotion, but outsideis 
realizing how advantageous it was to be close to Quezon, 
sought every opportunity to ingfratiate themselves and to 
help him in what way they could knowing that, sooner 
or later, Quezon would reward them for their loyalty and 
their support. There are many ways by which one can 
help a friend without contravening the bounds of pro- 
priety and honest government. Our Commonwealth Pres- 
ident knew their finest i)oints and he practiced them to 



[ 119 ] 



perfection. Roxas would have done well had be followed 
Quezon’s example. 

It should not be concluded, however, that Roxas was 
ungrateful or that he did not esteem his friends. On the 
contrary, whenever he could help them in any way he was 
always glad to do so providing his conscience was clear 
that he was not taking advantage of his official position. 
His affection for his friends was, in fact, so great that 
it often prevented him fi’om taking disciplinary action 
against them when they failed to comply with their duties. 
I remember two or three cases when subordinate officials 
should have been dismissed from office, yet Roxas found 
some way to help minimize the gravity of their offense. 
When he became President of the Philippiiaes this softness 
on his part proved a stain on his record. 

The three years that Roxas spent as Secretary of 
Finance were probably the three busiest years of his ca- 
reer before he became President. One had to have the 
endurance and the strength of an iron man to be able to 
keep up with the pace set by this brilliant Filipino leader. 
And yet although the volume of work which he tackled 
was tremendous he never lost his temper or his poise. He 
was invariably considerate to his subordinates. Never was 
he heard to raise his voice or scold a clerk, a stenogi’apher, 
or even a janitor or messenger. Those who had the pri- 
vilege of serving him could not help but love such a man 
for the nobility of his character and his consideration for 
the feelings of others no matter how humble a position 
they were occupying. When it is considered also that dur- 
ing this trying period Roxas’ domestic life was proving to 
be no easier than it had been in previous years, those of 
us who were close to him and knew of his trials and tri- 
bulations at home could not understand how he was able 
to patiently carry on the responsibilities of his office. 



[ 120 ] 




11 



I 



0\T was during Roxas’ incumbency as Secretary of Fi- 
nance, more than at any other time, that his grasp of 
our economic problems became most evident. The various 
government corporations of whose boards of directors he 
was appointed chairman seemed to acquire new life and 
gi*eater vigor as a result of his leadership. The speeches 
he delivered during this period in his career are parti- 
cularly noteworthy. 

On March 26, 1939, for example, Roxas was Com- 
mencement speaker at the graduation exercises of the Far 
Eastern University and the subject of his address was 
“The Basic Economic Problem of the Philippines and the 
Measures which ai'e being Proposed for its Solution." 
What he said at that time is just as applicable today as 
it was thirteen years ago. We would do well to heed his 
counsel. Consider the following: 

“Why is it that the Philippines has not been able 
to keep pace with other countries which have been 
able to increase their income by leaps and bounds 
until their productivity has reached such a point that 
to safeguard the balance of their national economy 
measures have been taken to restrict production? We 
have natural resources, we have the man power, and 
we have the capital — why then don’t we produce more? 

“My answer to this question is that the Filipino 
does not work enough, he does not work continuously, 
he does not work scientifically, and what is \vorse, 
many Filipinos don’t work at all. A large portion of 
our population are exclusively consumers, not pro- 
ducers. And there are altogether too many who live 
on the work of others, either as absentee landlords. 



[ 121 ] 



money-lenders, or false entrepreneurs. The educated 
Filipino runs away from the land, very often consi- 
dering work on the soil below his dignity. Many of 
us are shiftless and ignore completely the economic 
value of thrift. We often live beyond our income 
and share in the enjoyments of life in a measure ut- 
terly unjustified by the labor we have performed. 
The well-to-do are inclined to a life of luxury and 
ostentation, spending their time in wasteful leisure. 
Conspicuous consumption is practiced by a lai'ge num- 
ber of people, and many of them live in penury under 
the trappings of opulence. A considerable part of our 
savings is depleted in social frivolities, and it is the 
practice to go into debt or even to mortgage the home 
to raise funds for a town fiesta, a christening, or the 
anniversary of a relation’s death.” 

Referring to the mania of our people to look to the 
government for the enactment of laws that will solve the 
country’s economic problems, this is what Roxas said: 

“Many Filipinos believe that economic problems, 
such as the distribution of the pi-ofits of industry and 
the leveling of prices and wages, can be determined 
by political action without consideration to economic 
factors. Few seem to understand that wealth can be 
produced only by intensive, persistent and intelligent 
toil and that this country cannot be legislated into 
prosperity and affluence. Prices are always con- 
trolled by the law of supply and demand, and wages, 
while subject to the regulatory action of the Goveni- 
ment, must, in the last analysis, depend upon the ac- 
tual economic value of the work done. In competi- 
tive industry, the only fair and economically sound 
manner of fixing labor wages is to base them on in- 
dividual output; thereby, a man receiving low wages 
but whose output is very small may actually be over- 
paid when compared with the wages of a high-salaried 
wage-earner but whose output is much larger than 
that of the low-salaried employee.” 

In 1939 there were many Filipinos who claimed that 
they were willing to woi’k hard but that they simply could 



[ 122 ] 







Sccretury of Fiiiuncc Roxas and Xechnical 
Assistant Mardal P. Lichauco (1940). 



I 



not find work. We hear the same complaints today. Here 
was Roxas’ answer — 

“There is need of catching the imagination of 
our people, to focus it in this great enterprise of 
nation building. We cannot for long be free unless 
we build a strong economic foundation for that free- 
dom. Many will say. ‘We want to work but we can 
find no work.’ My answer is that there is work for 
everyone who wants to work. An enterprising man 
may even create work. Our natui'al resources are 
waiting for the application of human toil. We have 
vast unoccupied lands. Let us be pioneers. Let us 
have the courage, the earnestness, and the will to hew 
the foi’ests and to carve a home and a farm in their 
midst. Today, to erect a nation and to maintain it, 
there is need of men of force and vision and character, 
and especially, lovers of work — men who are not 
afraid to toil hard and continuously.” 

His concluding statement contains the key to our eco- 
nomic welfare. In ringing tones he told the students and 
the guests who had gathered in the auditorium of the Far 
Eastern University — 

“There is no substitute for individual initiative 
and enterprise, the priceless qualities of a people de- 
serving of respect, dignity and freedom. 

“Work is the main- solution of our economic and 
social problems. Only through work can we raise 
living standards and actually improve the condition 
of our masses. Let us vanish all thought that there 
is any other road or any shortcuts towards this goal. 
Neither luck nor the fiat of political power can ac- 
complish these things. The government can only 
establish facilities and favorable conditions for pro- 
ductive enterprise. We can only attain individual 
and national progress through the potent lever of toil. 
If we desire to live as free and cultured human beings, 
we must be prepared to carry the weight of that 
freedom and of that social structure which our cul- 
ture requires upon our bare and brawny shoulders 
as hard-working, industrious, enterprising men. 



[ 123 ] 



“That is the message which I wish to convey to 
the members of this graduating class. I urge you 
to propagate the gospel of work. Preach it every- 
where. Convince our countrymen that only through 
earnest and persistent toil can we improve our econo- 
mic condition as individuals and as a people. Let 
it be your inspiration and your guide. No matter 
what you do, put your heart in your work. Give to 
it the best that you have and the best that you can. 
Don’t be satisfied with what is expected of you. Give 
to the task all that is in you. Tell our people that 
our craving for liberty is meaningless, it advocacy the 
frothing of demagoguei’y, unless through productive 
work we apply ourselves seriously to the task of build- 
ing a sti’ong, stable and well-balanced economy.” 

A few months later, or on September 27, 1939, Roxas 
spoke before the faculty and the student body of the Ate- 
neo de Manila. To them he described his vision of an 
economic system for the Philippines. He said — 

“There can only be one sound and just economy 
for the Philippines. It is an econoiny that should 
safeguard the welfare of the masses, raising the stand- 
ards of living of the whole people rathei* than merely 
enhancing the wealth of a privileged class. My vision 
of our human landscape is not one formed by high 
peaks, swampy valleys and deep chasms, but one that 
is ever green with the fruits of toil, high above the 
sea level of starvation and want, and traversed by 
abundant streams bearing the milk of human happi- 
ness.” 

After reviewing the economic conditions then prevail- 
ing in our country and calling attention to the require- 
ments necessary to insure the social standards that we 
desired for our people, he proceeded to outline what he 
considered to be the only workable system of economy 
possible under existing conditions. He explored the pos- 
sibilities of expanding our foreign trade, of industrializing 
the Philippines as much as possible, of the advantages we 



[ 124 ] 



were deriving from American free trade and of the hard- 
ships that lay ahead as a result of the termination within 
a few years of that trade. He stressed the importance 
of developing our rich natui'al resources, and he appealed 
to the people to respond to the leadership of their Pres- 
ident. In biting language he condemned the sti’addlebug 
policy to which so many Filipinos at that time had sub- 
scribed to the effect that unless preferential trade with 
the United States was indefinitely extended our situation 
would be utterly helpless. “That is a defeatist attitude,” 
he said, “which is not justified nor in keeping with our 
political aspirations. It is a straddlebug policy which be- 
lies our faith in liberty.” In concluding his speech he gave 
voice once more to the true aspirations of the Filipino 
people. These were his words — 

“We have been the subject of a foreign power 
for centuries. All through that period it has been 
the consuming ambition of our people to be free. 
For once we are the masters of our fate. We are 
building here the only Christian nation in Asia. We 
are building here a democracy alongside peoples num- 
bering more than half the population of the globe 
subjected to other forms of government. We owe it 
to ourselves and to our forbears; we owe it to our 
Christian faith, to make a success of this epochal un- 
dertaking. We owe it to the United States to carry 
to a successful conclusion her noble experiment in in- 
ternational relations of which w'e are the beneficiaries. 
I am confident that we shall always have the sym- 
pathy and suppoi’t of that great nation. But we can 
depend only upon our own vitality and energy. Let 
us be inspii’ed by the vision of our destiny and in- 
flamed with the urge to fulfill that destiny. 

“There are some among us who wish to fashion 
foi' our country a life of perpetual dependence upon 
the generosity of the United States. Let us ask for 
the support of that great nation only for so long as 
we may need it, and be men enough to renounce it 
when, by our own efforts, we shall have rendered 



[ 125 ] 



it unnecessary. The Filipino nation, our nation, has 
long determined that it will lift itself from the ground 
and walk with dignity, confident of its own strength, 
on the highways of the world. 

“I give you that vision of the Philippines, deve- 
loi)ed materially and spiritually, rich and strong, by 
the efforts of its own people. It is a vision of hope 
and youth and power. It is a vision of a people using 
the limit of their energies to raise the nation to a 
position of stability and contentment. It will be a 
nation without a stratification of social classes, with 
a government that will be, in fact as in law, in the 
hands of the people, where the humblest citizen is the 
equal of the highest potentate of wealth, where the 
fruits of industry are equitably distributed, where 
there will be no dominant and no subservient groups, 
where labor is treated fairly and humanely, where 
justice reigns, and where religion and happiness illu- 
mine every home.” 

On September 17, 1940, or more than a year before 
the outbreak of World War II, Roxas had the rare privilege 
of addressing the people of the United States. Thru power- 
ful local transmitters his speech was relayed to San Fran- 
cisco from where it was passed on to the most important 
broadcasting stations in America, After expi'essing his 
extreme satisfaction at being able to address such a vast 
radio audience, and voicing his hope that, thru the recently 
established radio facilities in Manila, it would be possible 
for the United States and the Philippines to come closer 
together, he added, “This is more to be welcomed because 
in the past we have suffered from either indifference or 
misinformation on the part of the people of the United 
States.” 

Then Roxas proceeded to show that even at that early 
date he already foresaw the dangei’s that would befall 
the Philippines upon the outbreak of a second world war. 
While most of the people of our country and even many of 



[ 126 ] 



America’s leaders were apparently oblivious to the gather- 
ing clouds of war and the lack of prepax'ation to meet it 
immediately on this side of the Pacific, Roxas was fully 
aware of the true dangers. He said — 

“The international situation is filling us with 
misgivings as to the futui'e. We see danger signals 
ahead and we are impotent to face the possible emer- 
gencies were they to eventuate within the next few 
years. We are desirous of preparing ourselves ade- 
quately to meet any challenge to our liberties. But 
we are in complete ignorance of the plans of the 
United States, more particularly of her military stra- 
tegy in case our country should be drawn into the 
vortex of conflict. We are anxious to cooperate. We 
are determined, as we are bound by law, to place all 
our men and material resources at the disposal of 
America when the bugle call of defense is sounded. 
We would be glad to fight for every inch of our 
land against invasion if we are given the opportunity 
and the means to meet that ordeal. 

“We do not expect American soldiers to shed 
their blood in the Philippines. We want that privil- 
ege for ourselves. We will soon have approximately 
four hundred thousand trained men for the defense 
of our territory. What we need are arms and am- 
munition, airplanes and other equipment essential to 
modern warfare. These, I believe, the United States 
can supply us while, at the same time, safeguarding 
our communication with America with her powerful 
fleet. But nothing is being projected along this line 
that we know of. Is it the plan to leave the Philip- 
pines to its fate and to permit it ruthlessly to be 
overrun by the first invader? That would be inhuman. 
It does not square with American honor and traditions. 
It would destroy forty years of American altruistic 
efforts in this country to prepai'e us for independent 
nationhood and to advance the frontiers of democracy. 
American pride and prestige could not allow such a 
thing to come to pass. The conscience of America 
would revolt against it. The American people would 
risk everything to prevent the desecration of the 



[ 127 ] 



American flag and to stop the iron heels of conquest 
from treading on American territory. It will then 
be more costly for the United States at the last mi- 
nute to attempt the defense of the Philippines unless 
adequate preparations wei’e made for it now. More- 
over, it is the considered judgment of qualified obser- 
vers here that if the United States should today make 
herself strong in the Philippines, that alone would 
forestall her involvement in a war in this section of 
the globe. Our present insecurity is a source of great 
danger to the peace of America. I make this asser- 
tion because of my loyalty to America, because of my 
fervent wish that she may continue to live in peace, 
and because of my deep concern for the safety of my 
country." 

This speech, it should l^e remembered, was deli- 
vered one year and three months before the Japanese at- 
tack on Pearl Harbor. And yet Roxas was practically 
foretelling what was going to happen to the Philippines 
during the tragic years that were to follow. 

One of the most important provisions appearing in 
the Commonwealth Constitution adopted in 1935 was that 
which provided for a six-year term for the President of 
the Philippines without re-election. The delegates to the 
Constitutional Convention knew that in many other young 
republics, notably some of those in South and Central 
America where there is no limitation on the number of 
times a man can be elected President, it is not uncommon 
for a politician in poAver to avail himself of his influence 
in order to perpetuate himself in office. They did not 
want to see the same thing happen in the Philippines. 

By 1940 Quezon had served as President five years 
and, as elections were to be held in November, 1941, it 
was time to begin considering his successor. The field 
narrowed down to three men, namely, Osmena, Roxas, 
and Jose Yulo, the latter being at that time Speaker of the 
National Assembly. Yulo had entered public life only in 



[ 128 ] 



1935 when he was appointed Secretary of Justice. He ran 
for public office for the first time in 1938 when Quezon 
prevailed upon him to launch his candidacy for the As- 
sembly, assuring him also that he would be chosen Speaker. 
So great was Quezon's control of our government that he 
could even handpick the man who was to be Speaker of 
the Assembly. Yulo was, therefore, very definitely a 
Quezon man. 

As to who among these three prospective candidates 
would triumph in a Nacionalista Party convention for no- 
mination as candidate for the Presidency was a frequent 
subject of discussion by the newspapers and among promi- 
nent members of the party. Roxas’ followers confidently 
believed that, if Quezon would give the members of his 
party a free hand in the matter, Capiz’s foremost son 
would be nominated. But if Quezon intervened and exerted 
pressure among his closest henchmen the Nacionalista con- 
vention would nominate whoever Quezon favored. It was 
difficult to forecast what Quezon would do for he was an 
astute politician and played his cards well. I remember 
that on January 1, 1941, Quezon was among those who 
called on Roxas to felicitate him on his birthday. Bj>- 
chance Yulo happened to be there at the same time. Que- 
zon placed his right arm around Roxas and his left ai'm 
around Yulo and, facing the many guests assembled there, 
said, “Both of these men will, sooner or later, become pres- 
idents of the Philippines.” 

A man who has tasted power, however, will ordinarily 
not relinquish it willingly, and Quezon was no exception 
to the rule. A move was initiated by Quezon's staunchest 
followers to amend the Constitution of the Philippines by 
reducing the presidential term from six years without re- 
election to four years provided no man could serve as 
president for more than eight consecutive years. If ap- 
proved it meant that Quezon could run for President again 



[1291 



in 1941 and continue as President for two yeai's more fol- 
lowing which he would be automatically disqualified from 
holding office, which meant that the vice-president would 
thereupon assume the presidency. Quezon publicly an- 
nounced that he was not interested in seeking re-election 
but that if his people pressed him into service it would be 
unpatriotic on his part to refuse the call. As a matter of 
fact, those close to Quezon knew perfectly well that it 
was really he who had given the “go” signal to his hench- 
men to initiate the proposed amendment to our Constitu- 
tion in order to enable him to run for re-election in Novem- 
ber of 1941. 

The Commonwealth Constitution was amended accord- 
ingly for so great was Quezon’s prestige and power that 
our electorate was ready to do anything he recommended 
or approved. And so Quezon finally came out in the open 
and said that he was available for another term because, 
as he explained it, “Six years is too short a period for 
a good president but too long for a poor one.” He could 
not resist the temptation of enjoying two moi'e years of 
office in the highest position available to a Filipino. 

It was a bitter pill for Roxas. The change in the 
Constitution which enabled Quezon to be a candidate again 
thus preventing anyone else in the Nacionalista Party 
fi'om disputing the nomination did not disappoint him as 
much as he feared the possible serious consequences to the 
country because of the change in the presidential term of 
office. Roxas was one of those who had always sin- 
cerely believed that a six-year term without x*e-election 
w^as much better than a 4-year term with one re-election. 
Not only were the examples of the Central and South 
American republics before him but he knew that, even 
in the United States, a newly elected pi'esident, instead 
of getting down to hard earnest work as soon as he as- 
sumes office, is influenced in his actuations by the thought 

[130] 



that he must maneuver and carefully play his cards well 
in order to assure himself of re-election four yeai’s later. 
Roxas was convinced that Quezon had urged the amend- 
ment to the Constitution not because he believed it was 
good for the country but because he was unable to resist 
the desire to continue in power for two years more. I 
remember that during the Japanese occupation in 1943 
while chatting with Roxas in Manila one day, I mentioned 
the fact that Osmena, who was in Washington with Que- 
zon, would soon become president because Quezon’s eighth 
year in office was about to expire and, under our Con- 
stitution, he would have to relinquish it in favor of Osmeiia 
who was then Vice-President. I shall never forget Roxas’ 
answer. We were talking in Spanish and he said. “Si, 
Osmena sera presidente a menos que Quezon haga otra 
Salamanca” (Yes, Osmena will become president unless 
Quezon pulls another stunt.) 

When the Constitution was amended in 1941 changing 
the presidential term of office, the Filipino electorate also 
abolished the National Assembly and reintroduced the bi- 
cameral system with a House of Representatives whose 
membership would be elected for a four-year term and a 
Senate with 24 senators to be elected at large throughout 
the country, 8 of whom would come up for election every 
two years. Since 24 senators had to be chosen for the 
first Senate however, it meant that the 8 senators who 
received the highest number of votes would hold office 
for six years, the next 8 would hold office for four years, 
and the last 8 for two years. Thus, had World War II 
not intervened, there would have been an election in 1943 
for 8 senators. Another election should have been held 
in November, 1946 not only for 8 senators but also for 
the entire membership of the House as well as a President. 

Roxas decided to become a candidate for Senator in 
the elections scheduled to take place in November, 1941. 



[ 131 ] 



In August of that year, he therefore resigned his position 
as Secretary of Finance. I, of course, also resigned my 
position as his technical assistant and we immediately 
reopened our law office. Elizalde and Company was the 
first big client that Roxas brought into the firm. Various 
other companies soon followed because Roxas’ prestige was 
higher than ever and we were all set to make a financial 
success of the practice of our profession. Roxas plunged 
into his work with great vigor. Although he had to ab- 
sent himself for a few days from time to time in order to 
campaign in the provinces for the senatorial position for 
which he had launched his candidacy, he did not neglect 
his duties to our clients. Very often our entire office 
staff had to work with him until late in the evening in 
order to help finish a brief or an urgent legal opinion. 

The elections were rather uneventful. The 24 Na- 
cionalista candidates for the Senate, practically all of whom 
had been handpicked by Quezon, were elected. The Na- 
cionalista Party also made a clean sweep of the Lower 
House. As for the presidency and vice-presidency, Que- 
zon and Osmeha were re-elected by an almost unbelievable 
majority. The only opposition against them came from 
several small minority groups who put up fonner Senator 
Juan Sumulong as candidate for President under the ban- 
ner of the so-called Popular Front party. But they were 
poorly organized, they were plagued with dissensions, and 
they seemed to have divergent aims. Quezon and Osmena 
did not even bother to make any campaign speeches. Su- 
mulong received only 298,000 votes to Quezon’s 1,340,000. 



[ 132 ] 



(^liapier 1.2 



Roxas resigned the secretaryship of finance in 
order to be a candidate for the Senate in the 1941 
elections, he was nearly fifty years old. What kind of a 
man was he? What did he look like? What were his 
activities outside his career as a public official? 



Roxas was about five feet nine inches, or fairly tall 
for a Filipino. He weighed 165 pounds and enjoyed good 
health. There wei'e no indications whatsoever that he 
was suffering from any ailments. In fact, shortly before 
one of his trips to Washington he obtained two life in- 
surance policies totaling P100,000. Unfortunately he could 
not keep up the premium payments and, eventually, he 
had to let the policies lapse. His tastes were simple and 
he was conservative in the choice of his clothes, avoiding 
the use of gaudy shirts and neckties. In brief, he had a 
commanding appearance and one could not help but notice 
him even in a crowd. 



Much has been heard about Roxas’ oratorical abilities. 
Actually Roxas was not as great an orator as some of his 
contemporaries. While a law student he was beaten in the 
university’s oratorical contest by three of his classmates. 
His principal defect as a public speaker was that he could 
not be heard from a distance. He did not have the reso- 
nant voice of men like Manuel Briones or the late Domi- 
nador Gomez. Now that every public speaker can have a 
microphone at his disposal, it does not make much differ- 
ence how loud a speaker’s natural voice happens to be. But 
in the nineteen twenties and early thirties, before this 
electronic device was in common use in the Philippines, a 



[ 133 ] 



man who did not have a far-reaching and penetrating voice 
was under a severe handicap. Roxas, however, had a mas- 
terful control of both English as well as Spanish. His 
speeches not only sounded well but read well. Roxas also 
always spoke with great feeling as a result of which there 
were many occasions when he openly and unashamedly 
wept. He keenly felt the message that he was trying to put 
across and when the subject matter of his address was 
emotional in character he could not control his tears. 

I would say that Roxas' ability as a speaker was most 
effective when he was facing audiences of say not more 
than 200 people. For on those occasions he did not have 
to raise his voice and he could speak in a more conversa- 
tional tone. His delivery was perfect, and the choice of 
the words, the phrases, and the sentences which he em- 
ployed to convey his message were so appropriate that, on 
such occasions, there was no one among his contemporaries 
who could equal him. 

Unfortunately, we do not have any records of Roxas’ 
experiences as a young lawyer to enable us to determine 
Avhat kind of a practitioner he was in his early days. We 
do have the record of a case, however, which he handled 
late in 1941 after his resignation from the Secretaryship 
of Finance, and it clearly shows how good he was as a brief 
writer. One day in September of that year, Don Vicente 
Singson Encarnacion, then president of the Insular Life 
Assurance Company called at our office. He requested us 
to appear before the Supreme Court and plead for the i-e- 
consideration of a decision which that tribunal had recent- 
ly promulgated requiring his company to pay the proceeds 
of a life insurance policy to the beneficiaries named therein. 
The amount* of money which the defendant company was 
ordered to pay the plaintiffs was not large, but the prin- 
ciple involved in the case was extremely important to the 
future activities of all life insurance companies. 



[ 134 ] 



It seems that an agent of the Insular Life had ap- 
proached a certain Evaristo Feliciano to suggest that he 
apply for a life insurance policy. Feliciano frankly told 
the agent that he was suffering from tuberculosis. The 
agent, however, who was anxious to win a prize which the 
company had offered to the one who could obtain the gp'eat- 
est number of policies within a limited period, nevertheless 
induced Feliciano to sign the application for insurance. 
Printed in small letters on this application form appeared 
a statement to the effect that the applicant considered him- 
self to be in good health. There was no evidence to pi’oye 
that Feliciano had read this statement before signing the 
application. The application also contained a space in 
blank to be filled in by the company doctor after he had 
examined the applicant. The agent, however, connived 
with the company doctor and induced him to submit a re- 
port to the effect that the applicant, Evaristo Feliciano, 
was in good health. A policy was thereupon duly issued 
by the company. 

Feliciano died shortly afterwards and the beneficia- 
ries, who were his children, demanded payment. The in- 
surance company, having subsequently discovered the de- 
ception played by its own doctor and agent, refused to pay 
and offered instead to retiu'n the premiums. The benefi- 
ciaries sued the company in the Court of First Instance. 
The court awarded judgment in favor of the plaintiffs. 
The defendant company appealed but the Court of Appeals 
unanimously confirmed the decision of the trial court. The 
insurance company thereupon brought the case to the Su- 
preme Court. Extensive briefs and oral arguments were 
submitted by the company’s lawyers, but our highest tri- 
bunal, by a vote of six to three, confirmed the decision of 
the Court of Appeals. The majority justices were of the 
opinion that since the company’s agent and the company’s 
medical examiner knew all the time tlie true state of health 
of the applicant Evaristo Feliciano, and since it was the 



[IBS] 



insuring company who gave the agent authority to deal 
with the applicant thus implying that the applicant could 
put his trust on the agent who drafted and accepted the 
application and consummated the contract, it was but fair 
that, as between the company and the beneficiaries of the 
policy, the one who employed and gave character to the 
agent should be the one to bear the loss. The Supreme 
Court admitted that its decision might in the future lead 
to fraud and work hardship on insm-ance companies be- 
cause applicants in poor health might connive with the 
agents and doctors of insurance companies and thus ob- 
tain insurance policies which would not otherwise be is- 
sued had the company known the exact condition of the 
applicant’s health. Nevertheless the court concluded : “This 
simply means that the companies should exercise greater 
care in selecting their agents and doctors. Their protec- 
tion is still in their own hands and may be achieved by 
other means.” 

As every practicing lawyer knows, the probabilities of 
getting the Supi-eme Court to reverse its decision on a mo- 
tion for reconsideration are perhaps one in one thousand, 
especially when it is evident that the learned justices have 
already given considerable study to the issues involved. In 
this particular case the ponente was Associate Justice Jose 
P. Laui’el, and he had written a long and carefully worded 
decision in favor of the beneficiaries of the policy. Never- 
theless Roxas accepted the case because he was convinced 
that the Supreme Court’s decision was wrong in principle. 
He confided to me that he wanted very much to win this 
case because he wished to prove at that late stage of his 
career that he was really a good lawyer. Our entire office 
force, of course, assisted him in digging up more jurispru- 
dence on the subject, but it was Roxas himself who dic- 
tated and revised the 150-page motion for reconsideration 
which we subsequently filed. In the course of his argu- 
ments, not only did Roxas develop new lines of thought 



[ 136 ] 



which the Court had overlooked, but he conveyed his ideas 
across in so convincing a manner that the Supreme Court 
reversed itself and rendex'ed a decision in favor of the In- 
sular Life Assurance Company absolving it from any liabil- 
ity whatsoever. 

All students of law and, for that matter, any practi- 
tioner today, will be stimulated by a reading of the memo- 
randum filed by Roxas in that case. It is entitled “The 
Insular Life Assurance Co., petitioner v. Serafin D. Feli- 
ciano et al., respondents.” The original decision of the 
Court penned by Justice Laurel in favor of the beneficia- 
ries can be found in Volume 73, Philippine Repox*ts, page 
201, while the subsequent decision of the same court x'e- 
versing its px*evious holding appeax's in Volume 74, Philip- 
pine Repox'ts, page 468. 

Throughout Roxas’ entix*e political career there was a 
never-ending stream of visitors in his house. Many of them 
arrived befox'e eight in the morning, and those whom Roxas 
could not see before px'oceeding to his office in the Legis- 
lature or in the Department of Finance Building wex*e thei'e 
again in the afternooxx. Most of these visitors wanted jobs 
or favors of one sox*t or another. A public elective official 
indeed has to have considerable patience and stamina to 
go through the ordeal of having to satisfy or pacify in 
some form or another these nevex’-ending requests. 

Like every other public man occupying a position of 
importance, Roxas also received numerous invitations to 
social affairs and he had to devote much time to these ob- 
ligations. As a rule he did not enjoy them. Roxas liked 
to dance and he was, in fact, a very graceful dancer, but 
unless his partner was equally as good, he preferred to 
remain in the side lines. Thus, in the big social events 
where most of the women present were elderly matrons 
who were no longer as lithesome as they had been in yeax’s 



[ 137 ] 



gone by, Roxas tried to be as incoiispicuous as possible. 
He would go off to a corner of the ballroom there to chat 
with business friends or with some of his colleagues in 
public life. Whenever he did find himself in the company 
of younger people however, Roxas really had a good time. 
“I enjoy chatting or dancing with young women,” he frank- 
ly explained to me, “because it makes me feel young too.” 

It was on one of these occasions, however, that a pretty 
university coed inadvertently made Roxas realize his age. 
There was a reception given by the University of the Phil- 
ippines College of Engineering in the roof garden of the 
old Engineering Building on Florida street. Roxas at- 
tended the party by himself. There was one particular 
coed whom he singled out early in the evening and, as 
soon as he had been properly introduced, he asked her for 
a dance. The girl was thrilled at the idea of dancing with 
so prominent a public figure. She proved to be an excel- 
lent dancer and Roxas was enchanted with his pai-tner. 
He said not a word as he held her in his ai-ms and glided 
efffortlessly around the ballroom floor. The girl evidently 
was thinking hard as to what appropriate remark she 
should say after the dance. When the music ended and 
Roxas was escorting his partner to her seat, the pretty 
little coed turned to him and said : “Sir, for a man of your 
age you really dance quite well,” Roxas subsequently re- 
lated this incident to his friends, adding that never through- 
out his long political career did he feel so old as he did on 
that particular evening. 

Although Roxas was very fond of playing golf, he sel- 
dom had enough time on his hands to enjoy this game. He 
was a good horseman and he certainly would have liked to 
purchase a horse but even in those days it was a luxury to 
own a good saddle horse and Roxas simply could not afford 
it. His principal relaxation, therefore, during the three 
years preceding the outbreak of the war consisted of long 



[1383 



morning walks on Dewey Boulevard. He would pick me 
up as early as six-thirty or seven and, together, we would 
walk all the way to the Depai'tment of Finance Building 
in Intramuros. Thus we reached the office long before 
any employees got thei*e, except perhaps the janitors who 
could not help but be surprised whenever they saw the 
Secretary of Finance arrive at such an early hour. Occa- 
sionally in the evenings Roxas would play poker with Que- 
zon, Alunan, Aquino, Placido Mapa, and others. His knowl- 
edge of human character and his ability to bluff when ne- 
cessary enabled him to win more often than he lost. But 
sometimes he would lose and, lacking the cash with which 
to settle accounts immediately, he found it necessary to 
turn to me for a loan. But he never failed to pay back 
every centavo he borrowed. 

If Roxas had had more time at his disposal, he would 
have also devoted more attention to fishing and hunting, 
for he loved the sea and the outdoor life. Late in 1936, 
while we wei'e practicing law together, Roxas, Benigno 
Aquino, and I went to the Zambales mountains on horse- 
back accompanied by a mining engineer to examine cex’tain 
manganese claims which were reputed to contain valuable 
deposits. It was a whole-day trip and Roxas easily con- 
vinced us not only that he was an experienced rider but 
that he thoroughly enjoyed such an outing. While we were 
in the mountains we took the opportunity to hunt deer 
and wild boar, and Roxas also proved that he was a good 
rifleman. 

His love of horses should have led him to frequent 
more often the races in Manila. But he did not wish to 
be seen there as it might encourage government employees 
to also attend these racing establishments and to gamble 
more than they could afford. Whenever Roxas was in 
W'ashington, however, he frequently went to the racing 
meetings at the Pimlico and Havre-de-grasse Clubs in Mary- 



[ 139 ] 



land both of whose tracks were within motoring distance 
from the Capitol, There he showed to all of us that he 
knew horses well, for he picked many winners and he was 
invariably ahead in the betting. Or perhaps it was merely 
Dame Fortune bestowing on Roxas special consideration 
for his lack of funds from other sources. 

Successful men in public life frequently long for the 
quiet and the peace which a family man enjoys and wdiich 
is usually denied public figures. President Quezon, for 
example, once told me that he regretted having remained 
in politics for so long a period and that he would have 
preferred practicing law after his return to the Philip- 
pines from Washington in 1916. Roxas also frequently 
confided to his intimate friends that his idea of happiness 
was to live and work on a farm where he could have the 
leisure and the time to read good books and enjoy the 
company of his children. While we were in Washington 
he assured us that he was a good cook and, to prove it, he 
occasionally donned an apron and prepared a sukiyaki din- 
ner in the kitchenette of the hotel where we were staying. 

As I have already indicated several times, Roxas never 
had much money. This was a severe handicap and occa- 
sionally caused him embarrassment and humiliation. In 
1940, for example, he realized that his daughter Ruby, who 
was soon to celebrate her eighteenth birthday, was entitled 
to have a coming-out party. He wanted very much to honor 
his beloved daughter with a large dinner dance but he 
simply did not have the cash with which to pay for it. He 
therefore requested me to interview the manager of the 
Manila Hotel and ask if arrangements could be made for 
the holding of a big reception to be paid for in instalments. 
When I confided to the manager the name of the man who 
wanted to give such a party, he of course gladly acceded 
to the proposed arrangement and a dinner dance honoring 
Ruby Roxas was held in the hotel's air-conditioned ball- 



[ 140 ] 



room. The affair was a huge success, for aside from the 
fact that Manila’s 400 considered it a privilege to attend 
the I’eception, Rubj* Avas a veiy attractive and popular girl. 
But it took Roxas many months to save enough money to 
finally settle accounts with the hotel. 

Why did a man with the talent, the ability, and the 
influence of Roxas never have enough cash at his disposal? 
The answer, of course, was simple. During his long public 
career as Speaker of the House of Representatives, as mem- 
ber of the Joint Preparatory Commission for Independence, 
as Secretary of Finance and chairman of numerous im- 
portant government instrumentalities, Roxas could not 
practice his legal profession. Nor did he consider it pi'o- 
per to engage directly or indii'ectly in any business acti- 
vities. He not only felt that the public was entitled to all 
the time and attention that he could give to their problems, 
but he was convinced that if he did engage in a business 
activity, or if he became the silent partner of some laAv 
firm, our people would feel that he Avas taking advantage 
of his position to enrich himself. It AA^as only during the 
years 1936 and early 1937 Avhen he Avas a mere Assembly- 
man and Ave Avere practicing laAV together that he really 
felt affluent, but the money he saved during that period 
did not last long. When he resigned the Secretaryship of 
Finance in August, 1941, and we reopened our laAv office, 
he began to earn sufficient money again, and if Avar had 
not broken out so soon he undoubtedly Avould have been 
able to build up a big practice. But, eai'ly on the morning 
of December 8, 1941, the Japanese air force attacked Pearl 
Harbor. World War II had broken out in dead earnest. It 
was also the beginning of the most important and decisive 
chapter in the public career of Manuel Roxas. 



[ 141 ] 




(;;;v LTHOUGH Roxas was no longer occupying an execu- 
tive position in the government, he was among the 
first to be notified of Japan’s treacherous attack on Pearl 
Harbor. His first thoughts were of his daughter Ruby 
who, having recently recovered from influenza, was con- 
valescing in the Tagaytay Ridge Hotel accompanied by my 
wife. Thus it was that, very early on the morning of 
December 8th I received a telephone call from Roxas in- 
forming me of the outbreak of the war and i*equesting me 
to go to Tagaytay immediately and bring back his daughter 
to Manila. Roxas had foreseen that the Japanese would 
make large scale landings in the Philippines and the shores 
of Batangas province were among the sites where they 
might conceivably make their first attempt. 

Later that same day, being a member of the reserve 
forces, Roxas immediately reported for duty with the 
USAFFE. He was given the rank of Lieutenant Colonel 
and assigned to duty as aide to General MacArthur. But 
Lieutenant Colonel Roxas was to be a far more important 
man than his silver oak leaves might seem to warrant. 
Fully aware of his Filipino aide’s versatility, MacArthur 
entrusted Roxas with missions beyond the usual assign- 
ments given to such officers. His official designation was 
liaison officer between the USAFFE and the Common- 
wealth Government but, in reality, he was the personal ad- 
viser and confidant of both Quezon and MacArthur. He 
attended President Quezon’s Cabinet meetings and there 
was no doubt that the close collaboration that existed be- 
tween our Commonwealth President and the American 
Commanding General during those confused and perilous 



[ 142 ] 



days was in lai'ge part due to Roxas’ tactful inteiwention. 
Although he naturally had to give up his law practice 
there were a few odds and ends that he still had to take 
care of and, once in awhile, he managed to find time to 
come to our law office to look after our clients’ interests. 

As the Japanese ai'my began closing in towards Ma- 
nila from two directions, the question of President Que- 
zon’s evacuation from the capital was discussed by the 
Cabinet. klacArthur and Roxas attended this meeting 
and it was the former who suggested that Quezon should 
go to Cori*egidor. At first Quezon was reluctant to leave 
believing it was his duty to remain with his people but 
Roxas pointed out the merits of MacArthur’s suggestion 
and our President, thereupon, decided to follow it. 

A few hours before Quezon’s departure for Cori-egi- 
dor another Cabinet meeting was held. One of the mem- 
bers present asked the President for instructions as to 
what they should do if and when the enemy occupied Ma- 
nila. Quezon replied that he had discussed the matter pri- 
vately with General MacArthur and, in agi'eement with 
him, his instructions were that all govex*nment officials 
should remain at their posts until the Japanese should de- 
cide otherwise. “You should do your best to help avoid 
disorders and mitigate the sufferings of the civilian popu- 
lation,’’ said Quezon. “There is just one thing you must 
refuse to do. You must never take an oath of allegiance to 
Japan.’’ 

Early in the afternoon of December 24th, Quezon ac- 
companied by his wife and children, Vice-President Osme- 
na and Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos left for Corregidor. 
Just exactly why Mrs. Osmena was left behind has never 
been satisfactorily explained. There certainly was room 
enough for her in Corregidor. Roxas was supposed to go 
also but he said he would do so later for he wanted very 
much to see his family. The day war broke out Mrs. Ro- 



[ 143 ] 



i 



xas, who was extremely neiwous, accompanied by her chil- 
dren, had evacuated to Sibul Springs in Bulacan. Since 
the Japanese who had landed in Lingayen were making 
their way towards Manila however, and as the area near 
Sibul Springs was directly in their path, Roxas had sent 
his car to fetch his family. 

I was with Roxas until nearly six o’clock that evening. 
He paced the floor in deep thought but, as another hour 
dragged by he felt that he could no longer w'ait for his 
family. We shook hands solemnly. I shall never forget 
what he told me as we parted because it disclosed that he 
was one of the very few in Manila at that time who real- 
ized what a long ordeal lay ahead of us. One must remem- 
ber that even as late as December 24, 1941, not only the 
rank and file, but even most of the top officials in our 
government and in our army were very optimistic and 
sincerely believed that the mighty forces of the United 
States would quickly stem the tide of battle. We were of 
the impression that the USAFFE was retreating to Ba- 
taan only as part of a delaying action pending the arrival 
of reinforcements from America. We all believed in those 
days that the war in the Philippines would at most last a 
few months. But when Roxas shook hands with me, he 
said, “Goodbye, Marcial, this is going to be a very long war. 
God only knows what is in store for all of us.’’ Then he 
boarded the launch that ferried General MacArthur and 
the other members of his staff to Corregidor. 

During the siege of Corregidor Island and Bataan 
peninsula Roxas made several trips to the front lines. Our 
fighting USAFFE men were inspired to see a top rank- 
ing official of our govei'nment in battle uniform sharing 
the dangers of enemy fire with them. When food supplies 
began to run short Roxas was assigned the difficult task 
of replenishment. It so happened that among the Philip- 
pine interisland ships which had escaped Japanese bomb- 



[144] 



ings was the “Legaspi” of the La Naviera Line. She was 
docked in Corregidor with Captain Luis Conejero in com- 
mand. There was another veteran maritime officer in that 
island fortress also, namely, Captain Jose Amoyo who was 
very familiar with the waters between Manila and the Vi- 
sayan islands. Roxas prevailed upon Conejero and Amoyo 
to try to run the blockade with the “Legaspi” and proceed 
to Capiz where they could obtain plenty of rice. He of- 
fered to join the expedition but both Quezon and Mac- 
Arthur would not allow him to take the risk since his 
presence in Corregidor and Bataan was more important. 

The Governor of Capiz at that time was Gabriel K. 
Hernandez, a first cousin of Roxas, and a radiogram was 
sent to him to prepare the supplies. By traveling only 
at night and seeking refuge near wooded shorelines during 
the daytime, the “Legaspi” managed to reach Capiz. She 
loaded 17,000 sacks of rice and returned safely to Corre- 
gidor. The two courageous skippers were immediately 
awarded distinguished sei’vice medals by General MacAr- 
thur while Roxas was promoted to the rank of full Colonel. 
A second successful trip resulted in bringing back to the 
island forteess 30,000 more sacks of rice and corn and 
these food supplies undoubtedly helped prolong the resist- 
ance of our armed forces there. The third attempt, how- 
ever, proved fatal. The “Legaspi” was sighted by Japanese 
war ships which proceeded to shell her. The crew took to 
the life boats and made off for the nearest island. Three 
Filipino sailors were lost in this encounter. 

It was at this time also that President Quezon had a 
brain storm which present day writers have preferred to 
say as little as possible about but which incident is fully 
supported by the records. Quezon proposed to General 
MacArthur that he (Quezon) should return to Manila on 
condition that both the United States and Japan would re- 
cognize the neutrality of the Philippines and permit the 



[ 145 ] 



Filipino soldiers to return to their homes. To Quezon’s im- 
pulsive nature such a solution appeared then as a simple 
way out of the desperate situation in which his country- 
men found themselves. But Roxas was more far sighted 
and clear headed. He knew that neither the Japanese nor 
the Americans would seriously consider such a plan and 
that the Filipino people themselves would not sanction it. 
He tried to dissuade Quezon from pressing it but the Pres- 
ident insisted on submiting his idea to President Roose- 
velt. Sure enough, as Roxas had anticipated, Roosevelt 
replied that the Filipino soldiers could lay down their arms 
and go home if they wished to but that the American troops 
would continue fighting to the bitter end. 

Later on as the Japanese attacks were intensified 
President Roosevelt sent another radiogram to Quezon sug- 
gesting that the Filipino President go to Washington and 
there set up a refugee government. General MacArthur 
supported the proposal and Quezon decided to follow it. 
He wanted Roxas to accompany him to America but Roxas 
felt that if both the President and Vice-President of the 
Philippines were to leave the islands, it was his duty to 
remain behind so that our soldiers in the firing lines would 
not feel that their leaders had forsaken them. He, there- 
fore prevailed on Quezon to allow him to remain behind a 
while longer saying that he would join the presidential 
party later. 

Taking advantage of the law which the Philippine Con- 
gress had hastily approved shortly after the outbreak of 
the war conferring extensive legislative emergency powers 
on the President, President Quezon before leaving Corre- 
gidor signed two important executive orders. In the first 
he conferred on Roxas the presidential powers of govern- 
ment to be exercised during his and Osmena’s absence from 
the Philippines. In the second executive order, Quezon 
provided that should he and Osmena die or become incapa- 



[ 146 ] 



citated, Roxas would exercise the powers of the Px*esident 
until a successor could be duly elected. 

On February 20th Quezon and his party boarded an 
American submarine for the fii'st lap of their historic 
journey. Foi'ty-eight hours later they arrived in San Jose, 
Antique. The trip had been so unbearably hot and un- 
comfortable that Quezon was unwilling to continue to Aus- 
tralia. He and his pax'ty, therefore, drove from San Jose 
to Iloilo and, travelling in slow stages by car and launch, 
they made their way first to San Carlos, Negros Occidental, 
and, finally, to Bais where they remained for the next few 
weeks. The American submarine reiurned to Corregidor 
to pick up the American High Commissioner and members 
of his family for their long underwater trip to the United 
States. 

On March 12th General MacArthur, in compliance with 
instructions received fi*om President Roosevelt, also left 
Corregidor with his family aboard three PT boats. They 
made a successful dash to Mindanao where they boarded 
a plane for Melbourne, Australia. General Wainwright 
was left in command of America’s forces in the Philippines. 
Four days later, or on March 16th, Major Andres Soriano 
arrived in Bais with a letter from MacArthur urging Que- 
zon to continue on to Melbourne as soon as possible. Very 
early the following morning therefore, Quezon and his 
party, using one of the PT boats which MacArthur had 
employed on his trip to Mindanao, left Bais for Oroquieta 
from where they motored to Dansalan. There Quezon pre- 
pared a telegram for MacArthur stating that it was high 
time for Roxas to leave Corregidor for he was too valuable 
a man to risk in that belligerent island fortress. He also 
said that Roxas could be very useful and very valuable in 
the United States. The Commonwealth President concluded 
his message by asking MacArthur to send instructions to 
Corregidor ordering Roxas to proceed to Australia. 



[ 147 ] 



Quezon’s radiogram was sent from Dansalan to the 
GHQ Signal Corp in Corregidor to be in turn relayed on 
to MacArthur’s headquarters in Melbourne. Had the mes- 
sage been forwarded to Australia without any further 
delay it is most likely that Roxas would have had no other 
alternative but to obey the instructions of his superior of- 
ficer. But destiny intervened in the person of General 
Beebe. This American officer was at that time Chief of 
Staff in Corregidor. When he read Quezon’s radiogram 
he decided to show it to Roxas before forwarding it on to 
Melbourne. Roxas pleaded with General Beebe to with- 
hold the message and give him a chance to discuss its sub- 
ject matter with Quezon. He asked General Beebe also to 
send a radiogram to Quezon advising him of this request. 
The American General acceded and, in due course, received 
a reply from Quezon instructing him to withhold the radio- 
gram for General MacArthur and instead to send Roxas 
to Dansalan for a conference. 

Thus it was that on March 22, Roxas left Coi'regidor 
for Mindanao assuring his companions, however, that he 
would be back. The only means of transportation avail- 
able to him at the time was an old 2-passenger Bellanca 
that had no armament whatsoever and was not even equip- 
ped with a radio. In this rickety single engine plane Roxas 
and his pilot managed to elude Japanese aircraft on patrol. 
They landed first in Iloilo for refueling and then proceeded 
to Dansalan where they arrived at seven o’clock in the 
evening. 

In his meeting with Quezon, Roxas called the Pres- 
ident’s attention to the fact that General Sharp who was 
in command of the USAFFE forces in the southern islands 
needed his help because of the many problems that had to 
be solved there. The provincial governments were prac- 
tically without funds and were, furthermore, faced with 
evacuation and food problems. Roxas said he believed he 



[ 148 ] 



could be very useful in the islands for a few weeks longer 
at least. So Quezon finally gave in and agreed to let Ro- 
xas remain behind upon assurances that, as soon as it be- 
came too dangerous, he would take off for Australia. 

On March 26th three B-17’s from Australia landed in 
the Del Monte airfield to fly President Quezon’s pai*ty to 
Melbourne. They left at eleven o’clock that night. Que- 
zon and Roxas shook hands and embraced each other, nei- 
ther of them realizing then that it was to be a fai'ewell 
for they were never again to set eyes on one another. 

After Quezon’s departure Roxas made a tour of the 
provinces in Mindanao and the Visayan islands to help 
build up the morale of the soldiers and civilians stationed 
or living in those areas, as well as to advise the provin- 
cial governments I'egarding the distribution of food sup- 
plies and the building of evacuation camps. It was also 
necessai’y to print emergency paper money to be used dur- 
ing the critical weeks that were to follow. Wherever Roxas 
went he was received enthusiastically by the many thou- 
sands who were thrilled by his presence and encouraged 
by the example that he was setting before them. At Ba- 
colod City Roxas met Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos. The 
Chief Justice had been a member of President Quezon’s 
party from Corregidor but he separated from them in Ne- 
gros because he wished to check up on the activities of the 
Courts of First Instance in the Visayan provinces. It was 
a historic reunion because, as events later proved, Roxas 
was never again to see Santos. Our Chief Justice was 
later captured by the Japanese and summarily executed 
when he refused to cooperate with the puppet government 
which the Japanese were setting up in Manila. 

Roxas was unable to visit Cebu and Leyte for lack of 
transportation facilities. He, therefore, returned to Min- 
danao where he hoped to obtain a plane to fly him back to 



[ 149 ] 



Corregidor. In Dansalan he met Colonel Carlos Romulo 
who had just evacuated Corregidor on the first leg of his 
journey to Australia. Romulo brought with him orders 
from General Wainwright promoting Roxas to the rank of 
Brigadier General. 

Roxas could have joined Romulo on the flight to Aus- 
tralia but it was becoming evident more than ever that he 
was determined to remain behind not only as long as pos- 
sible but until the end of the war. He could not, however, 
return to Corregidor or Bataan because the airfields in 
those areas had been rendered useless by intensive enemy 
bombings, so he decided to remain with General Sharp in 
Mindanao. 



Bataan fell on April 9th, but neither Roxas nor Gen- 
eral Sharp were caught by surprise. Earlier GHQ reports 
from Corregidor had prepared them for this tragic news. 
Corregidor, of course, still remained but both Roxas and 
Sharp knew that it was but a matter of time before this 
stronghold would also capitulate. The American and Fili- 
pino generals thereupon intensified their plans to oppose 
the large scale Japanese landings that were momentarily 
expected in Mindanao. * Their strategy was to resist the 
landings for as long as possible and then withdraw to the 
hills of Bukidnon and Lanao where the region was ideal 
for jungle warfare. 

A few days after the surrender of Bataan a number of 
B-17’s arrived in the Del Monte airfield for refueling. They 
had come all the way from Australia to bomb Japanese 
concentrations in Bataan and the area surrounding Manila, 
after which they were to return to their bases. The bomb- 
ing group was headed by Colonel Gunn who brought with 
him a note from President Quezon asking Roxas to pro- 
ceed to Australia with the American bombers. In effect, 
Quezon told Roxas that there was no further excuse for 



[ 150 ] 



his remaining behind. After refueling in Del Monte the 
American bombers dropped their lethal cargo on the Jap- 
anese in Bataan and the suburbs of Manila but Japanese 
aircraft from Nichols Field immediately took to the air in 
pursuit and Colonel Gunn had to flee to Australia without 
making a stop-over at Del Monte to pick up Roxas. 



On the evening of April 29th two American amphi- 
bian planes were able to land in the waters surrounding 
Corregidor to evacuate some of the remaining important 
officials in that forti*ess as well as a number of American 
nurses. They took off very late at night and, early the 
following morning, they arrived on Lake Lanao near Dan- 
salan where General Roxas was on hand to greet the pas- 
sengers. At just about that time also strong Japanese 
forces ai'rived in Parang and began their march towaids 
Dansalan. Now was the time for Roxas to fly to Austra- 
lia. It was his last opportunity to leave but Roxas pei- 
sisted on his original plan of remaining with his people to 
the very end. Thus his last means of escape disappeared. 
As the amphibian planes rose from the waters of Lanao 
Lake bound for Australia, Roxas was left alone and on his 
own in Mindanao with the Japanese army closing in to- 
wards him from two directions. 



Leaving Dansalan by automobile and accompanied by 
Colonel Jose Razon and Lieutenant Manuel de Leon, Roxas 
drove on towards Bukidnon where he hoped to meet Gen- 
eral Sharp. He headed down the main road for Iligan first 
and then on to Cagayan de Misamis over the winding 
mountainous roads of the Bukidnon plateau. 
o’clock at night, April 30th, when Roxas and his staff 
knocked at the gates of Congressman Fortich s house in 
the little town of Dalirig, Bukidnon. Fortich who had been 
governor of his province and a member of Congiess, 
a close personal friend of Roxas. The paity remaine 
with Fortich four days during which Roxas was in cons- 



[ 151 ] 



tant communication with General Sharp who was making 
ready to give the Japanese battle along the hilly road that 
lead to the plateau. But the American General realized 
that he would not be able to hold out for long and he, 
therefore, tried to prevail on Roxas once more to evacuate 
to Australia. He offered to contact Genei-al MacArthur 
for the purpose of asking him to send one more plane for 
that purpose. But Roxas refused the offer and, two days 
later, he made up his mind to withdraw to the mountain 
fastnesses of Central Mindanao and engage in guerrilla 

warfare if and when the USAFFE army should be over- 
whelmed by the enemy, 

• finally fell on May 7th, 1942. General 

Wainwright who had succeeded MacArthur as Commander- 
m-Chief of the USAFFE, was brought to Manila by the 
Japanese from where he issued his historic broadcast ad- 
ressed to all the officers under his command including 
ose in the Visayas and Mindanao instructing them to 
surrender for otherwise the Japanese would annihilate the 
forces in Corregidor as well as all other USA- 
r FE umts who refused to give up. At first General Sharp 
was disinclined to obey General Wainwright's order believ- 
mg that his superior officer was acting under duress. A 
ew days later, however, more Japanese forces landed in 
Mindanao in even greater numbers and succeeded in pierc- 
ng t e USAFFE lines. Furthermore, a personal American 
missary from General Wainright who had been flown by 
the Japanese to the south was able to contact General 
bliarp to whom he explained that Wainwright’s orders 
were genuine and should be obeyed. Sharp therefore de- 
cided to surrender and, with his men, proceeded to a camp 
in Malaybalay which the Japanese had designated as the 
area where USAFFE troops should congregate for the 
purpose of laying down their arms. 



[ 152 ] 



When Roxas leai’ned of this unexpected turn of events 
he gathered a few Filipino officers around him to whom 
he explained his plans for their flight to the mountains. 
The members of his personal staff tried to dissuade their 
chief. They pointed out that the dangers that would be- 
set them were too great for a man of his position and age. 
There was always the possibility of his contracting malaria 
or some other ti'opical disease which might prove fatal 
for lack of proper medical attention. There was always 
the danger of an attack by bands of roving Moro high- 
waymen or of a sudden encounter with enemy patrols. Fur- 
thermore, Roxas would always run the risk of being recog- 
nized wherever he went and the Japanese would no doubt 
put a very high price on his head. But Roxas stubbornly 
insisted on going ahead with his plans. So with the help 
of air corp officers who for lack of airplanes had turned 
into supply men, a number of carabaos wei’e loaded with 
rice, sugar, salt, canned beef, bedding, guns, ammunition, 
and other supplies sufficient to last Roxas and his party 
for at least four months. 

At two o’clock in the morning of May 9th, the party 
started off. Roxas was on horseback and with the Mayor 
of the municipality of Pangantakan as guide, and Lieuten- 
ant De Leon as escort, the three men preceded their fol- 
lowers towards the so-called Pangantakan mountains be- 
tween Lanao and Bukidnon. Half way to their goal, how- 
ever, Roxas spent the night on the fringe of the woods at 
Lurugan. News had reached him that the Japanese were 
greatly dissatisfied with the situation in Mindanao because 
out of approximately 30,000 USAFFE men there less than 
7,000 had surrendered and the Japanese were thi'eatening 
reprisals. Roxas feared that, if he persisted in his plans 
to flee to the mountains and engage in guerrilla warfare, 
the Japanese would intensify their efforts to capture him 
as a result of which the civilian population in that island 
would suffer. He believed also that if he surrendered and 



[ 153 ] 



was imprisoned in camp his presence would lift the morale 
of his defeated forces, and he might, furthei'more, be able 
to do something to ameliorate their condition and their 
sufferings. These thoughts ran through his mind in camp 
that evening. 

When dawn came his mind was made up and he an- 
nounced his decision to the members of his staff. He or- 
dered Lieutenant De Leon and Colonel Razon to ride off 
with him to the nearest town from where he hoped to be 
able to contact General Sharp. The next day, unannounced 
and unnoticed Roxas and his aides entered the Malaybalay 
prison camp where they found General Sharp. The Jap- 
anese had not yet had time to supeiwise this camp — Whence 
Roxas was able to walk in with no one getting wise to it. 

After conferring with the American General, Roxas 
decided to remain and his magnetic personality and inborn 
leadership were soon immediately felt. It was natural, of 
course, that the Filipino prisoners of war should look upon 
him as their top man. Aside from the fact that he was the 
highest ranking Filipino officer, the Filipinos realized that 
he had joined them of his own volition and that he had 
done so because he wished to share with the men of the 
armed forces the trying ordeal which lay ahead of them. 
But the American officers and enlisted men in the prison 
camp also soon came to regard him highly, and even the 
Japanese in charge of the camp began to show Roxas cer- 
tain considerations. The Japanese did not, at that time, 
know exactly who he was because the camp commander 
had not yet made a list of all his prisoners. But they 
were attracted to Roxas by his personality, by his ability 
to command the respect of both friend and foe, and they 
instinctively felt that he was a leader of his people. 

Let us pause here a moment and see what was happen- 
ing in Manila. After the fall of Bataan and Corregidor 



[ 154 ] 



the Japanese Military Authorities learned that Roxas had 
not left the Philippines with President Quezon and that, 
in all probability, he was hiding in the mountains of Min- 
danao. They, therefore, sent word to their Mindanao com- 
mand to look for Roxas in that area. They did not know, 
however, that he had recently been promoted to the rank 
of Brigadier General. They still believed he was a Colonel. 
One must also remember that it is difficult, if not impos- 
sible, to write Filipino, Spanish and American names in 
Japanese. In order to simplify their language as well as 
to be able to send messages by radio or telegi'aph, the Jap- 
anese have invented a so-called Katakana alphabet. But 
even with this alphabet the closet that the Japanese could 
get to imitate the name or sound of Roxas was to use three 
symbols, one pi-onounced RO, another pronounced HA, and 
the third pronounced SHU. Therefore, the name of Roxas 
would have to be written RO-HA-SHU. Thus, the instruc- 
tions which were sent to the Japanese Mindanao command 
wei’e to find Colonel Rohashu, to convince him to join the 
Philippine Executive Commission which the Japanese au- 
thorities had set up in Manila and, if he did not comply, 
then to execute him. 

A few days after Roxas entered the Malaybalay prison 
camp, the Japanese commander summoned all the Filipino 
officers and asked whether there was an officer among 
^hem by the name of Colonel RO-KA-SHU. It seems that 
somewhere between Manila and Malaybalay the telegi’aph 
message conveying the name Ro-ha-su had been garbled. 
HA had been changed to KA. Hence, the request for a Fi- 
lipino officer by the name of RO-EA.-SHU. Of course, 
there was no one in the prison camp with a name sound- 
ing like that. As a matter of fact, at that time there was 
only one Filipino colonel there and his name was Colonel 
Baclig. That was too far to fill the bill for Colonel Roka- 
shu. The only man whose name might possibly come any- 



[ 155 ] 



where like it was, of course, General Roxas but then he was 
a General not a Colonel, and so the Japanese commander 
was politely informed by his Filipino prisonei's that there 
was no Colonel Rokashu among them. 

But Roxas’ identity as a war prisoner did not remain 
unknown for long. A few days later an order was received 
in camp to the effect that all the Filipinos should line up 
for inspection. But this was not to be a mere routinary 
check up. It seems that when war broke out on December 
8, 1941, Japanese civilians living in Mindanao, particular- 
ly in Davao, were arrested and placed in concentration 
camps with Philippine Constabulary soldiers detailed to 
guard them. After the Japanese forces successfully occu- 
pied Mindanao and released their countiTmen from the in- 
ternment camps, many of the latter complained that they 
had been cruelly mistreated by some of the Constabulary 
soldiers on guard during their period of confinement. A 
group of these Japanese civilians had, therefore, been sent 
to the Malaybalay prison camp to identify if possible the 
Filipino guards who had allegedly manhandled them. This 
was the object of the inspection. 

As the Japanese civilians passed or walked in front of 
the war prisoners they pointed out from time to time men 
whom they believed were the Constabulary warden who 
had mistreated them. These Filipinos were ordered to step 
out of the line for further investigation. Many of them 
were never heard of again. 

Among the Japanese civilians who were thus inspect- 
ing the Filipino prisoners of war was a certain Mr. Sato, 
an old Davao resident whom Roxas had met socially many 
years before the war when he was still Speaker of the 
House of Representatives. Mr. Sato walked by Roxas with- 
out recognizing him at first but, when about ten feet away, 
he suddenly turned around and took another good look at 



[ 166 ] 



the Filipino prisoner. His face beamed with satisfaction 
as he recognized Roxas. He walked towards him and ex- 
tended his hand. “Oh! Mr. Speaker,” he said, “how are 
you?” Then Mr. Sato turned to the Japanese officei's and 
there immediately followed an excited chat between them. 
It was very clear that Mr. Sato was impressing upon his 
countrymen the importance of this particular Filipino pri- 
soner of war. I 

Soon after the inspection was over a Japanese officer 
appeared in the nipa shack housing General Roxas and told 
him to report to the commandant’s headquarters. There 
Roxas was informed that, in the very near future, he would 
be taken to the Imperial Japanese Headquarters in Davao. 
The very near future turned out to be almost immediately 
for at six o’clock the following morning another Japanese 
officer appeared at Roxas' shack and told him to get ready 
to leave at once for Davao. Roxas packed a few of his be- 
longings and was gone in fifteen minutes. He was driven 
to Davao City there to meet the Japanese officer who had 
been entrusted with the mission of convincing Roxas to 
join the Japanese sponsored government in Manila and, if 
be refused to do so, to have him executed. The man upon 
whom the mission of convincing Roxas befell was a cer- 
tain Colonel Nobuhiko Jimbo, a professional soldier and 
Chief of Staff of the Mindanao conmiand. He was a be- 
spectacled bald headed serious looking man in his early for- 
ties. And, fortunately for the Filipino people, he was one 
of the few high ranking Japanese officers who, some years 
before, had forsaken Buddhism to follow instead the teach- 
ings of Christianity. 



/ 



[ 157 ] 



(Sliafoiey 1 4 



e OLONEL JIMBO received Roxas cordially. He did not 
speak English fluently enough and, therefore, had to 
make use of an interpreter. He urged the Filipino leader 
to join the Philippine Executive Commission on which the 
Japanese military authorities had ostensibly vested the 
powers of civil government. He told Roxas that the Jap- 
anese considered him a patriot of the very highest calibre, 
that they recognized he had fought them because he coii- 
sidez*ed it his duty to do so, but now that the Imperial 
Forces had completely ousted the Americans from Philip- 
pine soil it was the duty of all Filipinos to join together 
and help restore peace and order. Surely, said Colonel 
Jimbo, Roxas should realize these facts, and his love for 
country should induce him to welcome the opportunity of 
serving his people once more through the government 
which the Japanese Military Administration had set up in 
Manila. 

Roxas was equally polite in answering Colonel Jimbo. 
"Everything you have said,” replied Roxas, “may be true, 
but please remember that I am an officer in uniform and 
as long as the war continues in its present stage I cannot 
serve the Japanese, directly or indirectly, without being 
false to my oath as a soldier. Furthermore, I am a pri- 
soner of war and, as such, I cannot be forced to sei*ve with 
any organization created by the Japanese military author- 
ities.” 

Colonel Jimbo countered by saying that, in the re- 
habilitation of the Philippines, there was need of coopera- 
tion by the very best talent available among Filipinos and 
that he, Roxas, was second only to Quezon. Roxas replied 



[ 158 ] 



that the Japanese authorities had already obtained the 
service of many capable Filipino leaders, such as Laurel, 
Recto, Aquino, Alunan, and others. “But you are the 
Filipino with the greatest prestige in your country,” 
said Colonel Jimbo. Roxas had a ready reply. “I am 
very much flattei'ed. Colonel, but if I enjoy gi*eat prestige 
it is because I have not joined the Philippine Executive 
Commission. Should I join the organization which you 
have established in Manila I would lose the prestige which 
I now have and I would no longer be able to command 
the respect of my people.” 

This give and take melodrama lasted for three days 
with the Japanese Chief of Staff trying doggedly to break 
down Roxas’ resistance. At the end of the long drawn 
out debate Colonel Jimbo realized that he could not bi*eak 
Roxas, but instead of feeling angry or bitter towards his 
Filipino prisoner Jimbo had nothing but admiration and 
respect for him. He was not yet ready to give up how- 
ever, nor could he bring himself to cany out the second 
part of the order which he had received from Manila. 
For Jimbo was frankly shocked at the idea that death 
should be imposed on a Filipino prisoner of war, much 
less a general who had surrendered to the Japanese army. 
Writing in his memoirs of this incident. Colonel Jimbo 
says, “A great man had fallen into my hands dependent 
on the fairness and justice of our army. An order secret- 
ly to kill a prisoner who had surrendered was clearly 
against international law as well as the principles of the 
Japanese Imperial Anny. I resolved to do what I could to 
prevent such a miscarriage of justice.” 

At that time the Japanese troops in Mindanao con- 
sisted of an army corps commanded by Major General 
Torao Ikuta whose Chief of Staff was Colonel Jimbo. 
Jimbo, therefore, conferred with Ikuta and convinced him 
that the contemplated execution of Roxas was without 



[ 159 ] 



military justification. He asked also that the prisoner 
be delivered to his pei’sonal custody until further order’s. 
Ikuta yielded. The Japanese Colonel then picked up Roxas 
together with another war prisoner, a former governor 
from Mindanao, and drove off with them followed by a 
truck-load of Japanese soldiers. The two Filipinos thought 
that their fatal hour had come. Continuing with his 
memoirs. Colonel Jimbo adds: “The Filipino governor 
pleaded with me. T am an innocent civilian admin- 
istrator,’ he explained. T have not resisted the Jap- 
anese army by force. Do not take me to the execution 
grounds.’ But Roxas remained calm, dignified and com- 
posed. He patted his countryman on the shoulder and 
said gently, ‘Look over there. Governor, at the foot of Mt. 
Apo. How beautiful is the color of the sampaguita, our 
national flower.’ ” 

Instead of heading for the execution grounds how- 
ever, Colonel Jimbo who had already made up his mind 
to save Roxas, drove his prisoners to a hiding place which 
he had prepared in the Talmo district where the official 
quarters of the Furukawa Plantation Company were lo- 
cated. There he entrusted his prisoners to a certain Major 
Sumida. Before leaving. Colonel Jimbo shook hands with 
Roxas and, although neither man said a word, the silent 
handshake seemed to carry a great deal of understanding 
between them. As he drove his car back to Davao Colonel 
Jimbo realized that he had to choose between military 
discipline and humanity. He knew he was turning his 
back against the strict discipline of a soldier. It was a 
momentous occasion for him and a significant point in 
his life. 

Jimbo next sent a short telegram to Genei'al Hayashi, 
Chief of the Japanese Military Administration in Manila, 
stating that Roxas was still unconvinced about joining 
the Philippine Executive Commission. When this brief 



[ 160 ] 



message arrived in Manila General Hayashi took it for 
gi'anted that Roxas had been executed. He, thereupon, 
summoned two members of the Philippine Executive Com- 
mission to his office, namely, Jose B. Laurel and Benigno 
S. Aquino, and told them bluntly that Roxas had arrogant- 
ly refused to cooperate with the Japanese administration 
and, for that reason, he had been summarily executed. The 
Filipino officials were deeply gi'ieved, particularly Laurel 
who could not contain himself and who wept unashamedly. 
Within a few hours after they left Genei'al Hayashi’s of- 
fice, the news spread tlu’oughout the city that Roxas was 
dead. 

Not long afterwards however. Colonel Jimbo arrived 
in Manila by airplane resolved to state his case directly 
to the Commander-in-Chief, General Homma. He first ap- 
proached General Tokuji Wachi who was General Hom- 
ma’s right hand man. Wachi assured him that General 
Homma had never given any orders to execute Roxas. 
It later developed that it was General Hayashi alone who 
had issued the order in question. Thus Colonel Jimbo 
succeeded in having Roxas’ execution order rescinded. 

While Jimbo was in Manila however, the dreaded 
Japanese military police, or Kempei, in Davao decided 
to take a hand. They seized Roxas and took him to their 
headquarters where he was locked up in a small cell. 
There he was forced to sleep on the cement floor without 
a mat, a blanket, or even a mosquito net. It was very 
clear that the Kempei operatives were first trying to 
break his spirit. There followed harrowing experiences 
with the Kempei and, after the ordeal was over, Roxas 
had lost 30 pounds in weight. 

When Colonel Jimbo arrived in Davao and learned 
that, during his absence, Roxas had been taken away by 
the military police, he was, of course, enraged at their 



[ 161 ] 



interference. He secured the immediate return to him of 
his prisoner to whom he apologized most profusely. Then 
he had Roxas returned to Malaybalay in his own car 
with a Japanese officer and an interpreter as escorts. 

And so, approximately five weeks after he had been 
whisked away from his companions, Roxas returned to the 
prison camp. During the months that followed, Colonel 
Jimbo who had to fly to Manila from time to time made 
it a point to stop-over at Malaybalay to visit Roxas. These 
visits were most welcomed by all those who shared Roxas' 
quarters because Colonel Jimbo invariably brought some 
extra food for the occasion. Sometimes the Colonel even 
served as courier between Roxas and his companions and 
their relatives in Manila. When it is realized that author- 
ity in the Malaybalay prison camp was being exercised 
exclusively by another Japanese officer, namely, a certain 
Colonel Miyoshi, who was jealous of his own position 
and whose command was independent from Colonel Jim- 
bo’s, we can appreciate the risks which Jimbo was taking. 

It was during one of these visits that Colonel Jimbo 
expressed to members of Roxas' personal staff the very 
high regard which he had for their Filipino leader. In 
broken halting English Jimbo said, “General Roxas one 
man only one time in one thousand years in any coun- 
try.'' 



The first letter which I received from Roxas from 
the prison camp showed that his great concern was for 
his children. “My dear Marcial,” his letter read, “I hope 
you have been complying with my instructions about my 
children. Don't forget to visit them and bring them Avhat 
you can to make them less miserable than they must be. 
Tell Jessie to see my daughter and give her some sensible 
advice. I am most unhappy here but I have reached a 
point where I feel nothing about me matters anymore. I 



[ 162 ] 



am only thinking about my family and my country and 
those who have a share of mj* heart. I have suffered 
a lot and I can suffer more without flinching. I am not 
afraid to die for I know my country will be saved and 
those I love will be taken care of.” 

Before General Roxas’ return to Malaybalay the war 
prisoners in camp were very poorly organized. Since he 
was not attached to any of the units in Mindanao, Roxas 
and his aides took a shack in General Sharp’s headquarters 
area. But the Japanese soon decided that American and 
Filipino prisoners should be kept apart. A wire fence 
was thrown across the camp to mark the dividing line. 
The American prisoners were ordered to move to one side 
of the line Avhile Filipinos were instructed to take their 
places in the other. It did not take the prisoners long to 
obey the order. The entire transfer was, in fact, com- 
pleted in less than 48 hours for the process of moving 
consisted of shouldering a small cardboard box or canvas 
bag or bundle containing their worldly possessions and 
then walking across the line to the other side of the camp. 
Some of the Americans however who, with much ingenuity 
had already succeeded in making themselves comfortable, 
went to the extent of taking their nipa shacks across the 
line to their own area. 

As the ranking officer among the Filipino prisoners, 
Roxas was designated by the Japanese commander as chief 
of the area occupied by them. The Japanese knew that 
he was a recognized leader who could be trusted to keep 
the camp in order thus relieving them of many of the 
problems of administration. Except for guard duty, 
therefore, Roxas was given much leeway in determining 
the interior regulations and details of the camp. 

Roxas’ first concern was his men. The Malaybalay 
prison camp was located on an elevated plateau approxi- 



[ 163 ] 



mately 2,000 feet high. The nights were chilly and many 
men were inadequately provided with bedding. Roxas’ 
approach was characteristic of the simple way in which 
he always found a solution to difficult problems. He told 
his aides to instruct the men to line up one Saturday 
morning bringing with them all their worldly possessions 
and to place these before them on the gi'ound. At the 
appointed hour a thorough inspection was made by each 
unit commander and a list of each man’s belonging was 
noted. Then the men were dismissed. A few hours later 
Roxas summoned the men before him once moi’e. “I have 
ordered this morning’s inspection,” he said, “to find out 
who among you have more than you need and who among 
you do not have enough. It is our duty to help each other 
to the limit so that our common chance of survival will 
be greater. All those among you therefore who have more 
than you need should voluntarily part with what is not 
absolutely necessaiy in order that it may be divided among 
those who are in desperate need of more clothing.” The 
men soon saw the logic of the argument. That same 
afternoon Roxas’ quarters were littered with uniforms, 
blankets, bed sheets, mosquito bars and other items Avhich 
the men who had more than they needed voluntarily 
brought to him so that he might reissue them to their 
less fortunate brothei’s in camp. When this equipment 
was collected and reissued everyone found himself equipped 
with something. It was not very adequate, of coui'se, but 
it was better than what they had had before. One must 
also remember that in those days a prisoner who had 
two shirts was well-to-do and a man who had more than 
two shirts was a millionaire. 

Roxas’ efficient administration of the camp manifested 
itself in many other ways. For example, the hospital, or 
what was called a hospital for it was only an old bamboo 
nipa shack, was in very bad condition. There were gaping 
holes in the roof and along the sides. Under Roxas’ direc- 



[ 164 ] 



tion these were soon patched up. The kitchens were made 
cleaner and, through Roxas’ intervention, the Japanese even 
condescended to pipe water through the camp so that the 
prisoners were able to enjoy the luxury of running water 
to bathe themselves and wash their clothes. At Roxas’ 
request also the Japanese permitted them to open a small 
market where people from Malaybalay could bring what 
food was available to be sold at reasonable prices. Many 
women disposed of their wai’es for nothing for they had 
gone to the camp not to make money but to help the men 
there. Among those who frequented the market was a 
vei*y distinguished lady by the name of Remedios Ozamis 
de Fortich. She was the wife of the foirmer governor of 
that province. But forgetting her station in life she donned 
the clothes of a market vendor, complete with a basket 
on her head and, with her wares she would go to the camp 
and distribute what she had available to the men who were 
most in need. 

Roxas also knew that idleness is often conducive to 
mental depression and, in the case of war prisoners, even 
to desperation. He thei*efore considered it essential that 
his men be kept busy in such ways as would not only im- 
prove their mental attitude but also be of help to others 
in camp. Among the prisoners were men who, during 
their school days, had only been able to afford to go through 
the primary grades. So General Roxas rounded up those 
war prisoners who at one time had been school teachers 
and classes were organized where arithmetic, geography 
and Philippine history were taught. Most of the shoes 
worn by the prisoners were in very poor condition and 
many men w^ere, in fact, already barefooted. Roxas found 
two former shoemakers. He not only set up a small shoe 
repair shop but he encouraged some of the prisoners to 
learn the trade. Other men wei’e set to work making 
wooden slippers or “bakia.” There was a shortage of 
clothing in camp so Roxas found tailors to make “cami- 



[ 165 ] 



setas” and “calzoncillos” out of empty floui* sacks. The 
Japanese camp commander was so pleased with what Roxas 
was trying to accomplish that he coopei’ated in every way 
possible by furnishing some of the equipment necessary, 
such as needles, thread, scissors, two or three sewing ma- 
chines, nails, hammers, old discarded truck tires, writing 
paper, pencils, etc. 

Through General Roxas’ good offices also the Jap- 
anese authorities allowed the prisoners to engage in sports, 
such as basketball, volleyball, and even softball matches. 
At first games between American and Filipino teams were 
allowed but eventually the Japanese stopped it. As a re- 
sult of Roxas’ excellent administration the health record 
of the men in camp improved. There were never more 
than five or six men confined in the hospital at one time 
and most of them complained only of simple ailments. 

Late in September of 1942 the American prisoners 
were moved out of Malaybalay and transferred to Davao. 
They were given a few days’ warning and, between the 
date of the receipt of this notice and their departure, 
many of them came over singly oi* in groups to say good- 
bye to the man whom they had learned to admire so much. 
Roxas was very sad when he shook their hands for he 
felt that he would probably never see many of them alive 
again. 

The following month, October, 1942, the Japanese au- 
thorities decided to I’eturn the Filipino prisoners to their 
respective homes in the provinces. Those coming fi'om the 
Visayas and Mindanao were segregated in one group to 
be paroled to the provinces from whence they came. Those 
from Luzon were crowded into trucks and taken to Caga- 
yan de Misamis for eventual transfer to Manila in Japanese 
transports. But Roxas was not among those singled out 
to return home. He was informed that he must remain 
behind for later disposition. 



[ 166 ] 



It was a very sad morning for Roxas and his aides 
when the time came for them to part. As the latter Avere 
placed in a truck hemmed in like sardines with their com- 
panions, General Roxas stood silently by the roadside with 
drawn face. He waved his hand at the men as their 
vehicle began to move, then he walked slowly back with- 
out once turning ax'ound for a last look at his friends. 
There he was, a forlorn figure, alone but standing erect, 
dignified, and brave. 

On November 17th Roxas was removed from the pri- 
son camp in Malaybalay and driven to Davao where he 
was again questioned and asked to serve the puppet gov- 
ernment which the Japanese had set up in Manila. The 
Filipino general frankly informed the Japanese Commander 
in Mindanao that he preferred to remain in a prison camp 
for the remainder of the war. He was told, however, that 
he would be taken to Manila for a conference with General 
Wachi, the new Chief of the Japanese Military Adminis- 
tration, who had recently succeeded General Hayashi. ^ 

Five days later accompanied by Colonel Jimbo, Roxas 
was flown to Manila in a Japanese war plane and taken 
directly to his house on Taft Avenue. Since his arrival 
had not been previously announced his unexpected appear- 
ance pi'oved to be a most touching reunion, particularly 
with his daughter Ruby who was the first to embrace him. 
Mrs. Roxas, who had heard that Japanese officers were at 
the front gates, locked herself up in the bathroom and it 
was some minutes later, after many explanations and re- 
assurances from her son and daughter, that she was pre- 
vailed upon to extricate herself from the room where she 
had closeted herself. 

Roxas was in an extremely poor physical shape when 
he rejoined his family. He had weighed 165 pounds at 
the time of the outbreak of the war. He now barely tipped 



[ 167 ] 



the scales at 110. He was also suffering from incipient 
tuberculosis and an enlargement of his aorta. Before 
leaving their pi'isoner, the Japanese who had accompanied 
Roxas left strict instructions to the effect that no one 
was to be allowed to see him until further orders from 
the Japanese military authorities. Furthermore, a guard 
was left behind to see to it that this ordei* was strictly 
complied with. Gradually, however, these instructions 
were relaxed and members of his family and intimate 
friends were able to sneak into the house from time to 
time. 

Shortly after Roxas was brought to Manila and con- 
fined to his house, and as soon as he felt it was safe 
enough for him to see some friends, he told his brother 
Mamerto that he wanted vei’y much to confer with his old 
friend, Jose B. Laurel. Laurel was an Associate Justice 
of the Supreme Court at the outbreak of the war. When 
Quezon was evacuated from Manila with his family to 
join General MacArthur in Coiu’egidor our President had 
intended to have Laurel accompany him as adviser. At 
the last moment, however, Quezon decided instead to take 
Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos because he knew that Laurel 
had many Japanese friends and had been in fact, the attor- 
ney for various Japanese companies doing business in the 
Philippines before the war. Our President concluded that 
Lauiel could serve the Filipino people better if he remained 
in Manila. Soon after the Japanese occupied our capital 
city and organized the Philippine Executive Commission 
whose membership was composed of prominent Filipino of- 
ficials and leaders of the day. Laurel was appointed Secre- 
tary of Justice. Not long afterwards he was transferred 
to the position of Secretary of the Interior. It was appa- 
lent to everyone that the Japanese had a very high regard 
for Laurel and considered him the outstanding Filipino 
leader available at the time. 



[ 168 ] 



Roxas wanted to see his friend because he wished to 
discuss with him the problems facing the Filipino people. 
And so Secretaiy Laurel, accompanied by Roxas’ brother, 
Mamerto, drove to Roxas’ home early one evening. Laurel 
gave an account of what had happened to him since Quezon 
left for Corregidor in December, 1941. It was very evi- 
dent to Roxas that Laurel’s sole aim and purpose in ac- 
cepting the important positions thrust upon him by the 
Japanese was to do everything in his power to ameliorate 
the suffeidngs of the civilian population. Roxas told 
Laurel that he believed the war would last another year 
and a half. Laui*el was more pessimistic. He thought it 
would last at least three more years, if not five or even 
ten, although he was confident that eventually the United 
Allies would win. The two men parted from each other 
on the most friendly terms, Roxas being fully convinced 
that Laurel continued to be loyal to the Government of 
the United States and to the principles and traditions for 
which the American people were fighting the war. 

Early in February, 1943, General Wachi, Chief of the 
Japanese Military Administration in Manila, accompanied 
by his aide appeared at the Roxas household. Roxas re- 
ceived them in bed for he was still sick, pale and thin. 
The Japanese Administrator sat by his bedside and politely 
expressed concern over the Filipino leader’s health. “Take 
good care of yom-self,” he said. Sick though he was, Roxas 
had to listen once more to the same kind of explanations 
which he had heard from Colonel Jimbo regarding the 
Japanese Empire’s pui'pose in making war on the Anglo 
Saxon countries. It was not a very long visit for the 
Chief of the Japanese Military Administration was him- 
self a diplomat and he could see for himself that Roxas 
was really sick. He smiled and bowed as he bade goodbye 
to Roxas and the members of his family. 



[ 169 ] 



Two weeks latei* General Wachi returned accompanied 
by his adviser, Sycho Murata. Mm*ata had been the Jap- 
anese Consul General in Manila before the outbreak of 
the war. Roxas who meantime had made no effort to gain 
weight and who preferred to remain as sick looking as pos- 
sible, again received his visitors in bed. The Japanese 
officials explained that their government policy-makers in 
Tokyo had mapped out more definite political plans for 
the Philippines, that there was need for a man of prestige 
to put them into effect in the islands, and that there was 
no doubt about it but that Roxas was the logical man for 
that purpose. “Your country,” they said, “faces a critical 
period in her history. Your people need you and, if you 
love them, this is your opportunity to prove it.” 

“My devotion and my love for my people and my coun- 
ti-y have never waned,” I’eplied Roxas, “but I am not in a 
position to assume the work you wish me to undei'take. To 
begin with, my health does not permit me. In the second 
place, I am a prisoner of war. Finally, were I to serve 
the government which you are setting up here, the pres- 
tige which I now enjoy with my people would disappear. 
It would be better therefore if I were returned to a pri- 
son camp.” 

The Japanese officials could very well see for them- 
selves that Roxas was still a sick man and so they politely 
bowed themselves out. But it became vei'y clear' to the 
ailing Filipino leader that future visits would continue 
because of the insistent desire of the Japanese to make 
him collaborate with the Japanese Military Administration. 

Colonel Nagahama, Chief of the dreaded Japanese 
Military Police in the Philippines and at that time the 
most feared man in the country because of the way Filipino 
prisoners were tortured in the cells of Fort Santiago, next 
called on Roxas. He was less diplomatic than General 



[ 170 ] 



Wachi and, aiTogantly and bluntly, he told Roxas tliat he 
must serve in the government which the victorious Jap- 
anese were setting up in Manila. 

In distant Tokyo Japanese Premier Hideki Tojo in- 
formed the Japanese Diet that his government would soon 
gi*ant the Filipino people the “honor of independence.” 
The Japanese Military Administration in Manila thereupon 
announced that a Commission consisting of the most pro- 
minent Filipino leaders in the country had been named 
to prepare a draft of the Constitution of the Republic 
which the Japanese would set up in the Philippines. At 
a public demonstration on the Luneta the names of these 
men were announced and, included among them, was that 
of Manuel Roxas. Roxas, of course, had not been consulted 
about this. The names of the members of the Commission 
were i*ead alphabetically over the microphone. When the 
name of Roxas was announced cheei's and applause rose 
f i*om the crowd. It was the . first public announcement 
that Roxas was alive and the ovation was in reality an 
expression of gratitude on the part of the people that 
their great leader was safe. But the ovation which was 
so spontaneous undoubtedly impressed on the Japanese 
more than ever before that Roxas was indeed the unques- 
tioned leader of his people. 

On July 10, 1943, Premier Tojo paid a flying visit 
to Manila. He was then on his way to Singapore to or- 
ganize the so-called Free India movement to be headed by 
the Indian nationalist leader Chandra Bose whom the Bri- 
tish had banished from his country some years before. 
During Premier To jo’s 24-hour visit in the city he sum- 
moned the members of the Independence Commission to his 
hotel. Roxas, of course, would have preferred to remain 
quietly at home but an automobile was sent to his house 
and, sick as he was, the Japanese couriers escorted him 
to the Manila Hotel suite where Tojo awaited him. It 



[ 171 ] 



was the first time Roxas had left his house since his re- 
turn from Malaybalay. Throughout the conference which 
the Filipino Commission membei's had with Premier Tojo, 
Roxas sat without uttering a word. The meeting was fol- 
lowed by a cocktail party but Roxas excused himself saying 
that he was ill and should go home and, since he did in 
fact appear to be far from a well man, his excuses were 
accepted. “But you must get well soon,” the Japanese 
Premier counseled the Filipino leader. “I am going to send 
doctors from Japan to take care of you.” 

Sure enough, two weeks later Colonel Harada, Chief 
of the Japanese Medical Corps of the Japanese Imperial 
Forces, accompanied by two Tokyo specialists on respira- 
tory diseases, arrived in Manila with orders from Premier 
Tojo to diagnose Roxas’ ailments and to cure him as soon 
as possible. Roxas was frankly very much worried. Al- 
though he was still thin and pale he knew that, by taking 
more noui’ishment, he could gradually recover his health. 
How could he, therefoi*e, mislead the specialists from Ja- 
pan? Fortunately, the Japanese doctors who called on him 
many times during their stay in Manila invariably tele- 
phoned the Roxas household before coming to visit their 
patient. This gave Roxas enough time to work out a high 
pulse beat and a slight temperature. He would run up and 
down the stairs and do a little setting up exercises before 
their arrival. 

The Japanese physicians eventually diagnosed their 
patient's case as hypertension. They also admitted dis- 
covering a cardiac lesion which, if allowed to remain in 
its present stage, might prove fatal. They therefore pre- 
scribed complete rest and suggested that he go to Japan. 
Roxas explained that he preferred to remain in Manila 
because his wife was ill also and a separation would cause 
both of them much uneasiness. He further reminded Colo- 
nel Harada that, if he had wanted to, he could have left 



[ 172 ] 



the Philippines and gone to Australia and even to the United 
States before the occupation of Mindanao by Japanese 
forces. The fact that he chose to remain in the Philip- 
pines, he added, showed how intense was his desire to be 
with his people and his family. “By taking your prescrip- 
tions and following your directions, doctor,” he said, “I 
am sure I can get well right here in Manila.” And so 
after a month’s stay the Japanese specialists returned to 
Tokyo leaving cai*eful directions and numerous prescrip- 
tions to the Filipino doctors who were to continue cainng 
for Roxas. 

The Independence Commission which had been directed 
by the Japanese Military Administration to prepare a draft 
of the Constitution for the Republic which they proposed 
to set up in the Philippines held frequent meetings in the 
Metropolitan Water District Building. Roxas did not attend 
a single one of these sessions but he was subsequently in- 
formed that a draft of the Constitution had been com- 
pleted. A copy was sent to his house and, when he read 
it, Roxas was profoundly shocked by its contents. To be- 
gin with, the preamble stated that the Philippine Republic 
was to be considei-ed a part of the Greater East Asia Co- 
Prosperity Sphere. The Constitution itself did not contain 
a bill of rights and the government which it proposed to 
set up was not republican in form. Roxas tried to pi'evail 
on those members of the Commission who called on him 
to have the necessary changes made but he soon realized 
that, to accomplish this, it would be necessary for him to 
take an active part in the deliberations of the Commission. 
He became convinced also that it was impossible to prevent 
the adoption of some kind of a Constitution because the 
Japanese had already made up their minds to set up a pup- 
pet republic here. Hence, the best thing the Filipinos 
could do was to adopt a Constitution that would be in keep- 
ing with their democratic ideals and one which would cei*- 



[ 173 ] 



tainly not commit the people to suppoi't the Japanese 
Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. 

Roxas therefore suggested to his colleagues that a 
sub-committee be appointed to revise the draft which the 
Commission had prepared. They agreed to create such a 
sub-committee provided he would be one of its members 
and, since he claimed to be too sick to attend its sessions, 
they told him that the sub-committee would hold its meet- 
ings in Roxas’s own house. This constituted Roxas’ inter- 
vention in the drawing of the Constitution. Following his 
suggestions, all mention of Japan and the Greater East 
Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere was eliminated fx*om the ori- 
ginal draft. Furthermore, a bill of rights more or less 
similar to that found in the Constitution of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines was inserted and, in effect, the 
form of government pi’ovided for was republican in char- 
acter. Not a single word of disloyalty to America or alle- 
giance to Japan was included. 

When the time came to have the Constitution signed, 
Roxas suggested that only the President, namely, Jose 
Lam’el, and the Secretaiy of the Commission should af- 
fix their signatures to the document. But the Japanese 
Military Authorities could not be fooled that easily. They 
insisted that every member of the Commission should sign 
for they intended to make a show of the ceremonies. The 
signing of the document took place late one morning on 
the balcony of the Metropolitan Water District Building 
before a small crowd consisting mostly of government em- 
‘ ployees who had been summoned for that occasion. The 
members of the Commission signed their respective names 
as fast as possible and the show was over in a few minutes. 
It was followed by a banquet at the Sky Room of the Jai- 
Alai Building but Roxas refused to attend and instead 
returned to his home and got into bed feigning illness once 
more. 



[ 174 ] 



Brigadier General Roxas with the man who saved him from a Japanese 
firing squad, Col. Nobuhiko Jimbo (1943). 









f 






After the Constitution was signed, General Wachi 
summoned Roxas to his headquai'tei's and told him frankly 
that he was the choice of the Japanese Military Adminis- 
tration for President of the new Republic. Roxas called 
Genei'al Wachi ’s attention to the poor state of health in 
which he found himself. Furthermoi*e, he reminded Gen- 
eral Wachi that, as a matter of fact, he had always been 
opposed to the granting of independence at that time and 
he tried to convince Wachi that it was not advisable for 
the Japanese to choose him because it Avould mean placing 
their reliance on a man who was, technically, a prisoner 
of war and who could be accused by his countrymen of 
having changed his allegiance for purely personal consi- 
derations or because of cowardice. Roxas further ex- 
pressed the opinion that the logical man for the presidency 
was Jose P. Laurel whose great talent and previous record 
fully qualified him for the responsibilities of the office. 
His suggestion was well received because the Japanese 
officials had been getting along very well with Laurel. 
Hence, since Roxas was really not enjoying good health, 
they did not press him further and instead decided on 
Laui’el. The handpicked National Assembly which the 
Japanese had also set up in Manila thereupon proceeded 
to elect Laurel as the first President of the Japanese 
sponsored Republic. 

Roxas and Laurel, as I have already explained, had 
been close personal friends for many years. Each one 
had always cherished a veiy warm feeling towards the 
other. It was that rare case of two talented and patriotic 
men who had not the slightest feeling of jealousy between 
them. In fact, it was Roxas who had been largely res- 
ponsible for Laurel’s appointment to the Supreme Court 
during the Commonwealth Government. He had strongly 
urged Quezon to make the appointment and Laurel was 
aware of it. But Laurel was facing almost insurmount- 
able problems when he assumed the presidency of the pup- 



[ 175 ] 



pet republic. He had never been pro- Japanese in the 
sense that he wanted the Japanese to win the war but he 
feared that the conflict would last several years and that 
it was his duty as a Filipino to do what he could to ame- 
liorate the hardships and the sufferings of his people dur- 
ing that critical period. Furthermore, Laurel knew that, 
even if America and Britain were eventually to win the 
wai’, the Japanese nation would never disappear, that 
sooner or later Japan would again become strong and 
powerful and, therefore, that it would be foolhardy for 
the Filipinos to challenge her authority for the time being. 

Entrusted therefore with the difficult and dangerous 
responsibility of establishing some form of government 
in the Philippines and of feeding and clothing our rest- 
less population, it was but natural that Laurel should turn 
for help to those whose honesty, integi-ity and patriotism 
could never be questioned. He fi-ankly told Roxas that the 
Japanese wanted him included in the cabinet. Laurel 
added that he really needed his friend’s advice and coun- 
sel. Roxas pleaded that he be not drafted and Laurel 
fully appreciated his friend’s reasons for not wishing to 
be in any way connected with the Japanese sponsored 
puppet government. And so despite the fact that he knew 
the Japanese would be displeased at his failure to include 
Roxas in the original line-up of his cabinet. President 
Laui'el decided to ignore the Japanese order. 

Not long after Laurel took office however, the food 
situation in Manila grew from bad to worse. The ration- 
ing of rice was suspended for a few days because the 
government agency then in charge of obtaining that cereal 
had exhausted its stock. Actually the principal reason 
for the shortage in Luzon was because the Japanese Ax*my 
and Navy were competing with the Philippine government 
agency in the procurement of rice. Using their so-called 
Military Notes, better known during the occupation as 



[1761 



“mickey mouse money,” and which the Japanese presses 
wei'e printing as fast as they could turn them out, the 
Japanese were offering higher prices than President Lau- 
rel’s government could afford to pay. Laurel knew that, 
prior to the war, Roxas had been Chaii'man of the Na- 
tional Rice and Corn Corpoi*ation. This was the pre-war 
government agency whose duty, among other things, was 
to stabilize the price of these cereals. The President there- 
fore, urged Roxas to take charge of the republic’s rice 
procurement and distributing agency. 

Roxas asked for a few days to think the matter over. 
He summoned a few of his closest friends including Gen- 
eral Vicente Lini and asked for their opinion. They wei’e 
unanimously of the belief that Roxas should accept the 
position not only in order to save the people from hunger, 
but because by occupying the post in question he would 
have greater freedom of movement thus facilitating the 
contacts which he was trying to establish with the leadeis 
of the underground movement throughout the islands. 

Roxas told Laurel that he Avould be glad to help in 
formulating plans for the procurement of rice but that 
he would do so only in a private advisory capacity. Lain el 
was not satisfied. He was facing serious problems and 
he replied that no one could solve the rice shortage excep 
Roxas and that, if he persisted in refusing the position, 
an announcement would be made by Malacanan to t e e 
feet that President Laurel had requested Geneia 
to help him save the people from starvation but t a e 
Filipino leader had declined to lend a helping han . n 
short. Laurel made it clear that he would make oxas 
responsible before public opinion for the suffeiings an 
the starvation that might take place for lack 

Roxas realized that it was no longer possible oi im 
to refuse the position without laying himself open o e 
accusation that he had failed his people in their hour o 

[ 177 ] 



need. And so he reluctantly accepted the job of trying 
to obtain food for a hungry population and distributing it 
as equitably as possible among the people. The name of 
the organization through which he was to fulfill his as- 
signment was the “Bigasang Bayan,” or BIBA for short. 

Roxas launched a drive ui’ging Filipino farmers to 
sell their rice to the government at official prices. He 
appealed to their patriotism and, in this way, was able to 
obtain sufficient stock to continue rationing rice in Manila 
until the following harvest. Not a single grain of rice 
procured by the BIBA under his direction ever reached 
the Japanese forces. The only speech he ever delivered 
during the entire period of Japanese occupation was in 
relation to the problem of how to procure enough rice. 
And in the course of his speech he gave his word of honor 
that not a single grain sold to the BIBA would be given 
to the Japanese. It is needless to say that the Japanese 
military authorities resented this attitude. They did 
everything possible within their power to counteract his 
activities because they also were short of that cereal. 

There is one incident in connection with this matter 
which is worth mentioning. Under Roxas’ direction the 
BIBA at one time was able to buy approximately 3,000 
sacks of mongo beans. The Japanese navy was also trying 
to obtain mongo but its buyers had been rather unsuccess- 
ful for the reason that a great many hacienda owners, 
yielding to Roxas’ appeal, were selling their crop to the 
BIBA. When the Japanese Navy Authorities heard that 
BIBA had received 3,000 sacks of mongo they sent Jap- 
anese officers to the warehouses where it had been stored 
and demanded that they be given at least 300 sacks. Ro- 
xas instructed the BIBA manager to refuse to accede to 
the request and to explain that if the Japanese navy 
wanted any of their mongo they would have to submit 
their request to President Laurel because the BIBA was 



[1781 



not authorized to deal directly with the Japanese Navy 
Authorities. The Japanese navy officer who was tiying 
to get this mongo thereupon took up the matter with the 
Japanese ambassador in Manila and requested him to make 
the necessaiy representations to the Philippine govern- 
ment. The matter eventually reached the office of Pres- 
ident Laurel and one of his secretaries, without Laurel’s 
knowledge, ordered the BIBA to deliver 300 sacks to the 
Japanese navy. The BIBA manager, however, delivered 
only 100 sacks in order to give him time to advise Roxas 
of what was happening. When Roxas was informed of 
the incident he ordei’ed the BIBA manager not to deliver 
another grain of mongo. He also told Laurel that if any 
mongo was taken from the BIBA warehouses he would 
immediately resign his position. Laurel supported him 
and forthwith counter-manded the order which his secre- 
tary had previously given. 

As a result of this incident, the Japanese Militaiy 
Authorities decided they had had enough of Roxas for 
the time being. They pi'oposed to Laurel that the rice 
procurement agency of the government be reorganized and 
this was effected immediately. The BIBA was abolished 
and a new procurement agency known as the RICOA, or 
Rice and Corn Administration, was set up in its place. 
And, much to his relief, Roxas was dropped from the or- 
ganization. 

But the Filipino leader was not to be left alone for 
long. Early the following year (1944), the Japanese au- 
thorities decided that another effort should be made to 
obtain Roxas’ cooperation. They told Laurel that Roxas 
must be included in his cabinet. The President, took a 
middle course. He appointed Roxas as Chairman of the 
Economic Planning Board with the rank of a cabinet of- 
ficer. Roxas met this new challenge by refusing to at- 
tend a single meeting of the cabinet. Nor would he cash 



[ 179 ] 



any of the checks which the Malacanan disbursing officer 
sent him regularly on the 15th and 30th of each month 
representing his salary as a member of the cabinet and 
Chairman of the Economic Planning Board. Thus mat- 
ters stood throughout the remainder of the year 1944. 



[ 180 ] 



(^Laptev 1 5 



CSO'l HEN Roxas was brought to Manila in November of 
1942, it was, of course, not possible for him at fii’st 
to contact any of the members of the resistance movement 
in Luzon or in the southern islands. However, a few 
months later he was allowed to leave his house and at- 
tend church services as well as go to the hospital to visit 
some of his sick friends thei'e. From that moment on he 
began establishing contacts with the undei'ground forces. 

He formed a group in Manila which was to become the 
center of espionage in that area. Through its members 
he was able to establish contact with Commander Charles 
(Chick) Parsons in Mindanao. Eventually he succeeded 
in communicating with practically all the guerrilla head 
units in Luzon. He was also in touch with the leaders 
in Panay, in Negros, in Leyte, and in Mindanao. He gave 
them the valuable information which, from time to time, 
he was able to obtain in Manila and he encouraged these 
leaders of the resistance movement to coordinate their ac- 
tivities. 

In September 1943 President Quezon, from distant 
Washington, sent a special courier to the Philippines by 
submarine. He was Major Emigdio Cruz, the Army phy- 
sician who had accompanied Quezon to Corregidor and had 
later evacuated to Australia with our President. The 
Filipino Major succeeded in contacting Roxas and, through 
him, Roxas sent back to President Quezon a detailed ac- 
count of the conditions prevailing in the Philippines. He 
assured Quezon that our population remained loyal to the 
people of the United States. 



[ 181 ] 



Among those who were assisting Roxas in his undei*- 
gi’ound activities were Juan Elizalde, Enrico Pirovano, Jose 
Ozamis, Virgilio Lobregat and Liling Roces. On Saturday, 
February 12, 1944, the Japanese Military Police raided Eli- 
zalde’s apartment. They arrested not only Elizalde but all 
the guests who happened to be assembled there that even- 
ing. The number of people seized proved to be quite large be- 
cause the raid took place on the evening of Elizalde’s birth- 
day and many of his friends were paying him an “asalto” 
or sui’prise visit. Enrico Pirovano occupied an apartment 
in the same building and he was also roused from bed and 
taken into custody. Not long afterwards Ozamis was also 
arrested. Among those taken in the Elizalde apartment 
was Hans Menzi and it was fortunate that this particular 
person was included because he subsequently played an 
important part in saving Roxas from arrest. 

In Fort Santiago the Japanese proceeded to question 
their prisoners. Pirovano was among the first to go 
through the ordeal. The nature of the questions pro- 
pounded to him was such that Pirovano realized that the 
Japanese knew all about the activities of the guerrilla group 
to which he belonged. But it was also apparent that the 
Japanese were not so sure of Roxas’ connection with this 
particular underground organization. 

When Pirovano returned to the crowded cell where he 
was confined together with many of those arrested in Eli- 
zalde’s apartment, he managed to sit himself next to Hans 
Menzi. A word of explanation should hei’e be given re- 
garding Menzi’s position. Hans Menzi was born in Ma- 
nila of Swiss parents but, soon after reaching the age of 
majority, he was naturalized as a Filipino citizen. At 
the outbreak of the war he joined the USAFFE Intelligence 
Division, but when the army retreated to Bataan and Cor- 
regidor he remained behind in Manila to obtain information 
that could be of value to the USAFFE. Before the fall 



[ 182 ] 



of Corregidor, howevei*, the Japanese Military Police who 
had somehow been tipped off regarding Menzi’s activities, 
raided his apartment where they found plenty of incrimi- 
nating evidence. Menzi spent several months under tor- 
ture in Foi*t Santiago but he was eventually released be- 
cause the activities of which he was found guilty were 
committed by him before the fall of Corx*egidor or, in other 
words, while in the line of duty. 

After his release from Fox*t Santiago, Menzi led a 
fairly quiet life trying to regain his health. Although 
he knew of Roxas’ activities, he was not connected at the 
time with the Manila Intelligence Group. Pirovano, there- 
fore, had reason to believe that he (Menzi) would soon be 
released. “When you get out of here,” Pirovano whis- 
pered to Menzi, “tell Manoling that these Japs know every- 
thing.” 

A few days later Menzi was released by the Japanese. 
He immediately contacted Roxas to whom he conveyed Piro- 
vano’s important message. At just about that time the 
Japanese who had long suspected that Roxas was con- 
nected with an undergi'ound group, decided to grill him. 
They hoped that, in the course of their examination, Roxas 
would make a slip and implicate himself sufficiently to 
justify their placing him under arrest. But Roxas, thanks 
to the Pirovano message which Menzi had passed on to 
him, was ready for the investigation. Instead of disclaim- 
ing any knowledge whatsoever of Pirovanos' underground 
gi'oup, he managed to convey to his interrogators the 
thought that he did know something about their activities 
but that he had taken no part in the same. Roxas’ at- 
titude seemed to be consistent because, only a short time 
before, a French-Italian woman residing in Manila by the 
name of Madame Panzani whom the Japanese had enlisted 
for their counter intelligence service, had called on Roxas 
claiming to be a courier from the guerrillas. But Roxas 



[ 183 ] 



who had been forewarned by his friends about this woman, 
told her that he would have nothing to do with the people 
she represented because he considered himself a prisoner 
of war in the custody of the Japanese. 

It was indeed praiseworthy also that despite the beat- 
ings and the torture to which Juan Elizalde, Enrico Pii’o- 
vano, Virgilio Lobregat and others were subjected in Fort 
Santiago, no one squealed on Roxas. Eventually most of 
the leaders of the undergi’ound gi’oup to which these brave 
men belonged and many of those associated with them to- 
talling some thirty-four in number including several wo- 
men were taken by the Japanese to the Chinese cemetery 
in Manila and executed. 

Not long after this incident occurred the dreaded Jap- 
anese military police (Kempei) got hold of a document 
which they believed would surely justify their seizing Roxas 
at last. It was a letter from a guerrilla leader addressed 
to Roxas and found in the possession of a courier. Colonel 
Nagahama himself thereupon called on President Laurel 
and told him that the Kempei had finally obtained the 
necessary evidence to put Roxas behind the bars. “It would 
give me the greatest pleasure,” added Nagahama, “to per- 
sonally chop off Roxas’ head.” 

Laurel had known for sometime that Roxas was in 
communication with underground leaders but he resolved 
to defend his friend. “That letter,” said Laurel, “is either 
a forgery or it merely shows that the writer wants to ob- 
tain Roxas’ assistance. It does not necessarily mean that 
Roxas is actively assisting the guerrillas. As a matter 
of fact Roxas is assisting me more than anyone else in 
helping feed a hungry population. If you seize Roxas now 
there would be a revolution in the Philippines. You might 
as well kill me first, because if you take Roxas it will be 
impossible for me to maintain any semblance of order in 
our country.” 



[ 184 ] 



Colonel Nagahania was impressed but unconvinced. 
He left Malacaiian sajdng that he would give further 
thought to the matter. Wishing to take every precaution 
against the possibility that Nagahama might seize Roxas, 
Laurel immediately communicated with Japanese Ambas- 
sador Murata. Murata had always been a great admirer 
of Roxas. He was one of those high-ranking Japanese 
who believed that in due time this gi*eat Filipino leader 
might be won over. He was also convinced that if the 
Japanese arrested Roxas it would aggravate the guerrilla 
problem. Laurel explained to Murata the interview which 
Nagahama had just had with him and the Japanese Am- 
bassador thereupon assured the President that he would 
discuss the case with the highest Japanese commanding of- 
ficer then stationed in the Philippines. Evidently Murata 
succeeded in his efforts because Roxas was not molested. 

Not long after this incident, Roxas, in turn, was able 
to save Laurel from assassination. Those who are fami- 
liar with the occupation of Manila by the Japanese will 
recall that on June 5, 1943, or six months before the Jap- 
anese proclaimed our puppet Republic, a guerrilla hiding 
behind the bushes in the Wack Wack golf course shot 
and seriously wounded Laurel while the latter was play- 
ing golf. For many days Laurel hovex*ed between life and 
death but he finally managed to pull through and, by the 
time the Japanese were ready to px-oclaim the Philippine 
puppet republic, he was as strong as ever. Having failed 
to kill Laurel the guerrilla leader who had directed the 
attempted assassination, decided to try once more. For- 
tunately Roxas learned of his plans. Through Governor 
Sioco of Nueva Ecija Roxas sent word to the guerrilla 
leader concerned advising him that Laiu’el was actually 
helping the Filipino people during their ti'ying ordeal and 
that there was no justifiable reason for taking such dras- 
tic action against him. The guerrilla leader was thus pre- 



[ 185 ] 



vailed upon to give up his plan to make a second attempt 
on Laurel’s life. 

Later that same year 1944, an unsuccessful attempt 
was made to rescue Roxas and ferry him by submarine to 
Australia. To get a clear picture of this incident we must 
explain the part played by Commander Parsons. 

Charles Parsons, more popularly known as “Chick” 
Parsons, is perhaps one of the most coloi*ful American fi- 
gures we have had in the Philippines in many years. He 
came here when still a fairly young man and got a job 
as stenogi’apher in Malacanan. His personality, his intel- 
ligence, his willingness to work hard were bound to win 
him promotions and valuable business contacts. When war 
broke out he was already well established as a topranking 
executive in a big American firm. As luck would have it 
also. Chick had been appointed some years before as Con- 
sul for the Republic of Panama. The position was largely 
honorary because the Philippines has very little business 
with Panama, but the title c*f Consul gave Chick certain 
privileges. When the Japanese established the Santo Tomas 
Internment Camp for example. Chick Parsons was able to 
claim immunity from internment by virtue of his being 
the representative of a neutral nation. The Japanese, 
therefore, allowed him and his family to reside in their 
own home and, eventually, permitted them to leave the 
Philippines. 

Before his departure from Manila however. Chick se- 
cretly organized an underground group for the purpose, 
among other things, of obtaining valuable information to 
be later communicated to allied headquarters in Australia. 
The members of this group included a number of coura- 
geous Filipinos well known in business and social circles 
who were willing to risk their lives in order to help the 
allied cause. This group known as the Manila Intelligence 



[ 186 ] 



Group was later i*ecognized by General MacArthur who is- 
sued commissions to most of its members. 

After Chick Parsons was able to get out of the Phil- 
ippines, he contacted General MacArthur and President 
Quezon. MacArthur immediately summoned him to Aus- 
tx'alia. Before going there Chick passed through Wash- 
ington where he saw President Quezon. Quezon was veiy 
much worried about Roxas’ continuing presence in the 
Philippines. He had always believed that Roxas should 
have accompanied him to Australia and he shuddered when- 
ever he thought of the consequences to the futui’e of the 
country if the Japanese were to kill Roxas just as they 
had killed Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos. Quezon frank- 
ly told Chick Parsons that Roxas was the only one who 
could efficiently head the Philippine Government after 
him. He asked Chick to deliver to General MacArthur a 
personal letter in his own handwriting in which he asked 
the Supreme Allied Commander in the Pacific to do every- 
thing possible to rescue Roxas from the Philippines. 

When Parsons delivered Quezon’s letter to MacArthur 
in Australia, the American genei'al x*eplied that he believed 
it was still too early to effect Roxas’ escape from the Is- 
lands. It was then early 1943 and MacArthur was of the 
opinion that if Roxas wex*e to leave the Philippines at 
that time it would not benefit Quezon’s govexmment-in- 
exile. On the other hand, if Roxas remained in the Phil- 
ippines and was able to x*esist the px*essure of the Japanese 
and keep free of entanglements with the puppet regime, 
he could exex’cise a px’ofound influence on the people and 
would thus be of gx*eat help to the allied powers. Mac- 
Arthur, however, instructed Chick Parsons to contact Ro- 
xas just the same to tell him that the ground work necessary 
for his escape at the proper time was being prepared. 

An American submarine conveyed Chick Parsons to 
Philippine waters. He was put ashox’e late one night in 



[ 187 ] 



March, 1943, on the island of Mindanao. There Chick was 
able to find Colonel Fertig, head of the resistance movement 
in that area. With the radio equipment and other sup- 
plies which Chick brought ashore, the guerrilla leaders were 
able to establish better radio contact with Australia. A spe- 
cial agent, namely, Antonio Montalban, a brothex*-in-law of 
Senator Jose Ozamis who was then in Manila, was sent 
by Chick Parsons to contact the members of the under- 
ground gi’oup in Manila as well as pass on the word to 
Roxas, thru Senator Ozamis, that President Quezon was 
very much concerned about him and wanted to have him 
evacuated from the Islands as soon as possible. Ozamis 
conveyed this infor-mation to Roxas in Manila. Shortly 
thereafter Ozamis left for Mindanao, bringing with him 
a letter from Roxas describing his personal situation and 
stating that, in his opinion, it would be better for him 
to stay in the Philippines for the time being and do what 
he could to help his people. He added that he did not 
want to leave the Philippines until such time as unbearable 
pressure was brought to bear on him by the Japanese. Ro- 
xas also informed Chick Parsons that he was trying to 
develop and support the resistance movement in Luzon and 
that he was gathering much information that might be 
useful to GHQ in Australia. 

Chick Parsons returned to Australia with all the in- 
formation he had been able to get. During the many 
months that followed he made several more trips to the 
Philippines by submarine. On one of these trips he took 
Lt. Col. Phillips, an underground leader in Mindanao, to 
the northwest coraer of Mindoro. There Phillips set up 
a radio station thru which he maintained regular contact 
with the underground leaders in Luzon, particularly the 
Manila intelligence group. Phillips was, of course, ap- 
prised of the situation regarding Roxas and of the possibil- 
ity that, very soon, attempts would be made to rescue him 
from Manila. 



[ 188 ] 



Early in 1944, Roxas realized that it was becoming 
increasingly difficult for him to avoid active service in 
the government which the Japanese had set up in the Phil- 
ippines. He feai-cd that the Japanese Military Adminis- 
tration would force him to accept more important positions 
in the puppet republic and that, if he refused to participate 
in the activities of that government, the Japanese would 
find some way of disposing of him. He therefore informed 
Chick Parsons that it was time to get out of the islands. 

Chick suggested three plans of escape. Under the 
first plan, Roxas, his wife and two children would go to 
Capiz ostensibly for a short vacation. Soon after their 
arrival there however, the guerrillas who were operating 
very successfully in the island of Panay would swoop into 
Capiz and kidnap the entii'e Roxas family. Once in the 
hands of the guerrillas it would be relatively easy for 
them to board an American submarine for Australia. In 
those days however there was no way of travelling from 
island to island except by “batel” or a small unwieldy sail- 
boat. The trip from Manila to Panay was relatively dan- 
gerous. Hence, Plan No. 2 under which Roxas and family 
were to go to some suitable place in Luzon, such as Calata- 
gan, Batangas Province, ostensibly for a few days’ vaca- 
tion. There an American submarine would show up on a 
prearranged signal and the entire Roxas family would be 
evacuated. 

Neither of these plans appealed to Roxas. He felt 
that if his family were to accompany him either to Capiz 
or Batangas, the Japanese Military Authorities who were 
closely watching his every move would become suspicious. 
Hence, Roxas believed that Plan No. 3 was more feasible. 
Under this plan, Roxas alone would make a dash for Ba- 
tangas from where he would board a “batel” for Calavite 
Point on the northern coast of Mindoro where an American 
submarine would pick him up. Since Mrs. Roxas and her 



[ 189 ] 



children were not to be told of his plans, Roxas felt that 
they would be safe enough in Manila because the Japanese 
would necessarily have to conclude that he had either joined 
or been kidnapped by the g^uerrillas. Thus informed of 
Roxas’ decision, Chick Parsons went about making the 
necessai-y arrangements and an appointed date was set 
for the rendezvous off the northwest coast of Mindoro. 

But at this point destiny intervened in the person of 
General Vicente Lim. General Lim, the top ranking Fili- 
pino officer in the USAFFE, was among those who in 
April, 1942 had been captured in Bataan by the Japanese. 
He was imprisoned in Capas for several months but, be- 
cause of ill health, the Japanese had finally permitted him 
to remain in confinement in the Philippine General Hos- 
pital. Lim, however, was not as sick as he feigned to 
be. He confided to Roxas that he very much wanted to get 
out of the islands. Roxas sympathized with him and was 
willing to help. He, therefore, contacted Chick Parsons 
once more and requested him to obtain General MacArthur’s 
permission to have General Lim join him in his escape. 
MacArthur, for reasons of his own, denied the request and 
Chick regretfully relayed this message back to Roxas. Gen- 
eral Lim was, of course, very much disappointed but Roxas, 
who was convinced that Lim should join him, could not 
help but feel that perhaps MacArthur had not been pro- 
perly informed of the circumstances surrounding Lim’s 
position in the Philippines. He, therefore, suggested that 
General Lim meet Chick Parsons at Calavite Point on 
the designated day and hour of the rendezvous and there 
try to convince Chick to assume the responsibility of ferry- 
ing him to Australia. If Chick was willing to take the 
risk, the submarine was to proceed to Calatagan where 
Roxas would board it. The reason Roxas did not feel that 
both he and Lim should leave Manila at the same time 
for Calavite Point was because, in case Chick Parsons re- 
fused to take Lim, it would be dangerous for the General 



[ 190 ] 



to return to Manila having once left the city in the com- 
pany of Roxas. 

Shortly before th? date designated for the rendezvous 
at Calavite Point, General Lim slipped out of Manila for 
Batangas where he boarded a “batel” to cross the narrow 
channel which sepai'ates that province from Mindoro is- 
land. Roxas also made preparations to go by himself to 
Calatagan ostensibly for a quiet week-end but, in reality, 
to meet the American submarine that would carry him to 
Australia and to safety. Somehow, however, a Filipino 
spy by the name of Franco Vera Reyes in the service of 
the Japanese military intelligence got wind of the fact that 
a rendezvous was imminent in northern Mindoro between 
an American submarine and an important Filipino offi- 
cial whose identity he was unable to ascertain. We shall 
never know how Franco Vera Reyes acquired this informa- 
tion for this Filipino spy was eventually killed. But the 
Filipino traitor dutifully relayed his information to the 
Japanese Military Police. Patrol vessels were immediately 
ordered to intercept every sailboat crossing Mindoro Strait. 
The “batel” in which Genei’al Lim was trying to cross the 
channel accompanied by several members of an under- 
ground unit, was intercepted by the Japanese. They, how- 
ever, did not recognize General Lim or, for that matter, 
any of those who accompanied him and, since the papers 
exhibited by the “batel” skipper seemed to be in order, 
the officer in charge told the Filipinos that they could 
px'oceed. Unfortunately however, one of the other Jap- 
anese who had boarded the vessel was in the hold making 
a search of the various pieces of luggage carefully stowed 
away in the sailboat's cabin. In one of the suitcases he 
found two revolvers. He announced his findings to his 
superior officer and the sailboat and all those on board 
were, thereupon, taken to Calapan, Mindoro, for further 
investigation. There General Lim was identified. He and 



[ 191 ] 



his companions were taken to Fort Santiago whex’e most 
of them were eventually executed. Japanese forces also 
immediately raided Calavite Point towards which the sail- 
boat had been heading, thus compelling Chick Parsons who 
was waiting there to seek refuge in the mountains of Min- 
doro. The American sub which was cruising off shore 
fled to safer waters. 

It may well be asked why it was that, although the 
Japanese were dissatisfied with Roxas’ attitude towards 
them and although they had reason to believe that he was 
in some way connected with the undergi’ound movement, 
they did not execute or, at least, place him in confinement. 
Two reasons can be given to explain this. The first, as 
I have already shown, was the attitude of President Laurel. 
Laurel was willing to risk his own life to prevent any harm 
from befalling his friend. The second reason why the Jap- 
anese did not seize Roxas may be gathered from the ex- 
planation given by a Japanese named Kano who, during 
the Japanese occupation, was liaison officer between the 
Japanese Military Administration and Malacahan. Kano 
was captured in Sinoloan, Laguna, soon after the Amer- 
icans entered Manila and, in the course of an interview 
which he gave to a newspaper correspondent he said that 
the Japanese Military Authorities realized that Roxas was 
extremely popular with the Filipino masses. The Japanese, 
added Kano, regarded Roxas as an enemy and wanted to 
kill him but they had refrained from taking such drastic 
action because they feared that, if he were executed, the 
guerrilla movement throughout the islands would become 
greatly intensified. 



[ 192 ] 



(^Lapior 1 6 



American liberation forces successfully occupied 
Leyte in October, 1944. The Japanese therefore had 
reason to expect that attempts to effect similar landings on 
Luzon would soon be made. Two days before Christmas, 
the Japanese Military Authorities in Manila informed 
President Laurel that he, the members of his cabinet, and 
other officials including Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
Jose Yulo, Speaker of the House Aquino and also Brigadier 
General Roxas, must be evacuated immediately to Baguio 
for security reasons. After hurriedly packing, they and 
their respective families boarded automobiles for the five- 
hour drive to Baguio. Escorting them were Japanese 
guards riding in open trucks on which machineguns had 
been placed to forestall any rescue attempt by the guer- 
rillas operating in Luzon. 

Yulo and Roxas had made plans for a desperate try 
at escape while their vehicles were traversing Pampanga 
province. They proposed to break away from the motor- 
cade and make a dash for Floridablanca where the Yulos 
owned a large hacienda. From there they were to go into 
hiding. But as the cars sped along the main highway, it 
became apparent that it would be foolhardy to make the 
attempt. The Filipino officials were being too closely 
guarded by the Japanese soldiers driving in front and be- 
hind them. And so the group continued on to Baguio where 
Roxas and his family were accommodated in a small cot- 
tage and ordered to remain there until further orders. 

The American liberation forces finally landed in Lin- 
gayen on January 9, 1945, and immediately began their 



[ 193 ] 



inarch down the central plains of Luzon towards Manila. 
A powerful striking force veei’ed northward to cut off 
escape by the Japanese in that direction. Although the 
Americans penetrated Manila’s city limits on the evening 
of February 3, 1945, and succeeded in liberating the Santo 
Tomas Internment Camp, it took over two weeks more of 
intensive fighting before the city as a whole was free of 
Japanese. It was during this trj'ing period that count- 
less atrocities were committed on a helpless civilian popula- 
tion by the Japanese marines who were making a last ditch 
stand. By the time the Americans had killed or captured 
the remaining Japanese snipers, half of our fair city lay 
in ruins and thousands of civilians were dead or crippled. 
Without further loss of time however, Osmena who, fol- 
lowing Quezon’s death in the United States, had succeeded 
to the presidency of the Commonwealth, was hurriedly 
flown to Manila from Leyte. And in simple but touching 
ceremonies at Malacanan, General MacArthur turned over 
the reins of civil government to our Commonwealth Pres- 
ident. 

Roxas and his companions in Baguio knew nothing 
about what was taking place in Manila. Baguio itself was 
being subjected to terrific air bombardments, for the 
Americans believed that there were large Japanese forces 
stationed there. The bombings became so intense that on 
March 5th the Japanese authorities permitted the Filipino 
officials who were marooned in that city to seek shelter 
elsewhere. The Roxas and Yulo families sought refuge in 
the outskirts of the city. They slept in a cave during the 
first two weeks while the servants who had accompanied 
them were building a nipa shack. It was while they were 
in this hideout that news trickled to them to the effect 
that Manila had been liberated but that the price had been 
a costly one. 



[ 194 ] 



On April 13th Roxas and Yulo decided that they could 
safely make a dash for freedom. The American forces 
\vei*e still in the lowlands but most of the Japanese in 
Baguio had evacuated leaving a few armed men around 
the city. There was only one Japanese guard left with the 
Roxas group but this Nippon warrior had grown to like the 
people he was supposed to watch. He offered no objec- 
tion to Roxas’ departure and turned his back to them as 
they left. For three days and nights Roxas and Yulo ac- 
companied by their respective families and led by a faith- 
ful Igorot guide, made their way thru mountain, hill, and 
valley, sleeping under the trees at night and pushing ahead 
at daybreak. 

On April 16th they finally arrived at the town of 
Rizal, La Union, and there caught sight of an American 
soldier. Roxas identified himself. He was taken to the 
office of the commanding officer who lost no time in ad- 
vising General MacArthur in Manila. MacArthur imme- 
diately ordered Roxas brought to the city by special plane. 
SCAP headquarters also forthwith issued a statement 
which was widely circulated to the effect that the Amer- 
ican forces had succeeded in liberating Brig. Gen. Roxas 
and his family and that, at General MacArthur’s request, 
Roxas was immediately rejoining the Supreme Comman- 
der’s general staff. 

In contrast to the way in which MacArthur received 
Roxas, the American Supreme Commander also announced 
that the leading Filipino officials of the puppet government 
had been captured and that they would be placed under 
protective custody during the remainder of the war. These 
Filipino leaders, which included such well-kno^vn dignita- 
ries as Recto, Paredes, Alunan, and even Yulo, were later 
transferred to Palawan for security reasons. They were 
not released until after the surrender of Japan on August 
15, 1945. 



[ 195 ] 



When Roxas arrived in Manila he found that the house 
on Taft Avenue which he had occupied for so many years 
was in ruins. So he took up living quarters in the home 
of his older brother, Judge Mamerto Roxas, on Almeda 
Street in the Sta. Cruz district. There he received many 
of his friends who came not only to felicitate him on his 
safe return to the city but to inquire about his plans for 
the future. 

As I have previously explained, Osmena was brought 
to Manila in mid February, or nearly two months before 
Roxas was able to rejoin MacArthur’s staff. Immediately 
after Osmena was installed in Malacanan, he proceeded to 
organize his cabinet. There were then relatively few pub- 
lic figures from among whom he could choose his advisers 
for the reason that most of our leaders who had served 
the Japanese sponsored puppet government were still in 
Baguio. 

Included among those whom Osmena appointed to his 
cabinet was Tomas Confesor. He was designated Secre- 
tary of the Interior which at that time was probably the 
most important position in the cabinet. Confesor had for 
many years past been one of Roxas’ bitterest political 
enemies. He was also a Nacionalista like Roxas but he 
came from Iloilo, island of Panay, and he w'as unwilling 
to recognize Roxas as the undisputed leader of that Visa- 
yan stronghold. During Roxas’ incumbency as Speaker 
of the House of Representatives, for example, Confesor who 
was then a representative did his utmost to harass the pre- 
siding officer whenever possible. Political writers soon 
began calling him “the stormy petrel” and, although out- 
wardly he and Roxas appeared to be friends, for they were 
both Nacionalistas, those who knew the true situation real- 
ized that Confesor was merely biding his time and wait- 
ing for an opportunity to try and destroy the man who 
stood in his way as political leader of Panay. Confesor 



[ 196 ] 



was undoubtedly a man of great courage. When the Jap- 
anese entered Manila in January, 1942, for example, he 
was in the city but, soon afterwards, he managed to make 
his way back to Panay where he played an important part 
as civilian head of the local government which stubbornly 
refused to recognize the Japanese claim of sovereignty 
over the Philippine Archipelago. The Japanese Military 
Authorities soon put a big price on his head but he man- 
aged to elude them and, after the Ameidcans landed in 
Leyte, Confesor was able to join the liberation forces. It 
was very natural that Osmena should have chosen him to 
occupy an important position in the cabinet. 

The problems which faced President Osmena when he 
resumed his office in Malacaiian were indeed many and 
serious. He had come back to a land ravaged by war and 
blighted by disorder. Most of our cities and municipali- 
ties were in ruins. Transportation and communication fa- 
cilities had been disrupted and our treasury was almost 
empty. The job that lay ahead of him seemed too big and 
difficult for a man of his age. Osmena fui'thermore ap- 
peared tired and confused. He did not seem to have any 
specific plans for the rehabilitation of our countiy and he 
lacked the fire and the leadership which he had shown in 
his early days. To make matters worse his health seemed 
to be impaired. Soon after he organized his cabinet he had 
to fly back to the United States to undergo a surgical ope- 
ration. 

During the first few days following Osmena’s return 
to Malacaiian in February, 1945, a certain incident occur- 
red which I find necessary to mention here. Many people 
naturally wanted to visit the Commonwealth President for 
the purpose of paying their respects. Some wei’e govern- 
ment officials, others were personal friends. Included 
among those who was able to obtain an audience with him 
was Judge Mamerto Roxas, elder brother of Manuel Roxas. 



[ 197 ] 



He was a judge in. Manila at the time of the outbreak of 
the war and he had known Osmena for many years. Ma- 
merto naturally expected that, after greeting the President, 
the latter would inquire how General Roxas had fared dur- 
ing the war and if there was any news concerning him. 
And yet to Mamerto’s surprise and disappointment, Os- 
mena said not a word. The interview ended without any 
indication whatsoever on the part of Pz*esident Osmena 
that he was in any way interested about the welfare and 
whereabouts of the man with whom he had been associated 
for so many yeai’s and who had courageously remained in 
the Philippines rather than seek safety in flight to Aus- 
tralia or the United States. 

When Roxas finally arrived in Manila in mid Api*il 
to join General MacArthur’s staff, Osmena was still 
in the United States whither he had gone for a surgical 
operation. Not long afterwards however, it was announced 
that the Commonwealth President was on his way back to 
the Philippines. A large number of prominent civil and 
army officials went to the airfield to meet him and, among 
them, were General MacArthur and Brigadier General 
Roxas. Osmena flew to the Philippines in a C-54 United 
States army transport plane bound for Clark Field, Pam- 
panga. From there he was scheduled to transfer to a 
2-engine Douglas DC-3 for the short flight to Manila. 

Most of the people who had assembled at Nichols Field 
outside Manila to meet Osmena were not awai’e of the fact 
that the Commonwealth President was first landing at 
Clark Field. Among the few who did know of Osmena's 
schedule was Secretary of the Interior Tomas Confesor. 
Desirous of conferring with the President ahead of all 
others, Confesor went to Clark Field where he greeted Os- 
mena when the latter alighted from the 4-engine plane 
which had brought him all the way from the United States. 



[ 198 ] 



Then together the two men flew to Manila in a DC-3 where 
the rest of the Philippine officialdom awaited them. 

I do not know what transpired during the shoi't flight 
from Clark Field to Manila. I do not know exactly what 
Confesor told Osmena about Roxas whom the Common- 
wealth President was going to see for the first time since 
they parted company in Corregidor early in 1942. I cannot 
help but feel, however, that Confesor did everjdhing pos- 
sible to convince Osmena that Roxas had collaboi’ated vdth 
the Japanese and that it was not advisable for the Com- 
monwealth President to show that he considered Roxas an 
important personage. 

Whether the incident that occurred upon Osmena’s ax’- 
rival in the Manila airport was in any way influenced by 
the conversation which these two leaders had in the aii’- 
plane during the flight fi'oni Clax*k Field to Manila, or 
whether Osmena must assume sole I’esponsibility for his 
action only Osmena can answer today. This much, how- 
evei% can be told. When the Commonwealth President 
alighted from his plane, Roxas was among the fii’st to 
step forward to gi*eet him. The most natui*al thing for 
Osmena to have done was to embi'ace his friend and con- 
gi-atulate him for his having successfully sui’vived tlie oc- 
cupation. But the Commonwealth President did nothing 
of the sort. He shook hands with Roxas as if he was 
greeting a casual acquaintance. General MacArthur could 
not help but notice Osmena’s attitude and he tried his best 
to encourage a more amiable conversation between the two 
men. Roxas was coopei’ative but Osmena remained cool 
and indifferent. 

When Roxas retui’ned to his brother's house on Al- 
meda Street it was very evident that he felt both disap- 
pointed and disillusioned because of Osmena’s attitude to- 
wards him. Roxas was still a few meters away from Ma- 



[ 199 ] 



merto’s front porch when he caught sight of his brother 
who was looking out of the window. “Merto,” he cried, 
“do you know how Osmena greeted me at the airport to- 
day?" Mamerto was surprised and said, “Why, Manoling, 
what was the matter?" “Osmena," answered Roxas with 
bitterness in his voice, “shook hands with me as if I was a 
total stranger and as if we were being introduced to each 
other for the first time." 

Relating this incident to me later on, Mamerto added 
that, in his opinion, the attitude of Osmena towards Roxas 
during their historic meeting at Nichols Field proved to 
be a turning point in Roxas’ career. “I am convinced," Ma- 
merto confided to me, “that on that particular afternoon 
my brother Manoling decided, then and there, to launch his 
candidacy for President in the elections that were soon to 
be held in our country." 

But that was not all. There wei’e many American 
coi’respondents who interviewed Osmena in Malacanan 
shortly after his arrival. One of them remarked that the 
Commonwealth President would no doubt have his hands 
full receiving the countless number of visitors who would 
want to see him. “That is true," I’eplied Osmena, “but I 
have learned a great deal from my Washington visits. I 
will make it a point not to give more than five minutes to 
each caller." Whereupon one of the reporters present said, 
“Undoubtedly, Mr. President, Brigadier General Roxas will 
be among the first who will wish to confer with you." Os- 
mena replied quite coolly, “I see no reason why I should 
treat him any differently from the others." 

Osmena did not realize that this particular American 
correspondent knew Roxas personally and that, soon after 
this interview he would inform Roxas of what the Com- 
monwealth President had said about him. 



[ 200 ] 



The senators and the Congressmen whom the Filipino 
people elected in the November, 1941 election wei’e sup- 
posed to assume office two months later or on January 1, 
1942. They were, of course, unable to do so because on 
that date the Japanese invasion forces were entering the 
outskirts of Manila. Hence, the first session which the 
Congress was able to hold did not take place until after 
liberation, or on June of 1945. Our magnificent pre-war 
Legislative Building on P. Burgos Street was then in ruins 
so this historic meeting took place in an old wooden school- 
house building on Calle Lepanto. 

There was never any question as to who would be 
elected President of the Senate. There was only one can- 
didate and that was Manuel Roxas. He stood out like a 
giant and a tower of strength above all othei's. Roxas 
assumed office on June 9, 1945 and, in his inaugrui’al speech, 
he impressed upon his colleagues the serious problems con- 
fronting our people. “The destruction which the war has 
wrought on our land,” he said, “has been great and wide- 
spread. There is hardly a hamlet in the Philippines that 
has not been laid waste by the enemy. Our fairest cities 
have been razed to the ground, our homes and factories 
have been reduced to ashes, our farms have been devas- 
tated ; nothing is left of our commerce, our ships, our com- 
munication and land transportation systems. Our national 
economy has been disrupted and disorganized and our pro- 
ductive system severely damaged. We can expect only a 
meager portion of our normal revenues before the war 
because our national production income is less than 20 per 
cent of the pre-war level. This situation creates social 
and economic problems which challenge the vision and 
statesmanship of our Government and our people.” 

Roxas then made an announcement which, to a large 
extent, explains his relation towards the representatives 
of the United States when later he assumed the presidency 



[ 201 ] 



of the Republic. “Our only hope for an early i*eco- 
very,” he continued, “is the speedy gp’ant of rehabilitation 
aid so generously proffered by the United States and for 
which we should be deeply grateful. But it is upon our- 
selves that we should depend chiefly for the solution of 
many of our most pressing problems. It is upon ourselves, 
upon our willingness and eagerness to work and bring back 
productive enterprise that we can i*ely most for immediate 
relief. And this we can do even while we are still fight- 
ing this war, even while our sons are at the front bravely 
assisting the American forces in the effort to complete the 
liberation of our country and achieve final victory over 
Japan. We must put back our farms into production, 
reopen the doors of credit, canalize capital into productive 
activities, revive our commerce, reestablish our transpoi*- 
tation and communication system, rebuild our factories, 
stabilize our currency, solve our fiscal problems and create 
opportunities for labor. We must correlate wages with 
actual living costs, prevent inflation and restore confi- 
dence of the people in their government. 

“With the inauguration of the Congress of the Phil- 
ippines, we are taking one of the most vital and signi- 
ficant steps towards the reestablishment of constitutional 
process. We must maintain and enforce a regime of 
law; we must uphold justice for all. Every one should 
be entitled to invoke the guarantees of our Constitution 
and our laws. In that way alone shall we be able to bring 
back peace into the hearts of our people and contentment 
and happiness to our countrymen.” 

Then, apparently foreseeing that jealousies and per- 
sonal rivalries between political leaders might obstruct 
an early solution of the country’s ills, he said — 

“I call your attention to these problems. I urge 

upon you the duty of approaching them ‘with malice 

towards none,’ with a firm desire to do what is right 



[ 202 ] 



and just, with a determination to place the interests 
of our country uppermost in our minds. Our people 
have suffered too much to allow ourselves the tempta- 
tion of deviating from the path to which self-interest 
and patriotism beckon us. For my part, I assure you, 
I shall follow that coui'se no matter the cost, and may 
my people forget me if I fail them in this crucial 
hour.” 

These were indeed praiseworthy words. But insofar 
as some of Roxas’ political enemies wei*e concerned, they 
fell on deaf ears. For such misguided politicians had al- 
ready made up their minds to accuse Roxas of ti'eason. It 
mattered not to them that Roxas’ services were sorely 
needed by the Filipino people. It mattered not to them 
that even the guerrilla leaders had already publicly an- 
nounced that Roxas had been of invaluable service to their 
activities against the Japanese. These particular political 
enemies of Roxas had but one object in mind, namely, to 
eliminate him from the political scene. And so because 
Roxas had been Chairman of the Economic Planning Board 
during Laurel’s administration and a member of the Com- 
mission which drafted the puppet Republic’s Constitution, 
they decided to exploit these facts as much as possible to 
give some semblance of reality to their charges that Roxas 
had collaborated with the enemy and was, therefore, a 
traitor. 



[ 203 ] 




CT^HE Filipino people owe a great deal to General Mac- 
Arthur. He has always had the interests of our coun- 
try at heart. The “I Shall Return” promise which he made 
soon after leaving Corregidor for Australia proved to be 
an inspiration to us and did much to bolster our courage 
and keep our spirit alive during the trying period of Jap- 
anese occupation. But MacArthur committed a most seri- 
ous blunder when he did finally return to the Philippines. 
He took it for granted that the Filipino leaders who had 
served in the puppet government which the Japanese had 
set up here were prima facie traitors to the Commonwealth 
and to the government of the United States, and that they 
should consequently be immediately placed under arrest 
pending the formal filing of criminal charges accusing them 
of treason. The American General failed to realize that 
most of our pre-war leaders had served the puppet gov- 
ernment not because they were transferring their alle- 
giance to Japan, but because they considered it their duty 
to do everything within their power to alleviate the suffer- 
ings of the civilian population and that, at heart, they sin- 
cerely were praying that Almighty God would eventually 
give victory to the United Allies. The more level minded 
members of our community — and they were in the great 
majority, also knew that if Laurel, Aquino, Alunan, Yulo, 
Paredes and many other responsible public officials had 
stubbornly refused to occupy the positions which the Jap- 
anese Military Administration was thrusting upon them, 
the Japanese would have liquidated them as they did the 
late Jose Abad Santos. Furthermore, the military author- 
ities would have then placed minor politicians in posi- 



[ 204 ] 



tions of influence who would most probably have taken the 
opportunity to enrich themselves and wreak vengeance on 
their political opponents in order to insure their perman- 
ence in office. 

I consider General MacArthur therefoi'e, largely res- 
ponsible for giving Roxas’ political opponents the oppor- 
tunity to raise the issue of collaboration in the bitter poli- 
tical campaign that was to follow. To make matters worse, 
thex*e were a number of misguided American officials from 
distant Washington, notably the then Secretai'y of the In- 
terior Harold Ickes, who condemned all Filipinos who had 
served in the puppet republic. Since MacArthur had ar- 
rested those who had served in the puppet government, it 
became necessary also for the Osmena administration to 
set up a Peoples Court before whom these unfortunate of- 
ficials could be tried for allegedly having collaborated with 
the enemy. While criminal charges were pending against 
them they could obviously not be appointed to administra- 
tive positions where their previous experiences were sorely 
needed, nor could they run for public office. 

The great majority of the Filipino leaders whose pa- 
triotism was being questioned M'^ere personal friends and 
pre-war associates of Osmena. It has never been satis- 
factorily explained just exactly why Osmena did not lift 
a finger to help them by explaining to General MacArthur 
what these Filipino officials were faced with during the 
Japanese occupation, and why they were forced to accept 
the government positions which had been thrust upon 
them by the military authorities. If Osmena had any 
doubts regarding their loyalty and the situation prevail- 
ing here during the occupation, it seems to me that he 
should have sought the advice of men like former Chief 
Justice Ramon Avancena, or Don Ramon Fernandez whose 
integi'ity of character and loyalty to the United States 
could never be questioned. These men were well-known 



[ 205 ] 



Filipinos and personal friends of Osmena. They would 
have assured him that men like Laurel and Recto had 
never forsaken the United States and that, far from be- 
traying America, they had taken on difficult and danger- 
ous assignments in order to help our people. Osmena 
was, after all. President of the Commonwealth and there- 
fore the only one who was in a position to intercede for 
his former colleagues. Even if he did not succeed in per- 
suading General MacArthur to release the Filipino lead- 
ers whom he had arrested, Osmena could have, at least, 
given his friends the satisfaction of knowing that he sym- 
pathized with their position and that he was doing every- 
thing he could to help them. His hands-off policy instead 
gave many of his followers the impression that the Com- 
monwealth President approved what MacArthur had done 
and further served to cause dissension within the ranks 
of the Nacionalista party. 

Many of those eager to destroy Roxas availed them- 
selves of every means to besmirch his reputation. They 
went to the extent of bringing pressure on Lorenzo Ta- 
nada, the new Solicitor General whom Osmena had recent- 
ly appointed and who was in charge of prosecuting our 
so-called collaborators. They called on him and tried to 
convince him that an information should be filed against 
Roxas accusing him of the crime of treason. It mat- 
tered not to them that General MacArthur, who was fa- 
miliar with Roxas’ war record, had already cleared the 
Filipino leader. These politicians must have felt that, if 
Roxas was indicted, it would eliminate him from the po- 
litical scene for the time being at least. But Tanada 
knew that General Roxas, far from having collaborated 
with the Japanese, had at the risk of his own life been 
of great value to the underground movement. He refused 
to proceed against Roxas. 



[ 206 ] 



National elections should have been held in the Phil- 
ippines in November of 1945 or, in other words, four 
years after the elections of 1941. It was very apparent 
to all however that, because of the condition then prevail- 
ing throughout the Philippines, it was impossible to give 
the people a real opportunity to freely elect a president 
and a new Congi*ess. For aside from the fact that trans- 
portation and communication facilities were still disor- 
ganized, there was not even enough paper available in 
the country for the printing of ballots, nor enough build- 
ing materials with which to construct voting booths. 
Therefore the elections were for the time being, indefi- 
nitely postponed. 

As the days passed into weeks the question that was 
paramount in the minds of most of the people remained 
— who would be the Nacionalista candidate for president? 
It was a foregone conclusion that whoever that party no- 
minated would be elected because, at that time, there was 
no opposition group of any importance. Osmena of course 
wanted to continue in office but thei'e was a strong feel- 
ing among the people as a whole that the time had come 
for a younger and more vigorous man to take the helm. 

The leaders of the Nacionalista party as well as pro- 
minent businessmen and civic leaders were most desir- 
ous of averting a bi'eak among our principal leaders. 
They realized that the problems Avhich faced our nation 
were many and difficult of solution and it was, there- 
foi'e, advisable for the best niinds in the countiy to woi'k 
together The possibility of reaching a working arrange- 
ment between the two leading candidates, i.e., Roxas and 
Osmena, was the subject of discussion everywhere. 

Among the first to propose a workable solution were 
Jose P. Bengzon, who was then Nacionalista party whip 
in the lower house, and Jose Zulueta who was the Speaker. 



[ 207 ] 



After holding several interviews with the Commonwealth 
President, they concluded that the best solution was for 
Osmena and Roxas to run for election on the same ticket 
as President and Vice-President respectively but that, a 
few months after the inauguration of the Republic, Osmena 
would retire from office whereupon Roxas would automa- 
tically become President. 

At an informal caucus held in the Roxas household 
on Almeda Street, Bengzon described his plan, explaining, 
at the same time, that it was acceptable to Osmena. Every 
one present turned to Roxas for his reply. Roxas’ an- 
swer was short and to the point. “I am of the opinion,” 
he said, “that Osmena sincerely believes he can carry out 
this plan. But can anyone assure me that, after he has 
been in office a few months, he will be able to resist the 
pressure that will indubitably be brought upon him by 
his relatives and closest personal followers to continue in 
office for the remainder of his term?” 

Bengzon fully appi’eciated Roxas’ attitude. “I am 
afraid,” said Bengzon, “no one can assure us that the plan 
I have suggested will really be carried out in its en- 
tirety.” 

That Osmena very much wanted to continue in office 
if only for a few months after the establishment of the 
Republic soon became evident. Not long after the caucus 
which I have just described, he summoned Roxas to a 
conference at Malacanan. The meeting proved to be most 
cordial. Osmena’s attitude was very different from that 
which he had shown when he and Roxas met at the air- 
port. He appeared to look upon Roxas once more as an 
old friend with whom he had had many agreeable expe- 
riences in the past. 



[ 208 ] 



There was no one present at this meeting and what 
I am about to relate is what Roxas subsequently told me 
and his brother Mamerto. 

“After we had greeted each other wai-mly,” said 
Roxas, “Osmeha proceeded to unburden himself. T fully 
sympathize with your desire to run for the presidency,’ 
began Osmeha, ‘but I hope you will also understand my 
point of view. I have served our people loyally and faith- 
fully for nearly 40 years. I am a much older man than 
you are and I do not expect to be in public life veiy much 
longer. I want to have the satisfaction of being the first 
President of the Republic. I urge you, therefore, to ac- 
cept the working proposal which so many of our mutual 
friends have suggested. Let us run together on the Na- 
cionalista ticket, I as President and you as Vice-President. 

• Within a few short months after the Republic is inaugu- 
rated I shall retire from the presidency and you may then 
take over.’ ’’ 

“My immediate reaction to Osmeha’s proposal,’’ con- 
tinued Roxas, “was to reject it then and there. But I did 
not have the heart to turn the old man down so abruptly. 
I, therefore, asked him to give me a couple of days to 
think it over. We made a date to meet again later in the 
week.” 

On the appointed day Roxas called on Osniena in Ma- 
lacanan. “Mr. Pi'esident,” he said, “as you well know, 
a number of your closest political advisers have openly ac- 
cused me of treason. They claim that I have collaborated 
with the Japanese. I cannot believe that these followers 
of yours have made such base charges in accordance with 
your bidding. But I do know that you have not raised a 
hand to deter them from falsely accusing me. If I were 
now to withdraw my candidacy and accept the subordinate 
position which you offer, our people will conclude that 



[ 209 ] 



there is some truth to the charges which my political op- 
ponents have hurled against me. They will think that I 
am afraid to make an issue of them and that is why I am 
willing to play second fiddle to you. My conscience does 
not permit me to place such a blot on my political career. 
I would be ashamed to face my children for I would never 
be able to satisfactorily explain my conduct to them. 
Therefore, I find it impossible to accept your proposal. I 
fully sympathize with your desire to end your great ca- 
reer as first President of the Republic, but forces beyond 
our control have intervened and we must let the people 
choose between us.” 

The long awaited pi*esidential elections which should 
have been held in November, 1945, were finally scheduled 
for April 23, 1946. This meant that, whoever was elect- 
ed would hold office as President of the Commonwealth 
until July 4, 1946 when he would automatically become 
President of the Republic. Osmena, being in power, 
should have had every advantage in mai’shalling his forces. 
But it was very evident that the masses of our people 
wanted a younger and more courageous leader. Osmena 
seemed to sense it. Furthermore, efforts to reach a work- 
ing agreement between him and Roxas continued to be 
made by their mutual friends. Slowly and gradually Os- 
mena became reconciled to the thought that it would be 
more prudent for him to retire from public life rather 

than risk the possibility of a defeat in the closing years of 
his career. 

The final working solution suggested by those who 
were anxious to avoid a split within the ranks of the 
Nacionahsta party was to the following effect: A Na- 
cionahsta convention would be held in Manila to be at- 
en e^ y delegates from all over the islands. One of the 
party s outstanding leaders, namely, Mariano Cuenco 
who, incidentally, had been Osmeha’s political enemy, in 

[ 210 ] 



Cebu for many years, would thereupon nominate Osmena 
for the presidency. Osmena, however, would graciously 
decline the nomination giving as his reasons therefor his 
advanced age, his waning health, and the need of the 
counti'y to avail itself of the services of a younger and 
more vigorous leader. After Osmena’s refusal to accept 
the nomination, Roxas would thereupon be nominated by 
acclamation. It was also suggested by mutual friends of 
Osmena and Roxas that, after assuming office as Pres- 
ident, Roxas should offer to Osmena the position of either 
ambassador to Washington, or chief justice of the Su- 
preme Court, for either of which positions the retiring 
President was eminently qualified. 

The principal difficulty in carrying this plan into 
effect was to convince Mariano Cuenco that he Avas to be 
the one to nominate Osmena, lauding him at the same time 
for his past services to our country. “Believe me, Mar- 
cial,” Roxas said to me when he later described this inci- 
dent, “I had an exti'emely difficult time convincing Cuen- 
co to swallow his pride and agree to make the proposed 
nomination. But Cuenco eventually acceded to my re- 
quest. He promised me that he Avould forget his past dif- 
ferences with Osmena and would do his best to deliver a 
nomination speech of which his old political rival would 
have reason to be proud.” 

President Osmena gave considerable thought to this 
proposed working arrangement. He finally decided to 
accept it and he so informed Roxas Avhom he summoned to 
Malacanan for that purpose. Furthermore, he requested 
Roxas to prepare the statement that he (Osmena) would 
send to the convention floor upon his being notified of 
the nomination. Roxas gladly agi'eed to prepare it. He 
promised to send the draft to Osmena as soon as possible 
so that the latter might go over it and make such changes 
as he wished. Thus, the meeting ended and, during the 



[ 211 ] 



next few days, Roxas devoted considerable time and ef- 
fort preparing the statement that would justify Osmena’s 
decision declining the nomination. When this carefully 
worded document was finished, Roxas sent it to Osmena. 
The President said that he would go over it carefully, mak- 
ing only such changes as he believed would serve to moi*e 
accurately express his feelings. 



For some reason which we shall never be able to ex- 
plain unless Osmena himself volunteers to furnish the in- 
formation, the Commonwealth President suddenly changed 
his mind and decided not to proceed with the working so- 
lution which he had, at first, agreed to accept. Just ex- 
actly who it was who prevailed upon him to risk his great 
political career by launching his candidacy, I do not know. 
Most likely his wife, his sons and daughters, and his clo- 
sest political followers succeeded in convincing the aging 
Commonwealth President that he should make another 
bid for the highest elective position in our country. Thus 
the last efforts of Roxas' and Osmena’s friends to find 
a way out that would be acceptable to both men failed 
to materialize. The die was cast. The old Nacionalista 
^^ 4 - y ^ split in 1922 only to be reunited soon 

terwards, and which again had split in 1934 only to be 
reunited the following year, was once more divided. Ro- 
^^^^ounced that the party under whose banner he 

T iKo 1 ^ presidency would be known as the 

iiiberal party. 



fho cn- ^ decided to hold its convention in 

nniir , ^ because, at that time, it was the 

enmio-h^i- standing in Manila large and spacious 

• . , , ^ ^ delegates that were expected to pour 

^ ^ fi’om the provinces. The Nacionalistas an- 

ced that their convention would be held in the “El 
big nipa and sawali dancing pavilion 
le an uan district which some enterprising business- 



[ 212 ] 



men had constructed soon after liberation in order to en- 
tice dollax’-rich G.I.’s. 

Since the nomination of Osmeiia by the Nacionalis- 
tas was a foregone conclusion, the real pi'oblem before 
them was the choice of a vice-pi*esident. The party finally 
nominated Eulogio Rodriguez, Sr. from Rizal. Rodriguez 
was an old experienced politician having also been at one 
time Mayor of Manila, Secretary of Agriculture and a 
member of the Senate. He was extremely popular for he 
had that rare gift of being able to be attentive and nice 
to everybodj'^ and to make them feel that their problems 
were also his concern. 

The choice of a vice-presidential running mate in the 
Liberal ticket with Roxas offered a more difficult prob- 
lem. Since Roxas was from the Visayas it was advisable 
that the vice-presidential candidate be either from cen- 
tral or northern Luzon. If Mac Arthur had not taken it 
upon himself to denounce as collaborators all those who 
had served in the puppet government, Roxas would have 
asked either Claro Recto or Jose Laurel to team up with 
him. But these distinguished leaders had been indict- 
ed before the Peoples Court. It did not seem pi’oper to 
nominate for the vice-presidency a man who was facing 
trial for treason. Furthermore, Roxas realized that even 
if the Filipino people wei*e willing to elect either of these 
men, serious repercussions might follow in connection with 
our country’s urgent need for American economic and fin- 
ancial aid. For it was very evident at that time that not 
only the leaders of the Democratic administration in the 
United States but the American people as a whole were bit- 
ter and hostile against those Filipinos who had served 
Japan’s puppet regime. If we, therefore, elected any one 
of them to high office, the granting of the aid which we so 
badly needed from America might be retarded if not ac- 
tually withheld. 



[ 213 ] 



About the only one of our pre-war political figures 
whom the Japanese had not forced into an important ad- 
ministrative position during their occupation of the Phil- 
ippines was Senator Elpidio Quirino from Ilocos Sur. Qui- 
rino had occupied many important, positions prior to the 
war, having been not only representative and senator but 
also Secretary of Finance and Secretary of the Interior. 
Most important of all, he came from the Ilocano region 
where there were many soi’ely needed votes. As Roxas 
himself explained to his closest friends and advisers : “Qui- 
rino’s greatest asset to me is geography.” And so the Lib- 
eral convention nominated him as Roxas’ running mate. 

The results of the presidential election were, of course, 
bound to be critical. If Roxas was elected, it would mean 
that, for the first time since 1907, Osmena was being re- 
pudiated in the polls. Thus, instead of ending his public 
service with flying colors the Commonwealth President 
would be forced to go into retirement because of lack of 
confidence from the people whom he had served so faith- 
fully for nearly 40 years. On the other hand, if Roxas was 

e eated, the country would lose the future service of this 
great and talented leader. For Roxas announced to his 
c osest friends and associates that, if he should lose, he 
wou never again run for public office. Instead he said 
u e would exert his best efforts to found a new daily 
newspapiei. He believed that our country needed a truly 
m epen ent liberal newspaper that would courageously 
c ampion liberal issues, and he thought that he could best 

serve is people by directing the publication of such a 
journal. 

+ ^ people had been given the opportunity 

° ^ i. ^ ^ president and a vice- 

president, Roxas would have undoubtedly been elected by a 
yo e so overwhelmingly great as to be almost beyond be- 
lief. I have been told by many American officials who 

[214] 



were in the Philippines shortly before or during that cri- 
tical period that, in private polls conducted by them among 
Filipinos of all walks of life with whom they came in con- 
tact, the vote was invariably in favor of Roxas by odds 
of as much as 8 to 1, or 9 to 1. I have in mind, in paiv 
ticular. Colonel James Header who is- now occupying an 
important position in the United States Embassy in Ma- 
nila. At the outbreak of the war, Colonel Header was 
President of Russell Sage College in New York but, like 
many other middle aged Americans, he did not consider 
himself too old to join America’s Armed Foi'ces. He was 
in Manila soon after liberation and was placed in chai'ge 
of one of the Philippine Civil Affairs Units (PCAU) en- 
trusted with the difficult job of distributing food and sup- 
plies to our hungry population. He had no less than 2,000 
Filipinos working under him. Being curious to find out 
what they thought of our outstanding candidates for the 
presidency. Colonel Header privately and informally polled 
his 2,000 employees to determine their choice. The re- 
sults were 90% for Roxas and only 10% for Osmena. 

Unfoi’tunately, however, Roxas’ pi'oblem was not as 
simple as that. For besides electing a President and a 
Vice-President, our people also had to elect senators and 
congressmen. Local issues were, therefore, necessarily in- 
volved. In evei'y province, if not in every congressional 
district, there are usually two or more men vieing for 
leadership. If one of them got on the Roxas bandwagon, 
the other was almost sure to side with Osmena. There was 
the case, for example, of Pangasinan. For many years 
prior to the war Cipriano Primicias, one of the most bril- 
liant men in that province, was a well-known Roxas man. 
I remember Primicias telling me that he considered Roxas 
even more talented and capable than the mighty Que- 
zon himself and that he was ready to follow him at any 
time. But Primicias’ most bitter political opponent in 
Pangasinan was Eugenio Perez. Perez aligned himself 



[ 215 ] 



with Roxas and so this meant Primicias’ deflection to the 
Osmena group. 

What happened in Pangasinan was repeated in many 
provinces of the Philippines. The battle lines were thus 
tightly diawn and, since Osmena’s gi’oup was in powei' 
and had more money at their disposal, one could not easily 
foietell the outcome of the election. I, pei’sonally how- 
evei never had the slightest doubt that Roxas would win. 
I could not help but feel that Almighty God had spared this 
great Filipino during the trying days of the Japanese oc- 
cupation so that our people might turn to him for the 
leadership which our country sorely needed during the 
most critical period of our history. 

It was foitunate also that Roxas’ opponent was a gen- 
tleman. Osmena could, if he had wanted to, have availed 
himself of many political tricks to gain an unfair ad- 
van age ovei his opponent. But he was too honest a sta- 

esman o do it. He preferred to let the people judge him 
solely by his past record. 



Owing to the growing power of the Huks or com- 
munis - e dissidents in Central Luzon, Roxas was unable 
carnpai^ m that area. He was thus deprived of many 

rniiT-r^^ Nacionalista party was 

arnhin f But throughout the rest of the 

derlv he elections were generally peaceful and or- 

rwVh “k a single man was killed despite the intensity 
The eo»r^ t t *^^™Paign was conducted by both parties. 

tetd whtrl a comfortable 

tinued to ^ Which, on the contrary, con- 

ficM?v Before the final results were of- 

defeal Osmena very gallantly admitted his 

warml'v ' message to his old friend 

warmly congratulating him on his election. 



[ 216 ] 



Osmena thus never lost his composure. He accepted 
the people’s verdict without complaint and he declined to 
cast any aspersions on his victorious rival. And so this 
man who throughout his long political career had never 
been touched by the breath of scandal, whose reputation 
for complete integrity had never been questioned, proved 
to the very end that he was a gentleman and a true Chris- 
tian. 



[ 217 ] 




the day Osmena conceded his defeat, Roxas deliver- 
ed a stirring radio address beamed to the people of 
the United States. The President-elect took advantage of 
this occasion to make plain that the people of the Philip- 
pines had completely repudiated those political opponents 
of his who had charged him with having collaborated with 
the enemy during the Japanese occupation. “These char- 
ges of collaboration,” said Roxas, “have been completely 
and unequivocably repudiated by the Filipino people who 
were here during the war and were in the best position 
to know the significance of my actions. I, therefore, con- 
sider myself completely cleared of all taint of collabora- 
tion. My loyalty to my country and to the United States 
are today fully vindicated by the highest and fairest tri- 
bunal that can pass upon such matters. Had there been 
any semblance of truth to these charges, the Filipino 
people would have completely rejected me. Now the 
cards are clear. I will assume office on the 28th day 
of May and, beginning on that day, the Filipino people 
will roll up their sleeves and go to work. 

During the campaign I openly advocated close and 
m imate cooperation with the foreign policy of the United 
a es in the Orient. I shall abide by this commitment 
TT because I am convinced of the sincerity of 

, ^ nited States in the promotion of world peace and of 

e freedom and economic security of all the nations of 
the world. 

“Realizing the need of the Philippines for the pro- 
mo ion o pioductive and other economic enterprises as 
soon as possible, I shall welcome the assistance of Amer- 

[ 218 ] 



ican capital foi’ the development of oui* resources. My 
administration will maintain stable political and econo- 
mic conditions to safeguard investments. I believe that 
the reconstruction of the Philippine economy, so urgently 
necessary in order to provide employment to millions of 
our people and to raise their standax’ds of living, can only 
be more rapidly accomplished in this manner. I am con- 
fident that American capital jointly with Filipino capital 
will find attractive oppoi-tunities in the Philippines. 

"Our problems are great and difficult. Our time is 
short. The Philippine experiment is of tremendous im- 
portance to the fate of nations struggling for freedom. 
It must not fail. America cannot afford to allow it to 
fail." I appeal for American understanding of our diffi- 
culties and for the willing and sustained cooperation of the 
American Government.” 

Two days later Roxas spoke to the Filipino people 
over station KZFM and reminded them that the so- 
cial and economic problems facing the nation wex’e tx’e- 
mendous axxd that, although he hoped to be able to obtain 
financial help fx*om the Uxxited States govex’nment, we Fi- 
lipinos should xxot forget that, in the final analysis, salva- 
tion lay ixx our own hands. He said — 

“The work of rehabilitation and reconstruction 
will be stax’ted without delay. I shall even now txy 
to reach an agx’eemexxt with the Uxxited States Gov- 
ernmexxt coxxcernixxg the Rehabilitation Acts recently 
passed by the Uxxited States Congress. I shall imme- 
diately take up with the Office of the United States 
High Commissioner the details of agx*eements and other 
requix-emexxts provided by these laws so that I may be 
x-eady as soon as I axn inaugux’ated and the new Con- 
gress convexxes, to expedite official action on such 
measui’es. 

"But you must xxot have the impx*ession that our 
economic axxd social rehabilitation caxx be achieved 



[ 219 ] 



merely by the approval of the Rehabilitation Acts or 
by the inauguration of my administration. The as- 
sistance derived from America will merely give us the 
means which we need to effectuate our economic re- 
construction. 



“The actual work must be done by ourselves. You 
cannot expect everything from the Government; the 
Government alone cannot create the wealth needed 
for the sustenance of the whole nation. This duty 
devolves upon all our people for their individual wel- 
fare and our national prosperity. 

“In this task, we need patience and forbearance; 
we need foresight and readiness to undergo sacrifices 
for the common aim. We must obviate as much as 
possible unnecessary social conflicts and sincerely en- 
deavor to bring about a settlement of differences in a 
manner that may not be harmful to the progress of 
the wox’k that is to be done. Labor, including farm 
enants, will find a friend and a champion in my ad- 
mmistration^— their just and reasonable claims will be 
upheld; justice will be done to them. 

.. , other hand, we must recognize that cap- 

itai IS essential to economic enterprise. Without in- 
vestments labor could not be employed. I offer to 
®very assurance of fair and just treatment, po- 
security guaranteed by our 
vetitmlrFf laws. We must give to new in- 

sistflTipo ^ reasonable encouragement and as- 

trfttoi? wii? w i-evised. My adminis- 

successful enterprise.^® punitive measures against 

mil* aftermath since 

GVPTi nnv^ many of our standards and 

ino- fViQf ^uny of our people are expect- 

Tirnhiom ^ Government will solve their individual 
foit n fl?"' them without themselves making any ef- 
I ea. That is a mistake. All that 

mi> nnnnvf to guarantee to every individual an econo- 
*^^^ty and provide him with reasonably sat- 

wcvp ^^^^^tions under which he can pursue his 
oi\n welfare and happiness." 



[ 220 ] 



Before concluding, Roxas again pleaded with his peo- 
ple to forget past differences, to hold no grudge against 
any one and to join together to help solve the problems 
that were common to all. “Although the election cam- 
paign has been hard and, in many respects, bitter,” he 
said, “I assure you that I hold no grudge against any 
party, group or individual. When I assume office I shall 
regard myself not as the head of a party but as the Chief 
Executive of the whole nation dutj-bound to safeguard 
and promote the well-being of all my countrjnnen. 

“There will be no vindictiveness in my policies or ac- 
tions. No public official or private individual need have 
any misgivings as to my attitude towards them, whether 
they were for me or against me in the last campaign. Whe- 
ther they were for me or against me is now of no import- 
ance, provided they acted in accordance with the law and 
in the fi'ee exercise of their individual freedom. 

“Thei’e will be no pm*ges of any sort. Officials and 
employees Avho performed their duties efficiently and in 
conformity with the law will be retained in office. Those 
who violated their trust, whether they were for me or 
against me, will be dealt with in accordance with our laws. 
I request all officials and employees to carry on and dis- 
charge their duties honestly without fear that they will 
be punished because of their political affiliations.” 

A few days later Roxas left for the United States in 
a U. S. Army transport plane. He was in vei*y much need 
of a little relaxation. There were also two very good rea- 
sons why he made the trip. He wanted, first of all, to 
have a personal interview with President Truman whom 
he had never met and who, together with important lead- 
ers of Congress, had a great deal to say regarding the fu- 
ture financial and economic aid which the Philippines sore- 
ly needed. In the second place, Roxas wanted very much 

[ 221 ] 



a 



to see his beloved daughter Ruby whom my wife and I had 
taken to the United States a few months before. Ruby 
had enrolled at Vassar College and was very happy in her 
surroundings. She had made many friends and wanted to 
continue with her studies. But Roxas knew that he would 
need her in Malacanan and he hoped to prevail upon her to 
either return home with him or come back in time for his 
inauguration. 

On his way to the United States, Roxas’ plane stopped 
in Tokyo for refueling. Genei'al MacAi’thur who was then 
in Japan met him at the airfield and, as the Philippines 
President-elect alighted from his plane, the Supreme Com- 
mander of the Allied Forces in the Pacific stepped for- 
ward and embraced him. Then MacArthur made a state- 
ment to the press which was given considerable publicity. 
In this statement MacArthur described the important part 
which General Roxas had played in the underground move- 
ment during the Japanese occupation and of his firm con- 
viction that the Filipino general had never once been dis- 
loyal to his people or to the Government of the United! 
States. MacArthur further explained that he had not said 
anything befoi'e because he did not want the Filipino peo- 
ple to feel that he was intermeddling in Philippine politics. 

When MacArthur’s statement was published many of 
oxas friends felt that the American General had com- 
mitted a grea,t mistake in failing to make his revelations 
soonei . For if he had taken a more definite stand from the 
yei> beginning, had he sooner told the people of the Phil- 
ippines what Roxas had really accomplished during the 
political opponents might have realized the 
u 1 1 y of charging him with collaboration. Thus, it might 
ave een possible for Osmena to :^each a working solu- 
tion with him. A split in the Nacionalista Party would 
avoided. On the other hand, and in fairness to 
MacArthur, I cannot help but feel that, when following 

[ 222 ] 



Roxas’ escape from the Japanese SCAP oi’dered him 
to immediately report for duty with his staff, the Amer- 
ican General had done all that was necessary to show to the 
Filipino people his true feelings towards Roxas. If some 
misguided politicians were simply too blind to see this, or 
if they chose to ignore it and instead tried to besmirch Ro- 
xas’ reputation because they hoped to derive some per- 
sonal benefit from it, only the Filipino electorate could 
vindicate Roxas. This our people finally did in the most 
unequivocable terms possible. 

When Roxas arrived in Washington he was received as 
an offical guest of the American Government and invited 
to live in Blair House which is the residence maintained in 
the American capital for such distinguished guests. Dur- 
ing his brief visit and after he had conferred with Pres- 
ident Truman and prominent leaders of Congress, Roxas 
was invited to speak before the National Press Club. I 
was not present at this memorable meeting but an Amer- 
ican official whom we all knew here in the Philippines hap- 
pened to be there and he has kindly furnished me with a 
statement of his impressions. This American was Dr. 
Frank Waring who later was appointed by President Tru- 
man as Chairman of the Philippine War Damage Commis- 
sion. This is what Dr. Waring has to say about Roxas’ ap- 
pearance before that important organization: 

"RECOLLECTIONS CONCERNING THE SPEECH 
OF PRESIDENT MANUEL A. ROXAS BEFORE 
THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB IN WASHINGTON, 
D.-C. 

By Frank A. Waring 

"During President Roxas’ hurried trip to Washing- 
ton in May, 1946, following his election but just prior 
to his inauguration, he was invited to address the Na- 
tional Press Club. Approximately 300 members and 
their guests gathered at luncheon to hear him. Because 



[ 223 ] 



the audience consists chiefly of the Washington rep- 
resentatives of the leading newspapers throughout the 
United States, it is perhaps the most critical in the 
world. To be invited to speak before the members of 
the club is both an honor and an ordeal. They recog- 
nize ability and they quickly detect hypocrisy and 
mediocrity. 

“The President of the Press Club first called upon 
Paul V. McNutt, then United States High Commis- 
sioner in the Philippines, to present President Roxas. 
Instead of introducing the speaker whom the members 
had come to hear, McNutt committed the error of 
launching into an extended address of his own. With 
afternoon engagements befoi'e them, the membei'S be- 
came restive. Eventually McNutt presented Roxas, 
who under such circumstances was faced with a 
doubly difficult assignment. With perfect self- con- 
fidence he accepted the challenge. 

“In his opening remarks President Roxas threw 
down the gauntlet as only a confident man can. He 
said,^ ‘Gentlemen, today I am achieving one of the 
ambitions of my life. Often have I visited this club 
as a guest in years gone by, and have sat where you 
are sitting today. On each such occasion I wished 
that I might be standing here where I am today be- 
cause I thought I could do better.’ Then he proceeded 
to do better. In his speech he ran the gamut of hu- 
man emotions. His audience was completely capti- 
vated by the man, his magnificent delivery, and most 
of all, the content of his message. The members of 
the National Press Club applauded when he wanted 
them to applaud, they laughed when he wanted them 
to laugh, and they cried when he wanted them to 
cry. I watched that audience of cynical, hardened, 
experienced newspapermen at the conclusion of his 
speech and there was not a dry eye in the audience. 
1 ^w innumerable n^embers reach into their pockets 
and unashamedly wipe their eyes with their hand- 
kerchiefs. When Roxas concluded, that audience of 
.^00 rose as a unit and gave him a standing ovation. 
H was an experience never to be forgotten. I saw 
Romulo sitting at the speakers’ table with eyes shin- 

[ 224 ] 



ing — pride written on his face — as he listened to 
the voice and the words of a master. But Romulo’s 
face was only one of 300 which reflected in various 
ways and in vai*ying degrees the skill of one of the 
greatest orators of our time. 

“After the luncheon one of my old friends, who 
is recognized as a leading reporter throughout the 
United States, came to me, knowing my admiration 
and friendship for the man and said, ‘Your man 
Roxas is all right.’ If the National Press Club had 
had the authority that day to vote aid and assistance 
to the Philippines, it would have been carried una- 
nimously.” 



[ 225 ] 



^Lajyiev 1 9 



OXAS’ oath taking ceremonies as the last President 
of the Commonwealth were held near what was left 
of the Philippine Legislative building on P. Burgos St. A 
large grandstand was constructed alongside the I'emains 
of this edifice. It made a very di'amatic setting because 
directly across fi'om it were the ruins of Intramuros where 
so many innocent civilians had been massaci'ed by the Jap- 
anese. 

The retiring Pi*esident, Sergio Osmena, drove Pres- 
ident-elect Roxas to the gi’andstand. There was a tumul- 
tuous applause from the crowd when they saw these two 
veterans sitting together in the Malacanan limousine. When 
the car reached the grandstand Osmena alighted first fol- 
lowed immediately afterwards by Roxas. The two men 
shook hands solemnly and more cheers and applause rent 
the air. Osmena then got back into the car and drove off 
as the crowd paid him a standing ovation. 

The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court administered 
the oath of office to President Roxas and, witnessing the 
ceiemony, prouder perhaps than any other one present, 
was Roxas’ aged mother. Dona Rosario Acuna. Seldom in- 
ee is it given to a widowed woman to bring up a talented 
son and to live long enough to see his elevation to the high- 
est position which the people of his country can give him. 

When Roxas turned to the vast multitude to deliver 
IS inaugural address, the crowd quieted down for they 
were eager to catch every word he had to say. 

I assume in all humbleness the complex responsibili- 
ties which you have chosen to give me,” he began. “I 

[ 226 ] 



pledge my efforts and my life to discharge them with what- 
ever talent, strength and energy I can master.” Little did 
we know then that although his talent and patriotism were 
to remain strong and vigorous to the very end, there was 
not much strength and energj' left in the heart of this great 
leadei*. 

“Our appointment with destinj' is upon us,” continued 
Roxas. “In five weeks we will be a free Republic. Our 
noble aspirations for nationhood, long cherished and ardu- 
ously contended for by our people, will be realized. We 
will enter upon a new existence in which our individual 
lives will form together a single current, recognized and 
identified in the ebb and flow of world events as distinctly 
Filipino. 

“Yet look about you, my fellow-citizens. The ti'agic 
evidence of recent history stares at us from the bi'oken 
ruins of our cities and the wasting acres of our soil. Be- 
neath the surface of our daily strivings lie deep the wounds 
of war and economic prosti'ation. The toppled columns of 
the Legislative building before which we stand are mute 
and weeping symbols of the land we have inherited from 
war. 



“There is hunger among us. In the mountain prov- 
inces and in other far-flung areas of our land children 
starve. Prices race with wages in the destructive elevators 
of inflation. The black market with all its attendant evils 
of disrespect for law and public morality thrives in the 
channels of commerce 

“Plagues of rats and locusts gnaw at our food sup- 
plies. Public health and sanitation have been set back 
a quarter of a century. 

“Housing for most of our urban citizens is shocking 
in its inadequacy and squalor. Disease and epidemic 



[ 227 ] 



threaten, and we have to thank Divine Providence that 
the death toll is still relatively small. 

“Our communications are destroyed, stolen or disrupt- 
ed, and many of our countrymen are still today cut off from 
the main currents of national life. Schools have been burned 
and teachers have been killed, our educational system is in 
large measure a shambles. 

“I have sketched a dark landscape, a bleak prospect 
for our future. I have not meant unduly to dramatize our 
ills. I do not wish to parade the sack-cloth and ashes of 
our people. Nevertheless, it is necessary to know the truth. 
Many of us live today in the chambered Nautilus of our 
own mental construction. There are those who close theii* 
eyes to the problems that confront us, and prefer to di- 
rect the national attention and the national energy at ob- 
jects outside ourselves, at fancied enemies, at fancied 
fears of imperialistic aggression. The coincidence of easy 
money and high prices gives to some of our people the 
false illusion of national prosperity and the mad notion 
that we have time to dally and debate. The prosperity 
of money and prices is a hallucination, a nightmarish 
dieam resulting from the scarcity of commodities and the 
influx of a half billion dollars of troop money. Soon, very 
soon, we must awake from that dream.” 

+1, Roxas already foresaw that al- 

oug there were plenty of pesos in circulation in otir 
midst, much of it represented inflation and that too much 

TT •+ purchase of imports from the 

ni e States without the corresponding exports from our 
country. And so he forewarned our people 

We will find that mere money, bloated by inflation 
and circulating in narrow channels, does not bring about 
piospeiity and national well-being. Everyday, that mo- 
ney is being siphoned from our land by more and more 

[ 228 ] 



impoi*ts — not productive imports, but imports for con- 
sumption. Tlie well-being of the tradesman alone is not 
the well-being of our people. Disaster awaits us tomor- 
row if we do not rouse ourselves and get back to work, to 
productive work.” 

Although it was only less than a year ago since Amer- 
ica had liberated us from a cruel and ruthless enemy, 
there were already some people in our midst who were 
beginning to cast aspersions against America. Roxas had 
a ready aiiswer for them. ‘‘A nation,” he said, “is some- 
thing more than the people who inhabit a geographic area. 
It is a spirit, a tradition and a way of life. There have 
been Americans whom we have disliked. There have 
been American administrations from which we have I’e- 
ceived scant comfort. There have been American Gov- 
ernors General with whom we have quarreled. But we 
have never had cause to waver in our confidence or faith 
in America. We have clasped to our bosom her system 
of government, her language, her institutions, her histo- 
rical traditions. We have made them ours. We cannot 
forget this fact and this great truth. We are to be a free 
nation largely because we were aided in that direction by 
love of liberty and the goodwill of the Ameidcan people. 
If we succeed as a nation, if we are able to survive as a 
nation — and of course we will — we will have America to 
thank. I bear witness to the fact that America stands 
ready to help, without selfishness, without motive ex- 
cept to reward us for our loyalty and to advance in our 
land the great cause of democx’acy and freedom for which 
Americans and Filipinos died togethei’, in many corners 
of the earth in the past four years. 

‘T find no dream of empire in America. While cog- 
nizant of power, America, as a nation, is troubled in the 
use of that power by an earnest and heartfelt desire to 



[ 229 ] 



advance not the cause of greed but the cause of freedom. 
We are and shall be a living monument to this fact.” 

Then directly addressing himself to those who doubt- 
ed America’s good intentions, he added — 

“Yet we have today in our own land a few among 
us who would have us believe that we are in danger 
of an imperialistic invasion from the very nation 
which is gi^anting us our sovereignty. They would 
have us believe that the American Republic, resplen- 
dent in her power and prestige as the leader of de- 
mocracy and as the spokesman for freedom, would 
lend herself to a theft of our national heritage for 
the sake of a thimblefull of profits. No, my mind 
will not stoop to as low a conceit as that. The nation 
which spent three hundred billion dollai’s to arm the 
hosts of freedom, the nation which has spent and is 
spending so much of its substance not only to free but 
also to feed the hungry peoples of the earth will not 
do that. Snjall minds see small deeds. I will not 
place my Government in the position of accusing the 
Lmited States Congress of willingly conspiring to 
cheat us of our birthright. I admit the possibil- 
error in the United States Congress as in any 
other constitutional body. But I have faith that jus- 
tice will be done us by a counti'y which has been our 
mother, our protector, our liberator and now our be- 
netactor. In this world, the balances of justice move 
^ momentums. I am firmiy convinced 

at when the scales point unmistakably to injustice 
being rendered us, the United States Congress will 
giant us redress in full and generous measure. 

T have no fears from a nation which idolizes 
hunianity and crowns with laurels those who fight 
tor freedom and brotherhood. There is no greater re- 
gard in America today than the national regard for 
om' people. Shall we sacrifice that rich regard on the 
altar of petty pride and foolish fears? Shall we hold 
up to world obloquy the country whose legions liber- 
ated us for freedom? Shall we give comfort to the 
enemies of liberty in the crisis which now grips the 

[ 230 ] 



earth? The forces of evil may be defeated, but they 
ai’e not dead. And there are new forces of evil grow- 
ing even in nations which wei*e our allies. I see no 
such forces reflected in the policies of the United 
States. 

“Let us strengthen as much as we can the hand 
of the nation which stands clearly in the world’s con- 
fusion today for democracy and for justice under law. 
Let us bide our time for the rectification of alleged 
impositions. When the time comes, let us present facts 
rather than fears. 

“The gratitude of the Filipino people to Amer- 
ica is great and enduring. Our feeling toward Amer- 
ica is not represented by the loud complaints of an 
articulate few in our midst. I say in the presence of 
our great American High Commissioner — one of the 
ablest and most unselfish of our advocates and 
friends — that the America of Franklin D. Roosevelt 
and of President Truman is a land we love and res- 
pect. The mighty concern that these men have felt 
for our welfare dwarfs the magnitude of our fan- 
cied ills against the United States today.’’ 

After thus properly paying homage to America, the 
new Commonwealth President proceeded to describe to his 
people the work that lay ahead of us all. “Meanwhile,’’ 
he said, “with the tools which have been provided us, we 
must move forward without pause to bind up this nation’s 
wounds, to toil, to make, and to build. We have, and will 
have, a market for our produce. We must concentrate on 
production, on every-increasing production. This nation 
must produce to live. We must have income fi’om abroad — 
income for exports. We must have that income so that 
we may buy the machines, hire the technical skills, and, 
for a time, buy the food which we need to sustain our 
strength and impart vigor and health to our young. That 
task must be begun now, today. The time for action has 
come. The national energy, in all its parts, must be fo- 
cused on a single purpose, on the rehabilitation of our de- 



[ 231 ] 



stroyed and ravaged economic enterprises — on rice, on 
sugar, on coconuts, on abaca, on coconut oil, on cigars and 
tobacco — on gold and chrome, and manganese and lumber. 
We must foster the enterprises which will raise the national 
income and bring in financial returns from abroad.” 

But the President also realized that it was not enough 
to concentrate on production and that, while trying to car- 
ry on that difficult problem, there were other responsibi- 
lities equally as urgent which could not be ignored. Thus, 
he continued — 



“But our aim is not alone to rebuild the economy 
that was broken and destroyed by war. That is only 
the beginning of our task, stupendous as it is. We 
must feed the hungry and heal the sick and disabled. 
We must wage war against inflation and unemploy- 
ment. That is the obvious foundation stone of na- 
tional rehabilitation.” 

Nor was Roxas unmindful of the dangers that lurked 
outside the Philippines and, because we are not strong 
enough to defend ourselves against foreign aggx’ession, he 
called the people’s attention to our need for help from 
others. He said — 



We will be as wholehearted as any nation in our 
. j? the ideals of an indivisible peace and an 

mdiv^ible world. We will maintain with all our 
stren^h and all our power our obligations to the 
j to the causes set forth in the 

T ^ ° Nations charter to which we are a signatory. 

maintain friendly arid hon- 
uro 1‘elations with all our neighbors and look for- 
• j 1 when peace and security will be 
niutual consent and by the collective 
conscience of mankind.” 



Knowing fully well that membership in the United 
a ions was not enough to insure our protection against a 
strong aggressor, he went on to say— 



[ 232 ] 



“But until that happy day dawns upon us, we can 
much more securely i-epose our fate in the understand- 
ing and comradeship which exist between the Philip- 
pines and the United States than in the hope of an 
international morality which, however desirable, is 
still today in the process of development. We are for- 
tunate to have as the guarantor of our security the 
United States of America, which is today the bulwark 
and support of small nations everywhere in the woidd.” 

Finally, Roxas once more made a plea for the united 
effort of all his countrymen in whose wisdom, he said, he 
had complete faith and confidence. His concluding words 
were as follows : 

“We have great tasks before us, tasks which 
challenge the very best and the most that is within us. 
There is no seed of effort which can be spared from 
the national planting. Charity and understanding 
must replace bitterness and anger. We cannot afford 
to cherish old feuds or old divisions. For the many 
tasks of national reconstruction, we need the thou- 
sand talents of all our people — men and women alike. 
The recent elections are past. Likewise the strife 
of war is over. Bitterness engendered by these 
events must be forgotten and healed. Violations of 
basic law will be tested and punished by law. Trai- 
tors will not escape their just desserts. But among 
the people, there must be no recriminations or ma- 
lignancies. Eri'ors of mind rather than of heart 
must be forgiven. The gi'eat test of war and sacri- 
fice through which we have passed with such hard- 
ship will have failed in one of its few benefits if it 
has not taught us that only in unity can there be pow- 
er, that only in singleness of national purpose can 
there be achieved national salvation. I do not mean 
to suggest that there is no room in this democracy 
for division of views or of parties. Vigilant, free 
and constructive minority organization is a spur to 
majority leadership and responsibility. 

“But as we go forward in our full faith to work 
out the destiny of our land and of our people, we 



[ 233 ] 



must cling fast to one another and to our friends 
across the seas ; we must maintain in both our hearts 
and minds a gentleness of understanding as well as 
firmness of purpose. Sweat and sacrifice will be 
needed, but they will fall on barren ground, unless 
we move in the path of God, ‘with malice toward 
none, with charity for all, with firmness in the 
right as God gives us to see the right.’ 

“I have faith in the wisdom of our people. I 
have timst in the goodness of God. Let us together 
maintain our faith in each other, in liberty and in 
the ways of democracy, and give strength to one an- 
other as we advance in oux* search for the evergreen 
pastures of peace and well-being for all. With the 
help of God, let us build in this our land a monument 
to freedom and to justice, a beacon to all mankind.” 



Although many problems of state required his constant 
attention in Malacahan President Roxas did not forget the 
men to whom he owed his life, namely, Nobuhiko Jimbo 
and Jose Laurel. Through a letter from Jimbo’s wife he 
learned that his Japanese savior, who in 1944 had been 
transfeired by his superior officers from the Philippines 
to Manchuria, was being confined by Nationalist China in 
a Prisoner of War Camp at Tsinan in North China. Ro- 
therefore, addressed to Generalissimo Chiang Kai 
shek the following letter of appeal : 



My dear General Chiang: 

r.f +i that you will understand, from the text 

^ letter, why my first communication to you 

ninot ®f?^^Ption of the Presidency of the Philip- 
pines, should be of a personal nature. 

long known of your deep interest in the 
interest which I deeply appreciate as 
Yoiir concem for the advancement of 
T om oi human dignity in this part of the world. 
I am also informed of your intimate acquaintance with 



[ 234 ] 



and sympathy for the recent struggles through which 
iny countrymen have so arduously passed. Those 
struggles, of course, are brief in measurement of time 
compai'eci with those which the great people of China, 
under your leadership, have endured and put forth 
during the long night of crisis from which we are now 
emerging. 

“The purpose of this personal letter is to place 
before you certain circumstances involving a Jap- 
anese army officer now in the custody of your Gov- 
ernment, an officer of minor importance in the gen- 
eral scheme of things but one who played an impoi't- 
ant role in my own experience of the recent war. 

“This officer, a certain Lieutenant Colonel Nobu- 
hiko Jimbo is being held, I am told, in a prison in 
Tsinan, Shantung Province, China, as a suspected 
war criminal. 1 hasten to say that I know nothing of 
his activities in China, nor of the evidence against 
him. I do not, of course, wish to raise any question 
regarding his guilt or innocence based on his activi- 
ties in any theatre other than in the Philippines. 

“I should like to submit, however, that Colonel 
Jimbo is responsible for my being alive today. He was 
known in the Philippines as one of the few Japanese 
officers with a genuine sympathy for our plight, and 
as one of those who did what he could, within the 
limits of his official station, to alleviate the brutal 
savagery of his superioi's and subordinates. On one 
occasion he risked his life by disobeying an order 
issued for my execution, and made a successful ap- 
peal at a later time for the rescinding of the execu- 
tion order. This action was not based especially on 
a personal esteem for me, although he had that, too, but 
on a repugnance for the senseless cruelty and mur- 
der madness which possessed his commanders and 
associates. He was, of my acquaintance, the most 
humane of the Japanese invaders. 

“If there is any proper way in which you can 
give countenance to these representations on his be- 
half, I would feel a great load taken off my mind. I 
know that it is, in an official sense, impolitic for me 



[ 235 ] 



to make these statements on behalf of Colonel Jim- 
bo, but my conscience would not permit me to re- 
frain from doing what I can do to bring these cir- 
cumstances to the attention of appropriate officials 
of your government. 

Permit me, Your Excellency, to express senti- 
ments of friendship and admiration for you and your 
countrymen. 



“Very sincerely yours, 

MANUEL ROXAS” 



The Chinese Generalissimo was quick to act on Roxas' 
etter and Colonel Jimbo soon found himself a free man 
on his way back to Japan. 

Laurel’s case was more difficult and complicated. To 
egm with, all those who, like him, had actively served the 
Japanese sponsored puppet Republic were facing trial be- 
Court. Any consideration that Roxas 
,, show Laurel would also react on the cases 

Vr. ^ 1 4 .U indictees. But this was not all. Roxas 

ew that the people of the United States and their Philip- 

Commissioner Paul V. 
rrmnf ^ ^ Gcame the first American Ambassador to our 
contmued to be bitter towards Laurel and the 
nnf oo served under him. They could 

f j i-ini® the situation which had 

1 ipino leadei’s when the Japanese occupied 
fi’iendly gesture that the Commonwealth 
therefore, exhibit towards the indictees, 
the fin ^ leader Laurel, could result in retarding 
nppde<i economic aid which our country sorely 

fripnd <5 n ^ candidly told his most intimate 

to Laurel but I can- 
nppH A ^ e interests of our whole population. We 
niei lean e p immediately and I must not do any- 

[ 236 ] 



thing that will result in a delay or a denial of that assist- 
ance.” 

Desirous of seeing Laurel but knowing that a visit from 
his friend would be given considerable publicity by the 
newspapers, Roxas again availed himself of his brother 
Mamerto to ari*ange a quiet meeting that would not be 
known to anyone other than Roxas’ closest advisers. Ma- 
merto contacted Laurel and accompanied him to Malaca- 
nan late at night when no other visitor was in the palace. 
Roxas explained to Laiu'el the delicate position in which 
he found himself and assured his friend that, although he 
could not openly come out for him, he would do everjd;hing 
possible behind the scenes. 

Delay in the trial of those who had been indicted be- 
fore the Peoples Court for political collaboration was what 
the accused needed most. With the lapse of time there 
was bound to be a better understanding of the motives 
which had actuated the Filipino leaders in accepting the po- 
sitions which the Japanese militaiy authorities had thrust 
upon them during the war. Roxas frequently dropped 
hints to that effect from time to time for the benefit of the 
members of the Peoples Court. Fx'equent postponements 
were obtained by the indictees and, eventually, as Roxas 
had anticipated, the Filipino people made known their 
firm conviction that the acts alleged to have been commit- 
ted by our pre-war leaders during the time they occupied 
positions in the puppet republic were not voluntary on 
their part or were, in effect, performed by them in the sin- 
cere belief that it was theix* patriotic duty to execute them 
in the interest of the safety of their fellow countxymen 
who were at that time at the mercy of a ruthless enemy. 

Thus it was that, on Januaxy 28 , 1948 , while the trial 
of Laurel, Recto and others like them were still pending 
before the Peoples Coux*t, Px*esident Roxas dedded that the 



[ 237 ] 



time was pi'opitious for the issuance of an amnesty pro- 
clamation. “The occupation of the Philippines by the Jap- 
anese armed forces during the last war,” he said, “and the 
organization by them of a goveimment administered by ci- 
tizens of the Philippines was subject to the direction and 
control of the Japanese. Following liberation by the Amer- 
ican forces charges of political collaboration with the en- 
emy were filed against the Filipinos who occupied im- 
portant positions in that government. The majority of the 
Filipino people today however realize that the alleged acts 
attributed to these Filipino citizens eithei' were not vo- 
luntary on their part or, in effect, were performed by them 
in the sincere belief that it was their duty to execute them 
in the interest of the safety of their countrymen who were 
then at the mercy of the enemy. With the lapse of time 
there has come a better understanding on the part of the 
Filipino people of the motives which actuated the persons 
who held positions under the occupation government. 
There is evidence that a majority of the Filipino people 
have fully vindicated the accused, convinced that, in the 
discharge of their functions as public officials, they did 
everything to prevent the carrying out by the Japanese of 
their desire to induce or compel the Filipino people to arm 
themselves against the allied nations. The question of col- 
laboiation has divided the people of the Philippines since 
liberation in a manner which threatens the unity of the 
nation at a time when the public welfare requires that said 
unity be safeguarded and preserved. This question of col- 
a oiation is, furthermore, essentially political in nature 
an should be settled in accordance with the conscience of 
t e majority of the Filipino people. It appears that the 
overwhelming sentiment of the Filipino people is now in 
avor of lesolving this question as speedily as possible by 
t e giant of amnesty to all persons who have been accused 
01 may hereafter be accused of treason.” 



[ 238 ] 



“Therefoi'e,” concluded the President, “by virtue of the 
power in me vested by Article VII, section 10(6) of the 
Constitution, I do hereby proclaim and grant full and com- 
plete amnesty to all persons accused of any offense against 
the national security for acts allegedly committed to give 
aid and comfort to the enemy during the last war; Pro- 
vided, however, that this amnesty shall not extend to per- 
sons who are now or may hereafter be accused of treason 
for having taken up arms against the allied nations or the 
members of the resistance movement, for having volun- 
tarily acted as spies or informers of the enemy, or for hav- 
ving committed murder, arson, coercion, robbeiy, physical 
injuries, or any other crime against person or property, 
for the purpose of aiding and abetting the enemy in the 
war against the allied nations or in the suppression of the 
resistance movement in the Philippines. 

“All cases now pending before the courts for alleged 
offenses coming within the terms of the amnesty herein 
gi'anted shall be dismissed by the respective courts on their 
own motion or upon petition by the prosecution or the ac- 
cused.” 

Congress was quick to approve the President’s pro- 
clamation and the court cases then pending against so many 
of our pre-war leaders were thus satisfactorily settled. 



[ 239 ] 



(^Itapier 20 



ON^HHEN the original draft of the Hawes-Cutting Inde- 
pendence Bill was being prepared in Washington 
way back in 1930, Roxas suggested that the date for the 
inauguration of the Philippine Republic should be either 
December 30th, namely, Rizal’s death anniversary, or Jan- 
uary 1st, i.e.. New Year’s Day. Weather conditions in the 
Philippines during the first and last months of the year are 
usually excellent and Roxas believed it would be vei*y ad- 
vantageous to always have good weather on such an im- 
portant . anniversary. But every American senator and 
congressman who had anything whatsoever to do with the 
Independence Bill insisted that the date should be July 4th. 
They argued that it would be most appropriate to have the 
American sponsored Philippine Republic celebrate its in- 
dependence day on the same date that the American people 
commemorate their day of freedom. Undoubtedly, there 
was a great deal to be said in favor of this idea, especially 
from the viewpoint of world publicity. Roxas did not 
press his point any further and so the date of July 4th was 
inserted in the bill. 



Two or thi'ee days prior to the inauguration of our 
Republic, distinguished visitors from the United States be- 
^n ariiying in Manila. Many other countries also sent 
their emissaries and representatives including several Am- 
bassadors and foreign ministers. Housing facilities at 
that time were extremely inadequate here. The only hotel 
that could offer anything decent was the Manila Hotel, but 
even that government hostelry only had the barest essen- 
lals. There was not even enough paint available in the 

[ 240 ] 



country to paint the interior of this building. Thus the 
foreign dignatories found that they were being accommo- 
dated in rooms that still bore the scars of war, that their 
only source of illumination was an electric bulb dangling 
from a cord, and that a simple iron bed or an army cot, a 
couple of chairs and unvarnished table constituted the only 
pieces of furniture inside their chambers. 

Some two weeks before the arrival of our foreign vi- 
sitors, the Manila Hotel management announced that all 
civilian guests had to vacate their rooms one or two days 
before July 4th in order that the hotel might be able to 
accommodate the distinguished representatives from abroad 
who were coming to Manila for the inauguration of our 
Republic. With one single exception, all the Filipino and 
American civilians who were then living in the hotel gladly 
left the premises and did their best to find temporai'y quar- 
ters elsewhere. The lone exception was Tomas Confesor, 
the guerrila leader and former Secx'etary of tlie Interior in 
Osmena's cabinet. He stubboi'iily refused to vacate his 
I'oom and dared anyone to put him out, announcing that 
he would meet force with force. Rather than make an 
issue of it the hotel management left him where he was. 

The morning of July 4, 1946 proved to be cloudy with 
overcast skies. Our Weather Bureau frankly announced 
that intermittent showers were expected throughout the 
day. But a huge crowd nevertheless braved the inclement 
weather and gathei'ed in the Luneta whei’e a large wooden 
grandstand had been erected directly in front of the Rizal 
monument. 

It was, of course, a great day for speech making. 
President Truman’s proclamation announcing the independ- 
ence of the Philippines was solemnly read by the United 
States High Commissioner. There were speeches by Sena- 
<tor Tydings, by Ambassador McNutt, and also by General 
MacArthur who had hurriedly flown to Manila from Tokyo 



[ 241 ] 



to witness this great occasion. President Roxas was due 
to speak immediately after taking his oath of office as 
first President of the Republic, but the most dramatic 
event of the day was to come before him. 

For suddenly there was a deep silence. The vast 
nondescript multitude stood hushed and still. The inter- 
mittent showei-s which had thoroughly drenched the mul- 
titude earlier in the morning also came to an end. Every- 
one’s attention was focussed on the tall, silver pole in fi'ont 
of the grandstand from where the American flag was 
flying. Then the American Ambassador arose and slowly 
began to lower the Stars and Stripes. The United States 
Army Band struck up the Star Spangled banner and we 
all stood at attention. When the music ended. President 
Roxas in turn pulled at a white cord and up the same 
flag pole the Filipino flag slowly began to rise. The band 
played the Philippine National Anthem— “Ne’er shall in- 
vaders trample thy sacred shores”. And as our emblem 
slowly rose and a breeze from the west unfurled her colors 
for all to see and cheer, tears rolled down the cheeks of 
the thousands of Filipinos who were gathered there. Half 
way up the flag post the two flags met — one going up and 
e o ei coming down. They touched each other for a 
ee mg instant as if in a last caress, a last kiss before 

emblem rightfully took her place at the top 
of that silver painted pole. 

In another moment the American flag was being 
so emn y and carefully folded by the American represen- 
tative. Our own flag was now at the top of the pole flut- 
ring in e steady breeze that blew in from the bay. 
en £uns ig guns began to bark while the crowd broke 
ou wi uniestrained cheers and applause. Churchbells 
lom a over the city began to peal proclaiming as it were 
oui song o fieedom. Low flying army planes whizzed 
over the crowds who were yelling themselves hoarse. For 



[ 242 ] 



this was the greatest day in the lives of those who were 
fortunate enough to be pi-esent. This was the day whose 
events would be recounted again and again in verse and 
song and stoiw during all the years that were to follow. 

Such was the setting before him when Roxas, after 
taking his oath of office, turned to the assembled multi- 
tude who were eagerly awaiting his inaugural speech as 
first Pi'esident of our young Republic. 

He began, as he should have done, by first paying 
tribute to the country to whom in great measm*e we owed 
our freedom — “A historic drama has just been unfolded 
before our eyes. The American flag has been lowered 
from the flagstaffs in this land . . . not in defeat, not in 
surrender, not by compulsion, but by the voluntaxy act of 
the sovereign American Nation. The flag which was first 
raised in conquest here has been hauled down with even 
greater glory. The Stars and Stripes will no longer fly 
over this land, but in the hearts of 18,000,000 Filipinos 
and in the eyes of many millions more in this pai*t of 
the world the American flag flies more triumphantly to- 
day than ever before in history.” 

After reviewing America’s record in the Philippines 
which had culminated in the proclamation of our inde- 
pendence by the President of the United States, he con- 
tinued : 

“ . . . The historic event has been completed. There 
remains for us only to evaluate the significance of 
what has occurred. 

“There are moments when men should pause in 
humbleness and look bevond the passing shadow of 
events to see the towering magnitude of the forces 
which have been brought to bear upon the affairs 
of current time. I judge this such a moment, and 
I am humble before it. 

“We who are gathered here personify, but no 
more than that, the act of establishing a new nation. 



[ 243 ] 



All of us are mere symbols of the millions of men, 
and the hundreds of hopes which are involved in our 
passing pageant. 

“It can be said that the eyes of the world are 
upon us. But the world is not listening especially 
to the brittle words we say, words which pass quickly 
from hearing and fade soon from even the printed 
page. The peoples of the earth see in this occasion 
a magnificient flowering of the human spirit, an 
interval of grandeur in an epoch in which the gi'andeur 
of unselfishness is rai'e indeed. The peoples of other 
nations are listening to the words uttered here not so 
much as words but as sounds which have echoes in 
the human soul . . . mystic sounds unlimited by time 
or language . . . sounds which ring in intimate har- 
mony with the voices of freedom heard . . . now 

remote . . . now insistent . . . since the dawn of hu- 
man history.” 

Then the President harked back to history and traced 
t e story of mankind’s long struggle for freedom and for 
1 erty, beginning in ancient times from the hillsides of 

leece, through the middle ages and down to modern 

times : 



So as we embrace our national freedom, we must 
see in it, as other peoples of the world do, not alone 
P^oouct of our struggles and strivings, not alone 
me altruism of America, but also the final product 
e world s age-old quest for liberty. We owe to 
our own heroes . . . to Rizal, to Bonifacio, to Mabini, 
Pilar and to many others a gi*ati- 
^ ° memory , both deep and abiding. But in this 
moment we must likewise pay tribute to the 
apostles of freedom of many lands who contri- 
cnvai independence and nationhood, I'ust as 

^ c^ied on our soil. Kos- 

^^nyette, and Simon Bolivar were all soldiers 

\ Washington, Jefferson, and 

Franklin D; Roosevelt.” 



[ 244 ] 



I 



Having reviewed the past, the President asked his 
people to look ahead and consider the responsibilities which 
we as a nation had to face: 

“And now we must turn our eyes from the past 
and inspect as well as we can the dim and uncer- 
tain future. 

“F’rom this day forward our international x’espon- 
sibilities is absolute. As we are the masters of our 
own destiny, so too we must bear all the consequences 
of our actions. If we surmount the difficulties that 
beset us, if we conquer the obstacles which bar our 
way, our people will grow gi*eat in the eyes of men. 
But if we strut with false pride upon the world stage, 
if we berate with bombast our friends and benefac- 
tors, if we lend, for reasons of political expediency, 
comfort and encouragement to the enemies of peace 
and fi'eedom, if we invite poverty, chaos and dis- 
order to inhabit our land, we will break faith with 
our noble past and imperil our national future. 

“No longer are we protected by the mantle of • 
American sovei-eignty. No longer can we look to 
America to shield us from follies or excesses. There 
is no redress for our actions beyond the immutable 
laws of justice among nations. Our period of ap- 
prenticeship is past. We are an adult in the council 
of nations. Our decisions must be gravely made; 
they will be gravely judged. Our war-time heroism 
has commanded the respect of the world. We dare 
not sacrifice that respect. 

“From this daj’’ forward, it is not the leaders 
of Government alone who will be judged. By the 
actions of our Government, the Filipino people will 
be appraised. Our actions in the next years will 
determine the estimate the world will place upon our 
national character. Heavy is the weight of I'espon- 
sibility we bear as we start out upon the dangerous 
paths of independence. The ever-present guide is 
gone. We must find our own way, with the instincts 
we have inherited, with the wisdom we have ac- 
quired.” 



[ 245 ] 



The President then discussed the problem that had 
arisen as a result of Soviet aggression and of our need to 
align ourselves with the countiy who has proved to be our 
friend for so many years. He felt that we could not adopt 
a fence sitting policy but that we must take sides and, 
small as we are, that we must contribute what we could 
to help maintain the world’s freedom: 

“Words must cease to be substituted for thoughts 
and judgments. In a ti’oubled world where our al- 
liance with one group of nations or another might help 
determine the fate of mankind, we cannot afford to 
hesitate or choose capriciously. We cannot be epi- 
cures at the international table. We must select our 
fare, and adhere to that selection. Our alliances must 
be firm and unshakeable. Our loyalties must be 
strong and enduring. 

that our choice has been made. In 
the presence of our honored guests today, i.n the 
presence of the representative of the sovereign Amer- 
ican Nation, I state my firm conviction that we have 
already subscribed irretrievably to the principles of 
the American Declaration of Independence and the 
• *^°^^stitution. Those principles are now 
embodied in the basic law of our land. We are com- 
mitted to the cause and the international program of 
the United States of America. We are pledged to 
the support of the Four Freedoms. 

atomic age. We cannot stay the 
swirt advance of time even if we would. The world 
shrinks with each passing hour. Wings carry men 
across deserts, oceans and mountains. The wide wa- 
ters have ceased to bar access to our land. The stra- 
tosphere IS now an avenue for swift flight or swift 
destruction. 

In such a world we cannot retreat within oui’- 
selyes. We cannot live in unconcern for the world’s 
opinion. We cannot bar from our shores the pro- 
ducts of other lands. . . The world today is one.’’ 



[ 246 ] 



The President next described our obligations to tlie 
rest of the world and the dynamic growth of international 
interdependence and explained that the doctrine of absolute 
sovereignty is yielding ground. By our membership in 
the United Nations, he said, we have already surrendered 
some of our sovereignty and if we are called upon to help 
in the enforcement of peace, we must supply that help. 
Little did Roxas then realize that, scarcely four short years 
after his inaugin*ation, we would fulfill that duty by send- 
ing our bravest troops to Korea. 

Fully aware of the fact that being a small country, 
we lack the authority of power and must, thei*efore, depend 
on the world’s conscience for our px'otection and salvation 
against a foreign aggressoi*, he again sought to impress on 
his audience the meaning and value of our alliance with 
America : 



“But we have yet a greater bulwark today . . • 
the friendship and devotion of Amei'ica. That friend- 
ship, which is the greatest ornament of our independ- 
ence, raises us far above the level of our intrinsic 
power and prestige. There are many nations aspiring 
to world i*ecognition. There are many peoples who 
merit the sympathy and understanding of mankind. 
There are few who are poorer in wealth of goods and 
economic power than our own newborn Republic. In 
both Asia and Europe, the small nations tremble in 
the shadows of insecurity or are pawns in the insi- 
dious politics of power. Freedom, if it ever existed 
in many of those lands, has been erased. Famine, 
actual starvation, stalks the streets of cities and the 
by-roads of countrysides. What help they receive 
to avert epidemic and hunger must wait through the 
long processes of international consultation, and is 
subject to the moves and counter-moves of conflicting 
interests. We, of the Philippines, are spared that 
trial. American aid to us is direct and whole- 
hearted.” 



[ 247 ] 



Referring to those few misguided and self-appointed 
leaders among our people who, at that early stage of our 
career as a nation, were ah'eady belittling the value of 
America’s friendship, he said: 



“Should we in the Philippines disdain the sup- 
port of this modern Colossus whose might is the hope 
and strength of the world? No free nation today can, 
to its advantage, scoff and snarl at the United States, 
whose broad shoulders bear the awful weight of world 
peace. Subtract the influence of the United States 
ironi the rest of the world, and the answer is chaos 

' ’ ' ij i major poles of power in the 

world today . . . Russia and the United States, both of 
mem bestriding the oceans, facing the Orient and the 
since the Peace of Rome was broken 
JLr. ‘^^slaught of the barbarians twenty centuries 
g as there been a comparable situation. 

world cannot but have faith in America, 
part, we cannot but place our trust in the good 
jiTifi nation which has been our friend 

wll wn 48 years. To do other- 

in nm> foreswear all faith in democracy, 

in our future, and in ourselves. 

pursue our career as a nation, as we 
a treacherous waters, it is well to have 

• our know our bearings and chart 

it friio safest course, and I firmly believe 

tenino- of the world as well, is the glis- 

mie-hfv nrn^ America whose sure advance with 
fear ^ breaks for smaller craft the waves of 

+ Piosident then once more called his people’s at- 

Hnn or.,1^ . the problems of reconstruc- 

<!nnori Ai. ^ which faced us and of the need for 

^ niake up for what we had lost during the 
r that his administration would en- 

lage ree guided enterprise because that was the best 
ystem for our economic life. Said the President: 

[ 248 ] 



"We are a troubled people. Our economic goods 
are destroyed and our homes and buildings are in 
shambles. \\'e must rebuild a levelled land. Against 
a background of destruction, we acquire our sovereign- 
ty, we receive our national heritage. We must per- 
form near-mii'acles to bring prosperity to this, our 
land. The work of two generations was reduced to 
rubble in the passionate moments of war. Now we 
must rebuild in months what was created in decades. 
Time ^yields her whip-lash over us. Delay and decay 
stand in impatient turn at our door. Swift must be 
our actions lest the dynamics of chaos overtake our 
efforts. To help us succeed, we have the assistance 
and support of the United States. Without that as- 
siu’ance, our prospects would be bleak and grim. 

“In our economic life, we will continue to em- 
brace, as we have in the past, free but guided enter- 
prise. That is our system. We will defend it against 
the deceptive allures of communism, of militarism, 
and of fascism. We will not give comfort or coun- 
tenance to those antidemocratic creeds...” 

Clearly defining the difference between a democracy 
where the government exists by the consent of the people 
and fascism which believes that the people exist for the 
welfare of the state, he said: 

“Our nation is above all a nation of people. Its 
government exists by the consent of the governed 
and seeks to express the will of the governed. The 
welfare of all the people must be our primary con- 
cern. The toil and sacrifice we have laid out for 
ourselves must be directed not for the exaltation of 
the state, but for the elevation of all our citizens, for 
their greater happiness, for their economic secux’ity, 
for their well-being, for the attainment of gi'eater 
oppoi’tunities for their children. The sweat of the 
toiler’s brow must be fairly and fully rewarded. The 
products of enterprise must flow in px'oper measux-e 
to those who participate in all the processes of px'O- 
ductioxi. Thex*e mxxst be neither master nor sex'fs ixx 
our economic system.” 



[ 249 ] 



Finally, to those among his countiymen who were 
afraid to shoulder the responsibilities which we as a new 
nation had to face, this was Roxas’ concluding message: 



“As we stand at this moment, facing the thornj" 
path of the future, trying our first unaided steps on 
the road which leads to tomorrow, let us take com- 
fort in our national sturdiness and courage. We are 
18,000,000 strong. Our people bear well the burden 
of adversity. The national spirit is one of humility, 
of gentleness, and kindly brotherhood. Stout of heart 
and firm of purpose, prudent and wise in the deep 
wisdom of nature and of God, our people have great 
reservoirs. This land, this child of freedom, has great 
responsibilities to America. We are a staging area 
of democi’acy in this part of the world. But whatever 
history, of one thing we may be sure . . . 
the Fihpmo, strong in his faith and steadfast in his 
loyalty, will support his nation, come what may. This 
daughter land of America, sprung from the hardy 
stock of Asia, will not be awed by difficulties. It 
will live and endure the shocks of time. This is our 
aitn, and this is our resolve. With the help of Di- 
vine Providence, our steps will be illumined by the 
s ining countenance of truth and of righteousness 
will be eased from the weariness of 

. y gi'ace of knowledge that our people’s hap- 
piness IS our goal. 



\^T independence is our pride and our honor. 

defend our nation with our lives and our 
fortunes. As a poet wrote long ago: 



“ ‘Let independence be our boast 
Ever mindful what it cost. 

Ever grateful for the prize. 

Let its altar reach the skies.’ ’’ 



And so, after delivering what was perhaps the greatest 
and most important speech of his public career, Roxas rode 
tiiumphantly back to Malacanan as the first President of 
the Republic of the Philippines. 



[ 250 ] 




President Roxas being congratulated by Supreme Commander General AlacArihur im aediateiy after 
the President had delivered his inaugural speech on July 4, 1946. 




C^'^OHEN Manuel L. Quezon was first elected to the px’es- 
idency of the Commonwealth in 1935, some of his 
friends began calling him “Your Excellency,” while com- 
munications sent to his office were addressed “His Excellen- 
cy.” Quezon seemed to like the use of these exalted words — 
at least, he did nothing to discourage Philippine officialdom 
and the rest of his countiymen from refei*ring to him or 
addressing him in that fashion. Soon after Roxas was 
elected to the presidency however, many people began to 
address him as “Mr. President.” Others stuck to the more 
high-sounding form which the late President Quezon had 
prefei'red. 

I called Roxas’ attention to this one morning and told 
him that many American friends of mine had asked me 
to inquire what form of address they should follow when 
communicating with our President. Roxas did not hesi- 
tate with his reply. “The President of the United States,” 
he said, “has always been addressed as ‘Mr. Pi*esident’ 
and that form is certainly good enough for me.” 

“Why don’t you make a statement to that effect,” I 
suggested, “or instruct your public relations officer to make 
it known to the public?” 

“I should like to,” Roxas replied, “but I am afraid 
it might embarrass the family of my late predecessor in 
office.” He was obviously referring to Dona Aurora Que- 
zon and the children of the late President Quezon. Mrs. 
Quezon was one of those who, as soon as Roxas launched 
his candidacy for President, had come out openly and very 



[ 251 ] 



strongly for him. Roxas did not wish to do anything that 
might conceivably hurt her feelings. 

But the exalted position to which Roxas had been 
elected by his people did not in any way change him. He 
remained simple and unassuming. The great powers that 
were conferred upon him by virtue of his office did not 
turn his head or give him an exaggerated feeling of im- 
portance. Being President of our Republic it naturally 
became more difficult for his friends to approach him but 
this was due to the fact that there were altogether too 
many people who wanted to see him and it was impossible 
for Roxas to accommodate the public as well as his more 
intimate friends. 



It is not possible to mention, much less discuss, in 
the limited space available to us the accomplishments of 
President Roxas’ administration during the 22 months that 
he was in office. Aside from the fact that it is too early 
evaluate the importance and significance of 
what he was able to do for our country, volumes would be 
required to do justice to such an assignment. Roxas, of 
course, was not infallible and he committed a number of 
mistakes. It was his misfortune also that some of those 
in Whom he had shown great confidence failed to live up 
to what was expected of them. 

fn opinion, Roxas’ most important contribution 

Republic is to be found in the 
bpcrnn and finance. Actually his work there 

in April, 1937 during his membership 

rTPPPA^\^ reparatoi:y Committee on Philippine Affairs 

1;, I 7" the first real start 

aids the task of economic planning for the country 

o prepare us for the changes that would come in 
ur relationship with the United States and the rest of 
the world after independence. While a member of that 

[ 262 ] 






committee, he recommended the development of food enter- 
prises, the improvement and modernization of the copra 
and abaca industries on which so much of our foreign 
trade depends, the development of power sources and the 
manufactui'e of fex*tilizei*s, and the improvement and ex- 
pansion of our home textile industry for cheap wear. 

After he assumed the Secretaryship of Finance and 
during his incumbency as Chairman of the National Eco- 
nomic Council, he proceeded to gather the best minds of 
the country to work on the whole intidcate pattern of the 
national economy, each in his own line, to gather facts, 
figures, data, to suggest plans and pi’ograms which would 
all be put into a common fund of knowledge, sorted and 
adjusted, from which the national leadership could later 
di'aft a balanced, coordinated, practical and orderly econo- 
mic plan. Several years before World War II broke out 
and while he was Chairman of the National Development 
Company, Roxas had already began to put into gi'adual 
execution the different projects of his master plan. Tex- 
tile mills, hydro electi’ic power plants, copra centrals, all 
these began to take form at that early date. 

For Roxas was truly a man of vision. He knew that 
thorough and careful planning was essential to the deve- 
lopment of the Philippines and that this meant a long 
range proposition. Thus it was that, soon after he be- 
came President, he engaged the services of an American 
industrial firm to blueprint an improved plan for the eco- 
nomic and industrial development of the Philippines. The 
most comprehensive and exhaustive report ever made on 
the economic potentialities of our country in various 
fields was thus completed. It contains recommendations 
ns to the means of developing and expanding native in- 
dustries with available local facilities and the aid of in- 
vestments from abroad. The harnessing of hydro electric 
power in Ambuklao and Maria Cristina which are now 



[ 253 ] 



underway, is one of the results of the vision of this great 
leader. 

If Roxas were alive today he would probably be 
proudest of the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation and 
the Central Bank of the Philippines, both of which were 
his pet projects. We today, being mere humans, are easi- 
ly prone to forget the past and to look at our cities and 
farms only as they are now. We easily forget that, at 
the beginning of the Roxas administration, our cities were 
ghostlike scenes of general devastation, that many of our 
farms wei'e abandoned and that our national treasury was 
almost empty. Take away from the picture which we 
have befoi’e us today some 12,000 houses whose recons- 
truction has been financed by the RFC and you will haye 
a better concept of what this institution has meant to our 
country. For through the RFC it has been possible to 
grant to our people P177,000,000.00 in real estate loans 
alone. Into the field of industry the RFC has also poured 
many ^millions of pesos. Our sugar centrals have been 
the principal beneficiaries as a I’esult of which, from a 
pioduction of less than 13,000 tons of sugar after libera- 
tion we have been able to raise our annual sugar output 
to more than 1,000,000, tons today. Many new industries 
ave also been helped by the RFC so that today we have 
m our country numerous enterprises, such as the manu- 
arture of jute bags, rubber tires, oxy-acetylene and bot- 
e gas, nails, steel and rod iron, soap, paints, pulp and 

^pei and other products which did not exist here before 
the war. 

As for the Central Bank of the Philippines, Roxas 
a avored the creation of such an institution in order to 
give exibility to our currency and to provide adequate 
admimstration of credit and exchange. He had always 
felt that our old currency system which had been intro- 
uce by the United States some 50 years ago was anti- 



[ 254 ] 



quated and imposed a great handicap on the rapid econo- 
mic development of the nation. For under that system 
and in order to insure the convei'tibility of the peso our 
government was required to maintain on deposit in the 
United States US $0.50 for every Philippine peso in cir- 
culation in the Philippines thus immobilizing an excessive- 
13 ’’ large amount of our dollar resources. Under the pro- 
posed managed currency and Central Bank system which 
Roxas recommended, it would be possible to utilize as 
much as P200,000,000.00 of these reserves to finance many 
needed projects in the Philippines. 

President Roxas had also long ago realized the need 
for encoiu'aging a securities market in our country. He 
knew that without such a market the rehabilitation and in- 
dustrial development of the Philippines would be slowed 
down because it would be difficult for the Government to 
float bonds internally. And without a Central Bank it was 
well nigh impossible to develop such a securities market 
in the Philippines. The establishment of a Central Bank, 
on the other hand, would encourage our insurance com- 
panies, mortgage and savings banks, commercial and in- 
dustrial concerns, and civic minded private individuals 
to invest in government bonds because thej’^ would know 
that, in case of need, thej’ could borrow on such securities 
from a commercial bank which, in turn, could if neces- 
sary borrow from the Central Bank using the same securi- 
ties as collateral. 

In strongly recommending the creation of the Central 
Bank Roxas impressed the members of Congress with the 
importance of enacting the necessaiy legislation for that 
purpose. “The Central Bank Bill,” said the President in 
his message, “provides for the type of bank which is deem- 
ed best suited to for our country. It embodies all the latest 
improvements in currency administration which, since the 
early 1930's, have been found essential to the maintenance 



[ 255 ] 



of a sound and stable currency and banking system. I 
know of no other measure which will mean so much to 
our country.” 

Every day President Roxas used to work at Malacanan 
as if that day were to be his last. He was usually up be- 
fore eight and, around the breakfast table, while eating 
an orange, or a “naranjita,” sipping a cup of coffee and 
consuming two soft boiled eggs with toast, he began his 
work for the day. Surrounding him were his executive 
secretary, two or three cabinet officers and other close 
or intimate friends or advisers, all of whom had important 
matters to discuss with the President. After breakfast 
Roxas pi'oceeded to receive the many visitors who were 
waiting for him in his office. These conferences, espe- 
cially when there was a cabinet meeting, fx'equently lasted 
until two o’clock in the afternoon. After a short siesta, 
whenever he could afford to take one, Roxas was up again 
going over the many papers on his desk which had to be 
read or signed. Usually there were people who wished to 
see him and who wex’e unable to obtain an audience earlier 
in the day. Frequently there were speeches to be written 
or dictated. 

The President’s health which was quite good prior to 
the outbreak of the war, had been seriously impaired as 
a result of what he underwent during the period of Jap- 
anese occupation. The election campaign had also been a 
eayy drain on his strength. Not long after assuming his 
duties at Malacanan, Roxas began complaining of an occa- 
sional sharp pinching sensation on the left side of his chest. 

ey weie clear indications that his heart was under too 
seveie a strain and that this delicate organ was demanding 
moie rest whenever possible. The President began taking 
tablets containing a little strychnine. Although this me- 
dicine gave him some relief, it could not by any means cure 
his malady; Only plenty of sleep, rest, peace of mind and 



[ 256 ] 



body could ameliorate his condition and help preserve his 
waning strength. 

But he could not even have these simple remedies. 
His domestic problems which had been bad enough before 
he was President became much worse after he moved to 
Malacahan. He suffered terribly from lack of sleep. He 
could not easily get away by himself for a well-deserved 
rest. He was virtually a prisoner in the palace. It was 
only in Baguio where he could sometimes go accompanied 
by his daughter Ruby and one or two friends that he was 
able to find a little relaxation. But, unfortunately, Baguio 
is easily accessible from Manila and the problems of state 
pursued him there. The number of visitors and officials 
who called on him morning and afternoon were legion. 

On the afternoon of April 13th, President Roxas was 
conferred the degi’ee of Doctor of Laws, honoris causa, by 
the University of the Philippines. The ceremonies were 
held in the U.P. Campus. It rained during the early part 
of the afternoon and the President was slightly di*enched. 
But the affair did not break up for the vast audience which 
had gathered there were not willing to let a little rain 
spoil the significance of the event, particularly because they 
were eager to hear Roxas’ speech. Little did they know 
that it Avas to be their President’s last appearance before 
a Filipino audience. I shall quote here only one paragraph 
of the speech which, in effect, was Roxas’ valedictory to 
his people, particularly to the youth of our land on whose 
shoulders the future destiny of our country must rest. 

“When I was a young boy,” said Roxas, “my mother 
used to speak to me frequently about moral and ethical 
principles. She was quite Avell acquainted with the teach- 
ings of Christianity. She spoke to me of the basic prin- 
ciple of the Torah, which we now know as the Golden Rule : 
‘Do not do unto others that which thou wouldst not have 



[ 257 ] 



done unto thee.’ This was the basis of her philosophy, 
and she assured me that the practice of this principle would 
create in men a love of peace, kindness, patience, charity, 
honesty and justice. What she taught me has definitely 
influenced my whole life. I shall never be able to repay her 
enough for it. I was still vei*y young when she uttered 
this injunction to me: ‘Work hard to achieve a worthy 
ambition; be fair and just to every man; never do anything 
which will make your mother or those you love blush or 
shed a tear in shame.’ 

“I made this principle the lamp for my footsteps 
thi’oughout my life. I commend it to all of you. I found 
it an excellent touchstone to determine the wisdom or jus- 
tice of all my actions. It confoi-ms strictly to the require- 
ments of the moral law which underlies our social order 
and our legal institutions. It could be made the moral 
creed of all our citizens.” 



[ 258 ] 




CT^HE following morning, April 14, 1948, I called at Ma- 
^ lacanan accompanied by two American friends 
who had requested me to obtain an audience with 
the Pi-esident because they wished to discuss cei'tain 
matters with him. We were with the President about 
three quarters of an hour and, as I shook hands with him, 
I remarked that he did not appear well for he was pale 
and haggard-looking. He simply smiled and nodded his 
head as if indicating that there was nothing he could do 
about it. 

That same evening there was a “despedida” reception 
at Malacanan for U.S. Ambassador Emmet O’Neal who 
was returning to Washington. Roxas appeai’ed cheerful 
and in good humor. He danced two or three times and 
was, as usual, most attentive to his guests. He went to 
bed quite late despite the fact that eaidy the following 
morning he was scheduled to go to Clark Field there to 
deliver a speech and review America’s armed forces sta- 
tioned in that military base. 

He had an early breakfast on Thursday morning, April 
15th, and made ready to drive to the Sta. Mesa railroad 
station where he was to board a special train for Pampanga. 
Before leaving Malacanan he walked by the room which 
his Aunt Bibi was occupying. She had bestowed much 
care and affection on Roxas since his boyhood days and 
it was she who, during his long residence in Manila before 
he became President, had been practically in full charge 
of his household. He noticed that his Aunt Bibi was al- 
ready dressed so he went in, bade her good morning and 



[ 259 ] 



inquired about her health, little realizing that he was, in 
effect, bidding her farewell. 

At the Sta. Mesa railroad station quite a large number 
of people joined the Pi’esident. They included senators, 
representatives, cabinet officers and, of course, the ever 
present newspaper correspondents. The special train for 
Pampanga was made up of seven coaches including an air- 
conditioned compartment for the President. Throughout 
the trip Roxas gave every indication that he was feeling 
well. He chatted with many of his companions and went 
from coach to coach to see if everyone was comfortable. 

Ai'i’iving at Clark Field he was met by General Eu- 
bank, the American commander in charge of the air base. 
The General drove Roxas around to show him the installa- 
tions which had been constructed there since liberation. 
The President was very much impressed, particularly with 
the housing accommodations which the U. S. Government 
had put up for the use of army and civilian pei’sonnel. 
At 12:45 P.M. the party headed for the air terminal to 
wRness the air show which had been prepared for the 
Filipino President. Opposite the air terminal there was 
a captured Japanese plane which the Americans had placed 

a concrete pedestal as a souvenir. When President 
oxas noticed it he remarked: ‘T was flown in that kind 
0 an aircraft by the Japanese from the prison camp in 
Malaybalay to Manila.” 

The air show proved to be a thrilling spectacle and 
Roxas warmly congi’atulated General Eubank for such a 
sp endid peiformance. They then proceeded to the lun- 
c eon paity in the Officers’ Club, following which Roxas, 
accompanied by his American host, went directly to the 
Cohn Kelly Theater where the President was scheduled 
to address the American officers who had gathered there. 

[260] 



The President fii'st expressed his gratification at the 
pleasant visit which he was having in that American mili- 
tary base. He then congratulated General Eubank, his 
officers and his men for the extraordinaiy progress which 
they had made strengthening that outpost. “The estab- 
lishment of American bases in the Philippines,” he re- 
minded his audience, “is the result of the voluntaiy and 
free choice of Americans and Filipinos. The purpose of 
this base is not to wage a war of aggression. It is a base 
established for the purpose of insuring the mutual security 
of America and the Philippines and, most important of all, 
to help insure the permanence of peace in the world.” 

Remembering how the democratic nations in western 
Eui’ope and America had been suddenly attacked bj'^ the 
dictator nations, he added: 

“World peace cannot be maintained if each na- 
tion acting separately should merely await the ag- 
gressor at its borders. There must be a complete 
and firm agreement on the pai’t of peace and hbeity- 
loving peoples of the world to stop and, if necessaiy, 
to fight any aggressor that may want to ti’ample 
upon the liberties of other peoples or intei’fere in the 
free exercise of their sovereignty.” 

After briefly reviewing fifth column activities in many 
parts of the world, he concluded his speech with the fol- 
lowing words; 

“I am very happy that the President of the United 
States, supported by the American Congress, has at last 
shown an indication that America is going to piepaie 
for war ; that America is going to make a stand anci 
say to the aggressor, ‘You can go this far but no 
farther.’ If ivar should come, if God in His Supreme 
Wisdom should will it that the scourge of war again 
visit the bewildered peoples of this em'th, I am cer- 
tain of one thing — probably the only thing about which 
I can be certain — and it is this: That America and 
the Philippines will be found on the same side and 

[ 261 ] 



American and Filipino soldiers will again fight side 
by side in the same trenches or in the air or at sea 
in the defense of justice, of freedom, and the other 
principles which we both love and cherish ...” 

The President received a tremendous ovation from the 
American officers and enlisted men who had crowded into 
the Colin Kelly Theater. The temperature inside the build- 
ing was almost suffocating and it was quite a relief for 
Roxas and the members of his party when they were able 
to get out to enjoy a breath of fresh air. They returned to 
General Eubank’s house for a brief rest before proceeding 
to the parade grounds where a military parade was to be 
held in the President’s honor. Upon reaching General 
Eubank s quarters, Roxas went to the lavatory to wash 
and get ready. When he came out he was pale and sweat- 
ing profusely. “I am feeling dizzy,” he complained. Then 
he told Senate President Avelino to represent him at the 
parade and to tender his excuses to General Eubank for 
his failure to be there. Turning to his senior aide, he 
added: “Corvera, call a doctor.” 

Majoi Corvera summoned the first physician he could 
ind. After a brief examination the American army doc- 
tor wdered several mattresses placed on the floor so that 
the President might lie down. But Roxas explained that 
he felt better sitting up so he was provided with cushions 
and made as comfortable as possible. His feet were be- 
ynning to get cold so the doctor and Corvera began rub- 
ing t em biiskly. By that time other members of the 
Phrty had come into the room and began helping 
the doctor with ice and hot water bags. 

President complained of a little pain in the chest 
out said that, otherwise, he was feeling all right. Never- 
e ess, a special airplane was immediately dispatched to 
Manila to fetch Dr. Antonio Sison and to send word to 
Roxas’ family that the President had been suddenly taken 

[ 262 ] 



ill. At four o’clock that afternoon Roxas found difficulty 
in breathing. An oxygen tank was brought into the room. 
Two hours later, while he was under the oxygen tank, he 
asked that his mother be notified that he was slightly in- 
disposed but that she should not worry about him. The 
President did not know that his mother was already on 
her way to Clark Field accompanied by Mrs. Roxas. They 
arrived a few minutes later by which time Roxas seemed 
to be much improved. 

At around 8:00 P.M. the President was resting well 
and apparently getting some sleep, so General Eubank, 
Dr. Sison, and Mrs. Roxas went to the dining room for 
supper while an American army nurse was left to watch 
over the President. After dinner and not wishing to dis- 
turb their patient whom everybody believed was sound 
asleep. Dr. Sison and his companions went to the front 
porch. Suddenly at around 9 :20 P.M. the American nurse 
watching over Roxas noticed that something was wrong. 
She ran to summon Dr. Sison who came in accompanied by 
Dr. Ojeda. The President was gasping for breath. His 
mouth was wide open and he had extreme difficulty in 
breathing. He started to choke with hiccups. Almost as 
suddenly he stopped. Dr. Sison who had taken hold of 
Roxas’ pulse as soon as he reached his patient’s bedside 
sorrowfully released the President’s hand. “The Pi’es- 
ident,” he said, “is dead.’’ 

Mrs. Roxas came into the room at about 9 :35 P.M. 
but the President was already lifeless. 

When, late that same night, I was informed of Pres-' 
ident Roxas’ sudden death I called on his aged mother. 
Dona Rosario. It was then about two o’clock in the morn- 
ing and it was vei'y evident that the old lady had been 
shedding many bitter tears but, as we shook hands, her 
eyes were dry and her lips set tight. In answer to my 

[263] 



words of condolonce, she looked at me very solemnly and 
said, “Marcial, only Manoling’s I'elatives and closest friends 
really knew how my son has suffered these many years. 
Let us console ourselves with the thought that now he 
is at rest.” 

The day immediately following President Roxas’ death, 
telegrams and messages of condolence poured into Mala- 
canan Palace. They came from Presidents, Prime Minis- 
ters, Ambassadors, Admii’als, Generals, and friends and 
admiiers fiom all over the world. The most touching mes- 
sage, in my opinion, was that which came from Peyton 
Hawes, daughter of the late Senator Hawes. Most appro- 
priately enough this message of condolence was addressed 

Ruby Roxas who, more than anyone else, had 
suffered the gi*eatest loss. 

It is impossible to tell you how profoundly I feel for 
you at this tragic time,” said Miss Hawes. “Your father 
f destiny of his country more than any person 

^ n richness of his character spilled over 

o a ose fortunate enough to know him. When such a 
light goes out the darkness must seem limitless.” 

Befoie the President’s remains were removed from 
Malacanan Palace, his friend, Claro M. Recto, delivered 
Tf probably be the greatest oration of his career. 

e sei vices held shortly before the funeral procession 
began. Rectn aniri. * 



[ 264 ] 



rin,.;v, destiny of Manuel Roxas to govern 

T1.0 ^ most difficult era of our country’s history, 
firm by the war and enemy occupa- 

immediate and simultaneous 
the number and magnitude of 
commaTifi inadequate means at his 

of^h? ff remedy, and the extreme brevity 

wifhnnf to him, no other ruler 

s talent and industry could have achieved 



as much as he. He worked with such intensity that 
it seemed that every day was to be his last. He en- 
visioned the structm*e of the government with a sense 
of magnificence, but just when he was starting to 
translate into reality with every prospect of success 
the vast theories of his statesmanship, he was over- 
taken by his death which for the nation marked not 
the end but the beginning of a tragedy that nothing 
but the patriotism of all of us and a generous truce 
to old fratricidal quarrels can avoid . . . 

V 

“The achievements of Manuel Roxas must be 
judged as a whole rather than as isolated fragments 
or disjointed episodes if we are to determine their 
significance in history. Such an homogeneous analy- 
sis reveals not the prosaic feature of a public ad- 
ministrator or the extravagant profile of a demago- 
gue, but the superb stature of an intellectual giant, 
a truly great statesman, for whom the judgments of 
history, the spirit of the Constitution, the state of 
the world, the rivalries of mass ideologies, the in- 
tricacies of public economy and finance and the vast 
scope of law and jurisprudence, were the familiar 
rites of a cult in which, as high priest, he found neither 
enigmas nor mysteries. It is indeed his possession of 
such intellectual wealth, enhanced even more by a di- 
vine gift of eloquence not surpassed by any other of 
his generation, that will make the name of Manuel 
Roxas, in legend and in history, a patent of glory and 
a blazon of spiritual nobility not only for the Filipino 
people and the Malayan race, but for all humanity. 

“Manuel Roxas Acuna: you will not be gone for 
your people, for those who stayed quixotically at your 
side and will remain faithful to your memory, for those 
who fought your battles not because they looked to 
rich rewards but because they believed in your capa- 
cities, and shared your faith and your hopes, in a bet- 
ter future for your people. Profiteers and grafters 
avid for the satisfaction of their ignoble appetites 
abounded in your midst like the money-changers in the 
very temple where Jesus taught, but if you did not 
have the energy and the anger of the Master to drive 
them away with a whip — because they made the house 



[ 265 ] 



of prayer a den of thieves — your name and your 
achievements were not thereby dishonored nor was 
the banner torn and tattered which you raised in bat- 
tle. No, you will not be forgotten by your people, 
whom you served so well with all the vigor of your 
intellect and the goodness of your intentions, and 
least of all will you be forgotten by the youth whom 
you bewitched so often with the spell of your eloquence 
and the lofty flight of your thoughts. Like those 
stars whose light still reaches us thi’ough infinite 
space although they themselves died out thousands of 
years ago, the splendor of your genius will continue 
to illumine the fii’mament of our nation in order that 
this generation of Filipinos and the generations still 
to come may point out to the world and with just 
pride declare : He was one of the greatest men of his 
generation ; if in life he belonged to our country and 
our century, now he belongs to mankind and to the 
ages " 

Sunday, April 25th, dawned overcast and gray. Manila 
was overflowing with a thronging -multitude for people 
had come from as far south as Jolo and as far north as 
Aparri to pay their last respects to our departed leader. 
More than a million people lined the streets all the way 
from Malacanan to the North Cemetery. It was a mili- 
tary funeral, the President’s remains being placed on a 
caisson, while a large Filipino flag was draped on his 
casket. The procession was a grand spectacle. It was led 
by a motorcycle escort followed by military units— the 
Philippine Scouts, trim and formidable looking, British 
sailors, impeccable in white T-shirts and white shorts, an 
merican complement from war vessels which happened 
to be in Manila Bay and, last but not least, the veterans of 
the Philippine revolution under General Aguinaldo. The 
S. 13th Air Force in whose midst President Roxas had 
passed away, provided an aerial escort. Immediately fol- 
lowing the caisson after President Quirino’s car and mem- 
eis of Roxas immediate family were, of course, the high- 

[266] 



est officials of our land as well as members of the diplo- 
matic corps. As the caisson came to a stop in front of 
the acacia-shaded mausoleum in the Cementerio del Norte, 
the casket was unstrapped and lowered into a steel cai*- 
riage while the military band played “Nearer My God 
To Thee.” Apostolic Delegate Piani read a bi’ief burial 
service. It was exactly 11:59 P.M. when Msgr. Piani put 
down his missal and, with holy-water, blessed the bier, 
the flag, the coffin, and, finally, the tomb. At exactly 
twelve o’clock noon the first volley of the 21-gun farewell 
salute was fired. The coffin was slid into its resting 
place. Church bells from all over the country began to 
toll and the nation paused in prayer. The Philippine 
Military Academy cadets standing at the base of the mau- 
soleum fired three volleys of musketry. The volleys were 
followed by taps blown by a Philippine Army band cor- 
poral. It was precisely three minutes after twelve o’clock 
noon when the last bugle note ended. A plane roared 
overhead and dropped a bouquet of flowers. 

The same evening while the nation pondered over its 
irreparable loss, Jose Laurel speaking over the radio de- 
livered an eulogy to his friend. “Very few men in public 
life,’’ he said, “had the integrity of purpose, courage of 
conviction and the patriotism of the late President Roxas. 
His passing has left a void in our midst that cannot be 
filled by lesser mortals who are only endowed with apti- 
tudes in rendering venal services to the country which 
is at present in the face of economic, social and moral 
stress. In life, Manuel Roxas gave of his best as a sol- 
dier, statesman and Chief Magistrate of the country that 
did honor to and upheld the dignity of the land of his biith. 
He sincerely believed in the wisdom of his people, and, like 
the late President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, his viability 
— his power to grow in response to experience— was be- 
ginning to show.’ 



[ 267 ] 



“Whatever shortcomings or faults he might have had 
for, after all, he was human; whatever criticism might 
have been levelled against him, his brilliant record of pub- 
lic service, his sterling qualities as a leader of our people 
speak deservingly of MANUEL ROXAS as a symbol of 
the potentiality and gi'eatness of our race. In life he was 
great, in death he is greater. 

“A gi’eat patriot and a good friend has passed away. 
But MANUEL ROXAS will always live in the memory of 
his people.” 

When a great and good man like Roxas. is taken from 
us, we who are left behind wonder how we can ever do 
without him, that is, without the faith, the hope, the good- 
will, the fearless devotion to justice and righteousness, the 
clean-cut principles, the loyalty to truth, to country, and to 
God, as were exemplified in his life. We cannot but say, 

“How can we go on without his inspiration and leader- 
ship.” 



^ The answer is— “We cannot.” And yet we must carry 
on; in his spirit and by his example; facing the future 
with courage, doing our bit, leading, if we can, but fol- 
lowing always and never being left behind. 

From where will our new leadership come? Roxas 
himself has furnished the answer ; “From ourselves.” “The 
beauty of a democracy,” he once said, “is that, in the hour 
of need somehow, somewhere from among the people a 
eader will emeige. And the people will recognize him, 
01 God in His infinite wisdom seems to have decreed 
that his children shall always find a leader to show them 
the road to salvation.” 



[ 268 ] 



If I must, therefore, offer a final word to close this 
story of our great Filipino leader, that word is — “Forward!” 

“Forwai’d through the ages 
In unbroken line. 

Move the faithful spirits 
At the call divine. 

♦ ♦ « 

“Wider grows the Kingdom, 

Reign of love and light; 

For it we must labor 

Till our faith is sight; 

Prophets have proclaimed it, 
i\Iartyrs testified. 

Poets sung its glory. 

Heroes for it died. 

* * * 

“Forward through the ages 
In unbroken line. 

Move the faithful spirits 
At the call divine.” 



—THE END— 



[ 269 ] 



