Broadcast by Major Gsnoral B, J. Valdle 
on “Voice of FREEDOM" 1 Dec 1944 


REORGANIZATION OF THE 
PHILIPPINE ARMf 
AND 

REOPENING OF POST OFFICES 


Shortly' after the surrender of all U. S. Amy forces in 
the * Philippines s on Kay 1942, s number of officers and men of 
the Philippine Anry who had eacapeu to the mountains organized 
various units of resistance called guerrillas. Many young 
civilians who reiuced to submit themselves to tilts Japanese 
domination joined "these guerrilla unite. Under proper louder- 
ship these organizations harassed and fought and are still 
fighting the Japanese throughout the Philippines* There were 
areas in which the guerrilles ran all governmental agencies exist- 
ing under the Commonwealth before the war. In spite of endless 
hardships and untold privations those groups -of patriots continued 
their magnificent resistance, proving to the whole world that the 
Filipino people were not willing to give up the democratic way of 
life and the freedom that they had enjoyed under th'e , merican flag. 
At this time and as long as military operations continue these 
recognized guerrilla organizations will remain under the control 
and command of the U. S, Army commander in the field. 


Shortly after President Oamena and his .cabinet landed in 
Leyte, President Oisitna issued an executive order that all those, 
irrespective of nationality, who belonged to the recognised 
guerrilla units were members of the Phiiipoiae Arsy. 'The General 
Headquarters of the Philippine Anry was ret stablU shed and a United 
States Arny officer designated ae Acting Adjutant General. I 
appointed a board of officers whose duty it* iu to process all ex« 
USAPFE officers and man who fought in the early part of the was*. 
This board determines -whether the applicants really have bean 
members of the Philippine Army or Constabulary, wlither they served 
under the Japanese or under the puppet Republic, and if they did 
serve, what was the nature of their work,' Careful inquiries are 
made of the past service* rendered by the«* applicants to the 
Japanese authorities, whether or not they have -.or ted a.-; informers 
or as leaders of patrols against the guerrilla*. After the board 
has recommended the reinstatement of th® applicants those are 
assigned to a replacement depot as a part of the replacement bat- 
tallion. They are physically examined and if found physically fit 
are retained for future assignment. 


The 1st Leyte Compary of the Philippine Constabulary has bsen 
ersated with station in Tacloban. Major Ramon Gaviola, an old Con- 
stabulary officer, has been designated Acting Commanding Officer, 
Other Constabulary datatchmentc have been organized in other towns 
in Leyts to cooperate with U. S. Army authorities in the mainten- 
ance of peace and order. 


- 1 


/ 



Postal facilities ii* the Province of L*yte have been re- 
established. Teh Post Office of Tacloban, L.*y t« was officially 
reopened November o, 1944 and mail ayatem r as etabl ished Lctv.es.ii 
Tacloban and’ Palo. Xiie Post Offices in other towns will also 
be reopened as so on as appropriate personnel has bean selected 
ana appointed, kail communications will soon be reestablished 
with the towns of Tana wan, Toloaa, buiag amid Abuyog . The 
telegraph lines between Tacloban and oihor town* have been 
severely damaged by three typhoons which lauihed this island 
during the months of October and November* operation of these 
lines will be resumed as soon aa repairs nave been made. The 
Signal corps U.,s. gmgr lias very kiaaiy a<greeu to furnish the 
material needed i or thie repair* 


2 



t 


J 


Cf\ 


