
zmoxuim 



Pbeddde&t the tyik&t Philippine Republic 


Bqvm; MARCH 22, 1869 
2W: FEBRUARY 6, 1964 














MALACAtfANG 

UlXlDL-\C£ OP THE FittEfjtDI'KT 01’ TEE PHELlPFItfEK 

MANILA 


tfje ©resffbntt oE tl )t pines 

^rotlamaftan j®o. 200 


DECLARING A PERIOD OF NATIONAL MOURNING OVER THE 
DEATH OF GENERAL EMILIO AGUINALDO 

Whereas, General Emilio Aguinaldo, President of the First 
Philippine Republic, died today; and 

Whereas, the death of one of our greatest heroes and patriots 
is a great loss to our people; 

Now, therefore, I f DIGSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the 
Philippines, do hereby proclaim the period from February 6 to 20, 
1964, as a period of national mourning for one of the greatest sons of 
the country. During this period, flags of all government buildings 
and installations throughout the Philippines shall be flown at half- 
mast. The representatives of the Philippines in foreign countries 
should make arrangements for the display of the flag at half-mast 
over all embassies, legations and consular offices. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused 
the seal ol the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed. 

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of February, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four. 


(Sgd.) DIOSDADG MACAPAGAL 

President of thv Philippines 


By the President; 


(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO 
Actiny Assistant Eiieeutiue Secretary 


MALACASANG 

RESn>lL\CE OF THE PftEiilDKNT OF THE P Hn.IP PW^ 
MANILA 


W*p the iJre£t&etit ol tfje ipjjtltppttus 
3DmimstratLt!£ ©rfrcr £o. SO 


CHEATING A COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE 
NECROLOGICAL SERVICES OF THE LATE GENERAL 
EMILIO AGUINALDO, 


Whereas. Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo. President of the First Philippine 
Republic, died today- and 

Whereas, it is highly fitting and proper that adequate arrange- 
ments be made for the holding of official necrological services and 
a state funeral for the departed General, commensurate with the 
esteem and respect in which he is held by the Filipino people, and 
with the everlasting debt of gratitude that they owe him; 

Now, THEREFORE, L DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the 
Philippines, by vir tue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby 
create a Committee to take charge of the funeral arrangements 
and burial of the late General, composed of the following: 


Secretary Calixto Q. Zaldivar, Chairman 
Members 


Secretary Alejandro R. Rocos 
Secretary Macario Peralta, Jr 
Senator Gerardo Koxas 
Senator Ale Janeiro Almendras 
Justice Roberto Regala 
Com. Faustina Sy-Changco 
Congressman Justinlano Montano 
Congressman Jose B. Laurel, Jr. 


Secretary Librado D. Cayco 
Undersecretary Manuel Feliciano 
Governor Delfin Montano 
General Alfredo Santos 
Colonel Simeon C. Medalla 
Don Ramon Fernandez 
General Benito Natividnd 
Mr- Emilio Aguinaldo, Jr. 


Ambassador Manuel G, Zamora, Member -Secretary 

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day ol February, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four. 


(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL 
By the President: President of the Philippines 


(Sg<L) JUAN S + CANCIO 

Acting Assistant Executive Secretary 


[ 2 ] 


s§>tale Jf mitral arrangements tor tfce (ate 
(General <£milio aguinalbo 

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 1964: 

3 ;00 p in.— The remains will be transferred to the Aguinalda Residence in 
Kawit+ Cavite to lie in state. The public will be admitted 
to pay homage to the late General 

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 19&4: 

9:00 fl.Tn — The remains of the late General will be transferred to 
Makcanang to lie in state up to the morning of Friday, 
February 14, 1D64. 

itf-'Otf a.-m. — Arrive at Mfilacaflang. The public will be admitted to pay 
homage to the late GeneraJ. 

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 19G4; 

£;30 ft, m' 1 . — Mass at Mdatafteng will be said by Ftr ♦ Angel Padilla, PGB 
Chaplain* 

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1964: 

9:G0 tt.m.— The remains leave Malacahang for the Manila Cathedral, 

Intrnmuros, Manila. 

9:30 a .in,' — Arrival ol the remains at the Manila Cathedral 

H;QQ a.m,— Requiem Mass by Hb Eminence R ufin o J. Cardinal Santos 
in the Cathedral 

4:30 p.m. — The remains of the late General Aguinaldo will be brought 
to the Hall of Congress. 

5:1 i p.TT! — Arrival of the remains in Congress. The public will be 
admitted to pay homage to the late General Vigil over 
the remains will be resumed, 

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 19G4: 

10:00 e-in, — Necrological services in the Session Hail of the House of 
Represeotativeii 

U0O p.m . — The remains of the late General, will leave the Hall of Congress 
for the Roman Catholic Church in Kawit* Cavite, 

5:30 p.TTt. — Arrival of the bier at the Roman Catholic Church In Kawit, 
Cavite. Vigil over the remains in the Church. 

SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1964: 

10:00 o.m, — Requiem Mass by Mansi gnor Artemio G. Casas at Kawit 
Catholic Church. 

Jl;30 a, in, — The funeral procession will start from the Church to the 
residence of the late General where the burial will take 
place at high noon. ' 


program of ^tctologital ^>£rbtces 

ttticler the auspices of the 

VETERANS FEDERATION OF TIIE PHILIPPINES 

AGLIINALDO RESIDENCE, KAYYJT, CAVITE 
Monday, February 10, 1064 ut 10:00 a.m. 

★ 

L PRAYER™ 

Led by 14. Col. Dominacor be Vera 
C/liqJ of Chaplains, Philippine Constabulary 

II. "IN MEMORLAM 1 J — 

Philippine Constabulary Band 
Lt. Honorato S. Pedro, conciliating 

HI. EULOGY— 

1. Lt. Col. Gregorio N. e>e Guia 
President* Hunters ROTC, AI f- 

2 r Mrs. Minerva M_ Kiervlf 

President, Philippine Association of War Widows, Parents 
and Orphans 

3. Mr. Robert O. Phillips 

Department Commander, American Legion, 

Philippine Department 

V;t? 

4. Governor Alberto A. Villa vert 
Administrator, Philippine Veterans A dminl&t ration 

5. General Benito Nativibad 

Acting President, Asodachm de Ids Veteranoa de la 
Revolution 


6. Lt. Col. Simeon C, Medalla 

President, Veteran.? Federation of the Philippines 

IV. RESPONSE— 

Mr. Emilio Aguinaldq. Jr. 

V "NEARER MY GOD TO THEE”— 

Philippine Constabulary Band 


1*1 


program of Jlectological ^rrbtcts 

SESSION HALL, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
Safunltii/, February 15, 29G4 n( mm. 

★ 

L IN MEMORIAM — Op 62, No. 2 Buenaventura 

Philippine Army Chamber Orchestra 
Lt. Col. Jesus pel C armen, con ducting 

II, INVOCATION Rt. Rev. Msgr, Nicolas Ortega 

Chief of Chttplflins,, AFP 

III. ORATION . ..... Hon. Sabino Pacilla 

Associate Justice oj [he Supra we Court 

IV. ORATION Hon. Cornelio T, Villareal 

Speaker of the Hoxtse of ffepresen talipes 

V. ORATION Hon. Ferdinand E. Marcos 

President of the Senate 

VI. N AVE MARIA” ...... Santiago 

Miss Dalis ay J. All aba accompanied 
by the Philippine Army Chamber Orchestra 

VII. ORATION His Excellency Diosdado Macapacal 

President of the Philippines 


VUI, '‘NEARER MY GOD TO THEE” L. Mason 

Philippine Army Chamber Orchestra 


©rber of &tatt Jfimeral $)mtfisicm 

from the 

Ktucif CaiJitdie Church to the Burial Ground, Aguinatdo Residence 
Sunday f February 16, J9G*f 

★ 

Motorcycle Escort 

Escort Commander and Staff 

AFP Band 

Military Escort 

Chaplain 

CAISSON 

The President of the Philippines 

The Immediate members of the family of the late General AguinaMn 

The Vice President o£ the Philippines 

The President of the Senate 

The Speaker of the House of Representatives 

The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 

The Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions 

The Members of the Cabinet 

The Members of the Senate 

The Members of the House of Representatives 

The Associate Justices of the Supreme Court 

The Members of the Committee on State Funeral 

The Chief of Staff and Commanders of Major Services, AFP 

The Governor of Cavite 

The Provincial, City, and Municipal Officials of Cavite 

The Veteranos de la Revolucion 

The Veterans Federation of the Philippines 

Other relatives and close associates of the late General 


honorary ip till ^Bearers 


The President of the Philippines 

The Vice President of the Philippines 

The President of the Senate 

The Speaker of the House of Representatives 

The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 

The Dean of the Diplomatic Missions 

The Chairman of the Committee on the State Funeral 

The Governor of Cavite 


Hdjebule of Ihgil 

for tl)t iatc 

(general €mtlio lUgidnfllbo 

★ 

KAWIT, CAVITE 

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1964: 

0:00 a, m -12:00 noon- — Gold Star Mothers 
12:00 p.Ttt.-6:00 p.m. — FAIT 
15/00 y.m t -l2:W am, — PAwWFO 
I2;00 a.m<-G:00 a.m. — MFAL 

SUNDAY, FEBRUARY El. 1964: 

0:00 a.wi. -12:00 noon — DBC 
12:00 p.m.-G:00 p.m. — PVL 
6:00 p.nt.- 12:00 o-.m.- — 13 VL 
12:00 n.m.-0:00 a,m* — -M1SUVETS 

MONDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 19G4i 

G.-00 a. ]i i.-12; DO noon — ROLF 
1 ?;(]{) p.m.— PEFTOK 

6:00 pjn. -12:00 a.m— UNI VETS 
12:00 a.m.-OOO a.trt. — MVL 

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1964: 

6:00 a.m.-l 2:00 noon' — WAS 
32:00 p.m.-$:00 p.rn— CACVA 
6:00 p.m. -12:00 n.m.— COR VETS 
12:00 a.tn.-6;Q0 a. m — HUNTERS ROTC 
PQOC 


★ 

CEREMONIAL HAM., MALACAftANG 

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY II, 1964: 

10:00 fl.m. — The Vico President and members of his stall. 

11:00 Former President Carlos P, Garcia and members of his 

former cabinet. 

12:00 no cm — The President and members of the Senate, 

1:00 p.m, — The Speaker and members of Lhe House of Representatives. 
2:00 p.m. — The Chief Justice and Associate Justices of the Supreme 
Court. 

2:00 p.m, — Members of the Cabinet, the Auditor General and other 
officials with cabinet rank. 


m; 


4:0G p.m —The Priding JiiRiic^ rhd the Associate Justices of the Court 
of Appeals, 

S:0U p+m, The Chairman and Mere bers of the Commission on Elections, 

ft 00 p.m.— The Undersecretaries of Departments and other officials with 
tile tank of undersecretary * 

7:00 p.m. — Philippine Diplomatic officials. 

SM jjMTL — Judges of the Court of Tax Appeals., 

0:00-10:00 pm .— Commissioners of Public Service Commission, 

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY It 1964: 

10:00 (Liu. — Judges of Courts of First Instance. 

11:00 fl,m, — Judges of tlie Court of Industrial Relations. 

12$0 noon — Judges of the Court of Agrarian Relations and Juvenile and 
Domestic Relations Court. ' 

Uftfl p.m + — -The Chief of Staff and Commanders of I he Major Services 
of the Armed Forces of the Philippines., and Bureau 
Directors under the Department of National Defense 

2:00 p.m . — Provincial Governors, 

:i:00 p m. —City Mayors und other provincial and city officials. 

4:00 p.m .—' The President, members of the Board of Regents and Doans 
of die University of the Philippines. 

p.m, — The Heads of Offices under the Office of the President. 

fi.CO p.m. — 1 The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices of the Depart- 
ment of Finance, 

7M p.m, —The Bureau Directors and Hoads of Offices of the Depart- 
ment of Justice and the Solicitor General, 
p.m.— The Bureau Director® and Heads of offices of the Depart- 
ment of Agriculture and Natural Resources. 

£;0G-IG,£W p.m.— The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices of; the 
Department of Public Works and Communications, 

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 1964; 

0:00 a m -The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices of the Depart 
mem of Education 

i0:00 cl m.— The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices of tile Depart- 
ment of Labor 

11:00 a.m. -The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices of the Depart- 
ment of Commerce aud Industry 

12:00 ™>o«— The Bureau Directors mid Heads of Offices of the Depart- 
rnent of General Services 

1:00 P™‘ —The General Manager of Corporations tinder the Office of 
Economic Coordination 

2:00 p.m. The Mayor, U>c Vico Mayor and the Members of the Munici- 
pal Board of Manila 

3:00 p.m. Veteranos de la Revolution headed by Don Ramon Fernandes 


m 


4:00 p/m , — Veterans Federation of the Philippines headed by Colonel 
Simeon C, Medalla 

5:00 pm “Federation International do Abogadas 

5:30 p.m. — U. P, Women Lawyers Circle 

0:00 p.m. — 'The University of- the East 

7:00 p.ro. —The Knights of Rusal 

8:00 p.m. —The Philippine Historical Association. 

9:00-10:00 p.m — The President of the Philippines and the members of 
hh Cabinet 


★ 

SESSION HALL, HOUSE OF REPKES ENT ATIVES 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1964: 

5:00 p.wt. “Members of the Senate and Home of Representatives who 
are members of the Committee on State Funeral. 

p-iri.. - — The Secretary oi the Senate, Chiefs of Divisions and offices 
■of the Semite. 

7^0 p.flt, — The Secretary of (he House, Chiefs of Divisions anti offices 
of the House of Representatives, 

8:00 p.m* — AFP Retired Veterans Association* Inc, 
p.m. — The Congressional Press Club 

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 1 5, VJU. 

12:00 noon — The Governor and ranking officials of the Central Bank, 

L’OO prtti. Ihe President, the Board of Directors and ranking officials 
of the Philippine National Panic. 

2,00 p.m.—The Chairman and Board of Governors and ranking officials 
" of the Development Bank of the Philippines, 

3:00 pm.-^-The Officials of the National Press Club and members of the 
metropolitan press. 


JBioQi\ipl;sp of &tnna\ cEmUia Sgtriitaltro £ Jfamp 

President of the First Philippine Republic 

★ ’ 

From a hum Mo Katimwero lie became, through brilliant military exploits, 
the Supreme Filipino Revolutionary General and the President of the short- 
lived Pliilii pine Ki public, thus making him the most outstanding national 
leader during the? Philippine Revolution and the Filipino -Amt- noun War, 
which probably made this period the most colorful in the history of the 
Filipino people's struggle for independence. * 

Emilio Aguinaldo was horn in Kawit, Cavite on March 22, 1800- His 
father Cnrlos Aguinaldo and his mother Trinidad Famy, were respectable 
and well-to-do citizens of the town. ■ 

In 185 D, alter completing his elementary course in his town, ho went to 
Manila to study in the Cokpio tie Sait Jticut de Lc trail. Upon Lhe death of 
his father, he was compelled In return to his home town to farm and attend 
to the family business. In 1894, he secretly joined the KaUpunan Society 
and in die fell swing year, he was elected municipal captain of lib town, 
although he was only twenty-six years old- I 

In (he early pnrt of 1&96, Emilio married Ifiloria del Rosario and from 
this union five children were bom, namely: Carmen. Emilio Jr, p Cristina. 
Marta and Miguel, IliLarlfi dtd not live long, and many years alter her 
death, Emilio married Mnrla AgomuHo, who preceded him in dviilh about 
a year ago. 

Fired with patriotism, Emilio Aguinaldo promptly joined the rebels when 
the Philippine Revolution broke out in August, 189G. Because of his brilliant 
military exploits in Kawit, Imus, and Biuakayan in Cavite province, he ^oon 
became a popular and leading figure of the Revolution, His popularity 
placed the leadership of Andres Bonifacio, the Supreme Head of the Kati- 
punart in the balance. 

The question of national leadership was settled in the convention which 
was held at Tejems, Cavite, on March 22, 3897, where Emilio A go in a Ido was 
chosen President of the Revolutionary Government, Thus, Bonifacio was 
replaced by Aguinaldo as die supreme head of the revolutionary forces, but 
the former refused to recognize the decision, of the Convention. The mis- 
understanding led to the arrest, trial and finally, execution of Andrew 
Bonifacio, 

After the death of Bonifacio, the Spanish troops launched a vigorous 
offensive and soon recaptured most of the towns of Cavite and Rulacan, 
The insurgents, however, under the command of Apulnaldo, wiEh new 
headquarters at Biak-na-Bato continued to gain strength and seemed capable 
of prolonging the war. Governor-General Prime de Rivera realized there 
would bo a tremendous sacrifice of human lives and, he agreed to make 
peace with Aguinaldo. At the peace parley where Pedro Pa tern o was the 
negotiator,, they signed the Pact of Biak-na-Bato on December 14, 1897. 


mi 


As a consequence of fh c pact, General Emilio AgutncTdo together with 
other insurgent leaders went to a voluntary exile in Hongkong. In return, 
the Spanish government granted reforms, general amnesty, and a war in- 
demnity, Part of the war indemnity paid to Agum&ldo by the Spanish 
government was used secretly to purchase arms from Japan. 

As soon as the Spanish- American War broke out in April. IBS'S, the 
Filipino Junta in Hongkong decided to renew the revolution in the Philippines 
under the supreme command oi General Emilio Agulnaldo. 

Upon bih return to the Philippine. 1 , in May, 1898, Aguinaldo established 
a dictatorial form of government, and with arms and ammunition partly 
supplied by Admiral Dewey, Aguinaldo's troops defeated the Spanish forces 
In the provinces around Manila, On June 12, 1898, the Filipino rtwoluij unary 
leaders assembled at Kawit, Cavite and solemnly prod aimed the independence 
of the Philippines, General Emilio Aguinaldo on fhe same occasion, officially 
unfurled the Filipino Flag while the Philippine National Anthem was played. 
The dictatorship established by A gum aid o was supplanted by the Revolu- 
tionary Government on June 23, 1898. A Revolutionary Congress assembled 
at Eoraaoain Church, Malolos, Bulacan composed of eighty members re- 
presented the best intellects of the country. Its most significant accomplish- 
men i was the adoption of the Constitution of the Philippine Republic. 

General Emilio Aguinaldo approved the Malolos Constitution, which was 
formally promulgated on January 21, 189*9. Two days later, Aguinaldo was 
unanimously elected by the im Tubers of the Malolos Congress as President 
ot the Philippine Republic. The proclamation of the Philippine Republic 
and AguinaIdo + s inauguration took place on the same day. President Aguinal- 
do, in taking the oath ol office declared: 

“I swear before God to perform faithfully my duties and to 
uphold the Constitution and the laws, and to defend the 
integrity of the country." 

The Treaty of Paris of December 10, 1895. which ended the Spanish- 
American war stipulated the cession of the Philippines to the United States. 
As a result of this treaty, war soon broke out between the Philippines and 
the United States. General Agumoldo’s troops were no match, however, 
against the better equipped Americans and on March 31, 1899 Malolos, capital 
of the Republic, was cap Lured by the enemy. 

One of the ablest Filipino generals under Aguinaldo Antonio Luna. 
He was made the Director of the War Department of the revolutionary- 
forces and Commaiider-in-Chief of the Army of the Philippine Republic. 
Hts military ability soon became evident when the American forces suffered 
heavy casualties particularly in the bloody battle of Ca I inn pit. When General 
Luna met hi.* death in Caban at u an, the Filipino forces was greatly weakened 
and the American advances in ail sectors could no longer be stemmed. 
Hence, General Aguiualdo in November of ISD9, ordered all remaining 
military commanders to resort to guerrilla warfare. 


C 13 1 


Fnr his port, General Again oldo fought off his American pursuers. 
General Gregorio del Pilar who commanded Aguinaldo’s rear guard fought 
the Americans at Tirad Pass and on December 2, 1899 1 General dc! Pilar 
died heroically with las fifty soldiers. This memorable event delayed the 
capture o! Aguinaldo, 

After several months of fighting Aguinaldo and his party arrived at 
Palauan, Isabela in September, 1900, From there, he dispatch a confidential 
letter tu his guerrilla corranaodars in Central Luzon yaking fnr reinforce* 
ments. Tibs letter which was intercepted by the Americans led to his 
capture on March 22. 1901. He was promptly brought to Manila. On April 1. 
1901, Aguinaldo realized the futility of an armed resistance against the 
United States. 

For three decades .and a half after recognizing the sovereignty oJF the 
government of the United States, General Aguinaldo retired to private life. 
He was never directly or indirectly affiliated with any political party, Ilis 
only association has been with the Los Vbtcraaos dc la Jlcuolucitm Filfpina, 
a non-political organization of which he has been the president since its 
foundation. 

Regarded by many Filipinos and foreigners as the first unoilicial citizen 
of the Philippines, Kmilio Aguinaldo has not passed into obscurity. His 
residence at Kaw.it, Cavite is often visited by distinguished personages from 
the different parts of the world. To manifest the people’s gratitude to the 
president of tin- short-lived Philippine Republic, the Philippines Legislature 
enacted a jaw granting General Aguinaldo a life pension. 

Although he kept aloft from politics. General Agutnaldo sometimes raised 
his voice in times of crisis. Thus, during the bitter controversy between 
Governor-General Leonard Wood and Senate President Manuel L. Quezon, 
he openly supported the American chief executive. Again, when the Filipino 
people were divided into the pros and antis over the Hare-Ha wes-Cutting 
Act, he condemned this Act of the United States Congress for, according 
to him, it did not grant immediate, complete, and absolute independence to 
the Filipino people. 

In 1935 after retirement of thirty-four years, he astonished the nation 
by launching his candidacy for the presidency of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines. The other candidates were Senate President Manuel L. Quezon 
and Bishop Gregorio Aglipay of the Filipino Independent Church. The 
victory of Manuel L, Quezon, however, was a foregone conclusion. Of the 
1,021,445 votes cast for the three presidential candidates, Quezon received 
(194,104; Aguinaldo obtained only 179,390; and .Aglipnv got 1-17,1151, 

since the establishment of the new Republic of the Philippines, General 
Aguinaldo supported fully and cooperated with the government. At the 
time of his death, he 7- sLill a member of the Council of State, the highest 
body that Eid vises the President of the Philippines an important matters. 


illes&agES ot Condolence 


FROM PRESIDENT DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL 

I Join our people in mourning the death of General Emilio Aguinolda, 

His death is a source of profound sorrow to the entire Filipino Nation, 
He was one of the greatest men ever produced by tile Malayan mce. The 
people will forever remember him as a symbol o£ our revolution for freedom 
and independence at the turn of the century. Although he attained glory 
in life,, he will surely have greater glory Ln death because the people will 
enshrine him in history and in their hearts unto eternity. 


★ 

FROM VICE PRESIDENT EMMANUEL PELAEZ 

The passing away of General Emilio Aguinaldg is cause for deep sorrow 
among all citizens of this nation. 

The Grand Old Man of the Philippine Revolution lias lost his final battle. 
The Philippines has lost a great living hero. 

But his valiant fight for life clearly reminds us, his heirs, of what we 
must carry on. He has left us a rich history and a glorious spirit. He has 
left the Filipino the will to be great 

Mrs. Felncz and I wish to express our profound arid prayerful condolences 
to the family and relatives of General Aguinaldo on this hour of grief, and 
join the whole nation in mourning the loss of the Father of this Republic. 

★ 

FROM PRESIDENT OE THE SENATE FERDINAND E, MARCOS 

General Emilio Aguinaldo is dead. The first of the Asian revolutionaries 
is dead. 

With his death and the death of Rizal, Mabini, Luna, and Del Pilar on 
era has passed away, It was the era of self-abnegation— of a passion for 
anonymity and o£ spiritual values. 

Eut a new generation fired by their greatness raise aloft their now 
torches in crusade which they have lighted on the flames of the revolutionary 
spirit 

May this new generation keep faith with these values, 


■ . 4 


CIO" 


FROM SPEAKER CORNEQO T. VILLAREAL 


I urged the present generation of Filipinos to emulate the quality uf 
public service that General Emilio Aguinaldo rendered to his country in 
its hour of need. 

In the mr.7e of present-day problems and nation-building, we hove neg- 
lected to render the commensurate tribute to one man to whom we owe our 
independence today. 

Aguinaldo epitomized the quality of unselfish leadership and dedicated 
service to his country, never for a moment awaiting material rewards nor 
public recognition* 

Unfortunately, this, type of leadership is rarely displayed today. 

★ 

FROM CHIEF JUSTICE CESAR BENGZON 

Only a few men have lived long enough to sou (heir efforts flower to 
full blossom. General Emilio Aguinaldo was one of the few. He lived to 
witness the flowering of the Philippine independence for which he valiantly 
fought at Die turn of the century. Today, n country whose glorious history 
he helped to shape deeply mourns his death. 

There is no consolation for his loss, except the luster of what he has 
attained. 

His passing away, serves as a reminder that we, who now share the 
bounty of what he strived for, must carry on. Freedom entails a host of 
responsibilities, and from those it derives stability and strength. 

Aguinaldo will be enshrined m the memory of this and of the future 
generations of Filipinos. 

* 

FROM FORMER PRESIDENT CARLOS P. GARCIA 

We join you in mourning the death of your illustrious father whose heroism 
in war and statesmanship m peace make him one of the Greatest Asian, we 
pray the Almighty received his soul with His infinite mercy. 

★ 

FROM GENERAL ALFREDO SANTOS 

Every officer, unlisted man said civilian employee of the Aimed Forces 
of the Philippines today share the sorrow that must be yours and your 
family's duo to the passing of your beloved father, General Emilio Aguinaldo. 

The AFP has a special affection and respect for the General who was the 
recognized leader among Filipinos at the turn of the century. 

Mrs. Santos and I, as well as the entire Armed Forces, are praying for the 
eternal repose of his soul. We hope that you find consolation with the 
thought that he, now, is through with the sufferings in this world and had 
rejoined his old comrades-in-arms in the Heavenly Abode of Our Almighty 
God. 


FROM PRESIDENT LYNDON E. JOHNSON OF THE UNITED STATES 


On behalf of the people of the United States, I join ’with the people of 
the Philippines in mourning the pacing of the great leader of the Philippine 
revolution, Emilio Aguinaldo, who was a legend in his lifetime. 

We are confident that his struggle for Philippine independence, his low 
of freedom, and his devotion to country will continue to inspire his people. 

His monument is the Republic of the Philippines. 

★ 


FROM PRESIDENT SOEKARNO OF INDONESIA 

1 am most shocked and extremely moved to have received the sad news 
that General Emilio Aguinaldo has passed away. With this sad incident 
the Philippines have lost a great son and great leader who was fighting for 
the liberation of his people und country. To the family of General Emilio 
Agu inside and to the people of the Philippines, l express on behalf of the 
Indonesian people my heartfelt condolence and hope that God Almighty 
give them strength in this lime of sorrow, I also pray that God Almighty 
will give to General Emilio Aguinaldo a favored place in heaven. 

★ 

FROM HIS IMPERIAL HIGHNESS CROWN PRINCE AKIHITO OF JAPAN 

By command of Their Imperial Highnesses Crown Prince Akihito and 
Crown Princess Michiko I have the honor to convey hereby their hearty 
sympathy and condolence on tliu death of General Emilio Aguinaldo to you 
and through you to all the members of his family. Their Imperial Highnesses 
wish to join the family in mourning the death of the great and courageous 
leader of the Philippine Republic and will long remember in their prayers 
the Great General whom Their Imperial Highnesses once had the opportunity 
of personally meeting. 

★ 


FROM PRESIDENT ZALMAN SHAZAR OF ISRAEL 

We are deeply moved over the passing of Emilio Aguinaldo, your great 
national hero, freedom fighter, and President of First Philippine Republic,. 
Please accept our sheerest condolences on my behalf and on behalf of the 
people of Israel. 

★ 

FROM AMBASSADOR EUGENIO RUBINO OF ITALY 

I join you in mourning for the passing of one of the great figures of 
Philippine history General Emilio Aguinaldo. 


FROM AMBASSADOR WILLIAM E. STEVENSON 
OF THE UNITED STATES 

Mrs. Stevenson and I join with FiBpInos and Americans everywhere in 
mottmjng the passing of your father. His ignition in the history of his 
country is secure and he will always have a special place in the hearts of 
America ns far his indomitable courage in defending what he deemed right as 
well as for his great magnanimity in good time.: and bad.. 

We count as one of the great privileges of our assignment in the Phil- 
ippines the friendship extended to us by your Sate father, which we re- 
ciprocated in iull measure. 

★ 

FROM AMBASSADOR MIGUEL TEUS OF SPAIN 

Mr. President on behalf of Hie Excellency the Chief of Stale al the 
Government ol Spain cmd on my own I wish lo convey to Your Excellency, 
to your Government and to the People of the Philippines our deepest 
condolences for the domisD of die illustrious ex-PresIdenl General Aguinaido 
haro ot your tight fer independence whose namo will always bo honored in 
lha history of the Philippines. 

★ 

FROM GENERAL DOUGLAS MacARTHUR 

The passing of General AgiiinaHo closes one of the great chapters in 
Philippine his Lory. He was the very incarnation of the Filipino desire for 
liberty and freedom and his country owes him much. He was a life-long 
friend of mine and his death saddens me. 


[1TJ 


Senate Resolution Jto. 34 

★ 


RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE PROFOUND GRIEF OF 
THE SENATE UPON THE DEATH OF GENERAL EMILIO 
AGUINALDO, 

Whereas, General Emilio Aguinaldo, the President of the 
erstwhile Philippine Republic, lias this day departed for the Great 
Beyond; 

WHEREAS, he has served our country and people in war and 
in peace end is entitled to recognition as one of our outstanding 
heroes and patriots: Now., therefore, be it 

Resolued, That the Senate of the Philippines express, as it 
hereby expresses, its profound grief over the death of General 
Emilio Aguinaldo; and that in deference to this sad event, the 
Senate adjourn its session; and 

Resolved, further, That the Secretary of the Senate be authorized, 
as he is hereby authorized, to furnish a copy of tills resolution to 
the family of the late General Emilio Aguinaldo. 

Adopted, February 6, 1964, 


$ou*t IttSoIutton i?o. 134 

★ 


RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE PROFOUND CONDOLENCE 
OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON THE DEATH 
OF FORMER PRESIDENT EMILIO AGUJNALDO AND 
PROVIDING THAT THE HOUSE ADJOURN IN TOKEN 
OF MOURNING. 

Wheiieas, the late General Emilio Aguinaldo, former President 
of the First Philippine Republic, passed away on February 6 f 1964; 

Whereas, the members of the Fifth Congress of the Republic 
of the Philippines are cognizant of his valuable services to our 
country and people; 

Where as* as a revolutionary leader of the Philippine Forces 
he undauntedly fought the enemy forces; and 

Where AS; during liis lifetime he devotedly continued to render 
service to our country t particularly for the cause of Philippine 
Veterans: NOW* therefore, be it 

Resolved by the House of Representatives of the Philippines , 
To express, as it hereby does express, profound sorrow over the 
passing away of former President Emilio Aguinaldo; and 

Resolved further, That a copy of this Resolution be transmitted 
to the family of the deceased, and that upon adoption hereof, the 
House adjourn in token of mourning. 

Adopted, February 13, 1964, 


Committu on &tate jFumrnl 

* 


Secretary Calixto (X Zaxdivar, Chairman 


Secretary Alejandro R. Rocee 
S ecretary Mac arid Peralta, Jr. 
Senator Gerardo Rosas 
Senator Alejandro At-mendras. 
Justice Roberto Regala 
C ommissioner FausIXNO Sy-Changcq 
C onpre.Tsman Justi ntano S. Montano 
Congressman Josfi JJ. Laurel, Jr 


Members 

Secretary Liurado D. CayCO 1 
Undersecretary Manuel I-’esuciAm® 
Governor DELfiH Montano 
G eneral Alfredo S autos 
Colonel SuiSOn Medalla 
Don Ramon Fiousmujee , 

General; Benito Natividad 
Mr. Emuo Aguinaldq, Jr.. 


Ambassador Manuel G. Zamora, Member-Secretary 

★ 


SUB-COMMITTKE on KULKUOUS 
CEREMONIES 
CJiffirmnn: 

Governor Delfjn Montano 
M embers.* 

Secretary 1 Alejandro R- Rocks 
A ir. Emilio Agvinaldo, Jr. 

SUB-COMMITTEE ON MILITARY 
PARTICIPATION 

Chairman: 

Secretary Macajuq Peralta, Jr. 
Members: 

General Alfredo Santos 
C olonel SiMi'ON G, Medal la 

SUB-COMMITTEE ON NECROLOGICAL 
SERVICES 
Cftafniian; 

Congressman Ji'sm'iAtio S. 
Montano 

Members; 

Senator Geilahdlj Rudcas 
Congress man J qsf. B. Laurel, Jr. 


SUB COMMITTEE ON DUMB; 

Chairman; 

Undersecretary Manvel Flu icia.no 
Nlemh&ra: 

Commissioner Faustina 

Sy-Changco 

Mr. Emilio Acuinaldoj Jr. 
Director Ju 3 E Cnu£ 

SUB-COM MITTEE ON MEMORIAL 

PROGRAM: 

ChnirmdTt; 

Secretary Yirgiuo P. Reyes 

Vice-Cbmruwn; , 

Director Jcke Arcellana 

Members: 

Director SritArrw Lanot 
M r. Jose A. Balgutedra 
Mr. Elpipio de Peralta 

Mr. CK 6 TODAL OsoTEG 

Mr. Gonzalo Vru.AVETitiE, Jr. 


SUB COMMITTEE . ON nil'! OMATTC 
CORPS FAKTlOPaTIONi 

Chairman: 

Secretary T.i h hado D, CaycO 

Members: 

Ambassador Manu fx G. Zamora 
M inister Manuel Collantes 
M r. Cristqrai* Osoteo 


[ 20 ] 



