
DECEMBER 1940 



•EDITORIAL 



Philippines which \wvc makes its lirsl appearamv. 
has h(MMi phuiiief] and arraniicd as a nicdiuin of infonna- 
tion and opinion, lis sponsors. inliMosUMl in proniotin*i 
a greater flow of fael and eonnnenl on Philij)pine- Amer- 
ican rehilions. [cc\ thai this can ^^•ell he accomplished in 
pari ihrouiih a ma^iazine. anlhorilalive in tone, and open 
to every shade of re|)resenlative ihoughl and opinion. 

• • • 

In the pr(\^enl |)hase of world e\enls. ^vilh confusion 
ridinp: fast on the heels of destruction, and all our \ alues 
stretched uj)()n the rack of war. facts on the one hand 
and frank opinion on the (Uher carry a cool and reas- 
surinii: touch, ll is with this in mind tlial we launch our 
editorial venture. 

It is our helief that the Philippine Commonwealth, its 
aflairs and its prohlems, are of great and vital interest 
today, and have a peculiar significance in the cataclysm 
w^hich is going on ahout us. In the Far East today Fili- 
pinos and Americans together man the treacherous ram- 
parts, and keep joint watch on the Pacific frontiers. Yet 
it has been natural in late years, and especially in recent 
months, for current discussions to slur over the Philij)- 
pines and to lose sight of its problems. Too many in- 
formed people consider the Philippine nation a detached 
and semi-insulated area of the w^orld which figures oid\ 
passively in the dynamics of daily events. 

We Filipinos feel, however, that the welfare of Amer- 
ica, as well as the w^elfare of the Philippines, can be pro- 
moted by a better realization and closer acquaintance 
with recent developments in that sector of the world ; it is 
our hope to foster a more conscious relationship between 
our tw^o peoples and countries. 

• • • 

Common vigilance and cooperation in defense are by 
no means the only active tie of interest between us. We 
of the Philippines are today a people heading tow^ard 
the great adventure of independent existence after more 
than forty years under American direction: we face a 
world boiling with trouble, with aggression, and uncer- 
tainty. America, for its part, is taking the unprecedented 
step of preparing to hand a charter of liberty to a land 
acquired by the historical right of war and ])urchase. 
To yield sovereignty and independence to a people whom 
the United States has schooled in American tradition, 
taught the American tongue, and given the American form 
of constitutional government, is in itself an action of time- 
less importance in a world where all our \ alues are lieing 
tested in the fire of force. 



This great ad\enture of a [icople li\ ing by American 
ideals and the American system in an area of the world 
dominated elsewhere by dictatorship and force is a mighty 
test of those ideals, and of that system. Americans should 
be. and are interested in that test. 

It is fairly obvious, though not fully recognized that 
Filipinos do not \ isualize the adx ent of independence 
as the signal for the severing of all spiritual, cultural 
and connnercial ties which now exist between the peoples 
of the Philippines and the. I nited States. These ties of 
connnon interest will eventually prove far more lasting 
than the purely political bonds which exist until 1946. 
The United States, we expect, will always remain our 
closest friend, and confidant. The ties of commerce and 
investment are strong and real, while the channels of swift 
communication by airplane, telegraph, and radio will 
alwa\s keep the Philippines within ready earshot of the 
United States, regardless of political de\ elopments abroad. 

• • • 

Briefiv and somewhat sketchily. that is the basis for 
our issuance of this magazine. W e believe that leaders of 
thought in the I nited States can use and appreciate a 
frank discussion of our mutual problems, in the light of 
world developments, despite their primary preoccupation 
with those developments, themselves. 

Naturally our editorial accent will be on the Filipino 
viewpoint. However, this will not be a "'house organ," a 
"shop paper."" nor the peddler of a program. We have no 
desire to sell anything to anybody. We not only invite 
but solicit expressions of opinion on the Philippines and 
the Far East from those whose views must necessarily 
conflict w ith ours. Our primary desire is to arouse interest 
and discussion in these matters which concern both our 
countries, and to help Americans become more personally 
acquainted with the viewj)oints. the personalities, and 
the facts about the Philip])ines. 

W e hope to be ])oth entertaining and stinudating. edu- 
cational and informative. W^e will avoid, as much as 
possible, the didactic, the dull, and the |)atronizing. Our 
magazine will not be a primer for children, nor a statis- 
tical digest to file and forgel. 

We want to mak(^ friends. W e want to be read. W(» 
cxj)ect to improve. 

J. M. FLIZALDF. 

R(\^i(l(Mil Coimnissioner of lh(* Philippirn^s 
lo the Unih^l Slalcs. 



Personalities in this Issue 




• ROY HOWARD is nationally known as a newspaper 
publisher and authority on foreign affairs. A personal 
friend of President Quezon, he has visited the Philippines 
on four occasions. The article on page 5 was written 
after an extensive tour of the Far East last summer. 



JOAQUIN M. ELIZALDE 

• NOW IN his third year as Philippine Resident Com- 
missioner in the United States, Joaquin M. Elizalde is 
one of the best-known businessmen in the Commonwealth. 
His forefathers left Spain for the Philippines a century 
ago; the family has been intimately identified with insu- 
lar economy ever since. Commissioner Elizalde contrib- 
utes this month's editorial. 

• • • 

MAJ. GEN. JAMES G. HARBORD 

• AT A banquet in his honor at Malacanang Palace in 
Manila, Major General James G. Harbord was described 
by President Quezon as "not only a friend, tried and true, 
but a living example of honesty and integrity — a public 
official who exhibited exceptional love of duty." Chief 
of Staff and later Commander of the Service of Supply 
for the A.E.F., Gen. Harbord today is Chairman f)f the 
Board of the Radio Corporation of America. On j)age 
19 he recalls some of his early Philippine experiences. 



PAUL V. McNUTT 

• PALL V. McNUTT Wcis Higli (.oniiiiissioiKM* to the 
Philippine Islands during 1937 and 1 93fi. Since rtniirii- 
ing to Washington last year, he has headed th(» Federal 
Security Agency. His message is on page 4. 



LEO KOCIALKOW SKI 

• LEO KOCIALKOWSKL Democratic Congressnum 
from Chicago, is Chairman of the House Connnittee on 
Insular Affairs. On page 1 he ])leads for fuller mutual 
understanding between Americans and Filipinos. 

• • • 

HARRY B. HAWES 

• SHORTLY after Harry B. Hawes began i)racticing law 
in St. Louis in 1896, he took the added job of repre- 
senting the Republic of Hawaii during the negotiations 
for annexation to the Lnited States. Today, having 
retired from the Senate after sponsoring the Philij)j)ine 
Independence Act, he is once more practicing law — this 
time in Washington — and serving as counsel for the 
Commonwealth. His message is on j)age 15. 

• • • 

FRANCISCO VARONA 

• AS A member of the Philippine House of Representa- 
tives, Francisco Varona was responsible for many for- 
ward-looking labor laws. In 19.37, President Quezon 
asked him to survey Filipino labor problems in the 
United States, Hawaii, and Alaska. The following year, 
Mr. Varona was appointed Labor Assistant to the Phil- 
ippine Commissioner in Washington. He looks at the 
Filipinos in this country on page 14. 

• • • 

PILAR N. RAVELO 

• PILAR 1\. RAVELO, a member of the publicity staff 
of the Resident Commissioner's Office, w^as formerly 
a reporter and columnist for the Manila Daily Bulletin, 
and editor of the Woman's Home Journal, official organ 
of the National Federation of Women's Clubs of the 
Philippines. Since coming to Washington she has been 
a member of Mrs. Roosevelt's ])ress confereiu e. On page 
21 Miss Havelo descrilx's an old-fashioned IMiilippine 
Ch ristnuis. 



• 2 • Philippines 



Philippines 



Conteiils for December, 1940 

Editorial, /. M. Elizalde 1 

Personalities in Tliis Issue 2 

A Note from Paul V. MeNutt 4 

A Congressman Speaks, Leo Kocialkoirski 4 

Wanted: A Foreign Poliey, Roy Howard 5 

Independence and Economies, Manuel Roxas 7 

Loyalty, President Manuel L. Quezon 8 

As Amended 10 

Strategic Storehouse 11 

l/25tli of 1 Per Cent,' Francisco Varona 14 

Have We Kept Our Promises? Harry B, Hawes 15 

Jacobs Goes to Egypt, Julius Edelstein 17 

Meet John Ker Davis 18 

Over My Shoulder, Gen, James G. Harbord 19 

Xmas Without Santa Claus, Pilar N, Ravelo 21 

• • • 

Photo credit: U. S. Army Signal Corps. I^hilippine 
Army Signal Corps, l^hoio I'inisliing Corp., Manila; 
Office of the l^resident of the Philippines; and Tomel- 
den, Washington. 

• • • 

Back Cover: Inter-Island Shipping at Zamhoanga. P. I. 

• • • 

Prnnissitm to ri'priiit material apix'arin^ in 
**Philil»piiu*s" is fjladly ^raiitrtl ex<M'pt in cast's 
where us«« is specifically restricted. Proper credit 
ivill be appreciated. 




Flying over Manila, the visitor sees the capital 
of the Philii)pine Commonwealth as it appears 
on the front cover. Through the city winds the 
yellow Pasig River, its lower reaches providing 
a herth for dozens of hemp and copra-laden 
inter-island shit)s. In the center stands the mod- 
ern Bureau of Pt)sts. 



Ill the Editor*^ Basket 

"Philippines" next month will offer an im- 
portant study of the iron resources of the Philip- 
pine Islands and show who is utilizing this im- 
portant raw material. The international aspects 
are not what you have been led to believe. 



What does free trade with the Commonwealth 
mean to the average American businessman? A 
revealing article on the export trade of the 
U. S. is on the schedule for January. It offers 
encouragement to dairy farmers, fruit growlers 
and oil men. as well as a host of others. 



Is the Philippine Commonwealth a foreign na- 
tion or part of the United States? A member of 
the Philippine Commissioner's legal staff w^ill 
show why the answer is ''a little of one and a 
little of the other — and. from another stand- 
point, neither." 



In the lipstick department. Miss Ravelo, who 
describes a Philippine Christmas this month, 
promises a discussion of Filipino w^omen leaders. 



Incidentally, cartographer Frank Manning is 
working on a series of "thre(^-dimension" maps 
of the Commonwealth. Readers who wish copies 
for their own use should write to the editors. 
Whenever practicable, they will be supplied 
without charge. 



-Philippines- is puMished n,„„tl.ly hy the ofilcc „f the Philippine Resident < .<,nnnissioner to the I nited 
States. Editorial and eircnlat.on ofhces at 2.162 rVInssaehusetts Avenue ^orlh.vest, W ashinfrlon, D. C. Entered 
as third class matter in the \\ ashington jiost oflice on Decemher 1, 1910. Permit No. ."SO l.^. Printed in U.S.A. 



A Note from Paul V. McNutt 



To THE Philippines, to my Filipino friends, and to 
the new publication, "Philippines," which is being 
brought forth for the first time, my every enthusiastic 
wish for success. 

Although time has run swiftly since I left Manila, the 
memories I hold of the Philippines, its people, and its 
leaders are as fresh and moving as ever. 

The Philippines face great problems in a turbulent 
and threatening world. I know that the Filipino people 
face those problems with the same courage, the same 
resolution, and the same intelligence they have always 
shown in their great moments. I am positive that whatever 
their decisions and their actions in the trying months 
ahead, they will have the sympathy and friendship of 
the American people who have been so closely associated 
w^ith them for the past forty years. 

I am proud of the association I have had with tlieir 
history. I am ready today, as I hope I shall always be, 
to do whatever is in my power to be of assistance in the 
mutual development of the relations of our people. 

The idea of a Philippine publication, aimed at spread- 
ing information and opinion on Philippine- American rela- 
tions, is an excellent one. Any move to stimulate frank 
discussion of our mutual problems is a great contribution 
to our friendship. 

Paul V. McNutt. 

A Congressman Speaks 




Leo Kocialkowski 

Chaiiiiiaii of tiir flouse Committee on Insular Affairs. 



9 4 • Philippines 




Paul V. McNutt 

U. S. Hi<^h Coniniissioner to the J-^hilippines in 1937 antl 1938. 



• • • 



— Leo Kocialkowski 

When in my boyhood days I read of the Philippines, 
of Dewey's victory in Manila Bay, and of the strug- 
gles of Filipinos for reform and freedom, I little dreamed 
that later I would be brought into intimate contad with 
the solution of problems affecting the relations between 
the United States and the Philippine Islands. My service 
in the Congress and my position as Chairman of the Com- 
mittee on Insular AfTairs, which has jurisdiction over 
measures that have to do with Philippine questions, served 
to awaken in me greater interest in those lovely isles of 
the Pacific and their friendly and hospitable people. That 
interest was further deepened by my association with 
many able and patriotic Filipino leaders in Washington 
and by my visit to the Philippines, together with various 
Senators and Representatives, upon the inauguration of 
the new Government of the Phili|)pine Commonwealth in 
November, 1935. 

Despite the heavy demands upon my time in these days 
of c()nfusion and stress, it is a pleasure to accede to the 
request of my g(M)d friend, Resident Commissioner J. M. 
Elizalde, to contribute to the initial number of the 
magazine, ''Philij3|)ines." T have long believed a rcspon- 

( Turn to Page 23 ) 



Wanted: A Foreign Policy 



By Roy Howard 



D ESPITE [he lliousaiuls of miles between Manila and 
the Caribbean, llie deal for Anieriean bases in the British 
possessions was l)ii: news in the Philippines. Many viewed 
the move as a step toward nil i mate reversal of the Tyd- 
ings-MeDnflie Act izranting Philippine independence in 
1916. The interlocking natnre of the events is more logi- 
cal than is casnally ai)|)arent. 

Most Filipino politicians still proclaim pnblicly their 
desire for independence, now assnred them by Congress- 
ional action. In private conversation most will admit that 
once the American (lag comes down Japan can and will 
take over the islands at her convenience. 

In the face of sncl: certainty all Filipino leaders admit 
that Japanese dominance, which wonld certainly mean 
Japanese exploitation, wonld be intolerable after Ameri- 
can administration which has developed into almost com- 
|)lete local autonomy. 

Nowhere in the Far East, not even in China under 
Chiang Kai-shek, is local political leadership in stronger 
or more skillful hands than those of Philippine President 
Manuel L. Quezon. By no one are Japan's intentions 
better understood than by Mr. Quezon. But evertts have 
frozen the Filipino leader's position. 

For 30 years Manuel Quezon was a consistent and ag- 
gressive advocate of Philippine independence. The sin- 
cerity of his attitude was above question as long as the 
|)()ssibility existed of collective security — of independence 
to be guaranteed jointly by the I nited States, Great Brit- 
ain, Japan and other powers with territorial and political 
interests in the Pacific. 

The Manchurian incident of September, 1931, and Ja- 
pan's flouting of the Nine Power Pact was a crushing 
blow to Mr. Quezon's hopes. He understood the signifi- 
cance of Japan's conquest of Manchuria before most 
Filipinos had even sensed its relationship to their prob- 
lem. Abyssinia, the collapse of the League of Nations, 
the invasion of China proper, and the second World War! 
In succession they carried away, piece by piece, the last 
hope of Philippine independence coupled with security, in 
a world where force ignores all treaty obligations. 

With the new Commonwealth government and his own 
inauguration as president set for November, 1935, Mr. 
Quezon faced political suicide if at that time he attempted 
the hasty education of his people as to why the indepen- 
dence he had long fought for had suddenly become of 
questionable value. The new president, with a keen un- 
derstanding of the Philippine psychology, did not dare 
risk the charge of deserting the independence issue at the 
moment when even a hollow success was in sight. He 
stalled and played for time. 

In the meantime, two lobbies in Washington went into 
action to make certain, like it or not, the islands got 




their independence. One lobby represented American 
sugar interests, eager to exclude duty-free Philippine 
sugar. The other represented the dairy interests seeking 
to bar free Philippine coconut oil used in a small way 
in the manufacture of margarine. 

Today a well-organized committee of leading Filipino 
business men and politicians is w^orking for reconsidera- 
tion of the entire independence idea. The ultimate objec- 
tive is abrogation of the Tydings-McDuffie Act and estab- 
lishment of some form of dominion government under 
the American flag. 

President Quezon's hold on public confidence is so 
strong that no one doubts that he could, in a very short 
personal campaign, convince his people of the futility 
of a small nation so vulnerable hoping to defend its in- 
dependence in a corner of the world where might is the 
interpreter of treaties and the arbiter of the fate of small 
nations. 

Mr. Quezon has, however, remained silent on the sub- 



December^ 1940 © 5 © 




ject of independence after 1946. The reason is no uncer- 
tainty as to what he could persuade his people is best for 
them, but his very justifiable uncertainty as to how the 
American Congress would react to the suggestion of a re- 
consideration in favor of a dominion form of government 
for the Islands. 

Under the Tydings-McDuffie Act the subject of the 
future relations comes up automatically for considera- 
tion "at least one year" before the final grant of in- 
dependence. Theoretically this consideration has to do 
with future trade and tariff relations. Actually it is 
expected to embrace the broader subject of a continu- 
ance of the American flag in the Islands. 

Those working for dominion status hope that before 
1945 the great American export industries, such as U. S. 
Steel, General Motors, General Foods, General Electric, 
etc., will develop an appreciation of the great tariff- 
free market they are throwing into the lap of Japan. 
It is hoped and believed that once they realize that 
withdrawal from the Philippines means w^ithdrawal from 
the entire Far Eastern market, they will launch a cam- 
paign in Congress to offset the efforts of the relatively 
unimportant sugar and dairy lobbies. 

In the meantime, an effort will be made to urge upon 
Congress and the Washington Administration the formu- 
lation of a clear-cut Far Eastern policy — something we 
have lacked since the Japanese exploitation of Man- 
chukuo nullified the Open Door policy of John Hay. 
It is in connection with a new American policy in the 
Far East, which they believe may grow from the present 
tendency of British and Americans to draw together 
for common defense, that Filipinos opposed to indepen- 
dence base their hopes. 

If the United States intends to adopt a purely isola- 
tionist policy and interposes no objection to Japanese 
domination and exploitation of everything beyond Ha- 
waii, our day in the Philippines is obviously near its 
close. So also is the era of complete loc;al autonomy 



Trainees in the Philippine 
Army take an oath of allegi- 
ance to the Commonwealth. 

which the United States has developed under the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth. 

But many Americans in the Far East believe that iso- 
lation will be found impractical, if not impossible, and 
that before it is attempted consideration will be given 
not only to American export markets in the Orient, but 
also to our import needs in the form of rubber, tin. 
quinine, etc. If in the light of such considerations the 
United States adopts a policy of maintaining its political 
and economic status quo, the extension to the Pacific of 
the same basic formula of British-American mutual de- 
fense that has been established in the Atlantic would 
alter the entire picture for the British, the Dutch, and 
American interests. 

Recent straws in the wind have been the settling, by 
negotiation between Washington and London, of the status 
of necessary island bases for Pan-American Airways in 
the South Pacific. More recently there has been the in- 
creasingly recurrent suggestion of the use by the Ameri- 
can Navy of the great Singapore base. 

Should American use of the Singapore base develop 
even as a temporary measure, the move would alter the 
whole pattern of the Pacific, at least insofar as Japan is 
presently attempting to reshape that pattern in her own 
interest. An American or a British fleet at Singapore 
would definitely affect any plans Japan might have for a 
southward thrust in the direction of the Netherlands In- 
dies or Australia. It might even hasten a fair and just 
Sino-Japanese peace in a war which obviously has be- 
come deadlocked. 

But before any of this must come announcement of a 
definite and long-time American policy in the Pacific, a 
policy broad enough to respect the legitimate needs and 
aspirations of every other nation, Japan especially, but at 
the same time clearly defining and limiting the rights 
which America regards as legitimately hers, and the main- 
tenance of which she is prepared and willing to protect. 

Reprinted from the Wdnhinf/ton nuih/ \rn-H. ronrtes)/ of Srrippn- 
Hoivard NewHpaper». 



• 6 • Philippines 



IXDEPEXDE^CE and EC0i>03IlCS 

Proposals for a Revision of the Philippine 
Independence Act 



Oil Soplemhor 7 7, 19 the Hon, Manuel Roxas^ 
Philippine Secretary of Finance and chairman of 
the Philippine iSational Kcononiic Council^ broad- 
cast over Station K/All\^ Manila,, a plea to the peo- 
ple of the United States for a modification of the 
Independence Act, Follouinv: is an abstract of Mr, 
Roxas^ proposals^ which reflected the official view- 
point of the ComnKtnwealth Government on this 
all-important snb ject, 

Mr, Roxas beiian his political career at the aiae of 
27 y when he was elected taovernor of his province,, 
Capiz, Three years later ^ in 1922^ he was sent to 
the Honse of Representatives. Elected Speaker of 
the Honse the same year^ Mr, Roxas soon became 
€}ne of the foremost leaders in the Philippines, In 
1932 he helped draft the Han^-Hawes-Cntting Law^ 
ivhich was finally snpplanted by the Independence 
Act of 1934, Today he is considered one of the 
most eminent Filipino economists, 

^^ThE international situation is filling us ^sith 
misgivings as to the future. We see danger signals ahead 
and we are impotent to face the possible emergencies 
were they to eventuate in the near future . . . 

"We do not expect American soldiers to shed their 
blood in the Philippines. W^e claim that duty as our own. 
We have now approximately 150,000 trained men, . . ., 
a force which is being augmented each year by some 
30,000. We have conscription. We have an adequate 
framework. We have intelligent leadership. We have 
patriotism and determination. W^hat we need are more 
arms and ammunition, more airplanes and other equip- 
ment essential to modern warfare which are not produced 
in these Islands. These, I believe, the United States can 
supply us [with] v/hile, at the same time, safeguarding 
our communication with continental America with her 
powerful fleet . . . 

''The Philippine Independence Act approved by Con- 
gress In 1934 grants us ten years ... to make ready for 
an independent existence and the termination of prefer- 
ential trade with the Ihiited States . . . The aim of the 
plan was gradually to make the Philippines less de- 
pendent of the free American market . . . But the con- 
gressional formula as well as the plans we have adopted 
were predicated upon normal conditions prevailing in 
the world, with connnerce flowing freely among nations 
on the basis of free competition. That basic condition no 
longer exists . . . We have lost our trade with Europe, 
and our commerce with China and Japan has been 
drastically curtailed. 

"The effect . . . has been to bind [our economy] 
more closely with lhat of the United States, for America 
is |)ra( ticall v the only market that remains open to us. 




Finance Minister Roxas 



As a consequence, instead of reducing our economic 
dependence on America we find ourselves today even 
more dependent on her market than we were when Con- 
gress enacted the Independence Law . . . 

"W^e now find our task of economic readjustment not 
only extremely difficult but practically impossible during 
the period granted to us. These difficulties will be aggra- 
vated by the imposition of export taxes and quota limita- 
tions on our exports to the United States beginning next 
January . . . 

"W^e will have to undergo great human suffering unless 
we are granted immediate relief from the operation of 
Congressional statutes that will increase our burdens 
during these times of stress . . . Concretely, this relief 
should consist of prolonging the economic adjustment 
period for at least ten years more and postponing the 
gradual imposition of quotas and tariff duties on Philip- 
pine exports to the Lhiited States until four years after 
peace has been reestablished . . . 

''Congress has provided for the calling of a tradc^ con- 
ference between representatives of the Ihiited States and 
of the Philippines to meet at least two years before 1946 
in order to formulate plans for trade relations between the 
two countries after independence. I am of the ()|)ini()n 
that that conference should meet l)efore the end [ of 1940] 
so that our present problems and difficulties may be con- 
sidered and a sounder and fairer plan may be submitted 
to Congress for action at its next session. 

**An\ change in the program of economic adjustnuMit 
need not postpone or alter the date of indep(Midence pre- 
s( rib(^d in the 1 nde|KMidence Act . . . ' 



Decemhei% 1940 • 7 • 




In 1898 Manuel Qiu^zon 
fought in the revohitioii 
with Gen. Emilio Aguinal- 
(lo, first president of the 
short-lived Philippine Re- 
public. Today, President 
Quezon and Gen. Aguinaldo 
both affirm their loyalty to 
the Stars and Stripes as well 
as to the new flag of the 
Philippine Commonwealth. 




MESSAGE FROM 

PRESIDENT MANUEL L. QUEZON 

OF THE PHILIPPINE COMMONWEALTH 



The great inventions of our industrial civilization 
have, in recent years, almost annihilated the vast ex- 
panse of ocean which separates our two countries. 
Through the facilities of regular clipper service, Manila 
is now accessible to you from San Francisco in six days, 
while a telephone conversation between your citizens and 
ours has been made possible by the progress of the 
technology of communication. 

The task undertaken 42 years ago by the United 
States in the Philippines has no parallel in history. From 
the very beginning, it has been inspired by a spirit not 
of hatred or conquest, but of friendship and service. In 
a message to Congress, President McKinley said : "From 



the earliest moment no opportunity was lost of assuring 
the people of the Islands of our ardent desire for their 
welfare and of the intentions of this government to do 
everything possible to advance their interests." Later on 
he added: "We shall continue, as we have begun, to open 
the schools and the churches, to set the courts in opera- 
tion, to foster industry and trade and agriculture, and in 
every way in our power to make these people whom 
Providence has brought within our jurisdiction feel that 
it is their liberty and not our power, their welfare and 
not our gain, we are seeking to enhance. Our flag has 
never waved over any community but in blessing. I 
believe the Filipinos will soon recognize the fact that it 



• 8 Philippines 



has not lost its <iift of beiuHliction in its world-wide jour- 
ney to their shores.*' President Wilson, in a message to 
the Filipino |)eo|)le. said: **Vi e regard ourselves as trus- 
tees acting not for the advantage of the I'nited States 
hut for lh(^ h(Mu^nt of thi^ |)eo|)le of the Philippine Islands/' 

riiat was a nohle mission, nobly jnoelaimed by the 
highest r(»i)resentati\ es of the government and peoj)le of 
the I nited Slates. It brought about wonderful results. It 
paved lh(^ way for nuitual understanding and cooperation 
betwe(Mi Americans and Filij)inos. resulting in notable 
strides along all lines of national endeavor. It awakened 
in the Filipino heart a sense of loyalty produced not bv 
compulsion or [cixv. but by aiT(H-tion and admiration. It 
dro\(' home to tlie Filipino peo|)le the loftiness of Amer- 
ica's aims in this country. It has given the world a shining 
example of the great things which American princijiles 
and ideals are capable of achieving in the field of human 
relationship. It has d(Mnonstratt*d that in the relation of 
one peoj)le to another, harmony and peace may be 
attained when fairness and justice is allowed to prevail. 

Friends in America, may 1 lake advantage of this oppor- 
tunity to assure once again the government and people 



of the I nited States of the gratitude and loyalt\ of the 
Filipino people? As 1 have said on other occasions. \ve 
want the government and people of the L nited States to 
feel that we are bound to them no[ merely by the presence 
of the American Hag in oin- country, but by the nobler 
and stronger lies of gratitude and atTection — bonds of 
sentiment that are born of the human heart and ^vhich 
transcend the obligations of allegiance implied in the 
presence of that flag. Our loyalty to the I nited Slates 
is rooted in something more lasting than legal or political 
relationship. Our loyalty is built on faith — faith in the 
sense of fairness and justice of the American people, 
faith in the great })rinciples and ideals for which the Stars 
and Stri|)es proudly waves over land and sea. over a free 
and haj)p) peo})le. 

Our loyalty to the great American nation is but the 
fruit of her altruistic policy in dealing with our people — 
a policy which has been characterized by justice and 
good will and by both moral and material assistance. 
That loyalty. I am sure, will oulli\e the so\ereignt\ of the 
United States over our country, and will attest for all time 
the moral grandeur of America and the \itality of her 
free institutions. 




The President attends mass at the Letran College ehapeU Manila^* 
with Mrs. Qnezon and their ehildren. 



Decemher, 1940 



AS AMENDED 



Why Are wS o m e Provisions 
of tlie Fliiiippiiie C€>ii!<tiluti€>n 
Roiiili;' Cliaii^eii? 



A COXSTITLTIOX, to be sure, is intended to crystal- 
lize with more or less fidelity the political, social and 
economic ideologies of its framers, but as conditions and 
problems surrounding the 
people, no less than their 
ideals, are constantly chang- 
ing, the instrument must 
necessarily be amenable to 
changes and alterations. In 
the epigrammatic language 
of Justice Cardozo, the inn 
that shelters for the night is 
not the journey's end, and 
the Constitution, like the traveller, must be ready for the 
morrow. 

The constitutional amendments proposed by the Na- 
tional Assembly and ratified by the people of the Philip- 
pines are threefold: fl) to permit the reelection of the 
President; (2) to reestablish the bicameral system, re- 
viving the Senate: and (3) to create an Electoral Com- 
mission. 

Are the proposed amendments to the Constitution con- 
sistent with the principles of democracy? The essence 
of democracy is its representative character. Democracy, 
as we understand it nowadays, is republicanism. It is 
maintained as long, and so long as the people retain the 
ultimate power of selection of the persons or officials 
who are to exercise for a given period of time the powers 
of government. It is the Websterian theory that the 
source of all political powder is necessarily the people. 
As long as the people retain the power of selection at 
reasonable intervals, the essence of representative gov- 
ernment is maintained. 

I. Reelection of the President 

The original constitutional provision on Executive 
Power fixed the term of the President at six years with- 
out reelection. The amendment shortens the term to four 
years, permitting one reelection, and no more, by virtue 
of the clause providing that no person shall serve as 
President for more than eight consecutive years. This 
change permits more frequent renovation of the Presi- 
dency and thus makes the position more responsive to 
the popular will. The President, by the Constitution, may 
be removed from office only by impeachment, a power 
exercised by the Assembly only on rare and exceptional 
occasions. Where, therefore the President commits gross 
abuse, injustice, oppression or misconduct not embraced 



President Roosevelt on Decenilier 2nd an- 
nounced approval of three amendments to the 
Philippine Constitution. The nature of these 
changes, the first to he made in th(^ Common- 
wealth's charter, has heen explained in an author- 
itative paper hy Justice P. Laurel of the Supreme 
Court of the Philippines. This is a hrief digest 
of Justice LaureFs ohservations. 



within the grounds for inipeachnicnt (^numerated in the 
Constitution, the peoph.' are j)owcrh\^s to judge* hi in. 
much less remove him from office. Hence, the w is(h)rn 

of shortenin«i: the constitu- 
tional term of the Presi(h*nt. 



II. Return to Hicani- 
eralisni 

Tlie presence of a scMond 
chamber secur(\^ (^xhaustixe 
deliberation and axoids pic- 
cipitatc* action. lherel)v 
achie\in^ nuixiniuni wisdom 
in the legislatve jjrocess and coniparati\e exceUence in 
the quality of approved legislation. The Senate operates 
as the center of revision and resistance; it "watches and 
plans, weeds and discriminates, and quashes precipitancy 
in the framing or alteration of laws, as well as against 
yielding to the suggestions of indolence, selfish projects 
of ambition, or the cunning devices of corrupt and hol- 
low demagogues.' 

The revival of the Senate should speed the growth of 
national consciousness. Being chosen at large. Senators 
will represent the whole nation, and be a potent force 
in the cultivation of a militant sense of unity wdiich can- 
not be fostered by an assembly whose meml^ers represent 
different sectors of the country. The broad sweep of 
their perspective would furnish a new^ slant in the solu- 
tion of local and national problems. 

III. Independent Electoral Commission 

The constitutional amendment creating an independent 
commission on elections is wise for the following rea- 
sons: (1) transfer of the enforcement and administra- 
tion of the election law from the Secretary of the In- 
terior, a political officer, to the Commission on Elections, 
a non-partisan body, will provide a greater safeguard for 
elections; (2) elimination of partisan control and super- 
vision of elections will have a wholesome effect on the 
body politic, strengthening popular confidence in the 
sanctity of suffrage; (3) limitation of Executive pardon- 
ing power in election cases (it can be exercised only on 
the favorable recommendation of the Commission on 
Elections) deprives the political party in power of a 
method for frustrating the popular will at the polls; 
(4) the Commission on Elections being protected by 
ample safeguards against both executive and legislative 
encroachment or interference, the indej)endence so es- 
sential to honest, fearless and uncom|)roniising enforce- 
ment of the election law is guaranteed. 



• 10 ® Philippines 



Beneath the hills of northern 
Luzon, long famous for their 
Ifufjao riee lerraees, modern 
engineers have found unex- 
peeted mineral wealth. Not 
many miles from here are 
some of the rieliest gold mines 
under the Ameriean flag. 




Strategic Storehouse 

Philippine Resources Offer a Solution to U. S. Material Needs 



w ITH its eyes on the \ ilal jiroblem of national de- 
fense, the United States Government has listed fourteen 
"strategic materials" which are not produced in suf- 
ficient quantities within the bounds of the 48 states 
to meet estimated war-time needs. These include anti- 
mony, chromiunu coconut shell char, manganese (ferro- 
grade), manila hemp, mercury, mica, nickel, quartz 
crystal, quinine, rul)her, silk, tin, and tungsten. The 
need for this material is urgent. The metals must go 
into armor plate, food containers and electrical equip- 
meiit; other materials are necessary for gas masks, 
medicine kits, and precision instruments: rubber and 
silk play important roles in our everyday lives — and 
roles that would be even more important in war; Manila 
hemp is as vital to shipping as fuel or cargo. 

Of these strategic materials, however, a number are 
now produced in quantity under the American flag 
in the Phili])pine Islands. The western shore of the 
island of Luzon has one of the largest known deposits 
of chrome in tbe world. Manganese is found in many 
parts of the islands. Coconut shell char is available in 
unlimited quantities as a by-product of the copra indus- 
try. The southern islands of the Philippine Common- 
wealth have a natural monopoly on abaca, the so-called 
Manila hemp. (And, althougb production has not yet 
been undertaken on a large scale, experiments have 
proved that rubber can be produced in the archipelago, 
the output per acre approaching the world record.) 
Philippine resources thus include four of America's 
missing strategic materials. 

Recent exploration and development has increased the 



list of Philipj)ine natural assets. se\ eral of which are 
listed as of '"critical" importance to the United States. 
Iron mines are becoming increasinglv important: the 
Philippines apparently have most of what little workable 
ore is found in all the Far East. Nickel occurs in small 
quantities. Some petroleum is produced and research 
indicates the possibility of modest deposits. Total stands 
of marketable timber — particularly useful "Philippine 
mahogany'' — have an estimated value of $4,000,000,000. 

Kapok and carabao hides are urgently needed hy the 
Government: the Islands produce them. Newh de\ eloped 
mines have put the Commonwealth in ninth place among 
world gold producers: under the I'nited States flag, the 
Islands are second in output only to California. Sugar 
is one of the most important exports of the Common- 
wealth, and the I'. S. does not produce enough to fill 
its own needs. The ubiquitous coconut, whose dried meat 
is the second most valuable agricultural export, has an 
important part in the manufacture of American soaps, 
margarine and explosives. 

In the case of both chrome and manganese, tlu^ dis- 
covery that the Philippines has import ant deposits of ore 
is quite recent. Smaller bodies of chrome ore had been 
exploited in the past, however: one, in (^amarines Sin- 
Province, yielded 76,000 tons of ,'^2 j)er ccni ore Ix^Oic 
it was worked out. Today, chromite reserves in the 
vicinity of Masinloc. in Zambales Proxince north of 
Manila, have been estimated to total mor(^ than 10. 000. 000 
tons. Following recent discoveries in that pro\ ince. three 
areas were set aside there for official ex j)Ioit at ion. Two 

( Turn to /'ae:e 2.1 I 



December, 1940 . \\ . 



— 35 — -J"-.. -? r 




^ ^^^^^^ 





Above — President Quezon, surrounded by friends, brings in 
a sheaf of rice from his farm at Arayat, north of Manila. 





Above — High-speed Boats'' 
have an important place 
in Philippine defense plaD5. 



Left — Inter-island ships unload 
sacks of rice at the Pasig River 
quays in the heart of Manila. 



m 12 • Philippines 




Above — Filii)iiu) troops, iiiuirruoinu training as part of tlie Connnon- 

\v(»alth (Irfnise pro<irani. on parade at Camp Mur|)hv. outside Manila. 

Beloir — Intranuiros. the old W ailed City of Manila, is the site of 
the oldest hospital and the oldest uni\ (Msit\ under the Amei iean ilaa. 




Dei ember, 1940 • 13 • 




The Filipino Population of the IJ. S. 

By Francisco Varoiia 



Educational and economic motives are responsible 
for the presence in the United States of most Filipinos. 
Emigration to continental United States and its territories 
was relatively insignificant until shortly after the Span- 
ish-American War. Having been inculcated by American 
teachers in the public schools of the Islands with a de- 
sire to improve their education, early arrivals were gen- 
erally students. Following the exclusion of Japanese 
labor, Filipinos met the growing demand for efficient 
workers in the cane fields of Hawaii, the canneries in 
Alaska, and the agricultural regions of the Pacific Coast. 
Filipino migration gathered momentum through the 
twenties and early thirties until 1935, when it was effec- 
tively stopped by a provision of the Tydings-McDuffie 
Act which set an annual immigration quota of 50. 

Partly because of the steady stream of Filipinos re- 
turning to their homeland after a few years in the United 
States, the number remaining today is relatively small 
and steadily decreasing. In 1938, only 45,506 nationals 
resided in continental United States, the majority on the 
Pacific Coast. (The total comprised something less than 
1/ 25 of 1 per cent of the population of the United 
States. ) If statistics now being collected by the office of 
the Philippine Resident Commissioner in Washington 
are a criterion only about 4 per cent of these Filipinos in- 
tend to remain in the United States indefinitely. This 
means that the vast majority are interested mainly in 
learning American methods and efficiency, in preparation 
for jobs they hope to fill on their return to the Islands. 

Prior to the passage of the Tydings-McDuffie Act in 
1934, the Bureau of Insular Affairs of the War Depart- 
ment handled, among other matters, the problems of 
Filipinos in the United States. Today, this work is done 
much more comprehensively by the Nationals Division 
of the Resident Commissioner's Office. In issuing Certifi- 
cates of Identity to citizens of the Philippines, the office 
has tabulated the information contained in the first 298 
applications. Data based on such returns are not suffi- 
cient, naturally, to draw categorical conclusions, but the 
material at hand does indicate certain trends. 

The average age, as shown by the present survey is 
37 years.* The survey relative to educational attain- 
ments reveals some very interesting facts. For example, 
of the total registered thus far, grammar school gradu- 

* Bruno Lasker. in Filipino Immiaratiov to Contituntal United States 
and to Hawaii, put the average age at 25. 



ates re])resent 23 per cent: high school, li per cent; 
college. 21 per cent; and those having no formal educa- 
tion at all, only 3 ])er cent. 

This is doubtless one of the most im|)ortant factors 
which differentiate Filipino workers in the United Stales 
from those of certain other nationalities. A man who 
can perform his assignment intelligently, irrespective of 
the task, is bound to be a more efficient worker. More- 
c>\er the record of Filipino laborers in the cane fi(^lds of 
Hawaii and the agricultural regions of the WVst Coast, 
a^ well as in the canneries of Alaska, has been extremely 
creditable as regards both intelligence and efficiency. 

Filipinos are also in demand as hotel and restaurant 
workers. Whether this is because of natural inclination or 
custom is uncertain, but the fact remains that Filipinos 
are favored as bell-hops, bus boys, waiters and assistant 
cooks throughout the West. Intelligence, willingness to 
work, and unfailing courtesy are qualities that make the 
Filipino appreciated in this field. 

The average annual income of 257 Filipino wage 
earners so far tabulated is S921. Agricultural workers 
with lower incomes comprise the majority of this group, 
however, so the actual average is probably somewhat 
higher. Unlike some other racial groups, the Filipinos do 
not habitually send a large part of their earnings home. 
Available information indicates that the figure does not 
exceed 15 cents out of each dollar earned. 

Filipino labor in the United States is obviously of 
considerable potential importance to Insular finances, 
particularly if the habit of saving money and remitting 
it to relatives in the Islands is encouraged. On the other 
hand, however, the steadily diminishing Filipino popu- 
lation of the United States seems likely to counterbalance 
any greater tendency toward thrift. 

As a result of too much rugged individualism, mutual 
cooperation is often lacking among Filipinos in this 
country. The office of the Resident Commissioner is 
doing its utmost to foster a spirit of unity and mutual 
helpfulness. To this end, Filipino Executive Councils, 
wherein representatives of Filipino organizations in a 
given community serve as delegates, are being encour- 
aged and aided in their establishment. This, together with 
the program to encourage thrift and sound investment 
of incomes, will, it is hoped, be the best possible training 
for the responsibilities of independence when it becomes 
a reality in 1946. 



14 • Philippines 



Have We Kept Our Promises? 

By Senator Harry B. Hawes 



AbOI T forty years ago. seven million Filipinos in 
their group of 7,0o3 rieh islands eanie into the possession 
of the United States. 

The average American, when asked how this possession 
was secured, would invariably answer that it was ae- 
(|uired hy puri'hase from Spain for S2().()()(). ()()(). hut. 
as a matter of fact, the Archi|)elago came into our pos- 
session hy conqu(\^t in a ^^ar lasting over three \ears 
and costing tiie li\es of some I.OOO American soldiers 
and 16,000 Filipinos. 

First governed hy an American Conunission. then 
given civil govermnent with a measure of local sover- 
eignly under a Governor General appointed hy the 
President of the United States, the Filipinos graduated 
in 1935 from what we may call a ^iiigh schooF' political 
education. After the acceptance by plebescite of the sec- 
ond independence offer in 193 i. there came into existence 
a new form of government, called the Philippine Com- 
monwealth, in the control of which the Filipino people 
exercise in a general way the same local and sovereign 
rights granted to the citizens of each State of the Amer- 
ican Union. Connnonwealth autonomy is subject to but 
tw^o limitations: first, approval by the President of the 
thiited States is necessary for laws respecting currency, 
coinage, imports, and inunigration ; second, supervision 
and direction is maintained by the United States over 
foreign affairs, similar to that imposed on each of the 
48 states in our Union. 

Under the above reservations, the first great democratic 
state in the Far East came into being. Fired with en- 
thusiasm and patriotic inspiration, the Filipinos, guided 
by their great President, Manuel L. Quezon, have earn- 
estly faced the task of building up a nation w^orthy of 
the traditions of a great people. They have undertaken 
to meet the diflicult problems of national defense, of 
economic readjustment, of wider education, of sanitation, 
of social justice for the common tao, of public road 
building, of colonization of their unpeopled areas, and 
of development of their natural resources. 

In this process of nation-building, it is important for 
the American people to know that the entire cost has 
been paid by local taxation. No direct contribution has 
been made by the United States. In fact, only once under 
American sovereignty did the United States directly con- 
tribute to the support of the Philippines. After the sur- 
render of General Aguinaldo's forces an appropriation 
of $3,000,000 from the Federal treasury w^as made for 
the purpose of healing some of the wounds of war, and 
for rehabilitation and health purposes. I have alluded 




Senator Harry B. Hawes 

to this matter because of the erroneous impression that 
we have spent hundreds of millions in the Philippines 
for the Filipino people. This has been based on the mis- 
conception that our Army and Navy have been in the 
Philippines for the protection of that countrv alone. 
As a matter of fact, they have been there for the protec- 
tion of American interests in the entire Orient. The ex- 
penses of our Army and Navy there should be logically 
charged to the cost of maintaining our position as a 
great powder in the Pacific. 

In 1932, in a speech in the United States Senate. I 
made the following observation : ""The great thing, the 
big thing, the human thing is to redeem the promise 
made to the Filii)ino people so that they mav adjust 
their political and economic affairs and enter the family 
of nations, a grateful people, a happy people, a |)e()ple 
wdiose friendship and affection for America will be in 
part our rew-ard for keeping faith with them." 

Since that time, I have had no occasion to change m\ 
opinion. They have moved on their way in the new plan 
which provides ultimately for their self-determination in 
all things, but this is not an easy way. The path is strewn 

( Turn to Pa^e 24 I 



December, 1940 #15 • 




Malacanan Palace was the 
home of Spanish and Amer- 
ican governors. Today, it 
is President Quezon's resi- 
dence. 



Beside palm- fringed Dewey 
Boulevard, overlooking Ma- 
nila Bay, is the new resi- 
dence of Francis B. Sayre, 
American High Commis- 
sioner to the Common- 
wealth. 




i 




I I n B B sill I 




• 16 • Philippines 



Jacobs Goes to Egypt 

By Julius C. Edelstein 




Joseph E. Jacohs 

Joseph E. Jacobs, chief of the state Department's 
division of Philippine affairs, leaves his post this month 
to accept a diplomatic assignment in embattled Egypt, 
thus terminating a four-year monument of achievement 
whose full evaluation and appreciation must truly be left 
to future historians of Philippine-American relations. 

Such a sweeping statement may sound somewhat 
strained to the casual ear, which may never have even 
heard the name of Joseph Jacobs. That would not be 
surprising either, because this man has made an art of 
anonymity. Nevertheless, his accomplishments, though 
almost esoteric, are real and large, and he deeply merits 
a handsome valedictory. 

Jacobs is not a man who enjoys seeing written, in all 
solemnity, a heavy estimate of his good works in Philip- 
pine-American relations. Rather, he is the sort whose 
joy is in seeing an end achieved. For the record, let it 
be said that Jacobs founded the Philippine division in 
the Department of State. That was four years ago, shortly 
after the Philippine Commonwealth was inaugurated in 
Manila as a semi-sovereign government, with foreign 
relations under the direction of the United States. 

Jacobs had just completed a two-year "trick" as travel- 



Philippine Aifairs Chief 
Bows Out After 4 Years 

ing inspector for the Stale Department, covering con- 
sulates and legations of the I'nited States in Egypt, Iran. 
India. China, and the East Indies. Setting up and directing 
the new division was quite a ])ioneer job. ^vith its new 
duties and acti\ities to be determiTied. 

There wasn't much time for even that job when Jacobs 
first took over. Philii)pine Ihesident Manuel Que/.on was 
on his way to the United States with ideas for the recti- 
fication of certain economic injustices in the legal rela- 
tionship between the Philippines and the I'nited States. 
Jacobs was plunged into these momentous consultations 
and discussions, which finally resulted in establishment 
of the now-famous Joint Preparatorv Committer on Phil- 
ippine Affairs, the -JPCPA."" 

President Quezon came to W ashington and conferred 
with President Roosevelt and Assistant Secretary of State 
Francis B. Say re (now American High Conunissioner to 
the Philippines) over what could be done about economic 
relations. President Quezon is said to have favored a 
general conference of American and Filipino ofllcials to 
iron the whole thing out. Sayre's adviser and assistant. 
Joseph E. Jacobs, vigoroush urged a fact-finding com- 
mittee to studv the economic- factors inxolved and to 
report back to President Rooseveh. Jacobs* advice pre- 
vailed, and the JPCPA was set up by joint agreement 
between President Quezon and Assistant Secretar> Sayre. 

Jacobs was named chairman of the American group 
on the connnittee, under the Joint Committee chairman. 
Ambassador John A. Van MacMurray. For long months 
this group of Filipino and American fact-finders held 
hearings in the Iniited States and in the Philippines, and 
finally in May, 1938 agreed on a reporl to the President. 

Those who participated in the dc^liberations of the 
Committee tell of Jacobs* firm, unruflled patience in the 
numerous minor deadlocks, impasses and dead-ends whic h 
the Joint Committee reached and circumvented. After 
trying months of consideration, the final JPCPA report 
was signed and sealed. 

There began for Jacobs a new task — the transforma- 
tion of sweeping economic recommendations into legisla- 
tion for submission to Congress. Conferring constantly 
with legal experts, with Sayre. and with the Philippine 
representatives in Washington, he finally produced the 
Kocialkowski-Tydings amendments which — after exten- 
sive change and modification — were enacted into law as 

( Turn to Page 24) 



December, 1940 • 17 • 



Meet John Ker Davis 

He's New Chief of the Division 
of Philippine Affairs in 
the State Department 



O-X DECEMBER L a new chief of the division of 
Philippine affairs in the Department of State — John Ker 
Davis — takes office. China-born, John Davis will relieve 
Joseph Jacobs, who completes four momentous years as 
founder and first chief of this division (see page 17j. 

Davis begins his 32nd year in the foreign service of 
the United States, and the Philippine assignment will 
probably be his last before he retires from diplomatic 
work. He hopes, moreover, that Philippine affairs will 
be more placid than some of his previous assignments 
which have placed him under more military bombard- 
ment and fire than most army veterans experience dur- 
ing a lifetime. 

This veteran diplomat left Warsaw only a few days 
before the Nazi legions marched in triumph into the 
smoking ruins of that Polish capital. He sailed from 
Norway only shortly before the German "putsch" into 
the Scandinavian peninsula; he has seen China in flames. 
Davis has twice lost his household furniture "by in- 
vasion", has been in physical danger almost numberless 
times, and now looks forward to the peaceful economic 
and diplomatic tasks of Philippine-American relations 
with relish. 

Davis was born in Soochow, China, of American mis- 
sionary parents on March 5, 1882. He spent his entire 
adolescence in China during the "roaring nineties," saw 
the expansion of western influence, and the rapid growth 
of Japanese aspirations in that region of the world. 

He came to the United States to attend college and was 
graduated from Wooster College in Ohio in 1904. 
Completing his post-graduate studies he returned to 
China, became a private secretary, tutor, and then teacher. 
In 1910 he was named Deputy Consul General at Shang- 
hai, and from that time on was uninterruptedly in the 
foreign service of his government. 

For the next 16 years he served everywhere in China — 
at Chefoo, Antung, Nanking, Shanghai. When Nationalist 
uprisings in the interior of China threatened the lives 
of American missionaries and business men, Davis was 
sent into the heart of the trouble zone to evacuate the 
refugees, a task he and his helpers fulfilled in spite of 
great personal hardship and danger. 



After another period in the I riiled States for school- 
ing in the Department of Stat(\ Davis went again to 
China, this time to the Embassy at Peking. Then came 
London and Amsterdam, where he represented the I nit(Ml 
States at the Fifth Congress of the International (Chamber 
of Commerce. His next post was at Vancouver, British 
Columbia, and then back he went to Europe for the 
most exciting phase of his career. 

Davis was in the American Embassy at Warsaw when 
Poland was invaded in the grey hours of September 1. 
1939. As the "blitzkrieg" rolled nearer the Polish capi- 
tal, Ambassador Anthony Biddle decided to move part 
of his diplomatic establishment out of Warsaw^ before 
the invading Germans arrived. Davis was assigned to slay 
in charge of the Embassy, and to look after the Ameri- 
cans remaining in the beleaguered city. 

Under constant, ferocious and unprecedented aerial 
and artillery bombardment, the Poles held the city for 
two long, terrible weeks. All that time, while death swept 
the streets and human slaughter was a daily occurrence. 
Davis was charged with the duty of "protecting" Ameri- 
can interests. Huddled at times with the other Americans 
in the Embassy basement, and at other times chancing 
death in the shell-swept streets, Davis had more than his 
share of war. Two days before the city fell, he and many 
other Americans departed, passing through the German 
lines and finally reaching Norway. 

Davis has been in the Philippines several times, but 
has never served there. He has an intimate grasp of Far 
Eastern affairs, and has spent the last two months fa- 
miliarizing himself with the historical and political 
background of Philippine-American relations. The prob- 
lem of the economic relations is also on his study agenda. 

John Davis is already earnestly preoccupied w^ilh his 
new job. He is personally pleasant, even occasionally 
jovial, affable, and friendly. He meets people easily, 
talks easily, and seems to have a real interest in the 
Philippines. 

Davis is married and has a son. a student at Princeton 
University. He and his wife make their home at a Wash- 
ington a|)artmenl hotel. 



• 18 9 Philippines 




• II. S. Army and Philippine Constabulary officers 
confer during the hattle of Bud Dajo, 1906. After 
fierce fighting, troops drove rebellious Moro tribes- 
men from their mountain-top stronghold. 



OVER MY SHOULDER 



By Maj. Gen. James G. Harbord, Ret. 



^^HEN a man reaches the point where the only long 
view for him is over his shoulder, his recollections usually 
undergo one of two changes — either the lapse of time 
makes them fade in color or it magnifies the impor- 
tance of events which, after all, took place in a compara- 
tively small theater before an audience that has no doubt 
long forgotten them. In recalling my experience of nearly 
40 years ago in the Philippine Islands, I hope I shall be 
guilty of neither fault. 

My introduction to Manila took place on March 21, 
1902. That date was engraved in my mind by the fact 
that it w^as my 36th birthday. Furthermore, during the 
ensuing week Asiatic cholera appeared in Manila, re- 
maining in near-epidemic proportions for many months 
thereafter. 

I went to the Philippines as a caj)tain of cavalry, but 
after a year and a half in command of a cavalry troo]) in 
the I locos Provinces I was appointed Assistant Chief of 
Constabulary in the newly created Moro Province. Gov- 
ernor General William Howard Taft made the assignment 
on the reconnnendation of General Leonard Wood, new^ 
governor of Moro Pro\ ince. Our new Constabulary Dis- 
trict was called the Fifth, and included, besides the Moro 
Province, the Christian Provinces of Misamis and Surigao. 
I had my headquarters at Zamboanga from September. 
1903 to Oct()l)er, 1905. Fncouraged by Governor W(kk1 
and with some assistance from the Army, [ organized the 



Moro Constabulary in the districts of Zamboanga, Lanao. 
Cotabato. Davao, and Sulu to the point where, before I 
w^as relieved, the men were in some instances fighting side 
by side with American soldiers against their own tur- 
bulent people. This was no small achievement, for the> 
were recruited in many cases from the slaves of various 
Datos, were generally illiterate, and were utterly without 
conception of any government work. I could obtain 
recruits only through their local chiefs, and it is not 
strange that on the first pay-day many inquired if they 
should hand over their wages to the Dato who had recom- 
mended them. 

Some of the best officers that ever wore the (Constabu- 
lary uniform served under me in the Fifth District. John 
R. White, my first adjutant — a real soldier of fortune, 
though he will deny it if he ever sees this article- — 
stands out among the very best of the C')nstabular\ officers 
I met during more than a decade of service with that 
organization. Heyson, a gallant Kansan who had been 
an Officer of Volunteers, was murdered b\ a Moro s(Mitr\ 
at Siasi while Senior Inspector at Sulu. Jam(\^ F. Wood, 
a gallant Noungster from Chn eland. organiz(vl th(» (.on- 
stabular\ of Lanao. Waloe became a District Chief and 
later Assistant (Chief of Constabulary, (/ilhauser was first 
Senior Insj)ector and then (/oxernor of Lanao. Vernon 
Whitne\. desperateh wounded in combat with llic Moros. 
Liter became C/Oxernor of Sulu. The\ and main others 



DeiMMiiher. 191.0 « 19 • 



wrote their names on our little scroll of fame in the 
Moslem region of the Philippine Islands. 

I went from Mindanao to Tayabas in October, 1905, 
to be chief of the Second Constabulary District, succeed- 
ing Colonel H. H. Bandholtz, who later became perhaps 
the most efficient Chief of Constabulary we ever had. 
Later Samar and Leyte were added to my district, and 
I was in at the closing of the long pulcijan troubles in 
those provinces. 

The first incident of my stay in Tayabas that clings 
to my memory is a horseback ride from Lucena to Ati- 
monan, just after the great typhoon of October, 1905. 
On this, my first visit to the contracosta, my companion 
was a young lawyer named Manuel L. Quezon who w'as 
seeking election as Governor of Tayabas. The ride was 
the beginning of a friendship that has endured for 35 
vears. Nothing in his distinguished career since then has 
made me regret that I did everything consistent with my 
duty as a Constabulary Officer to help him in his first 
election. 

Two incidents in his subsequent administration as 
Governor of Tayabas stand out in my memory: 

The first was a visit to his birthplace at Baler, which 
he had left in 1898 to join the Insurrecto Army and had 
not revisited. Baler, like most coastal villages on Luzon, 
was situated a mile or two from the beach as a measure 
of protection against the Moros who, in Spanish days, 
regularly harassed this area for plunder and captives. Our 
Coast Guard ship had anchored off Baler during the night 
and we went ashore in the bright sunshine next morning. 
The people had been notified of the Governor's visit and 
were on the lookout for him. 

The welcome procession was headed by the Spanish 
priest, who had been there in the time of the insurrection, 
and by a local band. Quezon's own immediate family 
had passed on, but there were many old women who re- 
membered him as a small boy. All were in the procession 
that morning. Everybody carried flowers and I have never 
known a more touching scene than the welcome the 
Governor received in his own home town. 

All day long and until past midnight we witnessed 
scenes that have probably never been duplicated since 
and never were seen before under such circumstances. 
Games seldom played in the presence of the w^hite men 
were staged on the open plaza. There were fencing com- 
bats of the kind that in the old days trained every Filipino 
boy in the use of the bolo or machete. The music was 
constant and the old people performed folk dances that 
were disappearing even in the Philippines. The Governor 
made an address, talking equally well in English, Spanish 
and Tagalog. The feasting would terrify any person with 
a respect for his waistline. The whole town went down to 
the beach with us after midnight, when we sailed with 
many memories. 

The other incident was a little expedition after bandits 
in which Governor Quezon and I participated. We landed 
from a Coast Guard vessel at the little town of Gumaca 
after nightfall. Making our way by midnight up to the 



crest of the mountain range that l)(;rders the Boiuloc 
Peninsula we ran into a camp of the bandits who were 
asleep. Our approach had not been lieard and there was 
a spirited little fight, almost hand-to-hand, in which some 
of the bandits were wounded and Iat(M- captured. Few 
Governors personally hunted for outlaws in those (la\s. 

I had the pleasure of knowing many of iIk- (»arly 
Filipino leaders under American occupation. (Circum- 
stances in Spanish days were such that every Fili|)ino 
family that was able to do so sent its (>ldest son to Manihi 
to school. There was the University of Santo Tomas. the 
oldest university now under the American flag, souk* sub- 
sidiary schools, such as San Juan de Letran. and other 
Catholic institutions. Practically no educational facilities 
existed outside of Manila beyond the most j)rimar\ of 
parish schools. Consequently, the boys who were* of an 
age to aspire to be in the first list of elective Filij)ino 
Governors in 1905 were friends and plasniates from their 
school days in San Juan de Letran and kindred institu- 
tions. Relative importance among those early (/overnors 
was largely a holdover from boyhood leadersb.ip. 

As time for the promised first Insular h^gislature 
approached, these young Governors, though still in ()flic(\ 
recognized the opportunity for a larger theater and were 
elected to the first Philippine Assembly. Governors 
Quezon, Jaime C. de Veyra, Juan Luna. Isauro Gabaldon 
and a number of others destined to become leaders were 
prominent figures in that first legislature. Ex-Governor 
General Taft, then Secretary of War. came out in the 
autumn of 1907 for the inauguration, bringing with him 
the Chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs, General Clar- 
ence R. Edwards. Osmefia was elected Speaker of the 
Assembly and Quezon became Majority Leader. 

Philippine politics shortly before that had taken the 
trend which ultimately led to the autonomy and promise 
of independence which the Islands enjoy today. The first 
political organization I remember, after peace had been 
restored and self-government began, was the Partido 
Federal. Its announced aim was to bring about better 
relations between Filipinos and Americans, looking for- 
ward to an ultimate permanent connection between the 
Philippines and the United States. Cold water was thrown 
on their aspirations by Mr. Taft's blunt statement that 
the Philippines could never expect statehood. The intim- 
ation was made that we had enough troubles with people 
not of the white race and would not be anxious to take 
on any more. Thus rebuffed in their desire for permanent 
connection between the two peoples, self-respecting Fili- 
pino leaders had no recourse except to advocate 
independence. 

That was the road which was taken by all of the men 
whom I have mentioned above, with Quezon and Osmena 
as the principal advocates. The older Philippine states- 
men — Paxdo de Tavera, Benito Legarda and others — 
held themselves more or less aloof from the independence 
agitation and served on, realizing perhaps that before it 
could be accomplished they would have passed off the 
stage, as has happened. 



# 20 • Philippines 



By Pilar N. Ravelo 






X HREE hundred years of Spanish rule fixed in the 
minds of all Christian Filipinos the deeply religious 
significance of Christmas. Despite the introduction since 
1900 of the more secular American-style Christmas, 
characterized by a jovial Santa Claus, gayly decorated 
Christmas trees, and colored lights, tinsel and holly, 
the Filipinos, especially those in remote towns and 
barrios (villages), cling to their old Spanish traditions. 

Christmas in the Philippines is a festival widely anti- 
cipated and universally celebrated. The whole country 
takes on a festive mood. There is promise of much feast- 
ing, merry-making, and exchanging of gifts. To the young 
it means new clothes, abundant food, and money to spend. 
Everywhere there is gaiety and laughter. 

Christmas really begins nine days before December 
25 w^ith an early morning mass. The niisa de gallo is an- 
nounced by the pealing of church bells at 3 a. m. a nd 
usually the town band helps awaken the villagers. Church- 
goers attend the early morning mass in groups. The 
churches are decorated allegorically ; in the center niche 
of the altar are lifelike figures of Mary and Joseph. The 
music of the Christmas service suggests pastoral songs 
and dances with the ringing sounds of castanets, cymbals 
and tambourines, while the songs and hymns symbolize 
the joyous music of the angels when they heralded the 
birth of the Holy Child in a manger in Bethlehem nearly 
2,000 years ago. 

After mass, members of the congregation troop to the 
homes of friends and neighbors, where they have a break- 



fast of nati\e candies and hot steaming chocolate or rice 
coffee. Very often, if there happens to be a phonograph 
in the house, couples dance while they wait for the 
hostess to announce breakfast. The merry-making takes 
place every morning for nine days, each family taking 
its turn at entertaining. 

Each night, roads and streets are ablaze with rows 
upon rows of bright city lights, while picturesque paper 
lanterns of every color hang from the windows and doors 
of the houses. These native-made lanterns are a source 
of great delight because of the skill and painstaking 
effort that goes into their making. Often a whole village 
lakes part in a contest to choose the most artistic, the 
most beautiful, and the most original lanterns. These 
lanterns with their symphony of colors — red, blue, green, 
yellow — and their quaint designs, which are ])atterned 
after the moon, the stars, the sun, animals, houses, fruits, 
or anything which catches the craftsman's fancy, furnish 
a picturesque and gay setting for the celebration of 
Christmas. 

By December 24, the holiday |)reparation is at its 
height. Houses are made spotlessly clean, graying cur- 
tains are replaced by attractive new ones, potted plants. 
air|)lants and orchids are brought in from the hatalan - 
an outside porch made of bamboo — to adorn the win- 
dows and corners of the house. The hous(nvi\(\^ cook the 
siunan. hihin^ka, cuchinta, and the poto (all nali\e ])as- 
Iries) and pre])are the leclion (suckling pig be roasted 
on (Christmas day I . which is the main dclicacN. and s(m^ 



Decemb([M% 1940 ® 21 • 



to it that there is an ample supply of drinks for the elders. 

The children wait for Christmas Day with great an- 
ticipation. They are careful not to displease their parents 
lest they be forbidden to wear their new clothes or receive 
their gifts or attend the midnight mass, which is the most 
elaborate celebration of the Christmas season. 

Before the Christmas Eve mass the villagers gather in 
the homes of friends and relatives, w^here they dance to 
the music of bamboo flutes and string instruments. Folk 
dances are the most popular. This celebration continues 
until a few minutes before midnight, when the people 
hurry to mass. The churches are even more elaborately 
decorated than they were for the pre-Christmas services. 
More candles are lighted and, in addition to the lifelike 
figures of Mary and Joseph, there is a reproduction of 
the manger and the Holy Child. After the chanting of the 
mass and the benediction, the congregation gathers in 
front of the church, where the story of the Nativity is 
presented in a series of four tableaux. 

The first scene shows the Angel Gabriel appearing 
before the praying Virgin to herald the coming of the 
Holy Child. In the same scene Satan tempts the Virgin 
Mary, but he is driven away by the Angel Gabriel. The 
second scene shows Mary and Joseph wandering from 
house to house, asking for a night's lodging, but every 
house turns them away. The third shows the appearance 
of the herald angel in the midst of the shepherds and 
their flocks to announce the birth of their King. The 
final scene deals with the Nativity itself, when pauper 
and prince come to lay their gifts at the feet of the new- 
born Babe. Music accompanies the tableaux, and there 
is a rhythmic cadence and a touch of poetic charm in 
the manner in which each player portrays his part. Al- 
though crude and simple, the performance has beauty 
and dignity in the message that it brings to the hearts 
of men — the message of peace on earth and goodwill to 
men. 

On Christmas Day, the doors are open wide — every- 
one is welcomed to every household. Families visit from 
house to house. There is an abundance of wine, food, 
candies and fruit. There is feasting and merry-making 
everywhere. Everyone, even Grandma, is dressed in his 
best. The absence of a rosy-cheeked Santa Claus is not 
felt at all, since god-mothers and god-fathers act as living 
Santa Clauses for the children. Dimes, nickels and 
centavos (half cents) are distributed freely. Children in 
groups make the rounds of the village, singing Christmas 
carols, and are rewarded with gifts of money and candies. 

American influence in the Philippines has of course 
brought many changes, and the traditional Christmas 
celebration is slowly being supplanted by Santa Claus, 
elaborately decorated pine trees, and the exchange of 
expensive gifts. Store windows are gay with wreaths, 
tinsel and holly, and even the smallest shop is decorated 
with paper bunting and streamers. The exchange of 
Christmas presents is now profuse and universal; although 
an American innovation, it is in keeping with the Fili- 
pino's generosity and love of family. 



P. I. IWS 



Anticipating the time when full tariff duties will be 
imposed on sugar exported to the Lniled Stales, directors 
of the Philippine Confederation of Sugar Cane Planters 
have submitted to President Quezon a memorandum urg- 
ing the government to purchase all big sugar refining 
"centrals" in the Islands. 

The planters believe that the phin will not only save 
the sugar industry from ruin, but will also serve as a 
means for bringing about much closer cooperation be- 
tween the management of the "centrals", the planters 
and the laborers. They contend that under the present 
situation, relations between the "centrals" and the plant- 
ers are not ideal, as the planters and laborers benefit 
less than the "centrals" in the distribution of profits 
in the sugar industry. 



The Philippine Electoral Commission, created during 
the last special session of the National Assembly, will 
function for the first time this year in the December 10 
elections for provincial and municipal oflicials. As the 
name implies, the Electoral Commission has complete 
charge of all elections, seeking to make them truly ex- 
pressive of the popular will. The Commission consists 
of Pedro Concepcion, Chairman; Rufino Luna, Under- 
Secretary of the Interior, and Judge Jose Abreu. 



U. S. High Commissioner Francis B. Sayre expressed 
great satisfaction over the work being done by the U. S. 
Navy at the Cavite naval station during his recent in- 
spection tour of the 16th U. S. Naval District. The base 
is being converted into a really efficient plant, he reported, 
praising the efforts of Rear Admiral John Morris Smeal- 
lie and Maj. Gen. George S. Grunert in maintaining the 
efficiency of both the U. S. Navy and Army defense plans 
of the Islands. "The Philippines is lucky to have these 
two officers here at this time," Mr. Sayre concluded. 



The Benguet Consolidated Mining Company in Baguio 
in October signed a contract to supply the National De- 
fense Commission of the United States with 100,000 tons 
of chrome ore from the Consolidated Mine property in 
Masinloc, Zambales Province. (See page 11.) 



Ayala and Company of Manila has announced the sale 
of the sugar mill and entire equipment, including build- 
ings, of its Central Azucarera de Calatagan in Batangas 
to the Thai Niyom Panich Company, semi-governmental 



• 22 • Philippines 



firm of Bangkok, Thailand (Siam). The mill, idle for a 
year, has a capacity of approximately 750 tons a day. 
Plant and machinery, which is of American manufacture, 
will be dismantled and shipped to Thailand, where it 
will be resold to the Thai government. 



The enrollment for the current year at the Ateueo de 
Manila, an institution of learning conducted by the Jesuit 
Fathers of the Philip])ines. is 2,091. The Institution in- 
cludes grade school, high school, and college. It is the 
third largest educational institution under the direction 
of the Jesuit Fathers of the Maryland-New York province. 
The tw^o largest are Fordliam I'niversity in New York 
City and Georgetown I niversity in Washington, D. C. 



The latest Philippine census reveals 29,262 Japanese 
in the Islands, as compared with 117,461 Chinese. Out 
of a total of 166,977 foreigners living in the Philippines, 
8,739 arc Americans and 1,637 Spaniards. 

• • • 

A Congressman Speaks (from Page 4) 

relations between the two peoples would serve to bring 
about a better understanding upon the part of both, and 
a further cementing of the friendship existing between 
them. Since in a great part of the world the press has 
been throttled and public opinion is influenced, if not 
controlled, by propaganda, the importance of such an 
enterprise is more outstanding than at any other time 
during the history of the relations between the two 
countries. 

In these days when nations are being subjugated by 
their pow^erful neighbors, when nations in various parts 
of the world are combining together with the avowed 
purpose of w^aging war — either economic or physical — 
against the rest of the world, when individual liberty over 
so great a portion of the earth has been w^iped out, both 
the United States and the Philippines w^int to know^ the 
truth, to know^ the w^orst, with respect to the prospective 
change in their relationship, and to provide for it. The 
one important contributing factor to this result is an 
uncontrolled and uncensored press. 

The Philippines, because of Spanish and American rule, 
is the one country in the Far East which possesses the 
culture we know in the West. It is the only Christian 
nation in the Orient. Its new Constitution provides for 
the individual rights and fundamental freedoms that %ve 
cherish. 

It should be the ]Hirpose of both governments and 
peoples to conserve the gains of the past and promote 
those things that are mutually beneficial. Modern c(mi- 
munication and transportation have greatly reduced the 
distance between the two countries. The organs of infor- 
mation and opinion should helj) foster better understand- 
ing and closer friendship between them. 



Strategic Storehonse (from Page 11) 

of these reservations are now being surveyed and studied 
by the Philippine Government and the other by the 
United States. 

Philippine exports of crude chromite have boomed 
since 1935. In that year. 1,292 tons were shipped: for 
1939 the figure was 126.000 tons. During the first six 
months of 1940, exports nearly equalled those for all 
1939. Uncle Sam, busy building up stocks of strategic 
materials, took about 85 per cent of these shipments. 
Japan purchased about 10 per cent, and the rest was 
distributed among half a dozen other nations in all parts 
of the world. 

Similar increases have featured manganese production. 
Annual shipments have increased from 520 tons in 1935 
to 39.600 in 1939. Japan normally takes about 70 per 
cent of the output, but recent emergency purchases have 
diverted the bulk to America. Since deposits are widely 
scattered, development has been concentrated to date 
on ore bodies closest to the seacoasl. where transporta- 
tion is cheapest. The most important of these are on small 
islands in the southern half of the archipelago: Siquijor. 
south of Negros Oriental, and Busuanga. nortli of Pala- 
wan. 

Nickel and molybdenum are two other "defense*" min- 
erals occurring in the Philippines, but they are not of 
strategic importance to the I'nited States because more 
satisfactory supplies are found in \orth America. Neither 
mineral is at present know^n to exist in large quantities: 
nickel, how^ever. is associated with iron in the huge 
Philippine Government ore reserve at Surigao. and sur- 
veys of molybdenum resources have so far been incon- 
clusive. Mercury has been reported, but without official 
verification. 

Despite recent efforts to grow^ the abaca plant in 
Sumatra, Borneo and Panama, the Philippine Islands 
retain their natural monopoly over the production of 
Manila hemp. Satisfactory grow1:h requires peculiar con- 
ditions of soil and climate, w^hich a few islands of the 
Commonw^ealth alone seem to satisfy. Further experi- 
mentation may produce a type that will flourish in other 
lands, but for some years to come the world is likely to 
be dependent on Manila for its supply of cordage. Re- 
flecting this general demand, abaca plantations occupied 
1 1 per cent of the island's agricultural area and hemp 
products formed the third most important Philippine 
export item in 1939. In that year the United Stales ])aid 
S4,253,053 for abaca fiber, plus another S608.000 for 
prepared cordage. 

In an age w^hen closed economies are the fashion and 
sources of supply are increasingly subject to interru|)- 
tion through invasion, the United Stales is |)articularlv 
fortunate to have ample resources in as many strategic 
materials as it does. And it is doubh fortunate in ha\ ing 
an additional supply under its flag in the Philippine 
Islands. Such a circumstance nun casil\ be a mailer 
of national life or death in the event of war. 



Deeemher, 1940 • 2S • 



Have We Kept Our Promises? (fromPage 15) 

with many difficulties and some of these difficulties were 
created by us. 

Over their protest, officially expressed by their Legisla- 
ture and their leaders, free trade was established between 
the Philippines and the United States. They feared at 
the time that it would make them dependent upon the 
United States and that one single market would prevent 
a diversity of industries. The result has been what their 
thoughtful men anticipated — development of an economy 
based on the American tariff. 

As a result of this trade agreement, they have become 
one of the greatest purchasers in the world of American 
farm products and manufactures. They have sent their 
staple products — their sugar, their abaca, their copra, 
their lumber, and their minerals — to the United States. 
Today, more gold comes from the Philippines than from 
any state in the Union, except California. 

We, in return, send our cotton goods, our flour, our 
boots and shoes, our automobiles, our canned milk, and 
a long list of products from our farms and our factories. 
This is friendship — the "good neighbor" — of a practical 
kind which has existed for well over a quarter of a 
century. 

The young men of the Philippines come to our col- 
leges and schools for their education. They have carried 
back with them the best traditions of America, its 
political and historical ideals. The names of our fore- 
fathers are household words with them, taught by the 
fine soldiers who remained after the war and by that 
small army of American "school marms" who undertook 
their education. They have followed our methods of gov- 
ernment, of sanitation, of banking, of business manage- 
ment, and of social welfare. 

It is, indeed, a fine friendship which we must not lose. 
If we lose that friendship, if we do not assist in the ex- 
periment that is taking place, we will lose not only the 
friendship of 16,000,000 Filipinos, but the respect of 
the entire Orient, which is watching this experiment in 
democracy avidly. They want to know if we will be 
selfish; whether we will go through with our protesta- 
tions of friendship; whether the great American republic 
will forget its ward simply because it has grown to the 
stature of manhood. 

• • • 

The Philippine Archipelago is composed of 7,083 is- 
lands, the largest of which is Luzon. The population of 
the Philippines is 16,356,000, which is greater than the 
combined pojjulations of the New England states and 
California. 

The Philippine Islands has the oldest hospital and 
oldest uni\ersity under the American flag. San Juan de 
Dios Hospital was founded in L577. and the University 
of Santo Tomas was founded in 161 1, or 25 years before 
Harvard. 



Jacobs Goes to Egypt (from Papje 17) 

economic amendments to the Philippine iMclcjxMuh'ncc 
Act. These amendments, of IransccnchMilal imj)()rlancc and 
significance to Philippine national life, were signed hy 
President Roosevelt in the sunnner of 1939. 

In all the conferences, meetings and negotiations, 
Jacobs was an oninij)resent personality, .\ever in the 
limelight, he was always in the workroom. Some day the 
story of the exact part Jacobs played will \)c wrilteii hv 
a sympathetic historian. 

Since the passage of that legislation, Jacobs has had 
time to lay down the lines of practice for his successors 
(the first is John Ker Davis — see page 18). and to 
develop the lines of jurisdiction of his office. His incum- 
bency in his Washington post was lengthened to four 
years (the usual span is three) at the direct instance of 
President Roosevelt. He now goes to Egypt, where he will 
be counselor of legation and consul general in a countrv 
which may be overrun by an invading army by the time 
he reaches it. But Jacobs faces change with equanimity. 
During his lifetime he has served in China, Europe and 
Africa. 

A slight, soft-spoken South Carolinian, Jacobs still 
carries a hint of his Southern origin in his pleasant voice. 
He has few relaxations except his work, but he once had 
a mild passion for golf. He is attractive for his frank and 
direct sincerity, the sense of quiet conviction and authority 
with which he expresses an oj)inion — when asked. 

Not that Jacobs is without faults. He is inclined to be 
a little mousy, and to affect a cynicism he doesn't reallv 
feel. He is cautious and conservative, and somewhat slow 
to warm up. But, away from his job, he is a fellow you 
would want to have spend a week-end at your home or to 
join you at golf on your day off. That is what makes 
writing about him a pleasure. 

• • • 

5 O N NET 

You have to go. We must accept the truth 
And bravely smile the while we separate, 
Content we had this much, at least, of youth 
And happiness before it was too late. 
It would not be so hard to bear if I 
Were certain this were merely An revoir. 
It may mean more — perhaps it means goodbye. 
The roads are so uncertain where we are! 

Then let me take one last long look at you — 
Your eyes that always had so much to tell. 
Your brow, your chin that courage always knew, 
Your lips that even now must say farew^ell — 
That on my heart I may imj)rint your face, 
A living image nothing can erase. 

SOLKDAI) R. JUAN 



24 • Philippines 



A NEW MAGAZINE 



Philippines 



Publisher! by the Office of the Philippine 
Resident Commission in Washington, D. C. 

Philippines is imended for every American >vlio is interested 
in his nation's fntnre in the Far East. It Mill strive to keep him in- 
formed on developments in the Philippine Commonwealth and it 
will seek to explain the events that receive such cursory mention 
in the day's news. The magazine will not, however, pose as a pro- 
fonnd critic of foreign affairs. Neither will it knowingly present 
a one-sided pictnre. ''Philippines'' sole purpose is to promote in- 
telligent discussion of Insular problems, based on accurate knowl- 
edge rather than sentiment or sensationalism. 

The reader may expect antlioritative articles and comments, 
reflecting all representative viewpoints on Philippine affairs. Al- 
though every effort is to be made to obtain original material, the 
editors will not hesitate to reprint articles from other sources if they 
believe them to be of immediate interest to the readers of "Philip- 
pines". 

Expressions of opinion on every phase of Philippine-American 
relations are solicited. They need not conform to any standard 
viewpoint; it is only necessary that they be of gennine interest to 
American and Filipino readers. The availability of space in the 
magazine will, of course, be a controlling factor. The editors regret 
that, for the present, they cannot pay for these contributions. 



Philippines 



2362 Massiuhiiselts Ave., N.W. 



Washiiiglon, D. C. 




mum liiii 



Defense of the Philippines: I 

An Editorial 



JLfEFENSE of thr Philip|)iiio Islands, often sludied and 
discussed as a problem in strategy and naval tactics, must 
also be considered a problem in cooperation — between 
the United Slates and the Commonwealth. This viewpoint 
is all too infrequ(Mit. Yel Philippine- American coopera- 
tion in defense is absolutely essential. 

American oHicials recognize and proclaim their re- 
sponsibility to defend the Islands until July 4. 1946. when 
the Conunon wealth aitains full political inde|)endence. 
Thoughtful Americans will recognize this responsibility 
as an inevitable concomitant to the sovereignty which 
the United Slates retains until that date. It is also demon- 
strable that defense of the Philippines means defense of 
the vast interests ^^'hich the I nited States and other west- 
ern powers maintain in the Far East. 

Nevertheless the attitude of the Filipinos toward the 
defense of their homeland has been insufficiently explored, 
and the part they must play only infrequently considered. 
Yet they arc the ones who must be defended and who can 
aid most in that defense. Some 16.000.000 Filipinos are 
scattered through the archipelago whose defense the 
United States undertakes, and the Filipinos themselves 
are the best potential sinews t>f that defense. Every Fili- 
pino knows and appreciates his obligation to the Ameri- 
can people. The fact that a new factor — the prospect of 
political independence — is gradually altering our rela- 
tions does not mean we harl)or any less gratitude. Differ- 
ences of opinion and occasional sharp words are inevita- 
ble in an evolution as far-reaching as that now aflecting 
Philippine-American |)olitical ties. But from the stand- 
point of immediate common understanding on such a 
question as defense, there is no difference between us. 

Filipinos are ^villing and ready to assume all obliga- 
tions and responsibilities of defending their homeland. 
That point cannot be too often or too clearly emphasized. 
It is not a qtiestion of defending an apathetic peo])le. or 
of assuming sole responsibility. The Filipino people and 
their government are prepared to carry their share of the 
load, wherever the road may lead. That is no light state- 
ment, and it is made in the face of graphic and heart- 
rending tales of other nations who are defending them- 
selves today. 

The question now arises, what is the Filipino's part? 
To be bombed and to carry on with fortitude the tasks 
of civilian life is not enough. He must also man the 
ramparts, repel the invader wherever he may strike, and 
hold strategic outposts. Htmdreds of strategic islands 
must be defended, any niuuber of all-important moun- 
tain passes made secure. The unending coastline must be 
watched and guarded should aggression ever threaten. 



In anticipation of assuming these responsibilities, the 
Philippine government, as its lirst official act. passed a 
National Defense Act. Already. 120.000 Filipinos have 
learned the fundamentals of soldiery. But manpower and 
loyalty, as the world knows today, are not enough. Faith 
and determination are of little use against mechanized 
ruthlessness. Philippine defense needs power on the sea 
and in the air. 

These only the United States can supply. There are no 
forges, no factories in the Philippines of sufficient size. 
Only manpower. We produce no military airplanes and 
have no shipyards capable of building even a submarine. 

Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox and Secretary of 
War Henry L. Stimson have both stated that the United 
States is ready to defend the American ffag wherever it 
may wave, whether in New England or in the Philippines. 
They have declared that measures were under considera- 
tion to discharge that obligation. It may be presumed that 
a supply of arms to the Filipinos is one feasible means of 
defending the Philippines, and it may also be presumed 
that when the expansion of American defense production 
facilities reaches a sufficient level, steps will be taken to 
remedy present deficiencies in these supplies. 

American statesmen recognize the broad scope of 
Philippine defense. They foresee in a po-sverful and fully 
armed Filipino people the same deterrent to aggression in 
the Pacific as Britain now constitutes in the Atlantic. Just 
as the British ffeet now- defends the freedom of the Atlan- 
tic, so the American fleet, with a strong outpost in the 
Philippines, may be the guarantor of the freedom of the 
Pacific. 

The advent of political independence for the Philip- 
pines need not modify this prospe(*t nor does the neces- 
sity for defending the Islands alter essentially the out- 
look for independence. The basic need is for a common 
understanding betw^een the American and Filipino people, 
and a common determination to unite in defense of their 
mutual welfare and interests. Each may serve in his ow^i 
way toward that objective — through friendly and cour- 
ageous cooperation. ^ 



Due to poor health caused by continued over- 
work^ President Quezon of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth was ordered hy his doctors to seek com- 
plete rest late in December, Th e jisual !\ ew 
Year reception at Malacanan Palace in Manila 
was cancelled^ and the President retired under his 
physician'^ s care. 



^Philippines 

Vol. 1 No. 2 

Contents for February, 1941 

Defense of the Philippines 1 

Where Does the U. S. Stand? Oscar Chapman 3 

An Army of Better Citizens, Father Eclivin Ronan 4 

Blast Furnaces Needed, Stuart Lillico 6 

Economic Steps to Independence 7 

The Story the Magazines Missed, Samuel Caches 9 

Labor and the Commonwealth, /. Avelino 10 

Spain in the Philippines, Dr. David Rubio 11 

Filipino Women Make a New World, Pilar Ravelo 14 

Can the Commonw^ealth Buy Health? Dr, S. Y. Orosa 15 

Crossroads of the World, E, Wallace Moore 16 

The Islands Watch Congress, Julius C. Edelstein 18 

Professor in Government 19 

Philippine Island News 23 

• • • 

Photo Credit: Chaplains' Aid Association; De- 
partment of the Interior; Harris & Ewing; Philippine 
Tourist Bureau; Office of the President of the Philip- 
pines; Fenno Jacohs from Three Lions; and Tomel- 
den, Washington. 

• • • 

Back Cover: The Road to Baguio. Mountain Province. P. I. 



Permission to reprint material appearing 
in ^'Philippines" is gladly granted except in 
eases where use is specifically restricted. Proper 
credit will be appreciated. 




Secretary of the Interior Harohl L. Ickes '*rt*p- 
resents" the ]^hilipi)ines in th(^ American Cabi- 
net, since liis department is the h'<zal link be- 
tween the governments in Maniki and Washinji;- 
ton. Assistant Secretary of the interior Chapman 
on page 3 descril)es in ch*tail tht.' ties that bind 
the Philii)pines io tlie (hiited States. 

Ill This Issue 

Oscar Chapman, who survf^ys the compli- 
cated legal relationship between the United 
States Government and the Philippine Common- 
wealth, is Assistant Secretary of the Interior. 

• • • 

Father Edwin Ilonan is a member of the 
Passionist Fathers of Chicago. His article on 
the mf)ral values of military training is based 
on experiences in organizing the Philippim* 
Army's Chaplain Service during 1939 and 1910 

• • • 

Samuel Caches, president of the American 
Chamber of Commerce in Manila, thinks Ameri- 
cans don't realize the dollar-and-cents value of 
the Philippines. On page 9 he shows bow o-r^.^j 
that value really is. 

• • • 

Jose Avelino speaks on Philippine labor 
progress with authority. He was until recently 
President Quezon's Secretary of Labor. Today 
he is Secretary of Public Works and Communi- 
cations. 

• • • 

Dr. David Rubio is Curator of the Hispanic 
Room at the Library of Congress and professor 
of Spanish-American history at Catholic Uni- 
versity in Washington. D. C. 



Dr. Sixto Y. Orosa. a vice-president of the 
Philippine Medical Association, now^ resides in 
Bacolod City, Negros Occidental. 



F. Wallace Moore recently accepted a post 
adviser to the Philippine Tourist Bureau in 



as 

Manila. 



^'Philippines" is published monthly by the office of the Philippine Resitlent C:oniniission<>r to tlx- llniK-d 
States. Editorial and circulation offices at 2362 Massachusetts Avenue Northwest, Washinpton, D. i.. Entered 
as third class matter in the Washington post office on December 1, 1910. Permit No. .^Ot.'>. Printe*! in U.S.A. 



U/ltete Voei the U. S. Stand 



IN THE PHILIPPINES? 



What Are the Legal Ties That Bind the Two Governments? 



By Oscar Chapman 



There mc three quite distinct relationships between 
the United States and the Philippines .... political, eco- 
nomic, and cultural. Perhaps a fourth may be described 
as the "legal" relationship between the Federal Govern- 
ment of the United States and the Connnonwealth Gov- 
ernment of the Philippines. 

These categorical relationships, although all part of 
the same organic structure, become the more separately 
apparent when we consider the difference between the 
legal relationship, which is defined by statute, and the 
actual basic relationship which consists of all the unde- 
fined ties and associations which have grown up between 
the people of the Philippines and the people of the 
United States in the many years of intimate connection. 

Such distinction increases the difTiculty of appraising 
at a glance, or in a short space of words, the true rela- 
tionship between the United States and the Philippines 
as of 1941. The Department of the Interior is that branch 
of the Federal Government which is charged w^ith ad- 
ministering the legal portion of the Philippine-Ameri- 
can relationship. In a larger sense, however, an estimate 
of Philippine-American relations must take in the entire 
background of history which brought the Philippines and 
the United States together, and the flourishing day-to-day 
business carried on between the two countries, which 
makes them vastly more interdependent than any set of 
laws or political ties could of themselves possibly do. 
The trade and economic ties form a strong and vibrant 
bond, of which the existing legal associations are transient 
manifestations. To my mind this is the central, the basic 
fact of Philippine-American relations. 

f On the political and the legal side, the Philippines are 
traveling the road to full political independence, which 
they are scheduled to reach on July 4, 1946. Until that 
time the Islands remain under American sovereignty, 
and the United States Government is responsible for the 
national defense, the foreign relations, and other rela- 
tionships of the Philippines to the outside w^orld, in the 
same w^ay as the United States holds that responsibility 
for Hawaii, Puerto Rico, or. for that matter. South Caro- 
lina, Wyoming, Maine, California and the other slates. 

The mere act of providing for the Philippines a pro- 
gram of independence did not and could not end the 
international responsibility which the United States holds, 
in the eyes of the whole world, for the Islands, until the 
actual withdrawal of sovereignty is fully accomplished. 
Sovereignty is an international, and not a limited politi- 
cal concept. Regardless of how defensible or indefen- 




Oscar Chapman^ As- 
sistant Secretary of the 
Interior. 



sible the Philippines may 
be (which is the legal con- 
cern of the W ar and Navy 
Departments) , international 
law would term any act of 
aggression against the Philip- 
pines by a third power an 
act of aggression against the 
United States. That is. until 
the Philippines become in- 
vested with full and inde- 
pendent political sovereignty. 

When the Philippines w^ere 
acquired from Spain in 1898. 
they w^ere taken as a posses- 
sion of the United States and 
by 1909 they had been gathered within the full frame- 
work of American law and sovereignty, with the excep- 
tion of citizenship. They were placed inside the economic 
and tariff structure of the Ihiited States, and their na- 
tional economy developed as a part of the entire Ameri- 
can economy. 

In 1934 Congress granted the Filipinos a program of 
independence, in the Tydings-McDuffie Act, to reach its 
completion in 1946. The Filipinos accepted the offer and 
the Independence Act became a sort of Independence 
Treaty by which the United States in agreement with the 
Filipino people undertook to free the Islands after a 
specified period of transition, under certain terms and 
conditions. 

By the terms of the Act, drafted after years of dis- 
cussion and controversy, the Filipi.ios were accorded 
autonomy in their internal affairs under a Commonwealth 
Government, whose broad outlines were laid down in the 
Tydings-McDuflSe Act. 

The United States government retained for itself, until 
1946, broad but generally defined controls over the for- 
eign relations, currency, tariffs, and national defense of 
the Islands. In these fields the United States w^as to be 
sovereign; in internal matters, covering the welfare of 
the people, the Filipinos' own duly elected government 
was to legislate and administer unhindered. 

The Congress of the United States retains the right of 
legislation over the Islands as long as they remain under 

(Turn to Page 24) 



February, 1941 • 3 • 



CITIZENS 



By Father Edivin Ronan 




Headquarters Staff of the Philippine Military Academy at Itatiitio. 



No ONE can overlook the significance of the very first 
legislative act of the new Philippine Assembly following 
the inauguration of the Commonwealth on November 15, 
1935. These lawmakers saw a fundamental need to be 
met, an international problem to be solved. Thus, their 
first instrument of law, The National Defense Act, pro- 
vided for the establishment of the Philippine Army. Its 
theory, its composition, its methods, and the basic author- 
ity for all that has thus far been accomplished, as well 
as a guarantee of future progress and efficiency, was con- 
tained in that measure. Guided by Field Marshal Douglas 
McArthur and his staff, the training of both officers and 
men has progressed to a point where the Philippine Army 
has become an actuality — a small actuality, perhaps, but 
one fully warranting the heavy government expenditure 
entailed. 

For more than three years I have been closely asso- 
ciated with this building process, able to observe the 
patience and devotion with which our officers work to 
bring out talent in the rank and file. Indeed, it has been 
a pleasure and a source of inspiration to appraise the 
sound philosophy underlying this army pattern. Its value 
to the manhood of the country and the nation's future 
security is beyond doubt. 

The purpose behind this undertaking is not to foster 
military-mindedness. The glories of war have never been 
played up, nor has the ambition to challenge other na- 
tions on the field of battle been justified. The Constitu- 
tion visualizes the Philippine Army solely as a defense 
mechanism, not as a potential means of expansion by 
subjugating neighboring states. Therefore, shorn of all 
emotional and unpatriotic; ])atriotism, from the Chief of 
Staff down to the humblest Probationary Third Lieuten- 
ant, military training becomes a stern business aimed at 



developing the best in Filipino manhood. Our ohjcctix e 
is to create no more jjrofcssional soldiers than is abso- 
lutely necessary. Rather, we want a (Citizen Army pre- 
pared and equipped to lay aside its civilian role in an 
emergency and defend its country if threatened. 

A mere glance at our master schedule of training shows 
that the general staff has mapped out an efficient course 
of physical, mental and moral education, designed to 
build sound manhood and genuine citizenshij). Primarily, 
of course, trainees learn the fundamentals of military 
science, in theory and in ])ractice. These* > oung men 
spend but five and a half months in the Army; not a 
minute of that time is lost. Daily exercises and drill, 
together with lecture and study periods, consume the 
major portion of the day. Regular discipline, a scientifi- 
cally balanced diet, and 'careful medical and dental at- 
tention have wrought marvels in building up these young 
men bodily. The physical transformation that takes place 
during this short five and a half months is testimony to 
the value of this phase of army life. Our boys leave camp 
physically fit in the truest sense of the word. 

A fairly large number of trainees come to us illiterate 
and, indeed, badly handicapped in meeting modern life. 
A well established department of adult education under 
the Plans and Training branch of the (General Staff sets 
up in each class a school for illiterates and another for 
those somewhat more advanced. The educational projects 
embrace sound teaching in citizenship, ]:>atri()tism and 
social responsibility generally. A steady, marktnl increase 
in the number of departing trainees who hav(* met the 
literacy requirements and received certificate's of satisfac- 
tory progress is our reward in the educational field. 

High morale is so necessary in an army that little con- 



• 4 • Philippines 



slni('li\r izood can he arcomplished without it. Trainees 
come from all sections of the Islands, mingling with total 
strangers and provincianos from distant parts. Close at- 
tention, therefore, must he given to the task of assuring 
their proper assimilation into a compact hodv. There 
must be spirit, harmony, cooperation and a cheerful out- 
look. The chaplains are in a large degree responsible for 
realizing this particular phase of army morale. We might 
call it the tone or character of a given group: undoubt- 
edly it produces greater zest and application in all lines 
of military training. \o one appreciates this more than 
the officer-instructor. 

The Chaplain Service is one of the branches set up in 
every properly organized military force. The Philippine 
National Defense Act declares that 'The chaplains shall 
have charge of the religious welfare of the Army." The^e 
men are drawn from the various religious bodies in the 
Islands in proportion to the number of adherents to each 
faith. Recognizing religious welfare as a fundamental 
need to be provided for, the training schedule establishes 
regular times during which the chaplains nu\y accomplish 
their mission. 

The profit to the Army and to the country at large in 
men with sound religious and moral character cannot be 
overstressed. The Chaplain Service is producing these 
men through religious services, instruction, moral lec- 
tures, and personal interviews and contacts. These ac- 
tivities are actively supported by conuuanding officers 
w ithout exception. It goes without saying that the trainees, 
after their stay in the Cadres under such spiritual influ- 
ence, return to their homes better men. It should be noted 



how generously they respond to the ministrations of their 
chaplains. 

At present, approximateh 120.000 young men through- 
out the Islands have seen ser\ ice in our Cadre«i. The Army 
does not claim to have produced 120.000 finished soldiers, 
experts in any department. That has not been tJie object 
of the program. However, the Army does take much 
satisfaction in a job well done within the limits impi^sed 
by the time and means at its disposal. It is justly proud 
of its record. The Citizen Army thus established and 
trained has become a valuable asset to the country at 
large. Nor is its usefulness restricted to times of emer- 
gency and crisis. 

President Quezon, with keen foresight and long-range 
vision, is studying a plan to do more for these young- 
men. Following up the splendid start made by the Army, 
he would open new fields of greater opportunity. The 
training program has been a heavy load for the Com- 
monwealth, so that nothing will be lost of the good accom- 
l)lished, he will create an agency to guide and further 
their advancement, to keep them ever fit to serve God 
and country. 

When the day of Independence breaks upon an eager 
and awaiting people, approximately 300,000 young citi- 
zens, army trained and well schooled in their civic obliga- 
tions, will stand ready for the responsibility of defend- 
ing a sovereign, free people. Should the necessity arise, 
they w^ould be prepared to take to the field of battle to 
protect their Fatherland. ^ 




f. Mathematics class at 
thf> Philippijiii' Mill' 
I tary Arad^my. 

February, 1941 • 5 • 





The Philippines Has a Treasure In 
Iron Ore, but Lacks a Steel Indus- 
try That Can Take Advantage of 
the Good Fortune. 

By Stuart Lillico 

By one of those quirks that \ature apparently delights 
in perpetrating, the Philippines stands almost alone in 
the Far East as a producer of iron ore. Japan proper 
has practically no such resources: Manchuria's two im- 
portant iron deposits are of extremely low grade; there 
is a half-surveyed suspicion of ore in Chahar Province 
in North China. That is about all the experts have 
found. 

Consider the Philippines, on the other hand. Investi- 
gation to date has revealed upwards of a billion tons of 
ore, much of it of high quality. As the result of develop- 
ment in the past decade, iron stands next to gold in im- 
portance among Insular mineral resources. 

How'ever, two important facts must be borne in mind 
in connection with this booming industry. The first is 
that the entire output of Philippine iron mines goes to 
Japan. Nippon in 1940 paid approximately 83,000,000 
for an estimated 1.260,000 tons of ore. In October alone, 
91,000 tons were shipped northward by sea from the 
four important Philippine mines — Larap in Camarines 
Norte Province. Samar on half-wild Samar Island, Insu- 
lar at Paracale. and Gold Star on Marinduque Island. 
Shipments vary widely according to market conditions, 
the availability of ships, and weather conditions. The 
figure has declined sharply each winter in the past. 

The second important point is that the Philippine 
Islands have no steel industry of their own worth men- 
ticMiing. If the Commonwealth's iron resources are to be 
exploited, the output must go to feed the furnaces of 
some industrial country, and none is available today 
but the hungry Nipponese blast furnaces. 

Iron ore is know^n to exist in commercial quantities 
at half a dozen jjoints in the Commonwealth. In addition 
to those already noted, deposits are being worked in 
the Bulacan district, innnediately north of Manila; on 
northern Mindoro Island and in western Panay, south 
of I^uzon. The Islands' most important iron ore deposit 
is not >et being exploited, however. The huge govern- 
ment-reserved deposit at Surigao. in the extreme north- 
eastern corner of Mindanao, has been officially esti- 
mated at 500,000,000 metric* tons, but recent surveys 
suggest the figure may be as large as a billion tons. 

The Surigao dej)osit was discovered in 1912 by an 
American engineer who noted the terrain's similarity to 
the Nipe Bay de])osit in Cuba. Subsequent investigation 




Cost of Producing Philip pitu* Iran Ore. 



revealed deposits ranging in thickness from s(^\ en to -lo 
feet, about o5 per cent accessible* for mining. \(»arl)v 
Dahikan Bay offered natural harl)<)r faciliti(*s within 
easy reach of two ore l>odi(\'^ aggregating 20o, 000, ()()() 
tons. In short, Surigao comprises |)rol)ahly the finest col- 
lection of iron ore in the Far East. 

Soon after th(^ Surigao wealth w as discox (m chI. the 
Insular government took steps to reserve tht* deposits for 
its own use. In 191 1 the area was withdrawn from the 
public domain, and five years later the Philippine Legis- 
lature created a National Iron C()nij)any to exploit the 
deposit. Finally, in 1937 a program of intensive explora- 
tion and development was started. When current ])lans 
are carried out, power shovels working in open cuts will 
deliver ore to railway cars and a system of conveyor 
belts, which will dump the ore directly into the holds of 
ships in Dahikan Bay. From the standpoint of cheap and 
easy handling of the ore, Surigao is almost ideally laid 
out. 

In one respect, however, exploitation is under a serious 
handicap. Surigao ore is excessivelx porous, tests reveal- 
ing proportions of hygroscopic water as higli as ,37 

(Turn to Page 22) 



The Commonwealth (iovernnieiil has 
decided, as a matter of national poliey, to 
sell iron ore from National Development 
Company deposits only to the lUiited States. 
No furtht^r leases of iron or oil lands will 
he ma<le to |)ri\ate «;roups. 



• 5 © Philippines 



Economic J^tepA to Undependence 



200,000,000 



CIGARS 

DUTY FREE 




4,500,000 LBS 

TOBACCO 

DUTY FREE 



200,000 LONG TONS 

COCONUT 
OIL 

DUTY FREE 




85,000 GROSS 

PEARL 
BUTTONS 

DUTY FREE 



850,000 LONG TONS 
AND NO MORE 

SUGAR 

DUTY FREE 





6,000,000 LBS 

AND NO MORE 



CORDAGE 

DUTY FREE 



U.S.TARIFF 

^1 ON ALL 

GOODS 

X Xn ot on 

FREE LIST 




$10,000,000 

EXPORT 
TAX 

COLLECTED BY 
MANILA 




JA>sLAK\ L 194L marked ihe da^^■n of a new era in 
Philippine-American connneree. On that day. for the first 
lime since free trade was established in 1909. the ship- 
ment of Insnlar iioods to the United States was subject 
to a general restrictive levy. The imposition — 5 per cent 
of the standard tariff rate — marked an important step 
in the program of preparing Philippine economy for 
independence in 1946. There also went into operation 
the first in a series of reductions in import quotas of 
special conunodities. 

Ever since passage of the Pa\ ne-Aldrich Tariff Act 
in 1909. the Philippines has been well inside the Ameri- 
can tariff wall. Not only have Insular sugar, coconut 
oil, cigars, cordage, embroideries, canned pineapple, 
lumber, peanuts, straw hats and other goods entered 
the United Stales without dul\ or quota, but American 
iron and steel products, cotton goods, dairy products, 
cigarettes, gasoline. })aper. electrical equipment, toilet 
articles and fruit — farm and industrial products of every 
sort — have gone to the Philippines without levy or hin- 
drance. 

At the time free trade was being discussed after the 
Spanish-American War. Philippine leaders expressed the 
fear that Insular economy would be warped by such a 
gift. They were right, for Island products were chan- 
nelized naturally into the eager and highly protected 
American market at the expense of industries that might 
have competed in world marts. 

When the Philippine Independence Act was passed 
by Congress in 1934. establishing a 10-year transition 
period beginning November 15, 1935. it provided for 
gradual elimination of dependence on the free American 
market. An export tax equalling 5 per cent of the Ameri- 
can tariff was to be charged on all Philippine products 
except those on the existing free list. This tax would be 
increased annually by 5 per cent until 1946. when the 
Islands would no longer enjoy any preference. In addi- 
tion, a duty-free quota was set for sugar ( coinciding 
with the already operating AAA crop-control minimum 
of 850,000 long tons), an absolute limit was decreed for 
cordage (6,000,000 pounds amuially ) , and a duty-free 
limitation of 200,000 long tons was established in coco- 
nut oil. These restrictions became effective upon inaugu- 
ration of the Commonwealth on November 15. 1935. 

For a variety of reasons main branches of Insular 
industry faced great difTicultv in adapting ihemselves to 
the "weaning'* process. One of the most important causes 
was the steady dc^terioration of nornuil trad(^ throughout 
the world. Elaliorate ])lans {(^x o])ening new maikets for 



February, 1941 • 7 • 



Philippine goods in Asia and the Old World had to be 
scrapped. 

When it became apparent that many Philippine indus- 
tries would be unable to survive the imposition of even 
the first 5 per cent levy, officials in Washington and 
Manila held an economic conference to study the prob- 
lem intensively. The outcome was a series of recommen- 
dations, which in turn formed the basis of the 1939 
Tydings-Kocialkowski amendments to the Independence 
Act. 

Under the new program, plans for an all-inclusive 
export tax were dropped, and four of the Common- 
wealth's principal products were put on a quota basis 
beginning January 1, 1940, the quota to he decreased 
each year by 5 per cent. These items, and the quantities 
that were admitted free of duty during 1940, were as 
follows : 

Cigars— 200,000,000 cigars. 

Scrap and filler tobacco — 4,500,000 pounds. 

Coconut oil — 200,000 long tons. 

P'iarl buttons — 850,000 gross. 

The original quantitative duty-free limitations on sugar 
and rope — 850,000 long tons and 6.000,000 pounds, re- 
spectively — set by the Independence Act ( and modified by 
the Cordage Act of June, 1935 ) were retained, but the 
stipulation was added that not a single pound of cordage 
might be shipped beyond 6,000.000 pounds, even though 
the producers were willing to pay the full American 
duty. In this respect, the Islands are in a peculiar posi- 
tion, since foreign countries exporting cordage to the 
United States may ship any quantity they care to, pro- 
vided the tariff is paid on entry. 

Another minor change, but one of considerable im- 
portance to Manila's expanding needlework trade, stipu- 
lated that the duty on embroidered goods be based on 
the actual increase in valuation resulting from the work 
done in the Philippines. This takes cognizance of the 
fact that most Manila needlework is for American firms 
w^ho send half-finished clothing to the Islands to be decor- 
ated by dexterous and highly trained Filipino women. 



Thus, except for cigars, filler and scrap tobacco, coco- 
nut oil and pearl buttons ( which are under decreasinp^ 
quotas), Philippine products enjoying American tariff 
protection will pay a percentage of the United Stales 
duties as export tax, as originally provided. Accordingly, 
since the first day of 1941 the cost of exporting most 
Philippine products to America has been materially in- 
creased. This annual rise in cost will continue until the 
Philippine Commonwealth becomes completely independ- 
ent in 1946, when the Islands will be cut ofT conipletelv 
from their protection in the American market. 

The new export taxes are expected to yield approxi- 
mately 835,000,000 in the next five years, assuming that 
shipments to the United States remain at their present 
volume. Of this total, about 90 per cent will he paid by 
sugar exporters. The money is earmarked for the com- 
plete retirement of the Philippine bonded debt in th(» 
United States^ and is expected to put Insular finances on 
a sound footing in preparation for 1946, with a probable 
cash surplus of between S13.000.000 and 816,000,000. 

On the other side of the picture, although the amended 
Independence Act forbids a Philippine tariff on American 
goods, some decline in shipments is likely. This will he 
the result of a lowering of the general income in the 
wake of declining sales to the United States. In past 
years a slightly favorable merchandise balance has en- 
abled the Islands to pay for expensive American indus- 
trial goods. Recently, however, the trend has been re- 
versed and the Islands, instead of having a balance to 
meet freight, insurance and other invisible non-Philip- 
pine expenses, have been compelled to draw on the 
credit obtained through sales of gold and the refund 
of excise taxes by the United States Treasury. 

This unfavorable tendency is principally due to the 
limitations on Philippine products already imposed by 
operation of the Independence Law w^ithin the past five 
years. The result has been a decline in both value and 
volume of Insular exports to the United States. This 
trend will be aggravated by the export tax and quota 
system that went into effect this year. ^ 




Philippine Sugar^ as Represented by the Insular Sugar Refining Plant I\ ear Manila^ Faces 
a Period of Readjustment in Preparation for ItuU^pendence 

® 8 ® Philippines 




! / 1 



American M achinery 
mannfacturers have a n 
important market in the 
Philippines. 



THE 





THE MAGAZINES MISSED 



Imagine a SO-car railroad train pulling out of Akron, 
Ohio, headed for deepwater terminals at Philadelphia. 
Simultaneously, another 50-car train is leaving We- 
natchee, Washington, for Seattle. The first is loaded with 
rubber goods and machinery ; the second with apples. 
The following day, similar trains chuff out of Detroit 
and Woonsocket, filled to capacity with automobiles and 
cotton textiles. And the next day the shipments are from 
the Imperial Valley of California and the cigarette fac- 
tories of Durham, North Carolina. Every day of the 
year the procession continues. For each trainload, cash 
has been deposited in a safe American bank. This is the 
picture of the United States' export trade to the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth. 

American newspapers and magazines during 1939 and 
1940 published an interesting collection of articles deal- 
ing with the Philippines. The subject matter was diversi- 
fied. The majority were "surveys," designed to prove 
that the Filipinos had changed their mind about the de- 
sirability of independence. The problem of defending 
the Islands — either as a detached nation or as an ele- 
ment in American grand strategy — was a favorite theme. 
Manila politics came in for attention. In addition, the 
presence of numerous Japanese colonists at Davao was 
viewed with alarm, and the general Nipponese "threat" 
was often considered. 

There was some discussion of American investments 
in the Philippines and their future under independence. 
Writers made note of some extraordinarily successful gold 
mines. But, strangely enough, little attention has ever 
been paid to the one subject that is of immediate interest 



to millions of American farmers, factorv workers, manu- 
facturers, shippers and merchants — the SI 00.000,000 
annual sale of American products to the Philippine 
Islands and the steady expansion of what is probably the 
United States' last normal overseas market. This is the 
story the magazines have missed. 

The most encouraging element of this business is that 
it is steadily expanding. Just as the $100,000,000 total 
for 1939 exceeded the figures for 1938 by some 11 per 
cent, so the trade for 1940 is certain to be better than for 
the previous year. On the basis of 1939 returns. 105 
different American products found their best overseas 
market in the Philippines. In 55 other cases, the Islands 
were second best. That is "big news"" in the most funda- 
mental sense of the phrase. 

Fifty-fi\e thousand American cars and trucks operate 
over some 9,000 miles of Philippine roads. About 7,000 
miles are first-class surfaced national highways that have 
been built and maintained by the Commonwealth and 
the preceding governments. Manila imports more Ameri- 
can automobiles and trucks than any other port in the 
Far East. Furthermore, the Philippines is the best East- 
ern market for American tire casings and tubes, and one 
of the best in the world. 

Gasoline and fuel oil are major Philippine imports 
from the Ijiited States; the bulk of $3,073,754 worth of 
gasoline and $876,470 of oil bought in 1939 was Ameri- 
can. Half a dozen oil companies have important invest- 
ments in terminals, filling stations, agencies and equip- 

(Turn to Page 21) 



February, 1941 ^ 9 



LABOR... 

an dike 

The coming of the Americans in 1898 wrought many 
changes in the Philippine Islands, not only in political 
thought and institutions, but in social and economic life 
as well. For untold centuries prior to 1898, agriculture 
was almost the only occupation of the Filipinos. Their 
placid agrarian life was disturbed by Yankee enterprise; 
as the result, especially during the past two or three 
decades, the country has been going through a period of 
rapid industrialization. Coincident with this development, 
the working population has increased, while labor prob- 
lems of all forms and magnitude have arisen. 

In recent years particularly, labor problems have be- 
come relatively serious. Improvement of labor and liv- 
ing conditions and maintenance of harmony between 
Capital and Labor have required ever increasing atten- 
tion from the law^-makers. Every session of the Legisla- 
ture sees the introduction of new labor measures. 

The Philippine Constitution declares that "the promo- 
tion of social justice to insure the well-being and eco- 
nomic security of all the people should be the concern of 
the State," and that "the State shall afford protection to 
labor, especially to working women and minors, and shall 
regulate the relations between labor and capital in indus- 
try." Further, "the State may provide for compulsory 
arbitration." 

The National Assembly has passed a number of laws 
to implement these provisions. Recent enactments, for ex- 
ample, provide for an eight-hour working day, prohibit 
Sunday labor without additional pay, regulate the time 
and manner of wage payment, extend the Workmen's 
Compensation Act, authorize the Secretary of Labor to 
promulgate safety regulations, and create a Court of 
Industrial Relations empowered to arbitrate and settle 
industrial and agrarian disputes. 

While these laws have in a large measure improved 
working conditions, labor continues to be vocal. Filipino 
workers are now conscious of their rights and seek a 
better place in society. The cry for increased wages, 
union recognition and collective bargaining is particularly 
prominent. Fortunately, this fight has not been character- 
ized by serious hostility and violence. However, Philip- 
pine unions have not yet acquired the strength and power 
that characterize labor in some other countries. 

One of the first laws passed by the National Assem- 
bly protects the right of laborers to unite for collective 



By Hon. Jose Avelino 




bargaining. Nevertheless, many years may hav(^ to pass 
before our unions have sufficient coherence and strength 
to meet their emj)loyers on a footing of equalitv. In niv 
opinion, the problem of how far the GoxcMiunont should 
go to bolster Labor s bargaining pc^wer is oni^ that re- 
quires immediate solution. 

Although labor demands continue, comparative quiet 
reigns today. Threats of strikes increase, hut actual 
strikes are fewer. This may be because the Government 
has provided ample machinery for settling labor differ- 
ences. Most demands are compromised, whih* many 
threatened strikes are averted through either mediation 
by the Department of Labor or arbitration bv the Court 
of Industrial Relations. Employers and eniploves alike 
have learned to accept the intervention of these agencies 
as a matter of course. In most cases, the parties themselves 
seek it. These two agencies have made a distinct con- 
tribution to improving the conditions of the working class 
and bettering relations between Capital and Labor. 

Social security legislation is now engaging the atten- 
tion of both the Government and labor leaders. The 
Philippines has had an Employers' Liability Act since 
1908, and a Workmen's Compensation Law for more 
than a decade. However, labor today demands jM'otection 
from old age, sickness, unemployment and the like. Be- 
fore long, concrete and definite proposals must be sub- 
mitted to the National Assembly. The first is likely to be 
in regard to unemployment. 

Coupled with widespread economic distress and world- 
wide unrest, the Philippines have many peculiar problems. 
Geography — separation of the Commonwealth into several 
thousand islands and islets — renders labor movement 
difficult; the seasonal character of many tv|)es of eni|)lov- 
ment automatically throws laborers out of w^ork at the 
expiration of certain periods ever\ year; the exodus of 
young people from schools and colleges with no ready 
jobs at hand — all these account for the growing serious- 
ness of unemployment in this country. 

The Commonwealth Government realizes that most of 
its labor problems will continue for some time, beino 
concomitants of industrial progress. In seeking the proper 
solution, the Administration is guided not only by local 
experience, but also by the experience of otluM countries, 
especially the I iiited States. ^ 



o 10 ® Philippines 



^pain IN THE 

PHILIPPINES 

By Dr David Rubio 

Curator of the Hispanic Room at the 
Library of Congress, and Professor of 
Spanish-American History at Catho- 
lic University, Washington. 



SpAIWS 1)1()()(I1(»ss conquest of thr Philippine Islands 
is uni(}ue in the ainials of eolonizalion. The principal 
reason for this was that Ma«i;ellan in 1521 found a dis- 
united irroup of coini)lelely independent tribes. In addi- 
tion. ho\ve\(M'. the phenomenal sjiread of (Christianity 
throu^rh the archipelago iiave the S})anish j)riests a hold 
on Filipino loyalty that made armed force larueh un- 
necessary. Not until 1^)22 — three centuries after Mai>ellan 
— did Spain ha\e to j)ut a iiarrison in the Islands. 

The histoiy of Spain in tlu^ Phili j)])ines hciiins with 
Magellan's discovcMy of what he called the Islands of 
San l.azaro in rcHoiziiition of the holy da) on which 
he si^htcMl tluMU. Soon the na\ ijiator was on cordial terms 
with many of the nali\e tril)(\<. Peace pacts were ratified, 
and th(» "Indians"* often hrou<iht food to the Spanish 
soldiers. Howcmm*. on Mactan Island the S})anish did meet 
resistanc(\ and it was there that Maizellan died trying; 
to coxcr tile retr(\it of his men to their boats. 

Actual s(^ttlem(Mit of the Philip})ines began in 1561 
when MiiiU(^l Le<iaz|)i. aided by Andres de I rdaneta. an 
earlier ad\(Miturer turned Augustinian monk, arrived 
from Mexico Avith four ships and 400 men. When, at 
Cebu, Legazpi's efforts to win over the natives failed, he 
realized the necessity of ])r()\ in<2: the Spankirds' superior- 
ity at arms. Once this was done, however, the captain 
showed his tact and vision by making friendly pacts with 
the natives and befriending their leaders. It was this 
policy that won the Philippines for Spain without further 
bloodshed. When Legazpi died in 1572. the whole archi- 
pelago was under Spanish rule. 




St, Augustine Church in Mauila W as 
Built by the Spaniards in 1S99. 



One t)f tlu^ most interesting aspects of Philippine his- 
tory is the ra[)id con\ersion of the native population 
to (ChrislianitN . The Augustinians came Avith Legazpi. In 
1577 the Franciscans arri\ed. followed in 1581 by the 
Jesuits. The Dominicans came in 1587 and the Recollects 
in 1000. Ministers to bodih wants as well as spiritual 
needs, these priests foimd uo difliculty in converting the 
natixes to Catholic-ism. Morga. in describing the work of 
these missionaries, tells of the assiduity with which the 
natives embraced the Catholic faith. "'\o native pro\ ince 
resists religion or does not an ant it.** he wrote. The 
Filipinos attended sacraments with great de\otion. Many 
times, because of the scarcity of priests. the\ had to wait 
a whole day t(^ reach the confessional box. 

The effect of Christianity on the life of the people 
was notable. \\ oman's position was elevated, temperance 
was encouraged, slavery was lessened and usury was 
attacked. That the real conquest of the Philippines was 
accom|)lished bv these missionaries is shown b\ the 
ridiculously small military fori'c maintained to support 
the Catholic king. 

The missionaries, of course, had another important 
effect on Phili p})ine life. The nali\e culture was sub- 
merged almost completely by an incoming tide of S]:)anish 
learning and tradition. 

The first schools were parochial, where students learned 
the precepts of Christianity while stud)ing reading and 
\vriting. In music. Filipinos showed great adaptability: 
from the earliest da\s Manila had sph^idid choirs. Even 
in the pro\inces. this educational process went o!i con- 
stanth . Land grantees were required to instruct their 
sla\ es in the Faith, as well as in reading and w riting, 
when no friars were near. 

Sla\es were also taught arts and trades, for which they 
showed great a])titude. The women quicklx mastered 
needlework. 

In 1593 the friars brought Manila its hrsl |)rinting 
jiress. As publishing facilities increased, main works that 
Ave consider monumental c\cn t(^da\ apjx^ircd. "'Mora i]c 
Fili j)inas."* published in Manila b\ the great V\n\ Maiuu^l 
Blanco, has never been surpassed. 

In 1 001 the Jesuits founded the Coll(\a(^ of San Jose. 

(Turn /(> Paij:r I ^> ) 



Fehruary. 1941 ^ 11 ^ 




Readers may obtain at pies of this map without charge by writing 




^^HILIPPIISES, 2362 Massachusetts Avenue /Volf W ashington, D. C. 



FILIPINO 
WOMEN 

Make a 

New WorlJ 

By Pilar A'. Ravelo 



Jr ORTY YEARS of American rule has revolutionized 
woman's position in the Philippines. Three or four dec- 
ades ago she was content in her role as ''queen*' within 
the four walls of her home; today, she is a political power 
and a force for national progress. 

Prior to the coming of Magellan in 1521. Filipino 
women enjoyed equality with men. Queen Sima and 
Princess Urdu j a were among the women rulers who ad- 
ministered laws as efficiently as the men did. They held 
the family purse, engaged in business, and were economic 
consultants to their husbands. Philippine court records 
are full of instances in which a woman took up her 
husband's fight as her own. But feminine prowess was 
nullified under Spanish rule. Women were relegated 
to the background. The man became lord and master. 

With the arrival of the Americans in 1898 and the in- 
troduction of liberal public education, w^omen awakened 
and began to demand observance of their rights. The first 
institution of learning for women — the Instituto de 
Mujeres — was established by Rosa Sevilla de Alvero in 
1900. As early as 1902, agitation for better laws w^as 
started by La Liga Femenina de la Paz, In 1905, Miss 
Concepcion Felix organized the Asociacion Femenista 
Filipina. Among its aims were the suppression of im- 
morality, the regulation of work in factories, elimination 
of the ])racti('e of allow-ing parents to parcel out their 
children as servants in payment of debts, and the selec- 
tion of women for municipal and provincial education 
councils. Though this group accomplished little in a con- 
crete sense, its aims served as a standard for future years. 

In 1912. two famous suffragettes, Carrie Chapmann 
Catt and Dr. /Vletta Jacobs of Holland, visited the Philip- 
pines and urged the women to join the world feminist 
movement. The first woman's club was founded as the 
result, w^ith Sofia Reyes de Veyra as one of the in- 
corporators. From this club stem the 900 women's clubs 
now found throughout the Philippines. Agitation for 
feminine suffrage followed, but the mf)vement was hojje- 




Mrs. Josef (I Llaii(*s Kscoda, 
OrfXaniz(*r of the Philip ptito 
Girl Scoiii Mavonioiit. 



lessly premature. i\ot until 1918. when Governor General 
Francis Harrison, in his message to the Phili|)pinc Leg- 
islature, recommended votes for Filipino wf)nien, did 
the idea receive any popular support. Hut although hill 
after bill was introduced, nothing concrete resulted. 

The women were persistent, however, and in 1933. 
Governor General Frank Murphy signed a feminine 
suffrage bill. Before the bill could take eff(M;t, the Com- 
monwealth Constitution was drafted, stipulating tliat 
women would be granted the vote only if 300,000 went 
to the polls at a special plebiscite wtihin two years and 
signified their approval. As the result of a strenuous 
campaign, the women obtained about 500,000 votes in 
1937. Today, many elective j)ositions are held by women. 

An aftermath of the suffrage victory was a demand for 
eradication of obsolete laws in the Civil Code. The first 
result was amendment of the para phernal law. which 
gave the husband unqualified control over his wife's 
property. As the result of revision, women may now dis- 
pose of their own property whenever they wish, and hus- 
bands cannot touch it without |)ermission. 

A year ago the Philippine Association of Universit^ 
Women submitted to the Speaker of the National As- 
sembly eight proposed law^s tf) improve the legal status 
of women. To date, however, no action has been taken. 

Few movements progress without leaders. Typical of 
the Filipino women who have led the struggle for 
emancipation are Mrs. Asuncion Arriola Perez, executi\e 
secretary of the Associated Charities; Mrs. F^ilar Hidalgo 
Lim, president of the National Federation of Women's 
Clubs of the [Philippines, and Mrs. Josefa Llanes Escoda. 
chairman and organizer of the Girl Scout Mo\ enuMit of 

(Turn to Pagr 20) 



• 14 ® Philippines 



liS 19U1 the Philij)piiie Insular governmeni appropriated 
S149.100 for puhlie health purposes. By 1938 the figure 
had risen to 82,191.963, the equivalent of 19 cents for 
every man, woman and child in the Connnonwealth. If 
municipal and provincial expenditures on health work 
is added, the figure rises to 22.5 cents per capita. 

This steady increase in appropriations for public 
health in the Philippine Islands speaks well for the 
progressive nature* of the government. Nevertheless, our 
physicians are not satisfied. 

"Just a little more money."* they plead, "and we ll 
give our nation the best health record in the Far East.'* 

As proof of what "just a little more money*' will do 
they point to the record of some of the big Philippine 
sugar "centrals." Their annual expenditure on health 
and sanitation averages slightly more than the govern- 
ment's: the increase, however, has distinctly improved 
sickness and mortality records. As their immediate goal, 
government health men want Manila and the provinces 
to raise their appropriations to 50 cents per capita. 

To show where today's appropriations for public 
health go, let us look at a typical province and a tvpical 
town. Excellent examples are the province of Occidental 
Negros and the town of Silay, one of the most pros- 
perous in that part of the Conunonwealth. 

In accordance with the Philippine law. the province 
devotes at least 5 per cent of its total budget to health 
work. In addition, each municipality uses 5 per cent of 
its income for the same purpose. This fund is occa- 
sionally augmented by grants from Manila for the pur- 
chase of medicine or the construction of new dispen- 
saries. Thus, in 1939 a total of 816.500 was available, 
of which 75 per cent was used for salaries. 

Occidental Negros has 21 towns and one city, with 
a total population of 753.788. The province is divided 
into 19 sanitary districts, each with a physician in 
charge. Populations of these districts range from 25.000 
to 66,000. At Bacolod City, the provincial capital, a 
go\ernment general hospital has 100 beds. Scattered 
through the province are four maternity hospitals. 32 
child health centers, and 27 dispensaries and charitv 
clinics. 

Fifteen physicians are employed in the maternity 
hospitals, while the general hospital at Bacolod City has 
three resident physicians (including the director) and 
four interns. Each of the child health centers has a quali- 
fied nurse, and the ])rovince has 62 licensed midwives 
wh(^ have completed at least a year's training in a 
maternity hospital. Scattered through the province are 
52 sanitary inspectors — an average of one inspector to 
each 15,000 ])opulation. 

The city of Bacolod and two other towns have run- 
ning water. Other sections of the province have a total 
of 586 artesian wells. Although this is an average of 21 
w^ells to a town, actually several ha\e more than a hun- 
dred, while two have none at all. 

Occidental Negros boasts of 158 physicians in private 
Dractice. A few of these arc in the emplov of the pro\ - 



—^an tke 

COMMONWEALTH 




Public Health? 

3y Dr. Sixto 1 . Orosa 



inces sugar '"centrals." All of the 17 "centrals * and 
three large lumber mills have their own hospitals or 
infirmaries. Two of these industrial hospitals are par- 
ticularly well managed, and one enjoys the reputation 
of being better equipped than any in Manila itself. 

In considering the results of this situation, it should 
be borne in mind that Occidental Negros is one of the 
richest provinces in the Commonwealth, that its total 
of hospitals, infirmaries and clinics is somewhat above 
the national average (some provinces have no maternity 
hospitals at all), that the sanitary facilities are better 
than average and that the per capita health appropria- 
tion is greater than most other provinces. The mortality 
rate in 1939 was 16.82. The figure for the entire Com- 
monwealth was 16.53. and for the L nited States. 10.7. 
Of the Occidental Negros deaths. 92.97 per cent oc- 
curred without medical attention. In other words, al- 
though this province has a generally favorable health 
record, more time and money must be spent before 
western standards are approached. 

Now let us examine the town of Silay. the "Paris of 
Negros"* and one of the most progressi\ e in the province. 
Its population in 1939 w^as 39,571. The Silay sanitary 
division is under the direction of a physician, assisted 
bv four nurses ar.d two sanitary inspectors. There is a 
child health center, and a 16-bed maternity hospital with 
a physician, two nurses and f(Air midwi\es. One nurse 
\ isits government schools, treating skin diseases and 
similar minor ailments. 

The 10 private physicians in acti\e practice in Silay 
are generally alert and well trained. About 25 per cent 
of their ser\ ice is rendered to the poor without charge. 
The big proxincial hospital in Bacolod City is only 10 
miles awaN bv an asphalt road. Ne\ ertheless. in s})ite 
of these comparatix ely faxorable facilities, only U) jxM" 
cent of those who died in 1939 had medical attendance. 
Actually, only 8 per cent can be said to have had ade- 
quate medical service prior to death, since many of 
the rest were seen b\ th(^ doctor onl\ on llu^ last da>. 

It is interesting to not(^ that about 75 prr cent of 

(Turn to PaiKc 24) 



February. 1941 ® L> • 




The PHILIPPINE ISLANDS— all 7,000 of them— 
stand at the crossroads of the great Oriental trade routes. 
Rich in agriculture and minerals, its people an easy- 
going, lovable, happy-spirited lot, the Archipelago in 
all its overpowering beauty and natural wealth has for 
centuries tempted empire-builders. The mark left by 
repeated invaders, oriental and occidental, is evident in 
Las Filipinas today. The people are in the truest sense 
of the word a blend of the East and the West, of old 
and new, of progressive and conservative. 

The Philippines is fast becoming a focal point for 
world travelers. This has been emphasized by the arrival 
of Pan American Airways' giant Clippers which main- 
tain excellent service from Manila eastward to San Fran- 
cisco and westward to Hongkong, and are preparing to 
push southward to Singapore. N.Y.K. and the American 
President Lines, the Dutch K.P.M. and the Canadian 
Pacific Lines, offer a wide range of surface accommo- 
dations, bringing the most out-of-the-way parts of the 
world within easy reach. 

Access to the Philippines, which for so long was inade- 
quately served and in consequence received little con- 
sideration from the intending traveler, has converted 
these beautiful, healthful, tropical islands into a first- 
rate tourist attraction. Furthermore, the Commonwealth 
is the only country outside the Western Hemisphere 
which Americans are free to visit today. 

Here is novelty; a fascinating native charm; a gra- 
cious w^ay of living surviving from the days of old Spain. 
Here is variety. No land offers more. 

First of all. there is Manila, a growing port and capi- 



mORLD 

By E. Wallace Moore 

tal of the ambitious young Philippine Commonwealth, 
a city of modern convenience that retains its medieval 
charm and the tempo of native life. Furthermore, hotel 
facilities are famous throughout the East; the Manila 
Hotel is talked about wherever world travelers con- 
gregate. 

In northern Luzon, the traveler sees mountain pe()j)le 
living as most men lived 2,000 years ago, building mirac- 
ulous rice terraces and storing precious mountain water. 
Native cloth of great beauty is woven from pineapple 
and maguey fibers as it was done in Moses' day. 

In the southern islands he visits the enormous sugar 
"centrals" and abaca plantations, the coconut groves 
and rattan forests. Still another mode of living prevails 
here, the nipa hut built high above the ground on l)aniboo 
stilts, with a bamboo ladder in lieu of steps. 

Still farther south are the Moros — Mohammedans who 
came from Sumatra in the remote past and brought 
their culture and belief with them. Here, in and about 
picturesque Jolo, are pearl divers, gorgeous brassw^irk, 
fine steel blades, hand-wrought goods of the most primi- 
tive and delicate sorts. Here the Sultan of Sulu lives, 
surrounded by his 300 or more wives. 

Of variety, there is no end for the adventurous tra\ eler 
who comes to the Philippines. 

Travel to and from the Islands is no longer difficult or 
complicated. Arrangements can be made by any reliable 
tourist agency. Once arrived at Manila, the visitor can 
depend on the Philippine Tourist Bureau, a semi-official 
agency of the Commonwealth Government, to facilitate 
his travels to any part of the 7,000 islands that com- 
prise Las Filii)inas. ^ 




At Manila^ s Piers^ Ships of all JSalionalities Dock. 



• 16 ® Philippines 



THE ISLANDS WATCH 

By Julius C. Edelstoiit 



1 HE PHILIPPINES, like other areas under the Ameri- 
can flag, will watch Congress during the coming year 
for actions having a direct or indirect impact upon their 
national life. It is sometimes forgotten that 16,000,000 
Filipinos are as immediately affected by congressional 
legislation as the citizens of Wisconsin or Rhode Island. 

In a closely knit world, where economic relations span 
oceans and continents without regard for distance, even 
locally-directed legislation, designed to affect only the 
sharecroppers of Louisiana or the migrant farm workers 
of Colorado, may have a direct and powerful effect in 
the most distant barrios of the Philippines. 

The legislature of the Commonwealth Government, 
under its Constitution, has complete power over the 
internal economy and affairs of the island nation. But 
Congress retains and often exercises a power to legislate 
on matters of tremendous concern to the Philippines. 
It was for this reason that the Tydings-McDuffie Act 
provided that the Philippines should be represented in 
Congress by a Resident Commissioner, who should have 
the privilege of participating in debates and deliberation, 
but not the right to vote. In practice the Commissioner 
concerns himself only with legislation which has an effect 
upon the Philippines. The range of such legislation, how- 
ever, is tremendous. 

Legislation to renew or replace the present sugar quota 
control system must inevitably affect the Philippines, 
since the Islands supply approximately one-seventh of 
the sugar requirements of the United States. Any at- 
tempt to reduce the Philippine quota would raise the 
entire subject of the mutual obligations entered into by 
the I nited States and the Filipino people under the 
terms of the Independence Act. Nevertheless some sugar 
interests have discussed the ])ossibility of curtailing the 
Philippine quota at the current congressional session. 

Any revisions of the present monetary structure of 
the United States would have the most immediate reper- 
cussion in the Islands. The Philippine peso is tied to the 
Ainerican dollar and any readjustments in the gold con- 
tent of the one would reflect on the bu\ing power of the 



other. Moreo\er, the Philijjpines has been su|)pl\ ing large 
amounts of gold to the L nited States, and any shift in 
the value of gold would be a nialtei- of intimate concern 
to Insular economy. 

Through its cojMa and co( (jnul oil industr\ the Pliilip- 
pines has a tremendous interest in nn^asures afft^ liiig the 
fats and oils market of the L nited Slates. Proposals to 
increase or decrease the internal re\enuc or jjrocessiiig 
tax on coconut oil, or to give a conipc^itix e ad\ antage 
to cottonseed oil would have an inimediat(* reaction in 
the coconut plantations of the Philippines. 

Previous Congresses have ])rovided that processing 
taxes collected on Philippine sugar should be repaid to 
the Commonwealth treasury. There is also an authoriza- 
tion on record for the payment to the Philippines of 
approximately $24,000,000 to compensate for the losses 
suffered by the Philippine Government when its cur- 
rency reserves, deposited in dollars in the United States 
treasury, were reduced through devaluation of the Ameri- 
can dollar. Both these authorizations may figure in pro- 
posals for defense expenditures in the Philippines. 

The entire subject of national defense, which w^ill most 
certainly preoccupy the next Congress, and probably 
several subsequent Congresses, is of immediate interest 
to the Philippines. The Commonwealth is on the outer 
rim of the American defense establishments in the Pacific 
Ocean. The Asiatic Fleet is stationed at iManila, and 
American troops man the main strategic points in the 
Islands. Defense measures contemplated by the American 
Government have as great significance for the Common- 
wealth, for its security and future relations with both 
the Far East and the Western Hemisphere, as for the 
security of New York and San Francisco. 

A move to fortify Guam — or to abandon Guam — has 
as great meaning for Manila as for Washington. 

Similarly, the Congress with its broad power to levy 
embargoes, affect foreign policy and. in the last analvsis, 
to declare war, has a supreme and ultimate, infiuence on 
the lives and fate of all Filipinos. The delil)erations of 
the 77th Congress will be as closely watched in Manila 
as in an\ city of the I nited States. ^ 



o fla «^ Philippines 



Professor in Ooveriimeiit 



Rl I^KKT KMEKSON— or Dr. Rupert Emerson— has 
been director of the Division of Territories and Island 
Possessions of tlie Department of the Interior since May 
2. 1910. having succeeded Dr. Ernest Gruening, who was 
named Governor of Alaska a year ago. Emerson is still 
a stranger to many of those interested in Philippine and 
territorial alTairs. mainly because he is a modest unos- 
tentatious figure who pri^fers getting work done to being 
seen. 

Secretary of llu^ interior Harold L. Ickes brought Emer- 
son directly from Harvard University where Emerson 
was — and is — a Profi^ssor of Govermnent. Emerson has 
taken a lea\(^ of al)siMiC(* from Harvard, where he had 
taught for \:\ \cars. to try himself at this new job. 

Tlie Director of llie Di\ ision of Territories and Island 
Possessions has athninist rat i\ jurisdiction, as the func- 
tionary of tlic Sei'retary of tlie Interior, over the Phili|)- 
pines (as long as the Conunon wealth remains under 
I nit(Hl Stat(\^ sovereignl) I . Puerto Rico. Hawaii, the 
Virgin Islands, and Alaska. Tlie exact duties of the Di- 
rector, and the exact nature of iiis administrative juris- 
diction are prol)lems which are dailv being worked out 
by rule-of-tliunib. gi\ ing added zest and imj)ortance to 
Emerson's job. 

Befon^ liis ai)|jointnuMit. Emerson had never held a 



public post, nor had he been 
involved in politics. He spent 
considerable time in the Far 
East, during 1932 and 1933, 
:H)llecting material for a book 
on British administratiiMi in 
jMalaya and Netherlands gov- 
ernment in the Dutch East 
Indies. The book. ''Malaysia, 
A Study in Direct and Indi- 
rect Rule." is a standard 
book on the affairs of that 
region. 

Emerst)!! himself is a phys- 
ical stand-out because of hi^ 




Dr. Rupert Emerson 



extraordinar\ height, and 
his lean and friendly demeanor. He looks very much like 
a campus figure, dressing plainly and in keeping with 
his scholastic background. He has a sharp face, a drawl, 
and the plain engaging personalit) of a man interested 
in })eople as well as in personalities. 

Starting virtually from "scratch"" in Philippine affairs, 
Emerson has become extraordinarily well acquainted with 
Philippine politics and economics, and now plays a vig- 
orous role in Insular developments in Washington. ^ 



Spain in the Philippines (from Page 11) 

which flourished until the Jesuits were expelled in 1768. 
In 1611 this university was incorporated into the Uni- 
versity of Santo Tomas. giving courses in medicine and 
pharmacy. The Pontifical University of Santo Tomas. 
founded by Pray Miguel de Benavides with a bequest of 
1.500 pesos, offered instruction in theology, philosophy 
and the humanities, as well as the learned professions of 
those days. The university today is the oldest under the 
American flag, and its influence throughout the centuries 
has been tremendous. 

Nor was the missionaries' w^ork restricted to spiritual 
or literary fields. They built Manila — with their own 
hands in many cases. Ghirino, recalling the work of 
Father Antonio Sedeiio. a Jesuit, tells us that Father 
Sedeno not only "moved stones by his eloquence*' but 
also inspired the archbishop to build the first stone house 
in Manila. Personally directing its construction, he taught 
the natives to hew stones, to burn lime and to plan build- 
ings. So popular did he become because of his skill and 
so anxious was he to help the people with their problems 
that ]jractically all of his time was gi\en to building. 
(Chinese decorators and })ainters were hired to adorn 
cliurch(\s and monasteries. Tlic first fort (U)nslruct(Ml in 



Manila. El Guia. was done under the padre's direction. 
Largely because of Father Sedena's work, Manila today 
is. architecturally speaking, one of the pleasantest cities 
of the East. 

As for the government of the Islands, the main change 
brought about by the Spaniards was the creation of a 
strong central regime. They did not abolish the existing 
local governments. It was not Spanish policy to trample 
underfoot and completeK disregard existing native ad- 
ministration, no matter how poor it was. At the head of 
each barrio or local unit was a caheza de baran^av. As 
these minor barangayes were grouped into larger units 
or towns, the former dafos were elected captains and 
"little governors." Gradually the se\eral social classes 
were suppressed. 

The polity of the home goxernment toward the "In- 
dian." whether Aztec or Malayan, was always one of great 
concern for his spiritual and material welfare. There is 
no doubt that some governors disregarded coinpletelv 
the famous Leyes de Indias (Laws of the Indies), but 
most seem to ha\e done their best to improve the condi- 
tions of the nati\e. Santiago de Vera, one of th(^ most 
enlightened Philippine g()\ernors. commissioned Father 

(Turn to Pitgr 2 11 



February. 194i « 19 • 



Filipino Women Make Neiv World (from Page 14) 

the Philippines. Their stories are the history of the 
feminist campaign in the Islands, and their achievements 
are those of all Filipino women. 

Xo one in the Philippines has worked harder for the 
poor than has Asuncion Arriola Perez, executive secretary 
since 1923 of the government-supported Associated 
Charities. In recognition of her work, President Quezon 
appointed her to the official committee to study and 
revise the Eight Hour Labor Law, and recently Mrs. 
Perez was given a place on the National Security Board. 
She is the only feminine member of either of these groups. 
The National Unemployment Council, which she organ- 
ized, was forerunner of the National Unemployment 
Board I now called the National Relief Administration). 

Mrs. Perez' work is not confined to social welfare. 
She contributes articles to magazines regularly and has 
written "Love, Courtship and Marriage," a book based on 
actual marital cases brought to her attention. She lec- 
tures on social work at the University of the Philippines 
and at the Union College in Manila, and is an active 
leader of the feminist movement. Mrs. Perez is the wife 
of the director of the Bureau of Science Library and is 
the mother of three children. 

In 1936. Mrs. Perez represented the Philippines at the 
National Conference of Social Workers at Atlantic City, 
and the same year she made a study of social conditions 
among Filipino laborers in America. On this trip she 
also represented the Methodist Chuch of the Philippines 
at the General Conference of the Methodist Church in 
Columbus. Ohio. 

A militant suffragist, leader of half a million Filipino 
women in the suffrage plebiscite, president since 1931 of 
the National Federation of Women's Clubs, an efficient 
housewife and the mother of five children — these are a 
few of the accomplishments of Pilar Hidalgo Lim. Genial 
and energetic. Mrs. Lim has become as prominent as 
her husband, Brigadier General Vincente Lim of the 
Philippine Army, the first Filipino to be graduated from 
West Point. 

An honor graduate from the State University in 1913. 
Mrs. Lim spent 10 years of quiet married life before she 
accompanied Major Lim to the United States in 1924. At 
that time she distinguished herself by a series of lectures 
before American women's organizations. On their return 
to Manila, Mrs. Lim became active in club work and in 
1931 was elected president of the National Federation 
of Women's Clubs, a post to which she has been re-elected 
five consecutive times. 

It was during her third term that the women's suffrage 
drive reached its climax. Mrs. Lim headed the National 
Council of Women which mapped the 1937 plebiscite 
campaign; she and other leaders stumped the provinces 
and remote towns to appeal to the feminine population. 
As a result, the suffragettes polled 447,725 votes, greatly 
ex(!eeding the number required by the Constitution. 

But this was only the beginning. Mrs. Lim. through 




Mrs, Perez Mrs. Lint 



her 900 womeirs clul)s all over the Philippines, under- 
took feminine political education, too. She and Ikm* li(*lp- 
ers organized nursery classes, set uj) diet kitchens to 
train housewives, established homecraft classes and Ix^gan 
a sweeping campaign against illiteracy, sending t(*achers 
into the field to instruct illiterates. Now. the NFWC is 
training women in a wide variet) of ''emergencv'' activ- 
ities, such as first aid and home hygiene, making hand- 
ages, sewing clothes, child nursing, food conser\ atioiu 
and recruiting for volunteer work. 

For organization work and administrative ability. 
Josefa Llanes Escoda is supreme. She organized the first 
Boys' Club in 1937, initiated a National Girls' Week in 
1936 and founded the Girl Scout Movement of the Philip- 
pines. 

As field secretary of the Anti-Leprosy Society and as 
social organizing secretary of the anti-tuberculosis sec- 
tion of the Bureau of Health, Mrs. Escoda has visited 
almost every corner of the I^hilippines. She organized 
the first leper rehabilitation service for the Philippine 
Anti-Leprosy Society in 1929.; a report on her findings 
was considered most important by the Leonard Wood 
Memorial. 

Mrs. Escoda is never without friends. A year ago. 
while abroad to study Girl Scouting, she charmed manv 
an American audience with her talks on the Philippines. 
On her return she organized the Girl Scout Movement 
of the Philippines, which was incor j)orated and chartered 
in May, 1940, by the National Assembly. She is presentlv 
training a corps of leaders who will organize troops in 
all parts of the Philippines. 

Largely through her ability as an organizer, the 
NFWC has steadily grown in scope and activities. Mrs. 
Escoda is still connected with the Bureau of Health as 
editor of the Health Messenger, and she maps amuial 
child health day celebrations in the Philippines. She is 
a member of the Textbook Board and the only woman 
member of the advisory committee of the Communitv 
Assemblies for the Promotion of Adult Edu( ation. But 
her life ambition is to organize Girl Scout troops 
throughout the Philippines. Despite her activities, how- 
ever, this petite woman still keeps an attractive home for 
her husband, Antonio Escoda, a Manila newsj^aper man. 
and two lo\ely children. Antonio Jr. and Maria Teresa.^ 



• 20 • Philippines 



The Story the M(ii(azines Missed 




Sam II el G ach es 



(from Page 9) 

ineiit. Dicst'l engines (el^iefly 
American) at Insular mines 
raised I li e d e m a n d for 
fuel oil to S2.()1L506 that 
year. Allogelhei\ the Philip- 
pines ranks as one of the best 
o\erseas markets for Ameri- 
can motor vehicles a n d 
equipment, and as one of the 
best gasoline and oil mar- 
kets except under the extra- 
ordinary opportunities of 
war. 



riu* Clonnnon\v(\dlh is America's premier overseas cus- 
tonuM' lor cotton lcxtil(\^. too. Approximatelv 300,001) 
acres of Southern land are required to furnish the raw 
cotton used in the production of textiles and thread sold 
ever) \ear in llu* Islands. The demand for the finest 
cotton fabrics grows alongside the purchases of such 
staple goods as sheetings, khakis, denims and prints. 

Philippine imports of iron and steel products — chiefly 
from the United States— top §1,000,000 a month. They 
totaled 812,471,058 during 1939. The trend is steadily 
ui)ward. In common with all Conunonwealth trade, it is 
strictly on a cash basis; no forced exchanges, blocked 
currency or barter deals complicate this connnerce with 
the Philippines, whose public works program is construc- 
tive and substantial. 

American flour sales to the Philippines last year took 
the output from an estinuited 310,000 acres of wheat 
land. The total was 1,076,769 bags, with an invoice 
value of $2,638,510. American flour used in the Philip- 
pines fully loads ten 10,000-ton ships a year. Cargoes of 
thousands of tons arrive at Manila and Cebu at frequent 
intervals. Growth in the nundjer of bakeries is large, both 
in Manila and in the j)rovinces. The Islands form Amer- 
ica's best wheat-flour market overseas, and the demand 
promises to grow. 

The same is true of electrical goods; the Philippines 
buys 85 per cent of its requirements of such material 
from American factories. Sales came to $2,144,000 in 
1936, $3,534,000 in 1937, and $3,259,000 in 1938. Im- 
ports in 1939 w^ere invoiced at $3,824,921 and came 
mainly from American factories. 

Insular industry has been featured by a growing use 
of power in small factories. Home building is active in 
the Philippines, increasing the demand for electric lights. 
The country has more than 50,vl00 licensed radio receiv- 
ing sets and four broadcasting stations — three in Manila 
and one at Cebu. 

Popular American cigarettes, sold in every Philippine 
town and village, pay oidy Philippine revenue taxes and 



therefore are cheaper than they are in the I nited States. 
Consequently the Philippines (although it consumes 
millions of domestic cigarettes) bu}s more tobacco 
products from America than it sells to the United States. 
The Islands are, in fact, America's leading overseas mar- 
ket for cigarettes, cigar leaf and plug tobacco. 

America furthermore finds in the Philippines a good 
market for canned sardines, pilchards, salmon and mack- 
erel. Transpacific imports in 1939 included 22.589 cases 
of canned mackerel, three times as much as Japan sold. 
Of sardines and pilchards. America sold the Philippines 
215.649 cases in 1939. against 40.851 cases from Japan 
and 7.102 from Europe. Thus the American business was 
more than five times Japan's, and about 30 times 
Europe's. The tariff (from which An.icrican goods are 
exempt) is low: business is competitive. 

The Philippine milk market is a good one and it is 
rapidly expanding. Some 88.000 cases of evaporated milk 
were imported in 1921; 1939's figure was 737.280 cases 
— nearly eight and a half cans in 1939 for each can in 
1921. In the interim, single year increases were more than 
45 per cent. x\s the country lacks succulent meadow- 
grasses for dairy herds, imports of milk seem sure to con- 
tinue indefinitely in larger and larger annual shipments. 
The same is true of canned foods generally. The Filipino 
has become one of the American grocer's best customers. 

The Philippines buy $120,000 worth of fresh fruits 
and nuts abroad every month. Most of this Si. 440. 000 
annual business is w4th California and the Pacific North- 
west. New highways and connnercial trucklines ha\ e made 
American apples and oranges staples in shops through- 
out the provinces. They are stocked in every town. Grapes 
are in the same demand. Thanks to refrigerator ships and 
cold storage facilities in Manila and Cebu. this fruit 
reaches Filipino customers in prime condition. 

American meats sold in the Philippines in 1939 w'ere 
invoiced at $526,637. A typical single order of pork- 
whole carcasses frozen and shipped in c'old storage^ — 
placed by a Manila butcher shop meant the sale in some 
mid-western tow^n of four carloads of 250-|)ound hogs. 
Such orders are frequent throughout the year: despite 
the increasing production of both beef and ])ork in the 
Philippines, the demand for prime American meat in- 
creases. 

The quantity of canned meat bought aimually in the 
Philippines probably still exceeds that of fresh meat, 
however. The growth of such industries as mining has 
given the business a material filli]). as has tlu^ cosmojioli- 
tan life of Manila. 

American trade in the Philipj)ines luns wholly on its 
own power, without governmental loans or subsidiaries. 
Because it has increasing population behind it. this com- 
merce comprises one of the few bright spots in tlu^ for- 
eign trade of the United States. That is the slorv the 
magazines forgot.^ 



February, 1941 • 21 • 



Blast Furnaces Needed (from Page 6) 

per cent. The result is an alarming increase in ocean 
shipping charges, which in turn means a serious cut in 
the mine's profits. 

Although exceeded in potential importance by the 
Surigao deposit, the operations of the Saraar Mining 
Company are today the largest in the Commonwealth. 
Approximately 170,000 tons was produced in Septem- 
ber, 1940. Since operations started in February, 1938, 
the entire output has gone to Japan under contract. 

Geologically speaking, Samar Island is only half ex- 
plored, even today, so it is not surprising that the dis- 
covery of commercial iron deposits had to wait until 
1934. When investigation showed an immediate reserve 
of about 1,800,000 tons of hematite ore, averaging 60 
per cent iron, development work was organized at once. 
Operation is relatively simple and inexpensive, being 
accomplished with open cuts, a short railroad and end- 
less-belt conveyor that drops the ore directly into the 
hold of the ship that carries it to the blast furnace in 
Yokohama. 

Another important working deposit is at Larap, near 
the prosperous Paracale gold mines in southeastern 
Luzon. Repeated efforts to develop this property have 
given Larap a peculiar international history. In 1918, 
Japanese interests obtained a lease on part of the area 
and mined nearly 50,000 tons before the post-war col- 
lapse of steel prices terminated operations. Then, in 1923, 
a Chinese mining company hired F. R. Tegergren, a 
Swedish geologist, to make a survey. Although his report 
was favorable, the Chinese did not follow it up, so Teger- 
gren made a second survey in 1930. His report this time 
resulted in the organization of Philippine Iron Mines, 
Inc., by American industrial interests. 

October shipments to Japan from Larap totaled 31,000 
tons. Ore, which occurs in "lenses" ranging in thickness 
up to 60 feet, contains more than 85 per cent of iron and 
consequently commands a comparatively good price. 

Insular Mines shipped 30,850 tons to Japan during 
October, an increase of about 5,000 tons over the pre- 
vious month. This mine more than doubled its output 
in 1940. Similarly, Gold Star Mining reported a steady 
increase in its shipments throughout the year. However, 
October exports came to only 12,000 tons. Both of these 
latter mines are new^ developments and additional ore 
resources are constantly being discovered. 

The outlook for Philippine iron miners is not rosy, 
despite the ease with which they can sell their output. 
The price they can get from Japan is not high fit aver- 
aged about S2.25 a ton last year) : return is further 
reduced by the necessity of paying shipping charges on 
the ],500 to 2.000-mile haul to Kokura or Yokohama. 
There is no other practical market for the present. North 
China might l)e interested at some future date, but not 
today. 

The Commonwealth itself is almost out of the ques- 
tion. Not only is the demand for the hypothetical output 
of an Insular steel industry unimjjortant. but there is 



no good supply of the coking coal so essential for the 
operation of blast furnaces. 

For more than a century, it is true, small smelters 
have been operated in the vicinity of Angat and San 
Miguel, Bulacan Province. A few are still at work, pro- 
ducing native-style plowshares and points of cast-iron. 
But they constitute the only local utilization of Insular 
ore. If these operations have proved anything, it is that 
a Philippine iron and steel industry will require millions 
of dollars to establish. 

But the Commonwealth is not without those anxious 
to try. The suggestion has been made that hydro-electric 
resources be exploited to provide power for smelters, as 
is done to some extent in Japan. One mining official has 
proposed that the Commonwealth take the initiative, 
utilizing Maria Cristina Falls in Lanao Province, Min- 
danao, as a source of cheap power. The lowest electric 
rate prevailing in the Islands at present is about two 
cents per kilowatt; proponents of this plan believe a 
Maria Cristina Falls plant could produce power for about 
2/3 of a cent. 

Even without electricity, the project may not be im- 
possible. In the Mambulao district of Camarines Norte 
Province, gold mine officials overcame a difficult prob- 
lem in refining bulky gold-and-copper ore by erecting 
their own smelter. The resulting drastic reduction of 
shipping costs made it possible to market the output suc- 
cessfully in the United States. Similarly, in the event 
that blast furnaces were erected to handle Philippine iron 
ore, an economic market for pig iron might be founuJ in 
the Western Hemsiphere. Eventually, however, a native 
steel industry would be necessary to absorb the pro- 
duction. 

For the predictable present, however, the Philippine 
iron miners are helpless. Either they must continue to 
dispose of the output in Japan, or they must close down 
their plants, discharge their workers and go out of 
business. 



The national finances of the Philippine Islands are 
administer-ed under a budgetary system instituted in 
1917, which antedates by several years the budgetary 
system of the United States. 

• • • 

Long before Magellan came to the Philippine Islands 
in 1521, the Filipinos had established social and com- 
mercial contacts with the peoples of China, Japan, Borneo, 
the East Indies and India. 

• • • 

The Philippine Islands lie in the Pacific Ocean, slightly 
north of the equator. They can be reached from Cali- 
fornia in 21 days by boat or 4^2 days by Clipper. 



• 22 • Philippines 



p. 1. mm 



The Com niDii wealth 'rrcasiuy cites as a healthy feature 
of Phili|)pine finances the consistent decline in the gov- 
ernment's bonded indebtedness. During the last 11 years 
the total has fallen by nearly 827,000,000. Without de- 
ducting sinking fund payments made by the government 
annually, the total public debt in the same 11 years fell 
more than $17,000,000. The Treasurer reports that the 
total Philij^pine })ublic debt as of June 30, 1940 "was 
$73,453,500. Deduction of $35,970,099.72 in the sink- 
ing fund, however, leaves a net indebtedness of $37- 
183,400.28— the lowest in the history of Philippine gov- 
ernment finances. 



President Quezon recently awarded the Distinguished 
Service Medal of the Philippines to Major Hugh J. Casey 
of the V. S. Army Corps of Engineers, who has been 
assistant to the Commonwealth military adviser. The 
citation lists among Major Casey's contributions: aid in 
the development of the Corps of Engineers of the Philip- 
pine Army, an original survey of the hydro-electric re- 
sources of the archipelago, and the planning and execu- 
tion of harbor and flood control projects in the Islands. 
Major Casey has been assigned to a new^ post at Fort 
Lewis, Washington. 

• • • 

High government officials, headed by Secretary of 
Finance Manuel Roxas and Judge Vicente de Vera of 
the Public Service Commission recently inaugurated dou- 
ble-deck bus service in Manila. The new vehicles, oper- 
ated by the Manila Motor Coach Inc., have steel bodies 
and cost $6,000 apiece. 

• • • 

The Commonwealth government has undertaken a sur- 
vey to determine the exact prospects of the Insular rubber 
industry. Both production and manufacturing will be 
investigated. Most raw rubber now^ used by rubber shoe 
manufacturers is imported, although the existing plan- 
tations in Mindanao export their output to the United 
States. 

• • • 

Major General Basilio J. Valdes, Chief of Staff of the 
Philippine Army, recently assured students of the Vui- 
versity of the Philippines that the militarv authorities 
are fully aware of their res|)onsibilities and are doing 
everything in their power to provide an adequate national 
defense within the government's limited finances. 



U. S. High Commissioner Francis B. Savre and Presi- 
dent Quezon, accompanied by Davao and Cotabato pro- 
vincial officials, went to Parang, on Mindanao Island, 
recently to open the new Davao-Bukidnon highwav. The 
road not only facilitates travel between southern and 
northern Mindanao, but also opens vast tracts of agri- 
cultural land to settlers and homesteaders. The project 
cost the National Land Settlement Administration $500,- 
000. Road construction and public land subdivision will 
be pushed in Mindanao with government aid to increase 
the number of settlers and homesteaders. 

• • • 

Spain in the Philippines (from Page 19) 

Juan de Plasencia to study and report on native social 
organization, customs and laws so that he might govern 
more intelligently. This report, when finished, was dis- 
tributed among officials charged with the administration 
of justice, so that they might base their decisions on na- 
tive customs and unwritten law. 

On the other hand, friction between the military and 
the clergy was everlasting. Letters poured into the Span- 
ish throne from the missionaries, protesting against harsh 
treatment of the Filipinos by military and civil author- 
ities. The accused would usually answer these charges 
by blaming their accusers. They complained that the 
friars were ahvays meddling in non-religious affairs. 

'The Indian recognizes no superior but the friar, and 
he is much more attentive to commands of the friar than 
to those of the governor," Governor Dasmarinas declared 
in one of his letters. The friars for their part threatened 
to leave the Christian villages if their power was taken 
away. 

The Laws of the Indies promoted the agricultural side * 
of Philippine life, since governors and alcaldes (mayors) 
were required to encourage land cultivation and the 
planting of fruit trees. Most land grants definitelv stipu- 
lated that the new^ Spanish ow^ner must cultivate his land 
w^ithin a certain time, or lose it. The Spaniards brought 
horses and cows from Spain and Mexico, and imported 
new breeds of cattle from China and Japan. Many plants 
that we now^ consider indigenous to the Philippines were 
brought from America by the Spanish. Tobacco, corn, 
cacao, cotton, pineapples, maguey, peanuts, tomatoes, and 
squash are only a few^ 

The language of Spain still lives in the Islands. Several 
newspapers are published in Spanish, while Spanish cul- 
ture is perpetuated in the man\ church colleges, such as 
the University of Santo Tomas. directed by the Spanish 
Dominicans. The Royal Spanish Academy of Madrid has 
a corresponding branch in the Islands, the Academia de la 
Lengua de las Filipinas. These strong cultural ties 
w^rought by the friars will endure for \ears. for tliov have 
become integral parts of the life of the people. Spaiti 
has good reason to be j)roud of her ex(M^j)ti()nal work in 
all phases of Philippine life and culture. ^ 



Fehruary. 19111 • 23 • 



Can the Commonivealth 

Buy Public Health? (from Page 15) 

Occidental Negros' recorded deaths occurred in the 
barrios and haciendas. Only one out of every five had 
any medical treatment whatever. On the other hand, 
less than one-third of those dying within town limits 
were without attention. 

Looking at the other end of the life span, we find 
that Silay had 1,713 births during 1939. Physicians 
attended 62 confinements, nurses 128, and midwives 448. 
The remaining 1,025 occurred with benefit of unlicensed 
midwives or were unattended. 

When, at certain points in the United States, the record 
of deaths showed that 30 per cent of the dead were with- 
out medical attendance, the citizens raised such an out- 
cry that the government was forced to take remedial 
steps. We in the Philippines seem to be less vocal. Verily, 
health is purchaseable. 

There is still much room for improvement in health 
matters. To prove that diligence and public spiritedness 
can get results if encouraged and supported with funds, 
we need only point to the Philippine record in particu- 
lar fields. For one thing, smallpox has practically dis- 
appeared from the Islands since 1932, although it still 
constitutes a problem in some parts of the United 
Stdtes. 

Were the average health appropriation in the Com- 
monwealth to be raised to 50 cents per capita, Filipino 
scientists feel that truly great strides could be made in 
lengthening life expectancy. More training schools for 
nurses and sanitary inspectors could be opened, per- 
sonnel could be paid better, full-time service could be 
obtained, and health w^ork would become more attractive 
as a career. 

A step in this direction was taken recently when the 
Philippine National Assembly passed a law authorizing 
the President to create a Department of Health, charged 
with coordinating the work of the present Bureau of 
Health, the Bureau of Public Welfare, the hospitals, the 
Nutrition Institute and similar activities affecting health 
and w^elfare. Philippine physicians look forward to a 
marked improvement when this branch of the government 
gets into operation. 

But our most important need is still "just a little more 
mf)ney." ^ 

• • • 

The Phili])pine Archipelago is composed of 7,083 is- 
lands, the largest of which is Luzon. The ])opulation of 
the Philippines is 16.356.000, which is greater than the 
combined jjopulal ions of the New England states and 
California. 



Where Does the U. S. Stand 

in the Philippines? (from Pajrc 3) 

the American flag, but Congress is morally bound t<» 
observe the terms of the Independence Compact in all 
economic and political legislation affecting the Philij)- 
pines. The President of the United States is vested with 
sovereign power over the archipelago, and is authoriz(Ml 
to maintain contact and observation over Philijipinc 
affairs through the medium of the American High Com- 
missioner, who is now Francis B. Sa\ re. former Assis- 
tant Secretary of State. 

The United States President has the power of veto over 
all Philippine legislation affecting cundK y tariffs, im- 
migration, and other matters involving international 
obligations. Should grave national or international emer- 
gency arise, the United States President has th(» ultimate 
powder to suspend Philippine laws and act at his discre- 
tion, subject to the general legislation of the American 
Congress. 

The Department of the Interior, for its part, is charged 
with administrative jurisdiction over the conduct of re- 
lations between the Philippines and the United Slates 
Government. In actual practice that means exchange of 
information, communications, and contact between the 
Philippine Government and the United States Govern- 
ment. 

In general, the Interior Department acts as local "cor- 
respondent" for the High Commissioner and is the *N>ffl- 
cial advocate" before the American people of American 
interests in the Philippines. 

This Department serves, in conjunction with the De- 
partments of State, Treasury, Agriculture, Commerce, 
War and Navy, to determine administration ])olicy on 
Philippine questions through the medium of an interde- 
partmental committee on Philippine affairs. The inter- 
departmental committee acts to correlate the actions, 
attitudes and broad policies of the Federal government 
toward the Philippines. 

The Department of State looks after the foreign rela- 
tions of the Philippines. A division of Philippine affairs, 
under John Ker Davis, keeps close contact with the De- 
partment of the Interior and the Philippine Government 
for the supervision of this all-important phase of Philip- 
pine-American relations. 

The actual amount of detailed inter-communication and 
day-to-day exchange of affairs between the two govern- 
ments is tremendous, but the legal contacts, regardless of 
their extent, give only a fractional picture of the true 
depth of Philippine-American relations. 

We may thus easily draw a graph of Philipj)ine- Ameri- 
can statutory relations, but the much broader picture of 
basic relations cannot be drawn within a few pages. That 
relationship is based on a community of culture, institu- 
tions, language and forms of government, and a mutual 
history for the past 43 years. Changes in legal structure 
will have very little effect upon this basic pattern. ^ 



• 24 • Philippines 




You 
Manil 
in cell 



CIGARS of UNEXCELLED Oiial}ty 
SMOKE of UNSURPASSED VALUE 

Smoking good Manila cigars means 

enjoying the r/c/j pleasant aroma and the sweet 
) mellow flavor of famous Philippine Tobacco, 
rown in the valleys of eternal summer and 
sunshine. 



Manufactured entirely by hand under the strictest governmental 
regulation and sanitary control, MANILAS give you more smoking 
satisfaction for the price than any other cigars on the American 
market. 

These are the reasons why MANILA CIGARS are the choice of millions 
of smokers — tvhy doctors recommend them and connoisseurs prefer them. 

Ask for MANILAS . . . riie TeerUss Cigars 



PHILIPPINE TOBACCO AGENCY 

2362 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W-. 
Washington, D. C. 




f (ll. 1 



■t 




The Roosevelt Administration and the Phihppines 



All Editorial 



For forty years the United States has ruled the 
Philipj)ines witli wisdom, justice and beuelit to all. The 
four decades have been marked by phenomenal advances 
along the road to democratic freedom for the Filipinos. 
Universal education, women's suffrage, im|Moved public 
health, the democratic system itself — in all these and 
dozens of other lines we have made swift progress under 
American rule. But it is significant that not until the elec- 
tion of Franklin Delano Roosevelt as Presidejit of the 
United States in 1932 did we really come within reach 
of political independence, the lode-star of Philippine 
thought since the Islands came under alien rule in the 
Sixteenth Century. For this reason — and because most 
Filipinos have great personal admiration for the Presi- 
dent — the Commonwealth was gratified at Mr. Roosevelt's 
inauguration for an unprecedented third term. 

President Roosevelt's interest in, and understanding 
of, Philippine problems during the past eight years has 
been of the utmost human importance and historical 
significance. He has made possible the inauguration of a 
program that is without precedent. Only once before in 
modern history — in the case of Norway's separation 
from Sweden 35 years ago — have two nations come to 
the parting of the ways by mutual agreement and demo- 
cratic processes. For a great Power freely to give up a 
colonial possession and assist in setting it up as an in- 
dependent nation is entirely without parallel. 

It would be inaccurate to maintain that President 
Roosevelt alone is responsible for this. Unquestionably, 
it has been the w^ill of the American people. But the fact 
remains that your Chief Executive is the leader and spokes- 
man for a profound movement toward a better, more 
equitable way of life. Above all, he clearly understands 
the background and exact nature of Philippine aspira- 
tions. 

The Administration's interest in finding an equitable 
solution to Philippine problems did not cease with 
passage of the Independence Act in 1934 and the in- 
auguration of the Commonwealth the following year. 
Twice during the first half of the ten-year transition 
period, the President facilitated changes in organic laws 
to keep pace with changing world conditions. 

In the light of this long record of sympathy and under- 
standing, it is small wonder we Filipinos were gratified at 
President Roosevelt's reelection. A host of problems of 
vital importance to our national life await solution in the 
four years ahead. The entire future of liberal democracy 
may be changed by events over which we have no con- 



trol. At such a time we are fortunate to have wise, firm 
administrators in \\ ashington as well as in ^lanila. 

For instance, an ans\Ner must be found to the ques- 
tion: what will be the exact future relation of the Philip- 
pines to the United States? It is perfectly obvious that 
the ties between these two States can never be com- 
parable to those existing between America and China, 
Porttigal or Bolivia. Tradition, trade, politics, mutual 
interests, defense considerations — such cogent factors will 
for years prevent Philippine-American relations from 
assuming a conventional character. But what form will 
future relations take? That can be determined only 
through sympathetic negotiation and a thorough study of 
the human and political factors involved. 

How will the Commonwealth be defended? Final re- 
sponsibility for that answer falls on the shoulders of the 
President. It is becoming increasingly clear to the world 
that the Islands will be defended — by the American Army 
and Navy, and by the Filipinos themselves — but deter- 
mination of the role that each force shall play has not 
been made. In the years ahead — perhaps sooner than we 
anticipate — that decision must be reached, and w^e 
Filipinos are thankful that leadership in solving that 
question is in the hands of a man who has shown great 
ability and understanding in the past. 

There are important decisions to be made on the eco- 
nomic front. War in Europe and Asia has wrecked all 
the plans — apparently so w^ell laid in 1934 — for freeing 
Insular agriculture and industry of their dependence on 
the United States. As a result. 1940 saw^ an even greater 
than normal proportion of Philippine trade flow^ing to 
American markets, as shipments to Europe dw^indled al- 
most to nothing. Such a trend could hardly have been fore- 
seen; some new arrangement is essential if Common- 
wealth economy is to survive. Here, again, is a place for 
wise, understanding leadership in the White House. 

Come w^hat may, the Filipino people will always have 
an inherent admiration for the United States. Our gov- 
ernment is modeled after yours; our constitution con- 
tains your Bill of Rights: our peo{)le today face the 
same problems and perplexities your forefathers did in 
shaping a course for their new nation. For the example 
your nation has set. Filipinos are grateful. We are grate- 
ful, too, that during our vital transitory years since 1933 
there has been at the head of your State a wise and 
sympathetic administrator. We feel that his presence in 
the White House for the next four years w^ill be of the 
utmost importance to every Filipino. ^ 



Philippines 



Vol. 1 



No. 3 



The Roosevelt Administration and the Philippines 1 

A New Vocabulary, /. Weldon Jones 3 

''Our Course Is Clear," President Quezon 4 

Philippine Advertising, M, Farolan 6 

Strategic Manila Hemp, Rep. Fred L. Craivford 7 

One Language for All Filipinos, Dr, Leopoldo Y. Yahes - 8 

The Battle For Greece, Julius C, Edelstein 9 

The Story of the University, Dr, Melquiades /. Gamboa . 11 

History on a Postage Stamp, Victorino Paredes 14 

Lady Politicos, Pilar N. Ravelo 17 

Order of the Carabao, Col, Joseph M, Heller 19 

Coconut Oil, John B, Gordon 21 



Photo credit: Fenno Jacobs from Three Lions; 
Tomelden, Washington; U. S. Army Signal Corps; 
Harris & Evving; Philippine Tourist Bureau; Chap- 
lains' Aid Association; and Office of the President of 
the Philippines. 



Back Cover: San Agustin Church in Bacolod, Negros Occidental. 



Pmnission to reprint material appearing 
in "Pliilippin<'s" is gladly granted except in 
cases where use is specifically restricted. Proper 
credit will be appreciated. 




Students al the Philippine Miliiary Academy 
in Baguio follow a curriculum modelled after 
that of West Point. In the cover photo this 
issue. mend)crs of the graduating class, in pa- 
rade uniforms, participate in fioh' mass. 

In This Issue 

J. Weldon Jones was financial ailviser to the 
U. S. High Commission(ir in Manila until last 
Novemher, when he returned to Washington to 
accept his present post as Assistant Director 
of the Budget. 

• • • 

Fred L. Crawford, who views some interna- 
tional aspects of the Philippine hemp industry, 
is Congressman from Michigan and a member 
of the House Insular Affairs Committee. He 
visited the Islands in 1935. 

• • • 

Modesto Farolan is secretary of the Ad- 
vertising Clul) of the Philippines and editor of 
Commerce, published by the Philippine Cham- 
ber of Commerce. 

• • • 

John B. Gordon is secretary of the Bureau 
of Raw Materials for Anu rican Vegetable 
Oils and Fats Industries, with headquarters in 
Washington, D. C. For 20 years the bureau 
has been the source of statistical and economic 
information for the score of industries using all 
types of oils and fats. 

• • • 

Melquiades J. Gamboa is registrar of the 
University of the Philippines, in Manila. 

• • • 

Leopoldo Y. Yabes, who discusses the pos- 
sibility of a national language for the Philip- 
pines, is technical assistant and chief clerk of 
the Institute of National Language, in Manila. 

• • • 

Victorino Paredes is in charge of the Phila- 
telic Agency in the office of the Philippine Resi- 
dent Commissioner, Washington. Material on 
early history in his article came from 'The Postal 
History of Philippine Stamps,^' by John Murrav 
Bartels. 



PHILIPPINES 19 published by the ofrice of the Philippine Resident Commissioner to the U„it(.(l Slates. 
Editorial and eirculation offices at 2362 MasHatrhusetts Avenue Northwest, Washington, D. C. Entered 
ufi third elaKs matter in the WuHhirmton post ofliee on Deeember 1, 1940. Permit No. 50i5. Printed in U.S.A. 




A NEW VOCABULARY 



Are Philippine-American Dealings 
Handicapped byWorn-Out Words? 

J. Weldon JoneS/ Who Knows the 
Commonwealth, Thinks So. 



J. WKLDON JO\ES. Assistant Director of the Budget 
of the United Stales, speaks with a background of seven 
years as an American administrator in the Philippines 
when he urges a ''new \ (»cahuUu N to facilitate discussion 
of Philij)j)ine-American rehitions. 

"We are using loo many words full of powder smoke 
and too few based on sound conunon sense these days, " 
Jones observes with a Texas drawl. ''What is the mean- 
ing of 'manifest destiny", 'imperialism", 'exploitation' and 
'colonial j)olicy' in this day and age? Actually, terms like 
that are outmoded, and our thinking is hampered by a 
lack of new words to exj)ress new^ ideas. 

"The Filipinos suffer from the same inadequacy. Pat- 
rick Henry's 'Give me liberty or give me death' matched 
the feelings in their own hearts. In time, though, they be- 
gan to realize that they might be given liberty and death, 
but our vocabulary just doesn't contain the words to ex- 
press the proper solution. I think that a new- vocabulary 
is the first thing we must look for in adjusting Philip- 
pine-American relations." 

The new Assistant Director of the Budget is not one 
who believes that the Filij)inos "really do not want in- 
dependence." 

"Most Filipinos,"' he insists, "basically and earnestly 
desire independence. They wouldn't be worthy of their 
heritage or of our teaching if lliey didn't want inde- 
pendence." 

Jones' views on the Philippines carry special weight 
because he has no ax to grind. He went to the Islands as 
an appointee of President Roosevelt; he returned to take a 
new post just created by the same Chief Executive. He has 
no business stake in Manila, hence has no direct or in- 
direct financial interest in the future status of the Islands. 
His office has not been concerned with shaping policies, 
so he has no need to defend past or projected courses 
of action. Jones spent enough time in the Philippines to 
understand its problems thorough! \- yet he retained an 
American viewpoint that is at once statistical and sweep- 




J. JVeldon Jones^ 
Assistant Director 
of the Budget. 



ing. Above all. he has a genuine liking for the Filipinos 
themselves. 

"I don"t have the answers to all the questit.ns that 
hedge the future of Philippine-American relations."" Jones 
declares in his new W ashingtt)n office, across the street 
from the White House. "However. I do doubt that an 
abrupt breaking of those ties, w ith the I'nited Slates turn- 
ing its back on the Islands and walking away after 
nearly half a century of close and nuilually profitable 
give-and-take, is the proper solution. 

"The words we are using today to discuss the future 
come too much from the past. Too many are hold-overs 
from the dead era of imperialistic expansion. We still 
hold the thesis that one nation 'gives" and the other 
'takes'; the acid response, 'you can"t eat your cake and 
have it too', is all too common. Such expressions hamjxM- 
rather than simplify a solution of our problems. 

"It is assumed too often that the I'nited States still has 
something priceless to give away, and is withholding it 
from the Filipinos. Personally. I don"t know what it is. 

"I sav these things only as an individual looking at 
future relalio!is between m\ own country and the people 
of the Philippine Islands. I have no powc^r to change our 
official policies in the slightest, even if I knew the answers. 
Nevertheless, it is inspiring to me that people of another 
race have found something in u\\ Hag for which they are 
willing to die, even as Americans are."" 

The Philippines is not alone in facing an uncertain 
future, Jones believes. Every nation in the world is caught 
up in the same whirlpool. Consequently. America would 
do well, he feels, to hold all the friends it can. 

"You remember that old childhood jingle: Tl(^ who has 
a thousand friends has none to spare, but he who has an 



l ull} to Pai 



• 3 • 



'In The Midst 



of This 



Great Crisis 




Our Duty 
Is Clear 



A Survey of 
Philippine Defense Responsibilities 
by 

PRESIDENT 
MANUEL L. QUEZON 




President Quezon addresses the Philippine 
National Assembly. 



The PHILIPPINE COMMONWEALTH is fortunate in 
that it is still free from the armed conflicts now raging in 
several parts of the world. Let us hope that we may be 
spared the destructive effects of such conflicts. But our 
fate in this respect is linked with that of the United States. 
We are placed in that position not only by the very nature 
of our political relationship with that great nation, but by 
our common faith in democracy and by every noble im- 
pulse that animates our people. 

In these times of stress, our national security is natu- 
rally the greatest concern of our government, and we are 
doing all we can in this respect. But it must be admitted 
that with our own resources alone we are not now in a 
position to defend ourselves. 

The government of the United States has embarked 
upon a program of national defense which, we earnestly 
hope, includes the Philippines; for the defense of our 
country remains primarily the responsibility of the United 
States. This is as it should be, because so long as we are 
under the American flag it rests exclusively with the 
United States, and not with us, to determine whether we 
shall be at peace or at war. The Filipino people, desirous 
of cooperating with the United States in the execution of 
this defense program, are ready to bear their full share 
of that responsibility. To this end, I have assured the 
government of the United States in behalf of the Common- 
wealth, that the entire Philippines — its man power and 
material resources — are at the disposal of the United 
States in the present emergency. 

In my eagerness to expedite the organization of our 
national defense in cooperation with the United States 
and in the absence of available funds in the public 



treasury for that purpose, I have made representations to 
the Washington authorities requesting that the funds, de- 
clared by the Congress of the United States to be pay- 
able to the Philippine Commonwealth from the sugar ex- 
cise tax collections and from profits derived from the 
devaluation of the American dollar, be appropriated to 
be spent exclusively for our national defense under the 
direction of the United States. I have assurances that this 
matter is being given serious consideration. 

Since the establishment of the Commonw^ealth govern- 
ment, we have pursued a definite program designed to 
prepare our country for independence. This program was 
well under way at the outbreak of hostilities in Europe. 

The scheme of national defense for an independent 
Philippines is being executed as planned. Preparatory 
military training has been introduced in all elementary 
and high schools. In college and universities, instruc- 
tion in military science for the training of reserve oiTicers 
has been made compulsory. We have today a regular 
force consisting of 466 oflicers and 3,666 enlisted men, 
excluding the constabulary. This force has been organ- 
ized to undertake the training of the annual levies of 
trainees and to engage in the study and planning of the 
most effective employment of our trained man-power in 
an emergency. Our total reserve force numbers 132,000 
men organized into approximately 13 tactical divisions. 
The army and other national defense activities have been 
placed under the department of national defense, which 
was organized last year. 

The economic repercussions of fhc! present world war 
are being felt more and rnore acutely in the Phili|)pines. 
Our trade with many nations has been reduced, prices for 



4 • Philippines 



our export (•oiiiino(lili(\^ liavo gone clown, and freiuhl and 
insurance* rales lia\ (» inerc^ised more than 2(K) per eent. 
The resuk lias been a decline in national inconu* and pur- 
chasinu |)o\NtM-. 

1 hese chani:(\^ are hound to rt^ard our progress towards 
some of [he economic and social ohjectixes that we have 
set. l^ut we camiol ahandon th(\<e ohjectives. We nuist 
pursue iIkmu with grealtM- di^ermination. even if their 
achievement shonld entail luUlcd sacriiice. 

W e cannot now foretell the situation that will arise in 
the world after the war and it would he inadvisable to 
adopt economic phms hased on future conditions that 
might never materialize. In the meantime, we should con- 
tinue to minister to the health and welfare of our masses, 
intensify our eflorts to solve the unemployment prohlem. 
speed up the execution of our program of national de- 
fense, stnnulate the increase of our national income, in- 
sure a sunicient supply of food and clothing for anv 



eventuality, promote social justice, push forward the ex- 
tension of our educational facilities and the advancement 
of our I'ullural life, and safeguard fen* all our people the 
proper exercise of indi\ idual rights. 

Beyond any question, these are fateful days in which 
we live. ^ ital forces are reshaping political and sm'ial 
institutions the world o\ er. Fear and want are afllieting the 
human rai'e. Men and women e\ er\ where are scanning 
the future for securit) and a more jninnising life. In the 
midst of this great crisis, our duty is clear. By a solemn 
cox enant with Americ-a. the ad\ ent o{ our national inde- 
pendence is assured. We must prepare lor it: \\e must not 
lalter. Trusting in Divine Providence, we must nun e 
forward firndy and courageously to achieve our long- 
cherished ideal — the establishment of the Philippine Re- 
public — and to secure for our people prosperity, happi- 
ness and freedom under the shelter of peace and de- 
mocracy. ^ 




By M. Farolan 

PHILIPPINE 

-^duet tl5 in ^ 

Takes the 
AMERICAN ROAD 

Business in the Philippines is American business — 
American in trade-mark and American in method. 

Whether in a "sari-sari" store in some remote rural 
community or in a department store on Manila's Escolta. 
the processes and effect of modern American business 
methods are clearly visible. With pride, storekeepers point 
to the American origin of their better quality merchan- 
dise. Furthermore, it is common practice among non- 
American importers and dealers to try to pass cheaper 
foreign goods as American, either by glib sales talk or 
by the simple expedient of changing labels. 

Philippine business is American, particularly in pro- 
motion and advertising methods. Nowhere else in the 
Far East does advertising so closely approach the tempo 
and eSiciency of the United States as it has in Manila 
and throughout the Philippines — in newspapers and mag- 
azines, in neon signs and movie shorts, on billboards 
and moving vehicles; through catalogs, calendars and 
leaflets; over the radio, in shop windows and in house- 
to-house circulars. The popularity of advertised goods 
today show'S the general acceptance of the American 
system of salesmanship. The public has confidence in the 
value and force of that particular system's outstanding 
instrument, advertising. Not infrequently people say, "I 
never see that advertised," when refusing a brand offered 
at reduced prices. 

To what extent have the old-time Chinese storekeepers 
and peddlers — so important in the Philippine distribution 
system — been affected by American methods of busi- 
ness, particularly advertising? One need only look at 
the street peddler today to see the difference in the 
goods he sells and in the way he handles them. Whereas, 
at one time, he was c-ontent with his unsanitary system 
of dishing out foodstuffs, unmindful of dust or (lies, 
now he finds it necessary to wrap his cookies and cakes 
with cellophane, not only for sanitary protection but 
because it improves the appearance. Instead of seeing 
goods piled indiscriminately in Chinese stores, you now 
find them tastefully arranged in attractive window and 
shelf displays. Outside, you are dazzled bv arresling. 



though generally gaudy, neon signs. The Japanese out- 
does his Chinese competitor in advertising. 

Advertising is in such general use that even those who 
used to scoff now resort to it to gain an advantage. For 
instance, dealers in low-price goods, in phicing their ads, 
often do not identify their merchandise bv nationalitv or 
origin. Further, such ads are displayed along with those 
of American and Filipino firms and products. The ex- 
planation is obvious: the public prefers products with 
firmly established names and with American trademarks. 

Thus, it is not uncommon that, instead of previouslv 
displayed "Manhattan" shirts, the unwary reader finds a 
new ad for "Maukaltan" shirts. Of cousc*. that is still 
advertising, but is clearly a case wher(i method and aim 
ar3 illegitimate. However, this further proves th(» strong 
position American products h(dd in this market. 

Nearly everything manufactured and sold in America is 
today sold and used in the Philippines. Olfhand, vou 
can not name half a dozen exceptions, whether thev are 
tiny pins or bulky tractors and trucks. Furthermore, 
through modern advertising, consumption of American 
goods is increasing, so much sc) that, from nowhere on 
America's export list, the Phili|)pines has steadilv ad- 
vanced until today it is America's fifth best customer, 
the largest buyer of at least ten American products and 
the next best consumer of fiftecm others. Free trade, of 
course, is primarily resj)onsible for this, but this writer 
wishes to assign to modern American advert isin<i; methods 
a large measure of the credit. 

It is important to American manufactureis that Phil- 
ippine businessmen employ the same services and crafts- 
manship in their promotion work that they themselves 
know so well, for it simplifies market exj)loilalion, lowers 
selling costs and facilitates the development of new^ fields 
for future expansion. Business methods at work in the 

(Turn to Page 23 ) 




Amorictui scene on a Phili ppiiie liigJiivay. 



• 6 • Philippines 



Is Americans Supply of Precious Abaca ^ 



Fiber in Danger? 



By Rep. Fred L. Crau ford 



'X^OD/W I'^ili j)i!i(>s sliuxl upon the horizon of their 

destiny. I^'roin our \i(M\j)oint. they may either urow 
in inij)ortanee or rcM tMie entirely. \ et no man ean sav 
today in whieli diiiMtion tlieir future lies. There are 
too nian\ im|)ond(Mal)l(\s. too many faetors hevond the 
control of one man. one j)iM)j)Ie. or one leadershi|). The 
final decision d(^j)(Mids on the inler-action of many fac- 
tors, such as the airtiressive pressure of the land-lumur\ 
Jaj)anese, the Filipinos* internal surge toward ])olitical 
indej)endence. and the economic requirements of thi^ 
I nited Stales* Good i\ei»ihl)or policy, to mention just 
a few. 

While it is thus not possil)le to trace with assurance 
the future course of Phili|)[)ine-American relations, it is 
possible to asc(^rtain some trends, and from these trends 
to get some clue to the major developments themselves. 
Such ol)ser\ ations can he important auide-posts in de- 
termining our own ])olicy toward the Phili|)j)ines. 

It is highly noteworthy, for instance, that some Aveeks 
ago, the Conmionwealth Government sent a special com- 
mission to investigate the land-acquiring activities of 
the Japanese settlers at Davao, the Nipponese-dominated 
province in southern Mindanao Island. Davao is poten- 
tially one of the richest areas in the Islands, and because 
of the j)roduction of hemp, in which it excels, is also 
one of the most strategically important. The new com- 
mission was established to decide a \ery controversial 
subject, whether and to what extent certain lands in 
Davao have been acquired by the Japanese in defiance 
of Philippine law^ 

It has since been reported that the Commonwealth gov- 
ernment may institute prosecution against Japanese who 
may be found to hold title or control of land in viola- 
tion of Insular law designed to prevent the concentration 
of these lands in the hands of a nationalitv potentially 
hostile both to Filipinos and Americans. 

This particular problem is of special interest to me be- 
cause as far back as 193S I made a first-hand, although 
necessarily brief study of this entire situation. It is a 
much more important question today than it was then. 
At that time I was a member of the Congressional com- 
mittee which visited the Philippines to participate in the 
inauguration of a Commonwealth Go\ernment. All of 
us who witnessed that great occasion, climaxed by the 
administering of the oath to Manuel Quezon as the first 
l^residcnl of the (^onnnonw ealth. had a sense of the 




Fred L. Crawford of Michigan 

historic significance of the event. But we had onlv the 
barest foreboding of some of the de\elopnients then still 
in the inscrutable future. 

We all had heard of the concentration of Ja])anese 
innnigrants ( who were then — but are no longer — ad- 
mitt(Tl to the Philij)pines without restriction) on the 
island of Mindanao. The Japanese at Dax ao had alreadv 
grown ])roficient and famous for their cidtixation of 
abaca — Manila hemp- of which the Philij)j)ines is th(^ 
world's main prochirer. Dominating abaca prochict ion. 
the \ij)j)onese thus became an important i)otlhMUMk of 
a vital insular induslr\ . 

Attracted b\ this circumslanc(\ two of us \ isitt^l 
I)a\ ao. toured its abaca ])lantations. and niad(^ in- 
quiries concerning the own(M'shij) of th(^ land, llic Phil- 
ippine go\eriunent had alr(^ad\ aclc^l lo liinil further 
acquisition <>l land e\c(^pt 1)\ Tiiipino or \in(Mi(an cil- 

( Turn /() Paixc 21 I 




Moro 



Bicol 



Bontoc 



Tagalog 



O'ne Jlanaua^e For All Filipinos 



By Dr. Leopoldo Y. Yabes 



TThE movement for a Philippine national language, built 
out of native material, was born of a desire by the 
Filipinos to achieve fuller cultural and spiritual solidar- 
ity. Dr. Jose Rizal was among the first to realize the need 
for such a language. The movement culminated in a pro- 
vision of the Constitution of the Commonwealth requiring 
the National Assembly to take steps toward the develop- 
ment and adoption of a common national language based 
on one of the existing native tongues. The creation of the 
Institute of National Language in 1936 was the first 
step to carry out this mandate. 

'Tt is needless to elucidate the proposition that a people 
constituting one nationality and one state should possess a 
language spoken and understood by all," President 
Quezon pointed out in urging the establishment of this 
institution. 'Tt constitutes one of the strongest ties that 
bind the people and foster the unity of national ideals, 
aspirations and sentiments. ... It will take time, perhaps 
a very long time, but by painstaking and thorough study, 
w^ays and methods can be found for developing such a na- 
tional language." 

The President has repeatedly made it clear that the de- 
velopment of a native national language is not aimed at 
the liquidation of English and Spanish. 

"English is a practical necessity for us." he once stated. 
'Tt is the language by which w-e can make ourselves best 
understood by the Anglo-Saxon countries; it is the 
language which is helping us, and will help us, better to 
understand democratic principles and practices. . . . 

"The S])anish language still binds us to the Latin- 
Aniprican {)ef)ples. and the Spanish language will bind 
us to those peoples eternally if we have the wisdom and 
|)atriolism to preserxe it." 

fn ])ursuaii(e of his policN of [)romoting the literary 
use of all three tongues, the President has created a fund 
from which prizes will be given annually for the best lit- 
crar\ woiks in English. Spanish, and Tagalog. The first 
of these ( -oininonw caith Eiterarv Contests was condut ted 



bv the Office of the President last fall with commendable 
results. 

Tagalog was chosen as the basis of the national 
language because, of all the nati\e dialects in the Philij)- 
pines, it most nearly fulfills the r(*quirem(Mils set forth in 
the organic law of the Institute of National Language. 
It is widely spoken, has the most voluminous literature, 
is the best developed, and. by reason of its central geo- 
graphical location, has the best chanc(^ for growth. The 
aim of the Connnonwealth GovernmcMit is to develoj) this 
language into one that may truly be called national and 
Filipino. 

The organic law of the Institute [provides that the basic 
language should be enriched from the other native dia- 
lects, from Spanish and English, and from such classical 
languages as Greek and Latin. The assimilation into Taga- 
log of words from these languages will come in the 
natural course of its development: in fact, even without 
the aid of legislation, Spanish and English have already 
found their way into Tagalog and the other vernaculars 
to a considerable extent. 

The present concern of the Government is to spread 
this basic language throughout the country. If Tagalog 
has any capacity for growth ( and it undoubtedly has, 
otherwise it would not have attained its present degree 
to de\ elojjment ) , it will assimilate words from the other 
vernaculars once it is widely spoken throughout the 
country. The national language will not remain today's 
Tagalog. ( Had English, French or Spanish refused to 
grow, the} would have remained the undeveloped, pureK 
local languages that they were in their infancy.) 

Tagalog will in due time become Filipino. As language 
is the expression of a people's soul, it will express the 
soul, not of the Tagalogs alone, but of the whole Filipino 
people. It may take a long time and arduous effort to 
achieve this end, as the President pointed out. hut the 
project is worthy of all the expense and the sacrifice neces- 
sar\ to |jnsh it through. By execulixe order, therefore. 

( Turn to Pane IH I 



8 • Philippines 





UUC^ inC DMI I Lt 

FOR GREECE 

Have a Lesson 
FOR PHILIPPINE STRATEGISTS? 

By Julius C. Edelstein 



The strat04i;ic implications of the i)rolonii:ed battle be- 
tween Greek and Italian forces in the mountains of 
Albania have not been lost upon the men in Washington 
and Manila who are responsible for the defense of the 
Philippines. The Greek example has encouraged those who 
have loiiiT felt that the Islands could be held against an 
invader, provided that certain conditions were met. 

This problem of defending the Philippines has a back- 
ground of skepticism which has in recent years taken the 
form of a contention that the Commonwealth is an ''in- 
defensible salient," a hostage which the United States has 
been forced to yield to potential Far Eastern aggressors. 
From this viewpoint, the Philippines has constituted a 
vital weak link in the American defense chain. 

The Battle of Greece has exploded this line of reason- 
ing among informed Americans and Filipinos. Under the 
leadership of the United States, and with unreserved 
Philipj)ine-American cooperation, the Islands are now 
seen as a potential buttress of strength rather than an 
element of weakness in the Far East. For the Filipinos, 
this change may mean freedom from fear: for the United 
States it may mean a rampart where aggression in the 
Pacific can be challenged and halted. 

To pass from the very general to the more particular, 
the Filipinos now have before them an example — com- 
parable in many pertinent ])oints — of how a small na- 
tion, fighting on favorable terrain, can successfully meet 
a force superior in number and equipment, but inferior 
in incentive and organization. 

The exj^erience of Holland. Belgium and France makes 
it oln ious that mere determination and courage cannot 
halt a highly-trained, superbly equipped, mechanized 
force with command of the air and operating on simple 
terrain. Norway likewise showed that courage can be 
negated by guile and treachery, and that unprepared 
forces (the British Expeditionary Force in Norway) are 
at a tremendous disadvantage against an army that has 



carefully foreseen emergencies and has painslakinglx 
})lanned every step of a campaign. 

The Commonwealth, for example, combines the rugged 
terrain of Norway Avith the insular position of Great 
Britain. It has a loyal, unified population of 16.000.000. 
of whom 132.000 have already been trained in the rudi- 
ments of military science. And the Islands have the finest 
natural fortifications in the Far East. These advantages 
are available for whatever use and strategy American and 
Filipino leaders devise. 

The question then becomes, what specific conditions 
are necessary to give the Philippines the defensive powers 
which Greece has utilized with historic effect against 
Italy? What forces must be marshalled to present the 
same impregnable front in the Far East that Greece has 
presented in the Mediterranean? 

Sea power stands out as the most important military 
factor that the Mediterranean and the Western Pacific 
have in common. The British Navy has kept open the 
supply lines to Greece, while it has constantly threatened 
and harrassed communications between Italy and Albania. 
As regards the sea lanes to the Philippines, the United 
Slates has a naval problem which is admittedly difficult, 
but certainly not insoluble. American sea ])ower seems 
capable of operating in the Far East with almost as 
much freedom as Britain's fleet has won in the Medi- 
terranean. 

Control of the air is a further factor. As h^ig as the 
Philippine skies are unsafe for enemy ])lanes. defense 
forces on the ground can move to meet an aggressor with 
relative freedom. Ample fighting craft is the answer to 
this question. This, too, is a problem of procurement and 
supply which American officials must consider and decide. 

On the ground, trained Filipinos totaling more than 
132.000 men — a number increasing as the montlis go by 
— are ready for swift mobilization at strategic locations 
throughout the Philippines. Preparations for ci\ il de- 

( Turn to Pime 21 I 



• 9 • 




♦ 10 • Philippines 



. . . to give professional and technical training . . . 

The Story of the 



^~i^\\K Pliilippiiit' L(^iiislaliire, 
1 ecu^iiii/iii*; ihe need for an in- 
stitution to pro\ ide "advanced 
instruction in literature, philos- 
ophy, the sciences and arts, and 
to give professional and techni- 
cal training", on June 18, 1908 
passed an act known as the I'niversity Charter, founding 
the University of the Philippines. Estahlished with the 
two-fold ohjectiv(* of |)romoting culture and giving ]M'o- 
fessional instruction, the University opened its doors to 
a handful of student in the summer of 1908. Faculty 
members included some of the pioneer American educa- 
tors in the Islands. Today, the I'niversity. composed of 
17 schools and colleges, has an enrollment of about 8.000. 

The main campus covers approximately 25 acres near 
the center of iManila. while junior colleges have been 
established in the cities of Cebu and Raguio. The total 
fixed assets of the University approach $4,000,000. 

The University Library, one of the finest of its kind in 
the Orient, has the largest collection of books in the 
Phili]3pines next to the National Library. Some of the 
University buildings, including Villamor Hall and the 
Library, are considered outstanding examples of Philip- 
pine architecture. 

The University of the Philippines is to be moved to 
Quezon City, the new northern suburb of Manila, in 19 12. 
The CommonweaUh government has appropriated 
$8,750,000 for this project. The new site will not only be 
ample for the present University facilities, but w^ill be 
large enough for any additional buildings in the predict- 
able future — dormitories, an amphitheater, an enormous 
library building with an auditorium to accommodate 
2,500 persons, tennis courts, swimming pools and a 
gymnasium. 

The University of the Philippines is organized like an 
American university. Administration, the plan of study 
and methods of instruction are based on American 
models, modified to suit local conditions and the peculiar 
needs of the country. English is the exclusive medium of 
instruction, although courses are offered in Tagalog, the 
national language of the Philippines, Spanish, French, 
German, Chinese and Japanese. 

Studies at the University cover a wide range: agricul- 
ture, business administration, education, engineering, 
forestry, law, liberal arts, medicine and public health, 
nursing, dentistry, pharmacy, veterinary medicine, music 
and fine arts. 

Following the example of progressive American uni- 



versities- lirst-\ear students en- 
roll in the College of Liberal 
Arts, giving them a year in 
Avhich to decide upon a field of 
concentration. 

The University faculty at 
present has 715 members. The 
most inn)ortant hold doctors' and masters* degrees from 
American and European universities, and a system of 
fellowships enables junior members of the faculty to 
jnirsue advanced studies in the I iiited States. Specialists 
from European and American institutions are engaged as 
exchange professors. 

Characteristic of the democratic principles that are 
the United States' greatest contribution to the Philippines 
is a clause of the L^niversity charter which provides that 
**no student shall be denied admission to the t niversity 
by reason of age. sex. nationality, religious belief or 
political afli'liation." As a result, the student body is 
democratic in fact as well as in theory. Young men and 
women of many nationalities — Americans, Spaniards- 
Chinese, Japanese, Siamese, and Russians — matriculate 
with Filipino students. Of different faiths and divergent 
ideologies, their association is one of tolerance. Student 
councils have an important role in the government of the 
Ihiiversity and its constituent colleges. 

Co-educational, the University is a witness to the revo- 
lutionary change in woman's part in Philippine life. In 
some fields the girls have almost entirely crowded out 
men students. During the 1939-1940 scholastic year almost 
the entire enrollment in the colleges of Pharmacy and 
Education were women, who also outnumbered men in 
the study of music and dentistry, and in graduate work. 
Women studied in the colleges of Agriculture. Engineer- 
ing and Veterinary Science; in April. 1940, the University 
conferred upon a woman graduate the degree of Doctor 
of Veterinary Medicine cum laude. 

Extra-curricular activities are emphasized in a well- 
rounded program for all students. Basketball, tennis, base- 
ball, soccer and swimming are popular. So is dancing, 
but it is regulated by the University administration. Or- 
ganizations may hold only one dance each semester, and 
only after having presented a literary program. No dance 
may be held wdthin three months of Commencement, to 
prevent interference w^ith studying. 

A number of student publications are edited on the 
campus. The most important is the Philippine Collegian. 
the only college weekly in the Philippines. There is 
a seniors' annual and a literary annual, wdiile manv 

( Turn to Page 2'^ I 



University of the 
Philippines 

By Dr. Melqiiiades J. Gamhoa 



• 11 • 




• 12 • Philippines 



• 13 



PHILIPPINE HISTORY 



on a 



POSTAGE STAMP | 

By Victorino Paredes | 



The student of philately is also a student of history, 
whether he likes it or not. In no case is this truer than of 
the man who follows the progress of the postal system in 
the Philippine Islands — administered in turn by 
Spaniards, Americans a n d 




Filipinos— as it is reflected in » ^ited sw:s okamHTcv 
its adhesive stamps. Un the lace 
of these tiny colored squares of 
paper, and in the circumstances 
that led to their appearance, is 
all the romance, tragedy and 
drama of the Filipinos' 400- 
year connection with Western 
civilization. 

So far as is known, the first mention of the word 
"postage" in regard to the Philippines appears in a 
Spanish decree of June 16, 1803, which referred to pay- 
ment for franking the carriage of letters to the Islands. 
Thirty-five years later a decree ordered the concentration 
of the administration of mails at Manila, and the receipt, 
direction and delivery of correspondence both for the 
interior and abroad. The proof that correspondence had 
passed through the central office was to be a cancellation 
stamp with MANILA ISLAS FILIPINAS and the date in 
a circle. 

These references, however, antedate the introduction of 
adhesive stamps, which appear to have been first at- 
tempted in 1847. Plates were made and stamps printed in 
four values, the design differing for each. Apparently 
these stamps did not satisfy the Spanish oflicials, for 
they were never used and are still supposed to be in the 
archives of the Bureau of Posts at Manila. From a histori- 
cal point of view, as the first stamps for the Philippines, 
however, they are of interest and value to philatelists. 

By a royal decree of January 12, 1853, promulgated 
by a decree of the Captain General of the Philippines on 
December 7, 1853, the first postage stamps for the Philip- 
pines to be put in actual use were ordered. Plates ac- 
cordingly were engraved at Manila and the stamps were 
released to the public on February 1, 1854. The designs, 
crude copies of Spain's own issue, disappointed Spanish 
officials, for on September 1, 1854 (probably soon after 
the arrival in Spain of the first copies of the stamps) 
another Royal decree directed that all letters addressed to 



Spain or foreign countries should bear stamps madc^ in 
Spain. Only those for interior use might be |)rintcd at 
Manila. 

A provisional one-real issue became necessary in 1863 
owing to a temporary shortage of stamps for us(» abroad. 
The local authorities, unable to wait for a nrw suppK 
from Spain, ordered plates made and stamps printed at 
Manila. The Spanish government was requested, in s|)ite 
of its decree, to accept this provisional issue. Faced with 
a fait accompli, the authorities in Spain were obliged to 
agree, and the issue remained in use to the end of No- 
vember, 1863. 

Spain had a revolt on September 28, 1868, and two 
days later the Revolutionary Committee ordered the 
legend "Habilitado por la Nacion" surcharged on all 
postage, telegraph and other stamps. Twenty -seven of tlu* 

necessary hand stani|)ing dies 
were sent to Mani^la. where thev 
arrived in December, 1868, and 
were used to surcliarge the 
stamps on hand. Several types 
of this surcharge were used in 
Spain. It should be noted, how- 
ever, that those sent to the 
Philippines were all of the so- 
called Viscaya style. 
Spain's tangled politics during the next 20 years was 
reOected in the Philippines' stamps. These included is- 
sues celebrating the Provisional Government, the brief 
reign of King Amadeo, the subsequent republic, and the 
selection of Alfonso XII, young son of the deposed Queen 
Isabella, as king. Alfonso's portrait appeared on suc- 
ceeding issues until 1885. His posthumous son was born 
May 17, 1886, and became Alfonso XIII, but. curiously 
enough, not until January 1, 1890 did he appear on the 
stamps of the Philippines. The portrait remained in use 
until the Islands passed to the United Stales after the 
Spanish-American War of 
1898. 




A Royal decree of June 
11, 1896, provided that, 
beginning with the next 
issue (series of 1898- 
99), there should be uni- 
form stamps for Cuba, 
Puerto Rico and the 
Philippines. Accordingly, 
a new design was issued, 
that for each colony 
differing only in the name 
in the upper label. As the war with the United States ex- 
tended to the Philippines, and was further complicated 
by trouble with the Filipino Insurgents, postal affairs of 
the 1898-99 period became chaotic. In addition to the 
stamps issued by Spain and the stamps of the United 
States used by the American troops in the Islands, there 



UNITED STATES OFAMEPICA 

PPT " 




• 14 • PhiKppines 



wen^ iilso llic)S(* used by the so-called IxovDiulionarv Gov- 
ermncnl iiiuler (KMieral Einilio Aguinaldo. 

For at least ten inonlhs after February 1. 1899. the 
Filipinos were under the control of neither the Spanish 
nor tlu^ Americans. Their stamps, therefore, seem to be 
more or less on the same footing as those of the Con- 
federate States of America. The general opinion is that 
ihey were issued for legitimate purposes and that they 
were in use while ihe Aguinaldo government lasted. They 
thus ha\(' a j)hilal(^lic as well as historic interest whicii 
should apj)eal to American collectors. 

American troops in the Islands continued to use United 
States stamps until October 1. 1903. when the Postmaster 
General of the United States, through the War Depart- 
ment, ended the practice. In 18cS9. some current United 
States postage stamps, diagonally surcharged PHILIP- 
PINES, were issued for use in the Philippine Islands. 
During the next two years, these were supplemented bv 
surcharging other values. Stamped envelopes, wrappers 
and postal cards of the United States were also similarly 
surcharged, as well as current Special Deliverv and Post- 
age Due stamj)s. 

In SGptend)er, 1902. a temporary shortage of one-cent 
stamps resulted in the use of the one-cent Postage Due 
for local mail, in and near Manila. This provisional use, 
however, was only from Septendier S to 19. 1902. 




The first unsurcharged current issue printed purposely 
for the Philippines after the American occupation was 
released early in 1903. These stamps, '*the Old Current 
Issue," are of ordinary size, elaborately designed with 
the coat of arms of the Philippines. Above the crest are the 
words, PHILIPPINE ISLANDS running from left to 
right in an arch, with UNITED STATES'OF AMERICA 
directly beneath. This set has portraits of great Ameri- 
cans, the Filipino patriot. Dr. Jose Rizal, and early Span- 
ish navigators and explorers. This issue was in constant 
use until July 31, 1940, w^hen the President of the Philip- 
pines, at the suggestion of the Secretarv of Public Works 
and Communications, withdrew it from sale to preserve 
its philatelic value. 

During early 1935, another current issue was released 
by the Philippine Government. Still in use. it is know'U 
as the New Current Issue or the Pictorial Issue. The de- 
signs of all fourteen stamps of the set, ranging from tw^o 
centavos (1 cent) to five pesos ($2.50). are both educa- 
tional and historical, showing the growth of Filijiino fine 



arts talent since the early Spanish regime. The one. two. 
four and five-peso denominations are painstakingly done 
in two colors, a system only a few countries have at- 
tempted because it requires slow and very careful handling 
of the paper and presses. 

Shortly after the Pictorial Issue appeared, the Com- 
monwealth Government was inaugurated in the Philip- 
pines. By order of the newly elected President. Manuel L. 
Quezon, toward the end of 1935 all unsold pictorial 




stamps were surcharged horizontally with the word 
"Conunon wealth.'' 

To connnemorate the inauguration a set of five stamps 
was issued portraying the Temples of Human Progress. 
In December. 1935. another set was released to mark 
the first trans-Pacific airmail fiight. The two stamps of 
this set are believed to be the only gold-surcharged stamps 
in existence. 

On June 19. 1936, the Philippine Bureau of Engraving 
and Printing successfully printed three stamps in celebra- 
tion of the 75th birthday of Dr. Jose Rizal, Filipino pa- 
triot. ( Prior to that date, all Philippine stamps were pre- 
pared in Washington.) 

The Philippine Assembly proposed another set on the 
first anniversary of the Commonwealth, and on November 
15, 1936. three stamps were released with the portrait of 
the first President. Manuel L. Quezon. 

The thirty-third Eu<?haristic Congress held at Manila 
on February 3 to 7, 1937 was marked by a set of six 
stamps. These bore the map of the Philippines, with a 
white star representing Manila. The shining rays of this 
star, spreading over the entire archipelago, symbolized 
the light of Christianity in the Philippines. 

Since no special stamps celebrated the 1937 or 193o an- 
niversaries of the Commonwealth, on November 15. 1939. 
a series of three sets, of three values each, was issued. The 
first set shows the Triumphal Arch schedided to be 
built at Manila from proceeds of the sale of these particu- 
lar stamps. The second pictures show^ Malacanan Palace, 
official residence of the President of the Philippines. Tln^ 
third set shows President Quezon taking his oath of oflici^ 
before Ramon Avancena. Chief Justice of the Suprenu^ 
Court of the Philippines. ^ 

• o • 

Further information on (Commonwealth stam|)s is a\ ail- 
able from the Philippine Philatelic Agenc\, Washington. 
D. C. 



15 • 




Filipino WOMEIN have played an inii)()rtaiit role in 
Phili|)])ine politics since lliey earned the ri^iht to vote in 
1937. The nuid-slinging and hroken homes predicted by 
the pessimists failed to materialize: instead women have 
been a consistent force for honest govermnent. The hand- 
ful who hold elective positions have been active in ])ro- 
moting |)ul)lic health and welfare, mass education, 
elimination of \ ice and the strengthening of family ties. 

More than half a million women went to the polls in 
1937, their first chance to vote. Forty-two of the 17 Philip- 
pine provinces elected 306 women to their councils: 13 
women won seats as vice-mayors: two unseated veteran 
politicians in mav(Hality races; and three candidates for 
provincial boards led all other candidates in nuniber of 
vetes received. But the most spectacular \ ictory for the 
lipstick brigade in 1937 was the election of winsome Miss 
Carmen Planas (portrait above), a I niversitv of the 
Philippines co-ed, to the Manila city council. 

The December 1940 elections confirmed this victory. 
Miss Planas not only was re elected, but she actually 
topped all the council candidates. The opposition ran 24- 
year-old Miss Piedad Montenegro for the council, hoping 
to undermine Miss Planas' feminine vote. To the dismay 
of the ])oliticians. both women won seats. Miss Monte- 
negro, a trained accountant, aims to balance the city's 
school budget during her incund)ency. 

Women's entry into politics has put new life and color 
into local elei lions. Wives of candidates stump the barrios 
and remote villages on behalf of their husbands. 

''You say mv husband could be elected if he sup|)orted 
the majority part\." the wife of one minoritx candidate 
for governoi- told a crowd. ''Rut if he did. who would 
make up the minorilx that d(^f(Mids Mnir rights and works 



for your welfare?" The candidate \Non in a landslide. 

Even the First Lady. Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon, 
astounded veteran politicians by publicly stating her 
|)reference for a candidate who was losing to a ^vell-known 
utilities owner. The speech turned the tide, and Mrs. 
Quezon's candidate was swept into office. 

A governor seeking a third term was urged b\ political 
bigwigs to withdraw his candidacy to aid "party unit\**. 

**We prefer an honorable defeat.*" his determined wife 
told them. "We are poor, but we prefer to continue 
lighting rather than be humiliated by a withdrawal. \S'e 
expect nothing more than justice and we are ready to 
fight." The outburst, duly reported by the press, brought 
the husband an even greater majority than he had re- 
ceived in the two previous elections. 

CTOvernors. mayors and other elective oflicials in se\ eral 
provinces who tolerated "jueteng" lone form of 
gambling ) lost in the last elections because of an "unseat- 
corru|)t-oiricials*' drive carried out by clubwomen, stn-ial 
workers and women teachers. 

Active feminine participation in politics and jniblic 
affairs gained momentum during the 1940 elec-tion cam- 
paign as the number of registered women voters ap- 
proached the million mark. More women ran for office 
than ever before: two even tried for governorships, but 
lost to more seasoned politicians. Three were elected 
mayors, three more won places on provincial boards, four 
were elected to city councils ( in Manila. Baguio and 
Davao). several are now vice-mayors, and about 500 
gained seats on local councils. 

President Quezon, shortly after the December election, 
congratulated the women of the Philippines on the good 
showing made by their candidates, and said he would 
like to see more women run for elective posts. Such en- 
couragement from the Chief Executive immediateh 
strengthened the determination of women's groups to 
name their own candidates for the National Assembly. 

While women do not yet go in for open lobbying, thev 
achieve their end indirectly by going after the officials 
they have elected to office and keeping tabs on their ac- 
complishments. Women frequently approach the wives of 
officials and. through them, get better legislation and law 
enforcement. The ^vomen's greatest force for better 
legislation is the combination of the Women's Club, the 
Philippine Association of 1 1 niversitv W^)men and the 
League of Women Voters. These three formidable or- 
ganizations are educating w^omen in politics and training 
them for better citizenship. Men with ])olitical ambitions 
have suddenly found that their wives' affiliation to one 
of these groups is almost as important as their own party 
connections. 

As yet. no women have reached the National Assembly, 
but plans are afoot to nominate four women in time for 
the national election in December. Should they win one 
or more seats, they can at last hope to change the obso- 
lete laws which for years have ignoied their rights as 
indix iduals. Filipino women, armed with the \ ()tt\ arc^ out 
t(^ car\(^ a |)ermanenl pla( (^ for themscl\(\^ in public life. ^ 



• 17 ^ 



One Language for All (from Page 11) 

public and private secondary and normal schools in 1940 
began offering courses in the national language. The Uni- 
versity of the Philippines has had such courses for more 
than two years, and private colleges have followed suit. 
It has been proposed to make Tagalog the medium of in- 
struction in the primary grades in 194-6 or soon after; 
whether the project will be carried out depends on the 
officials who shape our educational policies. Of course, 
English will remain indefinitely as the medium of instruc- 
tion in the secondary and normal schools and in the col- 
leges and universities, because the national language will 
be deficient for higher instruction until it has attained 
fuller growth. By Philippine legislative enactment, Taga- 
log will become, side by side 
with English and Spanish, an 
official language on July 4, 
1946. The advancement Avill 
give official status to the na- 
tional language of a people 
on the day of their birth as a 
sovereign and independent 
nation. The action should 
also accelerate future de- 
velopment of the tongue. 

It must be admitted that 
some language experts of 
world importance doubt the 
workability of the whole 
scheme. H. L. Mencken be- 
lieves that "there is not 
much likelihood that any such artificial tongue [a na- 
tional language based on one of the existing native 
languages] will be perfected in the near future, or that it 
will be used by the generality of the Filipinos." Mencken 
is mistaken, of course, in assuming that the national 
language to be developed will be an artificial speech. 
The present plan is to disseminate the basic language in 
its present form. The process of growth and enrichment 
will follows. 

As regards the objection that non-Tagalog-speaking 
Filipinos will find it as difficult to learn Tagalog as to 
learn English or Spanish, an important psychological 
l)oint should be kept in mind. Philippine languages are 
cognate, agglutinative languages, belonging to the same 
Austronesian family. English and Spanish are inflectional 
and not akin to any Philippine language. Experience 
shows that it is generally easier for a person born to one 
agglutinative language to learn another than to learn an 
inflectional tongue. Finally, if the Filipinos have suc- 
ceeded in mastering both English and Spanish, as their 
considerable creative literary work in these languages 
indicates, there is no reason why they cannot acquire a 
language indigenous to a great portion of them and 
cognate to the rest without difficulty. ^ 

• 18 • Fhiiippines 



-flu/au -ktom -f/omQ 




Tagalog hoy 



Efforts by the office of the Philippine Resident 
Commissioner in Washington to unify Filipinos in tlie 
United States, Hawaii and Alaska have resulted in the 
organization of Community Councils in every city and 
locality with a large Filipino population. Tculay, 26 
councils in the United States and one in Alaska maintain 
contact between these nationals and the Philippine Res- 
ident Commissioner in Washington. Through these or- 
ganizations, problems of general Filipino welfare receive 
official attention. 



West Coast Communitv Councils in the oast two 
years have put particular emphasis on economic welfare 
and elevation of the living standard of large numbers 
of Filipinos in that area. At annual inter-connnunitv con- 
ferences, national, social and business problems con- 
fronting the communities are considered. Encouraged by 
a successful meeting last December, W(*st Coast Fili|)inos 
now plan an even bigger convention at Oakland in June. 
This will be followed by a Middle Western conference to 
include Chicago, Detroit, Denver, Kansas City and St. 
Louis, and later by an Eastern meeting comprising Wash- 
ington, New York City, Newark. Philadelphia and 
Boston. 



Filipinos along the Pacific Coast are campaigning 
for funds to establish community centers. This movement 
started in San Francisco, where plans to build a S30,000 
center are making steady progress. This building will 
serve as a commercial, social and cultural center for 
Filipinos in the Western States, as well as for visitors 
from the Islands. It may also house Philippine govern- 
ment agencies. To date, S3,000 has been raised. 



Seeking to develop the cultural and intellectual back- 
ground of Filipinos in the United States, monthly round- 
table forums are now being sponsored by a number of 
Filipino professionals and students, with the support 
of Community Councils. The movement was initialed in 
Chicago, and was later taken up by the Washington 
group. Forum subjects are voted upon in advance"^ so 
that members of the community can "study up." Prob- 
lems affecting Filipinos are considered, and a discussion 
of diversified national subjects, including arts and his- 
tory, usually follows. These round-table talks also foster 
better relations and understanding with the American 
public, and Americans are invited to take jxuL ^ 



Mizctm. ORDER OF THE C ARAB AO 

— — — ^— — By Col. Joseph M. Heller — 



H ALF A DOZFN AiiuMic an arniv ofTicers. irked at the 
'"face"' accruing lo nienilnMs of the Order of the Dragon, 
which Allied leaders had organized after the Boxer Up- 
rising in China earlier that year, met in the Army and 
Navy Cluh at Manila in 1900 and established their own 
Military Order of the Carabao. The name was meant to 
be a joke; the lowly carabao. hastily conscripted to drag 
artillery and supply wagons over jungle trails, was the 
most useful and damned animal in the Philippines. To 
the surprise of everyone involved, the Order found almost 
instant support. Still grcnving in strength, today it is the 
most important fraternal group in the I nited States 
armed forces. 

Proof of its popularitv is to be found in the annual 
"Wallows'' at Washington. The guest list includes Army. 
Navy and Marine Corps chiefs, members of the Cabinet, 
important Congressmen, and prominent writers. Marked 
by skits, songs and ofT-the-record talks, the Wallow is 
considered the outstanding social-military affair of the 
Washington season. 

The Carabaos are a distinguished group. Every chief 
of staff l)ut one since 1900 has been a member. General 
Pershing and most of the corps and division conunanders 
af the American forces in the World War belonged. 
The High Command of the Army, Navy and Marine 
Corps today is riddled with Carabaos. Secretary of War 
Henry L. Stimson, by virtue of his former position as 
Governor General of the Philippines, is an Honorary 
Carabao. 

The Order's constitution at first specified that member- 
ship should be limited to (commissioned officers of the 
Army or Navy who served in the Philippines between 
1898 and July 4, 1902, the official dates of the Spanish- 
American War and the subsequent insurrection. Later, 
however, the requirements were liberalized. At ])resent 
the Order is open to "any person who shall have honor- 
ably served in the Philippine Islands between May 1. 
1898 and July 4, 1913. both dates inclusive, or who 
participated in any campaign or expediti(m in the Phil- 
ippines for which a campaign medal is authorized by the 
War l)ej)artment. as a connnissioned ollicer of the United 
States Regular or Volunteer Army, Navy, Marine Corps, 
Coast Guard, Public Health Service, or as a Naval Cadet 
or Midshij)man. or as Acting Assistant Surgeon. Contract 
Surgeon. Contrac^t Dental Surgeon, or anv person who 
so served as an eidisted man in tlu^ United States Army, 
Nav>. Marine Cor|xs. Coast Guard, or Public Health 
Service and subsequently received a commission for 



appointment in any of the above named classes." These 
men have the rank of Veteran Carabaos. 

A second category — Companero Carabao — includes 
men who served in the Islands after July 4, 1913. 
Sons of Veteran. Companero or Associate Carabaos are 
eligible for membership as Ternero (calf) Carabaos. 
Carabaos of all classes totaled 994 at the end of 1940. 

The Main Corral of the order is at Washington. D. C. 
and a smaller Corral meets annually in San Francisco. 

The Military Order of the Carabao recognizes the 
serious nature of national defer.se. past and present, 
but it has so far refused to take itself or its ideals too 
seriously. The annual Wallows are happy affairs, at 
which national leaders and their policies occasionally 
come in for unmerciful ribbing. The 1913 program, in 
fact, so ridiculed the international program of President 
Wilson and Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan 
that it drew a stinging official rebuke from the \^'hite 
House. 

Subsequent Wallows have never quite reached that 
level, but they are still popular in Washington and 
are anticipated with great relish. The 1941 gathering was 
held at the Willard Hotel, Washington, on February 8. 
Speakers included the Secretary of the Navy and the 
Undersecretary of War. 

At the annual meeting late in December, 1940. officers 
for the current year were elected. These included: 

Grand Paramount Carabao (National Commander), 
Brig. Gen. A. Owen Seaman. USA. 

Grand Patriarch of the Herd (First Vice-Com- 
mander). Rear Adm. Walton R. Sexton, USN. 

Bell Carabao (2nd Vice-Commander), Maj. Gen. 
Thomas Holcomb. USMC. 

Grand Councillor of the Herd (3rd Vice-Com- 
mander). Maj. William T. Davis. M.C., USA. 

Grand Jefe de los Baiios (4th Vice-Commander), 
Col. Joseph F. Siler, USA. 

Grand Jefe de los Bebidos (5lh Vice-Commander), 
Rear Adm. Raymond Spear. USN. 

Grand Jefe de los Cargadores (6tli Vice-Com- 
Col. Charles R. Sanderson. USMC. 

Main Guard. Col. William H. Clopton. USA. 

Winder of the Horn. Comm. Joseph J. Kaveney. 
M.C.. USN. 

Carretonero. Capt. Luther Slicldon. Jr.. MC. USN. 

Camholing Carai)ao. Bri<i. C^en. James A. Ulio. l^S A. 

Veterinario. Maj. Richard I). LaCiarde. USA. 

Jefe de la Cuadra. Col. Charles G. Mortimer. USA. 

Director de Fiesta. Lieut. Col. llarrv F. Cunning- 
ham. USA. Res. 

(;ran(l Lead & Wheel Carabao (Secretary 1^-eas- 
urer). Col. Josepli M. Heller. M.K.C. USA. 



19 



FATS AND OILS 

APPARENT CONSUMPTION IN THE UNITED STATES BY MAJOR CLASSES OF USE 

1939 



FOREIGN 



DOMESTIC 



FOOD 



^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 



^^^^^^ 



^COCONUT OIL<^ 



EDIBLE TALLOW 



OLEO OIL AND EDIBLE ANIMAL STEARINE 



CORN OIL 



SOYBEAN OIL 



COTTONSEED OIL 



LARD 



BUTTER 




100 



90 



80 



70 



- 60 



50 



40 



30 



20 



- 10 



_L 



ALL USES 



re 



FOREIGN: 



DOMESTIC 



O 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 

HORIZONTAL SCALE: PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL CONSUMPTION BY MAJOR CLASSES OF USE 
VERTICAL SCALE: PERCENTAGE COMPOSITION WITHIN EACH MAJOR CLASS OF USE 

SOURCE BASED ON DATA SUPPLIED BY U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND U.S. BUREAU OF CENSUS 



90 



100 



UNITED STATES TARIFF COMMISSION— Octobor, ip4C 



• 20 • Philippines 



9 9 9 By John B. Gordon 



does it compete with American agriculture? 



Consider llio cocomit and what it docs for you. 
The soap you use in vour halli is belter because of 
coconut oil. The shatterproof ghiss in your new car is 
clearer and safer. Your wife's eveninir gmvn is slayer, 
the buttons on her street clothes briiziiter because of the 
coconut. And on the less attractive side of life, big guns 
boom Avith incr(\ised force and bombs have greater 
destroying power as the result of the amazing diversity 
of products modern science has squeezed from the 
ubiquitous Philippine^ coconut. 

The American farmin* once looked upon the "coco- 
nut cow" as a competitor, llydrogenated coconut oil. he 
feared, would drive his butter from the market. But. 
as the chart on the opj^osite page shows, the fear was 
poorly founded. The authoritative figures of the U. S. 
Department of Agriculture and the U. S. Bureau of Cen- 
sus demonstrate that coconut oil accounted for only 1.8 
per cent of the total edible oils and fats consumed in 
this country during 1939. Hardly a serious competitor 
for the cow, particularly in the light of the two and 
three-quarter million dollars worth of American dairy 
products sold annually to the Philippines! 

The graph divides the nation's consumption of oils and 
fat — it approached the amazing total of 10,000,000.000 
pounds in 1939 — into four channels — food, soap, paints 
and miscellaneous. Food accounted for 67 per cent of 
the total; soap, 20 per cent; paints and varnish, 8.5; 
and miscellaneous (for making tin plate, rubber sub- 
stitutes, plastics, lubricating oils, etc.) about 5. 

Butter, lard, cottonseed oil and soybean oil are the 
most important oils and fats produced by the American 
farmer, and they are consumed almost entirely as food. 
The coconut oil converted into food is negligible. Thus, 
the "coconut cow^" is in reality no competition at all to 
the products of the American farmer. 

Coconut oil finds its chief American use in the soap 



kettles. It produces a hard, free-lathering soap that is 
useful in water of any hardness. This quality is due to 
its exceptionally high percentage of laurit^ acid, which 
does not occur at all in oils or fats produced in the 
United States. 

The Tariff Connnissi* n fou.id that coconut oil com- 
prised 21.4 per cent of the oil and fat ingredients of the 
1939 output of American soap. Although it is the highest 
priced ingredient, it was used because no domestic fat 
or oil can replace it. Coconut oil provided the quick- 
lathering and free-rinsing qualities essential in any mar- 
ketable soap, while inedible tallow and grease supplied 
body and durability. 

Wliile at tiie present time no appreciable amount of 
coconut oil goes into other industrial uses, such as ])las- 
ticisers and varnishes and the requirements of miscel- 
laneous manufacturing, interest is growing in its util- 
ization in many fields. For instance, coc-onut oil goes into 
the cellulose acetate molding j^owder that is pressed 
into steering wheels, instrument panels, radio parts, 
toothbrush handles and similar items. Germany is mak- 
ing airplane wings and fuselages from plastics to save 
metal. Sulphated higher alcohols — in the preparation 
of which lauric acid plays an important part — are nec- 
essary for modern silk, wool and rayon fabric produc- 
tion, pulp and paper making, leather dyeing, electro- 
plating and a multitude of other processes. 

In scores of fields of modern life, coconut oil plays 
an important part. Bath soap, explosives, dress materials, 
radio sets and airplanes — all benefit by the fact that the 
Philippines produce under the American flag the world's 
largest supply of this valuable and essential tropical 
product. Best of all, coconut oil does not comj)ete with 
United States products. It is truly an aid to the American 
way of life. ^ 



The Battle for Greece (from Page 9) 

fense measures are going forw^ard. Roads are being built, 
and material accumulated. Fquipment is needed, of course 
— arms, tanks, trucks, munitions — but these can be pro- 
cured in time, as the needs are fitted into the general 
American defense scheme. 

United States government leaders have acknowledged 
and restated America's responsibility for defending the 
Philippines until the advent of independence in 1946. 
The next five years, therefore, constitute a ])rolonged 
crisis for the Philippines and the world. But with courage, 
foresight and preparation, the Philippines like democ- 
racy itself is eminently defensible. ^ 



The Philippine Commonwealth is di\ided into 49 
provinces, the governors of all but four ol which are 
elected by })opular vote for three-) ear terms. The un- 
developed non-Christian ])r()\ inc(\'^ of Cotabato, Laruu). 
Bukidnon and Mountain Province are governed b\ Presi- 
dential appointees. Phili|)pin(^ |)ro\ inces. uidik(^ Ameri- 
can states, are not comj)leteh soxcMcign uithin their own 
borders. For instance, therc^ are no j)r()\ incial suj)r(Mne 
courts, and all legislation is handled b\ the \ationaI 
Assenibh. Facli prox inc(^ (4ects and sends from i)nc to 
fi\e re{)res(Milali\ ((lej)ending on th(^ pnpulalion ) to 
the Assemblv. 

• 21 • 



A New Vocabulary (from Page 3) 

enemy meets him everywhere'. In the Filipinos, we have 
16,000.000 friends — genuine friends — and I do not favor 
sitting back, awaiting disaster, then commenting: 'Well, 
they asked for it.' Isn't a better solution possible? 

"It isn't as if we have been handing largesse to the 
Islands for 40 years. The United States has been given 
full measure in return — gold, export markets, safe 
sources of supply, a friendly base for our army and navy 
in the Far East. In the future, the Philippines may have 
still more to offer. Under those circumstances, why de- 
stroy the usefulness of a long-time friend, particularly if 
a new vocabulary — a new 
frame of mind, perhaps — will 
remedy the situation?" 




*1 



J. Weldon Jones, a tall, MHMIOK;t . 
soft - spoken, black - haired 
Texan of Welsh descent, rode 
herd on his father's Texas 
ranch as a boy. In 1917, 
Jones left college to go to 
France with the United 
States army, which detailed 

him to truck driving. With the return of peace, however, 
he went back to college and resumed the study of ac- 
countancy. For seven years he was a public and corpora- 
tion auditor. In 1929, Ohio State University named him 
a professor of accounting, auditing and income tax 
procedure. Jones was in that post w^hen President Roose- 
velt late in 1933 appointed him Insular Auditor for the 
Philippine Islands. 

Jones became financial adviser to the High Commis- 
sioner with inauguration of the Commonwealth govern- 
ment on November 15, 1935. Twice in the next five years, 
for a total of 17 months, he served as acting High Com- 
missioner. Last fall. President Roosevelt offered him a 
new job in Washington as Assistant Director of the 
Budget, part of the Executive Office of the President. 

Manila's regret at Jones' departure was relieved by one 
happy thought. It w^as that the Filipinos would have an 
understanding friend in Washington. 

"Weldon Jones," declared President Quezon shortly 
before the financial assistant's departure, "has been one 
of the most efficient, fair and tactful officials ever to come 
to these Islands." 

In a farewell interview with one of the Manila papers. 
Jones suggested that "horse-trading" might produce a 
better relation between Manila and Washington. 

"I have the feeling that some Yankee traders and some 
Yankee-trained traders should get together and use the 
vocabulary of horse traders," he declared. "Those old-time 
Yankee traders were not out to get each others' scalps so 
much as to trade again and again on succeeding Satur- 
days, to have a good time in the trading, and to find in the 
end that all had profited." ^ 



Better Understanding 



To the Philippine Resident Commissioner 
Washington, D. C. 

Having had the unusual experience as a young Amer- 
ican lawyer a decade ago of w^orking for almost three 
years in governmental service in the Philippines, it ^vas 
with more than ordinary interest that I picked up the 
first issue of "Philippines." I immediately felt that I 
had journeyed back and was among old friends and 
familiar scenes. But I am enthusiastic about your mag- 
azine for a much more vital reason than its vivid remind- 
ers of a happy and stimulatirig ])(M'iod in my own life. 

Many of those Americans who had the privilege of 
working in the government service under the Governor 
General of the late 1920's and early 1930's left the 
Islands with some feeling of futility. We were all working 
for a sound solution of both Philippine problems and 
the mutual problems of the United States and the Phil- 
ippine Islands. The lack of understanding and even 
interest in these problems not only among ordinary 
Americans but also among legislative, administrative and 
executive personnel in the United States gradually built 
up a feeling of discouragement. We considered the prob- 
lems important, but many of those who should have 
been interested and informed, comprehended little and 
cared less about these distant Islands. Many of us de- 
spaired of getting a sufficient section of American opin- 
ion interested in the Islands and, without such interest, 
intelligent handling of the problems seemed a dim hope 
at best. This reaction led to the view% which I have heard 
expressed, that we should get the American flag dow^n 
as quickly as possible and get out of the Islands, come 
what may. 

Due to the international spotlight being turned on the 
Far East, and the Clipper connections bringing the 
Islands closer, I have observed growing interest in the 
Philippines. Unfortunately, without having been there, 
the average person cannot easily achieve an adequate 
knowledge of either the Islands or the Islands in their 
relation to the United States. 

The first issue of your magazine "Philippines" with 
its interest-catching pictures and informative articles is 
most timely, and has given me renewed hope that this 
educational campaign may now awaken a w^ider interest 
in our mutual problems, thus materially aiding tow^ards 
the goal of an informed and intelligent solution of the 
joint problems of the Philippines and the United States. 



Francis O. AfTeld, III, 



Philadelphia, Pa. 



• 22 • Philippiiies 



jP/i i7 ip pin r A d vertisinti 



(from Page 6) 



University of the Philippines 



(from Page 11) 



Philippines are preparing the iiround for greater sales 
and consumption of American goods. 

Business leadership in the Pliilippines is shared by 
Americans and Filipinos. The consuming public is pri- 
marily the 16,()()0,()()() Filipinos, who for a full generatit)n 
have been banning American ways. The potential market 
awaiting American business methods is almost without 
limit. 

In advertising, the one fu^ld of American business that 
is new, but which is now being organized efTectivelv, 
leadershij) is again ji)intly AmiMican and Filipino. -The 
two races work in intimate cooperation seeking to pro- 
mote free IMiilippine trade with America, in the im- 
portance of which the\ unanimously agree. The presi- 
dent of the n(»wly organized Advertising Club of the Phil- 
ij)pines, for instance, is L. G. Wagner, of MuUer and 
Phipps, importers and distributors of American phar- 
maceutical and toilet goods. The vice-president is Pedro 
E. Teodoro, of Elizalde & Co., one of the biggest adver- 
tisers in the Commonwealth. Tiie writer, secretarv of the 
club, represents Madrigal «^ CA)mpany, an outstanding 
Filipino firm interested in shipping, textiles, coconut oil, 
hnnber, cement and coal. Th^^ nuMubershij) of this club 
includes all leading American and Fili|)ino firms and 
businessmen in Manila. 

The club has already made its influence felt through a 
decisive drive to clean Manila of the pseudo-publishers 
and fly-by-night publications that threatened to absorb 
an important j)arL of the money that would otherwise be 
devoted to legitimate ad\ertising and promotion. With 
determined government sup- 
port, it is also undertaking 
a campaign to curb such 
violations of advertising laws 
as misrepresentation, mis- 
labeling, illegal refilling 
of trade-mark-protected con- 
tainers, and the sale of in- 
ferior goods. The laxity 
of existing legislation has 
caused some difficulty, but 
everything is being done by 
the government to aid the 
drive until more teeth can be 
put in the law. 

These measures will ha\e 
the effect of protecting 
American business, although, 
of course, no discrimination 
is possible against anv busi- 
ness using legitimate meth- 
ods, regardless of nationality 
ing circumstances, they should 

ican domination of the Philippine market and kee}) the 
doors wide open for more business from the United 
States. ^ 




colleges and schools of the University publish their own 
bulletins and journals. 

Members of the University debating club take part 
in public debates in Manila during the school year and 
in the provinces during vacations. As the result, not only 
do the students receive practical training in public speak- 
ing, but the University also is brought closer to tlie people. 
The University dramatic club gives students technical 
training in the theory and practice of dramatic arts. 

Student health is constantly supervised through visits 
by University physicians, regular sanitary inspections of 
university restaurants and dormitories, and a program of 
physical training. Under the National Defense Act. men 
students receive military training. Weekly convocations 
are held and there are regular addresses by prominent 
speakers. From time to time the president of the University 
consults with the families of students to offer suggestions 
regarding their welfare. 

A Student Loan Fund helps students pay their matricu- 
lation fees, about one-fifth of the student body receiving 
some aid from this source. In addition, freshmen who 
lack funds to buy textbooks may rent them from the 
University at low rates. 

A program to attract the best student material in the 
Philippines was recently inaugurated. The number and 
size of scholarships awarded to high school honor gradu- 
ates (and to college graduates who desire advanced work) 
has been increased. This new system permits a high school 
graduate to attend the University free of tuition fees. 
Within four years, the I niversity hopes to have at least 

15 per cent of its students in 
this honor category. 

Graduates of the I niver- 
sity of the Philippines, num- 
bering some 12,753, are 
scattered throughout the 49 
provinces of the archipelago. 
Among the number holding 
responsible positions are the 
Speaker of the National 
Assembly. Cabinet officers. 
National Assemblymen. I^ni- 
\ersitv |)rt^sidents and pro- 
\ incial governors. 

The fundamental aim of 
the I niversity of the Philip- 
pines is to promote the w'el- 
fare of the Fili|)in() people. 
This is accomplished by de- 
\eloping clear and indepen- 
dent thinking, training the 



Quezon Institute^ Manila 
for tnhercnlosis patients. 

But under the exist- Filipino youth in the ideals of democracy, acting as the 
insure continued Amer- repository of knowledge of the Commonwealth, handing 

down the cultural legacv of the past to the present, and. 
finally, in developing to the fullest extent the native 
genius of the Filipino race. ^ 



• 23 • 




Strategic M anil a Hemp 



(from Page 7) 



After five years of exploration and development, the 
Davao Gold Mines has finally been brought into produc- 
tion with a 150-ton mill constructed by the Southwestern 
Engineering Co. When Davao Gold started operations in 
1935 the property was accessible only by a narrow- 
trail through the Mindanao jungle; after a landing field 
had been cleared, two airplanes carried men and mate- 
rials to the mines. (A Bellanca transported 2,290 men 
and 5,116,007 pounds of cargo, and a Waco carried 
1,315 passengers and 620,003 pounds of cargo.) Finally, 
the company installed a 41,000-foot aerial freight and 
passenger tramway, the first of its kind in the Philippines. 
Ore has been leaving the mines over this route since 
last October, and milling began in November. 

• • • 

Arrangements have been made by United States and 
Philippine postal officials to transfer airmail bound 
for Java and Singapore to occasional private or official 
planes when their departure southward from Manila 
coincides with the arrival of Clipper mail from the 
United States. Airmail for the Netherlands Indies is 
usually routed through Hongkong and Rangoon, addin- 
several days or even weeks to the delivery time. ^ 

• • • 

The President of the Philippmes has created a com- 
mittee charged with revising and codifying the existincr 
substantive laws of the Commonwealth. The new code 
will "conform with the customs, traditions and idiosyn- 
crasies of the Filipino people and with progressive prin- 
ciples of the science of law," according to the execu- 
tive order. This move climaxes years of effort by bench 
bar and legislators, who have sought to revise Philippine 
substantive laws, the greater part of which are in Spanish 
The penal code has been brought up-to-date by a similar 
committee created some time ago. 

• • • 

President Manuel L. Quezon has officially set the 
period from March 19 to 28 as National Defense Week 
for the Philippine Islands. Simultaneously Philinnine 
Army headquarters has scheduled its annual pro^^ram of 
active military training for all reservists for late in 
March. The largest number of trainees in Philippine 
history is expected to enroll. 

DATE OF THE MONTH 
Filipino Catholics celebrate March 19 as Saint Jo 
seph's Day. It is considered a day of obligation, whe^^n 
everyone attends mass. Saint Joseph is the patron of all 
who want a happy home life and a peaceful death. 

• 24 • Philippmes 



izens. This law was aimed dirt'ctly at lh(^ Japanese control 
of abaca production. 

But the extremely clever Nipponese had hit upon 
new devices for acquiring additional hind. They married, 
temporarily or otherwise, Filipino women in whose 
names title to the land was vested, or they bought land 
through corporations ostensibly owned by Filipinos, 
but actually controlled by Japanese. 

We observed many of thcs<^ practices, and subse- 
quently informally rej)orted ihcm to American and Fil- 
ipino ofTicials. In the folhnving years, efforts were made 
to stir up interest in this problem, but was actually 

done. The danger was generally discounted. 

Now we observe a change, a healthy one. People 
have become aware of the economic danger inherent 
in the control of a vital commodity by possibly hostile 
nationals. The Commonwealth Government's action in- 
dicates a new and praiseworthy awareness of the perilous 
factors involved, and this, in turn, indicates an aw^are- 
ness of the larger international and strategi(- consider- 
ations. 

In Washington, a government bureau has made a 
special study of our natural resources and the extent 
to which the United States is dependent for essential 
raw materials upon outside sources. It found that this 
country relies on the province of Davao, dominated as 
it is by Japanese, for 75 per cent of its hemp. It can- 
not be too strongly emphasized that rope and hemp 
could not be replaced for marine and naval use. It is 
an essential sinew of our national defense. 

We must continue to look to the Philippines for our 
supply of this vital commodity. It is one of the reasons 
Philippine trade is so valuable to us. No other part 
of the world raises abaca in any considerable quantity. 
Davao, of course, is not the only Philippine province 
where hemp is cultivated, but Davao is the keystone of 
the abaca industry. As long as it remains so, Davao is of 
vital interest and concern to us. We cannot afford to be 
complaisant about a potential danger to our industry 
and defense. 

We must look to our sources. Furthermore, we should 
make every effort to assist and encourage Filipino moves 
toward cooperation in mutual defense. ^ 



r ORD WILKINS, city editor of the American-owned 
Manila Daily Bulletin and Philij)]3ine correspondent 
for the New York Times, recently visited the United States 
on a three-months leave of absence. He is now back at his 
desk in Manila. In Washington to interview administration 
officials on behalf of his paper, Mr. Wilkins reported 
that the Philippine capital is rapidly replacing Shanghai 
as the most important news center in the Far East. 




You Can Get Genuine 
Manila Long Filler Cigars 
in cellophane in your city! 



CIGARS of UNEXCELLED Quality 
SMOKE of UNSURPASSED VALUE 

Smoking a good Manila cigar means 

enjoying the rich pleasant aroma and the siveet 
melloiu flavor of famous Phihppine To- 
bacco, grown in the valleys of eternal 
summer and sunshine. 



Manufactured entirely by hand under the strictest governmental 
regulation and sanitary control, MANILAS give you more smoking 
satisfaction for the price than any other cigars on the American 
market. 

These are the reasons tvhy MANILA CIGARS are the choice of millions 
of smokers — tvhy doctors recommend them and connoissetirs prefer them. 



Ask for a MANILA t^//^ the pleasant aroma 



PHILIPPINE TOBACCO AGENCY 

2362 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W. 
Washington, D. C. 






TO? LEFT: ERNEST HEMINGWAY, m loiilc lo China, was 
<£r('('lc(l in Manila 1)\ I'. Man<:alias. [)r(\^i(ienl of llic 
Philippine \\ r iters" Lca^zuc. and AnuuKlo G. Dayril. 

TOP RIGHT: A SCORE OF 355 won the IMiilippinc wom- 
en's ^olf ehainpionsh i j) foi Miss Doniin^ia Capali. 
wlio learned ihr <i;anie while* hunidress on a sugar 
estate. 

LEFT: U. S. NAVY PATROL BOMBERS, assigned lo the 
Asiatic fleet, look nj) lh(Mr nrw station near Manihi 
after an unexcntful flight across the l^ieilic from 
Hawaii. 

BOTTOM: THE METROPOLITAN THEATER, largest and 
finest in the Ph ili j)pines. is under eonsidcMalion for 
permancMit headquaiters of th(^ National Charities 
Sweepstakes. 




Why the Philippines Needs Ships 



Au Editorial 



TiWK arli('l(' by Admiral I'aH:)r\ S. Land, chairman of 
ihc I nilcd Stales Marilimr Ca)mmission. ai)pearinii in 
this issn(^ is of special inliMrsl lo ovory reader of 
PHILIPIMNKS. The (irsl olVuial statement to deal ^vilh 
the fulnrc* of Insnlar sliij)pinii.. it is imj)orlant lo every 
AnHM'iean and \ ilal lo e\ ery Fili|)ino. Maintenance of 
s(M\ ice on the lMiilip|)in(^-AnuMican trade lane, the Ad- 
miral (l(M-Iares niuHpii\ ocallx . *"is ess(Mitial lo both Amer- 
ican connn(M('(* and (l(*fiMisi\"* Spc^ikinir from llie stand- 
point of llu^ IMiilippiiu^ C.onnnonweallh. we believe that 
such servic(^ may be a mattcM* of nalit)nal life or death. 

In statinii that "trans-Pacilic shij)i)ini2: at present faces 
a critical l(^sl/* llu* Admiral j)ermits himself an under- 
stal(Mnenl. 11u» acnl(^ shortage of ships, accompanied by 
freii;ht-iat(» incr(\ises of as nuich as 100 per cent, ha^ 
broujiht onr nation facc^ to faci^ with the possibility of 
commercial isolation frmn the r(\<t of the world. Our 
economy — lik(^ that of (^(M y aiiricultural nation — dej)ends 
on our abilit) to s(^ll suiiar. coi)ra. ciiiars. Manila hemp, 
chromile. manuan(\-^(^ and otluM* bulk i)i-o(hu ts for the cash 
with which to pay for need(Hl sup|)li(\^ of dairy products. 
ci<!:arelles, machinery. Hour, cotton textiles and a hundred 
other kinds of manufactured lioods that we do not pro- 
duce. If that normal (and nuitually i)rorilable) exchange 
breaks down, the Philippines nuist face a serious economic 
and social situation with which it will be difllcult to cope. 
Such a breakdown is in(^\itable if we are unable to 
obtain sufhcient s})ace to ship essential cargoes across 
the Pacific. 

Tw^o possible wa>s of overcoming this acute shipping 
shortage are obvious, as Admiral Land points out. One 
is the substantial augmentation of the American merchant 
fleets serv ing the Connnonw ealth : the other is an im- 
mediate increase in Philijipine-flag tomiage through con- 
struction or purchase abroad. The Admiral gives us 
encouraging assurance of the j)rogress being made in the 
])rogram U) su})ply new. speedy and economical ships to 
America's half-dozen trans-Pacific lines. The trouble is 
that this lunv tonnage may not be available in time to save 
Phili})pine economy from ruin. 

Our principal ho])e of relief, then, is in the second 
course — an immediate increase in Philippine-flag ship- 
])ing through construction or purchase abroad. In this 
matter the United Slates Maritime Commission has been 
unable to help us, despite an obviously sincere attem{)t 
to do what it could. Because of the contingencies of a 
confused world-wide shortage of sea-going vessels, the 
Commission recently has declined to permit the transfer 
of American vessels to TMiilij^pine registry, taking the 
stand (mistaken, w'e feel) that such transfers W'Ould 
deplete the United Stales' own merchant fleet and tonnage 



reserves for possible wartime use. W'e are confident, how- 
ever, that the Maritime Commission will solve the Philip- 
pine shipping problem as part of its general eflfort to 
strengthen national defense in this vital field. Admiral 
Land's frank message strengthens that belief. 

Until 1916. the Philippines constitutes America's main 
outi)ost in the Pacific. For that reason, enlightened self- 
interest dictates that the United States keep the Islands 
constantly prepared. A nation threatened by serious 
economic and social trouble, as the Commonwealth almo-^t 
certainlv will be if the shipping shortage is not speedily 
alleviated, is at a disadvantage in building its defenses. 
EfTorts by the Maritime Commission to give us every 
facility for the exchange of goods promote not only 
Philippine interests, but American as well. 

National interest is not jeopardized by the transfer of 
American tonnage to Philippine registry. Vessels flying 
our (lag. while under Insular law. are indisputably subject 
to the jurisdiction and control of the United States Gov- 
ernment in lime of emergency, to the same extent that 
ships of American registry are. Thus, your Administration 
is sacrificing nothing" fundamental when it authorizes the 
transfer of 10 or 12 badly needed steamers to the Philip- 
l)ine flag. 

The l3elief that the Philippines somehow is no longer 
part of the United States is widespread but erroneous. The 
actual facts are quite to the contrary, as the excellent 
article bv Assistant Secretary of the Interior Oscar L. 
Chapman in the February issue of PHILIPPINES demon- 
strated. Our ships, which for conversational purposes 
are described as "under the Philippine flag," in fact fly 
the Stars and Stripes above our own colors. Basically 
even more significant, however, are the close ties that 
exist between your government and ours. We have the 
same objectives; our people have the same ideals. Every 
element of Philippine-American relations points to but 
one conclusion: our resources — human and material, men 
and gold and ships— are at America's disposal in time 
of emergency. 

The inability of our people— even our government- 
ow^ned corporations— to buy American ships when they 
are most needed is a temporary phenomenon, just as 
the basic shortage of United States tonnage is. Admiral 
Land's statement on the outlook for our shippers, ex- 
l)orters and farmers is encouraging, therefore. The legal 
complications that have made the transfer of ships often 
difficult in the j)ast are now^ being worked out; perhaps 
a solution will have been reached ])y the time this issue 
of PII1LIPPL\ES appears. Whatever the outcome, we 
are confident that the Maritime Commission does not 
intend to overlook Philippine needs in its planning. ^ 



Philippines 

Vol. 1 No. 4 

Why the Philippines Needs Ships 1 

A Friend in Court, Julius C, Edelstein 3 

Philippine Shipping, Adm, Emory S. Land 4 

Naval Power, Rep. Warren Magnuson 6 

Behind the Scenes in Manila, James Ross 8 

Pan-American Idea, Jlarry W . Frantz 9 

Filipino Repatriation Act, Manuel Adeva ] ( j 

America's Philippine Market 1] 

Manila's First Lady, Pilar N, Ravelo 1 5 

Quezon City, Harry T. Frost ]5 

Roces Publications, Emilio Aguilar _ ]8 

Philippine Coat of Arms \g 

Crisis in the Coconut Industry, Ernesto D. Ilustre 20 

Filipino Writers Discuss Problems 21 

• • • 

Photo credit: Fenno Jacobs from Three Lions: 
Tomelden, Washington; Office of the President of 
the Philippines; Philippine Army Sicrnal Corps. 

• • • 

Pacific strategy map drawn especially for Phiuppinks by 
lM*ank Manning. New York. 



Porn„ss.„„ to rcpri.-t matrrinl appoari.,;. 
,n Pliilippnus" .s ^.lacMy frrantrd .-xcMpt i,^ 
rases wl.rro ns,. is sprrinpaHy roslri.-MMl. Proper 
<Ticlit Will be apprcoiatrd. 




Althoutrh no l()n*r('r conncclcHl with the Phili|)- 
pincs, Frank Miirplix. Assoc iates Jiislice of the 
I niled Slates Sii|)r('in(' (!oinl. remains one 
of \V ashin<iton"s stainiehest friends of the Fili- 
pino jjcople. 

Ill This Issue 

ADMIRAL EMORY S. LAND, ( liairnian of the 
L. S. Maritime (^onnn ission. is AnuMica's No. 
i)nv aiilhority on shippinii j)rol)hMns today. 
Mis \ iews on th(* fiiliire of IMiili|)i)ine coni- 
nierce should Ix^ recjuired i(\i(Iinii for (n(M'y 
legishitor. 

• • • 

WARREN MAGNUSON is C.on-ressnian from 
WashinglcMi and a ( los(^ student of Pacific af- 
fairs. In this issiu^ he explains the naval po- 
tentialities of tlie Phili |)pines. 

• • • 

JAMES ROSS \v(Mit to the Philippines as a 
soldier in 1 o9o. A close friend of President 
Quezon, he still makes his home in Manila, 
where he j^ractices law. 

• • • 

HARRY W. FRANTZ is chief of the foreign de- 
partment of the I nited Press in Washington. 
He has traveled extensively in hoth Latin 
America and the Far East. 

• • • 

MANUEL ADEVA, whose understandino; of the 
prohlems of Filipinos in the United Stales is 
unquestioned, is a memher of the Philippine 
Resident Connnissioner's staff. 

• • • 

HARRY T. FROST, famous Chicago architect 
and city j)latiner, was called to Manila in 
1 93o hy President Quezon as consultant on the 
Commonwealth's new^ capital city. He consid- 
ers Quezon City the opportunity of a lifetime. 

• o • 

ERNESTO D. ILUSTRE is a pui>licity assistant in 
the OfTice of the Philippine Resident Commis- 
sioner in Washington. 



PHILIPPINES 19 puhHshod l,y th« ofTicc of x\u^ Philippine Rcvsi^hnt romniissi<,iic.r to the Dnilrcl Slal.s 
E.Iilorial and circulation offices at 2362 Massaclium^tts Avenue Northwtst, Washington, D. C. Enttr** 
as thir<l « lass matter in lli.. WaHhinp;ton post office on Deeeniher 1, I910. Peruul No. SO l.li. Printed in U.S. A 



j4 ^mnd in C^ud. . . 

FRANK MURPHY'S PLACE 
IN PHILIPPINE HISTORY 

By Julius C. Edelstein 



It was OiXCE said of Associate Justice Francis Mur- 
phy of the Sui)renu^ Gourl that he had found Irehmd in 
the l^hilij)|)incs. Thai was a rather happy renuuk. because 
it exactly epitonii/.inl the relationship that existed and 
exists even loda\ Ix^wcen Mr. Justice Mur])hy — 'ihe 
Governor" to his Filij)ino friends — and the Philippine 
])coplc. 

The description is apt because the relationship between 
"Governor"' Murphy and the Philip|)ines is much more 
than a mere temporal interlude in the career of the one 
and in the history of the other. It was and is bound up in 
tiic emotions, with ^(Microus amounts of nuilual apprecia- 
tion. It is bound up with Goxcrnor Murph\"s acquaintance 
with and int(Misc interest in the historical struiigles of the 
Irish peoj)le. it is a mcaninuful (expression of the fact 
that he felt he had found a similar |)iM)|)le in the Far East. 

Mr. Murphy, although elevated to the august might 
of the Suj)reme (]ourt btMicii. remains today actively 
interested in the Philippines, with whose history he was 
so profoundly associated as the Islands" last Governor 
General and first American Migh Conmiissioner. His 
personal correspondence and contacts still today reflect 
his persistent concern with Philippine alTairs and with 
Filipinos. 

Frank Murphy governed through one of the most his- 
toric phases of l^hilippine-Anierican relations, the tran- 
sition from American possession to semi-sovereign Com- 
monwealth status; and the full impact of that transition 
was understood and ex|)ressed by Mr. Murphy as by few 
Americans. During his period of oflice he lent major 
encouragement to the Filipinos' drive for sovereign go\ - 
ernment and gave a green light to Filipino elTorts which 
culminated in the successful creation of the Common- 
wealth. 

Because of this and man) more j)ersonal reasons. Fili- 
])inos have watched with pride the u|)ward march of ''the 
Governor", ever since he left Manila on May 11, 1936 
to become successively, within the space of four years. 
Governor of the state of Michigan. Attorney General of 
the United States, and linall\ Associate Justice of the 
Supreme Court. 

And today, as he sits in the hushed light of the majestic 
Su])reme (]ourt chaml)cr. Filij)inos think of him as oik^ 
of their own. His atlainmcnt of the supreme judicial 
honor the\ consider a new justification of their belief 
that the IMiilip|)incs has j)la\e(l a i)eculiarly historic role 
in the histoi ) of America in ])r(*paring a seiies of great 



leaders for American public life. But in the case of Jus- 
tice Murphy, the feeling of Filipinos is much beyond the 
mere pride of recognition. It involves the whole history 
of their mutual association. 

\Mien high-principled young Mayor Murphy was sent 
to the Philippines as Governor General in June, 1933. 
the first under the New Deal. Filipinos wondered what 
sort of an administration they were in for. and what 
understanding they might expect from a midwesterner 
who supposedly knew little of the hopes and aspirations 
of an island people 10.000 miles across the western sea. 

But in the Philii)pines Frank Murphy seemed to have 
found a kindred people, a folk whose aspirations he 
seemed to comprehend with more than an intellectual 
appreciation. He seemed to have a feeling for their age- 
old struggle for freedom and equality, and for the sense 
of personal dignity that goes with independence. It was 
exactly in that sense that Murphy ""discovered Ireland in 
the Philippines." 

In American politics. Murphy was credited with hav- 
ing been a liberal New Dealer long before the New Deal. 
In a period of unprecedented social ferment, unemploy- 
ment, and industrial dei)ression the strong voice of Mayor 
Murphy of Detroit called out for the assumption of 
responsibility by the state and nation for the welfare of 
those left jobless by the depression. 

As Chief Executive of the Philii)pine Government. 
Murphy remained a New Dealer. His philosophy of gov- 
ernment jibed perfectly with the concepts of social 
justice prevailing among Filipino leaders, the most promi- 
nent of whom was Senate President Manuel Quezon, soon 
to become the first President of the Philij)pinc Cotn- 
mon wealth. 

Murphy advocated and signed legislation for typhoon 
relief, recognizing for the first time the national responsi- 
bility for victims of social disaster. He urged slum clear- 
ance and low cost housing for the poor long before that 
ideal had become a commonly accepted national pro- 
gram in the Ihiited States. The crusading young Gover- 
nor General strengthened Insular finances, maintained a 
strictly balanced budget, took a stand against pork-barrel 
appropriations, and in general brought to a close the 
period of partial American control of internal IMiilij^piiK^ 
affairs with an exhibition of clean, cnicienl. and socially 
conscious government. 

When in May, 1931, Congress passed the Philipi)im^ 

( Turn to Pai^c 1^) I 



• 3 • 



mm li PHILIPPIC mnm 



ildiniral Enorj H. land 



CHAIRMAN 
U. S. MARITIME 
COMMISSION 



Foreign trade routes linking the United States with 
the rest of the world are vital to the welfare of this nation 
in times of peace as well as of national emergency. These 
marine arteries stretching out to many parts of the world 
must be kept open. Were certain essential raw materials 
cut off for lack of marine transportation, it is not an 
exaggeration to say this nation's continued existence 
might be in jeopardy. 

One of these highly essential life-lines is the trans- 
Pacific. Serving as a sort of hub in this transportation 
wheel of the Pacific are the Philippine Islands, which 
today represent our fifth best overseas customer, with a 
foreign trade aggregating approximately $300,000,000 
per annum. From the Philippines we import vast quan- 
tities of hemp, chromite, manganese, coconut oil and 
sugar worth about $90,000,000. To them we export better 
than $100,000,000 worth of canned milk, cigarettes, 
machinery, flour, meat and other products of American 
farms, mines, forests, and factories, destined both for 
Filipino consumers and our military and naval forces 
stationed in the Far East. From these facts it is obvious 
that the Philippine trade route is essential to both Amer- 
ican commerce and defense. 

Nevertheless, trans-Pacific shipping at present faces a 
critical test. Losses of foreign vessels to normal trade — 
through sinkings, acquisition by armed services, con- 
centration in the all-important North Atlantic service, 
and the laying-up of sizable Danish and other foreign 
flag fleets — have resulted in a space shortage and con- 
sequent rate increases. Shippers of several low-value 
(commodities stored in many Far Eastern warehouses are 
finding difficulty in obtaining ship space at rates that 
will allow the cargo to move. 

The Far East Conference of New York, one of the 




Admiral Emory S. Land 

three big gr(juj)s of ship operators in ihi^ trans-Pacilic 
service, infornicfl the Maritime (loniinission early in 
March that, as a result of tlie icfiuisilioiiing of tonnage 
by belligerent governments, sexcral niendxM- linens had 
become entirely clepend(Mit uj)()n cIuirlcM-ed \ essels. Unless 
freight rates could be niaintaincnl at a rcMiuinerative level, 
it contended, these lines might b(* forcc^I to abandon their 
services. 

Any such curtailment of s(m \ ice would, of course, })rovc 
detrimental to Philippine tra(l(\ Withdrawals would cause 
not only a shortage of needed American goods, but would 
reduce the nund)er of ships available for exports of 
Philippine sugar, copra. Manila fib(M- and other staple 
products to the United States. 

The increase in rates foi' chartered \ essels, as well as 
in the freight rates since the outl)r(\ik of the war, had 
reflec;ted increased costs of operation. Exp(Mises for wages, 
fuel, stevedoring, repairs and war risk insurance on hulls 
are all higher today than in (^arl\ 1939. Voyages in many 
cases are greatly lengthened 1)) wartime regulations, while 
delays often are occasioned by c ongestion in drydocks and 
repair yards. 

In the Far East, as well as in other trades, crew^s must 
be jjaid war l)onuses in addition to regular wages. These 
added expenses can be offset oidy through increased 
freight rates. Therefore, the upward tendency, although 
constantly scrutinized b) the Maritime Commission and its 
Divisions of Emergency Ship|)ing. O|)erations and Traflic, 
and Regulation, is largely ine\ ilal)le. Of course the 
scarcity of shijjs is also r(^sponsiI>le for increases, es- 
pecially in charter rates. 

Two possible* solutions of the shij) sliorlage suggest 
thems(*lves. One is encouragement of tlu^ infant Philij)- 
jjine merchant marine. The other is the assignment of 



4 • Philippines 



additional Aiiirricaii-llai: ships lo scM\r [\\c Islands. Let 
us considcM- ihi'st* hrirlly. 

It is not vrt ( (M taiii wIuHIkm-. in \ icw of the present 
status of llu^ Philippine* C.oinnionu ealth. an\ assistance 
to Philippine shippini: interests ean he ui\en under the 
United States AhMchanl Marine Act of ]9'M), as it now 
staufls. By this law. lh(* Maritinu* (^onnnission was author- 
ized to hnild in(M( hanl shi|)s to re|)laei^ aiiinu American 
tonna<:(\ and ()ther\vise to eneouraize ship operators in 
American-flag ser\ ices onh. This original program, in- 
voK inii 500 vess(ds n\ cv a period of ten \ears. is now well 
on its way and has heen accelerated. More recently, emer- 
gency plans have heen made to huild an additional 200 
freight vessels of simplified design. })lanned for rapid 
construction and economical operation rather than beauty, 
and primarily intendc^d to \ucc[ the growing ^\orld short- 
age of ships. 

In view of the aid-to-Hrilain program and the general 
scarcit) of ships, there ar(* prohahlx few vessels whicii 
can be sold to Insular interests for operation, nor does it 
seem possible at this time to gi\e Phili|)pine shipping 
firms any other direct assistance in their expansion plans. 

However, the outlook for an increase in the number of 
American-flag ships to serve the Islands is somewhat 
better. Our original 500-\essel construction program took 
into account the needs of the luit ion's entire overseas 
trade. Under this plan the American lines now serving 
the Philippines — the American Mail Line of Seattle, the 
American Presidents Line of San Francisco. Lykes Bros. 
Steamship Co. of New Orleans, the American Pioneer 
Line of New York, and the Isthmian Steamship Company 
of New^ York — are scheduled lo receive speedy, econom- 
ical, modern shij)s as soon as they are available. Addi- 
tions to these and other fleets in the j)ast 18 months have 
increased American tomiagi^ on the Pacific 12S per cent. 

Although the international situation somewhat be- 
clouds, for the lime being, the future program for assign- 



ing more tonnage to the I nited States-Philippine trad(^ 
route, the Maritime (Annmission in deciding on the dis- 
position of new ships as they come off the Asays certain!) 
^^ill bear in mind the importance to American connnerce 
and x\ el fare of unliampered Philippine trade. The Amer- 
ican Presidents Line already has received four of its jno- 
jecled seven passenger-and-cargo shi|)s: the rest are under 
construction and will go into ser\ ice as rapidly as they can 
be delix ered. L) kes Bros. Steamship Co. has four ne\v 
12.000-ton ships and six new 9-000-ton ships in tbe trade, 
and \\ \\\ ha\ e se\ en more new \ essels available w itbin a 
year. Plans lo su|)ply the American Mail Line with nine 
new 9.000-ton \essels in the next 18 months have not 
been changed and the first six ships will all be axailable 
Avithin six months. The American Pioneer Line expects lo 
recei\e eight 9.000-ton freighters in the same period. 
AN bile the Isthmian Steamship Ct>mpany also Avill ha\ e 
eight new 12.000-ton freighters operating Asilhin 18 
months. Each of these new ships, as il enters regular 
service, will strengthen trade ties between the I niled 
States and the Philippines. 

The Maritime Connnission is ever-mindful of the 
importance of unhampered trade with the Connnonwealth 
of the Philippines and is determined that these sea lanes 
shall be kept open. Chromile and manganese are strategic 
cargoes. Manila hemp is likewise vital. These commod- 
ities nuisl reach our shores without hindrance. Philip- 
pine sugar, which accounts for 15 percent of America's 
needs, is on the list of important cargoes. And we must 
not forget our SI 0().000,00()-a-year export trade with the 
Islands. These facts, together with the creditable efforts 
of Philippine interests t(^ build up their own merchant 
marine through construction and purchase, appear to me 
to be ample assurance that e\ery possible effort will be 
made to keep cargoes mo\ing freely across the Pacific 
between the Philippines and the United States, in war 
or in peace. ^ 



Admiral land, chairman of the 
agency that controls American shipping 
in every part of tlie world, can speak 
with authority on the prohlenis of trans- 
Pacific commerce. In this artich% he 
speaks out like tlie <leep-waler sailor 
that he is regarding the importance of 
the Philippines to Ignited States trade and 
d€*fense. Right: Shipping in the husy 
Pasig River, Manila. 




NAVAL 6^AIRBA5£S 
Tlnttcd States ^ 
Japanese a 
Britisfi O 
Dutch. A 
Russian. 4- 




A, 



Pt3 R-A mcr I Ciiu Airways 

•Other Airwaqs 





M*'* *^ 



V 7 -^ 




SPECIALLY \j 
DESIGNED 
£XECUT£D POR 

'Phiripplnii5 

fflANK MAMMInI^ 



MML POWER 

What St Means in 
the Far East Today 
and in 1946 



By Rep, Warren Magnuson 



(^)I)irs of the above map. illustrating the Phil- 
ippines' strategic position at the apex of the 
I'nitefl States' defenses in the Far East, may he 
t)htaineci without charge by writing Philippines. 
2:^,62 Massachusetts Ave.. NAV.. Washington. D. C. 



Approximately (mkk) .niies southwest of Seattle 

is America's westernmost naval outpost, the Philippines. 
These islands are the home hase of our famous Asiatic 
Fleet and contain our navy yard, naval air station and 
naval reservation. In the records of the Navy, the Philip- 
pines constitutes the 16th Naval District of the I'liited 
States. 

Il is to be remembered that these same Islands are the 
subject of a solemn compact under which Congress agreed 
to give them full political independence on July 4, 1946. 
That date is now five years away. But until that time we 
inevitably retain the responsibility of defendii.g the 
Philippines against all enemies, just as we are obliged to 
defend the soil of California or Maine. Our naval out- 
jjost is one instrument for the discharge of that inescap- 
able resp(jnsibility. 

From a longer range viewpoint it is also our oldigation 
— and indeed a necessity of national j)olic\ - to make the 
Phihp|iines ready to defend its own national integritv and 



• 6 • FhilippineB 



freedom in anti( ij)alion of llie dale when the aetual grant 
of independence^ is made. 

These two obligations are primarily eharged to the 
Army and \avy. Today those obligations ean and must 
be the eenlral facts of our policy toward the Philippines, 
situated as it is on one fringe of the world conflagration. 

From th(* stand|)oint of national de- 
fense policy we cannol alTord to leave 
a single border undefended, whether in 
the Philippines, in Hawaii, or Rhode 
Island. Our di^fenders cannol j)roj)erh 
retreat from point to })oinl in the face 
of danger: we are in ihe Philij)pines for 
the duration of lh(^ pri\<cnl (Mnergenc\. 
and no amount of \vishing can di\est us 
of the res|)onsibilily for defending our 
sovereignly. 

On the other hand il would seem lo 
the best interests of our national policv. 
not oidy lo tak(* whatexer sl(^j)s are wis(^ 
and necessary to strengthen our own 
defensive forces, but also to j)rei)are the 
Filipinos themselves to assume a grad- 
ually increasing share of the function of 
defense. We must certainly cooperate in 
their j^reparations eventually to assume entire res|)onsibil- 
ity for their own national j)reservation. 

We in the Tnited Stales have taken the stand that we 
will assist any nation which resists aggression. That is 
the meaning of "arsenal of democracy"'. We are es- 
])ecially interested, it goes without saying, in keeping 
true democracies from domination and control by greedy 
totalitarian neighbors. Every free democracy is another 
bulwark for the defense of the I'nited Stales. 

The Philippines, when it becomes independent, will be 
such a bulwark. Throwing the Filipinos to a totalitarian 
neighbor would deprive ourselves of the jjhysical comfort 
and support of 16,000,000 people who share our politi- 
cal ideology, our governmental forms and cultural in- 
stitutions, and who have been 40 years learning to esteem 
democracy and its values. It would also mean handing 
over to a potential enemy the many essential and stra- 
tegic resources with which the Connnonwealth abounds. 
Resource's that now flow into our markets on a commercial 
basis would be forcibly controlled for an eventual offense 
against our essential interests, even against our shores. 

This theoretical discussion comprises the background 
for a rather small but highly significant bill which the 
House of Representatives has already passed, and which 
is awaiting action in the Senate. This measure, approval 
of which I was glad to urge when it was in the House, 
would authorize the Secretary of the Navy to sell U. S. 
naval equipment to the Philippine Connnonwealth at cost. 
It would also authorize him to perform certain services 
for the Commonwealth and for its incipieiit naval estab- 
lishment. 

The significance of such a measure derives directiv 
from the larger circumstances described above, rather 




Rep. W arren IMagiiusou 
of \S asliiiigtoii 



than from its legislative provisions. The measure, in its 
execution, merely contributes to a general policv. 

The bill. H.R. 2107. was introduced by Rep. Carl 
^ inson. Chairman of the House Xaval AfTairs connnittee. 
at the request of the Xavy Department. Largely drafted 
by navy legal experts in consultation with the Office of 
the Resident Connnissioner of the Philip- 
pines in Washington, it authorizes the 
Secretary to : 

1. Sell materials, supplies, and equip- 
ment to the Commonwealth govern- 
ment : 

2. Re{)air or assist Avith the design of 
vessels, armament or equipment for the 
Connnonwealth in such amounts as the 
l iiited States naval establishment may 
be in a |)osition to do : 

3. Fix the cost for such supplies. 
equi])ment and services: the price for 
new supplies to be not less than the 
original cost to the United States govern- 
ment. 

Contracts under the authority in this 
bill nmsl contain the following restric- 
tions : 

1. The Philippine Government undertakes not to dis- 
pose of any materials, supplies, or designs to any third 
government under any circumstances; 

2. The authority for such sales and services lapses 
upon the final granting of independence to the Philip- 
pines. 

Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox, in submitting the 
proposed legislation to Congress, wrote to Speaker Sam 
Rayburn that "the enactment of the proposed legislation 
would place the Navy Department on an equal fooling 
with the War Department, so far as rendering assistance 
to the Commonwealth of the Philippines when such 
action is deemed advantageous to the public interest. 

In actual execution, this authority will make it possible 
for the Navy to make available to the Filipinos sufficient 
equipment and supplies for a small off-shore patrol, con- 
sisting mostly of small ' Q ' boats, equipped with tor- 
pedoes. Such deals, while possible now, must be routed 
through the War Department, a time-consuming arrange- 
ment. 

Naval training for Filipino seamen and the experience 
of operating a miniature fleet, even if it is only a coastal 
patrol, will go far toward strengthening the national 
morale. In the end. it will provide the nucleus of a Fili- 
pino Navy. 

At the same time — what is more important for today — 
it will provide a small force which may be of invaluable 
assistance in the immediate development of the defense 
problems of the Philippines. Such a small force, ac- 
quainted with the channels and watery passages of the 
archipelago, might easily jiroxe of incalculable assistance 
to American naval forces in the patrol of this \ asl area 
of the Phili])pines. In an emergency it is conceivable that 
such a force might pro\e decisi\ e. 



• 7 • 



BEHIND THE SCENES IN MANILA 

DON'T BELIEVE EVERYTHING 
YOU READ IN THE PAPERS 
IS THE ADVICE OF 

JAMES ROSS 



T 00 many American newspaper correspondents are 
making the long voyage to Manila in vain these days, to 
my way of thinking. Judging by the recent outbreak of 
"behind-the-scenes'' articles, literary visitors to the capital 
of the ambitious, young Commonwealth lay the founda- 
tion of their knowledge in the pleasant patio of Manila's 
fine hotel, talking to hospitable residents of th': 'Tearl 
of the Orient" who, in the words of Artemus Ward, 
"know a lot of things that just ain't so." Almost without 
exception, these w^riters have turned their indisputable 
fact-finding talents to a job of muck-raking that could 
have been done just as W'cll in Kansas City. They get only 
a glimmer of the real significance of an experiment in 
government that in time may prove more important to 
the American people than the outcome of the war in 
Europe. 

I have no wish to engage in acrimonious argument. 
Nevertheless, I can see no contribution to a righteous 
solution of one of the United States' most difficult pro- 
blems in the publicizing of inaccuracies and ill-considered 
conclusions. 

One writer, for instance, claims that all Filipinos "hate 
Americans." I went to the Philippines more than 40 
years ago as an officer in the United States Army. Our 
troops remained in the Islands after the Filipinos felt 
we had done a praiseworthy job of liberating them from 
Spain and might reasonably be expected to go home. 
The Filipinos made a determined, if futile, attempt to 
eject us, characterized by the display of no mean fighting 
qualities. The ensuing unpleasantness did indeed give rise 
to a certain amount of ill-feeling. But I insist that Amer- 
icans are not hated today. 

Establishment of civil government in 1902 won the 
wholehearted cooperation of Filipinos of all classes, 
including many outstanding leaders of the revolt against 
Spain and the subsequent insurrection against the United 
States. Certainlv no armed conflict, even between peoples 
of the same race, ever was followed by less rancor. 

The Filipinos are a kindly people, courteous to stran- 
gers and to each other, hosjjilahle to a fault, and recep- 
ti\e to social, political and economic imiovations which 
ap))ear to be for their benefit. Education along modern 
American liiu^s has l)e(Mi eagerly and gratefully received. 
The sj)rcad of the English language throughout the 



archipelagc^ has been nothing less than phenomenal. 

It is true — as recent writers have reported — that social 
conditions in the Phili jj])ines are not entirely satisfactory 
and that the lot of the laborer is not wholly happy. But 
living standards are infinitely higher than anywhere else 
in the Orient and superior to those prevailing in many 
parts of pre-war Europe. The Filipinos are the first to 
proclaim this improvement in their spiritual and material 
welfare in the past 10 years. Because of these advance- 
ments, high hojjcs have been built for th(» future. Whether 
these hopes are to be fulfilled depends upon continued 
American interest in Philippine affairs. 

Seven years ago Congress voted to cut the ties binding 
the Philippines to the United States. While the Tydings- 
McDuffiie Act may have been applauded in 1934, it was 
not of a character to insure the continued goodwill of 
the Filipino people. 

A highly placed Filipino once told me that the so- 
called Independence Act, while it might at first be hailed 
as a measure of emancipation, would in the end leave 
the Filipino people with an abiding resentment against a 
country that had given them merely the illusion of free- 
dom. I believe this prediction is accurate. The Tydings- 
McDuffiie Act in its present form is an instrument of in- 
justice. Before it is too late, the law should he subjected 
to the "realistic re-examination" proposed by former 
United States High Commissioner Paul V. McNutt. 

It is not my purpose to appear as the advocate of 
Mr. McNutt's proposal. The matter, nevertheless, merits 
thoughtful consideration at a time when events may soon 
make decisive action necessary. Whate\er may be done 
about the political provisions of this legislation, its 
economic conditions should, on elementary i)rinciples of 
justice, be subjected to radical revision. 

To those who may think that the Filipinos 'iiale 
Americans" and are eager to be rid of America as guide, 
guardian and friend, I reconnnend consideration of a 
statement made recently by the authorized spokesman of 
those people, President Maiuiel Quezon, before the 
I^hili])j)ine National Assembh . 

''All the res()urces of the Philippines, including iis 
manpower, are at th(^ disposal of tlu^ I nited Slates in 
the present emergency/" he announced. \\ hat l)(ni(M- proof 
of loyalty is there? ^ 



• 8 • PhilippineB 



The PAN-AMERICAN Idea . . . 



and the PHILIPPINES 



The of [\\c "Good \eiiihl)or** is associated in 

the public- iniiid with the American Republics, but its 
geograpbical scojx^ and beneficient influenc-e could readilv 
be extended to tbe (^onnnonwealtb of tlie Pliilippines 
without any conflict of ])urpose or tradition. The tra- 
ditions of lh(^ Philip|)ine Islands have for centuries over- 
lapj)ed those of tin* Spanish, Portuguese, and Anglo- 
Saxon jjeoples who ]3eo|)led the American continents, and 
there exist today many points of sentimental, cultural and 
commercial, no less than political contact. 

Thus, for exam|)l(\ the Fili|)inos share with the Port- 
uguese of Brazil the priceless memory of the great Port- 
uguese navigator Fernao de Magalhaes ( Ferdinand Ma- 
gellan) ; and with Argentina and Chile the knowledge 
that the Straits of Magellan and the Philippine Islands 
w^ere discovered in the course of the same wonderful 
voyage. 

They share with Mexico a history of two centuries of 
trans-Pacific galleon trade between Manila and Acapulo. 
a trade that made oriental luxury articles familiar to the 
uttermost bounds of the Americas. They share Avith all 
of Spanish-America a long colonial ])eriod under Spain. 
Manila and Havana were the special "jewels" of the 
Spanish crown. 

And finally, in the fateful decade now connnenced. 
the Philippines is in the camp of the Democracies, 
destined with the American Republics to make unknown 
sacrifices for the ]:)reservation of human freedom, civil 
liberty, and rej)resentative legislative government. 

Filipino statesmen and writers have long ap|)reciated 
their lies to the Latin American republics. President 
Manuel Quezon's '"good wilF' visit to Mexico in 1937 is 
evidence of this interest. Plans of Vice-President Sergio 
Osmena for a similar friendly tour of South America 
were disrupted 1)) the Euroj^ean War. 

Many stej3s could be taken to give practical effect to 
the "Good Neighbor'' policy in relation to the Philip- 
])ines, to the ultimate mutual advantage of the American 
Republics and the Islands. First, the sponsors of inter- 
American cultural programs should continually remember 
the connnon cultural heritage derived by the Islands and 
the American Republics from Euro|)ean sources. Amer- 
ican history, languages, geography, exploration and art 
can never be disassociated frc^ii trans-Pacific life. An ex- 
change of students and professors between Latin Amer- 
ica's ancient universities and those of the Philippines 
might have undreamed-of benefits. 

Second, in the fi(dd of diplomacy, there should be abun- 
dant opportunities for official contact and friendh as- 




Bv Harry W . Frantz 



sociation between statesmen of the Philippines and those 
of the American Republics. The Philippine Common- 
wealth must soon undergo a period of diplomatic appren- 
ticeship preparatory to complete independence. Filipinos 
should have the opportunity to attend Pan-American con- 
ferences. Their Resident Commissioner at Washington 
should be invited to attend sessions of the governing board 
of the Pan-American Union, at least as an observer. 
Young Filipinos should be attached to L'nited States Em- 
bassies or Legations in Latin American capitals for prac- 
tical experience in international relations. 

Third, commerce between the United States and the 
soon-to-be-born Philippine Republic should not be en- 
visaged as competitive with Latin American trade. The 
Philippines should be regarded as rightfullv entitled 
through long association and connnon interest to share 
whatever liberality or reciprocity the "Good Neighbor" 
policy may imply toward the American Republics. 

It is true that some Philippine products, particularlv 
sugar. compete with Latin American products in our 
markets, but experience has shown that all parties bene- 
fit by a connnon adjustment of rivalries through market- 
ing programs and a planned diversification of products. 
If L^ncle Sam looks to the American Republics as brothers, 
it is equally true that the Philippines was long a foster 
son and ward, and consequently entitled to family treat- 
ment. 

Trade experts will take note, too, that, with the tre- 
mendous geographical re-distribution of Asiatic com- 
merce, the Philippines may have a new role as inter- 
mediary in Far Eastern lousiness. History reminds us that 
the silver dollar became the currenc\ of China and great 
])arts of Asia as a direct consequence of the early ties 
between Mexico and Manila. 

In a strictly personal sense, any fair-minded obserx er 
would concede that the Filipino peo})le are qualified for 
membership in a ''good neighbor" comnumity. Iheir 
prominent traits are hospitality, generosity and adapt- 
ability to cosmopolitan society. All Resident Connnission- 
ers in Vi^ashingto!i from Pablo Ocanto and Henito Legarda 
in 1907 down to ihc incund)(Mit. Joaquin M. Elizalde. 
have enjoyed exlraordinarx popularit\ in and out of 
the Capitol because of th(Mr j)ersonal trails. Manila, in 
turn, has been a wonderful training-ground for United 
States officials and diplomats William Howard Taft. 
Henry L. Stimson. Frank Murphx. and Paul V. Mc\utt. 
to mention oidy a few. ^ 



• 9 • 



the 

FILIPINO 






L 








Ml—' 


By Manuel Adeva 


f 



Xt is axiomatic that few Filipinos come to the United 
States to stay. Most want merely to study; many are 
anxious to learn American production methods; a few 
like only to travel. Almost without exception, every 
Filipino looks forward to the day when he can return 
to the Commonwealth and live again among his own 
people. 

This fact was an element in a strange paradox that 
came to an end December 31, 1940. That paradox was 
the almost complete failure of the Filipino Repatriation 
Act of 1935. 

On July 10, 1935, the President of the United States 
approved H.R. 6464, "an Act to provide means by which 
certain Filipinos can emigrate from the United States."' 
Popularly called the Repatriation Act, it specified 
(broadly) that any Filipino in the United States was 
entitled to repatriation at the expense of the Government. 

'Tt is recognized that there are a great number of 
Filij)inos in the United States whose removal to the 
Philippines would be to their advantage and to the ad- 
vantage of the C(jmmunities in which they now reside," 
the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization 
Service reported at the time the measure was being con- 
sidered. "The Filijjino can not be removed unless he 
makes application for such benefit. He is not to be con- 
sidered as if dejjorted ..." 

The House Committee on Immigration and Naturaliza- 
tion Service estimated that 20,000 to 30,000 Filipinos 
would apply for rejjatriation. But on the day the act ex- 
pired, only 2,190 Filipinos had accepted free transporta- 
tion to Manila. 

\\ hat caused this surprising upset of all ofTirial expecta- 
tions ? Admittedly, the Repatriation Act was a boon to 
man\ Filijjinos in the Lnited States. The economic crises 
of 1029 and 1932 had thrown thousands of them out of 
employment. Hundreds ])e( ame destitute, dependent U(3on 
private or public charit\. Passage of the Philippine In- 
dependence y\ct in 1931 aggra\ated their already deplor- 
able condition by fostering a misconception of their legal 
status. Americans, reading that the Philipjjines had 



adopted its own Constitution and elected a Pr(\^ident, be- 
lieved the Commonwealth had becc^me an independent 
country and that Filipinos, therefore, w(m-c aliens. Citizen- 
ship was made a requirement for employment in many 
lines, and "non-citizen" Filipinos were laid oil. 

One would think that thousands of I'ilipinos. without 
employment and faced by starvation, would promptly 
apply for free transportation to Manila under the Re- 
patriation Act. Yet. records of the Immigration Service 
show that in 1936 only 157 avail(;d th(Mnsclv(\^ of the 
privilege and in 1937 not more than 526. 

The reason only a littler more than on(^ tenth of the 
estimated number look advantage of this hunianitarian 
law passed by the l nited States Government is easv to 
find. No matter by what sweet name it was called, the Re- 
patriation Act was considered by Filipinos to be a de- 
portation measure. Whoever availed himself of its 
benefits was thereafter pointed to as a failure. 

Early repatriates, moreover, were instrumental in dis- 
couraging others from returning und(M' tlie Act. Unsuited 
to life in the Islands, disillusioned by unfulfilled hopes 
of employment and disajjpointed by shattered dreams for 
a better life, they repeatedly admonished those still in 
the United States not to return home without savings and 
assured employment. The extensive publicity given to 
them in Manila upon their arrival as "deportees" and 
"problem children" added to the average Filipino's dis- 
trust of the well-meaning Repatriation Act. 

Admittedly, of course, many repatriates, reunited with 
their families after years of separation, were happy to 
be home again. Uetters written by parents who had aban- 
doned hope of ever seeing their sons again indicated the 
priceless value of this humanitarian measure. And the 
resolutions sent to the Secretary of Labor by repatriates, 
expressing appreciation for the benefits extended by the 
law and gratitude to Immigration officials for their suc- 
cessful and pleasant journey to the Philippines, was 
significant. 

The real answer, however, to the question of why few 
Filipinos returned under the Repatriation Act lies in the 
purpose for which most of them came to the United 
States. Their paramount motive was to better themselves, 
financially as well as intellectually. If they have failed to 
achieve their purpose, they prefer to remain in obscurity 
in the United States; if successful, they would not risk 
their future in the Philippines with tiie stigma of re- 
])atriation. The repatriation way was the way of those 
who have failed, and every Filipino wants to be a success 
in the United States. 

Expiration of the 1935 Act ended the effort to re- 
j)atriate Filijjinos through charily. Some lunv system is 
now needed. Most desirable would be a gcMieral increase 
in the income of Filipinos in the United Stales, since 
experieiKe has shown that success is a grc^aler spur to 
repatriation iban failure. |]ut ihe fact r(Mnains that most 

( / urn /() Pa ire 24) 



o 10 ® E^hiHppines 




ame 



ABOUT AMERICA'S PHILIPPINE MARKET 



Compiled hy Vrbano A. Zafra 



V><OLD slalislics in dollars and ceiiti? reveal many sijjnifieanl faets 
about Anieriean-Pliilippine eeononiie relationships. They prove the 
Philippines to be an eeononiie asset to the United States, both as a 
souree of stratejjie materials for national defense and as a eonsnmer 
of Ameriean farnu mine and faetory prodnets. 

From the standpoint of profits and benefits to Ameriean ex- 
porters, the Philippines is the fifth best enstomer of the United 
States. It is snrpassed only by Canada, the United Kingdom^ Franee 
and Japan. 



U.S. CHIEF MARKETS AND SUPPLIERS IN 1939 

COURTESY OF CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF U.S.A. 
EACH COMPLETE SYMBOL = 50 MILLION DOLLARS 



RANK AS 
BUYER 



RANK AS 
SELLER 



$ 505, 227,000 
$ 493, 450,000 



$ 231, ^05,000 



$ 181, 825,000 

KD(D 

. 100, 018, ooo 



$Q6, 809,000 
$ ^ o, 6ol,000 



$ 8 3, 177,0 00 



$ 81, 6^^,000 
$80,^41,000 



1 

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 



UNITED KINGDOM 
CANADA 
JAPAN 
FRANCE 

PHILIPPINES 

NETHERLANDS 
SWEDEN 
MEXICO 
CUBA 
BRAZIL 



3 
1 
2 
11 

8 
22 
17 
15 
6 
5 



$151,320,000 



$332,681,000 

€)€)€)( 

$ 161,082,000 



$ 61,406,000 



15; 

$01,906,000 
$28,272,000 



$42,006,000 



$ 54,^7^,000 
$ J01,0P6, OOO 
$106,298,000 



The Pliilip|)iii(\-i buys more cluMiiicals from I'nitod Statos tliau any country rxcopt 
Canada and \hr United Kino(Ioni. In 1939, the Pliilii)pines i)aid 88.619,625 for eheniieals. 

The Philipi)ines is the fourth best l)uyer of AintMiean vegetable pro(hiets. Th(^ vahie 
of these exports to the Phihpiiines in 1939 was $18,055,301. 

The iron and steel industries of the United States sent to tlu^ IMiilippino S32.79().()()0 
worth of eleetrieal and industrial niaehinery and nitMal numufaetures of all types in 1939. 
United States exports of gasoline and other oils to the rhilij)pin{\^ aggregated 88. 887. 000 
that vear. 



• If o 




^amc Ijfach \BOUT MAER\CKS PHILIPPINE MARKET 



TThE Philippine Commonwealth for many years has heen the IS'iun- 
her One Buyer of more than 100 individual Ameriean products. 



PRINCIPAL MARKETS FOR U. S. 


COTTON 


MANUFACTURES 


ftSf EACH COMPLETE SYMBOL = $ 2,500,000 


PHILIPPINES 

$ 13,94), AAQ 




CUBA 

$ 8,095, 437 




CANADA 

$ 7,287,659 




COLOMBIA 

$ 3,279,903 





Southern cotton fanners furnished the raw materials for 
S56.292.104 worth of cotton cloth exported in 1939. Tlie 
Philij)pines paid 2TV r of the totaL For years the Philippines 
has ])een America's Ix-st market for cotton cloth. 



PRINCIPAL MARKETS FOR WHEAT FLOUR 
WHOLLY OF U.S. WHEAT 

© EACH COA\PLETE SYMBOL=$500.000 



PHILIPPINES 

$3,394,754 

CHINA 

$3,136,176 

NETHERLANDS 

i2.33 1.350 

CUBA 

$1,677,556 



i 



The Pacific Northwest ex|)orte(l floui". made wholly of 
American wh -at. valued at SI 6.950.058 in 1939. The Philip- 
pines was the hest huy<'r. takin«i: 20'' r <d the total shipments. 



CHIEF BUYERS OF AMERICAN CIGARETTES 

\\, EACH COMPLETE SY^^BOL-$500,000 



PHIUPPINES 

$5,607,3 2 8 



FRANCE 

$682,730 



CANAL ZONE W 

$560,847 

NETHERLANDS V\\ 

$555,422 V3V 



K\})ort< of \meiican cij^arettes. manufactured from 
lohacco «i.j-owii on thr \tlanlic Seal)(>ard. amounted to S12.- 
6 15.50 1 in 1959. The l^hilippines was ai^ain the hest cus- 
touH'i- with pnic]ia>e^ amnunling t«» 85.607.528. oi* 15'^^ of 
tin- ex pni t t ot al. 



CHIEF BUYERS OF U.S. STEEL 
GALVANIZED SHEETS 

/^EACH COMPLETE SYAABOL= $ 3 00,0 O O 

^mmp nHimatiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 

CUBA 

$435,130 



American sletd factories in P^59 exported S8.9 15.129 woith 
of tj;alvaniz<-d >te(d sheets, (►f which HO^'r went to the Philip- 
l)in(\<. Here ajiain the Philip|)ines was the best custonuM'. 




^ame Ijfach XBOUTMAERiCKS PHILIPPINE MARKET 



U.S. BEST CUSTOMERS FOR 
TRUCK AND AUTO TIRES 

EACH COMPLETE SYMBOL = $ 500,000 



PHILIPPINES ((^ 

$2,237,281 

BRAZIL 

$ 1,116,245 

CUBA 

$ 1,002,237 

IRAN 

$8 60,33 3 

BRITISH INDIA ((^ 

$824,869 




RiiMxT factories in the I'nited States e\i)()rte(l in 
tires of ail kinds valued at 810.27;"). 307. The Philii)i)ines was 
the laiirest ini|)(>rter. takini: I I''; of the total V. S. e\i)orts. 



U.S. BEST CUSTOMERS FOR 
EVAPORATED AND CONDENSED MILK 

2 EACH COMPLETE SYMBOL =$ I 00,000 

PHILIPPINES gggggggggi 



$959,970 

CANAL ZONE 

$23^.308 

MEXICO 

$97,706 

NETHERLANDS 
INDIES 

$ 92.221 



BBS 
E 



Kxports of eva{)orated and condensed milk from Ameri- 
can dairy farms amounted to $2,078,348 in 1939. Of this. 
\()^ ( went to the l^hilippines. which has for years heen the 
hest customer. 



F(>R1'\ years of Aiiiorioaii occupalion has seen 
Philippine lra<le >villi the Ignited Slates inerease 
31 times over. Philippine purehases of American 
prodnets have increased 43-fol(K while Philippine 
sales to the United States have mnltiplied 24 times. 

Thronghont the* period of this notahle develop- 
ment of American-Philippine trade, free trade has 
prevailed. 



AMERICAN-PHILIPPINE COMMERCE, 1899-1939 


1939 




HHHHI^^IHH^^^HH sioo.oie.oooBi 






1910- 
1914 


$I9,'430,000 


'mW^ $22,596,000 


1899- 


1 $2,347,000 


1910 


^ $ 3,81^, 000 




U.S. IMPORTS FROM PHILIPPINES 




g^;^:^^ U.S. EXPORTS to Philippines 



Americ AN hnsinessmen, hanks^ insurance firms 
and investment houses have henefited from the 
development of Philippine industries aiicl re- 
sources, particularly the recent expansion of ^jold 
mining. Today, the Philippines is the second most 
important gold producer under the American flag. 



U.S. PRINCIPAL GOLD PRODUCERS IN 1939 

^-^^ EACH COMPLETE SYMBOL = 10 MILLION DOLLARS 

N^^Jl^rk' 



CALIFORNIA 

$^9,263,500 ^ 

PHILIPPINES^ 

$3S.S32.900 

ALAS K A '^M^ k] 

$23,399,000 ^ 

SO. DAKOTA 

$21,48^,000 ^^S^ 

COLORADO -"^^ ^ 

$12,6^0,000 ^^^^ ^ 

NEVADA 

$11,930,000 ^^J>^ 



13 




^ame Ijfach \BOUT XmRiCKS PHILIPPINE MARKET 



/VMERICAN merchant ships have carried the hulk of Aniericau- 
PhiHppine commerce, assisting United States competition in ship- 
ping in the Pacific. 



NATIONALITY OF VESSELS IN PHILIPPINE TRADE 
AND THE VALUE OF CARGOES CARRIED 

ANNUAL AVERAGE, 1930-1939 



AMERICAN 

$70.1 50.000 

BRITISH 

$56,131,000 

JAPANESE 

$33,3Z8.O0O 

NORWEGIAN 

$21,139,000 

DUTCH 

49.l2 9.O00 

GERMAN 

DANISH 

$7,344,000 

OTHERS 

$12,585,000 



PERCENT 

32% 
26% 
15% 
10% 
4% 
4% 
3% 
6% 



EACH COMPLETE SYMBOL = 10 MILLION DOLLARS 

^7 jl^^ ^ig^^ ^g^^ 
^^B^ 



Mi 



TOTAL $218,254,000 = 100% 



J. HE Philippine market comprises a population of 16,000,000 

half again as large as Canada, almost equal to the combined popu- 
lation of the Netherlands and Belgium, two and a half times the 
number of people in California or four times the entire popuhition 
of Cuba. 

COAAPARATIVE POPULATION OF DIFFERENT AREAS 

EACH COMPLETE SYMBOL= 2 MILLION 



PHILIPPINES 

16, 356, 000 

CANADA 

II, 500,000 

NETHERLANDS 

8,639,5 95 

BELGIUM 

8,386, 553 

CALIFORNIA 

6.031,000 

CUBA 

4J08,650 



O Or, On Oo O^. Of) ^ n n 

tS& tSA tSk Kf^ t 

^ ^ ^ i g 

^ ^ ^ ^ fi 

H 0 0 0 I 

^ ^ ^ ^ I 

^ i ' 



• 14 • Philippines 




jHanila^s ji/ist 

FIRST LADY 



In almost cvcM v proN iiice of the Philii)i)ine> today 
there is a j)ark. a iiardcMi. a slrrrt — oflrn a wludc town — 
which bears the nainr Aurora, lioiiorinii the First Ladv 
of the Coiuniomveahh. Mrs. Aurora Aragon Quezon. A 
woman of rart^ personal charm and simple elegance, 
possessed of a kind heart and sympathetic understanding 
that have endeared her to the Filipino people. "Dona 
Aurora" has eflicienlly combined her duties as hostess of 
Malacanan. as wife of the first l^resident (^f the Connnon- 
weallh, and as the mothcM- of three lo\eIy children. 

yVlthough Aurora Aragon was born of well-to-do |)ar- 
enls in the town of Hal(M\ Tayabas Province, the conllsca- 
lion of their property by the S|)anish goveriunent during 
the revolution lueant hard work for the eight children. 
The family lived in a one-room uipa shack and slept on 
a bamboo floor covered with native woven mat. Mrs. 
Quezon's childhood experiences served her well, for she 
not only understands the needs of the j)oor. but can hel|) 
w^omen leaders and government oflicials solve manv of 
the social ])roblems of the country. 

Describing her girlhood, the First Lady once told a 
large group of laborers that she did wliat no young 
man or w^oman would do today — pound rice in crude 
w^ooden mortars, w alk barefoot and fetch water in earthen 
jars, do the family laundry, help cultivate vegetables 
and sw^cet potatoes in the home lot. and plant rice in 
the muddy fields in rain and scorching heat alike. 

What little schooling Dona Aurora had began when she 
learned the alphabet froiu her aunt. Manuel Quezon's 
mother. This w^is supplemented by two years in the 
Franciscan convent at Baler and two years at the Philip- 
pine Normal school, where i)oor health ])revented her 
completing the regular course. Mrs. Quezon's inability to 
finish her formal studies made her the more determined 
to improve herself. Reading Fnglish, Spanish and Taga- 
log, she built up a library which today has more than 
2,000 volumes, ri h in ancient history and tales of the 
Filipino people. 

Her marriage was the culmination of a quiet romance 
with her cousin, Don Manuel, then president of the Philip- 
pine Senate. It took |)Iace in Decend)er. 1918 at Hong- 
kong while Mr. Quezon was en route to the United States 
as head of tlu^ first Philij)|)ine Ind(^|)(Mulence Mission. 

So imjx^tuous was tlu^ wedding that, when Mr. Quezon 
wired his friend, ernor-(/(MHMal F. B. Harrison. 



Br Filar N. Ravelo 



about the event, he forgot one of the most important 
details. Harrison had to cable back. "What is the name 
of the bride?*' 

The success of the nation-wide health rehabili-alion 
movement, especiallv among the indigent, is attributed 
to the persistent efforts of Dona Aurora in improving 
Fili|uno welfare. Clinics, nurseries, diet kitchens, and 
child welfare centers are now established throughout the 
Philippines. Provincial executives, inspired by the First 
Lady's interest in comnumity health and nursing, have 
taken up the campaign for more hospitals. 

At the recent inauguration of a hospital in a Socialist 
province. Mrs. Quezon was guest of honor. She listened 
patiently to the Socialist mayor until he declared that the 
new hospital was onlv for the privileged. Dona Aurora, 
enraged at the allegation, stood up and firmly told the 
audience that the hospital had been erected for all. 
irrespective of class. She received a thunderous ovation. 

E\en before she became hostess at Malacaiian. Mrs. 
Quezon's name was a synonym for humanitarian efforts, 
and public health and nursing projects. Each Christmas, 
hundreds of poor Manila children received money, food 
and clothing from Dona Aurora. She continues this 
philanthropic work at Malacaiian, but on a greater scale. 
Her children now help in distributing these gifts. 

Mrs. Quezon helped found the Asociacion de Damas 
Filipinas in 1913. The organization now^ operates a settle- 
ment house for destitute women and children. Through 
her sponsorship and initiative, the Community Health and 
Nursing Association of Manila was founded. Because •)f 
her tremendous influence over Filipino women, she js 
honorary president of everv important w'omen's organi- 
zation in the Commonwealth. 

In recognition of her efforts to improve public health, 
the Philippine General HospitaPs School of Nursing has 
awarded her a diploma in nursing. She has also recei\ed 
an honorary degree of Doctor of Law^s for humanitarian 
service from Marygrove College, Detroit, (1937). the 
Philippine Women's l iiiversity in January. 1910, and the 
I niversity of Santo T(;mas in March, 1910. 

Table temiis w ith the President is Mrs. Quezon's fax or- 
ile indoor sport. The President loses many a game to his 
charming wife, although he is considered adept at the 
game himself. ^ 



1. 




mm CITY 

Functional Planning 
Gets its Chance 



QUEZON CITY FROM THE AIR. Quezon Boulevard, main 
thoroughfare from Manila, leads directly to the new 
Capitol, rising in the ellipse near the top. 



wii!i!!:;^:;;l.ls 





NEW GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS are rising. President 
Quezon laid the cornerstone of the new Capitol on Novem- 
ber 15. 1910. 





MODEL HOMES FOR CIVIL SERVANTS, who will work in 
Quezon City. Government-spf)nsored low-cost housing is 
a feature of the Philippines' ambitious new capital city. 



By Harry T. Frost 

J I ST after the turn of the ccMitury — almost before the 
Philijjpine InsurrecticMi had ended — an ambitious citv 
plan was drafted for Manihi. As broad new streets were 
laid out through the suburbs, fine buildings were de- 
signed to take ad\antage of the improved vistas. A great 
( i\ ic rennaissance was |)redictcd. The forecast was justi- 
fied: in 40 years the jjopuhition of Manila and its suburlis 
grew from 350,0()() to well o\er a million, and the Philip- 
jjine capital developed into the most beautiful city in the 
Orient. 

But the result was not what had been anticipated. The 
truth was that Manila quickly outgrew itself. A new and 
farther-reaching plan was necessary. We believe that 
the answer is in Quezon City. 

The Old Manila that Admiral Dewey found in 1398 
was situated on a narrow tongue of flat delta land be- 
tween the muddy Pasig River and land-locked Manila 
Bay. The capital of today extends for five miles along the 
eastern shore of the bay and irdand for another five miles. 
Behind Manila, a mile or two back from the bay, the 
uplands of Central Luzon begin. The slope is gradual, 
ascending to a comparatively cool and dry [)lateau with 
an altitude of about 200 feet. The terrain is rugged in 
spots. Several streams have cut their way through the 
fertile soil U) the underlying volcanic rock, adding variety 
and interest to the countryside. This is the site of Quezon 
(jty. which in a few years is to take the plac^e of Manila 
as the capital of the Philippines. 

Quezon City is no capricious monument t(^ the first 
president of the Commonwealth. It is the result of a 
steady and insistent demand for space. The area could just 
as easily have continued as a batch of unrelated suburbs, 
but the natural beauty of the irregular plateau, high above 
Manila, suggested a new. better- jjlanned, more beautiful 
capital citx. Strongh supporting these artistic considera- 



o 16 ® Philippines 




BROAD AVENUES hisrcl Qiirzon Chy. Most of the land 
was until {\\c y(\irs aizo (Miliri^ly undeveloped. Its size 
permits cil) j)laiuiinu on a scale st^ldoni possible today. 



ticns was tlu^ thouuht of the praelieal deheieneies of 
Manila — o\ ere rowdin*}:, narrow streets, under-sized build- 
ing lots, and serious lack of open space. Quezon City is 
a new urban area planned in advance to make livin^ 
more pleasant. 

The actual genesis of the idea was on a small scale. The 
uplands were part of a series of feudal land holdings 
which, even as late as 1935, were entirely undeveloped. 
One vast estate — its 4.000 acres only a mile from the 
edge of Manila — was bought by the government. Bridges 
were built and a low-cost housing development started. 
The idea of a haven for the underprivileged expanded 
into a dream of a city, and the city with great natural ad- 
vantages blossomed into a new capital of the Common- 
w^ealth, with ample room for rich and poor. The bound- 
aries were made to encompass many suburbs on the 
eastern edge of Manila. Quezon City was born. 

Quezon City's area of 280 square miles is more than 
twice that of Manila, and the Goven.ment owns a third 
of the land. Substantial areas have been set aside for 
public buildings, schools, j)arks, a new 1,200-acre campus 
for the University of the Philippines, a permanent Na- 
tional Exposition, and a large arboretum and nursery to 
supply trees and plants for the entire city. With such a 
large area under goverim.ent control, tliere is a fine op- 
portunity for proper city d(^velopment. Fortunately, also, 
much of the private j)r()j)(Mly is in large holdings. Thus, 
city layout is facilitated. 

School sites are being established about a mile and a 
half apart. School grounds will be from eight to 16 acres 
in extent. Provision is also being made for a golx course, 
a \ ocational school, ccnu^ti ries and an aviation field. 
There will be drives beside the many waterways. The 
suI)di\ision of ])ri\ale j)roperl\ will follow a plan pr*)- 
viding major and minor sti(M»ls and school and park 
sites. Areas for public markc^ts ha\e been set aside. Sec- 
tions intended as business districts are being designed for 
that j)urj)ose, with ample streets and j^arking space. 

Work is proceeding rapidly on the construction of 
Quezon City. An a\( nuc 200 fc(H wide has been built from 




STREAMS AND VALLEYS are being bridged in accordance 
with a master plan. Water courses are being beautified 
as part of the park system. 



the center of Manila to the Capitol site, a distance of 
five miles. President Quezon laid the cornerstone of the 
Capitol building last Commonwealth Day, November 15. 
Other public buildings soon to follow are the city hospital 
and several public markets in widely separated neighbor- 
hoods. Plans are being prepared for the Supreme Court 
Building and the Executive Mansion. 

Many city planning opportunities present themselves 
in Quezon City, not the least of which is the projection of 
new streets into old Manila. Quezon City is indeed a huge 
suburb, separated from Manila only by such open park 
spaces as can be acquired today. The new capital will 
inject new life into the bigger city. 

In a recent message to the Philippine National As- 
sembly, President Quezon summed up the program for 
the new capital. 

"The rapidly increasing population of the city of 
Manila," he declared, "and the highly unsatisfactory con- 
ditions in the districts where the laborers live have con- 
stituted a problem which for a long time needed attention. 
To solve this problem, as well as give impetus to scientific 
city planning, Quezon City has been created, adjoining 
Manila, and is now being developed into a model com- 
munity.*' 

Manila is fortunate in that any discussion of the ad- 
\anlages or disadvantages of urban decentralization is 
still academic. By comparison with an American city, it 
has few automobiles and no radiating six-lane parkways. 
Ccnsequently, the urge to move ever farth'^r into the 
suburl)s is almost entirely lacking. Manila is spared the 
daily five oV'lock rush of thousands of cars along jammed 
thoroughfares. Th^re are no sprawling sul)divisions. no 
no-nian s-land of barlxH'ue huts, road houses and bill- 
])oards. Manila, instead of looking forward to an old ag(^ 
marked by miles of abandoned slums and. as is the case 
in many American cities, declining pro|)erly \ alu(^s. 
continues its a igorous growth as a center of conun(M'<'(^ 
ard industry. It is this condition that Qntv.on (jt> is 
designed to promote. ^ 



• 17 • 




By Emilia Agiiilar 
• .18 o Pliilippimies 



A POPULAR fiction magazine that 
thrives without advertising ... a 
national English-language weekly in 
a country where English was virtu- 
ally unknown 40 years ago . . . ten 
publications under one roof . . . 

The largest publishing enterprise 
in the Philippines, Ramon Roces. Inc.. 
has performed journalistic feats that 
seem little short of miracles U) most 
American editors. For instance, your 
"pulps" prosper without advertising, 
but ad-less Liivayway is far from ])e- 
ing a pulp publication. To the con- 
trary, it holds a literary position 
comparable to Collier's or the Satur- 
day Evening Post. 

Likewise, there may seem to be 
nothing remarkable in an English- 
language weekly edited by and for 
Fili|)inos. But the Graphic makes a 
specialty of well-rounded. stafT-written 
articles on Philippine and world af- 
fairs; it dramatizes the week's news 
in a regular supplement after the 
fashion of Time and Neiisiceeh : and 
it publishes literary works of such 
distinction that some of them have 
found their way into y\merican an- 
thologies and magazines. 

Lastly, it may be suggested that 
]nd)lication of ten magazines by one 
house amounts to uneconomic dupli- 
cation. Closer acquaintance with the 
special fields of the various Ramon 
Roces magazines is necessary for full 
appreciation of their work. 

Luzon, the largest island of the 
Philippines, has three great language 
groups, Tagalog, Ilocano. and Bicol, 
while two other important dialects 
are used in the Visayan islands to 
the south. To obtain anything re- 
sembling complete coverage, a pub- 
lisher obviously must use more than 
one medium. The w^eekly Liwayway 
(whose circulation of 85,000 is 
double that of its nearest competitor ) 
serves the Tagalog-speaking belt of 
Central Luzon. Baiuiawag and Bikol- 
uon are read in the northern fllocos) 
and southern ( Bicol ) provinces re- 
spectively; the former is also })opu- 
lar in Ilocano communities in Hawaii 
and on the Pacific (]oast. The western 
Visayas area is served by Bisaya in 
Cebuano. and eastern Visayas by 
11 iligaynon in Tlongo. All are weeklies 



excej)t th(^ fortnightly Bikolnon. the 
latest addition to the Ramon Roces 
chain. 

While these vernacular magazines 
are addressed to the masses. Crap/iic, 
an Engh*sh-hinguag(* weekly. aj)peals 
to th(» great middh* class and the in- 
telligensia. Its circuhition ranks next 
to that of f.iirayu ay. f/iicai^a is a true- 
deteclixc weekly in Tagalog. and the 
/1^ri( ul/ural-//i(/iistriai M o n t Ji I y ^ 
edited in English, is directed at farm- 
ers and stockmcMi. Ramon Roces. Lie. 
also has a majorit\ int(M(\^t in and 
publishes the Wo/nan's Ilo/ne Journal' 
World, the Philippines' only womeirs 
magazine. 

'I he Ramon Roces j)ul)lishing house 
began with a hand-me-down press 
conlributed by Alejandro Roces, Sr., 
publisher of the TVT papers of 
Manila, the Tribune (English). Van- 
f^uardia (Si)anish). and Taliha (Tag- 
alog). Young Ramon, with this equip- 
ment, launched a picture magazine in 
V^^25. It failed almost immediately. 
Within less than a month, however, 
he put out the first number of Liway- 
way, an immediate success. It netted 
him enough to construct his own 
building and found Graphic a few^ 
years later. His other magazines fob 
lowed steadily as business expanded. 
Early this year he opened a new four- 
story building in downtown Manila, 
the best appointed publishing estab- 
lishment in the city. 

Ramon Roces has a reputation of 
benevolence toward his w^orkers. 

"It is our conviction," he says, 
'•that by creating a wdiolesome and 
friendly atmosphere in our offices we 
shall inspire greater industry, dis- 
cipline, enthusiasm, and loyalty." 

In the new Philippine census just 
compiled, the number of regular 
new^spaper and magazine readers is 
given as 1,717,457. Of this audience, 
Ramon Roces magazines reach no less 
than 1.247.936. In their regional em- 
phasis, the Roces vernacular publica- 
tions correspond to American dailies, 
but in circulation they (correspond to 
the American national magazines. 
They are thus difficult to classify in 
terms of American ])eriodicals. The 
one thing that everybodv conccrlcs 
without reseixalion is that they are 
ubicjuitous. ^ 




iMIJOLIC (,f [\w IMiilippiiu^s" lonu 
coniKN lioii w ilh the \\ (v-^Um ii world. 

coal of anus of (loininon- 
wrahh (•oinl)in(\^ iialiNc ideas with 
motifs l)orr()\\(Hl from S|)ain and \\\c 
I idled Slal(\<. Siiini (Icanlh . il is [he 
se\enth in ihe Islands* l()()-\ear his- 
tory as a ])olilic'al enlily. 

The ])resent eresl consists of ihrtM^ 



The Philippine 

parts: an American eagle, a shield 
thai conihines Spanish heraldry Avilh 
nali\e Philip|)ine symhols. and a 
si roll. This dt\^iun hecame ollicial in 
1V).">5. at llu^ linu^ of the inanuuralion 
oi llu^ ('onnnonu (\dth. and was 
a(hij)liMl Irom an earlier crest pro- 
(hictni in If the history of 

|)ri^\ ions political chaniics in the 
I'hilippin(\< is a reliable i>nide. llu^ 
ollicial cr(\<[ will auain he altered in 
10 1() w luMi llit^ C'.onnnonwealth he- 
ci.nu\< an indcptMulenl Republic. 

I h(^ (\irlii\-l knoAMi coal of arms 
madt^ ils appi\iranci^ ahoul I and 
conlinutnl in us(^ until ihe middle of 
lh(^ last ctMitur\. when anotluM-. based 
on llu^ Spanish cr(\^l. was adopted. 
This was rej)udialed b\ the Filij)inos 
who riwolled in 11)92. Wso native de- 
^iuns ^\lM•e j)ut forward simultauf^- 
ousl\. ii(MUMall\ sitnilar bul \ar\inu 
in detail. Thesi^ ditTerenct\< \\ere ad- 
justed in K)9{> and the result iui^- coat 
of arms was oHicially adopted that 
Near b\ the shorl-li\ed Philippine 
Republic. 

American occupation of the Islands 



Coat of Arms 

necessitated another change, however. 
The new seal, jnepared for the De- 
partment of State by Gaillard Hunt, 
bore 13 alternating red and ^^•hite 
stri|,>es. a blue chief, and an cn al con- 
taining the arms of Manila — the 
castle of Spain — and a sea lion. Sur- 
mounting the shield was an American 
eagle, and below a scroll w ith '"Philip- 
j)ine Islands.** This coat of arms re- 
mained in use for 30 years. 

Establishing of the Conunonw ealth 
brought a modification. The stripes 
Nvere reduced to two. and three five- 
pointed gold stars were added. 
"Philippine Islands** on the scroll 
became "Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines.** That is the Conunonwealth 
coat of arms as it appears today. 

Last August the Philippine Na- 
tional Assembly decided the seal was 
out of date, and voted to adopt a new 
form. Six months of consideration, 
however, eonvinced the legislators 
that their decision was unwise. In 
March they voted to restore the 1935 
form, with its Spanish castle and its 
sea lion, to official use. ^ 



A Friend in (.our I (from Page 3) 

Indej)endenc(» Act, and soon thereafter the Philippine 
Legislature ratified the compact. Murph\ took energetic 
and joyful charge of the historic transition to Conunon- 
wealth status. Ih' called a (^)nstilutional Convention to 
draft the new basic law of [he Philippines, and directed 
the holding of the nation-wide ])lel)iscil(^ which ratified 
it. He personall) went 1 (),()()() miles to Washington for 
the signing of the infant Constitution at tlu^ White House, 
and he superintended tlu^ first election of a Connnon- 
w ealth President. 

On No\end)er 15. 1935. Murph\ formally turned ov(M' 
the role of Chief Kx(M'utive to President Manuel 1.. 
Quezon. designation of President Roosevelt, he then 
became the first American High ('ommissionei-. 

He had closed an era. We saw the fruition of )cars of 
struggle for a goal of which he had a |)eculiar apprecia- 
tion. He saw a j>eople granted a charier of independenct\ 
and was a figure in the drama prcM cding that grant. The 
last \mcri< an proconsul (d ihc old i(^gime was also |)ri\i- 



leged to be the first conunissioner to the new. It was a 
mo\ ing experience. 

In addition to his other achievements in the Philip- 
])ines. Frank Murphy helped with the preparations for 
Conunonwealth status by persuading Filipinos from every 
station of life to contribute their talents to the business of 
governing themselves. Some of the men he introduced 
to government are leaders of the national effort today. 

On Ma\ 11. 1936 Murphy returned to the United 
Stales to report to President Roosevelt; soon after he 
took a leave of absence to cam})aign successfully for the 
go\ernorshi|) of Michigan. His lMiilip|)ine assignment 
was over. 

Murphy left his Filipino friends with deep rc^gret. and 
he has maintained the closest personal contacts w ith nuuiy 
of them ever since. From time to time he has j)ublicly 
expressed a longing to visit again the scene of his dra- 
matic and historic experiences in the Far East. His years 
in Manila made a j)rofound and lasting impression on 
Murj)liy*s character, just as he made a lasting imprint 
on the Philippines. ^ 



• 19 • 



CRISIS 

. . . in tka ^kili^pinc Coconut SJ n(J.u6t'iij 



By Ernesto D. Ihistre 



W ITH copra prices at the lowest level in five decades 
and giving no promise of revival, the Philippine coco- 
nut industry, the Islands' second most important source 
of income, faces a crisis that means poverty to the more 
that 4,000,000 Filipinos who depend on it for a livelihood. 
Late last fall, grow'ers in Laguna, Batangas and Tayahas 
Provinces, despairing of salvaging their $225,000,000 in- 
vestment and 835,000,000 annual trade, actually discussed 
cutting down their coconut trees and planting food. 

The importance of the coconut industry to the Philip- 
pine economic structure is often overlooked. More than 
1,500,000 acres of land are devoted to growing. Exports 
of coconut oil, copra, desiccated coconut and copra meal 
had a combined value of $21,325,000 in 1939. Most im- 
portant of all, it is the poor man's industry, since it 
takes a minimum of investment and skill. 

Coconut palms, w^hich require about five years to reach 
maturity, continue to produce for about 30 years. Ripe 
coconuts are collected, split and spread in the sun. When 
the meat can be removed from the shell, it is placed on 
a grid and smoked until dry. The product is copra. 

The crisis confronting Filipino copra producers — 
primarily the result of low' prices — is made more difficult 
by three contributing factors. These are the relatively 
inefficient methods employed in the Philippine copra 
industry; the closing of European and other important 
foreign markets by the war; and the operation of re- 
strictive limitations on the entry of Philippine coconut 
oil into the United States. 

In appraising their mounting troubles two years ago, 
Filipino coconut men were candid enough to realize and 
admit they would have to overhaul their wasteful method 
of kiln-drying the coconut 
meat if they wished to com- 
pete with other parts of the 
East Indies. They know that 
better (•o])ra fetches a In^tler 
price in the world markets: 
they knew. too. that over- 
hauling the entire industry to 
insure better copra Avould 
cost several million dollars. 
This they were willing to 
spend. Hut no sooner was 
this dcM'ision jeached than 
the outbreak of war in Eu- 
rope demolished all thes(^ 
carefully-laid plans. Outlets 
on the continent disa})peared. 




TROPICAL HELMETS for the Phili|)|)in(^ Armv 
now manuiaclured from coconut filxM*. 



resulting in the Icjss of more than a million dollars in an- 
nual trade. Furthermore, the American market — the onlv 
impf)rtant buyer left for Philipj)inc coconut |)r()ducls 
— is getting smaller ever\ \ear. For. although cojn'a is 
on the Lnited States customs free list. imj)orts of coconut 
oil are limited to decreasing cpiotas under th(^ Inde- 
pendence y\ct. 

Fully cf)gnizant of this fad. but determined to amel- 
iorate conditions in the coconut growing j)rovinces, the 
Phili]3])ine (^oNcrnment recently undertook a rehabilita- 
tion program. Maximo Rodriguez, former governor of 
Tayabas Province and long an advocate of rehabilitating 
the industry, is in charge. An important planter him- 
self, Rodriguez, who has a reputation for executive abil- 
ity, has surrounded himself with able assistants, who have 
at heart the interests of the industry. 

The most difficult job facing Philippine coconut grow- 
ers is to prepare themselves for the eventual loss of 
preference in American markets — a gigantic task indeed 
in view of the keen competition from babasii oil from 
South America. The first step will be to establish '"cen- 
trals" and copra dryers in all coconut-producing regions, 
and to study methods to utilize such by-products as coir 
fiber and coconut shell. Attention is also being given to 
proposals that a campaign be waged to improve copra 
qualit}, that wherever possible Philippine motor vehicles 
and stationary internal combustion engines use coconut 
oil as fuel and that all coconut b>-pr()ducts be utilized. 

Whether such remedial steps at this late date can save 
the Philip})ine coconut industry from ruin is impossible 
to say. It is a fact, however, that coconut men look at the 
future with no enthusiasm. The Connnonw'ealth Govern- 
tnent's hands are tied ])y the {provisions of the Philippine 

Economic' Readjustment Act, 
( the Tydings - Kocialkowski 
Law of 1939) which specifi- 
cally forbids any cash sub- 
sidy to the industry. Particu- 
larly depressing is the fact 
that the anticipated rise m 
copra prices in the wake of 
the lJnit(^d States' broad na- 
tional def(Mis(^ prcpgram has 
n o t materialized. Further- 
more, there is a strong 
prol)al)ilit\ that the lost 
markets in Europe could not 
1)(^ regained for many years, 
e\(Mi if an armistice w^ere de- 
clared within tb(^ next few 
months. ^ 



• 20 • Fhilflppiiies 



FILIPINO WRITERS 
DISCUSS PROBLEMS 
AT ANNUAL SESSION 



U^MJKl'] \vril(Ms in olhcr coiinl rit^s. wIumo ihr risinii; 
crescendo of aiili-aircrafl harraiics. the strain of national 
defense, llu* i)r()l)lein of niaintaininii ft)od supjilies. and 
worries o\ er ei\ ilian slu^llers dominate literary endeavors. 
Filipino writers at lluMr s(H-ond annual eonferenc^e just 
eoneluded in Manila discussed tluMr problems in a hiiih 
spirit of optimism that recounized no obstacle to their 
self-assifjjned task of impro\ ing Philippine literature. More 
than 200 dele^rates from all ])arls of the Islands, repre- 
sentinii: Tagaloii. S[)anish. and iMiiilish-speakinir liroups. 
attended. 

Secretary of Finance Manual Roxas brought the writers 
into touch with reality at the start with an admonition that 
they could not remain indifTerent to the vital changes tak- 
ing place in the world if they wished to become a potent 
social force. After outlining the sociological role which 
literature plays in Philipj)ine national life. Mr. Roxas 
declared that 'iiterary activity is most necessary during 
vital social changes, when institutions are torn down and 
others set up, when the masses ar(^ moving restlesslv for 
greater freedom and larger oj)portunities, and when 
grave j)olitical upheavals are taking place." 

"Philii)pine literature," he warned, "cannot and should 
not remain on the sideline as an indifTerent spectator; it 
must take up the cudgel for or against these changes and 
ideologies, and make articulate the sentiment of the silent 
masses of our people." 

Numerous subjects were taken uj> during the panel dis- 
cussions. The objective was improvement of Filipino 
literature in essence of thought and in choice of theme. 
Claro M. Recto, whose Spanish j)()ems are acclaimed even 
in Spain, declared that good writing must have an uni- 
versal ap|)eal that transcends national boundaries. 

At the opening of the conference, Federico Mangahas, 
president of the Philij)pine Writers League, read a 
message from Ernest Hemingway, who was in Manila en 
route to China. Although unal)le to attend personallv, 
Hemingway declared in his message: ""I think the writer's 
gravest problem, as always, is to write the truth and eat 
regulail). If a writ(M- tri(\^ always to find out what is 
true anfl lh(Mi write it trul\. he w ill ncner be without em- 
ployment l)ut he will often be hungrv. ' ^ 




Miss Enya Gonzalez 



One of the best-known Filipinas in the L nited Slates is 
Miss Enya Gonzalez, star of the opera and concert stage. 
In addition to her classical roles, Miss Gonzalez has 
po|)ularized a numlier of Philippine folk songs for Ameri- 
can audiences. Currently, she is the star of a series of 
radio broadcasts from Washington, D. C, sponsored by 
Manila Cigars. 

• • o 

Plans for enlarging the American merchant marine 
are ex})ected to result in a marked shortage of experi- 
enced seamen to man these vessels. In anticipation. Fed- 
eral oflicials ha\e relaxed the prohibition against the em- 
ployment of non- American seamen in American bottoms, 
with the result that man\ shipping companies are again 
signing on Filipinos. The shortage of experienced workers 
has also caused U. S. navy yards on the Pacific Coast to 
employ Fili])inos in greater mnnbiMs. 

o • e 

The troubled inlcMiiat ional situation. ])arti('ularl\ in th(^ 
Far East, is blamed for a sudden decline in the numbcM- 
of Filipinos visiting the Philipj)ines. This trend became^ 



• 21 • 



particularly noticeable early this year. Filipino travelers 
in the Lnited States in many cases are reluctant to go 
back to Manila for the present. 



Despite the proviso in the Selective Service Act which 
exempts them from the draft, many Filipinos in the United 
States have volunteered for the army or navy. A number 
are now serving in America's armed forces. The concen- 
sus among them was best summarized by a youthful 
Filipino soldier. "America has been good to me," he 
pointed out, "giving me livelihood and education. I feel 
I ought to reciprocate in the same full measure when she 
needs mv services." 



Miss EMELDA TANA- 
WIN, for the past two years 
a nursing student at Colum- 
bia University on a scholar- 
ship from the Philippine 
chapter of the Daughters of 
the American Revolution, at- 
tended the recent D.A.R. con- 
gress in Washington. A grad- 
uate of St. Luke's Hospital 
in Manila. Miss Tanawin 
spoke at one of the sessions 
on the health work dene l)y 
American medical men in the 
Phil ippines. 




in the South Pacific 

The lighl-l)rown comijlexion ()f the Filipino, accordinii; 
to an ancient fable, is the j)erfcct ( roalion of God. As llie 
story goes, in the beginning, the Creator took clay and 
shaped it in the form of man. Then He |)ut it in the sun 
to bake. After a short Vvhile, He examined his handiwork, 
but found that it had not baked sufliciently — it was too 
pale. This became the white man. 

The Creator was not satisfied, so He fashioned anotli^r 
figure and baked it. This time, afraid that it would 
not bake sufficiently. He let it stay in the sun too long and 

it burned. This one became 
the black man. 

But the Creator was still 
not satisfied; so He took a 
third bit of clay. This time 
He was very careful. He 
watched the figure with great 
care until it became a deli- 
cate brown. Finally He was 
content — He had made man 
just as He wanted him. This 
last on(» became the brc 
man. 



rown 



MANILA HEMP, strategical 
pines, goes into the rope-lay 



Symbolic of the great concern felt by Filipino parents 
in the Lnited States, particularly in California, for the 
proper upbringing of their American-born children, par- 
ents' organizations and child welfare committees have 
been organized in several West Coast cities. Parents feel 
they should give their children a better understanding of 
the Philippines and its culture in order that they may be- 
come better /\merican citizens, conscious not only of their 
duties and obligations for the future, but of their racial 
history, as well. 



A FOUR-CORNERED rival ry is in progress among the 
Filipino communities of New York, the District of Colum- 
bia, Detroit and California for the privilege of presenting 
the 2nd National Filipino Athletic Tournament this sum- 
mer. The scene of the 1941 contest will be decided at a 
coming conference of representatives of these communities. 
S])onsored by the office of the Philippine Resident Com- 
missioner, the first truly national athletic meet among 
Filipinos was held in Washington, D. C. last summer. 
Teams from California, Detroit, New York, the Bronx, 
Philadelphia and the District of Columbia participated. 



product of the Philip- ReCENT books dealing 
ing machine. ^'^^^•^ Philipinnes have in- 

cluded : 

Farther Westing— A Philippine Footnote by Aus- 
tin and Josephine Craig. Philadelphia: Dorrance & Co. 
A social study of the Philippines. 

Delilah by Marcus Goodrich. New York: Farrar ^S: 
Rinehart. 

A novel laid in the Philippines, seen through the myopic 
eyes of Navy men. 

Our Future in Asia by Robert yVura Smith. New York: 
Viking Press. 

An analysis of America's position in the turbulent 
East, with the Connnonwealth as its center. 

The American Empire by William H. Haas. Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press. 

A "round-up" of America's territories and possessions. 

Orphans of the Pacific by Florence Horn. New Y^)rk: 
Reynal & Hitchcock. 

Extremely readable, candid birdseye view of the Com- 
monwealth. 

A Voyage Around the World in the Years 1740 to 
1744 by Richard Walter. San Francisco: Book Club of 
California. 

An interesting ac. onnt of the Manila gall(M)n trade. 



• 22 • Philippines 



p. 1. mm 



Pi{ESII)E.\'I' OI KZON iiiilhoii/cul a draslic (nrrluuil 
of the Pliili j)|)in(* (lineal ional sNslcin itncMilly when lie 
api)r()\ (*cl four fundauuMilal riMoinnuMulalions for carr\ - 
in^ out llic I'^ducalion Av l of 1^10. I mlcv the revised 
rules, wliieli lak(» efTeet with [\\c opcMiiuu of the new 
school )eai- in Junc^: (1 ) the niiniinuui aiii^ for (Milerinu 
j)ul)lie school is x^ncu n (\ns : l2) liie (diMiUMilarN course 
is reduced from s(»\ cmi to six y(\irs. lour in the priinar\ and 
two in the inlerinediale (l(^j)arlnuMil : two sini>U^ ses- 

sions will 1)(* ludd daily in crowdcul schools: (1) and the 
school year is (li\ idtnl into four (]uarlers of twelve weeks 
each, eliniinatini; tin* customary lonii \acation helween 
semesters. Thes(^ chanues arc^ (^xptn tcHl to sol\ the school 
crisis, which causcMl thousands of students to he turned 
away (ner) \('ar for lack of (dassroom space. 

• • o 

In a recent C^ahiiuH miH^iui:. tlu^ followinu proposals 
were accepted h) tlu^ Pr(\^i(l(Mit : 

1. Refusal, as a <i(MUMal |)olicy. of authorizations to sell 
serviceahle \ essels of Philij)|)ine r(\aistr\ ahroad. 

2. Resumption of daily airmail s(m\ ice from Manila to 
Bagnio hy the Iloilo-i\i\uros Air E\pr(\^s Companv, and 
Philip})ine Air Lines. altiMiiately. 

3. An end)ar<2:o on (^xporls of rice to foreign countries, 
including the Ignited States. 

• o • 

A NEW airport has heen opened in Aparri. Cagayan 
Province, at the northern tip of Luzon. Costing $12,500, 
the new field is one of the biggest in the Archipelago, cov- 
ering about 60 acres. Another will soon he constructed at 
Tuguegaraf), in the same province, with an ap|)roi)riation 
of $5,000. 

• • • 

TllL National Land Settlement Administration, inspired 
hy the success of the Koronadal settlement, will shortly 
ojjen three new areas with a total land area of 191.200 
acres to agricultural settlers. Idiese projects are in 
Mindoro Province, Cagayan de Misamis, and Allah Val- 
ley, Cotahato Province. To date 15.000 settlers have moved 
to Koronadal, where tlu^y ha\e developed flourishing 
poultry and pig farms, ha\ e harxested good crops of corn, 
rice and peanuts, and ha\e grown ruhher trees that now 
measure more than two feet in h(Mghl. A j)proxiinatel\ 
1,500 acres has Ixmmi plantcMl with ruhlx^r. and |)lans are 
Ijeing prepared to incrcnise llu^ ar<\i to 5.000 acr(\>^. This 
year 7,413 acres will Ix^ planted with rice. 



The Bureau of Plant Industry has distributed to farm- 
ers throughout the Philipj)ines 9.250 pounds of standard 
Sinnnaba tobacco seed as part of a program to improve 
Philipj)ine leaf tobacco. The seed will cover about 
75.000 acres, almost half of the Commoi wealth's average 
yearly tobacco acreage. The objec* is to standardize the 
K\if quality and thus stabilize the Philippine tobacco 
industr\ . 

• • • 

D ETERMINED to speed the administration of justice 
in the Phili|)pines, Under-Secretary of Justice Emilio 
Abello has reconnnended to the National Assembly bills 
providing for an in:-rease in the number of provincial 
judges, particularly in Rizal, Batangas and Samar Prov- 
inces: and for abolition of the aunual two-months vaca- 
tion in courts of first instance: and has asked enactment 
of a law implementing the Constitutional provision re- 
garding the election of citizenship by Philippine residents 
ha\ ing dual citizenship. 

w • • 

Ql EZO\ CITY odicials announced recently that S12.500 
had been made a\ailable for malaria control work. Simi- 
lar projects ha\e been undertaken in the provinces of 
Mindoro. Cagayan, Tayabas, Zanibales, Koronadal \ alley 
in ("otabato and Port Lamon in Lanao. 



The National Development Company has received from 
President Quezon a special, exclusive i)ermit to develop 
an\ oil properties found in the provinces of Cagayan. 
Isabela. Bulacan, Pangasinan, Nueva Ecija, Tarlac, 
Pampanga, lloilo, Cebu, Leyte and Tayabas. In exchange, 
the government-owned firm will pay the government a 
gross production royalty of ]2Vl> pei* <^^nt crude oil 

or casing-head gasoline produced, and 6V4 P^^' ^'^^^^ 
natural dry gas, or the proceeds of their sale. 

• • • 

IlOCOS NORTE PROVINCE will resume large-scale 
cultivation of cotton under a plan whereby the National 
l)evelo{)ment Company will furnish the farmers w'ith ma- 
chines for bailing and ginning. The output will be used 
b) the expanding weaving industry of Northern Luzon. 
Ilocos Textiles Inc. is obtaining new mechanical looms 
to be installed at its factory in Laoag. 

• • • 

1 HE connniltee on re\ ision of laws in the National 
Assend)l\ has appro\ed a bill requiring the registration 
and rmger[)rinting of aliens in the Philipj)ines. This 
mer.sure is |)atterned aft(M- lh(^ Alien Registration Act of 
19 10 in the United States. Americans are exei]i|)ted. 



• 23 • 



The Bank Commissioner of the Philippines interprets 
the substantial increase in loans by all banks during the 
first five years of the Commonwealth period as a reflection 
of the growth of Insular business. A consolidated financial 
statement shows that as of November 30, 1940 loans and 
discounts amounted to $59,813,500, an increase of §28,- 
361,500 since November 30, 1935. The comparison of 
figures at the end of each calendar year since 1935 shows 
an even more encouraging trend. 

• • • 

W^HEN Eelipe Abeleda finished his law course at the 
University of the Philippines in 1930, he lacked §13 to 
pay for his diploma. University authorities let Abeleda 
graduate and take part in the commencement exercises 
on the understanding that, when his personal circum- 
stances improved, he would pay. Abeleda went home to 
Mindoro to practice law. In reply to the Registrar's regu- 
lar appeals for §13, Abeleda promised to pay — as soon 
as he was elected governor. Recently, Abeleda strode into 
the Registrar's office, laid down his §13 and demanded his 
sheepskin, now mellowed with age. Abeleda was elected 
governor oi his home province last December. 

9 9 9 

Repatriation Act (from Page 10) 

Eili})inos have small incomes, with little incentive or op- 
portunity to save for a future trip home. To meet this 
problem, several solutions have been suggested. One in 
particular — an arrangement whereby Filipinos could de- 
posit installment payments on their tickets to Manila with 
the office of the Resident Commissioner of the Philippines 
in Washington — is now under serious study. Whatever 
decision is reached, however, efforts to promote repatria- 
tion must take into account the fact that Filipinos have 
always come to the United States in search of educational 
and financial improvement, and that they are reluctant to 
accept a method of return that smacks of poverty or 
deportation. ^ 



Help Wanted 

Publication of Philippines is only one of the ac- 
tivities of the office of the Resident Commissioner of the 
Philippines to the United States that may interest you in 
your daily work. For instance, each month a dozen or 
inoi'c teachers write in for suggestions on teaching about 
I he Phi lij)pi lies. The Information Division helps them. 
Editors ask for ])holos and biographical material, busi- 
nessmen want trade figures, and Spanish-American War 
veterans seek dates and maps to support their tales of 
adventure. The ofhce does its best to help. If you have a 
question on the Philippines that the public library can't 
answer, write to the Office of the Philippine Resident 
Commissioner. 2362 Massachusetts Avenue Northwest, 
Washington, D. C. 



"As Free 
and Happy 
As Our Own'' 

The Phihppinc Piesiflent (Commissioner 
Washington, D. C. 

Dear Sir: 

Thank you for your generous offer of a subscrii)lion 
to PHILIPPINES. I hasten to take advantage of it. 

I spent four of the hai)piesl yrars of niy life in Minda- 
nao and the Visayas— Cuyo, y\guataya and Iloilo. Since 
much of my time was occupied with teaching the then 
younger generation the languag(> and customs of our own 
country, I have never ceased to |)c interested in the de- 
velo])mcnt of those "Jewels of the l^u ific'". [hr Philii)pine 
Ishmds. 

Ha])pily, this interest has 1)(.(mi facililatiMl and main- 
tained hy correspondence with a nundx^r of comrades and 
friends who still live in that part of the world. Chief 
among these are Josej)h S. Johnston of Johnstons. Inc., 
Zamhoanga; Jose Ponce de Leon, a retired Constalndary 
office of Cuyo, and M. A. Maxey of Davao. 

However, since the infornuition which I receive from 
these comrades and friends is less general than personal, 
I will appreciate having your pul)licati()n very much in- 
deed. I get The Manila Bulletin now and then, and am a 
suhscriher to The American Oldtimet\ also of Manila, 
hut I am sure that your magazine will give me mudi 
additional information that I will he glad to obtain. 

Out of a membership of two hundred in our camp, more 
than two-thirds saw service in the 'Tslands." The situa- 
tion being what it is in that part of the world at present, 
all of us are a bit anxious as to just what is going to 
happen to a land and jjeople we tried in our small way 
to make as free and happy as our own. I am sure that 
you will understand that our interest and anxiety is for 
the best interests of that land and that people. 

Eugene Dillingham, Adj, 
Claude L. Herbert Camp No. 38 
United Sjnmish War Veterans 
Terre Haute, Indiana 



XhE Philippine Islands have a land area of 114,400 
square miles — approximately equal to that of Italy 
(119,744), greater than the British Isles (94,284) and 
slightly less than Japan proper (148,756). 



• 24 ® Philippines 




You 
Manil 
in ccllopl 



CIGARS of UNEXCELLED Oucdity 
SMOKE of UNSURPASSED VALUE 

Smoking a good Manila cigar means 

enjoying the rich pleasant aroma and the sweet 
mellow flavor of famous Phihppine To- 
bacco, grown in the valleys of eternal 
summer and sunshine. 



Manufactured entirely by hand under the strictest governmental 
regulation and sanitary control, MANILAS give you more smoking 
satisfaction for the price than any other cigars on the American 
market. 

These are the reasois ivhy MANILA CIGARS are the choice of mtUious 
of smokers — ivhy doctors recovimend them and counotsseiirs prefer them. 

Ask for a MANILA with the pleasant aroma 

PHILIPPINE TOBACCO AGENCY 

236.^ Massachusetts Avenue, N. W. 



Washington, D. C. 




Tli€^ Pbili|»|iiiii^ Army 

by Gen. Basilio VaUlvs 



by Dr. Hu Shih 



The Fight on Lieproi^^y 

by Perry Burgess 




The Pliilippine Lrgi^liilure 



Ml k.l 



r 




Top: President Quezon, recuperating 
from his recent illness, plays soli- 
taire aboard the yacht Casiana, while 
Manuel Jr. watches. 



Center: Winsome Miss Carmen Pla- 
nas, Manila's coed councilwoman, re- 
ceives the congratulations of friends 
on her recent sweeping reelection 



Below: Play Day at the University of 
the Philippines in Manila included an 
exhibition of Filipino folk dances. 



: ain TfV From Kul^ 



,000 



in A prc^ 



' ;1> \* 



proceau; 
^'^^ fully u- 
!Uons to 



Vichy ^csj 

\t Is ton 

'R.>. of N; 
t Hood ilsri 
occurred hp.d' 



iHead 
ffiocral 



ke. of RivGTji 



er Van Wagoner Tufty, Pilar 
\, Resident Commissibner J. M. 
Katherine Lenroot, Violet 



tijzaiae, ivarnerine Lenroot, 
Sweet Haven and Dolores Abellera, at 
a recent Philippine luncheon given by 
Ravelo at the Shoreham Hotel, 

\A/n clu I n m f in t-fe 



to 



"Too Busy I 
finUndon 



sba^-l?-'" ..«lH^t ^^^^^^^ '5 



^Pf^^SS ctmncnsu^eertn;. ^^^^^^^ - v 



I and every o^^^^i 

movies ana ^ i i^^^ so - o. r imt ,^ tnc V indcpcndencB. 

\ To them 1^ has a n»tu'n \ „,„„ »>^v>A 



in tt«lr das- , 



Money for Philippine Defense 

All Editorial 



liN his message to the Philipj)ine National Asseinblv this 
year, President Mannel Qnezon pointed out that tlie exist- 
ing finances of the Connnonw eaUh are insullieient to cover 
the huge cost of building an adequate modern defense for 
our Island democracy. To meet tlie emergency, he Avent 
on, he had approached the Government of the United 
States with the request that a sum of approximatelv 
$54,000,000, due to Manila from the United States 
Treasury, '"he approj)riated to be spent exclusivelv for 
our national defense under the direction of the United 
States." The proposal was so unusual that its full signifi- 
cance was overlooked by many. Even today, after nearlv 
six months have passed, its importance is only gradually 
coming to be recognized. 

This money. $51,000,000. consists of funds authorized 
by Congress but never appropriated. About $23,000,000 
is the Philippine gold devaluation fund: the remainder 
constitutes collections on the sugar excise tax which 
Congress, in the Sugar Act of 1937. ordered returned to 
the Philippine Government. The significance of President 
Quezon's offer is that he is willing to put this $5 1.000.000 
at the disposal of the United States. Whereas, other 
American attempts to strengthen the defenses of its demo- 
cratic allies have involved turning over vast sums of 
money with little or no check on its expenditure, in this 
case the Ui'iited States itself is asked to do the spending. 
All we ask is that the money be used to defend the 
Philippines. 

Few Americans realize that the Islands have had almost 
no financial support from the United States since they 
were occupied in 1899. Aside from the cost of maintain- 
ing the United States Army and Navy in the Far East — 
which should not be charged to the Filipinos any more 
than the cost of the Brooklyn Navy Yard should be 
charged to the people of New York — appropriations have 
been limited to $6,000,000 for relief and construction 
after the Insurrection ended. This is infinitesimal com- 
pared with Federal appropriations for any state of the 
Union. Indisputably, the Philippines has been a cheap 
dependency. This tradition of self-sufficiency is strength- 
ened by the proposal to use the authorized $54,000,000 
for defense under American supervision. 

The creditable nature of this situation is all the more 
aj)parent when the Philippine position is contrasted with 
the stand taken by many of the other nations requesting 
varying amounts of American money for their defense 
and financial stability. Not only does Manila have an 
impeccable record as regards the payment of its obliga- 
tions, but it also has one of the lowest debts per capita 
in the world. The Philippine? has not found it necessary 



to finance its foreign trade with loans from the Lnited 
Slates. In every respect the Commonwealth has been an 
excellent world neighbor — frugal, hard-working and 
honest. 

In view of these facts. President Quezon's request that 
the I'nited States direct the expenditure of the money 
due Manila, and that it be used exclusively for defense 
purposes, is of great significance. W e feel, naturally, that 
American military experts are best equipped to handle 
the job. since Philippine defense is inseparable from the 
strategy of the United States. Such men can assure the 
fullest possible coordination of the two systems. They can 
make certain that the money is spent to the greatest ad- 
vantage. They can presumably expedite delivery of mod- 
ern weapons from the American arsenal. From the 
practical standpoint, therefore, this arrangement will be 
of mutual advantage to Filipinos and Americans. 

Exactly how the $54,000,000 would be spent is nec- 
essarily confidential, but a few points seem obvious. W e 
need planes and artillery. In the past we have obtained 
as large quantities of this material as our finances would 
permit, but the total is still inadequate. The greatly in- 
creased danger in the world today makes procurement 
a hundred times more urgent. In this we must depend on 
the heavy industry of the United States. 

With regard to small arms and infantry equipment, 
we are in a somewhat better position, although here, too, 
the genius of American defense experts will be invaluable. 
Our growing army is well trained: with complete equip- 
ment it can be a decisive factor in the defense of democracy 
in the Far East. 

Another branch on which further expenditure is needed 
is the Off-Shore-Patrol, the fleet of motor torpedo-boats 
designed for reconnaissance work and beach protection. 
The expenditure of a comparatively small amount of 
money on this arm will materially increase the effective- 
ness of our defense forces. 

All these improvements are. in the long run. pillars 
of the United States' own defense system. The Philippines 
is rapidly losing its character as an exposed American 
flank and becoming a well fortified bastion: what was an 
isolated garrison will soon be a unit in a chain of defenses 
across the Pacific Ocean. 

Thus President Quezon's suggestion is an important 
contribution to world democracy. Furthermore, it is an 
exceptional demonstration of the Philippine desire to 
cooperate with the I'nited States to that end. From that 
standpoint alone — even if no other existed — the action 
would justify the attention it is just begimiing to 
receive. ^ 




DEFEND THEMSELVES 




By General Basilio V aides 

Chief of Staff, Philippine Army 




A NATION about to become independent in a world 
where national existence is so dependent upon ability to 
withstand armed aggression is faced with the grave re- 
sponsibility of providing itself with an adequate military 
establishment. While the United States retains responsi- 
bility for Philippine defense until 1946 and is furnishing 
seaward and landward military forces, a logical question 
might be: "What is the Commonwealth doing to provide 
ultimately its own national defense?" 

Guided bv the United States, President Quezon, the 
National Assembly and the Commonwealth Military Staff 
are combining their efforts to overcome the inherent 
obstacles to Insular defense. Definite financial, economic 
and industrial limitations: the absence of any martial tra- 
dition; and little appreciation of the dynamic character 
of modern warfare — all these emphasize the colossal 
proportions of the task at hand. They have not, however, 
daunted those responsible for its accomplishment. The 
consensus among experts is that our efforts to provide a 
national defense for an independent Philippines have 
been highly fruitful. 

We do not yet have a "balanced" military organiza- 
tion. Gradually, however, elements of our final, complete 
army are being organized and trained. The rate is in pro- 
portion to the finances, equipment and facilities on hand. 
The whole project is based on sound long-range planning, 
competently conceived to utilize every ounce of available 
resources in the most profitable manner. Year after year 
the Philippine Army is growing in strength and experi- 
ence, an ever more potent factor in Philipjjine defense. 

The first session of the Philippine National Assembly 
in 1935 passed Commonwealth Act No. I, "a Plan of 
National Defense." Several months prior to the estab- 
lishment of the Commonwealth, President Quezon had. 
with the consent of the Government of the I'nited States, 
secured the services of General Douglas MacArthur, a 
veteran soldier and recognized military genius, to advise 
the government in the organization, tiaining and su|)|)ly 
of the Army and in setting up the defense stru( tur(\ A 



staff of American Arni\ ofliccrs was j)r()\ idcd as as- 
sistants lo (General MacArthur. 

The National Dc^fensc Act rc(|iiircs ( ( )ni pulsorx mili- 
tary service for all male citizens bctwtHMi the ages of 20 
and 50. It recognizes the right of the government to 
utilize all the moral and material resources and the serv- 
ices of the inhabitants of the iMiili|)pines in the defense 
of the Archi])elago. y\ll men completing 20 years of age 
nmst register every year. Their number varies from 
90.000 Uy 120,000. From thes(« are selected 20,000 to 
M).000 men who undergo six months of intensive military 
training. 

The first registration took place in April, 1936, just 
five months after the enactment of lln^ law. By January, 
1937, only nine months lat(M-, ihc first group of 20.000 
men was in barracks. These w(Me followed by the second 
group in July of the same year. This process has been 
repeated yearly. 

As the men are discharged after completion of train- 
ing they enter the reserves. Those from 21 to 30 belong 
to the First Reserve. The Second Reserve w ill be composed 
of men from 31 to 40, and the Third Reserve will include 
men from 41 to 50. Our task of training the men of the 
First Reserve will be completed in 1946. By that year, if 
the Philippine Army adheres to its i)resent procurement 
program, we will have about 350.()()() trained reserves of 
ages ranging from 21 to 30. By 1966 the Philippines ex- 
pects to have about 1 ,0()().()()() fighting men ready. 

Today the Philippine Army has a total trained reserve 
of ap])roximately 143,000 men. This does not include 
5,000 recently alhuted to the Ihiited States Army to bring 
the American-officered Philip[)ine Scouts to full divi- 
sional strength. 

The Philippitie Archi])elago has been divided into 10 
military districts of approximatel\ equal poi)ulation. 
P'unctioning under decentralized control b> Army Head- 
quarters, the districts train thcMr men and organize their 
headquarters, rifle, machine gun and trench mortar units 
of reserve divisions. Our organization i)rograni calls for 
the creation of three r(^ser\(' divisions in each district 



• 4 • 



by 1916. a total of 30 reserve cli\ isions. Tocla\. 10 divi- 
sions are fully organized, with one division of approxi- 
mately 7.500 men in eaeh distric t. 

From the beginning, the impossil>ility of the Philip- 
pine Government's finaneing the purehase of naval vessels 
and the mainlenance of a naval foree and essential shore 
establishments has been obvious. Ideas of ereating a 
navy were immediately abandoned and replaeed by a plan 
to organize a Naval Corps under army eontrol. Initial 
combat equipment, chosen with eare and due considera- 
tion for its role in the defense of the islands, consists of 
exceedingly fast motorboats equipped with torpedoes, 
machine guns and depth 
charges. The organization of 
several nine-boat squadrons 
is contemplated. 

Development and organi- 
zation of an air arm received 
immediate attention. The 
training of flyers and the men 
of the service echelon has 
been undertaken since the 
very beginning, with an air 
force of 500 first-line planes 
of all categories as our ob- 
jective. This branch of tlic 
army is expanding rapidly 
and is attracting many of 
our best young men — pro- 
fessionals, college graduates 
and young officers of the 
Regular Army. Several fully 
equipj)ed operating fields 
have already been established 
in strategic localities. In addition, the Archipelago is 
dotted with commercial fields available to military planes. 
Civil aviation, developing rapidly, is controlled by the 
Secretary of National Defense, through the Chief of the 
Army Air Corps. 

Production of officer personnel has been expanded to 
meet our growing requirements. We have reorganized the 
famous old Constabulary Academy, which is now ex- 
clusively engaged in the production of officers for the 
army. Graduates average 85 a year. Philippine colleges 
and universities in which ROTC units have been estab- 
lished also supply officers. Military instruction in these 
schools was made compulsory this year. In 1942 we ex- 
pect 2,000 prospective reserve officers; in 1943 and sub- 
sequent years approximately 4,000. A few reserve officers 
are commissioned in the sj)ecial services of the Philip- 
pine Army each year because of special qualifications. 
They undergo three months of intensive basic military 
training. 

Mobilization and supph have received careful and 
thorough attention. All provincial, city, town and village 
officials know the functions ihey will be called upon to 
perform in the e\ent of an emergency requiring the 
mobilization of the reser\e forces. These officials will dis- 




GENERAL BASILIO VALDES, 
head of the Philippine Army, greets Captain 
James Roosevelt in Manila 



tribute mobilization orders to officers and reservists. On 
M-Day they can assemble their reservists and lead them to 
mobilization areas already designated by the Philippine 
Army. W arehouses have been constructed to store sup- 
plies and equipment. As each new company, battalion and 
regiment comes into being, supplies and equipment re- 
quired for extended field service go on the shelves of the 
warehouses, to be held in readiness for the M-Day. 

W e have consistently received every assistance from 
the American forces. The training of our technical units 
in the coast artillery, field artillery, signal corps, and the 
air corps has been made possible as the result. When we 

lack material or capable in- 
structors. ^ve have gone to 
the United States Army for 
them: our requests have 
ne\er been refused. Ameri- 
can oflicers are rendering the 
Philippine Army the fullest 
and most effective service in 
all phases of the work of 
establishing a sound and en- 
during defense system for 
the Philippines. This spirit 
of cooperation and ser\ ice 
which animates the conduct 
of the United States Army 
officers in their relation with 
the armed forces of this 
c o u n t r y has materially 
strengthened the bonds be- 
tween the Ignited States and 
Philippine Armies. 

Until 1935 the Philippine 
Constabulary was the only native armed force in the 
Islands. Today Philippine Army troops are the boast of 
our citizens and are receiving many compliments from 
military observers on their increasing efficiency. Gradually 
the equipment necessary to maintain the more expensive 
branches of the service is being procured. Insofar as can 
be foreseen at this time, the picture in 1946 will be one 
of complete satisfaction. 

In spite of historical inhibitions, the Filipino is in- 
herently a good soldier. He is used to hardships, has 
moral courage and is accustomed to taking orders. In his 
native terrain he can outmarch and maneuver an> alien 
soldier. The combination of this knowledge with the train- 
ing in sound tactical doctrine he is now rcnciving should 
make the individual Filipino a formidable military op- 
ponent. And with the fulfillmc^nt of the total provisions of 
the plan for organization, supply and equipment by 
1946. Philippine defense by Filipinos should bcMonic a 
practical reality. In the meantime, every unit and every 
bit of equipment we have is at the disposal of thc^ Com- 
mander of the Philipi>ine Department of ihc^ United 
States Ami) . ^ 



• 5 • 









AERIAL HUB 

of the 

FAR EAST 



Mamla — daily growing more important as the huh of 
transportation in the Far East — recently added another 
spoke to its aerial wheel when the Civil Aeronautics 
Board in Washington approved Pan American Airways* 
application to extend its trans-Pacific service to Singa- 
pore. The first through passenger flight from San Fran- 
cisco reached Britain's Malayan stronghold on May 27. 

'Tn view of existing world conditions, and the im- 
portance of the East Indies and Malaya to the United 
States,*' the Civil Aeronautics Board announced, 'Sve 
found the service to Singapore necessary in the puhlic 
service. The minimum time by ship from the United 
States to Malaya is 27 days; the maximum, seven weeks. 
By air, the trip to Singapore will take less than a week.** 

In the past. Pan American Airways' giant clippers 
have been crossing the Pacific weekly to Manila, Hong- 
kong and Macao, China, with stops en route at Honolulu, 
Midway Island, Wake Island and Guam. Under the new 
schedule the weekly service will continue as far as Manila. 
On alternate weeks, however, the big flying boats will 
head southward from the Philippine capital to Singapore, 
instead of westward across the China Sea to Hongkong. 

"Although the service to Hongkong will be cut in half, 
the Civil Aeronautics Board stressed, "mail for that city 
delivered in Manila on the weeks in which there will be 
no service can be transferred to surface ships. It is esti- 
mated that the cost to the United States Government will 
be small, since the amount of trans-Pacific service will not 
be increased, and the flights to Singapore will result in 
the cancellation of a similar number of flights to Hong- 
kong." 

The Board's certificate of convenience and necessity 
covers a period of five years. Pan American Airways 
officials conceded that the heavy volume of tralllc antici- 
pated ow the Manila-Singapore run was largely due to ihr* 
war. and that they had no assurance it wouhl conliniie 



after the present emergency enchul. Tbt^refore. a time limit 
of five years was requested. 

"It is. of course, imjjossiblc to forecast pr(n*iselv how 
lojjg the proposed service would be recjuired by these 
considerations," the Boarcl |)ointud out. "However, the 
five-year j^eriod requested does not a|)|)ear unreasonable." 

Entirely aside from its relation to American polic-y in 
the Far East, extension of the air ser\ ice to Singapore is 
of considerable importance to Manila. C.onnnerce between 
the Phili])jjines, on one band, and Mala\ a and ihi^ Nether- 
lands Indies, on the other, has long Ixhmi hampered by 
indifferent mail ser\ ice. HusinessnKMi frequenllv have 
frjund it quicker to s(mi(1 a letter airmail to Balavia by 
wa\ of Hongkong. Rangoon and Singapore, than direct 
U) Bata\ ia by ship. 'I ra\ ('lers. formerl) forcc^l to spend 
four davs aboard a ship, can now mak(^ tlu* bop from 
Singaj:)(jre to Manila in 10 hours. I'be intrinsic im- 
pf)rtance of the new service is shown by the fact that, for 
the past year, high Dutch and British oflicials en route 
U) Manila to make the clipper connection to the United 
States have consistently chartered sptn ial j)lanes to reach 
the Philippine metropolis. 

Connection is now made at Singapor(^ with British 
Overseas Airways planes winging w(^stward to India, the 
Near East, Africa and Europe, and with the Australian 
air liners threading the East Indies to Sydney and 
Auckland. At the New Zealand cit\. other connections 
are possil)le with Pan American planes crossing the 
South Pacific to Hawaii and Los Angeles. 

"We feel that the extension of Vixw American Airways' 
service to Singapore will materially contribute to Ameri- 
can trade and prosperity," H. M. Bixby, Pan American 
vice-president, declared. "Its importance to Manila, al- 
ready a vital aviation center, is obvit^us. I expect that in 
time the Philij^pines will be the hub of the entire Far 
Eastern air transportation s\stem. * 




• 6 o 




IN ASIA 



By Dr. Hn Shih 
Chinese Ambassador to the United States 

iiiese Republic and the Philippine 
Coniinonweallh there are iinunnerable lies of historical 
association, geographic proximity, trade, amity, and 
understanding. Yet the strongest lie of all today is our 
nmtual dedication to the preservation of democracy, and 
the philoso])hy of democracy in the Far East. That is 
the same lie that aligns us with the United States in the 
present titantic world struggle of ideologies. 

The Filipinos and the Chinese, among all the teeming 
millions in that section of the world, are fervently dedi- 
cated to the concepts of human dignity, of the funda- 
mental worth of the individual, and the right of the com- 
mon man to live a proper life, as he sees fit. That is the 
belief that binds us together, and makes our individual 
fates a matter of common concern. 

One of the basic concepts of the philosophy of Con- 
fucius, that much-abused philosopher, is that of the im- 
perfect man, striving through self-cultivation to become 
a superior man, that is, superior to his own past. That 
thought underlies all democracy, in that the democratic 
society feels itself to be moving continuously forward, 
under the impetus of the individual, striving to improve 
himself. It is absolutely opposed to the philosophy of 
totalitarianism which carries the thesis that man is a 
stupid animal who must be led by specially bred and 
inspired leaders .... the so-called "fuehrer principle". 
Confucius formulated his philosophy of education for a 
democratic society in these words: "With education there 
is no class." [ Yu chiao ivu lei.) 

The Chinese have long cultivated the philosophy of 
peace, human dignity and personal liberty. The Filipinos, 
in their own way, and under United States leadership, 
have developed that philosophy into a form of govern- 
ment which may some day be a pattern and an inspira- 
tion to all Oriental peoples. 

Trade has long flourished between the two countries. 
In the earliest times our merchants and seafaring men 
had f()und the islands of the Philippines md laid the 
basis for a commerce that was to endure in one degree 
or another for long centuries. The Philip])ines produce 
much thai (]hina can use, sugar, hemp, and minerals, 
while the Chinese economy has much to offer l(^ the 
Phili]ipin(^s. There is an excellent basis {ox a constantly 



increasing and expanding commerce between our two 
peoples. I have no doubt that one day that trade will 
have its chance to flourish as it should. 

The oriental world must be made safe for people to 
live and trade in. according to their own lights, and not 
at the point of a bayonet. China, and the resurgent 
Chinese people are engrossed in fighting a great battle for 
the preservation of their national integrity and identity, 
and for their right to live as a nation among nations. 
That fight is not our fight alone. It is the fight of all 
peace-loving and liberty-loving peoples, including the 
peoples of the Philippines and the United States. 

It has been shown only too clearly that the conflict 
between China and Japan is not an Asiatic struggle. It is 
part of a world struggle. Most Filipinos are sw^iftly 
realizing today that should China fall, their own fate is 
endangered. When a peaceful nation like China cannot 
live in peace and freedom, the future of the Philippines 
as a people is very precarious indeed. 

Democratic control of government and human ization 
of society are the products of the ceaseless toil, struggle 
and thought of nations and of individuals. The Filipinos 
and Chinese should together stand as representatives of 
such upward striving in the Far East. The great Filipino 
patriot, Dr. Jose Rizal, saw that ideal and fought for it in 
the nineteenth century. Dr. Sun Yat Sen, father of the 
Chinese Republic, conceived and upheld it in even more 
recent times. 

The Philippines is. in our way of reckoning lime, a 
young nation. It is a nation with vigor and courage. 
Representing at the same lime values which are good in 
both the Orient and the Occident, the Connnonwealth 
carries on Oriental shoulders the brave traditions and 
concepts of American democracy. Together with the 
United Stales, the Philippines constitutes a stronghold of 
good in the troubled Far East. With the influence and 
help of this united peo])le the ( ause of democracy -will 
certainlv triumph. ^ 



• 7 • 



7^ 



7 



wete 



tL 



WHO SET THE PACE 



W'hEX the history of the 
anti-leprosy campaign is 
written, there will loom big 
in that chronicle the story 



of the 
disease 
Islands. 



^ht against the 
the Philippine 




Perry Burgess 

So much has been written during the last decade and a 
half about leprosy in the Philippines that the uninformed 
are likely to think of the Islands as having an unusual 
amount of it. That is not true. With the exception of 
recent surveys in three areas in the Philippines and two 
in the Virgin Islands, conducted by the Leonard Wood 
Memorial, there have not been, so far as I know% any 
attempts to survey whole areas, examining every person 
and following up family contacts. Therefore, the sug- 
gested number of victims in any particular area of what 
we are beginning to call Hansen's Disease is an estimate, 
pure and simple. Sometimes this estimate is made by a 
scientific worker who has been reasonably careful in ar- 
riving at the numbers; it is frequently made, as was 
true at a place in India where I visited, by a native with 
no medical training. 

However, by these estimates it w^ould appear that the 
Philippines has no more leprosy per capita than any 
other Malay or Oriental country. The author has made 
it a point to inquire of health authorities in Japan, the 
Netherlands Indies, Malaya and French Indo-China. Their 
estimates of the number of cases are all very similar — 
n()t much less or more than one per thousand. That cer- 
tainly cannot be considered excessive, since we find 
about the same estimate of incidence in certain countries 
in South America, notably Colombia and Brazil. We know 
by actual survey that that pro|)ortion is greatly exceeded 
in some islands in the West Indies. 

Nevertheless, the Philippine Islands are in the spot- 
light in the fight against the disease. This is not because 
they have so much leprosy, but because since the begin- 
ning of the American regime the Islands have largely 
takeii the lead in the anti-leprosy campaign. 

The Spaniards were not greatlv interested in the prol)- 



The Philippine Contribution 
To Leprosy Control 

By Perry Burgess 

President. The Leonard Wood Foundation 
Author of Who Walk Alone 




Entrance to the Leonard Wood Memorial 
Leprosarium at Cehu, Philippines 

lem. When the United States took over the Islands and 
set up first a military and then a civil government, 
leprosy came in for attention forthwith. I'ntil that time, 
some 400 victims of this disease were cared for in 
special places or in connection with provincial hospitals. 
One of the most notable of these was San Lazaro, in 
Manila, a hospital built by the Franciscan monks in 
1578, one year after Sir Francis Drake made his voyage 
of discovery around the world. Twice the building w^as 
destroyed because of war. The first was in 1662, when 
invasion was threatened by the Chinese pirate. Hue-Sing. 
Exactly 100 years later the British entrenched themselves 
behind the hospital and from that jioint threatened the 
Spanish positions. When, 21 years later, the Spaniards 
were again threatened by the British, the hospital was 
burned for the second time. The next year, in 1 7cS 1. the 
King of Spain, by royal decree, set aside the present site 
for a new "Sanctuary of Sorrow.*^ 

On the edge of the city of (]ebu there was another 
hospital for the victims of this disease. A two-story stone 
building did service for many years and finally was 
torn down to furnish material for a new skin clinic being 
built on the same sit(» by the Leouartl Wood Memorial. 
The obi hospital for le])ers was at the same time moved 



• 8 • 



out into the country some eiglit miles, near the town of 
Concepeion. where the Memorial had erected one of the 
world's most modern leprosaria. 

During Spanish times it was often customary to per- 
mit lepers to come into the city one day a week to nsW 
for ahns. 

Not long after the Americans came into the Philip- 
pines, serious work was undertaken to cope with this 
disease which was a great social and economic prohlem, 
both to the victim and the members of his family. Two 
years after the Insurrection ended a group of islands in 
the Calamian group, just off the northern tip of Palawan, 
w^as set aside as a reservation for those suffering from 
Hansen's Disease. The largest island, Culion, the one that 
was to become the site of the colony, had been a Spanish 
naval outpost and included a small barrio. All the private 
property was purchased, the people were moved off, and 
in August, 1901'. construction of the colony was begun. 
A year later effective segregation was instituted in the 
Philippines. By 1913, Culion had a population of 3.500. 
Eventually it was to reach the staggering total of 8,000. 
Now its numbers are dropping because, true to its 
policies, the Philippine Health Service has moved another 
step forward in the combating of this disease and has be- 
gun building, as rapidly as practical, agricultural colonies 
located near the homes of the patients. 

It is a long, and often hopeless, trek from some little 
barrio in the Visayas to Manila and down the edge of 
the China Sea to Culion. That journey, and the lack of 
information as to what actually happened to patients 
on Culion, caused many, in the earlier days, to leap 
overboard as their ship entered Culion harbor. The w^ise 
and kindly procedure of the Health Service in disseminat- 
ing information and in trying to give to their charges 
some semblance of normal life has changed all that. 

A decade ago I was taken through the Cebu provincial 




Clinic and bus, contributed to tbe Philippine 
Health Service by the Leonard Wood 
Memorial 



health center, situated in an old Spanish fort which liad 
been set aside for the purpose. In one room tlie walls 
were covered with knives. Since I cherish a special 
interest in small knives and have a considerable collec- 
tion. I asked to see them. I learned that they symbolized 
the change in the attitude of the leper toward segrega- 
tion and particularly toward being sent away to Culion. 
These knives — scores of them — had been taken from 
lepers when the Health Inspector went to take them into 
custody. 

Two bolos are at the present time in my collection, 
sent to me by the then director of health. One. with a 
great nick out of the blade, had been used to revenge 
the owner on tw^o neighbors whom he thought had re- 
ported him as a leper. The other had been used against 
an inspector of the health service. This inspector, inci- 
dentally, now lives in Cebu. A w^orker for the Memorial 
in its surveys in Talisay. he still carries the long bolo 
scar across his face. 

In those early days, almost every leper had to be 
taken by force. Today. 90 per cent volunteer for isola- 
tion. The word has spread through the barrios of Luzon, 
the Visayas. even down through the Sulu Sea to Jolo, that 
in the Philippines the leper is getting the breaks, that 
American and Filinino scientists are working at the 
mysteries of his disease, that in its many leprosaria he 
can find some degree of normal living and be certain that 
all that science can make available will be his for the 
taking. 

The spirit which animates the Filipino and American 
worker has permeated the world. Today, not in the 
Philippines alone but in most countries where this illness 
exists, conscientious men of science are at work trying to 
alleviate suffering. The glory of the Filipinos wall be 
that tliey were the ones who set the pace. ^ 




Mr. Burgess addressing youthful patients at 
San Lazaro Hospital at Manila. The institu- 
tion is nearly 300 years old. 

• 9 • 



CHARLES EDWARD RUSSELL 



The PHILIPPINES lost a valuable 
friend and a loyal supporter with the re- 
cent death of Charles Edward Russell in 
Washington. Author, crusader, newspaper- 
man, humanitarian. Russell throughout 
his long life was active in many causes — 
among them the Philippines, the Irish Re- 
public and the Zionist movement. 

His interest in the Philippines became 
concrete shortly after the turn of the cen- 
tury with the organization of an American 
Anti-Imperialist League, which advocated, 
among other things, independence for the 
Filipinos. In the early 1920's Russell made 
a trip to the Islands at the request of 
Manuel Quezon and Sergio Osmena. The book he wrote 
on his return to the United States stressed the desirability 
of immediate independence and proclaimed the ability of 
the Filipinos to rule themselves. He later collaborated 
in a biography of the Filipino patriot. Dr. Jose Rizal. 

Russell took a prominent part in the fight for Philip- 
pine independence, ("ontributing a steady flow of news- 
paper and magazine articles. As president of the Philip- 
pine Civic Bureau in Washington, which urged immediate 
independence, he fought vigorously against the Hawes- 
Hare-Cutting Act to grant independence on the ground 
that it delayed consummation unnecessarily. He opposed 
the Tydings-McDuffie Act for the same reason. 

Shortly before his death, Charles Edward Russell wrote 
a brief article for Philippines, expressing his hopes for 
the future of the Filipino people. We publish it here 
with our tribute to a great liberal, a clear thinker and a 
staunch friend. 



History in general may be criticized as lacking in 
humor and therefore unavailable for entertainment pur- 
j)oses. Occasionally, however, it breaks out into a broad 
guffaw of merriment, and one phase of the relations be- 
tween the I'niled States and the Philippine Islands is 
likely to have all of that aspect when the future philoso- 
pher comes to review- it. 

I mean the nf.tion, sedulously fostered by certain 
Americans, that this country performed an act of con- 
spicuous altruism when it seized the Philippitie nation 
and for forty odd years managed or mismanaged its 




Charles Edward Russell 



affairs. According to this delectable doc- 
trine, we found the Islands larg(*ly peopled 
by ignorant savages that lived in trees and 
gibbered, and at great expense *i)y slow^ 
d(*grees subdued them to the useful and 
ihe good," teaching them, above (nerything 
else, "'self government." 

"Self government," say we. with smug 
Anglo-Saxon superiority, as if we had 
discovered that recondite art and had a 
jjatent on it. An average American of that 
order would be proudly incredulous if 
told that when his own ancestors were in- 
d(Hxl hairy savages running about the 
woods of Northern Europe, the Filipinos 
had ordered government, towns and cities, written 
language, and culture that included ensemble music. 
Yet that is the fact. 

He would also be astonished to learn that his govern- 
ment's noble experiment in altruism for the Philippines 
had cost it nothing except for its military establishment. 
Yet that is also the fact. And if someone were to tell 
him that sjjiritually and morally, American tuition in the 
Islands has been nothing pridefully to write home about, 
indignation would probably supplement his incredulity. 
Yet that again is the fact. 

But about the joke of teaching self government to 
these lowly Islanders, the point of it is that we have been 
teaching them something they already knew^ How do we 
manage to elude the historical fact of Apolinario Mabini. 
Filipino of the Filipinos, and easily the compeer in 
democratic philosophy of Jefferson and Mazzini? How^ do 
we ignore the Philippine Republic, b) Filipinos designed 
and founded in cleanest democracy more than forty 
years ago? How avoid the Malolos constitution, Filipino 
made, and one of the best democratic documents extant? 
And how al)out the excellent order in the barrios w^hollv 
under Filipino management? Instead of needing instruc- 
tion in self govermnent, these people seem rather in a 
j)ositi()n to teach it. Compare homicide records, for 
instance. 

But what I am [)leading for now is less of the Ameri- 
can condescension toward *'the little brown brother." He 
is no foundling child. He needs no wet nurse. He can 
take care of himself. All he wants is a cliaiK e. ^ 



© 10 » 




The Philippine 
Summer Capital 

By Pilar 1\. Ravelo 



JBaGUIO was where Americans and 
Filipinos joined hands to make a city; Baguio 
toda) is where Americans and Filipinos have 
bridged the diflerences of race and custom, 
and have worked together to make the most 
progressive place in the Islands." 

The only really temperate spot in the Philippines, the 
city of Baguio clings to the pine-clad Benguet mountains 
160 miles ncHlh of Manila. Five thousand feet above 
tropical sea level, Baguio is the coolest, the most pro- 
gressive city in the Archipelago. Pure, forest-scented air. 
cooled by lofty peaks; broad paved streets with wide 
sidewalks; an excellent drainage system; modern build- 
ings and homes; and weather that is perpetual spring — 
all these contribute to the phenomenal attractiveness of 
Baguio, the summer capital of the Philippine Common- 
wealth. 

Forty-one years ago, when Dean C. Worcester, author, 
historian and then a member of the Philippine Commis- 
sion, discovered the potentialities of Baguio, he and his 
party hiked over red clay footpaths. The present site of 
Burnham Park and the lagoon was a carabao wallow, 
kept by Igorots living in scattered nipa shacks. Only one 
white man lived in Baguio then; he was Otto Scheere. 
whose house stood where the famous Pines Hotel stands 
today. 

The construction of highways and roads into Baguio 
and nearby Trinidad Valley began in December, 1900. 
Not until January, 1905, however, did Col. W. V. Kemion. 
aftrrr "vvhrrm sCTpentiTie Kennon Road was named, drive 
the first wagon clear through. 

Today, speedy air-conditioned trains run from Manila 
to Damortis. at the foot of the Benguet hills. From there, 
large, comfortable buses wind up the famous Zigzag 
through narrow canyons to inviting Baguio. By airplane, 
the resort city is an h;)ur from Manila; by automobile, it 
is five hours of easy driving over first class roads. 

Baguio's temperate climate has made it a welcome 
haven for thousands during the sweltering heat of sum- 
mer. The average temperature is 61.4 degrees, with an 
annual variation of only 1 degrees. But Bagnio's weath 
offers surprises too. especially during the rainv season. 
On July 15. 1911. in a single 21-hour period. 45.99 
inches of rain fell. Two feet of precipitation in 21 hours 




is not infrequent. In 1938, the city had a total of 210 
rainy days. Two other common weather phenomena are 
the heavy mist that veils the city in the early morning and 
late afternoon, and the hail storms that send everyone 
scampering. 

Camp John Hay, founded in 1903. is probably the 
most unique and beautiful army post under the American 
flag. The camp has all modern facilities: well-built quar- 
ters, playgrounds, a well-kept golf course, beautiful 
gardens and, best of all, the Bell Amphitheater. Situated 
near the summer headquarters of the commanding gen- 
eral of the Philippine Department of the I'nited States 
Army, the latter attracts tourists, vacationists and candid 
camera fans because of its natural beauty. Camp John 
Hay has a steak fry at the Army and Navy Club every 
Saturday night; the occasional outdoor programs feature 
Igorot dances. 

A junior branch of the University of the Philippines — 
popularly known as the Baguio College — prepares stu- 
dents from northern Luzon for their degrees in liberal 
arts. Thus. Baguio is something of a college town, be- 
sides being a health resort and a convention city. 
Furthermore, every summer, in addition to the students, 
-thousands of school teachers from all parts dT tlie Philip- 
pines gather for two months of rest, study and social 
activity at the Teachers' Camp. The scattered school build- 
ings and dormitories are connected by improvised native- 
made canopies for the convenience of the teachers during 
the sunnner rains. 

The Philip})ine Military Academy, the Conmion- 
wealth's ''West Point."* is an important new attraction of 
the city. Hundreds of Filipino youths, future officers of 
the Philipi)ine Army, receive their training here. The 
Academy's summer dances have an irresistible attraction 
for debutantes and other sunnner visitors. 

High Dominican Hill, site of a famous (/rotto of 
Lourdes. is accessible* bv motor car. From this \ antage 

{Turn to Pafi;r 18) 




• 13 • 



in 'Touck uritfi 

VARGAS 



President Quezon has a 
Secretary who is becom- 
ing a Manila Legend. 




Whenever President Quezon is away from his desk 
— whether on a visit to the United States, an inspection 
trip in Mindanao, a tour of low-cost housing projects on 
the outskirts of Manila, or at home under doctors' orders 
— the routine business of running the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines falls to Jorge B. 
Vargas, the Presidential secretary. So efficient is Vargas 
in performing his manifold duties that his name appears 
in American newspaper dispatches w^ith a frequency 
exceeded only by that of Mr. Quezon himself. In Manila 
he has become something of a contemporary legend. 
"Get in touch with Vargas," is the answer to innumerable 
queries. 

During his recent illness, President Quezon had to 
rely on Vargas to handle many of the burdens of State. 
The secretary increased in stature under the load of serv- 
ing as eyes, ears, mouth and hands for his ailing chief. 

Democratic and unaffected, a hard worker and a self- 
made man, Secretary Vargas sets a pace around th*^ 
Presidential office that wears out most other officials. 
Rising at 6, he remains on duty until late at night, usually 
with only brief interruptions for meals or relaxation. 
Paradoxically, tliougk. he maintains his social contacts, 
finds time for tennis and bowling, and has established 
a reputation as a model husband and father. 

Vargas' days are as diversified as his talents. Before 
breakfast he putters around his orchard and poultry runs. 
He turns on the radio for the news broadcasts and thumbs 
through the morning ])apers while he eats. He is off to his 
(jffice at Malacanan before most of Manila is fully awake. 
From then until 2 oVlock in the afternoon he devotes all 
his attention to the amazing variety of jobs that fall to 
a successful Presidential secretarv. 

Jf the President is available, appointments must be 
made. If not. Vargas may undertake to sjjeak for his chief. 
Dozens of connnunications must be dis|>atched on all 



sorts (jf governmental business. Inquiries from th(* press 
are answered. Visitors are greeted and political grievances 
soothed. In all these and a hundred otliiM- activities. 
Vargas submerges himself. 

By 2 o'clock the rush has subsided and Secretary 
Vargas goes home for lunch and a siesta. Back at his desk 
by 4 or 5 o'clock, he plunges into the ""paper work'' 
that has jjiled up on his desk. Often it is well past mid- 
night before he switches off the lights and goes home. 
Supper has consisted of a sandwich or two and a glass of 
milk. 

Despite the constant ])ress of business — complicated 
b\ a crowded scjcial and f)fficial schedule — Vargas usually 
manages to get in some terniis or bowling at the Loang- 
Laan Tennis Club, of which he is president. If the day 
has been too busy for a game, he will leave his desk 
during the evening, rush to the club for a set under 
lights, then hurry back to Vlalacanan and his job. 

The Presidential secretary finds occasional relaxation 
in dancing or a show. Good tennis thrills him. A bang-up 
boxing or wrestling bout is a treat, too. Vargas belongs 
to the Manila Yacht Club, Los Taniaraos Pol ) Club, the 
Wack Wack Golf Club, and half a do/en social organiza- 
tions. All somehow^ get a measure of his attention. 

Vargas' interest in sports even extends into his hobby 
of collecting books. Sporting editions have a prominent 
place among the 2,500 volumes of his steadily growing 
private library. However, the selection has both variety 
and richness. Currently he is developing the Filipiniana 
section through the acquisition of rare Philippine manu- 
scripts. Stamps go into another collection, and to date 
his scrapbooks exceed 100 volumes. A genuine lover of 
books, Vargas is meticulous in their care: no minor 
faults in design, printing or binding escape his eye, and 
he is equally critical of granmiatical or typographical 
errors. 

An efficient executive. Secretary Vargas is just as suc- 
cessful as a family man. He and Mrs. Vargas are both 
busy, but their home life follows the orderly pattern of 
a typical Filipino household. Five boys and three girls 
assure pleasant distractions from the cares of official life. 

Convent-educated, Mrs. Yulo Vargas is a seasoned 
home-maker. Furthermore, her friends will tell you she 
is a good cook, an excellent interior decorator, and a 
successful manager of the family business interests. Like 
her husband, she is fond of sports. Mrs. Vargas bowls 
occasionally, goes in for gymnastics and dances well. 

Today, Secretary Vargas is one of the most popular 
men in the Commonwealth administration. He performs 
a difficult j(^l) well, without ostentation or favoritism. 
Sure indication of his ability is the manner in which he 
has maintained close liaison between Malacanan Palace 
and the Fili|)ino p(H)plp during the President's recent 
illness. A job like that is not easy. Manila often (alls 
Secretary Vargas the 'Mittle President."" ^ 




The FILIPINO WOMAN has 
physical traits in coininon with inanv 
peoples of the Far East. She is, in 
fact, often mistaken for a Chinese, 
Japanese or, most frequently, a Ma- 
layan. This is easily explained: 
Chinese, Japanese and Malayan Mood 
all flows in Filipino veins. 

Three races of men migrated from 
Southeastern Asia to populate the 
Philippines — the Negritos, the In- 
donesians and the Malays. The Ma- 
lays, with the most highly developed 
civilization, are still dominant and 
their influence on the Filipino, both 
physical and cultural, has been the 
most marked. Because of China's 
proximity to the Philippines, Chinese 
have migrated to the islands in large 
numbers. They have intermarried to 
such a great extent that almost every 
Filipino has a few drops of Chinese 
blood. Spanish influence is also very 
evident. 

Small in stature, usually not taller 
than five feet five inches, the Filipino 
woman has straight black hair, clear- 
cut features, dark eyes and a light- 
brown comjjlexion. Strangely enough, 
she looks like a true Filipina only 



Clothes Make 

the 

Filipino 



woman 

By Flora Ylogon 

How Filipino clothes have 
changed in the past two decades. 
Left, the traditional Maria Clara 
dress, product of Spanish rule. 
Right, modern style, lighter and 
freer. 



when she wears her native dress. Her 
costume, like her own personality, has 
undergone many transformations; 
her clothes today mark the transi- 
tion from the old order to the modern. 

In the early days, the Filipino 
woman was secluded in the home, and 
her daily excursions went no farther 
than the market or the church. Walk- 
ing slowly and with dignity, she 
could not raise her eyes to a member 
of the opposite sex. The Filipina's 
lack of freedom was reflected in the 
style of her clothes. The bulky Maria 
Clara costume prevailed, for etk^iette 
required that a woman'^s clothes 
should not I'eveal the feminine form. 

The Maria Clara dress concealed 
the figure well. First, there were three 
or four petticoats, very full, gathered 
and ruflled. A waist, the "camisa", 
made of closely woven pineapple 
fiber or Canton linen, came next, 
l^sually enil)roidered, its long gath- 
ered sleeves hung loosely to the 
wrist. A collar which resembled a 
monk's cowl was folded over the 
breast and partly covered the high, 
broad neckline of the '"camisa *. 

A full, loose skirt fell to the floor 




and covered the feet. In the Tagalog 
regions, an apron-like "tapiz of 
thick black material was worn over 
the skirt, reaching the knees. The 
''tapiz" was a symbol of modesty and 
no Tagalog woman dared to go into 
the streets without one. W hen she 
went to church, the Filipina wore a 
black veil which covered her face. 
To see to the side, she had to turn 
her head. She was modesty personi- 
fied. 

Today, women of the Philij)pines 
have yielded to new influences, and 
.J,lie ixative dress has also undergone a 
change. The "camisa" is now very 
sheer — the sheerer it is, the more it 
is admired. The sleeves, which for- 
merly hung loosely and covered the 
arm- completely. have become 
shorter, wider, and are starched stifl 
to resemble wings. The neck line is 
lower and broader, while the "monk s 
cowl" no longer hugs th(^ ncrk bul 
falls lower in three folds that lea\ e 
the shoulders bare, extending across 
the back of the "'camisa" in an in- 
verted triangle, with th(^ tip ri^aching 
the waistline. TIk^ collar and widc- 
I Turn lo Pdij^c 2 ) I 



The Philippines Has a $4,000,000,000 Nest E39 

By Ivan M. Elchibegoff 



1 HE Philippine Commonwealth is 
predominantly an agricultural coun- 
try, and forests comprise one of its 
most important natural resources. 
With the advent of economic and po- 
litical independence, the exploitation 
of these forest resources is expected 
to play an increasingly valuable role 
in domestic and international 
economy. 

When they withdraw from the 
Philippines, Americans can leave no 
finer monument than their work in 
Insular forestry. American foresters 
—men such as George Ahern, founder 
of the Philippine Forestry School, 
and George Fischer, adviser on 
natural resources to the Common- 
wealth—wall be remembered grate- 
fully for what they did in establish- 
ing sound forestry in the Philippines. 
The knowledge they gained there has 
been invaluable in spreading appre- 
ciation of Latin American forests, as 
well as those of the Malayan archi- 
pelago. Furthermore, American 
forestry influence has been dissem- 
inated throughout China, Japan. 
Malaya and the rest of the Far East 
by graduates of the Philippine School 
of Forestry. 

Philippine forestry has a history 
older than the American occupation. 
Long before the Spanish-American 
W^ir. the Spaniards organized a Bu- 
reau of Forestry in the Philippines 
and enacted forestry legislation that 
actually handicapped development. 
The old feudal regime could not meet 
the requirements of contemporary 
industrial exploitation of timber 
stands, although the Spanish laws 
were fashioned after those of their 
neighl)ors in western Europe. Despite 
these handicaps, local conditions 
favored the development of a lumber 
industry that could satisfy the local 
demand and meet export require- 
ments. With the end of Spanish 
dcminatinn. American capital and 




Modern sawmills handle logs 
of Philippine mahogany 

technique soon permitted large scale 
utilization of the magnificent forests. 

Philippine forests are officially 
computed to occupy 43,700,000 acres, 
approximately 59 per cent of the 
total land area. Standing timber is 
estimated to total 464,700,000,000 
feet, worth some $4,000,000,000. This 
is about 8250 worth of standing tim- 
ber for each Filipino man, woman 
and child. When the logging, manu- 
facture and transportation costs are 
added, it can be seen what a tremen- 
dous factor in Philippine national 
economy lies in the timber resources. 

The Islands contain about 3,000 
species of merchantable trees attain- 
ing one foot and more in diameter. 
For the present, however, only 20 or 
so are known commercially in export 
markej:s. Under the names "Philip- 
})ine mahogany*' and "Phili])pine 
hardwoods", they account' for be- 
tween 85 and 90 per cent of the lum- 
ber exports. Although the Philippine 
forests are ])redominantly hardwood, 
some species are ca|)al)le of substitu- 
tion for soft woods. This is an im- 
portant technical factor in the compe- 
tition between Philijjpine and Ameri- 
can lumber in the Japanese market. 

Nowhere is the contrast of old 
and new in the Philippines better ex- 
emplified than in the technological 
set-up of the lumber industry. Next to 
the Moro splitting off the most ac- 



cessible parts of the log, the traveler 
finds an up-to-date sawmill using 
high-powered American logging and 
cutting machinery, producing hun- 
dreds ()[ thousands of board feet of 
lumber a day. 

Statistics offer the best measure- 
ment of the industry's growth in the 
l)ast 40 years. Production in 1900 
totaled about 20,000,000 board feet; 
the output was approximately 1,000- 
000.000 feet in 1938. Progress has 
been steady, with American money 
and skill playing a most significant 
part. The backbone of this advance 
has been the local market, which con- 
sumes 75 to 85 per cent of the 
yearly output. Exports increased from 
6 to 9 per cent during the first decade 
of the century; between 1930 and 
1910 they rose from 15 to 25 per 
cent. These figures may not seem im- 
portant to the layman, but in terms 
of standards of living they mean 
that the yearly consumption of lum- 
ber increased from about 10 board 
feet per capita in 1900 to 60 or 70 
board feet in 1938. American con- 
sumption in 1938 was 164 board 
feet. The increase in total production 
indicates a TOO per cent growth in 
agricultural populaticMi and produc- 
tion. It also signifies the development 
of skilled machinists and other in- 
dustrial workers. 

As is normal at this stage of Philip- 
pine economic development, the in- 
dustry is controlled to a considerable 
extent by foreign capital. Recent 
figurc^s show that 12 per cent of the 
money is American. 30 per cent 
Philippine. 10 ])er cent Chinese, 5 
|)er cent British and 4 per cent 
Japanese. The remainder, about 9 
per cent, is mixed foreign and Philip- 
pine capital. The American invest- 
ment mav increase further, depend- 
ing on the industry's decline in the 
Pacific \()rthwesl. on the one hand, 
I Turn to Pap;e 23) 




• 17 • 



Varona, Labor Aide, 
Returning to Manila 




Francisco Varona 

three years of service as labor assistant to the 
Philippine Resident Commissioner in Washington, Fran- 
cisco Varona has been granted an indefinite leave of 
absence and will leave for the Philippines early in July, 
(vommissioner Joaquin M. Elizalde has announced. Mr. 
Varona expects to seek a seat in the Philippine Senate 
next fall. 

As aide to Commissioner Elizalde, Mr. Varona has 
been instrumental in the organization of Filipino Execu- 
tive Councils throughout the United States, and under his 
direction the Nationals Division of the Resident Commis- 
sioner's office is attempting to register all Filipinos in 
I he ( nitcrl States. Mr. Varona has been particularly ac- 
tive in nii^dialing laboi" dis})utes involving Filipinos. He 
is faiiiiliaiK known to Filipinos everywhere as "Don 
Pa..,.- * 



Letters From Our 

Interested Readers 

Resident Connnissioner of the Philij)pincs 
Washington, D. C. 

Just today I received a cojjy of PiiiLiPPiNKS and I 
can hardly tell you how much I appreciate it. It seems 
ahnost impossible that the Islands liav(* improved and 
advanced as they have during the past 11 years. 

1 look back at the time when it was dangerous for 
one man or even two to be away from the barracks. I 
recall that we established a guard post at the ri\'er cross- 
ing north of San Isidro. The post was some distance from 
the town. One side of the road was covered by a dense 
growth of bamboo and other tropical vegetation — 
bananas, mangoes, etc.; the other side was not covered 
so densely. 

One day, one of the men on guard at the river post 
came into the "cook shack" for dinner and afterwards set 
out for his post again. Apparently he was overpowered 
by skulking natives and murdered, for he never showed 
up again. A thorough search failed to reveal anything. 
As long as we were in that neighl)orhood — San Isidro, 
Gapan, Cabiao, Cabanatuan — nothing ever gave up a 
clue as to the cause oi his mysterious disappearance. 

Now, here comes your splendid nuigazine which gives 
me a different vision of the Philippines. The cultural ad- 
vancement is something to marvel at! The splendid archi- 
tectural improvements make one wonder if it is really so. 

Many, many thanks for the wonderful magazine. 

LoLis Collins 
Baker, Oregon 



Baguio (from Page 11) 

point, one commands a complete view of Baguio and its 
environs — the Mansion House, summer home of the 
United States High Commissioner; the summer residence 
of the President of the Philippines; the city auditorium 
at Burnham Park, where the younger set gathers for 
dancing; the Country Club with its popular golf course; 
the Baguio Catholic Cathedral atop a nearby hill; seven 
large hotels at vantage points around the city; and at- 
tractive modern residences with beautiful gardens. 

But the most colorful spot in Baguio is the Market 
Place, where the mountain people, the Igorots, gather 
from distant villages to sell their wood carvings, hand- 
woven cloth, baskets, curios, jewelry and fruits and 
vegetables. 

Baguio is, finally, a very interesting paradox. Located 
in the mountains of northern Luzon, whose inhabitants 
are among the oldest but least advanced of the Filipino 
people, it symbolizes the success of the joint efforts of 
Americans and Filipinos in the creation of a resort city 
which is, to many minds, the j^Icasantest and most modern 
in the Far Fast. ^ 



Philippine Laws 
To Control Aliens 
Go Into Operation 

The first cuinpreliensive rcslriction of aliens in the 
history of the Philippine Islands hegan on January 1. 
1911. with enforcement of the 1910 Philippine Immigra- 
tion Act. The Commonwealth legislation closely follows 
American patterns with only a few nolahle exceptions. 
For instance, the Philippines, unlike the United States, 
makes no distinction as to race or nationality. Secondly, 
the PhilippiiH^ definition of an alien does not include 
citizens of the I'nited States, while the United States 
considers the Filipino an alien. Finally, the Philippines 
has estahlislu^d an ahsolute quantitative limitation, in 
contrast to the American proj)ortional svstem. 

The Philippine law distinguishes hetween innnigrant 
and non-inmiigrant aliens. Non-immigrants include per- 
sons in the Islands temijorarily, tourists, seamen, inter- 
national traders and students. They are restricted quali- 
tatively, hut not quantitatively. The second classification, 
immigrants, is suhject to both quantitative and qualita- 
tive restrictions. 

Denied entry to the Philippines, regardless of pur- 
pose, are persons found on the non-admission list of most 
countries — paupers, the insane, polygamists, criminals, 
etc. 

From the international standpoint, the most signifi- 
cant feature of the new law is its quota figures. An abso- 
lute limit of 500 of any one nationality, or without na- 
tionality, can be admitted for any one calendar year. 
This feature brought a diplomatic protest from Japan, 
wdiich felt that, in practice, it was being discriminated 
against. No limitation is i)laced on nonquota immigrants 
— approved employes, the immediate family of Philip- 
pine citizens, women who have lost their Philippine 
citizenship through marriage to aliens, to mention sev- 
eral categories. 

Fingerprinting of incoming aliens is handled by immi- 
gration officials at ports of entry. Persons about whose 
status there is any doubt are referred to a board of 
special inquiry. An alien who has been excluded by a 
local board may appeal to the Board of Connnissioners 
of the Bureau of Immigration in Manila. 

Another bill passed by the Philippine National Assem- 
bly requires the registration and fingerprinting of all 
aliens resident in the Commonwealth. This new legisla- 
tion is very similar to the Alien Registration Act of 1910 
in the I nited Stales. ^ 



LCQ to ■Old 
West Coast Filipinos 




Dr. Macario D. Bautista 



The opening of a branch of the Office of the Philip- 
pine Resident Commissioner in San Francisco was an- 
nounced June 1 by Commissioner Joaquin M. Elizalde. 
Primarily an extension of the Nationals Division of the 
Washington office, the new agency was made necessary 
by the concentration of Filipinos on the Pacific Coast 
and the growing need for a greater solidarity among 
them. 

Dr. Macario D. Bautista. physician of Stockton. Cali- 
fornia, is director of the agency. Mr. C. T. Alfafara. 
popular president of the Filipino community in San 
Francisco, has been named secretary. 

The primary purpose of the San Francisco office is to 
act as liaison agent between the Filipino communities 
on the Pacific Coast and the Office of the Philippine Resi- 
dent Commissioner in Washington. The staff, for instance, 
is charged with advising the Commissioner on all pend- 
ing state or local legislation affecting Filipino interests, 
and any cases of discrimination. Filipino travelers will 
be aided in their dealings with immigration officials, and 
the issuance of visas and re-entry permits will be facili- 
tated. 

At least one inter-communit\ Filipino conference will 
be arranged by the branch office eac h year. 

"We hope by this step to extend more effect i\ eh the 
services and protection of the Philippine Connnissioner's 
Office to the Pacific Coast." Dr. Bautista declared. "The 
agency stands ready to assist both AnKM'icans and 
Filipinos in any jiroblem that legitimateh comes within 
our sj)heie/" ^ 



o H 1]) • 



Export Control 



(from Page 3) 



Philippine Government and Filipino leaders, both in 
Washington and in Manila. They rose to the occasion 
magnificently, throwing their full support behind a propo- 
sition which was sure to mean a real sacrifice to them. 
That made the task of the sponsors of the legislation much 
lighter. 

It was my privilege to have been a member of the 
congressional party which visited the Philippines six 
years ago for the inauguration of the Commonwealth 
Government and of Manuel Quezon as its first President. 
I saw the Philippines at first hand, and my observations 
of economic and social con- 
ditions there gave me a deep 
appreciation of the impor- 
tance to the FilipiMOS, as well 
as for us, of export control. 

I was pleased to be able to 
introduce this bill in the Sen- 
ate where it was considered 
and acted on within two 
days. The identical bill in- 
troduced in the House by 
Representative May, chair- 
man of the Military Affairs 
Committee, was also given 
prompt approval in commit- 
tee. On the floor of the 
House- Representative May 
offered my bill as a substi- 
tute for his own. facilitating 
its final passage. 

The administration departments strongly favored 
the legislation. The proposal was, in fact, submitted to the 
Congress by Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson. The 
stated objective was to prevent the leakage to foreign 
countries of essential resources produced in the Philip- 
pines. It was felt highly desirable that these resources be 
husbanded for the defense of the United States and of the 
Philippines. Testimony was presented in the hearings be- 
fore our committee that considerable amounts of these 
vital materials were being shipped to Axis nations. Ob- 
viously such a situation was not consonant with our na- 
tional policy. To understand its existence and develop- 
ment, however, it is necessary to understand the general 
background of our original national export control legis- 
lation. Then we may see how the problem of the Philip- 
pines was gradually impressed upon us. 

The Congress in July, 1940 passed legislation to a])ply 
export licensing control to all essential products, com- 
modities, and materials produced in continental United 
States. Under that law, exports of high-octane gasoline, 
steel, iron, aluminum, tin, rubber and a long list of other 
essential materials were placed under supervision and 
restriction. Congress had intended, and the Administration 
carried out a program whereby all such shipments out- 
side the borders of the I nited States were made to con- 
form strictly to the necessities of national def(Misc. Dis- 




Copra, dried coconut meat, now requires a license 
for export from the Philippines. 



crction in issuing licenses for export was left in the hands 
of the Export Control Achninistralion. an organization 
rej)resenting the State and the \\ ar Departments, among 
others. This was as it should be. Losses of \ ilal defense 
materials were immediately curtaih'd. W lial sliipnicnts 
were permitted went to countries in uhos(» economic wel- 
fare we were espcciall\ interested, in furtherance of oiir 
national policies, inekuling the (/ood \eigld)oi- policy in 
South and Central America. 

But Washington soon oi)ser\('d lhal some vital ma- 
terials continued to j)ass out of American jurisdiction 
through the Philippines. Of course, there was nothing 
im])roper about this at the time. Th(^ Philij)pines had 

not been nuMitioned in the 
original ex|)()rt control law, 
because it had not heen 
llionglil either necessary or 
fair. have pinched oil the 
Connnonwcniltirs export 
trade without first consulting 
the Filipinos who would bear 
the chief burden of that 
|K)lic\ would undoubtedly 
ha\(' i)e( ri grossly unjust. 
After all. it was our national 
defense that we were seeking 
to improve. Moreover, at the 
time of the original passage 
of the export control act. 
many res|)onsil)le j^eople had 
no idea that the Filipinos 
were willing t(^ stand beside 
us in the diplomatic tug of 
war that was going on in the world. 

Yet the queer paradox of the question was the fact 
that the Philippines was scheduled to remain under the 
Americ:an Flag until 1916. Despite the Independence Act 
of 1934, the Filipinos were not yet independent. In an 
international sense we were still responsible for them and 
for their jjlace in the world. That complicated the question 
of ex|)ort control. 

At first the contradiction was not especially apparent 
to us. We passed the exj)ort control act for continental 
United States and were willing to let the matter rest 
there. Our un\villingn(\ss to ])resume u})on the delicate in- 
ternational ])ositi(;n of the I^hili p|)ines, combined w^ith 
our lack of information as to the probable extent and 
importance of ''leakage'' from the Islands, made the ques- 
tion fairly academic anyway. But then two changes oc- 
curred. First, both our experts and the Filipinos began 
to notice an important increase in shi})ments of vital 
Philipjnne v(^getabl(^ oils, base melcils and hemp to Japan, 
Russia anfl similar markc^ls. These were highly im[)ortant 
materials, and our ollieials were frankly dislurl)ed. 

The second change was the growing consciousness that 
th(^ Fili])inos wcvr on our side* in the world ideoh)gical 
( ordlicl. 1 he\ bad d(4i IxMaleU chosen, we understood, to 
throw their lot in with us. regardh^ss of lh(^ menace to 



• 20 • 




IVIaiiihi hemp exports 
may iio>v he eurtaiUMl 



llieniselvcs. A coincidcMil rral- 
izalioii was that, until 19l(). 
we wore j)lainly r(\^j)()nsihlo 
for the defnisi* of the Philij)- 
j)ines as well as ihc I nilrd 
States. 

'rhes(^ two realizations 
conihined to sii»i*»;est to both 
odieial and non-onieial cir- 
cles that export control be 
applied to the Philippines. 
Actually, accord ini: to testi- 
mony presented to us, the 
Fili})inos themselves were the 
first to make the suggestion 
and to ofTer to act U|)on it. 

Actin*^ under instructions 
from President Q u e z o n. 
Joaquin M. Elizalde, Philip- 
pine Resident Commissioner in \\ ashinizton. contacted 
Administration officials and offered to aj)|)l\ ex}3ort con- 
trol in whatever form the I'nited States thouiiht best. 
Filipinos, he declared, were willing and ready to make 
whatever sacrifies were necessary, 'fhat offer was deeply 
appreciated in Washington. A bill applying export C(^n- 
trol to the territories and possessions was inunediately 
drafted and submitted to Congress. 

When Mr. Elizalde api)eared before our Senate Mili- 
tary Affairs Committee, he reiterated the Common- 
wealth's full and unqualified su])port for the proposed 
legislation, even at the expense of a national economy 
completely dependent upon exports. Dean Acheson. As- 
sistant Secretary of State, and Brigadier-General Russell 
Maxwell, Export Control Administrator, appeared on be- 
half of the Administration to i)resent basic testimony 
concerning the need for the legislation and to urge its 
adoption. That was done in record time. 

This commentary, however, would not be complete 
without again emphasizing the gracious cooperation of 
President Manuel Quezon, who unquestionably reflected 
the attitude of the 16,0()0,0()() Filipinos in his desire to 
work closely with the United States on these propects of 
benefit to us both. President Quezon has not taken ad- 
vantage of the situation. Instead, he placed the matter at 
our discretion during the discussion of this important 
matter. 

Great credit is likewise due to the Congressional repre- 
sentative of the Philippine (government. Commissioner 
"Mike" Elizalde, who has in this, and in all other matters 
been a vigorous, able and active advocate of his country, 
able to work in closest harmoiu with his colleagues in 
Congress. Elizalde's personality and ])ersonal ])opularit\ 
have gained him an entry into many high circles to the 
ultimate benefit of his country. That, added to the deep 
a])preciation which we ha\e develo})ed liere for the co- 
ojjeration and patriotism of President Quezon, has made 
it a pleasant task to coo|)erate with the Philippine Com- 
monwealth in our legislalise function. ^ 



Service in the Philippines 
By 

Major Alexander Sydney Lanier 



I HAVE HAD the privilege of seeing each copy of 
Philippines since its first issue. The magazine is of 
particular interest to one who spent more than four 
years in the '*Sun Kissed Isles". The photographs show 
the great progress of the Islands since I was there 30- 
odd years ago. The whole is of interest also because it 
revives memories of most pleasant experiences and of 
happv vears I spent in the Philippines, and of the 
friendships I formed among the Filipinos and Americans. 
In fact, the ties betw-een those who served in the Islands 
in the earlier days are comparable only to those formed 
in combat service or those of our school days. 

I went to the Philippines in 1906 at the request of 
General Clarence R. Edwards. Chief of the Bureau of 
Insular Affairs in Washington, as assistant to the Insular 
Attorney General. It was my privilege to serve under Gov- 
ernors General Henry C. Ide and Cameron Forbes. Com- 
Hiissioner James F. Smith, and more immediately under 
Attorneys General Wilfley. Gregoria Areneta and Ignacio 
Villamor. I consider Areneta a man of uncommon ability. 

It was my privilege during that period to draft many 
vital Philippine laws. Among the legislation I helped 
prepare w^ere the laws creating the University of the 
Philippines, segregating the lepers at Culion, creating the 
Commission to regulate railroads and public utilities, and 
pensioning the Constabulary. I also aided in preparing 
the habitual criminal act, and wrote the opinions of the 
Bureau of Justice. 

I liked the Filipinos, and always found them courteous 
and hospitable. I sympathized with their political as- 
pirations, and had faith in their capabilities for self- 
government; and in those early formative days it was 
within my sphere of activities to preserve and protect 
Filipino civil rights. Whenever there w^as presented to me 
a question of law involving Filipino rights, and any 
doubt existed, I always resolved the doubt in favor of the 
Filipino. 

As long as I live, I shall alwa)s cherish happy memo- 
ries of the Philippines and its peoples. I can only wish 
for them unmolested freedom to develop to the fullest 
their undoubted abilit) and their capacity for self- 
government. May they l^e blessed with happiiu^ss and 
prosperity, and with perpetual ])eace and security at 
home and al)road. ^ 



• 21 • 



p. I. mm 



Secretary of National Defense Teofilo Sison in a 
recent report to President Quezon and the Philippine As- 
sembly submitted a series of recommendations "for the 
maintenance of a strong and efficient air force in the 
Philippines." The plan called for: 

Expansion of the Philippine Army air corps and off- 
shore patrol; Government aid in training civilian pilots: 
appointment of Filipino pensionados to take special 
courses in aeronautics abroad; consolidation of Philip- 
pine commercial airlines and their operation under 
government supervision or control; establishment of an 
adequate central airport in Manila; complete Filipiniza- 
tion of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey; ac- 
quisition of an additional survey ship; acquisition of a 
new and larger site for the Philippine nautical school. 

Coincident with these recommendations came an an- 
nouncement that 100 officer-aviators will be detailed this 
year to speed the training of Filipino pilots. 

• • • 

Since the Philippine census was taken in 1939, the 
population has increased by 770,597, bringing the total 
to 16,771,900, the Bureau of Census and Statistics has 
announced on the basis of estimates made on January 1, 
1941. Manila had 673,000. Cebu is still the most densely 
populated province, with 1,085,400. 

• • • 

Shipping difficulties have failed to curtail the Philip- 
pine export trade, contrary to earlier fears. The total 
value of shipments in the first quarter f $40,167,220) 
was ahead of the 1940 figures ($37,282,721) by 7.7 
per cent. A sharp recovery in Philippine purchases 
abroad was also noted during this period. 

• • • 

Jr RESIDENT QUEZON has issued an executive order 
regulating the reappointment and reinstatement of gov- 
ernment employes who resign to engage in politics. Such 
persons hereafter cannot return to the public payroll 
until six months after the elections in which they directly 
or indirectly took part. 

• • • 

The training of volunteer guards for civilian de- 
fense in the event of emergency will be started soon in 
all Philippine towns and cities by the Philippine Con- 
slabular). Volunteers will receive instruction in first 
aid, repair and construction work, police, traffi{' and 



guard duties, gas decontamination and fire prevention. 
In Manihi alone a guard unit of 17-()()() Filipinos and 
Americans between ilie ages of Jo and 60 is i)huHied. 

• • • 

General EiMILIO AGUINALDO, leader of the in- 
surrectionists of 1899 and 1900, and still a strong advo- 
cate of immediate independence, recently reconnnended 
that Manila be designated an open city immediately upon 
the outl>reak of any hostilities involving the Philipj)ines. 
General Aguinaldo expressed full c(jnfidence in the abilitv 
of Insular defense forces. "All veterans of the revolution 
are with me," he declared, "and we are ready to fight 
again, this time with our American friends and bene- 
factors." 

• • • 

Acting immediately to carry out a set of recommen- 
dations on civilian defense issued by President Quezon, 
the National Assembly passed a bill appropriating 
85,000,000 to cover the costs. As the first step to provide 
cash for defense purposes. President Quezon has author- 
ized the release of $10,000,000 from the fund given him 
under emergency legislation to cover the purchase of seeds 
and short-season crops, the acquisition of poultry and 
livestock, and the production and storage of other food- 
stuffs. Discussion has already started on means of meet- 
ing emergency food requirements. 



Vice president SERGIO OSMENA recently told 
the Manila press that, as far as the Filipinos are con- 
cerned. Independence is a closed matter which can only 
be reopened by the United States. He declared that 
the Filipinos are willing to fight for the United States 
if necessary; and although they will rely on American 
naval and military aid until 1946, Filipinos will handle 
civilian defenses. 

• • • 

The devastating fire which swept the Tondo district of 
Manila in May, leaving 30,000 homeless, has forced 
adoption of a number of government measures for re- 
lieving fire sufferers and rehabilitating the burned area. 
Mayor Eulogio Rodriguez announced establishment of 
a 82,500,000 revolving fund to urbanize Tondo and 
help prevent a repetition of the $2,000,000 conflagration. 
A modern town, without nipa shacks and the old slums, 
is planned. Model tenement houses will be leased or sold 
on the installment basis to Tondo residents, preferably 
fire victims. 

• • • 

President Quezon has issued an executive order re- 
quiring afl government offices and entities to acquire and 
store a four-month reserve of gasoline, lubricating oil, 
grease, kerosene and Diesel oil. These supplies, in cans, 
will be stored in safe and convenient places. 



• 22 • 



Treasure in Timber 

(from Page 16) 

and political developments in the 
South Pac'ilic. on the other. Philip- 
pine eajMtal is certain to increase. 
Total investments at present are about 
815,500.000 — a relatively small 
amount in view of the over-mature 
timber available for innnediate 
cutting. 

The lumber industry has developed 
mainly on the basis of the domestic 
demand from expanding agricultural 
export industries, such as sugar, 
copra and abaca. Nevertheless, 
Philippine woods have already at- 
tained an enviable position in world 
markets. The first South Sea tropical 
timber to reach Europe in substantial 
quantities came from the Islands, 
with the possible exception of teak 
from Southeastern Asia. In technical 
properties and adaptability, they have 
proven their ability to compete with 
hardwoods from other parts of the 
tropical world. 

In the past 20 years the percentage 
of Philippine timber sold abroad has 
increased until in 1937 not less than 
25 per cent of the national cut was 
exported. The trade is predominantly 
with Japan, the United States, the 
British Empire and China, but more 
than 25 other countries received their 
quota. 

Although exports have been sub- 
stantial and are still growing in 
value, compared to such products as 
guo-ar, copra, coconut oil, Manila 
fiber and canned fruit they are insig- 
nificant, of course. But the interna- 
tional timber trade in the Pacific is 
expanding and the Philippine share 
will continue to grow in quantity 
and value, with a further increase 
in its relative importance to the na- 
tional economy. 

Of individual markets, Japan is 
the most important and is still grow- 
ing. The United States is the most 
profitable. This is because America 
imports finished sawmill products, 
while Japan takes rough timber and 
does the manufacturing at home. 

Since 1929, Ja])an has sought to 
limit its j)urchases of raw and semi- 
manufactured products in the United 
States. American lumber exports to 




Liiniliermeii use mocleni equip- 
ment at every opportunity 



Japan have probably suffered more 
than any other product from this 
|)olicy. One of the reasons the 
Japanese were able to do this was 
the presence in the Philippines of a 
readily available source of timber. 
Therefore, in the event the Philippine 
Government decided to protect its 
woodworking industry by imposing 
an export tax on rough timber, Japan 
would probably look for another 
source in Malaya or Siberia. In fact, 
the Japanese already hold several 
concessions in the Netherlands Indies 
and British North Borneo, which 
supply about as much as the Common- 
wealth does. A policy of protection 
for the domestic Philippine sawmill 
industry is therefore of questionable 
value unless other markets capable 
of substantial improvement can be 
found. This is the next task of the 
Philippine lumber industry. 

The Islands have been regular im- 
porters of American softwood since 
the end of the 19th century. United 
States Government statistics show 
that the first purchase of American 
lumber, valued at Si 10. occurred in 
1824-25. In 1842-44, the Philippines 
took S4,500 worth. In the first decade 
of this century. United States lumber 
exports to the Philippines averaged 
about 20.000,000 board feet a year. 
They have declined now to between 
3,000.000 and 5.000,000 board feet. 
These Philippine imports are '4ia- 
bituaf rather than economically 
necessary: for we are told by the 
foresters that the Islands ha\e wood 
for every conceivable use. ^ 



Clothes (from Page 15) 

puffed sleeves give the garment the 
graceful lines of a butterfly. 

The skirt has also adopted new 
styles. The fullness has disappeared 
and the design now conforms with the 
"camisa". Fitting the hips closely as 
an American or European dress does, 
it falls in graceful folds to the floor, 
ending in a train in the back. Philip- 
pine dresses, whether for ordinary 
use or special occasion, morning or 
evening, always have a train. It is 
easily managed, however. During 
the day it is pinned to the side: at 
tea it is held in the left hand: and on 
formal occasions it is allowed to trail 
gracefully behind. The trimming and 
material of the train vary according 
to the occasion. Those for daily use 
are made simply, of inexpensive 
material, while those for evening 
wear are of costly materials, elab- 
orately embroidered with silver, gold 
or silk thread. 

Until the modern era. Filipino 
dresses came in black or white or dull 
shades. Now of every conceivable 
combination of colors, they are gay, 
flamboyant. Dresses in the modern 
style no longer include the ''tapiz.'" 
which only members of the older gen- 
eration still wear. Even this modern 
version of the native dress is bein<2: 
replaced by the short Western dress, 
especially in the schools and offices, 
where it is less expensive and more 
convenient. The native dress, how- 
ever, will not completely disappear, 
for it is a creation of beauty and a 
real part of the Philip])ine tradi- 
tion. ^ 




The Philippine and Anid^i-iraim 
flags fly together 



• 23 • 




FILIPINO AUTHOR 

By P. C. Morantte 



w HEN the winners of the First Commonwealth Literary 
Contest were announced on November 15, 1940, the 
Philippine public showed special interest in the prize 
entries. Letters from all over the Islands poured into 
Malacaiian Palace, asking w^here copies of the books by 
the winning authors could be procured. 

Having been awarded a prize, I received my share of 
inquiries from those interested in reading my book. 
Filipino Life. I had to admit to my correspondents — 
fellow writers, teachers, editors, students, librarians and 
one Assemblyman — that my work was still in manuscript 
form and that they would have to await publication be- 
fore they could read it. 

In order to meet the public clamor for the winning 
literary works, a number of authors who received sub- 
stantial cash awards were prompted to publish their own 
books. The result of their private ventures in the pub- 
lishing field was far from satisfactory. Success was 
literally impossible. For lack of capital, the author- 
publishers were forced to print only limited editions, 
which meant a high price per copy to meet production 
costs; the price being prohibitive, few books could reach 
the Filipino reading public. 

The I Philippine ) University Press and the Philippine 
Book Guild, both of which publish literary works in 
English, fared no better than the author-publishers did 
when they undertook the publication of some of the prize 
winners. 

Obviously, book publishing in the Philippines is a 
luxury. But it is a luxury that needs encouragement — 
intensive and extensive cultivation — if the basic purpose 
of the Commonwealth Literary Contests — "to help writ- 
ers to help themselves and put the nation on the cultural 
map of the world" — is to be fully realized. This ultimate 
aim will not be realized if the winning authors use their 
rash prizes to publish their own works. They certainly 
make no money for themselves. To the contrary, such 
ventures drain away the material resources of which all 
young writers are badly in need. Their hope of reaching 
the widest possible reading public is defeated by their 
com|)lete lack of experience in the publishing field. 
Furthermore, writers who publish their own books are 
almost ahvays regarded with suspicion by r ritics, despite 



the distinction their works have acquired through the 
Commonwealth Literary Contests. 

It is apparent, therefore, that our main j)r()bh'm is to 
have well-established pul)Iishing firms undertake the 
publication of winning literary works. Such firms can 
give us a chance to make money and at the same time 
create an extensive reading j)ublic for their books. L'n- 
fortunately, no such juiblishing house exists in the 
Philippines, particularly as far as publishers of English 
works are concerned. 

For a satisfactory sohition of this j)roblem. I believe 
Filipino authors should turn to American j)ublishers. 
For instance, New York, the recognized literary capital 
of the world, has numerous reputaide book firms. Very 
probably, one of them could be interested in a contract 
to handle exclusively the publication of winning English 
entries in the Commonwealth Literary (Contests. The 
Commonwealth Government or the Philij)pine Writers' 
League, or both, should take the lead in promoting such 
an arrangement. Perhaps a publisher's contract could be 
made part of the Contest prize. 

There is an alternative. A Filipino publishing house 
might be established in New York to deal exclusively 
with the j)ublication of winning works in English (if it 
were feasible, Spanish and Tagalog works could be trans- 
lated into English, loo). Should this firm be affiliated to 
an American publishing house of good standing — under 
conditions similar to those governing the business rela- 
tions of The Viry;Lnia Quarterly and E. P. Dutton & Co.. 
Inc. or between The Atlantic Monthly and Little 
Brown & Co. — so much the better. But the main tiling 
is to have the winning entries (especially in English) 
published in America. Methods of furnishing capital 
could be worked out by, for instance, the Philippine Book 
Guild, which might act as sole distributing agency in the 
Philippines. A subsidy from the Commonwealth is not out 
of the question, though it is preferable to have the project 
in willing private hands. 

There are some compelling reasons why winning liter- 
ary works should be published in America. It w^ould have 
the great advantage of giving Filipino hooks a better 
chance of being read widely by Americans. Secondly, 
publication facilities are the best in the United States: 
book publishing is a highly specialized trade, involving 
wide experience, sound judgment, salesmanship, public- 
ity, and other attributes we still lack. Furthermore, 
Fili|)ino writers would have a better opportunity of mak-' 
ing a name for themselves in America. And with their 
names established, they could better express to the Ameri- 
can jjeople the issue confronting the Philippine nation. 
Fourthly, with the help of distinguished American editors, 
the quality of Filipino writings would be improved im- 
mensely. Finally, the most effective way to ])ut our na- 
tion on the cultural map of the world is to have excellent 
literary works by Filipino writers ])ul)lished in America. 
For America has now become the cultural center of the 
world. ^ 



• 24 • 




PHILIPPINE TOBACCO AGENCY 



2362 Massachusetts Ave./ N.W. 



Washington,, D. C. 




Dr. Quo Tai-chi, en route to Chungking to 
take his new post as Chinese Foreign 
Minister, called on President Quezon. 




Loyalty Offered and Accepted 

An Editorial 



Filipinos in all walks of life, from the humblest 
farmer to the l^esideiU of ihc^ Commonwealth, have 
repeatedly expressed their loyally to the I nited States 
and iheir devotion to the demoeratie ideals by whieh 
Ave live. President Quezon's moving Loyalty Day mes- 
sage, published elsewhere in ihis issue of Philippines, 
is proof beyond question of the spontaneity of this 
feeling. As long as we are under the American flag, 
Filipinos will unhesitatingly sup})ort United States policy 
in the Far East, wherever that policy may lead us. 

President Roosevelt's sudden, dramatic order placing 
the Philippine Army under American conunand was con- 
vincing proof that our sincerity was accepted and appre- 
ciated by the highest officials of the American Govern- 
ment. As such, it was welcome news to every Filipino. 

The Philippine troops will constitute a loyal and 
\alual)le addition to the United States Army Forces in 
the Far East. To an extent that few Americans realize, 
these men have boundless faith in the ideals for which 
your nation has stood during its 40 years of close rela- 
tions w4th the Phili])pines. The ]:)olicy that the Ihiited 
States has followed in dealing with our jieople may have 
seemed fanciful and idealistic at times, but it has had 
the concrete and jrractical result of producing 16,000,- 
000 devoted friends. Loyalty to the Stars and Stripes 
among Filipinos would shame many Americans. 

To date, we have had little opportunity to demonstrate 
the value of our spirited young army as a defense weapon 
— a fortunate circumstance for which we give full 
credit to the prestige of your army and navy. But mili- 
tary men assure us that the force of 143.000 that Gen- 
eral Douglas MacArthur has set up since 1936 is alert, 
determined and ])ossessed of good basic training. While 
we make no boast of invincibility, w^e are confident that 
any would-be invader would have to pay dearly for every 
inch of Philippine soil he occui)ied. Cooperating closely 
with the American soldiers in the Philippines, our men 
can be of inestimal)le value in defending this Far Eastern 
outpost of the democratic system. 

It is no secret that the training which General Mac- 
Arthur has given the Philip])ine Army has put greatest 
emphasis on defensive tactics — preventing enemy land- 
ings, fighting rear guard actions, raiding supply lines 
and communications. To this work the Filipino is well 
adapted by nature; it is the type of fighting he used most 
creditably against both Spain and the United States 40 



vears ago. In bringing the young Philipjnne Army up-to- 
date on this kind of warfare. General ^lacArthur pre- 
pared us for our most useful defense role. \\ e may 
assume that the numeric-ally small but highly trained 
American force in the Commonwealth will devote its 
talents to the more specialized offensive phases. 

It should be pointed out in any such discussion as 
this of Philippine defenses that General MacArthur 
is held in particularly high esteem in Manila. Every citizen 
of the Connnonwealth knows the monumental work he 
has done in bringing our army into being. In his posi- 
tion as military adviser to President Quezon, he has 
been unobtrusive but effective. Credit for the army s 
fine progress he has invariably assigned to others, yet 
all knew that MacArthur was the genius behind the 
organization. Experienced in Philip])ine defense prob- 
lems as few other Americans are. his appointment as 
commander of the newly organized I nited States Army 
Forces in the Far East is a source of satisfaction to all 
of us. 

It cannot be stated too often that the Philippines yields 
to no other political unit under the American flag in 
the extent of its whole-hearted cooperation with the 
United States Government. Time and again we have sacri- 
ficed our own immediate interest in following a course 
designed to benefit the whole of the country. The recent 
unquestioning acceptance of the American export control 
system for the Connnonwealth is a case in point. It is 
possible to interpret the Federalizing of the Phili})pine 
Army as a serious set-back to our long-standing ind(^- 
pendence as])irations ; this, indeed, it may have been. Rut 
w^e feel it to be worth noting that there was no quibbling, 
that the Philippines accepted the President's order w^ith 
far better grace than many states ha\e shown toward 
Federal relief work or power projects within (heir 
borders. 

For the truth of the mall(M' is lhal \\c Filipinos ar(^ 
proud to belong to the growing arm\ of idealistic ])eo- 
])le who are ready to fight for ihc^ir democracy. We con- 
sider it a privilege to stand sIiouKKm' lo shouldcM' with 
the rest of the libertydoN ing world in rc^sisling lolali- 
tarianism. And while we are grateful lhal iIk^ I nilcd 
States has convincingly shown its determinalion lo 
fend its Philii)])ine Inislion. we want everv American lo 
know that w^e Filipinos ar(^ i-ca(l\ lo do our ])arl in lhal 
fight. * 




Above: Nearly 2,000 Ameri- 
can soldiers arrived at Man- 
ila aboard the U. S. Army 
transport Washington. 



Above: Tons of scrap iron, 
about to be loaded for ex- 
port, were caught in Manila 
by the extension of export 
control to the Philippines. 



Dr. Quo Tai-chi, en route to Chungking to 
fake his new post as Chinese Foreign 
Minister, called on President Quezon. 



Below: Nelson T. Johnson, U. S. Minister 
to AusfroliOf was greeted by American naval 
officers when he passed through Manila. 



Below: Mr. and Mrs. Henry Luce, of New 
York, were guests of President Quezon at a 
dinner party during a brief visit to the 
Philippines. 



Loyalty Offered and Accepted 

An Editorial 



FtTJPINOS in all walks of lifo. from the humblest 
farmer to the Prtv^idiMit of [\\c (".ommomveallh. have 
repeatedly exi)r(^ss(Ml their loyally to ihe I nited States 
and their devotion to the democratic- ideals In whii'h 
we live. President Quezon's movinii; Loyalty Day mes- 
sage, published elsewhere in this issue of Philippines, 
is proof beyond question of the s|)(^nlaneity of this 
feeling. As long as we are under the American flag, 
Filipinos will unhesitatingly su}iport L nited States policy 
in the Far Fast, wherever that policy may lead us. 

President Roosevelt's sudden, dranuitic order placing 
the Philippine Army under American command was con- 
vincing proof that our sincerity was accej)ted and appre- 
ciated by the highest ollicials of the American Govern- 
ment. As such, it was welcome news to every Filipino. 

The Philippine troops will constitute a loyal and 
valuable addition to the United States Army Forces in 
the Far East. To an extent that few Americans realize, 
these men have boundless faith in the ideals for which 
your nation has stood during its 40 years of close rela- 
tions with the Philippines. The policy that the United 
States has followed in dealing with our people may have 
seemed fanciful and idealistic at times, but it has had 
the concrete and practical result of producing 16,000,- 
000 devoted friends. Loyalty to the Stars and Stripes 
among Filipinos would shame many Americans. 

To date, w^e have had little opportunity to demonstrate 
the value of our spirited young army as a defense wea])on 
— a fortunate circumstance for which w^e give full 
credit to the prestige of your army and navy. But mili- 
tary men assure us that the force of 143.000 that Gen- 
eral Douglas MacArthur has set up since 1936 is alert, 
determined and possessed of good basic training. While 
we make no boast of invincibility, w^e are confident that 
any w^ould-be invader would have to pay dearly for every 
inch of Philippine soil he occupied. Cooperating closely 
w4th the American soldiers in the Philippines, our men 
can be of inestimable value in defending this Far Eastern 
outpost of the democratic system. 

It is no secret that the training whidi General Mac- 
Arthur has given the Philippine Army has put greatest 
emphasis on defensive tactics — preventing enemy land- 
ings, fighting rear guard actions, raiding su|)])ly lines 
and coiumunications. To this work the Fili|)ino is w^ell 
adapted l)y nature; it is the type of fighting he used most 
creditably against both Spain and the I nited States 40 



vears ago. In bringing the young Philippine Army up-to- 
date on this kind of warfare. General MacArthur pre- 
pared us for our most useful defense role. W e may 
assume that the numerically small but highly trained 
American force in the Commonwealth will devote its 
talents to the more specialized offensive phases. 

It should be pointed out in any such discussion as 
this of Philippine defenses that General MacArthur 
is held in particularly high esteem in Manila. Every citizen 
of the Commonwcaith knows the monumental work he 
has done in bringing our army into being. In his posi- 
tion as military adviser to President Quezon, he has 
been unobtrusive but effective. Credit for the army's 
fine progress he has invariably assigned to others, yet 
all knew that MacArthur was the genius behind the 
organization. Experienced in Philippiue defense prob- 
lems as few other Americans are. his appointment as 
commander of the newly organized I'nited States Army 
Forces in the Far East is a source of satisfaction to all 
of us. 

It cannot be stated too often that the Philippines yields 
to no other political unit under the American flag in 
the extent of its whole-hearted cooperation with the 
United States Government. Time and again we have sacri- 
ficed our own immediate interest in following a course 
designed to benefit the whole of the country. The recent 
unquestioning acceptance of the American export control 
system for the Commonwealth is a case in point. It is 
possible to interpret the Federalizing of the Philipi)ine 
Army as a serious set-back to our long-standing inde- 
pendence aspirations: this, indeed, it may have been. Rut 
w^e feel it to be w^orth noting that there was no quil)bling. 
that the Philippines accepted the President's order w^ith 
far better grace than many states ha\ e shown toward 
Federal relief work or power ])roj(H'ts witliin lluMr 
borders. 

For the truth of the matter is tluil wc^ I'ilipinos iwc 
proud to belong to the growing arnn of idealistic 
])le who are ready to fight for their democracy. \\ con- 
sider it a ])rivilege to stand shoulder to should(M- with 
the rest of the libertydox ing world in resisting totali- 
tarianism. And while we are grateful that th(^ I nited 
States has con\incingly shown its del(Mniinat ion to dr- 
fend its Philipi)ine bastion, wc want (^very AnuM icaii lo 
know that we Filii)inos arc r(^ad\ lo do onf pari in thai 
fight. * 



^Philippines 

Vol. 1 (August, 1941 ) No. 6 

All Our Manpower, President Quezon 3 

A Fair Chance, Rep. Dan R. McGeliee 4 

Filipino CwiYvdn Defenses, Dr. Cami/o Os 'uis 6 

Philippine Mettle, Delegate Samuel King 7 

General Douglas MacArthur 8 

Wayne Coy, Julius C. Edelstein ]0 

Manuel Roxas ] ] 

Manila's New Position, Wilbur Burton 14 

August 13, 1898 15 

Away From Home 17 

"Look Glamorous, Please," Pilar N. Ravelo 19 

P. I. News 22 

For Your Information 23 

A Filipino Looks at Defense, P. C. Morantte 24 



Photo Credit: Harris & Ewing; Tomelden, 
Washiii<!:ton : Signal Corps, U. S. Army; Photo 
Finishing Corp., Manila; Palmer Pictures; 
Fenno Jacohs from Three Lions; Philippine 
Army Signal Corps. 



Back Cover: iManila Bay at sunset. 



Pfrniission to reprint material appearing 
in PHILIPPINES is gladly f^ranted excipt in 
cases where use is speei fieally restricted. Proper 
credit will he appreciateil. 




SIiouii lied Up at l^icr \(). 7. Manila, the 
loniiol coNcK'd pier in tlic world, llie Ameri- 
can -II a,ii liner 1^ re side lit ( .ool id li:<' sy mholizes 
the IMiili|)pines" iireatesl worry today- sliij)- 
pinir. \\ hoiesale withdrawals of vessels of all 
nationalities from the Pacific ha\(^ left the 
Islands w ith no way of shippinir their j)roducls 
to market. 



Ill This Issue 

REP. DAN R. McGEHEE, of Mississippi is a 
memher- of the House Insular AITairs Com- 
mittee and co-author of U.K. 5().'>1-. 

• o • 

DELEGATE SAMUEL KING, n presenlative in 
(>>n<rress of tlu^ jx'oph^ of Hawaii, is a long* 
time friend of the Philip|)ines. 

• • • 

DR. CAMILO OSIAS, former Counsellor in the 
OfTice of the Philippine Resident Commissioner 
in Washington, is now^ Director of Publicity 
and I^ropaganda for the Civilian Emergency 
Administration in Manila. 

• • • 

WILBUR BURTON recently returned to the 
United States after more than a decade of 
newspaper work in the Far East. He is a fa- 
mdiar writer in man> American journals, 
o o • 

JULIUS C. EDELSTEIN is a mend)er of the for- 
eign news staff of the United Press in Wash- 
ington. D. C. He handles all his ofTice's Philip- 
jMue assigrmients. 

• • • 

PILAR N. RAVELO, prominent former nevvs- 
j)aperwoman of Manila, is now^ a member of 
the press relations staff in the OfTice of the 
Philippine liesident Commissioner. 

• • • 

P. C. MORANTTE is a fnM-lance writer and 
cnlie now li\ in*! in New York Citv. 



PHILIPPINES ia puhlished hy the ofr.ee of the Philippine Resident Co 



Editorial and circulation oflices at 2362 Massaehusetts Avenue North 



inmiHsioner to the United Slates. 



as third class matter in the WaHhin^toii post office on Dec< inl)er 1, 19 lO. P« 



>vest, Washington, D. C. Entered 



rniit No. 



!»rinte«l in U.S.A. 



'All Our Manpower and Material Resonrces' 

President Mannel L. Quezon 



on J^h lUppln Q ^ oiiG.lt If 

Events IkwoikI iHc borders of the Philippines are 
rcipidly and deeply afTeeliii^ our lives and our fate. 
Nearly Iwo-lhirds of I he peoples of the world are at 
war in three eonlinenls and the remaining one-lhird, 
including ourselves, is in some way already involved 
in the eondiet. No greater ordeal has afllieted the human 
race since the dawn of civilization. What is our stake 
in the present war? 

We owe loyalty to America and we arc bound to her 
by bonds of everlasting gratitude. Should the Ihiited 
States enter the war, the Philii)pines should follow her 
and fight by her side, placing at her disposal all our 
manpower and material resources to help her in achie\ - 
ing victory, for the cause for which America would 
fight is our own cause. 

The United States is struggling to prevent the domi- 
nation of the w^orld by dictators. We, too, would fight 
and die against such masters. The United States w^ants 
to uphold the rule of right and justice in international 
relations and to safeguard the independence of small 
nations, to free them from the fear of aggression and 
subjugation by military powers — and we, too, would fight 
and die to save our country from such threats and 
perils. And so, if the United States decides to enter this 
war, it w^ill be our war, and her decision will be our 
decision. In such event, she will find all the peoples of 
this country to the last man on her side, fighting under 




Filipino veterans of the Insurrection renew their 
pledge of loyalty. 




Citizens of Manila parade with banners voicing 
allegiance to the United States. 



her l)anner and praying to Almighty God for the victory 
of her arms. 

Our stake in this war is more than the continued 
existence of democracy and individual freedom in the 
world. It is more than the maintenance of a free economy 
and free commercial intercourse among nations, and an 
unregimented social life. Our stake in this war is our 
own future independence and the assurance that that 
independence may endure. 

I have endeavored to the full measure of our re- 
sources to hasten the execution of our national defense 
program. The United States is also doing everything 
to strengthen the military defense of our country. I 
trust that very soon it will be possible for the Govern- 
ment of the United Stales to send us more planes and 
more guns and ammunition to increase our ])ower of 
resistance. We only need more equipment and more 
supi)lies, for we have abundant manpower, have strong 
intelligent young men who are eager to join the ranks 
for our defense and to uj)hold the principles which 
President Roosevelt has proclaimed to the wa)rld. 

For the safety of our civilian j)opuIation I have, jointly 
witli llie High CommissioncM' of the United States in 
the Philippines, established the Civilian Emergency 
Administration and called ui)on the men of the Philip- 
|)ines to enlist as volunteers to protect our homes, to 
track down spies and saboteurs, and to help minimize 

{Turn, to Page 21 ) 



3 



5034 






for PliilippiiK^ Trufle 

By Rep. Dan R. McGehee 



A HERE is now pending in Congress legislation re- 
quested by the Philippine Commonwealth, and supported 
by Administration officials, to grant the Philippines 
temporary release from certain economic restrictions 
imposed upon them in 1934. 

These restrictions were drafted by the framers of 
the Philippine Independence Act and were dcsignc^d to 
help '"wean" Insular economy from its dependence on 
the free American market. Those restrictions, which were 
laid out in times of peace and normalcy, contemplated 
inducing the Filipinos to diversify their markets and 
seek commercial connections with countries other than 
the United States. 

Today it is apparent that all the normal standards 
of action have gone by the boards. An orderly adjust- 
ment of national economy is impossible, especially 
when that economy depends for its very existence upon 
exports to consumer markets overseas. That is clearly 
the case in the Philippines. 

The Philippine Independence Act was an ingenious 
plan to accustom the Filipinos gradually to regard the 
United States as a foreign market in which they would 
eventually be required to pay full tariffs on such ex- 
ports as sugar, cordage, coconut oil and cigars. The 
adjustment was to come about by means of a graduated 
export tax, which the Filipinos would impose upon their 
own shipments. This would amount during the first year 
to 5 per cent of the American tariff duty, increasing 
by 5 per cent every year until 1946 when independence 
is to be finally granted. That would force Filipino pro- 
ducers who could not compete in the American market 
under those conditions gradually to find other l)uyers 
for their goods. 

That j)lan was modified in 1939 to provide gradually 
decreasing quotas in the place of the gradually increasiiig 
taxes on some of the exports. That was because the 
tariff on th(> sf)-called quota connnodilies — cigars, tobacco, 
pearl buttons and coconut oil — was so high that even 5 
per cent of it would ruin the industry immediately 
by j)revenling exports to the United States. 

That was a prelty good plan, and a pretty ingenious 
idea for gradual adjustment of an economy which would 
no longer depend for its existence on having a free 
market in the United States. Both the Filipinos and 




Trade restrictions threaten the usually bustling Port of 
Manila with paralysis. 

the Americans wlio collaborated in drafting that his- 
toric law agreed uj)on the desirability of the objective. 

The current wars in Europe and Asia had not appeared 
upon the horizon in 1931 when this plan was draw^n. No 
one then dreamed that within seven short years the 
world w^ould be j)lunged into a series of holocausts 
involving three-quarters of the globe. Neither members 
of Congress nor members of the Filipino Legislature 
had an inkling of what was in prospect. 

The war has come and it has presented us all with a 
picture we never would have thought ])ossible. Millions 
of tons of the world's shipping now lie on the floor of 
the ocean. Other millions of tons are tied up in harbors, 
unable to venture forth without risking rapture or de- 
struction. The balance^ of world shipping is straining 
every seam and boib^' to carry war materials across 
dangerous seas to strategic j)oinls along the battle front. 

There is little spacc^ left for ordinary commercial 
shipping. The ordinary products of nuMi's labor, the 
fruits of the fields which are merely good to eat or 
useful for the making of ci\ ilian goods, now lie on 
wharves and in w ar(»h( inscs. far from their markets. 

Meanwhile jiations other than llu^ United States — 
belligerent nations ha\c had to sax [\\riv financial re- 
sources, had to prohibii purchase of anvthing which 
is not absolutely ess(Mitial to war. Tii(^) could neither pay 



• 4 • 



for prodiicls from [\\c Phili|)j)inrs nor innnnt them 
on crrdil. 

The slraleuic inaliM'ials in Philij>j)incs did find 

a ready iniukrl in connlrirs other tlian the I'nited States. 
Bnl in Jnly. 1911. I^esident Roosevc^lt signed a hill 
t(^ place Philij)pine ex])orts of strategie materials nnder 
strict licensini: to prevent them from movinii into markets 
other than the I'nited States. Kv(m ywhere tlie Phili|)pines 
was checkmated in its efforts to chaniie the direction 
of its trade. 

Internal conditions, too. have conspired a^iainst the 
original plan. Government revenues fell off, domestic 
prices rose, the cost of livin"; sky-rocketed, and the 
need to spend money for civilian defense hecame pressing. 

That is the situation the Philippines is in today. It 
is not of the Filipinos' own choosing, nor can ihev 
remedy it hy any measures of their own. What little 
of their goods they can ship to the United States must 
pay terrific freight charges and war risk insurance. 
Ill the case of the most important connnodity. sugar, 
the cost of shipment has increased five times over, dimin- 
ishing the return to the farmer and producer by just 
that proportion. Approximately 20.000 sugar producers 
and 2.000.000 farm laborers face bankruptcy as the 
result. 

On top of these burdens, there is the added load of 
the export tax, which today is no longer an adjustment 
tax. as it was intended to be, but a tax on the pro- 
ducer and worker. It has, apparentlv. no benefit except 



to pro\ ide a fund for the retirement of pri\ atel\ held 
bonds. 

ll \vould seem just that the Filipinos be reliexed of 
tluL-. burden temporarih. at least. The pending legislation 
provides for such a suspension. There is no point to he 
ixained in continuing either the export tax or the dimish- 
ishinc: quotas while world conditions preclude any ad- 
justment of Philippine econonn . Any help which we 
can aive the Philippines in stabilizing its economic 
conditions must certainly be regarded as support given 
to democracy in the Far East. 

The Congress is not asked to gi\e a handout to the 
Philippines. No appropriation or grant is required. W e 
are merelv asked to acconnnodale them by permitting 
them to postpone the application of a tax upon them- 
selves, designed to benefit not us. but them. The same 
i^ true with diminishing quotas. We need their products 
for national defense. It is not clear how much they will 
be able to ship next year because of the shortage of 
bottoms. We owe it to oursehes. however, as well as to 
them, to place no barriers in the path of obtaining essen- 
tiU materials of every kind. Thus, although they may 
not be able to ship copra, which is on our free list, 
thev might find tanker space to ship coconut oil. or 

^;ivice to ship tobacco. It would seem verv wise 
cornel bpact. ' ^ j . ' . j 

J the decks for the emerirencv. and to extend 



to eJ 



a helping hand to our Filipino friends who have in 

, ^oAMi qo strikin":lv shown that thev are with us in 
recent aa>s - r . 

ihi. crisis. * 




Abaca fiber, essential for 
rope, is loaded into an 
inter-island ship at Legaspi, 
famous hemp port on Luzon. 



• 5 • 




Members of the Women's Auxiliary Service parHci- 
pate in air-raid maneuvers. 

O ><E big task the Philippine Government cannot pass 
on to the United States — the maintenance of peace and 
order within its boundaries. The Filipinos, realizing 
the tremendous responsibility on America's shoulders in 
the democracies' fight against totalitarianism, are doing 
their level best to make it easier for America to win her 
cause, which is also their cause. No effort, therefore, 
is being spared to prepare the Philippines for the ex- 
io-encies of war at any moment. It was to this end that 
the Civilian Emergency Administration was created April 
1. 1941 by an executive order of President Manuel L. 

Quezon. * 1 • • 

i\o time was lost in organizing the Adnnnistration. 
The President designated the Secretary of National Dc- 
fense as chairman of the central planning board, with 
representatives of the Executive Departments of the 
(;oN eminent as members. A program was drawn up to 
,.()xer air-raid precautions, volunteer guards, food ad- 
, Ministration, fuel administration, utilities and industries, 
publicity and propaganda, evacuation, public welfare 
and morale, health and sanitation, and transportation and 
(oinnuinicalions. i • 

The functions of the (.KA are national m scoj)e. [ n- 
der its leadership, separate units of tli- govennn-nl 
an> charged with executing the projects (lc:•id(^'j on b;, 
lh(^ central body. 1'hese agencies inclufJed the iNalional 
Knierii(Mn \ Commission, composed of rcprcsental ives of 



the different brandies of the Ext^cutive Departments of 
the Government, with the Secretary of National Defense 
as chairinaii: the Provincial Einergenc\ (lommitlee in 
each jn-ovince. with the provincial governor as chair- 
man and other provincial oHicials as members: the Mu- 
nicipal Eiiirrgency Committee in each municipality, with 
the mayor as chairman and municipal onicials as mem- 
hers: and a City Emergency Committee in each chartered 
city, headed by the mayor and with other citv oHicials as 
members. 

nu-r '■'-^'"'^•"'i""- .uaMajivr „f tl„. 

Philippine Rod LiosH. a Dir.-. i,,,- .,f l'ul,li, it\ and I'lon ,- 
Luanda, a lood Administral.,,-. an I.ulust.ial l>r..du,-ti„n 
Adininistrat,,.-. a Fu,.] and Transp-.i lalion Administra- 
lov, a .National Air Raid Wardon. and a Dir.-.lor of 
Conimun,cati.,ns have Leen. app„inl,.,l to p,-, f.,rin .no.-ial 
funct.on. ,n .-incrgen.ies. Wo l.oli.-vo ihis arran.l.inont 
lusion." ' ' '"■"^••'"-f^ l.a^al^.in; oon- 

The Food Administrator assunu-s tho rosponsil.ilit v of 
averting any shortage of food by inoroasing the pro 
chK tion of essential foodstuffs, eiu ouraging "the pla 
ing of shor time crops, and ac quiring adeq^uate reserve 
stocks of all essential imported ilonis \ „A '^•^^''^'^e 
executive order .11 , ii« nis. I nder a recent 

execuiue order, all commercial (inns and est ,1,1 Ul, 
ments have been asked to render montblv 
food stocks in their possession " 

stocks must be repo' tJd t ^he ^'::d^ld" ^^■^"'"'•^ 
that this official can ^A■,n nb. 1 'Administrator so 

case of a food shortage! -'i'^^ i» 

The Industrial Productitm A.l • • 
the task of putting indu r cm T^'ar'T"^'' 1^'"'^ 
acquisition of reserve supplies " ^ p ^^^'^ 
essential fuels is the task of the fS; "TV"'" "'^ 
Administrator. To help him in this i sk "p 
has rennir,.r1 dl „ '"resident Quezon 



nd 



has required all government ent Ues o'^TT;-^^'^" 
maintain at least a four-montb establish a.... 

line, lubricating oil an^ h^roT'^ ''Y' 
utility enterprises are under orders Tl "'n 
cautions. The same Administrator i \ l"'^' 
l)ortation facilities necessary lo ""^ 
citizens from points of dan4r " iu»n-essential 

Rules and regulations for ' the , 
raid shelters in Manila and in b ' ""^'.' "^ l'^*" of air- 
printed and extensively distribnt j ^''^^'^'^'^ have been 
Raid Warden. I^lans Le /^.r. ^'^^ '^«'i'>"al Air 

""t«" in the cities and or , 3 ^ '^'■'"'''^•'^ 
held in Manila in July bf' (the fust was 

niipinos to what is now' ni I'l^ ^'<'' nM.„n the 

fies. "'-''I'y routine in nianv .ou:,- 

The Director of r 

P"'"'^ase a.Hl s,,,r a;; ':';''''';;'''.'''^ .vsponsii>!e for tli. 

<>i suMicieiil sit 



supplies to insure c(,nlin,i,.n - . i ". "^"^ *" ^^'^^' ti'cal 

-'vi- at ail lil;;::: T, ''''^'''^'V'- and 

"■"'"^'•'"'r ll"- '■-nplovmcn ' r.'' ; r additional 

' / "lu ni oi a( f It 1 



^><'l<s of electrical 



nuMi to in- 
present re- 



•■•''vinghis full attention 

■■• \Mlh tlio <-o()peralioii of the 



PHILIPPIIES mm ITS METTLE 

4jaufauan Salute 



By Delegate Sam uel W . King 




If iiolhing else, the present phase of world events has 
cleared the air. Like a sudden bolt of lightning, it has 
fiercely illuminated all the great issues of our generation. 
By its searching glare, people the world over have now 
been able to find tlieir places in the conflict of ideas 
and ideologies. 

We in Hawaii have watched with great interest the 
choice which our neighbors of the Pacific, the Filipinos, 
have made. We are, of course, deeply concerned with 
their decision, both for reasons of geography, and 
because of our many mutual interests. 

The fact that the Filipinos deliberately, but with 
characteristic fervor, threw in their fortunes on our 
side — the side of democracy — w^as to us a source of 
great satisfaction. To choose to fight along with us, and 
to help bear the brunt of whatever physical impact may 
come, w'as, however, no easy decision. 

In Hawaii we are peculiarly well situated to appre- 
ciate the implications of that decision. The people of 
Hawaii ( American citizens since 1898) know w^ell that 
the geography which gives our islands supreme mili- 
tary importance in the Pacific also gives its inhabitants 
a heavy burden of dangerous responsibility. We are 
proud to bear that responsibility. Mainlanders, long 
secure in their geographic isolation, must stretch their 
imaginations to conceive of the very real danger which 
civilian residents of such an outpost as Hawaii — or 
the Philippines — face in these days of lightning w^arfare. 

It might have been safer for the Filipinos to let the 
United States bear the responsibilities for protecting 
its interests in the Far East. If the Filipinos had taken 
that course, their personal danger w^ould have been 
greatly minimized; in the first place, by the decreased 
likelihood of the Philippines becoming a battleground; 
in the second place, by the desire of any potential 
aggressor to win the goodwill of its neutral inhabitants. 

That seems to me to be an extremely compelling 
demonstration of the fact that being an American or 
being loyal to American ideals is not limited to any 
single area or race. We in Hawaii have often faced the 
inference that Americanism and devotion to democracy 
are exclusive exercises of mainland citizens, and that 
our citizens of Hawaii, who today bear a much greater 
responsibility for the preservation of democracy, are 
somehow barred from the inner temple because we live 
some miles away from the shrine. That is obviouslv 



an extremely short-sighted view. The Filipinos, though 
not American citizens and though racially an alien 
people, have given the full lie to this "exclusive" 
theory. 

In so doing, the Filipinos have in fact rendered a 
genuine service to democracy. Here is an Oriental people, 
promised a share in the Asiatic "New Order" if they 
will but join it, deliberately choosing instead to stand 
in the way of a potential holocaust because they believe 
firmly in our way of life. 

For this and for many other reasons, we of Hawaii 
have long appreciated the Filipinos. Besides being our 
neighbors in the Pacific, thousands of Filipinos have 
come to work on our plantations, and to make their 
temporary or permanent homes ^s '^th us. They have been 
a sober, industrious, law-abiding citizenry, contributing 
much to our common w^elfare. A great many of them 
today are American citizens, either by birth or through 
naturalization, and will remain a permanent part of our 
community. 

The Philippines and Hawaii have long been linked in 
trade. Ships and planes putting out for the Philippines 
and the Far East have always made Hawaii a port of 
call. For generations there has been a constant inter- 
change of ideas, visits and good feeling between the 
peoples of the two island groups. We have watched 
closely the political and economic developments of the 
Islands, and have always felt on intimate terms with 
Filipino leaders, who have regularly visited us. 

We know that it has been the long-cherished goal of 
the Philippines to form an independent Republic, pat- 
terned after our own. That aspiration has been written 
into the law of the Ihiited States as the Philippine 
Independence Act. We know, too, that this aspiration 
has not and will not interfere with the deep associations 
that will always link the Philippines and the I'nited 
States. Trade and the identity of ideals will survive and 
persist. 

Just as the Filipinos look forward to independence, 
so do we of Hawaii look to eventual statehood. Ihat 
has always been our goal. When the clouds of inter- 
national crisis and conHicl ha\e rolled away. 1 ha\e 
every hope and confidence that the citizens of the State 
of Hawaii and the citizens of the Republic oi tlie 
Philippines will both be on guard in tlic Pacitic. Il\ ing the 
banner of democracy. 



4f 



GREATEST SOLDIER SINCE GRANT 



Lt. Gen. Douglas MacArthur^ 
Commander of the U. S. Army 
Forces in the Far East^ Knows 
Hi's SifaizsY and His Philippines 



'The greatest American soldier since Grant," is a 
favorite description of Lieutenant General Douglas Mac- 
Arthur, newly appointed Commanding General of the 
Lnited States Army Forces in the Far East. It expresses 
the feelings of thousands of 
General MacArthur's person- 
al and professional admirers. 

The man named by Presi- 
dent Roosevelt late in July 
to head American defenses 
in the Orient has a military 
record that is almost without 
parallel in the history of the 
Lnited States. The son of a 
great army man, MacArthur 
was the youngest Chief of 
Staff the nation ever had, and 
one of the finest. During the 
World War he was repeated- 
ly cited and decorated for 
his ability and personal brav- 
ery. Even more important to 
his new post, for the past six 
years General MacArthur has 
been military adviser to 
President Manuel L. Quezon 
and genius, of the program 
by which the Philippine 
Commonwealth has been 
building up its defense or- 
ganization in preparation for 
Lidependence in 1946. 

"MacArthur was the per- 
fect choice for the Orient," 
wrote General Hugh S. John- 
son, who thirty-eight years 

ago graduated from West Point with the new Far Eastern 
commander. "Like his father before him, he is almost too 
brave for high command. He can't resist going over the 
top with his men. As an ex-Chief of Staff, he knows the 
Orient, and especially the Philippine problem, better than 






Fort Santiago in Manila. 



Left — Philippine Defense 
Council meets with Pres- 
ident Quezon. 



any other oflTicer. And he 
is brilliant — almost be- 
yond belief. A little spec- 
tacular and theatrical, 
perhaps, but that is a 
detail. The Philippine 
Army is his own crea- 
tion." 

General MacArthur has had a long and peculiarly close 
connection with the Philippines. His father. General Ar- 
thur MacArthur, participated in the capture of Manila in 
1898; later he commanded the American troops around 
the capital in putting down the Philippine Insurrection. 
From May 6, 1900 to July 3, 1901, General MacArthur 
was military governor of the entire Philippine Islands. 

Young Douglas MacArthur reached Manila in 1903 as 
a second lieutenant of engineers just out of West Point, 
where he was head of his graduating class. His first 
duties consisted largely of the supervision of construction 
work on wharves, seawalls and roads. After a year he was 
ordered back to the United States, where he inunediately 
began displaying the brilliance that has characterized his 
still-far-frorn-concluded career. 

General MacArthur's part in the World War is perhaps 
best summarized by a citation in 1918. 

"As brigade commander." this statement pointed out, 
"General MacArthur personally led his men and by the 
skillful maneuvering of his brigade made possible the 



• 8 • 




Reserve stores of 10-inch shells on Corregidor, guarding 
Manila Bay 



capture of Hills 228. 242 and the Cote de Chatillon. 
He displayed indomitable resolution and great courage 
in rallying broken lines and in reforming attacks, there- 
by making victory possible. On a held where courage was 
the rule, his courage was the dominant feature." 

Such citations, it should be stressed, are seldom given 
to general officers. In addition to three American medals 
earned in the World War and another awarded for his 
"meritorious and distinguished service" as Chief of Staff 
of the United States Army from 1930 to 1935, General 
MacArthur has been decorated by nearly a dozen foreign 
governments. 

In 1919, MacArthur was named superintendent of the 
Military Academy from which he had been graduated 
only 16 years before. Then, from West Point, he was 
ordered to the Philippines in 1922 for his second tour of 
duty there. During his three years in the Islands, the 
new brigadier general was commander successively of the 
District of Manila, and the 23rd Infantry Brigade at Fort 
McKinley. Largely because of his outstanding success 
during this tour. General MacArthur was returned to 
Manila in 1928 as Commander of the entire Philippine 
Department of the United States Army. 

MacArthur was certainly one of the most popular de- 
partment connnanders ever to serve in the Philippines. 
The officers and men who served with him then still 
express their admiration. 

"When the pressure was greatest. MacArthur was the 
coolest," is the way one of his former subordinates de- 
scribes the general. 

One of the finest monuments to MacArthur's work in 
this period is the popularity of Camp John Hay, the beau- 
tiful and restful army camp at the cool mountain resort 
of Bagnio. 150 miles north of Manila. Camp John Hay 
had been established early in the American administra- 
tion, but not until MacArthur took command did it attain 
its fullest usefulness. The voung general ordered exten- 




A 75-mm. gun at full recoil during maneuvers by the 
Philippine Army. 



sive improvements and made it possible for officers and 
enlisted men to visit cool Bagnio at frequent intervals 
without having the time deducted from their furloughs. 
In many other concrete ways he contributed to the popu- 
larizing of this healthful camp. 

An unprecedented five-year tour as Chief of Staff 
in Washington followed the Philippine interlude. An 
official citation of MacArthur's accomplishment best 
tells the story of his exceptional work in the capital. 

•'As Chief of Staff of the Army of the United States," 
this document pointed out, 'lie has performed his many 
important and exacting duties with signal success. He 
devised and developed the Four Army organization 
of our land forces; he conceived and established the 
General Headquarters Air Force, thus immeasurably 
increasing the effectiveness of our air defenses; he 
initiated a comprehensive program of modernization 
of the Army's tactics, equipment, training and organ- 
ization. In addition, the professional counsel and as- 
sistance he has continuously rendered to the President, 
to the Secretary of War, and to the Congress have been 
distinguished by such logic, vision and accuracy as to 
contribute markedly to the formulation of sound defense 
policies and the enactment of progressive laws for pro- 
moting the nation's security." 

This, then, was the man who in 1935 was loaned by the 
Ignited States Army to the infant Philippine Common- 
wealth to serve as military adviser. 

Already well acquainted with Philippine potentialities. 
General MacArthur soon presented to President Quezon 
a plan for making the Commonwealth "invasion-proof." 
In brief, this called for compulsory military training for 
all young men, the formation of an efficient air force and 
the organization of an "off-shore patrol" of small, swift 
motor torpedoboats. Within 10 years, approximately 
400,000 partial!) trained men would be available for 

( Turn to Page 20) 



. 9 . 



On the Honor Roll . . . 

Wayne Coy/ McNutt^s Aide In Manila 
. . . is Now Number One Cogwheel 
in Defense Machinery 



By Julius C. Edelstein 

Add Wayne Coy to the list of men in public life for 
whom government service in the Philippines seems to 
have woven a magic spell which sent them on to greater 
national fame and fortune. The list includes in past 
and current history William Howard Taft, Leonard Wood, 
Henry L. Stimson, Frank Murphy, and Paul V. McNutt. 
On a somewhat lesser plane, perhaps, but in the same 
category, there is now the name of Wayne Coy. 

Coy is the young administrator who was catapulted 
onto the front pages recently with the White House an- 
nouncement that he was to become Liaison Officer for 
the Office for Emergency Management (OEM). The title 
didn't sound particularly' impressive, but it turned out 
that Coy was to coordinate the entire vast administra- 
tive machinery of national defense — as tough and sen- 
sational a job as can be conceived. 

The fact that a young man (38) was given one of the 
most important jobs in the national defense adminis- 
tration was enough to make a good news story. The 
fact that it was Wayne Coy, a likable, unassuming fellow 
who was often mistaken by passers-by for Charley Chase, 
the movie cemedian, made it even better. 

Back in 1937 Wayne Coy was just a friendly, able 
young man from Indiana who had made good as a small- 
town newspaper editor, became press secretary to a 
governor, and then regional WPA Administrator. It so 
happened that the governor was Paul Vories McNutt of 
Indiana who, in 1937, was appointed American High 
Commissioner to the Philippines. 

It was natural that McNutt should offer to his young 
friend and political adviser, Wayne Coy, the job of 
administrative assistant in Manila. Coy had never spent 
much time out of Indiana, and the idea of being a 
government official in the strange and exotic Far East 
appealed to him. So with his pretty wife. Grace, and 
their young son, Stephen. Coy set off for a new phase 
of his career. 

No one had ever said that Coy was slow in catching 
ont(j things. He quickly became as adept in Philippine af- 
fairs as he had been in Indiana politics. He brought to 
the intricacies of government in the new Commonwealth 
the rich and practical good sense of the Indiana soil. 




Sparked with driving energy, he was a p(Mfect counter- 
part and foil for his boss. High Connnissioner M(\\utt. 

In the minor and major problems of IMiilippine-Ameri- 
can relations Coy soon found himself perfectly at home 
and McNutt leaned on him with increasing confidence. 
Like McNutt, Coy had the middl e-westerner s corner- 
store friendliness, and the art of getting along with 
everybody. McNutt and Coy won the enthusiastic friend- 
ship and respect, first of the old High Connnissioner's 
staff left behind by Governor Frank Murphy, and then 
of the Filipinos, themselves. An era of '"good feeling** 
developed, of poker-playing, hail-fellow-well-met neigh- 
borliness between American officials and Filipinos, which 
helped to pave the w^ay for the complete unity of today. 

McNutt, secure in his personal relations with the 
people among whom he was working, used his own 
super-abundant energy to do a job in the Philippines 
which added to his national stature, and helped make an 
international figure out of a local political leader. When 
McNutt laid aside the Commissionership in 1939 to re- 
enter the national political picture at home, he was a 
full-fledged presidential possibility, an administrator 
with a record of performance, and an individual of 
international renown. In this development Coy received 
the credit that was due him. 

In the return to the United States Coy preceded 
McNutt by two months. In that interval Coy w^orked 
unceasingly to cultivate good-will for McNutt among the 
New Deal elements in the national capital w4iere McNutt 
had the least strength and needed the most. 

Coy, himself, was well spoken for among this group. 
As a WPA Administrator for Indiana, and later as 
regional administrator, Coy had earned the respect and 
friendship of WPA Administrator Harry Hopkins, Presi- 
dent Roosevelt's closest and most trusted friend. When 
Coy returned to Washington, Hopkins found a desk 
foi' him in the office f)f the President's Budget Pureau. 

There Coy worked on Pliilippine })rol)leins, and on 
national jjolitics. He also found time to figure out 
a few "angles"' for the [)udget bureau a f(^w ingenious 

( 7 urn to Petite 2,') ) 



o 10 o 



r 



MAIIEL ROXAS 

... Orator and Eeonoiiiist 



When ih.- iii-st i>hii ippine Independence Hill was hc- 

in^ debated before the Senate Finance Connnittee in 
1932, a Filipino of above-average heiiiht and weight 
was one of the principal speakers. He was Manuel 
Roxas y Ac-ufia. who even then bore a reputation as one 
of the most eloquent of a nation of orators. 

The man whose oratory impressed the Senate 10 vears 
ago is now one of the half-dozen most important oHi- 
cials of the Govermnenl of the PhilipjMne Conunonwealth. 
Besides being Minister of Finance under President 
Quezon. Manuel Roxas is chairman of the powerful 
\atioiud Development C'.ompany. As an outstanding law- 
yer, he not long ago declined a chance to sit on the 
Supreme Court of the Philippines. Furthermore. Roxas 
is recognized as a hard-working economist who has done 
niuc-h to keep his nation's finances stable in spite of 
trade restrictions, defense expenditures and falling 
exports. 

Born in Capiz, Paiuiy. in \H92. Roxas had instilled 
in him at a* ver) early age the ideal of an independent 
Philippines. The death of his father, one of the first 
casualties in the revolt against Spain, made a deep 
impression on young Manuel, leaving a conviction that 
he must do his utmost to help make his country free. 

Young Manuel soon discovered his flair for oratory, 
and he decided to capitalize on it. He worked to improve 
his Spanish, and he studied for a while at St. Joseph's 
College, Hongkong, in order to perfect his English. 

In 1918 Roxas returned to Capiz to practice law. A 
year later he began his political career when he ran 
against the local machine for provincial governor and 
was elected. When his term expired in 1921, he was 
elected to the Philippine House of Representatives. Al- 
most as soon as the Legislature convened, he was made 
Speaker of the House at the unprecedented age of 30. 
replacing Sergio Osmena, who had resigned to take a 
seat in the Senate. Roxas was reelected to the House 
and to the Speakership for three consecutive terms. 

During this era, Speaker Roxas devoted all his energy 
to the fight for Philippine independence, visiting Wash- 
ington several times. His first trip was in 1930. when 
the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Inde|)endence Bill was intro- 
duced into Congress. Speaker Roxas was one of the 
leaders in the fight for this measure, and he returned 
triumphant to the Philippines in 1933. only to have 
the Philippine Legislature rc^ject the bill. The sub- 
sequent acceptance of the substitute Tvdings-McDullie 
Act was in effect a i^olilical set-back for Roxas. Fo 
a while his political future seemed in jeopard). 

When a convention was called in 1935 to draft ihc 
(Conunonwealth (Constitution. h()we\er. Roxas was elected 
a delegate. He was a mendxM' of the cominittct^ that com- 



posed the lirst draft. After the Constitution had been 
appro\ed by the Philippine Legislature. Roxas ac-com- 
})anied President Quezon to the United States to obtain 
the approval of President Roosevelt. 

Roxas was elected to the National Assembly of the 
new Conunonwealth on his return from W ashington. 
Soon afterward, however, he gave up politics to practice 
law. The interlude was brief. In 1937 he was appointed 
to the Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine AfTairs. 
whose function it was to recommend to the American 
Congress the steps that should be taken for the gradual 
readjustment of Philippine-American economic relations. 
The task was a monumental one. requiring 15 months 
of careful research and study. 

W ith the completion of the Committee s w ork in Jul\ . 
1938. President Quezon appointed Roxas chairman of 
the National Economic Council, which included leading 
Philippine economists and industrialists. Its function was 
to formulate plans for reconstructing Philippine economy. 
Later he was also made chairman of the National De- 
velopment Company, which is in charge of Common- 
wealth measures to achieve economic self-sufficiency for 
the Philippines. In November. 1938 Roxas accepted an 
additional position — Secretary of the Department of 
Finance. 

At 49, Manuel Roxas y Acuna is one of the Common- 
wealth's outstanding public figures, and one of the best 
known after President Quezon himself. His popularity 
in the Philippines may be judged by the fact that, on 
his last birthday, Manila's three radio stations all spon- 
sored elaborate programs in Roxas' honor. 

American officials and students of Far Eastern affairs 
probably remember Roxas best for his speech of Sep- 
tember 17, 1940, proposing a readjustment of the Philip- 
pine Independence Act to meet war-time conditions. 
Summarizing the entirel) unforeseen obstacles in the 
])ath of Philippine economic independence, the Finance 
Minister asked that the period of trade adjustment be 
prolonged by 10 years, and that the imposition of 
graduated tariffs and quotas on Philippine ex])orts 
to the I nited States be postponed until four years after 
peace had been reestablished in Euro])e and Asia. 
Furthermore, he ])ro[)osed thai th(^ Philippine-American 
Irade c onference pro\ ided for in the Independence Act 
])c called as soon as practical, '"so that (Uir present 
problems and difficulties nun be considered and a 
sounder and fairer plan submitted to Coiign^ss lor 
action at its next scission. 

Despite his acute realization of thi^ (Monomic dislo- 
cation accompain ing inde])end("nc(\ Roxas laxors frc^c- 
dom acc(^rding to schedule. The economic probh^ms. h(^ 
beli(nes. can be kc^pt entirelx se])arate from ])(>liti(s. ^ 



© 1! I • 




WHIT WILL I 



Without adequate shipping facilities, Philippine econ- 
omy is crippled. Dependent almost entirely on overseas 
markets, the Commonwealth today is suffering severely 
as the result of wholesale withdrawals of ships of all 
nationalities from the Pacific. Unless they can get their 
sugar, copra, hemp, iron, gold, tobacco, lumber and 



Harvesting Sugar Cane 




threshing Rice by Hand. 



Sawing Philippine Hardwood. 



Crushing 



• 12 • 



r 



mmm do? 



chromite to market, the Filipinos will have no cash with 
which to maintain their annual purchases of American 
farm and factory products worth $100,000,000. Ships 
alone are the key to the problem facing Philippine com- 
merce and industry today. Below are scenes from Insular 
industries endangered by the Pacific shipping crisis. 




Rafting Coconuts to Market. 



Mining Chromite on Luzph^ 




MANILA'S POSITION 

. . . in a ^kan^in^ -fl^ia 

By Wilbur Burton 



D LRLXG the past fifteen years there has been a con- 
stant shift southward of what might be termed the po- 
litical and economic center of gravity in the Far East. 
L p to 1926, Peking was the chief political center with 
Tokyo second in importance; hence, most newspaper 
correspondents were stationed in those cities. In com- 
merce, however, Shanghai was the jnain center with 
Hongkong second. 

The Chinese Nationalist Revolution, which attracted 
major international attention from mid-1925 to early 
1927, resulted in Shanghai's becoming politically pre- 
dominant while retaining — and even increasing — its 
economic significance. Tokyo and Hongkong continued 
secondary in politics and economics respectively. Manila 
was hardly even in third place from a political or 
economic viewpoint. 

This situation prevailed generally until 1937, when 
the Sino-Japanese War was resumed. With Shanghai 
apparently dead politically and commercially, no other 
comparable Far Eastern center has developed to take 
its place, but the shift seems still southward. Hong- 
kong was booming until a year ago: then it succumbed 
to the adverse forces of tw^o wars. Meanwhile, there 
has been a steady rise in the importance of Manila. 
Will it be the future political and economic center of 
gravity for the Far East? 

The primary question, of course, is the future position 
and policy of the United States in the Western Pacific. 
Conceivably, this might bring a restoration of Shanghai. 
On the other hand, if the United States is really inter- 
ested in the Netherlands Indies and British Malaya, 
Manila would appear to be the ideal center for all 
American interests. In brief, it would seem that Shanghai 
can be restored only to a position secondary to that 
of Manila. 

When the first Clipper landed in Manila in 1935, the 
city bounded from a mere insular capital to major rank 
among Far Eastern cities. Virtually everything since — 
whether good or bad for the rest of the world — has 
increased Manilas im|jortance. Hitler's occupation of 
Holland, with the consequent orphaning of the East Indies 
and their dependence on United States protection, put 
Manila in a decisive strategic position with relation to 
the whole future of the Far East. And the decline of 
Hongkong also increased Manila's importance. 



Today Manila and Shanghai are the last cities of any 
consequence (outside the Western Hemisphere) where 
normal freedom of trade still exists and there is no 
censorship. But Shanghai's freedom is limited and tenu- 
ous. Manila, it is true, is suflering from the general 
shortage of shipping in the Pacific, but it is less de- 
pendent on imports for living than Shanghai is. 

Vital war materials originating in the Philippines 
or produced in the Indies and transshipped at Manila 
give the city an especially conmianding position toda>. 

In peace-time potentialities, Manila has all the essen- 
tials for retaining its war-won j)ositi()n. Manila Bay 
is naturally a far belter harbor than the Whangpoo 
River at Shanghai, though perhaps inferior to Hong-, 
kong. Fine harbor facilities, however, can be constructed. 
In the past there has been a shortage of American and 
Philippine ships, but even before the Euro})ean war 
the Fili})inos started developing their own merchant 
marine. Furthermore, the United States will emerge from 
the war with the greatest merchant fleet in history. 

Geographically, Manila is almost equidistant from 
\okohama and Singapore, which means it is most con- 
veniently located in relation to China, the East Indies, 
Indo-China, Thailand and British Malaya. Moreover, 
it is on a direct line between Australia and East Asia. In 
brief, it is the logical cross roads of all the Western 
Pacific. 

In natural and civic amenities, Manila has always 
been outstanding. Although unequivocally tropical in 
climate, it is never as uncomfortable as Tokyo or 
Shanghai or Hongkong in the summer. Travelers gener- 
ally regard it as climatically superior to Batavia, al- 
though perhaps not to Singapore. But Baguio offers 
an ideal retreat, closer at hand than any other "iiill 
station'* in the Far East. Compared to Shanghai or 
much of Hongkong, Manila is well laid out and more 
attractive for Western residence. 

One drawback, perhaps, is that labor is higher 
priced in Manila than in other cities. 

No area of the Far East is capable of greater economic 
development than the Philipj)ines. As such develop- 
ment is carried out Manila will benefit. With everN 
natural advantage, therefore, the Philippine capital shows 
promise of becoming the political, economic and 
strategic center (jf the entire western Pacific. ^ 



14 • 



13, IS9S: 




American soldiers going over the top as the attack 
on Manila commences 



A UGUST 13. anniversary of the American oecu|)ation 
of Manila in 1898, is a le^^al holiday in the Philippines. 
That the Filipinos should celebrate the capture of their 
capital by a foreign country is a distinct tribute to the 
unprecedented colonial record of the United States in the 
Philippines. 

Whatever Filipinos individually may feel about Philip- 
pine independence, which they have strived for cen- 
turies to attain, they are united in the conviction that 
American occupation of their country marked the be- 
ginning of the modern Philippines. The Filipinos' as- 
tounding progress in government, education, sanitation, 
agriculture, industry and conuuerce in the last 43 years 
has few parallels in world history; diey readily attribute 
this steady advancement to the wise, sympathetic tutelage 
of the United States. 

Thus, in the Philippines, Occupation Day is not a day 
of humiliation as in many other countries. The Filipinos 
proudly celebrate it as victory day for the forces of good 
and human progress. They set it aside as a day in which 
to rededicate themselves to the same democratic ideals 
and principles which gave birth to the United States. 

When the combined American naval and military forces 
decided to attack Manila on August 13, 1898, they were 
already w^ell entrenched in the Philippines. Admiral 
George Dewey had annihilated the Spanish fleet, which 
had served as the first line of defense for the tottering 
Spanish regime in the Philip])ines. The Americans had 
had more than three months to concentrate a military 
force of 10.000 men outside Manila and to encourage 
Emilio Aguinaldo, generalissimo of the Filipino forces 



What Happened in 
Manila 43 Years Ago 
When the American 
Army Stormed the 
Philippine Capital? 




A symbol of victory, the Stars and Stripes flies over 
Fort San Antonio de Abad. 

revolting against Spanish rule, to harass the 12.500 
Spanicirds bottled inside Manila. 

A de facto alliance between the Americans and the 
Filipinos was the natural result of the Spanish-American 
War and the Filipino attempt to overthrow the regime 
in the Philippines. When Dewey was in Hongkong await- 
ing orders, he was approached by Aguinaldo's men. Of 
this incident Dewey later told a Senate committee: ''I 
heard there were a number of Filipinos in the city of 
Hongkong ^w\\o were anxious to accompany the squadron 
to Manila in case we w^ent over. . . . They seemed to 
be all very young earnest boys. I did not attach much 
importance to what they said or to themselves.'* They 
had told Dewey thai their leader Aguinaldo was in 
Singapore and was anxious to see the Admiral. 

The American consul at Singapore had also tohJ Dewey 
about Aguinaldo's wish. 'T attached so little importance 
to Aguinaldo that T did not wait for him." Dewey lat(^r 
observed. Aguinaldo missed Dewey by a day or so. 

But after the destruction of the Sjnmish lleet. Dewey 
realized that that was not tlie end (^f the war with Spain. 

{Turn to Pa^c 76 i 



• 13 • 



August 13, 1898 (from Page 15) 

With no American army to do the necessary land fight- 
ing to wrest the country from the Spaniards, he needed 
Filipino help to complete the conquest. Aguinaldo and 
his staff were brought to Manila Bay on one of Dewey's 
ships, the McCulloch, 16 days later. 

What actually transpired between Dewey and Aguinaldo 
is the subject of historical controversy. The Filipino 
leader, however, got the impression that the Americans 
were in the Philippines to free the Filipinos from Span- 
ish rule as they were doing for the Cubans in Cuba. 
Anyway, he was urged by Dewey to recruit men for an 
army to besiege Spanish-held Manila. 

"I was waiting for troops to arrive, and I felt sure 
the Filipinos could not take Manila, and I thought that 
the closer they invested the city the easier it would be 
Avhen our troops arrived to march in," Dewey frankly 
told a Senate committee when asked why he accepted 
Aguinaldo's help. "The Filipinos were our friends, as- 
sisting us: they were doing our work." 

Aguinaldo recruited 25,000 men, according to Dewey, 
who also admitted that he could have had any number 
of men. The only problem was arming them. Aguinaldo 
not only accomplished the remarkable feat of raising 
a formidable fighting force just 12 days after his "re- 
turn from Elba" but demonstrated his ability to strike 
immediately. On May 31 he ordered a general attack. 
Although he did not succeed entirely, he captured some 
guns in the Spanish arsenal located at Cavite, across the 
bay from Manila, and established a tightening cordon 
around Manila. On June 6, Aguinaldo captured 1,850 
Spanish officers in Cavite Province. 

Not until June 30 did the first batch of American 
soldiers arrive in the Philippines under the command 
of Brig. Gen. Thomas M. Anderson. Actually, President 
McKinley had ordered Maj. Gen. Wesley Merritt to 
organize and command an expedition to the Philippines, 
but he did not reach Manila until July 25, so upon Ander- 
son fell the credit of being the first American proconsul 
on Philippine soil. 

President McKinley's written instructions to the com- 
mander of the expeditionary force embraced a two- 
fold purpose: (1) ''the severance of the former poli- 
tical relations of the inhabitants and the establishment 
of a new political order," and (2) to police the Philip- 
pines 'Svhile in the possession of the United States." 
Merritt was granted "absolute and supreme" powers over 
the Philippines, but was ordered to make the occupa- 
tion "be as free from severity as possible" and to exer- 
cise "a high sense of justice." 

Before Merritt's arrival Aguinaldo established a pro- 
visional government, compelling y\nderson to write him: 
"I observe that Your Excellency has announced yourself 
dictator and proclaimed martial law. As I am here simplv 
in a military capacity, I have no authority to recognize 
such assumption. I have no orders from my government 
on the subject." 

It was becoming more and more apparent that conflict 




American troops being ferried ashore before the attack 
on Manila. 

would break out between the Americans and the Filipinos. 
"The people expect independence," Anderson reported to 
Washington. 

Merritt and Aguinaldo never met. "General Aguinaldo 
did not visit me on my arrival nor offer his services as 
a subordinate leader," Merritt later reported. Merritt 
himself never asked for the Filipino leader, who every 
day was getting more suspicious of the Americans. Thus 
the preparations for the attack on Manila were conducted 
by the Americans without reference to the Filipino 
forces. 

Before the final battle between American and Spanish 
forces on August 13, there were exchanges of notes be- 
tween them. Knowing that the enemy had superior fight- 
ing power, the long-besieged Spaniards, whose supplies 
were getting dangerously low, were anxious to surrender, 
but they felt that the American terms were incompatible 
with Spanish honor. 

Admiral Dewey and General Merritt agreed to make an 
all-out combined attack on Manila. Dewey's fleet took 
a position along the shore. The Monadiiock and Monterey 
covered the German Asiatic fleet, which had been trying 
to help the embattled Spaniards. Dewey gave orders 
to fire on the Germans if they gave the slightest sign of 
abandoning their neutral position. 

At 6:45 in the morning of August 13, all American 
troops left Camp Dewey for the front. They found that 
Aguinaldo's forces had blockaded the city except for 
the positions held by the Americans on the south. 

The army assault began at 9:30. The fleet opened fire 
15 minutes later. Plans were carried out on schedule, 
but the Americans advanced so rapidly that they did 
not allow sufficient time for the Spaniards to retreat 
gracefully after fighting with valor. 

Aguinaldo's troops surged forward in the wake of the 
Americans, but they were stopped by orders from Gen- 
eral Merritt. They were not allowed even a "look-in." 

[Turn to Page 17) 



• 16 • 



August 13, 1898 



(from Page 15) 



When the Spanish i!;eneral surrendered and the American 
flag was hoisted over Fort San Antonio de Abad at 11 
o'clock that morning, the Filipinos were not permitted to 
see the ceremony. 

The attack on Manihi cost the Americans only five 
men killed and 43 wounded. For the ease with whicli the 
Americans took the city, they could have thanked the 
Filipinos* long siege, which had softened the harried 
Spaniards, but didn't. "Divided victory was not per- 
missible,"' the American generals cabled Washington. 
"It was fitting that whatever w^as to be done . . . should 
be accomplished by the strong arm of the United States 
alone." 

The capture of Manila was only the beginning of the 
American's trouble in the Philippines. Although the 
Treaty of Paris of 1898 ceded the Philippines to the 
United States by right of conquest and purchase, the 
American and Filipino forces soon clashed. Fighting 
lasted for months even after General Aguinaldo was 
captured on March 23, 1901. in a clever ruse executed 
by Col. Frederick Funston. 

Complete occupation of the Philippines necessitated 
a long war with the Filipino insurgents under Aguinaldo. 
More than 120,000 American troopers were dispatched 
to the Philippines. During the three and one-half years 
of war, 4,165 Americans were killed, and the United 
States Government expended $185,000,000. The Filipinos 
put up a good fight, but the Americans were better trained 
and better armed. The war cost the Filipinos 100.000 
lives. 

Enmity between the belligerents was bitter. But when 
Aguinaldo laid down his arms and took the oath of 
loyalty to the United States, he became an exemplary 
citizen, cooperating in the reconstruction program of 
the conquerors. A young major in Aguinaldo's army, 
Manuel L. Quezon, also took the oath of loyalty. Now 
President of the Philippines, he recently proclaimed a 
Loyalty Day. during which he reassured the democratic 
world that the Philippines is united behind the United 
States in whatever course she might take. 

Today the armed forces of the United States and the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines stand side by side, 
ready for any emergency in the Far East. ^ 





Rodolfo Cornejo 



Corregidor after the battle. 



Rodolfo cornejo. Fil- 
ipino composer and pianist, 
was guest soloist with the 
Xew York Symphony Or- 
chestra in a concert held at 
the Brooklyn Museum on 
July 13. John Barnetl con- 
ducted. The concert was 
broadcast over station 
WNYC. 

Cornejo played his "Phil- 
ippine Rhapsody" which he 
composed during the ocean 
trip from Manila to San 
Francisco early in 1939. Two 
Philippine folk songs form 
the basis of the work. This 
is his second visit to the United States. 

A graduate of the Manila Conservatory of Music. 
Cornejo studied at the Chicago Musical College and 
later at the Eastman School of Music in Rochester. New 
York, where he won a scholarship. He has been heard 
several times in the past over the National Broadcasting 
Company, the Columbia Broadcasting System, and the 
Mutual Network. 



Filipino loyalty to the United States was reaffirmed 
in a resolution passed unanimously at the 3rd Filipino 
Inter-Community Conference recently concluded in Oak- 
land, California. Copies of this resolution were sent 
to President Roosevelt and President Manuel L. Quezon 
of the Philippine Commonw'ealth. 

Presided over by Felipe Esteban, president of the 
Filipino Community of Alameda and Contra Costa coun- 
ties, the conference dealt with many of the problems 
affecting the Filipinos in the United States, particu- 
larly on the West Coast. Methods of achieving economic 
stability and assuring the proper education of their 
American-born children were discussed. 

With a view to unifying the several Filipino connnuni- 
ties on the Coast, the convention formed a central organi- 
zation to be known as the "Pacific Coast Filipino 
Inter-Community Organization." Manuel M. Insigne, 
well-known Filipino newspaperman and labor leader of 
Sacramento, w^as chosen as the first head. 



• 17 • 



amorous 



ippines 



By Pilar IS. Ravelo 



(jrl-'VMOl K a> radiated l)\ Philip])iiie ciiuMiia stars has 
little in eoininoii with the brand sold in Hollywood. Ma- 
nila niovi(* fans seofT at s()|)histieation. Actresses who 
lead private lives, who smoke and drink, or who go 
out unehaperoned have poor hox oOire ratings. Glamour 
in th(* I^hilippines deri\es from the naiveness and 
unsjjoiled eharm of the aelress. from soulful eyes that 
reduce an audience to tears, from neatness of attire, 
and. finally, from that blooming look, exuberance and 
natural vitality which no amount of make-up can supply. 

If time before the camera is a measure of glamour, 
then Rosa del Hosario, with 10 years of screen work to 
her credit, is Glamour Girl \o. 1 of the Philippine 
movies. She has been on tht* screen ever since she was 
14. Today she dictates her own contract to the studios, 
c-hooses the plays she will star in and picks her lead- 
ing man. No other movie star has ever received SLOOO 
for 15 days of work (as Rosa did in Cadena de Amor). 
and she alone has starred in a Philippine picture 
iZamboanga) for world distribution. 

There was a time, during the early days of Philippine 
movies, when kissing was not tolerated on the screen. 
Rosa del Rosario made history by participating in a 
screen kiss without causing the theater-goers to raise 
their hands in horror. The kiss was very artistically 
dom^ — under w^ater. And she it was who popularized 
the "sarong", long before the garment became a syno- 
nym for Dorothy Lamour. 

Rosa prefers tragic roles. She realizes that the average 
romantic movie patron usually goes to a show for one 
purpose — to have a good cry. 

Lilia Vizconde, unlike other cinema stars, does not 
^vear a bathing suit merely to accentuate the dangerous 
curves. Lilia really swims. She is fond of dancing, 
too. and she prefers a small friendly party to a round 
of Manila's night clubs. On the campus, where she is 
still pursuing a college education during her spare 
time, she is distinctly Miss Glamour. Lilia holds two- 
thirds of the University's important honorary positions, 
including regimental sponsor, sweetheart of the l)askel- 
ball team and. above all. society editor of the college 
paper. 

Professionally. Miss Vizconde is among Manila's 
highest paid stars; she seldom receives less than S50() 
per picture. She has had an important beneficial effect 
on the movies, too. Her becoming an actress paved 
the wa> for other talented coeds and helped impro\c 
the standing of cinema actresses in the eyes of the con- 
ser\ative pul)lic. 

Yhc \alue of a glamouiDus name is apparent in the 



case of Sonia Reyes, ^\ho was born Victoria Barry. At 
first the publicity department called her ^'icky Barry, 
which Hollywood would call **a natural.** But somehow 
the name fell flat. Provincial movie fans would ha\ e 
none of that foreign-sounding stuff. So. in time. \ icky 
Barry became Sonia Reyes. And where Vicky Barry had 
received barely one fan letter a day. Sonia Reyes av- 
erages thirty a week. 

Whatever her name, the young lady is fond of swim- 
ming. singing and reading romantic stories. Her great 
ambition is to get a chance at Hollywood. She'd be a hit. 

Healthy, sports-minded and athletic. Liicita Goyena. 
who spells glamour on the X-Oxitic Films lot. is a 
working gold mine for her company. In four years in 
the movies, she already has more than 15 pictures to 
her credit. On and off the screen, she has real charm. 

Lucita would rather don slacks and go careening along 
a dusty road on a bicycle than apply cold cream or 
take a beauty sleep. She is full of vitality, is excep- 
tionally personable and friendly, and is the pal of 
everyone in the studio. Despite her hoydenish per- 
sonality, she now plays "lady" roles. Between scenes 
she makes wry faces at the copious tears she is forced to 
shed in the name of drama. 

Mila del Sol. who has a chubby face and a vivacious 
twinkle in her eyes, is the personification of laughter and 
life. Brown in complexion and well-shaped, Mila has 
a fetching smile and very round lively eyes that ha\ e 
a tendency to look coyly upward. She is the sole sup- 
port of the film company for which she Avorks and 
consequently is given many privileges not extended to 
other stars. Her pictures have been consistent money 
makers. I'nlike most players, she never makes less than 
two pictures at a time. The two shows are "shot ' simul- 
taneously and Mila alternates betw^een them. 

Ester Magalona is the sweetest story the Philippine 
screen has ever told. She is as pretty as she is talented. 
Still in high school. Ester can don a haliutauak (na- 
tive Filipino dress) or a bathing suit ^vith equal grace. 
Not surprisingly, she has one of the biggest collections 
of fan mail in Manila. 

Intelligence is an asset to glamour in the case of 
Yolanda Marquez. who plays the piano, dances the 
rhumba and can talk on Hemingway and Steinbeck Avith 
the best of the local literati. And what is more, she can 
name one oi* two things wrong with surrealist art. She 
combines a surprisingh mature intellect and a flair for 
the arts witli a natural girlish charm. Great things are 
in store for ^ olanda. She has a w'eakness for good clothes 
and boasts of one of the two most expensive wardrobes 
in Manila's land of glamour and celluloid. ^ 



• 19 • 



Defense for the Civilian 



(from Page 6) "Greatest Soldier'' 



(t roni Page 9) 



Bureau of Health, the Philippine Constabulary, and the 
Philippine Social Security Administration, Avill look after 
the public welfare in emergencies. This job will include 
the quick dispersal of the population in case of air 
raids, the proper care of evacuees, and the maintenance 
of peace and order. Health officials will oversee the 
manufacture of serums and the acquisition of an ade- 
quate supply of medical and surgical materials. Steps 
are being taken to have such materials stored in strategic 
locations throughout the country so as to have them on 
hand where most needed. 

Several towns in the provinces around Manila have 
been surveyed as evacuee reception centers. Sites have 
been selected from the point of view of the accessibility 
of food and water, sanitation, and comparative safety 
in case of hostilities. The people of the towns selected 
have shown unprecedented enthusiasm in cooperating 
with the authorities for the accommodation of the pros- 
pective evacuees. Rehearsal evacuations of large num- 
bers of people will be undertaken as soon as some neces- 
sary additional facilities are installed in the reception 
centers. 

Red Cross nurses and assistants are now working in 
the 38 towns selected so far to receive refugees. Their 
goal is to bring health and sanitation facilities up to 
standard, improve water supply and drinking facilities, 
and make a systematic survey of houses available to 
accomodate evacuees. First estimates indicate that these 
38 municipalities will be able to handle all who quit 
Manila without building additional shelters. The food 
supply is sufficient for at least four months. 

The first line of our civilian defense in case of war 
will be the Volunteer Guard, organized under the direc- 
tion of the CEA. The Chief of the Constabulary is in 
charge of recruiting and training these guards. The 
membership quota will be 400,000 able-bodied men. 

The Volunteer Guard is intended exclusively to pro- 
tect the civilion population. For example, its duties will 
include the suppression of espionage and sabotage, the 
maintenance of peace and order, and the protection of 
public utilities and war material plants. The Guards will 
also assist in emergencies caused by fires, epidemics, air 
raids or other disasters, seeking, if not to prevent, at 
least to minimize, injury to persons and property. 

Nothing is being left to chance in the defense of our 
civilian population. Filipinos are fully confident that 
their external security is safe in the hands of the United 
States. At the same time, we realize that our internal 
peace and order is our own responsibility, and we are 
bound to safeguard it without loss of time. We will not 
fail in our duty to cooperate with the United States. When 
the time comes for real action, our civilian population 
will be ready to stand up to any enemy without fear or 
vacillation. ^ 



serv ice al 




Beach defense 



h(nl notice. Tliis 
program, it was cstimaled. 
would cost the Pliilipj)ines 
s{J.()()().()()0 a year. 

C/ciKMal MacArthur be- 
lieves tliat the Connnon- 
vscallh can — for all practical 
])urj)oses — be defended 
against invasion. When, re- 
cently, critics declared that 
the Islands ])osition was liopeless, the general replied 
that it would take ''half a million men, 810,000.000.000. 
tremendous casualties and three years* time succ(\^sfull\- 
to invade the Philippines.'* 

"Personally," he added, ''ten years hence I would 
not want to lead any force in an attempt at invasion.*' 

Philippine Army chiefs are equally confident. At no 
time in history, one of them declared recently, has the 
Philippines been better prepared to meet anv foreign 
attack. 

General MacArthur would be the last to insist that 
the Philippine Army's approximately 150,000 reserves 
are fully trained soldiers. Military experts everywhere 
are fully cognizant of Filipino shortcomings. But the 
Philippine defense program was not designed to pro- 
duce men of professional caliber at once. MacArthur's 
first objective was to give as many men as ])ossible the 
rudiments of military training on a program that kept 
within the limits of the modest Philippine national 
budget. 

When w^ar started in Europe two years ago, General 
MacArthur became restless in Manila. He confided to 
friends his keen regret that he had retired when so 
much was happening. He felt on the shelf in his island 
outpost. With recent developments in the Far East, 
however, his new appointment as commander of all the 
United States Army Forces in the Orient has been a 
great source of satisfaction to him and to his many 
friends. 

"I am glad to be able to serve my country at this 
crucial time," General MacArthur declared when news 
of his new^ job reached Manila. "The action of the 
American government in establishing this new connnand 
can only mean that it intends to maintain, at any cost 
and effort, its full rights in the Far East. It is quite 
evident that its determination is immutable and that 
its will is indomitable. To this end both the American 
and Filipino soldiery can be expected to give their 
utmost." ^ 



The latest Philippine census re\eals 29,262 Japanese 
in the Islands, as compared with 11 7.10] Chinese. Out 
of a total of 166.977 foreigners living in th(^ Phili j)pines. 
H.llV) are Americans and 1.637 Spaniards. 



• 20 • 



"All Our Man power'" (from Page 3) 

ihc dainaiic and drslriu'tion Avhich the enemy might 
inflict u|)on us. I urge upon our women the duty of 
cooperating in this civilian efTort and training them- 
selves |)ro|)erl\ to give iirsl aid to tlie wounded and 
lh()S(^ that may riMcMNt^ in- 
jurv of any sort hy enemy 
action. 

These are tinu\s of stress 
and great danger. Every 
rilij)ino should awaken to 
the realities of the situation. 
Our first concern should be 
to insur(^ an adequate food 
suj)i)lv. Ihc Government is 
trying to huild up stocks of 
food, hut these will not he 
su(lici(Mit. if our lines of com- 
mimication with the United 
Stat(\s are disrupted. Wc can 
oidy insure^ an adequate food 
suj)ply at all times and in 
any emergency, hy produc- 
ing in our country all our 
requirements. This we can 
do. This we should do. 

Lahor and capital should likewise comi)rehend their 
duties and responsihililies in the present crisis. They 
should avoid conflicts that will stop ])roduction. Strikes 
are wasteful and I hope they will not he resorted to 
except in extreme cases and only after giving the 
agencies of the Government an opportunity to settle 
the controversy. 

In order to finance our defense preparation, I have 
rc^quested the President of the United States to make 
available to our Government the funds derived from the 
excise tax on Philippine sugar, as well as the funds 
accruing to our Government from the devaluation of 
the American dollar. I have assurances that this request 
is receiving sympathetic consideration by the American 
Government and I trust that favorable action wall be 
taken thereon in the near future. Our Government has 




Vice-President Osmena, with Mrs. Osmena, leads 
in the pledge of allegiance to the U. S. 



also been taking steps to obtain equipment and war 
materials from the L nited States under the Lend-Lease 
Act. It is my expectation that supplies will be given us 
through this method in increasing quantities. 

The Connnonwealth Go\ernment has been working 
in intimate collaboration with the L nited States 

Gonnnissioner and American 
military and naval authori- 
ties in the Philipjiines in re- 
lation to our national defense 
program. I wish to make pub- 
lic my ap}>reciation of the 
splendid spirit of cooperation 
which has been patent in 
all our dealings. Above all. 
I wish to express our grati- 
tude for the interest which 
President Roosevelt and the 
American Government as a 
whole have shown in the de- 
fense of the Philippines. 

W e have set aside Loyally 
Day to express the whole- 
hearted and unswerving loy- 
alt\ of all the elements of 
our population to the L nited 
States of America and to 
the Philippines, as well as the great principles of liberty 
and democracy which are cherished by Americans and 
Filipinos alike. This enthusiastic demonstration is doubly 
significant because it is held upon the initiative of our 
laboring masses and their leaders who. in this manner, 
have sought to prove that their loyalty to our country 
is above their loyalty to anv class, and their condemna- 
tion of communism and other political philosophies 
which are subversive of the present order under our 
Constitution. No more fitting day could have been chosen 
for this purpose than the anniversary of the birthday 
of Dr. Jose Rizal, for the ideals and w^ay of life for 
which he strove and died are the same as those for 
the defense of which we are ready to sacrifice our lives 
and our all. ^ 




Crowds line Padre Burgos Avenue, in Manila, to 
watch the Loyalty Day parade. 




Members of the Philippine Cabinet participate in 
the Loyalty Day parade through Manila. 



21 



p. 1. lEWS 



The national assembly recently passed a hill 
authorizing the President of the Philippines to aholish 
the Department of Interior and transfer its powers, 
functions and duties to other departments of the govern- 
ment. Executive supervision and administration of prov- 
inces, municipalities, chartered cities and other political 
subdivisions would be shifted to the Office of the 
President; the board of review for moving pictures 
would go to the Department of Public Instruction; reg- 
istration of priests and ministers and the administration 
of the marriage law, to the Department of Justice; 
and the constabulary and the local police force, to the 
Department of National Defense. The National Informa- 
tion Board has already been transferred to the Civilian 
Emergency Administration. Abolition of the department 
will be completed by December, 1941. 

• • • 

President manuel l. quezon recently appoint- 
ed his secretary, Jorge Vargas, chairman of the board 
of directors of the Philippine National Bank. Secretary 
Vargas will succeed Secretary of Justice Jose Abad 
Santos, who has been named associate justice of the 
Supreme Court of the Philippines. 

• • • 

a pr(jviso of a bill recently passed by the National 
Assembly, the Official Gazette of the Philippines, now 
published by the reporter of the Supreme Court, will 
be expanded and edited henceforth by the Office of the 
President. The new Official Gazette will be of wider 
public interest. Publication will be undertaken by the 
staff at Malacanan Palace now in charge of publishing 
legislative messages and speeches of the Commonwealth 
President. 

• • • 

Bhk;. gen. GLILLERMO FRANCISCO, chief of the 
iMiiIi|)j)ine Constabulary, has announced that 4.000 of the 
5.()()() sold iers needed to raise the Constabularly to its 
newly authorized strength of 10,000 men have been re- 
crniU'd. ( ^)nstal)ular\' provincial insjjectors and jjolicc 
olliccjs ol chartered cities are acting as recruitin^^ 
agents. 

• o • 

Philippine purchases of bicycle parts and accessor- 
ies from lh(^ [ nited States during 1910 increased by 69 
JXM' cent, according to the I . S. Department of Com- 
iH('r('(\ The Philij)pines competed with China, Cuba, 
and r)razil in the value of these imports. 



To maintain food resources in the Philipj)ines with- 
out depriving the people of essential minimum dailv 
needs, Dr. Victor Biiencamino. food administrator of 
the Civilian Emergency Arhniiiislialion. has announced 
a ])Ian for controlling liie sale and consumi)lion of fot)d- 
stuffs through a system of *'aj)i)licat ions'* and "ration 
cards." The a])plication cards will i)e used by dt^alcrs 
who wish to sell food in places where goNcrnnuMit agen- 
cies camiot handle th(; work. Ration cards will be used 
1))' individuals bu\ing food for family consumption. 
Through the Office of the Philipj)ine Resident Commis- 
sioner in Washington, I). C. ihc Civilian Emergency 
Administration has ordered about S2. 500. 000 worth of 
camied goods and other foodstuffs. The \alioiud Food 
Products Corporation has also Ixmmi gixcn an order 
for foodstuffs worth SLOOO.OOO. The Administration plans 
to maintain a six-months slock of foodstuffs, and local 
importers have been urged to make similar j)reparations. 

• • • 

IVIaMLA recently staged its first j)raclic(» blackout of 
oO minut(?s* durati(jn, with air-raid sirens screaming 
and y\rmy ])lanes flying overhead. Army fliers, reporting 
by radio from 3,000 feel, found a high degree of coop- 
eration. Only scattered lights violated the widely circu- 
lated black-out instructions. The exercise w^as under 
Filipino direction, with the United Slates Army assist- 
ing but remaining in the backgroinid. The Civilian 
Emergency Administration, hc^aded by Connnonweallh 
officials, w-as in active charge. 

Brilliant moonlight flooded the city, nuiking the black- 
out of major objectives impossible, but Army fliers re- 
j)orted it was difficult to distinguish military objectives 
from an altitude of 3,00f) feel. However, the w^aterfront 
was fairly vulnerable, they said, the i)iers being clearly 
visible against Manila Hay. The silvery Pasig River, 
which meanders through Manila's central district, also 
was clearly distinguishable. 

• • • 

Six Germans holding key positions in the Manila Gas 
Corporation were removed recently in a general shakeup 
which was offiicially attributed to the international situa- 
tion and the fact that the corporation is considered a 
strategic industry. 

Americans and Filipinos eventually will take the places 
of the German officials, ClifTord P. Billings, vice-presi- 
dent of the Philij)pine Gas and Electric Company, of 
which the Manila Gas Corj)oration is a subsidiary, an- 
nounced. 

Simultaneously, President Manuel Quezon sunnnoned 
eight Socialist mayors from (^(Mitral Luzon and w^arned 
them that any act of dislo\ alty lowaid the Commonw^ealth 
(^overmncnl and the I niled Slates would ])c dnxli with 
sternly. 



On the Honor Roll (from Page 10) 

niodifications in the vast reorganization and regrouping 
of government bureaus that were going on at the time. 
Budget Director Harold Smith, another close friend 
and adviser of the President's, discovered in Coy a 
thorough-going liberal with a genius for common sense. 
It was Coy who helped to draft the transfer of Philip- 
pine jurisdiction from tlie War Dei)artment to the 
Department of the Interior in llie early sununer of 1939. 

When McNult arrived in the ''States'*, the ground was 
well-prepared for a triumphal entry. And it was a 
triumphal entry. President Roosevelt was impressed and 
offered McNutt the jol) of Federal Security Adminis- 
trator, a post with semi-cabinet rank. McNutt did not for- 
get Coy. He made him Assistant Federal Security Ad- 
ministrator, a dizzy ascent iov a ])lain Indiana boy. 

He wasn't |)articularly overawed. It was something 
like being WPA Administrator of Indiana, only there was 
much more of it. The job fit Coy like an old shoe. He 
knew how to talk to social security experts, to em- 
ployment directors, to youth leaders, to old dealers, 
and to new dealers. Officials who might have resented 
him because he was young grew to respect and praise 
him. 

The ]M'aise reached the ears of the White House. Coy 
was called in for little special jobs, somewhat outside 
of his field. He was asked to draft memoranda on gov- 
ernment policy, to confer on social trends, and to advise 
with other inner-circle officials on the broad programs 
of government. 

National defense became the national preoccupation, 
as em])hasis shifted from the domestic to the world 
front. Coy began taking a hand in that. too. He helped 
to draft a plan whereby McNutt took over all the 
national defense functions associated with the health, 
training, welfare, and recreation of potential soldiers, 
and of the civilian population. It was a big job. 

Coy moved to a job even bigger. In April he was 
named Liaison Officer for the Ofhce for Emergency Man- 
agement. McNutt, his boss, bade him god-speed. From 
that time on, McNutt was to report to the White House 
through Coy, on matters of national defense, and their 
government relationship was turned around. Rut Coy's 
political loyalties remain the same. It is a good bet that 
in 1914 Coy will be in McNutt's corner, ])ulling for his 
nomination as Democratic candidate for the presidency. 

1944 is three years away. Today defense is the watch- 
word. Coy is at the switchboard of the entire adminis- 
trative machinery of defense. 0PM. OPACS. OCD, and 
NDAC, the ali)habctical collection of defense agencies, 
keej) in touch with White House policy through Coy. 
Major decisions, of course, are made as always at the 
White House. He winks late and works hard. It is a 
highly important job. an all-important job. Rut Coy 
says it is much like his work in Indiana and in the 
Phili|)])incs, only there is more of it. ^ 



For Your Information 



THE INFORMATION DIVISION of the Office of the 
Philippine Resident Commissioner does a great deal 
besides editing Philippines. Its activities include such 
diversified lines as distributing photos, producing radio 
broadcasts, editing movies and researching into climatic 
peculiarities. The object of this wide program is to 
give the widest possible circulation to information on 
Philippine industry, defense, history, culture and trade. 

In addition to current and back copies of Philippines. 
which is published in W ashington. D. C a booklet pub- 
lished by the Commonwealth Government in Manila is 
now available in limited quantities. This booklet meets 
the need for generalized material on the Islands, touch- 
ing briefly on almost every phase of modern life. 
Another set of pamphlets, published by the various 
government agencies concerned, contains specialized ma- 
terial on such Philippine industries and resources as 
mining, forestry, fish and game, mango culture, land 
utilization, rice growing, derris. cacao and tobacco. All 
the above are available without charge. 

On behalf of the semi-official Philippine Tourist Bu- 
reau, the Office of the Resident Commissioner distributes 
tourist literature from the Commonwealth. Material on 
hand at present includes folders on interesting and 
popular sights in the vicinity of Manila, and copies of 
a new quarterly magazine. Philippine Tourist. 

Of particular value to teachers are the enlarged re- 
productions of maps appearing in Philippines. Limited 
quantities of these can be obtained without charge by 
writing to the information division. 

Transcriptions of the series of Philippine radio pro- 
grams recently broadcast from Washington will soon 
be available for classroom use or for rebroadcasting. 
These 10 programs touch many aspects of Island life, 
and are designed to be both entertaining and informa- 
tive. Complete information will be released soon. 

Also in preparation is a small textbook on the Philip- 
pines, designed especially for educators. Illustrated with 
photos, maps and drawings, the publication will contain 
basic material for a brief course of instruction on the 
Commonwealth. Copies are ex|)ected to be availal)le by 
October. ^ 

The 42ND ANNUAL REUNION of the National So- 
ciety-Army of the Philip])ines was held at St. ]\-ters- 
burg, Florida, August inclusive. The Reunion was 

sponsored b> the Manila Outpost, the Society-Army of 
the Philippines and the St. Petersburg ChandxM- of 
Commerce. 



23 



T I Lip t no Jloolc5 at 

Philippine Defense 

By P. C. Morantte 

American observers of Far Eastern affairs generally 
aflBrm that the Philippines — whose protection against 
aggression is the responsibility of the United States 
until 1946 — is the Achilles heel of American defense. 
Fortunately, this favorite opinion of Monday morning 
strategists is not shared by Filipino military experts or 
by General Douglas Mac Arthur, whose job it is to make 
the Islands reasonably defensible. 

It has been pointed out that, since Admiral Dewey 
was able to destroy the Spanish fleet and capture Ma- 
nila in six hours, a powerful enemy could do the same 
thing today. This is false logic, for there is no com- 
parison between the Spanish fleet of 1898 in the Islands 
and the American Asiatic fleet of 1941. Without trying 
to minimize Admiral Dewey's brilliant accomplishment, 
it is an historical fact that the Spaniards guarding Ma- 
nila were demoralized by internal confusion, and their 
defenses undermined by the harassments of the Filipino 
revolutionaries. Today the situation in the Philippines is 
altogether different. The Filipinos are not in rebellion 
against the Lnited States; on the contrary, they are 
alert and united and wholeheartedly committed to sup- 
port any military move the United States may make in 
the Orient. To be sure, the whole Philippine Army 
numbers only 150,000; but this number of armed Fili- 
pinos might be enough to wreck an invasion. 

The fortified island of Corregidor at the mouth of 
Manila Bay can hold out for only 30 days at most against 
an enemy assault, according to John Gunther. This time 
element, however, can be decisively important to the 
American Navy stationed at Hawaii. So long as the 
Fleet keeps on fighting, so long would the island of 
Corregidor stand. And while Corregidor stands, a great 
portion of the Phili])pines would continue fighting. 

Many parts of the Philippines would carry on the 
fight even if Manila fell. The experience of the Ameri- 
can soldiers trying to occupy the entire Philippines after 
the Spanish- American War proves this. The Americans 
thought that capturing Manila meant the surrender 
of the whole archipelago. They soon found they were 
gravely mistaken. Even after General Emilio Aguinaldo, 
head of the Philipj^ine Revolutionary Army, had cleared 
out ihe last vestige of Spanish armed resistance, America 
had lo send 125.000 soldiers to the Islands at a cost 
of al)()Ut S200.000.()()0. according to War Department 
records. The expedition sent to put down General 
Aguinaldo's native army numbered roughly 50,000. And 



the Americans fought the Filipino insurgents for two 
years. Two years to force a j)oorly armed nali\e armv 
to surrender! 

Now, supposing an enemy were to allem|)t to occupy 
the Islands today. It would find itself in a graver pre- 
dicament than did the Americans. For todav the defense 
of the Philip])ines is being f(jrmidal)l\ augumented with 
American help. 

It is often argued that Philippine geograi)hv offers 
a variety of landing points for an invader, \\4iile it is 
true that the Islands afford as many landing spots 
as there are habitable islands, it d()(\s not necessarilv 
follow that the Philippines is an easy prey. It should be 
remembered that America had to send a comparatively 
large army to the Islands in order to supj)ress a few 
thousand native fighters, because the numerous islands 
themselves helped in dissij)ating the American forces. 
Scattered into loosely independent contingents, they 
favored the Fili])ino soldiers' peculiar guerilla method 
of combat. 

Filipinos fighting an invading army would have quite 
an advantage. Once away from the landing shores and 
open plains, the enemy's blitzkrieg tactics would be handi- 
cajjped. Then Filij)ino fighters could stage surprise at- 
tacks from the mountains and forests; they would be a 
deadly torment to the enemy. Every tree could l)e a trench, 
every ravine a fortress. A mechanized army would be at 
a hopeless disadvantage in a jungle battle. 

Artillery needs charted ground to be effective. But 
Philippine topography is very irregular, characterized 
by islands, boggy fields, swamps, jungles, mountains, 
forests and treacherous waters. Filipino resistance is not 
maintained in villages and towns, but in gulleys and 
gulches and swamps and blufi's and Thermopylean passes. 
General Gregorio del Pilar, commanding a rear guard 
of about 60 native fighters against a battalion of Ameri- 
can soldiers, almost won the grim battle of Tilad Pass 
in December, 1899. 

Americans should not entertain a defeatist attitude 
toward the defense of the Philippines. Given sufficient 
help, the Filipinos can hold any enemy at bay. 

The public declaration by the Secretary of the Navy 
that the United States will defend the Philippines as 
long as the American Hag flies there was very heartening 
to us. The Filipinos are happy to have this assurance, 
which they consider an appropriate answer to their 
plea for military assistance, broadcast to the United 
States last fall by the Philippine Secretary of Finance, 
Manuel Roxas, and indorsed by President Manuel L. 
Quezon. 

But American official assurances should be accom- 
panied by increasing material aid. The Filipinos are 
asking only for arms and anmiunition. We doiTl need 
American men: we will do the fighting ourselves. We 
are dead set on that ])oint. All America has to do is 
suj)ply us with the equi])menl we need to tneet a military 
crisis. This is the only way lh(^ Philij)pines can be saved 
from an invader. ^ 



• 24 • 




PHILIPPINE TOBACCO AGENCY 



2362 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 



Washington./ 0. C, 



Philippines 



Ships aind Sugar 

By George H, Fairchild 



Philippiiie Edu4ratioii 
aD tl TJ toracy 



No.l M^i-kei for U.S. Flour 

V By Herman Fnkler 




Oil in the|PliUij^|ii|aes 





Vol.1 No. 7 



Manuel L. Quezon, President of 
the Philippine Commonwealth 
(right), accepts the congratula- 
tions of Nationalisto Party leaders 
o" his nomination to serve a 
second term. Manuel Roxas, for- 
mer Secretary of Finance (center). 
Assemblyman Sotto of D« 



avao. 




to 



Delegates 
Manila hear 



♦h^ Nationalista Party convention in 
leaders pledge loyalty to the 



Filipino women 



their 



United States. 



convention. Th 
entire 



Were weii rc^, 




suffrage. 



sta 

e 




Commonwealth labor leaders pledge their support to 
Lieut. Gen. Douglas MacArthur on his appointment as 
commander of all U. S. Army Forces in the Far East. 



Planes and personnel of the Philippine Army Air Force 
being inducted into the service of the United States on 
an army air field outside Manila. 



The Philosophy of Leaving Home 

An Editorial 



In (lays such as llu*st\ Avlirn the lives of small nations, 
are frequently snulTed out between sunset and sunrise, 
particular hardihood is necessary to discuss such a sub- 
ject as inde|)endence for the Philippines. The tragic his- 
tory of the i)ast two years shows all too well what can 
ha])pen to even the ])roud and strong. Neither courage 
nor peaceful intentions nor a passion for human prog- 
ress is insurance against armed might, loosed without 
prov(H"ation. W hat, therefore, can be said about a nation 
of 16,0()(). ()()() preparing to make its own way in the 
modern world? 

The Phili})pine independence movement has been the 
eause of a great deal of misunderstanding in the Lnited 
States. This movement has often been misrepresented 
as one based on ingratitude and unfriendliness toward 
the American people. It is occasionally described as a 
jjolitical maneuver, with little popular backing. Fre- 
quently the situation is held to be the result of agitation 
by certain American interests, who feared the competi- 
tion of Philippine products. None of these theses is accu- 
rate. Certainly, ingratitude has no j)lace in our hearts. 

An easy w^ay to understand the Philippine desire for 
independence is by analogy. The youth who reaches 
maturity and longs to leave the family home for a life 
in which he must depend on himself is a close parallel 
to our situation. In his father's house, the boy may enjoy 
great comfort and protection from want: going out into 
the w^orld may be uncertain and fraught with terrible 
hardships. From the standpoint of his immediate well- 
being, the son w^ould be well advised to stay close to 
the family table. Nevertheless, he is ready — even deter- 
mined — to take all the knocks and setbacks necessary to 
make him finally an upstanding citizen. 

The Filipinos are that youth. They have been taught 
by their parent country, the United States, the virtue 
and desirability of freedom and self-determination. The 
lessons of the American revolution- -in which the ]3 
colonies embarked on an independent course under cir- 
cumstances not a shade more favorable than those facing 
the Philippines today — were not lost on them. The 
Filipino people would be unworthy in their own minds, 
and certainly by the measure of American standards, 
if they did not have that urge toward self-government. 
Americans should have no dilTiculty understanding — and 
appreciating — a determination that is so characteristically 
American. Far from inferring disloyalty or ingratitude, 
the Phili])pine independence movement signifies an un- 
swerving belief in the ideals taught b\ the United States. 

No resp()nsil)l(^ Fili|)in() denies the immeasura])le value 
of the sj)irilual and material blessings heaped on the 



Philippines during the past four decades of American 
rule. Our Connnonwealth status today is concrete evi- 
dence of the advancement we have made in these years. 
We know that we enjoy far more freedom than do many 
supposedly independent States. It is because we have 
made this great progress that we desire to push forward 
to complete independence. 

To understand that feeling, think iigain of the youth 
who w\ants to leave home. Under his parents' roof, this 
boy has things very much as he wants them. He is 
assured of protection: he is assisted in preparing him- 
self for the future. But, at the same time, he is subject 
to many humilitating restrictions. His companions are 
chosen for him; important decisions in his life are made 
over his head; and his daily activities are forever subject 
to shifting family circumstances. All these are perfectly 
natural to expect when the lad is in his "teens. They 
become less bearable as the boy matures. Eventually, 
they become intolerable. The youth — if he has any 
spirit — longs for complete independence. He insists on 
the right to be master of his own fate, regardless of 
whether his decisions are wise or foolish. 

The parallel between the home-bound youth and the 
Filipinos is obvious. Who can blame the 16.000,000 
Filipinos if they desire independence? To a spirited race 
the feeling is as natural as the urge to breathe. 

No believer in democracy can find fault with these 
objectives. The only point open for discussion is whether 
the youth of our analogy has obtained the maturity 
necessary for a successful independent career in a preda- 
tory w^orld. Inevitably, there is disagreement on this. 
But w^hat young man of spirit is willing to watch from 
the window of his parental home until everyone agrees 
that he is strong enough to fend for himself? 

There is honest doubt as to what will ha])pen to the 
Philippines once the Stars and Strii)es are hauled down. 
Many Americans are convinced that the new-found free- 
dom' will speedily be lost again. Students of economy 
see an even greater danger in the probable dislocation 
of Philippine commerce once the present modified free- 
trade ties with the Ignited States are cut. Naturally, 
informed Filipinos see these hazards and share these 
misgivings. But it is significant that— despite the obvious 
disadvantages and dangers— there is no important body 
of opinion in the Philippine Commonwealth todav thai 
opposes independence. The ])arallel with the ambitious 
youth still holds true. The prospect of hardship and 
privation is not enough to discourage a nation detcM- 
mined to establish itself as an upstanding member of 
tlie world community. ^ 



Manuel L. Quezon, President of 
the Philippine Commonwealth 
(right), accepts the congratula- 
tions of Nationalista Party leaders 
on his nomination to serve a 
second term. Manuel Roxas, for- 
mer Secretary of Finance (center), 
Assemblyman Sotto of Davao. 




Delegates to the Nationalista Party convention in 
Manila hear their leaders pledge loyalty to the 
United States. 



Filipino women were well represented at the Nationalista 
convention. The Philippines is the only nation in the 
entire Far East enjoying feminine suffrage. 





Commonwealth labor leaders pledge their support to 
Lieut. Gen. Douglas MacArthur on his appointment as 
commander of all U. S. Army Forces in the Far East. 



Planes and personnel of the Philippine Army Air Force 
being inducted into the service of the United States on 
an army air field outside Manila. 



The Philosophy of Leaving Home 



All Editorial 



I 



N days j^iich as ihcsr. when the lives of small nations, 
are frcqtienlly snnlTcul out between sunset and sunrise. 
j)articular hardihood is necessary to discuss such a sub- 
ject as independenc^e for the Philippines. The tragic his- 
tory of the past two years shows all too well what can 
ha|)pen to e\ en the ])roud and strong. Neither coin age 
nor j)eaceful intentions nor a j)assion for human prog- 
ress is insurance against armed might, loosed without 
j)rovocation. W liat. therefore, can be said about a nation 
of 16,0()().()()() preparing to make its own way in the 
modern world? 

The Philippine indei)endence movement has been the 
cause of a great deal of misunderstanding in the L nited 
States. This movement has often been misrepresented 
as one based on ingratitude and unfriendliness toward 
the American people. It is occasionally described as a 
])olitical maneuver, with little popular backing. Fre- 
quently the situation is held to be the result of agitation 
by certain American interests, who feared the competi- 
tion of Philippine products. None of these theses is accu- 
rate. Certainly, ingratitude has no place in our hearts. 

An easy w\iy to understand the Philippine desire for 
independence is by analogy. The youth who reaches 
maturity and longs to leave the family home for a life 
in which he must depend on himself is a close parallel 
to our situation. In his father's house, the boy may enjoy 
great comfort and protection from want; going out into 
the w^orld may be uncertain and fraught with terrible 
hardships. From the standpoint of his immediate w^ell- 
being, the son w^ould be w^ell advised to stay close to 
the family table. Nevertheless, he is ready — even deter- 
mined — to take all the knocks and setbacks necessary to 
make him finally an upstanding citizen. 

The Filipinos are that youth. They have been taught 
by their parent country, the United States, the virtue 
and desirability of freedom and self-determination. The 
lessons of the American revolution- -in which the 13 
colonies embarked on an independent course under cir- 
cumstances not a shade more favorable than those facing 
the Philippines today — w^ere not lost on them. The 
Filipino people w^ould be unworthy in their own minds, 
and certainly by the measure of American standards, 
if they did not have that urge toward self-government. 
Americans should have no difficulty understanding — and 
appreciating — a determination that is so characteristically 
American. Far from inferring disloyalty or ingratitude, 
the Philii)])ine independence movement signifies an un- 
swerving belief in the ideals taught ])y the United States. 

No resp()nsil)l(^ Filipino dcMiies the immeasurable value 
of the spiritual and mat(Mial l^lessings heaped on the 



Philippines during the past four decades of American 
rule. Our Commonwealth status today is concrete evi- 
dence of the advancement we have made in these years. 
We know that we enjoy far more freedom than do many 
supposedly independent States. It is because we have 
made this great progress that we desire to push forward 
to complete independence. 

To imderstand that feeling, think again of the youth 
who wants to leave home. Under his parents" roof, this 
boy has things very much as he wants them. He is 
assured of protection; he is assisted in preparing him- 
self for the future. But. at the same time, he is subject 
to manv humilitating restrictions. His companions are 
chosen for him: important decisions in his life are made 
over his head: and his daily activities are forever subject 
to shifting familv circumstances. All these are perfectly 
natural to expect when the lad is in his 'teens. They 
become less bearable as the boy matures. Eventually, 
thev become intolerable. The youth— if he has any 
spirit— lonos for complete independence. He insists on 
the right to be master of his own fate, regardless of 
whether his decisions are wise or foolish. 

The parallel between the home-bound youth and the 
Filipinos is obvious. Who can blame the 16.000.000 
Filipinos if thev desire independence? To a spirited race 
the feeling is as natural as the urge to breathe. 

No believer in democracy can find fault with these 
objectives. The only point open for discussion is whether 
the youth of our analogy has obtained the maturity 
necessary for a successful independent career in a preda- 
tory world. Inevitably, there is disagreement on this. 
But what young man of spirit is willing to watch from 
the window of his parental home until everyone agrees 
that he is strong enough to fend for himself? 

There is honest doubt as to what will happen to the 
Philippines once the Stars and Stripes are hauled down. 
Many Americans are convinced that the new-found free- 
dom will speedily be lost again. Students of economy 
see an even greater danger in the probable dislocation 
of Philippine commerce once the present modified free- 
trade ties with the United States are cut. Naturally, 
informed Filipinos see these hazards and share these 
misgivings. But it is significant that-despite the obviotis 
disadvantaoes and dangers-there is no important body 
of opinion^ in the Philii)pine Commonwealth today that 
opposes independence. The parallel with the ambitious 
vouth still holds true. The prospect of hardship and 
privation is not enough to discourage a nation deter- 
mined to establish itself as an upstanding member of 
the world community. ^ 



Philippines 



Vol. 1 



(October, 1941) 



No. 7 



On the Air 3 

Ships and Your Sugar Bowl, George H. Fairchild 4 

Prize Pupil, Dr. Camilo Osias 6 

Jose Yulo, P. C. Morantte 8 

Union for Democracy, Walter Brooks Foley 9 

Philippine Literacy, Cesar M. Lorenzo 10 

Oil Is Where We Find It, H. Foster Bain 11 

The Forgotten Boundary, James K, Eyre, Jr 14 

Guy Swope, Julius C. Edelstein lo 

No. 1 Market, Herman Fakler 16 

Philippine-American Trade, Tranquilino B, Aquino 18 

Luzon, Ernesto D, Ilustre 20 

Hands Across the China Sea, Randall Gould 24 



Photo Credit: Photo Finishing Corp., Manila; 
Palmer Pictures; Fenno Jacobs from Three 
Lions; De])artment of Agriculture; Department 
of the Interior; Harris & Ewing; U. S. Maritime 
Commission; Bureau of Education, Manila. 



Back Cover: Play Day at the University of the Philippines, Manila 



Permission to reprint material appearinj; 
in PHILIPPINES is gladly granted except in 
<"ase.s wlKTe use is specifically restricted. Prop<T 
credit will he appreciated. 




I ni\('rsit\ of the Philipj)in(\^ co-eds. luirrying 
to class in the heart of Manila. svinl)()lize 
the great strides cchicalion has made in the 
Philij)pincs chiring 10 years of AnuMican rule. 



Ill This Issue 

GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD, doyen of sugar men 
in the Commonwealth and head of the im- 
portant PhilipjiiiK^ Sugar Association, is at 
present in the I nited States seeking ships to 
transpcnt crude sugar across the Pacific. 

DR. CAMILO OSIAS, prominent as an author 
and educator, is chairman of the Philippine 
National Educational Council. 

HERMAN FAKLER, vice-i)rcsident of the Mill- 
ers' National FcfhMation. is the chief repre- 
sentative in Washington of the American flour 
milling industry. 

RANDALL GOULD was for nearly two decades 
an American ncwsj^aper editor and corres- 
pondent in the Far East. Today he is a mem- 
ber of the firm of Starr, Park & Co., New 
York City. 

WALTER BROOKS FOLEY, besides being a 
prominent Manila clergyman, is executive sec- 
retary of the Committee for Philippine Ameri- 
can Cultural Relations. 

TRANQUILINO B. AQUINO is a junior busi- 
ness research economist for the Works Prog- 
ress Administration. He obtained the figures 
for his article on Philippine-American trade 
directly from the i)reliminary reports of the 
Department of Commerce. 

CESAR M. LORENZO recently returned to 
Manila after completing a course in l)usincss 
statistics in the I nited States at the direc- 
tion of the Commonwealth Government. 

H. FOSTER BAIN, adviser to President Quezon 
on mining |)robl(Mns. is an authority on the 
mineral resource's of ihr Far East. 



PHILIPPINES 19 publielicd by tlio office of the Philippine Htsidcnt Commissioner to the United States. 
Kditorial anil circiilatii)n offuM'S at 2.'K>2 MaKsaelni«elts Av«iuie North w«'st, W ash iii<it on. I). (.. Distributed 
without eharfie. Kntered as third elass matter in the Wa.shinyton post offiee on Deeeniher 1, I lO. Pi rniit 



5045, Printed in U. S. A. Stuart Li 



e<litor. 



High Philippine and American 
Officials Discuss Mutual Relations 




J. M. ELIZALDE, Resident Commissioner of 
the Philippines to the United States, 
observing the 43rd anniversary of the 
occupation of Manila by the U. S, Army. 
Aug. 13, 1941 



PRESIDENT QUEZON of the Philippine 
Commonwealth addressing American radio 
listeners on August 19, 1941: 

Mr. Vicc'-Prrsidv'nl WalLuH- aiul peo- 
ple of the United States: 

I ^veleoine the opportunity to restate 
the stand of the Filipino people in 
this grave national eniergeney. We owe 
loyalty to America and we are hound 
to her hy honds of everlasting gratitude. 
Should the United States enter the 
war, the Philippines would follow her 
and fight hy her side. i)lacing at her 
disposal all our manpower and male- 
rial resources, for the cause for wdiich 
America would fight is our own cause. 

The United Stales seeks to defend 
the princii)les wdiich w^e cherish and 
without which we could not live as a 
free nation. She is striving to i)reserve 
liherly and democracy and individual 
freedom. These are things for which, 
we, loo. would strive and die. The 
United States is struggling to prevent 
the domination of the worhl hy dicta- 
tors and we, too. WM)uld strive and 
die against such masters. The United 
States wants to uphold the rule of 
right and justice in international re- 
lations and safeguard the independence 
of small nations, to free them from 
the fear of aggression and suhjugation 
hy militant i)owers. and we. too. wouhl 
strive and die to save our country 
from sucli threats and perils. So, if 
the United States (h'cidi^s to enter this 
war. it will he our war as much as 
the war of the United States and her 
decision will he our ow^n decision. In 
such event she will find all llie ])eople 
of my country, to the last man. on her 
side fighting under her hanner and 
praying to Almighty (hxI for the vic- 
tory of her arms. 

Mr. Vice-President. 1 wish to assure 
you and the penpl(> of America that we 
are with the United States in life and 
in death. 




In the Southwestern Pacific lie a 
group of small countries encircling the 
China Sea. Today that area is of tre- 
mendous importance to American pol- 
icy and to the future of the American 
people. Surrender of this area to con- 
trol hy imperialistic powders, hy ap- 
peasement or as the result of w^ar. 
would have a permanently crippling 
eflect upon the efforts of the United 
States and other democracies to pre- 
serve a free w^orld. Freedom of trade 
routes in every part of the world and 
the accessihility of essential raw ma- 
terials for American industry are 
among the immediate interests at 
stake. . . . 

The four decades wdiicli have fol- 
lowed I the American occupation in 
1898] have heen full of spiritual and 
material hlessings for the Philippines. 
We have made astounding progress in 
every field. The years of the United 
States tutelage in our country are rec- 
ognized hy all today as a hlessing to 
our people. 

Surely it w^as inevitahle that in the 
years intervening there should have 
heen some dissensions and difficulties 
hetween two progressive peoples. In 
the process of develoi)ment and adjust- 
ment there were many jilans, policies 
and ideals w^hich had to he reconciled. 
This collection of differences in the i)asl 
is now popularly referred to as the 
"Philippine prohlem." 

Actually, there have heen no con- 
troversies of importance. In the long 
run we have heen ahle to meet each 
other half-way. It is Uuv. of course, 
that in the i)ast 40 years have had 
to adjust a great many prohlems. Tlu^e 
was, for instance, the political matti^r 
of independence aspirations — the desire 
of the Filipinos to run their own local 

(7'///7/ to Page 22) 



VICE PRESIDENT WALLACE felicitating 
President Quezon on his 63rd birthday, 
August 19, 1941: 

It is with real pleasure. Mr. Presi- 
dent, that I join with the people of the 
Philippine Commonwealth in felicitat- 
ing you on your l)irtliday. The 63 years 
of your eventful life have heen marked 
hy the rise of the Filipinos as a na- 
tion from a condition of utter servi- 
tude, and that rise has been in great 
part due to your own efforts. 

Despite the growing national con- 
sciousness of the Filipinos and despite 
the passage in 1934 of the Philippine 
Independence Act, the Philippine Com- 
monwealth is still an integral part of 
the United States. It will continue as a 
unit of our country at least until July 
4. 1946, wdien the present law provides 
that an independent Philippine Repub- 
lic shall be inaugurated. Until that 
day, Filipinos ow^e the same allegiance 
to the Stars and Stripes that we do 
here. And. Mr. President, I am happy 
to note that they are proving their 
loyalty just as convincingly. The en- 
thusiastic response of the great mass 
of Filipinos to President Roosevelt's 
order Federalizing the Philippine Army 
has heen a source of i)rofound gratifi- 
cation to us in Washington. It is proof 
that the Philippine Commonwealth 
stands with us. shoulder to shoulder, 
in the world-wide defense of democracy. 

We here in Washington are well 
aware of th(> crisis facing Philippine 
economy as the result of your willing- 
ness to cooperate with us. Your crops 
cannot be marketed unless ships are 
available to carry them to market. 
The urgent necessity of winning the 
Battle of the Atlantic l)efore anything 
else means that your needs must in 
many cases take second place. But 
kee]) this in mind also. The moment 
{Turn lo Page 22) 



/^A^finDYOUR SUGAR BOUJL 

By George H. Fairchild ^fJoK 



President, Philippine Sugar Association 



XHE AMERICAN housewife may not know it, but she 
has a direct interest in Administration efforts to main- 
tain enough cargo ships on the Pacific to move a million 
tons of Philippine sugar every year. The reason for this 
is simple: that million tons (approximately 15 per cent 
of the United States" annual consumption ) is the differ- 
ence between ample sugar for all and a system of ra- 
tioning. The housewife must pay — not in cash, but in 
sugar — for every ship that is transferred from the Pa- 
cific Ocean to the Atlantic. 

Do not infer from this that I — or the Philippine Sugar 
Association which I represent — oppose American efforts 
to aid Great Britain. Quite the contrary. The Battle of the 
Atlantic must l)e won, even if it means further drastic 
curtailment of l^hilippine sugar exports and an actual 
shortage of sugar on the American market. What I do 
mamtain is that the national emergency must not be used 
as an excuse to cut our share of the American sugar mar- 
ket, a step that would ])ring economic chaos to a vital 
outj)()st of democratic defense and real hardship to every 
consumer in the I nited States. 

Lnder conditions lhat have come to be accepted as 
normal during the jjast decade, sugar production, distri- 
bution and consumption throughout the world have been 
placed under control through a delicately balanced In- 
ternational Sugar Agreement, to which the I nited States 
and the Philipj)in(\'=i subscribed in 1937. Thus, as an exam- 
|)le. the PhilippiiK^s Lmdertoc)k to sell its sugar only to 
the I n\W(\ Statcv*^. abaiirloiiinu its markets in (Ihina. Bus- 




Sacks of raw sugar are piling up in Philippine ware- 
houses for lack of transportation to the United States. 

sia and other parts of the Far East. In return, it was 
assured of a stable market for a million tons of raw 
sugar a year, although the Philippines has grown as 
much as 1,500,000 tons in its best years. This figure 
(850,000 long tons) was included in the Philippine In- 
dependence Act and the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 
1937. 

Every student of economics knows lhat. since the war, 
this delicately balanced distribution system has been 
entirely upset. Whole continents are now cut off from 



• 4 • 



their suiiircs of supply. Iinj)orlanl producing areas 
have heen devastated I ihe I kraine. for instance, gro^ss 
sugar heels for half of Russia). Shipping shortages make 
it inipossihle for olT-shore ])roducers to deliver their full 
quotas. To cap the confusion, consumption is rising 
steadil) . 

All this upheaval ini\uis increasingh more serious 
shortages in the Tnited States. Rationing is the inevitahle 
outcome, unless su|)plies can he assured and increased 
innnedialeh . 

The I nited States Go\ ermnent has heen active in trv- 
ing to meet these dangers. Its first stcj) was to increase 
hy 1. ()()().()()() tons the amount of sugar that could he 
marketed in this count r\ under the Agricultural Adjust- 
ment Act. More recenth. it estahlished a price "ceiling" 
of three and a half ciMits a pmmd for raw sugar reach- 
ing th(^ refiners. This has prevented for the time heing 
any further general rise in prices. Hut. even with the 
increased marketing quotas, the American housewife — the 
idtimate user of the sugar — soon ^\ill he unahle to hu\ 
the amount of sugar she wants. 

This is where the Philippines comes into the domestic 
sugar picture. The million tons a year from the Common- 
wealth, produced and controlled under the sovereignty 
of the United States, may l)e the difTerence between fam- 
ine and sufliciency. It is essential to the well-being of 
every American housewife, therefore, that the flow of 
sugar across the Pacific iu)l be impeded. 

It is no secret that we are now having difliculty get- 
ting the Philippine sugar crop delivered to United Slates 
refineries. The indications are that the vear will end 



wilh between 70.000 and 100.000 tons of our quota lying 
on the docks at Manila. Iloilo and Cebu. due to the 
alarming hick of ships available on the Pacific to carry 
crude sugar. Unless next year brings a drastic improve- 
ment, sugar receipts in the I'nited States from the Philip- 
pines will fall short of requirements b\ 750.000 tons. 

The only remedy Uw this dangerous situation is posi- 
tive action by the I nited States Maritime Connnission 
in assigning additional ships to the Philippine service. 
\ew cargo vessels are beginning to come off the ways: 
every one that can possibly be spared from the Atlantic 
should be turned over to a company operating in the 
trans-Pacific trade. Resolule steps are necessar\ if sugar 
rationing is to be avoided. 

I repeat: Do not interpret this as evidence that Philip- 
pine sugar producers insist that their interests be put 
ahead of those of the nation. Far from it. Members of 
mv association. Americans and Filipinos alike, are united 
in the conviction that the Administration's foreig:i policy 
must have absolute precedence over private desires. 
What we do object to is the tendency to use the war-time 
shortage of shipping as an excuse to bar Philippine sugar 
from the American market. If a sacrifice is necessary, it 
must be general — not limited to the Filipinos. 

We feel that any diversion of cargo vessels from the 
Pacific that is not absolutely essential to winning the war 
is an unjustifiable disruption of a mutually profitable 
trade involving millions of American and Filipino farm- 
ers and factory workers. Furthermore — and this touches 
every American — it is an action that will inevitably 
result in an acute shortage of sugar — with rationing the 
inevitable result. ^ 






Upper left: Philippine fields meet 
15 per cent of America's sugar 
needs. 

Upper right: Strict laboratory con- 
trol protects Philippine sugar. 



Two million Filipinos earn a living from 
the sugar industry. 



Center: Sugar is the most important 
cargo of ships and railways. 



Modern steam tractors speed the planting 
of the cane fields. 



• 5 • 



ill ilM^ l*liili|»piiuvs is ilu^ 
K«iu€*alioiiai SvsiiMii 




XT is a favorite sport among laymen and educators, 
American as well as Filipino, to discuss the progress of 
education in the Philippines. Even as critical a group as 
the Monroe Survey Board of 1925 had this to say about 
the Philippine educational system 15 years ago: 

"One of the most remarkable chapters in the history 
of education has been written since the opening of the 
twentieth century in the Philippine Islands. The stu- 
dent will scan the pages of history long before he will 
read of an adventure in human enlightenment more bold 
than that which has been undertaken in this oriental 
setting. Attribute it to the naive faith of America in her 
own institutions and ideals, or to the wisdom of far- 
seeing statesmanship, the result remains the same. For 
25 years these Islands have served as a laboratory for 
an educational experiment of enormous magnitude and 
complexity. To any one interested in the technical prob- 
lems of classroom instruction, in the general admin- 
istration of education, in the relation of the school to 
social conditions, in the effects flowing from the con- 
tacts of diverse culture, in the more abstruse problems 
of the ethnologist, or in the wider human problems of 
the adjustment of races this experiment will have deep 
significance." 

Everything else considered, education will remain as 
America's greatest contribution to Philippine civiliza- 
tion. As a matter of fact, her achievements in business, 
government, hygiene and sanitation, social relations, 
and even in the fields of religion, science and technology 
were made possible largely because of an effective edu- 
<ational system. This fact assumes still greater signifi- 
cance when one remembers the tremendous handicaps 
that the system had to face from the beginning. The lan- 
guage difficulty was only one of these. 

Filipinos have always had an enthusiastic belief in 
the eflicacy of education in promoting the welfare of 
the people. In the United States it is necessary to pass 



Chain Camilo Osias 

PluLippine i\ational Council of Education 

Phnim!^^ u^'''' ^'^^nipulsorv attendance laws. In the 
to nrr.T' ^•<>nipulsi(,n is upon the Government 

in ind "^'"'^ '''''''' educational facilities. Year 

the\son;r'u'"^^ Batanes in the North to Sulu in 

Goverl . r '"'^'^^ constant demands upon the 

Pinr\ T w """" ^^^^^"^^^ - J^-ol- The Philip, 

ache .I t Assembly has an invariable annual head- 
.fter ''^ Education c ertifies each June, 

School ^''''^ thousands of children of 

that 1 "^T accommodated. Without exception 

eiHi..7 ^^PI>roi)riate an additional amount, 

^tner irom Us reserve fund or by curtailing other activi: 

schoo? mo^eV'^ '^^^^^ ^^'^ ^'eniands of parents for more 

mpniri u^^"' ^^^r P^'^^^ isi^^"^- often have to be supple- 
o> contributions from the peonle. E\ ery year in 
every province, the people, vear.iing for the education 
01 tneir children and convinced that the resources of the 
Government have heen exhausted, give everything they 
nave, even to the posts that are needed to strengthen their 
nomes against the annual typhoon, in order, themselves, 
to bui d schoolhouses; and when the buildings are 
hnished, by voluntary labor, they hire a teacher with 
what little money they have or with its equivalent in 
nee, iuel, fish, and coconuts, or board and lodging, or 
a promissory note until the Government can send them 
a teacher or certify to the availability of funds. 

The children, in turn, are eager to go to school. They 
consider it unfair punishment to be kept out of school 
for any length of time. From the first grade up, they 
manage in a most remarkable manner to learn— in the 
borrowed English language— their three R's. to say 
nothing of finding out what took place at the Boston 
Tea Party and whether George Washington really cut 
down the cherry tree. If at limes they memorize ' their 
mathematics or geography or history lessons without 
understanding. forgi\e them. Remember how few of 



• 6 • 



their childhood rxpericMices have heen associated Avith 
the Eii<rlish hmgiiaize. 

But in spile of these and other handicaps, if we look 
at the achie\ enients of llie scht)ols in the past four short 
decades, vwn tlie most pessimistic of us has every reason 
to <ilorify America's ^ienius in estal)lishing an educa- 
tional system that in many ways sur|)asses some of the 
best in the I nited States, and to extol the Filipinos* cor- 
responding; aj)litude for ''readin*. *ritin'. and Arithme- 
tic." 

Let us enumerate a few of these achievements: 

1. Throuiih this school system, patterned after the 
American plan and usinii Eniilish as its medium of in- 
struction, a Mala\ people, who for more than three 
centuries li\ed imder Spanish rule, with schools avail- 
able for only the privileged few. has been introduced 
to Anglo-Saxon institutions and civilization. Through 
this system an elTort has been made to give a conunon 
language to more than 16 million people. One now can 
travel to the far corners of the archipelago and be under- 
stood in the English language. 

2. Through this system the teachers have sought to 
bring to the Orient the pri)ducts of science and tech- 
nology. In 40 years the dreaded cholera and smallpox 
have been nearly eradicated, and other diseases are now 
under control. Agriculture, transportation, and connnu- 
nication show a record of substantial progress. 

3. Through this system literacy has increased from 
5 per cent at the time of the American occupation to 70 
per cent at the present. The right to vote and to hold office 
is given to women, and the latest figures show that our 



election records are. in general, free from serious irregu- 
larities and that the percentage of those voting compares 
favorably with the best records in the American states 
and in national elections in the L nited States. 

4. Through this system the people have learned to 
exploit their resources — lands, mines, forests, and 
w^aters. There are no breadlines in the Islands. During 
the depression the national budget was balanced. W e 
have never failed to meet our financial obligations and 
our country has one of the lowest per capita debts today. 

5. Foremost of the achievements of the educational 
system is its success in preparing the people for demo- 
cratic self-government. Among the leaders in the Govern- 
ment service today are graduates of our educational 
institutions. The fight for Philippine independence and 
its successful consummation are partly a product of our 
study of American history. One reason why we today have 
a successful republican form of government is the fact 
that the schools, themselves, were the training ground 
for democratic citizenship. 

If we compare the conditions in the Philippines today 
to those in Europe. South America. Asia, and even \orth 
America, we find that there are few ways in which the 
Filipinos are inferior with respect to internal peace, 
material comforts, economic stability, or religion. The 
unity of our people under wise leadership can be attrib- 
uted in large part to wise guidance by America through 
a modern, effective system of education. We learned our 
lessons well because America has been a good (albeit 
exacting) teacher. ^ 




I.AWYER 

FOR THE PEOPLE 



By P. C. Morantte 




HEX in 1921 General Leonard Wood was Gov- 
ernor-General of the Philippines, he undertook to abolish 
the "Board of Control" which the previous Governor- 
General, F. B. Harrison, had established in the Insular 
Government. Wood claimed the Board had no standing 
in law and was usurping the powers of the Governor- 
General. He found formidable opposition in a youthful 
lawyer named Jose Yulo y Yulo, who fought the move all 
the way to the Supreme Court of the United States. Yulo 
lost the case, but his action brought him to the forefront 
of Philippine lawyers. A little later, Manuel L. Quezon, 
today President of the Commonwealth, admitted to 
friends: "Yulo is the equivalent of any three other legal 
minds in the Philippines." 

That legal brilliance has taken Jose Yulo a long way. 
Still comparatively young, the ex-Speaker of the National 
Assembly is president of the Nationalista Party and one 
of the men to whom Filipinos look for future leadership. 

Even as early as 1921. Yulo was already recognized 
as the foremost corporation lawyer in the Islands. As 
attorney for the Philippine sugar industry, he had one 
of the most impressive incomes in Manila. This lucrative 
private practice continued until 1934, when Governor- 
General Frank Murphy and Senate President Quezon 
prevailed upon Yulo to accept the post of Secretary of 
Justice. The step, his friends declare, meant accepting a 
salary about one-fourth of his previous income. 

As Secretary of Justice. Jose Yulo instituted a whole 
series of judicial reforms. The entire Department of 
Justice was reorganized. An improved standard of ju- 
dicial learning was achieved; the machinery was more 
efficient, and public respect for the courts was increased. 

As legal adviser to the President of the Philippines, 
Secretary of Justice Yulo was instrumental in obtain- 
ing a coconut oil excise tax refund of $50,000,000 for 
the Commonwealth from the United States Treasury. The 
legality of the refund had been seriously questioned by 
some American interests: Filipinos, on the other hand, 
believed that the excise collected on Philippine coconut 
oil under the Agricultural Adjustment Act legally be- 
longed to the Philippines. Yulo took charge of the case for 
the Commonwealth ; after a brilliant fight in the United 
States courts, he established the legality of the refund. 



From 10:il t«» 1938, con- 
( urrcMitl) \s ilh his poi-ition as 
Secrctar\ of Justice. Yulo 
was also chairman (»[ the 
bf)ard of directors of the 
Philippine National Bank. 
His tenure was marked by a 
genfMal improvement of the 
institution s condition. Bank- 
ing facilities were aug- 
mented. ])rovincial branches 
were established, and invest- 
ments put on a much more 
solid basis. The result of his 
w(jrk was a net profit of S l.TSO.OOO — the most im- 
])ressive ever realized b\ the Philii^pine National Hank. 

Not until 1938 did Jose Yulo enter politics. He was 
shy and lacking in political experience: even his most 
influential friends were a little bit dubious about his 
future. But his decision to resign his Justice portfolio 
and run for an elective office was wise. Seeking a seat in 
the National Assembly from the third district of Occi- 
dental Negros Province, Yulo was elected by the largest 
majority ever polled under the Commonwealth. 

When the Assembly convened. President Quezon 
backed Assemblyman Yulo for the Speaker's chair. The 
former Secretary of Justice was elected without serious 
opposition, and held the position until this Fall, when he 
resigned to run for the newly created Philippine Senate. 

One of the most easily visible results of Yulo's leader- 
ship in the Assembly can be seen in the Constitution. He 
was a leading exponent of an amendment to reduce the 
age qualification of Assemblymen to 25 and of Senators 
to 35. And as president of the dominant Nationalista 
Party, he managed the national plebiscite on amending 
the Constitution to permit revival of the two-house legis- 
lature and to permit the President of the Philippines to 
serve two four-year terms rather than one of six years. 

When the Filipino people showed in the plebiscite that 
they approved of these changes in their charter, Yulo 
came to the United States to explain the Assembly's stand 
to the President of the United States. Many of his coun- 
trymen give Yulo credit for the fact that these amend- 
ments were accepted by President Roosevelt. 

On his return to the Philippines early this year, 
Speaker Yulo was hailed by the people of Manila. Speak- 
ing to a great rally on the green Luneta. facinii Manila 
Bay, he told them: 

'These amendments are now part of our Constitution, 
and it is for us all to work them out as intelligently and 
speedily as we can. in order to convert them into a living 
portion of the fundamental law of the land. . . . My 
little task is done, but the much bigger task which is 
ours — yours and mine — has only begun. May we. each 
and all of us, be equal to the task which remains.*' ^ 



• 8 • 



r 



* UNION for DEMOCRACY* 

f <i r 1^ li i I i p |» i II o A iii o r i a ii 
Cii I i iiral IColai itiiis 

By waiter Brooks Foley 

**************** 

If \vc hiniglc. we're sunk! That is not high-grade Shake- 
spearian English. Inil even that great dramatist used 
slang that still soinids modern. W e Americans bungled 
20 years ago when the opportunity eame for world leader- 
shij). We missed the boat, the bus and a better order of 
civilization. For that i)it of bungling we are now paving 
the highest price in llesh and blood and finance. However 
we are being gi\en a c hance to sit in again on the game 
being i)layed around the world table. We need all our 
wit and wisdom. We can't afTord to make anv mistakes 
in judgment this time. 

One way to avoid playing the wrong kind of game is 
to check up on the actual cards we hold, particularly the 
strong cards. One is the fact of a great base of funda- 
mental democracy in the Philippines. This is not always 
readily observable in government forms and formulas, 
in tactics of political parties, or in measures of economic 
procedure. It is essential that we look back over the past 
hundred years and see the reiterated struggle of many 
individuals to find safety in freedom, and life satisfaction 
in release from grinding restrictions. 

The resistance to arbitrary controls was more clearly 
evidenced in the Philippines, and more consistently 
declared, than in any other Oriental country. When In- 
dia W'as acquiescing in domination by England, with 
scarcely more than a ripple of resentment, when the 
Netherlands Indies lay quiet, with scarcely a struggle 
against Holland, when China was sub-divided by pro- 
vincial war lords and the people crushed, when Japan 
w^as destroying individual rights in favor of government 
control, in the Philippines the fires of freedom flamed 
again and again. 

That flame has become the throbbing heart-beat of 
democracy in Asia. Not yet has the Philippine place in 
this advance been accurately estimated. In Manila, the 
Committee for Philippine American Cultural Relations, 
of which I am executive secretary, is assessing its value 
and presenting the refined gold of democratic enterprise. 
Like other social procedures, we know that democracy 
cannot be grown unless it finds itself in satisfactory soil 
and is assisted by an adequate climate. It is a common- 
place to say that d(jctrines like communism cannot be 
transplanted from original seed-beds and be expected to 
grow unless the new fields have been found suitable for 
the reception of the plants. That statement is based on the 
truism that people of ever\ locality produce the results 
that occur. What people desire, that they eventually 



secure. Democracy has developed in the Philippines be- 
cause the people resented the political, economic and 
cultural restrictions, and they revolted against tyranny. 
This made it possible to add to the soil and climate of 
Philippine life the seeds of democracy discovered by the 
United States in its adventurous social advance. 

The members of our Connnittee. both Americans and 
Filipinos, recognize that nations have now reached a 
new period in the world history. Without hesitation, and 
without surrender of national loyalties, we feel that our 
loyalty to freedom and democracy requires mingling our 
beliefs and efforts with those in other sections of the 
world, who believe and work as we do. in order to pro- 
ceed any further. It seems to us that democracy has gone 
as far as it can nationally. Its only hope for survival is 
on a world scale. We are not willing to be stalemated. 
We are insistent on expansion through union. 

The challenge is for **union now" rapidly and cer- 
tainly, without^ the traditional bungling. That requires 

oenius the genius of common humanity in its search 

for the grail of worthful living. The country that 
tries to save its own soul these days by staying within 
its own borders will surely lose. The nation that seems 
superficiallv to lose its national soul for the sake of the 
oospel of building a more decent world order will surely 
find it. It is not sufficient to defend our borders, we must 
extend them. We urge that this is the pot of gold at the 
foot of the international rainbow, where clouds seem to 
have blotted out the sun. Democracy is not charity: it is 
our only chance. That is why we must not bungle. That is 
why a group of us. living in the Philippines and seeing 
world life in perspective, believe fundamentally in the 
future advance of Philippine American cultural relations. 

It i^ our ambition to see that these relations are not 
concerned alone with the loyalty of ^orth Americans 
and Philippine Americans to a common democratic ideal. 
We can have, in other words, no hyphenated loyalty. We 
are after a dedication of ourselves to a world practice of 
democratic principles. We start only, where we are. using 
our individual tasks as the platform from which we pro- 
claim the doctrine of world freedom and democracy. 
We have no hyphen in the title of our Committee. There 
is no point of hesitation in our common beliel 

We cannot afford to bungle at this point. This is no 
time for "muddling through." We need to promote pre- 
cision in democratic precedure. W^e must exchange our 
yahies until thev flow together. We must destroy our dis- 
aoreements. We must base our program on our common 
democratic desire. Trade must be in the interest of as 
many people as possible. Politics must be of. by. and for 
as mam citizens as will cooperate. Education must set 
minds fi-ee in an atmosphere of willingness to cooperate 
Spiritual techniques nuist be used in collaboration, not 
division. 

Out ..f this .-piiit of adventure will come a greater 
Asia not built .... battleships. Out of this will co.ne a 
„ew u<.rld order nol fou.ided on futilities or antago- 
nism. Mutual mi..gli.)g i.-terests can be made to keep us 
fro.n muddling. tAt 



• 9 • 



PHILIPPIC lITEllAtl: 



By Cesar M. Lorenzo 

^^XE great asset in the social, economic and political 
progress of a country is her literate population. Indeed, 
President Manuel L. Quezon took cognizance of this fact 
when he said: "Our country must have a wholly liter- 
ate population, because only on the foundation of an 
intelligent public opinion can we build the structure 
of liberty and sound government.*' 

The National Assembly, aware of the necessity of 
eradicating illiteracy, several years ago created the Office 
of Adult Education. This agency started to function 
within two years of the inauguration of the Common- 
wealth Government. Almost simultaneously, the Bureau 
of Education expanded tremendously its work in primary 
education. In fact, the increase in public school enroll- 
ment during the first three years of the Commonwealth 
equaled that of any previous ten-year period. The com- 
bined efforts of the Bureau of Education today seem 
to promise the practical elimination of illiteracy in a few 
more decades. 

Let us now examine the state of Philippine literacy as 
reported by the Philippine Censuses of 1939, 1918, and 
1903. Census practice considers only persons 10 years 
old or over and able to read and write as literates. 

In 1903 about one-fifth of the total Christian popu- 
lation could read and write. The proportion of literate 
men was nearly double that of women. The census 
of 1918 also collected information on literacy, but the 
tabulated data are not comparable with the 1903 or 
1939 figures because of a different definition used. In 
the census of 1939, about one-half of the total popula- 
tion ( including non-Christians) could read and write. 

The percentage of literacy, therefore, had more than 
doubled in about 36 years. Among the women the 1939 
figure was more than four times greater than that for 
1903. The general increase in the percentage of literacy 
reflected the progress made by the Philippine public 
schools during the same period. The enormous increase 
in literate women was primarily a reflection of the fact 
that the same educational opportunities are now open 
to them as to men. 

Although the figures are not strictly comparable, the 
percentage of literacy in the Phil ippines in 1939 was 
very much higher than that for British India in 1931. 
Moreover, it compared favorably with Mexico, Portugal 
and Spain in 1930. Literacy in the Philippines was much 
inferior to that of Japan. Canada and the United States, 
however. 

The prevalence of literacy in the Philippines in 1939 

( Turn to Page 22) 



im - 1939 

imij 




INCREASE 
48.8 Vo 28.6% 

54.3 V. 24.6% 

4 3.2% 32.5 V. 



EACH COMPLETE SYMBOL = 10 V. LITERACY 



PERCENTAGE OF LITERACY IN THE PHILIPPINES 
IN THE DIFFERENT OCCUPATIONAL GR0UPSH939 


% 100 80 60 40 20 

1 1 ! 1 ! 


D 20 40 6p 70 V. 


I^^k CLERICAL 


MANUFACTURir^^^Tl^ 


^L^xV PROFESSIONAL 


FISHING ^5lii^ 
49.4 Vo '^"■"^k 


fi^ijfV PUBLIC SERVICE 
95.1% 


DOMESTIC 

48.2 Vo iiiHI 


-C TRANSPORTATION AND 
^^^^ COMMUNICATION 




V^^s^ MINING AND 
^^^^^ QUARRYING 
^ 75.1 % 


FORESTRY AND 

HUNTING (^WjI^ 


TRADE 









PERCENTAGE OF LITERACY OF THE 
PHILIPPINES AND OTHER COUNTRIES 



t A Jt A A A -O- A A 




1 



UNITED STATES- -95.7V. 

fwlwllllll 



CANADA 




JAPAN- 




PHILIPPINES 
. 48.8 V. 



mn 



PORTUGAL 32.2Vo 

BRITISH INDIA 
9.5 V. 



EACH COI^PLETE SYMBOL = 1 0 V. LITERACY 



10 



IS WHERE WE nm 

By H. Foster Bain 

Advisor. Philippine Bureau of Mines 

.^Vn active cainpaiiiii of exj)l()ralion for 
petroleum is under way in the Philii)i)ines. 
Whether or not connnercial oil fields will 
be found cannot, of course, be foretold. 
However, competent oil men from the 
United States feel that indications warrant 
drillin<; at a number of points. 

Although expectations of finding oil 
fields in the Philippines go back to Span- 
ish times, actual development has lagged, 
despite the well-known presence of gas 
escapes, oil seeps, bituminous residues, 
and good-looking geological structures. A 
few^ shallow^ holes have indeed been drilled; 
some have even produced oil. but in terms 
of gallons per day rather than barrels per 
hour. Until recently, only one serious at- 
tempt had been made with modern tools 
and skill to find production. That was in 
the early 20's w^hen the Standard Oil Co. 
of California drilled on Bondoc Peninsula 
in Southern Luzon. Five holes were 
started, and one w^as continued to a depth 
of slightly more than a mile. Drillers 
found gas and show^ings of oil, but nothing 
commercial. The venture was abandoned 
ported expenditure of some $1,500,000. 

Standard Oil officials stated that that sum was as 
much as they felt justified in spending on a single wild- 
cat venture. They were also careful to point out that 
while they felt the particular structure drilled had been 
adequately tested without favorable result, this did not 
necessarily condemn the Islands as a whole or, in fact, 
anything but the area drilled. 

After this, several other American companies went 
into the field. While some apparently were willing to 
spend considerable sums on the venture, no tangible 
results were obtained. 

Thorough-going investigation of Philippine oil pros- 
pects has consistently been hampered by the land laws. 
Holdings are strictly limited in size, and inter-locking 
ownership is prohibited. The difficulties w^ere compounded 
by an epidemic of unwholesome speculation, which re- 
sulted in a public scandal a few^ years ago. The sub- 
sequent cancellation of all oil prospecting permits 
brought an end to private enterprise in this field. 




Shortly after the outbreak 
of the war. the Philippine 
Government ordered the Na- 
tional Development Com- 
pany, in cooperation with 
the Bureau of ]\Iines. to 
make a comprehensive geo- 
logical survey of all pros- 
pective oil fields. 

The National Develop- 
ment Company is a govern- 
ment-o\\ned corporation or- 
ganized under special law. 
As a corporation, it is able 
in many ways to act more 
directly and quickly than 



Three scenes 
from the oil 
prospect! ng 
operations re- 
cently under- 
taken in the 
Philippines by 
the National 
Development 
Company. 
Two rigs are 
now wildcat- 
ting on the is- 
land of Cebu. 



after 



a re- 




even the best official bureau. It has the further ad\antage 
that it is exempt from limitations on land holdings. It 
does, however, pay taxes comparable to those faced by 
private companies, and it has ])een steadily administered 
from the point of view of supplementing rather than 
supplanting private initiative in development. In the 
matter of petroleum, it seemed to be the onl\ agency 
capable of moving ahead under the actual conditions. 

Work on the geological surve\ was accord ingh begun 
in the Spring of 1939. A seven-volume confidential re- 
port covering all but the southern islands was filed with 

( Turfi to Pajj^e 23 \ 



© I 11 ©• 



B 



By James K, Eyre^ Jr, 



M< 



.OST Americans realize that the Philippine Islands 
occupy a strategic position in the Far East. Yet it is 
probably true that little is known about their exact geo- 
graphical boundaries. The process of fixing those boun- 
daries involved many interesting historical forces. A 
comparatively narrow strip of water, for instance, sepa- 
rates the Japanese possession of Formosa from the north- 
ern end of the Philippines. Definition of the exact line 
between Japan and the Philippines, which took place 
during the waning years of Spanish sovereignty in the 
Islands, is still of considerable importance. 

In 1894-1895, Japan decisively defeated Imperial 
China upon the battlefield. In the peace settlement which 
followed the victors were ceded the island of Formosa, 
contiguous to the northern part of the Philippine Archi- 
pelago. Japan's growing strength was in direct contrast 
to the decadence of Spain's colonial administration. Not 
unnaturally, Madrid feared that Japan's southward ex- 
pansion might create serious difficulty. Rumors were cur- 
rent that the Japanese coveted the Philippines. Although 
these reports w^ere of little validity, the seriousness with 
W'hich they were treated indicated the Spanish feeling 
of insecurity. 

Spain sought to secure an understanding with Japan 
which would clarify future relations between the two 
countries. Accordingly, on August 7, 1895, a treaty w^as 
signed at Tokyo by the accredited representatives of the 
Spanish and Japanese Governments. There was much 
rejoicing at Madrid, since it was believed that Spain's 
hold on the Philippines had been made more secure. 
Buried among the events of the past, this little treaty 
has received scant attention from American observers. 
Its text, printed in both French and Spanish, may be 
found in the official set of treaties published by the Span- 
ish monarchy shortly after the beginning of the present 
century. The agreement was brief and to the point. 

Don Jose de la Rica y Calvo, the Spanish Minister at 
Tokyo, acted in behalf of his Government. Japan was 
represented by Marquis Saionji, Minister of Public In- 
struction, who later became one of his country's most 
honored statesmen. In the opening statement, it was 
asserted that Japan and Spain, in the spirit of friend- 
ship v/hich existed between them, wished to determine the 
line of demarcation between their respective possessions 
in the western Pacific. It was agreed by the two con- 
tracting parties that the degree of latitude whidi passes 



through the Bachi [or Bashi] Channel represented the 
boundary line between Japanese and Spanish territory. 
The channel referred to lies between Formosa and the 
Batanes Islands off the northern coast of Luzon. Ja|)an 
also announced that it did not have any claims upon the 
islands to the south and southeast of this line. Spain 
made a similar assertion concerning the islands to the 
north and northeast. 

Following Spain's defeat l)y the L nited States in 1898, 
a peace conference was held at Paris. It was decided that 
the Phili])pines in its entirety should l)e ceded to the 
United States. Therefore it became necessary to define 
clearly the territorial limits of the Islands. In the nego- 
tiations which followed, the agreement which had been 
signed in 1895 by Japan and Spain was utilized by the 
peace commissioners. Article III of the Treaty of Paris 
outlined the northern boundary of the Philippines as 
follows: "A line running from west to east along or near 
the twentieth parallel of north latitude, and through the 
middle of the navigable channel of Badii. from the one 
hundred and eighteenth (11 8th ) to the one hundred and 
twenty seventh (127th) degree meridian of longitude 
east of Greenwich. . . ." 

In 1900 the question was raised whether the Batanes 
and Calayan Islands were Philippine territory. Ameri- 
can troops occupied them, and the Spanish Ministry for 
Foreign Affairs took cognizance of this action. It w'as 
acknowledged that, according to the terms of both the 
Treaty of Paris and the earlier agreement betw^een Spain 
and Japan, these islands properly belonged to the Philip- 
pine Archipelago and that they legally had passed into the 
possession of the United States. ^ 



Hong Konq^ 




fFORMOSA 
% (JAPAN) 




FRENCH 
INDO^.':.. 



J? 



HALF MOON 
SHOAL 

>-< SWALLOW J. . \t)J^^: . 

BRITISH; .i'^f?! 




® 14 • 



The iVi^w llir^^i^lor €>f <lie 
llivisiiiii 4if Torriliirios 
and Islaiiisl INisMCVssiiins 
I iiflt^rsiaiiils llolli lNiliii4\s 
and Dipl<»uiai4*y 



VF U\ J. SWOPE set many tongues to waggiiiii in W ash- 
ington last sunnner when he voluntarily resigned his 
S15,000-plus job as Governor of Puerto Rico to accept 
an So,000 position as Director of the Division of Terri- 
tories and Island Possessions in the Interior Department. 

In politics such an action is virtually without prece- 
dent, unless the subject is under extreme duress, and. as 
far as can be determined, no duresses were involved in 
Governor Swope's decision. In fact, both Secretary of the 
Interior Harold L. Ickes and the vast majority of the 
Puerto Rican people considered him highly satisfactory 
as Governor. Such an accord regarding a Governor of 
Puerto Rico is so unusual as to be historical; in the 
past Secretary Ickes, as the Cabinet officer in charge 
of Federal administration in Puerto Rico, has often 
formed one apex of a restless and unhappy triangle, 
with the Governor and the people of Puerto Rico at the 
other points. 

But Swope chose to resign the governorship. While 
his action mystified many, and gave rise to any number 
of extravagant explanations, the reasons which Swope 
himself acknowledged were both logical and simple. He 
felt the portfolio of the Director of Territories w^as one 
which he could competently handle; at the same time 
the shift would bring him closer to his political origins 
in Pennsylvania. He believed in the simple philosophy 
of giving up sweets while the taste is still pleasant. 

Director Swope surprised cynical observers by taking 
an immediate interest in his new job. He tackled Phil- 
ippine affairs as if they had always been his primary 
concern in life. He showed similar enterprise in study- 
ing Alaska, Hawaii and the Virgin Islands. Territorial 
officials were agreeably surprised at Swope's genuine in- 
terest in their problems. Realists, they had expected him 
to use the Territories post as a "breather" while await- 
ing political developments in Pennsylvania. They were 
mistaken. 

Undeniably, Swope's talents lean toward politics, but 
he is also a much-better-than-average administrator. Ob- 
servers believe his tenure in the Territories post will be 




By Julius C. Edelstein 



about as long as he chooses. His shrewd amiabilit\ should 
make it possible for him to get along with his superiors, 
with his subordinates, and with the public whom he must 
serve. Swope owes this talent to his political training. 
Or it may be that he owes his success in politics to this 
talent. 

To Guy Swope. politics is a method of getting things 
done in a way that will disgruntle the least possible 
number of those to and for whom they are being done. 
In Puerto Rico, for instance, politics is about as in- 
volved as anywhere on earth; Swope sat on the political 
lid there, dispensed patronage, and saw through a revo- 
lutionary program of social and economic legislation — 
all without making any considerable number of per- 
sonal enemies. 

On an island where Governors from \^'ashington oc- 
casionally arouse an all-too-active native opposition. 
Swope was conspicuously not shot at. There were other 
factors, of course, but during Swope's brief term Puerto 
Rico enjoyed its first political armistice in years. 

Following his appointment, Swope delighted Puerto 
Ricans by delivering part of his inaugural address 
in carefully rehearsed Spanish. Laboriously he has ac- 
quired since then a fair speaking knowledge of Spanish: 
he reads it readily, too. Today, he has a working ac- 
quaintance with Latin-American psychology and polit- 
ical techniques, which should be of real value in his 
new job. 

Personally, Swope is of a type usually described as 
"having a pleasing personality." He is above medium 
height and well-built, with a good head of light curly 
hair. He wears rimless glasses, and is inclined to thrust 
out his jaw to show purpose and determination. Swope. 
whose voice has a pleasing rasp, has a tendency to roll 
his rrr's like a Fourth of July orator. 

A Pennsylvania Dutchman, as he will tell you upon 
slight provocation, Guy Swope is the kind of self-made 
man who doesn't burst with it. He was born in a legiti- 
mate log cabin in Meckville. Berks County. Pemisyl- 

( Turn to Page 21 ) 



• 15 ® 



lo. 1 MARKET A 



MERICAX WHEAT 



FARMERS A]\D MILLERS LOOK AT 



THE PHILIPPIi\ES 



By Herman Fakler 

Vice-President, .Millers' 
National Federation 



A sling full of Ameri- 
can flour is loaded for 
the Philippines. 



-T EW Americans — even 
those living in the great 
wheat belts of the Middle 
West and the Pacific North- 
west — realize the import- 
ance of the Philippine mar- 
ket to the producers of 
American flour. Neverthe- 
less, it is a fact that one sack 
out of every five exported by 
the United States is con- 
sumed in the Philippine 
Commonwealth. Filipino 
purchases during the past 
decade have averaged §2,203,476 a year. 

In other words, between 1931 and 1940, American 
^vheat farmers, millers and shippers alone received more 
Irom sales of flour to the Philippines than the United 
states Government paid to Spain following the cession 
ot the Islands to this country after the Spanish-American 
War. 

This fact is important today, because the Philippines 
one of the few rich overseas markets remaining to 
American farmers and processors. Furthermore, it^'has 
been m increasing jeopardy during the past two years 
in the wake of the stringent shortage of cargo ships in 
the Pacific. Unless this situation is corrected, we may 
h)se the bulk of our most important export market. 

Some features of our flour shipments to the Philip- 
pines are interesting. For instance, American flour enjoys 





Herman Fakler 

the protection of the Insular 
tariff wall, through which 
Lnited Stales products pass 
without payment. At present, 
this ad\ antage amounts to 
12 cents a barrel. For another 
thing, our trade is on a strict- 
ly cash basis; commerce has 
never been dependent on 
loans from American banks 
or government agencies. 
Neither has this business 
been complicated by the fi- 
nancial restrictions, frozen 
credits, quotas or barter arrangements that prevail in 
many other markets. American wheat farmers and mil- 
lers have always found their business with the Philippines 
a source of mutual satisfaction. 

Our flour exports to the Islands originate in the great 
wheat fields of Oregon, Washington and Idaho, where 
annually more than 110.000,000 bushels are harvested. 
Since these States utilize only 27.000,000 bushels locally 
for seed, feed or human consumption, approximately 
83,000,000 bushels must be disposed of in outside mar- 
kets. Remember that from 85 to 95 per cent of the farm 
land in the Pacific Northwest wheat belt is devoted to 
this one crop (53,000 individual farms are involved), 
and you will understand the importance of the export 
market to these States. 

During the past decade, the Philippines, which has 



• 16 • 



a steadily rising standard of living and a rapidly increas- 
ing population, has imported an average of 925.000 bar- 
rels of flour a year. Approximately 60 per cent of this 
has come from the United States. Australia has supplied 
about 25 per cent and Canada some 13 per cent. 

Australian Hour, ground from the same type of soft 
wheat that the American j)roduct is. is the principal 
competitor of United States Hour. Canadian flour, ground 
from hard Avheat, is less popular. It is interesting to note 
that, during the decade ending December 30, 1940, 
American flour unloaded at Manila had an average 
value of $4.08 per barrel, against SI. 10 for Canadian 
flour and S3. 26 for Australian. 

American millers had no difllcully holding the bulk 
of the Philippine market against Canada and Australia 
until 1935. The Philippine tariff of 42 cents per 196- 
pound barrel, which did not apply to our products as 
it did to the others, gave us an important advantage. 
Our exports began to decline in 1935, however, in con- 
sequence of lower prices and stiller competition from 
Australia. Adoption by the Federal government of a 
system of export subsidies reversed the trend in 1936. 
That subsidy today amounts to 60 cents per barrel. 
American flour, therefore, enjoys a Si. 02 advantage (42 
cents Philippine tariff and 60 cents export subsidy). 

The Philippine market for flour — as for many other 
American products — has increased steadily in import- 
ance. In 1900, the Islands imported 90,000 barrels. Ten 
years later the figure was 285,000 and this was nearly 
doubled (500,000 barrels) bv 1920. Imports approxi- 
mated 800,000 barrels in 1930. During both 1939 and 
1940, Philippine purchases of foreign flour materially 
exceeded 1,000,000 barrels. 

One effect of the wars in 
Europe and Asia has been 
a substantial increase in the 
Commonwealth demand for 
American and Canadian 
flour. Imports from the 
United States rose 200.000 
barrels in 1940, and those 
from Canada were up ap- 
proximately 20,000. Largely 




because of the serious shortage of shipping space fol- 
lowing wholesale withdrawal of British top.nage from 
the Pacific. Australia's share of the Philippine flour 
market dropped nearly 150.000 barrels in 1940. 

Figures gathered by the Insular Collector of Customs 
show that this tendency was reversed in the first four 
months of 1941. Canada. Australia and the United 
States all show substantial increases. Total imports 
rose from 357,000 barrels in the first four months of 
1940 to 399.000 in the same period of this year. 

Since September. 1939. flour prices have doubled in 
the Philippines. Quotations in August. 1939 fluctuated 
from S2.95 to S3. 15 a barrel for American flour. The 
current price level is between S6.29 and S6.95. In recent 
months. Australian quotations have been slightly under 
those of American flour, while the Canadian product has 
equalled or slightly exceeded our quotations. 

These remarkable increases have been largely due to 
a disproportionate rise in shipping costs. Freight rates 
have risen from an average S5.50 a ton in early 1939 
to S22.50 or more today. Not onlv do these higher retail 
prices in Manila mean a decline in consumption: they 
presage the day when there will not be enough shipping 
space available to supply the Philippine market. The 
result will be either a falling off of Filipino flour con- 
sumption or a loss of the market to other producers 
better able to deliver their goods. 

Recently the Maritime Commission has indicated that 
enough ships will be left on the Pacific to care for all 
legitimate Philippine needs. Obviously, this will relax 
some of the pressure on American flour men. It is im- 
portant, however, to keep this vital trade between the 

Pacific Northwest and the 
Philippine Commonwealth 
flourishing. Not only is flour 
an essential part of the 
Islands' food supply, but the 
maintenance of our No. 1 
overseas market is an ex- 
tremely serious matter for 
the many thousands of 
Americans engaged in rais- 
ins wheat and milling it. ^ 



A shipping shortage 
threatens to stifle the 
United States' profit- 
able flour trade with 
the Commonwealth. 



• 17 • 



Philippine-American Trade 1039-1940-1041 



By Tranquilino B. Aquino 



^\^AR and the national defense program have 
caused a persistent decline in United States ex- 
ports to the Philippines since 1939. The value fell 
from 899,800,000 in 1939 to 893,200,000 in 1940 
— a decrease of 7 per cent. The downward ten- 
dency continued in 1941; exports for the first 
quarter amounted to 823,700,000 as compared 
with 826,500,000 in January-March, 1940. This 
was a loss of 11 per cent. 

The figures on which the accompanying charts 
are based are the last likely to he available until 
the termination of the emergency. The Depart- 



ment of Commerce has ceased publication of trade 
data. 

Actual causes of the decline are clear. The trans- 
fer of shipping to the Atlantic has left the Pacific 
without adequate tonnage for its normal trade. 
Furthermore, the 1939 trade was above normal 
due to efforts of Filipino importers to lay in stocks 
in anticipation of such a stringency. While signi- 
ficant of world conditions, therefore, the drop in 
American exports to the Philippines does not mean 
permanent loss of the market. Buying will un- 
doubtedly revive with the return to normal. ^ 



U.S. EXPORTS OF DOMESTIC PRODUCTS TO THE PHILIPPINES, 
BY IMPORTANT COMMODITIES 



THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS 
9 8 7 6 5 4 




LEADING IRON AND 
STEEL-MILL PRODUCTS 

BARS AND RODS 

GALVANIZED STEEL SHEET 

TIN PLATE AND TAGGERS' 
TIN 

TUBULAR PRODUCTS AND 
FITTINGS 



AUTOMOBILES. PARTS 
AND ACCESSORIES 

AUTOMOBILE TIRES AND 
INNER TUBES 

GASOLINE 
ILLUMINATING OIL 
GAS OIL AND FUEL OIL 

RADIO APPARATUS 

MEDICALS AND 
PHARMACEUTICALS 

CIGARETTES 

COTTON CLOTH, FINISHED 
AND YARN-DYED 

RAYON PIECE GOODS OTHER 
THAN PILE 

MEAT PRODUCTS 
DAIRY PRODUCTS 
WHEAT FLOUR 



1940 



y/^ ALL OTHER COMMODITIES 




FIRST QUARTER 

1940 1941 PERCENT 

2 10 12 CHANGE 




5[,e^ -04.4 P ^l 3 J^^. 0^ Billliill -09-3 



99J58 



TOTAL 



93,176 -6.6 26,537 23,668 -10.8 



source: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE. THE FIGURES FOR 1940 AND THE FIRST QUARTER OF 1941 WERE TAKEN DIRECTLY FROM WORK 
SHEETS OF THE DEPARTMENT AND HAVE NOT BEEN PUBLISHED AS YET THEY ARE SUBJECT TO REVISION. 



18 




• 19 • 



IIIZOS 



Where History and Pro|;^re$<N Meet 



By Ernesto D. I lustre 



X HE largest of the more than 7,000 islands which com- 
pose the Philippine archipelago is Luzon Island or Lu- 
zong, which means "mortar*' in Tagalog, one of the native 
Filipino dialects. With a land area of 40,814 square miles. 
Luzon is only a little smaller than the ^vhole State of 
West Virginia, and, besides, a tropical treasure house 

The first to become aware of this fact were the Chinese 
who arrived at various Luzon ports in their colorful 
junks and who traded with the islanders nearly 10 cen- 
turies ago. Later, Arabs arrived from Malaya and the 
Xear East, bringing with them in their praus not only the 
wealth of the Indies to exchange for Philippine products 
and gold, but also their Mohammedan faith, which they 
assiduously propagated among the Filipinos. All this 
took place many years before the Spanish conquest of 
the Islands began in 1.521. 

After Spain had occupied the Islands and its conquis- 
tadores had made Manila their headquarters, the Span- 
iards thoroughly exploited the resources of the country. 
Annually, galleon after galleon laden with the products 
of the Islands, mostly those found or grown in Luzon, 
crossed the Pacific en route home. In spite of this system- 
atic exploitation, however, Luzon's resources remain 
barely touched; its soil is still unbelievably fertile and 
Its mineral deposits are almost untapped. 

Except for the Cordillera mountain chain, which runs 
down the whole Pacific Ocean side of the island and 
which cuts it in half just north of Cabanatuan. Luzon 
IS a lowland traversed by rivers that regularly inundate 
their banks. Its perpetually fertile alluvial and coastal 
plains are naturally ideal for the cultivation of rice, to- 
bacco, abaca (hemp), sugar, coconuts, timber, and many 
other tropical products. The sub-soil, too, is rich in gold, 
chromite. manganese, asbestos, and many other essential 
minerals. 

Manila, the largest city in the Philippines and the 
capital of the country, is located on the estuary of the 
Jasig Ruer, which flows into Manila Bay. the scene 
"l^POP r ,^f'^'^y"s ^'i^tory over the Spanish fleet in 
^rfyS. Founded in 1.571 by Miguel Lopez de Legaspi. 
ivtanila ,s now a modern city with a land-locked harbor 
capable of sheltering the whole world's fleets at once. 

I he capital is defended by the most modern fortifica- 
tion ,n the Philippines. Cavite, across the bay from 
manila, is the site of a rapidly growing United States 
naval air base and is the headquarters of the United 
^ales Asiatic fleet. Olongapo. in Subic Bay, due west of 
vianila, is a United States naval base with dockyard facili- 
iies tor small naval craft. Corregidor, the rocky island 

• 20 » 



guarding the mouth of Manila Bay. is one of the most 
heavily fortified spots in the Far East. Like Singapore, 
it is capable of withstanding sustained naval and air 
attacks and a l<)nfr sieee. 

Baguio, cool and colorful summer capital of the Phil- 
ippines, is perched on the Henguet |)hilcau approximately 
5,000 feet above sea level. With a temperature that seldom 
goes above 85 degrees Fahrenheit. Haguio has gardens 
lush with such temperate zone vegetation as asparagus and 
strawberries. Nearby forests include dense stands of 
pine— within a few degrees of the equator. 

Laoag, capital of I locos Norte Province, is the cultural 
as well as the textile center of Northern Luzon. Within 
a hundred mile radius are grown tobacco that is noted 
for its aromatic quality, and long-staple cotton to feed 
Laoag's vast and growing hand loom industry. 

Aparri and Ilagan, provincial towns in Northern Lu- 
zon, are located in the fertile Cagayan and Isabela val- 
leys. The two are the centers and chief markets of the 
principal tobacco producing areas of the Philippines. 
Cagayan and Isabela tobaccos are famous throughout the 
world and are the basis of the finest Manila cigars. 

Around Lucena and the other towns of Tayabas and 
Laguna Provinces are miles and miles of coconut trees. 
From the coconuts, farmers extract an oil that is invalu- 
able in making soap, explosives, plastics and stainless 
steel. Thousands of tons of copra cake and coconut oil 
are exported annually from this region to the L^nited 
States. 

Daet and Naga are the twin centers of the abaca or 
hemp industry in southern Luzon. Abaca, distantly re- 
lated to the banana plant, grows only in the Philippines 
and is universally known under its trade name, ''Manila 
hemp," derived from the port from which it w^as origi- 
nally shipped. No other natural fiber can compare with 
it in tensile strength nor can any know^n fiber readily 
take its place for naval use. Classed by the United States 
as one of its strategic materials, abaca or hemp is indis- 
pensable to the merchant marines and navies of the 
world. ^ 



The map of Luzon on page 19 is the first of three 
drawn specially for Philippines by Frank Manning. 
When completed, the series will be available as a 
sino^le sheet. 



Philippine Veterans 
Are Proud of Record 

jAlMONC war veterans' oriranizations. the National So- 
cicly-Arniy of the Phili|)i)ines is j)rohaMy unique. There 
are other groups of men who fouiiht in the Spanish- 
Anieriean War. and there is an ''Order" of ofiieers who 
served in the Philippines, but the National Society-Army 
of the Phili|)pines is the sole body whose membership 
rules are framed to include only the men wlio planted 
tlie Stars and Stripes on the far shore of the Pacific 
Ocean in 1898. 

Organized in Denver on August 13. 1900 by Brigadier- 
General Irving Hale, the National Society-Army of the 
Philippines today is active in securing protection for all 
veterans of the Phili|)|)ine campaign. Specifically, it is 
now backing H. 1\. 5236. a bill to extend govermnent 
relief to men who served in the Islands subsequent to 
Julv 16. 1903. the oflicial termination of the Philippine 
Insu rrcction. 

''We maintain that we carried the American flag a 
oreater distance from our homeland than anv other army 
in the history of the world has ever done.'* declares 
Charles V. Stevens, secretary of the Jolo Outpost in Min- 
neapolis. '*We also believe that our organization fur- 
nished more of the ranking oflicers of the Army and 
Navy in the World War than did any other veterans' 
grou[). 

"The National-Society-Army of the Philippines is 
not an offshoot of any other organization. We are the 
oldest veterans' group organized in the Spanish- Ameri- 
can War period and are now recognized as a major body 
by the United States Government. The Society repre- 
sents a definite group of men. and a definite idealism 
born during that period of unusual, perilous service. 
By our sacrifice, the United States was raised from a 
fifth-rate power to a position today second to no other 
nation." 

Colonel Alexander Greig, of St. Petersburg. Florida, 
is national conunander of the Society. National head- 
quarters is maintained in Boston, where Major Joseph 
S. Wood, the national secretary-treasurer, has his office.^ 

R ECENT' books dealing with the Philii)j)ines have 
included : 

Waj' and Diplomacy in Eastern Asia. By Claude A. 
Buss. New York: The Macmillan C(Mnpany. 

Cross Winds oj Empire. By Woodbern E. Remington. 
New York: John Day. 

The Armed Forces oj the Pacific. By Capt. W. D. Pul- 
eston. Hartford: Yale University Press. 

The Fi^ht for the Pacific. By Mark J. Gayn. New York: 
Morrow. 

Pian^i;. the Moro Chieftain. By F. P, Stuart. New York: 
A book about Philii)pinc jungles for juveniles. 



Guy Swope (from Page 15) 

vania. the son of hard-working German-speaking folk. 
Although his forebears came here 200 years ago. Eng- 
lish was a foreign tongue to young Swope when he en- 
tered the little country school of his neighborhood. 
He learned the language and whatever else was taught, 
eventually becoming a school teacher at the princely 
salary of S280 per year. Subsequently a government 
revenue agent, he finally turned to commerce, became 
a public accountant, and was the controller of a large 
department store and vice-president of a bank when he 
found himself in politics. 

Swope worked for Roosevelt in 1932. and for Gov- 
ernor Earle for governor of Pennsylvania in 1934. Earle. 
elected, named Swope director of the budget, with a seat 
in the state cabinet. In 1936. Swope ran for Congress 
in a district which had not gone Democratic since the 
Civil War. He won. In 1938. when the district returned 
to its normal Republican complexion. Swope received 
his biggest break. Upon the recommendation of Senator 
Joseph GufTey, President Roosevelt appointed Swope 
Auditor of Puerto Rico. 

When Admiral William D. Leahy, the Governor, left 
San Juan last winter to become Ambassador to France. 
Swope was named his successor. More than anything 
else, Swope wanted to be liked by the Puerto Ricans. 
He, himself, like them socially: he did not look upon 
them as ^'natives." He walked down into the public 
square, stood on the street corner, and read a news- 
paper while a ragged muchacho polished his shoes. That 
made the Puerto Ricans feel they really had a neighbor in 
the Governor's mansion. 

In Washington, Swope is still a ''neighbor" to all of 
Uncle Sam's off-shore dependencies. That's why the 
Philippines is lucky in the selection of its new ''boss.'* ^ 



Philippine Resident Commissioner 

Washington, D. C. 

Sir: 

I was introduced to your magazine. PhilippiiNES. in 
July through "The Military Engineer." When I received 
my first copy, I read it all in one day. I must say I 
learned more about the Philippine Islands from your 
publication than 1 ever learned in st'hool. 1 was so 
thrilled with it. that I loaned the copy to a friend. He 
loaned it to a friend, who loaned it to someone else, and 
so on. until it passed through the hands of 34 people in 
about five weeks. It Avas returned in a very dilapidated 
condition. 

I should like to add my thanks to those of my friends 
that my one July issue reached for introducing us to 
your fine publication. It has made us more l^hilippincs 
conscious, and proved to us that the Philippines is ca|)- 
able of self-governmcnl. 

Gordon P. Fishkr 
Baltimore, Maryland 



• 21 • 



Vice-President Wallace 



(from Page 3) Philippine Literacy 



(from Page 10) 



we have ships to spare, the Philippines will receive fu!I 
consideration. . . . 

Because we know you so well, President Quezon, and 
admire you for what you have done for your |)eople. 
we Americans have confidence in you as the leader of a 
nation that is standing with us in defense of the demo- 
cratic way of life. . . . 

To the great task of assuring a belter world (>[ the 
future, the Filipino people, under your able leadership, 
have dedicated themselves with their whole spirit, th(^ir 
full manpower and all their resources. Under the di- 
rection of that brilliant American soldier, General J3oug- 
las MacArthur, you have undertaken the training of a 
fine citizens' army. Those forces today are a loyal, valu- 
able and welcome addition to our own military strength 
in the Far East. ... 

(Vice-President Wallace then spoke in Spanish. The 
following is an unofficial translation:) 

Bonds of history, culture and idiom make the Phil- 
ippines a spiritual sister to the Latin American Repub- 
lics. And on this occasion it gives me pleasure to state 
that in these critical moments, the Philijjpines, as well 
as the American Spanish-speaking countries, together 
with the Lnited States, are giving the world an in- 
spiring example of unbreakable solidarity in their united 
struggle to preserve liberty and democracy. Together we 
fight for the same ideals, the same aspirations. Together 
we fight for a better world, and it is our hope that\hen 
the world is normal once more, the existence of small 
countries will have been secured. ^ 

/. M. Elizalde Speech (from Page 3) 

affairs. The regulation of our trade with the United 
States was another. . . . 

Today, all of us are involved in a titanic world strug- 
gle to uphold freedom, liberty and tolerance. This is a 
struggle in which none can stand aside. The whole 
world is in its grip, divided into two hostile camps. In 
this division we in the Philippines have unstintingly 
pledged our whole support and loyalty to the democratic 
cause proclaimed by the United States. 

I have the most solid conviction that unless demo- 
cratic' ideals survive in this world struggle, and unless 
individual freedom is finally triumphant, there will be 
no possible life for small countries, nor place for them 
in the world of the future. 

Our own interests involved in the victory of democracy 
are twofold: 

First, to uphold the ideals which we share with Amer- 
ica, and 

Second, to help make possible a world in which our 
aspirations may be realized. 

To this great task, the Filipino jjeople. imdcu' the 
leadership of President Manuel Qufv.on. have dedicated 
themselves with their whole spiril. their full manj)ow(M- 
and all their resources. . . . ^ 



\aried widfdy b\ j)ro\ inccs. ranging from 1{).5 per cent 
in Sulu to 72. o per cent in Uamarincs Norlc. in liie cilv 
of Manila, the litcracs rale was JiO.T per ccnl. In poorh 
organized f-onnnunilics and in rural areas, the lilerac\ 
was low. Transportation- connnunicalions and adecjuale 
(educational facilities were the chief causes of the large 
flifferences between geograjWiie areas. I'^or exam|)l(\ in 
the scattered Visayan Islands and in the Mountain Prov- 
ince the p(?rcentage of literacy was much lower than il 
was in the Tagalog regions in Luzon. 

Among various occu|)ational grou|)s. literacy rales 
revealed some interesting features. Fort^slry and hunting 
had the ])oor(?st record. \\[\.'.\ \)vv cent. In llu^ agricultural 
pursuits, the literac\ rate was about I I \)cv vv\\{. Hiis 
occupational grouj) consisted largely of small farmers, 
farm managers, and farm laborers. 

On January 3, 1939. all persons who actually 
working at their occupations w(M*e consichMed as em- 
j)loyed. On this basis, investigators found 50.2 per cent 
of literacy among the employc^l and only 16 j^er cent 
among the unemployed. This fact woidcl s(hmh to indicate 
that a literate person has a better c-hance to get a job 
than an illiterate one. In fact, an illiterate has prac- 
tically no chance of getting a government job. as in 
many cases the ability to read and write is required. 

The census of 1939 also reporlc^d the number of lit- 
erate jjersons of voting age (21 years old or over). Ex- 
actly 41 per cent were found literate. Since this was 4 
per cent less than the figure for persons 10 years old or 
over, obviously the literacy rate for persons between 
the ages of 10 arid 20 was considerably above 50 per cent. 

The literacy of men of voting age was 51.7 per cent, 
against 36.3 per cent for the women in 1939. Li J91o. 
only 40.4 per cent of such men were literate, and 24.1 
]}er cent of the women. 

A better picture of the growth of literacy in the 
Philippines may be shown by the figures on men of 
voting age. In 1903, the percentage was 3L4. We have 
already seen that the return in 191o was 40.4 per cent, 
and in 1939 it was 51.7 per cent. In all categories, men 
showed a better literacy record than women. 

A study revealed that literacy had a close association 
with school attendance, family income, and news|)aper 
reading. Provinces boasting of a high percentage of 
school attendance, invarial)ly had a high percentage of 
literacy. A high degree of correlation between literacy 
and family income was also noted. Generally, there was 
a larger proportion of literac) in provinces where the 
])ercentage of moderate income families was also high. 

The census of 1939 also revealed that oidy 15 per 
c(^nt of all ])ersons 10 years old or over were reading 
newspapers and magazines regularly. As the general 
literacy rate of the Phili|)pin(^s was about 19 per cent, 
more than two-thirds of the lilerale were not reading 
nny ncnvspaper or magazine^ regularly. ^ 



• 22 • 



Oil Is W here W e Find It (from Page 11) 

Pr(»sicI(Mil QiKv.oii early ill is year. The staff inelucled a 
dozen widely (^x|)(M'i(Mieed lieologisls and ])aleonlologisls 
drawn from [he leadinii American ])elroleum eompanies. 
with a large e()r|)s of Filipino eniiineers and geologists 
who had hren trained in tlu^ I niled States or loeally. 
Direction was at first in the hands jointly of H. Norton 
Johnson. formiMly with General Petroleum Corporation, 
and (/rant W. Corhy. whose early career was with the 
Marland comj^anies. After Mr. Johnson's return to the 
L nited States, Mr. Corhy took full charge of the work 
and pushed it through. From the first. Director Ahadilla. 
of the l^ureau of Mines, acted as adviser, for which ])o- 
sition his years in Mexico. Peru, and Brazil as get)logist 
for various American p(nrt)leum comj)anies, as well as 
his extensive knowledge of the Philippines, peculiarly 
fitted him. 

The work was organized and conducted on the broad- 
est and most scientific lines and was pushed with great 
vigor. For the first time, a comj)lete section of the strata 
involved, mainly Miocene in age, has heen made, and 
])ositive correlations can he made not only within the 
Islands hut with the rocks in neighhtning countries. 
The principal oil-bearing horizons in the iXetherlands 
Indies have been recognized; sections of possible oil- 
bearing sediments up to 17,000 feet thick have been 
found. By means of topographic and geological mapping, 
a number of structures have In^en determined and out- 
lined. The geological work in doubtful areas is being 
checked by geophysical surveys conducted by the Geo- 
physical Engineering Corporation of Pasadena. A con- 
servative number of drilling sites have been selected, 
and preparations are now under way to test the first of 
these. 

Meanwdiile, acting under general law. President Que- 
zon had reserved for the Commonwealth Government 
the petroleum lands in a number of provinces. By au- 
thority of a special law, he recently gave the National 
Development Company a permit to enter these lands for 
exploration, development, and production. This com- 
pany has, therefore, an almost complete monopoly on 
Philipi^iue petroleum lands. The exception is in a few 
very small leases of long standing, and two areas held 
on lease under the general law by the Far East Oil De- 
velopment Co. This corporation, the only non-govern- 
ment company now^ active in the oil field, is now owned 
by Philippine, American and Spanish capital. 

After drilling a few^ shallow holes on Bondoc Penin- 
sula not far from where Standard Oil of California tried 
to find oil 15 years before. Far East Oil in 1940 moved 
its rig to the Daanbanlayan structure in Northern Cebu. 
This is a large dome with good closure, considered to be 
very favorable. Here, with great skill and good fortune, 
a hole was carried to a depth of 6.010 feet with a rig 
and tools designed to go onlv to 1. ()()() feel. l)Ut. desj)ile 
this technical success, the hoh^ i)ro\ed dry to the depth 



tested. However, the most favorable horizons, which 
show seepage on outcrop and which are oil-bearing in 
the Netherlands Indies, lie still deeper. The overlying 
beds had thickened here to an unexpected degree. 

Not discouraged by the results of this first deep test 
Far East Oil ordered from the I'nited States a rig and 
equipment })ermitting it to go down to the Basement 
Complex, estimated to be some 10.000 feet from the 
surface. 

The rig which Far East had been using and which 
had so signally proved its sturdy worth was sold to 
the National Development Company. It has been moved 
to the Barili anticline farther south in Cebu. On this 
structure, the beds at the surface are the geological 
equivalents of those at the bottom of the Daanbantayan 
hole. Drilling to 1.000 feet should test all the probably 
favorable strata. 

This Spring, Mr. Corby left for California by .Clipper 
to enlist a drilling crew and make certain supplementary 
purchases of equipment. In his absence, and pending 
arrival of Far East's own new drill, its superintendent. 
A. E. Ireland, and crew, built roads and camps and 
moved the old drill to its new location. By the time 
this article appears two modern outfits will be busy wild- 
catting on the island of Cebu in the Middle Philippines. 

The economic importance of the discovery of oil. if 
it is present in the Philippines, is so evident as hardly 
to require mention. The Islands have only limited coal 
fields and industrialization requires fuel first of all. To 
the Far East as a whole, also, an additional petroleum 
supply is important. In Sakhalin, far to the north, devel- 
opments have been much less satisfactory to date than 
were anticipated, though whether this is due to natural 
or artificial conditions is not entirely clear. In Japan, 
despite long and earnest effort, only a small supply has 
been found, and on Formosa, aside from large volumes 
of gas, exploration has yielded even less. 

Known oil fields in China are small and discovery 
of oil in the Jurassic beds in Manchuria is too recent to 
permit any sound judgment as to its extent. The fields 
in the Netherlands Indies have been important for more 
than a generation, but there is a growing conviction that 
sound management and excellent conservation methods 
have been at least as important as natural richness. 
What New Guinea and other areas now being explored 
will vield remains to be seen. 

In all this search for oil. the Philippine venture evi- 
dently has a legitimate place. It may prove, as has fre- 
quently happened elsewhere in the world, that pools of 
commercial importance are absent, or that such pools 
as are present, though commercial, are small and scat- 
tered. Even so. it is of great national importance to 
know what is and what is not present. Even a negative 
result has a value. Meanwhile, the venture is based on 
careful studies and sound evidence, and is being con- 
ducted bv experienced men along well established lines. 
It is a venture, yes. but so was Magellan's vo\age. ^ 



• 23 • 



HANDS ACROSS THE CHINA SEA 




Randall Gould 



By Randall Gould 

TThE geographic proxim- 
ity of China and the Philip- 
pines is obvious. Their com- 
mon ties and interests have 
not always been so easy to 
perceive. Political and other 
considerations have often, 
and over long periods, ten- 
ded to sweep them in differ- 
ent directions and at times to 
make them seem almost parts 
of different hemispheres. Yet 
there have always been factors tending to overwhelm such 
artificial separations. Today it is these factors, operat- 
ing in a troubled world where many men's hands are 
against their neighbors, which are strongest in reviving 
and strengthening the natural feeling of kinship between 
continent and archipelago. 

Cliina certainly has progressed during recent years 
under a spur of urgent necessity. I think the same may 
be said for the Philippines. There has been a difference 
between the terms of necessity. China's problem for years 
has been one of trying to grow up before being dismem- 
bered. Of late this has taken a particularly acute form, 
yet essentially it remains a problem to which China is 
relatively accustomed. The aggravated crisis has been 
countered by a phenomenal advance in leadership and 
national unity. 

The Philippines has fortunately been spared the test 
of bloodshed. Nevertheless, there has been an invisible 
crisis hardly less acute in the necessary trend toward 
greater self-government and eventual freedom, and in 
the resultant problems of maintaining an independent 
political and economic life. 

Facing these tests of not merely capacity for self- 
development, but of actual national survival, both China 
and the Philippines have disclosed latent strengths hardly 
suspected by even their warmest friends. Each has moved 
in new directions— and many of their paths have been 
common ones. In each case, the example of the United 
States and the personal guidance of American citizens 
have played a most important part in directing the 
courses adopted. 

A striking fact in each of these essentially Oriental 
lands has been the democratic urge. Until the present 
world crisis this choice may not have been so significant; 
toda> . however, every country must decide between 
democracy and totalitarian dictatorship. There seems no 
floubl that the jjresenl desire of both people in China and 
the Philip])ines is to "go democratic" in spite of all ob- 

• 24 • 



stacles. Such a choice, in this era of i)n'^^i»^*** pnlitics. 
inevitably draws China and the Philii)pinc'S together in 
a bond of common purpose. 

There are other ties, iy[ course. Proximity can pro- 
duce strange reactions; in the case of China and the 
Philippines it has worked for greater friendship. Neither 
has ever displayed an aggressive attitude toward the 
other. Their national courses have been peaceful and 
harmonious. True, neither have they had the close eco- 
nomic relations their proximity would appear to war- 
rant, but that was due tc) special circumstances which are 
now rapidly changing. 

In the case of China, there was an innate conservatism 
and isolationism. As a nation, China has done little in 
promoting her foreign trade, even with lands as near as 
the Philippines. The Islands, on the other hand, have been 
inhibited by an economic development leased on political 
ties with the United States. With Philippine-American 
relations changing as they are today, there is every reason 
to expect economic and other tics with China will be 
strengthened. This seems inevitable, even though Wash- 
ington and Manila succeed in separating i)olitical inde- 
pendence from a com])lete econc^mic severance which 
might be disastrous. 

The question of blood relationships between the Chi- 
nese and the Filipinos is most interesting. In a conver- 
sation at Manila last year, Chinese Consul-General C. 
Kwangson Young remarked to me that it was difficult to 
estimate the precise number of Chinese in the Philip- 
pines because of the intermingling of Chinese emigrants 
with the Filij)inos. It is part of this easy assimilability 
that the part-Chinese always consider themselves natives 
of the country in which they Avere born (although always 
remembering, and taking pride in, their Chinese blood). 
Although the 1939 census counted 130.000 Chinese, the 
actual number, including those of mixed blood, undoubt- 
edly approached 400,000. 

The example of the Philippines, progressing along 
political, economic, social and military lines, has been 
an inspiration to the people of China. There have been 
many points of resemblance between the problems of 
the two countries as they advance in world position. Not 
only China, but the Far East and the entire world, has 
been moved to admiration at the rai)id progress of the 
Philippines under American tutelage. Themselves striv- 
ing for freedom the Chinese have seen in the Filipino 
aspiration for independence a s])iritual bond and a hope 
for their own success. 

Given restored peace in China and a continuation of 
the peace enjoyed by the Philippines, the knitting of 
ties between the two countries will certainly proceed 
apace. Meanwhile troubled world conditions at least 
accentuate some of the elements of spiritual harmony 
between these two outposts of democracy. Such develop- 
ment is a l)y-no-means neglioil)l(» basis for a ra|)idly ])ro- 
gressing enlejite when world conditions i)ermit. ^ 




These colorful PHILIPPINE Hand Made NOVELTIES fashioned from the famous 

MANILA HEMP — the Strongest Fiber in the World. 





NEARLY 400 RESIDENTS of the Tondo district of 
Manila were transferred to prepared evacuation 
centers in the suburbs within an hour during a 
recent practice. 




MANILA FAMILIES participate in a practice evacua- 
tion of crowded sections of the Philippine capital. 
All children were "tagged" by the Red Cross. 




MEMBERS OF THE WOMEN'S AUXILIARY SERVICE 

in Manila practice caring for a "wounded" Fili- 
pino soldier during recent maneuvers. 






PHILIPPINE AND AMERICAN DEFENSE CHIEFS in 

the Commonwealth were present at the recent 
launching of the first Island-built motor torpedo- 
boat. Mrs. Quezon was the sponsor. 




PHILIPPINE DAY at the California State Fair was celebrated in Sacramento on September 6th. 



Six Years of the Philippine Commonweahh 

All Editorial 



Six eventful years have passed since the sweUering 
day in iSoNemher. 1935. when the democratic world 
celehralcd ihe inauguration of the Government of the 
Coinnionw(\dlh of tlie Philippineii. Those six years have 
heen full of chaos and disappointment for many nations. 
They have brought enslavement and death to freedom- 
loving people in Europe. They have meant hardship and 
privation to others who have escaped actual invasion. To 
the Fili|)in()s. those six years have brought confusion as 
one after another of the foundation stones upon which we 
hope to build our new nation have been submerged by the 
tide of war. The prospect is one that might easily generate 
despair in a hv^s hardy and determined people. 

It is significant that we have not despaired. True, the 
first six years of tlie Conuuonwealth have brought us a 
new understanding of the responsibilities of national 
identity, and a ch^ircr realization of its dangers, but there 
has l)een litth^ inclination to abandon the program. The 
1 6,000,()()() Filipinos are as determined as ever to carry 
through the schedule that was inaugurated with such 
liigh hopes and ideals on November 15. 1935. 

It is fitting, therefore, that we pause on the sixth anni- 
versary of that history-making occasion and take stock of 
ourselves. What have we done with the intervening years? 
Have we made substantial ])rogress as an enlightened 
l^eople? How are we preparing ourselves for eventual 
independence and reliance on our own resources? 

In the first place, our program of public education has 
made substantial progress under the Commonwealth. 
More Filipinos than ever before in history are attendmg 
schools — from kindergartens to universities and night 
classes for adults. Our rate of literacy has been climbing 
steadily to a point where we are second in the Far East 
only to Japan. We are building an ever more important 
body of Filipino literature in English, Spanish and our 
own native dialects. In the cultural sense, the Philippines 
is preparing rapidly to accept its national responsibility. 

Six years have seen many economic advances, too. 
Real progress has been made in our program to diversify 
crops and to make the Connnonwealth more nearly self- 
sufficient in foodstuffs. We are l)eginning to manufacture 
textiles and light industrial products. Although the 
economic consequences of the war ha\ e made serious 



inroads into our commerce, we have made every effort 
to adapt our business life to the prospect of separation 
from the protected United States market. Admittedly, we 
have lost ground in many ways since 1939, thanks to the 
economic devastation in the wake of the war: nevertheless, 
we have gained experience and fortitude that will stand 
us in good stead in later years. 

Our progress has not been entirely material. By our 
often-expressed determination to stand with the United 
States in w^hatever course it may take in this world crisis, 
we have gained immeasurably in the spiritual sense. 
The decision has given us greater internal strength, as 
well as winning for the Commonwealth a place among 
the democratic, freedom-loving people of the world. Far 
from weakening our position in the Far East, where we 
occupy a geographical position of some peril, we have 
won the respect and cooperation of our democratic neigh- 
bors. At the same time we have made it clear to anv 
potential aggressor that we will fight for our independ- 
ence and our free institutions. The Commonwealth is 
not making the mistake of other small nations who thought 
that timidity would win immunity from aggression. 

Because of the problems we face together and which 
we are all working to solve, the Filipino people are 
more united today than ever before. The six years of 
the Commonwealth have given us new confidence in 
ourselves. We are better prepared for the job of running 
our country in the democratic tradition. We see more 
clearly our national goals and ideals, and are unified in 
our determination to attain them. Our experience as a 
Connnonwealth has fitted us better for the job of defend- 
ing democracy in the Pacific. 

Under the inspired leadership of President Manuel L. 
Quezon the Philippine Commonwealth has made sub- 
stantial progress during six years of increasingly difficult 
world conditions. Ahead of us we see the warning signs 
of still more serious troubles. This anniversary of the 
inauguration of our own government, therefore, should 
be the occasion for rededicating ourselves to the task 
that was In^gun in 1935. We Filipinos — 16.000,000 
strong — will act upon our determination to find a just. 
responsil)le place in the world communil) . Ever loyal to 
the United States and the democratic institutions for which 
it stands, we will press forward to our clicrislicd aoal. ^ 



Philippines 



Vol. 1 



(November, 1941) 



No. 8 



Outlook on the Pacific, Di\ Ernest Gruening 3 

American Sovereignty, John J. Dempsey 4 

The Filipino Fighting Man, Colonel F. A, Blesse 6 

Advance in Public Health, Di\ Sixto Y. Orosa 8 

Sergio Osmena 9 

Funds for Defense, Sebastian Ugarte 15 

Women and the Commonwealth, Pilar N, Ravelo 10 

S40,000,000 Nugget, Quirico A. Abadilla 17 

Filipino Footnotes ]8 

Two Flags ]9 

The Visayan Islands, Ernesto I lustre 21 

Philippine Air Lines 22 

Philippine Commerce Charts 23 

Critical Awakening, P. C. Morantte 24 



Photo Credits: Underwood and Underwood; 
Department of the Interior; U. S. Army Signal 
Corps ; Fenno Jaeobs from Three Lions ; Pahner 
Pic tures, and Blackstone Stud ios. 



Back Cover: Facade of historic Binondo Church, Manila. 



«S?!r*I\i^^i"" roprint material appearing 

.n PHILIPPINKS is f^Iadly erantrd excf.pt in 
oasi s ^v)H.r<- use is spi rifirally restricted. Proper 
« r«Mlit will be appreciated. 




The coat of arms of the Phih'ppinc Conimon- 
weahh reproduced on the front cover is in 
honf)r of the sixlli anniversary of the in- 
auguration of the Commonwealth on Novem- 
ber 15, 1935. 

Ill This Issue 
DR. ERNEST GRUENING, the Governor of 
Alaska, was formerly Director of the Division 
of Territories and Insular Possessions in the 
Department of the Interior. 

• • • 

JOHN J. DEMPSEY, Undersecretary of the 
Interior, is a friend of the Philippines of 
many years' standin-. Formerly a Congress- 
man from New Mexico, he was a member of 
the Maritime Commission prior to his ap- 
pointment to the Interior Department. 

• • • 

SEBASTIAN UGARTE is legal assistant to the 
Ihihppine Resident Commissioner in Wash- 
ington. 

• • • 

QUIRICO A. ABADILLA is director of the Bu- 
reau of Mines in Manila. 

• • • 

P. C. MORANTTE, a Filipino writer and critic 
of note, IS now in New York completing a 
book on life in the Philippines. It will be pub- 
lished next year. 

o o • 

ERNESTO D. ILUSTRE is a member of the press 
relations staff of the Philippine Resident Com- 
missioner's Office. 

• • • 

DR. SIXTO Y. OROSA, vice president of the 
Phihppme Medical Association, is a V^'^^' 
ticing physician in the city of Bacolod, Negros 
Occidental Province. 

• • • 

COLONEL F. A. BLESSE, after three years of 
service with the United States Army in the 
Philippines, is now attached to the Surgeon 
General's Headquarters in Washington, D. C. 



PHILIPPINES is puMisInd by th«. offu-c of flu- Philippiiu' R<si<lriit r.oinmiHsioiirr to the IJiiiUd Stales. 
E<Iit<iri:il aiul rimilation ofTicMs at 2302 MasHachiisitts Avriiui-, N«irtliwest, Washiiifitoii, 1). C. Distrihutr.! 
>vit!iout cIiarKr. Entered as thir«J riass matter in the Wasllillt^ton post ufFMc on DecM inhtr 1, 19 10, Permit No. 
3015, Printed in L. S. A. Stuart Lillico, editor. 





By Dr. Ernest H. Grnening 

Governor of Alasha 



\^HEN. in 1518, Balboa stood in awe and wonder 
on a Panama mountain peak and looked out upon the 
great Pacific, he had no way of knowing it was the wid- 
est ocean upon the earth's surface. Geographers subse- 
quently established that as a fact. But it remained no more 
than a geographer's fact for centuries. 

Not until centuries later did the w^idth of the Pacific, 
as well as its very existence, begin to play a decisive role 
in the history of the United States. Today, after 430 
years, the Pacific Ocean has been shrunk to channel 
w^idth by the developments of history. 

Today w^e face the fact that our western rampart is 
not the breakers that sweep the beaches of California 
nor even the waters that wash Waikiki. Our frontier in 
the w^est reaches to the China Sea, just as in the east it 
extends to the English Channel. These are facts of both 
geography and realistic world politics. These facts have 
been crystallized and brought home to us by the swift 
pageant of events in Europe and Asia which, we are now 
being shown, are of an identical pattern. 

The Pacific is not narrower today because a poten- 
tially hostile power has moved geographically closer to 
us. Mainly it is so because we now see that against a 
world system of aggression we cannot wait to defend 
ourselves at Hawaii, at San Diego, or at any other 
proximal point. That is exactly what aggressor nations 
want us to do. They hope to pick the time, the place and 
the occasion for the attack. We must understand that 
purpose and prevent its realization. We must not permit 
either the Atlantic or the Pacific, as broad as they are, 
to become our Maginot Line. 

In the west, we now look out from Alaska, from 



Hawaii, and from the Philippines upon sea and air lanes 
that might some day become roads for attack upon us. 
We have accepted a grave responsibility in undertaking 
to protect the Western Hemisphere in all of its great 
expanse. Our charge includes not only the United States, 
Canada, and Mexico, but also the long coast of South 
America, from the Panama Canal to Tiorra del Fuego 
over 100,000 miles of coastline. 

It becomes obvious even to the layman that this huge 
coastline cannot be protected by a line of ships, waiting 
in territorial waters for an attack. Such a plan of 
defense is obviously ridiculous. From Hawaii we could 
not prevent an attack upon the southern coast of South 
America, for instance, or upon Alaska, or upon the 
Philippines. Static defense is a demonstrated failure. 

Defense of democracy is not a military question, but 
a human one, and there is only one answer. We cannot 
afford to permit aggressor nations gradually and pro- 
gressively to acquire the bases from which to attack us. 
We must not permit them to take the Pliilippines, be- 
cause that would make easier an invasion of the Dutch 
East Indies, which would facilitate the conquest of 
Australia, which in turn would give our enemies every- 
thing they need to move against South America. The 
aggressor technique is plain and open to all w^ho will 
read. The examples of Czechoslovakia, Norway, Holland, 
Belgium, France, and all the rest are fresh in everybody's 
mind. In the Pacific, the process lias been slower but 
unmistakable — first Manchuria, then China, Hainan, 
French Indo-China and Thailand. 

The Philippines constitutes a barrier, past which an 
aggressor must move in any further advance southward 

[Tuni to Page 19) 



• 3 • 



'STILL AI IITEGRAL PART 



of the 

LflTED STATES 



?9 



A llevicw of Aiii€^ri€*aii wSovcreig'iity 
in ilie PliilipiMiies 

By John J. Dempsey 

Undersecretary of the Interior 
of the United States 




is the status of the Philippines?" 

That inquiry is received almost every day in this De- 
partment. Recent events have focused attention on the 
Commonwealth and have made it necessary to give care- 
ful consideration to the question. This is because the 
Islands are becoming increasingly important from a 
defense standpoint and it is necessary to make sure that 
our defense efforts there are not hampered by inadvert- 
ently wording proclamations and administrative regula- 
tions in such a way that they are not effective in the 
Philippines. 

It is a fact that many people in the United States, who 
remember rather vaguely reading a few years ago about 
an Independence Act having been passed by Congress, 
are under the mistaken impression that the United States 
Government retains little or no control in Philippine 
aflfairs. Even well-informed people are often confused 
on the extent of this control, and it is not surprising that 
this is true, as even prior to the passage of the Inde- 
pendence Act in 1934 there were many unusual features 
which might mislead a casual inquirer. The people of 
the Philippines have always had their own Customs and 
internal revenue laws, collections being deposited in the 
Insular Treasury. They have had their own currency 
and postal systems and our experiments with the 18th 
Amendment were never extended to the Philippines. 

But when it comes to the question of basic sovereignty 
there has ne\er been any doubt. President Roosevelt's 
order of July 26 ])lacing the armed forces of the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth under the direct conunand of 
Lieutenant C/cneral Douglas Mac Arthur was a dramatic 
demonstration of this fact. It was a forceful reminder to 
the whole \\<>rbl that American sovereignty over the 
Islands will coiiliiuK^ wilhonl modification until the day- 



July 4, 1916 — that the projected Philippine Republic 
is actually inaugurated. 

The President's action was specifically authorized by 
Section 2(aj (12) of the Tydings-McDudie Act of 1934, 
the famous Philipjjine Inde])endence Act. Tliis legisla- 
tion, which established the method by which the Fili|)inos 
will take over their own government, is the general basis 
for our present-day legal relations with Manila. 

Those of us who have had oflicial dealings with the 
Philippine Commonwealth and its representative in Con- 
gress, the Resident Commissioner of the Philippines to 
the United States, J. M. Elizalde, are fully aware of the 
close legal ties between Washington and Manila. These 
ties are generally well-defined. Many were set down 
specifically in the Tydings-McDufTie Act: most of the 
rest have been worked out by trial and error in the 
past six years. 

I might cite a few instances of the power over impor- 
tant Philippine affairs exercised by the United States as 
evidence of our continued sovereignty. The calling of 
the Philippine Army into Federal service is only one 
example. Here are a few more: 

All citizens of the Philippines owe allegiance to the 
United States. 

Commonwealth olTicials, before beginning their 
duties, must subscribe to an oath recognizing the 
su])reme authority of the United States. 

By the terms of the Commonwealth Constitution the 
United States retains complete control over Phili])l)ine 
foreign affairs. exj)orls, imj)orts and c()inage. 

The right to ex|)r()priate |)r()j)erly for ])u])lic uses, 
and to maintain military rescMvalions and armed forces 
in the Islands is expressly gixcn to the UniU^l Stales. 

Pliili|)j)inc legislative action must be reported to 
Cloni^ress. 



• 4 • 



The Supreme Court of the United States has the 
right to review decisions of Conunonwealth Courts. 

The President can intervene any time he thinks that 
the government of the Common weahh is in danger, 
that life, |)roperty or individual liherty need protec- 
tion, or tliat government obligations are not being 
discharged. 

Such facts demonstrate better than anything else that 
the Connnonwealth of the Philippines is by no means 
a foreign nation. 

No less a body than the Supreme Court of the Lnited 
States has confirmed this relationship in legal terms. 
In the case of Cincinnati Soap Company v. U. S. in 1937, 
Mr. Justice Sutherland, who delivered the opinion of the 
Court, points out that "the sovereignty of the L nited 
States has not been, and, for a lone; time, may not be, 
finally withdrawn. So far as t^he United States is con- 
cerned, the Philippine Islajids are not yet foreign terri- 
tory.'' 

Following the organization of the Office of Production 
Management nearly two years ago, with its first efforts 
to direct production toward defense needs, considerable 
uncertainty prevailed regarding the exact responsibility 
of the Philippines to the United States, and vice versa. 
The confusion ^vas confounded with the passage of the 
Export Control Law, which did not mention the Philip- 
pines specifically. Should priorities be applied to Insular 
business? V/here should the Islands stand in the grant- 
ing of preference ratings? Should shipments to Manila 
be classed as exports or as domestic commerce? Should 
exports from Manila be controlled or left free? 

The solution to these questions Avas long in commg. 
Formal extension of the Export Control Law to the 
Islands w^as an important step forward. Answers were 
delayed in certain cases by the fact that many officials 
had never considered the Philippines seriously before. 

Gradually it is being established to the satisfaction of 
all concerned — and by "all" I include the Filipino 
people — that \vhile the Independence Act was a prelmii- 
nary step toward the ^vithdrawal of sovereignty, the 
Islands are still an integral part of the United States. 
The defense agencies of our Government in their adminis- 
trative procedure recognize this fact. 

It is only reasonable that this should be so. The Islands 
are our first line of defense in the Far East. We are 
pledged to defend them and the Filipino people are dis- 
posed to support us in every possible way. We cannot 
afford to allow red tape to stand in the w^ay of accom- 
plishing our common purpose. On all questions which 
come up as a result of our defense program, it is the 
fixed policy of this Department to urge that the Philip- 
pines be accorded exactly the same treatment that is 
given to all other territories under the American Flag. ^ 



Three definite interpretations of preference rat- 
ing orders, designed to avoid any misconception of 
the status of the Philippines, were issued by Donald 
M. Nelson, Director of Priorities, on November 5. 
They refer respectively to tlie needs of industries, 
utilities and mining companies. 

The first two bring tlie Philippines witliin the 
application of Preference Rating Orders P-22 and 
P-46, relating to priorities on material intended for 
the repair, maintenance and operation of utilities 
and industries. The third states tliat "mines located 
in the Philippine Islands are 'domestic mines* 
within the limits of 'the United States, its territories 
and possessions' as these terms are used'' in Prefer- 
ence Rating Order No. P-56. 




LIEUTENANT GENERAL DOUGLAS MacARTHUR, 
Commander of the United States Army Forces in 
the Far East, with headquarters at Manila, symbol- 
izes America's continued sovereignty in the Philip- 
pines. The entire Commonwealth army is now a 
unit of the United States Forces. 

• 5 • 




f^OR more than three years, it was my good fortune 
to serve the United States Army in the Philippines. My 
particular duty was the organization and training of a 
Medical Service for the promising young Philippine 
Army. That fact gave me an exceptional opportunity to 
see and appraise the average Filipino soldier, the man 
who today is an integral part of the United States Army 
under President Roosevelt's order calling the entire 
Philippine Army into Federal service. By the time I left 
those rich islands in the Far East last Spring, I had gained 
a great admiration for the Filipino as a citizen and as a 
potential fighting man. 

Primarily, my experience taught me that the average 
Filipino soldier has a high sense of military duty. Once 
his instructions are clear, he can be depended on to 
carry them out fully. I found little tendency to be con- 
tent with half measures. Of course, we had to be careful 
that our instructions — delivered in English — were under- 
stood by the Filipino soldiers, whose knowledge of that 
language is often sketchy. 

Leadership is still something of a problem in the 
Philijjpine Army. I believe, however, that this is a 
temporary condition that time will correct. In this new 
army, it is necessary to train officers and enlisted men 
at the same time. Leadership must be developed through 
ex|)erience and thorough training. I have met a number 
of Filipino graduates of the United States Military Acad- 
emy at West Point, and many from the old Philippine 
Constalnilary Academy at Baguio, w^ho are now serving 
with ihrir new army. In general, they are a superior 
group of officers. They are conscientious and capable 
and clearly demonstrate that, when properly trained, 
the Filipino can be developed into excellent officer mate- 
rial. Some of the others who had received their advanced 
military training in the Islands, either at the Philippine 
Military Academy or in the universites, also showed 
splendid ])()ssibilities. This is especially true of the Philip- 



THE FILIPINO 
FIGHTING MAN 

By Colonel F. A. Blesse 

An Appraisal of tin* Mm 
Charged ivilh Defending the 
Ph Hi p p ine C o m mo f uveal t h 



pine Military Acadcni), where the curriculum, standards 
and requirements are closely ])atterned after the United 
States Military Academy at West Point. 

My experience left w^ith me a great respect for the 
ingenuity of the average Filipino soldier. Time and again, 
on arriving at an overnight bivouac, I would assign an 
orderly to prepare my quarters while I supervised the 
w^ork around camp. On my return an hour later, it was 
not unusual to find my quarters completely set up, with 
a whole array of such minor "conveniences" as clothes 
hangers, wash stands and even a mat beside my bed, all 
constructed by hand from material growling around the 
camp site. There seemed to be no limit to what those 
men could produce in an emergency. 

On one occasion I turned a squad of medical enlisted 
men loose in a manuever area without special equipment 
and wdth instructions to do the best they could for a 
dozen 'Svounded" soldiers I had scattered through the 
field. Each "casualty" bore a tag describing his injuries — 
this man, a shattered leg; that one, a shrapnel wound 
in his chest, and so on. The ingenuity that these men 
showed in caring for the "wounded" was remarkable. 
Splints, dressings, and bandages of all sorts were quickly 
fashioned out of sticks, banana leaves, jungle grass, vines 
and the ordinary soldiers' personal equipment. Within a 
very short time every one of these "patients" was in a 
condition to be transported to the nearest hospital. 

Part of my tour of duly in the Philippines was spent 
with the famous Philippine Scouts. As the reader un- 
doubtedly knows, this is a division of Filipino soldiers 
serving under American officers and has always been an 
integral part of the United States Army. These men 
serve enlistment terms of three years, as compared with 
the five and a half months of training received by 
"draftees" in the Philippine Army. Partly because of 
this fact and i)artly because the Scouts have a tradition 



0 (5 » 



of more than 30 years as compared to about five years 
for the national army, the Scouts consider themselves to 
be vastly superior to ordinary soldiers. One result of 
this is keen competition to fill any vacancy in the ranks 
of the Scouts that may occur. In the usual Scout unit, it 
was apparent that the large numbers of applications re- 
ceived for enlistment were frequently disregarded, and, 
instead, brothers, cousins and nephews — even sons — of 
the men already in the ranks appeared to take the exami- 
nations for enlistment whenever vacancies occurred. 
Many of the units were proud of the way vacancies were 
passed from one member of a family to another. As far 
as I could tell, the efficiency of the Scouts did not suffer 
in the least from this practice, and the tradition prob- 
ably improved both discipline and morale. However, a 
higher educational standard was often available from 
other sources. 

In the medical units the replacement system ^vas, there- 
fore, rearranged to include applicants of higher educa- 
tional qualities, w^ith all vacancies filled from among 
the best qualified applicants and in accordance ^vi\.h an 
arranged priority. Nevertheless, in these units, w^hen- 
ever we had a vacancy the nephew of one of our sergeants 
would appear at my door, asking to be allowed to take 
the examination. Each time I refused him because of 
lack of education, explaining that we were accepting only 
approved applications filed in the regular w^ay. This 
applicant refused to be discouraged and appeared rou- 
tinely as each vacancy occurred. Finally, in desperation, 
I gave my consent to his taking the regular phyiscal and 
mental examination for an opening. He passed handily, 
and became one of the best soldiers I ever encountered. 

In the early days of the Philippine Army Medical 
Corps, our appropriation was not large enough to finance 
proper medical field training for the young doctors, 
dentists and veterinarians who had enrolled in the Medi- 
cal Officers' Reserve Corps. Eventually we obtained 
facilities for this training by the establishment of the 
Medical Field Service School. Funds not being available 
at that time, it was necessary to ask Medical Reserve 
Officers to take this six weeks' basic course of training 
without any monetary compensation at all. The response 
to this normally unattractive offer was surprising. At 
no time did we have any trouble finding enough qualified 
men for this course of training. Many of these appli- 
cants stayed on with the corps for a full year or more 
of active service as army doctors. Of course, they ben- 
efited by the experience and practice, but it was obvious 
that this was not the reason for their willingness to be 
of service. They w^ished to serve their country and did 
not hesitate to make personal sacrifice in doing so. Most 
of the 160,000 trainees who have passed through the 
Philippine Army since it began to function in 1936 were 
also impelled by a genuine desire to be of service to 
their Commonwealth and to the United States. My ob- 
servation was that their attitude toward compulsory 
training was, in general, excellent and morale very good. 

Perhaps in closing, I should say a few words about the 
Medical Corps of the Philippine Army, since I was pri- 



marily concerned with its organization and development. 
As is the case in most components of the Commonwealth 
defense forces, the Medical Corps is patterned after that 
of the United States Army. In a few respects, however, 
this was modified to take advantage of Philippine condi- 
tions. Each Infantry Division contains a medical bat- 
talion — there are no medical regiments. Each infantrv 
regiment contains, as an integral part of its organization, 
one medical company. Medical detachments are limited 
to the smaller units. This organization was thoroughlv 
tested during maneuvers with extensive evacuation of 
simulated casualties. In each case, it accomplished its 
mission efficiently. In my opinion, its organization is 
sound and, in any emergency, will properly care for 
and evacuate its casualties. Its equipment is reduced 
to the minimum necessary and, wherever possible, this 
equipment has been produced from Philippine sources. 
Such articles as splints, litters, wheeled litters, first aid 
packets, and medical chests are reproduced locallv. These 
not only meet every requirement as to standards, but 
result in a considerable saving of time and cost. 

My three years of contact Avith the Filipino soldier 
were happy ones for me. I felt that I was working with 
an alert and patriotic people who were genuinelv inter- 
ested in national defense. Among them I left manv friends 
and I retain very pleasant memories of their kindness 
and cooperation. The Chief of Medical Service of the 
Philippine Army, Colonel Victorio Luna, and his capable 
assistant. Major Olympia, are maintaining a high stand- 
ard of efficiency in the Medical Service. Thev are worthv 
examples of the highest type of experienced Filipino 
ofiicers. I left the Islands with the conviction that in the 
Philippines we Americans are setting up a lasting monu- 
ment to our democratic way of life. ^ 




A medical unit demonstrates a Tropical 
Ambulance during recent field maneuvers 



• 7 ® 



IN PUBLIC HEALTH 

By Dr. Sixto Y. Orosa 



OxE of the things for which Filipinos are most grate- 
ful to the United States is for the introduction and devel- 
opment of a real health service in the Philippines. The 
embers of the Insurrection were scarcely dead in July. 
1901, when the United States Government organized a 
Bureau of Health in the Islands. The function of this 
body was to stamp out epidemics, reduce infant and adult 
mortality, improve morale, and generally to promote 
the health and welfare of the Filipinos. The first Direc- 
tor of Public Health under the military government was 
L. M. Maus, w^ho continued under the civil government 
until 1903. 

Our public health program received its greatest im- 
petus from Dr. Victor G. Heiser, Director of Health from 
April, 1905 to February, 1915. During Dr. Heiser's 
administration, laws were enacted to establish a perma- 
nent income for the health service from funds contributed 
by Insular, provincial and municipal governments. After 
Dr. Heiser's retirement. Dr. Vicente de Jesus became 
Director of Health, the first Filipino to hold this posi- 
tion. The present director is capable Dr. Eusebio D. 
Aguilar, who received his medical education in the 
United States. 

From a small and modest beginning, the Bureau of 
Health has grown into one of the largest bureaus of the 
Philippine Commonwealth. Its activities reach every part 
of the Islands. The number of physicians employed by 
the Bureau as health officers for the provinces increased 
from 11 in 1904 to 398 in 1938. The total number of 
physicians under this Bureau in 1938 totaled 680. 

Cholera and smallpox, which during the Spanish 
regime and in the early years of the American occupa- 
tion were responsible for a great number of deaths, have 
been almost entirely eliminated. Bubonic plague, for- 
merly common, has become a medical curiosity. 

There are, however, important health problems ahead. 
The most common diseases in 1938 were malaria, tuber- 
culosis, influenza, diarrhea and enteritis, bronchitis, 
broncho-pneumonia, lobar pneumonia, dysentery and 
typhoid fever. But the fight against them is being in- 
tensified. For instance, tuberculosis is being brou^-ht 
under control by the work of the Quezon Institute for 



Tuberculosis, considered the most up-to-date in the 
Orient, and the mass examination and treatment of tuber- 
cular patients by means of four travelling X-ray units. 
Experiments in malaria control have gained recognition 
both within the Philippines and outside, and Filipino 
research in leprosy has received world-wide acclaim. 

Among the factors contributing to the progress of 
our public health program, and which have been given 
special attention, are the installation of safe water works, 
the drilling of artesian wells, the sanitary disposal of 
waste, the operation of public health laboratories in 
practically every province, extensive immunization work 
against contagious diseases, a sanitary program for the 
schools, public health education, food inspection, hos- 
pital and dispensary service, care of the insane, the open- 
ing of special clinics (maternity, child health, etc.) and 
the increase of public and general hospitals. Health 
service is rendered the public schools by Red Cross 
dentists and nurses; the United States Treasury Depart- 
ment furnishes quarantine service. 

The improvement in Philippine health conditions is 
reflected in Philippine vital statistics. The death rate has 
decreased — in 1904 it was 18.62 and in 1938, 16.53 — 
while the birthrate has increased — from 27.39 in 1904 
to 32.34 in 1938. 

From 1930 to 1938 the annual death rate of persons 
without medical attendance did not change materially, 
the average yearly rate being about 230,500. The recent 
organization of charity clinics throughout the country, 
however, is expected to extend the public health pro- 
gram greatly. The charity clinics are under the direc- 
tion of young medical graduates and are located in out- 
of-the-way barrios where there are no practicing physi- 
cians. This plan not only brings doctors to the small, 
heretofore neglected towns and villages, but also helps to 
prevent the overcrowding of the large towns with physi- 
cians. The salary is small, but the job is part-time, so 
that the "country" doctor may devote a good part of his 
time to private practice. By the end of 1939, 470 such 
clinics were functioning. In addition, in 1939 public 
dental clinics were established with an average of three 
clinics in each province. ^ 



• 8 • 




Vice-President of 
the Philippines 

TThE career of Vice President Sergio Osmena in the 
service of the Filipino people extends from the day in 
1896 when the revolution against Spain interrupted his 
studies in Manila under the Paulist Fathers. Too young 
to bear arms, he wrote behind a pseudonym in the liberal 
paper edited by Romero Salas. 

Sergio Osmena was born 63 years ago in the city of 
Cebu, of humble parents. He was educated in his early 
youth in the Seminario de San Carlos in Cebu, later finish- 
ing the secondary course in the same institution. During 
his student days in the province, he was entirely self- 
supporting, except for occasional help from an uncle. 
The story is told that young Osmena, when he came to 
Manila for his higher education, used to peddle eggs 
from Cebu in order to earn money for his matriculation. 

The lives of President Manuel Quezon and Vice Presi- 
dent Osmeiia complement each other to a remarkable 
degree, and it is impossible to dissociate one from the 
other. In the year 1894, Manuel Quezon and Sergio 
Osmena, both 16 years old, were enrolled in the University 
of Santo Tomas, at Manila. Both took the law course. 
Poor but brilliant, both were assisted by a grant of free 
tuition in the University. 

In those early years of scholastic companionship there 
developed between the two a friendship that was deep- 
seated; they seemed to have a premonition of a common 
destiny. The law class of 1894 at Santo Tomas Univer- 
sity was described by one professor as "the most distinc- 
tive and the most rebellious" he had ever known. 

Quezon was then and still is the man of action. Osmena 
became the calm thinker and planner, the philosopher of 
political movements which would lead his country toward 
a greater destiny. Their different natures caused Quezon 
and Osmefia to become separated when the revolution 
broke out. Quezon joined the Philippine Revolutionary 
Army for the fight against, first, the Spaniards, then the 
Americans. Osmena became a revolutionary propagandist 
fighting with his pen for his country's liberty. The two 
met again eight years later, when peace was restored be- 
tween the Americans and the Filipinos. Osmena had be- 




come a crusading Manila reporter and political writer. 

With peace, neither was satisfied. Quezon, demobilized 
and penniless, found employment as a clerk in the Monte 
de Piedad Bank. Osmena. with Rafael PahiKi and Jaime 
C. de Veyra, organized in Cebu a newspaper called El 
Nuevo Dia. But the main ambition of the two young men 
was to become lawyers, so they prepared themselves ac- 
cordingly. Soon Osmena passed the bar examinations, and 
accepted a post as provincial fiscal of Cebu. During this 
period Osmeiia first showed his legal caliber. An Ameri- 
can ship-owner of Cebu, who had kept a number of native 
laundry women isolated, was convicted through his ef- 
forts. Punishment of an American malefactor was with- 
out precedent in Cebu then. Osmena next directed the suc- 
cessful prosecution of a United States Army officer who 
had killed a municipal policeman. 

As a reward for his brilliant record as fiscal, he was 
soon elected governor of Cebu Province. As governor, 
young Osmena put down the banditry and fanatical up- 
risings that were scourging the island. On one occasion 
he went — alone and unarmed — to the mountain hideout of 
the two bandit leaders, the Quintin brothers, and per- 
suaded them to give themselves up to the authorities. 
Through this feat, the young governor leaped from com- 
parative obscurity to national prominence. 

From Cebu, Osmena went again to Manila, this time 
to take a seat in the Philippine Assembly, the newly cre- 
ated legislative body of the Islands. Osmena was elected 
Speaker unanimously and retained the chair until 1916. 

In 1907 the party in power was the Partido Federal. 
Osmena helped organize the Partido Nacionalista as the 
opposition. In the general elections that year, Osmena's 
party swept the country triumphantly. 

From 1907 to 1921 Osmena reigned supreme. But in 
1916, Manuel L. Quezon, fresh from his conquests in 
Washington, D. C, as Resident Commissioner and flushed 
with justifiable pride at having secured passage of the 
Jones Law, began to challenge Osmena's power. Quezon 

{Turn to Page 19) 



• 9 • 



Filipino IJlJomen and the Qommonlvealth 

By Pilar N. Ravelo 



X PREDICT a great future for Filipino women", Mrs. 
John Nance Garner, wife of the former Vice Presi- 
dent of the United States, told me in an interview six 
years ago. Mr. Garner was in the Philippines representing 
the United States Government at the inauguration of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines, and Mrs. Garner 
had accompanied him. 

I was reminded of Mrs. Garner's prediction as I be- 
gan a resume of what Filipino women have done during 
the six years that the Commonw^ealth has been function- 
ing. They have advanced in almost every field. 

For instance, ministering to the needs of sick animals 
was once considered a man's job. Today, it is no longer 
a strange sight to see a woman shoeing a horse or battling 
with anthrax. Two years ago, the first three women grad- 
uates of the college of veterinary science of the University 
of the Philippines were promptly offered research posi- 
tions. All rejected the jobs; instead, they preferred active 
participation in the profession itself. 

Our women are becoming air-minded, too. Declaring 
that they were going to join the Philippine Army air re- 
serve for emergency service, 30 coeds from the University 
of Santo Tomas recently entered the Flying Club of the 
Philippines. 

"It's all right to serve as nurses, but we'd rather be 
combat fliers", these courageous girls declared. No one 
really expects them to participate in any fighting, but the 
experience of England shows that women fliers can do 
important work behind the lines. 

Philippine opposition to women in medicine is slow- 
ly waning. Women physicians have clearly demonstrated 
their competence. Where we had only a handful of women 
doctors a decade ago, today about 400 practice in all 
parts of the Philippines. Women have even been appointed 
to the Board of Medical and Dental Examiners, positions 
formerly given only to men practitioners. 

The Philippine National Assembly is helping to im- 
prove the position of Filipino women by amending many 
of the obsolete laws unfair to women and children. Last 
year, for example, the Maternity Law came into effect, 
providing two-months maternity leaves with pay for 
women employed by the Government. A subsequent bill, 
still pending, is designed to extend the benefits of the 
Maternity Law to women employed by private concerns. 

Four years of feminine suffrage has been fruitful. Most 
of the 500 women who hold elective positions in the Com- 
monwealth have made civic and social welfare work their 
major concern. Today the Philippines boasts of sanitary 
markets and slaughter houses, cleaner streets and better 
parks for children, water systems in almost every town, 
more adult education, and more hospitals and health cen- 
ters. Even unemployment has diminished because of a 



housewives' campaign to give every possible employ- 
able man or woman a job. 

The new emphasis on defense has not escaped the at- 
tention of Filipino women. Women, individually and in 
their many clubs and organizations, are zealously and 
effectively working on Red Cross projects, food conser- 
vation, nursing and allied services for the nation. 

Mrs. Francis Sayre, wife of the United States High 
Commissioner to the Philippines, and Mrs. Manuel Que- 
zon, our First Lady, are co-chairmen of the Red Cross 
Volunteer groups. In Manila, the stately ballroom of the 
High Commissioner's residence has been converted into a 
sewing hafl. Three days a week women gather there to 
prepare bandages for soldiers, to sew for evacuees and 
indigent families, and to perform other useful tasks. This 
same work is done by members of the different clubs. 
The National Federation of Women's Clubs, with its 900 
aflSliated groups throughout the country, the National 
League of Women Voters, the Young Women's Christian 
Association, the Girl Scouts of the Philippines, as well 
as the coeds in public and private schools and univer- 
sities, are all participating in this important w^ork. 

In line with the food plans announced by the Civilian 
Emergency Adminstration, Filipino women now culti- 
vate home vegetable gardens. Fruits and vegetables are 
preserved on an ever-larger scale, too. Furthermore, the 
Division of Plant Utilization of the Department of Agri- 
culture and Commerce is urging women to exploit such 
plentiful Philippine products as the coconut and cassava, 
upon which they may fall back in the event of a food 
shortage. 

Preparations are being made to take over men's jobs. 
Women are now learning to drive cars and ride bicycles; 
to plant crops and harvest them; to make ordinary house- 
hold repairs, and to perform clerical work in provincial 
and municipal offices. Simultaneously, our w^omen are 
studying nursing and allied services. First-aid classes 
under competent doctors and health officers are now be- 
ing conducted in every town in the Philippines. ^ 



MEN OF THE COMMONWEALTH 

(opposite page) 

UPPER RIGHT: Jose Yulo, Vice President Sergio Osmena, 

Quintin Poredes and Maximo Noel. 
ASSEMBLY: Jose Yuio addressing Nacionaiista Party con- 
vention. 

LOWER CENTER: President Quezon signs State papers, sur- 
rounded by Jorge Vargas, Jose Yulo, Benig- 
no Aquino, Manuel Roxas, Enrique Maga- 
lona and Vincente Singson Encarnacion. 
BORDER PORTRAITS (downward from left) : Teofilo Sison, 
Rafael Alunan, General Paulino Santos, 
Manuel Roxas, Quintin Poredes, Benigno 
Aquino, Jorge Vargas, Ramon Avancena, 
Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos. 



• 10 • 




• 11 • 




• 12 



mOS for 

piiiiippiy 

DEFENSES . . . 

By Sebastian Ugarte 

Funds for n nancing Philippine defense efforts are 
involved in a bill now pending before the House of 
Representatives. Worked out by the Commonwealth 
Government and the W ar Department in Washington, this 
legislation is being pushed by American defense experts 
and by President Quezon. 

The object of H.R. 5825 is to make available from two 
specified funds money for the defense of the territories 
and people of the Philippines. The legislation in one part 
takes the form of an amendment to the Philippine Inde- 
pendence Act. 

What particular funds are involved? 

There are two sums — the Sugar Excise Tax Fund and 
the so-called Gold Devaluation Profit Fund. Together, 
they amount to some $53,000,000. Previous Congresses 
have authorized the establishment of these funds, but no 
move has ever been made actually to appropriate the 
money. 

The Sugar Excise Tax Fund began to accumulate in 
1937, w^hen the Sugar Act authorized the Federal Gov- 
ernment to collect half a cent a pound on sugar pro- 
duced from Philippine cane and marketed in the United 
States, and to transfer the proceeds to the Commonwealth. 
The Independence Act specifically provides that this 
money can be used only "for the purpose of adjusting 
Philippine economy to a position independent of trade 
preferences in the United States and in preparing the 
Philippines for the assumption of the responsibilities of 
an independent State." The proposed legislation would 
permit the use of these funds for defense purposes. 

According to the Sugar Act, these collections will con- 
tinue until June 30, 1942. During the period from No- 
vember 1, 1937, when the Act went into effect, to De- 
cember 31, 1941, approximately $35,000,000 in sugar 
excise taxes wdll have been collected. Between the latter 
date and June 30, 1942, an additional $4,000,000 will 
probably accumulate. The original bill submitted to Con- 
gress by Secretary of War Stimson made all sugar excise 
tax collections available for defense. H.R. 5825 limits 
appropriations to the money received prior to the enact- 
ment of the law. 



In addition to the sugar excise tax money, the so- 
called Gold Devaluation Profit Fund is made available 
for defenses under the pending legislation. Congress in 
1934 passed a law authorizing and directing the establish- 
ment on the books of the United States Treasury. '*when 
the funds therefore are made available", of a S23.862,- 
750.78 credit in favor of the Philippine Treasury. It rep- 
resented the increase in value of the gold deposits of the 
Philippine Government in United States banks when the 
weight of the gold dollar was reduced. Although author- 
ized, none of this money has been actually appropriated; 
nevertheless, several efforts to repeal the Act of 1934 hiave 
been blocked by Congress. 

The history of this pending legislation extends over 
approximately a year, but its basis is in the program 
of military training that the Philippine Commonwealth 
has pursued since the day of its inauguration. This pro- 
gram costs approximately $8,000,000 a year. When, in 
the summer of 1940, it became apparent that the Islands 
were facing ^vith the United States an emergency of far 
greater proportions than had been generally anticipated, 
efforts were made to find additional funds to speed up 
this training program and to pay for material of all 
sorts. The $53,000,000 in the Sugar Excise Tax Fund 
and the Gold Devaluation Fund was the only money avail- 
able. Early this year, therefore, President Manuel L. Que- 
zon, in his annual message to the Philippine Assembly, 
declared, 'T have made representations to the W^ash- 
ington authorities requesting that [these] funds . . . 
be appropriated to be spent exclusively for our national 
defense under the direction of the United States. I have 
assurances that this matter is being given serious con- 
sideration." 

During July, 1941, the situation in the Pacific became 
so tense that President Roosevelt decided to use his au- 
thority under the Independence Act to call the Philippine 
Army into the service of the United States. Subsequently, 
the Commonwealth questioned the use of this money to 
pay for the maintenance of its forces called into the 
service of the United States. Upon receiving assurances 
that the War Department proposed to use the entire 
$53,000,000 for military works of a permanent nature — 
air fields, strategic roads and bridges, naval defense in- 
stallations and strategic material reserves — the objection 
was dropped. 

The Commonwealth Government's approval of H.R. 
5825 has been based on its realization of three factors: 
that all other considerations must be subordinated to the 
immediate need for adequate defense; that our financial 
resources are unequal to the extraordinary expenses which 
the present emergency demands, and these funds are the 
only ones available to us at the moment; that most of the 
proposed expenditures would be for permanent and semi- 
permanent improvements, and that these will redound 
to the long-term benefit of the Philippines. 



• 15 ® 






16 • 




Suppose, in the spring of 1931, you had asked a 
competent mining engineer about the mineral resources of 
the Philippine Archipelago. He ^vould have given you a 
pretty gloomy report. 

"Well," he would probably have drawled, obviously 
trying to make the best of a poor subject, "I hear they 
have some gold and a few base metals like iron and cop- 
per. But — so far as I know — nobody's made enough 
money out of any of them yet to buy a new hat." 

It was thought, ten years ago, that the Philippines 
had been pretty well prospected. Some important Ameri- 
can mining interests had sent scouts to the islands. No 
one seemed to have found anything worth a heavy in- 
vestment. Mining was not an important Philippine in- 
dustry in 1931, however you looked at it. 

True, geologists could point to the Surigao iron de- 
posits as one of the most interesting in the world, but 
no blast furnace was buying that type of ore. Manganese 
had been found at several points, but there were no mines. 
The same was true of chrome. One deposit had been found 
in Zambales Province, north of Manila, and in the first 
flush of enthusiasm over the discovery, the area was set 
aside as a special government reserve. Disillusioned at the 
low grade of the ore, however, officials released the 
deposit in 1931 and for three years no one even bothered 
to stake a claim on the property. It is typical of the 
new position of mining in the Philippines today that the 
Zambales chromite deposit is now known to be one of the 
largest and most valuable in the world. 

At the beginning of 1930, the Philippines boasted of 
six gold mines, three of which had at one time or another 
paid dividends. The outlook was so gloomy that the Ben- 
guet Company began to liquidate its assets until only five 
cents a share remained unpaid. Citizens of Manila still 
talk about the days when a handful of gold mining stock 
bought a good cup of coffee along the Escolta! 

Ask the same mining man today what he thinks of 
Philippine mineral prospects and he will literally burst 
into song. 

"Do you realize," he demands, grabbing you by the 
lapel, "that in 1940 we dug $38,000,000 worth of gold 



. . . the Output of 
Philippine Gold Mines 
Every Year 

By Qnirico A. Abadilla 



out of the Philippine hills, that mining is threatening 
sugar as the pillar of our economy, and that the Common- 
wealth is the sixth most important gold-producing coun- 
try in the world? Did you know, sir, that, under our 
American flag, only California digs more gold than we 
do? Alaska? We've been ahead of that cold storage plant 
ever since 1936." 

You are justified in asking what caused this change 
from poverty to riches. Devaluation of the dollar was un- 
doubtedly a factor, although production began to increase 
several years before the gold price was raised. The re- 
lease of local investment funds due to the contraction of 
the sugar industry was also important, but again this 
followed and accentuated a movement already under way. 
As profits began to be reported and the probability of 
securing profits from other properties increased, money 
was attracted. For a time there was a roaring local stock 
market which, as is usual in new gold mining regions, 
led to unhealthy speculation and finally to deflation, all 
without any marked influence on the steady increase in 
output. By the time the speculative fever passed, gold 
mining was well established in the Philippines, although 
several newly formed and incompletely financed com- 
panies had difiiculty continuing operation. It is worth 
noting, in passing, that the new industry was almost en- 
tirely financed by local Philippine and American capi- 
tal. In contrast to most gold mining booms, little money 
came from outside. London invested a small amount and 
individuals in the United States have bought some shares, 
but no big foreign mining house has established itself in 
the Islands and no mines are owned abroad. To a large 
extent the mines have supplied their own capital. 

The increase in the price of gold was probably the 
most influential factor in the rapid increase in gold pro- 
duction, but the adoption of advanced technique also 
played an important part. The so-called Butte system, 
calling for a daily mapping of working faces, for in- 
stance, quickly piled up geological data and provided 
a solid foundation for ore reserve estimates, previously 
lacking. This in turn permitted safe investment in under- 
ground development and surface plant which lowered 
costs, increased profits, and led to more prospecting. 



• 17 • 



$40,000,000 iSugget (from page 17) 

starting an upward spiral in mining operation. 

There were other contributory factors. Mining became 
active in the Philippines when the industry was generally 
depressed elsewhere in the w'orld. As a result, abundant 
technical talent w^as available for even such minor posi- 
tions as shift boss. Contrary, too, to earlier expectations, 
Filipino labor proved well adapted to mining. Patient and 
intelligent supervision built up a satisfactory working 
force much more rapidly than had been anticipated. 

As a result of all this expansion, 23 mining and mine 
management companies paid dividends aggregating §11,- 
545,797 in 1938. Three paid more than $1,000,000 each 
and one distributed 85,100,000. The bulk of the profit was 
from the Baguio district, but Paracale, Masbate and Suri- 
gao also surged forward, and other minor districts were 
represented among the dividend payers. 

Philippine gold mines are generally shallow^ and as 
a rule little mining has been done below 1,000 feet. There 
are exceptions, however. One is in Balatoc, where min- 
ing has continued to 2,000 feet, with workings planned 
below that level. The bulk of the gold so far mined has 
come from the type of deposit known to the geologist as 
"epithermal," characterized by richness rather than depth. 
However, this type has yielded some of the great bonanzas, 
such as that at Goldfield in Nevada. 

In the Philippines, tonnage yielding a half ounce or 
more of gold is mined as well as some work ore containing 
two and three ounces. The veins extend exceptional dis- 
tances horizontally, the Balatoc-Itogon exceeding 12,000 
feet. Individual stoping lengths are shorter but recur- 
rent, and individual ore shoots are mined for as much 
as 1,600 feet along the strike. Ordinary stoping widths 
range from five to 20 feet, but widths up to 80 feet are 
found. 

One large low^-grade mine, Masbate Consolidated, is in 
operation treating 4,000 tons a day with plans to increase 
to 5,000. Four placer mines are operated, the largest being 
the Coco Grove at Paracale on the Pacific shore of Luzon. 
Coco Grove's two modern dredges during 1939 handled 
3,793,291 cubic yards wdth an average value of 26 cents. 
There is one small smelter in the Paracale district for 
treating concentrates and the Lepanto Consolidated Min- 
ing Company is operating another for making copper 
matte at its property in Northern Luzon. 

Largely under its ow'n steam, the Philippines has thus 
forged ahead among gold producing countries until to- 
day it holds a position of great importance. The change 
in the past decade has done more than bring prosperity 
to a few mining promoters. Last year, 40,000 laborers 
were eniployed at wages considerably above the average 
for the Commonwealth. The government received approxi- 
mately $3,750,000 from the industry. With the advent of 
independence in 1946. our new nation will have a sounder 
financial basis because of its great expansion in mining — 
this despite the gloomy outlook in 1931. ^ 



The first popularly accepted description of the Fili- 
pinos by a "foreigner" was written in 1250 by a Chinese 
geographer named Chao Ju-kuo. However, the Oriental 
Library at Tokyo has found that a Chinese, Ma Tuan-Lin, 
wrote about "the country of Mait [now known as Min- 
doro], some people of which came to the coast of Kuan- 
Chou [Canton] with goods and treasures on board, in 
the 7th year of T'ai-p'ing-hsing-kuo [a.d. 982]." 

• • • 

Official reports of the Philippine Labor Depart- 
ment estimate that approximately 4,037,000 persons are 
actively employed in the Commonwealth. In the face 
of our country's present population of some 16,000,000, 
that indicates that 11,963,000 Filipinos are living off 
their relatives. At least, we have no bread lines. 

• • • 

Our forefathers used to employ the John Alden method 
of proposing marriage. The best friend of the prospective 
groom was sent to the girl's house to make the proposal. 
Carrying a spear which he thrust through the ladder at 
the girl's house, the "best man" offered her a dow^ry as 
well as promises, and explained his mission not only to the 
girl but also to her father. If her father accepted, a w^ed- 
ding day was set. An old woman administered the marital 
oath. At the wedding feast, relatives of the bride were 
guests, whereas those of the bridegroom acted as hosts 
and hostesses. In entering her new house, the girl was 
carried on the shoulders of the men (not the bride- 
groom). Inside, she was waited upon by the bridegroom's 
father and close relatives. Not until she had been offered 
a present by the bridegroom's father, would she sit or eat 
or enter her nuptial bed. 

• • • 

Unlike the system in America, Philippine traffic fol- 
lows the Continental pattern. Since vehicles move on the 
left side of the road, the steering wheels of Philippine 
autos are on the right side. Gears are shifted with the 
left hand. But Filipino pedestrians are as individualistic 
as New York's "stupidestrians." 

• • • 

There are a number of theories about the origin of the 
80 catalogued Filipino languages and dialects. Some trace 
our tongue back to Sanskrit, others to Malayan. For w4iat 
it may be worth, we offer to researchers the following 
words which share a certain commonness with Hindu- 
Malayan-Aryan-Indian-pure Sanskrit-Chinese-Polynesian: 
hukum (judgment or decision) ; champaka (a kind of 
flower) ; pwasa (fast) ; tao (man or figure of being) ; 
nana or nanay (mother) ; ulan or uran (rain) ; saksi 
(witness) ; hari or jajji (head or chief). 



• 18 • 



TWO FIAU 



w, 



HENEVER the Hag of the 
Phili|)pinc Conmmonwealth is 
iinfiirlrd in the Far Eastern winds. 
ihc Stars and Stri|)es, roprcscnt- 
inii; the I nitcd States, whieh still 
I'xereises sovereianty over the 
Islands, flies above it. But. al- 
though it enjoys n(^ independent 
life yet, the Philippine flag is of 
near half a eentury standing. 

The Philippine flag assumed its 
present form (exeept for minor 
modifieations) early in 1898, when 
it was designed and adopted by the 
Junta Patrioiica, a couneil of exiled 
Filipino leaders in Hongkong. Af- 
ter the Battle of Manila Bay. Gen- 
eral Emilio Aguinaldo, leader of the Filipino Army, re- 
turned to Manila. On June 12. 1898, the flag which he 
had brought with him was unfurled over the Philippines. 

During the first years of the American occupation 
of the Philippines, displaying of the Filipino flag 
aroused so much excitement that, in 1907, the Philippine 




Conmiission was forced to pass a 
Flag Law which forbade its dis- 
play even in native homes. From 
1908 to 1919 there was great agi- 
tation for the repeal of the Flag 
Act. Victory came when a bill of 
repeal was signed by Governor 
General Francis Harrison on Octo- 
ber 22. 1919. This date, in effect, 
marked the recognition of Filipino 
nationality. 

The colors and designs of the 
Philippine flag are symbolic. The 
red. white and blue, which are pre- 
dominant, were adopted in honor 
of the United States. The three 
stars represent the union of Luzon, 
the Visayas and Mindanao, the three major regions 
of the Philippines; the eight rays of the golden sun 
stand for the provinces of Manila. Bulacan. Morong 
( Rizal) , Laguna. Pampanga, Neuva Ecija. Batangas and 
Cavite — where the first battles against Spain took 
place. ^ 



Outlook on Pacific (from Page 3) 

and eastward. Despite the technical difficulties of defend- 
ing the Philippines — and they are being repaired — it is 
essential that the Islands be defended. We cannot yield 
the Philippines to an aggressor without giving him an 
added weapon against ourselves. That is imperative 
today. There w^ill be time when peace is reestablished to 
return our minds to purely political objectives. 

President Manuel Quezon and the Filipino leaders well 
recognize the real factors of the situation. They know 
their interests today are identical with our interests. They 
cannot look forw^ard to real independence in a world 
where small natixDus exist only at the temporary pleasure 
of aggressive, greedy neighbors. The Filipinos have re- 
iterated their loyalty to the American flag, which is 
proof to Axis nations that the perils of democratic life 
are preferable — to one people, at least — to being under 
totalitarian "protection." 

In Alaska, a growing military development has made 
it possible for this Territory to play its proper role in 
the defense of the Pacific. Today there is general realiza- 
tion that the United States must be defended from Alaska, 
from Hawaii, and from wherever else is necessary. 
Alaskan residents, who include a considerable number 
of Filipinos, will do their part in whatever dangers may 
come as a result of our enlarged role in national defense. 
People of every locality, territory, or nation must realize 
at last that the defense of one is the defense of all. 7^ 



Sergio Osmena (from page 9) 

or£:anized the Collectivist Party, which, after five years of 
rivalry, won the election of 1922. 

Despite this apparent opposition, however, the Quezon- 
Osmena alliance continued until 1932, when it split on the 
bitter controversy over the merits of the Hare-Hawes- 
Cutting law. This was the first Philippine Independence 
Act, which passed the House of Representatives in 1932. 

Osmena supported the measure; Quezon fought it. Os- 
mena broke away from the Nacionalista Consolidado 
Party, of which Quezon was boss. The strife lasted three 
years. During that period the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law 
was rejected by the Filipinos. But, after all, the two dif- 
fered only on methods, not on fundamental principles. 
A new coalition was proposed. They got together again 
and have worked harmoniously for the good of the nation 
ever since. 

When the first Commonwealth elections were held in 
1935, Manuel Quezon was chosen President and Sergio 
Osmena, Vice President. They are running for reelection 
in the national polling November 11. 

For more than five years now Osmena has discharged 
the duties of his office with distinction. He has always 
been a valuable adviser to the President, an active col- 
laborator in the successful prosecution of governmental 
afl^airs. He embodies the ideas of a great statesman, and 
is reluctant to jump at quick conclusions w^ithout careful 
deliberation. ^ 



® 19 e 



^mk^ islwds . . . 



SUGAR BOWL 
OF THE 




w. 



UFA. on Marcli 1 (). 1S21. FiMcliiiaiul Maiicllaii. after 
crossing the hroaci Pacific Ocean from South America, first 
siohted the little islet of Homonhon at the southeastern 
tip of Samar in the center of the Philippine cluster of 
islands, he thought that he was at the end of his long 
voyage to discover the wealth of the Indies. Ihifortunate- 
ly, Magellan did not live to enjoy the rewards of his cour- 
age and daring. Nor did he ever know that the lands he 
discovered were not part of the fabulous S|)ice Islands. A 
little over a month after he brought his galleons into the 
harbor of present-day Cebu, Magellan lost his life in a 
battle with the natives of Mactan Island, just a few miles 
away. A monument today nuirks the spot where the first 
man to cross the Pacific died. 

Historians and economists who enjoy analyzing the 
"ifs" of history feel that, had Magellan lived and known 
that the islands he discovered were not part of the Indies, 
he would have been just as glad. For these islands, part 
of what Ave now call the Visayan group, were already 
noted, as they are now, for the fertility of their soil and 
the industry of their j)e()ple. For the next three centuries 
they contributed not a little to Spain's profiable Acapulco 
galleon trade that shuttled yearly between the Philippines 
and the western coast of Mexico. 

Today the Visayan group, with a total land area al- 
most six times greater than the whole Territory of Hawaii, 
is not only the most densely populated section of the 
Commonwealth, but also is so fertile that it is often 
called the "granary of the Philippines." From its well- 
cultivated farms come corn, tobacco, abaca (hemp), rice, 
peanuts, bananas, mangoes and pineapples. Even more 
important, more than 75 per cent of Philii)pine sugar ex- 
])orts during many years of the past two decades has 
originated in the Visayas. This, despite the fact that actual- 
ly only a small percentage of the land is tilled. In many 
places^ particularly in Samar and Leyte. three-quarters 
of the land is covered with virgin forest and dense jungle. 



By Ernesto D. Ilustre 



Samar — the fourth largest island in the Archi- 
|)elagi) — has the distinction of beiiig the first of the 
7.063 Philippine Islands on which the Spaniards 
set foot. Its rugged landscape, dominated by wild 
forest-clad mountains, gives Samar a forbidding- 
character. Samar is still largely under-developed, 
except in the immediate vicinity of the towns that 
fringe its coasts. 

Nearbv Leyte. one of the largest and most fer- 
tile in the Visayan group, is a hemp and coconut 
center. It also abounds with mineral deposits. Coal, 
asj)halt. oil. gold, iron and sulphur are also found. 
Prosperous Cebu Island is one of the nn^st important 
hem|) centers in the Philippines. Cebuanos — noted for 
their industry and thrift — grow extensively such tropical 
commodities as coconuts, sugar cane. hemp, bananas. 
pinea})|jles. mangoes. to])acco and corn. The capital of the 
])rovince. Cebu City, is the metropolis of the \ isa} an 
Islands and the oldest European city in the Philippines. 
Here Magellan made his first converts to Christianity. The 
harbor, an imi)ortant center of inter-island and export 
trade, is protected from storms by the island of Mactan. 

Iloilo City, in the island o[ Panay, ranks next to 
Manila as a port of entry for foreign commerce. Located at 
the mouth of the Iloilo River, it is famous for its pine- 
apple-fiber cloth, pottery, shell articles, cutlery and cigars. 

The island of Negros is the sugar-bowl of the Philip- 
pines. Its two provinces. Negros Occidental and Negros 
Oriental, produce over 75 per cent of the sugar exported 
annually by the Philip])ines to the United States. The 
capital of Negros Occidental, Bacolod. is a miniature 
American city with neatly laid-out and paved streets, 
stately buildings and modern go\ernmenlal offices. 
Dumaguete, the capital of Negros Oriental, is the seat 
of Silliman LJniversity, founded in 1901 with a gift from 
Dr. Horace B. Silliman of New York. The famous school, 
alma mater of many present-day Filipino leaders, is main- 
tained by the Presbyterian Board of Foreign Missions. 

Masbate Island boasts of a rich gold mine, the only 
open-cut gold deposit in the Philippines. The Arroroy 
district, in northwestern Masl)ate. contains one of the 
largest gold ore reserves in the (j)nnnonwealth. Cattle 
ranching is also carried on Ikmc on an extensive^ scale. ^ 



The map of the Visayan Islands on pairc 20. a 
companion to the section published in Vol. L No. 7. 
was drawn specially lOi Philippinks hy b'rank 
Manning. Mindanao will he pictured later. 



• 21 • 



Trails in The Soutli Paeilie Hh^y 

Philippine Air Lines Reports on Its First Six Months 



j^\eRIAL transportation in the Philip- 
pines made an important advance in 
February, 1941 when a group of Manila 
businessmen decided to create Philippine 
Air Lines, Inc., a corporation to develop 
passenger, mail and exjjrcss package 
transportation throughout the Common- 
wealth. Operations were inaugurated 
on March 15 and have continued with- 
out interruption since then. 

A six-times-a-week run from Manila to Baguio, the 
Philippines' famous mountain resort and one of the 
most important gold mining centers in the Islands, and 
a three-runs-a-week service to the towns of Paracalc, 
Naga and Legaspi in Southern Luzon were the first to 
be undertaken. Thus, Manila was linked more closely 
to two important mining districts and to two of the most 
progressive provinces in the country. 

Philippine Air Lines services were popular from the 
start, due to the saving of time involved. Ordinarily, 
the trip to Baguio by railroad and bus requires eight 
hours; the P.A.L. ships cover the distance in 45 minutes. 
The journey to Paracale and Legaspi takes almost a full 
day by railroad; with P.A.L. service, Paracale is only 45 
minutes from Manila, and Legaspi is 90. 

The success of the two first schedules induced P.A.L. 
to increase its fleet. Within a month of the inauguration 
of service, a new plane was received from the United 
States. P.A.L. is now planning additional routes to the 
sugar districts, to the tobacco provinces and to Moroland. 
More planes have been ordered and will be put in opera- 
tion as soon as they are delivered, the necessary govern- 
ment permits having been obtained already. 

The P.A.L. lines in operation at present, besides serv- 
ing the resort city of Baguio, Paracale, reborn during 
the gold mining boom, and Legaspi, at the base of beauti- 
ful Mt. Mayon, also reach Cebu, the oldest town in the 
Philippines, founded by Magellan, Masbate, in a very 
rich mining district, and Tacloban, an important market 
for copra. The lines in preparation will link Manila w^ith 
Delmonte and its rich pineapple plantations, Davao, the 
hem]:) capital, and fertile Cotabato, all in the rich island 
of Mindanao. Soon, thanks to P.A.L., all these towns — 
scattered among the 7,000 islands of the Philippine 
Archipelago — will be on the outskirts of Manila. 

A resume of the activities of P.A.L. in its first six 
months of operation shows the great inijjrovement its 
services means to passenger, mail and express transpor- 
tation in the Philij)pines. The statistics show that P.A.L. 
planes made 111 lr\])^ during those six months, carry- 
ing 2.295 j)ass(M)gers to all parts of th(^ Philipjjines, and 
covering J27.14o miles in .')9 l fl\ ing hours. The Manila- 
Baguio route was first wilh L129 })assengers and 211 
trips. Miles coxererl lolaled 53,lor>, and hours flown, 




194. The others showed: 

Manila -Paracale -Legaspi route: pas- 
sengers, 907; trips, 111; mileage, 
49,242; hours flown, 317. 

Manila-Cebu route ( 20 days of opera- 
tion) : passengers, 140; trips, 17; mile- 
age, 7,524; hours flown, 47. 

Chartered tri|)s: passengers, 119; 
trips, 42; mileage, 15,921; hours 
fiown, 10 L 

Most of these chartered lri])s were to meet emergen- 
cies. In some cases doctors, special serums and medical 
supplies were flown to distant mining cam])s or cities. 
On others, injured workmen or sick persons were carried 
to Manila for hospitalization. Maritime accidents were 
also attended to. P.A.L. ])lanes were used to spot the 
exact ])osition of grounded ships or to carry specialists 
and crews in salvage operations. 

The Philippine Air Lines operates with twin-motored 
Beechcraft planes, manned by ex|)erienced pilots and 
co-pilots, who are in constant contact wilh their base 
through two-way radio. Pilots are former members of 
the United States Army and Navy Air Corps and the 
Philippine Army Air Corps. P. I. Gunn, a veteran of 
naval and commercial aviation, is chief pilot and opera- 
tions manager. He is assisted by H. 0. Lott, formerly 
chief pilot for Western Air Express Co., Colonel Arnaiz, 
hero of the Manila-Madrid flight, and Lieutenants Ramos 
and Tirona, outstanding officers of the Philippine Army 
Air Corps. 

Philippine Air Lines rates compare closely with charges 
made by American airplane companies. The 45-minute 
flight from Manila to Baguio, for instance, costs $12.50; 
a ticket from Manila to Cebu costs $35. 

Previous to the appearance of P.A.L., a number of air 
services had been organized and operated in the Philip- 
pines. The first such venture was started in 1931. Operat- 
ing and financial difficulties, however, resulted in the 
abandonment of all earlier services. 

Philippine Air Lines is a Filipino corporation, w^ith a 
well-known Filipino businessman, Ramon Fernandez, as 
president. Manuel Elizalde of Elizalde & Co. is first vice 
president; John Schultz is second vice president and treas- 
urer. The company is managed by A. Soriano y Cia., with 
administrative offices at the Soriano Building in the heart 
of Manila's business section. Traffic and operating offices 
and workshops are situated at the Nielson Airport, on the 
outskirts of the capital. ^ 



The graphic report of Philippine trade on page 23 

will he brought up to date for each future issue. 

Figures are the latest available two weeks before 
publication. 



22 



Total Philippine Commerce for Five Month Period 

January-May, 1939-1940-1941 



^ildAhif EACH COMPLETE 


SYMBOL = 


$10,000,000 












IMPORTS 


COUNTRIES , 




1939 






1940 




1941 






^24,265,605 




64 20 7o 

1 u 


$47,352,375 




78 . 90% 


$43,787,372 


80. 68% 


UNITED 


















STATES 


















ORIENT 


$ 7,498,495 
^^^^ 




19.84% 


$ 8,263, 029 




13. 777o 


$ 8,815, 470 


16.247. 


EUROPE 


$ 4, 978, 252 




l3.l7 7o 


$ 3,025, 552 




5. 047o 


$ 975,399 


1 . 8 1 7o 


OTHERS 


$ 1,057, 107 

\ 




2. 79 7o 


$ 1,375,249 

4 




2. 297o 


$ 694,346 


1 .287o 


TOTAL 


$37,799,459 


$60,016,205 




$54,272,587 


EXPORTS 


COUNTRIES 




1939 






1940 




1941 




$43, 822,558 

MM 




78.907o 


$37,441, 673 




75. 847o 


$59,939,503 


80. l87o 


UNITED 














^^^^ 


STATES 


















ORIENT 


$ 4, 538, 760 




8. 1 67o 


$ 4,925,928 

M 




9 98 7o 


$ 1 2, 919, 180 


1 7. 287o 


EUROPE 


$ 5,796, 134 




10 . 457o 


$ 5, 150, 746 

M 




10. 437o 


$ 1,080,778 

1 


1 . 457o 


OTHERS 


$ 1,383,006 


2. 497o 


$ 1,846,683 

i 




3.747o 


$ 817, 863 

1 


1 . 0 97o 


TOTAL 


$55,540,458 


$49,365,030 




$74,757,324 


SOURCE; BUREAU OF CENSUS 


AND STATISTICS, MANILA AND MONTHLY TRADE REVIEW OF 


THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS. 





• 23 • 



IN THE PHILIPPINES 

By P. C. Morantte 



Jl or the past ten years there have heen vigorous dis- 
cussions, in print as well as on the platforms, about 
Filipino writers and their writings. More broadly, this 
talk has concerned Philipjjine literature in general. It 
is an interesting fact that Filipino writers in English, al- 
though a comparatively recent development, have been 
leading the Tagalog and Spanish writers in their critical 
attitude toward Filipino life and letters. Nowadays, all 
are awakening to the fac t that literature has a social re- 
sponsibility and that belles letlres do not touch deejj 
enough the native life to insure it progress toward human 
betterment. 

Such writers as Federico Mangahas, editor of the Herald 
Mid-Week Magazine, and Salvador P. Lopez, editor of 
The Philippines Herald, have done much to give social 
direction to the works of Phili])pine writers. But literary 
productions by a great many of their contemporaries, who 
presume to be modern critics of Filipino life, are moti- 
vated too much by social dilettantism to carry genuine 
convicti(jn and integrity. Consequently, whatever sincerity 
of purpose they may have in championing the cause of 
the masses is more often than not nullified by their pri- 
mary concern for identifying themselves with the intellec- 
tual fad of the moment. 

On the other hand, we have some critical writings in 
English that seek merely to catalog our literary prog- 
ress of the past 15 years or so. The most important of 
these critical writings are by Jose Garcia Villa ( who 
uses the pen name of Doveglion ) . He is considered the 
foremost critic of poetry and short stories in the Philip- 
pines today. Before Mr. Villa made his debut as a critic 
about 1927, literary criticisms had been published spor- 
adically by the late Fernando Maramag. by Carlos P. 
Bomulo (now general manager of the Manila Herald), 
and by Professors Crislino Jamias and Ignacio Manlapaz. 

Jose Garcia Villa took u|3 literary criticism with a 
Messianic j^assion. Since 1927 he has been devoting a 
great deal of his time to the task of selecting the best 
Filipino short stories of the year. Whenever the j)oetry 
j)ro(hiction warranted the selection, he has nominated 
the best Filipino poems of the year or of ihe several years 
under his j)ui*\ iew. Despite his aj)parent |)ersonal bias in 
judging a j)iece of writing on the basis of its esthetic 
value. rath(M- than its utilitarian responsibility. Villa's pon- 
tifications on literary ANorks have been largely responsible 
for waking up lh(^ ci itical facult) in Filij)ino writers. 

Anolher iniporlant critic is Salvador P. Lojjez. who 
difTcis from Villa in nian\ rcs()ects. Villa has esthetic con- 



science. Loj)ez has only a liberal faith in art. He is more 
concerned with social scenes and doctrines than with 
esthetics. His book of essays on life and letters. Literature 
and Society, which won a Commonwealth Literary I^rize 
last year, was written "'in terms of j)eople and of the 
dignity and the responsibility (jf human personality and 
particularly of the artist as a conscious force in the l)et- 
terment of s(K;iety." Edgar Snow, a noted American liberal 
and student of the Far East, characterizes I^opez as a 
worthy successor of Rizal, Mabini and Aglipav. in the 
general context of his appeal. 

"He does not yet possess the critical faculty of those 
great leaders of his peo])le", Mr. Snow admits, ''but there 
are signs that he may not lack their courage."' 

A. E. Litiaco, literary editor of the Manila GrapJiic 
is also a responsible critic. His most important field, how- 
ever, is as literary editor of the magazine in which prac- 
tically all our best short stories of the past few \ears 
have been printed. 

A well-known Filipino writer, who does not pretend 
to be a critic but, nevertheless, is one in the sense that his 
works are definitive of Philippine life, is Manuel E. 
Arguilla. Unquestionably, he is the foremost short story 
writer in the Philippines; some of his stories have been 
accorded special mention by the late Edward J. O'Brien, 
famous anthologist of short stories. A book of his short 
stories, "How My Brother Leon Brought Home a Wife." 
won for Arguilla a Commonwealth Literary Contest prize. 

Arguilla's stories are living commentaries. They pro- 
vide subjects for critical discussions. He has no doctrinal 
])reoccupations; he seeks only to portray lifo in a frame- 
work that is at once realistic and artistic. His characters 
open up fresh insights for more active critics and they 
remain for them a source of analysis. From his tales the 
critics, no less than the readers, learn the essence of 
native life, for his stories are also valid explanations of 
the contemporary scene. 

Literary criticism is already beginning to engage the 
interest of other Filipino writers. Arturo B. Rotor, author 
of the book, 'The Wound and the Scar" ( Philippine Book 
Guild), I. V. Mallari, Jose M. Hernandez and Teodoro 
Agoncillo are in this group. 

Despite this progress, Filipino criticism is still too 
inhibited to enjoy a respectable standard of quality. It 
suffers from too much moralism. It is obsessed w^ith 
counterfeit intellectualism. Its standard stresses ethical 
truths, ahvays inferring that a work of art cannot exi'st 
unless it conforms to conventional ideals. It lacks human 
personality and betrays sadly a want of both philosophy 
and discipline in esthetic thinking. 

Allegorically speaking, literary criticism in the Philip- 
pines is about ready for its birth. Filipino writers in 
English, Tagalog and Spanish are attending to its par- 
turition with something like parental concern. Just now, 
however, there is much speculation as to what kind of 
animal the thing will be when it is eventually born. But 
more im|)ortant than the thrill of exjiectancy is the 
knowledge that in due time it will take a definite place 
in Philij)pine life and letters. ^ 



• 24 • 




BLOOD COMPACT 
30 Centavos Orantzc-Red 
1939, surcharptui xv i t h 
a mall **Comntoii wealth,'* 
Scott i\umbcr: 442 A62(h) 



It A RASOA Ii\ CUVRCH 
I Pvso Oraitfzo & Black' 
1939, sitrrharpril with 
small **('.oninion wraith.** 
Scott dumber: 443 A63(b) 



CFMRCE rr Asmi\GToy 

5 Pesos Green & Black 
1 9 4 0, surcharged with' 
small '^Commonwealth.** 
Scott Number: 446 A66(b) 



BATTLE OF MAML4 BAY 
2 Pesos Bistre Brown & 
'Black 1939, surcharged 
with s mall **Common- 
wealth.** 

Scott Number: 444 A64(b) 



MONT ALB AN GORGE 
4 Pesos Blue & Black 
1 9 4 0, surcharged with 
small '^Commonwealth.** 
Scott Number : 445 A65(b ) 



STAMPS of the PHILIPPINES 

PHILIPPINE PHILATELIC Agency 

2362 Massachiiselts Avenue, N. W. 
Washington* D, C. 





^ Vtoftr9^^' < ' i> STATICS ill* vtli/?kR;X %M\ ' 
in!njpi»iMnsLVM)s J 

f U^s. I'osr.u.!-: Wsi! i 



CpMMDNWEALTH 



JOSE P. RIZAL 
2 Centavos 
Light Green 
1941, Regular. 
Scott Number 
461 



JUAN DE LA 
CRUZ 

20 Centavos 
Light Olix^e Green 
1939, surcharged 
with small 
**Common wealth.** 
Scott Number 
440 A60(a) 



COMMONWEALTH 





i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 



SALT SPRINGS 
12 Centavtts 
Black 1940 
surcharged 
ti'ith small 
''Commonwealth.** 
Scott Number 
438 A58(b) 

20 CENTAVOS 
Special Delivery Blue Violet 
1939, Type of 1919. Special 
Deli very surcharged with 
"Commonwealth.'* 
Scott Number: E7 SD2 



MAGELLAN*S LANDING 
16 Centavos Dark Blue 1939 
surcharged with small "Com- 
ntnnwealth.** 

Scott Number: 439 AB9(b) 



PKAIiL FISHING 
8 Centavos—— 

Violet 1939 

surcharged . with 
small "Common- 
tccalth.** 
Scott Number 
436 A56(b) 

FORT SANTIAGO 
10 Centavos Rose Carmine 
1939, surcharged with small 
"Common wealth.** 
Scott Number: 437 A57(b) 



n OMAN AND CARABAO 
4 Centai'Os — yellow'green, 
1940, sttrcharged tclth small 
"Commonivealth.^* 
Scott Number: 434 A54( b ) 




UNITBOSTATESOF AMERICA 
P>nUPPINE« ISLANDS . 



• 0 



For Further Information Address PHILIPPINE PHILATELIC AGENCY Washington, D. C. 



