1 



6cial Numbe 




, ^August, 1916 



ENGLISH SECTION. 

How the Dill Passed 3 

A Solemn Pledge and a Charier 5 

The President's Statement 12 

The Farewell Banquet at the New Willard 13 
The Anti-Imperialist League and the 

Jones Bill 19 

Editorials — 

The Man Who Embalmed Fitness — 
William Atkinson Jones — Adios 6, 7 



SECCION CASTELLAN A. 

Editoriales — 

Wil'iam Atkinson Jones— El Destruc- 
tor Del Imperialisnlo — Una Promesa 
Sulemne y Una Ley Organica— Adios . . 8, 9 
Como Se Aprob6 El Proyccto de Ley Jones 10 
El Presidentc Y La Xueva Ley Organica. . 12 



v. o- 



i 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. k 

-^y; ■ — r 

000 000000000 0000000000000000 000n0r}000ft0rw> 
n \ p. 
n \ " 0. 

1 ° 

s Teodor o R. Yangko I 

n n 

n n 

n n 

n n 

g n 

a Muelle de la Industria g 

JEj SAN NICOLAS, - MANILA, P. I. g 

P Telegraphic Address, "ORO"— Code: ABC, FifthEdition 0 

5 = Telephone 276 = 0 

s 0 



n 
n 
n 
n 
0 
0 
0 
0 




0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 



H n 

0 Steamers running to the provinces of | Lineas de vaporcs a las provincias de 0 

0 T _ 0 

0 Laguna, Rizal, Pampanga, Bataan g 

0 Cavite and Zambales 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

Q r-, n 

n 0 
0^0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

n 0 

0 VAHADERO DE NAVOTAS.-FINCAS 0 

0 BAZAR "SIGLO XX" q 

0 Carbon y Productos del Pais 0 

n L Consignaciones Q 
0 



I 

* 

The Filipino People 

Vol. 4, No. 1 WASHINGTON, D. C, U. S. A., AUGUST, 1916 Price 10 Cents 



HOW THE BILL PASSED 



A Typical Manila Day with Sunshine Beaming Joyfully upon the Good Work Done in 

America's Stately Capitol Building 



Congressmen Laud Mr. Quezon's Services to the Filipino People 



It was a typical Manila day — great 
shafts of brilliant sunshine wanning 
every cornice of the Stately Capitol 
Building, a grateful breeze, sister tq that 
which blows by the Maleeon. The 
atmosphere in the House was charged 
with expectation. Underneath and in 
between the huzzing of Congressional 
conversation, the impatient gavel-raps 
and "gentlemen will please come to 
order," the speeding to and fro of juvenile 
page-boys painfully trying to look old 
and important, the sparring for time and 
"campaign opportunity" — back of all this 
was an incessant assurance that some- 
thing was going to happen. It happened. 

The conference report was read. Mr. 
Jones, looking the invalid he is, but alert 



(By An Old-Time Manila Editor) 

of eye and vigorous of voice, explained 
tlie purport of the changes made. He 
avoided saying anything which would 
arouse anew the resentment of the 
"sleeping dogs" on the minority side. 
It was a dignified speech, a capable 
matter-of-fact elucidation, particularly 
the pertinent answers to questions put 
by Judge Towner and others regarding 
the status of Americans in the Philip- 
pines who desire to play an active part 
in insular politics. No excitement yet. 

The explanations are over. The Speaker 
pro tempore announces that "the gentle- 
man from the Philippines has the floor." 
All eyes turn to the compact, natty 
figure in spotless white duck who is stand- 
ing beside the reading desk. Hon. 



Manuel L. Quezon, perfectly at case as 
he always is under any given circum- 
stance, acknowledges with a graceful 
sweep of the hand and inclination of his 
head the cordial salvos of applause which 
arise from all sides of the House. He 
begins to speak and Congress ceases to 
converse. It sits back and listens, as it 
always dx's when something worth while 
is being said. 

Every word of the speech told. Fre- 
quently, the representative of the Filipino 
people was forced to pause while the 
delighted legislators of the greatest nation 
on earth cheered a point particularly 
well made and worth remembering. 
Winn Mr. Quezon announced that this 
was his valediction, Congress, without 



~ 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 



respect of party, demurred. "Yes/ 
he insisted, ,4 I have made up my mind." 
He gave full credit to those who had aided 
the passage of an act of justice. He made 
it clear to the House, and through the 
House to the nation, that the Filipino 
people will expect and insist upon com- 
plete fulfilment of the pledge so solemnly 
made, while they on their part will prove 
to America and to all the world that they 
can maintain a government, stable and 
just, in every respect worthy of full- 
fledged independence. He finished amid 
unusually whole-hearted cheering to be, 
immediately, the center of ;i throng of 
famous Congressmen, congratulating him 
upon his speech and the success of his 
campaign in this country, and wishing 
him the great future he deserves among 
his own people, whose political emancipa- 
tion he has achieved. They slapped him 
on the shoulders and gripped his hands, 
telling him over and over again what an 
inspiration to all has been his seven years' 
service in Congress. And the sturdy 
"iron man of Tayabas" took it all calmly 
as part of the day'* work. It was not 
of himself he was thinking, but of his 
at last emancipated compatriots so many 
leagues away, co-partners in his work 
and in his day of triumph. 

Friends and foes of justice to the Philip- 
pines alike paid public testimony to 
Mr. Quezon's ability and unsparing 
energy. These were some of the brightest 
touches in the debate — the chief feature 
of which, beyond all comparison, was the 
Philippine Commissioner's "Swan Song" 
— if that it is to be. 

Here a-c some of the tr'butcs, as grace- 
fully put as they are well de ervc:l, paid to 
Mr. Quezon durirg the closing moments 
of his Philippine debate by his confercs 
of the Congress: 

Mr. Towner. I think it may perhaps be 
fitting for a member of the minority to 
say thai while he has not always been 
able to agree with the Commissioner from 
the Philippine Islands, he is ready to 
say that he has never known any man 
more devoted to the interests of his 
people as he understood those interests, 
than has been the gentleman from the 
Philippine Islands. (Applause.) In sea- 
son and out of season, with an ability and 
persistence rare and creditable to any 
representative in any parliament in the 
world, this gentleman has worked for his 
people. 

Mr. Miller. I indorse all that the gentle- 
man from Iowa said, as it has my hearty 
and unstinted approval. Senor Quezon 
has achieved notable distinction. He is 
today easily the most popular and beloved 
Filipino among his own people. He has 
won this splendid place in the hearts of 
his countrymen by his unfailing devotion 
to the Filipino's interests as lie under- 
stands them, by his honesty, his loyalty to 
principle, by his generous nature and 
those qualities of personal charm which 
make him the friend and comrade as well 
as the leader and statesman. These 
same qualities have endeared him to us 
here and enabled him to perform the great 
work for his cause which, in my opinion, 
no other living Filipino could so ably 




PRSIDEXT WOOD ROW WILSON' 



tarry on. He has achieved success, in 
that today sees the passage of the bill for 
which he has long labored, lie should 
be happy today — happy in his success; 
happy in the knowledge that while attain- 
ing it he has won the esteem and admira- 
tion of the entire membership of this 
House. (Applause.) 

Mr. Cline. Mr. Chairman, I do not 
want this opportunity to go by without 
making an observation upon the character 
and ability of the representative of the 
Philippine Islands. After seven years of 
association with him, after seven years of 
close observation, I am glad to say today 
that he illustrates the possibilities of his 
raCe, J believe that I speak the senti- 
ment of this House when I say that no 
man could have more faithfully, more 
honestly, more courageously, and with 
greater ability represented the Philippine 
Islands than has the gentleman from the 
Philippines. (Applause.) 

Mr. Brumbaugh. I want to take 
occasion here to testify to what I learned 
from my recent travels through the 
Philippine Islands, to the respect and 
confidence the people of those Islands 
have in their representative, Mr. Quezon, 
and I want to speak this word of apprecia- 
tion of the fidelity and ability with which 
he has represented his people upon the 
floor of this House. (Applause.) I found 
everywhere in the Islands that the people 



had universal confidence in him as a man 
and as a representative, in his integrity, 
and in his devotion to what they believed 
to be the best interests of those Islands. 
I join with his numerous friends in wishing 
him long life, success, health, and happi- 
ness. (Applause.) 

After the vote was taken — the act 
accomplished — Mr.' Quezon, the members 
cf the Insular Affairs Committee, the 
staff of the Philippine Delegation and a 
number of Filipino visitors in Washington, 
were "filmed" by an enterprising movie 
man on the Capitol steps. Doubtless, 
the reels will be shown and vastly cheered 
in the Philippines. A charming young 
figure in the group was Miss Trinidad de 
Leon, the dainty daughter of former 
Assemblyman de Leon, who is making her 
first tour of America and winning hosts of 
American friends. 



EXPORTERS 

Manila Hemp M. O. P. Shells 
Cum Copal and other Native Product* 
214 David, Manila 

Davao and ZamBoanga 
P. O. B. 1115 Manila 




THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 




RON. WILLIAM J. BR VAX 



A SOLEMN PLEDGE AND A CHARTER 



I 



Victory? Not all we have fought for, 
some with deeds as well as with words; 
not all we require and desire; yet, none the 
less, victory — a great, a memorable 
victory. The eighteenth day of August 
in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred 
and sixteen will be remembered by the 
Filipino people with pride and with joy 
unto the crack of doom. The day and 
the men, Filipino and American, who 
helped make it memorable. 

The passage of the Jones Bill, its sig- 
nature by the President of the United 
States, the confession by Congress that 
the Philippines of right ought to be, and 
shall be independent — these are not 
incidents in the life of our people. They 
mark an epoch in Philippine political 
history. Congress, the law-making power 
of the United States, deaf and dumb to 



Filipino pleadings through eighteen years, 
has at last spoken — complete emancipa- 
tion is to be ours as soon as stable govern- 
ment is established in the land we love. 

The words of the preamble constitute 
no empty phrase. This is no partisan 
political declaration. It is the Congress 
which speaks. Let no man forget that 
fact. The- American people are responsi- 
ble before all the world for the exact 
fulfillment of this most solemn pledge. 

They are responsible to us. We, too, 
Filipinos, are responsible to them. 

The enactment of the Jones Bill gives 
us for the first time in our history a 
Charter of Real Liberty. To all intents 
and purposes the making of our laws, the 
administration of these laws, is now in 
our own hands. Before all the world we 
have sought and accepted a weighty 



responsibility. We must not, we dare not 
underestimate that responsibility. 

From now onward every act o our 
legislators, of our public officials, high and 
low , becomes a matter of international, 
BS well as national importance. The 
worlds searchlight will be trained upon 
cur every deed; our public declaration 
will be examined under a microscope. It 
is for us to see to it that we give no just 
cause for reasonable censure. 

For years we have been maligned by 
men of evil heart and oblique mind- 
,,,n who cared not what they said or did 
so long as the world thought ill of us, our 
capacity for self-government. It was 
because of the wrong impression created 
by these men that we had to plead so long 
in vain to the American Congress to 
obtain that which just and generous 
Americans would gladly have conceded 
;s a matter of right. That wrong im- 
pression still survives. It must be 
dissipated-banished forever. We must 

dissipate it. , 

It does not suffice that one is just and 
rcaosnable. The ways of the world 
require that justice and reason be made 
fully apparent. Ttjsthe concern of every 
in dividu gljjlip^ 

inTeTn^tio ^alac^e^nce to t hat highplanc 
cnSteenTand respect to wluclTom^vir- 
tuSTo unaEaTs^^ 

usTTiiis is no vanity; it is duty of the 
1, ft lest nature. The world moves rapidly, 
these days; and all nations are compelled 
1o take full cognizance of the progress of 
each entity in the great Cosmopolitan 
Commonwealth. 

We must be unto each other, Filipinos, 
Spartan critics of each other's words and 
acts, yet kindly disposed and comradely 
withal, helping one another along the 
way _ t hc road which will surely lead to a 
brighter and a greater tomorrow. One 
thought, alone, should inspire us— the 
fair fame of the Philippines our mother, 
our sister, sweetheart and wife! Nothing 
must sully her honor— no speck nor whis- 
per of scandal must touch her garment. 

In thc legislative hall, in the executive 
chamber, in thc conduct of our courts, in 
our relations with each other and with 
those who are guests within our gates, let 
us be guided by this dominant idea — 
what can wc say or do which will add new 
laurels to our beloved motherland— our's 
in every sand that is laved by the sea, 
every hill that arises to worship the 
heavens, every leaf and blossom which 
woos the wind and the sun! 

Our fathers have told us how, in their 
dreams, they visioncd, as through a glass 
darkly, a Philippines, free, prosperous, 
happy — the sons and daughters of the 
soil standing up erect with smiling faces 
and the little children playing with the 
broken shackles which had ceased to scar 
and scar the flesh of men and women cre- 
ated by God to worship Him, alone. Rizal, 

{Continued on page 12.) 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE 



Issued Monthly by 




MANUEL L. QUEZON 




Washington, D. C. 




MANUEL L. QUEZON 


- Editor 



Published Monthly by Mnnuel L. Quezon, 
Washington, I). C. Subscription rate $1.00 
per annum; payable by check or money order; 
single copy, 10c. Subscriptions outside the 
United States $1.50 per annum in advance. 
Remittances should be made payable to Maximo 
M. Kalaw, Manager. 

Office of Publication, 148 House Office Bldg., 
Washington, D. C. 

Entered as second-class matter Sept. 27, 1912, 
at the post office at Washington, D. C., under the 
Act of March 9. 1879. 

Advertising rates furnished on application. 

This journal is devoted solely to the interests 
of the Filipino People, whose name it bears; and 
to the fair and truthful exposition of the relations 
between the Philippines and the United States, with 
a view to hastening the ultimate establishment of 
Philippine independence upon a self-governing 
republican basis; by the aid and with the recognition 
of the United States. 



AUGUST, 1916 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE 



"THE FILIPINO PEOPLE" is issued 
by me as the Resident Commissioner 
from the Philippine Islands, as an official 
medium for expressing the views of the 
people whose name it bears. In stating 
facts regarding conditions in the Philip- 
pines, I give them as I know them, 
without intending that they shall be 
colored by any influence or prejudice, 
that they may be set forth authorita- 
tively and with the greatest possible 
approach to accuracy. 

I assume in my official capacity all 
responsibility for the ideas offered and 
the statements made ; and 1 desire solely 
to bring about a better understanding 
in the Philippines and in the United 
States of the real conditions which exist 
in both countries. 

MANUEL L. QUEZON, 
Resident Commissioner from the 
Philippine Islands. 

THE MAN WHO EMBALMED 
"FITNESS" 

When President Wilson sought a man 
who would give the force of actual prac- 
tice to the policy of "The Philippines for 
the Filipinos" (acclaimed in words but 
denied in deeds by his three Republican 
predecessors) his mind's eye settled upon 
the Hon. Francis Burton Harrison, of 
New York. Mr. Harrison accepted the 
Governor-Generalship of the Philippines. 
He has carried out the President's man- 
date. 

He wronged no man, American or 
Filipino, in faithfully performing the 
tasks which called him to Manila. But 
because he lived up to the letter of the 




HON*. FRANCIS BURTON HARRISON. 
Governor-General of the Philippine Islands. 



McKinley-Taft-Roosevelt doctrine, every 
act of his administration was made the 
target of misrepresentation and base 
slander. His motives were impugned. 
Publicly and privately, he was exposed to 
the slings and arrows of partisan opponents 
who hesitated at no extremity of falsehood 
in order to delude the American people 
into the belief that he was the Siva, the 
Destroyer, of all that had been created 
by American occupation of the Philippines. 

Yes, Mr. Harrison has been a "Des- 
troyer" in the Philippines. He "des- 
troyed" prejudice, to begin with. He 
brought to a summary end the rule of 
coercion and chaps which was rapidly 
creating a wide and deep chasm between 
Filipinos and Americans. Courageously 
and wisely, he destroyed the system by 
which the insular treasury was being 
pillaged for the benefit of callously covet- 
ous corporate contractors. He found 
the finances in a critical condition. He 
made the insular government self-sup- 



porting, self-sustaining despite adverse 
circumstances created by the war. 

For three years before his arrival, the 
Philippine Assembly had refused to vote 
approval of the extravagant Forbes 
appropriation bills. Herod from Harvan 1 
had to fall back upon the provision in 
the law which continued the appropria- 
tions in the last approved money bill. 
The Commission and the elected Philip- 
pine legislature had nothing in common; 
Mr. Harrison and the legislature — not to 
speak of the entire Filipino people — 
worked as one man. Why? Because they 
had the self-same objective in view — the 
greater good of the Filipino people. 

In applying the President's policy so as 
to enable the Filipino people to prove 
their capacity in handling difficult execu- 
tive as well as legislative work, Mr. 
Harrison did much to open the eyes of 
Congress and the American people as to 
actual facts of "Filipino fitness." It 
was a body blow which made the rabid 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE 



7 



ivumionists writhe. Without this iron- 
clad argument provided by three years of 
liberal and just government in the 
Philippines, it is doubtful if victory could 
have been won. This fact should not, 



and it will not be forgotten. The name 
of Francis Burton Harrison will remain 
engraved upon the hearts of our people 
as that of one of the chief authors of our 
Declaration of Independence. 



ADIOS 

This is the last issue of The Filipino 
People. As I announced in the first 
number, printed in September, 1912, the 
publication was established by me as the 
Resident Commissioner of the Philip- 
pine Islands "as an official medium for 
expressing the views of the people whose 
name it bears." I assumed in my official 
capacity all responsibility for the ideas 
offered and the statements made. My 
sole desire was "to bring about a better 
understanding in the Philippines and in 
the United States of the real conditions 
which exist in both countries." 

The passage of the Jones Bill enables 
me to bring to a close my official mission 
in the United States. Others, of course, 
will continue that which I have begun. 
Much still remains to be done, but I feel 
that the time lias come when I can resign 
my office and retire to private life. 
Consequently, and I confess with some 
regret, I am compelled, perforce of its 
personal-official character, to bring to an 
end the publication of The Filipino 
People. 

It has enjoyed the support of many 
unselfish friends. To these friends I 
tender the lasting gratitude of my com- 
patriots beyond the sea, as well as my 
own fervent thanks.. 

It has, I do believe, accomplished much 
good. In part, at least, it has counter- 
acted the evil activities of bitter enemies 
of my people. *I bear no malice towards 
these enemies of Filipino freedom. On 
the contrary, I wish them well, praying 
only that they may yet see the light and 
follow it as fearlessly and as persistently 
as they have assailed the interests of my 
people, now, in their hour of promise, 
dearer than ever to me. 

There is nothing more to say except to 
place upon record my abiding faith in 
the justice and generosity of the American 
people; and to extend to friends and foes 
alike with all my heart the assurance that 
I shall never forget the courtesy and 
appreciation with which my efforts have 
been received. 

Adios! 

Manuel L. Quezon. 



OH TA DEVELOPMENT CO. 

EXPORTERS 

Manila hemp 

M. O. P. Shells 

Gum Copal and other Native 
Products 

214 David, Manila 

Davao and Zamboanga 
P. O. B. 1115 Manila 





[^The history of the world, dark, re- 
pellant in so many places, is ever 
brightened by the deeds of men who have 
not hesitated to make the last requisite 
personal sacrifice in order to champion 
the cause of the weak and the oppressed. 
These are the world's true heroes! They, 
it is, who provide the most precious 
pages which are as footholds on the steep 
precipice of time, urging onward and 
upward men of later ages and genera- 
tions that the emancipation of the human 
race along lines of complete comrade- 
ship and appreciation and understanding 
may, at last, be attained. 

William Atkinson Jones, the Virginia 
gentleman, is one of them. A statesman 
and a sturdy Democrat, he will live in the 
annals of East and West as The Father of 
Filipino Freedom. Our people are a grate- 
ful people. They never forget a friend or 



a friendly deed. As long as the Philip- 
pines endure, Mr. Jones will be remembered 
with pride and with thanks and his splen- 
did work extolled. 

Calumny, caustic, carping criticism did 
not still his eloquent voice or abate by 
one jot his enthusiastic interest and ac- 
tively in the fight, which he made his 
own "fight. Weakened in body by illness 
which threatened his very life, he stood 
firmly by the helm until, after many 
heart-breaking setbacks, he brought his 
ship safely into port. His ship and our 
ship! The Filipino people hope best to 
prove their gratitude to this great Vir- 
ginian by steering a safe, sane and suc- 
cessful course to the estuary which is 
now in sight— thanks largely to his 
sympathy, his unselfish energy and his 
unwavering loyalty — Complete Independ- 



8 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 



EL PUEBLO FILIPINO 



Revista Mensual, Washington, D. C. 

E. E. U. U. de A. 



desembocadura que ya csta a la vista, 
gracias en gran parte a su Interns, energfa y 
lealtad inquebrantablc — hacia la com- 
pleta indepcndcncia de Filipinas. 



MANUEL L. QUEZON Director 



Publfcase mensualmente bajo la direccidn y 
responsabilidad de Manuel L. Quezon, en Wash- 
ington. D. C, E. E. U. U. de A. Precios de sub- 
scripcidn: En los Estados Unidos, $1.00 al ano; 
en otros paises, $1.50; Numero suelto, 10c. Pago 
adelantado, por cheque 6 giro postal. Haganse 
los pagos a nombre de Maximo M. Kalaw, ad- 
ministrator. 



Precios de anuncio: Se enviardn a solicitud. 
Admitida en el correo de Washington como 
correspondencia de segunda clase. 

Consagrase esta revista exclusivamente a los 
intereses del Pueblo Filipino cuyo nombre Jleva 
y a la imparcial y vcridica expo&ici6n de las 
relaciones entre las IsJos Filipinas y los Estados 
Unidos, con el objeto de acelerar el estalecimiento 
definitivo de la indepcndencia filipina sobre un 
regimen republicano, cc n )a ayuda y el reconoci- 
miento de los Estados Unidos. 



AGOSTO, 1916 



WILLIAM ATKINSON JONES 

La historia del mundo, cuyas pdginas 
son negras a ratos y en muchos de sus 
pasajes horripilante, tiene tambicn lmcas 
brillantes, y esas son las que relatan los 
hechos de hombres que no vacilan ante 
el peligro mas grande y estdn dispuestos 
al sacrificio si ellos' son precisos para 
abogar por la causa de los ddbiles y 
oprimidos. Y estos hombres son los 
verdaderos heroes de la humanidad. 
Son ellos los que legan a la posteridad las 
pdginas mds preciosas de la historia, que 
constituyen algo asf como escalones 
construidos en el precipicio del tiempo, 
estimulando a hombres y generaciones 
venideras a que prosigan y avancen hacia 
la emancipacitfn de la raza humana 
para que llcgue al fin el dfa en que todos 
los hombres se entiendan y conozcan 
mutuamente y se sicntan verdaderos 
camaradas. 

William Atkinson Jones, el caballero 
de Viriginia, es uno de esos hombres 
Estadista y demdcrata fiel, su memoria 
vivira eternamente en los anales de 
Oriente y Occidente como el Padre de la 
Libertad Filipina. Nuestro pueblo es 
un pueblo agradecido. Nunca se olvidan 
de un amigo o de un favor recibido. 
Mientras exista un solo filipino, Mr 
Jones serd recordado con orgullo y con 
gratitud, y su esplendida labor ensalzada 
La calumnia, ni la critica mds accrba 
pudieron acallar su elocuente palabra 
o aminorar su entusiasta interes y activi- 
dad en la lucha por la causa que el hizo 
suya. Ffsicamente ddbil, debido a un 
mal que amenazaba su propia vida 
sostuvose con firmeza, sufrio hondas 
decepciones, hasta conducir su nave a 
Puerto seguro. j Su nave y l a nuestra! 

Pueblo fihpino espera demostrar meior 
su gratitud a este ilustre virginiano 
guiando la nave por curso seguro hacia la 



EL DESTRUCTOR DEL IMPERI- 
ALISMS 

Cuando el Presidcnte Wilson buscaba al 
hombre que podn'a dar efectividad a la 
poh'tica "Filipinas para los filipinos" 
(aclamada en palabras pero no traducida 
en hechos por sus antecesores), su pensa- 
miento estaba fijo en el Honorable 
Francis Burton Harrison de Nueva York. 
Mr. Harrison acept6 la jefatura del 
Gobierno de Filipinas, y a f<5 que cumplid 
con el mandato que recibicra del Presi- 
dente. 

No causd dano a ningun horn lire, 
americano o filipino, al desempenar con 
fidelidad la misidn que lc llcvara a Manila. 
Pero por haber ajustado su conducta a la 
letra de la doctrina enunciada por 
McKinley, Roosevelt y Taft, sus actos 
oficiales fueron el bianco de calumniosas 
acusaciones. Aun sus intenciones fueron 
ridiculizadas. Publica y privadamente 
fue el criticado por sus adversarios polfti- 
cos quienes no vacilaron en recurrir.a la 
falsedad y a la mentira para pintarle 
ante el pueblo americano como el "des- 
tructor" de todo lo bueno que la ocupa- 
ci6n americana trajo a Filipinas. 

Convenimos en que Mr. Harrison fiie" 
un "destructor" en Filipinas. fil "des- 
truyo " el prejuicio. Tambidn "destruyd" 
€1 la coercion y el caos que que se con- 
vertfa en un abismo cada vez mds hondo 
que separaba a los filipinos de los amcri- 
canos. Con valor y decision, "des- 
truyd" 6\ tambicn el sistema mediante el 
cual la Tesoreria Insular era vfctima del 
pillaje, mediante la concesidn de con- 
tratas a ciertos codiciosos constructores. 
El hallo* el Gobierno Insular en un estado 
econ6mico deplorable, e hizo que los 
ingresos de ese gobierno bastasen para 
sus atenciones, y esta situation satis- 
factoria no fu£ afectada por las des- 
favorables circunstancias creadas por 
la guerra. 

Por tres anos sucesivos antes de su 
Hegada, la Asamblca Filipina se nego a 
prestar su asentimiento a los extrava- 
gantes presupuestos. El Gobernador 
General tuvo que recurrir a la disposition 
de la ley orgdnica que continuaba los 
presupuestos del ano anterior. La Co 
misi6n y la Asamblca Filipina electiva 
nada tenfan de comun; Mr. Harrison y 
la Legislatura-sin mencionar al pueblo 
fihpino en general-laboraron como un 
solo hombre. torque? Porque tenfan 
un objetivo comiin, el biencstar del 
pueblo filipino. 

En la apkcacidn de la poh'tica del 
Presidcnte de dar oportunidad al pueblo 
filipino de demostrar su capacidad en 
resolver diffciles problemas ejecutivos 




VICli-PRESIDENT TH3MAS R. MARSHALL 

asf como legislatives, Mr. Han 
contribuyo mucho en abrir los ojos del 
Congreso y pueblo americanos hacia la 
realidad respecto a la "capacidad" de 
los filipinos. Fue* un golpe magistral que 
caus6 la furia de los retencionistas. Sin 
este argumento incontestable propor- 
cionando por tres anos de gobierno jus to 
y liberal en Filipinas, es muy dudoso que 
hubiesemos obtenido victoria. Este hecho 
no puede ni debe ser olvidad.,. K\ 
nombre dc Francis Burton Harrison sr 
perpetuard grabado en los corazon« 
los filipinos, como uno de los principalis 
redactores dc nuestra Declaracidn de 
Independencia. 



UNA PROMESA SOLEMNE Y 
UNA LEY ORGANICA 

i Victoria! No hemos obtenido todo 
por cuanto hemos luchado, algunos con 
hechos asf como con palabras; no hemos 
alcanzado todo cuanto neccsitamos y 
deseamos; y, sin embargo, nuestro ha sido 
el triunfo, un triunfo grande y memorable 
El dfa diez y ocho do Agosto del ano de 
mil novecientos diez y seis serd recordado 
por el pueblo filipino con orgullo v jubilo 
hasta la ctemidad. Tambitm re'eordara 
nuestro pueblo, ademas del dfa, a los 
hombres-americanos y filipinos— que 
contnbuyeron a hacer memorable esa 
fecha. 

La aprobaci6n del Bill Jones, su sancion 
por el Presidcnte de los Estados Unidos, la 
corifesion hecha por el Congreso de que 
las Islas Filipinas constituyen v deben 
constituir una naci6n independiente, son 
succsos que deben revestir trascendcntal 
importancia en la vida de nuestro pueblo 
Marcan una epoca en la historia poh'tica 
de FUipinas. El Congreso, el poder 
legislador de los Estados Unidos, que por 
diez y ocho anos ha estado sordo y mudo a 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 




HON. CHAMP CLARK 
Speaker, U. S. House of Represcnta ives 



los ruegos del pueblo filipino, ha hablado 
al fin ; ha dicho que gozaremos de nuestra 
complete emancipaci6n tan pronto como 
pueda cstablecerse un gobierno cstable en 
la tierra que adoramos. 

Las palabras contenidas en el pre- 
ambulo del proyecto no constituyen una 
frase hueca. No es la declaraci6n de un 
partido politico. Es el Congreso el que 
habla. Que nadie se olvide de este hecho. 
El pueblo americano es responsable ante 
el mundo entero del fiel cumplimiento de 
esa solemne promesa. Tambien son res- 
ponsables a nosotros, pero nosotros, los 
filipinos, tenemos tambien responsabili- 
dades que cumplir rcspecto a ellos. 

La promulgation del Bill Jones nos 
concede, por vez primera en nuestra 
historia como pueblo sometido, un c6digo 
de verdaderas libcrtades. Teorica y 
practicamentc, el poder de dictar nuestras 
leyes asf como la facultad de aplicarlas, 
cstdn en nuestras manos. El mundo 
entero es testigo de que hemos buscado y 
aceptado una responsabilidad trcmenda. 



No debemcs, no intentamos siquiera, 
aminorar esa responsabilidad. 

De hoy en adelantc, cualquier acto de 
nuestros legisladores, de nuestros funcio- 
narics publicos de alta y baja categorfa, 
cstara revestido de una importancia no 
solamcnte nacional, sino tambien interna- 
cional. Las miradas del mundo entero 
estaran fijas en nuestras acciones; nuestras 
. declaracioncs publicas scran cstudiadas 
con dctenci6n. De nosotros depende el 
no dar lugar a una justa eensura. 

Hemos sido, por muchos anos, vfctimas 
de hombres de corazon maligno e inteli- 
gencia obtusa, de hombres que no les 
importaba que decfan o haci'an con tal de 
que el mundo pensase mal de nosotros y 
cucstionasc nuestra capacidad para go- 
bernarnos. A las calumnias levantadas 
por csos hombres contra nosotros se debe 
el que hayamos tenido que rogar por tanto 
tiempo, y en vano, al Congreso americano, 
para obtener lo que la justa y generosa 
America nos hubiese concedido gusto- 
samente como algo que nos pertenece por 



ADIOS 

Este es el ultimo numcro del "Pueblo 
Filipino." Como anuncie* en el primer 
mimcro, publicado en Scpticmbre de 
1912, esta revista fue* fundada por mi 
como Comisionado Residente de las Islas 
Filipinas "como un 6rgano oficial para 
extcriorizar en los Estados Unidos los 
sentimientos y aspiraciones del pueblo 
cuyo nombre lleva." Asurru en mi 
caracter oficial toda responsabilidad por 
las ideas cxpresadas y las declaracioncs 
hechas, siendo mi unico deseo el "esta- 
blecer, tanto en las Islas como en los Estados 
Unidos, mcjor conocimiento de las con- 
diciones cxistentes en uno y otro pafs." 

La aprobacidn del Bill Jones me pone 
en condiciones de poder dar por cumplida 
mi misi6n oficial en los Estados Unidos. 
Otros, sin duda, continuardn la labor que 
hecomenzado. Mucho qucda aun por 
hacer, pero creo que ha llegado para mi 
la oportunidad de retirarme de la vida 
publica. Por este motivo, veome obligado 
a confesar con sentimiento, que tendrd 
que dar por terminada tambien la misi6n 
de la revista "El Pueblo Filipino." 

Este modesto peri6dico ha gozado del 
apoyo de muchos amigos desintercsados. 
A cstos amigos deseo exprcsar la gratitud 
etcrna de mis compatriotas del otro lado 
del Oceano, y darles mis gracias. 

Creo que esta revista ha hecho bastante. 
Por lo menos ha contrarrestado los 
esfuerzos de los mas fieros adversarios de 
mi pueblo. No siento rencor alguno 
contra estos enemigos de la libcrtad de 
Filipina. Por el contrario, dcsdoles bienna- 
danzas, y solo ruego que ellos pucdan 
aun ver la luz y la sigan con el valor y la 
tenacidad con que han combatido los 
intereses de mi pueblo en sus horas de 
prueba, cuando he scntido mas carino por 
esc pueblo. 

Nada me resta que decir sino ei hacer 
patente mi fe inquebrantable en la 
justicia y gencrosidad del pueblo ameri- 
cano; y agradeccr a amigos y enemigos, 
con la efusion de mi corazdn, por la 
cortesi'a que me han dispensado y el 
aprecio con que han recibido el fruto de 
mis esfuerzos. 
iAdi<5s! 

Manuel L. Quezon. 



derecho. La impresi6n err6nea causada 
por esas calumnias aiin subsiste. Debe 
scr disipada, borrada para siempre. Es 
nuestro deber disiparla. 

No es bastante que uno sea justo y 
razonable. El mundo requiere que la 
justicia y la raz6n scan evidentes, visibles. 
Todo filipino debe cstar interesado en que 
nuestra raza ascienda en la estimation 
internacional, a esa altura a que, por 
nuestras virtudes, nuestros ideales, n i - 



(Cojilinua en la pdg. 11) 



10 



COMol^APROBd EL PRO YECTO 
DE LEY JONES 



Un Dia Tipicamente Manile«o, cone! Soli— * >C°» S « S 

Labor Reahzada en el Capitolio Amc 



Brillantes Rayos la Noble 



Los Congresistas Elogian los Servicios Prestados por 



Fud un dia tipicamente manileno: el 
sol, que resplandetia con brillantez, 
hatia sentir su calor en todos los ambitos 
del majestuoso Capitolio; una brisa 
agradable, comparable con la brisa que se 
disfruta cn el Malec6n, amortiguaba la 
calidez de la atmcsfera. El ambiente 
cn la Camara era de expectation. Por 
dure el murmullo de la conversaci6n 
congrcsional dejabase oir de cuando en 
cuando el ruido de los malletazos y la 
voz potente del* Speaker que invitaba 
cortesmente a los legisladorcs americanos 
a observar orden; Gentlemen uill please 
come to order. Los pajes cruzan precipita- 
damente el gran sal6n, tratando en vano 
de imprimir gravedad a sus rcstros de 
adole^cente. En medio de esta atmcsfera 
bullia la expectaci6n de que algo habria 
de ocurrir. iY ocurri6! 

El informe del Comite" de Confcrencia 
se ley6. Mr. Jones, invalido en aparieritui, 
pero con mirada alerta y vigorcsa voz, 
explic6 la importancia de los cambios 
hechos. Evit6 proferir palabra o frase 
alguna que pueda revivir el resentimiento 
de los "dormidos canes" del lado de la 
minoria. Fue" un discurso muy atinado 
el suyo, una h&bil prescntaci6n de los 
hechos, y sus contestations a las pre- 
guntas hechas por el Juez Towner y 
otros miembros respecto a la condition 
de los americanos en Filipinas que deseen 
tomar parte activa en la politica insular, 
fueron notablemente acertadas. Nada 
emociotionante aim. 

Las cxplicaciones han terminado. El 
Speaker anuncia que el "caballero de 
Filipinas tiene la palabra." Todas las 
miradas se dirigen a la correcta, pulcra 
figura ataviada en fcraje inmaculadamente 
bianco que se levanta cerca de la mesa de 
lectura. El Hon. Manuel L. Quezon, 
con la naturalidad que le es caracteristica 
bajo cualquiera circunstancia, agradece 
con un gesto gracioso de la mano y una 
inclination de cabeza la salva cordial de 
aplausos que se le tributa desde ilos 
distintos lados de la C&mara El co- 
mienza a hablar, y el Congreso cesa de 
conversar. Los miembros se sientan y 
escuchan, como sicmpre lo hacen cuando 



(Por un antiguo periodista de Manila) 

se dice algo que es digno de ser cscuchado. 

El discurso ha terminado. Con fre- 
cuencia, el reprcsentanto del pueblo 
filipino so veia obligado a hacer pausa 
mientras los deleitados legisladorcs de la 
gran maci6n norteamericana rendian su 
tributo a una frase o periodo del discurso 
dicho con oportunidad y digno de ser re- 
cordado. Cuando el Sr. Quezon anunci6 
que el discurso que 61 pronunciaba era 
el ultimo, el Congreso, sin difcrencias de 
partido, prescnt6 su "demurrer." "Si," 
insisti6 el Comisionado, "tengo tomada 
mi determinaci6n." 

El Comisionado rindi6 tributo a aquellos 
que le han prestado su apoyo para la 
consumacion de este acto de justicia. 
Hizo entendor enfdticamentc a la Camara, 
y por conducto de la Camara a la naci6n, 
que el pueblo filipino esperara el cumpli- 
micnto de la promcsa tan solemnemente 
echa, e insistird en su cumplimiento, 
mientras que ellos, por su parte, demos- 
traran a America y al mundo entcro que 
son capaces de|mantener un gobierno 



DERIIAM BROS. 

Lumber Dealers 

Offices: Saw Mill and PlaninR Mill, 6 calle 
Duque de Alba (Tnnduay), Manila, P. 1. 

Chas. S. Dcrham Wm. S. Dcrham 
Telephone 316 



ARCADIO ARELLANO, 

Arquitecto en ejercicio desde 1895. 
435 San Pedro, Manila, P. I. 



ANGEL JOSfi, 

Lanchas, Lorchas, Cascos for Hire 
General Discharging 

Estero Binondo 54. 



cs tablevjusto,digiioentodosbsrespeetus 
de ser completamente independiente. 
Tcrmind su discurso en medio de entu- 
S L tasaclamaciones,yel lugar en que se 
levantaba se convirtio pronto en el centre 
de un corro de Congresistas de renombre 
auc le felicitaron por su discurso y por 
el exito de su campana en este pais, y 
expresaronle sus deseos de verle dis- 
frutando del gran porvemr que el se 
merece, en medio de los suyos, cuya 
emancipaci6n politica ha obtenido. To- 
cdronle los hombros y estrecharon sus 
manos aquellos veteranos legisladorcs, 
repitiendole una y otra vez que sus siete 
anos de servicio en el Congreso ha sido 
una inspiraci6n para todos los miembros. 
V el erecto "hombrc fucrte de Tayabas n 
tom6 estas demostraciones con calma, 
como parte de la labor del dia. No 
pensaba en si mismo sino en sus emanci- 
pados compatriotas de allendo los mares, 
coparticipes suyos en su labor y en su 
dia de triunfo. 

Amigos y encmigos de la causa filipina, 
rindieron publico testimonio a la habilidai 1 
del Sr. Quezon. He aqui algunos de los 
brillantes toques del debate, cuyo aspect o 
primordial, que estd fuera del alcance «lc 
toda comparaci6n, fue el "Canto del 
Cisne" del Comisionado Quezon, si es 
que podemos llamarlo asf: 

Mr. Towner. Creo que quizas g a 
propio para un micmbro de la minoria 
deeir que, mientras no le fu6 siempre 
posible estar de acuerdo con el Comisiona- 
do de las Islas Filipinas, estd dispuesto 
. a deeir que jamas ha conocido un hombre 
mas consagrado a los intereses de su 
pueblo, como 6\ entendi6 esos interesos, 
como lo ha cstado el caballero de las Islas 
Filipinas. (Aplausos.) A tiempo y fuera 
de tiempo, con una habilidad y tenacidad 
raras y dignas del orgullo de cualquier 
miembro de parlamento en el mundo, este 
caballero labor6 por su pueblo. 

Mr. Miller. Estoy completamente de 
acuerdo con lo que el caballero de Iowa 
acaba de deeir, lo que sinceramente 
apruebo. El Sr. Quezon ha ganado una 
distmci6n notable, ftl es hoy el filipino 
mas popular y amado entre los suyos. 
El ha ganado este lugar prefcrente en los 
corazones de sus compatriotas por su 
persevcrante devotion a los interesos de 



THE FILIPl NO PEOI'I.K. 



11 



los fihpmos, como 61 los entiende, por su 
^onradez, per su lcaltad a los principios, 
Por su natural generoso y aciuellas cuali- 
oades personales agradables que hacen de 
un amigo y camarada, a la vez que 
Y estadista - Estas mismas cuali- 
dades han hecho que el sea amado por 
nosotros y han contribuido para que el 
pueda realizar la gran labor en favor de su 
pueblo, labor que, en mi opini6n, ningun 
nlipino viviente, podria realizar con tanta 
habihdad. £l ha triunfado, pues este dia 
presencia 61 la aprobaci6n del proyecto de 
ley por el que tanto y por tan largo 
tiempo ha laborado. £l debe sentirse feliz 
este dia, feliz en su triunfo, feliz en saber 
que micntras 61 obtenfa ese triunfo ganaba 
a la vez la estimacion y admiraci6n de los 
miembros de esta Camara. 

Mr. Cline. Sr. Presidente, no quisiera 
dejar pasar esta oportunidad sin hacer 
algunas observaciones acerca del cardcter 
y habilidad del representante de las Islas 
Filipinas. Despu6s de siete aiios de 
asociacion con 6\, despues de siete afios 
de observaci6n detenida, siento placer en 
decir que 6\ es un ejemplo de lo que su 
raza puede llegar a ser. Creo cxpresar el 
sentir de esta Cdmara cuando digo que 
ningun hombre puede con mayor lealtad, 
mayor honradez, mayor valor, y mas 
habilidad representar las Islas Filipinas, 
que el caballero de Filipinas. (Aplausos.) 

Mr. Brumbaugh. Deseo aprovechar 
esta ocasi6n para declarar aqui lo que he 
observado durante mis recientes viajos 
por las Islas Filipinas, el respeto y la con- 
fianza que el pueblo de aquellas Islas 
tienen en su representante, el Sr. Quezon, y 
deseo hacer oir mi voz de admiraci6n por 
la fidelidad y habilidad con que 6\ ha 
representado a su pueblo en esta Camara. 
(Aplausos.) Dondequicra que fuf en las 
Islas, halle que el pueblo tenia con nan za 
en 61 como hombre y como representante, 
en su integridad, y en su devocion a lo 
que ellos crcen ser beneficioso para ellos. 
Me sumo a sus numerosos amigos en 
desearle muchos aiios de vida, prosperidad, 
salud, y felicidad. (Aplausos.) 

Despues de haberse votado el proyecto, 
el Sr. Quezon, los miembros del Comite* 
de Asuntos Insulares de la Camara, el 
personal de la delegation filipina, y algunos 
lilipinos que estaban devisita en Washing- 
ton, fueron "sorprendidos" f rente al 
Capitolio por un "tomador" de vistas 
cinematogralicas. Indudablemente las 
peliculas que contiencn estas vistas 
"movibles" serdn cxhibidas y aclamadas 
en Filipinas. Prest6 singular atractivo 
al grupo la Scnorita Trinidad de Leon, la 
encantadora hija del ex-diputado Sr. 
Ceferino de Lc6n, quien hacc su primer 
viaje a America y cstd ganando numerosas 
amistades en este pais. 




SENATOR GILBERT M. MITCHOCK. 
Chairman. Committee on the; Philippines, United States Senat- 



UNA PROMESA SOLEMNE Y 
UNA LEY ORGANICA 

{Continuation de la pdg 9) 
tros actos, tcnemos derecho a figurar. 
Esto no es vanidad; es un deber sacratf- 
simo. El mundo evoluciona hoy con 
rapidez, y todas las naciones se ven obli- 
gadas a observar con cuidado los progresos 
que hacc cada miembro de la gran familia 
international. 

Dcbcmos, los filipinos, ser le uno para 
el.otro, criticos espartanos de los actos de 
cada cual, pero siempre dispuestos a ser 
camaradas y a prestarnos mutua ayuda 
en nucstra peregrinaci6n por el camino 
que scguramcnte nos conducira a un 
futuro grandioso y brillantc. Una sola 
idea debe ser nucstra inspiration, y esa 
es la de laborar por el bucn nombre de las 



Islas Filipinas que es nucstra patria y a 
la vez personifica a nuestras madrcs, 
nuestras hermanas, nuestras amadas, 
nuestras esposas. Nada debe mancillar su 
honor; debemos conservar inmaculada su 
tunica contra los manchones del escdndalo. 

En nuestros salones legislatives, en 
nuestros recintos ejecutivos, en el funcio- 
namicnto de nuestros tribunales de 
justicia, en nuestras rclaciones entre 
nosotros mismos y con aquellos que son 
nuestros hue'spedes, debemos dejarnos 
guiar por esta idea dominante: iQ\i6 
podemos decir o hacer que pueda anadir 
laurelcs a nucstra amada patria, en que 
cada grano de arena acariciado por el 
mar es nuestro, en que son nuestras las 
montanas que se levantan para adorar los 
cielos, en que cada hoja y capullo que el 



12 



vicnto acaricia y el sol dora son nuestros! 

Xuestros antcpasados nos han contado 
c6mo, en sus suenos, han vislumbrado 
como altrav^s de ceniciento cristal, una 
Filipinas libre, prospera, feliz; los hijos e 
hijas del pais crectamente lcvantados, 
con semblantes risuenos y los ninos 
jugando con los grilles rotos que han 
cesado dc atormentar y rasgar la piel de 
liombres v mujeres creados por Dios para 
adorarle a fil solo. Rizal, con los ojos 
velados por la negra tunica de la muerte, 
apercibi6 esa visi6n, que di6 calor a su 
corazon y fortified su valor mientras los 
provectiles de sus verdugos cantaron un 
triste requiem y enviaron a nuestro heroe 
a "dondc no hay verdugos ni ppresores." 
Para ver ese sueno rcalizado con prontitud, 
hombrcs y ninos, mujeres j6vencs y viejas 
sacrifiearon tambien gustosos sus vidas 
durante el pcriodo mas negro de nuestra 
historia, en aquella 6poca en que habiamos 
perdido todo cuando creiamos haber 
ganado todo, en los anos 1898 a 1902. 
Volvamos esa pagina. Cerremos el volu- 
men de predicciones, de agitaci6n, de 
rcpulsa, de desenganos, de promcsas in- 
cumplidas, de qucjas vanas. iAbramos 
un nuevo libro este dial 

cQue se escribira en ese libro? Noso- 
tros mismos podemos y debemos decidirlo. 
Y este nuevo libro, compatriotas, no es 
un mero volumen de predicciones o de 
agitacidn; es un libro de hechos, de ace ion. 

Nuestra propia labor debe y debera de- 
cidir nuestra suerte; decidira la realization 
final de nuestras aspiraciones que no 
pueden ni deben scr sino ver a Filipinas 
convertida en nacion libre e independiente, 
ver a nuestra patria ocupando su lugar en 
la gran familia de estados, y contemplar en 
ella la Ptrla de Oriente sonada por Rizal. 

A SOLEMN PLEDGE AND A 
CHARTER 

{Continued from page 5) 
the film of death obscuring his eyes, saw 
this vision, and it warmed his heart and 
steeled his courage while the bullets of his 
executioners sang his sad requiem and sent 
him Home. To hasten this culmination of 
hope brave men and boys, and tender girls 
and aged women, too, died cheerfully 
during that darkest period of our history 
when all seemed lost just when we had 
deemed all won— 1898-1902. Turn down 
that page. Close the volume of antici- 
pation, of agitation, of rebuffs, disap- 
pointments, broken promises, vain re- 
grets. We open a new book, today! 

What is to be written in that book we, 
ourselves, can and should decide. And 
this new book, Filipinos, is no mere volume 
of anticipation or agitation — admirable 
though that has been and concrete in its 
results— but a Book of Deeds, of Action! 

Our own work must, and it shall decide 
our destiny — the ultimate realization of 
all our hope — the Philippines, a Nation, 
Free and Independent, peer of our comrade 
commonwealths, Pearl of the East! 



Mm 




SENATOR JOHN F- SHAFROTH 



THE PRESIDENTS 
STATEMENT 

Immediately after signing the Jones 
Bill, on Tuesday, August 29, President 
Wilson said: 

"The Philippine Bill excites peculiar 
feelings in me, because there have been 
times when the people of the Philippine 
Islands doubted our intention to be 
liberally just to them. I hope and believe 
that this bill is a sufficient earnest to them 
of our real intentions. It is a very satis- 
factory advance in our policy of extending 
to them genuine self-government and 
control of their own affairs. It is only by 
such means that any people comes into 
contentment and into political capacity, 
and it was high time that we did this act 
of justice which we now have done. 



EL PRESIDENTE Y LA NUEVA 
LEY ORGANICA 

Immediatamente despues de firmar la 
Nueva Ley Organica para Filipinas, a las 
10:30 de la manana del 29 de Agosto, el 
Presidente se expreso as(: 

"El Proyecto de Ley de Filipinas causa 
en mi especial emoci6n, porque hube 
ocasiones en que el pueblo de Filipinas ha 
dudado nuestra intention de scr liberal- 
mente justos con ellos. Espero y confio 
que esta ley sera prueba suficicnte de 
nuestras verdaderas intenciones. Repre- 
senta un progresD satisfactorio en nuestra 
polltica de conceder a los filipinos mayor 
autonomi'a y dominio sobre sus propios 
asuntos. Solamente asi es como cual- 
quier pueblo puede sentirse satisfecho y 
demostrar su capacidad politica, y ya 
era ticmpo de que realizaramos el acto 
de justicia que acabamos de rcalizar. 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 



13 



THE FAREWElE BANQUET AT THE MEW 
WILLARD HOTEL 

GIVEN ?^mTouEZ T 0»p?^ R - ,ONESA ™ AG01I >WATCH 
u MR. QUEZON BY THE MEMBERS OF CONGRESS 



{Contributed) 



Concessioner Quezon left Washington 
2 ° rdcr t0 render ** Manila an account of 
his stewardship as the spokesman for his 
people, August 30. Q n the evening Qf 
the previous day-nine hours after Presi- 
dent Wilson had signed the bill-he was 
host to a company of about one hundred 
M the handsome Red Room of the 
WWillard Hotel. The guests included 
the most famous men in the Congress of 
the United States, present and past 
American officials associated with the 
political development of the Philippines; 
It was a notably brilliant company.' 
Hon. Claude Kitchin told how Speaker 
Clark, Mr. Adamson, chairman of the 
Interstate Commerce Committee, and the 
floor leader, himself, had declined a 
pressing invitation from the President of 
the United States in order to dine with 
Mr. Quezon and testify their regard for 
him and their appreciation of his wonder- 
ful work in Congress. Mr. Jones sat to 
the right of the host and Senator Shafroth 
on Mr. Quezon's left; yet there was no 
sign of partisanship — quite the reverse. 
Mr. Quezon possibly intended the dinner 
as a personal tribute to the Congressional 
friends he has made during seven years' 
hard, uphill work to the goal achieved. 
They turned the tables on him and 
demonstrated the superiority of parlia- 
ments by transforming the occasion into 
a testimonial to the political genius and 
personal charm of their host. Among the 
old time notables in the Philippine 
Government who cheered the praises of 
Mr. Quezon sung by Senators and Repre- 
sentatives were former Gov.-Gen. James 
F. Smith, W. Morgan Shuster and Maj. 
George P. Ahern; Brig. Gen. Mclntyre 
and Colonel Walcutt of the Bureau of 
Insular Affairs represented the official 
link between past and present. The 
table was banked with the prettiest 
blooms of the season, great magnolia 
blossoms, dahlias, roses, gladiolas, forget- 
me-nots and lilies of the valley. In front 
of the host stood a tall, tapering silver 
loving cup, which, towards the close of the 
dinner, Mr. Quezon presented to Mr. 
Jones as a token of his love and grati- 
tude. 

Mr. Tavenncr, of Illinois, on behalf of I 

I those who have worked with and against I 
Air. Quezon in Congress, presented the j 
retiring Commissioner with a handsome ' 
gold watch, inscribed as follows: 



"Presented to Honorable Manuel L. Quezon 
by His Admirers in the U. S. House ' 
of Representatives in Appreciation 
oj His Splendid Services in 
The Cause of 
P h il ippin e Independence 

August, 1916." 



Hie company cheered with enthusiasm 
when Mr. Tavenncr expressed the hope 
thai the watch would tick for Mr. Quezon 
during a long, prosperous and happy life- 
time. 

At the close of the dinner motion pic- 
tures of the most important scenes at- 
tending the e nactment of the bill, includ- 
ing the signature by the President, were 
flashed on the screen set up at one end of 
I be dining room. Mr. Quezon explained 
that these pic tures will be shown through- 
out the Philippines after his return to his 
homeland. 

Among the speeches delivered at the 
banquet were the following: 

Senator Stone, of Missouri, said : 

"Nine years ago it was my privilege 
to visit tne Philippine Island's. During 
my jounieyings through the Islands I 
Had the honor of heing entertained by 
our distinguished host, then the Gov- 
ernor of his province. Never in my life 
was I the recipient of a sweeter, more 
delicate or more affecting courtesy than 
he extended to me. (Cheers.) He asked 
me to attend this dinner. It was 
a graceful compliment. The one shadow 
over it was that it is to be a good-bye 
I am sorry to see the Governor go away 
not to come back again in his official 
capacity. 

"I am sure, gentlemen, that those of 
us who have been associated with him 
here have esteemed him for his own 
sterling worth, for his character, for his 
patriotism; and that our friendship and 
goodwill in every way will follow him 
no matter how far or how high he goes. 
(Cheers.) I ask you, gentlemen, to rise 
with me and drink this toast to our 
host." (Cheers.) 

Mr. Cooper, of Wisconsin, said: 

"I do not believe that any country 
wherever situated in the whole history 
of the world has had a representative 
to advocate its cause as the cause of the 
Philippine Islands has been advocated 
by Manuel L. Quezon. (Cheers.) We 
all know that— we in the House who 
know what that man has been through 
while he has been advocating the cause 
of the Philippines. ( Cheers. ) The base- 
less slanders that he has been called 
up' ui to encounter and endure have 
taught us to admire his unfailing tact 
and courtesy. 

"Mr. Toastmaster. I want to say a 
word to you, directly. Your conduct in 
the advocacy of that most difficult cause, 
in the Congress and throughout the 



country, illustrates a very important and 
oft-forgotten truth— that a man may be 
always fearless and determined and yd 
ever just and fair; and that, in public 
life, it is possible for a man to he am- 
bitious and yet never cease to be a gen- 
tleman, (Loud cheers.) I cordially cam- 
cur in the sentiments expressed by the 
gentleman from Missouri. I am glad to 
he here hut sorry it is in the nature of a 
farewell. 

Here Mr. Cooper told an appropriate 
Lincoln anecdote. There were two 
brothers Sloane, and the one succeeded 
the other in Congress. The retiring 
brother introduced his successor to the 
great, martyr President. Lincoln took 
a hand of each and said : "I am glad to 
meet you and welcome you, Mr. Sloane. 
I am sorry, very sorry to lose you. Mr. 
Sloane !" 

They would welcome with cordiality 
the successor whose path had been made 
so easy by Mr. Quezon, but their feelings 
would be like that of the Jews of old. 
"Those who saw the new temple re- 
joiced; but those who thought of the 
old temple mourned." Well, indeed, 
said Mr. Cooper with deep feeling, has 
Mr. Quezon deserved and surely he will 
receive the thanks and the honor— the 
highest honor in the gift of the Filipino 
people. (Cheers.) 

The Wisconsin jurist and legislator, 
who has ever been a loyal friend of the 
Philippines, touched briefly upon the his- 
tory of the Philippine legislation in Con- 
gress. He spoke of the proved worth 
of the Fijipinos— of Chief Justice Arel- 
lano, quoting from President Taft's 
statement that the presiding judge of 
the Philippine Supreme Court "Would, 
in ability, in integrity, and in high pur- 
pose, compare favorably with any su- 
preme court justice in the United 
States." 

"Taft said that," declared Mr. Cooper; 
"and he ought to be able to judge, for 
lie is himself one of the greatest judges 
in the world." 

At the request of Mr. Quezon. Mr. 
Cooper gave a short account of the life 
of Jose Rizal and recited the valedictory 
verses written by the poet-hero on the 
eve of his execution, "My Last Thought. ' 
He quoted in fine scorn the remark of 
former Speaker Cannon during the de- 
bate on the Philippine Organic Law of 
1902— "they (the Filipinos) are all bar- 
barians, savages incapable of civiliza- 
tion." and asked: "Who among us could 
write such a wonderfully beautiful 
poem? You have heard how nine years 
ago Mr. Quezon could not speak Eng- 
lish. How many Americans could hope 
to go to the Philippines and in nine 
years master a strange language so as 
to speak with the compelling eloquence 
■n^vhich that man spoke tonight? 
(Cheers. I 

"We went to the Philippines," con- 
cluded Mr. Cooper, "not to establish 
tyranny, but to set wider the bounds of 



14 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 



freedom and to bring to those islands 
the blessings of modern civilization. We 
owe much to our host that we are suc- 
ceeding in that great task. (Loud 
cheers.) 

Mr Tavenner, of Illinois, said he 
understood there were three parties in 
the Philippines, all favoring indepen- 
dence They had one good thing m com- 
mon Xonc vielded to the other in their 
admiration of the worth and respect 
for the work of Mr. Quezon. (Cheers.) 

"Now, gentlemen." continued Mr. 
Tavenner, "I wish to present him with a 
slight token of our admiration and ap- 
preciation of his excellent services. The 
thing that I am going to present to him 
ticks. And. Mr. Quezon, it is our hope 
that it will tick for you throughout a 
Ion- prosperous and happy lifetime." 
(Cheers.) 

The Illinois Democrat— one of the 
best-looking men in Congress, and whose 
charming bride was an interested spec- 
tator of the dinner, sitting with other 
lady friends of the company in the upper 
gallery— then handed to Mr. Quezon the 
gold watch, a parting gift from his 
friends in Congress. 

Speaker Clark said: 

"Mr. Toastmaster and gentlemen: I 
deeply appreciate the kindliness of heart 
which inspired the remarks of the gen- 
tleman from the Philippines. I am 
obliged to him for the tender of the 
votes of the Philippine Islands. It 
demonstrates that they are fit for self- 
government. (Laughter and cheers.) 

"I have frequently told people with 
whom I have conversed the remarkable 
story of Quezon— not having been able 
to speak a word of English ten years 
ago and now being one of the best speak- 
ers on the floor of the House of Repre- 
sentatives. (Cheers.) His case is very- 
similar to that of Carl Schurz, who be- 
came in his time the best speaker and 
writer of English in the United States, 
although when he came first from 
Germany he could not utter a word of 
English. He spoke book English. He 
learned how to speak and write from the 
best sources; and in addition to that he 
happened to be in Congress, the world's 
greatest educational forum. (Laughter 
and cheers.) As with Carl Schurz, so, 
too, has it been with our brilliant friend 
from the Philippines." 

The speaker digressed to poke a little 
fun at the Congressional Record and the 
time-honored (and sometimes abused) 
privilege of "extending the record" in 
"leave to print." When he came first to 
the House, Mr. Clark remarked that he 
felt strongly opposed to that practice. 
It seemed wasteful. But he had later 
learned otherwise. First, it thelpcd'the 



House to a lot of good information; and 
second— candidly— he would rather some 
members would print what they intend- 
ed to say than that he should have to 
listen to what they did say. (Laughter.) 

"The chief reason why we are here" 
said the speaker, "is that we all like 
the Commissioner from the Philippines. 
I do not see how we could help liking 
him." (Cheers.) "The second reason is 
that the American people have a very 
great sympathy with the Filipino people 
in the efforts they have been making, and 
are now making, to better their condi- 
tion. I think brothers Jones, Garrett 
and the others with them are entitled to 
the thanks of the American people as 
well as of the Filipino people." (Cheers.) 

"They say that 'wise men change their 
opinions and fools never do.' Our dis- 
tinguished friend from the Philippines 
is a wise man. We all know that. 
(Cheers.) Xow, Mr. Quezon has said 
that he is going away, never to come 
back. I hope he will change his opinion 
and come back. (Cheers.) 

"With all respect to the other good 
men they may have, I think he could do 
more good for them than any other two 
men they could send here." (Prolonged 
cheers.) 

Mr. Towner, of Iowa, a Republican 
member of the Insular Affairs Commit- 
tee, said : 

"I should like to add a word to what 
has been said, particularly by the 
Speaker, regarding the Commissioner 
from the Philippines. I entirely agree 
with the Speaker that there are no two 
men. in the Philippines who could be 
sent here who could do more for the 
Philippines than can the present Com- 
missioner. (Cheers.) The present Com- 
missioner has won the hearts of Con- 
gress because of his perfect candor and 
sincerity; because he has been an elo- 
quent, earnest and consistent advocate 
of liberty and freedom — and that meets 
with the earnest and immediate response 
of every American citizen. (Cheers.) 

"It is because of these considerations 
that we are always ready to hear him 
and to give him, as the representative of 
his people, a more ready acceptance than 
we possibly could others who might be 
sent here — because of his candor, be- 
cause of his energy and because of the 
fact that we believe him to be entirely 
sincere and devoted to the cause which 
he advocates." (Cheers.) 

"1 have not always agreed with the 
representative from the Philippines. I 
have not always agreed with others who 
have advocated the granting of larger 
measures of self-government to the peo- 
ple of the Islands than I thought was 
advisable in their own interest. But 
while we may have differed, as we have 
differed, with regard to measures and 
the exact application of principles, we 



A11P : n our desire to do 
^ve all been as one ofd 

ft* wW 1 £ better, more Sue- 

t0 make them and us jet 

mankind. I have ; { . ^ 

ffiifi^Sk independence or 

have stood upon that common ground. 

Commissioner goes home to 
his people I hope he will take this mes- 
g back to them-that there is not and 
□ever has been any reluctance upon the 
part of any body of Americans irre- 
spective of party, to give them further 
opportunities of self-government which 
we thought they could possibly exercise 
with safety to themselves. If we have 
seemed to deny them some things some- 
times, it has not been with any selfish 
motive, but, on the contrary, merely in 
their own interest. No American state, 
no American enjoys complete liberty of 
action. We are all subjects of the state; 
not the subjects of an individual, ot 
course, but subject' to the law and to 
the principles of constitutional govern- 
ment. In that sense, all of us have been 
subjects and will continue to be sub- 
jects as long as our government lasts. 
We want the Philippines to have just 
as large a share of self-government as 
the people of these Islands can stand; 
and, because the Commissioner from the 
Philippines has worked honorably, ably, 
fearlessly and devotedly to that end. we 
wish for him a long and happy and pros- 
perous career to the advantage of his 
people, and for that people we wish 
peace; happiness and prosperity whether 
it shall be under the American flag or 
under their own Philippine flag." 
(Cheers.) 

Mr. Kitchin, of North Carolina, said : 
"I do not think I could express more 
feelingly the high honor and deep per- 
sonal affection in which we hold the 
gentleman from the Philippines than 
by saying frankly that we excused our- 



YU BIAO SONTUA 

Dasmarifias No. 209. Manila, I. F. 

Comerciantes en toda clase de pro- 

ductos del Pals. 
Importaci6n de iVrroz. Molino de 
Arroz en Bautista (Pangasinan). 
Armadores del Vapor 
"Y SONTUA.' r 
Sucursales: 
Calbayog, Catbnlogan, Carigara, 
Tacloban y Surigao. 

Direcci6 telegrafica: "Sontua " 
Tel. 68. P. 0. Box 186. 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 



IS 



selves from the President's table, or 
rather made the President excuse him- 
self from feasting us in order to come 
down here and say Godspeed to 
Quezon. (Cheers.) We are delighted to 
be here to pay our respects to our dis- 
tinguished host, who is as able as wise, 
as tactful, as loyal a representative as 
any one people has ever sought. 
(Cheers.) I am glad I have remained in 
Congress long enough to see the enact- 
ment of as large a measure of self-gov- 
ernment for the Filipino people as that 
signed today by the President; and I 
hope that I shall live long enough (and 
not be a much older man, at that) to see 
another act passed giving to the Filipino 
people a full measure of independent 
government. (Cheers.) Our friend from 
the Philippines has told us that if the 
Filipinos had a voice in the election of 
the next President, their votes would all 
be cast for the gentleman from Missouri 
now sitting by my side. I can't say how 
the Filipinos may feel about this matter, 
but I know without a doubt that if the 
people of the United States had their 
way they would unanimously vote for 
our distinguished host as the President 
of the Philippine Republic, when ii 
comes; in fact, I nominate him now for 
that great honor. (Prolonged cheers.) 

"I regret that for some years to comt 
this will be the last time that I shall be 
in his presence, look into his face and 
enjoy his comradeship. (Cheers.) As the 
Speaker said, I hope he will change his 
mind and I assure him that if he does 
so he will always have open arms ex- 
tended to him and a hearty welcome 
whenever he comes back to this place, 
where he has done so much good." 
(Cheers.) 

Mr. Philip Campbell, of Kansas, said: 
"I cannot permit this occasion to pass 
without joining in this tribute of af- 
fectionate farewell to our host and 
friend. We do not have to agree with 
him always in order to admire and love 
him. (Cheers.) I have said on several 
occasions and I take pleasure in re- 
peating it here that there is no man in 
the American Congress better able to 
take care of himself on the floor of the 
House than the representative of the 
Philippine Islands. (Cheers.) I wish him 
godspeed, and his people peace, progress 
and prosperity under this new act which 
he has won for them and hope that he 
will reconsider his resolution and come 
back again here to give us the happiness 
and decided advantage of his presence 
and participation in the work of Con- 
gress." (Cheers.) 
Senator Phelan, of California, said : 
"I feel that coming from California 
I am the nearest neighbor of the Fili- 
pino people and, therefore, we take an 
especially deep interest in their welfare. 



There is, however, another reason why 
personally I feel strongly moved by their 
efforts to attain their aspirations as a 
people; for I, too, am sprung from a 
subject race. Perhaps that has given me 
sympathy and intelligence in approaching 
their problems. You can win these peo- 
ple from whom I have sprung by their 
affections but you can never reconcile 
them to their chains. (Cheers.) Hence, 
I am glad, tonight, to see that our great 
government has risen to the position 
where it, too, can comprehend the needs 
and interests of a people who by rea- 
son of their weakness have been sub- 
jected to centuries of tyranny, and that 
we have, at last, determined to act 
towards them under a high and deep 
sense of justice and generosity. 
(Cheers.) I wish we could have gone 
further and given them all they have 
asked of us. It should not concern us 
what kind of government they give 
themselves. It is not our government, 
but their government. Tonight we see 
the triumph of generous sentiment over 
commercial cupidity. (Cheers.) Grati- 
tude is worth something. I read the 
other day of two Cuban officers in the 
service of Mexico, who, when it looked 
like the certainty of trouble between 
Mexico and the United States, laid down 
their arms because, they said, they could 
not fight against the United States be- 
cause the United States had made Cuba 
free. (Cheers.) The gratitude of 
Cuba is ours today, and if need were 
to arrive the people of Cuba would 
stand shoulder to shoulder with us, be- 
cause we have made Cuba free. 
The same truth applies to the Philip- 
pines. God forbid that this coun- 



'Extraordinariamcntc Grande! 



try of ours should ever be plunged into 
war; but if trouble should come, if only 
we carry out the policy of which we 
have now given a positive pledge, the 
people of the Philippines will be our 
friends, because we shall have treated 
them with justice and with generosity." 
(Cheers.) 

Mr. Slayden. of Texas, read a num- 
ber of the earliest American Congres- 
sional and other statements regarding 
the proper policy to be pursued in the 
Philippines in support of his conten- 
tion that from President McKinley 
downwards there was no idea of perma- 
nent retention until well after the be- 
i\\\un<A pi i he negotiations which led to 
the Paris' peace pact. In the 55th Con- 
gress he had himself denounced "any 
unmminave alliance with Asiatic 
islands" because he was convinced that 
the way to accustom people to the 
blessings of freedom was to give them 
complete freedom. "That," said Mr. 
Slayden, "is my position tonight. I be- 
lieve that it is our duty not to stop 
short of the final step of which the Act 
signed today is but as the means to an 
end. I believe in the absolute, unmodi- 
fied, unqualified independence of the 
Philippine Islands." (Cheers.) 

Mr. Borland, of Kansas City, Mo., 
said : 

"Mr. Toastmaster and gentlemen : 
There are two very impressive facts 
which stand out in this gathering. One 
is the splendid tribute that has been 
paid to the Commissioner from the 
Philippine Islands, not only for his in- 
tegrity and ability as a man but for his 
intense loyalty to the cause for which he 
spoke. (Cheers.) It is our love of 



iExtraordinariamente Magnifico ! 



lExtraordiiiariamcnte Maravilloso ! 

i La existencia que 

LA ESTRELLA DEL NORTE 

i posee en 

BRILLAPsTES, PERL AS, PIEDRAS PRECIOSAS 

Alhajas de sumo gusto y primoroso arte Objetos de lujo. Articulos de plata 
en toda su inmensa variedad. Cristal tallado. Servicios completos de mesa. 
Objectos de Bellas Artes. Instrumentos de Marina y Optica. Articulos* ade- 
cuados para regalos de Boda. Efectos propios para regalos de Navidad. 

Al alcance de todas las fortunas y & satisfaccion del mas refinado capricho. 
Visitad nuestro Establecimiento. 

LA ESTRELLA DEL NORTE 

MANILA Fundada en el Ah6 de 1870 ILOILO 

PARIS LEVY IIERMANOS, 46-4tf-50 Escolta NEW YORK 

I 



16 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 



loyalty which bespeaks the broad spirit 
of American life. The second fact is 
contained in the words of the Commis- 
sioner himself when he said that he is 
returning to his people with no intention 
of coming back to us. His work has 
received the cordial applause of friends 
and foes. I know of no better message, 
no more splendid lesson that he can take 
back to his people than this: 'Because 
he has worked at all times unselfishly 
for his people the heart of Congress has 
gone out to him.' That should be an 
inspiration to his own people as it is 
an e xemplification of the broad spirit of 
fairness and toleration in which Con- 
gress endeavors to work for the Amer- 
ican people." (Cheers.) 
Mr. Moore, of Pennsylvania, said: 
••Mr. Toastmaster and gentlemen: 
I am glad, indeed, of this opportunity to 
say something which has been passing 
through my mind. I have a very high 
opinion of the gentleman from the 
Philippines. He has interested me more 
than most men ever since I have known 
him. He has been a marvel for energy, 
for wisdom and for ability, and the 
tributes that have been paid him in this 
room have not miscarried or been ex- 
aggerated. (Cheers.) 

''No man could be more deserving of 
the acclaims of his people than Mr. 
Quezon is when he returns to the Philip- 
pine Islands. Hs is a remarkable man 
with a very remarkable history. 

"When a mere boy he had a military 
career— one which would have done 
credit to any man in the United States. 
He had an educational career, more 
thorough in its scope, more lasting in its 
influence, than that of many men in the 
United States who have given them- 
selves wholly to the cultivation of the 
mind. We have learned much from 
him during his career in this country as 
the chosen representative of his people. 
The mind of a man who could not speak 
English nine years ago and who tonight 
speaks English as grammatically, as elo- 
quently as can any man educated in the 
United States must undoubtedly have 
some views of interest and of impor- 
tance to the people of the United States, 
not to speak of his own people. (Cheers.) 
I trust that when he goes back to the 
Philippine Islands he will be charitable 
in the expression of such views as he 
has formed about us. He has had a won- 
derful career, while still a young man. 
The best part of his life is still before 
him. Since I have known him I may 
say frankly that I have envied him the 
opportunity which he has of becoming 
a real leader of mankind — one of the 
leading statesmen of the earth. (Cheers.) 

"There are few men at this table who 
can hope to hold the place which will 
be given to Mr. Quezon among the 
champions of the rights of the people in 



the history of the whole world. 
(Cheers.) His name will stand out in 
lucid letters for all time— a name which 
will be dear to all lovers of human 
liberty— Manuel L. Quezon. (Cheers.) 
All honor to Mr. Jones, whose name is 
attached to this legislation— all honor to 
him because he has deserved it. 
(Cheers.) But, if we have our Wash- 
ington in this country, if the English 
people have their Wellington and the 
( It-mum people their Bismarck, history 
will record that they have their Quezon 
in the Philippines." (Prolonged cheers.) 
Senator Shafroth, of Colorado, said: 
"I have been gratified very much by 
the expressions so deservedly used re- 
garding our friend and host. I want 
to say to you that today I wrote a 
letter to Governor-General Harrison 
and in that letter I said that the 
Philippines could not get along without 
Mr. Quezon here and that he should 
be returned to Congress whether he de- 
sired it or not. (Cheers.) I would re- 
gard it as almost a fatal mistake not 
to have him here and I hope that when 
he gets to the islands and observes the 
sentiments there— which I am sure are 
even stronger than they are here, 
strong as these sentiments are — that he 
will reconsider his decision and return 
here. (Cheers.) We have done some- 
thing for the Philippines at last 
(cheers), but something more has got 
to be done in order to accomplish the 
great work to which he has devoted 
his talents. There have been differ- 
ences of opinion regarding this matter 
—differences as to the best ways and 
means to be employed. But so far as 
the Senate is concerned there never has 
been any doubt as to the ultimate aim 
for which we have been striving— there 
has been but one opinion as to that. 
Mr. Quezen takes back with him to the 
Philippines a substantial proof of ac- 
tual accomplishment. If he remains 
adamant in his present determination, 
he will still be with us, if not in per- 
son, then in spirit. I hope and be- 
lieve that his reception in the Philip- 
pines will be all that which his friends 
here would wish him, and more." 
(Cheers.) 

Returning thanks for the loving cup, 
Mr. Jones, of Virginia, said: 

"My heart is stirred to its very 
depths. I should be insensible to the 
very sentiments of life, to love itself, 
to a sense of gratitude, to the pulse- 
beats of my own heart if I did not feel 
profoundly stirred by the action of the 
gentleman from the Philippines, my 
dear Mr. Quezon, in presenting me with 
this beautiful tribute. I would that I 
could fittingly express my thanks for 
his gratitude and for his generosity. I 
cannot do it. I could add nothing if 
I were to attempt to add to the beau- 



The Yek To„ B L« , Fire : & Mann, 
Insurance Co., 
TheYekTongUn^anCo.,Ltd. 



Leonardo guison y pablo 

LANCHAS Y CASCOS 
Tel. 94*- E<tero B inondo » No ' W " 



"EL CENTRO DE MODAS" 
94, Escolta. Manila, P. L 

Sastreria y Camiserla. Vende toda 
clase de tejidos y artfculos 
para caballero. 



SING JUCO & CO. 

J. M. Bnsa, Iloilo, I. F. 

Compra y venta de Azucar al por mayor. 
Fmportacion y Esportacion. Comer- 
ciantcs en toda clase de Pro- 
duces del Pais. B ^ 

m N °" "siNG-BENCO. Manager 



SYYAP & CO. 

Men's 
Furnishing Goods 



21 Escolta, Manila 



SIULIONG Y COMPAftlA 

Ingreso No. 6, Binondo, 
MANILA, P. I. 



Importation y exportaci6n de efectos. 
Compra y venta de Letras 
sobre los principales 
puntos del Oriente. 



Agentes de varias CompafHaa de 
seguros y de pr&tamos. 



LA VILLA DE PANAY 

DE M. B. QUESIANG & CO. 
Iloilo, I. F. 

Almaccn de comestibles y bebidas de todas 
closes. Aquardiey res y Anisados de 
ha Clementina. 
Importacion y Exportacion. 
Tel. No. 49. P. O. B. 21. 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 



17 



tifu , sincere and the just tributes al- 
ready paid to our dear friend here to- 
night. There is not one of us who does 
not know that every word said was 
more than deserved by him. (Cheers.) 
It is a great source of pleasure to me 
that the measure which has recently 
been passed by Congress will meet with 
satisfaction and produce happiness in 
the Philippine Islands. No one of you 
could be more grateful than I am for 
that fact. 

"However feeble my efforts may have 
been I have striven as best I could to 
secure through Congress a declaration 
on the part of the people of the United 
States as to what should be the future 
status of the Philippines. I tried my 
best to create a sentiment in Congress 
favorable to action on this great ques- 
tion and it is naturally a source of very 
great satisfaction to me that at last I 
have lived to see the Congress of the 
United States give to the people of the 
Philippines this substance of self- 
government with the hope that in the 
near future they will be given its title. 
(Cheers.) 

"I wish I had the eloquence of our 
dear friend from the Philippines so 
that I could express myself more clearly 
and more fully. He is about to return 
to his people. I know that he will 
receive such an ovation, such a heart- 
felt welcome as never yet was ac- 
corded to any mortal man within the 
Philippine Islands. (Cheers.) And in 
my judgment he well deserves this 
great reception which surely will be his. 
(Cheers.) 

"During the seven years in which he 
has represented his people— and I think 
I had a better opportunity of observ- 
ing his work than any other man in 
Congress— he has not only worked with- 
out a single hour's cessation to create 
a sentiment in favor of the independ- 
ence of his country ; his own noble 
words and acts — I know I can honestly 
add, this thoughts — have been the very 
best advertisement of his people's fit- 
ness for independence. (Cheers.) I am 
too much overcome by the feelings 
this occasion excites to say what I 
want to say just as I should like to say 
it. This, however, I must say; that 
while I have always believed that it 
was the duty of the United States to 
fix a definite date for the ultimate in- 
dependence of the Philippines, from the 
expressions of opinion on all sides upon 
this question which I have heard, I do 
firmly believe that the bill enacted by 
Congress will give more general satis- 
faction than any measure yet proposed 
or any measure that we might possibly 
have enacted. (Cheers.) 

"I share the sentiments expressed this 
evening that it will be a great loss 



to us as well as a loss to Filipino in- 
terests here, if the gentleman who is 
now going from us insists upon refusing 
re-election as the representative of his 
people in the capital of the United 
States; and yet I am not prepared to 
say that his decision in this matter is 
not a wise decision. 

"Under the act just passed the Fili- 
pino people will establish a new gov- 
ernment. They will be called upon to 
exercise new legislative powers; and it 
seems to me that this is a patriotic 
thing for the gentleman who sits by my 
side to decline a renomination to Con- 
gress when— largely because of his own 
great and good work— the place would 

(Continued on page 18) 



BRAULIO FELICIANO t HIJOS 
FABRICANTES DE JARCIAS 

de las acreditadas marcas Laguna 
Rope y Patent Manila Premiadas 
con medalla de oro en las 
Exposici6nes de Filipinas 
Estas Jarcias son puras y exclusi- 
vamente de Abaca superior sin 
mezcla de Maguey. 

Muelle de Binondo No. 62, 
Telefono 4066. Manila, I. F. 



WONG AHANG & CO. 

Establccido desdc 1890. 
Callc Aldcqiicr No. 4 
Iloilo, I. F. 
Importacion de efectos de China y Japon. 

Exportation de Productos del Pais. 
Tel. No. 186. P. O. B. 86. 



Macleod & Company 



EXPORTERS OF 

Manila HEMP 



1043 Muelle de la Industria, 

Manila and Cebu. Chicago. 



MANILA 

New York and London. 



LAS ISLAS FILIPINAS 

De 

Valle, Evangelista y Tanjoco 
Escolta 101 MANILA, P. I. 

Establecimiento de tejidos y novedades de Europa 



INSULAR LUMBER COMPANY j 

Our Tanguile and Almon Lumber Offers an Acceptable 1 
and Reasonably Priced Substitute 

for 

MAHOGANY 

Large Stocks Always on Hand Well Manufactured and Seasoned 

Write for Samples and Prices 

MANILA, :: P. I. 



is 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 



(Continued from page 17) 

mean to a certain extent an easy 
sinecure and instead of coming here 
where he has made so many permanent 
friends to stay where the hard work 



'ill be, no- 
\vn\ people 



own", people and to give them the 
benefit of his own great experience in 
legislative matters and a knowledge of 
things that will help them to utilize to 
the best purpose this new liberal gov- 
ernment which we have given them. 
(Cheers.) I do believe that they will 
need his counsel and his experience 
there in Manila, more than they will 
need him here in Washington. Yet, 
do I believe that the day is not far 
distant when conditions will he reversed; 
when the stable government predicated 
in our promise will have been estab- 
lished; when by their own acts they 
will have proved that they deserve in- 
dependence. (Cheers.) And when they 
have demonstrated that fact, not only 
tc the people of the United States 
but to the whole world, they will surely 
send once more to the Congress of the 
United States the Hon. Manuel L. 
Quezon (prolonged cheers) to tell us 
that they now expect us to carry out 
the covenant we have this day made 
with them that when they shall have 
established a stable government they 
shall be given their freedom, their in- 
dependence. (Cheers.) 

"We shall all welcome him when he 
comes back. (Cheers.) I may not be 
here to join with you in welcoming 
him, but I know that you will give 
him a greeting worthy of his place in 
the life of his people, worthy of his 
part in the history of the world, worthy 
of this Congress which we are all proud 
to serve. (Cheers.) I believe, too, that 
Congress will stand ready to make 
good the solemn promise contained in 
the bill to which the President of the 
United States affixed his signature this 
morning. (Cheers.) 

'"Mr. Quezon, I would like to say a 
word to you directly and to send 
through you a message to your people; 
but I shall not take up the time at 
this late hour to do so. I believe when 
you land at Manila, the people of your 
country will say to you. 'well done, 
good and faithful servant' and that 
every honor they can confer will be 
conferred upon you. (Cheers.) It 



would be the delight of my life to 
accompany you back to Manila and to 
witness the welcome which I know 
awaits you in those beautiful islands 
for the work you have done in the 
Congress of the United States. God- 
speed and a happy return to your na- 
tive land. (Cheers.) Thank you again, 
dear friend, for this beautiful symbol 
of your affection towards me. I as- 
sure you that I shall treasure it as my 
most precious possession throughout 
the remainder of my life." (Cheers.) 



M. J. OSSORIO 

Comisiones y Consignaciones 
No. 26, Juan Luna 
Tel. No. 1071 

Dircccion Telcgrafica: OSSORIO 

MANILA 

Code: "A. B. C." 5th. 



ANTONIO M. H. LIM-GENCO Y CO. 

Plaza del Conde No. 127 Manila, I. F. 

Comisiones y Consignaciones de tabaco Rama de Isabela, 
Gagayan y Paneasinan 
Telefono 3620 P. 0. Box 901 



WARNER, BARNES & CO., Ltd. 

LONDON MANILA ILOILO 

General Merchants, Insurance & Shipping Agents 
IMPORTERS AND EXPORTERS 



AGENTS. 

Nippon Yusen Kaisha. 
American Asiatic Steamship Co. 
White Star Line. 
Bibby Line. 

The Great Transiberian Route. 
International Sleeping Car Co. 
Sperry Flour Co. 
Hill & Herbert, Ltd. 
Fnwcett, Preston & Co. 



INSURANCE AGENCIES. 

Law Union and Rock Insurance Co., 
Ltd. 

State Assurance Co., Ltd. 

China Fire Insurance Co., Ltd. 

Maritime Insurance Co., Ltd. 

Western Assurance Co. 

Tokio Marine Insurance Co., Ltd. 

Yangtse Insurance Association, Ltd. 



General Managers: The Pasig Steamer and Lighter Co., Ltd. 
The Pasay Estate Co., Ltd. 



Telegraphic Address: WARNER 
P. O. Box 294 



No. 7 Anloague 
MANILA, P. I. 



VIUDA DE TANTOCO 

Calla Marina No. 4 B , Iloilo, I. F. 

Importation y Exportation de toda clase de Productos del Pais. 
Compra-ventade Azucar. Fletamento de Lorchas. 

Direction Telegrafica— " Tantoco " 
Tel. 12 P O "R 7n 

GENERAL MANAGER ' 

Marina de la Rama Tanbunco 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 



19 



P. MARQUEZ LIM 
Iloilo,LF.Calle Real No. 17 

Tel. No. 25 p. o. B. 17 



THE ANTI-IMPERIALIST 
LEAGUE AND THE 
JONES BILL. 

The Anti - Imperialist League of 
America, whose efforts and activities in 
favor of Philippine independence are 
well known to Americans, to Filipinos, 
and to the world, addressed the following 
appeal to President Wilson, which, we 
believe, largely contributed to the speedy 
consideration and enactment of the Tones 
Bill: 

Boston, August 4, 1916. 
To the President. 

Sir: 

May we venture to suggest the supreme 
importance of the passage of the Philip- 



pine bill at the present session in the form 
agreed upon by a joint committee of con- 
ference from both Houses of the Congress. 
Such action seems desired earnestly by the 
Vice-President, by the Speaker and by the 
loading Democratic members of the 
National Legislature with whom we are in 
correspondence, as well as by the party at 
large, according to its will expressed in its 
last platform, in succession to those of 
four preceding campaigns. 

The only serious opposition indeed 
originates with the purely selfish and 
short-sighted investors and foreign owners 
in the Philippines, working through one 
of the most active and well endowed 
lobbies ever known in Washington. Yet, 
now a presidential candidate with per- 
verse inconsistency joins openly for the 
first time in their advocacy of a per- 
manent colcniatism the "malefactors of 
great wealth" whose defeat in another 
sphere won him his spurs in better days- 
accepting their flimsy plea of a national 
"duty" to fulfil a self-imposed "trust." 

Mr, Hughes has betrayed, indeed, the 
attitude of his own party whose platform 



recognized as at least "half done" this 
"duty" — to improve conditions in the 
Philippines so that they might attain the 
end of "a constantly increasing partici- 
pation in their government" — i. e., 
independence. Mr. Hughes has also 
betrayed the attitude of his first lieu- 
tenant who in view of present world con- 
ditions had veered to the position of the 
great Republican leader of 1898 like Hoar, 
Harrison and Sherman that we had no 
place for "possessions" in the Eastern 
Hemisphere. 

The defiance, which it is believed that 
Mr. Hughes' own party does not justify, 
should be squarely met by the definite 
promise of independence contained in the 
bill which has passed the House of Repre- 
sentatives and which will undoubtedly 
receive concurrent endorsement of both 
chambers at the present session, with that 
support from yourself which we respect- 
fully solicit. 

(Signed) Moorfield Storey, 

President, 
Erving Winslow, 

Secretary. 




MOORFIELD STOREY 
President. Anti-Imperialist League 



ERVIXG WIXSLOW 
Secretary, Anti-Imperialist League 



THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 



I) 

i 




" W Address, TABACALERA P. O. Box 143 

Compania General de Tabacos de Filipinas 

MANILA, PHILIPPINE ISLANDS Capital $15,000,000 

Established 

MANUFACTURERS AND 
TOBACCO GROWERS 

Proprietors of 
«LA FLOR DE LA ISABELA' 
Cigar Factory 

High Grade Genuine Philippine 
Cigars and Cigarettes exclusively 
made from the most selected leaves 
grown in the Company's Estates. • 

"LA FLOR DE LA ISABELA" 
is the largest factory in the 
Orient with perfect sanitary instal- 
lations — well ventilated, airy work- 
ing rooms — Absolute cleanliness in 
every department. 

PRIVATE BRANDS SUPPLIED 

Agency for the United States East Coast! 
Compania General de Tabacos de Filipinas 
27 William Street, New York 




Agency for the United States Pacific Coast: 
J. B. HAVRE & CO., 
1023 Kohl Building, San Francisco, California 



HEAD OFFICE: BARCELONA, SPAIN 



nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnpnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn 



n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 



"GERMINAL" ST. LOUIS, 1904 

inn::"::;""-"":""""? 



. n The name that stands for perfection in Manila Cigars 

and Cigarettes 



n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 



Daily output of Cigars, over 
Daily output of Cigarettes, over 



n 

GRAND PRIX g 

n 
n 
n 

D 

n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
a 
n 
a 



300,000 
- 7,000,000 



□ When you buy a Manila Cigar insist on it being a □ 



n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
a 
a 



"GERMINAL" 

:::::: """»""»""""""""::::::::::::::::::::™ 



n 
a 
n 
□ 
n 
n 
n 



nnunnnnnnnn0n0n00000000000n000000000000n0 

When writing to advertisers please mention "The Fiupino People." 



THE FILIPINO^^I 



D 

n 
n 
□ 

D 
D 
□ 

n 
a 
a 



n 
n 



□ Aceptan Comisiones, Consignaciones y 



flfl nnannnnnnnn"nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn 

an n 
a n 

g Establecidos en 1904 n 

D n 

n n 

I Fernandez Hermanos jj 

f,nmerciant es y Navieros § 

n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
□ 

5 Administraciones n 

n 5 

n n 

n n n n 

d n 

n n 

g Administradores Generates de la g 

g COMPANIA MARITIMA g 

6 (Sociedad Anonima, Filipinas) U 

n n 
n n 

§• * . |f. g 

S a 

□ Agentes de las Compafiias: g 

g Atlas Assurance Company, Ltd. 0 

North British & Mercantile Insurance Company 

Q British Dominions General Insurance Company, Ltd. 

The Ocean Marine Insurance Company, Ltd. q 

n 
□ 

n n n 



n 
n 
n 
n 
n 

□ No. 6 Plaza Moraga MANILA n 

n H 
n S 
nn nn 
nnnnunnnunnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnannnnnnnnnnn 

Reconiendamos sc racncione esta Revista al cscribir a los anunciante. 



