August 19, 1937 



The Honorable, the 
Secretary to the President 
of the Philippines, through 
The Uhief of Staff, P.A. 

Manila 

Sirs 

I acknowledge receipt of copy of your letter addressed to 
the Chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs, requesting informa- 
tion regarding the nature of the decoration granted by the King 
of Belgians to Capt. Cirlaco Carrillo and myself and t he r easons 
for the award. Although the Information is requested from the 
Chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs, I desire to advance the 
information desired, inasmuch as being one of the persons con- 
cerned, I know the reason for the award. 

In 1932 the now King of the Belgians, then Crown Prince 
Leopold, paid an official visit to the Philippines, with his 
wife, the late Queen Astrid. Governor General Roosevelt, 
then Governor General of the Philippine Islands, designated 
me as Alde-de-Camp and personal physidan to their Highnesses, 
the Crown Prince and Princess during their stay in the Philip- 
pines. For fifteon days I travelled with them and accompanied 
the Crown Prince in his trips through thick forests In various 
parts of the Islands where he made a study of our trees, col- 
lecting at the same time birds and butterflies. Capt. Carrillo 
commanded the Government Cutter "Arayat” which was placed at 
the disposal of the Crown Prince. In recognition of the 
services rendered to him and his wife, upon his return to 
Belgium, the Crown Prince recommended Capt. Carrillo and my- 
self for these Belgian decorations. Governor General Rooso- 
velt and Colonel MacDonald, U. S. Army, who also rendered 
services to the Crown Prince during his stay In the Philip- 
pines were awarded similar decorations and are now authorised 
to wear them. 



Very respectfully. 



(A TRUE COPY) 



(Sgd. ) BASILIO J. VALDES 
Major General 
Deputy Chief of Staff 




ll 




P. R. 36 



Second Session 



{RESOLUTION 36 



) 



resolution authorizing "ajor osjeral basilio j. values, dspott 

CHXLEF or 8?AJF ARMY OF THE PHILIPPINE TO ACCEPT THE 
ORDER AHD TO HEAR THE CORRESPONDING EECGRATIOH , CONFISRED 
UPON HIM BT HIS MUBSTY, THE KDF. OP BELOIAHS. 

•HHRBAS, His >iajesty 9 the Idas ot Belgians has conferred 
upon Major General Basilio J. Valdde# Deputy Chief of Staff, Array 
of the Philippines, the order of the Belgian Crown with its cor- 
responding decoration; 

WHEREAS, the said order and decoration were conferred upon 
Major General Basilio J. Valdle in recognition of his distinguished 
ssrvioes rendered to the then Crown Prince Leopold, now King of 
Belgians, during his -visit to the Philippines in 1938; and 

1H3R1AS, the official notification of bis appointment as 
officer of the "Order of the Belgian Crown" with the corresponding 
deoeratlon, is in the custody of the Adjutant-General, U# s. Amy, 
Fashington, B.C. 0 until the National Assembly of the Philippines 
shall have consented to Major General Easilio Unlade’ acceptance 
of the eaid order, pursuant to Act of Congress approved April 84, 
1937 (Pvt. Sbo 55, 73th Congress); 

Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved by the iraticnal Assembly to express es it hereby 
expresses its consent that Major General Basilio I. Valdls aay 
accept the order of the Belgian Crown conferred upon him by His 
lajesty, the ’lug of Belgians and to wear its corresponding de- 
coration. 



I hereby certify that the foregoing Resolution No# __ > 
was adopted by the National Assembly of the Philippines on 
. 1937. 



Adopted 



, 1937 

' >• * '• ■# 



Secretary, National Assembly 



• 4 

Upon «y arrival m Washington, I spoke to 
Colonel ahe&ouald .of the Bureau Ul ^nstuoi* rn * 0*1 O mw Aioui^iAavvev 
submitted icy name to Congress for the required approval * 

I have Just received a letter from the Resident Coamissioner 
of the Philippines in Hashington, quoting a portion of a letter re- 
ceived tf bin fro® the Chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs re- 
lative to the awarding of this decorations 

»0a June 14, 1937, this Bureau was informed by the Adjutant 
General that General Valdes under the previsions of the 
Act of Congress improved April 24, 1937 (Pvt. So. 55, 

75th Congress), had bean authorised to accept the deco- 
ration; that inasmuch as the provisions of Art. XU, 
reetioa I (9), of the Philippine Constitution seems 
clearly to rerulre the consent of r4^XKSC-6SKt»nf the 
Philippine National A sseocbly in addition to that of 
Congress, the decoration awarded him, the decoration 
in question would be retained in the Office of the 
Adjutant General until the consent of the Philippine 
Assembly bad been granted •* 

In compliance thereof, I respectfully request that pro- 
per authority be obtained fxow the Rational Assembly to enable 
me to accent the above-mentioned decoration . 

Attached 1 * draft of Resolution authorizing a» to accept 
and wear the above-described decoration. 



>W 



Major General 
Deputy Chief of Staff 



