

Vol.l No.fi 




Above: 



ciHiers arrive 
can soiaiers « 

aboard the U 



transpo 



rt Washington 



Dr. Quo Tai-chi, en route to Chungking to 
take his new post as Chinese Foreign 
Minister, called on President Quezon. 



Ab °ve : Tons „t 
abo "t to h« i . SCrap iron - 
were cc ^u** f ° T ^~ 

by *• ZSS 5 Manila 



T Johnson, 



U. 5. Mfnfater 



Below: Nelson ' ^ h/ American naval 



Below: Mr. and Mrs He 

rtffc/ were cjuost* 0 f President ° f New 

Philippines. 





Loyalty Offered and Accepted 

An Editorial 



FILIPINOS it; all walks of life, from the humblest 
fanner U> the President of the Commonwealth, have 
repeatedly expressed I heir loyalty lo the United States 
and their devotion to I he democratic ideals by whieh 
we live. President Quezon's moving Loyally Day mes- 
sage, published elsewhere in this issue of Philippines, 
is proof beyond question of the spontaneity of this 
feeling. As long as we are under the American flag, 
Filipinos will unhesitatingly support United Stales poliey 
in I he Far East, wherever that poliey may lead us* 

President Koose veils Midden, dramatic order placing 
the Philip]')] no Armv under American command was con- 
vincing proof that our sincerity was accepted and appre- 
ciated by the highest oflieials of the American Govern* 
merit. As such, il was weh onie news lo every Filipino. 

The Philippine troops will constitute a loyal and 
valuable addition to the United States Army Forces in 
the Far East, To an extent that lew Americans realize, 
these men have boundless faith in the ideals for whieh 
your nation has stood during its 40 years of close rela- 
tions with the Philippines. The poliey that the United 
States has followed in dealing with our people may have 
seemed fanciful and idealistic at titties, but it has had 
the concrete and practical result of producing 16,000.- 
000 devoted friends* Loyally to the Stars and Stripes 
among Filipinos would shame many Americans, 

To date, we have had little opportunity to demonstrate 
the value of our spirited young army as a defense weapon 
—a fortunate circumstance for whieh we give full 
credit to the prestige of your army and navy. But mili- 
tary men assure us that the force of 143.000 that Gen- 
eral Douglas Mue Arthur has set up since 1936 is alert, 
determined and possessed of good basic training. While 
we make no boast of invincibility, we are con fit lent that 
any woulcbbe invader would have to pay dearly for every 
inch of Philippine soil he occupied. Cooperating closely 
with the American soldiers in the Philippines, our men 
can be of inestimable value in defending this Far Eastern 
outpost of the democratic system. 

It is no secret that the training which General Mac- 
Arthur has given the Philippine Army has put greatest 
emphasis on defensive tactics — preventing enemy land- 
ings, fighting rear guard actions, raiding supply lines 
and eommuuiealious. To this work the Filipino is well 
at la pled by nature: il is I he type of fighting he used most 
creditably against both Spain and the United States 40 



vears ago. In bringing the young Philippine Army up-to- 
date on this kind of warfare. General Mac Arthur pre- 
pared us for our most useful defense role. \\ e may 
assume that the numerically small but highly trained 
American force in the Common wealth will devote its 
talents lo the more specialized offensive phases. 

It should be pointed out in any such discussion as 
this of Philippine defenses that General Mac Arthur 
is held in particularly high esteem in Manila. Every citizen 
of the Commonwealth knows the monumental work lie 
has done in bringing our army into being. In bis posi- 
tion as military adviser to President Quezon, he has 
been unobtrusive but effective. Credit for the anmV 
fine progress he has invariably assigned to others, yet 
all knew that Mae A it bur was the genius behind the 
organization. Experienced in Philippine defense prob- 
lems as few other Americans are. his appointment as 
commander of the newly organized United Stales Army 
Forces in the Far East is a source of satisfaction to all 
of us. 

It cannot be staled loo often that the Philippines yields 
to no other political unit under ihe American flag in 
the extent of its wholehearted cooperation wilh the 
United Slates Government. Time and again we have sacri- 
ficed our own immediate interest in following a course 
designed lo benefit the whole of the country, The recent 
unquestioning acceptance of the American export control 
system for the Commonwealth is a case in point. It is 
possible to interpret the Federalizing of the Philippine 
Army as a serious set-back to our Jong-standing inde- 
pendence aspirations: this, indeed- il may have been. But 
we feel it to be worth noting that there was no quibbling, 
thai the Philippines accepted the President's "rrlcr wilh 
far belter grace than many stales have shown toward 
Federal relief work of power projects wilhiii iheir 
borders. 

For the truth of ihe mailer is lhai we Filipinos are 
ptottd to belong to the growing arm) of idealistic peo- 
ple who are ready b» fight for their democracy. We con- 
sider it a privilege to stand shoulder to shoulder wilh 
the rest of the Ilberiy-loving world in resisting totali- 
tarianism. And while we are grateful thai the I nilcd 
Slates has convincingly shown its delermi mil ion to do- 
fend its Philippine bastion, we wanl e\ery American l<> 
know that we Filipinos are rau\\ to do our part in that 
%ht. * 




Above; Nearly 2,000 Ameri- 
can soldiers arrived at Man- 
ila aboard the U. S. Army 
transport Washington, 



Above: Tons of scrap iron, 
about to be loaded for ex- 
port, were caught in Manila 
by the extension of export 
control to the Philippines. 



Dr. Quo Tar-chi, en route to Chungking to 
rake his new post as Chinese Foreign 
Minister, called on President Quezon. 



Below: Nelson T. Johnson, U. 5. Minister 
to Australia, was greeted by American naval 
officers when he passed through Manila. 



Below: Mr. and Mrs. Henry Luce, of New 
York, were guests of President Quezon at a 
dinner party during a brief visit to the 
Philippines, 




Loyalty Offered and Accepted 

An Editorial 



Filipinos in m walks »r life, from the humblest 

farmer Lo the President of the Common weal Iru have 
repeatedly expressed their loyalty to the I nited Slates 
and their devotion to the democratic ideals by whirh 
we live. President Quezon's moving Loyalty Day mes- 
sage, published elsewhere in this issue of Philippines, 
is proof beyond question of the spontaneity of this 
feeling. As long as Ave are under the American Hag, 
Filipinos will unhesitatingly support I nited Slates policy 
in I lie Far East, wherever that policy may lead us. 

President Roosevelt's sudden, dramatic order placing 
the Philippine Army under American command was con- 
vincing proof that our sincerity was accepted and appre- 
ciated by the highest officials of the American Govern- 
ment. As such, it was welcome news to every Filipino. 

The Philippine troops will constitute a loyal and 
vain aide addition to the United States Army Forces in 
the Far East. To an extent that few Americans realize, 
these men have boundless faith in the ideals for which 
your nation has stood during its 40 years of close rela- 
tions with the Philippines. The polic\ that the United 
States has followed in dealing with our people may have 
seemed fanciful and idealistic at times, but it has had 
the concrete and practical result of producing 16,000.- 
000 devoted friends. Loyally to the Stars and Stripes 
among Filipinos would shame many Americans. 

To dale, we have had little opportunity to demonstrate 
the value of our spirited yoong army as a defense weapon 
— a fortunate circumstance for which ahc give full 
credit to the prestige of your army and navy. But mili- 
tary men assure us that the force of 143,000 that Gen* 
eral Douglas Mac A rlhur has scl up since 1036 is alert, 
determined and possessed of good basic training. While 
we make no boast of invincibility. Ave arc confident that 
any Avonld-be invader would have to pay dearly for eA'ery 
inch of Philippine soil lie occupied. Cooperating closely 
Avith the American soldiers in ihe Philippines, our men 
can be of inestimable value in defending ihis Far Eastern 
outpost of the democratic system. 

It is no secret tfaat the training which General Mat- 
Arthur has given the Philippine Army has put greatest 
emphasis on defenshe tactics — preventing enemy land- 
ings, fighting rear guard actions, raiding supply lines 
and communications. To this work the Filipino is avcII 
adapted by nature; it is the l\pe of fighting he used most 
c redit abh against both Spain and the United States 40 



years ago. In bringing the young Philippine Army up-to- 
date on this kind of warfare. General Mac Arthur pre- 
pared us for our most useful defense role. We nun 
assume that the numerically small but highh trained 
American force in the Commonwealth Avill devote its 
talents to the more specialized offensive phases. 

It should be pointed out in any such discussion as 
this of Philippine defenses that General M ac Arthur 
is held in particularly high esteem in Manila. Every citizen 
of the Commonwealth knows the monumental work he 
has done in bringing our army into being- In his posi- 
tion as military adviser to President Quezon, he has 
been unobtrusive but effective. Credit for the army's 
line progress he has invariably assigned to others, yet 
all knew that Mac A rlhur was the genius behind the 
organization. Experienced in Philippine defense prob- 
lems as few other Americans are. his appointment as 
commander of the newly organized I nited Slates Army 
Forces in the Far East is a source of satisfaction to all 
of us. 

It cannot be staled too often that the Philippines \ ields 
to no Other political unit under the American (lag in 
the extent of its whole-hearted cooperation with the 
United States Government, Time and again we have sacri- 
ficed our own immediate interest in following a course 
designed to benefit the whole of the country. The recent 
unquestioning acceptance of the American export control 
system for the Commonwealth is a case in point. It is 
possible to interpret the Federalizing of the Philippine 
Army as a serious set-hack to our long-standing inde- 
pendence aspirations: this, indeed, il may have been. Bui 
Ave feel it to be worth noting that there was no quibbling, 
that the Philippines accepted the Presidenfs order with 
far better grace than main slates have shown toward 
Federal relief work or power projects within their 
borders. 

For the tin Mi of the matter is thai we Filipinos are 
proud to belong lo the growing arm a of idealistic peo- 
ple who are read) to fight for their democracy. We con- 
sider it a privilege lo stand shoulder to shoulder whh 
the rest of the lihcrU -lo\ ing world in resisting lolali- 
larianism. And while we are grateful that the United 
Stales has convincingly shown ils determinnl ion lo de- 
fend its Philippine bastion, we want v\rv\ American to 
know that we Filipinos arc read) lo do our part in thai 
fight, * 



^Philippines 

Vol. 1 (August, 1941 ) No, 6 

All Our Manpower, President Quezon $ 

A Fair Chance, Rep. Dan ft Me.Cehee 4 

Filipino Civilian Defences. fJr t Ca/niJo (Jsias 6 

Philippine Mettle, Delegate Samuel King 7 

General Douglas Mac Arthur 8 

Wayne Coy, Julius C. Edelstein 10 

Manuel Roxas 1] 

Manila's New Position. Wilbur Barton 1 I 

August 13, 1398 7 5 

Away From Home 17 

"Look Glamorous, Please/' Pilar N. Ravel o 19 

P. t News___ 22 

For Your Information __ 23 

A Filipino Looks at Defense, P. C. Moranile 24 



Photo Credit: liar ris & Ewing; Tomeldem 
Washington; Signal Corps, U. S. Army; Photq 
Finishing Corp., Manila; Palmer Pictures; 
Fenno Jacobs from Three Lions: Philippine 
Army Signal Corps, 




Shown lied u\i id Pier V>. 7. Manila, the 
hmjiv&t vwvtvil |>i*T in the world, the Atnerfc 
eiin-flajl II Her /Vc*o/e/// (:<H)!i*lgt' symbolizes 
the Philippines* greatest worry today — shipr 
pin*:* Wholesale withdrawals of vessels of all 
nationalities from Ihe Pacific lone left the 
Islands with no way of shipping their products 
to market. 



Iii This Issue 

REP. DAN R. McGEHEE, of Mississippi is a 
member of the House Insular Affairs Gun- 
milter and eo-authur of II. H. 5034. 

• o * 

DELEGATE SAMUEL KING, representative in 
Congress of the people of Hawaii, is a long* 
Lime friend of the Philippines. 

• m m 

DR. CAMILO OS1AS, f.» rmer Counsellor in the 
Office of the | Mnltppine Resident Commissioner 
in Washington, is now Di reel or of Publicity 
anrl Propaganda for the Civilian Emergeney 
Adm in isl ration in Manila. 

• mm 

WILBUR BURTON recently returned to the 
United States aflor more than a decade of 
newspaper work in the Far Fast- He is a fa- 
ro i liar writer in many American journals. 
o m m 

JULIUS C. EDELSTEIN is a member of the for- 
eign news staff of the United Press in Wash- 
ington, IX C. He handles all his office's Philip- 
pine assignments. 



Back Cover: Manila Ray at sunset. 



Permission lu reprint mjllrrint :i ppc-.ir i n jg 
irt PHILIPPINES 19 gladly granted e*c*pt in 
RflSf& wfirri* ubc Is «tn*f:ifiraily rvstHcrtt-rl. Pmprr 
rrifJit will he a |p p rv eintncl . 



PILAR N. RAVELO, prominent former news- 
paperwoman of Manila, is now a member of 
the press relations staff in the Office of the 
Philippine Resident Commissioner. 

m m m 

f\C MORANTTE is a free-lance writer and 
frit if now living in New York City, 



PHILIPPINES i s publish™] by (ho olfiru tif U.r Philippic n t . w idrnt C„u lutiHHi( „ u . r tn %hi T1 . . 

BM«*m »** .lrc„| B || 0 n ,1b™ at M.^l u, A vr . N„r«h™,/ Z2i»L ' D T F . 

an third r la^ man* r in ilj.. W^hinKinn p.^r . t ffir^ on Di-<-t'mli<-r J 1*HU P,™,ii w ' " 

' null i>t». ( >(i I'rini*'*] In I.LS.A. 



'All Our Manpower and Material Resources' 

President Manuel L. Quezon 



EVENTS beyond the borders of the Philippines arc 
rapidly and deeply u fleeting our 1 i\ es and our fate. 
Nearly two- thirds of die peoples of the world arc at 
war in three continents and the remaining one-third, 
including ourselves, is in some way already involved 
in the conflict. No greater ordeal has a filleted the human 
race since the dawn of civil i /.at ion. W hat is our stake 
in die p rescn L war? 

We owe loyalty to America and we are bound to her 
by bonds of everlasting gratitude. Shim Id the t niicd 
Si ales enter the war, the Philip pi nes should follow her 
and tight by her side* placing aL her disposal all our 
manpower and material resources to help her in achiev- 
ing victory, for the cause for which America would 
tight is our own cause. 

The L ui led Slates is struggling to prevent the domi- 
nation of the world by dictators. We, too, would fight 
and die against such masters* The I nited States wants 
to uphold the rule of right and justice in international 
relations and to safeguard the independence of small 
nations, to free them from the fear of aggression and 
subjugation by military powers — and we, too. would fight 
and die to save our country from such threats and 
perils. And so. if the United Slates decides to enter this 
war, it will be our war, and her decision will be our 
decision. In such event she will find all the peoples of 
this country to the last man on her side, fighting under 




Filipino veterans of the Insurrection renew their 
pledge of loyalty. 




Citizens of Manila parade with banners voicing 
allegiance to the United States. 



her banner and praying to Almighty God for the victory 
of her arms. 

Our stake in this war is more than the continued 
existence of democrat-} and individual freedom in the 
world. It is more than the maintenance of a free economy 
and free commercial intercourse among nations, and an 
u n regimen led social life. Our stake in this war is our 
own ful u re independence and ihc assurance I hat that 
independence may endure. 

I have endeavored to the full measure of our re- 
sources to hasten the execution of our national defense 
program. The United States is also doing everything 
to strengthen the military defense of our country, 1 
trust that very soon it will be possible for the Govern- 
ment of the United Slates to send us more planes and 
more guns and ammunition to inn cast 1 our power of 
resistance. We only need more equipment and more 
supplies, for we have abundant manpower, have strong 
intelligent young men who are eager to join the ranks 
for our defense and In uphold I he principles which 
President Roosevelt has proclaimed hi ihc world. 

Tor the safely of our civilian population I have, jointly 
with the High Commissioner of the United States in 
die Philippines, established the Civilian Emergency 
Administration and called upon the men of ihe Philip- 
pines to enlist as volunteers to protect our homes, to 
track down spies and saboleurs. and to help minimize 

(Turn- to Page 21. \ 



3 



R.S03" 





Mfcta ' 



for Philippine Trado 

By R(7^. />«« R. McGehee 



T HERE is now pending in Congress legislation re- 
quested by the Philippine Commonwealth, and supported 
by Administration officials, to grant the Philippines 
temporary release from certain economic restrictions 
imposed upon them in 1934- 

These restrictions were drafted by file framers of 
the Philippine Independence Act and were designed to 
help "wean" Insular economy from its dependence on 
the free American market. Those restrictions, which wcrt; 
laid out in times of peace and normalcy, contemplated 
inducing the Filipinos to diversify their markets and 
seek commercial connections with countries other than 
the United States, 

Today it is apparent that all the normal standards 
of action have gone by the boards. An orderly adjust- 
ment of national economy is impossible- especially 
when that economy depends for its very existence upon 
exports to consumer markets overseas. That is clearly 
the ease in the Philippines. 

The Philippine Independence Act was an ingenious 
plan to accustom the Filipinos gradually to regard the 
Lnited States as a foreign market in winch they would 
eventually be required to pay full tariffs on such ex- 
ports as sugar, cordage, coconut oil and cigars. The 
adjustment was to come about by means of a graduated 
export tax, which the Filipinos would impose upon their 
own shipments. This would amount during the first year 
to 5 per cent of the American tariff duty, increasing 
by 5 per cent every year until 1916 when independence 
is Lo lie finally granted. That would force Filipino pro- 
ducers who could not compete in the American market 
under those conditions gradual! \ to find other buyers 
for their goods. 

That plan was modified in 1939 to provide gradually 
decreasing quotas in the place of the gradually increasing 
taxes on some of the exports. That was because the 
tariff on the so-called quota commodities— cigars, tobacco, 
pearl hutlons and coconut oil- was so high that even 5 
per cent of it would ruin the industry immediately 
b) preventing exports to the United States. 

Thai was a pretty good plan, and a pretty ingenious 
idea for gradual adjustment Of an economy which would 
nn longer depend for its existence on having a free 
market in lhe United Stares. Both the Filipinos and 




Trade restrictions threaten the usually bustling Port of 
Manila with paralysis. 

Lhe Americans who col lain ira ted in drafting that his- 
toric taw agreed Upon the desirability o$ I ho objective. 

l he current wars in Europe and Asia had not appeared 
upon the horizon in L934 when ibis plan was drawn. No 
one then dreamed thai within seven short years the 
world would be plunged into a series of holocausts 
involving three-quarters of the globe. Neither members 
of Congress nor members of the Filipino Legislature 
had an inkling of what was in prospect. 

The war has conic and it has presented us all with a 
picture we never would have thought possible. Millions 
of tons of the world's shipping now lie on the floor of 
the ocean. Other millions of tons are tied up in harbors, 
unable to venture forth without risking capture or de- 
struction. The balance of world shipping is straining 
every seam arid boiler to carry Mar materials across 
dangWOttS seas to strategic points along the battle front. 

There is little space [eft for ordinary commercial 
shipping. The ordinary products of men's labor* the 
fruits of the fields which are mere!) good to eat or 
useful for the making of civilian goods, now lie on 
wharves and in w aj chouses, far from their markets. 

Meanwhile nations other than lhe L nilod Stales— 
belligerent nations have had lo save their financial re- 
sources, had lo prohibit the purchase of anything which 
is uol absolute!) essential to war. The\ could neither pay 



• 4 • 



r 



for products from the Philippines m>r import I hem 
nn credit. 

The strategic materials in the Philippines did fin;! 
a read) market in eon n tries other than the United States. 
But in July, 1911. President Koosevelt signed a hill 
le place Philippine exports of strategic materials under 
Strict licensing to prevent them from moving into markets 
other than the I niled Stales. Everywhere the Philippines 
was check mated in its efforts to change the direct ion 
of its trade. 

Internal conditions, loo. have conspired against the 
original plan. Government revenues fell off. domestic 
prices rose, the cost of living sky -rocketed, and the 
need to spend money for civilian defense hecame pressing. 

That is the situation the Philippines is in today. It 
is not of the Filipinos' own choosing, nor can ihev 
remedy it hy any measures of their own. What little 
of their goods they can ship to the United States must 
pay terrific freight charges and war risk insurance. 
In the case of the most important commodity, su ix ar* 
the cost of shipment has increased five times over, dimin- 
ishing the return to the farmer and producer by just 
that proportion. Approximately 20.000 sugar producers 
and 2,000.000 farm laborers face bankruptcy as the 
result. 

On top of these burdens, there is the added load of 
the export tax. which today is no longer an adjustment 
tax. as it was intended to he, but a lax on the pro- 
ducer and worker. It has, apparently, no benefit except 



to provide a fund for the retirement of private!) held 
bends. 

li would seem jnst ihat the Filipinos be relieved of 
thi:- burden temporarily- at least. The pending Legislation 
provides for such a suspension. There is no point to be 
gained in continuing either the export tax or the dimish- 
ishing quotas while world conditions preclude an\ ad- 
justment of Philippine economy. Any help which we 
can give the Philippines in stabilizing its economic 
conditions must certainly ho regarded as support given 
to democracy in the Far East, 

The Congress is not asked to give a handout to the 
1 Philippines. No appropriation or grant is required. We 
nre merely asked to accommodate them by permitting 
them to postpone the application id" a tax upon them- 
selves designed to benefit not us. but them. The same 
iv; true with diminishing quotas. W e need their products 
for national defense. It is not clear how much they will 
be able to ship next year because of the shortage of 
bottoms. We owe it to ourselves, however, as well as lo 
them to place no barriers in the path of obtaining essen- 
tial materials of every kind. Thus, although they may 
not be able to ship copra, which is on our free list. 
I her might find tanker space lo ship coconut oik or 
corner space to ship tobacco. It would seem very wise 
t lca i' the decks for the emergency, and to extend 
■i helping hand to our Filipino friends who have in 

rent days so strikingly shown that ihev are with us in 
thb crisis, 





lor FILIPINO 
CIVILIAN 

By Camilo Osias . ' • . 




Members of the Women's Auxiliary Service partici- 
pate in air-raid maneuvers, 

O \F big la*k the Philippine Government cannot pass 
on to the United States — the maintenance of peace and 
order within its boundaries. The Filipinos, realizing 
the tremendous responsibility on America's shoulders in 
the democracies' fight against totalitarianism, are doing 
their level best to make it easier for America to win her 
cause, which is also their cause. No effort, therefore, 
is being spared to prepare the Philippines for the ex- 
igencies of war at any moment. It was to this end that 
Lhe Civilian Emergency Administration was created April 
j 1941 by an executive order of Presideul Manuel L. 
Quezoit. 9 t 

No time was lost in organizing the Ad mm [stratum. 
The President designated the Secretary of National De- 
fen^e as chairman of the central planning board, with 
representatives of the Executive Departments of the 
Government as members. A program was drawn up to 
TOVer air-raid precautions, volunteer guards, food ad- 
ministration^ fuel adminisl ration, utilities and industries, 
publicity and propaganda, evacuation, public welfare 

ninI 'ale. health ami sanitation, and transportation and 

r uininunirations. 

The fuuetions of the CM are natmnaf tn scope. L n- 
der il^ leadership, separate units of the governm <nl 
af< * charged with executing the projects <\<>\<{r:\ on b\ 
lhe central bod\. These a-em ics included the Naliunal 
Kmeriicncv CnmniisRion. eprnposed of j cpj denial h m of 



6 • 



the different branches of tlx* K\ccuti\c Departments of 
the Government, wilh 1 1 1 SrcrHarv «.f .National Defense 
as chairman: uV Pro\ irn ial Kmrr^rnrv Committee in 
caeli pruvinrc, *ilh rf><- prt»\ ioc ial -n\n n (t r as chair- 
man and nther provincial olisciaU a- members: the Mu. 

nirlpal Kmrriifliry < !u itU-c j, ( curb munic ipal it y. with 

the mayor as chairman and municipal afTittals us nietn- 
hcrs: and a City Emergency Committee in each chartered 
eit>. headed t.v the ma>or and with uther cilv officials as 
members. 

Parallel to this organisation, the manager D f the 
1 hilsppmc Red Gross, a Director of I'uhlioitv and Pron-i- 
panda, a Food Administrator, an Industrial Production 
Adm.mstrator, * Fufe and Transportation Administrn- 
or. a National An- Raid Warden, and a Director of 
Communications have been appointed to |>in .f 01 . ltl ,„„. inl 
functus » emergencies. We b elie ve this arrangemen 
fu'lr " WH> ' l,,WUr,( i)n,V " Mti ^ l«ir«K*i..7c .,,„. 

The Food Administrator assumes the resp, ...sihiliL v of 
averting any shortage of food by increasing the pro 
du.-t.on of essential foodstulFs. encoura^m, ■ tl" ,> u 
nig of short- time crops, and acouirho, "t . [ 
stocks of all essential inipor ( ^ XV""'" 
executive order, all ,-om men-ial f »' "iT™ 1 
ments have been asked 7 r", 5 'r ,M 01,t,,WW *- 

food stocks in their possessi,, ' ! hly ,v ' ,,,rl * "» 
slocks musl be reported t he F F"™«";» ttv " il » bl * 
dial this official can , , ' Admmiatrator so 

-ase of a food shortage! ***** & 

The Industrial Production a a * ■ 
the task of pulling ^ ' ' 'r^'" ^ ™ 
acquisition of reserve supplies t ^ ^ The 

essential fuels is the task of the ^7 ''TV'' 1 - B " d ° lher 
Administrator. To helo hi™ m H, ■ , ru,ls l"»rtntii>n 
h-. quired „„ 

maintain at least a four-no,,, ,1 establish and 

line. lubricating J 17^^ 2^ * 
utility enterprises are under order K*"?* , PuWic 
cautions. The same Adnunistra ' ' c" B,,n,lar l Jrp " 
P«W*« facilities necessarv !o ' '*"* B of tr£ >»^ 
otizeus from points of danger UaU ' """-essential 

Rules and regulations b, r " ,i 1( . 
^d shelters in Manila and ia ™ n *^»n ot air- 
printed and extensivelv dktrll . ] ,ri>vl,,I ' ( ^ have been 
Raid Warden. Wa^ ^ ^ Air 

->l'ts m the eiH^ am] J * 1 . ^ prm-tn-e -blaek- 

he|d in Manila i„ dl f ^ Uhe flrst 
Filipinos fo what is tto W ' n ;„J J ls u> ^gmtom the 
tries. oi^niiy roulim 

The Director ,,f c 
l«'n* Wmi d s«or;7' ( T m, 'n l r 8 is -I— ib!c for th , 

s »l>l»li«'« to i^re ( Z nl \L T s,,M ' ks <)f electrical 
Iadi0 — fcr a. alHm " T ll ,eIeph(m " lrf ^ r «P«». ««d 
'""tcials and the en,„lox7o, 7 } >Ur ^ aw ,,f additional 
sure uninterrupted "finn »' ff . ««Ulilit,n„l men lo in . 
PrfvlnjE his full atteiUbli S,UI,,( ' '"■«* at present re- 

' .-u,,, „r „,, 



tn many conn- 



PHILIPPINES PROVES ITS METTLE 

-@ -//awaiian Salute 



By Delegate Samuel W\ King 




If nothing else, the present phase of world events has 
id eared the air. Like a sudden holt of lightning, il has 
fiercely illuminated all the great issues of our generation. 
By its searching glare, people the world over have now 
been able to find their places in the conflict of ideas 
and ideologies. 

We in Hawaii have watched with great interest the 
choice which our neighbors of the Pacific, the Filipinos, 
have made. We are. of course, deeply concerned with 
their decision, both for reasons of geography, and 
because of our many mutual interests. 

The fact that the Filipinos deliberately, but with 
characteristic fervor, threw in their fortunes on our 
side — the side of democracy— was to us a source of 
great satisfaction. To choose to fight along with us, and 
to help bear the brunt of whatever physical impact may 
come, was, however, no easy decision. 

In Hawaii we are peculiarly well situated to appre- 
ciate the implications of that decision. The people of 
Hawaii I American citizens since 1898) know r well that 
the geography which gives our islands supreme mili- 
tary importance in the Pacific also gives its inhabitants 
a heavy burden of dangerous responsibility. We are 
proud to bear that responsibility. Ma inlanders, long 
secure in their geographic isolation, must stretch their 
imaginations to conceive of the very real danger which 
civilian residents of such an outpost as Hawaii — or 
the Philippines— face in these days of lightning warfare. 

It might have been safer for the Filipinos to let the 
United States bear the responsibilities for protecting 
its interests in the Far East. If the Filipinos had taken 
that course, their personal danger would have been 
greatly minimized; in the first place, by the decreased 
likelihood of the Philippines becoming a battleground: 
in the second place, by the desire of any potential 
aggressor to win the goodwill of its neutral inhabitants. 

That seems to me to be an extremely compelling 
demonstration of I he fact that being an American or 
being loyal to American ideals is not limited to any 
single area or race. We in Hawaii have often faced the 
inference that Americanism and devotion to democracy 
are exclusive exercises of mainland citizens, and that 
our citizens of Hawaii, who today bear a much greater 
responsibility for the preservation of democracy, are 
somehow barred from the inner temple because we live 
some miles away from I he shrine. That is ohvioush 



an extremely short-sighted view. The Filipinos, though 
not American citizens and though racially an alien 
people, have given the full lie to this "exclusive" 
theory. 

In so doing, the Filipinos have in fact rendered a 
genuine service to democracy. Here is an Oriental people* 
promised a share in. the Asiatic "New Order" if they 
will but join it, deliberately choosing instead to stand 
in the way of a potential holocaust because they believe 
firmly in our way of life. 

For this and for many other reasons, we of Hawaii 
have long appreciated the Filipinos. Besides being our 
neighbors in the Pacific, thousands of Filipinos have 
come to work on our plantations, and to make their 
temporary or permanent homes with us. They have been 
a sober, industrious, law-abiding citizenry, contributing 
much to our common welfare, A great many of them 
today are American citizens, either by birth or through 
naturalization, and will remain a permanent part of our 
community. 

The Philippines and Hawaii have long been linked in 
trade. Ships and planes putting out for the Philippines 
and the Far East have always made Hawaii a port of 
calk For generations there has been a constant inter- 
change of ideas, visits and good feeling between the 
peoples of the two island groups. We have watched 
closely the political and economic developments of the 
Islands, and have always felt on intimate terms with 
Filipino leaders, who have regularly visited us. 

We know that it has been the long-cherished goal of 
the Philippines to form an independent Republic, pat- 
terned after our own. That aspiration has been written 
into the law of the United States as the Philippine 
Independence Ad. We know, ton, that this aspiration 
has not and will not interfere with the deep associations 
that will always link the Philippines and the United 
States. Trade and the identity of ideals will survive and 
persist. 

Just as the Filipinos look forward to independency, 
so do we of Hawaii look to eventual statehood. Thai 
has always been our goal. When the ehuuls nl in In 
national crisis and conflict have rolled away. 1 ha\ e 
every hope and confidence that the citizens of the Slate 
of Hawaii and the citizens of the Republic of the 
Philippines will both lie on guard in the Pacific* flying lire 
banner of democracy. ^ 



GREATEST SOLDIER SINCE GRANT 



Lt. Gen. Douglas MacArthur, 
Commander of the U. S. Army 
Forces in the Far East/ Knows 
His Strategy and His Philippines 



'"The greatest American soldier since Grant/' is a 
favorite description of Lieutenant General Douglas Mac- 
Arthur, newly appointed Commanding General of the 
United States Army Forces in the Far East It expresses 
the feelings of thousands of 
General MacArthur's person- 
al and professional admirers. 

The man named by Presi- 
dent Roosevelt late in Julv 
to head American defenses 
in the Orient has a military 
record that is almost without 
parallel in the history of the 
United States, The son of a 
great army man, Mac Arthur- 
was the youngest Chief of 
Staff the nation ever had, and 
one of the finest. During the 
World War he was repeated- 
ly cited and decorated for 
his ability and personal brav- 
ery. Even more important to 
his new post, for the past six 
years General MacArthur has 
been mi I i tar) adviser to 
President Manuel L. Quezon 
and genius, of the program 
by which the Philippine 
Commonwealth has been 
building up its defense or- 
ganization in preparation for 
Independence in 1946. 

"MacArthur was the per- 
fect choice for the Orient," 
wrote General Hugh S. John- 
son, who thirty -eight years 

ago graduated from West Point with the new Far Eastern 
commander. "Like his father before him, he is almost too 
brave fur high command. He can^t resist going over the 
top with his men. As an ex-Chief of Staff, he knows the 






Fort Santiago in Manila. 



Orient, and especially the Philippine problem, belter than 



Left — Philippine Defense 
Council meets with Pres- 
ident Quezon. 



any other officer. And he 
is brilliant — almost be* 
vol id belief. A little spec- 
tacular and theatrical, 
perhaps, but that is a 
detail. The Philippine 
Army is his own crea- 
tion." 

General Mac Arthur has bad a long and peculiarly close 
connection with the Philippines. His father. General Ar- 
thur MacArthur, participated in the capture of Manila in 
1898; later he commanded the American troops around 
the capital in putting down the Philippine Insurrection. 
From May 6, 1900 to July 3, 1901, General MacArthur 
was military governor of the entire Philippine Islands. 

Young Douglas MacArthur reached Manila in 1903 as 
a second lieutenant of engineers just out of West Point, 
where he was head of his graduating class. His first 
duties consisted largely of the supervision of construction 
work on wharves, sea w alls and roads. After a year he was 
ordered back to the United States, where he immediately 
began displaying the brilliance that has characterized his 
stilbfar- from -con eluded career. 

General Mac Art bur's pari in the World War is perhaps 
best summarized by a citation in 1918. 

"As brigade commander." this statement pointed out, 
"General MacArthur personally led his men and by the 
skillful maneuvering of his brigade made possible the 



8 




Reserve stores of 10-inch shells on Corregidor, guarding 
Manila Bay 

capture of Hills 228, 242 and the Cote dc Chatillon. 
He displayed indomitable resolution and great courage 
in rallying broken lines and in reforming attacks, there- 
by making victory possible. On a field where courage was 
the rule, his courage was the dominant feature." 

Such citations, it should be stressed, are seldom given 
to general officers. In addition to three American medals 
earned in the World War and another awarded for his 
'-meritorious and distinguished service" as Chief of Staff 
of the United States Army from 1930 to 1935, General 
MacArthur has been decorated by nearly a dozen foreign 
governments. 

In 1919, MacArthur was named superintendent of the 
Military Academy from which he had been graduated 
only 16 years before. Then, from West Point, he was 
ordered to the Philippines in 1922 for his second tour of 
duty there. During his three years in the Islands, the 
new brigadier general was commander successively of the 
District of Manila, and the 23rd Infantry Brigade at Fort 
McKiuley. Largely because of his outstanding success 
during this tour. General MacArthur was returned to 
Manila in 1923 as Commander of the entire Philippine 
Department of the United States Army. 

MacArthur was certainly one of the most popular de- 
partment commanders ever to serve in the Philippines. 
The officers and men who served with him then still 
express their admiration. 

"When Lite pressure was greatest. MacArthur was the 
coolest," is the way one of his former subordinates de- 
scribes the genera L 

One of the finest monuments to MacArihur's work in 
this period is the popularity of Camp John Hay : the bean- 
t if ill and restful army camp at the cool mountain resort 
of Bagnio. ISO miles north of Manila. Camp John Hay 
had been established early in the American administra- 
tion, but not until MacArthur took command did it attain 
its fullest usefulness. The young general ordered exten- 




A 75-mm. gun at full recoil during maneuvers by the 
Philippine Army. 

sive improvements and made it possible for officers and 
enlisted men to visit cool Baguio at frequent intervals 
without having the time deducted from their furloughs. 
In many other concrete ways he contributed to the popu- 
larizing of this healthful camp. 

An unprecedented Jive- year tour as Chief of Staff 
in Washington followed the Philippine interlude. An 
official citation of MacArthur's accomplishment best 
tells the story of bis exceptional work in the capital. 

"As Chief of Staff of the Army of the United States," 
this document pointed out, "he has performed his many 
important and exacting duties with signal success. He 
devised and developed the Four Army organization 
of our land forces; he conceived and established the 
General Headquarters Air Force, thus immeasurably 
increasing the effectiveness of our air defenses; he 
initiated a comprehensive program of modernization 
of the Army's tactics, equipment, training and organ* 
ization. In addition, the professional counsel and as- 
sistance he has continuously rendered to the President, 
to the Secretary of War. and to the Congress have been 
distinguished by such logic, vision and accuracy as to 
contribute markedly to the formulation of sound defense 
policies and the enactment of progressive laws for pro- 
moting the nation's security/' 

This, then, was the man who in 1935 was loaned by the 
United States Army to the infant Philippine Common- 
wealth to serve as military adviser. 

Already well acquainted with Philippine potentialities. 
General MacArthur soon presented to President Quezon 
a plan for making the Commonwealth ih invasion-proof," 
In brief, this called for compulsory mi lit an training for 
all young men, the formation of an efficient air force and 
the organization of an "off-shore patrol" of small, swift 
motor torpedoboats. W ithin 1 0 years- approximately 
400,000 partial I \ trained rnen would be available for 

{Turn to Page 20) 



• 9 • 



On the Honor Roll . . . 

Wayne Coy, McNutt's Aide in Manila 
. . . is Now Number One Cogwheel 
in Defense Machinery 



By Julius C. Edelstein. 

Add Wayne Coy to the list of men in public life for 
whom government service in the Philippines seems to 
have woven a magic- spell which sent them on to greater 
national fame and fortune. The list includes in past 
and current history William Howard TafL Leonard Wood, 
Henry L, Stirnson. Frank Murphy, and Paul V. McNutt, 
On a somewhat lesser plane, perhaps, but in the same 
category, there is now the name of Wayne Coy. 

Coy is the young administrator who was catapulted 
onto the front pages recently with the White House an- 
nouncement that he was to become Liaison Officer for 
the Office for Emergency Management (OEM), The title 
didn't sound particular ly impressive, hut it turned out 
that Coy was to coordinate the entire vast administra- 
tive machinery of national defense — as tough and sen- 
sational a job as can be conceived. 

The fact that a young man I 38) was given one of the 
most important jobs in the national defense adminis- 
tration was enough to make a good news story. The 
fact that it was Wayne Coy. a likable, unassuming fellow 
who was often mistaken by passers-by for Charley Chase, 
the movie cemedian, made it even better- 
Back in 1937 Wayne Coy was just a friendly, able 
young man from Indiana who had made good as a small- 
town newspaper editor- became press secretary to a 
governor, and then regional WPA Administrator, It so 
happened that the governor was Paul Vories McNutt of 
Indiana who, in 1937. was appointed American High 
Commissioner to the Philippines. 

It was natural that McNutt should offer to his young 
friend and political adviser, Wayne Coy, the job of 
administrative assistant in Manila. Coy had never spent 
murh time out of Indiana, and the idea of being a 
government official in the strange and exotic Far East 
appealed to him. So wilh his preth wife. Grate, and 
their young son. Stephen, Coy set off for a new phase 
01 bis career. 

No one had e\cr said thai Coy was slow in catching 
onto things. He ijuickh berame as adept in Philippine af- 
fairs as he had been in Indiana politics* He brought to 
the intricacies of government in the new Common wealth 
the rich and practical good sense of the Indiana soil. 




Sparked with driving energy, he was a perfect counter- 
part and foil for his boss. High Commissioner McNutt. 

In the minor and major problems of Philippine-Ameri- 
can relations Coy soon found himself perfectly at home 
and McNutt leaned on him wilh increasing confidence* 
Like McNutt. Coy had the m iddle- westerner's corner* 
store friendliness, and the art ot gelling along with 
everybody. McNutt and Coy won the enthusiastic friend- 
ship and respect, first of the old High Commissioner's 
staff left behind by Governor Frank Murphy, and then 
of the Filipinos, themselves. An era of "good feeling" 
developed, of poker-playing, hail-fellow-well-met neigh- 
borliness between American officials and Filipinos, which 
helped to pave the way for the complete unity of today. 

McNutt. secure in his personal relations with the 
people among whom he was working, used his own 
super-abundant energy to do a job in the Philippines 
which added to his national stature, and helped make an 
international figure out of a local political leader. When 
McNutt laid aside the Conunissionership in 1939 to re* 
enter the national political picture at home, he was a 
full-fledged presidential possibility, an administrator 
with a record of performance, and an individual of 
international renown. In this development Coy received 
the credit that was due him. 

In the return to the United States Coy preceded 
McNutt by two months. In that interval Coy worked 
unceasingly to cultivate good-will for McNutt among the 
New Deal elements in the national capital where McNutt 
had the least strength and needed the most. 

Coy, himself, was well spoken for among this group. 
As a WPA Administrator for Indiana, and later as 
regional administrator. Coy had earned the respect and 
friendship of WPA Administrator Harry Hopkins. Presi- 
dent Roosevelt s closest and most trusted friend. When 
Coy returned to Washington. Hopkins found a desk 
for him in the office of the President's Budget Bureau. 

There Co\ worked on Philippine problems, and on 
national politics, lie also found linn* to figure out 
a few "angles" 1 fur the budget bureau a lew ingenious 

[Turn to Page 23 1 



10 



MANUEL ROMS 

Orator and Economist 



When the lirsi run ippinc Independence Hill was be- 
ing debated before the Senate Finance Committee hi 
1932, a Filipino of above-average height and weight 
was one of the principal speakers. He was Mannel 
Roxas y Acuna. who even then bore a reputation as one 
of the most eloquent of a nation of orators. 

The man whose oratory impressed the Senate 10 years 
ago is now one of the half-dozen most important ofli- 
eials of the Government of the Philippine Commonwealth. 
Besides being Minister of Finance under President 
Quezon, Mannel Roxas is chairman of the powerful 
National Development Company, As an outstanding law- 
yer, he not long ago declined a chance to sit on the 
Supreme Court of the Philippines, Furthermore. Roxas 
is recognized as a hard-working economist who has done 
much to keep his nation's finances stable in spite of 
trade restrictions, defense expenditures and falling 
expo rts. 

Born in Capiz. Panay, in 1892. Roxas had instilled 
in him at a* ver> early age the ideal of an independent 
Philippines. The death of his father, one of the first 
casualties in I lie revolt against Spain, made a deep 
impression on young Manuel, leaving a conviction that 
he must do his utmost to help make bis countrv free. 

Young Manuel soon discovered his flair for oratory, 
and be decided to capitalize on it. He worked to improve 
his Spanish, and be studied for a while at St. Joseph's 
College, Hongkong, in order to perfect bis English. 

In 1918 Roxas returned to Capiz to practice law. A 
year later he began his political career when be ran 
against the local machine for provincial governor and 
was elected. When his term expired in 192 L he was 
elected to the Philippine House of Representatives. Al- 
most as soon as the Legislature convened, he was made 
Speaker of the House at the unprecedented age of 30. 
replacing Sergio Osmena. who had resigned to take a 
seat in the Senate. Roxas was reelected to the House 
and to the Speakership for three consecutive terms. 

During this era, Speaker Roxas devoted all his energy 
to the fight for Philippine independence, visiting Wash- 
ington several times. His first trip was in 1930. when 
the Hare-Hawes-Cutling Independence Bill was intro- 
duced into Congress, Speaker Roxas was one of the 
leaders in the fight for this measure, and he returned 
triumphant to the Philippines in 1988. only to have 
the Philippine Legislature reject the bill The sub- 
sequent acceptance n f the substitute Tydings-McDullic 
Act was in effect a political set-back for Rnxa$« Fn 
a while his political future seemed in jeopard). 

W hen a convention was called in 1985 to draft the 
Commonwealth Constitution, however. Knxus uas elected 
a dc legate. He was a member of the committee that corn- 



posed the first draft. After the Constitution had been 
approved by the Philippine Legislature. Roxas accom- 
panied President Quezon to the I nited States to obtain 
the approval of President Roosevelt, 

Roxas was elected to the National Assembly of the 
new Commonwealth on his return from W ashington. 
Soon afterward, however, he gave up politics to practice 
law. The interlude was brief. In 1937 he Mas appointed 
to the Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs, 
whose function it was to recommend to the American 
Congress the steps that should be taken for the gradual 
readjustment of Philippine-American economic relations. 
The task was a mono mental one. requiring 15 months 
of careful research and study. 

With the completion of the Committee's work in July* 
1938. President Quezon appointed Roxas chairman of 
the National Economic Council, which included leading 
Philippine economists and industrialists, Its function was 
to formulate plans for reconstructing Philippine economy. 
Later he was also made chairman of the National De- 
velopment Company, which Is in charge of Common- 
wealth measures to achieve economic self-sufficiency for 
the Philippines, In November. 1938 Roxas accepted an 
additional position — Secretary of the Department of 
Finance. 

At 49, Manuel Roxas y Ac una is one of the Common- 
wealth's outstanding public figures, and one of the best 
known after President Quezon himself. His popularity 
in the Philippines may be judged by the fact that, on 
his last birthday? Manila's three radio stations all spon- 
sored elaborate programs in Roxas* honor. 

American officials and students of Far Eastern affairs 
probably remember Roxas best for his speech of Sep- 
tember 17, 1940, proposing a readjustment of the Philip- 
pine Independence Act to meet war-time conditions. 
Summarizing the entirely unforeseen obstacles in the 
path of Philippine economic independence, the Finance 
Minister asked that the period of trade adjustment be 
prolonged by 10 years, and that the imposition of 
graduated tariffs and quotas on Philippine exports 
to the I nited States be postponed until four years after 
peace had been reestablished in Europe and Asia, 
Furthermore, he proposed that the Philippine- American 
trade conference provided for in the Independence Act 
be called as soon as practical, "so thai our p resent 
-uohlems and difficulties nun be ronsiderer! and i\ 
sounder and fairer plan submitted to Congress lor 
action at its next session. 

Despite his acute realization of the economic dislo- 
cation accompanying independence. Roxas Favors Free- 
dom according In schedule. The economic problems, he 
believes, can he 1 kepi eulirelv separate [ruin politics. ^ 



\ a 




WHAT WILL I 



Without adequate shipping facilities, Philippine econ- 
omy is crippled. Dependent almost entirely on overseas 
markets, the Commonwealth today is suffering severely 
as the result of wholesale withdrawals of ships of all 
nationalities from the Pacific, Unless they can get their 
sugar, copra, hemp, Iron, gold, tobacco, lumber and 



Harvesting Sugar Cane. 




Sawing Philippine Hardwood. 



Crushing 



Threshing Rice by Hand. 



12 



r 



DUSTRIES DO? 

ehromite to market, the Filipinos will have no cash with 
which to maintain their annual purchases of American 
farm and factory products worth $100,000,000, Ships 
alone are the key to the problem facing Philippine com- 
merce and industry today. Below are scenes from Insular 
industries endangered by the Pacific shipping crisis. 




Rafting Coconuts to Market. 



Mining Chromite on Luzon. 



• 13 ■ 



MANILA'S POSITION 

By Wilbur Burton 



D 1 RING the past fifteen years there has been a con- 
stant shift southward of what might be termed the po- 
litical and economic center of gravity in the Far East. 
I p to 1926, P eking was the ehief political renter with 
Tokyo second in importance: hence, most newspaper 
correspondents were stationed in those cities. In com- 
merce, however, Shanghai was the main center with 
Hongkong second. 

The Chinese Nationalist Revolution, which attracted 
major international attention from mid- 1925 to early 
1927. resulted in Shanghai's becoming politically pre- 
dominant while retaining — and even increasing — its 
economic significance. Tokyo and Hongkong continued 
secondary in politics and economics respectively, Manila 
was hardly even in third place from a political or 
cei > 1 1 ami c view po int. 

This situation prevailed generally until 1937, when 
the Sino-Japanese War was resumed. With Shanghai 
apparently dead politically and commercially, no other 
comparable far Eastern center has developed to take 
its place, but the shift seems still southward- Hong- 
kong was booming until a year ago : then it succumbed 
to the adverse forces of two wars. Meanwhile, then* 
has been a steady rise in the importance of Manila. 
Will it be the future political and economic center of 
gravity for the Far East? 

The primary question, of course, is the future position 
and policy of the United States in the Western Pacific, 
Conceivably, this might bring a restoration of Shanghai. 
On tiie other hand, if the I in ted States is really inter- 
ested in the Netherlands Indies and British Malaya. 
Manila would appear tu he the ideal center for all 
American interests, [n brief, it would seem that Shanghai 
can be restored only to a position secondary to that 
of Manila, 

When the first Clipper landed in Manila in 1935. the 
city bounded from a mere insular capital to major rank 
among far Eastern cities. Virtually everything since — 
whether good or had for the rest of the world has 
increased Manilas importance. Hitler's occupation of 
Holland, with the consequent orphaning of Lhc East Indies 
and their dependence cm I nited States protection, pul 
Manila in a decisive strategic posit inn with relation If* 
the whole future of the Far East* And the decline of 
Hongkong also inor eased Manila V imporlance. 



Today Manila and Shanghai arc the last cities of any 
consequence (outside the Western Hemisphere) where 
normal freedom of trade still exists and there is no 
censorship. But Shanghai's freedom is limited and tenu- 
ous. Manila, it is true, is suffering from the genera! 
shortage of shipping in the Pacific, but it is less de- 
pendent on imports for living than Shanghai is. 

Vital war materials originating in the Philippines 
or produced in the Indies and transshipped at Manila 
give the city an especially commanding position toda\. 

In peace-time potentialities, Manila has all the essen- 
tials for retaining its war- won position. Manila Bay 
is naturally a fur better harbor than the Whangpoo 
River at Shanghai, though perhaps inferior to Hong- 
kong. Fine harbor facilities, however, can be constructed. 
In the past there has been a shortage of American and 
Philippine ships, hut even before the European wur 
the Filipinos started developing their own merchant 
marine. Furthermore- the United Slates will emerge from 
the war with the greatest merchant fleet in history. 

(JeographicaJly. Manila i> almost co;uidist li til From 
Yokohama and Singapore, which means it is most con- 
veniently located in relation to China, the East Indies, 
Indo-China. Thailand and British Malaya. Moreover, 
it is on a direct line between Australia and East Asia. In 
brief, it is the logical cross roads of all the Western 
Pacific. 

In natural and civic amenities. Manila has always 
been outstanding. Although unequivocally tropical in 
climate, it is never as uncomfortable as Tokyo or 
Shanghai or Hongkong in the summer. Travelers gener- 
ally regard it as climatically superior to Batavia, al- 
though perhaps not to Singapore. But Bagnio offers 
an ideal retreat, closer at hand than any other "hill 
station" in the Far East. Compared to Shanghai or 
much of Hongkong, Manila is well laid out and more 
attractive for Western residence. 

One drawback, perhaps, is thai labor is higher 
priced in Manila than in other cities, 

Vi area of the Far Fast is capable of greater economic 
development than the Philippines* As such develop- 
ment is carried out Manila will benefit. Willi ever) 
natural advantage, therefore, the Philippine capital shows 
promise of becoming the political, economic and 
strategic center of the entire western Pacific. 



14 



I3.IS9Z 




American soldiers going over the top as the attack 
on Manila commences 



A LCI ST 13, anniversary of the American occupation 
of Manila in 1898, is a legal holiday in the Philippines, 
That the Filipinos should celebrate the capture of their 
capital by a foreign country is a distinct tribute to the 
unprecedented colonial record of the United States in the 
Philippines. 

Whatever Filipinos individually niav Tcrl a hunt Philip- 
pine independence, which they have strived for cen- 
turies to attain, they are united in the conviction I hat 
American occupation of their country marked the be- 
ginning of the modern Philippines. The Filipinos 1 as- 
tounding progress in government, education, sanitation, 
agriculture, industry and commerce in the last 43 years 
has lew parallels in world history; they readily attribute 
this steady advancement to the wise, sympathetic tutelage 
of the United States. 

Thus, in the Philippines, Occupation Day is not a day 
of humiliation as in many other countries. The Filipinos 
proudly celebrate it as victory day for the forces of good 
and human progress. They set it aside as a day in which 
to i ededicate themselves to the same democratic ideals 
and principles which gave birth to the United States. 

When the combined American naval and military forces 
decided to attack Manila on August 13, 1 898. they were 
already well entrenched in the Philippines. Admiral 
George Dewey had annihilated the Spanish fleet, which 
had served as the first line of defense for the tottering 
Spanish regime in the Philippines. The Americans had 
had nunc than throe months to concentrate a militarv 
force of 10.000 men outside Manila and to encourage 
Emiliu Agninaldo. generalissimo of the Filipino fences 



What Happened in 
Manila 43 Years Ago 
When the American 
Army Stormed the 
Philippine Capital? 




A symbol of victory, the Stars and Sfripes flies over 
Fort San Antonio de Abad. 

revolting against Spanish role, to harass the 12.500 
Spaniards bottled inside Manila. 

A tie facto alliance between the Americans and the 
Filipinos was the natural result of the Spanish-American 
War and the Filipino attempt to overthrow the regime 
in the Philippines, When Dewey was in Hongkong await- 
ing orders, he was approached by Aguhialdo's men. Of 
this incident Dewe> later told a Senate committee : '"I 
heard there were a number of Filipinos in the eity of 
Hongkong who were anxious to accompany the squadron 
to Manila in ease we went over. . . , They seemed to 
be all very young earnest boys. I did not attach much 
i i li port a nre to what lhe\ said or lo themselves/ Thoy 
had told Dewey that their leader Aguinaldo was in 
Singapore and was anxious to see the Admiral, 

The American consul at Singapore had alsu told Dewey 
about Aguinaldo's wish. fc i attached so little important-e- 
ft) Aguinaldo that 1 did not wait for him." Dewey latrr 
observed. Aguinaldo missed Dewey by a day or so. 

Hut after the destruction of the Spanish fleet. Dewey 
realized that that was not the end of the war with Spain. 

( Tu rn to Page J 6 i 



August 13, 1898 



(from Page 15) 



With no American army to do the necessary land fight- 
ing to wrest the country from the Spaniards, he needed 
Filipino help to complete the conquest. Aguinaldo and 
his staff were brought to Manila Bay on one of Dewey's 
ships, the McCulloch. 16 days later. 

What actually transpired between Dewey and Aguinaldo 
is the subject of historical controversy. The Filipino 
leader, however, got the impression that the Americans 
were in the Philippines to free the Filipinos from Span- 
ish rule as they were doing for the Cubans in Cuba. 
Anyway, he was urged by Dewey to recruit men for an 
army to besiege Spanish -held Manila. 

"T was waiting for troops to arrive, and I felt sure 
the Filipinos could not take Manila, and I thought that 
the closer they invested the city the easier it would be 
when our troops arrived to march in," Dewev frank I v 
told a Senate committee when asked why he accepted 
Agutnaldo's help. "The Filipinos were our friends, as* 
sisting us: they were doing our work." 

Aguinaldo recruited 25,000 men. according to Dewey- 
who also admitted that he could have had any number 
of men. The only problem was arming them. Aguinaldo 
not only accomplished the remarkable feat of raising 
a formidable fighting force just 12 days after his "re- 
turn from Elba" but demonstrated his ability to strike 
immediately. On May 31 he ordered a general attack. 
Although he did not succeed entirely, he captured some 
guns in the Spanish arsenal located at Cavite- across the 
bay from Manila, and established a tightening cordon 
around Manila, On June 6- Aguinaldo captured 1.850 
Spanish officers in Cavite Province, 

Not until June 30 did the first batch of American 
soldiers arrive in the Philippine* under the command 
of Brig, Gen. Thomas M. Anderson, Actually. President 
McKinley had ordered Maj. Gen, Wesley Merritt to 
organize and command an expedition to the Philippines, 
hut he did not reach Manila until July 25. so upon Ander- 
son fell the credit of being the first American proconsul 
on Philippine soil. 

President McK in ley's written instructions to the com- 
mander of the expeditionary force embraced a two- 
fold purpose; (1 ) "the severance of the former poli- 
tical relations of the inhabitants and the establishment 
ol a new political order/ 7 and \ 2\ to polite the Philip- 
pines "while in the possession of the United States." 
Merritt was granted "absolute and supreme" powers over 
the Philipp ines_ hut was ordered to make the occupa- 
tion f *fce as free from severity as possible" and to exer- 
cise ;i a high sense of justice." 

Before Merritfs arrival Aguinaldo established a pro- 
visional government, compelling Anderson to write him: 
"1 observe that Your Excellency has announced yourself 
dictator and proclaimed martial law. As I am here simph 
in a military capacity, I have no authority to recognize 
such assumption. I have no orders from my government 

<m I he SllbjtM-l." 

it was becoming more and more apparent that conflict 




American troops being ferried ashore before the attack 
on Manila. 

would break out between the Americans and the Filipinos. 
'The people expect independence," Anderson reported to 
Washington. 

Merritt and Aguinaldo never met, "General Aguinaldo 
did not visit me on my arrival nor offer his services as 
a subordinate leader/' Merritt later reported. Merritt 
himself never asked for the Filipino leader, who every 
day was getting more suspicious of the Americans. Thus 
the preparations for the attack on Manila were conducted 
by the Americans without reference to the Filipino 
forces. 

Before the final battle between American and Spanish 
forces on August 13, there were exchanges of notes be- 
Iween them. Knowing that the enemy had superior fight* 
ing power, the long-besieged Spaniards, whose supplies 
were getting dangerously low, were anxious to surrender, 
but they felt that the American terms were incompatible 
with Spanish honor. 

Admiral Dewey and General Merritt agreed to make an 
all-out combined attack on Manila. Dewey's fleet took 
a position along the shore. The Monadnock and Monterey 
covered the German Asiatic fleet, which had been trying 
to help the embattled Spaniards. Dewey gave orders 
to fire on the Germans if they gave the slightest sign of 
abandoning their neutral position. 

At 6:45 in the morning of August 13, all American 
troops left Camp Dewey for the front. They found that 
Aguinaldo's forces had blockaded the city except for 
the positions held by the Americans on the south. 

The army assault began at 9:30. The fleet opened fire 
15 minutes later. Plans were carried out on schedule, 
but the Americans advanced so rapidly that they did 
not allow sufficient time for the Spaniards to retreat 
gracefully after fighting with valor. 

Agumaldo's troops surged forward in the wake of the 
Americans, hut they were stopped by orders from Gen- 
eral Merritt. They were not allowed even a "look-in." 

\Turn ttt Page 1?) 



• 16 



August 13, 1898 (from Page 15) 

When the Spanish general surrendered and the American 
flag was hoisted over Fort San Antonio de Abad at II 
o'clock that morning, the Filipinos were not permitted to 
see the ceremony. 

The attack on Manila cost the Americans only five 
men killed and 43 wounded. For the ease with which the 
Americans took the city, they could have thanked the 
Filipinos" long siege, which had softened the harried 
Spaniards, but didn't, "Divided victory was not per- 
missible/' the American generals cabled Washington. 
"'It was fitting that whatever was to he done * . - should 
be accomplished by the strong arm of the United Slates 
alone," 

The capture of Manila was only the beginning of the 
American's trouble in the Philippines. Although the 
Treaty of Paris of 1898 ceded the Philippines to the 
United States by right of conquest and purchase, the 
American and Filipino forces soon clashed. Fighting 
lasted for months even after General Aguinaldo was 
captured on March 23, 190L in a clever ruse executed 
by Col. Frederick Funston. 

Complete occupation of the Philippines necessitated 
a long war with the Filipino insurgents under Aguinaldo. 
More than 120,000 American troopers were dispatched 
to the Philippines. During the three and one-half years 
of war. 4.165 Americans were killed, and the United 
Slates Government expended $185,000,000. The Filipinos 
put up a good fight, but the Americans were better trained 
and better armed. The war cost the Filipinos 100,000 
lives, 

Enmity between the belligerents was bitter. But when 
Aguinaldo laid down his arms and took the oath of 
loyalty to the United States, he became an exemplary 
citizen, cooperating in the reconstruction program of 
the conquerors, A young major in Aguinaldo"s army, 
Manuel L, Quezon, also took the oath of loyalty- Now 
President of the Philippines, he recently proclaimed a 
Loyalty Day. during which he reassured the democratic 
world that "the Philippines is united behind the United 
States in whatever course she might take. 

Today the armed forces of the United States and the 
Common wealth of the Philippines stand side by side, 
ready for any emergency in the Far East. + 




Corregidor after the bottle. 



-@wa.y ^ta/n -//ame 



is his second visit to the United States* 

A graduate of the Manila Conservatory of Music. 
Cornejo studied at the Chicago Musical College and 
later at the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, New 
York, where he won a scholarship. He has been heard 
several times in the past over the National Broadcasting 
Company, the Columbia Broadcasting System, and the 
Mutual Network. 

w: w m 

FlLIPINO loyalty to the United States was reaffirmed 
in a resolution passed unanimously at the 3rd Filipino 
Inter-Community Conference recently concluded in Oak- 
land* California, Copies of this resolution were sent 
to President Roosevelt and President Manuel U Quezon 
of the Philippine Commonwealth. 

Presided over by Felipe Esteban, president of the 
Filipino Community of Alameda and Contra Costa coun- 
ties, the conference dealt with many of the problems 
affecting the Filipinos in the United States, particu- 
larly on the West Coast, Methods of achieving economic 
stability and assuring the proper education of their 
Americ an-born children were discussed. 

With a view to unifying the several Filipino cumin uni- 
ties on the Coast, the convention formed a central organi- 
zation to be known as the "Pacific Coast Filipino 
Inler-Cominunity Organization/' Manuel M. Insigne. 
well-known Filipino newspaperman and labor leader of 
Sacramento, was clmsen as I he first head. 




Rod olf o Cornejo 



RODOLFO CORNEJO. Fil- 
ipino composer and pianist, 
was guest soloist with the 
New \ ork Symphony Or- 
chestra in a concert held at 
the Brooklyn Museum on 
July 13. John Barnett con- 
ducted. The concert was 
broadcast over station 
WNYC. 

Cornejo played his '"Phil- 
ippine Rhapsody" which he 
composed during the ocean 
trip from Manila to San 
Franeisco early in 1939. Two 
Philippine folk songs form 
the basis of the work. This 



• 17 * 



Zoo/ GL 



amorous 



~PIease~/\4fcs 



By Pilar IS. Ravelo 



lppmes 



CjrtfcAMOl K as radiated h> Philippine cinema stars has 
little in common with the 1 1 rand sold in Hollywood. Ma- 
nila mi j vie fans sruflf at sophistication. Actresses who 
lead private lives, who smoke and drink, or who go 
mil unchaperoned have poor box office ratings. Glamour 
in the Philippines derives from the naive ness and 
unspoiled charm of tile actress, from soulful eyes that 
reduce an audience to tears, from neatness of attire, 
and. finally, from Mint blooming look, exuberance and 
natural vitality which no amount of make-up can supply. 

11 time hefore the camera is a measure of glamour, 
then Rosa del Rosario. with It) years of screen work to 
her credit, is Glamour Girl No, 1 of the Philippine 
movies. She has been on the screen ever since she was 
1 1. Today she dictates her own contract to the studios, 
chooses the plays she will star in and picks her lead* 
tflg man. No other movie star has ever received $1,000 
for 15 days of work (as Rosa did in Cadena de Amor), 
and she alone has starred in a Philippine picture 
{Ztimboanga) for world distribution. 

There was a time, during the early days of Philippine 
movies, when kissing was not tolerated on the screen. 
Rosa del Rosario made history by participating in a 
screen kiss without ra using the Mi eater-goers lo raise 
their hands in horror. The kiss was very artistically 
done — under water. And she it was who popularized 
the "sarong' \ long before the garment became a syno- 
nym for Dorothy Lamour. 

Rosa prefers tragic roles. She realizes thai the average 
romantic movie patron usually goes Lo a show for one 
purpose — to have a good cry. 

Lilia Vizconde, unlike other cinema stars, does not 
wear a bathing suit merely Lo accentuate the dangerous 
curves. Lilia really swims. She is fond of dan ring. 
Loo. and she prefers a small friendly party lo a round 
of Manila's nighl elubs. On the campus, where she is 
still pursuing a college ed neat ion during her spare 
time, she is distinctly Miss Glamour. Lilia holds two- 
thirds of the University's impo riant honorary positions, 
including regimental sponsor, sweetheart of the haskel- 
ball team and, above all. society editor of the college 
paper. 

Professionally. Miss Vizconde is among Manila's 
highest paid stars: she seldom receives less than §500 
pet incline. She has had an important beneficial effect 
on the movies* too. Her becoming an actress paved 
the wa> Un- other talented coeds and helped improve 
the standing of cinema actresses in the eves of the con- 
servative public 

The value of a glamourous name Is apparent in the 



case of Sonia Reyes, who was born Victoria Barry. At 
first the publicity department called her Vicky Harry, 
which Hollywood would call "a natural. But somehow 
the name fell flat. Provincial movie fans would have 
none of that foreign-sounding si nil. So. in time. \ icky 
Barry became Sonia Reyes, And where Vicky Barry had 
received barely one fan letter a day. Sonia Reyes av- 
erages thirty a week. 

Whatever her name, the young lady is fond of swim- 
ming, singing and reading romantic stories. Her great 
ambition is to get a chance at Hollywood. She d be a hit. 

Healthy, sports-minded and athletic. Luctta Goyena. 
who spells glamour on the X-Oxitie Films loi_ is a 
working gold mine for her company. In four years in 
the movies- she already has more than 15 pictures to 
her credit. On and off the screen, she has real charm, 

Lucita would rather don slacks and go careening along 
a dusty road on a bicycle than apply cold cream or 
take a beauty sleep. She is full of vitality, is excep- 
tionally personable and friendly, and is the pal of 
everyone in the studio. Despite her hoyden ish per- 
sonality, she now plavs "lady" roles. Between scenes 
she makes wry faces at the copious tears she is forced to 
shed in the name of drama. 

Mila del Sol. who has a chubby face and a vivacious 
twinkle in her eyes, is the personification of laughter and 
life. Brown in complexion and well-shaped. Mi la has 
a fetching smile and very round lively eyes that have 
a tendency to look coyly upward. She is the sole sup- 
port of the film company for which she works and 
consequently is given many privileges not extended to 
oilier stars. Her pictures have been consistent money 
makers, Unlike most players, she never makes less than 
two pictures at a time. The two shows are "shot simul- 
taneously and Mil a alternates between them. 

Ester Magalona is the sweetest story the Philippine 
screen has ever told. She is as pretly as she is talented. 
Still in high school- Ester can don a halitttawak (na- 
tive Filipino dress 1 or a bathing suit with equal grace. 
Not surprisingly, she has one of the biggest collections 
of fan mail in Manila. 

Intelligence is an asset to glamour in the case of 
Ynlanda Marquess, who plays the piano, dances the 
rhumba and can talk on Hemingwav and Steinbeck with 
the best of the local literati. And what is more, she can 
name one or two things wmug with surrealist art. She 
combines a surprisingly mature intellect and a flair tor 
the arts with a natural girlish charm, threat things are 
in store For Yolanda. She has a weakness for good clothes 
and boasts of one of the two most expensive wardrobes 
in Manila's Laid of glamour and celluloid. ^ 



19 • 



Defense for the Civilian 



(from Page 6) 



"Greatest So!tlier J ~ 



(from Pago 9) 



Bureau uf Health, the Philippine Constabulary^ and the 
Philippine Social Security Administration, will look after 
the public welfare in emergencies. This job will include 
the quick dispersal of the population in case of air 
raids, the proper care of evacuees, and the maintenance 
of peace and order. Health officials will oversee the 
manufacture of serums and the acquisition of an ade- 
quate supply of medical and surgical materials. Steps 
are being taken to have such materials stored in strategic 
locations throughout the country so as to have them mi 
hand w here most needed. 

Several towns in the provinces around Manila have 
been surveyed as evacuee reception centers. Sites have 
been selected from the point of view of the accessibility 
of food and water, sanitation, and comparative safety 
in case of hostilities. The people of the towns selected 
have shown unprecedented enthusiasm in cooperating 
with the authorities for the accommodation of the pros- 
pective evacuees. Rehearsal evacuations of large num- 
bers of people will be undertaken as soon as some neces- 
sary additional facilities are installed in the reception 
centers. 

Red Cross nurses and assistants are now working in 
the 33 towns selected so far to receive refugees. Their 
goal is to bring health and sanitation facilities up lo 
standard, improve water supply and drinking facilities, 
and make a systematic survey of houses available lo 
accomodate evacuees. First estimates indicate that these 
38 municipalities will be able to handle all who quit 
Manila without building additional shelters. The food 
supply is sufficient for at least four months. 

The first line of our civilian defense in case of war 
will be the Volunteer Guard- organized under the direc- 
tion of the CEA. The Chief of the Constabulary is in 
rhar^c of rcri-uiting and training these guards. Hie 
membership quota will be 400,000 able-bodied men. 

The Volunteer Guard is intended exclusively to pro- 
tect the civil ion population. For example, its duties will 
include the suppression of espionage and sabotage, the 
maintenance of peace and order, and the protection of 
public utilities and war material plants. The Guards will 
also assist in emergencies caused by fires* epidemics, air 
raids or oilier disasters, seeking, if not to prevent, at 
least to minimize, injury to persons and properly. 

Nothing is being left to chance in the defense of our 
civilian population- Filipinos are fully confident that 
their external security is safe in the hands of the United 
States. At the same lime, we realize that our internal 
peace and order is our own responsibility, and we are 
bound lo safeguard it without loss of time. We will not 
fail in our duty to cooperate wilh the United States, When 
the time comes for real action, our civilian population 
will be ready to sland up to any enemy without fear or 
vacillation- 




Beach defense 



service at short notice. This 
program, il was estimated, 
would ca$t the Philippines 
sa.non.oun a year. 

r,r niTa I Mac Arthur be- 
lieves that the Common- 
wealth c an — for all practical 
purposes — he defended 
against invasion. W hen, re- 
cently, critics declared that 
the Islands' position was hopeless, the general replied 
that it would take '"half a million men, S I 0.000.000.000. 
tremendous casualties and three years' time successful t-j 
tc invade the Philippines/" 

"Personally/' he added, "ten years hence 1 Would 
not want to lead any force in an attempt at invasion. 

Philippine Army chiefs are equally confident. At no 
time in history, one of them declared recently, has the 
Phil ippines been better prepared lo meet any foreign 
attack. 

General Mac Arthur would be the last lo insist that 
the Philippine Army's approximately loOJIOO reserves 
are fully trained soldiers. Military experts everywhere 
are fully cognizant of Filipino shortcomings. Hut the 
Philippine defense program was not designed to pro- 
duce men of professional caliber at once, Mac Art bur's 
first objective was to give as many men as possible the 
rudiments of military training on a program that kept 
within the limits of the modest Philippine national 
budget, 

When war started in Europe two years ago, General 
MacArlhur became restless in Manila, He confided to 
friends his keen regret that he had retired when so 
much was happening. He felt on the shelf in his island 
outpost. With recent developments in the Far EasL 
however, his new appointment as commander of all the 
United States Army Fore es in the Orient has been a 
great source of satisfaction to him and to his many 
friends, 

"I am glad to be able to serve my country at this 
crucial time/' General Mae Arthur declared when news 
u f his new job reached Manila, "The action of the 
American government in establishing this new command 
can only mean that it intends lo maintain, at any cost 
and effort, its full rights in the Far East. It is quite 
evident that its determination is immutable and that 
its will is indomitable. To this end both the American 
and Filipino soldiery can be expected to give their 
utmost." 



The latest Philippine census reveals 29.202 Japanese 
in the Islands, as compared with 117.161 Chinese. Out 
of a total of 160.077 foreigners living in the Philippines 
8.739 are Amerieans and \A*'M Spaniards. 



20 



^.ill Our Manpower* 



(from Page 3) 



the damage anil desl nul u hi which the enetm might 
inllit l upon us. 1 urge upon our women the duty of 
cooperating in this civilian effort and training them- 
selves properly to give lirst aid lo the wounded and 
those tliul may receive in- 
jury exf any sort by enemy 

action, ^ 

These are times of stress 
and great danger- Every 
Filipino should awaken lo 
the realities of the situation. 
Our first concern should he 
lo insure an adequate food 
supply. The (rovenuneul is 
trying to build up stocks of 
food, hut these will not be 
sufficient, if our lines of com- 
m indention with the United 
States are disrupted. We can 
only insure an adequate food 
supply al all limes and in 
any emergency. In produc- 
ing in our country all our 
requirements. This we can 
do. This we should do. 

Labor and capital should likewise comprehend their 
duties and responsibilities in the present crisis. They 
should avoid conflicts that will stop production. Strikes 
arc wasteful and I hope they will not be resorted to 
except in extreme cases and only after giving the 
agencies of the Government mi opportunity Lo settle 
the controversy. 

In order to finance our defense preparation, T have 
requested the President of the Tinted States io make 
available to our Government the funds derived from the 
excise tax on Philippine sugar, as well as the funds 
accruing to our Government from the devaluation of 
the American dollar, I have assurances that this request 
IS receiving sympathetic consideration by the American 
Government and T trust that favorable action will be 
taken thereon in the near future. Our Government has 



Members of the Philippine Cabinet participate in 
the Loyalty Day parade through Manila. 




also been taking steps to obtain equipment and war 
materials from the I nited States under the Lend -Lease 
Act, It is my expectation that supplies will be given us 
through this method in increasing quantities. 

The Commonwealth Government has been working 
in intimate collaboration with the L nited States 

Commissioner and American 
\ military and naval authori- 

ties in the Philippines in re- 
lation to our national defense 
program, I wish to make pub- 
lic my appreciation of the 
splendid spirit of cooperation 
which has been patent in 
all our dealings. Above all. 
1 wish to express our grati- 
tude for the interest which 
President Roosevelt and the 
American Government as a 
whole have shown in the de- 
fense of the Philippines. 

We have set aside Loyally 
Day to express the whole- 
hearted and unswerving loy- 
alty of all the elements of 
our population to the I nited 
Slates of America and to 
the Philippines, as well as the great principles of liberty 
and democracy which are cherished by Americans and 
Filipinos alike. This enthusiastic demonstration is doubly 
significant because it is held upon the initiative of our 
laboring masses and their leaders who. in this manner, 
have sought to prove that their loyally to our country 
is above their loyalty to any class, and their condemna- 
tion of communism and other political philosophies 
which are subversive of the present order under our 
Constitution, No more fitting day could have been chosen 
for this purpose than the anniversary of the birthday 
of Dr, Jose RizaL for the ideals and was of life lor 
which he strove and died are the same as those for 
the defense of which we are ready to sacrifice our lives 
and our all, ^ 




* t fit 




Vice-President Osmetic, with Mrs, Osmena, leads 
in the pledge of allegiance fa the U. S, 



Crowds line Padre Burgos Avenue, in Manila, to 
watch the Loyalty Day parade. 



• 21 • 



P. 1. 1WS 



THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY recently passed a bill 
authorizing the President of the Philippines to abolish 
the Department of Interior and transfer its powers, 
i unctions and d Lilies Lo other departments of the govern- 
ment. Executive supervision and administration of prov- 
inces, municipalities, chartered cities and other political 
subdivisions would be shifted to the Office of the 
President; the board of review for moving pictures 
would go to the Department of Public Instruction; reg- 
istration of priests and ministers and the administration 
of the marriage law, to the Department of Justice: 
and the constabulary and the local police force, to the 
Department of .National Defense. The National Informa- 
tion Board has already been transferred to the Civilian 
Emergent y Adnnnish alion, Abolition of the department 
will be completed by December, J 941. 

ft # • 

President manuel l. Quezon recently appoint- 
ed his secretary, Jorge Vargas, chairman of the board 
of directors of the Philippine National Bank. Secretary 
Vargas will succeed Secretary of Justice Jose A bad 
Santos, who has been named associate justice of the 
Supreme Court of the Philippines. 

• ft m 

£$V s proviso of a bill recently passed by the National 
Assembly, the Official Gazette of the Philippines, now 
published by the reporter of the Supreme Court, will 
be expanded and edited henceforth by the Oflice of the 
President. The new Official Gazette will be of wider 
public interest. Publication will be undertaken by the 
staff at Mai ae an an Palace now in charge of publishing 
legislative messages and speeches of the Commonwealth 
President. 

ft- • ft 

Brig, gey gi illermo francisco, chief of the 

Philippine Constabulary, has announced thai J .000 of the 
o.MUO soldiers needed to raise the Constabularly to its 
new!) authorized strength of IU.000 men have been re- 
cruited. Constabulary provincial inspectors and police 
officers of (haltered cities are acting as recruiting 
agents, 

ft ft ft 

PHILIPPINE purchases of bicycle parts and accessor- 
ies from the I ' uiled States during 1 9 10 increased by 69 
per eenL according to the \ . S. Department of Com- 
merce. The Philippines competed with China. Cuba, 
and J5razil in the value of these imports. 



To maintain fond resources in thr Philippines with- 
out depriving the people of essential minimum daily 
needs. Dr. Victor Hncinainino. food administrator of 
the Civilian Emergency Administration, has announced 
a plan for controlling the sale and consumption of footl- 
sLufls through a system of "applications*' and "ration 
cards." The application cards will he used by dealers 
who wisli to sell food in places where government agen- 
cies cannot, handle the work. Ration cards will be used 
by individuals buying food for family consumption. 
Through the Oflice of the Philippine Resident Commis- 
sioner in Washington. D. C. the Civilian Emergency 
Administration has ordered about $2-500.000 worth of 
canned goods and other foodstuffs* The National Food 
Products Corporation has also been given an order 
for foodstuffs worth §1,0110.001), The Administration plans 
to maintain a six-months stock of foodstuffs, and local 
importers have been urged to make similar preparations* 



JVLa.MLA recently staged its lirsL practice blackout of 
30 minutes 1 duration, with air-raid sirens screaming 
and Army planes flying overhead. Army fliers- reporting 
by radio from 3.000 feet, found a high degree of coop- 
eration. Only scattered lights violated the wide!) circu- 
lated black-out instructions. The exercise was under 
Filipino direction, with the [ nilcd Stales Army assist- 
ing but remaining in the background. The Civilian 
Emergency Administration, headed h\ Commonwealth 
officials, was in active charge. 

Brilliant moonlight flooded the city, making the black- 
out of major objectives impossible, but Army fliers re- 
ported it was difficult to distinguish military objectives 
from an altitude of 3.000 feet. However, the waterfront 
was fairly vulnerable, they said, the piers being clearly 
visible against Manila Hay. The silvery Pasig River, 
which meanders through Manila's central district, also 
was clearly distinguishable. 



SlX Germans holding key positions in the Manila Gas 
Corporation were removed recently in a general shaken p 
which was officially attributed to the international situa- 
tion and the fact that the corporation is considered a 
strategic industry, 

Americans and Filipinos eventually will take the places 
of the German officials, CI i fiord I*. Hillings, vice-presi- 
dent of the Philippine Gas and Electric Company, of 
which the Manila Gas Corporation is a subsidiary, an- 
nounced. 

Simultaneously, President Manuel Quezon summoned 
eight Socialist mayors from Central Luzon and warned 
them that any act of dis!o\all\ toward the Commonwealth 
Government and the Curled Slates would be dealt with 
sternly. 



22 



On ihe Honor Roll 



(from Page 10) 



modifications in the vast reorganization and regrouping 
of govern men I bureaus that were going on at I he time* 
Budget Director Harold Smith- another close friend 
and adviser of the President's, discovered in Coy a 
ihorough-going liberal with a genius for common sense. 
It was Coy who helped to draft the transfer of Philip- 
pine jurisdiction from the War Department to the 
Department of the Interior in the early summer of 1939, 

When McNutt arrived in the "Slates", the ground was 
well-prepared for a triumphal entry. And it was a 
triumphal entry* President Roosevelt was impressed and 
offered McNutt the job of Federal Security Adminis- 
trator, a post with semi-cabinet rank. McNutt did not for* 
get Coy. He made him Assistant rYdrral Security Ad 
nun istraior, a dizzy ascent for a plain Indiana boy. 

He wasn't particularly overawed. It was something 
like being WPA Administrator of Indiana, only there was 
much more of it. The job fit Coy like an old shoe. He 
knew how to talk to social security experts, to em- 
ployment directors, to youth leaders, to old dealers, 
and to new dealers. Officials who might have resented 
him because he was young grew to respect and praise 
him. 

The praise reached the ears of the While House. Coy 
was called in for little special jobs, somewhat outside 
of his field, lie was asked 1o draft memoranda on gov- 
ernment policy, to confer on social trends, and to advise 
with other inner-circle officials on the broad programs 
of government. 

National defense became the national preoccupation, 
as emphasis shifted from the domestic to the world 
front. Coy began taking a hand in that. too. He helped 
to draft a plan whereby McNutt took over all the 
national defense functions associated with the health, 
training, welfare, and recreation of potential soldiers, 
and of the civilian population. It was a big job. 

Coy moved to a job even bigger. In April he was 
named Liaison Officer for the Office for Emergency Man- 
agement, McNutt, his boss, bade him god-speed. From 
that time on, McNutt was Lo report to the White House 
through Coy, on matters of national defense, and their 
government relationship was turned around. But Coy's 
political loyalties remain the same. It is a good bet that 
in 1914 Coy will lie in MiNulfs corner, pulling for his 
nomination as Democratic candidate for the presidency. 

1914 is three years away. Today defense is the watch- 
word. Coy is at the switchboard of the entire adminis- 
trative machinery of defense. OPM, OP ACS. OCD, and 
i\I)AC, the alphabetical collection of defense agencies, 
keep in touch with White House policy through Coy, 
Major decisions, of course, are made as always at the 
White House. He works late and works hard. It is a 
highly important job. an all-important job. But Coy 
says it is much like his work in Indiana and in the 
Philippines, only there is more of it. ^ 



For Your Information 



THE INFORMATION DIVISION of the Office of the 
Philippine Resident Commissioner does a great deal 
besides editing Philippixes. Its activities include such 
diversified lines as distributing photos* producing radio 
broadcasts, editing movies and researching into climatic 
peculiarities* The object of this wide program is to 
give the widest possible circulation to information on 
Philippine industry, defense, history, culture and trade. 

In addition to current arid back copies of PHILIPPINES, 
which is published in Washington. D. C. a booklet pub- 
lished by the Commonwealth Government in Manila is 
now available in limited quantities, This booklet meets 
the need for generalized material on the Islands, touch- 
ing briefly on almost every phase of modern life. 
Another set of pamphlets, published by the various 
government agencies concerned, contains specialized ma- 
terial on such Philippine industries and resources as 
mining, forestry, fish and game, mango culture, land 
utilization, rice growing, derris, cacao and tobacco. All 
the above are available without charge, 

On behalf of the semi-official Philippine Tourist Bu- 
reau, the Office of the Resident Commissioner distributes 
tourist literature from the Commonwealth. Material on 
hand at present includes folders on interesting and 
popular sights in the vicinity of Manila, and copies of 
a new quarterly magazine. Philippine Tourist. 

Of particular value to teachers are the enlarged re- 
productions of maps appearing in Philippines. Limited 
quantities of these can be obtained without charge by 
writing to the information division. 

Transcriptions of the series of Philippine radio pro- 
grams recently broadcast from W ashington will soun 
be available for classroom use or for rebroadcasting. 
These 10 programs touch many aspects of Island life, 
and arc designed to be both entertaining and informa- 
tive. Complete information ivill be released soon. 

Also in preparation is a small textbook on the Philip- 
pines, designed especially f*>r educators. Illustrated with 
photos, maps and drawings, ihe publication will contain 
basic malerial for a brief course of instruction on the 
Common wealth. Copies arc ex pec led to be available bj 
October, ^ 

TllE 42N1) AWI AL REIWUA of the National So- 
ciety-Army of the Philippines was held at St. Peters- 
lung, Florida. August 1043 inclusive. The Reunion was 
sponsored In the Manila Outpost, the Socieh -Army of 
the Philippines and the St Petersburg Chamber &f 
Commerce. 



• 23 • 



■@ rilitaino Jlooki at 

Philippine Defense 

By P. C. Morantte 

AmEPvICAN observers of Far Eastern affairs generally 
affirm, that the Philippines — whose protection against 
aggression is the responsibility of the United States 
until 1946— is the Achilles heel of American defense. 
Fortunately, this favorite opinion of Monday morning 
strategists is not shared by Filipino military experts or 
by General Douglas Mac Arthur, whose job it is to make 
the Islands reasonably defensible- 
It has been pointed out that, since Admiral Dewey 
was able to destroy the Spanish fleet and capture Ma- 
nila in six hours, a powerful enemy could do the same 
thing today. This is false logic, for there is no com- 
parison between llie Spanish fieri of I wUH in the. Islands 
and the American Asiatic fleet of 1941* Without trying 
to minimize Admiral Dewey's brilliant accomplishment, 
it is an historical fact that the Spaniards guarding Ma- 
nila were demoralized by internal confusion, and their 
<le fences undermined by the harassments of the Filipino 
revolutionaries. Today the situation in the Philippines is 
altogether different. The Filipinos are not in rebellion 
against the United States: on the contrary, they are 
alert and united and wholeheartedly committed to sup- 
port any military move the United States may make in 
the Orient- To he sure, the whole Philippine Army 
numbers only 150.000; but this number of armed Fili- 
pinos might be enough to wreck an invasion. 

The fortified island of Corregidor at the month of 
Manila Bay can hold out for only 30 days at most against 
an enemy assault, according to John Gunther. This time 
element, however, can be decisively important to the 
American Navy stationed at Hawaii. So long as the 
Fleet keeps on fighting, so long: would the island of 
Corregidor stand. And while Corregidor stands, a great 
portion of the Philippines would continue fighting. 

Many parts of the Philippines would carry on the 
light even if Manila fell. The experience of the Ameri- 
can soldiers trying to occupy the entire Philippines after 
the Spanish- American War proves this. The Americans 
I nought that capturing Manila meant the surrender 
of the whole archipelago. They soon found they were 
gravel j mistaken, Even after General Emilio Aguinaldo, 
head of the Philippine Pe\ n|ut ionai \ Arm v. had rleared 
out I Ik* lasl vestige of Spanish armed resistance. America 
bad lo send [ 25JH10 soldiers to ihc Islands at a eosl 
at about $200,000,000, ucenrding to War Department 
records. The expedition sent to put down General 
A«nmialdo*s native army numbered roughly 50.000, And 



the Americans fought the Filipino insurgents for two 
years. Two years lo force a poorly armed nathe army 
to surrender! 

Aow, supposing an enemy were to attempt to occupy 
the Islands today. It would find itself in a graver pre* 
die a merit than did the Americans. For today the defense 
of the Philippines is being formidably augumenlcd with 
American help. 

It is often argued that Philippine geography offers 
a variety of landing points for an invader. While it is 
true that the Islands afford as many landing spots 
as there are habitable islands, it does nol necessarily 
follow that the Philippines is an easy prey. It sin mid be 
remembered that America had to h i ik1 a comparatively 
large army to the Islands in order Id suppress a few 
thousand native fighters, because the numerous islands 
themselves helped in dissipating the American forces. 
Scattered into loosely independent contingents, they 
favored the Filipino soldiers' peculiar guerilla method 
of combat. 

Filipinos fighting an invading army would have quite 
an advantage. Once away from the landing shores ami 
open plains, the enemy's blitzkrieg ladies would be handi- 
capped. Then Filipino fighters could stage surprise at- 
tacks from the mountains and forests; they would be a 
deadly torment to the enemy. Every tree could be a trench, 
every ravine a fortress. A mechanized army would be at 
a hopeless disadvantage in a jungle battle. 

Artillery needs charted ground to be effective. But 
Philippine topography is very irregular, characterized 
by islands, boggy fields, swamps, jungles, mountains, 
forests and treacherous waters. Filipino resistance is not 
maintained in villages and towns, but in gut leys and 
gulches and swamps and bluffs and Thermopylean passes. 
General Gregorio del Pilar, commanding a rear guard 
of about 60 native fighters against a battalion of Ameri- 
can soldiers, almost won the grim battle of Til ad Pass 
in December, 1899. 

Americans should not entertain a defeatist attitude 
toward the defense of the Philippines. Given sufficient 
help, the Filipinos can hold any enemy at hay. 

The public declaration by the Secretary of the Navy 
that the United States will defend the Philippines as 
long as the American flag flies there was very heartening 
to us. The Filipinos are happy to have this assurance, 
which they consider an appropriate answer to their 
plea for military assistance, broadcast to the United 
States last fall by the Philippine Secretary of Finance. 
Manuel Koxas, and indorsed by President Manuel L. 
Quezon, 

But American official assurances should he accom- 
panied by increasing material aid. The Filipinos are 
asking only for arms and ammunition. We don't need 
American men; we will do the fighting ourselves. We 
arc dead set on thai point. All America lias lo do is 
supply us with the equipment we need Lo meet a military 
crisis. This is the only wn\ the Philippines can be saved 
from an invader. ^ 



• 21 • 




tf^f PHILIPPINE TOBACCO AGENCY 

2362 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. Washington, D. C. 



1 






