THE PARTICULARS OF THE 

PHILIPPINES' PRE-SPANISH PAST 



• 



* 




Kublai Khan's Fleet (in which Marco Polo sailed) Entering the Indian 
Archipelago. A. D. 1292. 



(Dm tvn by Cnfotitt Yule from description.) 



Particulars of the Philippines' 
Pre-Spanish Past 



Chinese Knowledge of the Philippines in the Third Century 

(also A. D. 606, 636, and 1174-1189.) 
Somewhere in the Southern Philippines 

(A. D. 618-906, 627-649, 674, 766-779, 813, 827-S35, 
860-873, 992-1109, 1129.) 

Marco Polo's Reference to Sulu, c.1292 
Friar Odoric's Mention of the Philippines, c.1328 
Ibn Batutu's Account of the Philippines, c.1347 

with Doctor Rizal's comment thereon. 

The Bisayans in Borneo 

(Early XIV Century, 1368, c. 1450.) 

Sulu in 1512. (Portuguese account) 
The Discovery of Mindanao in 1512 
When Portugal Dominated the Philippines 

(1522, 1538, 1542, 1543, 1545.) 
A Spanish Contribution, re 1372 



MANILA, MCM.XVI 



A PERSONAL NOTE 



My recent research trip terminated much sooner than I had anticipated, 
through locating half a dozen Chinese authorities of which I had long had 
an indefinite idea. Reluctantly had I returned to Manila last July and at 
once I set about getting the time to follow up till decisively determined the 
clues which seemed so aggravatingly near to disclosing the desired sources 
upon the history of what is for me the most fascinating part of the Philip- 
pines' past. 

Now in my notebook arc definite references to book and chapter in Chinese 
works of the XIV, XV, XVI and XVII centuries where are mentions of the 
Philippines. The books deal in an encyclopedic way with China's neighbors 
and before another six months has gone by it is expected that the extracts 
of interest here will have been translated, annotated and fitted into their 
proper places into what will then be a fairly complete story of this country 
and its people from about A. D. 200 to 1521, that foreshadowed in the pamphlet 
"A Thousand Years of Philippine History Before the Coming of the Span- 
iards", which was published some years ago. 

Other authorities to be consulted in carrying out this project would be 
chiefly Doctor J. A. Robertson's translation of the Bisayan manuscript his- 
tory compiled from local traditions by Padre Pavon, together with its law 
code of 1433; Doctor N. M. Saleeby's writings on the Moros and Professor 
H Otley Beyer's ethnological studies, besides the Field Museum publications 
°. n B * £aufer an <* F «y Cole. Thus it will be seen the work does not mate- 
rially differ from what is being done by most college students, only no 
one gives references and the libraries in which these are looked up, either 
personally or through employing some one abroad, are scattered all over the 
world. The method is the same, only it is on a larger scale. 

Simple as this work seems, it is of great importance that it be done and 
with as little delay as possible. It is the necessary preparation for the needed 
History of the Philippines, for the opening editorial "Our Purpose' in the 
shortlived Retnsta ffistorica </< Filipinos: (May, 1905) is not yet obsolete: 
4 We are tired of hearing it stated that the time is now ripe to write the history 
of the Philippines; we ck> not think it to be venturesome when we affirm that 
at present we have not even material sufficient accumulated, both as to quan- 
tity and quality, to permit the minute analysis which must precede all attempt 
at the historical synthesis of our civilization". 

Of course since then the splendid Blair-Roberston collection has appear- 
ed, making available practically everything of value which has ever been 
written in any European language about this land since Magellan's time, 
but probably not two dozen sets of this really invaluable work are to be found 
in the Philippines. The establishment of libraries as liberally as schools and 
their equipment with historical reference books would seem the only adequate 
plan for getting history teaching to produce full results, judging by the ex- 
perience of other popularly-governed lands. 

But in addition to this material for the study of what Spain did here, 
and of equal interest at least, we want to know what Spain found here. Rizal 
in his annotations to Morga's 1609 History and in his essays "The Indolence 
of the Filipino" and "The Philippines A Century Hence" tries to give partial 
answer to this most natural question, a query which few others in his day 
dared voice, though Juan Luna with his historical paintings, Dr. T. H. Pardo 
de Tavera with his Sanscrit studies, Isabelo de los Reyes in folk-lore inves- 
tigations and Mariano Ponce through recalling the earliest-known Filipinos 
were tending toward the same end. The historical review just mentioned 
most strongly speaks of "the indigenous factor, whose proper recognition 
in our history we demand" and declared "the indigenous element in the Phil- 
ippines during pre-Spanish times. . . . ought by rights to be given a large 
place in our history." 

Austin Craig. 

University of the Philippines. 
Manila, November 29th, 1916. 



CHINESE KNOWLEDGE OF THE PHILIPPINES 
IN THE THIRD CENTURY 

(Dr. Terrien de Lacouperie's "Formosa Notes on MSS., Races and 
Languages.*' London, 1887, p. 444 el seq.) 

It is from the north through their early relations 
with Japan that they (the Chinese — C.) heard for the 
first time, and rather loosely, of the great island (For- 
mosa — C.) as one of those belonging to the elongated 
line of island groups extending southwards from Korea 
and Japan to the Philippines. These early statements, 
which date from the third century, are interesting by 
their age and by the peculiar importance given therein 
to races of short men, i. e., of Negrito race, and cognate 
to the substratum of the population of Japan, to which 
the present race is indebted for their small size and 
several features of their language; they were also the 
very negritos which formed one of the earliest human 
strata on the mainland, in parts of Eastern and South- 
ern China, in Indo-China proper, and in Eastern India. 
Recent anthopological researches have shown that this 
small and short race, pure or mixed, spread on sea 
from the southeast of New Guinea to the Andaman 
Islands, from Sumatra, Java, Timor, etc., to Japan. 
And on the mainland it spread from Eastern China, 
Annam and Malacca peninsula to the West of India 
beyond the Indus, and from Cape Comorin to the Hima- 
layas. 

A later information which we have on the subject 
in Chinese sources, dating from A. D. 606, is found in 
the dynastic history of the Sui (A. D. 581-618), under 
the heading of Liu-K'iu, which was the general desig- 
nation of all the islands east of the Chinese coasts and 
south of Japan. (There is Chinese precedent for 
joining together the first parts of two chief minor names 
to make a group name, so as Luzon was Liu-sin and 
Formosa was K'iu-lung, this may be the origin of 
Liu-k'iu.— C.) 

* ******** 

The Chinese Annals of A. D. 628 and 636 speak 
of the states 6f Shvrnai and Kamtang as having sent 



tribute to the Emperor; they were islands in the south- 
east apparently corresponding to the Philippines, 
and they were inhabited by Kun-lun men (Tang shu- 
Tai ping yu lan, k. 788, /. 6 v.). The second of these 
names is perhaps the modern Gaddan of Luzon, a 
Tagala nation and the statement that they were 
Kun-lun men (i. e., negritos-C.) may have arisen 
from the name of the Kalingas alio a TagaTtr^ m 
the same island. (I n this case Dr. L. thinks, accord- 
ing to a note, that the use of the name Kunlun may be 
without value as it might not be derived from there but 
from Kaling a name he would derive through Java 
from the bold Kalingas of Southern India" but which 
another Chinese narrative quoted in this pamphlet 
would seem to apply to a part of the Philippines.— C.) 

***** 

* * * * 

,hnJ^tZ e ru heT evidences of importance which 
show that the Chinese were acquainted with the dark- 
skinned occupiers of Formosa as originated from the 
Philippine Archipelago The Yang tchw wen Kao 
says that the island of Taiwan (or Formosa, the Jap- 
anese now use this old name-C), which was formerly 
called Kv-lung, was originally a part of the Liu-kiu 
state which was founded by some descendants of 
the Ha-la. The author does not say what the Ha-la 
are, assuming that his readers are acquainted with that 
name, so we must look elsewhere for the wanted expla- 

"f lu 11 ' J- nd l l 1 ?, the Mon hoh "A Description 
ot the Miao and Man Tribes," by Tsao Shu-K' iao 
of Shanghai. The entry about that people is amongst 
those of the south. They are described as dark with 
deep set eyes, a peculiarity which the Chinese stated 
to be that of the Kun-lun men, as we have seen above. 
The author of the M mo Man hoh Ichi says also that the 
Mala do not know the practice of chewing betel, and 
he proceeds with some details on their clothes and 
customs in so far as they are peculiar to themselves, 
but they are unimportant. Now these Uala of the 
Chinese are simply the Gala,- -commonly Ta-gala, 
with the usual Ta prefix left off (Dr. L. quotes in a 
note as a conjecture Leyden's opinion that the Chinese 



have mistaken the first syllable To- for their own word 
ta "great" and dropped it with their usual contempt 
for foreign nations, the more reasonable that the prefix 
"little" is often used by them with Liu-sung, or Liu- 
sin, to destinguish it from their own "great" dynasty 
of the same name — C); and the statement agrees en- 
tirely with the inference of ethnologists deduced from 
travellers' reports as to the parentship of several tribes 
of aborigines of Formosa with the Tagal population 
of the Philippines. 

The Chinese ethnographical notices of the Sung 
Dynasty on the Liu-Kiu islands, including as they do 
all the islands from Japan to the Philippines, state 
that next to Liu-Kiu lies the country of the P J i- 
shc-yc (pronounced Bishaya — C.) in which we must, 
I think, recognize the Bisayas, the most diffused 
population of the Philippines, and next to the Tagalas 
in importance. They made a raid on the coasts of 
Fuhkien at Tsiuen-tchou during the period 1174-1189 
and caused a great deal of havoc. 

SOMEWHERE IN THE SOUTHERN 
PHILIPPINES 

(Extracted, with verbal variations due to not accepting 
his forced identification as Java, from Groeneveldt: Notes on 
the Malay Archipelago and Malacca compiled from Chinese 
Sources. Batavia, 1876, p. 12 ei seq.) 

Kaling is situated on an island in the southern 
ocean. It lies on the eastern side of Po-li (Poni or 
Borneo— C), on the western side of Dva-patan (Da- 
pi tan district of Mindanao — C), toward the north it 
has Cambodja and on its south the sea. 

The walls of the city are made of palisades, and 
there is a large, two-story building, thatched with 
coir, in which the king lives. He sits on a couch of 
ivory (white camagon wood? — C). 

When they eat, they use no spoons or chopsticks 
but put the food into the mouth with their fingers. 
They have letters and know a little astronomy. Their 
wine is made out of the coconut tree's flowers which 



7 



are more than three feet long and as large as a man's 
arm. These are cut and the juice collected and made 
into a sweet and intoxicating wine. 

Old History of the rang Dynasty {A. 1). 618-906); Booh 1.97. 
Ka-ling is also called Djapo (Dva-apo— C). (Here is left out 
substantially a repetition of the old histoids accounL-C.) 

They have couches of ivory and mats of the outer 
skin of bamboo. The land produces tortoise-shell, 
gold and silver, rhinoceros horns and ivorv There 

rlneou^y™ ^ Water bubbles U P *pon- 

tor £f J2? ^i 116 tOWn ° f D j' a P°' but his ^es- 

lEtt? n ^ m ° re t0 the east at the town 
Pa-lu-ka-si On different sides there are twenty-eight 

rffi^TrK a ^.nowledging the supremacy 
ln? t lZ v are ^"ty-two high ministers and 

rfth^ n^i ^ ( ? atU ? ~ c -) is the first 

+u 2 t moun tams is the district Lang-pi-ya. 
where the king frequently goes to look at the sea 
. -^??\ a ^ e ^ mn } er " s olstice a gnomon is erected 

J^JTof i Shad ° W at noon falls 0" the south 
side and is 2.4 feet long. 

During the period Chin-kwan (A. D. 627-649) 
ST!. £ untr V* ent ™oys to bring tribute, together 
with those of Dva-hala and Dva-patan. The Emperor 
favored them with a reply under the great seal and 
as Dva-hala asked for good horses, these were given 
to them. 6 

In 674 the people of this countrv took as their 
ruler a woman, named Sima, whose "rule was most 
excellent, for even things dropped in the road were 
not picked up. An Arab prince who heard of this 
sent a bag of gold to be laid down within her territory, 
but the people that passed that way avoided it in 
walking, so it remained there for three years. Then 
the heir apparent stepped over this gold, which so 
incensed Sima that she wanted to kill him. Her 
ministers interceded and the Queen said to the culprit: 
Your fault lies in your feet, therefore it will be suffi- 
cient to cut them off." Again the ministers inter- 
ceded and she had his toes cut off in order to give the 



example to the entire nation. When the Arab prince 
learned of this, he became afraid and dared not attack 
her. 

Between the years 766 and 779 three envoys came 
to China from Kaling. In the year 813 its presents 
were four black slaves, parrots of various colors, 
"pinka" (meaning uncertain - C.) birds, and other 
things. The Emperor' honored the envoy with a 
title, "Left Defender of the Office of the Four Inner 
Gates,' ' and when the envoy wanted to decline this 
in favor of his younger brother, the Emperor praised 
him and bestowed titles on both. Between 827 and 
835 they came again to court with tribute, and between 
860 and 873 they sent an envoy to present female 
musicians. 

New History of the Tang Dynasty (A. I). 618-906). Book 
2 ! J, part 2. 

Djapo is situated in the southern ocean. Going 
from the capital to the east, one comes to the sea in a 
month, and from here it takes a ship half a month to 
get to Pulo Condore. On the west the sea is at a dis- 
tance of forty-five days. On the south it is three days 
to the sea and from there five days' sailing to the Tazi 
(Arabs- -C.). On the north the distance from the 
capital to the sea is five days and, embarking there, it 
takes fifteen days to go to Borneo, fifteen days more 
bring one to the east-coast of Sumatra, seven days more 
to Kora (on the Malay Peninsula?— C.) and lastly 
seven days longer to Ch'ai-lih Ting (an island near 
the entrance to the Gulf of Siam? — C), which is on 
the way to the land of the Giauchi (Northern Annam) 
and to Canton. 

The country is flat and fit for agriculture. Its 
products are rice, hemp and peas, there being no wheat, 
and a tenth part of their produce is paid as taxes. 
Salt is obtained by boiling seawater and fish, turtles, 
poultry, ducks, goats and cattle,which they kill for the 
the purpose of eating, are plentiful. Their fruits are 
papaya, coconuts, bananas, sugar cane and taro (gabe 
or aba — C). The country further produces gold, silver 



9 



rhinoceros-horns, ivory, lignum aloes, sandalwood 
anise, pepper, pinang, sulphur and sapanwood The 
people are also engaged in rearing silkworms and making 
silk; they weave a thin silk, a yellow silk and cloth 
made of cotton. They cut leaves of silver and use 
them as money. The officials in charge of trade take 
one-tenth of a gold tael (Chinese ounce) for each 2 2 
piculs of palay. 

Their houses are handsome and adorned with 
yellow and green tiles. When Chinese merchants 
arrive there they are entertained as guests in a public 
building and the eatables and drinkables are abundant 
and clean. The country does not produce tea, but a 
wine is made from coconut and other palm trees which 
is very fragrant and good. They have no corporal 
punishments, all transgressions being penalized with 
fines in gold which vary according to the nature of the 
offence. Only robbers and thieves are made to suffer 
death. 

The king has his hair in a knot upon the top of his 
head, and wears golden bells, a silk robe and shoes of 
leather. He sits on a square couch and his officials, 
who see him daily, salute him three times on going 
away. When he goes out he rides on an elephant or 
sits in a carnage, with an escort of five to seven hundred 
soldiers. When the people see the king, they squat 
down until he has passed. Three sons of the king 
are viceroys and there are four dignitaries, called 
Lo-ta-lien, who manage together the affairs of the state, 
just as the ministers in China. These latter have no 
nxed pay but from time to time they get products 
ol the soil and other things of this kind. Next there 
are more than three hundred civil employees, considered 
equal to siu-tsai (China's graduates of the lowest 
degree), who keep the books in which the revenue is 
put down. They have also about a thousand officials 
of lower rank who attend to the walls and moat of the 
town, the treasury, the granaries, and to the soldiers. 
The general of the army gets every half-year ten taels 
of gold and there are thirty thousand soldiers who, 
semi-annually, are paid according to their rank. 



10 



It is not the custom to use go-betweens, or match- 
makers, in contracting a marriage. Some gold is 
paid to the relations of the girl and then she is married. 

In the fifth month they go in boats for their amuse- 
ment and in the tenth month they repair to the moun- 
tains to enjoy themselves there. They have mountain- 
ponies, which carry them very well, and some go in 
mountain -chairs. Their musical instruments are a 
transversal flute, drums and wooden boards. They 
can also dance. The people wear their hair hanging 
loose, and their dress, wrapped around their breast, 
extends below the knees. When ill they take no medi- 
cine but only pray to the gods and to Budha. They 
have proper names, but no family names. In their 
language pearls are called mutiara, ivory they call 
fcara, incense kuntunlulin, and the rhinoceros timi, 

In the 12th month of the year 992, their king 
Maradja sent an embassy, consisting of a first, a second 
and an assistant envoy, to go to court and bring tribute. 
Said the first envoy: "Now that China has a rightful 
ruler again, our country comes to perform the duty 
of bringing tribute." The presents sent by the king 
were ivory, pearls, silk embroidered with flowers and 
gold, silk of various colors, sandalwood, cotton goods 
in various colors, tortoise-shell, betel-trays, short 
swords with hilts of rhinoceros-horn or gold, rattan 
mats woven with patterns, white parrots, and a small 
pavillion which was made of sandalwood and adorned 
with all kinds of precious materials. 

After a voyage of sixty days they arrived at the 
district Ting-hai (Island of Chusan), whence the su- 
perintendent of trade first sent a messenger to inform 
the Emperor. The envoys were dressed like those of 
Persia who had brought tribute before. With the 
assistance of an interpreter, the envoy related how 
a Chinaman from Kien-khi, who was owner of many 
vessels and a great merchant, had often come to his 
country and that he now availed himself of this one's 
guidance to come to court and bring tribute. Also 
he said that his king was called Adji Maraya, the king's 
concubines were Lo-kicn-sa-p'oli and that in his coun- 



11 



Z^M^jt^- \ n his ianguage the 

and the wife nf rtw. i- g VCSSels was called P(>,w 
and the wife of the king was styled Pohopini. 

ornaments. A garment nf ^ n ° hairpins or like 
was wrapped Jun7£ body V& 3 ^ 

stand her talk and in saluHn. u b ° dy COUld Unde ^ 
just like the men did T hpr ' g i P rostern ed herself 
about his neck a goiden rff Wasa l so a chil d who wore 
hands golden bracdetf W n ^ a lock and on his 
He waf called [ £ with a strin S of silk ' 

The envoy stated th*+ u- 
with San-bo-tsai (Palem^ country was at enmity 
they were always fiSwSF' £ Sumatra > a "d that 
following story "In ou " g r t0gether - He also told the 
on the mountains and y are many monkeys, 

When called, with 'the sound .f^ afraid ° f men " 
ward, and if any fruit^t aMSWaM » they come for " 
monkeys advance first nrown to *em, two large 
the kings, or chiefs, of thf^l 0311 ^ by the natiVCS 
when they have fin shed eL^ 8 ' and lt is only 
what remains." Catlng that the others take 

peroral" wder? t^soS^ w th ~ ° apita1 ' the Em ' 
well. He remained some tl t0 treat him 

presented with large SSitSu ^ Whe " he left waS 
also with good horses anH eS , 0f g ° ld and silk ' and 
asked. and mi »tary arms as he had 

The envoy mentioned that tW u a • uu 

a country called Paraman where tL ^ f^S? 
gift of looking into other ne^l? ■ ? e ° ple had the 
anybody wanted to do them '^Tt' u Whe " ever 
it beforehand. mischief, these knew 

In the 6th month of the ve*r iinn «.u 
envoys to bring tribute and the S^i Y ?"S 

for them the same ceremonies af fSTv, PrES*! 
(Northern Annam). In the year „ * 

^ " <>f Djapo ^ffEJ 

hv th?/ T ^ POn T US title was not considered 
by the translator worth giving i n its entirety as it 



12 



was verbose and difficult to render into English — C), 
and appointed nominally 2,400 houses, which weer 
in reality 1,000, for his sustenance (probably for the 
sustenance of envoys, etc., sent by him). In 1132 
this allowance was increased nominally by 500, really 
200, houses. 

Comment. — Groeneveldt's attempted identification of the 
country here described is based on the similarity of one of several 
transliterations of the Chinese name with Java. He finds it 
necessary to consider the writer of the account careless in listing 
products and attributing neighbors which do not fit in with 
Java and then ignores the shadow cast by the gnomon which is 
impossible for Java's latitude. None of these difficulties exits 
for the southern part of the Philippines. 



MARCO POLO'S REFERENCE TO SULU 
c. A. D. 1292 

(From "The Book of Ser Marco Polo, the Venetian, concerning the 
Kingdom and Marvels of the East,'* Cordier-Yule (3rd edition). London, 
1903. Vol. II, p. 276.) 



CHAPTER VII 

Wherein the Isles of Sondur and Condur are 
spoken of; and the Kingdom of Locac 

When you leave Chamba and sail for 700 miles on a 
course between south and south-west, you arrive at 
two Islands, a greater and a less. The one is called 
Sondur and the other Condur. As there is nothing 
about them worth mentioning, let us go on five hundred 
miles beyond Sondur, and then we find another country 
which is called Locac. It is a good country and a 
rich; [it is on the mainland]; and it has a king of its 
own. The people are Idolaters and have a peculiar 
language and pay tribute to nobody, for their country 

13 



is so situated that no one can enter it to do them ill. 
Indeed if it were possible to get at it, the Great Kaan 
would soon bring them under subjection to him. 

In this country the brazil which we make use of 
grows in great plenty; and they also have gold in in- 
credible quantity. They have elephants likewise, and 
much game. In this kingdom too are gathered all 
the porcelain shells which are used for small change 
in all those regions, as I have told you before. 

There is nothing else to mention except that this 
is a very wild region, visited by few people; nor does 
the king desire that any strangers should frequent 
the country, and so find out about his treasure and 
other resources. We will now proceed, and tell you 
of something else. 

COMMENT.— Colonel Yule in his "Cathay and the Way 
Thither" (London, 1866), Vol. II, p. 521 et seq., says: "I suspect 
this kingdom of Soolo, or Suluk as the Malays call it, may be also 
the Lohac of Marco Polo which has so much troubled commen- 
tators (III, 7). This was an extensive region, lying 500 miless 
south-east of Sondur and Condur (Pulo Condur), inhabited by 
pagans, with a language of their own, under a king tributary 
to no one, being in a very inaccessible position, producing much 
brazil-wood and great abundance of gold, having elephants in its 
forests, and supplying all the east with porcelains or cowry-shells 
for currency. The position answers to that of Soolo with fair 
accuracy; cowries are said to be found in quantities there only 
of all the Indian islands; the elephant, as we have seen, is reported 
to exist there, and certainly does exist in the adjoining territory 
of Borneo, belonging to Soolo; its "much gold" is spoken of by 
Barbosa, Pauthier, indeed, in his new edition of Polo from ancient 
French Mss. reads Soucat instead of Lohac, and identifies it 
with Sukadana, on the S. W. of Borneo. But neither elephants 
nor cowries appear to be found in that part of Borneo; and as 
the native name of Soolo is Sug that >??«//have been the name 
indicated, if Soucat be the right reading. Let me add, however, 
that Soolo is said to have been at one time subject to Sukadana, 
and this circumstance might perhaps help to reconcile Pauthier's 
suggestion with the facts. " 



14 



FRIAR OEORIC'S MENTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



22. Of the land called Thalamasin, and of the trees 
that give flour, and other marvels. 

Near to this country is another which is called 
Panten, but others call it Thalamasyn, the king 
whereof hath many islands under him. Here be 
found trees that produce flour, and some that produce 
honey, others that produce wine, and others a posion 
the most deadly that existeth in the world. For 
there is no antidote to it known except one; and that 
is that if any one hath imbibed that poison he shall 
take of stercus humanum and dilute it with water, 
and of this potion he shall drink, and so shall he be 
absolutely quit of the poison. [And the men of this 
country being nearly all rovers, when they go to battle 
they carry every man a cane in the hand about a fathom 
in length, and put into one end of it an iron bodkin 
poisoned with this poison, and when they blow into 
the cane, the bodkin flieth and striketh whom they 
list, and those who are thus stricken incontinently 
die]. 

But, as for the trees that produce flour, 'tis after 
this fashion. These are thick, but of not any great 
height; they are cut into with an axe round about 
the foot of the stem, so that a certain liquor flows 
from them resembling size. Now this is put into 
bags made of leaves, and put for fifteen days in the 
sun; and after that space of time a flour is found to 
have formed from the liquor. This they steep for 
two days in sea-water, and then wash it with fresh 
water. And the result is the best paste in the world, 
from which they make whatever they choose, cates 
of sorts and excellent bread, of which I friar Odoric 
have eaten: for all these things have I seen with mine 
own eyes. And this kind of bread is white outside, 
but inside it is somewhat blackish. 

By the coast of this country towards the south 
is the sea called the Dead Sea, the water whereof 
runneth ever towards the south, and if any one falleth 
into that water he is never found more. [And if the 

15 



shipmen go but a little way from the shore they are 
carried rapidly downwards and never return again. 
And no one knoweth whither they are carried, and many 
have thus passed away, and it hath never been known 
what became of them]. 

In this country also there be canes or reeds like 
great trees, and full sixty paces in length. There be 
be also canes of another kind which are called 
Cassan, and these always grow along the ground 
like what we call dog's grass, and at each of their 
knots they send out roots, and in such wise extend 
themselves for a good mile in length. And in these 
canes are found certain stones which be such that if 
any man wear one of them upon his person he can 
never be hurt or wounded by iron in any shape, and 
so for the most part the men of that country do wear 
such stones upon them. And when their boys are 
still young they take them and make a little cut in the 
arm and insert one of these stones, to be a safeguard 
against any wound by steel. And the little wound 
thus made in the boy's arm is speedily healed by apply- 
ing to it the powder of a certain fish. 

And thus through the great virtue of those stones 
the men who wear them become potent in battle and 
great corsairs at sea. But those who from being 
shipmen on that sea have suffered at their hands, have 
found out a remedy for the mischief. For they carry 
as weapons of offense sharp stakes of very hard wood, 
and arrows likewise that have no iron on the point; 
and as those corsairs are but poorly harnessed the 
shipmen are able to wound and pierce them through 
with these wooden weapons, and by this device they 
succeed in defending themselves most manfully. 

• ° f theSe ° anes called Hassan they make sails for 
their ships, dishes, houses, and a vast number of other 
things of the greatest utility to them. And many 
other matters there be in that country which it would 
cause great astonishment to read or hear tell of; 
wherefore I am not careful to write them at present. 



16 



COMMENT.— Thala Masyn, Crawfurd thinks, may be 
Tolaga Ma. sin or Salt Lake: Yule suggests Tanamasin, Salt 
Land, and Banjarmasin (Salt garden), Southern Borneo, is 
one of Yule's guesses, as well as Talysian, near Panteh, on the 
Biru coast of East Borneo. The latter would have come within 
the Sulu sphere of influence and possibly even the former. 
Yule calls attention to the resemblance between this name and 
Tawalisi, which he considers the kingdom of Soolo or Suluk, 
N. E. of Borneo, and quotes Crawfurd: * 'Owing to some cause 
or other there has sprung up in Soolo (Sulu — C.) a civilization 
and power far exceeding those of the surrounding islanders. 
A superior fertility of the soil, and better means of maintaining 
a numerous and concentrated population has probably been 
the main cause of this superiority; but whatever be the cause, 
it has enabled this people not only to maintain a paramount 
authority over the whole Archipelago (i. e., the so-called Soolo 
Archipelago), but to extend it to Palawan and to the northern 
coasts of Borneo and islands adjacent to it." The reasoning 
by which Dr. Rizal preferred the Northern part of the Phil- 
ippines to Sulu for Tawalisi would seem applicable here, and 
names for salt regions (like Maasin) are common from Panga- 
sinan, a salt kingdom once powerful enough to be recognized 
by China, south to Sulu. References here are: Yule, Cathay 
and the Way Thither, (London, 1866), Vol. I, p. 90— Odoric 
section, and Vol. II, p. 520— Ibn Batutu section. Chau-Ju-kua 
mentions that foreign traders barter salt for Bornean products, 
so that Sulu and Luzon, which are mentioned as producing it by 
boiling seawater, have a point in their favor and in either case 
the land mentioned may be considered to be in the Philippine 
Archipelago, since Yule has sufficiently established that it must 
be in this vicinity or Borneo. 



IBN BATUTU'S ACCOUNT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

After leaving Kakula they sailed for thirty-four 
days, and then arrived at the Calm or Pacific Sea 
(ul Bahr-ul Kdhil) which is of a reddish tint, and in 
spite of its great extent is disturbed by neither winds 
nor waves. The boats were brought into play to tow 
the ship, and the great sweeps of the junk were pulled 
likewise. They were thirty-seven days in passing 
this sea, and it was thought an excellent passage, for 
the time occupied was usually forty or fifty days at least. 
They now arrived at the country of Tawalisi, a name 
derived, according to Ibn Batuta, from that of its 
king. 



17 



It is very extensive, and the sovereign is the 
equal of the King of China. He possesses numerous 
junks with which he makes war upon the Chinese 
until they sue for peace, and consent to grant him 
certain concessions. The people are idolaters; their 
countenances are good, and they bear a strong resem- 
blance to the Turks. They are usually of a copper 
complexion, and are very valiant and warlike. The 
women ride, shoot, and throw the javelin well, and 
fight in fact just like the men. We cast anchor in 
one of their ports which is called Kailukari. It 
is also one of their greatest and finest cities, and the 
king's son used to reside there. When we had entered 
the harbor soldiers came down to the beach, and the 
skipper landed to speak with them. He took a present 
with him for the king's son; but he was told that the 
king had assigned him the government of another 
province, and had set over this city his daughter, 
called Urduja. 

The second day after our arrival in the port of 
Kailukari, this princess invited the Ndkhodah or skip- 
per, the Kardni or purser, the merchants and persons 
of note, the Tindail or chief of the sailors, Si/x/h- 
saldr or chief of the archers, to partake of a banquet 
which Urduja had provided for them according to her 
hospitable custom. The skipper asked me to accom- 
pany them, but I declined, for these people are infidels 
and it is unlawful to partake of their food. So when 
the guests arrived at the Princess's she said to them, 
"Is there anyone of your party missing?" The 
captain replied, "There is but one man absent, the 
BaksM (or Divine), who does not eat of your dishes." 
Urduja rejoined "Let him be sent for." So a party 
of her guards came for me, and with them some of the 
captain's people, who said to me "Do as the Princess 
desires." 

So I went, and found her seated on her great 
chair or throne, whilst some of her women were in 
front of her with papers which they were laying before 
her. Round about were elderly ladies, or duennas, 
who acted as her counsellors, seated below the throne 



18 



on chairs of sandalwood. The men also were in front 
of the Princess. The throne was covered with silk, 
and canopied with silk curtains, being itself made 
of sandalwood and plated with gold. In the audience 
hall there were buffets of carved wood, on which 
were set forth many vessels of gold of all sizes, vases, 
pitchers, and flagons. The skipper told me that these 
vessels were filled with a drink compounded with 
sugar and spice, which these people use after dinner; 
he said it had an aromatic odour and delicious flavour; 
that it produced hilarity, sweetened the breath, pro- 
moted digestion, etc., etc. 

As soon as I had saluted the princess she said 
to me in the Turkish tongue Hum mi sen yakshi mi sen 
[KfotUh frdsanfYakhshi misan?) which is as much 
as to say, Are you well? How do you do? and made 
me sit down beside her. This princess could write 
the Arabic character well. She said to one of her 
servants, Dawdt wa batak katur; that is to say, "Bring 
inkstand and paper." He brought these, and then 
the princess wrote, Bismillah Arrahrn&n Arrahim (In 
the name of God the merciful and compassionate!) 
saying to me, "What's this?" I replied, "Tar&ari 
n<im" (Tangri nam), which is as much as to say "the 
name of God;" whereupon she rejoined "Khushh" 
or "It is well." She then asked from what country 
I had come, and I told her that I came from India. 
The princess asked again, "From the Pepper country?" 
I said "Yes." She proceeded to put many questions 
to me about India and its vicissitudes, and these I 
answered. She then went on, "I must positively go 
to war with that country and get possession of it, for 
its great wealth and great forces attract me." Quoth 
I, "You had better do so." Then the princess made 
me a present consisting of dresses, two elephant-loads 
of rice, two she buffaloes, ten sheep, four rothls of 
cordial syrup, and four Martabans, or stout jars, 
filled with ginger, pepper, citron and mango, all pre- 
pared with salt as for a sea voyage. 

The skipper told me that Urduja had in her army 
free women, slave girls, and female captives, who 
fought just like men; that she was in the habit of 



19 



making incursions into the territories of her enemies, 
taking part in battle, and engaging in combat with 
warriors of repute. He also told me that on one 
occasion an obstinate battle took place between this 
princess and one of her enemies; a great number of 
her soldiers had been slain, and her whole force was 
on the point of running away, when Urduja rushed 
to the front, and forcing her way through the ranks 
of the combatants till she got at the king himself 
with whom she was at war, she dealt him a mortal 
wound, so that he died, and his troops fled. The 
princess returned with his head carried on a spear, 
and the king's family paid a vast sum to redeem it. 
And when the princess rejoined her father he gave 
her this city of Kailukari, which her brother had 
previously governed. I heard likewise from the same 
skipper that various sons of kings had sought Urduja's 
hand, but she always answered, "I will marry no one 
but him who shall fight and conquer me!" so they 
all avoided the trial, for fear of the shame of being 
beaten by her. 

We quitted the country of Tawalisi, and after 
a voyage of seventeen days, during which the wind 
was always favorable, we arrived in China. 

Dr. Rizal's Comment. — I cannot accept Yule's 
suggested suspicion that Tawalisi may be found only 
in a Gulliver's Geography. While I may have doubt 
regarding the accuracy of some of Ibn Batutu's details, 
still I believe in the voyage to Tawalisi. There are 
details which only the reality of the statements could 
have furnished, details which could not have been 
invented,— like the change in the government of 
Kailucary, previously ruled by the son of the King, 
etc. Besides, what possible interest could Ibn Batutu 
have had in falsifying? In this travel -account he 
introduces nothing in favor of his religion or of himself, 
nor does he mention new marvels or entertaining adven- 
tures. The traveller had visited so many and such 
beautiful countries, much more interesting than Tawa- 
lisi, that he would not go out of his way to discredit 
them m order to invent an insignificant incident. 

20 



That after his return he tried to embellish his travels 
with some exaggerated and fanciful details is possible. 
But imagination, love of the marvellous, or a certain 
confusion produced by the multitude of things seen 
can equally well have been the cause. 

Situation of Tawalisi. — The principal data in 
which I think this ought to be sought are the distances, 
which do not vary with time and I give preference 
to these over details regarding names and customs. 
From Kakula, in Mul-Java (Maldiwas?), to Tawalisi 
usually took seventy-four to eighty-four days. Ibn 
Batutu spent seventy-one days, thirty-four going 
under sail and thirty-seven rowing. From Tawalisi 
to Canton was fifteen days with a favorable wind. 
These details argue for Ibn Batutu's veracity since 
travellers usually make the lands they invent remote. 

With these two data, and knowing that the average 
attainment of Ibn Batutu's ship was from eight to ten 
geographical leagues (fifteen of these to the degree) 
— from the Maldives to Bengal, forty-three days, from 
Bengal to Barahuagan (Cape Negro, Pegu?) fifteen — 
we may trace two arcs, one from Canton with a radius 
of 180 geographical leagues — on the supposition that 
with favoring winds the day's sail might be twelve 
leagues, and the other are from Kakula (between Java 
and Sumatra) of 430 leagues' radius — calculating that 
by oars the speed would be only half. The inter- 
section of these arcs, we should find, would be exactly 
in the neighborhood of the northern part of the Phil- 
ippines. By the details of distance given Tawalisi 
could not be found in Celebes (one of Sanguinetti's 
theories) nor in Sulu (Yule's opinion), since from these 
points one could not get to Canton in fifteen days 
on a junk of the velocity of that day. Neither can it 
be in Tonquin (the other guess of Sanguinetti), nor 
even in Formosa, because where else can we locate 
a tranquil sea, without waves, wind or current, except 
where the typhoon reigns? The pacific sea of Ibn 
Batutu we can interpret, like Yule, by the Celebes 
sea where storms are very rare. Then the language 
used would be explained for "of a land" could be spoken 



21 



of Borneo while if the navigation were close to the 
continent one would say "of the land," Asia being 
well-known. & 

—From a London letter to Dr. A Js )/,,,., „, /,., 

original in Ayer collection, Chicaoo, fumiZheA "$% ° f j^ %Sg» fim * 



THE BISAYANS IN BORNEO 

p. 1 f ( r^) CD ° Ugall: PaBan TribCS ° f B —°- London 1912. Vol. I. 

In the earliest years of the fourteenth centur y 

n?W ^r\ & eXte o d i d ? C P ° Wer of Majapahit 
(in Java-C.) over Palembang in Sumatra, Timor, 
Ternate, Luzon, and the coasts of Borneo In 
1368 Javanese soldiers drove from Bruni the" Sulu 
marauders who had sacked the town. How earlv 

the Arab doctrines were taught in Bruni it is impossible 
to state with any precision. Local tradition ascribes 
their introduction to the renowned Alak ber Tata 
afterwards known as Sultan Mohammed. Like most 
of his subjects this warrior was a Bisava After 

SenW^T ^ c UbdUed thC PCOple of Kalak, 
Seribas, Sadong Semarahan, and Sarawak (all parts 

lhJ^ g rea V S K a ^ d °l Borneo -C). and compelled 
In M P& Z^ nte - . He st °PPed the annual payment 

m«5?f Ja S f ° nC Jar ° f pinan § i uice - a useless com- 
modity though troublesome to collect. During his 
reign the Muruts were brought under Bruni rule by 
peaceful measures, and the Chinese colony was kept 
m good humor by the marriage of the Bruni king's 
Mother and successor to the daughter of one of the 
principal Chinamen. 

Alak ber Tata is said to have gone to Johore, 
where he was converted to Islam, given the daughter 
ot bultan Bulkiah and the title of Sultan, and was 
confirmed in his claim to rule over Sarawak and his 
other conquests. (The authors' note here queries 
how it was possible for this ruler of c. 1450 to visit 
Johore, which was founded after the capture of Malaca 
by the Portuguese in 1512.— C.) 

Sultan Mohammed was succeeded by his brother 
Akhmad, son-in-law of the Chinese chief, and he was 



22 



in turn succeeded by an Arab from Taif who had 
married his daughter. Thus the present royal house 
of Bruni is derived from three sources— Arab, Bisaya, 
and Chinese. The coronation ceremony as still main- 
tained affords an interesting confirmation of this 
account. On that occasion the principal minister 
wears a turban and Haji outfit, the two next in rank 
are dressed in Chinese and Hindu fashion, while the 
fourth wears a cluneal over this trousers to represent 
the Bisaya; and each of these ministers declares the 

Sultan to be divinely appointed We come now 

to the most heroic figure in Bruni history, Sultan 
Bulkiah, better known by his earlier name, Nakoda 
Ragam. The prowess of this prince has been celebrated 
in prose and verse. He journeyed to distant lands, 
and conquered the Sulu Islands and eastern Borneo. 
Over the throne of Sambas he set a weak-minded 
brother of his own. He even sent an expedition to 
Manila, and on the second attempt seized that place. 
Tribute poured into his coffers from all sides. His 
wife was a Javanese princess, who brought many people 
to Bruni. These intermarried with the Bisayas, and 
from them, it is said, are sprung the Kadayans, a quiet 
agricultural folk, skilled in various arts, but rendered 

timid by continual oppression 

Nakoda Ragam's capital at Buang Tawa was on 
dry land, but when he died, killed accidentally by his 
wife's bodkin, the nobles quarreled among themselves 
and some of them founded the present pile-built 
town of Bruni. It was to this Malay (Bisayan — C.) 
capital and court that Pigafetta paid his visit in 1521 

with the surviving companions of Magellan It 

is easy to see from Pigafetta's narrative that at the 
date of his visit the effects of Nakoda Ragam's exploits 
had not evaporated. The splendor of the court and the 
large population the city is said to have contained were 
presumably the result of the conquests he had made 
in neighboring islands. 

23 



SULU IN 1512 



(Duarte Barbosa: East Africa and Malabar in the Beginning of the 
XVI Century. Stanley translation. London, 1866, p. 203.) 

Seventy-five leagues further on to the northeast 
in the direction of China is a very large island and well 
supplied with various provisions, which is called Solor. 
It is inhabited by Gentiles, almost white men and well 
made. They have a Gentile king and a language of 
their own. In this island there is much gold, which is 
found in the earth; and all round this island the Moors 
gather much seed pearl and fine pearls of perfect color 
and not round. 

Comment. — Crawfurd says (Dictionary of the 
Indian Islands and Adjacent Countries; London, 1856; 
p. 407): "The first authentic notice of Soolo is by 
Barbosa." Quoting the above extract he concludes. 

It is evident from this description that the island 
alluded to, notwithstanding the orthography, is Soolo, 
or Suluk (our Sulu— C), and not Solor between Floris 
and Timur, and to which the description in no respect 
applies. 



THE DISCOVERY OF MINDANAO IN 1512 

of IhTwSt??. L0I jf 0n !- 86 , 2 reprin ^ ° fthe 1601 translation "The Discoveries 
VnL n ,°" their firm anginal unto Ike yeere of our Lord t566: Briefly 

■/ /, / / /" if'T', A Go^no, Governor of Ternate. the 

Sst h t^p' " C " (PagC n7e, SC7 .)-(One of the three extant 
EWn Ir o 5 Portuguese or.ginal edition belonged to Mr. John Carter 
crown, of Providence, Rhode Island.) 

Antonie de Breu and those that went with him 
tooke their course toward the north, where is a small 

island called Gumnape (or Ternate) From thence 

they went to the Islands of Burro and Amboino, and 

came to an anker in an haven of it called Guliguli 

Here the Portugals burnt the ship wherein Francis 
berrano was, for she was old and rotten. They went 
to a place on the other side standing in eight degrees 
toward the south, where they laded cloves, nutmegs 
and mace, in a Junco or barke, which Francis Serrano 
bought here. 



24 



They say that not farre from the Islands of Banda 
there is an island where there breedeth nothing else 
but snakes, and the most are in one cave in the middest 
of the land .... In the yeere 1512 they departed from 
Banda toward Malacca, and on the baxos or flats of 
Lucapinho Francis Serrano perished (i. e., was 
wrecked- -C.) in his Junke or barke, from whence 
escaped unto the Isle of Mindanao with nine or ten 
Portugals which were with him, and the kings of Maluco 
sent for them. These were the first Portugals that 
came to the Islands of Cloves, which stand from the 
equinoctiall line towardes the north in one degree, 
where they lived seven or eight yeeres. 

COMMENT:— In the Barcelona Library's Duarte Barbosa 
MSS. is an appendix relating to this voyage and from it one 
learns that Serrano's "nine or ten" companions were two other 
Portuguese, a Spaniard and five Malays, instead of all "Portu- 
gals" as suggested above. De Barros tells how Serrano "wrote 
some letters from the Maluco Islands where he was to Ferdinand 
Magellan, on account of being his friend when both were in 
India, principally at the taking of Malacca." Pigafetta in his 
account of the first circumnavigation refers also to this and tells 
of finding the widow and orphans of Serrano on one of the islands 
of the Moluccas after their Cebu disaster, the "discoverer of 
Mindanao" having died shortly before their arrival. 



WHEN PORTUGAL DOMINATED THE PHILIPPINES 
(galvano, ob. cit., p. 168.) 

In this yeere 1225 Don George de Meneses, cap- 
taine of Maluco, and with him Don Garcia Henriquez, 
sent a foyst to discover land towards the north, wherein 
went as captaine one Diego de Rocha, and Gomes 
de Sequiera for pilot, who afterwards went as pilot 
on an Indian voyage. In 9 or 10 degrees they found 
certain islands standing close together. That passed 
among them and they called them the Islands of 
Gomes de Sequiera, he being the first pilot that dis- 
covered them. And they came backe againe to the 
fort by the (Moro — in the Portuguese,— C.) Island 
of Batochina. 



25 



(galvano, OB. CIT., P. 208.) 



In the same yeere 1538, Antoine Galvano being 
chiefe captaine in the isles of Maluco, sent a ship 
towards the north, whereof one Francis de Castro 
was captaine, having commandment to convert as 
many as he could to the faith, having been asked to 
do so by many of those parts * * *. When Francis 
de Castro arrived at the Island of Mindanao and 
other islands near them, sixe kings received the water 
of baptisme, with their wives, children and subjects; 
and the most of them Antoine Galvano gave commande- 
ment to be called John (in the Portuguese version, 
Joannes — C), in remembrance that king John the 
third raigned then in Portugall. * * * It is further 
to be noted that the people of these islands do gild 
their teeth. 

(galvano, ob. cit., p. 230.) 

In the yeere 1542, Don Antony de Mendoca 
(viceroy of New Spain— C.) sent unto the Islands of 
Mindanao, Cebu and Nata, where Magellan died, 
a fleete of sixe ships * * * the generall whereof 
was one Rui Lopez de villa Lobos, being his brother in 
law and a man in great estimation. * * * The 
15th of the same month (December) they had sight 
of the islands which Diego de Roca, and Gomez de 
Sequiera, and Alvaro de Saavedra had discovered, 
and named them Los Reyes, because they came unto 
them on Twelfe day. And beyond them they found 
other islands in 10 degrees all standing round, and in 
the midst of them they came to an anker, where they 
tcoke fresh water and wood. In the same yeere 1542 
Don Diego de Almagro was slaine in Peru by the 
hands of one Don Vaca de Castro. 

In the yeere 1543, in Januarie, they departed 
from the foresaid islands with all the flete, and had 
sight of certaine islands, out of which there came 
unto them men in a certaine kinde of boats, and they 
brought in their hands crosses, and saluted the 
Spaniards in the Spanish toong saying, "Buenas diets, 

26 



Matelotes" that is to say "Good morrow, companions 
(rather sailors — C.)"; whereat the Spaniards much 
marveled * * *. The Spaniards not knowing that 
many thereabouts had been christened by Francis 
de Castro * * * some of them named these 
Islands, Islas de las crazes and others named them 
Islas de los Matelotes. 

(GALVANO, OB. CIT., P. 233 ET SEQ.) 

In the same yeere 1543, the first of February, 
Rui Lopez had sight of that noble island Mindanao, 
standing in 9 degrees: they cou,d not double it nor 
yet come to ancre as they would, because the christened 
Kings and people resisted them, having given their 
obedience to Antonie Galvano, whom they had in 
great estimation, and there were five or six Kings 
that had received baptism, who by no meanes would 
incure his displeasure. Rui Lopez perceiving this, 
and having a contrary wind sailed along the coast 
to find some aide. * * * 

So sayling in 16 degrees of northerly latitude 
700 leagues from when they had come, as it seemed 
to them, wanting wind they arrived againe at the 
Islands of the Philippinas. They had sight of 6 or 
7 islands more, but they anker ed not at them. They 
found also an Archipelago of Islands inhabited with 
people, lying in 15 or 16 degrees; the people be well 
disposed and the women well proportioned, and more 
beautiful and better arraied than in any other place of 
those parts, having many jewels of gold, which was a 
token that there was some of that metal in the same 
countrie. Here were also barkes of 43 cubits (64m 
ft.c.) in length and two fathoms and a halfe (15 ft.— c.) 
in bredth, and the plankes five inches thicke, which 
barkes were rowed with oares. They told the Spaniards, 
that they used to saile in them to China, and that if 
they would go thither they should have pilots to con- 
duct them the countrie not being above five or six 
daies sayling thence. There came unto them also 
certaine boates well built and fitted, wherein the 
master and principall men sate on high, and under- 



2 7 



neath were very blacke moores with frizled haire, 
as if for parade on state; and being demanded where 
they had these blacke moores, they answered that 
they had them from certaine islands standing fast 
by Sebut (Cebu— C), where there were many of 
them (Negros? — C). 

(galvano, ob. err., p. 239.) 
In this yeere 1545 and in the moneth of June, 
there went a junk from the citie of Borneo, wherein 
went a Portugall called Peter Fidalgo (Pero fidalgo, 
in the Portuguese original— C), and by contrary he 
was driven towards the north; where he founde an 
island standing in 9 or 10 degrees, that stretched it 
se fe to 22 degrees of latitude, which is called The 
Isle of the Lucones, because the inhabitants thereof 
were so named. It may have some other name and 
harborowes, which as yet we know not: it runneth 
from the north unto the south-west, and standeth 
betweene Mindanao and China. They say they sailed 
along by it 250 leagues, where the land was fruitfull 
(or pleasant may be a closer translation— C.) and well 
covered (possibly, better, well favored— C), and they 
amrme, that there they will give two pezos of gold 
tor one of silver: and yet it standeth not farre from 
the country of China. 

a l£*&- a l ( '' 1 J''"'" UUe A J^JksZA^^Ver^. of Dresden? in 
Au^'rfeotUnScmm,*. Co nr fu»nshr < i b !/ Dr. J. /'. HntfTuff. 



A SPANISH CONTRIBUTION RE 1372 

(Probably by a Dominican Friar of the China mission.) 

Translated from "La Ilustraci&n del Oriente," an illustrated 
literary and historical review of Manila, of Dec. 23, 1877, and 
there signed "7'., Taiping Chan,,, 6 December 77." 

When did the Chinese learn of the existence of 
Luzon? It must have been in a very recent epoch, 
. their annals, so minute in describing what was 
going on in the empire and outside, mention Luzon 
only a century and a half before the Spanish occupa- 
tion. Their tardy knowledge was natural enough since 



28 



they did not discover the Islands of Formosa until 
1430 and then by accident, a mandarin who was on 
his way to Siam (Sien-lo) having been cast away upon 
its shores in a storm. 

The data on this island are to be found in the 
Chinese work "Ming-shi," and there it is said that the 
earliest relations between China and Luzon date from 
A. D, 1372, the year in which there came to the imperial 
court of Yung-hu the first ambassadors from Luzon 
with the customary "tribute;" for one should note 
that the custom so widespread in the Orient and even 
in Europe in the Middle Ages, of initiating diplomatic 
relations with an interchange of presents, has been 
interpreted by China as a sign of submission and 
vassalage rendered to the Emperor. 



29 



