Republic of the Philippines 
Department of Commerce and Industry 

sscuRims ms s&cmm, ca-*iiaaiCM 

Manila 

CSHilPICAgb OF FILING OF BY-LAWS 

to all to mm thlsk vmmm mi cos, qr^inoss 

THIS IS TO CLHTIFX that the By-Laws of tits 

BAGUIO MILITARY INSTITU1E, INC. 

copy annexed, adopted by the stockholders owning or 
representing at least a majority of all the subscribed 
capital stock on March 31 19 5 6 . certified 

to by a majority of the Board of Directors aid counter- 
signed by the Secretary of the Corporation, was filed in 
this Office on the 10th day of April 19 5 6 . 
pursuant to the provisions of Section 20 of the Corpora- 
tion Law, Act 1459, as amended, and attached to the other 
papers pertaining to said corporation* 

IN WITKL33 tviiaaiiOF, I have hereunto set my hand and 
caused the seal of this Coemission to be affixed at 
Manila, Philippines, this 10th day of April- 
in the year of our Lard nineteen hundred and fifty — six T 
and of the Independence of the Philippines, the Tenth » 

(Sgdj MARIANO G. PINEDA 
Coonissioner 


V 


# 


$ 


BKFUdUC OF Uili PHILIPPINES) 


t SiS* 


DOHSi IN m. cm OF BAGUIO) 


KcmiuL ammamm 


TO ALL TO VJHCH THhSE KdiSENTS PAY CCHE, OiiEETIttGSi 


That I, Guillermo F. de Guzman, Couns ellon-at-lav 
and a duly eenaisaloned Notary Public In and for the 
City of Baguio, Philippines, • 


That I have compared the herein attached (!) Certifi- 
cate of Filing of BfJns consisting of one page, 
bearing date of April 10, 1956, Issued by the Secur- 
ities and Exchange Commission, and (2) By-Laws of the 
Baguio Military Institute, Inc., consisting of fifteen 
pages, bearing date of March 31, 1956, ulth the ori- 
ginal copies thereof which bear the signature of 
Concussioner Mariano G. Pineda on the first instrument 
and on the second of the signatures of Messrs. Benito 
H, Lopes, Baaon Enriquez, Fernando Bautista, Baedlio 
J. V a ldes, Jose V. Andrada and Ernesto Flores, and that 
the sane are full, true, and correct literal copies of 
the said "Certificate of Filing of By-Laws" and "By- Laws 
of the Baguio Military Institute, Inc. and of the 
whole thereof. 

WITNESS m HAH) AND OFFICIAL SEAL at the City of 
Baguio, Philippines, this 6th day of June, 1956. 


DO HEBEBX CEhTIFI 


(Sgd) GUILLEKMO F. DE GUZMAN 
Notary Public 

My eoosaiesian expires December 31, 1937 


Doe. Ho.jkflk. 
Page Mo. LI 
Book Mb. V 


Series of 1956 


B Y =. L A US 

OF THE 


BAGUIO MILITARX INSTITUTE, INC* 

ARTICLE I 
Office 

Die principal office of the corporation md the educa- 
tional institute to be operated by it shall be located and 
established in Baguio City* Philippines, Die corporation may 
establish and maintain a branch office in Manila whenever war- 
ranted by the exigencies of its business affairs* 

ARTICLE II 
Stock 

1* Certifica tes of Stock- - Each stockholder of the cor- 
poration whose stock has been paid for in full shall be enti- 
tiled to a certificate or certificates showing the amount of 

i *• 

stock of the corporation standing on the books in his name* 
Each certificate shall be numbered, bear the corporate seal 
and the signatures of the Chairman of the Board of Trustees 
and the Secretary* and be issued in numerical order from the 
stock certificate book* A full record of each certificate of 
s to 6c, as Issued* Bust be entered on the corresponding stub 
of the stock certificate book* 

2* Transfers of Stock. - Transfer of stock shall be 
made upon the proper stock books of the corporation and must 
be accompanied by the surrender of the duly endorsed certifi- 
cate or certificates representing the transferred stock* Sur- 
rendered certificates shall be cancelled and attached to the 
corresponding stubs in the stock certificate book* and new 
certificates Issued to the parties entitled thereto* The 
stock books shall be closed to transfer five (5) days before 




- 2 - 

the general election of members of the Board of Trustees and 
other officers and fifteen (15) days before the declaration of 
dividends. 

3. Stock and Transfer Book. - The stock aid transfer 
book and other records of the corporation shall be kept in its 
principal office in Baguio City, and they shall be open for 
inspection during business hours by any stockholder of the 
corporation. 

4. - toy Stockholder who 
claims that his certificate of stock has been lost or destroyed 
shall file an affidavit in triplicate with the corporation 
stating the circumstances of such loss or destruction, and he 
may be required to give further notice thereof by pdBLi cation 
in a newspaper of general circulation in Baguio City onoe a 
week for three (3 ) consecutive weeks. Mien the stockholder 
concerned shall have fulfilled all requirements prescribed by 
existing law, a new certificate or certificates marked "DUPLL- 
CATE" shall be issued to such stockholder. The Board of Trus- 
tees may require the stockholder to file a bond or other secu- 
rity for a sum and in such form and -with such sureties as the 
Board may deem satisfactory in order that the corporation may 
by reason of the issuance of such new certificates. The fore- 
going procedure shall be observed insofar as consistent with the 
provisions of Republic Act Ho. 201 and other pertinent laws. 

5. Treasury Stock. - All issued and outstanding stock 
of the corporation that may be purchased by or donated to said 
corporation shall be treasury stock and shall be held subject 


to the disposition of the Board of Trustees or the stockholder 
as the ease may be* Such stock shall neither vote nor parti- 
cipate In dividends while held by the corporation. 

ABT1GLS III 



1* AnmiAl - The regular annual Meetings of 

the stockholders of the corporation shall be held after the 
year 1956 on the 20th day of August in each calendar year at 
5 <00 P.M. , if not a legal holiday, and if a legal holiday, then 
on the next business day following, for the purpose of electing 
members of the Board of Trustees and for the transaction of 
such other business as may be properly brought before the meet- 
ing, 

written or printed notice of the annual stockholders 0 

«4 

meeting shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to each stockholder 
of re cozd not less than fifteen (15 j days before the date of 
such meeting, but failure to mail or send such notice, or any 
irregularity therein, shall not affect the validity of any 
annual meeting or of any proceeding thereat, Tfeiver of such 
notice may be made in writing by all or any of the stockholders, 
2, SmaaiAL Meeting*. - Special meetings of the stock- 
holders may be held at any time in the principal office of the 
corporation upon of the Chairman, or pursuant to a reso- 
lution of the Board of Trustees, or upon written call signed 
by stockholders of record owning a majority of the entire 
issued and outstanding stock of the corporation. Calls for 
special meetings shall specify the time, place and object or 
objects thereof, and no other business than that specified 




- 4- 

ln tli* shall be considered at any such meeting* 

A written notice stating the day* hour end place of the 
meeting and the general nature of the business to be transacted 
thereat shall be sent to each stockholder of record at least 
cue (1) week before the date of such special meeting* Such 
written notice, however, may be waived In writing by the stock- 
holders* 

3, Vote* - At such meeting of the stockholders, every 
stockholder shall be entitled to vote in person or by proxy, 
and he shall have one vote for each share of stock standing in 
his name on the books of the corporation at the time of the 
dosing of the transfer books for such meeting. The votes for 
members of the Board of Trustees and, upon demand of any stock- 
holder, the votes upon any question before the meeting, shall 
be by ballot* 

4* - Any stockholder entitled to vote at the 

meetings of the stockholders may be represented and vote there- 
at by proxy appointed in an instrument in writing, subscribed 
by such stockholder or by his duly authorised attorney, and 
delivered to the Secretary at or before the time of such meet- 
ing* Proxies shall be properly signed and sealed but they 
shall inquire no other attestation* 

5* Quorum . - A majority in amount of the stock issued 
and outstanding, exclusive of treasury stock, represented by 
the stockholders of record thereof, in person or by proxy, 
shall be requisite to constitute a quorum at any meeting of 
the stockholders* Ihen a quorum is present at any aich meet- 
ing, a majority vote of the stock represented thereat shall 


decide any natter brought before sudh meeting, unless the con- 
current vote of a greater number is required by the Philippine 
Corporation Lav. 

If a quorum Is not present at the time and place fixed 
by the by-laws for the annual meeting, or fixed by notice as 
herein provided for a duly called special meeting, a majority 
in Interest of the stockholders present in person or by proxy 
may adjourn from time to time, without notice other than by 
announcement at the meeting, until a quorum Is secured. At 
any such adjourned meeting at which a quorum may be present, 
any buaineee may be transacted which might have been transacted 
at the meeting as originally called and notified. 

6. Klection ofTruateea . - The five (5) members of the 
Board of Trustees of the corporation shall be elected by a 
plurality vote, cast by ballot, at the annual meeting of the 

M A 

stockholders for that year. The trustees so elected shall 
hold office until the expiration of their respective terms and 
until the election and qualification of their respective suc- 
cessors. 

7. Order of flusipeae . - The order of business at the 

* 

annual meeting of the stockholders, and, so far me practicable, 

* 

at all other meetings thereof shall be as follows} 

1. Boll call 

2« Beading and Disposal of any 
Unapproved Minutes 

3* Reports of Officers and Committees 
4* Election of Trustees 

5. Unfinished Business 

6. New Business 

ARTICLE IV 
Tfte goard of 


1 . 


Number and Qualifi cations. - The number of the first 




* 

- 6 - 

Board of Trustees shall be five (5) but say time during the 

m- 

existence of the corporation the number of trustees may be In- 
creased to any number not exceeding fifteen (15 U fie person 

a 

shall be Sleeted, nor be competent to set as trustee of the 
corporation, unless he is a stockholder of record at the time 
of election* Zf any trustee shall cease to be a stockholder 
of record, his term of office shall forthwith terminate and 

eeesa* 

2* General Powers * - The Board of Trustees shall have 
entire charge of the properties, business, interests and gene- 
ral operations of the corporation, with full power and author- 
ity to manage and ccnduct the same* In addition to the speci- 
fic powers conferred on the Board of Trustees by these by-laws, 

■ the Board shall have general power to do all 3uch things as 
I may be necessary for the best interests of the corporation and 
not inconsistent with the statutes of the Philippines or with 
’ these by-laws* 

3* Vacaati.es* - Xn case of any vacancy in the Board of 
Trustees by reason of death, resignation, disability or other 
cause, the remaining trustees, if still constituting a Riorum, 
by the affirmative vote of a majority of the Board of Trustees, 
may elect a successor to hold office for the unexpired term and 
until the election of his successor by the stockholders of the 
corporation* 

In ease of any increase in the Board of Trustees between 
the annual elections of its members, the newly created trustee- 
ships shall be filled at a special acs stockholders • meeting called 
for the purpose* 


7 






..Iwuld ths. rembcrshlp of th*. 4Mid of trust,**** «& *uy tire 
fall below tH» jonfrer necessary to constitute a quorum, then 
a special meeting of Ua stockholders iiiOl Uu culled toy the 
Choir rwo and such nuabur « f truatuus shall V>* sleeted thereat 
a* mgr be necessary to restore the boas* t . its full Roabwv 


,-y r 

J shell be held in the principal office of the corporation in the 

such other place as the Uoeni may in its 


dims * - the Uoaxd of Trustees ahall hold 


regular aeeiinge on such dates mid Obo as the Chairman ahall, 
in ibis discretion, determine* ate decretory tfioll give written 
notice of sudi re,,uUr aeetift;. to each trustee at lewut throe 
(3 i days before such em*ting,si^tfcQg the tiac ami place there- 
of. iUt failure to iva such notimm or irregularity therein 
dual affect the validity of any re.ptlar meeting of the -osrti 
of Trustees or of any proeeftiing tliereat if all the .debars 


6. .aaK&Uffltftai* " dpadlsl matings of the Uoard 
of Trustees 4*/ be called by the Chulraaa on ouu (1) day's 
notice to each trustee either personally or in writing or on 
the unites repeat of at least time (2 } trustees. 3uchosll 
shall specify the tire, place and object or objects of such 
special meting* 

7* cuenee- « A rejority of the >o**d of trustees shall 
constitute a quorum for the trartsaotloa of business sod, in 
th# presence of qu-fron, majority rote of the trustees psreseiit 


ship* 




are p reeea v at such ae© 'inn* 




- s - 

at any board meeting shall be sufficient to decide any action* 

6* Election of Officers* - At the first regular meeting 
of the Board of Trustees after the time fixed for the annual 
meeting of stockholders each year, or at a special meeting 
called for the purpose after the annual meeting of the stock- 
holders, the Board shall elect the officers of the corporation. 

9, Per Diems and Privileges of Trustees . - All members 
of the Board of Trustees shall receive a per diem, of One hun- 
dred Pesos (/100.00) each for actual attendance at meetings of 
the Board in addition to hotel accommodations and transportation 
at the expense of the corporation to and from their places of 
residence and Baguio City whenever attending meetings of the 
Board of Trustees* 

AKTICIli V 

«awa 

1* Enumeration. - The officers of the corporation shall 
corslet of the following, nanaLy, a Chairman ofthe Board of 
Trustees, a Treasurer, aid a Secretary, whose powers and duties 
shall be as hereinafter provided and as the Board of Txustees 
may fix in conformity with the provisions of these by-laws. 

The Board of Trustees may create other offices for the admi- 
nistrative supervision of the institution to be established 
by the corporation. All officers shall be elected to their 
respective offices by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees. 
Any officer may hold more than one office provided that the 
duties thereof are nob incompatible. 

2. qualifications. - Except the Chairman of the Board 
of Trustees, tfio must be a stockholder, the Treasurer and the 
Secretary need not be stockholders of the corporation. 


3 . 


m Board of Trustees. - The Chairman 


V of the Board of Trustees shall be the chief executive officer 
of the corporation and shall exercise direct and active manage- 
ia«nt and control over the business operations of the corporat- 
ion subject to the resolutions and instructions of the Board 
| of Trustees and according to his own discretion in conformity 
\ with such resolutions and instructions. 

The Chairman shall sign, execute and deliver all contracts 
and agreements in the naae of the corporation. He shall also 
sign, with the countersignature of the Secretary, all certifi- 
cates of stock. Subject to the approval of the Board of Trus- 
tees, he shall have the power to obtain loans, overdrafts and 
credit facilities in behalf of the corporation from persons, 
banks and credit institutions md to mortgage or pledge the 
real and personal properties of the corporation as security 
for such obligations. He shall establish in the name of the 
corporation an account or accounts with any local banking insti- 
tution, in liiich corporate funds shall be deposited, subject 
to withdrawals by checks, drafts or other instruments signed 
either - (a) by him alone as Chairman, without counters i^ature 
or (b ) by the Treasurer with the countersignature of the Chair- 
man or such other officers as the Board of Trustees may desig- 


Sub ject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, the 
Chairman stall appoint a Superintendent, a Commandant, and 
such other administrative officials and employees as may be 


institution to be established by the corporation. He shall 

i • 

exercise general superintendence and direction over all the 
! other officers, administrative officials, anployees and suboiw 


nate. 


I necessary for the operation and conduct of the educational 




10 




dinste personnel of the corporation and he shall see to it 
that their respective duties are properly perfoxmed. Subject 

f to the approval of the Board of Trustees, the Chairman shall 
have the power to remove or suspend these administrative oi’ii- 
cialn and employees of the corporation, prescribe^ their powers 

j 

| 

I and duties and fix their respective salaries or compensations. 

/' 

The Chairman shall submit such reports an the operations 
of the corporation as the Board of Trustees may require, and 
he shall from time to time report also to the Board of Trustees 

- » «fc 

all matters within his knowledge which the interests of the 
corporation may require to be brought to their attention. He 
shall also see to it that all resolutions of the Board of 
Trustees are properly carried out. 

He shall, have the general powers and duties of supervision 
and umnageraent usually vested in the chief executive officer 
of a corporation, and he shall also perform arch other duties 
as ray be assigned or delegated to him by the Board of Trustees, 
or vhich may properly pertain to his office and vhich in his 
Judipent will serve the best interests of the corporation. 

4* Treasurer . - The Treasurer shall be the custodian of 
the fends, properties, securities and valuable documents of the 
corporation ouch as certificates of title, insurance policies, 
bonds and other written instruments, and lie shall be responsi- 
ble for all moneys and other properties of the corporation 
under Ids charge. He shall keep full and accurate records 
and accounts in books belonging to the corporation of all re- 
ceipts, disbursements, assets, liabilities and general finan- 
cial transactions of the corporation. 

Be shall deposit ell moneys and other valuable effects 


11 




of the corporation coming into his hands in such depositaries 
as may be designated by the Board of Trustees, and he shall 
disburse the funds if the corporation pursuant to the instruc- 
tions of the board of Trustees or of its authorized officers, 
taking proper vouchers for all such disbursements. He shall 
also indorse for collection or deposit all bills, notes, checks 
and other negotiable instruments of the corporation mid deposit 
the same to its credit. With the countersignature of the Chair- 
man or each other officer as the Board of Trustees may designate, 
the Treasurer may sign checks, drafts, or other instruments for 
the withdrawal of corporate funds deposited in banking insti- 
tutions* 

The Treasurer shall render to the Board of Trustees and 
to the Chairman, whenever so revested, all such statements 
and accounts as may be required of him, and he shall prepare 
an annual report showing the financial condition of the cor- 
poration at the end of the fiscal year, which report when made 
shall be presorted to the next succeeding meeting of the stock- 
holders* He shall also discharge such other duties incidental 
to his position as may be required of him by the Board of Trus- 
tees* 

5* Secretary* - The Secretary must be a citizen of the 
Philippines, He shall keep full minutes of all meetings of 
the stockholders and of the Board of Trustees in accordance 
with these by-laws* 

He shall have charge of the corporate seal and affix the 
same to certificates of stock when such certificates are duly 
signed by the proper officers, end shall affix the said seal. 


12 



attested by his signature, to such other instruments as are 
duly authorized by the Board of Trustees. He shall sign with 
the Chairmen all the certificates of stock issued, and he shall 
also be responsible for the stock certificate book, the stock 
transfer book, the stock ledger, aid such other bocks and papers 
as the Board of Trustees may place in his care. 

• t 

He shall make such reports to the Board of Trustees and 
to the Chairman as may be required of him. and he shall likewise 
prepare such reports and statements as are reqiired by the laws 
of the Philippines. He shall perform such other duties as arc 
incidental to his office or as may be assigned to him from time 
to time by the Board of Trustees or the Chairman. 

6. Compensation. * All officers of the corporation shall 
receive such salaries or remuneration as my be determined by 
the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the Chairman. 

7 * Delgation of Duties. - In case of the absence or 
disability of any officer of the corporation, the Board of 
Trustees my delegate his powers and duties to any other of- 
ficer or officers for the time being aid until the proper of- 
ficial returns or again performs his duties or his successor 
is elected. 

ARTICLE VI 

Finsime 

1, fflrSfPA ** The fiscal year of the corporation starting 

with the year 1956 shall commence on the first day of July and 
shall end with the last day of June of each calendar .year. 

2. Dividends. - Dividends shall be declared at such 


-13 - 

times in such percentages as the Board of Trusteos may 
determine, but no dividends shall be declared or paid except 
from the surplus profits arising from its business, nor shall 
any dividends be declared that will impair the cardial of the 
corporation# 

3* Bank Deposit a- - The Treasurer shall deposit the 
funds of the corporation in the corporate name as the same 
may come into his hands in such depositary banks as may be 
designated by the Board of Trustees. Withdrawals from such 
bank accounts shall be made only by checks, drafts, or other 
instruments aligned either by the Chairman of the Foard of 
Trustees without countersignature, or by the Treasurer with 
the countersigiature of the Chairman or such other officers 
as the Board of Trustees may designate# 

ARTICLE VII 

aundrv Provisions 

1, Corporate Seal. - The corporate seal shall consist 
of two concentric circles betv/een which shall appear the name 
of the corporation, to wit* BAGUIO MILITARY INSTITUTE, INC., 
and the words "BAGUIO CITY, PhILIPPIi<h.a$, and In the center 
of Which shell be inscribed the words "liiCtiiPCRATtD, 1956" • 

2# AjaffiStafflifi. - These b^-laws may be aaended or repealed, 
in whole or in part, at any regular meeting of the stockholders 
or in any special meeting duly called for the purpose provided 
that a majority of the entire subscribed capital stock of tue 
corporation shall vote for such amendment or repeal. The power 
to amend or repeal these by-laws may be delegated to the ibard 
of Trustees in the manner provided in the Philippines u orpora- 




-14- 

tioo law* 

- 0000O0000 - 

Bie foregoing by-laws were adopted by the vote of the 
stockholders holding or representing the entire subscribed 
and outstanding capital stock at the first meeting of the 
stockholders of said corporation held in the City of Baguio, 
Philippines, ax the 31st day of March, 1956. 

IN UITNESS WHEREOF, we the undersized stockholders, 
present or represented at said meeting and voting thereat 
in favor of the adoption of said by-laws, have hereunto sub- 
scribed our names and with the Chairman of the meeting and 
the Secretary of the same do likevd.se with our signatures 
attest. 

(Sgd) BBHTO H. LOPEZ (Sgd) lERH&NDO MUTISTA 

(Sgd) RAMON ENRIQUEZ (Sgd) BASILIO J. VAIDES 

(Sgd ) JOSE V. A1DRADA 

ATTEST: 

(Sgd) BENITO H. LOPEZ 
DEI Chairman of the meeting 

SEAL 

(Sgd) ERNESTO FLCKES 
Secretary of the meeting 

CERTIFIED TUBE Ail) CORRECT: 


ERNESTO bo FLORES 

Secretary, board of Trustees 


KHCftj ALL vm BY THESE mamst 

THAT MB, the undersigned, being all of the trustees 
of the BAGUIO MILITARY XSWIW5K, 1140.* an institution 
duly organized and existing under the laws of the Philip** 
pines, do hereby certify that the foregoing by-laws were 
adopted by the vote of more than a majority of ill the 
subscribed capital stock of the institution at the first 
meeting of the stockholders thereof held on the 31st day 
of March, 1955 in the City of Baguio, Philippines* 

(Sgd) BEJUTO H. LOPES (Sgd) IK8SIND0 BAUilSTft 

(Sgd) BAHUK EKEIWUBZ (Sgd) BASIU0 J. ViOBBS 

(Sgd) dOBE V. AUDidJDA 


A t T £ 3 I t 

(Sgd) ERIUSTO ?LCEE3 

Secretary of the meeting 


A Bulb COPY* 




• *' 

B JX - L A V/ 3 
OF TIE 

BAGUIO MILITARY INSTITUTE, INC. 

ARTICLE I 
Office 

The principal office of the corporation and the educa- 
tional institute to be operated by it shall be located and 
established in Baguio City, Philippines. The corporation may 
establish and maintain a branch office in Manila -whenever war- 
ranted by the exigencies of its business affairs. 

ARTICLE II 

Stock 

1. Certificates of Stock . - Each stockholder of the cor- 
poration whose stock has been paid for in full shall be enti- 
tled to a certificate or certificates showing the amount of 
stock of the corporation standing on the books in his name. 
Each certificate shall be numbered, -bear the corporate seal 
and the signatures of the Chairman of the Board of Trustees 
and the Secretary, and be issued in numerical order from the 

stock certificate book. A full record of each certificate of 

l 

stock, as issued, must be entered on the corresponding stub 
of the stock certificate book. 

2 . Transfers of Stock . - Transfer of stock shall be 
made upon the proper stock books of the corporation and must 
be accompanied by the surrender of the duly endorsed certifi- 
cate or certificates representing the transferred stock. Sur- 
rendered certificates shall be cancelled and attached to the 
corresponding stubs in the stock certificate book, and new 
certificates issued to the parties entitled thereto. The 
stock books shall be closed to transfer five (5) days before 


f 




• 0 

. t * 

- 2 - 

the general election of members of the Board of Trustees and 
other officers and fifteen (15 ) days before the declaration of 
dividends , 

3. Stock and Transfer Book. - The stock and transfer 
book and other records of the corporation shall be kept in its 
principal office in Baguio City, and they shall be open for 
inspection during business hours by any stockholder of the 
corporation, 

V f "V' 

4. Lost or Destroyed Certificates . - Any stockholder who 
claims that his certificate of stock has been lost or destroyed 
shall file an affidavit in triplicate with the corporation 
stating the circumstances of such loss or destruction, and he 
may be required to give further notice thereof by publication 
in a newspaper of general circulation in Baguio City once a 
week for_three ( 3 ) consecutive weeks, When the stockholder 
concerned shall have fulfilled all requirements prescribed by 
existing law, a new certificate or certificates marked "DUPLI- 
C.kTJl; , . ) : shall be issued to such stockholder. The Board of Trus- 
tees may require the stoolfholder to file a bond or other secu- 
rity for a sum and in such form and with such sureties as the 
Board may deem satisfactory in order that the corporation may 
be indemnified against any loss or damage that may be incurred 
by reason of the issuance of such new certificates. The fore- 
going procedure shall be observed insofar as consistent with the 

provisions of Republic Act No. 201 and other pertinent laws, 

1 

5. Tre asury otock . - All issued and outstanding stock 
of the corporation that may be purchased by or donated to. said 
corporation shall be treasury stock and shall be held subject 




- 3 - 

to the disposition of the Board of Trustees or the stockholder 
as the case may be. Such stock shall neither vote nor parti- 
cipate in dividends while held by the corporation. 

ARTICLE III 

i 

Stockholders 

1. Annual Meetings . - The regular annual meetings of 
the stockholders of the corporation shall be held after the 
year 1956 on the 20th day of August in each calendar year at 
5:00 P.M., if not a legal holiday, and if a legal holiday, then 
on the next business day following, for the purpose of electing 
members of the Board of Trustees and for the transaction of 

/ 

such other business as may be properly brought before the meet- 
ing. 

/ 

Written or printed notice of the annual stockholders' 
meeting shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to each stockholder 
of record not less than fifteen (15 ) days before the 4ate of 
such meeting, but failure to mail or send such notice, or any 
irregularity therein, shall not affect the validity of any 
annual meeting or of any proceeding thereat. Waiver of such 
notice may be made in writing by all or any of the stockholders, 

2. Special Meetings . - Special meetings of the stock- 
holders may be held at any time in the principal office of the 

corporation upon call of the Chairman, or pursuant to a reso- 

/ 

lution of the Board of Trustees, or upon written call signed 
by stockholders of record owning a majority of the entire 
issued and outstanding stock of the corporation. Calls for 
special meetings shall specify the time, place and object or 
objects thereof, and no other business than that specified 



- 4 - 



in the call shall be considered at any such meeting. 

A written notice stating the day, hour and 'place of the 
meeting and the general nature of the business to be transacted 
thereat shall be sent to each stockholder of record at least 
one (l) week before the date of such special meeting. Such 
written notice, however, may be waived in writing by the stock- 
holders. v 

3. Note. — At such meeting of the stockholders, every 
stockholder shall be entitled to vote in person or by proxy, 
and he shall have one vote for each share of stock standing in 
his name on the boeks of the corporation at the time of the 
closing of the transfer books for such meeting. The votes for 
members of the Board of Trustees and, upon demand of any stock- 
holder, the votes upon any question before the meeting, shall 
be by ballot. 

4. Proxies . - Any stockholder entitled to vote at the 
meetings of the stockholders may be represented and vote there- 
at by proxy appointed in an instrument in writing, subscribed 
by such stockholder or by his duly authorized attorney, and 
delivered to the Secretary at or before the time of such meet- 
ing. Proxies shall be properly signed and sealed but they 
shall require no other attestation. 

5. Quorum. - A majority in amount of the stock issued 
and outstanding, exclusive of treasury stock, represented by 
the stockholders of record thereof, in person or by proxy, 
shall be requisite to constitute a quorum at any meeting of 

* 

the stockholders. When a quorum is present at any such meet- 
ing, a majority vote of the stock represented thereat shall 


/ 


4 




- 5 - 

decide any matter brought before such meeting, unless the con- 
current vote of a greater number is required by the Philippine 
Corporation Law. 

If a quorum is not present at the time and place fixed 
by the by-laws for the annual meeting, or fixed by notice as 
herein provided for a duly called special meeting, a majority 
in interest of the stockholders present in person or by proxy 
may adjourn from time to time, without notice other than by 
announcement at the meeting, until a quorum is secured. At 

- . ' t 

any such adjourned meeting at which a quorum may be present, 
any business may be transacted which might have been transacted 
at the meeting as originally called and notified. 

6. Election of Trustees . - The five (5) members of the 
Board of Trustees of the corporation shall be elected by a 
plurality vote, cast by ballot, at the annual meeting of the 
stockholdqrs for that year. The trustees so elected shall 
hold office- until the expiration of their respective suc- 
cessors. 

7, Order of Business . - The order of business at the 

i 

annual meeting of the stockholders, and, so far as practicable, 
at all other meetings thereof shall be as follows: 

1. Roll Call . 

2. Reading and Disposal of any 

Unapproved Minutes 

3. Reports of Officers and Committees 

4. Election of Trustees 

5. Unfinished Business * 

6. New Business 

ARTICLE IV 

The Board of Trustees 



1 . 


- The number of the first 






6 


Board of Trustees shall be five (5) but any time during the 


creased to any number not exceeding fifteen (15). No person 
shall be elected, nor be competent to act as trustee of the 
corporation, unless he is a stockholder of record at the time 
of election. If any trustee shall cease to be a stockholder 
of record, his term of office shall forthwith terminate and 


2. General Powers . - The Board of Trustees sha.ll .have 

entire charge of the properties, business, interests and gene- 
ral operations of the corporation, with full power and author- 
ity to manage and conduct the same. In addition to the speci- 
fic powers conferred on the Board of Trustees by these by-laws, 
the Board shall have general poiirer to do all such things as 
may be necessary for the best interests of the corporation and 
not inconsistent with the statutes of the Philippines or with 
these by-laws. . ^ 

3. Vacancies, - In case of any vacancy in the Board of 
Trustees by reason of deaths resignation, disability or other 
cause, the remaining trustees, if still constituting a quorum, 
by the affirmative vote of a majority of thd* Board of Trustees, 
may elect a successor to hold office for the unexpired term and 
until the election of his successor. by the stockholders of the 
corporation. 

In case of any increase in the Board of Trustees between 
the annual elections of its members, the newly cre'ated trustee- 
ships shall be filled at a special stockholders’ meeting called 
for the purpose. 


existence of the corporation the number of trustees may be in- 


crease 


\ 






Should the membership of the Board of Trustees at any time 
fall below the number necessary to constitute a quorum, then 
a special meeting of the stockholders stall be called by the 
Chairman and such number of trustees shall be elected thereat 
as may be necessary to restore the Board to its full member- 
ship. 

4. Place of Meeting . - Meetings of uhe Board of Trustees 
shall be held in the principal office of the corporation in the 
City of Baguio or in such other place as the Board may in its 
discretion determine. 

5. Regular Meetings . - The Board of Trustees shall hold 
regular meetings on such dates and time as the Chairman shall, 
in his discretion, determine. The Secretary shall give written 
notice of such regular meeting to each trustee at least three 
(3) days before such meeting, stating the time and place there- 
of, No failure to give such notice or irregularity therein 
shall affect the validity of any regular meeting of the Board 
of Trustees or of any proceeding thereat if all the members 
are present at such meeting. 

6. Special Meetings . - Special meetings of the Board 
of Trustees may be called by the Chairman on one (l) day's 
notice to each trustee either personally or in writing or on 
the written request of at least Wo (2) trustees. Such call 
shall specify the time, place and objeot or objects of such 
special meeting. 

7. Quorum . - k majority of the Board of Trustees' shall 
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and, in 
the presence of quorum, majority vote of the trustees present 


at any board meeting shall be sufficient to decide any action. 

/ 

8. Election of Officers. - At the first regular meeting • 
of the Board of Trustees after the time fixed for the annual 
meeting of stockholders each year, or at a special meeting 
called for the purpose after the annual meeting of the stock- 
holders, the Board shall elect the officers of the corporation. 

9. Per Diems and Privileges of Trustees . - All members 
of the Board of Trustees shall receive a per diem of One Hun- 
dred Pesos Q?100,00) each for actual attendance at meetings of 
the Board in addition to hotel accommodations and transportation 
at the expense of the corporation to and from their places of 
residence and Baguio City 'whenever attending meetings of the 
Board of Trustees. 

.ARTICLE V 
Officers 

. ' N. 

1. Enumeration . - The officers of the corporation shall 

consist, of the following, namely, a Chairman of the Board of 

\ 

Trustees, a Treasurer , and a Secretary, whose powers and duties 
shall be as hereinafter provided and as the .Board of Trustees 
may fix in conformity with the • provisions of these by— laws. 

The Board of Trustees may create other offices for^the admi- 
n is t ratios supervision of the institution to be. established 
by the corporation, All officers shall be elected to their 
respective offices by a majority vote of the Board of Irustees* 
Any officer may hold more than one office provided that the 
duties thereof are not incompatible, 

2. Qualifications . - Except the Chairman of the Board 

of Trustees, who must be a stockholder, the Treasurer and the ^ 
Secretary need not be stockholders of the corporation. 


- 9 - 




3. Chairman of the Board of Trustees . - The Chairman 
of the Board of Trustees shall be the chief executive officer 
of the corporation and shall exercise direct and active manage- 
ment and control over the business operations of the corpora- 
tion subject to the resolutions and instructions of the Board 
of Trustees and according to his own discretion in conformity 
with such resolutions and instructions. 

The Chairman shall sign, execute and deliver all contracts 
and agreements in the name of the corporation. He shall also 
sign, with the countersignature of the Secretary, all certifi- 
cates of stock. Subject to the approval of the Board of Trust*.-. ; 
tees, he shall have the power to obtain loans, overdrafts and 
credit facilities in behalf of the corporation from persons, 
banks and credit institutions and to mortgage or pledge the 
real and personal properties of- 'the corporation as security 
for such obligations. He shall establish in the name of the 
corporation an account or accounts with any local banking insti- 
tution, in which corporate funds shall be deposited, subject 
to withdrawals by checks, drafts or other instruments signed 
either - (a) by \iim alone as Chairman, without countersignature; 
or (b) by the Treasurer with the countersignature of the Chair- 
man or such other officers as the Board of Trustees may desig- 
nate. 

Subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, the 
Chairman shall appoint a Superintendent, a Commandant, and 
such other administrative officials and employees as may be 
necessary for the operation and conduct of the educational 
institution to be established by the corporation. He slia.ll 
exercise general superintendence and direction over all the 
other officers, administrative officials, employees and subor- 


/ 


- 10 - 


dinate personnel of the corporation aid ha shall see to it 

\ 

that their respective duties are properly performed. Subject 
to the approval of the Board of Trustees, the Chairman shall 
have the power to remove or suspend these administrative offi- 
cials and employees of the corporation, prescribe their powers 
and duties and fix their respective salaries or compensations. 

The Chairman shall submit such reports on the operations 
of the corporation as the Board of Trustees may require, and 
he shall from time to time report also to the Board of Trustees 
all matters within his kno-wledge which the interests of the 
corporation may require to be brought to their attention. He 
shall also see to it that all resolutions of the Board of 
Trustees are properly carried out. 

He shall have the general powers and duties of supervision 
and management usually vested in the chief executive officer 
of a corporation, and he shall also perform such other duties 
as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Board of Trustees, 
or which may properly pertain to his office and which in his 
judgment v&ll serve the best interests of the corporation. 

4. Treasurer. - The Treasurer shall be the custodian of 
the funds, properties, securities and valuable documents of the 
corporation such as certificates of title, insurance policies, 
bonds and other writt en instruments, and he shall be responsi- 
ble for all moneys and other properties of the corporation 
under his charge. He shall keep full aid accurate records 
and accounts in books belonging to the corporation of all re- 
ceipts, disbursements , assets, liabilities and general finan- 
cial transactions of the corporation. 

He shall deposit all moneys and other valuable effects 


of the corporation coming into his hands in such depositaries 
as hi ay be designated by the Board of Trustees, and he shall 
disburse the finds of the corporation pursuant to the instruc- 
tions of the Board of Trustees or of its authorized officers, 
taking proper vouchers for all such disbursements. He shall 
also indorse for collection or deposit all bills, notes, checks 
and other negotiable instruments of the corporation and deposit 
the same to its credit. With the countersignature of the Chair- 
man or such other officer as the Board of Trustees nay designate, 
the Treasurer may sign checks, drafts, or other instruments for 
the withdrawal of corporate funds deposited in banking insti- 
tutions. 

\ 

The Treasurer shall render t,o the Board of Trustees and 
to the Chairman, whenever so requested, all such statements 
and accounts as may be required of him, aid he shall prepare 
an annual report showing the financial condition of the cor- 
poration at the end of the fiscal year, which report when made 
shall be presented to the' next succeeding meeting of the stock- 
holders. He shall also discharge such other duties incidental 
to his position as may be required of him by the Board of 
Trustees. 

5. Secretary . - The Secretary must be a citizen of the 
Philippines, He shall keep full minutes of nil meetings of 
the stockholders and of the Board of Trustees in accoi’dance 
with these by-laws. 

He shall have charge of the corporate seal and affix the 
sane to certificates of stock when such certificates are duly 
signed by the proper officers, and shall affix the said seal. 



0 




• 12 . 




attested by his signature, to such other instruments as are 
duly authorized by the Board of Trustees. He shall sign with 
the Chairman all the certificates of stock issued;, and he shall 
also be responsible for the stock certificate book, the stock 
transfer book, the stock ledger, and such other books and papers 
as the Board of Trustees may place in his care. 

He shall make such reports to the Board of Trustees and 
to the Chairman as may be required of him and he shall likewise 
prepare such reports and statements as are required by the laws 
of the Philippines. He shall perform such other duties as are 
incidental to his office or as may be assigned to him from time 
to tine by the Ebard of Trustees or the Chairman. 

6. Compensation . - All officers of the corporation shall 
receive such salaries or remuneration as may be determined by 
the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the Chairman. 

7. Delegation of Duties . - In case of the absence or 
disability of any officer of the corporation, the Board of 
Trustees may delegate his powers and duties to any other of- 
ficer or officers for the time being arc. until the proper of- 
ficial returns or again performs his duties or his successor 
is elected. 


1. Fiscal Year. - The fiscal year of the corporation starting 
with the year 1956 shall commence on the: first day of July and 
shall end with the last day of June of each calendar year. 


ARTICLE VI 


Finances 


2, Dividends. - Dividends shall be declared at such 





- 13 - 


tines and in such percentages as the Board of Trustees may 
determine, but no dividends shall be declared or paid except 
from the surplus profits arising from its business, nor shall 
any dividends be declared that will impair the capital of the 
corporation. 

3. Bank Deposits . - The Treasurer shall deposit the 
funds of the corporation in the corporate name as the same 
may come into his hands in su ch depositary banks as may be 
designated by the Board of Trustees. Withdrawals from such 
bank accounts shall be made only by checks, drafts, or other 
instruments signed either by the Chairman of the Board of 
Trustees without countersignature, or by the Treasurer with 
the countersignature of the Chairman or such other officers 
as the Board of Trustees may designate. 


1. Corporate Seal . - The corporate seal shall consist 

of two concentric circles between which shall appear the name 
of the corporation, to wit: BaGUIO MILITARY INSTITUTE, INC., 

and the words "BAGUIO CITY , PHILIPPINES" , and in the center 
of which shall be inscribed the i/ords "H'JCOilPORATLD , 1956" . 

2. Amendments . - These bj r -laws may be amended or repealed, 
in whole or in part, at any regular meeting of the stockholders 
or in any special meeting duly called for the purpose provided 
that a majority of the entire subscribed capital stock of the 
coppoi'ation shall vote for such amendment oi repeal. The power 
to amend or repeal these by-laws may delegated to the Board 

of Trustees in the manner provided in the Philippines Corpora— 


ARTICLE VII 


Sundry Provisions 


tion law. 

- 0000O0000 - 

The foregoing by-laws were adopted by the vote of the 
stockholders holding or representing the entire subscribed 
and outstanding capital stock at the first meeting of the 
stockholders of said corporation held in. the City of Baguio, 
Philippines, on the 31st day of March, 1956. 

IN WITNESS WHEIiEOF, we the undersigned stockholders, 
present or represented ht said meeting and voting thereat 
in favor of the adoption of said by-laws, have hereunto sub- 
scribed our names and with" the Chairman of the meeting and 
the Secretary of the same do likewise with our signatures 
attest. 


( Sgd ) BENITO H. LOFEZ (Sgd) FERNANDO BAUTISTA 

(Sgd ) RAMON ENRIQUEZ (Sgd) BASILIO J. VaLDES 

( Sgd ) J Obiii V . ANDiiADA 

ATTEST : 

(Sgd) BENITO h. LOPEZ 
Chairman ,.of the meeting 

(Sgd) ERNESTO FLORES 
Secretary of the meeting 




- 15 - 

D IRECTORS 1 C ERTIFICATE 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 

THAT HE, the undersigned, being all of the trustees 
of the BAGUIO MILITARY INSTITUTE, INC . , an institution 
duly organized a„nd existing under the laws of the Philip- 
pines, do hereby certify that the foregoing by-laws were 
adopted by the vote of r.iore than a majority of all the 
subscribed capital stock of the institution at the first 
meeting of the stockholders thereof held on the 31 st day 
of March, 1955 in the City of Baguio, Philippines. 

( Sgd ) BENITO H. LOPEZ (Sgd) FERNANDO BAUTISTA 

(Sgd ) RAMON ENRIQUEZ (Sgd) BASILIO J. VALDES 

(Sgd) JOSE V. ANDRADA 

ATTEST: 

(Sgd) ERNESTO FLORES 
Secretary of the meeting 


A TRUE COPY: 


