-lb ’ • ^ 

Broedcaat by Major Qsn«ral B* J. Valdl# 
on “Voice of FHHEDOM” 1 Dec 1944 



REORGANEATICN OF THE 
PHILIPPm ARiDT 
/OTD 

hEOPilHING OP POST OFFICES 



Shortly after the surrender of all U. S, Amy forces in 
the * Philipp :^c s j on mey 1942, s number of officers and men of 
the Philippine Anry who had eacapeci to tiie mountain© organized 
various units of resistance called guerrillas. Many young 
civilians who reiused to submit themselves to t!ie Japanese 
domination Joined these guerrilla uiiits. Under proper leader- 
ship these organizations harassed and fought and are still 
flghtii^ the Japanese tlu'otghout the Philippines. There vjors 
areas in vihich the guerrillas ran all govcrrjaexital agencies exist- 
ing under the ComiuonweaiUi before th*s war. In spit* of cndlor.6 
hardships and unto la privations tlioso groips of patriots continued 
their magnificent resistancu, proving to the v;hole world that the 
Filipino people were not willir^g to give up the domocratic way of 
life end toe freedom that they had enjoy ud under the Amorlcan flag. 
At this time arid aa long as military operations continue th'Sae 
recognized guerrilla organizations riill remain lirider the control 
and command of toe U. S, A:c:ry comrriander In the field. 



Shortly after President Oamena and his .cabinijt landed in 
Leyte, President Oiciena issued 3 ii executive order u’:iat all tnoffs , 
irrespcctiv'!) of nationality, v/ho beloxigecl to too racognized 
guerrilla units were msmbare of thu Philippine .'irty , 'Ti:e Genorsl 
Headqu^rteru of the Phixippine wae reU^abUshed and a United 

States Arny officer dcci^ietec ae Acting Adjutant Oenersl. I 
appointed a board of officera whoue duty it l»i to prociias all ex- 
USflJPPh officers and mc-n who fought in the early part of toe- waso 
Thii -board determines -whether the appllcante really have been 
members of the Philippine Arn\y or ConMtabulary, vvhVthsr they served 
under the Japaneae or under the puppet Republic, and if they aid 
serve, what was the nature of their work.’ Carof ^ul inquiries" are 
made of the pset services rendefisd by these apolicants to the 
Japanese authorities, whether or not they have -;orV:«.a a.^ inijimera 
or as leaders of patrols against the guerrillas. After the board 
has recommended the reinstatement of the applicants these are 
assigned to a replacement depot as a part of the rej^lacwment bat- 
■tallion. They are phyoically examined and if found phyeicaily fit 
are retained for future asaignmant. 



The 1st Leyte Compary of the Philippine Cons-tabulary has been 
created with station in Tacloban. Major Hanxjn Gaviola, an old Con- 
stabulary officer, has oeen designated Acting Comanuing Officer. 
Other Constabulary detatchments have been organized in o ther towne 
in Leyte to cooperate with U. S. Aray authorities in the ioaintan- 
ance of peace and order. 



- 1 




Po«tal 1 a th« Provinca of have been re- 

• atabiisheci. Teh Poat Ollice df Tacioban, L,eiyte vuaa officially 
reopened Kovember b* 1944 aiid inail ^>'atem x^ceatabliahed betvjctn 
Tacloban axid palo. The Poet Office e in oth«r tc»n« will al*o 
be reopened aa aoon aa appropriate peraonneil. has be^n aelected 
and appointed. Mail cooununicationa vifill eoor 4 do reeataDiian«d 
with till towna of Tanewan, Toloaa, bulag a^id Abu/og. The 
telegraph lines between Taclobaa and otticz* towna have bteii 
•everely u&iiiaged by tliiae typhoons which istaned tiiis island 
dui'ing the »nonUifr of October and Hovaaioer* operation of these 
lines v;ill be rceurced as soon as x‘e pairs btoave been uiade. The 
Signal Corps U. ,n. t*.r-ny iias very kinaiy co furnish the 

material nseoad for this repair. 



2 - 




t 






