PHILIPPINE HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION 








BULLET 







Volume XXII 



Numbers 1>4 




" January-December, 1978 











i- - 




QUEZON 
In Retrospect 

Edited by 

Mauro Garcia 

1 

and 

Juan F. Rivera 




^The ^PHILIPPINE HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION 
Founded 1955 

HONORARY OFFICERS: 

H. E. President Ferdinand E. Marcos 
Honorary President 

Dr. Francisco Dalupan 
Honorary Vice-President 

Prof. Gabriel F. Fabella 
President Emeritus 



OFFICERS FOR 1978: 

President; Ma. Minerva A. Gonzalez, University of Santo Tomas 
Vice-President: Pilipinas E. Pineda, University of the East 
Treasurer : V Lourdes Y. Santos, University of thevnEastv / 

Asst. Treasurer: Bonifacio S. Salamanca, University of the 
Philippines 

Secretary: Flordeliza K. Militante, National Historical Institute 
Auditor: Celedonio O. Resurreccion, Far Eastern University 
PRO : Mauro Ga|*cia, Jorge B. Vargas Filipiniana Foundation 

BOARI> OF GOVERNORS: 

t 

The above officers and the following governors: Paulino M. Ca- 
pitulo, Lyceum of the Philippines; Regino “Dodds'* Giagonia, Phil. 
Merchant Marine Academy; Gloria M. Santos, Saint Mary’s Col- 
lege; Leslie E. Bauzon, University of the Philippines. 

BOARD OF EDITORS: 

Leslie E. Bauzon, University of the Philippines 
Mauro Garcia, Jorge B. Vargas Filipiniana Foundation 
Regino “Dodds” Giagonia, Phil. Merchant Marine Academy 

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR: 

Gloria M. Santos, Saint Mary’s College 

The objects and purposes of the Association are (a) to promote and 
propagate historical knowledge ♦ and studies; (b) to collect and pre- 
serve relics, manuscripts, documents, and the like pertaining to the 
Philippines; and (c) to Undertake any and other activities that will 
promote the ob j ect s~~andT5U!PpDSes of^he “Assnciation . The ‘fe^Iar 
membership fee in the Association is P20.00 a year which entitles a 
member to regular issues of the HISTORICAL BULLETIN free of 
charge. The life membership fee is -P200.00. 



PHILIPPINE HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 




Volume XXII / January-Dccember. 1978 / Nos. 1-4 



QUEZON 

In Retrospect 

Edited by 

Mauro Garcia 

% 

and 



Juan F. Rivera 



I 



. 

' 



[ Articles in. the HISTORICAL BULLETIN do not represent the 
views of the PHA. Although the editors are responsible for their 
selection and acceptance, responsibility for the opinions expressed in 
i the articles and for the accuracy of statements contained in them rest 

( with their authors. 

Articles for the BULLETIN should be sent to The Editor, Philip, 
pine Historical Association, 2872 Lamayan Street, Sta. Ana, Manila. 

Subscriptions and other business correspondence should be ad 
dressed to the Executive Director, Philippine Historical Association, 
2872 Lamayan Street, Sta. Ana, Manila. 

The BULLETIN is published quarterly in March, June, September 
and December. 

Subscriptions are P20.00 a year in the Philippines; elsewhere, $7.50. 
Single copies are P6.00 and S2.50 

Copyright 1978 by the Philippine Historical Association. 




Q U E Z O N 

IN retrospect 

A Commemorative Volume Issued on the 
100th Birthday of President 
Manuel L. Quezon 



Edited by 



MAURO GARCIA 
and 

JUAN F. RIVERA 



Manila 

Philippine Historical Association 
1978 



K O S 'J U 

T -> ?r nr K o H r a H / : 

lit) lyftin-'{ iiriulo / ‘I /ilinoiiri'r>rt '< » /• 
’If) /i;brl)Tt{l 
tttlU'.S/ 






. ’ .* .#•" 



'• ■■ .1 



iMiq 




&. .. t 


1# 




yiyix. 
















1 

r 


i -"It- * 




f • 4^ *' 




*'■ t / 




i'- 

% ■ • 1 i‘ 


4» '^**N 
> “ • 




1 i 

|Uv. » 



t ’i • . 




r/:r‘C' 



Irt..,!/. 

^rr[ 






FOREWORD 



The Philippine Historical Association presents to its 
readers this 1978 issue of its Historical Bulletin entitled: 
(itiezon: In Retrospect in commemoration of President Ma- 
nuel L. Quezon’s 100th birthday anniversary. 

The volume is a collection of thought-provoking articles, 
challenging speeches and rewarding reminiscences of persons 
who knew President Quezon some of whom worked with him 
closely in the building of the Filipino nation for more than 
35 years. 

President Quezon’s rise to greatness — his philosophy, 
aspirations and ideals for the nation, his qualities as d 5 mamic 
leader, the problems he met and how he tackled them, and his 
achievements — are worth recalling because they are cardinal 
in understanding the role he played in the struggles of the 
Philippines for peaceful independence. 

Because of the great role played by President Quezon in 
shaping the destiny of the Philippines from the time he was 
a member of the Philippine Assembly in 1907 up to his un- 
timely demise in August, 1944, his services to the Filipino 
people are inspiring and worth emulating. If history is shap- 
ed by men who make history, this commemorative volume, 
a fitting tribute of the Philippine Historical Association, brings 
into sharp focus. President Quezon’s contributions to the dev- 
elopment of the Filipino nation. Contemporary history rec- 
ords that President Quezon and his reduced cabinet had the 
greatest pleasure of seeing the Philippines acquired advance 
political status during World War II. 

With this volume, the Philippine Historical Association, 
ioins the Filipino people in paying tribute to one of its great 
statesmen — Manuel L. Quezon whose enduring greatness must 
live in our hearts. 



MA. MINERVA A. GONZALEZ 
President 

Phil. Historical Association 



If 






•'.Jl 1)1 . lu. .-.I '>*' 1 

b‘)IjUriJ fid ilitjll l« '•(tixili r:i ! I- .. , 

i<) ;...'M.yifi‘\irrfi n. i :n »n' j < »! • ■, 

i.'iuj -/jih-iiM.! v) .. ) 

.c'ji’ib'ff, /fi(?l' )vo't<i ii 1 !ii noijj -f!,. I '• .j u: ; 

io r/> »((3 ,-.iuu*'' rj ): ‘»q.- 

mb' flJiv/ lr>;uO V f-oii 'ja ymi ', jo.' • ii'i.'. 

ftiidf vjDfii -u>i m-i’iui ' liqlli'T • ■li »r 

'firtfji ao{irifj ?ii! 

-iji r elfl .tioijiui obi •h. ij.,: : i 

■’lU bfiK jn^rtJ jbrw ionj ' 4 il v/orl dft'i .i ..t 'v(a .( , 

'iUtIIji/J') '.nu rflif/ij'iwi ril'iov.' '.I'fi ■ - . Ill- 

•jlil 'ill ill Iv.' 'III -dlf) l it ;;irl")n • 

.'riiiobnoq ib,i, luii u: , im - 

rrl uox‘»uti lifjbi'MiT vj F^j’/niq «)lot Ismu o>i> lo . 

“aw -fil 'irrifi 'il) rnoi'l ."'niqqllut‘1 'a .'rril^.sb orl5 
fiu njf{ o' qn i'lcl ni v.f(i.rroP'*A ' nifitbiir"-; ofli li. : la 
<)i.jql)[i'U obi ul - t-lrl i»l . 'j- o/ *. »- u* ’ ) 

e,l T j|iii’ii»Ififf’ .b fo i>r.r vr o ' 

ori'iifo'/ ‘lyi '» 'K. f ' I Tin 'iJi ''rO' rb ■ • rr 
c^’tn.vi' .11 ti . Ill'll !. 

■/•)() »rli .')) I'r.'T.i'-'j'i .■\to...->i ’ ■ •■; ' . • ■■: 

'I'll /_[!■;> 'I (tritiin'-J :c,.:i •) I. r’ ' • 

•?fl. Ij.ifl ' Oil'; ■ " i- ■■ 

‘■•>aii.bi; bS'iif/air: ? 'n'qg.iiitH j 'i I . 

.T! 1- • - 

!r)<Jnl''0,.-'I 'k, :oi''iII '/-liq'ifiio'I 

" -b ‘ o* o.'UfflfJ ■ ■' ■ : . • 

.■^Ij r' . C*X fv . , 



fn \ 'u>) .■""rr'’' .• k/ 

' ' <0 'jf 

* * • ' li . ’ I Tu I . } ’ ’’’i ' r 



i. 



CONTENTS 



Foreword 



Page 

V 



THE VOICE OF QUEZON 

Our Faith in America is undaunted 

By Manuel L. Quezon 

Remember the Philippines 

By Manuel L. Quezon 



QUEZON, THE MAN 

Manuel L. Quezon: Patriot and Statesman 

By Sergio Osmeha 

Quezon, the leader 

By Miguel Cuenco 

The Character of Manuel L. Quezon 

By Encarnacion M. Alzona 

Manuel L. Quezon as Resident Commissioner 

By Gabriel F. Fabella - - 

Quezon and the Campaign for Philippine Independence 

By Nicolas Zafra 

Rise of President Quezon to Leadership 

By Eulogio B. Rodriguez 

The Reluctant Partners 

By Benvenuto R. Diho 

Quezon and Osmena: Their Last Battle 

By Frederic S. Marquardt 

President Quezon’s Contributions to Allied War Effort 

By Harry W. Frantz 

What Kind of Nationalist was Manuel L. Quezon 

By Theodore Friend 

Quezon: The Aristocrat as Leader 

By Andres Cristobal Cruz 

Manuel L. Quezon: An Appraisal 

By Gabriel F. Fabella 



12 

18 

29 

38 

45 

56 

62 

75 

82 

86 

93 

102 






Quezon’s Gift: A Dream of Social Justice 

By Emerenciana Y. Arcellana 112 

Quezon and the Church 

By Frederic S. Marquardt 129 

Quezon and the Commonwealth 

By Celedonio O. Resurreccion 137 

i ; ^ 

Quezon and his Health 

By Artemio A. Garlit 144 

Quezon and his Fights 

By Rodrigo C. Lim I54 

MLQ’s Life Retraced 

By Camilo Osias 150 

Quezon, the Nationalist 

By Carlos Quirino 

The Measures of his Greatness 

By Various Authors jg- 

EULOGIES ON QUEZON 

We Do Not Gather Here to Grieve • 

By Manuel A. Roxas 214 

Manuel L. Quezon: In Memoriam 

By Sergio Osmena = : ! 223 

Before the Mortal Remains of Manuel L. Quezon 

By Claro M. Recto 29g 

He Did Much for Our Country 

By Pacifico A. Ortiz, S.J 235 

We Never Had a Better Friend 

By Frank Murphy 240 

Message of General of the Army Douglas MacArthur 240 

ANECDOTES ABOUT QUEZON 
Anecdotes about Quezon 

By Carlos Quirino 9^^ 

Manuel L. Quezon and I 

By Proceso E. Sebastian 9^g 

Quezon as I Kjnew Him 

By Sotero S. Laurel, III 950 



j 



Quezon, the Father 

By Araceli T. Salazar 

The Quezon-Salazar Incident 

By Leopoldo R. Serrano • • 

Quezon, As I Knew Him . _ . 

By Luis Serrano 

Deep Secret of Quezon Revealed for .First Time 
By Vicente L. del Fierro 

Quezon, His Secret 

By Jesus Ma. Intengan 

Quezon, the Press Photographers’ Favorite 

By Rodolfo M. de Leon 

They Loved Quezon 

By Antonio L. Arizabal 

Stories of Quezon 

By Amante F. Paredes 

Let George Do It 

By A. Oliver Flores 

Quezon’s War with the Ugly American 

By Jesus V. Merritt 

How Quezon Handled Government Crooks 

By Rodrigo C. Lim 

My Days with Quezon 

By Jorge B. Vargas 

Not So Long Ago 

By Jose E. Romero 

Quezon’s Greatest Triumph 

By Benvenuto R. Dino 

Quezon’s Parting Words 

By Jesus A. Villamor 

Quezon, the Unknown 

By Jose A. Quirino 

Manuel L. Quezon — As I Knew Him 

By Phillip L. De Vault 



. 256 
. 261 
, 266 
271 
. 273 
. 276 



290 

293 

296 

301 

308 

314 

319 

329 

340 



346 



APPENDICES 

The Philippine Government: From Manila to Washington 349 



A Government in Exile 

By Amante F. Paredes 358 

From Poverty to Prominence 

By Manuel L. Quezon 366 

Red-letter Days in President Quezon’s Life 370 



OUR FAITH IN AMERICA IS UNDAUNTED 



By Manuel L. Quezon 

ONCE AGAIN I find myself in this august Hall, where for 
7 years I pled the cause of my people, their freedom, and 
independence. The memory of those happy days, some of 
the happiest of my life, rush into my mind now, almost mak- 
ing me forget the sad plight in which I find myself. 

I came to Washington in the winter of 1909-10. On the 
very first day that I was introduced to the Speaker and given 
a seat in this Chamber, a stranger in a foreign land, I received 
a hearty welcome. And I was treated with not only courtesy 
but cordiality. 

On the 14th of May 1910 I addressed the House of Repre- 
sentatives for the first time. On that occasion I described 
the splendid work that had already been done by the Ameri- 
can administration in the Philippines, with particular refer- 
ence to schools, sanitation, and roads. 

I am glad — 

I said on that occasion — 

to be able to affirm that, under American occupation, there has 
been established in the Philippines a more liberal government; 
and the Filipinos have enjoyed more personal and political liberty 
than they ever did under the Spanish crown. These facts are 
freely acknowledged throughout the length and breadth of the 
islands, and my countrymen wish me most earnestly to assure 
the House, and, through them, the people of the United States, 
that they are grateful, profoundly grateful, for all the benefits 
that your Government has conferred upon them. 

But, sirs, despite it all, the Filipinos are not as yet a happy 
people. You would ask me why? Then I will answer in the 
language of that great apostle of human freedom, Daniel Webster : 



» Address before the U.S. House of Representatives. Reprinted 
from the Congressional Record, June 2, 1942, Vol. 88, Pt. 4, pp. 4789- 
4791. 



1 



2 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



No matter how easy may be the yoke of a foreign power, no 
matter how lightly it sits upon the shoulder, if it is not imposed 
by the voice of its own opinion and of its own truth, he will not, 
he cannot, and he means not to be happy under its burden. 

These words I uttered in this same Hall 32 years 8-go. It 
..ook 7 years of constant pleading before I secured the enact- 
ment of the act known among us as the Jones law, in which 
the United States for the first time solemnly pledged the faith 
of this country to the independence of the Philippines when a 
s able govemrnent should have been established there. Under 
IS act the Filipino people for the first time in their history 

^>?ere to have a legislature of tvyo houses elected by them- 
selves. 

began building, day after day, the founda- 
° that the United States would, in due 

consider stable, so that independence might be granted. 

■u.y th course of a few years, another act was passed 

of °^ess which fixed the year 1946 for the granting 
denPnriJ ^"^ependence to the Philippines. Under this In- 
ore-ar.ir Commonwealth of the Philippines was 

adontprf -w established, with a constitution framed and 
adopted by the Filipino people themselves. 

A fivp first President of the Commonwealth. 

bv its Snpjfw from the House of Representatives, headed 

«ve delegation irom the Se- 

thp inanoiiT-of .c Came to the islands to witness 

see with*" thp-^°^ Commonwealth. They came there to 

which had 1 inauguratioFx of human liberty 

which had been granted by the United States. 

Philinri" <^ay On the Commonwealth of the 

nPCP^r t and executed those policies 

Tx-mc H TK ^ file Filipino people to assume their res- 

ponsibilities as an independent nation in 1946. The first act 

pa^se y e legislature, to create a citizen army, was recom- 
mended by me and known as the National Defense Act. The 



QUEZON— OUR FAITH IN AMERICA 



3 



act was in accordance with the plan submitted by Genei*al 
Mac Arthur/^ 

I had secured from the President of the United States 
permission to bring him to the Philippines as my military 
adviser in order to organize our armed forces. The outcome 
is the army that has just fought side by side with your own 
men in the defense of your flag in the Philippines. That is 
the army which has shed its blood bravely, nay, willingly, so 
that it might show to the United States the gratitude of our 
people for the just and wise policy that you have adopted and 

followed in your dealings with us. 

/ 

I am not going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, what the armies 
in the Philippines, Americans and Filipinos alike, have done. 
You have read all that in your press. Nor am I going to 
dwell at length upon the gallantry, the heroism, and the won- 
derful leadership of Douglas MacArthur. • 

. You well know that in those dark and terrible days there 
were many other men, too, who deserve your recognition. 
There was, of course, General Wainwright, whose tragic res- 
ponsibility it was at last to surrender Corregidor. He, too, 
has been a hero throughout the war, from the first day to 
the last. And there were other American officers and, may 
I say, some Filipinos also. 

There was General Lim, a West Pointer, the first Filipino 
to graduate from that famous military academy, and there 
was General Capinpin, who had risen from the ranks. I might 
mention many other gallant Filipinos, but names of Lim and 
Capinpin alone would be enough to cover with glory the mili- 
tary history of my country. 

Mr. Speaker, you have heard of the gallant achievements 
of many Americans and Filipinos during the war. To me 
perhaps the most striking act of heroism was one that has 
not been publicised enough. It is the story of a Filipino mess 
sergeant. You would expect a general, an officer, even a sol- 
dier of the line, to be a hero. That is his duty; that is what 
he is there for. But a cook; the duty of a cook is to feed his 



4 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



men. He is not supposed to be on the firing line. He is 
supposed to be as far removed from the bullets as possible, 
so that the men for whom he provides food may be duly 
taken care of. 

I shall read to you the citation for the award of the 
Medal of Honor: 



award of medal of honor 

By direction of the President, under the provisions of the 
act of Congress approved July 9, 1918, a Medal of Honor was 
awarded by the War Department in the name of Congress to 
Jose Calugas, sergeant. Battery B. Eighty-eight Field Artillery, 
ilippine Scouts, United States Army. For conspicuous gal- 
antry and intrepidity above and beyond the call of duty in action 
Wh enemy at Culis, Bataan Province, P.I., January 16, 1942. 

en the battery gun position was shelled and bombed until one 
^ece was put out of action and casualties caused the removal of 
^ e remaining canonneers to shelter, Sergeant Calugas, mess ser- 
ce^d ^^other battery, voluntarily, and of his own accord pro- 
and yards across the shell-swept area to the gun position 

the volunteer gun squad, which fired effectively on 

conUnued^' although heavy bombing and shelling of the position 

am Congressional Medal, Mr. Speaker. I 

never ^ whole history of the war there has 

to run f nnn^ even his privilege 

he renrp'«; almost hand-to-hand fight. To me 

innrp ^determination of the Filipino people to do 

the UnitPrf standing by their mother country, 

me United States of America. 

pupn^i-ri^ not going to tell you all about the war. I will not 
f story of my escape from Corregidor, a belea- 

surroimded by enemy warships and bombed 
T ^ f f ^ ^ enemy war planes and heavy artillery. Instead, 
wan o lead to you documents which will tell you of the 
recen commitments of the President of United States to the 
miippines, and of my own promises to my people. Perhaps 
these documents will tell you better than in any other way 
a very important chapter of the battle of the Philippines. 



QUEZOA— OUR FAITH IN AMERICA 



5 



I left Manila on the 24th of December last. The enemy 
was bombing the port area of the city at that moment, just 
where I had to take and did take the ship for Corregidor. 
We arrived at Corregidor late in the afternoon. 

I may tell you, however, that I went to Corregidoi only 
upon the insistent demand of General MacArthur. This I 
make of record, because I wish my people to know that I 
did not leave Manila of my own free will. As a matter of 
fact, I did not want to leave Manila. I did not wish my 
people to think that I was going to the fortress and leaving 
them behind. I told General MacArthur, when he first pro- 
posed that I go with him to Corregidor, “General, I don’t 
want to do that. I think my duty is to be with my people. 
If they are going to be overrun by the enemy, I want to be 
overrun with them. If they are going to be prisoners and 
enslaved, I want to be a prisoner and enslaved with them. 
If they are going to be killed, I want to be killed with them.” 

But General MacArthur said, “No; that is not your duty, 
Mr President, as I see it. With your consent, I have declared 
Manila an open city and therefore the Japaneses forces will 
enter it without a struggle. Your Government must be saved. 
Under international law, as you know, as long as your Gov- 
ernment has not been overtaken by the enemy; they have not 
conquered your country.” 

Acting upon this theory, I left Manila and went to Cor- 
regidor. 

On the 28th of December I received from the President 
of the United States the following message: 

TO THE PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES . 



News of your gallant struggle against the Japanese aggres- 
sions has elicited the profound admiration of every American. 
As President of the United States, I know that I speak for our 
people on this solemn occasion. The resources of the United 
States of the British Empire, of the Netherlands East Indies, and 
the Chinese Republic have been dedicated by their people to the 
utter and complete defeat of the Japanese war lords. In this 
<»reat stru<^“le of the Pacific the loyal Americans of the Philippine 



6 HISTORICAL BULLETIN 

Islands are called upon to play a crucial role. They have played, 
and they are playing tonight, their great part with the greatest 
gallantry. As President, ! wish to express to them my feeling 
of sincere admiration for the fight they are now making. The 
people of the United States will never forget what the people of 
the Philippine Islands are doing these days, and will do in ttie 
days to come. I give to the people of the Philippines my soleaui 
pledge that their freedom will be redeemed and their indepen- 
dence established and protected. The entire resources in men. 
and materials of the United States stand behind that pledge. It 
is not for me or for the people of this country to tell ’you whore 
your duty lies. We are engaged in a great and common cause; 
I cdiint on every Philippine man, woman, and child to do his 
duty. We will do ours. 

Gentlemen of the House, I have spent the major part of 
public career in legislative bodies. I know how legisla- 
tors react to Executive pronouncements of this sort. They 
3nd perhaps, speaking from the point of view of consti- 
tutional law, they are right — “The Chief Executive has no po- 
wer to commit the people and this Government to my po- 
^ know you and I know your heart. I think also 
a I know the American people. I feel that the pledge made 
y e President of the United States will be considered by 
th^^ own pledge, and will be honored by 

d people as a national commitment. I am confi- 

heartedty ^o'^otry and the Congress will back it up whole- 

idpni^w^^^ dsys after I received this proclamation from Pres- 
, bbsevelt, I published this proclamation to the Filipino 
soldiers at the front: 

TO THE FILIPINO SOLDIERS AT THE FRONT: 

th America and your own countrymen have been 

n e y the gallantry with which you have been defending our 

coun Ty. I am grateful and proud for the resistance you have 

o against such tremendous odds. You have performed 

ee s of heroism and valor which will live in the history of these 
s irring days. The service that you are rendering to your people 
an your country, to say the least, is the equal of that rendered 
y our fathers who fought and died in the battles for our liberty. 



QL/EZOiV— OUK FAITH IN AMERICA 



The President of the United States, speaking for the Govern- 
ment and people of America, in a recent proclamation addressed 
to the people of the Philippines, solemnly pledged that the free- 
dom of our country will be preserved and our independence pro- 
tected. He asserted that behind that pledge stood all the resour- 
ces of America in men and materials. You are, therefore, fight- 
ing with America because America is fighting for our freedom. 
Our salvation will depend upon the victory of American and 
Filipino arms. 

America will not abandon us. Her help will not be delayed. 
The enemy's temporary superiority in the air, on land and on 
sea cannot last much longer. We must resist further advance 
of the enemy until assistance arrives and I trust it will be soon. 
The outcome of the battle of the Philippines will depend in very 
large measure on your firm and unyielding resistance. 

I am aware of your sufferings, your privations, your sacri- 
fices, and the dangers to which you are exposed. All these 
weigh heavily upon my mind, but I am consoled by the fact that 
I am sharing with you your trials and tribulations. Indeed, right 
now bombs are falling near me just as they must fall around 
you. But we cannot allow them either to daunt our spirit or 
weaken our determination to continue fighting to the bitter end. 
We must stand by our plighted wcrd, by the loyalty that we have 
pledged to America, and by our devotion to freedom, democracy, 
and our liberty. We are fighting that the Filipino people may 
be the masters of their own destiny and that every Filipino not 
only of this generation but of the generations to come may be 
able to live in peace and tranquility in the full enjoyment of 
liberty and freedom. Your duty— our duty— is to fight and re- 
sist until the invader is driven from our land. You must not 
give up a foot of ground when the battle joins. You must hold 
in places— and hold— and hold. 



I also sent to the President of the United States this an- 
swer to his message: 

HON. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT: 

My heart, and I know the hearts of all Americans and Fili- 
pinos in this country, are filled with gratitude for the reassuring 
words of the President of the United States. IN^y answer, our 
answer, to him is that every man, woman, and child in the Phil- 
ippines' will do his duty. No matter what sufferings and sacri- 
fices this war may impose upon us, we shall stand by America 



8 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



with undaunted spirit, for we know that upon the outcome of 
this war depends the happiness, liberty, and security not only of 
this generation, but of generations yet unborn. 

Mr. Speaker, I shall delay you no longer. These com- 
munications which I have just read show the effect which the 
mesage of the President had upon us, and upon the spirit 
with which our soldiers fought side by side with yours in 
defense of your flag. I shall not tell you, Mr. Speaker, I 
shall not tell the House of Representatives, I shall not tell the 
Senate of the United States, I shall not tell the Government 
and the people of America what they should do for us in the 
days to come. All I want to say is that death, ruin, and des- 
truction have never daunted our spirit nor lessened our faith 
in the United States. 



REMEMBER THE PHILIPPINES 



By Manuel L. Quezon 

IT IS A VERY high honor and a rare privilege that you 
have conferred upon me in inviting me to address the Senate 
of the United States, the greatest legislative body in the world. 
I appreciate it more than I can say, and I thank you from 
the bottom of my heart. 

On August 19, 1941, 4 months before Japan attacked the 
Philippines, it was my privilege to address Vice President 
V/allace over the radio from Malacahan Palace in Manila, and, 
through him, the people of the United States. 

On that occasion, I said: 

In this grave national emergency, the stand of the Filipino 
people is clear and unmistakable. We owe loyalty to America 
and we are bound to her by bonds of everlasting gratitude. 
Should the United States enter the war, the Philippines would 
follow her and fight by her side, placing at her disposal all our 
manpower and all our material resources, however limited these 
might be. We stand with the United States in life and in death. 
(Applause) 

Those words may have sounded then to some people in 
this country as more rhetorical than real. To the Filipinos, 
however, the sentiments that I expressed and the pledge that 
I made were known to be not only sincere but perfectly na- 
tural. What else could be expected of a people whom Ame- 
rica has treated justly and fairly and to whom liberty and 
independence have already been assured through the Tydings- 
McDuffie Act? 

Moreover, the tie which binds our two countries trans- 
cends all political and legal relationships. It depends not 
m.erely upon a written alliance, a declaration, or a treaty. 



* Address before the U.S. Senate. Reprinted from a mimeographed 
copy issued by the Quezon Memorial Committee. 



10 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



It consists of spiritual kinship and relationship. Our aims, 
our hopes, our aspirations, are the same as your own. In 
the great moral cau.ses the principles of righteousness, of 
liberty, of peace, the United States and the Philippines are in 
complete accord with one another; they are in absolute and 
hearty agreement. 

There has been no question, therefore, as to the loyalty 
of the Filipinos to the United States, or the extent to which 
they would go in fighting for the American flag. I say “in 
fighting for the American flag” advisedly, for we fought in 
the Philippines by your side against overwhelming odds, not 
only to defend our country against the invader but also to 
defend your flag against the attack of Japan. (Applause* 

When we entered the first World War, although the Phil- 
ippines were in no way involved therein, we offered to the 
Government of the United States one submarine and one des- 
royer, and also asked to be permitted, to be permitted to send 
fight under your banner on the battlefields 
o urope. That we did not have the privilege of actually tak- 
ing pa^t in that war by your side has always been a source 

0 regret to us. However, even then, individual Filipinos 
mught and died in your ranks. I remember at this time 

omas Claudio, whom we have immortalized by giving his 
name to the training camp of our national guard. 

T u the Senate, since I arrived in this country 

1 have learned that there is a war slogan, “Remember Pearl 
ar or . I approve and fully understand the slogan. The 

^ < Pearl Harbor aroused every red-blooded and 

pa riO Tc meiican to a point where he can never be satisfied 

wi any-thing less than the definite and complete defeat of 
Japan. (Applause) 

about the Philippines? Of course, so far as their 
po 1 ica relations with the United States are concerned, there 

between the position of tiawaii and that 
® ® ^ ippines. Hawaii is much an integral part of the 

United States as is Washington, D.C., or California, while the 



QUEZOiV— REMEMEER THE PIilLlPFi:^ES 



11 



Philippines has already been formally declared by the Con- 
gress to be a distinct and separate nation, to become fully 
independent of the United States on July 4, 1946. 

But, when we were attacked by Japan, the American flag 
was still flying over the Philippines, and we were still under 
the protection of, and owed allegiance to, the United States. 
Although in domestic affairs we had almost complete auto- 
nomy, in foreign affairs all governmental powers and respon-* 
sibilities of a trustee in the care and protection of its rus 
are greater even than those of an owner in respect to his own 

property. 

Gentlemen of the Senate, I am not in this country to 
persuade you to send forces at once to tne Philippines to 
drive the invader out of my beloved fatherland. Nor will I 
try to convince you that the Pacific is more important tnan 
the European or the Atlantic theatres of war. deci- 
sions are to be made by you. You wixl d vVaj s ^ 

I am sure, that only in the Philippines has youi iiag oeen 
hauled down and replaced by the flag of the Kisin„ Sun. 

In view of this tragic event, I do hope that the A^^e^Jcon 
people in this hour of their great responsibility 
will always keep before them the memory cf devoUon 
and sacrifices of the people in the Philippines. Let me ask 
then, in turn, that your people adopt still anomer war s oga 
— ^‘Remember the Philippines' . 

(Prolonged applause: Senators and occupants 

of the galleries rising.) 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: PATRIOT AND STATESMAN 
By Sergio Osmena 



THE GENERAL and enthusiastic celebration today of the 
birthday of our beloved President is expressive of a double 
satisfaction on the part of the people: they are grateful to 
Divine Providence for the restoration of the health of our 
leader and for his selection to succeed himself in the high 
post which he so worthily occupies. 



For alniost six months our people were deeply concerned 
over the widely circulated news regarding the state of the 
^ health. In the centers of population, as well as 
as ® ^®^pt 6 st country districts, in the mansions of the rich 
^he humble homes of the poor, everyone inquired 
nra^°ri^ f about the health of our Chief Executive and all 
enli^^ early recovery. Finally, the prayers of the 

nranr were heard and the President’s health has been 

evpn/^^ y restored in an almost miraculous way. This happy 
ioicina^-^^ uced general rejoicing in the nation and this re- 
IS reflected today in the celebration of his birthday. 



of the m hr^ another reason for satisfaction on the part 
Three or renomination for the presidency. 

oTowino- years ago, when the first indications of the 

realizpri o facing the country were beginning to be 

economic in connection with the vital problem of 

to conspn^^f Jnstment, the idea of persuading the President 

obstacles in the waw Ihf.T 

himself to the extension ofw''^ opposition of the President 
tutionai original term, and the consti- 

tutional prohibition against reelection. 



nffipp U70 desire to have the President continue in 

vital no rf ased on the popular conviction that there was a 
e or his services, not only because of his proven 



’^ Speech delivered at Station KZRM on Anom. 
occasion of the 63rd birthday of President Manuef ' 



24, 1941, on the 
Quezon. 



12 



OSMEiV A— MANUEL L. QUEZON 



13 



capacity to run the government, but also, because of the salu- 
tary influence that his powerful personality would exert in 
the preservation of our national unity in the midst of the 
highly critical and difficult circumstances now existing all 
over the world, the more he insisted on his refusal, the stron- 
ger became the determination of the people to keep him a 
the head of the Government. 



The statements of the President to the effect that he did 
not desire reelection were clear and unequivocal. There were 
a few, however, who, given to suspicion, expressed doubts 
regardino- his real attitude on this subject. But everyone who 
has had the opportunity to know his plans and to talk to him 
about the matter not only once but a number of times was 
convinced that the President has done all that he can possi- 
bly do to avoid a second term. I am one of those who enter- 
tain this conviction. 



As every one knows, my personal relations with the 
idem have been sufficiently close to give “f “ 
to know his plans. Not only am I privileged to be one of hio 
immediate associates in the Government, but the “ 

friendship and mutual confidence existing between i^s has 
been formed through many years of collaboration and mutual 

support. 

In spite of temporary differences of opinion— differences 
being natural among free men-we have always together 

because we have been friends since boyhood and above a . 
because we have always professed the same political Principle 
-faith in the capacity of our people for self-govern^ 
in the right of their country to an independent existen . 

Except for the fact that he fought as an 
army during the Revolution and I made use of pen 
stead of the sword in the common defense of national 
aspirations, our career has moved in paral^l lines. ^ we 
boarders together in the Colegio de Santo Tomas at the «ame 
time and stayed for some years under the same roof and 
the same room, while we supported ourselves y 
students who lived in Santo Tomas but studied law until tne 



14 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



war intarrupled our studies. When peace came we found 
our;ieives together again as we prepared in tne house of our 
common friend and companion — Jose Clemente Zulueta — on 
Calle Azcarraga for the examination for admission to the Bar. 



were admitted to the practice of law, we received 
a -^e same time the unexpected nev/s of our appointment 
p positions in the Government, he as Fiscal of Tay^ibas and 

^ surprise to us because, aside 
time* ^PPly for the positions, at that 

^ pre-requisite for appointment to the Gov- 
entirpiv cercain political ideas, and cur ideas were 

hisrh fiom those which found acceptance in the 

Govprn->^<^^ ^ Government. AiVe were elected Provincial 

frnnfcri"^^ ^ siarne day and the main problem which con- 
niiViiio provinces v/as the same: the restoration of 

incial ^ served together in the Convention of Prov- 

blv Wp later on in the Philippine Assem- 

of a Senate, and v/e were co-members 

States tn Pr «. rmssions which went to the United 

ino-ton. ricgotiations with the authorities in Wash- 

maintain '•’U <^afsrided the Jones Law and fought to 

the r)rov=«;*in autonomy established in the Philippines under 

pendencTw » “ the Inde- 

carrv out th^ ^ now serving the Commonwealth to 

lead to thp* in^o outlined in that Law which will finally 

used the word ^ deliberately 

Law b-canc-p oifi, ^ referring to the Independence 

™nt “a I »ad a disagree- 

no difference nf rf original law, there was 

merits of the IndepenTence^TcT the intrinsic 

chanp-ps in M-.0 'r Act as reproduced, with some 

thpr ?n?it?n .^ydings-McDuffie Law. and we worked tege- 
but also hv acceptance not only by our Legislature, 

national 1^1^ '^ogother we have m.aintained a single 

under mine under his direction, and previously 



I am reciting these facts so that those who now hear me 
may understand the reasons which enable me to affirm cate- 



OSMEA'A— MANUEL L. QUEZON 



15 



goiiir.liy and without fear of successful contradiction, that 
President Quezon has not sought his reeiection either dur- 
ing ihe d.scussion of the constitutional amendments or 
after their approval. With his health impaired by overwork 
and his pre-occupation with affairs of State, he has talked 
to me many times about his earnest desire to leave the Pres- 
idency after his term of six years is over. Even now, with 
resolutions pouring from all parts of the Philippines urging 
iiis reelecticn and his unanimous renominaticn by the Party, 
he has not changed his stand. Pie is not a candidate, he w.ill 
not work for his reelection, but, if called to duty by the direct 
vote of the people, he will, as he himself has stated, heed the 
call. 

I well remember a conference which he and I had upon 
my return from the United States in October of 1939. He 
spoke lengthily about the conditions of the country, about 
our pressing and urgent problems, and about his impaired 
health. He told me that he did not v/ish to be reelected, even 
if his reelection were legally permitted. 

And, immediately after the plebiscite on the amendments 
to the Constitution, I saw him in Baguio. I had just come 
from a speaking tour in Cebu and the Bicoi prov.inces, and 
I was reporting to him the overwhelming popular sentiment 
in favor of his reelection. I stated to him my view that the 
result of the plebiscite was almost a mandate for his contin- 
uance in office. It was a clear day and we were walking in 
the aarden in front of the Guest House. The Piesident, al- 
though evidently gratified at the new^s, said; “The trouble is 
that I do not like to be a candidate.” And, when we saw one 
of his daughters on the balcony of the house and the Pres 
ident told her of the subject of our conversation, she express 
ed dissatisfaction at the thought of her father continuing in 
office and further endangering his health. The President 
turned to me and remarked: “You see, even my family is 
against my reelection.” Instances of this kind reflecting the 
President’s attitude can be multiplied indefinitely. 

Therefore, what I can state to you now is that if the 
movement for the President’s reelection persisted and in- 



16 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



creased in momentum, especially when the country found its 
horizon darkened by perils from without and, as a culminat- 
ing point in its irresistible growth, finally found formal and 
legal expression in the overwhelming affirmative vote in favor 
of the amendments to the Organic Law, it was not because 
the President wished it to be so but in spite of all attempts 
on his part to discourage it. 

The legal obstacle to the assertion of the popular will 
having been removed, the Party to which our beloved leader 
belongs has renominated him for the Presidency of the Com- 
monwealth. The people, with that instinct which frequently 
is as wise as it is unfathomable, insist that he should add still 
more to the already inestimable sacrifices he has made for his 
country by giving to his native land in the next few years the 

priceless benefits to be derived from his unsurpassed states- 
manship. 

The rejoicing throughout the nation todav is. in a sense. 



Lxiai me naiion, alter making certain that all its elements 





Our celebration of the birthday of our beloved leader 
> year has, therefore, an extraordinary significane. It sym- 



OSMEiV^— MANUEL L. QUEZON 



17 



will have the best possible leadership, is ready for any event- 
uality. Truly, then, the hour and the occasion are of historic 
importance. 

As one familiar with his struggles and his triumphs, his 
rise from a humble youth to the leadership of his people, his 
patriotism and his spirit of service, his love of home and 
family, and his possession of those human qaulities that have 
made him the idol of his people, I cannot help thinking that 
the events of the last few days and the depths, spontaneity, 
and sincerity of the people’s rejoicing over his natal day must 
evoke mixed feelings from the heart of our Chief Executive. 

He cannot but feel gratified over the manifestations of 
love, gratitude, and confidence that have come from eveiy 
nook and corner of the land; yet he must contemplate with 
a heavy heart the enormous burden that the people insist he 
should carry so that the interests of the nation may be as 
safe as the human mind and the human will can make them. 
But, such is his patriotism and his spirit of service, that no 
matter how hard the task or how heavily the load may weigh 
on his spirit, he cannot refuse to serve his people. 

Ladies and Gentlemen : Tonight, the 63rd anniversary of 
the birth of our beloved Chief Magistrate, His Excellency, 
President Manuel L. Quezon, I make bold to express to him, in 
behalf of almost 17,000,00 men, women, and children in these 
Islands, our heartfelt congratulations for the renomination 
awarded to him by his Party, as a result of an insistent and 
irresistible public demand, our warmest felicitations on his 
birthday, and our best wishes for many more years of health, 
happiness and success. 



QUEZON THE LEADER' 



by Miguel Cuenco 

MY PERSONAL and official relations with Manuel Ij. 
Quezon began in the year 1932 v;hen, upon his return to the 
Philippines after a long illness in Monrovia, California, I was 
introduced to him at his house on Roberts Street, Pasay, by 
Manuel A. Roxas, Speaker of the House of Representatives. 

I v/as then serving my first term in the House as Representa- 
tive of the 5th Congressional District of Cebu. The last time 
I saw him was in Iloilo City in early year 1942. He was with 
the Lopez brothers (Eugenio and Fernando), on his way to 
Washington, D.C., accompanied by his lady, Doha Aurora, liis 
children and his aide. Col. Manuel Nieto. The last message 
i received from him was a radiogram he sent from America 
to my late brother, Mariano Jesus Cuenco, and myself, through 
the headquarters of Col. Ruperto K. Kangieon, the resistance 
chief for Leyte and Samar, in April 1944. The naessage read: 
Congratulations on your heroic patriotism. Signed Pres- 
ident Quezon.” 

Tn^July 1942, my brother and I sent President Quezon, 
re,ni tiie luountains of Mindanao, a long handwritten report 
on the situation of the Philippines during the first months 

0 the Occupation. Neither my brother nor I asked for any 
tan>^ oi position in the guerilla forces or any monetary coin- 
^nsadon, knov/ing that whatever we could do for our Mo- 

Psle into insignificance compared with the 
sacri-ices of Rizal, Burgos, Lopez Jaena and the other Fili- 
pino greats who fell in the night. The message that my bro- 
i6x and I received from President Quezon was enough ac- 
knowledgment and compensation. General Mac Arthur ac- 
knov/ledged receipt of my v.'ar reports when my brother and 

1 visited him at his headquarters in Manila shortly after the 
Liberation. 



10 PliiliFPine Free Press, August 24, 1968, pp. 



18 



CUENCO— QUEZON, THE LEADER 



19 



Quezon’s personality has left a lasting influence upon our 
national life. He was a surveyor and a lawyer. He received 
his degree of perito agronomo from Colegio de San Juan de 
Letram It is not surprising, therefore, that shortly before 
the war, he caused the construction of the Quezon Bridge 
and the Quezon and the Aurora boulevards in Manila and the 
establishment of the ever progressive and expanding city 
v.'hich is named after him. 

Pie was a leader of great self-respect, sense of dignity and 
honor. Prom 1934 up to the outbreak of the war, I was the 
chairman of the House and National Assembly Committee on 
Public Works. In the early days of the Commonwealth re- 
gime, it was proposed that some public works projects to be 
Tncluded in the annual bill be financed by the issuance of 
P20 million public bonds. The newspaper reported that Au- 
ditor General W. Jones had criticized the proposal. This 
irked Quezon, who considered Jones’ opposition an undue 
interference in our purely domestic affairs. He sent Pres- 
ident Franklin D. Roosevelt a long radiogram, voicing his 
protest against Mr. Jones’ attitude. 

To forestall future possible friction. President Quezon 
asked Roosevelt that the American government find a way 
to give complete independence to the Philippines within one 
year, instead of waiting for the termination of the 10-year 
transition period prescribed by the Tydings-McDuffie Law. 
President Quezon informed me later that President Roosevelt’s 
answer was that so many laws, plans and arrangements con- 
cerning Philippine-American relations were predicated on the 
10-year transition period that the United States would prefer 
to abide by it. 

It was my impression that President Quezon accepted 
the 10-year transition period of the Tydings-McDuffie Law 
because he could not get from the American Congress a better 
bill at that time. As far as he was concerned, the Filipino 
people were ready for independence in the same year the 
aforesaid Act was approved. 



20 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



In the first months of the Commonwealth, but before the 
Jones incident, when he was organizing the National Econo- 
mic Council entrusted with the function of helping the Pres- 
ident shape the economic and financial policies of the govern- 
ment, I wrote him a letter suggesting that Dr. Salvador Ara- 
neta be appointed one of the members of the Council. He 
summoned me at once to Malacahang. He was not question- 
ing Araneta s qualification as an economist, he said, but he 
could not appoint him because the latter was for the reexam- 
ination of the idea of independence for the Filipinos and for 
e in efinite continuation of the Commonwealth status. Ara- 
ne a, might conceivably obstruct the President’s plan for acce- 
era ing the granting of independence before the end of the 
10-year transition period. 



. .. well-meaning Filipinos of unquestioned pat- 

tbp were in favor of reexamination, among whom were 
Leader of the First National Assembly, 
tativp ^ Jose E. Romero, of Negros Oriental; Represen- 
of FnrPio^^A^« Ramos of Pangasinan (the present Secretary 
na- anri ^ Cebu Provincial Governor Hilario Abella- 

hacennprn^'^^ well-known capitalists, industrialists and 
inatinn rf' Quezon, although against the reexam- 

their idpac^^^^ I’ight of its advocates to propagate 

sonally wasTgainst fh^^ support of public opinion. I per- 
outstanrbno- 1^1 ^ reexamination, although many of its 

friends tn'^x/h^ supporters were my closest personal 

mends, to whom I was deeply attached. 

since mv^ ^ Lave of history has convinced me 

to a forei<m ^ truth that no people subjected 

I wrote the Rp^T attain full growth and progress, 

corrections intx° V National Assembly, with minor 

Quintin ParedPQ° Majority Floor Leader, Don 

Dino nprml t ’ the determination of the Fili- 

co-authored the SsZtion^'f'’ Both of us 

thP o ^ ^ ^ ^ sponsored it on the floor of 

Neverthpipcc ^ Passed by an overwhelming majority. 

tus was thp h(^f f or a Commonwealth sta- 

or he country, it was an abstract question 



Cl/EiV CO— QUEZON, THE LEADER 



21 



which could he answered only in the future. Notwithstand- 
ing my profound personal conviction, in a spirit of respect 
and tolerance for the opposite view, I suggested to the chani- 
pif'ns of the reexamination movement to translate their mani- 
festos, speeches and propaganda materials into the principal 
dialects and distribute them throughout the length and 
breadth of the country. I myself made the translation into 
Visayan Cebuano. 

In his long fight in the United States for our independence 
and for the recognition of our national rights, Manuel L. 
Quezon championed our cause with dignity and honor. He 
had no use for subservience, nor did he show any sign of 
inferiority complex — thus did he catch the attention and earn 
the admiration of Woodrow Wilson and Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt, one of the greatest figures in American histoiy. 
In the years since Liberation, no Filipino leader has emerged 
with Quezon’s high qualifications to pursue our interests in 
relation to the United States. 

In recent years, for instance, the American government 
has given the Philippines and Japan aid in the form of millions 
of dollars for the printing of textbooks to be used in the pub- 
lic schools of both countries. In Japan, textbooks are printed 
by the Japanese themselves, but paid by the United States, 
whereas textbooks for the Philippines are printed by Ame’ i- 
can publishing firms. The Japanese fought for the printing 
arrangement they now enjoy. The Filipinos did not. We 
cannot expect the Americans to think and work for us, Fili- 
pinos. 

If Quezon had no inferiority complex in his dealings with 
the leaders of the mightiest nation that the world has ever 
known, he had the same feeling of absolute self-confidence 
in his relations with the most notable Filipino leaders and 
statesmen. He never allowed the intellectual superiority of 
any other Filipino political leader to overshadow or over- 
whelm him. Osmena, Aguinaldo, Aglipay, Sumulong, Roxas, 
Recto, Paredes, Diokno, Aquino, the Sotto brothers, Singson 



22 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Encarnacion, Rodriguez, Montinola and others were, at one 
time or another, Quezon’s political collaborators. 

President Quezon confided to me that he had no “per- 
sonal affection” for Manuel A. Roxas and Benigno Aquino, 
Sr., but that he recognized them as brilliant and able public 
officials. It would be a disservice to our country, he said, 
net to appoint them as Secretary of Finance and Secretary 
of Agriculiure and Natural Resources, respectively. 

Complementing Quezon’s sense of superiority was his 
noble and generous heart, which made him forget and for- 
give past offenders and past offenses. He was magnanimous 
in victory. His reconciliation with his political enemies was 

sincere, without any sediment of rancor or mental reserva- 
tions. 



He believed passionately in government as the expression 
and instrument of national solidarity. He knew that only in 
sus aming your brother can you hope to sustain yourself, 
ihe Commonwealth was an era of goodwill, harmony and 
mutual political sympathy and understanding. Quezon be- 
came e strongest political leader the country has ever known 
an very ikely may ever know in the generations to come. 

radicals, the capitalists and labor- 
ers rich and poor. Catholics, Protestants, Aglipayans, Knights 
of Columbus and Masons were for him. 



r<r>nc^-.r^ P^'i'tinsanship incapable of obtaining the active 

4 . . , ® able men in the opposing party is prejudicial 

t e national interest. The poor performance of the Fili- 
pmo pane a the Bangkok conference on the Sabah contro- 
versy as reported by Quijano de Manila (PP, Aug. 3), is a 
\a ua e esson to us. As in the conduct of lawsuits, where 
a sensi e par y employs the best lawyer, uses the best wit- 
ness and presents the best documents as evidence, our coun- 
try should have sent to Bangkok its best men, like Senators 
Salon^, Tolentino, Diokno, Tahada, former Senator Sumu- 
long. Congressmen Enverga and Pelaez. Moreover, the offi- 
cials of our Department of Foreign Affairs should have pi'e- 
pared themselves long ago by conducting an intensive re- 



c UEiVCO— QUEZON, THE LEADER 



23 



search on Sabah, in the same manner that Egyptian scholars 
studied the Suez Canal question at the Sorbonne and other 
French universities long before the crisis over this important 
waterway exploded in 1956. 



The ill-effects of a narrow partisanship are likewise evi- 
dent in congress. The Liberal leaaersnip in the House of 
Representatives bypassed a bill that 1 haa presented in 1962, 
based on an extensive study made by Dr. Salvador Araneta, 
embodying a bold and comprehensive program of construc- 
tion by the government of houses lor the low income sectors 
of our population. The LPs gave way instead to a bill of the 
Macapagal administration appropriating the relatively insig- 
nificant amount of PI 5 million for housing projects, mostly in 
Manila and suburban districts. 



One year before the 100th anniversary of the birth of 
Apolinario Mabini, I filed a bill appropriating P2 million for 
the printing and free distribution of the Memoirs of the 
Brains of the Philippine Revolution in their original Spanish 
version and translated into English and the main Filipino 
languages. To ensure the passage of a compromise measure. 
Speaker Jose B. Laurel, Jr. and I presented a modified bill, 
reducing the appropriation to half a million pesos. This 
modest bill, was passed by the House but the Committee on 
Education in the Senate, headed by a Liberal, a daughter of 
an illustrious patriot and Mabinista at that, did not even 
report the bill to the Senate. Mr. Laurel and I are Naciona- 
lis'tas. This explains why the above-mentioned two bills were 
frozen by the Liberal leaders in Congress. 

We have to oppose our antagonist’s ideas with better 
ideas. Truth is distilled from free and intelligent discus- 
sion. President Quezon adhered to this principle in his deal- 
ings with my humble self as a legislator. 

For one reason or another, which I never came to know. 
President Quezon did not include any appropriation for the 
nation’s military trainees in the budget he had submitted to 
the National Assembly. I announced on the floor of the 
Assembly that I would speak against this aspect of the Ap- 



24 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



propriation Bill. The announcement caused some embar- 
rassment to the Majority Floor Leader, Don Quintin Paredes, 
for whom I have always entertained the greatest admiration 
and respect. It also embarrassed some members of my fa- 
mily, considering that my brother Mariano Jesus was an out- 
standing leader of Mr. Quezon’s party. They tried to dis- 
suade me from delivering my speech against the bill. They 
were afraid that the President would resent my speech. 

But I proceeded with my speech. In doing so I was 
only fulfilling what I considered my duty to our country. 
First of all, I had to be consistent with myself. In February 
1939, the Committee on Naval Affairs of the United States 
Senate had disapproved an appropriation for the fortifica- 
tion of Guam. So on March 1, 1939, I delivered a speech on 
the floor of the National Assembly, drawing the attention of 
our government and people to the need for military prepared- 
^ss. I considered the elimination of the appropriation for 

e trainees a serious disruption of our military preparedness 
program. 

It was argued by the legislators who opposed the appro- 
priation for the trainees that the latter should first be taught 
oiv to read and write before being given military training 
e ground that many of them w”ere illiterates. I replied 
that the alleged illiteracy was inconsequential. Many of the 
signatories of the Declaration of Human Rights of the French 
eyo ution could not write. They merely placed a cross on 
eir names. My speech was published in full in some metro- 
po 1 an newspapers. I gave President Quezon a copy of the 
speech He was not offended at all. On the contrary, he 
congratulated me. 

Sectionalism is one of the evils which have plagued the 
Filipino Chief Executives or the leadership 
of Filipinos who have held positions of power and influence 
smce the beginning of this century. President Quezon did 
no practice sectionalism, nor did Don Sergio Osmena. True, 
smefia and Quezon did appoint a few of their provincemates 
to government positions. But they had devoted political fol- 



CUENCO— QUEZON, THE LEADER 



25 



lowers from all regions of the country. Quezon abhorred the 
practice of bureau directors who I'ecruited their subordinate 
personnel from their provinces or regions. In his view, sec- 
tionalism was the mark of a tribal form of government, devoid 
of a national outlook. It was also a manifestation of an 
inferiority complex on the part of the high official who ap- 
pointed men whose only credentials were their being his 
paisanos. 

I have family roots in the Tagalog region and in Pasay. 
My maternal ancestors came from Manila. My forebears, on 
my father side, came from Capiz and Iloilo. I am related 
to the late Dona Rosa Sevilla de Alvero, an educator, orator, 
writer, independence and social leader. Her son Jesus was 
a topnotcher in the architects' examination. My brother was 
at that time the Secretary of Public Works, appointed by 
President Quezon. I had personally recommended to Pres- 
ident Quezon the appointment of Jesus to a position in the 
Bureau of Public Works. I told the President that I had to 
bother him because Alvero was my relative and if my brother 
appointed him, both of us would be open to the charge of 
nepotism. 

The President gave Alvero a letter recommending him to 
the Director of Public Works but the matter didn’t end there. 
Nepotism, he pointed out to me, is an obnoxious government 
practice if the appointed relative is not qualified, but it would 
be unjust not to appoint brilliant and deserving persons just 
because they are relatives of the appointing officer. Nepo- 
tism, as clarified by President Quezon, is indeed responsible 
for the presence of misfits in many government officers on 
the national, provincial and municipal levels. 

Quezon had a strong sense of justice. He had no patience 
with public officials who abused their authority, with judges 
who rendered unjust or prejudicial decisions. His sense of 
justice impelled him to protect even his enemies against op- 
pression or persecution from his own partymen. 

The Philippine Senate elected in 1931 was dominated by 
a political bloc headed by the late Senators Aquino, Quirino 



26 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



and Arranz. The election of Senator Alejo Mabanag of La 
Union, a political foe of Mr. Quezon, was protested by De 
Guzman of Pangasinan who had the support of the ruling 
bloc. Quezon s nealth was so poor then that sometinie.s it 
was difficult for him to stand up. He was told that the 
election protest against Mabanag would be decided in favor 
of De Guzman, not on the basis of the recorded evidence, but 
on the sheer power and influence of the bloc. 



He was carried on a stretcher to the Senate where he 
argued vigorously and uncompromisingly that only justice, 
strict justice be accorded Mabanag. He saved Mabanag from 
^r am oi^ter. I encountered a similar difficulty in the 
House of Representatives. This had to do with Hilario Abs- 
of what was then the town (now city) of Cebu, 
on ' irivestigation, v/as found guilty of a serious 

Tv, dismissed by the Provincial Board headed by 

wnc iff- Mariano Jesus Cuenco. The dismissal 

as affirmed by Governor General Davis. 

^ political battle in Cebu, 

men nf fh Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill. The 

the HTTP ^ gi’O’Jp headed by my brother v/ere against 
idenf r^f led by Senate Pres- 

Pros henri°ri\ favored the Act were called the 

result of t£ elecSnlrCebu Speaker Roxas. The 

nrovinoioi f 1 4 . Cebu was inconclusive. Our entire 

2 500 votes Governor Cuenco, lost by about 

dates of the A rnunicipal presidents and five candi- 

two ronrespntnt-^^ were elected, as against 

ibellana a^rp ' to the Pros. The election of 

trict was nrnte^i ative of the Second Congressional Dis- 
The main rp ^ ^ ^ one-time Representative Tomas Alonso, 

he had been protest against Abellana was that 

was^ thus municipal president. He 

Antis mmxpri f position of representative. The 

Antis moved to stop Abellana from taking his oath of office. 

mittp^^f^^^^ assigned to a House electoral com- 

mittee of which I was head. At a caucus of Anti senators 



CUEjVCO— QUEZON, THE LEADER 



27 



and representatives presided over by President Quezon, I 
reported that American precedents were on Abellana’s side. 
Moreover, his majority had been overwhelming. President 
Quezon commended my stand and my committee dismissed 
the protest against Abellana. 

President Quezon was an avid student of international 
affairs. When the Second World War broke out early in 
September 1939, he invited the eminent historian Dr. Encar- 
nacion Alzona and myself to a dinner conference at Mala- 
cahan Palace. From 7 p.m. to midnight, we discussed the 
world situation. The Chief Executive relied on Dr. Alzona 
for information on Russia, Rumania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Yu- 
goslavia and Czechoslovakia, counti’ies which she had visited. 
Concerning Japan, Quezon admitted that he had miscalculated 
Japanese foreign policy. He thought that out of prudence, 
the Japanese should have limited themselves to the conquest 
and exploitation of Manchuria, a country the size of Canada 
and rich in agricultural and mineral resources. They could 
have used Manchuria as a powerful industrial base, but they 
had gone on to invade China. 

President Quezon asked me why the Japanese soldier was 
brave. I answered that one reason for Japanese bravery was 
their profound belief in the life hereafter. The President 
agreed, waxing eloquent on how such belief lightened man s 
burden of many earthly problems and drove him to acts of 
sublime sacrifice. 

He condemned the dictatorial policies of Hitler. However, 
the President thought that Nazi Germany was not totally un- 
justified in her grievances against England, a small country 
in territorial area but controlling at that time about two- 
thirds of the world’s natural resources. Any unequal distri 
bution of the world’s wealth, he said, is always a source of 
war. He was aware of the Anglo-Saxon predominance, if noi 
monopoly, of the oil riches of the Middle East. More than 
20 years after the end of the last World War, Quezon s observa- 
tion about the Middle East remains valid. The Arab nations 
led by President Nasser of Egypt and aligned against England 
have the support of Russia and France. If present tensions 



28 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



are not resolved, a major war will break out in the Middle 
East, sooner or later. 

Quezon was an intense personality radiating human 
warmth. He was essentially a grateful man. In the National 
Assembly, he was attacked by Assemblyman Camilo Osias on 
account of the appointment of a judge. Quezon could hardly 
restrain his anger at the solon from La Union. Several months 
after the incident, Quezon told me that he could “destroy” 
Osias if he wanted to, but instead he was looking for a posi- 
tion to which Osias could be appointed. He owed Osias a 
debt of gratitude which he could never forget. In his younger 
days, while in America, he had suffered from a dangerous 
type of neurasthenia which urged him to jump from high 
buildings. Osias had taken care of him with the utmost 
solicitude. 



He was, among other things, a musician and a good dan- 
liked to see beautiful women and handsome men. 
g mess in men and women he found repulsive. He also had 
a sardonic sense of humor. As president of the Common- 
f ^ state visit to Mexico and Cuba. In Havana, 

e me Igencio Batista, the army lieutenant-turned-dictator, 
atiste said he wanted to discuss social justice with the Fili- 
pino President. 

tr, Quezon quickly eyed the dictator from head 

•nprc^?. ^i<^ uot consider Batista the right 

could talk about social justice — an 
has since been confirmed by Cuban history. To 
tu onyersation on the subject. President Quezon politely 
asked the dictator: “Puedo ofrecerle un cigarillo?” 



THE CHARACTER OF MANUEL L. QUEZON * 



By Encarnacion Alzona 

MANUEL L. QUEZON’S public career began in 1899 
when he enlisted in the Philippine Revolutionary Army, attain- 
ing the rank of major. It ended on 1 August 1944 when he 
died at Saranac Lake, New York, as President of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines. 

Soon after the capture of General Emilio Aguinaldo at 
Palanan on 23 March 1901, which marked the downfall of the 
First Philippine Republic, Major Quezon surrendered and 
took his oath of allegiance to the United States at Mariveles 
before Lieut. Lawrence S. Miller. In the following year he 
v/as admitted to the bar and shortly after drafted into the 
government service. He occupied successively the posts of 
Provincial Fiscal of Mindoro and later of Tayabas, Governor 
of Tayabas, Representative of Tayabas in the Philippine As- 
sembly, Resident Commissioner at Washington, Senator, 
President of the Senate, and lastly President of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines, covering a period of a little over 
forty years. 

This period of the history of the Philippines is of world 
interest. It witnessed an historical phenomenon of far-reach- 
ing influence — the dramatic rise of an oriental people from 
subjection to emancipaton. The protagonist in that drama, 
who played his role with supreme artistry, was Manuel L. 
Quezon. 

He made his debut on the public stage as a revolutionary, 
determined to fight with the sword for the independence of 
his country. That gallant attempt failed imfortunately. Re- 
flecting on that memorable episode years later, he declared 
sadly that the Philippine-American War was suicide for the 
Filipino soldiers. Armed with obsolete rifles with very limit- 

* Reprinted from the Bulletin Ng Sainaliang Pangkasaysayan Ng 
Pilipinas, July 1957, pp. 37-45. 



29 



30 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



ed supply of ammunition, poorly clad, and ill-fed the brave 
Filipino soldiers plunged into the battlefield to face an ene- 
my with superior equipment and organization. 

In the light of this tragic experience, he perceived that 
the Eilipinos must win their freeuom through peaceful me- 
thods. They had no other alternative. To this patriotic la- 
bor he was to devote the rest of his life. The success that 
crowned his effort could best be appreciated by a considera- 
tion of his character. 



He was endowed with a brilliant mind and that mind was 
cultivated and disciplined by a classical education, by far the 
best preparation for public service. His classical training 
gave him a concept of the dignity of public office, which he 
upheld throughout his life. Several anecdotes bring out this 
admirable trait of his. 

■ Doctor T. C. Wang, former Chinese Ambassador at Wash- 
mgtcn, D.C., met him at Shanghai when the boat taking him 
^o. the United States stopped at that port. After the dinner 
given in his honor, he returned to the boat, unlike the other 
members of his party who proceeded to a night club. Dr. 
ang, who had known him in Washington, expressed sur- 
him; “What’s the matter? Have you reform- 
ed. This was the President’s reply; “My friend, I’ve lost 
my reedom. There are things Manuel Quezon enjoys doing 
ut which President Quezon would not allow him to do.’’ 



He peimittecl no one to insult the dignity of his position. 

c lummy Amei’ican v,'ho greeted him at a dance with a pat 

Manuel!’’ was instantly re- 
buked by him. 



niversally known was the incident v/hich occurred at 
° Letran, his Alma Mater. At the alumni reunion 
erv. on 7 November 1937, v/hich he attended, the Franco 
ymn was played. Immediately he rose and protested say- 
I did not com.e to this gathering as President of the 
1 ippir^s, I came to this gathering as an alumnus of I.etran. 
But the President of the Philippines cannot dissociate himself 
irom the alumnus of Letran while he is President of the Phil- 



ALZONA — CHARACTER OF QUEZON 



31 



ippjnes. For this reason, I cannot, as President of the Phil- 
ippines, ignore acts committed in my presence that should 
not be committed.” 



‘‘That Franco Hymn should not have been played heie. 
The Franco Government is still unrecognized, ihe U.S. Cong- 
ress has enacted a neutrality law and it is my duty to enforce 
that law in this country. . . What has happened has been a 
great mistake and a lack of consideration lor the President 
of the Philippines.” 



Because of his respect for law and lofty concept of the 
dignity of public office he was swift in meting out punishnnent 
to an erring official even if he was a close friend or a strong 
political leader. His method of approach was 
confronted him with the facts of his case and rendered his 
decision on the spot. No protracted and elaborate investi- 
gations were needed by President Quezon to determine the 
guilt or innocence of a public official. He himself weighed 
the facts on hand and, if he was convinced that 
was guilty, he summoned him and told him so with his chai- 
acteristic frankness, for he was endowed with a keen mim 
and boundless courage. The guilty official, knowing that he 
could not hoodwink the President, humbly bowed to his deci- 
Sion. 



It was well known that he was equally intolerant of in- 
competent government officials. He dismissed them or gave 
them another assignment. 



Thus, under President Quezon’s administration, govern 
ment officials were careful in the discharge of their duties 
Their ability inspired confidence and their decorum 
manded the respect of the public. At that time, unlike to av 
( 1956 ), private citizens did not regard everyone in the govern- 
ment service if not an actual crook or racketeer a poten la 
one. It was then an honor to be a public servant. 

By nature he was inclined to mercy and moderation. 
Towards his critics and adversaries he was magnanimous. 
He was a noble antagonist, never spiteful. The case of Rafael 
Palma was an illustration. As president of the State univer- 



32 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



sity, he attacked President Quezon on his stand on the Hare- 
Hawes-Cutting Law. President Quezon defended himself and 
won. Palma resigned from the university. Referring to this 
case, he declared to the delegation of Young Philippines that 
called on him at Malacanang on 29 September 1937: “I don’t 

resent the fact that people are against me. The best proof 
is the case of President Palma. He created the belief that I 
was a traitor to the country, that I was a dangerous public 
man. I know that Palma believed in good faith what he said. 
He was attacking me because he thought he was right. I 
went after him. I defeated him, but I did not punish him. 
When I had a chance to do something for him, I did it, be- 
cause I knew he could render service to the Government, 
n I am willing to give a chance to every man.” 

storm over the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law had 
bitterness it engendered had been dispelled, 
P ^ Quezon appointed Palma chairman of the National 
a wo which carried a compensation of P12,000 



Quezon by profession was a lawyer, a brilliant 
training developed to a high degree his 
hi<? sharpened his perspicacity, and deepened 

thp loo-^i human nature. Possessing a high regard for 

ivi-ir. ®ssion, he openly condemned fellow lawyers 

wa^thi I profession. The judiciary 

with particular attention. He was displeased 

who recommended to him for judicial 
lacked legal experience and integrity. At 
law Pr>ii^ ■ ^ criticized certain law professors of the State 
wr<=-i whom he believed were not qualified. The uni- 

versity president resented it. Informed of this, he said em- 

^ right to express my opinion on that 

off ^ ^ lawyer and naturally interested in matters 

affecting my profession/^ 



Law,” he told the law students of Santo Tomas Uni- 
versity at their convocation held on 2 October 1937, “is not 
^ caUing. It is a vocation, an apostleship of justice 

and fair dealing. The study of law requires also the study 



/I LZOA’ A— CHARACTER OF QUEZON 



33 



of logic, psychology, and ethics. It requires especially the 
study of the philosophy of law. . .” And he quoted in Latin 
the definition of law by St. Thomas Aquinas: “Ordinatio ra- 
tionis ad bonuni comme ab eo sui ciiram, comunitatis habet 
promulgata,” which in English is “An ordinance of reason for 
the common welfare, promulgated by those who govern the 
community.” He was well versed in the philosophy of St. 
Thomas Aquinas and could quote passage from his Summa 
Theologiae. 

He was courageous in the expression of his conviction. 
Attacked by some lawyers for his public criticism of some 
court decisions, he defended his stand by citing supporting 
arguments from American history: President Lincoln and 

the Dred Scott Case, President Jackson, President Theodore 
Roosevelt, and President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. He 
said: “. . . you will see that there are ample precedents with 
which I could justify myself for criticizing judicial decisions. 
But I want to say frankly that, even if I did not have such 
precedents to follow, I would still not be silent in the fac^ 
of what in my conscience I consider a wrong decision or an 
act of injustice. For, even assuming that under the theory 
of separation of powers and the postulate of judicial 
pendence, the Chief Executive may in no case utter a word 
in connection with acts of the other branches of the Govern 
ment, I would still interpret my oath to ‘do justice to eveiy 
man’ as imposing upon me the duty not only to do justice 
in cases where the decision rests with the Executive, but a so 
to see that the other branches of the Government 
commit acts of injustice to any man.” He continued: This 

is not the first time that I have criticized a judge for domg 
what, in my opinion, is wrong. When a judge of the Court 
of First Instance on technical grounds, absolved a man who 
caused the death of his servant— an old woman— by infhctmg 
upon her cruel punishment all night long, I denounced e 
judge on the floor of the Senate and succeeded later m get- 
ting him out of the judiciary. It will be recalled that I h^e 
dismissed a judge from office, despite the fact that the u- 
preme Court only recommended that he be allowed to re- 
sign, when I found out that said recommendation was pre- 



34 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



dicated upon the findings of the Supreme Court that he was 
guilty of charges preferred against him, including acts of 
abuse in the treatment of litigants and witnesses, especially 
the poor and the ignorant.” 

As Resident Commissioner in Washington he consistently 
advocated the granting of independence to his country when 
that question v/as unpopular in America. Nevertheless, his 
profound sincerity and courage won him the admiration and 
1 expect of Americans. They recognized in him a brilliant 

“ faithful and courageous interpreter of 
■-en aspirations. One of his American admirers, the late 
professor William P. Shepherd at Columbia 
iiAer^itj,, used to quote to his classes his reply to a question 
propounded to him by an American at a public forum- when 
Commissioner: “Mr. Quezon,” the American 
fil what s the difference between the Nacionalista Party 
i ‘ " smoerata?” “Sir,” Quezon replied, “the difference 
Pp_i^^^‘ f Nacionalista Party is in power; the Demiocrata 

mr fh ^^to power.” Pie was heartily applauded 

oy the audience. 

^'’''^sgnetism was recognized by all, friend 
com rnanners were attractive, urbane. Hand- 

poised, an eloquent speaker, he could hold the 
a ention of his audience for hours. Doctor T. C. Wang pro- 
nounced hini one of the world’s foremost orators; and the 
^nu ar .rnCTican author Jonh Gunther wrote about him the 
could list many of the sources of Quezon’s 
^ wei. x* or instance, he is indisputably the best orator in 

Ta^^a^.o^”*^^ languages: English, Spanish, or 



T, *. 1- eloquence alone but the substance of 

w a e sai and the manner in which he said it that made 
nm an excellent puolic speaker. When he rose to speak, 
e Lad something worthv/hile to say, and he possessed the 
rare gift of expressing his ideas in simple but forceful lang- 
uage and v/ith profound earnestness. 

A.nother quality that endeared him to many was his sense 
Oi gratitude. Those who had in any way helped him in for- 



.4 LZOiV A— CHARACTER OF QUEZON 



35 



mer years became the recipient of his favors, his kindness 
and consideration. He was especially solicitous about the 
aged and the poor. It was his genuine concern for the lot 
of the poor that led him to launch a programme of social 
justice. On the second anniversary of the establishment of 
the Commonwealth, 15 November 1937, he gladly approved 
the bill providing for the abolition of the cedilla tax because 
that tax was a burden to the poor. To the members of the 
National Assembly who witnessed the cererncny of the sign- 
ing of that bill at Malacahang he declared: ‘T desire to con- 
gratulate you on the enactment of this Bill, which I am about 
to sign, abolishing the ccdula tax. This is a tax which has 
been borne by our people for centuries. It has caused un- 
told. hardships to those w’ho earn hardly enough to make a 
living and it constituted one of the serious grievances of our 
people against the Spanish Government.” 

On that same occasion, speaking at the Luneta in Taga- 
log, he announced the new* principle of taxation that would 
henceforth guide his administration. Translated into Englisn 
he said: ‘Trom now on, no tax shall be collected that will 
not be based on the ability of the tax-paying public to pay. 
Until now the poor are heavily taxed in our cou^tr5^ mo 
rich may say that they are paying more taxes, because some- 
times they are paying thousands of pesos in taxes but I am 
prepared to agree with anybody who is paying this much that 
if he gave me the wealth from which he derives his income 
to pay his taxes to the government, I would pay taxes twice 
as much. What the rich pay for taxes are only taken from 
their surplus, but the poor get their money to pay their taxes 
from their means of subsistence and the subistence of their 
families. The sacred duty of the citizens is to support their 
government. What I mean to say is that the taxes that they 
should pay must be based on their ability to pay. For exam- 
ple, by the abolition of the cedilla tax do the poor people 
think they are not paying any taxes? No. Is it not true that 
if today a poor man buys cloth and orders a suit to be made, 
coming from Europe or America, he pays taxes based on 
the value of the cloth? That is why I say that the great 



36 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



portion of the collections realized from internal revenue taxes 
comes from the poor, although the rich also pay their taxes. 

“So there will be equality between the rich and the poor 
in the payment of their taxes, I will ask the National Assem- 
bly to impose more taxes upon the wealthy class because 
they are in a position to pay. In this way, taxes will not be 
a burden to anybody and it would not be difficult for the 
Government to work out its problems.” 

In his message to the National Assembly on 24 January 
1938, he emphasized the importance of social justice. He 
said. We are earnestly concerned with social justice. With- 
out a strict application of social justice to all elements of 
the community, general satisfaction of the people with their 
government is impossible to achieve. Here, in the just and 
equitable solution of social problems, is the real test of the 

sufficiency of democracy to meet present-day conditions of 
society.” 

f President Quezon did not belong to the category 

o ose who follow the saying, “Bo as I say and not as I do,” 
■h^ principles of social justice to the tenants of 

IS -hectare farm in Arayat, Pampanga, thus setting a 

w o esome example to other landlords. His property became 
a model farm. j- 

Quezon is also admired for his mastery of the 
1 icu art of handling men, including scheming politicians. 
His dramatic instinct, experience of political life, and pro- 
oun nowledge of human nature gave him a decided advan- 
tage in any political struggle. With considerable ease he 
cou ma *e his partisans follow gladly his wishes, render his 
opponents politically impotent and convert them into his fol- 
owers. Defeat was unknown to him; he was always a win- 
ner. Possessing these valuable qualities he would have been 
a national leader in any country of the world. 

Perhaps less known to the general public was his artistic 
taste. As a student at San Juan de Letran College, he studied 
the piano, attaining enough proficiency in the art of playing 
that instrument to contribute a piano selection to a literary- 



ALZONA— CHARACTER OF QUEZON 



37 



musical programme by the school. In his day he was the 
best ballroom dancer. Under his direction Malacanang Pa- 
lace was remodelled and the grounds beautified. He loved 
the venerable trees growing in the groimds surrounding the 
place. How indignant he was when the architect in charge 
of remodelling the building announced to him that in order 
to execute his plan one of those trees must go. He ordered 
him to alter his plan to save the tree. The result is artistic. 
That tree is now in the center of a tiny patio. 

He had an affectionate nature. He was devoted to his 
wife whom he adored and to his children. He could have 
married any beauty and heiress in the Philippines or abroad; 
but he did not. When the time came for him to establish 
his own family, he sought the hand of an obscure but vii- 
tuous beauty of Baler, his native town, his cousin Miss Auroi a 
Aragon. 

The radiant personality of Quezon illuminated his time. 
He was the commanding figure of his epoch, memorable for 
the gathering of our nationalist forces which were to lead to 
the establishment of our present Republic. Well might it be 
christened the Quezon Era. 



MANUEL L. QUEZON AS RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 

(1909-1916)- 



By Gabriel F. Fabella 

MANUEL L. QUEZON’S role as one of the two Filipino 
Resiclenc Commissioners to the United States during the per- 
iod 1909-1916, is reiaiively unknown. And yet if one would like 
to explain partly why he is sometimes referred to as the 
“Paiher of the Filipino Nationalist Movement” during the 
American tenure in the Islands, or better still, the “Architect 
of Philippine Independence” under America, he cannot ignore 
but point out Quezon’s political career as Filipino Resident 
Commissioner to the United States from 1909-1916. 

Quezon served in this capacity for three successive terms. 
He was first elected to the position, succeeding Pablo Ocampo 
de Leon, on May 15, 1909, and was re-elected thereto in 1911, 
1913, and 1915. Like his colleague, Benito Legarda, his offi- 
cial function as a Resident Commissioner was to give perti- 
nent information to the United States Congress about 'the real 
conditions in the Philippines in order that the body could le- 
gislate wisely and constructively for the colonial government 
in the Philippines. But Commissioner Quezon went beyond 
that duty by conducting in the United States a campaign for- 
immediate, complete and absolute Philippine independence. 
Even before leaving the Islands for Washington, D.C. to as- 
sume his post, he, together wnth some Filipino nationalist 
leaders, had already rightly recognized that the best way to 
carry out an effective fight for early Philippine independence 
was to influence American public opinion and the United 
States Congress. For the former was, and still is, a potent 
factor in determining policies of the American government 
and the latter was the body that would ultimately decide the 
question of Philippine independence. 



' ii-apei read at a symposium held on August 
College of Arts and Sciences Theater. Reprinted 
Bulletin, 1962, Vol. VI, No. 3, pp. 253-258. 



17, 1962, in the U.P. 
from the Historical 



38 



FABELLA — QUEZON AS RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 



39 



Having been sworn in as a courtesy member of the House 
of Representatives of the United States Congress, Comniis- 
■sioner Quezon busied himself mastering the English language 
in order to be able to deliver speeches in English. He hired 
a tutor, but realizing that the process was very slow, he gave 
up after finishing fifteen lessons. Instead, he taught himself 
by reading books, newspapers, and magazines with the help 
of an English-Spanish dictionary, and also by attending 
social gatherings without any one with him to act as his 
interpreter. 

On May 14, 1910, about five months after his ax'rival in 
the American capital, Quezon delivered his maiden speech 
in the lower house of the United States Congress. He le- 
viewed in detail the splendid work of the United States 
emment in the Philippines, expressing his people’s gratitude. 
He also appealed to the pride, patriotism, and devotion to the 
principles of liberty and self-government of the American peo- 
ple. But then he added the reminder that in spite of all the 
good things done by America in his country, the Filipinos 
preferred to be free and independent. He declared. 

All this we acknowledge; for all this we are thankful, for all 
this we are grateful to your Government and to your people. 
But, Sir, despite it all, the Filipinos are not, as yet, a happy people. 
Would you ask me why? Then, I will answer in the language oi 
that great apostle of human freedom, Daniel Webster: 

‘No matter hov/ easy may be the yoke of a foreign power, 
no matter how lightly it sits upon the shoulders, if it is no 
imposed by the voice of his own nation and of is 
country, he will not, he cannot, and he means not o 
happy under its burden.’ 

These words, to us Mr. Chairman, are freedom’s text and 
rallying cry. We feel their truth deep in our souls, for it is e 
vital spark of our national hope. . . 

On the whole his address was mild in tone, and the Fili- 
pino nationalists who expected him to make an impassione 
harangue in favor of immediate independence, were some- 
what disappointed. But Quezon knew that he was in Wasm 
ington to persuade and not to insult and, therefore, he had 



40 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



to act accordingly. The character of the independence cam- 
paign he was to undertake — conciliatory in form, taut direct 
and determined in sutastance — was thus reflected in his 
•speech. 

Quezon made the United States Congress his real field of 
action for his campaign. On the floor of the House of Re- 
presentatives, he delivered speeches and vigorously partici- 
pated in the debates every time the subject of Philippine inde- 
pendence was the issue. On one occasion, when he had an 
opportunity to inform his colleagues in Congress why the 
grant of independence to the Philippines rather than incor- 
poration of the Philippines as a state of the Union would be 
a v/ise and just policy for the American government to pur- 
sue, he said: 



American policy regarding the Philippines must be based upon 
e theory that the United States by its traditions, by its history, 
and institutions, and by the principles which constitute the very 
oun ation of ics national life, cannot consistently hold colonies 
against the avowed will of the inhabitants thereof. Therefore. 

a po icy to be truly American must contemplate as a final 
outcome either statehood or independence. 



Statehood for the Philippines is not desirable, either from the 
standpoint of the American or from that of the Filipino. Differ- 
ences in race, customs, interests, and the thousands of miles of 
^a er ich sejiarate both countries, are insurmountable obsta- 
cles to Philippine statehood. 



^ er aps he delivered his most elocfuent speeches, plead- 
or w at he called the ''holy cause,” the independence of 
IS peop e, when the United States Congress was considering 

26 September to 14 October, 

' floor often times defending the inde- 

pen^ 1 , and at other times clarifying some unpleasant re- 
f ^ colleagues. In one of the sessions, he got into 
a Heated debate with Congressman Simon D. Fess of Ohio. 
Cong;ressman Fess asked Quezon whether he believed that the 
Filipinos, without the aid of the Americans, could have made 
e progress they showed since the beginning of American 
ru e in e Philippines. Quezon made no answer, but when 
It was impatiently demanded, he finally answered in the af- 



F.4BE/.^A— QUEZON AS RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 



41 



fjrmative, causing mucli discomfort and em^barrassment to 
the American solon. 

Fully aware that he should also influence American pub- 
lic opinion in order to carry out his campaign more success- 
fully, he spoke before American audiences outside the United 
States Congress. Under the sponsorship of the Anti-Imperial- 
ist League, he traveled through the different states in the 
American Union, taking every opportunity to speak on the 
actual conditions in the Philippines. At the same time, he 
tried to remind the American people that, through their 
Congress, they had the moral duty to enact a law giving the 
Filipinos their independence. Speaking before the Chamber 
of Industry of Cleveland, Ohio, on April 14, 1914, Commis- 
sioner Quezon stated that the Filipinos were unanimous in 
their desire for independence, and that the argument of their 
incapacity to exercise it was merely a reason of those who 
wanted to I’etain the Islands for the protection as well as for 
the advancement of their interests. He declared. 

We all want independence and are entitled tc it. The argu- 
ment of Filipino incapacity for self-government is hypocritical. 
It is the veil with which American office-holder covers his desire 
to keep his place. It is the ambush behind ivhich lurk the com- 
pany which monopolizes our hemp, and the sugar interests, which 
have already acquired, in defiance to Congress, 65,000 acres of 
land in one tract. . . Or at best it is the wish fathei to the 
thought of some missionaries or churchmen who mistakenly 
think that they can make more converts among the wild men 
of the Philippines. 

Aside from speaking tours, Commissioner Quezon attend- 
ed national conventions and popular gatherings of political 
parties. In 1912, when the Democratic Party members con- 
vened in Baltimore to select their presidential standard bear- 
er, Quezon personally appeared before the Platform Commit- 
tee and helped in the writing of the plank of the platform 
dealing with Philippine independence. He also gave ban- 
quets to cultivate the friendship of the Democratic Party 
leaders, especially those who were occupying positions in- 
fluential in Philippine affairs. 



42 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



To influence American public opinion further, he wrote 
campaign articles for American magazines and newspapers. 
Not satisfied with this, he founded his own periodical entitled 
The Filipino People in September, 1912. According to him, 
the organ was intended to be “an official medium for express- 
ing the views of the people whose name it bears and designed 
to bring about a better understanding in the Philippines and 
in the United States of the real conditions which exist in both 
countries.” The paper continued publication for four years 
and was terminated when the passage of the Jones Bill by the 
United States Congress in August, 1916, was certain. 

So vigorous and spirited indeed was his campaign for 
immediate, complete and absolute Philippine independence 
that, at times. Commissioner Quezon was misunderstood by 
those elements who opposed him. On one occasion, he was 
denounced in Congress by Representative Austin of Tennessee 
of using money and banquets in order to gain the support 
of the Congressional leaders. At another instance, he was 
openly warned by General Edwards, then chief of the Bureau 
of Insular Affairs, that should he insist on continuing his 
independence campaign, every effort would be taken to retire 
him from the resident commissioner ship. 

Undaunted, however, by the charges and the threats 
hurled at him, he continued his campaign, giving greater vigor 
to it when the Democratic Party came into power in 1913. 

As a consequence of his untiring efforts. Commissioner 
Quezon was able to obtain results which, though not as much 
as what he really wanted— immediate, complete and absolute 
independence were of great political significance in so far 
as preparing the Filipinos in the art of self-government. In 
1913, he secured from President Wilson the appointment of 
Representative Francis B. Harrison of New York as governor- 
general of the Islands. Governor Harrison’s administration 
later proved to be a significant phase in the Filipino struggle 
for independence. For it gave substance to the Democratic 
Party s pledge of Philippine independence by converting the 
colonial government of Americans aided by Filipinos under 
the Republicans into a government of Filipinos aided by 



FABELLA QUEZON AS RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 



43 



Americans. Believing that the only way to teach the Filipinos 
the art of self-government was to let them exercise it, he 
rapidly filipinized the government civil service. In fact, Gov- 
ernor Harrison even went to the extent of virtually abandon- 
ing his exeutive powers in order to give the Filipino leaders 
in the government ample freedom to conduct their 0 \vn gov- 
ernmental affairs. 

A more significant achievement was the Jones Law’*’ 
which, Quezon, himself, considered as the “crovv'’ning glory 
of his work as resident commissioner. How he was able to 
obtain the enactment of the law from toe United States wOng 
ress cannot be told in just a few words. Suffice it to say, 
hov^ever, that he had to use all the iniluence of his office as 
resident commissioner, his persuasive eloquence, and his en- 
viable personal magnetism. The difficulties he met and over- 
came could be imagined by realizing that it took him seven 
years to convince the United States Congress to approve th.^ 
law. 

The Jones Law provided substantial changes in the ad- 
ministrative structure of the Philippine Government whici^ 
in effect, would give greater political responsibility 
Filipinos. The preamble of the Law declared it to be t e 
purpose of the people of the United States to withdraw their 
sovereignty over the Philippine Islands and to recognize txreir 
independence therein.” This feature of the law made it 
first’ act of the United States Congress relating to the 
ment in the Islands which explicitly set forth a qua i lec 
promise of eventual independence. For that reason, the aw 
was held with great political significance by the Fihpmos. 

From the foi'egoing discussion, it is, therefore, ver5^ apps^ 
rent that Manuel L. Quezon’s role asji resident commissioner 
is not at all without significance, r'or as such, he was 
first Filipino Resident Commissioner to serve not 
mere encyclopedia, giving information to the United >-> a os 
Congress about the real conditions in the Philippines, bu as 
a true and dedicated agent of his people to work fOx c .eir 
immediate, complete and absolute independence. A,, ou-, 
he failed to accomplish that objective of bringing home an 



44 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



independence law which would grant early and unconditional 
Philippine independence, yet, in a sense, he succeeded in his 
work. He was able to lay the groundwork for the later 
campaign for Philippine independence in the United States. 
Aside from that, he obtained some political concessions from 
the American government which, to a large extent, enhanced 
the capacity of his people to maintain their own self-govern- 
ment. More significant, however, was that having secured 
the approval of the Jones Law in 1916, he, in effect, gave 
greater impetus to the later independence movement which 
ultimately led to the attainment of our freedom from the 
United States in 1946. 

Encouraged by the conditional promise of independence 
embodied in the Jones Law, the Filipino Nationalists stepped 
up their campaign for independence. From 1919-1933, several 
independence missions were sent to the United States to con- 
vince the American Government that a stable government 
had already been established in the Philippines and, there- 
fore, independence should be granted. Out of these missions, 
which were indicative of the more persistent and vigorous 
independence campaign after 1916, resulted the passage of 
the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law and the Tydings-McDuffie Law, 
the latter becoming our historic Independence Law. Such 
being the case, it can be said that as resident commissioner, 
Manuel L. Quezon provided the generating force that led to 
our independence from the United States in 1946. Indeed, 
as resident commissioner, he planted the seed of indepen- 
dence, out of which grew a tree whose fruit has given us the 
freedom and independence that we enjoy today. 



QUEZON AND THE CAMPAIGN FOR PHILIPPINE 
INDEPENDENCE^ 



Bj' Nicolas Zafra 



August 19, this year, is the late Manuel L. Quezon's 100th 
hirth anniversary. By this time, too, he has been dead 34 
years. 

Death is oblivion to ordinary mortals, but to Quezon it- 
is a security of place in Philippine history. Future genera- 
tions are not likely to forget him or any of the landmarks 
of his political career many of which are now important- 
events of our contemporary history. Now is the time to- 
indulge in fond recollection of the great events of Quezon’s 
life. Admittedly, the outstanding episode of his life was his 
role in the campaign for Philippine independence — the “sacredl 
cause” of the Filipino people. 

The grand strategy for the campaign for independence 
was worked out by Sergio Osmeiia during his incumbency 
as Speaker of the First Philippine Assembly. It called for 
two distinct courses of action: (1) for members of the Assem- 
bly to demonstrate their capacity for statesmanship through 
the high quality of their legislative labors, producing legisla- 
tions evincing concern for the welfai'e of their people. This 
part of the strategy was meant to erase the impression then- 
held by a considerable portion of the American people that the 
Filipinos lacked the capacity for self government. The other 
part of the strategy was aimed at winning and preserving" 
the friendship, goodwill and sympathy of the American peop o- 
toward the Philippines and the Filipino people and their as- 
pirations for independence. 

Quezon’s role in the campaign for independence passed 
through two stages: (1) 1908-1923; and (2) 1923-1935. In the 
first stage, Quezon carried out his assignment in the campaign 

* Reprinted from the 1978 Manuel L. Quezon Centennial Souvenir 
ProRram, pp. 41-48. 

45 



L 



46 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



under the supreme command of Speaker Osmeha. In the 
second stage, as a result of the 1923 power struggle in the 
country, Quezon displaced Osmeha as leader in the campaign. 

The first move in the independence campaign was the 
election by the Philippine Assembly of Quezon as Resident 
Commissioner in the United States. At the time of his elec- 
tion, Quezon was floor leader in the Assembly. In his actua- 
tions as a member of that body, he displayed a brilliant mind, 
a charming prsonality and a spirit of dedication to the causa 
of Philippine Independence. 

In May 1910, Quezon delivered his maiden speech in the 
li.S. Congress. It v/as his Initial move in the campaign for 
independence. In accordance with the campaign strategy 
laid down by Speaker Osmeha, Quezon conveyed the appre- 
ciation and gratitude of the Filipino people for all the bene- 
fits that they received from the United States. “My country- 
inen,’’ he said, “are grateful, deeply grateful for all the bene- 
fits the U.S. Government has conferred upon them.” But he 
reminded Congress of the Filipino people’s aspiration for in- 
dependence. “But despite all,” he said v/itli all the force of 
his eloquence, “we still want independence. . . Ask the bird, 
Sir, who is enclosed in a golden cage and the care of his own- 
er if he would prefer his cage and the care of his owner to 
the freedom of the skies and the allure of the forest.” 

In 1912, the Democratic Party gained full control of the 
Government of the U.S. Resident Commissioner Quezon took 
advantage of this turn of events to secure a change in the 
governorship of the Philippines. W. Cameron Forbes was 
then Governor-General of the Philippines. He had an excel- 
lent record during his incumbency as a member of the Phil- 
ippine Commission. He improved the means of travel and 
Lransportation in the country by building a network of good 
roads and bridges. Kenncn Road which made Baguio with 
its healthful climate easily acces,sible from the lowlands is 
a monument to his administration. Moreover, he had close 
and friendly relations v/ith the country’s political leaders and 
prominent elements of Filipino society. But Resident Com- 
missioner Quezon felt that it was his duty to secure a new 



ZAFRA — QUEZON AND PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



man for the governorship of the Philippines whose attitude 
towards the Filipino people’s independence aspirations was 
unequivocally favorable and sympathetic. How he went 
about in pursuance of this purpose is told by Quezon himself 
in his autobiography as follows: 



President Wilson one day summoned me to the White House 
and asked my opinion as to whether a new Governor General 
should be appoint, or whether Governor General Forbes shou d 
be left in his post. To a Filipino, with Oriental ancestiy, a litt e 
Spanish education-which practically all that I then had, the 
question was very trying indeed. Friendship to me ^ 
meaning and personal favors are never forgotten. ^ei 

hand I had come to Washington to perform a sacTed d y. 
measured my words and gave President Wilson the following 
answer: “Mr. President, if it is your intention to disregard the 
Democratic platform and merely carry on the ^ 

Republican Administration, then you can find "O J^etter man 
for the iob than Governor General Forbes. If, on the contrary 
you intend to take immediate steps, as in my opinion 
take, to make good the new historic commitment of your partj 
to grant independence to the Philippines as soon as Possible 
then Governor Forbes can neither be the spokesman for nor 
executor of your policies in the Philippines. 



As can well be seen from the above-quoted passage, Que- 
zon’s approach to the problem before him was admirable. It 
w^as a model of finesse which undoubtedly made^ a deep im 
pression on President V/ilson. In effect. President Wilson 
appointed Francis Burton Harrison as Governor General oi 
the Philippines. He was a friend of Quezon. With his ap- 
pointment Quezon had for sure something to do. 



The administration of Plarrison was a landmark in the 
history of America’s colonial venture in the Far Eas . 
was friendly, helpful and sympathetic toward the Filipmos 
and their political aspirations. He allowed the Fnipmos 
through their political leaders to introduce changes an 
tices in the colonial government which expanded to the 
fullest extent possible Filipino participation in the acuninis- 
tration of national affairs. Foremost among such ^lanps 
was the creation upon the recommendation of the Filipmo 
leaders of the Council of State. This body was composed 



48 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



of the Governor General, members of the cabinet, the Speaker 
of the House of Representatives, the President of the Senate, 
and the floor leaders respectively of the House of Repre- 
sentative and of the Senate. Membership in the Council of 
State was renewable at the beginning of a three-year period. 
New members were chosen from the party which won in the 
last national election. The Council of State was supposedly 
to act as an advisory body to the Governor General. Actually, 
it was the supreme governing body of the Philippines. 

Creation of the Council of State brought to the Philippine 
government a distinctive feature of the parliamentary system 
of government, namely, the union of the executive and legis- 
lative branches of government. Under the new arrangement, 
members of the cabinet could appear on the floor of the 
Legislature to explain or defend proposed measures relating 
to their respective offices, a practice common in a parlia- 
mentary system of government based on the principle of 
ministerial responsibility. 

The Council of State gave the Filipinos an opportunity 
to experiment with a semi-parliamentary system of govern- 
ment. But Governor-General Wood did not look with favor 
upon the experiment. He believed it placed him as the re- 
presentative of American sovereignty in a position of respon- 
sibility without the corresponding authority. Under the cir- 
cumstances, a clash was inevitable Between him and the Fili- 
pino leaders in the Council of State. In effect, a contro- 
versy over a case involving an American member of the police 
force of the City of Manila, which was under the jurisdiction 
of the Department of the Interior, brought Governor Wood in 
a head-on collission with the Filipino leaders in the Council 
of State. As a result, the Filipino members of the Council 
of State resigned from that body. Governor Wood accepted 
their resignations. Subsequently, Governor Wood allowed 
the Council of State to go out of existence. 

The administration of Wood was a dark day indeed for 
the cause of Philippine independence. Apart from the fact 
that Governor Wood was openly opposed to the Filipino peo- 
ple s independence aspirations, the permanent source of 



ZAFR.4— QUEZON AND PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



49 



funds for the expenses of the campaign for independence was 
cut down during his administration. The Philippine Inde- 
pendence Fund which the Philippine Legislature had created 
was, by a ruling of the Insular Auditor, Ben Wright, and, 
presumably on Wood’s order, declared illegal. The Filipino 
people, thenceforth, had to provide through individual con- 
tributions funds for the campaign. 

The death of Governor Wood (1926) gave the Filipinos 
an auspicious occasion to renew their efforts in the campaign 
for independence. The first important task awaiting them 
was to obtain the appointment of a suitable successor to 
Governor Wood. To attend to this matter, Quezon and 
Osmeha constituted themselves into a commission to go to 
the United States. Quezon’s choice for the governorship oj. 
the Philippines was Henry L. Stimson, former Secretary of 
War during the presidency of William H. Taft. In their 
conference with President Coolidge, the Filipino Commis- 
sioners recommended Henry L. Stimson for the governorship 
of the Philippines. They visited William H. Taft, the first 
civil governor of the Philippines who was at the time Chiei 
Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, to ask his support for 
Stimson’s appointment. They of course saw Stimson. Stim- 
son at first would not at all consider the offer presented to 
him. But Quezon would not take “no” for an answer. Bring- 
ing to bear all his power of persuasion, he reminded Stirnson 
of his own words that the government of the Philippines 
was a grave responsibility resting on the United States. Al- 
though Stimson did not give a word of acceptance, Quezon 
and Osmena left the conference with Stimson fully confiden 
that Stimson would not refuse the offer if it was officially pre- 
sented to him. In effect, a few days later, they read in th... 
newspapers that Henry L. Stimson had been appointed Gov- 
ernor General of the Philippines. 

The case of Stimson is an interesting incident in the life 
of Quezon. It reveals a notable facet of his character. Que- 
zon was fully aware of Stimson’s opposition to Philippine 
independence and yet, surprisingly, he wanted him so much 
for the governorship of the Philippines. Quezon came to 



50 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



know Stimson intimately when the latter visited the Philip- 
pines at the height of the controversy between Wood and the 
Filipino leaders in the government. With his keen percep- 
tion of human character, Quezon saw the depth and sincerity 
of Stimson’s concern for the safety and welfare of the Fili- 
pino people. Of Stimson, he said in his autobiography: “no 
representative of the U.S. in the Philippines had won my res- 
pect and even my personal affection than did Governor Gen- 
eral Stimson.” 

As Governor General of the Philippines, Stimson won the 
inendship, good will and cooperation of the Filipino people. 
He revived the Council of State thereby reestablishing the 
semiparliamentary character of the Philippine government. 
Stimson’s administration generated such a spirit of coopera- 
tion among his colleagues in the government that his name 
became synonimous with “cooperation.” 

But, to the great disappointment of many Filipinos, Gov- 
ernor Stimson did not stay long in his post. Soon after the 
inauguration of Hoover as President of the United States, 
Stimson was called back to Washington. He was made Sec- 
retar of State in the cabinet of President Hoover. At that 
time, ominous developments were taking place in Eastern 
Asia which caused no little concern to the Government of 
the United States. As Secretary of State, it was Stimson’s 
responsibility to take adequate measures to safeguard Ame- 
rica’s interests in the Far East. Accordingly, he launched 
what has come to be known in American diplomatic history 
as the “Stimson Doctrine.” The “Doctrine” gave notice to 
the world that the U.S. would not admit as legal any situation 
brought about by the violation of treaty agreements. 

During the administration of President Hoover, a severe 
economic depression hit the U.S. Many sectors of the na- 
tion’s economy felt its disastrous effects. Factories closed 
dov,?n, banks suspended their operations, millions of families 
suffered the loss of life’s savings. The U.S. Government was 
asked urgently to provide remedial measures. Strangely 
enough, one suggested measure of relief was to grant inde- 
pendence to the Philippines. The reason behind the proposal 



ZAFRA — QUEZON AND PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



51 



was that American industry would be relieved from the com- 
petition of duty-free products of the Philippines in the U.S. 
domestic trade. 

Obviously, the situation in the United States was greatly 
favorable to the cause of independence. The Filipino leaders 
were not slow in taking advantage of the situation. A nev/ 
mission was created composed of Senator Osmeha as chair- 
man and Speaker Roxas as co-chairman. The OSROX as the 
Mission came to be known was instructed to obtain indepen- 
dence for the Philippines under the most favorable condi- 
tions. 

In Congress many proposals were submitted for the so- 
lution of the Philippine problem. Out of these, one was final- 
ly framed which counted with the support of the majoiity 
of the members in both Houses of Congress. Known as the 
Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill, the measure was approved by sub- 
stantial majorities in both Houses of Congress. But Cong- 
ress ignored the presidential veto and quickly repassed the 
Bill. As enacted by Congress, the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act 
bore the title Philippine Commonwealth and Independence 
Law. 

The Act provided for an institutional process in which 
successive steps were to be taken, namely: (1) the calling of 
a constitutional convention to frame a constitution for the 
Philippines (2) submission of the constitution to the people, 
(3) regulating trade relations betwen the U.S. and the Phil- 
ippines; (4) withdrawal of American sovereignty following 
the expiration of a ten-year period; (5) imposition of duties 
after independence; and (6) acceptance of the Act by the 
Philippine Legislature. 

The approval of the Independence Law was viewed as a 
glorious culmination of the Filipino people’s historic strugg e 
for liberation. Surprisingly, however, Quezon was not happy 
over it. Pie found certain provisions of the Law objection- 
able. One was that giving the U.S. the right to retain military 
and naval bases in the country. Another was that relating 
to commercial relations of the Philippines with the United 



52 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



States. The retention of military and naval bases, Quezon 
pointed out, would give the Philippines the shadow not the 
substance of independence. As regards the commercial pro- 
visions, Filipino opposition was justified on historical 
grounds. V/hen the U.S. imposed free trade upon the Philip- 
pines with the Payne-Aldrich Act, the Philippine Assembly 
opposed the move. It feared that free trade would eventually 
bind the Philippines to the U.S. with strong economic ties 
which would make it difficult for it to realize its indepen- 
dence ideal. For the U.S. now to grant independence to the 
Philippines v/ithout giving it reasonable time to adjust its 
economy to the conditions and realities of independence 
would be unjust to the Filipino people. 

The Independence Act gave ties to a nationwide contro- 
versy in the Philippines. One group, the Pros, led by Osme- 
na and Roxas, called for acceptance of the Law. The Antis, 
led by Quezon clashed in a memorable debate. In speeches 
bristling v/ith wit and punctuated with brilliant flashes of 
eloquences, they defended their respective positions on the 
Independence Law. In the House of Representatives, Roxas 
eloquently explained the merits of the Independence Law. 
When submitted to a vote in the Legislature, the Hare-Hawes- 
Cutting Act was decisively rejected. The Legislature next 
resolved to send Quezon to the U.S. to ask for a modification 
of the Law or for the enactment of a new one more accept- 
able to the Philippines. 



Many people at the time even among those who support- 
ed Quezon in the fight over the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act 
thought that the rejection of the Independence Law was a 
risky venture which exposed the cause of Philippine inde- 
pendence to the danger of indefinite postponement to an un- 
certain future if not of total loss. Quezon himself must have 
been aware of this danger. When he left for the U.S. in pur- 
suance of his mission, it was certain that he knew he was 
carrying the burden of a great responsibility. 

In Congress, the leaders who worked so hard for the 
passage of the Independence Law were no longer enthusiastic 



Z/lFR/1— QUEZON AND PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



53 



over the Philippine problem. They were, understandably, 
irked by Quezon’s seeming vacillation on the issue on inde- 
pendence for his country. Their attitude toward Quezon 
was cold if not openly hostile. In a confrontation between 
them and Quezon, Senator Joseph Robinson told Quezon, 
referring to the Independence Law, to “take it or leave it.” 

Quezon was not at all daunted by the hostile attitude of 
the Congress leaders. He bided his time. He wrote a me- 
morandum for President Roosevelt on the objectionable fea- 
tures of the Independence Law. Next, he arranged with the 
VJhite House for an appointment for him to see President 
Roosevelt. 

In the White House conference. President Roosevelt told 
Quezon he agreed with Quezon’s criticisms of the Indepen- 
dence Law. But he assured Quezon that the U.S. was willing 
to revise the law in a manner that would be just to both the 
American and the Filipino peoples. The President’s assur- 
ance naturally pleased Quezon. It gave him good reason to 
claim that his mission was after all a success. In ef ec , 
shortly after the establishment of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, a Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine 
Affairs was created to study economic problems of Philippme 
independence and propose legislative changes. The Filipino 
membership in the Committee was headed by Jose Yulo, a 
v.'ell-known commercial law expert. 

In pursuance of the Roosevelt-Quezon understanding, a 
new independence bill was drafted. Known as Tydings Me 
Duffie it passed both Houses of Congress and signed into law 
by President Roosevelt. On May 1, 1934, the Philippine Legis 
lature formally accepted it. The institutional piocess was 
thereby set in motion that would lead eventually to indepen- 
dence for the Philippines in 1946. On November 15, 1935, the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines was set up with Quezon 
and Osmeha as President and Vice-President respectively. 
Both were reelected to their respective posts in 1940. 

In 1943, the eight-year tenure of Quezon as fixed by the 
Constitution as amended was due to expire. Before the ex- 



54 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



piration date arrived, Quezon gave notice of his desire to 
continue as President alleging that, in the emergency through 
which the Philippines was passing on account of the Japanese 
occupation of the country, the interests of the Filipino people 
required that the status quo as regards the presidency should 
he continued. Announcement of Quezon’s intent gave rise 
to a serious crisis in the Philippine Government in exile. Os- 
mena, however, volunteered to refrain from claiming his right 
of succession to the presidency for the sake of national unity 
and out of regard for Quezon’s physical condition. It was 
a magnificent gesture of abnegation on the part of Osmena. 
It aborted the crisis. Together with Senator Tydings, Os- 
meha worked out a plan of action for the U.S. Congress 
whereby the status quo as regards the presidency of the 
Philippines was legally continued. 

By that time, Quezon’s health had greatly deteriorated. 
The ravages of tuberculosis had wrought havoc on his con- 
stitution. He was bed-ridden. He was dangerously close to 
the brink of death. Death finally came to him on August 1, 
1944. It was a clear sunny day in mid-summer that dawned 
that day. Father Pacifico Ortiz, S.J., Quezon’s chaplain, ce- 
lebrated as usual mass for Quezon. The Gospel read at the 
mass was from the eighth chapter of Matthew. The passage 
happened to be one of Quezon’s favorite readings from the 
Holy Scriptures. It tells the story of the centurion whose 
servant was seriously ill. He begged Jesus to come and heal 
him. Jesus said that he would come. Overwhelmed by Je- 
sus’ kindness, the centurion replied: “Sir, I am not worthy 
to have you come under my roof. Just say the word and my 
hoy will be healed.’’ 

Shortly after the mass, news came over the radio of 
MacArthur’s forces having made another landing which 
brought them more closely to the Philippines. The news 
greatly excited Quezon. In his excitement internal hemorr- 
hage set in causing him to vomit blood. A few moments 
later, Quezon v/as dead. But he was happy in the thought 
that the day of liberation of his beloved country was near. 



ZAFRA QUEZON AND PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



55 



News of Quezon’s death came to the Philippines through 
secretly hidden radio sets. The Filipino people deeply 
mourned the passing of theii’ great leader. Not a few among 
them wondered with no little feeling of concern whether the 
Philippines could have another Quezon in the forseeable fu- 
ture. However, those who are familiar with the nature of 
the historical process in the Philippines are not at all con- 
cerned about the problem of political leadership in the coun- 
try in the years to come. Philippine history amply shows 
that the Filipino race has the potentiality of producing 
leaders with the intellectual, moral and patriotic giandeui 
of Manuel L. Quezon. 



RISE OF PRESIDENT QUEZON TO LEADERSHIP 



By Eulogio B. Rodriguez 

BEFORE TAKING up the services rendered by President 
IManuel L. Quezon to his country from the time he entered 
the government service by accepting the position of fiscal 
for the province of Tayabas in 1904 up to the time of his 
■death in 1944, we have to state that as a youth of twenty-one 
■years of age, Quezon saw military service in the Philippine 
revolutionary forces under General Emilio Aguinaldo against 
"toe Americans. This was in that little mountainous penin- 
sula of Bataan so famous in World War II and from 1899 
to 1901 when he had to surrender to the American forces. 
When he had to leave his country for Australia forty years 
thereafter, he addressed his last goodbye to his country in 
those same majestic mountains as it was written that he 
was never to return. 

His whole life-time was dedicated to his own country 
ail his energy, his wisdom, were devoted to the pursuit 
of, as General MacArthur said, “man’s most precious herit- 
freedom. His career spaces the most glorious century 
of Philippine history. His biography is the heroic history 
of that epoch and of the present Philippines as a modern 

nation. He has fought innumerable battles and won them 
all.” 



While his acceptance of his appointment as prosecuting 
attorney of Mindoro was a financial sacrifice on his part (he 
was earning more as a practicing attorney), he said to him- 
self. This position which is being unexpectedly offered to 
me may be the starting point set by fate for a greater service 
v/hich I may render to my people in their work of self- 
redemption.” 



To those skeptics who doubted the ability of the Orien- 
tals to live a democratic life and practice a democratic form 



■ f^s’orinted from the Administration Magazine, August, 1948, pp. 



56 



RODRIGUEZ— RISE OF QUEZON TO LEADERSHIP 



57 



ci’ government he answered: “For three-hundred years the 
Christianization had prepared us for democracy since Christ’s 
teachings were indeed the essence of democratic ideas and 
principles.” 

President Quezon was very well read and well informed, 
philosophy, history and biography having been among his 
favorite subjects. With a brilliant mind, instinctive, keen 
and quick to grasp and retain points he read and learned, 
he could impart them fluently and lucidly when occasions 
demanded. Simple was his style, but clear and vigorous. 

In delivering his speeches, he possessed that power of 
marshalling his points into a unified logic so that those who 
heard him had a clear picture of what he said. That pecu- 
liar skill, that unusual eloquence together with that magnetic 
and winsome hold he had on his audience kept people spell- 
bound for hours evidently without tiring on what he said. 



From his written thoughts and spoken words containing 



His belligerent attitude and spirit of suspicion and skep- 
ticism forced him to reluctantly accent the terms of the Ame- 
ricans. He laid down his arms and took the oa.th of alle- 
giance to the United States. The suspicion and hostility in 




of the past and among the present leaders of nations 




him. 



58 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



the young man’s mind ebbed away as he realized that history 
was not repeating itself and that the Filipinos had not just 
changed masters on the signing of the Treaty of Paris. As 
with the passage of time the young man became convinced 
that the Americans were giving the Filipinos “a helping hand 
and a voice that, like theirs, may be that of a free and inde- 
pendent people,” President Quezon began to show rare capa- 
city for leadership. 

“You must bear in mind,” he continued, speaking this 
time to the Americans, “that freedom for our country is 
everything to us, just as your freedom is to you. Freedom 
is the greatest human cause. It is something without which 
no self-respecting people can enjoy the maximum of happi- 
ness and contentment.” 

President Roxas paid him high tribute saying that v/e 
are a free people and free nation, in large part, because of 
President Quezon, and that our present government, the Re- 
public and its institutions are as much his work as they could, 
be of any single man and they constitute his perpetual monu- 
ment. “In recalling his life,” the late President Roxas said, 
“we recall the story of the modern grov/th of our nation. 
His climb to fame and leadership is a tale which must be told 
to all our generations. The spirit which broke the bonds of 
personal poverty which hurdled every obstacle because there 
was none great enough to stay him, is one of the proudest 
products of our race: His name is truly a glittering orna- 

ment of this nation.” 

Former Governor General, now Justice Murphy of the 
U.S. Supreme Court, one of his closest friends, greatly mourn- 
ed his death and said that “the government of the United 
States deeply mourn the great loss of its best friend, the one 
who worked and struggled hard to obtain the independence 
and self-government of the Philippines.” He added that Pres- 
ident Quezon “never violated his oath to the people of the 
United States and in obedience to that oath, he came to our 
land and perished in exile. One thing he never would tole- 
rate would be the slightest hint of violating his oath of of- 
fice.” 



RODRIGUEZ— RISE OF QUEZON TO LEADERSHIP 



59 



The glowing tribute paid by General MacArthur was no 
less laudatory nor less sincere. 

“Of all men of all time, none more truly merited the 
application of patriot-statesmen. He could, as he. 

Among the beautiful tributes Justice Claro M. Recto paid 
President Viezon at the national leader’s final resting place 
were the following: 

“And this under the fascination of his personality and 
the incantation of his words, there emerged one after another 
these historical milestones which marked the progress of 
our land of promise; first, the independence clauses in the 
platforms of the political parties; then 

in 1916- later in 1934, the Independence law, the Consthution 
ana the Commonwealth; and finally the 
the 4th of this month of July, was boin to 

life.” 

Judge Pablo S. Rivera of Negros Occidents who was 

with President Quezon in .nd placed him 

Jones Law, exalted the late f 

on the highest pedestal of statesmanship in the follow in, 

terms: 

•■I do not Itncw of any 

parallel President Quezon s. In the lo ^ y 

elections or suffrage by ^ j. suffer a defeat from 

another international figure who ffj.a<^e of his peeople 

the time he ?his exfraordi- 

to the day of his de^h T1 ^ psychology, 

nary career seems simple^ H heart— he was 

of psychological career extending from 

a masterful man. of wisdom that weathered 

youth to old age he ^ook a co t opinion. He never 

the ever-changing current of fi P He never 

fought principles. He always stood 
fought for himself. He always fought for the people. 

Concludino- Judge Rivera stated further: “His colleagues 
in Congress pSd him this tribute: ‘He crossed swords with 



60 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



some of the ablest minds of this country and in all such 
encounters he had emerged triumphant or at least held his 
own.’ ” 

President Quezon always had an unswerving faith in the 
American people and in the great power of the American 
nation. He said these words full of encouragement to the 
Filipino people at the outbreak of the last world war: 

“I urge every Filipino to be of good cheer, to have faith 
in the patriotism and valor of our soldiers in the field. But 
above all, to trust America and our great beloved leader — 
President Roosevelt! The United Nations will win this war. 
America is too great and too powerful to be vanquished in 
this conflict. I know she will not fail us!” Then his indo- 
mitable character and strong determination were stressed 
when he said: “The Philippines will stand by the United. 

States till the bitter end,” and when the Great Battle was 
already won his weakened voice came from his smiling pale 
lips with these words: “Thank God the facts have proved that 
I was right. We stood by the United States to the end. I 
am proud of the Filipino soldiers.” 

In his radio talk over the Columbia Recording Company, 
President Quezon told his radio audience that the Atlantic 
Charter’s real test would come after the victory of the United 
Nations and he continued: 

“Then we shall be faced with the task of making good 
on our promise to ourselves. We shall be called upon to 
make the postwar sacrifices that will take the principles of 
freedom out of a charter and put them into everyday life. 
We shall embark on the gigantic task of creating a world 
without fear and without want, a world where all of us can 
live in freedom to speak and think and worship, a world 
where evil men can no longer break the peace.” 

Let us all remember his counsel to us Filipinos. Let 
us all unite for the rehabilitation of our country both morally 
and economically. When we Filipinos talk we should use 
words as before the war and not “bullets” as we do now. 
Remember “words” and forget “bullets”. 



RODRIGUEZ— mSE OF QUEZON TO LEADERSHIP 



61 



The Philippines Historical Committee organized by our 
government to identify, designate and appropriately niarlc 
historical places abounding in our country, prepared the fol- 
lowing marker to be installed at his birthplace. 

BIRTH I’L.'lCE OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 
1878-1944 



This niiiks the snot where President 3Ianuel Luis Quezon 

1 10 Aiijnist 1878 to Lucio Quezon and Maria Molina of 

was born ^ August iiighlights of his public 

this toiui provineial fiscal 1903-04, provin- 

eareer: SoUhci 1899 la ^ Philippine Assembly 

eial governoi 190o-06, Washington D.C. 1909-16, presid- 

1907-09, resident comniis_sionci to VV ^ Common- 

ent of the Philippine garanac, Salt Lake 

wealth of 1944.’ An indomitable crusader for 

City, N.I., social justice, a great and fiery 

Philippine i'«lependenee ^ a true patriot, 

statesman, dynamic and lai-sigmeu 



THE RELUCTANT PARTNERS’’ 



By Benveniilo R. Dino 



AS THE LAST sultry days of summer vanished into au- 
tum. President Manuel Quezon watched the dwindling days 
of his power. Autumn of 1943 would mark — by constitu- 
tional legacy — the end of the tenure as President of the 
Philippine Commonwealth Government-in-exile. 

By a provision in the Philippine Constitution — a provi- 
sion which Quezon himself insisted be inserted — no Philip- 
pine president could serve more than eight years. On the 
15th of November, 1943, Quezon would have served eight 
years. According to the Constitution, he would have to re- 
tire in favor of Vice-President Sergio Osmena, who stood by 
his side, eager to take his turn as president. 

However, Quezon was convinced that he had become the 
symbol of the Filipino’s resistance against the Japanese inva- 
sion. He felt it essential to remain President, not only for 
the sake of the exiled Philippine Government but also to 
continue representing the Philippines in Washington. 

The argument advanced by Quezon was not exclusively 
for the pursuance of personal ambition. There were also 
those who favored this course. The Filipino people, had 
they been free to register their wishes, would have certainly 

kept Quezon in the presidency through a constitutional am- 
endment. 

While autumn loomed ahead, the issue grew before the 

Should Quezon continue as pres- 
ident? If so, by what legality? Or should he retire in favor 
of Vice-President Osmena? If so, what chances had the lat- 
ter of pushing on the war effort toward the eventual libera- 
tion of the Islands? Would a U.S.-gxiaranteed Independence 
follow that liberation? 



* Reprinted from the 
pp. 34, 36, 40, 168-170. 



Philippine Free Press, 



December 12, 1964, 



62 



DI/vO— THE RELUCTANT PARTNERS 



63 



Physically ill with the coming damp of autumn, Quezon 
had to face a bitter choice. 

He would have to break precedent by exerting his in- 
fluence upon Cabinet members of the government-m-exile, 
ccmpelling them to make a joint-decision m his favor or sii 
on as president without the legality of a constitutional man- 
date. Another course would be to peacefully give way o 
O-neha and retire. If he chose the latter course, he would 
stay on in the United States as a sick, stateless statesman, 
of whom there were scores wandering in America and Ei^^ 
lard. Therefore, Quezon was personally reluctant to ^ive up 

his office. 

“The Philippines needs a man at the helm that people 
have complete Mth in,” he said. "What it Osmena hecomes 

the nresident now? There would be o^^^ena’s 

The members of the Japanese puppet cabinet are 

men!” Quezon said. 

Although litelong friends and political 

and Osmena had also been lifelong ouezon and 

AS the two top men at the helin of §ove™»nt 

rntmr a 

sh^w^s rivalries and periodic 

clashing of views. 

Having observed them both closely many 
ture to say that the pair would ener"y' 

Osmena's sober, deliberative calmness complemented the 
former’s fiery temperament. 

Sometimes Quezon was guided in hiS policies ^ 

temperament than by logic. His behavic^ was mipu 

sometimes instinctual. On the other an , sme 
proach to pressing problems was that of a patient, keen- 
minded diplomat. He matched Quezon’s flare for quick ac- 
tions by a personal precision. While Quezon s fighting spirit 
was marked— and often marred— by efforts to anticipate re- 



64 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



suits, Osmena would rather woo conformity from the oppo- 
sition in order to win security. 

It was inevitable, therefore, that these radical differences 
and personal idiosyncracies would come between them. The 
duet now turned into a duel. 

Quezon bewailed Osmena’s conformity as an attitude of 
irresoluteness, bordering on expediency. Osmena questioned 
Quezon’s blinding capacity for absolutism and illogicity. Que- 
zon resented Osmeha’s “premature” bids for safety. 

As early as the first beleaguered days of Corregidor, Os- 
meha purportedly volunteered to escape to America. A simi 
lar incident was repeated on the submarine that brought the 
Quezon-Osmeha party, late in February 1942, to safety in the 
enemy-occupied Visayan Islands. Osmena had insisted that 
the refugee party should continue the trip, by submarine, 
straight to the United States. Quezon sharply dissented and 
challenged the Vice-President to “go it alone,” if he wished. 
Again in Australia, Osmena anticipated Quezon’s decision to 
leave by surface ship for the United States when Australia 
v/as near the brink of a Japanese invasion. When he found 
Quezon adamant, Osmena desisted and the pair pursued their 
trip to exile “peacefully” together. 

These differences did not grow into open hostility. The 
cold war that slowly developed between Quezon and Osmena 
could hardly be called “war” but it was obviously less than 
friendship. Before the glare of floodlights and flashbulbs, 
the duo would jostle at each other, exchange laudatory re- 
marks and set up obliging poses. But no sooner would each 
stand at a respectable arm’s length distance from the other, 
than harmless humorous jokes would turn to downright 
mean sarcasm. 

Quezon always referred to Osmena as plain “Sergio.” 
This reflected an intimacy acquired through common strug- 
gle in the political field. It also meant that the standards 
of loyalty to which all of Quezon’s followers were subject did. 
not even exempt the Vice-President. For example, Quezon 
never called Osmena “Mr. Vice-President.” At the same time 



DI NO— THE, RELUCTANT PARTNERS 



65 



he expected the latter to refer to himself always as “Mr. Pres- 
ident” or “Sehor Presidente.” As a matter of fact, Quezon 
often complained that “Sergio was never loyal” to him. Oh 
one occasion, Osmena, deaf in one ear, probably missed hear- 
ing a statement pronounced by Quezon. The President com- 
plained later, “It hurts me when my people do not listen to 
me.” 

Ordinarily, Quezon’s jibes at Osmena held to the pattern 
of too-familiar jokes and pungent remarks. Osmena would 
hit back with well-turned criticism at which Quezon would 
first laugh. Then, stung, he could not resist flaring up with 
a hot reply. Sometimes these battles of mutual criticism 
would last for months on end. 

Most typical was the battle over Philippine independence 
which both fought with the American Congress. 

OsiTiena took me aside one pleasant afternoon in Mel- 
bourne, shortly before our departure for the United States. 
The Vice-President obviously had something in mind when he 
unprecedentedly invited me out for an exclusive walk. 

Osmena said, “The Jones Law, commonly known as the 
Independence Law, which Quezon brought from the United 
States, was of my own making. Commissioner Quezon did 
not really do anything unless it was previously okayed by 
me or unless I suggested his next step. It was I who direct- 
ed the campaign from behind the same at home. It was my 
aim to preserve the unity of the party. That was why I re- 
linquished the leadership and bade Quezon to go instead. 

“When Quezon was about to leave for the United States 
after the Philippine Legislature rejected the Hare-Hawes-Cut- 
ting Law, he invited me to join his party to the United States. 
If they failed to obtain a new bill,” Osmena said, they would 
have accepted the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law. But if they suc- 
ceeded in getting a new bill, the credit would be shared 50-50 
between us. I had then everything to gain and nothing to 
lose. But I declined to go. If I "went with him, Roxas and 
company would have formed a new party in order to reject 
the new bill. So I stayed home to prevent this coup. I as- 



66 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



smed Quezon that if he got a new bill, I would support him 
hack home. I did. Later, when Quezon returned with the 
Tycings-McDuffie Law, I was able to persuade Roxas and the 
others to accept it.” 

Months later, when we were in Washington, it was Que- 
zcB S turn to fightback. “I only made Osmeha my vice-pres- 
ident, as an act of justice because of his long service. He is 
ungrateful!” 

As vice-president, Osmena did not challenge Quezon’s 
leadership as long as Quezon was fit. But after Quezon’s 
ailment, he more than once suggested that he (Osmeha) take 
over as “acting president.” 

Back in Corregidor, during the early days of the war, 
Quezon had been at the point of abdicating. On February 
10, 1942, Quezon had wanted to resign and leave Osmeha to 
succeed him. Quezon asked the latter to decide. Osmeha 
kept quiet for a long time, hesitated, and finally said: “I am 

■willing to be acting president, if the President cannot carry 
on the work because of his health. However, I would not 
want the President to resign.” 

Quezon did not resign. Neither did he allow Osmeha to 
assume the role of acting president. 

The problem of constitutional legality came in 1943. 
Long before November _came, Osmeha again renewed his sug- 
ges'iions to take the oath as “acting president.” Quezon, at 
thus time, had only recently been brought to McMartin Camp 
near Lake Saranac. The transfer had been effected because 
of deteriorating health early in July, four months before his 
tenure of office was to expire by constitutional provision. 
The Vice-President was evidently anticipating the deadline. 
This irked Quezon. The President promptly sent a telegram 
to Osmeha telling him not to take the oath since it was not 
necessary. 

On July 6, the President, visibly worried, addressed a let- 
ter to Justice Frank Murphy, requesting the latter to inter- 
"uene. Justice Murphy, former governor general and later 



67 



DInO— THE RELUCTANT PARTNERS 



American high commissioner to the Philippines, was familiar 
with the old personal differences between Quezon and Os- 
meha, as well as with questions dealing with the legality ot 
power He would be relied upon to settle renewed differ- 
ences by persuasion, by weight of legal grounds and by pres- 
tige. 



Quezon explained: “1 have designated the Vice-Presid- 

ent to take charge of the Philippine Government in Washing- 
ton while I am sick. I have sent him to represent me m 
social functions and conferences, with all the emoluments of 
his position. This does not entail, however, such things as 
nie power of determining major policies of the government 
which belong rightly and exclusively to the President. VTiat 
more does he want?” 



Osmena wired the same day, answering Quezon’s tele- 
gram. He insisted on taking the oath of office since he was 
in a better physical condition to perform the task of t.ie 
presidency (few days previously, Osmena himself had jast 
recovered from a sudden, brief but serious illness). 



Angered by Osmeiia’s insistence, Quezon wired back: 
“Do not take oath, for reason already explained to you. The 
pro-Jap Filipinos now in the puppet-cabinet in Manila are alx 
your men. The effect on the Filipino people worries me to 

death.” 



Quezon, still angry, hurriedly scribbled another letter to 
Justice Murphy, stating that he would not allow Osmena to 
take the oath as acting presMent, unless President Fran.-vun 
D. Roosevelt of the United States said so. 

Evidently it was Quezon’s intention to involve the pres- 
ident of the United States in the political showdown with 
Osmena Thus, no action against his authority could be ef- 
fected, without the U.S. president’s complicity. This would 
ward off any possibility of adverse action against him, should 
Osmena succeed in pushing through with his plans to take 
over. Furthermore, with the November 15 deadline coming 
to a close, this would presumably precipitate results in his 
favor. Should the U.S. president make a premature decision. 



68 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



it would result in a terrific psychological setback for the U.S. 
government, for it would necessarily imply that the promise 
of independence was nominal because the president of the 
United States could decide on Philippine presidential succes- 
sion. 

The White House endorsed the dilemma back to Quezon 
on the basis of the war effort. President Roosevelt knew the 
implications of Quezon’s request. He preferred to' wash his 
hands of the whole affair. Legally, the question had to be 
settled by an office that could supersede the Philippine Con- 
stitution. 

Quezon refused a congressional intervention. “This is 
strictly a family matter between us,” he insisted. 

Other reasons complicated the issue for President Roose- 
velt. If he ruled in favor of Quezon, the Japanese would 
claim that the autocratic Americans had violated the Philip- 
pine Constitution. If, on the other hand, he told Quezon to 
retire in favor of Osmeha, Japan would shout that the faith- 
less Americans had let down their own best friend. There 
was no alternative but to endorse the issue back to the Phil- 
ippine government-in-exile. Let them decide for themselves. 
Allow them to draft their own resolution. Have it confirmed 

by the American congress later. Let Quezon be his own 
judge. 



Quezon, however, did not 
to be decided by his cabinet, 
cabinet to vote in his favor? 



like this. He wanted the issue 
But could he rely on his own 



fv. 7 serious doubts in Quezon’s mind regarding 

e loyalty of the men that surrounded him. He took great 
in eres iti their personal views, interpreting them within the 
context of the problem. While Quezon did not relish the 
1 ea o giving way to his successor he was at the same time 
desirous to keep everything legal. 

With the pioblem now back in his hands, Quezon prompt- 
y ispatched old reliable Col. Manuel Nieto to Washington, 
o confer with Osmeha about a possible compromise. If the 



DJnO— THE RELUCTANT PARTNERS 69 

latter could be persuaded not to push his claim to the presid- 
ency, then the question of leadership would be nonexistent. 
Nieto left for Washington on the night of July 6. 

Quezon now began to consolidate his position before 
the members of his cabinet-in-exile. All of the cabinet mem- 
bers, however, were reluctant to openly pronounce their 
choice in the presence of both President Quezon and Vice- 
President Osmeha. 

Personally, Quezon felt he could rely on Col. Manuel 
Nieto, his trusted aide; Col. Andres Soriano, his lifelong 
friend who was Secretary of Finance; and Resident Commis- 
sioner Joaquin “Mike” Elizalde. Later, after Quezon’s death, 
the latter two would not be included in Osmeha’s cabinet. 

There were also other cabinet members that could be 
relied upon to support Quezon. General Basilio J. Valdes, 
wartime Defense Secretary, was a staunch Quezon man; and 
Dr. Arturo B. Rotor, Secretary to the President. While not 
absolutely sure of the latter, Quezon at least counted on him 
to join the majority. When he came to Carlos P. Romulo, 
the Secretary of Information, Quezon commented: “He will 

bat for me because I am right.” 

Fear of reprisal, should Osmeha take over, lingered in 
the minds of the cabinet members. The tendency to let 
iate take its course was most tempting. Yet, by common 
consent, the force of Quezon’s courageous personality held 
the bulk of the cabinet together in his favor. 

“Some people like Osmeha. But I’ve been for Quezon 
for a long time, and nothing has happened to make me 
change my mind,” a cabinet member confided. 

While biding his time, Quezon made me read to him 
volumes of books sometimes up to the wee hours of the 
night. On the other occasions he would resort to a game to 
gauge his chances. He would play solitaire propped up in 
his bed, while I fixed the cards on a nearby table. If the 
combinations happened to turn out against his expectations. 



70 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



he would direct me to cheat. This was one unusual charac- 
teristic of Quezon: he would even cheat fortune itself. 

Except for the fateful Shoreham conference with Roose- 
velt's emissary, on the morning of October 4, wherein Que- 
zon outwitted the American panel over postwar bases ar- 
rangements, there was little to be done in the sickbed head- 
quarters at the Washington hotel. 

Meanwhile, Osmena went about bringing his case before 
Arnerican authorities. Quezon refused to be disturbed by 
news that Osmena was lobbying with Secretary of War Henry 
L. Stimson and members of the U.S. congress. Quezon, cock- 
sure of himself, commented: "Everything is okay now with 
Osmena. In spite of what he did, I will give him a chance. 
I will not deprive him of the chance of succession after the 
war. The only matter with him is that he listened to the 
‘imperialists’ (pro-Americans). But it is natural for him to 
do that.” 

Quezon still recognized the worthy motives of his oppo- 
nent. Formerly, he had threatened to wreck Osmeha’s chan- 
ces by amending the Constitution immediately after libera- 
tion, thereby forcing a new election. Then Quezon would 
have supported Roxas against Osmena. 

The real issue came to a head on the afternoon of Nov- 
ember 3 the day the cabinet of the government-in-exile con- 
vened for a conference. The cabinet members sat around 
Quezon’s bed. 

Quezon stated that if the cabinet were to reach a deci- 
sion, it had to be a fair one. All the cabinet members, Que- 
zon reasoned, were his appointees — all, except Jaime Hernan- 
dez, the auditor general. It was imperative that his view be 
considered as having more weight than all others put together. 

Apologizing nervously, Jaime reouested that he be given 
time to think it over. 

Visibly irked by Hernandez’s wavering, either to Osmena 
or to himself, Quezon dismissed the session with a dry curt; 



D/A-O— THE reluctant PARTNERS 71 

“The meeting is adjourned.” His scraggiy eyebrows shook 
vehemently. He stared at Hernandez quizzically The ca- 
binet members folded their papers, abruptly and silently- 
filed out of the door. 

The following day Osmeha appeared at the Shoreham. 
His arrival coincided with a closed-door talk between Quezon 
and Justice Murphy. 

Assigned to usher in the former governor "eneral I ac- 
companied Murphy to the President’s bedroom. Meanwhile, 
Serapio Canceran, the President’s private secretary, took care 
of Osmeha. We made certain that they would not meet each 
other. After Quezon’s lengthy conference with Murphy, I 
accompanied him through a side door, by-passing Osmeha. 
With Murphy gone, I announced to the Vice-President in Can- 
ceran’s office that the President was now ready for him. 
They had a long serious talk that day. 

Three days later, Osmeha revealed that Quezon was 
engaged in another political gambit. A resolution, subject 
to approval by the U.S. congress after signature by all the 
members of the government-in-exile, was in Quezon’s hand. 
Osmeha refused to sign the resolution. 

“The resolution is unjust,” Osmeha complained. “Ac- 
cording to the resolution, both of us would be allowed to 
continue in our tenures as President and Vice-President, 
respectively, until the Philippines is liberated. If the Pres- 
ident dies before that date, I would still remain Vice-Presid- 
ent.” Then he continued: “I have plenty of chances to win. 
If I only stand pat, the President will be out by November 
15. But I want to help maintain unity. If I am an obstacle 
to our chances of getting millions for the Philippines’ reha- 
bilitation after the war, I shall not accept the presidency. I 
would accept only if Quezon should support me.” 

I told the President about the Vice-President’s chagrin 
over the reported injustice of the resolution. Quezon re- 
plied, “I shall not allow Sergio to be treated unfairly. If 
the congi’ess passes the original resolution, I shall not accept 



72 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



the presidency.” It was clear to me that Quezon was play- 
ing poker for his confirmation with all the cards in his favor. 

November 9 came and a telephone call announced that 
the U.S. Senate had passed the joint-resolution. “This house 
will debate it tomorrow,” President Quezon announced tri- 
umphantly. 

At 4 p.m. on November 10, word came that a motion 
forwarded by Rep. Judd, suggesting the return of the reso- 
lution back to the Philippine committee had lost by a vote 
of 169 to 119. This meant that the resolution was now ready 
for confirmation by congress. Congress then approved the 
resolution by majority vote: 181 to 107. A flood of telephone 
calls jammed the President’s private telephone. 

At 4:30, Vice-President Osmena appeared, beaming. In 
a traditional handclasp accompanied by the characteristic 
Latin embrace, Osmena congratulated President Quezon. 

After Osmena left, Quezon revealed that had Osmena 
insisted in becoming president, Roosevelt would have pro- 
claimed an executive order abolishing the Commonwealth 
government-in-exile. The U.S. President would then let Gen. 
MacArthur act as military governor of the Philippines until 
the civil government was restored. 

Osmena never knew this. 

“Had Osmena won his case,” Quezon later said, “he 
would have been president for only two days at most. I 
would have fought him therefore. He was afraid of hos- 
tile attitude toward him in the executive branches of the 
U.S. government and in the congress. So he came back and 
begged me to make my decision instead. I washed my hands 
of it. So he went to Millard E. Tydings, asking the latter to 
prepare a resolution on the basis of the letter signed by me 
and by all the members of the cabinet, also signed by no 
other than Osmena himself. This was the joint resolution.” 

When November 15, 1943 came, Quezon was still the 
president. Osmena took the blow gamely. “If it is in the 



DJjVO— THE RELUCTANT PARTNERS 



73 



interest of the country, I shall abide by the decision of the 
Congress,” he said. 

The fight for presidential succession demonstrated be- 
yond all shadow of doubt that, amid political tiffs and fits 
of rivalry, the two men at the helm of the Philippine govern- 
ment could be relied upon to settle their differences peace- 
fully. 

EDITOR’S NOTE:* 



After interviewing Vice-President Osmena (November 27, 
1943) and President Quezon (November 25, 1943), Frederick S. 
Marquardt, then Chief of the Office of U.S. Office of War In- 
formation in the Southwest Paciic (see FREE PRESS, December 
15, 19621, came to the conclusion that Osmena had indeed per- 
formed a great service for the Philippines in one of the most 
touching- acts of self-abnegation in the history of the country. 
Osmena gave up the presidency “after having been— in effect- 
elected to it. He signed away his right to the chief magistracy, 
when all he had to do was remain silent.” 



According to Marquardt, Vice-President Osmeira was willing 
to discuss any method by which Quezon could stay in office, 
although he never gave his blanket consent. Osmena said he 
would comply if a request came from President Roosevelt. As 
events turned out, the letter which Quezon had wanted Osjnena 
to sign during the crucial cabinet meeting, was not the letter 
Osmena had e.xpected Roosevelt to send: one, requesting both of 
them to take the question of who would be president to the U.S. 
Congress. Instead it was a letter from both of them asking 
Congress to act. On the basis of his procedural defect, Osmena 
refused to sign. After hearing the opinion of the cabinet members, 
Quezon, according to Osmena, said: “Well, I see the cabinet is 
divided. In that case my decision is made. . . I shall leave here 
on November 14. Mr. Osmena will become President on the 15t . 
This is the final cabinet meeting.” After the meeting Osmena 
said he spoke to Senator Tydings to revise the letter, and after 
a few changes the cabinet approved it and all of them signed it. 
The rest is history. The Senate passed the joint resolution but 
there were more than 150 votes against it in the 
after a particularly hot debate. Osmena could undoubtedly have 
killed the bill in the Lower House had he expressed any disap- 
proval of it.” 



Two days before his interview with Osmena, Marquardt spoke 
to President Quezon and was informed that both he and the Vice* 

*( Philippines Free Press) 



4 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



President had decided to settle the question of the presidency 
among themselves without requesting U.S. Government interven- 
tion. Quezon added, however, that “some people apparently con- 
vinced Osmeha that he should have the office according to legal 
right.” This took place in summer. With the coming of fall, 
according to Marquardt, Quezon had shown the author a six-page 
letter asking Roosevelt to settle the issue. Quezon initially re- 
fused to sign the draft of the letter because “it was simply a mat- 
ter of dignity. I wasn't a job seeker and never had been one. I 
wasn’t going to sign a letter to Congress now begging for a job.” 
On the basis of an appeal to patriotism from Secretary of vVar 
Stimson, President Quezon finally relented and this time it v/as 
Osmeha who wouldn't sign the letter. At this point the crucial 
cabinet meeting was held where Quezon, with his customary 
dramatic flourish said; “Gentlemen, I'm through. . .'' I'm leav- 
ing here on the 14th.” 

According to Marquardt, Quezon smiled and said: “Osmeha 
came over quickly and said he'd sign the paper. So did everyone 
else. And that’s how it happened. 



QUEZON AND OSMENA: THEIR LAST BATTLE 



By Frederic S. Marqiiardt 

MANUEL L. QUEZON and Sergio Osmena formed 
tl:e most enduring partnership in Philippine history. For 
mere than a quarter of a century they directed the political 
campaign for Philippine independence. As the United States 
extended greater and greater authority to the Filipinos, Que- 
zon and Osmena used it to build a new ship of state. It is 
an ironic twist of fate that Quezon didn’t live to see the ship 
launched, while Osmena was not privileged to stand at the 
rudder during the launching. 

Both of these architects of Philippine independence were 
born in 1878; Quezon on August 19; Osmena on September 
9. Both were elected to the First Philippine Assembly in 
1807; Osmena became speaker; Quezon was made majority 
party floor leader. When the Philippine Senate was consti- 
tuted under the Jones Act, Quezon became its piesident, 
Osmena, majority floor leader. In the autonomous Philip- 
pine Commonwealth, Quezon was president, Osmena was 
vice-president. 

Throughout the American regime these two Filipinos 
dominated Philippine politics. They complemented each other 
perfectly The explosive, Latin-tempered Quezon was an 
ideal foil for the even-handed. Oriental-minded Osmena. They 
had their differences, but usually kept them to themselves. 
There were some notable exceptions, such as unipersonalism 
in government and the advisability of rejecting the Hare- 
Hawes-Cutting independence law in the hope of getting some- 
thing better. 

Quezon won both those fights. He convinced the Na- 
cionalista Consolidado Party it should give up the concep. 
of unipersonalism, and then gathered to himself a e po- 

* Reprinted from the Philippine Free Press, August 15, 1953, pp. 
25-26, 28. 



76 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



wer he could lay his hands on. He persuaded the legislature 
it should kill the Hare-Hawes-Cutting independence law, and 
then secured approval of the Tydings-McDuffie Act, virtually 
a carbon copy. 

Their last battle could easily have disrupted the Quezon 
Osmeha partnership, and might have seriously affected the 
Philippine war effort in World War II. But Quezon and 
Osmena settled their differences privately and presented a 
united front to the world. 

That was just 10 years ago. The issue was fought out 
in Washington, where Quezon and Osmeha headed the Phil- 
ippine government in exile. The story is little known in the 
Philippines, which v/as under Japanese occupation at the 
time. It is specially pertinent in this election year of 1953. 

The question involved presidential tenure of office. Then, 
as now, the Philippine Constitution provided no man could 
hold the presidency for more than eight successive years. 
Quezon had been sworn in as president on November 15, 
1935. His eight years would be up on November 15, 1943. 
According to the constitution, Osmeha was due to become 
president on that date. 

But few men willingly yield political power. Quezon 
wanted to retain his high office. There were some strong 
arguments on his side. He was a symbol of Filipino resist- 
ance to the Japanese. He was far better known than Os- 
meha, in the United States and throughout the world. If 
he were replaced as president, the constitutional issue would 
be lost sight of. The Japanese would claim that the United 
States had double-crossed a loyal friend. Foreign nations 
might think that Quezon had removed himself from office 
as a protest against America’s policy of Europe-First instead 
of Asia-First in fighting the war. 

On the other hand, Osmeha knew that the office legally 
belonged to him. He felt capable of doing the job. And he 
believed profoundly in a government of law, not of men. One 
breach of the constitution could lead to another. This, he 
reasoned, would be a good time to show that even in moments 



MARQUARDT— QUEZON AND OSMENA 77 

of grave emergency the Filipinos could live under and abide 
by the laws they themselves had made. 

In the end, as was usually the case, Quezon’s will pre- 
vailed. Osmena was ready to sacrifice personal ambition to 
the national welfare. The old working partnership was re- 
established and the two men petitioned congress to set aside 
the Philippine constitution. 

Thus it was that the Congress of the United States passed 
a bill providing that the president and vice-president of the 
Philippine Commonwealth now serving should continue in 
office until the United States president proclaimed that con- 
stitutional processes had been restored in the Philippines. 
President Roosevelt signed the bill into law on November 
12, 1943. 

In view of charges of American intervention in the cur- 
rent elections, it is interesting to note that 1943 was one year 
in which the United States did actually determine who would 
be president of the Philippines. But it was done on the writ- 
ten petition of the executive heads of the Philippine govern- 
ment, and it met considerable opposition in the United States. 
In hi's definitive work, “First Malayan Republic” (published 
in 1951), George A. Malcolm called congress’ action “consti- 
tutionally indefensible.” 



Quezon’s Story 

I visited Washington shortly thereafter, and had long 
interviews with both Quezon and Osmena, the former in his 
lavish suite in the Shoreham Hotel, the latter in his modest 
apartment in the Twenty-Four Hundred Hotel. Each told 
me his side of the story, and I still have the notes I made 
ii-nmediately after the interview. They reveal a story which 
has never been fully told before. 

My interview with Quezon was on Thanksgiving Day, 
November 25. The president was propped up in bed, and 
his frail body was frequently wracked by coughing spells 
induced by the tuberculosis which was to result in his death 
less than a year later. 



78 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



I took the opportunity to congratulate him on the way 
the Filipino government in exile had worked out its prob- 
lems. I pointed out how sharply this contrasted with the 
bitterness shown between De Gaulle and Giraud in the Free 
French government. 

“Vice-President Osmeha and I agreed to settle the issue 
between ourselves last May,” Quezon said. “President Roose- 
velt told me he wanted me to remain as president after Nov- 
ember 15. I asked him not to take any action without con- 
sulting Osmena.” 

Quezon’s opinion was that the Philippine Gonstitution 
was not operative, since the Tydings-McDuffie Act provided 
that the President should have authority in the Philippines, 
and obviously he had none there. “I am the president of 
half a dozen men, not of the Philippines,” Quezcn said 
laughingly. 

Judge Sam Rosenman, one of Roosevelt’s aides, tried to 
bring the matter to a head. After talking with both of the 
Filipino leaders, he drafted a letter to congress which he 
hoped they would sign. Over the phone he told Quezon that 
Osmena had agreed to sign. But Quezon objected. He didn’t 
want to be in the position of a suppliant. Secretary of War 
Stimson, former governor general of the Philippines, tried 
to persuade Quezon. Here’s how Quezon described the in- 
cident: 

“Stimson came in and showed me the letter and asked 
Tne to sign it. I said I couldn’t. He said, “That’s your 
Spanish pride, Don Manuel.’ I said it wasn’t a matter of 
pride but one of dignity. I wasn’t a job-seeker, and never 
had been. I wasn’t going to sign a letter to Gongress now 
t>egging for a job. 

Then Stimson said, T’m asking you to sign that letter 
ecause we need you in the war effort, and we need you at 
the head of the government. It’s your duty.’ 

So I said, “Then I’il sign it. I have never yet failed in 
my patriotic duty. If Osmeha will sign it, I will.’ 



MARQUARDT—QMEZO-N AND OSMEnA 



79 



“So I thought it was all settled, hut that afternoon Os- 
r.*ena came and said he couldn’t sign the letter and he didn’t 
think I should.” 

According to (Quezon, Rosenman called him up and said, 
“What’s the matter with you fellows? When Osmeha wants 
to sign, you don’t. And when you want to sign, he doesn’t.” 

Quezon went on with his story, gestulating dramatically 
in his sickbed. “So I called a meeting of the cabinet, and 
told them I had agreed to sign the request to congress be- 
cause the secretary of war said it was my duty. However, 
Sergio wouldn’t sign it. 

“Then I said, ‘Gentlemen, I’m through.’ I turned to 
Hernandez (Jaime Hernandez, secretary of finance) and said, 
‘Fix up a complete financial report for my entire term of 
office.’ Then I said, ‘Rotor (Arturo B. Rotor, private secre- 
tary), get all my papers for me.’ And then to all of them I 
said, ‘I’m leaving on the 14th.’ ” 

Quezon smiled as he concluded, “Osmeha came over 
quickly and said he’d sign the paper. That’s how it hap- 
pened.” 

Vice-President Osmeha’s account was a little different. 
He gave it to me on Saturday, November 27, at the Twenty- 
Four I-Iundred Hotel. He, too, had talked with Secretary of 
War Stimson, who said that “the one great aim of the United 
States was to recapture the Philippines and give the Filipinos 
their real independence.” 

Osmeha continued: “Stimson said that in defeating Japan 
the United States would need the help of the Filipinos, all of 
them, and that he hoped President Quezon and I would both 
be able to help, and not just one of us, as would happen if 
Quezon were to be replaced by me as president. I told him 
I was anxious for unity too, but that there were certain legal 
obstacles to be considered. He said the method of settling 
the issue could be left to the legalists. But he emphasized 
that two men were essential in the reconquest of the Philip- 
pines — MacArthur and Quezon. 



80 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



“One day,” said Osmena, “Quezon called me to the Shore- 
ham and said, ‘Well, they’re going to throw me out into the 
street.’ I told him I had no intention of throwing him out, 

I said I had long since told mutual acquaintances that if I 
should become president I M'ould make Mr. Quezon head of 
a council of state and ask him to stay at the Shoreham with 
all the prerequisites of his present office. I didn’t want to 
move into that big suite. This place is fine for me.” 

Dramatic Meeting 

After his talks with Stimson, Quezon, and others, Osmena 
decided he would sign the petition to congress if he could 
get a letter from President Roosevelt asking him to do so. 
When he went to the dramatic cabinet meeting Quezon had 
described to me, Osmeiia thought Quezon had a request from 
Roosevelt. On learning Roosevelt hadn’t put his request in 
writing, Osmena said he couldn’t sign the letter. 

“President Quezon spoke to us at some length, lying 
there in his bed,” said Osmena. “He asked me if I wanted 
to be heard, and I presented my side of the case. Then he 
called on Hernandez, who said, “This is a very vital matter 
and I would like a little time to think it over.’ 

Then Mr. Quezon said, ‘Well, I see the cabinet is divided, 
n that case, my decision is made. I have rented a house in 
California and I shall leave here on November 14. Mr. Os- 
meha will become president on the 15th. This is the final 
cabinet meeting. It’s goodbye to you all.’ 

They all walked out, and I walked to the elevator with 
them. Then I returned to the president’s bedroom and told 
him I wanted to think things over and I would see him in 
the morning. I thought he might change his mind. But 
when I saw him the next day, he was as determined as ever. 

I m disgusted with it and I’ll have no more to do with 
itjr’ Mr. Quezon said. 

u J3ie from settling the case?’ I asked him. 

No, you go ahead and do what you like,’ he said. 



MARQUARDT— QUEZON AND OSMEnA 



81 



“ ‘All right,’ I said, ‘but I want one promise from you. 
I want you to let me handle the case entirely alone. Please 
don’t call up anyone or do anything about it.’ 

“ ‘I’ll promise that,’ Quezon said. ‘You can do anything 
you like. I’ll have no more to do with it.’ ” 

Now on his own, Osmeha decided to consult Sen. Mil- 
lard E. Tydings, head of the senate committee on insular 
affairs and author of the Philippine Independence Act. Os- 
mefia and Tydings discussed the matter at length, and Ty- 
dings assured him congress would not intervene except at 
the*’ direct request of Quezon and Osmeha. Bowing to the 
inevitable, Osmeha went to work on the draft of a letter to 
congress in which he voluntarily relinquished his legally- 
established right to the presidency. Tydings helped polish 
the letter. Osmeha took it to the cabinet, which approved 
it. Then he took it to Quezon, who promptly signed. 

Thus the Japanese were robbed of a potentially powerful 
propaganda weapon. And history was given an example of 
how Filipino leaders can work together when necessity arises 
and when they are of the stature of Manuel Quezon and 
Sergio Osmeha. 



PRESIDENT QUEZON'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE 
ALLIED WAR EFFORT' 



By Harry W. Frantz 



THE LATE President Manuel L. Quezon of the Philippine 
Ccmmonwealth, gave brilliant political aid to the United 
NaJons before his death at Saranac Lake, N.Y., on August 
1, 1944. As head of a government-in-exile at Washington 
dui.-ng more than two war years, and as an intimate friend 
Oi the late President Roosevelt, the leader of the Filipino 
people was a frequent vehicle for fraternal statements or 
policy expressions helpful to the Allied cause. 



The Office of War Information and the Office of Inter- 
Affairs frequently carried these statements by Pres- 
ident Quezon on major political development, and his world- 
wide recognition as democratic leader of a fighting small 
nation gave his expressions primary international importance. 

Scarcely one month after his arrival in Washington, the 
-njhppine Commonwealth on June 24, 1942, signed the dec- 
wrauon of the United Nations. A few weeks later President 
Quezon became a member of the Pacific War Council. These 

fiiWTi world that the United States intended to 

U ...11 Its independence pledge, and symbolized this country’s 
ro.e as a champion of small and relatively defenseless nations. 



^ President Quezon’s addresses and press statements, often 
with hign official collaboration, were broadcast to 
^ ry on the globe. Collectively, they served not 

interest of the Allies, but prepared world opin- 
if l!® establishment of the Philippine Republic, which 
ac„^ally became fact on July 4, 1946. 



Ready today, the messages reveal accurate prophecies of 
ue liberation of the Philippines, the defeat of Japan, the 



Reprinted frem the Quezon Memorial Book, pp. 137-139. 






82 



FR^lWrZ— QUEZON’S CONTRIBUTION TO THE WAR 83 

establishment of the United Nations and the fulfillment of 
the United States pledge of Philippine independence. 

On May 19, 1942, President Quezon spoke to the South 
American republic from New York. Recalling that the Phil- 
ippines had once shared the lot of the Latin American peoples 
as a province of Spain, he said; 

“I am immensely grateful to learn that all the sistrr 
republics of this hemisphere have agreed to discuss and plan 
a program of common defense. I am confident that, if the 
Americans can maintain the true cause of democracy, all 
liberty loving nations, sooner or later, will not only overco;ae 
the foreign yoke of oppression but will also enjoy peace 
thereafter.” 

At the time when the world was electrified by the an- 
nouncement of the Casablanca conference between President 
Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill, President Quezon 
stated: 

“As head of the government of the Philippines, and as 
a Filipino, I want to express both my admiration for tne 
courage shown by President Roosevelt and my eternal grati- 
tude for what he has accomplished. I feel certain that ine 
liberation of my people is not far away. All of the enslaved 
nations must now feel that the hour for their redemption has 
struck.” 

On November 9, 1943, President Quezon haiiea tne Mos- 
cow announcement of a four-power pact as a recognitiDU 
that the small nations would have a right to be heard when 
peace was declared. 

“The pact,” he said, “is more than a pledge to win tae 
war, and win it in a total way. It is a formal commitm'.,nt 
of the leader-nations in the fight for freedom and democracy 
to see to it that after the war shall have been won, then- 
strength and power will not be used for their own aggrandl-'-. 
ment\ut to give security to a peace in which the large na- 
tions as well as the small nations will respect the principles 
of sovereign equality.” 



84 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Commenting on the Teheran conference. President Que- 
zon said on December 6, 1943, “Germany and Japan will both 
be crashed and reduced to impotence, so they may never 
again disturb the peace of the world.” 

“The peace that will follow will be enduring. The new 
world will be constituted by a family of democratic nations — 
large and small alike — where tyranny and slavery, oppression 
and intolerance will have no place. For such world the sac- 
rifices of all liberty-loving peoples will not have been in 
vain.” 

President Quezon, on the occasion of the Australian 
Foundation Day, January 26, 1944, praised the reciprocal 
military aid of the Philippines, and the Southern Common- 
v/ealth during the war. “This has shown that Australia and 
the Philippines have sacred interests in common. I hope and 
confidently expect that these two democracies, Australia and 
the Philippines, will in the future cooperate with one an- 
other for the preservation of their liberties and the welfare 
of their peoples.” 

On February 24, 1944, President Quezon in a broadcast 
to the Filipino people said: “The United Nations are defeat- 
ing the enemies of freedom in every quarter of the globe. 
The day of justice and real Philippine Independenc is draw- 
ing nearer. Keep your courage and faith. The United States 
of America will make good her pledge to establish and recog- 
nize the Philippine Republic.” 

One of the last messages of President Quezon was that 
sent to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek on July 7, 1944, three 
weeks before Quezon’s death; “As China enters its eighth year 
of unwavering resistance against Japan the world must not 
forget that it was the Chinese people who seven years ago 
pioneered in the fight for democracy against totalitarianism,” 
he said. 

“Your courage and determination have made up for what 
you lacked in armed power and yours is a struggle for hu- 
man freedom that will go down in history as one of the 



FRAjYTZ— QUEZON’S CONTRIBUTION TO THE WAR 



85 



noblest exemplifications of a nation’s imbending will against 
tyranny and oppression.” 

“As the forces of liberation continue advancing every- 
where, it is my hope, and I am sure it is that of all loveis 
of freedom, that your arms may soon achieve that victory 
which the brave Chinese people so rightly deserve.” 



WHAT KIND OF NATIONALIST WAS MANUEL 
L. QUEZON? 



By Theodore Friend 

IF MEDICAL SCIENCE had had the means of treating 
tuberculosis twenty years ago that it has now, Manuel' Quezon 
might still be alive to celebrate his eightieth birthday this 
Tuesday. Instead of passing into the realm of history, where 
even the clearest and strongest of voices are muffled, Quezon 
vvould be with his people today, challenging them, encour- 
aging them, perhaps even cursing them, as it was once hi-? 
habit and even his delight to do. In these days of a growinz 
riationalism, as yet unfocussed and uncertain, a Quezon sti'L 
living would take charge of defining this pent-up force in 
the people, and channeling it into constructive use. 



Few men of the twentieth century had such long careers 
as recognized leaders of their people — Quezon was twent:.- 
tv/o years in the foremost electoral position his count iV 
offered, the crucial years in the movement for national in- 
dependence. Gandhi and Stalin come to mind as havinz 
enjoyed comparable periods of prominence, although in muc’’ 
different situations. Although those two diverse and con- 
characters operated in political systems consider- 
ably different from Quezon’s, the point of mentioning them 
IS eir extraorainary ability of impressing their wills upc." 
t eir peoples, an ability which Quezon shared. Long after 
most have exhausted their power and imagination, and 
-ong after a people’s taste for a leader has normally cloyed, 
uey continued to dominate in their separate and distinct 
as loris. andhi and Stalin may perhaps be historical 

political types peculiar to the twentieth centu; •/ 
~ the Commissar” in Arthur Koestler’s phrase 

Manuel Quezon eluded both categories. He eludes, in fact, 
any typification, and goes on beckoning to and challenging h:s 
people as a personality of unique persuasiveness. 

th weaknesses of present day nationalism in 

B 1 ippines are in part a result of the ultra-personal qua- 



86 



friend— MANUEL L. QUEZON AS NATIONALIST 87 

lity of his rule, still his people have something to learn from 
the development of his nationalistic thought. His grovirth 
towards maturity from phrasemaker to statesman is an in- 
spiring one, but it goes easily unnoticed in the common recol- 
lection of his countrymen, who remember or are told of his 
flashing eyes and stirring speech, his capacity for fury and, 
equally, forgiveness. Story after story is related about his 
courage, his initiative, and his idiosyncracies — so many tales 
that it becomes easy in fascination and admiration of the 
man to overlook the growth of his thought. Through his 
papers willed to the public and deposited in the Bureau of 
Public Libraries this growth is traceable. 

Perhaps Quezon himself is responsible for the affection- 
ate caricature of himself which is abroad today, even though 
he made sure that the records would survive to correct it. 
Devotion, just as much as lesser sentiments, can distort the 
object at which it is directed. And even though Quezon 
seemed to elicit devotion without seeking it, he had a special 
sense, which he always kept sharp, of what was in the hearts 
of the people, and what they needed for fulfillment. Not 
that he had the spontaneous love of the masses which flowed 
from a Magsaysay — Quezon’s temperament and taste were 
too aristocratic for that — but he did know what they wanted 
in a leader and he played up to it. Perhaps it is true of 
masses everywhere, but probably more true in the Philippines 
than elsewhere, that they play a feminine role towards their 
leader. They are patient with outrages, they are long-suffer- 
ing and forgiving, as long as he shall excite and satisfy their 
hunger for lordly, even reckless, courage. They will accept 
abuse of faith and even contempt from their leader, so long 
as he does not falter in the manly role, so long as he acts 
commar.dingly. In this role Quezon never faltered. Even 
though he might reverse himself twice within a day, he did 
it with an appearance of supreme confidence. Even when 
he might in spirit be vacillating, his demeanor was of a man 
unswerving. As he remarked to Sergio Osmeha, who for so 
long was both Quezon’s colleague and his competitor, “I also 
come to the same decisions (as you do), only it takes me 
less lime.” 



88 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



“But,” Osmena replied, “I never make your mistakes.” 

“When I do make mistakes,” Quezon shot back, “I use 
the time in rectifying them that you -waste in making stu- 
dies.” 

If the remark was indelicate, it was at least partly true. 
For all of his many talents, his conscientiousness and saga- 
city, Osmena was never able to capture the popular imagina- 
tion as Quezon did, in his romantic role of warrior-hero. 
Charm and flair, even flamboyance, always triumphed over 
undramatized intelligence. With his accustomed patience, 
Osmena came to accept the fact, and in his later years he 
created his own useful role as the balance wheel of Philip- 
pine nationalism, helping to moderate Quezon’s eccentrici- 
ties and extremes. 

In earlier days, however, competition between the two 
men tended to drive them both to extremes. They were 
both prone, like their counterparts in India and Indonesia, 
to overemphasize their party as the means of securing free- 
dom. Not until 1922 did either of them clearly distinguish 
between loyalty to the nation and loyalty to the Nacionalistas. 

man, and the occasion was the contest 
with Osmena for domestic political leadership. “My loyalty 
o niy country begins,” he said during his campaign, “where 
P^^ty ends.” Although the Nacionalistas had 
Kept the issue of independence before the people since the 
first provincial elections of 1905, Quezon thus became the 
irst within the party to declare it was not necessarily the 
best instrument for obtaining sovereignty, nor was it iden- 
ica with the national interest. But the statement itself 
does not establish Quezon as a constitutional theorist, nor 
even, necessarily, a sincere politician. The historian search- 
es in vain for real issues in the election of 1922 other than 
^e very simple one “Who shall be the supremo, Osmena or 
Quezon?” By splitting off his own wing of the Nacionalistas 
and forming a separate party, Quezon decided the question 
in his own favor. 

The move, however, was purely a tactical maneuver, as 
his subsequent coalition with Osmena proved. He had gain- 



89 



™;e«d-manuel l. Quezon as nationalist 



ed a personal ascendancy in Philippine politics which was 
never to he reversed, but his development as a mature nation- 
alist was many years later in coming 

First he had to consolidate his position with respect to 
Osmena. And n tha necessity lay the beginnings of his 
f^ous clashes with Wood, and the ensuing deadlock between 

n politicians which lasted 

until Woods death. As a colonial administrator Wood is 
subject to a variety of criticisms: at the least, his stiffness 
of person and policy laid him open to attack from the na- 
tionalists, and Quezon took careful aim. Some of his As- 
saults were justified and proper; all of them were popular. 
As a way of getting nationalistic sentiment behind him, Que- 
zon could not have improved on his campaign against Wood. 
By the time Osmena dared challenge him again in 1933 over 
the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act, Quezon had deeply identified 
himself with the nationalistic cause. So much so, that the 
Philippine Congress at his command turned down the first 
offer of indepedence ever extended a colonized people. This 
while thousands of Indians languished in jail for participat- 
ing in Gandhi’s campaign of passive resistance to the Bri- 
tish! 



How had Quezon done it? First of all, his campaign 
against Wood had been so intense as to convince the people 
utterly that Quezon was the warrior-hero needed to lead 
them to the promised land of independence. At one tiriie 
Quezon had fretted at the lack of nationalistic issues made 
available to him by a beneficent insular government: a friend 
recalls him hurling his sun helmet across his room exclaim- 
ing, “Damn the Americans! Why don’t they tyrannize us 
more?” Then came Wood, whose sense of dignity had 
grown so greatly at the expense of his sense of diplomacy 
that he continually fed Quezon with issues. Anti-imperial- 
ism, anti-militarism, even anti-Americanism — all of them be- 
came live political weapons and Quezon grew skilled at touch- 
ing them off. The people had been respectful and even 
affectionate to Governors-General like Harrison who showed 
them consideration, but now Quezon held center stage and 



90 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



declaimed to an enthusiastic audience on the errors of the 
chief executive. On a trip to the provinces in 1926 he uttered 
what is probably the classic statement of his nationalism as 
anti-imperialism: “I would prefer a government run like hell 
by Filipinos to one run like heaven by Americans.” The re- 
mark circulated around the world. 

Nationalism, however, has other and more fruitful forms 
of expression than this. Quezon began to dare to use them, 
when, having beaten Osmena and the H-H-C Act, his power 
was assured. He had gone to America and come back with 
the Tydings-McDuffie Act providing his people with indepen- 
dence after all. He also came back assured of the services 
of General Douglas MacArthur to build a Philippine military 
establishment in preparation for independence. And he 
brought back, furthermore inspiration from the New Deal 
to face the problems of his country’s poor. America had not 
prepared the Philippines to defend itself, nor had she gotten 
to the root of the problem of poverty. Now while her own 
military languished, she was at last attending to her own 
“forgotten man.” 

Perhaps this was the essence of wisdom in nationalism, 
beneath the cant and hysteria which tend to surround it— 
that only an independent people have both the sight of their 
own real needs and an interest in satisfying them. An im- 
perial power, no matter how good its intentions, is usually 
so occupied with its own problems as to be unable to grapple 
with the basic problems of the people it rules. America had 
pven the Philippines democracy, but not economic stability. 
America had provided better health and education for the 
poor, but had not come to grips with the basic causes of 
their poverty. Only Filipinos, in all probability, could un- 
erstand the complex whys of poverty, of tenancy, of land- 
lessness, and only they could safely attempt to relieve them. 

And so, while America was feeling the first reinvigora- 
tions of the New Deal, Quezon as President of the Philippine 
Commomvealth launched his campaign for social justice. 
To acquaint himself more closely with agricultural prob- 
lems, he bought land near Mount Arayat, and personally kept 



FRIEND— MANUEl. L. QUEZON AS NATIONALIST 



91 



in touch with the administration of it. As well as the far- 
mer, the long ignored laborer began to receive Quezon’s 
attention. This evidence of sympathy and concern from the 
leader took much of the steam out of the young Communist 
party, which was as yet very distantly affiliated with Mos- 
cow. Instead of growing closer to the Com-intern it now 
moved farther away, attracted to Quezon by his reforms. 
As one of the party leaders told the President. 

“We don't want to assert our personality in politics. . . 
we are. . . willing to cooperate with the Administration in 
its social justice program. We are interested in that more 
than anything else.” 

Thus Quezon, finding the negative nationalism of the 
Twenties a barren and wornout thing, turned his attention 
inward upon the deficiencies of his own people and their 
economic system. 

“We may not go down in history as statesmen,” he told 
Ihe National Assembly in 1937, but, he implored them. “Let 
us win the title of friends of the poor, the highest title to 
which a Christian man can aspire.” 

No matter how well Quezon’s social justice program 
advanced, other events fated it for short life. No amoimt 
of progress in the simultaneous program of national defense 
could have forestalled the events of December 1941. For the 
whole Western world was sadly unready for Japan’s joining 
the Axis powers. Not the least tragic result of the Japanese 
invasion and occupation of the Philippines was that it put m 
end to improvement of the farmer’s lot and the laborer s, 
and instead immeasurably worsened it. From this grievous 
situation arose the Huks. Their arms gave them power, but 
what gave them unit was the common experience of suffer- 
ing which Quezon had been trying to alleviate. Domestic 
progress had ceased, a victim of external aggression. 

Exiled as he was during the war, Quezon must have felt 
the greatest anxiety at being out of touch with his people. 
Unable to help them except as a distant symbol of freedom, 
Quezon turned his mind to the central question of the sur- 



92 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



vival of the Philippines as a nation. As early as 1926, he 
once told an American friend, he had foreseen Japanese in- 
vasion as a possible threat to his country but in those days 
he had satisfied hirhself with rhetorical nationalism: it was 
the very year of the famous “heaven-hell” statement. 

Now sitting in the Pacific War Council with the Allied 
strategists, all merely emotional nationalism was gone frorn 
him. His plan of national defense had been insufficient, 
and an unprepared America was unable to withstand the 
first months of enemy onslaught. As tuberculosis sapped ^ 
his strength Quezon pondered: the Filipinos could run the ' 
Philippines maybe not like heaven, but certainly in a way' 
which did them credit. ^ ^ut could and the laborer’s, and in- 
stead immeasurably worsened it. Prom this grievous situa- 
tion arose the Huks. Their arms gave them power, but what' 
gave them unit was the common experience of sufferirig 
.which Quezon had been trying to alleviate. Domestic pro""-' 
gress had ceased, a victim of external aggression. 

Exiled as he was during the war, Quezon must have fkt 
fered a security nowhere else to be found against dangers 
irom outside the nation. " 



T^us while Quezon was completing a cycle in his policy, 

progressing straight ahead in his'', 
,ing of domestic problems. .,_Ever a brilliant politician, 
C;ommonwealth he grew into a statesman’' 
courage to look outwards for support against his',. 

. . y - ^c weakness, and to look inwards to correct his 
society s basic faults. In doing so his nationalism, which ;' 
had once showered forth in emotional sparks, now burned ' 
like a pilot light, steadily and evenly, illuminating for his 
people the leader’s matured vision: above personal and prov-' " 
mcial interests, above party and private interests— the inter- ' 
ests of the nation. 



QUEZON: THE ARISTOCRAT AS LEADER* 



By Andres Cristobal Cruz . 

“In a community as poor and primitive as Baler, we were 
considered the number one family,” Manuel L. Quezon wrote 
in his autobiography, The Good Fight. This was because his 
parents, both teachers, were of Spanish descent and the peo- 
ple, mostly tenants of the Tayabas haciendas, looked up to 
the “buena familia” in their community. 

Quezon had an aristocratic pride which remained with 
him to the end and which gave not only color to .his person 
as a national figure, but also, in a way, gave shape to his 
thinking on how to secure independence. = i 

Revolutionary ' 

Born August 19, 1871, Quezon joined the Revolution in 
1898 and became a second lieutenant. He. served as an aide 
to the intrepid General Mascardo. When the Philippine- Ame- 
rican War ended, Quezon stayed on for a while as a guerrilla. 
He perceived the inevitable end of the Revolution as he watch- 
ed a forlorn General Aguinaldo under American guards. 

He surrendered in 1901 and became governor of Tayabas. 

American civil authorities in Manila heard of Quezon, the 
“Kastila” and of his imperious words and deeds. He had 
bawled out an American official who was interloping and 
would have thrown an inkstand to the American’s face had 
not the shocked official hastily evicted himself from Quezon’s 
sight. . And Quezon was just beginning to speak English! 

Quezon was contemporary in his political conduct, and 
he had the charismatic appeal. He was able to weld together 
and even manipulate for his own political interests the dis- 
parate elements of post-revolution Philippines. He was arro- 
gant, imperious, and even dictatorial. 



•Reprinted from. the Chronicle Magazine, August 17, 1968, pp. 10-11. 



93 



94 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Quezon was “arrogante” and this endeared him, if not to 
the American civil authorities, to his own countrymen, par- 
ticularly to that new breed that began to stalk the land— the 
post-revolution Philippines, the breed that was to embody 
the old world and the new, that began to learn the rudiments 
of parliamentary struggles which were necessary for the real- 
ization of independence. Of this breed, Quezon emerged as 
the activist, not so much for the Filipinization Movement, but 
more so for the Independence Movement. 



On July 30, 1907, by authority of U.S. President Theodore 
Roosevelt, an election was held for membership in the Phil- 
pine Assembly. Manuel L. Quezon was elected Majority Floor 
iicader, Sergio Osmeha, “El Chico” from Cebu, was Speaker. 

In Quezon, the national moment seemed to have caught 
fire. There was excitement in the air. The Filipinos in the 
sidewalks of Manila were jostling and elbowing Americans in 
the street. Curses rent the air, on stage where the Moro- 
moro was dying, and in the newspapers of the day. With 
flashing eyes and flailing arms, Quezon was to rally the Fili- 
pinos to a cause of national unity and dignity. 



He was at ease with everyone, the rich and the poor alike, 
and according to his son Manuel Quezon, Jr., “There was 
a er mess towards the young, dignity and mutual respect 
_oward the old.” His oratory was natural, not learned, and 
trilingual tongue—English, Tagalog, Spanish. There 
was nothing inscrutable about him for his face, his gestures, 
tempers were visible to all. But he could also 
hange his minds as quickly as he could decide on a course 
ac ion. e continued the struggle for independence under 

a new colonial dispensation, but without a fawning subser- 
vience. 



He was to become the Philippines’ most effective resident 
commissioner in Washington. Armed with a Spanish-Ameri- 
^o^sry. he sought U.S. Congress leaders and voiced 
he sentiments of his countrymen on the question of indepen- 
ence. He learned politics fast in the cloakrooms and corri- 
dors of U.S. Congress. One could imagine that diminutive 



CRUZ— QUEZON: THE ARISTOCRAT AS LEADER 



95 



“castillian” Filipino speaking up to the tall Americans, repos- 
ing faith in God, democracy, and Americans. 

Religious Issue 

The cosmopolitan rich of Manila were attracted towards 
Quezon’s growing leadership. Quezon had brought home the 
first Jones Bill which defined American policy on the futurj 
political status of the Filipinos. American business lobbied 
against the Jones Law together with the American Catholic 
hierarchy which raised in the Philippines the issue of Quezon 
being a Freemason. In a speech in the U.S. Congress, Quezon 
eloquently affirmed that the Jones Law would bring more 
autonomy for the Filipinos. 

“. . . Heretofore, we have been the least and the last factor 
in the Philippine affairs. Hereafter we shall be the first and 
foremost factor. . . Heretofore things were done by the Philippine 
government not only without the consent, but on many occasions 
against the strong opposition of the Filipino people. . . Hereafter 
nothing will be done without our consent, much less in defiance 
of our opposition. . .” 

The Jones Law declared that the U.S. would withdraw 
"their sovereignty over the Philippine Islands and recognize 
their independence as soon as a stable government can be 
established therein.” It also provided for a Senate of twenty- 
four elective members to replace the Philippine Commission. 
Quezon was chosen President of the Senate. This led to his 
break with Sergio Osmeha, regarded as the Number Two man 
in the government. 

Practical Politician 

"The trouble with you,” he told Osmena, “is that you take 
the game of politics too seriously. You look too far behind 
you ai:d too far ahead of you. Our people do not understand 
that ... All they want is to have the present problem solved, 
and solved with the least pain. That is all.” 

Quezon considered party leadership in the government 
as being "undemocratic and conducive to aristocracy or auto- 
cracy.” Quezon charged that the Nacionalista Party had be- 



96 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



come an Osmena party, that Osmeha had instituted a “one* 
man rule. All measures that were approved by Osmena. 
Quezon declared, became laws, and no law could be approved 
without Osmena s approval. Osmeha, Quezon charged, was 
a dictator. 

Quezon was for collective leadership with responsibility , 
reposed in each branch of the government. Osmeha present- > 
ed his resipation as vice-president of the Council of State 
and as president of the Nacionalista Party. This was rejected. 
Osmeha tried to manuever Quezon when Osmeha followers, 
dominated a newly created Council of Ten. Quezon offered 
to resign. “My loyalty to my party ends where my loyalty 
to my country begins,” Quezon orated. 



He organized in 1922 the Partido Nacionalista Colectivis- 
ta, and became its president. In the elections of 1922, Que- 
zon’^s party won more seats in the Lower House. Quezon was 
reelected .Senate President. Osmeha and his party allied with 
Quezon to form the Partido Nacionalista Consolidado. Que- 
zon s charismatic leadership won not only men, but women 
as well, to his cause. 



Decade of Prosperity ^ ' 

©njoyed a measure of prosperity — freer 
licthort and the United States was estab-. 

it< im' ^oads, bridges, and hospitals were built. For 

the TT Philippines was dependent on 

® American market was the only market for the 
Philippines, and this fostered an agricultural economy. 



diversification of agricultural produc- 
1 e political autonomy was increasing, the economy ■ 
continued to be moored firmly to the U.S. economy. In the" 
agitation for political Independence, Quezon and other nation- • 
f paid little attention to economic independence, and' ■ 
^ insidious harm that economic dependence 

on the U.S. would bring about in the Philippines. , ; 

Lacking a wider and incisive ihsight into the economic 
problems for having concentrated more on the political needs 



CRUZ— QUEZON: THE ARISTOCRAT AS LEADER 



97 



of the country, he made alliances with oligarchs who per- 
sonally got more for their closeness to him than he from 
them, and much less for the national welfare and social well- 
being of the great masses of the Filipinos. He was the aris- 
tocrat who would, in breeches and jodphur boots, bend under 
the sun and plant rice, who would stop to talk to people on 
a roadside sari-sari store, who would shed genuine political 
tears, and still could chasten foe and friend alike, and carry 
the dignity of his office here and abroad with that passionate 
affirmation that he was first and foremost a Filipino. 

Quezon’s popularity faltered when after a stay in the Uni- 
ted States in 1931, he issued a statement suggesting th’at the 
Philippines should have a dominion status. The radical had 
turned conservative, even “treacherous” a§ Osrhena followers 
charged. The “Free State” plan, devi^d by Philippine- Ame- 
rican sugar interests, would make the Philippines a partner 
of America for at least ten years, arid depending bn a plebis- 
cite, the partnership might be prolonged iridefinitely. Quezon 
had been briefed on developments between China and Japan 
in Manchuria. But the “dominion status” plan was met with 
demands for “immediate, absolute, and complete indepen- 
dence.” 

The masses could not accept the view of Quezon even as 
he explained that withdrawal of the sugar market would mean 
unemployrnent and disruption of public works projects. The 
campaign for independence mounted in the U.S. Osmeria and 
Roxas would gain politically if they came back with an ihde- 
pendence bill. Immediately, Quezon intrigued and inveigled, ' 
but Osmena and Roxas would have none of Quezon's impof- 
turrings. The anti-independence group in the U.S. were for 
a long transition to independence, the better to afford them- 
selves the benefits of their investments in the Philippines, 
enjoy tax-free imports, and export to Filipinos their consumer ■ ■ 
goods. 

Split Worsens 

Now Quezon was apprehensive that Osmena and Roxas 
might just win their fight for immediate, absolute and com- 



98 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



plete independence. The Os-Rox mission came back with the 
Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law, in spite of Quezon himself accom- 
panying, a handpicked mixed group of his men to work out 
a program for common action between the Os-Rox Mission 
and the Mixed Mission to consider the split opinion in the 
Philippines with regards to the lendepence bill. 

The two missions came back in 1933. Both were received 
enthusiastically, but Osmeha and Quezon were already bitterly 
split. 

Quezon had launched a reign of terror, according to Os- 
meha, and no one could speak against the bill. He challenged 
Quezon to resign as president of the Senate. He, Osmeha, 
would also resign as president pro tempore. Quezon wanted 
to remove opponents holding key positions in both houses. 
When U.P. President Rafael Palma advocated acceptance of 
the H-H-C Act, Quezon cut the budget of the University. He 
went to the T-V-T building to get the support of his publisher- 
friend Don Alejandro Roces, but the chain supported Osmeha. 
The DMHM chain, owned by Don Vicente Madrigal, was for 
Osmeha. He rounded up other friends to purchase the news- 
papers from Madrigal returning the chain when the Quezon 
faction won in 1934. 



Quezon Campaign 

Funds to fight against the H-H-C Act were raised by 
Quezon from friends and compadres, "merchants and all per- 
sons of goodwill." This included the Elizaldes and Sorianos, 
e k^rec es group, and other sugar entrepreneurs. Quezon 
raise not only funds but also acquired new friends. Adroitly, 
he managed to get Artemio Ricarte to support him. Ricarte's 
support was shown to General Aguinaldo, Bishop Aglipay, 
and Judge Juan Sumulong, and the three turned pro-Quezon. 
Even the Cornmunist Party of Crisanto Evangelista sided with 
Quezon, so did other leaders of the proletariat of the day like 
Ramon ’^rres, Francisco Varona of Tondo, and Pedro Abad 
Santos, the socialist. The realist writer, Manuel L. Arguilla, 
captured the mood and temper of the times in his story called 
The Socialist”, where Quezon’s charismatic appeal is im- 



CRUZ— QUEZON; THE ARISTOCRAT AS LEADER 



99 



plied. Osmena pledged to push the fight against Quezon, 
“against a personal leadership gained through intrigue and 
machinations,” a leadership through the corrupt influence of 
the patronage of the cacique. But Quezon had already 
triumphed; behind him were the radicals and the conserva- 
tives. The terms of independence as laid down by the H-H-C 
Act were turned down. Quezon generously requested Manuel 
Roxas to accompany him to the U.S. to ask for another inde- 
pendence act. 

Political Chameleon 

“There are two Mr. Quezons,” Roxas huffed. Quezon 
was both “an astute, slippery politician” and a “high-brow 
superbly conservative statesman.” Quezon said one thing in 
the Philippines, and another in the United States, so charged 
Roxas. Quezon was a political chameleon, and to Osmena 
and Roxas, that was monstrous enough. 

The aristocratic political chameleon went to work in the 
U.S. Theodore Friend, in a recent book Between Two Em- 
gjY 0 g account of Quezon s diplomatic duplicity in 
securing a second independence act, the Tydings-McDuffie 
Law, which was considered identical to the Hare-Hawes-Cut- 
ting Act. 

On November 15, 1935, Quezon and Osmena were installed 
as the first President and Vice President of the Common- 
wealth, respectively. In May of the same year, the Sakdals 
rose in revolt to forestall the establishment of the Common- 
wealth, accusing political leaders of being “insincere and in- 
attentive to the demands of the poor.” During the first year 
of the Commonwealth, Quezon presided over the establish- 
ment of the Philippine army. 

Military service was made compulsory to all Filipino citi- 
zens; the civil service was extended to all branches and agen- 
cies of the government; steps were taken for the development 
and adoption of a national language. Foremost of Quezon’s 
pronounced commitments was that to “social justice” to in- 
sure the well-being and economic security of all the people. 



100 



historical bulletin 



‘‘The time is past when any government can feel secure with- 
out the full support and cooperation of the people — cooperation 
which is the result of devotion for and loyalty to their govern- 
ment engendered by a sense of satisfaction and happiness which 
their government insured for them. . . 

“What we have in excess of our needs and reasonable luxuries 
should be spent pro-bono-publico — for the public good. The strug- 
gle that we see everywhere is between those who have and those 
who have not. . 

Quezon worked, for the PI minimum wage and 8-hour 
working days. Large haciendas were purchased and divided 
for resale to tenants. Public lands were opened for settle- 
ment. The Educational Act was passed providing for the pri- 
mary education of children; artesian wells, puericulture cen- 
ters, hospitals, including the Quezon Institute for the preven- 
tion and cure of tuberculosis, were established. 



Corregidor Incident 

When the war broke out in 1941, Quezon was already a 
sick man. His lungs had been ravaged by tuberculosis, and 
his previous stays in the United States for treatment had 
only temporarily halted further breakdown of his health. 
Iri Corregidor, where he had evacuated with his war' cabinet, 
Quezon, heard broadcasts from President Roosevelt and other 
U.S. military officials stating that the U.S. would attend to 
Europe first. Quezon flared: “Where are the planes this 
sinverguenza is boasting of? Que demonio! how typically 
American to writhe in anguish at the fate of a distant cousin 
while a daughter is being raped in the backroom!” The Ja- 
panese were preparing for bigger offensives. Carlos P. Ro- 
mulo, over a ‘Voice of Freedom” broadcast to Bataan, ex- 
pressed negative reaction to Quezon’s proposal for demo- 
1 ization, evacuation, and neutralization of the Philippines. 
Quezon called for Romulo, and told the protege: 

“I tell you our country is being destroyed. Do you expect 
Qftf ° contmue this sacrifice? The fight between the United 
apan is not our fight. I want to go back and try to 
protect our own people, Romulo, not America.” 



CRUZ— QUEZON: THE ARISTOCRAT AS LEADER 



101 



When Romulo reminded Quezon that this would be con- 
trary to the President’s previous messages, Quezon, still seized 
with coughing, replied that it was. He said: “We are dying 
because we are not getting protection from those who pro- 
mised us protection.” Quezon later changed his mind and 
agreed to be evacuated to Australia and then to the United 
States. 



Dignity in Sickness 

' He was becoming irritable, but beneath his torturing 
cough, he carried his dignity. He would deal with President 
Roosevelt himself, and Roosevelt invited Quezon to meetings 
of the Pacific War Council. Quezon kept critizing the Amen- 
can drive in Europe. He insisted that the war be fought in 
the Pacific first. They heard him, but did not heed him. 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: AN APPRAISAL* 



By Gabriel F. Fabella 

IF I WERE FREE to choose my subject I would have pre- 
ferred to talk on “The Human Side of Manuel L. Quezon," 
because I could say a fev/ words on my personal contracts 
with “The Star of Baler.” I have been advised, however, to 
limit myself as a student of history to an evaluation of the 
great man’s life in perspective. I, therefore, decided to give 
you my appraisal of his role in history, particularly of the 
part he played in the political development of the Philippines. 

It has been said with some truth that the times in which 
one lives make the man. But it has also been asserted with 
as much validity that the man can shape the course of events. 
Illustrations of the first statement may be cited from the 
history of many nations. The story of Abraham Lincoln is 
a case in point. While no one can gainsay the fact that 
Lincoln was a great man in the best sense of the word, the 
other fact remains that were it not for the times in which 
he lived, the name of Abraham Lincoln would hardly be 
remembered today. He is immortal because Lincoln answer- 
ed the needs of his times. He preserved the American Union 
and that is his greatest title to fame and glory. The Ameri- 
can people recognize this, and that is probably the reason 
why at their nation's capital, Lincoln is one of three who 
have been honored with imposing memorials. 

That verdict of the American people is shared by others. 
The late English novelist-historian, H.G. Wells for one, paid 
a great tribute to the man when he singled out Abraham Lin- 
coln as the sole representative of America in his list of ten 
greatest men the world has produced. H.G. Wells was act- 
ually saying that Lincoln was the greatest American. If so. 



delivered before the Rotary Club of Manila al 
Manila Hotel on August 16, 1962. Reprinted from the Historical 
letin, 1962, Vol. VI, No. 3, pp. 231-238. 



the 

Bui- 



102 



FABELL/1— MANUEL L. QUEZON: AN APPRAISAL 



103 



it must be acknowledged that it was the American civil war 
that made Lincoln. 

Other examples in history may be given of events making 
the man, but as the Spaniards say, para muesfra basta un 
boton. 

Manuel L. Quezon is a good example of the man making 
history. He determined the course of events in our country 
from 1907 to the time of his death in 1944. Please, note that 
the period covered is thirty-seven long years. With your in- 
dulgence, permit me to refresh your memory with Quezon's 
role during the period in question. In a very brief sketch 
I propose to review with 3 'ou the highlights of his career to 
explain how Quezon made history. 

"Why I start with 1907 and not earlier, needs explana- 
tion. It is true that Quezon participated in the Revolution, 
but his role in that movement was comparatively insignifi- 
cant. Even his services as provincial fiscal of Mindoro and 
as governor of Tayabas, (now Quezon Province) cannot be 
considered national in scope. But with his election as As- 
semblyman for Tayabas (1907) that is another story. Of 
course he was never Speaker of the Philippine Assembly but 
he was the floor leader of the majority party. And those 
who are familiar with the workings of a lawmaking body 
know what that means. Moreover, let us not forget that 
Quezon was the one who nominated Sergio Osmeha for the 
Speakership of the Philippine Assembly. It may almost be 
justified to say, therefore, that he made Osmeha. The poli- 
tical partnership which he thus established has no counter- 
part in the histories of other countries. The Osmeha-Quezon 
eras in our history were replete with unparalleled achieve- 
ments. 

From 1909 to 1916 Quezon served our country as Resident 
Commissioner to the United States, and he was the best 
commissioner we ever sent to Congress. As late as 1954 
surviving colleagues of Quezon fondly remembered our leader 
as the best orator in the House of Representatives in spite 
of the fact that he hardly knew English in 1909. It was 



104 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



during his incumbency as resident commissioner that the 
independence campaign was actually begun. He was not the 
first representative this country had in Congress because 
Pablo Ocampo and Benito Legarda preceded him, but their 
efforts did not quite register. Benito Legarda pertained to 
the Partido Progresista v/hich was quite lukewarm to inde- 
pendence. Pablo Ocampo was a Nacionalista but he did not 
possess the caliber of Manuel L. Quezon. Almost singlehand- 
ed, he brought home in 1916 the Jones Law which officially 
and definitely committed in writing the American people's 
promise of independence. That was the significance of the 
Jones Law. It was the first official American commitment. 
Incidentally, it should have been called the Quezon Law 
because the real author of said bill was Manuel L. Quezon. 
He confessed this during one of the political controversies in 
the Philippines. With his success in Congress Quezon earned 
the right to be the future leader of his people. 

As President of the Senate from 1916 to 1922 Quezon 
shared with Osmeha the responsibility of running the gov- 
ernment. Let us recall that since 1916 the unforgettable 
Francis Burton Harrison permitted the Filipinos to run the 
government. He was convinced that the only way to train 
the Filipino for self-government was to give him responsi- 
bility. In 1922 Manuel L. Quezon assumed the leading role 
in the government after he was chosen president of the 
Partido Nacionalista Consolidado.* It was Quezon who man- 
euvered the Filipino opposition to Leonard Wood because 
the said Governor initiated the policy of strict construction 
of the Jones Law. In justice to Leonard Wood it must be 
said, in passing, that the former chief of staff of the United 
States Army was technically right. However, succeeding as 
he did the administration of Harrison whose policy was in 
consonance with the intent and spirit of the Autonomy Act, 
the Filipino people thought that Wood was curtailing some 
of their inherent prerogatives. So heated was the contro- 
versy between Quezon and Wood that even school pupils at 
that time used to say that the Governor-General was not 
Wood but Iron. He was made of iron all right, but I repeat 
that Wood was technically right. Both Harrison and Wood 



F.4 BELL A— MANUEL L. QUEZON: AN APPRAISAL 



105 



were right except that the first interpreted the law liberally, 
the other, very strictly. The conflict lasted until Leonard 
Wood’s death. 

The Filipino people at that time were all befuddled by 
Wood’s intransigence, but after a lapse of some thirty years, 
we have a better perspective of things. We must admit that 
the Filipino conflict with Wood did not promote the cause 
of independence. On the contrary, it retarded the progress 
of the movement so that the Filipinos decided to cooperate 
with the next American chief executive. The Stimson era 
of cooperation thus began. But while Quezon’s conflict with 
Wood did retard the coming of independence, it served to 
give notice to the Americans that they could not ride rough- 
shod over the backs of the Filipino leaders. Thereafter, 
America adopted a cautious policy. She sent here governors 
who were acceptable to the Filipino people. 

Some of you may recollect the case of Nicholas Roose- 
velt who wrote a book The Philippines: A Treasure and a 
Problem. He was proposed for appointment as Governor- 
General of the Philippines. The Filipinos vehemently oppos- 
ed Roosevelt’s appointment because of his well known views 
derogatory to the Philippines. Consequently, Nicholas Roose- 
velt’s nomination for the governorship was withdrawn. The 
United States had to send here another one who was more 
understanding of Filipino aspirations. 

Then came the enactment of the first independence law 
better known as the Hare-Hawes-Cutting bill which was the 
fruit of the labors of the Osmena-Roxas mission. Instead of 
bringing happiness to our country, however, it occasioned the 
greatest and most turbulent political conflict ever witnessed 
in this country. It rocked the whole nation from Batanes 
to Tawi-tawi. The reason was Quezon’s opposition to the 
proffer of independence. 

Why Quezon opposed the Hare-Hawes-Cutting legislation 
is still a matter of conjecture, specially because Quezon like 
all Nacionalistas was known as a champion of “immediate 
complete and absolute independence.” His enemies, there- 



106 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



fore, had apparent reason to call him insincere: that he adopt- 
ed the slogan of the Nacionalistas merely as a convenient 
sibboleth to keep himself in power. It was even bruited 
about that while in America Quezon used to tell the Ameri- 
cans he was against the independence because he was not 
sure that the Filipinos were capable of maintaining an inde- 
pendent existence. Of course, he would never say that in. 
the Philippines for that would mean his calvary. He was 
insincere his political opponents insisted. 

The verdict of his people is that Quezon must have been 
sincere in the light of his actuations on the whole. As “Old 
Abe once said, “You can fool all the people at one time; you 
can fool part of the people all the time, but you cannot fool 
all the people all the time.” That he was truly sincere is 
attested by the fact that Quezon’s last thoughts before he died 
were of his beloved country, and if it were but possible, he 
wanted to die in his native land. It is, therefore, hard to 
believe that he was fooling his people all that time. 

Why he was against the acceptance of the Hare-Hawas- 
Cutting^ law, might have been motivated by reasons of his 
own. It could not be on account of the bill’s provisions on 
military and naval bases, nor its economic provisions and 
neither on the powers of the United States High Commis- 
sioner. His political enemies accused him of personal am- 
bition to keep himself in power. Acceptance of the inde- 
pendence^ law would mean promoting the political interests 
of Osmena and Roxas, and he was afraid that his own pres- 
tige and power would be weakened thereby forfeiting his 
leadership of the nation. He must have remembered the 
Jones law as having paved the way for Quezon’s rise to 
power. With these considerations in mind, Quezon had the 
bill rejected in the Philippine Legislature, and decided to go 
America to secure a better law. Thus Quezon staked his 
political future in one great gamble. Strangely enough he 
won. 

Quezon’s success in reviving the independence law that 
he killed is like the raising of Lazarus from the dead. The 
Jews could never believe that a dead man buried several 



FABELLA— MANUEL L. QUEZON: AN APPRAISAL 



107 



days could be brought back to life. Quezon’s opponents, 
thought the same of the independence bill. It was an im- 
possible thing considering that Congress leaders had openly 
come out and said that no better law could be obtained at 
that time. What his enemies failed to reckon with was 
Quezon’s intuition and political sagacity. 

Quezon, to my mind, did not secure a better law than 
the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill. Neither was it new. I am in- 
clined to agree with Senator Camilo Osias that the so-called 
new law was the same old law but for a change of some 
fifty words. It was the same ink in a new bottle Osias in- 
sisted. The provision on military and naval bases in the 
Tydings-McDuffie law did not make it any better, as shown 
by the fact that after independence was attained our people 
found it necessary to permit by treaty the existence here of 
such bases as they still do today. Perhaps the old law was 
then better from this point of view. At that time, however, 
Quezon made the Tydings-McDuffie law appear the better 
law and it was to his credit that his people believed him. 

The Tydings-McDuffie law was Quezon’s greatest political 
triumph. And he won because he carefuly analyzed the poli- 
tical situation and circumstances in the United States at 
that time. Osmeha and Roxas were over-anxious to return 
to the Philippines and “bring home the bacon.” After Pres- 
ident Hoover’s veto of the bill, the Osrox mission was asked 
if they favored the approval of the independence bill over the 
^..residential veto, and they agreed despite Quezon’s advice 
to the contrary. But Quezon was correct in his prognosti- 
cation. 

In the November elections of 1932 the Democratic can- 
didate Franklin D. Roosevelt was catapulted to power. Roxas 
and Osmeha should have taken i-nto consideration the fact 
that the Democratic party had always stood for independence. 
Had they waited for the change of administration, they could 
have secured a better law than the Hare-Hawes-Cutting. That 
was the mistake of Osmeha and Roxas. They could not wait, 
and in failing to wait, they lost a very great opportunity. That, 
was where the political magician outwitted them. The Ty- 



108 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



dings-McDuffie law paved the way for Quezon’s election as 
President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. 

As first president of the Commonwealth Quezon demons- 
trated his unequalled statesmanship. Long before his inau- 
guration as president, and even as candidate for said office, 
Quezon already had a blueprint of what he expected to do. 
He would prepare the country for the advent of independence. 

In 1907 the first bill approved in the Philippine Assembly 
was the Gabaldon law which appropriated PI, 000, 000 for the 
construction of barrio schools. The reason is obvious. The 
most imperative need of the Philippines in 1907 was schools 
and the people’s representatives were equal to the situation 
by meeting their needs. That was statesmanship of the first 
order and Osmena and Quezon should be given credit for 
that legislation. As a matter of fact even the skeptical Ame- 
ricans applauded, the actuation of the First Philippine As- 
sembly. 

Immediately after the inauguration of the Commonwealth 
Quezon called the First National Assembly to a special ses- 
sion. The first message he sent to said body was a proposal 
for the defence of the Philippines after independence. He 
had things all worked out. He requested President Roose- 
velt to detail Douglas MacArthur with the Commonwealth 
government as military adviser. It was MacArthur and his 
staff which included Dwight D. Eisenhower who prepared the 
details of the bill for national defence. The National Assem- 
bly gladly approved the bill because they knew that that was 
the imperative need of the moment. Quezon should be cre- 
dited with this statesman-like piece of legislation. In fact 
most of his actuations as President were directed towards the 
definite goal — preparation for independence. 

Quezon mapped out a program for the development of 
the country with a view to economic sufficiency. The socio 
economic program of the present administration had its be- 
ginnings during his administration. Our only regret is that 
Quezon apparently neglected this phase of the national prob- 
lem during the entire period of the independence campaigns. 



FABELLA— MANUEL L. QUEZON: AN APPRAISAL 



109 



The preparation for economic independence was too short 
and too late. The consequence is that we still are economic- 
ally dependent upon aliens to this day. 

He was aware that the national well-being of his people 
was dependent upon the contentment, happiness and pros- 
perity of the majority. Since the majority of our people be- 
long to the peasantry or to the proletariat, he paid particular 
attention to their needs. He, therefore, launched his “social 
justice” program which was similar to Franklin D. Roose- 
velt’s “New Deal.” In this way Quezon anticipated Magsay- 
say’s solicitude for the common tao. 

As the chief magistrate of the nation President Quezon 
established definite criteria for public service. He set the 
example of strict and blind justice and he did not hesitate to 
punish erring public servants. He would not abet graft and 
corruption, and in spite of his cordial relations with high 
officials he ousted from office those who exceeded or abused 
their powers. Thus, Quezon is fondly remembered by his 
people as the best executive this country has produced. And 
when I say this I am not unmindful of Macapagal’s efforts, 
but it is too premature to hazard an evaluation of his admin- 
istration. Only time will tell. All I am saying here is that 
Quezon has not been surpassed in the magnitude and virility 
of his achievements. 

In retrospect let us review the legacy of Quezon to pos- 
terity. First. He left to us famous utterances which consti- 
tute what we might call “Quezonisms” like: (a) “My loyalty 
to my party ends where loyalty to my country begins.” This 
was stated at the time of the split of the Nacionalista into 
two wings, the Colectivista and the Unipersonalista. tti) I 
prefer a government run like Hell by Filipinos to a Paradise 
government run by foreigners.” (c) “What a beautiful spec- 
tacle for our country to behold political fights limited to dis- 
cussion of principles and eliminating personalities.”*’ This 
statement was made during one of his conflicts with his friend 
Sergio Osmena. There are many others too numerous to 
mention. 



ilO 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Second. Quezon’s concept of public service was in line 
with the principle that public office is a public trust. He 
not only believed this principle, but he practiced it. That 
was why he would not sanction graft and corruption and 
punished those who took advantage of their offices to enrich 
themselves, and those of their relatives and protegees. 

Third. His solicitude for the common man became the 
ideal for his successors in the presidency. He believed that 
the tao deserves a square deal from everyone including those 
of his landlords and patrons whose general attitude was to 
forget his welfare. 

Fourth. Quezon was a champion of human dignity. He 
would not submit himself to humiliations nor would he hu- 
miliate others no matter how humble. He gave every man 
due respect because he believed in the equality of all men. 

Fifth. He yielsTed to no man in his solicitude for the 
welfare of his country, and if he died in 1944 (that was before 
the end of World War II) it was partly because of his anxiety 
ever the fate of the Philippines. Like Franklin D. Roosevelt 
Quezon was actually a war casualty. 

Sixth. Quezon set the example as leader for succeeding 
presidents. While he sought advice from friends, as president 
he chose to lead. During his administration all important 
legislations came from Malacahang. One assemblyman even 
described the lawmaking body of his time as Quezon’s “Rub- 
ber Stamp Assembly’’; such was the force of Quezon’s dyna- 
mic leadership. As a leader of men he was like Franklin D. 
Roosevelt who died a champion. Quezon was never defeated 
in a political fight. His whole life in fact v/as The Good 
Fight. 



As a parting word, permit me to say that it is an honor 
and a privilege for this country to have produced a man 
and a leader of such versatility as Quezon. He would have 
been great in any country, in any clime, at any time. Had he 
been born in Germany he might have been a Bismarck; if in 
America, he should have been one of the greatest presidents 
of the United States. I am convinced of this. Claro M. 



FABELL^— MANUEL L. QUEZON: AN APPRAISAL 



111 



Recto, who used to be one of his formidable opponents, 
ended as an ardent admirer of Quezon as leader. If as 
Elumentritt said that a man of Rizal’s caliber appears but 
once every two centuries, I would add that a leader of Que- 
zon’s sagacity and practical wisdom is almost as rare. I 
close this talk, therefore, with this invocation: 

Oh God! Give us men tried and true. 

Give us leaders truly great; 

Send us another Manuel L. Quezon. 



QUEZON^S GIFT: A DREAM OF SOCIAL JUSTICE- 
By Emerenciana Y. Arcellana 



THE YEAR of the inauguration of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth, 1935, was the year of my graduation from elem- 
entary school, in the seventh and last grade of which I first 
became truly conscious that there was such a thing as a 
government of the Philippines. Almost synonymous with this 
government at the time was the name of its foremost leader. 
Manuel L. Quezon. 

The year 1935 was also my first year in high school, as 
it was the first year of Quezon’s six-year term as President 
of the Commonwealth. Quite early in this incumbency, the 
name of Manuel L. Quezon became synonymous with his pet 
idea, social justice. The term occurs and recurs in ahnos': 
ail of his speeches, messages, press statements, interviews, 
conferences and forum discussions from 1935 to 1944, the 
year of his death. 

Jusi, what was Quezon’s theory of social justice all about? 
Did Quezon in his actions keep faith with his theory? What 
motives impelled him to adopt this theory and promote it 
v/henever possible during his administration? 

Even before he called it social justice, Quezon had been 
moving towards a formulation and definition of his self- 
assigned mission. As governor of Tayabas province (now 
Quezon), and even earlier as provincial fiscal of the same 
province, his championship of the poor was well known. 
This bias gained such currency that Quezon felt called upon 
to explain in his public pronouncements that he did not side 
with the poor simply because they were poor. “I have made 
known to the friends who are constantly at my side that my 
fervent desire is to aid and take care of the poor, but that 
such assistance will be within reason, for although a person 



r^r, Philippine Free Pre.ss, December 13, 1969, 

PP* oU, liUf 1 12. 



112 



ARCELLAN A— QUEZON'S DREAM OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 



113 



be poor, I cannot help him unless he be entitled to it by 
right. That is what I really cannot do — side with those who 
are in error. . 

During his first term as governor of Tayabas he told the 
people of his province, especially the poor, that he needed 
their assistance in the establishment of a clean government 
and honest public service. That did not mean, Quezon 
promptly added, that he took the part of the poor as against 
the wealthy, or that he would aid only the poor. It simply 
meant that as the poor did net have any means to pay for 
their needs nor were they learned enough to help themselves, 
he considered it reasonable to defend them and their righto 
if they were aggrieved. 

That, Quezon said later as President of the Common- 
wealth, was similar to what he had in mind regarding social 
justice. It meant '"justice not for a few alone, but for all. 
especially for the poor workingmen who are, as it usually 
happens, injured in their rights; it is justice for everyone, 
now especially, when all are aware that the field laborers and 
factory hands are of the belief that they must be given that 
to which they are entitled.’' 

The quotation is from a speech entitled "Social Justice” 
which Quezon delivered before the representatives of labor 
under the leadership of Cresenciano Torres at a Malacanan 
Palace luncheon in their honor, February 17, 1938. 

Some four months before this, at the commencement 
exercises of the University of Santo Tomas College of Law, 
on October 2, 1937, Quezon had emphatically explained his 
criticism of the judiciary on the Cuevo-Barredo case thus. 

"My administration is committed, by its preelection plat- 
form, to ameliorate the lot of the common men. The Cons- 
titution of the Philippines imposes upon the Government the 
inescapable duty to exert my influence to secure the coope- 
ration of every branch of the Government to redeem our 
pledge and, above all, to carry into effect the mandate of the 
Constitution. 



114 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



‘‘I come from the masses. My ancestors were of the 
poor class. I am not afraid nor ashamed to confess that 
my heart beats in unison with the hearts of the needy and 
for them. Justice shall be done to the poor and the humble 
in this country so long as I am President. I am determined 
to fight for the rights of everyone, rich and poor alike, but 
more particularly for those who are unable to pay handsome- 
ly for expensive lawyers. And let it be known that I shall 
use all the powers of my office to win this fight. . 

The powers to which Quezon referred included those 
implicit in his oath of office, “to do justice to every man.'' 
Indeed, there is evidence that Quezon was constantly aware 
of his tremendous responsibility. Wherever he spoke — whe- 
ther on a routine inspection visit in Tuguegarao, or at a gov- 
ernor's conference in Malacahan, before the National Assem- 
bly at its opening or closing session, before various civic 
groups, before planters and sugar central owners, before stu- 
dents, before labor leaders — whatever might be the main sub- 
ject of his speech for the occasion, such as the launching of 
a TB fund campaign or his birthday anniversary — Quezon 
adverted to the plight of the underprivileged and to his plans 
and his moves to ameliorate their lot. Quezon's personal 
burden was the poor, and it seemed that in his heart and in 
his mind he was convinced that an intelligent social justice 
program was the ideal carry-all. 

The agrarian problem Quezon considered the foremost 
social problem of his time, and he stated it foursquare before 
the Assembly on December 21, 1935 in the course of his con- 
gratulatory speech to the First National Assembly for its 
unparalleled record" of accomplishment during its inaugural 
session. There was one measure, he stated, which would 
have given him the greatest satisfaction to recommend for 
enactment then, and that was “legislation which would solve 
once and for all the problem of the relationship between the 
tenants and the landowners, especially in the large estates." 

There were negotiations then being conducted by the 
Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce with the owners of 
the estates in Manila, Batangas, Laguna, Bulacan, Bataan, 



^RCELLANA— QUEZON’S DREAM OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 



115 



and Rizal so that once acquired by the government, thesB 
lands might be resold to tenants according to conditions 
still under study. It was well to bear in mind, however, 
Quezon even then admonished, that the mere acquisition of 
these estates by the Government might not solve the social 
and labor questions that had arisen. The problem as he saw 
it involved the relationship between tenants and landowners 
— w^hether within large or small estates, owmed by individ- 
uals or corporations, public or private — transcending in im- 
portance practically all other social problems in the Philip- 
pines. Quezon thought that lack of fairness in the treat- 
ment of the workers in the field necessarily resulted in social 
unrest. 'T have no doubt,'’ he said, ‘That if we could secuie 
for every tenant or field what in equity should come to him, 
as his share in the products of his toil, there would be moie 
contentment amongst the poorer classes of our people. 

Plowever, Quezon was not able to recommend during the 
short Assembly session then the necessary legislation of the 
subject, as “the Government was not yet in possession of all 
the facts required to formulate a definite policy in which the 
rights of all parties concerned" would be duly considered to 
Quezon's satisfaction. As Quezon himself explained apolo- 
getically, the difficulty of the problem was further compli- 
cated by the lack of a uniform tenancy system in the Phi 
ippines, the system varying not only by province but by mun 
icipality in some places, according to century-old custom^ 
and practices. For all his reputation for impulsiveness, Que- 
zon was not one to be rushed into a sweeping land reform 
program without due regard to facts and consequences. 

Still, he seemed anxious enough to see injustice corrected, 
as may be proved by his subsequent acts toward reasonable 
expropriation and resettlement. As early as possible during 
his Commonwealth presidency, he had ordered a thorough 
investigation of the all-important question for purposes of 
corrective legislation. His interest in an improved relation- 
ship between landlord and tenant throughout the Philippine ^ 
WT^ould be reiterated again and again in his messages to the 
National Assembly and in his speeches to different groups. 



116 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



He was annoyed that the Tenancy Law which had been in 
the statute books for several years had not been put into 
effect, as its enforcement in any province depended on an 
affirmative resolution of the majority of the municipal coun- 
cils of the province, thus augmenting discontent and social 
unrest. 

The large landed estates or haciendas presented a thorny 
problem. Quezon’s administration was committed under the 
coalition platform to a policy favoring the acquisition of 
these estates at a fair and just price, so that they might be 
sold in small lots to their tenants. However, in his message 
to the National Assembly at its next opening session on June 
16, 1936, regarding “the country’s condition and pi’oblems,” 
Quezon stated with regret that after a careful study of the 
question, he had reached the conclusion that such a step 
would not remedy the situation, but v/ould only transfer to 
the Government the agrarian and social problems existing 
in these haciendas; nor could expropriation and resale be car- 
ried out without gi'eat financial loss to the country. 

Quezon recalled how friar lands were acquired by the 
Government for the purpose of reselling them in small par- 
cels to the men who were v/orking on these lands, but “for 
several causes,’’ the result was that large areas of these ha- 
ciendas were now in the hands of other people, the lot of 
the tillers not being in the least improved. The investment, 
therefore, said Quezon, of several millions of nesos by the 
Government in the purchase of friar lands had redounded 
(with few exceptions) to the benefit of people not contem- 
plated by the Government. In this transaction the Govern- 
ment lost heavily and as Quezon saw it, there might be some 
justification in exposing the country to this financial loss 
if the purpose of the project would be achieved. The pur- 
pose was to enable the majority of the people working on 
the haciendas to become owners of the land they were then 
cultivating. Quezon at the time was certain, however, that 
such would not be the case. Hence, despite the coalition 
platforrn commitment, Quezon decided to junk wholesale 
expropriation of haciendas and proposed resettlement in- 



.4RCELL.4iV/l— QUEZON’S DREAM OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 



117 



stead. He said he did not wish to “impose upon our people 
the burden of a national debt which our children will have 
to bear merely to give a few individuals the opportunity to 
acquire particular areas at the expense of the people when 
there is so much available fertile lands in Mindanao.” 

Meanwhile, Quezon advocated the adoption of measures 
similar to those adopted in Ireland to solve agrarian prob- 
lems there. He also recommended the immediate passage 
of a law authorizing the expropriation of those portions of 
the large haciendas which were urban in character and were 
occupied by the houses of the tenants. With the opportunity 
to own their homes thus assured, Quezon felt, the tenants 
might no longer find the settlement of their current diffi- 
culties relative to their farm lands of urgent necessity. 

Hence, Quezon in a subsequent message to the Assembly 
certified to the necessity for the immediate enactment of 
law authorizing the President to order the institution of 
expropriation proceedings, or to enter into negotiations, for 
the purpose of acquiring portions of large landed estates 
which were then used as homesites. 

This admittedly was a departure from Quezon’s preelec- 
tion platform. His reasons at the time seemed convincing 
enough. Why deprive property-owners by expropriation 
when so much idle land still remained unappropriated else- 
v/here? And especially since past experience seemed to indi- 
cate that expropriation was no satisfactory solution to the 
agrarian problem? There must be other ways. Evidently, 
as he had said time and again, Quezon’s concept of social 
justice did not mean simply to take from the rich and give 
to the poor. Besides, Quezon was not only an idealist but 
a pragmatist, too. Understandably, his state-of-the-nation 
speech on June 18, 1936, advocated a policy of progressive 
conservatism. And quite consistently, in his speech he titled 
“Social Justice” and delivered on the first anniversary of 
the Philippine Commonwealth, he stressed; 

“It is my ambition that this new nation will be able to 
undertake changes in its national economy, in its industrial 



118 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



and agricultural organizations, looking toward the better- 
ment of the working class without depriving capital of its 
rights, without endangering our social and political institu- 
tions, and all in the midst of peace and order, by cooperation 
between [sic] all the elements of the community/' 

Notwithstanding this conservative statement, Quezon's 
message to the National Assembly less than a year later, on 
September 3, 1937, dealt with expropriation proceedings for 
the acquisition of large haciendas: 

'‘When a class, family, or group has monopolized vast 
domains and the people thereby converted into mere serfs, 
history is replete with instances when in their wrath the 
people have revolted and by force deprived the landlords 
of their possessions. The Philippines is not the first country 
which has faced the land problems caused by the ownership 
of big estates. The problem upon which the executive and 
legislative officials of this Government have been elected con- 
tains a specific pledge that we shall solve this problem.” 

Thus, while Quezon never once lost sight of the top 
economic problem of his day, his tentative solutions varied, 
and his actions might even suggest a vacillating policy. Plow 
ever, it is reasonable to assume that he was trying, with the 
means available to him, to explore possibilities and weigh 
alternatives. One may say that for a President whose powers 
v/ere constitutionally vast, Quezon went about the problem 
too cautiously and conservatively. But he w^as far from com- 
placent. Already, the Sakdalistas were pressing impatiently 
and aggressively for reforms. 

There were, of course, other problems besides the agra- 
rian. Quezon was also concerned with revising the several 
pension systems then in force — particularly the Teacher's 
Retirement Fund — which w'ere then in danger of running 
deficits. It was Quezon's persistent efforts to promote the 
interests of employee-contributors and safeguard the solvency 
of pension funds which finally established the Government 
Service Insurance System in 1937 by consolidating previous 



ARCELLAN A— QUEZOl^S DREAM OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 



119 



individual pension systems and extending the system to cover 
all government employees. 

On June 4, 1936, before the Rotary Club of Manila, Que- 
zon had to defend the creation of the Rice and Corn Corpora- 
tion, expounding on the functions of Government. With a 
hint of impatience characteristically Quezonian, he complaiii- 
ed that everybody •was criticizing, nobody was suggesting any- 
thing new. “We have had 35 years, at least, of this situation," 
he said. "There were years when there was too much rice, 
and the price of rice was not sufficient to pay the poor far- 
mers; at times the price was so high that the consumer coulct 
not pay for it.” 

On his 58th birthday on August 19, 1936, Quezon in a 
radio broadcast declared that the keynote of his birthday 
celebration was higher wages for Filipino laborers. Endors- 
ing the campaign launched by the Anti-T.B. Society against 
tuberculosis, he appealed for support not only in the usual 
ways; he directed attention to preventive measures, saying 
that “to eradicate tuberculosis from the Philippines, we must 
eliminate the causes that have made the white plague the 
one disease that claims more victims every year than any 
other disease known to us in the Philippines. The most 
common cause of tuberculosis is malnutrition. Our poor 
people are underfed, and lacking strength, they are an easy 
prey to tuberculosis. They are underfed because they are 
underpaid.” 

Quezon therefore urged all sectors concerned to pay bet- 
ter wages to all laborers both on farm and in factory. He 
said that it was no excuse to say that in comparison with 
neighboring countries we were better off; the fact was that 
the wages we paid were not sufficient to give the working- 
men what he needed for his support and the sustenance of 
his family. In words that rang with authority and conviction, 
Quezon said: “It is trite to say that the first and most fun- 

damental right of a man is his right to live. This right im.- 
poses upon well-organized society the duty to provide him 
with the means for his existence. That other countries 



120 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



around us fail in this primary duty is no good excuse for us 
to evade it.” 

Quezon pleaded on his 58th birthday celebration for all 
to join him in one concerted effort to improve the living 
conditions of our mases. He expressed the wish to see this 
d.one spontaneously by those in a position to do so “without 
our having to impose it by legislation.” Social justice, he 
said, “is far more beneficient if it comes as a matter of sen- 
timent and not of law.” In a sense, Quezon, repeated appeals 
for voluntary personal action for social amelioration antici- 
pated by some two decades Nehru’s policy of voluntary land 
gifts from the rich for distribution to the poor. 

Still, Quezon was not one to rely solely on private voli- 
tion. As if to set an example, that very day (his 58th birth- 
day) he signed an executive order fixing a minimum wage 
for all government laborers, an increase of 20% over thai. 
which they had been receiving in the past, since “by all signs 
and portents the country was out of the depression and 
there was an upward swing in our trade and business.” This 
executive order (#49) fixed the minimum daily wages to be 
paid to able-bodied common laborers employed by, or under 
the direct supervision of the different branches of the Na- 
tional Government. Five days later came Executive Order 
#50 fixing the minimum salary for employees of the Gov- 
ernment. 

Before capitalists and industrialists, wealthy planters and 
other groups, as well as to the whole nation, Quezon repeat- 
edly emphasized the urgency of a revision of traditional atti- 
tudes toward a more just treatment of labor if we were “to 
preserve substantially our accustomed way of life.” 

From representatives of labor Quezon pleaded for help 
and cooperation, saying that they could aid the Government 
by exposing any improper governmental administration, and 
by telling what must be done in their interest.” However, 
he advised them never to resort to force to secure their ob- 
jectives or to break the laws of the land, to cultivate the qua- 
lities of patience and self-control, while the Government was 



.4 RCELLAA' A— QUEZON’S DREAM OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 



121 



"striving industriously to obtain social security and financial 
amelioration for the working masses.” 

; Quezon often reiterated the responsibility of government 
“never to tolerate any improper habit or custom.” He en- 
joined justices of the peace to be upright and honest non- 
partisans, because “the justice of the peace is in many cases 
the. only court of justice for the poor man. . . I am striving 
to convince the people that in the Philippines the poor man 
receives justice from our Government the same as the man 
of means.” 

In a speech delivered at Tuguegarao, Cagayan, on Feb- 
ruary 28, 1936, Quezon declared: “The Government must be 
just, must protect the people from abuses and wrong doings; 
and if anyone violates the law or commits abuses, it is the 
duty of the Government officials to go after such man, regard- 
less of who he is (applause). We must have but one norm 
of conduct in our dealings with the people. The law must 
be the same for the powerful and fon the weak, for the rich 
and for the poor. . . .” 

On January 20, 1937, before departing for the United 
States, Quezon explained, at the banquet in honor of mem- 
bers of the Cabinet, the National Assembly, and provincial 
governors and treasurers, how the government was to func- 
tion in his absence, and then proceeded to discuss social 
justice again in one of his more inspired speeches. He spoke 
of the duty to uphold social justice in accordance with our 
Constitution. Linking it with the national defense program 
then recently launched, Quezon said: “It will serve us none, 
gentlemen, to instruct all the Filipinos in the use of arms, if 
with it we do not inculcate in the heart of the Filipino the 
love of the country in which he lives, so that he will be dis- 
posed to fight and die for it. The love of the citizen for his 
country should not be alone for the beauty of its panoramas 
nor for the riches of its soil. Love of country springs from 
the satisfaction one finds in living in it, from the intimate 
security in which one can live freely and quietly under a just- 
government where the natural resources of the country are 
the nation’s own and for the good of all its inhabitants. . . . 



122 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



We have to give to the Filipino nation a just government, an 
honest government.” 

He directed the government officials to explain to that 
part of our society “which enjoys privileges and comforts 
that if it wants to continue enjoying these privileges and 
comforts, it should give to the less fortunate part of our 
population a just share of the fruits to which it is entitled 
because of its honest labor. Quezon declared that domestic 
tranquility in the Philippines could only be guaranteed by 
justice. All the military preparations then being made with 
so much money and labor, he said, would not suffice to assure 
internal peace if the farmhand, the factory worker, and the 
small employee did not receive their just share of the fruits 
of their labor. 

At Iloilo on August 25, 1937, after discussing local poli- 
tics and administration, Quezon enjoined his audience on 
behalf of the working class thus: “We must all cooperate 
to find the means and to use these to improve the lot of the 
working class in the Philippines. Particularly should the 
provinces enjoying the benefits of the sugar industry imme- 
diately and substantially raise the wages of labor. No indus- 
try in the Philippines is being benefited by our trade rela- 
tions with America nearly so much as the sugar industry. 
There have sprung in Negros, Iloilo and Pampanga in the 
last few years, millionaires as we have never had before. 
They have palaces, automobiles, and live a life of comfort and 
luxury here and abroad. I am not criticizing them; it is 
their privilege to spend their money as they please. I am 
merely stating a fact, for I want to point out that we are 
doing everything we can, not only to prevent the collapse, 
but to maintain in full blast, the prosperity of the sugar 
industry. But the government demands that this prosperity 
be shared with the workingmen in the sugar fields and in 
the sugar centrals. Very little, if any, of the immense pro- 
fits of the sugar industry, has gone into the pockets of labor.” 

Quezon thus said in all earnestness to owners of sugar 
centrals and to proprietors of sugar lands that unless they 
raised the wages of the laborers and treated them better, the 



ARCELLAN A— QUEZON’S DREAM OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 



123 



Government and the country might lose interest in the pro- 
tection of the sugar industry. He stated that the Govern- 
ment could not be the servants of a privileged class, but the 
whole people, and should not permit an injustice to be done, 
much less perpetuated, against any constituent part of the 
■community. He warned the sugar barons that unless the 
sugar industry of its own account increased immediately the 
wages of its workingmen, he would ask the National Assembly 
to enact legislation that would compel that industry to do so. 

He then proceeded to explain the meaning of social 
justice for a clearer understanding of the concept. He said 
it did not mean favoring the poor or favoring labor against 
anybody regardless of whether he was right or not. It did 
not mean dispossessing the rich of his lawful property and 
distributing that property among the unemployed. Social 
justice, in other words, did not mean communism. Social 
justice involved all, it meant justice for every constituent 
element in the community. “Of course, today (1937), when 
you speak of social justice, you emphasize the need of giving- 
better treatment to labor, because in the present state of the 
Philippine society labor is not receiving its due. This -was 
why he was making speeches advising the people to remem- 
ber that the right to property has its limitations — the limit- 
ations imposed by the welfare of the community where one 
lives. Again he said that property is secondary to the right 
to live, that whenever a conflict occurs between the right to 
property and the right to live, the latter should prevail. 

Thus, Quezon recommended to the National Assembly on 
February’ 16, 1938, the enactment of a law ordering the 
prompt payment of salaries and wages by employers on pain 
of stiff penalties. He likewise recommended the reenact- 
ment of Act No. 2549, as amended by Act No. 3958, prohibit- 
ing, among others, the payment of salaries or wages by means 
of tokens, chits, or objects, as the former act had been ex- 
pressly repealed by the Revised Penal Code. 

On April 30, 1938, Quezon recommended to the National 
Assembly the enactment of a law to repeal Act No. 1874 
commonly known as the Employers’ Liability and to amend 



124 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



the provisions of Act No. 3428 known as the Workmen’s Com- 
pensation Act, so as to afford greater protection to laborers 
who suffered injuries or death in connection with their em- 
ployment. Quezon also sought to increase the penalty for 
refusal or negligence of an employer to send to the Bureau 
of Labor the notice of information required by the latter Act 
of all injuries received by their employees in the course of 
their employment. Thus did Quezon initiate the rectifica- 
tion of existing laws in order to preclude decisions on labor 
cases similar to those made by "fifteenth century judges.” 

The cedula tax was abolished, “because this is a tax that 
is a burden to the poor,” Quezon declared at the Luneta on 
the second anniversary of the Commonwealth. “From now 
on, no tax shall be collected that will not be based on the 
ability of the tax-paying public to pay. Until now the poor 
are heavily taxed in our country. . . What the rich pay for 
taxes are only taken from their surplus, but the poor get 
their money to pay their taxes from their means of subsist- 
ence and subsistence of their families.” 

Quezon had the Probation Law repealed on September 
^ , 1937. This law had been made to depend upon the will- 
ingness or ability of the provincial governments to appro- 
priate the funds necessary for the payment of salaries of the 
probation officers, as a result of which no province made 
any provision. The privilege thus became effective only in 
Manila (on national funds). Quezon explained that this might 
give the impression that the government was favoring the 
rich as against the poor, since there were likely to be more 
rich people residing in the city than elsewhere. 

On September 3, 1937, Quezon in a message to the Na- 
tional Assembly certified to the necessity of a heavy penalty 
for jueteng, in the form of long imprisonment, saying that 
Gambling is doubtless one of the weaknesses of human na- 
ture that should be dealt with by governments with sound 
discretion, but jueteng is not gambling. It is merely an or- 
ganized fraud a fraud of such shocking proportion that it 
has become the greatest scandal in our community life. The 
worst victims of this criminal racketeering are the poor.” 



ARCELLAN A— QUEZON'S DREAM OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 125 

Its existence, he said, is common knowledge, but it has been 
impossible to eradicate it, because the penalty is either a 
small fine or a few days' imprisonment. 

Quezon also caused the abolition of the sweepstakes after 
a few years of operation for related reasons: it tended to be 
patronized by the poor, who could ill afford it, on the long, 
long chance that they might be bailed out of poverty; thus, 
the rich, who were indifferent to the sweepstakes, stayed rich 
or got richer, while the poor got poorer for betting in the 
national lotteries. Later, however, the sweepstakes were re- 
stored to finance government charities. 

Why did Quezon choose to champion social justice in his 
time? Why did he decide to launch this almost lone person- 
al crusade? Was he genuinely interested in the plight of the 
poor, the common tao? Or was he thinking of himself, too, 
and his family, which had in the course of his successful 
public career by then become fairly wealthy, and therefore 
as a class, vulnerable to the unsettling doctrines which in 
the 1930s had begun to filter into our young nation’s con- 
sciousness, further complicating its already manifold prob- 
lems associated with the preparation for independence? Was 
Quezon aware, not only of the isms overrunning Europe and 
Asia, but also of the New Deal in America, which was Pies- 
ident Franklin D. Roosevelt’s own way of keeping those isms 
at bay? 

Did Quezon really feel for the poor? He said so count- 
less times. He demonstrated this appreciably. Perhaps the 
best clue is in his autobiography The Good Fight, in which 
is related one of the most tender scenes of his youth: 

I told my father that I was assured of my room and board 
and that for my clothing and other necessary expenses as a stu- 
dent, I would do some other work in my spare time. (Quezon is 
here referring to his admission to the University of Sto. Tomas 
as a scholar.) My father was the happiest man on earth. ‘My 
son, I shall be going back home in two hours. I won’t bother you 
with my advice. Just be good and be just to your fellowmen. 
No matter how high your station in life may be, never forget 
that you came from poor parents and that you belong to the 
poor. Don’t forsake them, whatever happens.’ 



126 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



‘God bless you,’ he said when we parted. I never saw him 
again. 

Indeed, shortly after this his father was to die in the 
province. These then, it turned out, were his father’s last 
words to him. What son could forget his father’s dying 
wish? What son could ignore its quiet mandate? 

My interview with Fr. Pacifico J. Ortiz, S.J., who was 
for many years Quezon’s private chaplain, and was with 
him all through the hard evacuation days of 1941 until he 
died in New York in August 1944 (after just having listened 
to some heartening news about the Philippine campaign) 
may be summed up in the following quotation — I write this 
interview from memory, and these as far as I recall were 
Fr. Ortiz’s words: 

For all his flair for the bright and gay life, Quezon loved the 
poor sincerely. And they loved him, too— one could sense this 
instantly whenever he moved amongst them. He was no Mag- 
saysay, who would jump fences barefoot. But he cared enough 
wr them to plan for them and fight for them with all his might. 
His travels abroad, particularly in the United States, where he 
had occasion to observe at first hand the Rooseveltian New Deal 
in actual operation, and in Mexico, which more closely approxi- 
mated Philippine conditions, and his painstaking efforts to keep 
abreast of developments in Europe, with Mussolini and Hitler 
asserting hegemony by upsetting the status quo, and of course, his 
awareness of Communist ideology and the Soviet Russian expe- 
riment all these were factors urging a more positive program 
for social amelioration. Of course, his ideas then might be con- 
sidered quite conservative now, but for his time they were bold 
enough to embarrass some people. . . . No, Quezon never forgot 
his father’s parting admonition. He was loyal to his beginnings. 

Did Quezon think of himself, too, and of his family, as 
■well as of the nation he led for nearly three decades? The 
question is almost superfluous. What family man does not 
think of himself, his job, and his family, in whichever order? 
■With Quezon the thought became even more pressing with 
each hlness, or rather each flare-up of TB, which was his 
■chronic illness. In his busy and colorful life, death loomed 
like a raven at the door. He was conscious of it, and could 



ARCELLAN A— QXJEZOWS DREAM OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 127 

not but wish that he were physically more able, that he might 
do more to insure the well-being of the family and the nation 
which were his twin responsibilities. He felt that freedom 
was the best atmosphere in which to live, and that freedom 
was best secured by justice. As a keen student of Thomism, 
Quezon knew that peace (social peace, individual peace, 
world peace) was possible only with justice. Even as he 
sponsored woman suffrage, he thought and spoke about his 
daughters— of a posterity in which he may no longer be 
around, but which, if he had anything to do with it, he 
wanted to be fair and just to all, including women; if society 
is to be stable it must be just; if people are to be happy, 
they must believe in the justice of their society. Indeed, it 
is one of the inexplicable ironies of fate that his widow and 
older daughter were later to perish at the hands of the under- 
privileged, whose cause Quezon so ably championed while he 
lived. 

Did Quezon seek to outflank communism and other pos- 
sible radical doctrines violative of his sense of values? It 
would seem so. He was familiar with contemporary history. 
He was both well-read and well-travelled. He was a practical 
politician, true, but he was a statesman, too. In the Thomis 
tic tradition he was for a happy social order in which all the 
component parts cooperated harmoniously, because each one 
got his just due. Obviously, Quezon saw the handwriting 
on the wall even before it could be fully written for the Phil- 
ippines, because he knew what went on elsewhere. 

Quezon was a leader who felt for his people and sensed 
what they needed; one might say he thought for them, too, 
and acted as he felt necessary. He thought that social jus- 
tice was the alternative to revolution, which is the bloody 
price of social injustice, but not necessarily its solution. He 
knew that long, unmitigated suffering and deprivation could 
not forever fester without relief, that such a condition had 
better be remedied as early as possible or the consequences 
for the society he loved would be frightening. He had a 
statesman’s foresight. 



128 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Not the least that he foresaw was his own approaching 
death. He spoke of death as if it were for him a constant 
companion and a consistent reminder of his life’s mission. 
To groups of listeners both here and abroad he would speak 
of his awareness that he would not live forever, that politics 
and the power that it had given him was only a means by 
which he might do good, do right, and see that justice was 
done in accordance with the principles of the Constitution, 
his oath of office, and beyond this, in accordance with the 
will of God. When he spoke thus, it was not really to be 
sentimental or to appeal to the emotions of his hearers. It 
was not to gain sympathy for himself but support for his 
cause; it was really to persuade his audience that his motives 
were noble, his intentions honest, and his ideals the highest 
for his people. Quezon was no tearful sentimentalist; he was 
realist enough to be privy to the ephemeral nature of man 
the brevity of human life, and therefore the need for a man 
to serve his fellowmen. In this personal dedication he found 
fulfillment, and therefore a measure of happiness, and per- 
haps, too, a glimpse of immortality. 



QUEZON AND THE CHURCH ■ 



By Frederic S. Marquardt 



JOSE RIZAL and MANUEL L. QUEZON were both born 
into the Catholic religion. Both were educated in church 
schools. Both spent many of their adult years outside the 
church. But that’s the end of the parallel religious exper- 
iences of the two leading Philippine heroes. While historians 
differ as to whether Rizal reasserted his faith in the church, 
there is no doubt that Manuel Quezon died a Catholic. 

There was an altar in the room in which death came to 
Quezon at Saranac Lake on August 1, 1944. A frequently 
read Bible was near his bed. Quezon took almost daily com- 
munion from his personal chaplain, the Rev. Fr. Pacifico A. 
Ortiz, S.J., during his long illness. He and the members of 
his family said the rosary together every night. 

Quezon’s was no deathbed conversion, or more accurate- 
ly reconversion. For the last 14 years of his life he was a 
practicing Catholic. But for the previous 25 years he had 
nothing to do with the church. It was during this early period 
that he was married in a civil ceremony in Hongkong, later 
repeating the vows before a priest almost as an afterthought. 
During his break with the church he was the Grand Master 
of the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of the Phil- 
ippines, an order generally regarded as anti-clerical. The 
Supreme Council of the Scottish Rite Masons in Washington, 
D.C., elected him to the 33rd degree, highest honor in Ma- 
sonry. Caballero and Concepcion, in their biography on 
Quezon, date this event as October 23, 1929. 

Less than a year later Quezon was back in the Catholic 
fold. Time, the American newsmagazine, reported in its is- 



* Reprinted from the Philippine Free Press, December 11, 1954, 
pp. 34, 143, 144. 



129 



130 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



sue of December 9, 1935: “Catholic-born Manuel Quezon re- 
tracted Masonry on his 52nd birthday, 1930, aboard the s.s. 
Empress of Japan, in the presence of Most Rev. Michael J. 
O’Doherty, Archbishop of Manila. Two years later he de- 
mitted (i.e. resigned) from his loge.” 

In his autobiography. The Good Fight, Quezon was ama- 
zingly sketchy about his religious experiences. It should be 
noted, of course, that the book was unfinished at the time of 
Quezon s death, and was published posthumously after his 
friends and relatives had done some work on the manuscript. 
He was a sick man when he dictated the book, and he had no 
opportunity to put it in final shape As the head of a govern- 
ment in exile, he was taking a high-level part in the struggle 
that v/ould leave scars on his country for years to come. 
There was little time for reflection or research. Still, Quezon 
did indicate in his book one of the events that may have led 
him away from the church. 

Describing his part in the Philippine Revolution, Quezon 
told how he came down with a bad case of malaria while 
serving on General Mascardo’s staff. The illness probably 
occurred^ in 1900, although the date is not definitely estab- 
ished. I spent a month in the house of Cabesang Doro’s 
friend in Navotas,” wrote Quezon, undoubtedly referring to 
the town in Rizal province. “This old man had amassed so 
much money from the fishing business that he had been able 
to send his son to be educated in Europe. While convales- 
cing at his house, I read books which left in my mind some 
doubt as to the certainty of the existence of hell as taught by 
my friar teachers doubts which in after years contributed 
to my leaving for a long time the Catholic faith and .joining 
the Masonic Order. I returned to the old church after my 
children had grown up.” 

The foregoing pithy reference doesn’t throw much light 
on Quezon’s religious experience, but it is all he chose to 
include in his autobiography. 

I have been able to find no published record of Quezon’s 
beliefs during the years when he was outside the church. 



MARQUARDT — QUEZON AND THE CHURCH 



13i 



However, I once examined an unpublished autobiography of 
the late Teodoro M. Kalaw, who had a distinguished careei 
in Philippine politics during the first half of the i^merican 
regime. In the manuscript (Chapter X) was a letter from 
Quezon to Kalaw. As nearly as I could ascertain, it must 
have been writtent about 1915, when Quezon was represent- 
ing the Philippines as resident commissioner in Washington. 
In the letter, writing in Spanish, Quezon said: 

‘‘You know that I ^ni a free thinker. I do not believe 
matrimony is an indissoluble tie, as I do not see the necessity- 
of any religion for any people and nation. Science should 
be, and has to be, the Religion of the future. This Religion 
will make the man of tomorrow more perfect, morally speak- 
ing, than the religious man of today, because the believer of 
our day is synonymous with the ignorant. To believe is to 
see what we have not seen^• in other words to have faith in 
whatever hoaxes some people, who consider themselves semi- 
divine, preach and practice. Nevertheless, even when such 
are my honest convictions regarding divorce and religion, 
still consider it very inopportune to pass the Divorce Law 
now. 

“Because of the trouble between (Archbishop of Manila) 
Harty and the YMCA, Harty has written to American Catho- 
lics attacking our Government. For the first time the Catho- 
lics here are (word indecipherable) if it is good for Catho- 
licism to have the American government in the Philippines. 
It is very convenient for us to let them ponder over this, 
while at the same time we show them what good Catholics 
we are. The Catholic vote may yet give us our indepen- 
dence.'' 

There seems to be an inconsistency in Quezon s referring 
to himself as a “free thinker," and then suggesting we show 
them what good Catholics we are." One can only surmise 
that Quezon was speaking ironically in the latter instance. 
As a matter of fact, Quezon was wrong if he thought the 
Catholic vote in the United States would bring about inde- 
pendence. Only a few years after this letter to Kalaw was 
written, the same Archbishop Harty sent a cablegram to the 



132 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



predominantly Catholic delegation in the New York delega- 
tion in the House of Representatives urging the delegates "to 
vote against immediate independence. 

If Quezon didn’t write much about his experiences with 
the Catholic Church, he showed no reluctance in discussing- 
them. On October 21, 1937, I made extensive notes of a press 
cor^erence President Quezon had held the preceding Sunday 
in his study in Malacahang Palace. The conference lasted 
two hours. Originally called because the President wanted 
to discuss a forthcoming legislative message, the conference 
soon branched out into a discussion of nearly everythino- 
under the sun, including religion. Other correspondents pre- 
Walter Robb of the Chicago Daily News, Ray Cronin 
The Associated Press, Dick Wilson of the United Press 
Dave Boguslav, then editor of the Manila Tribune, now The 
lamia Times. I was associate editor of the Philippines Free 
ress, and correspondent for the International News Service. 

always been curious about Quezon’s return to the 
urch, and I kept the conversation on this subject as Ion" 
4 ?■ Pi-esident was speaking “off the record," 

went published at the time. His story 

went like this, according to the notes made at the time and 
still in my possession. 

of mv re-entering the church for the sake 

as the ehUH ^ devout Catholic, and 

she was ilf r ^ wonder why 

"ion And I was apparently lacking in reli- 

iWlliefii tLnM^ to be more 

-"ivino- the onesf in my footsteps without 

s, vm^ the question of religion serious thought. 

Order^iJi Villallonga, former head of the Jesuit 

^ thP r he would give me some instruction 

m tne Catholic religion. 

^^^her Vilallonga, whom I had known for years, came 
out to see me and the first thing he wanted to do was say 

^ ^ him, ‘Never mind the mass. Tell me why 

I should re-enter the faith.’ 



MARQUARDT— QUEZON AND THE CHURCH 



133 



“He talked to me for a while, and then he sent me a book, 
saying it would instruct me in the Catholic religion. Well, 
I read the book, and one of the portions in it told about a 
good-for-nothing Spaniard who sailed from Spain for the 
Philippines. Before he left his home his mother gave him 
a Medal, bearing the likeness of the Virgin of the Rosary, 
and once a day this fellow would say a ‘Hail Mary to the 
Medal. The rest of the time he was the worst possible sort 
of a rake, committing all the crimes imaginable. 

“When the boat he was on passed Mariveles, a storm 
canie up and the man was shipwrecked. By dint of great 
eiiort, he managed to swim ashore to Cavite but he was so 
exhausted by the time he reached there that he fell down on 
the beach and died. 

“The next day the people in Manila noticed that the Vir- 
gin of the Rosary in the chapel of the Dominican Church had 
dust on it. And do you know what the conclusion of the 
story was? That the Virgin in Manila, made of wood, had 
walked all the way to Cavite to help this sinful man into 
Pleaven, merely because he had said one ‘Hail Mary’ a day! 

“When I read that story, and considered that the Cath- 
olic Church expected grown-up, intelligent men to believe it, 
I decided that I had better stay outside the church. 

“So I did nothing until once, when I was returning to 
Manila from the United States, I found myself on board the 
same boat with Archbishop Michael J. O’Doherty. I was 
chatting with the Archbishop one day when he asked me why 
I did not return to the church, pointing out that my children 
were growing up and that I owed it to them, if for no other 
reason, to again become a practicing Catholic. 

“I said to the Archbishop, ‘I personally would like to 
return to the church. But I can’t join an organization which 
expects me to believe that a wooden image walked all the 
way from Manila to Cavite to help a sinner get into Heaven. 
Then I told him the entire story which I had read in the book. 



134 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



“The Archbishop laughed and said, ‘Well, I don’t believe 
that story either, but I’m still a member of the church. It 
wasn’t long before he convinced me that I could rejoin the 
church without insulting my own intelligence. As I recall it, 
he said a mass on that occasion.’’ 

I was anxious to find out Quezon’s attitude toward Ma- 
sonry. So I pressed him on this subject. His statement, 
also taken from my notes of October 21, 1937, follows: 

I didn t actually resign from the Masonic order until 
several months later, and I never denounced Masonry. There 
is a formal form which those returning to the church from 
the Masonic lodge are supposed to sign, but I refused to sign 
it. Instead, I wrote the Archbishop a personal note saying 
that I understood that I could not be readmitted to the Catlv 
olic Church so long as I remained a Mason and for that rea- 
son I was resigning from Masonry.” 

The “personal note” from Quezon to Archbishop O’Do- 
herty is included in Sol Gwekoh’s Quezon, His Life and Ca- 
reer. The original was in Spanish, says Gwekoh, and was 
witnessed by Mrs. Quezon. It was dated August 18, 1930, 
which^is one day off from the 52nd birthday m.entioned in 
Times’ account. Since he was crossing the Pacific at the 
time, it is possible that Quezon was confused by the Inter- 
national Date Line. 

document cited by Gwekoh, this statement is at- 
tributed to Quezon: “I abandon Masonry and I abandon it 
orever, not only because this is a condition sine qua non for 
a Catholic, but because the religious beliefs that I now sin- 
cerely profess, are in direct opposition to certain Masonic 
eories. I shall never again belong to any society condemn- 
ed by the church. I deplore with all my heart having spent 
the best years of my life in complete forgetfulness of my God 
and outside His curch.” 

Not long after the press conference at which President 
Quezon spoke so freely of his religious experiences, I asked 
him if he would authorize publication of the facts that led 
to his readmission to the church. I pointed out the doubts 



M^RQU/IRDT— QUEZON AND THE CHURCH 135 

that always arose regarding Rizal’s religious beliefs, and sug- 
gested that Quezon prevent all speculation in his own case 
by writing an article for the 1937 Christmas issue of the FREE 
PRESS, repeating what he had told us at the press conference. 

The President thought about my request, then turned it 
down. It is only now, 10 years after his death, that I feel 
free to publish this personal version of Manuel Quezon’s 
religious beliefs. In his note to me, dated November 18, 1937, 
President Quezon said: 

“I have been thinking over the question you submitted 
to me yesterday and I have come to the conclusion that it 
would not be proper for me at this time to write such an 
article. It is of no concern to the public what my religion 
is and why I belong to that church. The separation of church 
eind state is a fundamental constitutional mandate and people 
may suspect some ulterior motive in my writing such article. 

“Therefore I will not write the article you’ve suggested.” 

The important thing about President Quezon’s letter, it 
seems to me, was his concern over the separation of church 
and state. The issue of religious education in the public 
schools was a live one. Only a veto by President Quezon 
prevented the enactment of a law that would have permitted 
religious education in the schools during regular time. 

Despite the President’s veto, the bishops of Cebu an- 
nounced their intention to continue the fight for religious 
education in the public schools. President Quezon then made 
a blistering statement ending all speculation as to where he 
stood on the question of separation of church and state. 

“It should be unnecessary to remind the ecclesiastical 
authorities in the Philippines,” said Quezon, “that the separa- 
tion of Church and State in this country is a reality and not 
a mere theory, and that as far as our people are concerned, 
it is forever settled that this separation will be maintained 
as one of the cardinal tenets of our government. They should 
realize, therefore, that any attempts on their part to inter- 
fere with matters that are within the province of government 



136 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



will not be tolerated. If the said ecclesiastical authorities 
desire to have the government respect their rights and afford 
them every kind of protection in the free exercise of their 
religion, they must not only abide by the laws and lawful 
orders of the government, but they must also acknowledge 
and respect the principle of the separation of church and 
state.” 

If President Quezon’s message to the bishops was the 
highlight of his intensely religious period, his letter to Teo- 
doro Kalaw was a similar highlight of his years as a free- 
thinker. When he was almost literally at war with the church, 
he advised Kalaw against any breakdown in the sanctity of 
mari’iage. And when he had again become a practicing Ca- 
tholic, he warned a congregation of bishops to keep their 
hands off political affairs. Both events illustrate the essen- 
tial balance that is a requisite of true statesmanship. 



QUEZON AND THE COMMONWEALTH 



By Celedonio O. Resurreccion 

NOVEMBER 15 IS almost a forgotten date. Yet it is as 
important a date as Indepence Day of the Philippines. Twen- 
ty-seven years ago the foundation of the Republic was laid 
with the inauguration of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines. On the silver anniversary of that solemn and historic 
event nothing was done by the Government to commemorate 
it. 

The Commonwealth was more than a mere transition 
that would serve as an economic bridge between the colonial 
era and that of statehood. It was to be a supreme test of 
the capacity and political maturity of the Filipino people for 
self-government. 

That the Filipinos were ready for autonomy was their 
claim upon the passage of the Jones Law on August 29, 1916, 
which in part declai’es that “it is, as it has always been, the 
purpose of the people of the United States to withdraw their 
sovereignty over the Philippine Islands and to recognize their 
independence as soon as a stable government can be establish- 
ed therein.” 

In fact, the independence movement under the American 
regime had its inception even before the formal cession of 
the Philippines by Spain to the United States imder the terms 
of the Treaty of Paris of December 10, 1898.^ It gained im- 
petus notwithstanding the prohibition by Governor William 
Howard Taft against the formation of political parties with 
independence as part of its basic platform. It continued to 
grow in spite of the enactment of the Sedition Law of ov 
emtoer 4, 1901, which made it ‘^unlawful for any person to 
advocate independence, or separation from the United States 
whether by peaceful or other means, or to officially pub is 

Reprinted from the Historical Bulletin, 1962, Vol. VI, No. 3, pp. 
160-265. 



137 



138 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



pamphlets advocating such independence or separation.” To 
add extra-legal teeth to the Sedition Law, at least in spirit, 
appointments to important choice positions in the govern- 
ment were made in favor of members of the Partido Federal, 
then the only party allowed to exist because of its patent 
pro-American platform and policies. 



The Commonwealth of the Philippines saw the light of 
day not without labor pains. The crisis in Philippine politics 
began when the Ninth Independence Mission, composed of 
Senate president pro tempore Sergio Osmena and Speaker 
Manuel Roxas, sailed for Washington in 1931 to press for the 
enactment of a bill providing for Philippine independence. 
Alter two years of painstaking labor, the United States Conp^- 
ress passed the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill, as amended, and, 
ater, overrode the veto of President Hoover. Credit for the 

p^sage of the independence law was naturally given to the 
OSROX Mission. 



In the meantime, in Manila the third member of the Ninth 
Independence Mission, Manuel L. Quezon, who elected to re- 
mam in the home front, registered eloquently his opposition 
;? Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill in a speech delivered on March 
+ 1 ,’ ^^he Philippine Columbian Clubhouse. Thereafter 

divided into the "Pros”, which sided with 
zon Mission, and the “Antis” which sided with Que- 



Quezon himself headed another mission to the United 
States and brought back the Tydings-McDuffie Law, which 
w^ very much similar to the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law. The 

unanimously accepted the new law. 
with both the Pros and the Antis claiming credit for it. 



Like the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act, the Tydings-McDuffie 
Law was enacted “to provide for the complete independence 
of the Philippine Islands, and for other purposes.” Among 
Its salient features were: (1) a provision authorizing the 
election of delegates to a constitutional convention; (2) man- 
a ory provisions in regard to the democratic character 
of the constitution; (3) a provision requiring the submission 



RESI/RRECCIOjY— QUEZON AND THE COMMONWEALTH 139 

of the constitution of the President of the United States for 
his approval if it conformed with the provisions of the 
Tydings-McDuffie Act; (4) a provision requiring the submis- 
sion, after approval by the United States President to the 
Filipino people for ratification or rejection, as the case may 
be; (5) relations with the United States pending complete 
independence; (6) recognition of the Philippine independence 
and withdrawal of American sovereignty; and (7) neutraliza- 
tion of the Philippine Islands. 

Events moved fast thereafter. On May 27, 1934, the 
Philippine Legislature authorized “the holding of elections of 
delegates to the Constitutional Convention.” The election 
was held on July 10 of the same year, in accordance with 
Proclamation No. 634. Adopted by the Convention on Feb- 
ruary 8, 1935, the Constitution was ratified by the people on 
May 14, 1935. 

The first national election took place on September 17, 
1935, with three candidates worthy of mention Manuel L. 
Quezon, Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo, and Monsiguor Gregorio Ag- 
lipay. Their respective speeches of acceptance of their no- 
mination provide interesting study of their policies if and 
when elected to the highest post under the Commonwealth. 

Saying that he looked upon the Constitution of the Phil- 
ippines as the expression of the sovereignty and of the aggre- 
gate wdll of the people, Quezon declared that he would abide 
by its provisions, uphold democratic principles underlying 
the Constitution, oppose dictatorship, defend rights and li- 
berties, and insure for every citizen the right to worship God. 

Quezon favored a simple and economical government, 
that is, “one in keeping with the limited resources of our 
country but which is capable of ministering to the needs of 
the nation.” 

The Picos della Mirandola of our time would be holding 
a lighted candle before President Quezon in vain. He an- 
nounced his norm of conduct in public office, thus: 



140 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



I shall be unsparing in my efforts to carry out the mandats 
of the Constitution regarding the civil service. Merit and charac- 
ter alone will be the qualification for office or promotion. For 
the highest posts I shall call on the most capable, honest and 
patriotic citizens, regardless of political affiliation or religious 
belief. This is not time for placing party considerations above 
the common weal. In fact, one of the main purposes of ths 
coalition is to secure the cooperation and help of the best avail- 
able men to insure the sucess of the Commonwealth. I shall 
tolerate neither corruption nor inefficiency in public office. 



Quezon’s views of the social problems of the time was 
one of fine perception, deep understanding, and constructive 
paternalism. “Let us beware of men,” he warned, “who deli- 
berately, for political or selfish aims, stir up discontent 
among the masses. They preach subversive doctrines, speak 
of evils and abuses that do not exist, or magnify those which 
often are inevitable in democracies. These men are the worse 
enemies of society, more dangerous to the community than 
ordinary criminals. They have no sympathy for the people, 
but are mere self-seekers, intent only in securing either pecu- 
niary or political advantage for themselves. ... He who tries 
to curry favor with the masses by appealing to the passions 
of the people, stirring up their prejudices, or capitalizing dis- 
content or human suffering, is unworthy of public trust.” 

In the battle of the minds, in the battle of ideologies, 
Quezon assumed an intransigent position. “I am against 
communism. I am a firm believer in the institution of pri- 
vate property. I contend, however, that whenever property 
rights come in conflict with human rights, the former should 
yield to the latter.” Here Quezon was a clairvoyant. He saw, 
by a decade earlier, the deathless spirit that was to promul- 
gate the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of the United 
Nations. 

General Aguinaldo in his acceptance speech mentioned 
forty-four principles to guide his conduct should the people 
give him their confidence. “I declare,” he said, “that I shall 
use all the energies of which I have enumerated, if the elec- 
torate places its confidence in me, with the cooperation of all 



RESURRECCION— QUEZON AND THE COMMONWEALTH 14i 



compatriots of good will, and with the aid of Divine Provi- 
dence.” 



Bishop Gregorio Aglipay was hacked up by the newly 
formed “Partido Republicano,” which had among its purposes 
the extension of help and assistance to the poor, the unem 
ployed, the laborers, and the establishment of a good govern- 
ment in general, as well as the preservation of equality and 
fraternity among the masses. 

Quezon and Osmena kissed up with the coalition of the 
Pros and the Antis in 1935, shortly before the election. They 
teamed up against the Aguinaldo-Melliza and the Aglipay- 
Nabong combinations. The election established in no uncer- 
tain terms the strength of the Quezon-Osmeha team which 
garnered not merely a plurality but a majority of the votes of 
the Filipino electorate, as shown by the following tabulation: 



FOR PRESIDENT 

Quezon 694,104 

Aguinaldo 179,390 

Aglipay 147,951 

Racuyal 158 



FOR VICE PRESIDENT 

Osmena 817,446 

Melliza 70,906 

Nabong 51,373 



On October 12, 1935, the Philippine Senate and the House 
of Representatives, in joint session, passed a resolution “cer- 
tifying to the Governor-General the result of the election for 
President and Vice President of the Philippines. This was the 
last requirement before the inauguration of the Common- 
wealth. 



It was a beautiful morning. The sun rose with all res- 
plendence as if to rival the splendor of the occasion. The 
morning breeze, cool and playful that particular November 
morning, contributed to the general high spirits. Everybody 
was in patriotic mood, aflame with a sense of triomph and 
fulfillment. From the gate of the Legislative Building c loud- 
speaker was pouring out Philippine music, including violin 
selections from the incomparable Filipino virtuoso, Ernesto 
Vallejo. 



142 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



At 7:45 a.m. a bugle call announced the processional 
march of officials and distinguished guests to the improvised 
grandstand on the steps at the main entrance of the Legisla- 
tive Building. Then the colors were borne to the rostrum. 
All was quiet and still now. The program had begun. 

His Grace the Archbishop of Cebu, the Most Reverend 
Gabriel M. Reyes, D.D., was going to say the Invocation. “To 
the King of ages, immortal, invisible, the only God, be honor 
and glory for ever and ever. Amen.” There was earnestness 
in his exultant voice, clear as clarion. “We thank Thee for 
this day so longed for by the Filipino people. . . We pray 
Thee, O God of Wisdom and Justice, from whom all authority 
comes, to assist with Thy light and power the authorities who 
have been elected by the will of their brethren. . .” 

Frank Murphy, last Governor-General and first American 
High-Commissioner, introduced George H. Bern, Secretary of 
War of the United States, who delivered an address after 
which High Commissioner Murphy read the proclamation of 
Fresident Roosevelt, announcing the results of the national 



Secretary Bern stood up to make an announcement, 
i announce,” his voice was firm and pregnant, 

that the heretofore existing Government of the Philippines 
IS now terminated, and that the Government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines in entering upon its rights, privi- 
leges, powers, and duties. . . is the successor to the hereto- 
fore eidsting Philippine Government and to all the rights and 
obligations thereof.” 



It was President Quezon’s happiest moments. To him 
who led his party through thick and thin, first, in the politics 
of survival and, later, in the politics of independence, it was 
a glorious moment of fulfillment. 

In his inaugural address. His Excellency Manuel L. Que- 
zon, President of the Commonwealth, spoke with humility 
before the people to whom he acknowledged his exalted posi- 
tion. In the exercise of your constitutional prerogative you 
have elected me to the presidency of the Commonwealth,” he 



J?ESUKRECC/OiV— QUEZON AND THE COMMONWEALTH 143 

iDegan. “I am profoundly grateful for this new expression 
of your confidence, and God helping me I shall not fail you.” 

President Quezon was realistic and far-seeing. “Under 
the Commonwealth, our life may not be one of ease and com- 
fort, but rather of hardship and sacrifice,” he warned. “We 
shall build a government that will be just, honest, efficient 
and strong so that the foundations of the coming Republic 
may be firm and enduring — a government, indeed, that must 
satisfy not only the passing needs of the hour but also the 
exacting demands of the future.” 

He concluded with an appeal, mingled with fortitude and 
hope, and prayer. “I appeal to your patriotism and summon 
your nobility of heart so that we may, united in the common 
endeavor, once more dedicate ourselves to the realization of 
our national destiny. I face the future with hope and for- 
titude, certain that God never abandons a people who ever 
follow His unerring and guiding Hand. May He give me 
light, strength, and courage evermore that I may not falter 
in the hour of service to my people!” 

Those were words of wisdom. Quezon knew his personal 
limitations and made public avov/al of them. He knew the 
great power of the Supreme Ruler Who guides the destiny of 
men and of nations and he implored for it. Yet he asked for 
“light, strength, and courage” not for self-aggrandizement, not 
for egocentric ends, but rather so that he “may not falter in 
the hour of service to my people.” It is a selfless utterance 
in a selfless moment. 

Indeed, the birth of the Commonwealth provides an en- 
during monument to the Father of his Country, a constant 
reminder to the present and future generations of Filipinos 
of the high ideals and noble vision which the Commonwealth 
nurtured for them. 



QUEZON AND HIS HEALTH ^ 



By Artemio A. Garlit 

THE LATE President Manuel L. Quezon, who once con- 
quered tuberculosis, was in turn conquered by the same dread 
foe. His struggle with the disease was uneven but it stretch- 
ed over a period of more than 20 years before he succumbed. 
Had they fought on even terms, he might still have won. 
Indeed, it seemed that only in this fashion could this remark- 
able man be laid by the heels. During his long and colorful 
political career, he never knew defeat. For well-nigh 25 years 
he had drawn the national chain of events and affairs with 
strong competent hands; had enjoyed the people’s confidence 
and the power that went along with it. Suddenly, the chain 
snapped. Death had at last intervened and stilled forever 
the heartbeats of this beloved leader of his people. 

But his extraordinary career did not end with his demise. 
It continued blooming to maturation until its appointed time. 
The grant of Philippine independence finally completed the 
cycle. 

Dying in an hour of triumph in the greatest battle of his 
life, Quezon carried with him to the grave the knowledge 
that the total defeat of the enemy in the greatest of all wars 
was not only sure but also calculably imminent. On the 
morning of August 1, 1944, several hours before he breathed 
his last, he had heard over the radio that the allies had just 
made a successful landing on Noenfoor which, until then, was 
the nearest landing to the Philippines. He was then at Lake 
Saranac sanatorium. New York, where he had been under 
treatment for sometime. Greatly elated by the news, it 
occurred to him that very soon the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines-in-exile would be reestablished on Philippine soil. 
Whereupon he immediately gave instructions for the then 
Brigadier-General Carlos P. Romulo to prepare a public state- 



o 0-3* from the Administration Magazine, August 1948 , pp. 

ly-Ao, 



144 



G.4RLIT— QUEZON AND HIS HEALTH 



145 



ment in his (Quezon’s) name. “Now I know we are on our 
way hack!’’ were the words he was reported to have wished 
issued in the statement. Accordingly, in his office in Wash^ 
ington, Romulo began writing the President’s message. 

But, later that day, Quezon’s condition worsened. News 
of the landing had overly excited him and hastened the inevi- 
table. Death has sometimes a definitive way of communi- 
cating its proximity and the terrible intimation of its near- 
ness must have impressed itself upon him for soon he asked 
his personal physician to read to him from the Beatitudes. 
All of a sudden, as he lay back on his pillows, blood gushed 
from his mouth. He was dead. Two months later, on Oct- 
ober 20, the liberation forces landed on Leyte. 

Quezon’s fight against the white plague was no less dra- 
matic than his political battles. As early as October of 1921 
he already showed the first symptoms of the disease, accord- 
ing to Dr. Antonio G. Sison, director of the Philippine Gen- 
eral Hospital and dean of the State University’s College of 
Medicine. The then senate head was aboard the s.s. Empress 
of Russia on his way back to the Philippines from the United 
States. One day, as the ship approached Yokohama, he play- 
ed back tennis and caught cold. Fever developed which lasted 
for more than a week. Having received advance information 
that he was on the steamer. Dr. Sison, then in Shanghai, paid 
a courtesy call and found Quezon sick with fever. The phy- 
sician had to attend to the ailing leader in whom he detected, 
after a careful diagnosis, the initial symptoms of lung trouble. 
Advising Quezon to be very careful, he frankly disclosed what 
he found. 

However, it was not until about the middle of 1927 that 
Quezon visibly declining in health, was found to be definitely 
suffering from tuberculosis. This, according to Dr. Miguel 
Cahizares, director of the Quezon Institute and a woild re- 
nowned TB specialist, who played an important role in the 
late leader’s fight against the ailment. 

Strenuous activity had worn down Quezon’s health. As 
the senate president and acknowledged leader of his people 



146 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



he had to put up with innumerable claims on his attention, 
time and effort. At the same time, the fights into which he 
pitched himself with a peculiar zest increased as he grew in 
fame and stature. Indeed, paradoxically enough, the very 
elements that partly made up the essence of the man — his 
restless energy, his nervous, explosive temperament, his im- 
petus nature and his passionate love of life — elements that 
helped to make him great, also conspired to undermine his 
physical well-being. He would not rest; he thrived on vigor- 
ous movement, on fights; a Daemon seemed to possess him 
And so his health went from bad to worse. 

On October 1, 1927, he sailed for the United States where 
he submitted himself to a general health check-up in the Fisk 
Life Extension Institute, New York, upon the suggestion of 
Ex-President William Howard Taft who -was then chief jus- 
tice of the U.S. supreme court. Thereupon he was referred 
to a Dr. Miller of New York who advised him to take his rest 
and treatment in the Pottenger sanatorium at Monrovia, Cali- 
fornia. So he went to the sanatorium recommended where 
Doctors Pottenger, Cahizares and Trias were his attending 
physic'ians. When he realized the seriousness of his illness, 
he cabled his resignation to the then Senator Osmeha but the 
latter turned it down which resulted in his re-election as 
senate president in absentia. Needless to say, he improved 
m health, what with highly capable physicians attending 
im, the beautiful scenery and the invigorating air of sunny 



following year, however, he suffered a relapse, his 
tuberculosis returning with greater virulence. On the advice 
o his physicians, he again booked passage for the United 
States. Incidentally, I was at Pier 7 where thousands of peo- 
ple converged to see him off on the day he sailed. I was on 
oar» the liner he took when I saw him carried up the gang- 
plank on a chair. He was very weak, thin and haggard. But 
for his eyes which still gleamed imperiously like an eagle’s 
beneath beetling eyebrows, one would have thought that he 
indeed was dying. 



GARLIT— QUEZON AND HIS HEALTH 147 

I saw Mrs. Quezon with tears in her eyes as she bade 
her friends and relatives goodbye. I more than half suspect- 
ed that she must have been thinking that that was the last, 
time the Filipino people would be seeing her husband alive. 
Snatches of the conversation I heard on board the ship that 
day, behind Quezon’s back, were to the effect that his days 
were already numbered. When the ship sailed, he stood up 
despite his weakness, supporting himself on the rating, and 
waved his hat to the people who rent the air with shouts of 
"Mabuhay”. Upon reaching his destination, he sought rest 
and treatment in the Hayes Clinic near Monrovia where he 
recovered. 

What perhaps contributed much to his improvement was 
his will to live. Here again, as in every instance where he 
waged a seemingly hopeless fight, his indomitable spirit car- 
ried him over to victory. When he left the clinic, he was 
brimming with health and looking for another fight. 

Tuberculosis was not the only ailment from which Que- 
zon suffered. He also contracted malaria, dysentery, renal 
calculi (“stone”), and appendicitis. His first critical illness 
was malaria for which he was “doctored” to within an ace 
of his life, sometime in 1900 during the insurrection of the 
Filipinos against the Americans. He was then a colonel com- 
manding a force of insurrectos from Balanga to Mariveles 
under General Mascardo. One morning he woke up with a 
high fever and, accordingly, sent for a close friend who 
was in the town of Pilar. Informed of Quezon’s plight 
and the purpose for which he had been called, he came with 
a man whom he, out of respect, perhaps, or through ignor- 
ance, called a doctor. The “doctor” had been, in fact, a sort 
of nurse in the San Juan de Dios Hospital and, when he settled 
in Pilar, became the town physician. The medicine man 
brought with him some pills which he gave the patient to 
take, not in little doses but all at once. Before long Quezon 
felt that he was about to cross the Great Divide. Alarmed, 
the attending men fetched the parish priest who, upon ar- 
riving, administered the last sacraments and, before leaving, 
gave Quezon a five-dollar coin. 



148 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Quezon survived the ordeal and, years later, it occurred 
to him that the “doctor” had given him an overdose of aspirin. 
When he became strong enough, he was moved to a house 
in Navotas where he rested for a month. The man who ac- 
companied him on the journey to Navotas— his orderly who 
hailed from Bohol — attended to his needs with devoted soli- 
citude and helped much in his recovery. Quezon regretted 
his inability to repay this man because when he was in a 
position to do so, the man had already died. 

Meanwhile, owing to the return of his malaria, Quezon 
was ordered by General Mascardo to surrender to the Ame- 
ricans, which he did in April of 1901. He came back to Ma- 
nila, staying in the house of Dr. Alejandro Albert, formei' 
undei'secretary of instruction. Before long, however, he was 
taken prisoner by the Americans and confined, first in a big- 
house where he stayed for two months and, later, in a room 
mside Intramuros walls where he was locked up for four 
months. Upon his release, which he suspected to be merely 
a trick laid for him by the Americans, he disappeared for a 
while to make sure that they were not really after him any 
more. Having assured himself that he was already free from 
further molestation, he returned to the residence of Dr. Al- 
bert who gave him accommodation. 



The harrowing experience proved too much for the ma- 
laria-stricken man who shortly afterwards came down with 



a nervous breakdown. With the assistance of the Dominican 
friars, he was brought to the San Juan de Dios Hospital where 
he stayed for several months. Later, when he was still con- 
valescing,^ he transferred to Dr. Gregorio Singian’s home, at 
the latter s instance, where he continued his treatment until 
completely recovered. 



Sometime in 1931, when he was in Baguio, he was affect- 
ed by dysentery. During his confinement, an incident occur- 
red over which the whole nation chuckled when it was known 
later. It happened that Father Serapio Tamayo of the Uni- 
versity of Sto. Tomas, who had been one of his teachers dur- 
ing his student days and who was now one of his closest 
friends, was vacationing at the time in the Pines City. 



GARLIT— QUEZON AND HIS HEALTH 



149 



One day, Father Tamayo went to see Quezon and an- 
nounced himself. So the nurse told the senate leader that 
'The priest is here.’' Thinking that she was referring to the 
press since she had been pronouncing the word "press with 
a long e, as is the custom of the people up north, he imme- 
diately flared up and shouted: "Tell the press to go to hell! 

Now Father Tamayo was just within hearing distance 
and, catching the remark, promptly left the place in high 
dudgeon. Reaching his quarters, he informed Quezon^ by 
phone of what had happened. The latter quicklj^ apologized 
and gave his own explanation. 

In 1934, he sailed once more for the United States, this 
time to have himself operated on for renal calculi, commonly 
known as "stone’’. On this trip he was accompanied by Dr. 
Januario Estrada of the Philippine General Hospital. He 
went to the John Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland, 
where he was operated upon by a Dr. Young, a famous uro- 
logist. 

Hardly three years had passed since he left John Hop- 
kins Hospital when he again went under the knife for still 
another ailment — appendicitis. In November, 1937, he went 
to the Philippine General Hospital and was operated on by 
Doctors Estrada and Antonio Vasquez. Doctors Sison and 
Cahizares were the other two attending physicians during his 
confinement. He was already President of the Common- 
wealth. 

In December of 1940, his lung ailment, which had been 
quiescent for sometime, became active again. The final strug 
gle against his formidable adversary had now begxin. It 
v^as the last dividend he was to receive in terms of impaiied 
health for the rigorous life he had been leading. Upon the 
advice of his physicians, he tried to find as much rest as he 
could manage and, for this purpose, he occupied a house on 
Gilmore Street, Quezon City. Doctors Sison and Canizares, 
who had been indefatigable in their effort to preserve his 
health, again became his attending physicians. 



150 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Meanwhile, world conditions became worse. The strain- 
ed relations between the United States and Japan assumed a 
more serious aspect. Suddenly, on December 7, 1941, Japan 
attacked Pearl Harbor without warning. Quezon’s worries 
now started in earnest. Japan moved swiftly and, the follow- 
ing day, bombs started falling on Philippine soil. During 
the first week of the war, in spite of nightly fever and weak- 
ness, he visited the Philippine General Hospital when inform- 
ed that many civilians had been injured in the air raid on 
Camp Nichols. Almost every day he held meetings with the 
Council of State until his departure for Corregidor. 

He also called a special session of the National Assembly 
which met and subsequently passed two measures. One was 
a resolution which reaffirmed the abiding faith of the Fili- 
pino people in, and their loyalty to the United States, and the 
other was a law granting the President all the powers that 
may be delegated to him in time of war under the Constitu- 
tion. After every air raid on Manila he visited different sec- 
ions of the city to see the extent of the damage and casualty 
and to boost the morale of the people. 

When it became evident that the Japanese forces would 
soon be in Manila, Quezon left for Corregidor, on the night 
of December 24, taking with him ex-President Sergio Osmena, 
then vice-president. Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos who was 
later killed by the Japanese, Major General Basilio J. Valdes, 
Colonel Manuel Nieto and his private secretary, Serapio D. 
Canceran. He also took along Dr. Andreas Trepp, a lung 
specialist. At 12 o clock that night, which was Christmas 
Eve, he heard mass with his family and party with an impro- 
vised altar inside the tunnel. 

All through that night and the night following, the Pres- 
ident coughed. Humidity and lack of fresh air aggravated 
his already battered health. On December 27 he sent Colonel 
Nieto to Manila to get all the medicine he needed. 

At one time during his first few weeks on the embattled 
“Rock”, because of his physical condition and the fear that 
his people might miss him badly, he entertained some doubt 



GARLIT— QUEZON AND HIS HEALTH 



151 



as to the usefulness of his presence in Corregidor and thought 
of returning to Manila to offer himself as a prisoner of war 
to the Japanese. It also came to his mind that such course 
of action would be to the best interest of both the Americans 
and Filipinos. He told this to General MacArthur, but the 
latter answered that, on the contrary, it would only serve the 
purpose of the Japanese to weaken Filipino resistance. 

Studying the matter at greater length, he came to the con- 
clusion that the island fortress was not the place foi him and. 
so, on February 21, upon the advice of General MacArthur 
and his physicians. Dr. Trepp and General Valdes, he boarded 
a submarine for the Visayas. From here he proceeded to 
Mindanao by means of a P-T boat and from Mindanao he 
flew to Australia. Finally, on April 20, he sailed for the 
United States, reaching San Francisco on May 8. From San 
Francisco a special train sent by President Roosevelt took: 
him to Washington where President Roosevelt himself, flank- 
ed by American cabinet members and all the living Governors- 
General and High Commissioners of the Philippines, welcom- 
ed him with open arms. 

Once within the comparative safety of the United States, 
he promptly established the exiled Commonwealth govenv 
ment of his country and continued working for his people and 
the allied cause with the same vigor and statesmanship which 
had always characterized his actuations. Finally, he entere 
the Saranac Lake Sanatorium where he was attended to y 
Dr. Edward Hays until he died. 

It seems quite curious that Quezon’s first and last serious 
illnesses had something to do with the change of his re i 
gious beliefs. The first change occurred when he was cot- 
valescing from malaria during his days as an insurrecto. He 
was then staying in a certain rich old man’s house where he 
happened to read some hooks which made him doubt e 
existence of hell as expounded by Catholic priests. Because 
of this doubt he later deserted the Catholic fold. 

The second change took place when he was confined in. 
the Pottenger Sanatorium for tuberculosis. Being still in 



.152 HISTORICAL BULLETIN 

grave condition at the time, he thought that he was going to : 
die “like an animal without spiritual consolation or hope.” * 
So when he left the sanatorium he devoted himself to the 
study of Catholicism, this principally at the bidding of his > 
•wife who had set her heart on his reconversion of his child- 
hood faith, and finally, after several years, he renounced his 
masonic affiliation and returned to the Catholic fold. 

In his great concern for the common tao, Quezon pro- 
jected his personal case into a national problem. He enlarg- > 
ed his battle against his ailments into a nationwide campai^ . 
against all diseases. During his public career, specially when 
he was President of the Commonwealth Government, he es-, 
tablished more hospitals throughout the Philippines, improv- 1 
ed and expanded old ones such as the Santol Sanatorium, 
which later became the Quezon Institute, and the Philippine 
General Hospital. 

During the observance of his 58th birthday ..anniversary ' 
in 1936, he signed an executive order fixing the minimum’ 
wage of government laborers with an increase of 20 per cent, 
which was followed by private concerns later. '' ' ' ’ ‘ 

In a radio speech that day he said: “More important, 
however, than curing tuberculosis' is preventing it.- I am told 
that there was an old Chinese custom wherein a Chinese fa- 
imly paid a handsome salary to its physician while there was 
no sickness in the family, but reduced the pay as soon as 
somebdy was taken ill. Whether or not the 'Chinese knew at 
the time they were indulging in the science 'of preventive me- 
dicine, the fact is that they seemed to have had the proper 
slant of the prevention of disease. I mention this because it 
is my conviction that while there should not be any let-up 

lu against tuberculosis, and should give 

the Philippine Anti-Tuberculosis Society our unstinted sup- 
port, the time has come for us to take preventive measures, - 
for to eradicate tuberculosis from the Philippines we must 
ehminate the causes that have made the white plague the one 
disease that claims more victims every year than any other 
disease known to us in the Philippines. . . The most cornrhon 
cause of tuberculosis is malnutrition. Our people are under- 



GARL/T— QUEZON AND HIS HEALTH 



153 



fed and, lacking the physical strength, they are an easy prey 
to tuberculosis. They'are underfed because they are under- 
paid. . .” That night he proposed as the keynote of his birth- 
day, anniversary celebration an appeal to the nation that bet- 
ter wages be paid to laborers be they on farms or factories. 










1 



4' 



QUEZON AND HIS FIGHTS^' 
By Rodrigo C. Lim 



THE CURRENT power struggle among the country’s 
top political leaders, particularly that between President 
Garcia and NP and Senate President “Amang” Rodriguez, 
reminds us of the fights the late President Quezon had in his 
over 30 years of public life. 

In one respect Quezon’s political career was unique, 
singular. It could be perhaps duplicated but surely not sur- 
passed by that of any other Filipino leader, or any leader in 
any other country for that matter. For not once in his in- 
cessant political strifes did he suffer a single defeat — and in 
many of them he was pitted against the most formidable 
opponents of his time. 

Foremost of these battles was his historic fight for poli- 
tical supremacy in the early 20s against then Speaker Osmena 
on the issue of collective versus unipersonal leadership. For 
over 15 years the two leaders had been disinterestedly and 
unselfishly collaborating in the common effort of nation build- 
ing, forming a political partnership without parallel anywhere 
else then or today. Times there were when, because of con- 
flict of opinion on vital national questions and of diametric- 
ally opposed characters and temperaments, a clash appeared 
imminent and inevitable. Each time, however, one or the 
other sacrificed personal pride and ambition for the good of 
the country, particularly the cause for which both had fought 
in war and in peace — Philippine independence. 

But even the sweetest of honeymoons cannot last forever 
and in due time, the Quezon-Osmeha combine ended as any 
such political alliance is bound to end somehow, sometime. 
The formal parting of the ways came in the evening of Feb- 
ruary 17, 1922 when, before a mammoth crowd that over- 



* Reprinted from the Philippine Free Press, August 20, 1960, pp. 
:, 36, 52. 



154 



LIM— QUEZON AND HIS FIGHTS 



155 



flowed the pre-war Manila Grand Opera House, Quezon dec- 
lared war against his life-long friend and partner. 



''When one is convinced that the conduct of a party is 
no longer in consonance with the will of the people and does 
not respect the demands of public opinion,'' he told the teem- 
ing thousands that jammed that huge theater, then no mem- 
ber is under any obligation to remain in that party. It was 
then that he pronounced his classic now oft-quoted dogma. 
"*My loyalty to my party ends where my loyalty to my country 

begins." 



Talking of the conflict, which some wiseacres of the time 
called a fight between autocracy as represented by Osmena 
and democracy as typified by Quezon, the late Teo . 

Kalaw, then secretary of the interior and one of the greatest 
minds the Philippines has ever produced, said; 

“The split came as a result of the disagreement over the 
leadership question. Our faction stood for the so-calle uni 
personal leadership, which involves centralization and mi y 
if responsibility, and the other for the so-called collective 
leadership which puts responsibility in each departmen o 
the government. In other words the unipersonalists support- 
ed the introduction of the parliamentary form of government 
in the Philippines and the collectivists the presidential form. 

While a good many people sincerely believed that Que- 
zon only wanted to establish government by the peop e 
by means of a voluntary expression of the .sovereign will o 
the people” and “not the people’s rule without the expression 
of the popular will,” there were others who accused him o 
provoking the split to take control of the party an perpe 
tuate himself in power. 

To those critics he retorted: 



“Can I find a position in the Philippine government and 
in the gift of the Filipino people higher than that of president 
of the Senate, the highest position to which a Filipino could 
be sent by his countrymen? If I wanted to perpetuate my- 



156 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



self in power, is there anything better for me than to remain 
in the Nacionalista Party?” ' ' ; ' I • - ' 

From the thunderous ovation that, greeted his memorable 
pronouncements that evening at the Opera House, could be 
foreseen the outcome of the first clash between the two Fili- 
pino titans. In the subsequent election, in June, 1922, during 
which both were in the United States as joint chiefs of an 
independence mission, Quezon’s Collectivistas won with such 
a convincing majority that he thereafter became the acknowl- 
edged leader of Filipino participation in the government. ■; 

The Quezon-Osmena divorce did not last long however. 
Quezon did not have a sufficient majority in the Lower House 
to elect the speaker of his choice, the then rising politics;! 
star from Capiz, Manuel Roxas, and as between his former 
partner and the Democratic, he chose to coalesce with the 
former. Neither did the Cebuano leader want any coalition 
with the oppositionists. Thus was formed the Nacionalista 
Consolidado Party with Quezon as head. 1 

No sooner had Quezon and Osmena kissed and made up 
when MLQ had to face a greater fight with no less than the 
representative of American sovereignty in this country — Gov^- 
ernor-General Wood. 

•) 

Open Break 

An arch-enemy of Philippine independence. Wood was set 
on undoing all that his predecessor, Francis Burton Harrison, 
had done to give the Filipinos ample powers and responsi- 
bilities in preparation for self-government. Among other 
things, he turned his cabinet secretaries into glorified office 
clerks, solely responsible to him and under his absolute con- 
trol, although their appointments were subjects to the con- 
trol and approval of the Philippine legislature. To advise 
him in matters that were purely the concern of the Filipinos, 
he instead formed what then Editor Carlos P. Romulo called 
the “Kitchen Cabinet,” or “Cavalry Cabinet” as others dubbed 
it, composed of U.S. Army officers including his playboy son, 
Lt. Osborne C. Wood. 



I. JM— QUEZON AND HIS FIGHTS 



. 157 



: Quezon was not; one to take such affront to Filipino dig- 

nity lying down. The, open. break was precipitated by Gov- 
ernor Wood’s reinstatement of an Amercan police detective 
who had been suspended by the city mayor with the approval 
of the secretary of interior. Quezon considered this act a 
clear violation of the fundamental law of the land and “a 
backward step and a curtailment of Filipino autonomy gua- 
ranteed by the organic act and enjoyed by the Filipino people 
continuously since the operation of the Jones Law.” Shortly 
before midnight of July 17, 1923, the department secretaries 
led by Quezon and Speaker Roxas marched to Malacahang 
and presented their resignations from the cabinet and the 
council of state. 

Wood accepted the resignations which he considered “a 
challenge and a threat which I cannot ignore.” He likewise 
accepted the resignation of City Mayor Ramon J. Fernandez 
which was simultaneously presented with those of the cabinet 
men. 

Quezon had so presented the issue that the people readily 
rallied around him. Only dissenters who saw in the crisis 
a chance to assume the powers formerly enjoyed by Quezon 
and company, were the Democratas led by Judge Juan Sumu- 
long who branded the resignations as “fictitious, artificial, 
ridiculous and frivolous.” The case was later submitted to 
the people when a special election was held in the fourth 
senatorial district to fill the vacancy created by the resigna- 
tion of Senator Pedro Guevara who was chosen Resident Com- 
missioner to Washington. 

« ' / 

Battle Royal 

Never had the people witnessed such a battle royal in 
which all available instruments of political warfare were uti- 
lized. Quezon went to the people in behalf of his man, ex- 
Mayor Fernandez, with no other issue but “A vote for Fer- 
nandez is a vote for the people; a vote for Sumulong is a vote 
for Wood.” The result was an overwhelming majority for 
Fernandez and once again, Quezon scored one of the biggest 
victories in his political career. 



i58 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



A consequence of his rift with Wood which ended with 
the latter’s death on August 7, 1927, was Quezon’s equally 
acrimonious controversy with his former revolutionary chief. 
General Aguinaldo, whom he had served as an aide with the 
rank of major. Aguinaldo did not only express support for 
Wood but tried to strengthen the latter’s position here and 
in America by expelling Quezon from his Veterans of the 
Revolution Association. The bomb that was expected to dis- 
credit the Filipino leader in the eyes of both Filipinos and 
Americans proved a dud however. It turned out that Qviezon 
had never been a member of the association and he could 
not therefore be expelled therefrom. 

“While I am a veteran I have never affiliated with the 
association,’’ Quezon pointed out, “and from the time Gen- 
eral Aguinaldo, for purely personal motives, came out in 
support of General Wood I have considered any association 
with it not only an inconsistency but a betrayal of public 
trust on. my part.” 

Offshoot of that controversy which lasted for quite a 
time was the withdrawal by the legislature of Aguinaldo’s 
P12,000 annual pension. 

Second Break 

Last but not least of Quezon’s major political battles 
was his second break with Osmena on the question of the 
H-H-C (Hare-Hawes-Cutting) Law. As everyone familiar with 
Philippine history knows, that law which provided for inde- 
pendence after a transition period of ten years, was passed 
by the U.S. Congress through the efforts of the so-called 
OSROX mission headed by Senator Osmena and Speaker 
Roxas. Quezon objected however to the economic provisions 
of the law and caused the legislature to reject it. 

With the OSROX group, aside from Osmena and Roxas, 
were such political stalwarts as Rep. Benigno Aquino, Sen. 
Jose O. Vera, Commissioner Osias and U.P. President Palma. 
On Quezon’s side were his right-hand man Senator Jose Ma. 
Clarin, Senator Elpidio Quirino and Reps. Quintin Paredes 
and Jose Zulueta. A tribute to Quezon’s political sagacity. 



L7M— QUEZON AND HIS FIGHTS' 



159 



he won to his side such former enemies as Aguinaldo, Sumu- 
long, Recto and other lesser oppositionists. 



The bitter fight had its first repercussions in the legis- 
lature when Osmena men or “Pros” were eliminated from 
key positions. Foremost of those “decapitated” was Speaker 
Roxas who was replaced by Rep. Paredes. The senate re- 
elected Quezon as president; Clarin, president-pro tempore, 
and Quirino, floor leader. There was then no question that 
Quezon and his “Antis” were masters of the situation. 

Quezon’s stock rose to greater heights when, despite 
dark predictions of failure voiced by the “Pros,” he went to 
America and came back with another law— the Tydings-Mc- 
Duffie Act — which was admittedly a much better law in so 
far as the Filipinos were concerned. Without a dissenting 
vote the legislature later accepted the law which became 
foundation of the present Republic. 

Eloquent Evidence 

Once more, the people gave eloquent 
confidence in Quezon when, in the election e 
month after the acceptance of the T-M lavv, is m 
to victory throughout the country. 

The foregoing are but a few of the fights that niade Qu^ 
zon’s political career colorful and dramatic. As jj^s been 
already said, in not one of them did he ever taste the better 
pill of defeat. This, many of those who knew ^tribute 
to his great and winning personality, his ^ writer 

human nature and his fighting spirit. o i i , 

would add: if Quezon never lost a fight, it was 
fore he plunged into a battle he macte sure »> 

political or otherwise. I still remember that the eve of 
his declaration of war against Osmena 

H-H-C law, he gathered at his home in Pasay the biggest rnen 
in business, finance and industry to ask for their support. 

“Somos or no somos?” he asked them, and when every- 
one chorused “Somos,” he fired the following day the first 
salvo against the OSROX. 



MLQ’S LIFE RETRACED = 



By Camilo Osias 



BIDDEN by the invitation of the Kiwanis Club of Que- 
zon City ^ to take part in the luncheon program to celebrate 
the birthday of Manuel L. Quezon, I am glad to take part 
because I consider it a civic duty and an evidence of sound 
nationalism to recall the anniversaries of Filipinos Avho have 
won public recognition as architects of the nation. 

There is no question that Quezon deserves to be honored 
as among the vanguards in the building of this new nation. 
Nationals and foreigners alike have borne witness to the fact 
that our record of emancipatory struggle in this country and 
the valiant fights of this, patriot and leader are intimately in- 
tertwined. 

I accepted the suggestion of the president of this club to 
speak of Manuel L. Quezon, as an architect of this new nation 
having intimately labored with him. 

Quezon’s entire career, distinctive for having been a fight- 
er for great causes, was dedicated toward the achievement 
for our people of a free, prosperous, and sovereign nationhood. 
In a message to the Filipino people which may be considered 
as part of his last will and testament, he said: 

“Your country is a great country. It has a great past, 
and a great future.” This is indeed a continuing challenge 
to his fellow-citizens -and it is worthwhile to inspire ourselves 
in the valuable legacy which he bequeathed to this and future 
generations. 

The full text of his injunction should be broadcast far 
and wide and I hereby reproduce it. 



* Address delivered before the Kiwanis Club in Oup7on nn 

-Manila Times, August 22, ^966, 



160 



OSMS— MLQ^s-LIFE RETRACED 



-161 



A MESSAGE TO THE FILIPINO PEOPLE . . 'T 



‘‘My fellow-citizens, there is one thought I want you always 
to have in mind,- and that is that- you are Filipinos, that -the 
Philippines is your country and the only country God has given 
you. That you must keep it for yourselves, for your children, and 
for your children’s children, until the world is no more. You 
must live for it and die for it if necessary. 



1 



“Your country is a great country. It has a great Past and 
a great future. 

• “The Philippines of yesterday is consecrated by the sacrifices 
of lives and pleasures of your patriots, martyrs, and soldiers.^. 

“The Philippines of today is honored by the whole-hearted 
devotion to its cause of unselfish and courageous statesmen. 



“The Philippines of tomorrow will be the country of plenty, 
of happiness, and of freedom. The Philippines with her head 
raised in the midst of the West Pacific, Mistress of her own 
destiny, holding an her hand the torch of Freedom and Demo- 
cracy, a republic of virtuous and righteous men and women, all 
working together, for a better world than the one we have at 

present.’' 



From his boyhood through his manhood and to his last 
- breath, he was a fighter endowed with a vision splendid an ^ 
with' rare moral courage. . ^ 



Of the galaxy of Filipino leaders whom I have been pri- 
vileged to know in my long span of life, Manuel L. Qi^zon 
stands out pre-eminent. It is significant that the as 
emanating from his pen bears the significant title The Good 

Fight. 

As a student in Manila, he participated in many fist fights 
and intellectual contests. He fought an officer of the hated 
Guardia Civil in his hometown of Baler. At one time while 
vacationing there, he became hated by the parish priest whose 
hand he did not want to kiss as was the general custom in 
those days. 

He brought joy to the hearts of his loving parents when 
he 'showed in Manila that he could be self-supporting while 
pursuing his studies. Completing his law studies from the 



162 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



University of Santo Tomas and soon after passing the bar, 
he became an employee in a law firm at a modest salary but 
with the right to enhance his earnings by retaining the fees 
from some clients. 

After winning court cases assigned to him he saw his 
opportunity to progress as a private practitioner. We learn 
from his autobiographical work that he went to Lucena to 
defend a client and while there he interested himself in de- 
fending the poor people who were languishing in jail through 
flimsy causes or trumped-up charges. He made it his rule 
to charge high fees from the affluent clients and to defend 
the poor and the needy without pay. 

One of his celebrated cases was what he called the Mason 
case. It was the case of an American lawyer whose real name 
was not Mason but for ethical considerations he did not 
record. A detailed report is included in Chapter V of the 
The Good Fight entitled “Law and Practice and Public Office.” 
I can do no better than quote his words: 

“The case which definitely established my popularity in 
Tayabas and which, in my opinion, later contributed to my 
election as provincial governor, I shall call the ‘Mason Case’, 
because that was not the name. 

“Mason was an attorney and accompanied by his secret- 
ary who acted also as his interpreter, he came to my office 
one day with twenty-five different deeds of sale of agricultural 
properties which he wanted to me register in his name. (The 
prosecuting attorney was then at the same time the register 
of deeds). I took the papers from him and said that I would 
attend to it as soon as possible, and he left. 

I placed the papers in one of my drawers and was so 
busy that I forgot all about them. A week later Mason’s 
secretary came to see me in behalf of his principal to inquire 
whether I had registered the deeds and I told him no, explain- 
ing my reasons, promising, however, to do it immediately. 

One hour later, Mr. Mason himself, accompanied by the 
same secretary, came to my office with his hat on and with- 



OSIAS—MhQ’s LIFE RETRACED 



163 



out even greeting me, shouted: “What did you do with the 
papers I gave you?” I repeated the answer I had given an 
hour before to his secretary. 

He then threatened that he would complain to my supe- 
riors in Manila unless I registered the deeds immediately. 
My temper, which I had been trying to control since he enter- 
ed my office, gave way and getting hold of my ink-stand, I 
ordered him out of my office, saying that otherwise I would 
break his head. He left, but not without repeating his 
threat.” 

After the visit of this American lawyer, Atty. Quezon 
examined the papers and found that the documents covered 
sales of lands planted with coconut trees including working 
animals and that all in all, the twenty-five deeds of sale repre- 
sented several thousand acres with about 50,000 coconut 
trees and two or three hundred working animals. The total 
value of the properties exceeded P60,000.00.” 

He found the owners of these properties in the provincial 
jail of Tayabas who have signed the deeds of sale with Mr. 
Mason’s secretary and one of the jail guards acting as wit- 
nesses. 

The case was tried by an American judge and the plain- 
tiff was defended by some of the ablest and most promi- 
nent lawyers at the time, the names of whom are remembered 
to this day: Judge Kinkaid, Mr. Fisher, Judge Bishop, and 
Mr. Green. 

Those were the so-called “Days of the Empire,” when 
the majority of the Americans in the Philippines were de- 
cidedly anti-Filipino and looked upon us with contempt. 

Of course, his sense of justice pointed out men of rare 
exceptions including Colonel Bandholtz of the Constabulary 
and Governor Taft who was. disliked by many of his compa- 
triots because of a speech he delievered advocating the prin- 
ciple “The Philippines for the Filipinos.” 

That was the first time during the American occupation 
that a case was brought before the courts with an American 



164 



HISTORICA-L. BULLETIN' -• I 



lawyer as a defendant and a Filipino lawyer as a prosecutor.- 
Atty. Quezon . obtained the conviction: of Mr., Mason which 
naturally caused no little commotion and, enhanced his pres-, 
tige in the province of Tayabas and in the Philippines. 

Quezon was a fighter as a soldier of the Revolution. He 
joined the movement as a second lieutenant and one of his 
early assignments was to capture a band of malefactors. He 
caught the members of thergang, who were court-raiartialed, 
and the authorities imposed their just punishment. For his 
bravery and success he was promoted to first lieutenant. 

7 ' He served in various capacities in the different seats of 
^ the revolutionary government established by Aguinaldo from 
Malolos to Cabanatuan. 

:.L He .was a part of Aguinaldo’s staff and he came to know- 
the intrepid General Antonio' Lima whom- Quezon admired, 
and described as “a highly. Mucated man” and added: “No 
l^raver soldier was ever born in any clime or any land. When 
eyer a key position was at ' stake/ he always took personal 
command of the Filipino forces and was the last to retreat. 
At Calumpit, one of the most bloody battles fought during 
the war of resistance against the United States, he was wound- 
ed, but did not enter a hospital.” 

: i . - ! ) c " i ' 

After serving in Nueva Ecija, in the Mountain Province, 
and in Tarlac, Quezon asked General Aguinaldo to be sent to 
the front. He forthwith was detailed to General Mascardo 
in a handwritten recommendation of Aguinaldo. 

v With General Mascardo in Pampanga, he participated in 
the bloody fights. Later he was assigned to take charge in 
the Bataan sector. I was appointed division superintendent 
of schools in Bataan and from the lips of many who had. 
known Quezon I came to know that he was distinguished 'as. 
a_ gentleman, as a daring fighter, as a good leader of men.' ; 

He loved his soldiers and shared their difficulties in 'tra-’ 
-velihg up and down, the inountains, swimming -rivers, "^and at 
times subsisting on scanty food of little rice 'and salt.- 1 



OSIAS—M'LQ’s LIFE RETRACED 



165 



■' Toward the end of the Revolution, he was assigned to a 
mission to travel to Manila to ascertain whether or not the 
rumors were true that Aguinaldo was captured. General 
Mascardo was anxious to know the facts and received instruc-. 
tion to continue fighting or to surrender. 

General Aguinaldo, being a prisoner in Malacanang and 
had taken the oath of allegiance to the United States, felt 
that he had no right directly or indirectly to advise if the 
General should go on fighting. 

General Mascardo had to assume responsibility for: his 
decision. Quezon saw and interviewed Aguinaldo in Mala-' 
canang, “very .well treated by the Americans, but a prisoner' 
just the same.”. On parting from his revolutionary chief 
Quezon with tears in his eyes prayerfully uttered “God keep 
you, Mr .A President.” That experience led Quezon to ponder 
oh General Aguinaldo and the dark future of his country. 

With, the restoration of peace and the completion of his 
education in the. University of Santo Tomas, he found a new , 
field wherein to demonstrate his qualities as a fighter — po- . 
litics. . • , . - 

The success he attained as a practitioner and later as a 
provincial fiscal of Mindoro and then of Tayabas province, 
now named in his honor, aroused in him the ambition to 
become an elective provincial governor. 

During the early American government, provincial and 
ratmicipal officials were appointive. When it came time to 
extend autonomous power to the Filipino people and the posi- 
tion of governor became elective Quezon decided to become 
a, candidate. 

• This was against the advice of some friends who thought 
it, -was a pity to. discontinue practising law which was giving 
hirn' handsome returns and engage in an uncertain political- 
fight.- / .. j 

' Some Americans in a group advised the young attorney ; 
not to run ‘for they were committed to support another can- ■» 
didate. Quezon, however, lent a deaf ear to their well mean- > 



166 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



ing suggestions and told them: “I am going to fight and win. 
If I lose, you should celebrate your victory and I will furnish 
the drinks but if I win, we will celebrate together and you 
have to attend and bring in the drinks.” 

The campaign was fast and furious. Able bodied and 
tireless as a campaigner going from town to town on horse- 
back or on foot, he became known to the people and when 
the votes were counted, Quezon was elected. The celebration 
was held and the Americans did their part of the contract. 

From that time on, Quezon forgot his hatred of Ameri- 
cans due to the ill-treatment meted out to him as a prisoner 
and, through the influence of other prominent Americans, he 
revised his promise to hate Americans and not to learn the 
English language. 

As a Governor of the province then infested with bandits, 
he exercised personal leadership in the pacification of the 
towns and barrios. He personally supervised the municipal 
officials and was in the habit of travelling at night alone to 
see if the policemen were doing their job. 

Catching some of them asleep at their posts, he sum- 
marily fired them to set an example. He supplemented his 
program of service with practical things such as establishing 
more barrio schools, improving sanitation, encouraging self- 
help in the building of roads and bridges, and exercising some 
coercive measures to get people to plant coconuts. 

As a superintendent of schools assigned in the then 
province of Tayabas which included Marinduque, I met some 
of the coconut planters who confirmed the story being bruited, 
about that Governor Quezon used to whip or threaten indo- 
lent men who had vacant lots and did not plant coconuts. 

I asked one farmer who owned a goodly number of fruit- 
bearing coconut trees if he was one of the men whom the 
governor whipped in order to plant coconuts. He said, “Yes 
and I am not sorry because from these coconut trees I noxv 
own this house, and my children are going to school and one 
of them is attending college in Manila.” 



OSMS— MLQ’s LIFE RETRACED .163 

Quezon, no doubt, had a great deal to do with converting 
his native Tayabas into one of the best coconut producing 
provinces in the Philippines. 

The program of America to extend autonomy to the pro- 
vinces and municipalities continued and then came the time 
when the Philippine Assembly was to be organized with elec- 
tive members. Until then the Philippine Commission was 
the unicameral legislative body enacting laws for the Phil- 
ippines, the commission consisting largely of Americans with 
a few Filipinos without portfolios. 

The extension of suffrage for the election of assembly- 
men was inaugurated and several of the intelligentsia of the 
race presented their candidates to constitute a coordinate 
legislative chamber to share in the responsibility of enacting 
laws for the country. 

Manuel L. Quezon ran for the post of assemblyman and 
easily won. To that first Philippine Assembly were elected 
men who have become true architects of the nation among 
whom was the Hon. Sergio Osmena, former governor of Cebu, 
and was chosen by his peers to be the first speaker and Que- 
zon was chosen as floor leader. 

The two men shared the role of leaders in the political 
field. They were among the founders of the Nacionalista 
Party born to wage the fight for immediate and complete in- 
dependence. 

While a member of the Philippine Assembly, Manuel L. 
Quezon was chosen to be a resident commissioner of the 
Philippines to the United States. This position entitled our 
representative to be a member of Congress with all the rights 
and privileges of American representatives except the right 
to vote. 

The demonstrated eloquence of Quezon in the Philippine 
Assembly found good application on the floor of the U.S. 
House of Representatives. 

By his personality, by his known devotion to the cause 
of freedom, and his capacity for work and for winning friends. 



168 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



his career as a commissioner for a period of seven years was 
crowned with the passage of the Jones Law which led to the 
reorganization of the Philippine government including the 
formation of a new legislative body known as the Philippine 
Legislature consisting of the Philippine Senate and the House 
of Representatives. 

Quezon and Osmeha, as a result of the Jones Law, con- 
tinued their leadership in the intensified fight for Philippine 
Independence. 

Osmena continued as a Speaker of the House of Repre- 
sentatives and Quezon, elected as a Senator from his sena- 
torial district without campaigning, was chosen President of 
the Senate. 

One of his most effective fights for a good cause was his 
long struggle for the improvement of the national economy. 
With Speaker Osmena and other leaders, Quezon devoted 
much time toward securing the greater participation of the 
Filipinos in the national economy. 

It was fortunate that the country had leaders like Que- 
zon and Osmeha who looked into the future and saw the 
interrelationship between political independence and econo- 
mic progress. 

They inaugurated the policy that the government should 
initiate economic and industrial policies and practices that 
would be properly oriented toward eventual entrepreneurship 
of Filipinos and the establishment of free enterprise. 

It was designed that the government should take initia- 
tive in economic and financial ventures wherein Filipino capi- 
tal was timid and wherein Filipinos were somewhat inexper- 
ienced. 

The role of government was therefore to blaze the trail, 
open the eyes of the private sectors, and once these are ready 
and willing to undertake the enterprises themselves the gov- 
ernment should withdraw control from the business field 
and only render assistance and cooperation to them. 



OSIAS—MLQ’s LIFE RETRACED 



169 



It was some such forward looking and statesmanlike 
■view of sound economic policies that governmental and semi- 
governmental coi-poration were organized like those that exer- 
cised control and supervision over sugar, abaca, coconut, and 
other major activities. 

Under the Osmena-Quezon-Palma and later Quezon-Osme- 
ha-Palma triumvirate the Philippine National Bank was or- 
ganized. 

Businessmen came to realize with their leaders that there 
was a need for financial institutions which would extend 
credit for industrial ventures and economic corporation. To 
this end a law was passed to establish a Board of Control 
consisting of the Chief Executive, the Speaker of the House 
of Representatives and the President of the Senate. 

The Board of Control was authorized to vote the stock 
of the government in important financial and economic or- 
ganizations such as the Philippine National Bank and national 
development companies for productions of petroleum, for 
mining coal and iron, for the construction and operation of 
cement plants, coconut oil refineries, sugar refineries. 

The government purchased and operated the Manila Rail- 
ways and later the Manila Hotel was acquired by the latter. 
The Jones Law established an all-Filipino Legislature elected 
by the people. This Legislature enacted laws to lodge the 
po’wers of administration as much as possible in Filipino 
ha.r.ds. 

Under the liberal administration of Governor General 
Harrison who was appointed upon the triumph of the Demo- 
cratic Party in the United States headed by President Wood- 
row Wilson, the Philippine National Bank was among the 
enterprises or corporations organized and it was a powerful 
instrument that lent aid to several economic corporations 
built around the major products of the Philippines. 

When Governor General Wood who succeeded Governor 
General Harrison upon the winning of the Republican Party 
headed by President Harding issued Executive Order No. 



170 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



37 eliminating the representation of the Philippine Legislature 
from the Board of Control for commercial and industrial 
enterprises capitalized by the government, a great constitu- 
tional issue arose. 

President Quezon showed his sterling fighting qualities 
when he led the fight against the step which was a reversal 
of a policy pursued under Governor Harrison because it 
meant the curtailment of the autonomous powers contem- 
plated under the Jones Law for which Quezon labored so 
hard in Washington. 

Quezon as a leader in the Senate fought the Chief Execu- 
tive who sought solely to exercise all the powers and duties 
of the Board of Control. The Jones Law in its preamble 
publicly and categorically announced that it was the purpose 
of the United States to accord the fullest measure of autono- 
ihous powers to the government of the Philippines prepara- 
tory to the redemption of America’s pledge to recognize full 
and complete Philippine Independence. 

In this fight for the preservation of powers won by the 
Filipino participation in the government, Quezon as a leader 
was unbending. He used to say often “we have the duty to 
maintain the autonomy granted to us in the Jones Law in its 
fullest.” 

Pursuant to this conviction, he obtained the unified back- 
ing and support of the Filipino people irrespective of party 
affiliations in his patriotic fights against any attempt to di- 
minish Filipino autonomy in the slightest degree. It was one 
of the bitterest fights in the determined forward march to- 
ward a free and sovereign nationhood. 

President Manuel L. Quezon labored hard and consist- 
ently for intellectual emancipation. He, together with other 
leaders, was successful in inaugurating a financial policy of 
giving the lion’s share of the annual government appropria- 
tion for purposes of education. 

One of his most constructive addresses was delivered 
before teachers and students from different institutions in 



OSIAS—MLQ’s LIFE RETRACED 



171 



Manila wherein he pleaded for education as a means of social 
reconstruction. Like Rizal before him, Quezon realized that 
education was the handmaiden of liberty. 

He inherited principles enunciated by educational philo- 
sophers that a nation must be rooted in virtue. 



While militating in the ranks of Freemasonry he imbibed 
the great and lofty aim set forth in the principles of the fra- 
ternity which says: “Through the improvement and strength- 
ening of the character of the individual man Freemasonry 
seeks to improve the community." Quezon was strong in 
developing the individual character of the citizens for the 
stability and progress of the nation. 

One of his invaluable contributions was the Code of Citi- 
zenship, the text of which follows: 

A CODE OF CITIZENSHIP AND ETHICS 



1. Have faith in Divine Providence that guides the destinies 
of men and nations. 

2. Love your country for it is the home of your people, the 
seat of your affections, and the source 

•well-being. Its defense is your primary duty. Be rea y 
times to sacrifice and die for it if necessary. 

3. Respect the Constitution which is the expression of your 
sovereign will. The government 4s 

been established for your safety and we are. officials 

and see that they are observed by all and that public officials 

comply with their duties. 

4. Pay your taxes willingly and promptly. Citizenship im- 
plies not only rights but also obligations. 

5. Safeguard the purity of suffrage and abide by the deci- 
sions of the majority. 

6. Lo.e and respact your parents. It Is your duty to serve 
them gratefully and well. 

7. Value your honor as you value your life. Poverty with 
honor is preferable to wealth with dishonor. 

8 Be truthful and be honest in thought and in action. Be 
just and charitable, courteous but dignified in your dealings with 
your fellowmen. 



172 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



9. Lead a clean and frugal life. Do not indulge in frivoUtJr 
or pretense. Be simple in your dress and modest in your beha- 
vior. 

10. Live up to the noble traditions of our people. Venerate 
the memory of our heroes. Their lives point the way to duty and 
honor. 

11. Be industrious. Be not afraid or shamed to do manual 
labor. Productive toil is conducive to economic security and adds 
to the wealth of the nation. 

12. Rely on your efforts for your progress and happiness. 
Be not easily discouraged. Persevere in the pursuit of your legi- 
timate ambitions. 

13. Do your work cheerfully, thoroughly, and well. Work 
badly done is worse than work undone. Do not leave for tomor- 
row what you can do today. 

14. Contribute to the welfare of your community and promote 

social justice. You do not live for yourselves and your families 
alone. You are a part of society to which you owe definite respon- 
sibilities. " 

15. Cultivate the habit of using goods made in the Philip- 
pines. Patronize the products and trades of your countrymen. 

16. Use and develop our natural resources and conserve them 
for posterity. They are the inalienable heritage of our people. 
Do not traffic with you citizenship. 

The Republic of the Philippines and the Filipino people 
have in Manuel L. Quezon a patriot and a statesman who 
waged a valiant and heroic fight for great causes, many and 
varied, all centered upon the ideal and objective — an indepen- 
dent, progressive, and sovereign nationhood. 

As a soldier, lawyer, executive, legislator, and leader of 
independence as his goal, he labored and fought for political, 
economic, cultural, and spiritual independence. It was in 
line with Quezon's invariable and firm faith in independence 
that I, not long since, made articulate these views and senti- 
ments: 

‘‘The Philippine Commonwealth was conceived in inde- 
pendence. It was born in independence. It must be nurtured 
in independence. It must grow in independence. And it 
must mature and endure in independence." 



173 



OSMS— MLQ’s LIFE RETRACED 

Quezon deserves great credit in the enactment of the 
Independence Law which provided that “the President of the 
United States shall hy proclamation withdraw and surrender 
all rights of possession, supervision, jurisdiction, control or 
sovereignty. . . and, on behalf of the United States, shall re- 
cognize the independence of the Philippine Islands.” 

He fought a national campaign to he the first President 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines which was semi- 
independent and semi-sovereign preparatory to the establish- 
ment of the Republic of the Philippines which was indepen- 
dent and sovereign. 

He lived to take a major part in the approval of the 
Constitution of the Philippines the preamble of which pro- 
vides for the supreme purposes "to insure the blessings of 
independence to ourselves and our posterity under a regime 
of justice, liberty and democracy.” 






QUEZON THE NATIONALIST * 



By Carlos Quirino 

A NATIONALIST is one with a profound devotion to the 
unity and independence of his country. Under this definition 
a multitude of Filipinos would qualify as nationalists. Rizal 
and Marcelo del Pilar, for example, would be considered the 
great nationalists of thes closing decades of the Spanish re- 
gime. Bonifacio and Aguinaldo were the great nationalists 
of the early decades of the American occupation of the Phil- 
ippines. Jose P. Laurel and Claro M. Recto, despite the judg- 
ment of their antagonists during the Japanese occupation, 
were true nationalists. But the greatest nationalist of them 
all, in my opinion, was Manuel L. Quezon. 

f- 

All the nationalists named above advocated national unity 
and some fought on the battlefield for the independence of 
our country. But only Quezon achieved the independence that 
all these heroes sought during their lifetime. Rizal and Del 
Pilar desired freedom for the Philippines but did not even 
come close to obtaining it. Bonifacio and Aguinaldo fought 
vainly for it during the Philippine Revolution. Laurel and 
Recto proclaimed an independent Philippines, but it was a 
puppet republic under the heel of the Japanese. Only Quezon, 
it can be truly said, secured the independence that has lasted 
to this day. 

What made Quezon the greatest nationalist of them all? 
It was his pride in being a Filipino and his consistent refusal 
to be subvervient to anybody in the world. These traits, his 
racial pride and rejection of subservience, were noticeable 
in him even in his teens, when he pounced on the Spanish 
sergeant of the guardia civil in his home town of Baler, Taya- 
bas, for suggesting that he turn pimp. Merely to challenge 
a Spanish officer could have earned him harsh punishment 
in those days. He also refused to kiss the hand of the new 



* Reprinted from the Manila Review, No. 16 , pp. 116 - 122 . 



174 



QUIRINO— QUEZON THE NATIONALIST 



175 



parish priest, a Spanish friar, in defiance of custom. For his 
utter lack of respect for the Spanish overlords he spent seve- 
ral days in jail. 

After Manila fell to the Americans in August 1898, he 
offered his services to the revolutionary army, was commis- 
sioned a second lieutenant, and later became aide-de-camp 
to General Aguinaldo, during the war against the gringos. 
After Aguinaldo ’s capture in March 1901, and after spending 
a couple of years in the forests of Bataan where he came 
down with malaria and dysentery, he surrendered to the 
American authorities. He had failed to attain his nationalist 
aspirations by force of arms. 

At the suggestion of the acting provincial governor of 
Tayabas, Quezon joined the American insular government, to 
pursue his dream of independence. In doing so he was not 
demeaning himself before the new masters of the archipelago. 
This was amply proven when an American lawyer, Francis J. 
Berry, publisher of the Cablenews, the most influential Manila 
newspaper at the time, tried to browbeat him into prosecut- 
ing some farmers for brigandage. As provincial fiscal, Quezon 
had no use for American arrogance, and when he refused to 
go along with the scheme of the American carpetbagger — ^who 
wanted to take possession of the coconut lands of the so- 
called brigands — he was threatened with disciplinary sanc- 
tions for dereliction of duty. 

“Get out — and stay out!” Quezon shouted at his visitor. 

When Quezon was already the provincial governor, an 
American barged into his office demanding in a loud voice 
that he punish a Filipino provincial official who had not given 
the proper attention to the white man. Quezon rose from his 
chair, grabbed the inkstand with one hand, and with the 
other pointed to the door. “Get out — and stay out,” he told 
the crass intruder. 

This refusal to be intimidated by any white man, no 
matter how high the office held, was demonstrated decades 
later in the august rooms of the U.S. Congress when the 
Senate majority floorleader, Joseph T. Robinson, questioned 



176 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



his motive in objecting to the provisions of the Hare-Hawes- 
Gutting law. 

“Go to hell-” Quezon dismissed his critic. 

Quezon finally got what he wanted — the independence 
of the Philippines as provided for in the new Tydings-Mc- 
Duffie law. What he and earlier nationalists had failed to 
achieve by force of arms, he obtained by peaceful means, by 
persistently and continuously pleading his cause in the halls 
of the U.S. Congress and the White House. 

Before reaching his goal, he had to travel a long road, 
beset by the intransigence of American governors-general. 
In the case of Francis Burton Harrison, he had no difficulty 
at all, partly because he had supported Harrison’s candidacy 
for the post and the latter was properly appreciative, and 
partly because Harrison believed in giving the Filipinos as 
much leeway as possible in managing their affairs. But with 
Governor Leonard Wood the opposite was true, partly because 
of the Rough Rider’s rigid character, and partly because the 
chief executive believed in American supremacy over colonial 
subjects. Wood put a stop to the encroachments on the exe- 
cutive power of the Governor-General that the Filipinos had 
made under the Harrison administration, and even tried to 
regain the political ground that his kindly predecessor had 
relinquished. Quezon opposed Wood because he refused to 
surrender the gains made during previous years; to do other- 
wise would have been to stifle the growth of Filipino self- 
government. 

Thus, in one of his provincial speeches attacking Wood, 
Quezon uttered those words that stirred the nationalistic feel- 
ings of all Filipinos: “. . . I would prefer,” he said, “a gov- 
ernment run like hell by Filipinos to one run like heaven by 
Americans!” 

But Wood refused to budge, like the granite hills of Ver- 
mont, and Quezon could make no headway. This impasse 
taught Quezon a lesson. With the governors-general who 
came after Wood (Henry Stimson, Dwight Davis and Theo- 



<3 U/RIWO— QUEZON THE NATIONALIST 



177 



dore Roosevelt, Jr.), he avoided any confrontation. The 
Philippine ship of state sailed smoothly thereafter. 

Psychologists tell us that people with an inferiority com- 
plex tend to he retiring in public and submissive to others. 
These were two traits that were simply unknown to Quezon. 
The lack of a sense of inferiority explains many incidents in 
his life. 

For example, while traveling on the luxury ship He de 
France in 1933, he and his entourage had the renouned pianist 
Ignatz Jan Paderewski for a fellow passenger. It was the 
custom for the ship’s orchestra to play the national anthem 
of the important personages on board. The musicians wanted 
to honor the Filipino group but did not know the musical 
score. Thereupon Quezon, in the presence of the Polish 
maestro, haltingly played with one finger the Philippine an- 
them on the orchestra’s piano, sufficiently for the entire 
orchestra to render the piece moments later. 

Quezon refused to play second fiddle to anybody. This 
is the reason why he wrested political leadership from Sergio 
Osmena, his ally and sometime rival. How Quezon supplant- 
ed Osmena gives a good clinical insight into the personality 
of the man from Baler. 

Quezon had been Osmeha’s lieutenant while they were 
still members of the first Philippine Assembly. The Cebuano 
was the Speaker, while the Tayabas member was the majority 
floorleader. Their friendly collaboration lasted for about 
nine years. But after Quezon had secured the passage of the 
Jones bill, which granted a measure of self-government to the 
Filipinos, and had been elected President of the Senate, their 
rivalry developed slowly but surely. Insular affairs made 
a turn for the worse after the First World War. The govern- 
ment-owned Philippine National Bank had been mismanaged 
and had lost millions of pesos as a result. A fact-finding mis- 
sion composed of Governor Wood and former Governor 
Forbes had found that the United States in the Philippines 
was in a “position of responsibility without authority.” The 



178 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



probers found many cases of inefficiency and blatant corrup- 
tion in government offices. 

Members of the ruling Nacionalist party blamed the 
Speaker from Cebu for his selection of men for key positions 
in the government. Quezon seized upon this dissatisfaction 
to accuse Osmena of “unipersonalism,” of deciding national 
and party affairs all by himself. On the other hand, Quezon 
claimed, he always consulted the members of the party on 
important matters and was therefore a “colectivista,” because 
he followed the collective will of the majority of the party 
members. 

Quezon, adroitly moving his political pawns, obtained a 
slight majority in the Senate in the June 1922 elections, but 
failed to secure a majority of the seats in the Lower House. 
He proceeded to get the man of his choice into the Speaker- 
ship. The story is told by Antonio de las Alas, one of Que- 
zon’s henchmen, of how Quezon made this possible. 

Quezon invited the Assemblyman from Batangas for “an 
evening of relaxatioh” in a Cavite cabaret. 

“Tony,” said Quezon, “do you still want to be the Speaker 
of the House?" 

“Yes, Mr. President,” replied De las Alas. 

‘ You better not be a candidate, because I have promised 
that position to Manoling Roxas.” 

But it is not my decision — it is the decision of the ma- 
jority of my colleagues.” 

. were to follow his public posture of being a “colec- 
tivista,” Quezon should have given in there and then. But 
he had one more ploy in his mind. 

Nevertheless,” Quezon insisted, “you’d better withdraw.” 

“Why should I?” 

Because I cannot continue as Senate President if you 
are the Speaker. You very well know what tradition dic- 
tates the two legislative chambers should not be headed by 



QU/RINO— QUEZON THE NATIONALIST 179 

persons coming from the same senatorial district. So you 
be the Speaker and I’ll resign as President of the Senate.” 

Tony de las Alas was taken aback. For Quezon to relin- 
quish the Senate presidency would be to explode a political 
blockbuster with disastrous consequences. After thinking 
it over for a minute or two, the Batangueno said: “If that’s 
the case, Mr. President, you continue as Senate President and 
I’ll withdraw as candidate for the speakership.” 

It was during this first battle with Osmeha that Quezon 
made another famous declaration. “My loyalty to my party 
ends where my loyalty to my people begins!” he exclaimed 
at a public meeting. Unfortunately, this set a precedent 
among his less scrupulous successors in the political arena, 
who have not hesitated to change parties with the ease of 
changing shirts in order to further their individual ambitions. 

Quezon’s second fight with Osmena took place about a 
decade later, over the approval of the Hawes-Hare-Cutting 
law which would give independence to the Islands after a 
10-year transition period. The former Speaker, together with 
his fellow Visayan, Speaker Manuel Roxas, had spent more 
than a year in Washington, D.C., lobbying for the passage of 
an independence bill, and when their efforts were successful, 
Quezon rejected the law for various reasons. In reality, Que- 
zon was fully aware that if the country obtained its indepen- 
dence through the efforts of Osmena and Roxas, he would 
lose his position of leadership in the archipeago, for whoever 
brought home a guarantee of independence from the U.S. 
Congress would become the darling of the electorate. Thus, 
after a reconnaissance trip to Washington, D.C. he boldly 
turned down acceptance of the Hawes-Hare-Cutting law. The 
subsequent passage of the Tydings-McDuffie law vindicated 
his political prescience. 

In his third and final contest with Osmena, Quezon had 
recourse to his histrionic ability. Both were then living as 
exiles in the United States, while the Japanese were running 
roughshod over Jose P. Laurel and his supposedly independent 
administration. Quezon’s term as President would terminate 



180 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



at the end of his second four-year term on November 15, 1943, 
under the constitutional mandate that no person could serve 
more than eight consecutive years in the office. 

Quezon’s appeal to President Franklin D. Roosevelt to 
settle the problem went unheeded. Osmeha believed that the 
terms of the Constitution should be carried out despite the 
extraordinary conditions brought about by World War II. 
After months of uncertainty and arguments with Quezon, 
Osmeha finally asked Roosevelt to favor a joint congressional 
resolution suspending the provisions of the Philippine Consti- 
tution on presidential tenure. 

Osmeha was practically pushed into giving way to Que- 
zon during the last meeting of the cabinet in Washington that 
October. Told by his subordinates that they needed more 
time to study the problem of his continuation in office, Que- 
zon rose from his sick bed and ordered his secretary to pack 
his bags and be ready to leave for California immediately. 

“If you want the government — you can have it!” he told 
Osmeha. 

Quezon was suffering from an advanced case of tuber- 
culosis, and he was racked by a fit of coughing that alarmed 
the cabinet members. Quezon’s face was twisted in a paro- 
xysm of pain. 

Osmeha afraid that if Quezon died in disappointment for 
failing to continue as President, he would be blamed by his 
people, hurriedly said, “Leave the question of your continu- 
ance in office entirely in my hands, Mr. President.” 

On the following morning, Quezon called for his secre- 
tary, Dr. Arturo B. Rotor, the writer-physician. The President 
seemed happy and his cheeks were rosy. 

‘Rotor, ’ said the President with a twinkle in his eyes, 
“how was my performance yesterday?” 

Ah, exclaimed Rotor a decade later, recalling the event, 
‘ what a great dramatic actor the Philippines lost when Ma- 
nuel L. Quezon chose law instead of the stage!” 



QUIRIWO— QUEZON THE NATIONALIST 



181 



Quezon however, could not break the rules of diploma- 
tic protocol, despite his refusal to kowtow to foreigners. 
The inauguration of the Commonwealth of the Philippines on 
November 15, 1935, nearly turned into a fiasco because the 
American authorities denied the new Filipino chief executive 
a 21-gun salute. 

Late in 1935, Gener-al Douglas MacArthur informed Que- 
zon that during his inauguration, he would be given the 21-gim 
salute ac'*.orded only to heads of state. Roosevelt had agreed 
to this, apparently in ignorance of protocal. But when the 
time for the rites came. Governor General Frank Murphy 
turned out to be a stickler for protocol. Secretary of War 
George Dern, who represented Roosevelt at the inaugural 
rites for the Commonwealth Government, supported Murphy, 
who apologetically explained to Quezon that protocol was 
inflexible in such cases. 

Quezon boiled in anger. “I don’t have to take my oath 
of office before that assemblage,” he said. “I can do so any- 
where I please, and I’ll still be President of the Philippines.” 

Until the eve of the inauguration ceremonies Quezon 
would not yield. A cablegram came from Roosevelt at the 
last hour apologizing for his mistake and begging Quezon 
to accept the 19-gun salute. Quezon relented and agreed to 
appear the next morning in front of the legislative building. 
All through the ceremony, Quezon’s face was taut and rarely 
smiled. Guests noticed a strained look on his face. He was 
still smarting from what he believed was a slight to his office. 
To the end of his days, he demanded that he be addressed as 
“President of the Philippines,,” and never as “President of the 
Commonwealth.” 

To make up for his obstinacy during the inauguration, 
Murphy was the first to call on Quezon at Malacahang Palace 
in the official exchange of courtesy calls. Quezon took this 
as a precedent in the course of his official relations with the 
representative of the United States in the Islands. 

But when J. Weldon Jones, the new U.S. High Commis- 
sioner, arrived a few months later, he claimed, on the advice 



182 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



of American military men who disliked, both Quezon and 
MacArthur, that it was improper for him to call first on the 
Commonwealth President, since the Commonwealth was not 
a sovereign state. 

For weeks Jones remained at the Commissioner’s resid- 
ence on Dewey Boulevard, while Quezon fumed at the Palace. 

“Admitting for the sake of argument,” said Quezon, “that 
the High Commissioner precedes the President of the Phil- 
ippines, the rules of ordinary courtesy demand that he, upon 
landing on Philippine soil, should first call on the head of the 
government. The High Commissioner is not an official of the 
Philippines. How can the President know who the High Com- 
missioner is unless the Commissioner himself calls on him, 
and formally informs him that he is the High Commissioner? 
I may receive a formal commimication from the U.S. Pres- 
ident or the Secretary of War to this effect. But how can I 
identify him unless he presents himself and tells me that he 
is the U.S. High Commissioner?” 

Reminded that he rated only a 19 instead of a 21 -gun sa- 
lute, the fiery Filipino chief executive retorted: “The question 
of the number of gun salutes is of little consequence to me. 
I don’t care if not a single gun is fired by the army or navy 
of the United States. I would order my own army or navy 
to fire 50 or 100-gun salutes and nobody could stop me.” 

Commissioner Paul V. McNutt arrived some months later 
with a written ruling by Roosevelt that the U.S. High Com- 
missioner, as the representative of the President of the United 
States, was the number-one man in the Islands and outranked 
the President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. 

This ruling, the next Commissioner, Francis B. Sayre, 
observed, “understandably irked Quezon and his people. . .” 
“So Sayre, with great diplomatic tact, purposely absented 
himself and his wife from social functions attended by the 
Quezons, so that the Filipino couple could make their appear- 
ance as the ranking figures of the affair. 

If Quezon did not have an inferiority complex, neither 
did he affect a superior air. He never looked down on for- 



Qtr/RIJVO— QUEZON THE NATIONALIST 



183 



eiders, especially Americans and Englishmen, just because 
of the color of thfeir skin. But he was quick to resent being 
imposed upon, or denigrated, by them. 

In his travels abroad he always stayed in the best hotels, 
rode in Rolls Royce or Cadillac limousines, and booked pas- 
sage on luxury liners, because he never wanted foreigners to 
think that Filipinos came from a lesser breed of men. But 
at home, among his fellow countrymen, he behaved differ- 
ently. He would ride on a carretela while touring the prov- 
inces, and eat with his fingers the plain food offered by his 
rural hosts. 

He was a fastidious dresser in public. When his good 
friend Roy W. Howard, publisher of the Scripps-Howard 
chain of newspapers, gave him as a present a colorful McCrory 
shirt from Hollywood, handmade in the latest fashion, he 
liked it so much that he immediately ordered a dozen from 
the U.S. manufacturer. 

This penchant for dressing up like a dandy had its comic 
repercussions early in his public career, when he was the 
newly-appointed Philippine Resident Commissioner to the 
United States. He had been invited to give a luncheon speech 
before a prestigious New England club. A large curious crowd 
was at the station. Since he knew no one there, he stood 
waiting to be greeted. The train left, and the crowd dispers- 
ed. Finally, somebody who had remained behind approached 
him with the words, “Are you Commissioner Quezon?” 

The welcome!* was profuse in his apologies for not having 
instantly recognized the guest of honor. 

The Americans had expected their guest to come dressed 
like a headhunting Igorot, complete with feather headdress 
and G-string— such was the image they had of Filipinos, after 
the St. Louis Exposition when a band of Igorots were exhibit- 
ed in the United States as typical of the Islands. 

Commissioner Quezon had arrived dressed immaculately 
in a morning coat, stripped pants, patent leather shoes and 
spats. A mestizo, he looked more like a Spanish or Latin 



184 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



American diplomat than a Filipino mountaineer. Quezon 
merely laughed off the incident and attributed the mistake 
to the provincialism of New Englanders. But from that time 
on, he made sure that his hosts would recognize him for 
what he truly was — the representative of the Filipino nation. 



THE MEASURES OF HIS GREATNESS- 



By Various Authors 



.. MEASURED by all the accepted yardsticks of greatness, 
and tested by all the possible formulas of leadership, Senate- 
President Manuel L. Quezon, who completes his 54 years 
tomorrow, stands unique among the national leaders of the 
world. 

There are kings who have kept their thrones by abdi- 
cating power. There are dictators who have maintained 
thejr authority through the support of terrorizing organiza- 
tions. There are presidents whose popularity waned before 
their terms of office have ended. But Senate-President Que- 
zon, wielding power and with only a political party as an 
extra-legal means, has been the idol of his people for two 
decades. 

Why, in a popular government where elections are held 
ever so often, he has not suffered the fates of kings and dic- 
tators and presidents, will be one of the wonders of history. 
And yet, his leadership is devoid of intrigue and mystery. 
His hold on the people and the people’s hold on him are 
matters of fact so often discussed that they have come to 
be taken for granted. 

Quezon has come to the present height of his leadership 
because the people have abiding affection for and faith in 
Quezon. How the leader has come to deserve these two of 
the highest of popular tributes in fact constitutes the senate- 
president’s life-history which, of course, can only be treated 
justly and adequately in a lengthy biographical work. 

Popular affection for a leader is born of a combination 
of circumstances. Quezon, the brilliant student in San Juan 
de Letran College and Sto. Tomas University; the courageous 
major in the revolutionary army; the comparatively untried 



* Reprinted from the Philippines Herald, August 18, 1932. 



185 



186 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 

and perhaps comparatively crude Quezon in provincial poli- 
tics; the yoimg diputado in Manila beginning to captivate 
imagination with his keen mind and persuasive oratory; the 
resident commissioner in Congress who returned home with 
the Jones Law; the senate-president who guided his people 
through their greatest trial in nationalism; the leader of today 
cautiously but firmly guiding his people to the final consuha- 
mation of their aspirations: These fragments of history con- 
stitute the kaleidoscopic mental picture that touches the 
hearts of millions of Filipinos. 

When the young Quezon played his boyish pranks, when 
the matured Quezon fought for his Country, when he stormed 
in Congress to wrest a political concession from the sov- 
ereign government, he won his people with his attribute of 
fighter. His personal magnetism and his democracy, his 
boon companions of boyhood days tell, have developed with 
the years. His irresistible and contagious enthusiasm and 
earnestness in dealing with problems and persons have with- 
stood sickness. Always democratic, he has through the years 
allowed himself to be drawn closer to the people by an in- 
creasing and abiding affection. 

Rivaled by their affection for the man is their faith in 
his capacity and patriotism. Three decades of continuous 
public service have been rewarded by an enduring popular 
faith in the senate-president. He is the old reliable in every- 
thing that concerns the popular welfare. When Quezon does 
this or advocates that, there is not in their mind any room 
for doubt whatever. They have witnessed his patriotism 
tested in every conceivable manner and always in every test 
proving its inexorable goodness. An abiding faith in the man 
has been the result. 

Expressions of tribute to Quezon are nuinerous. Those 
from his own people, and others in a position to observe iiis 
life and career, on the occasion of his birthday tomorrow, 
appear hereunder. Along with them should be remembered 
others paid him by such judicious and wise men as the late 
Senator Jones, author of the Jones Act, Roy Howard, Cong- 



187 



THE MEASURES OF HIS GREATNESS 

ressman Henry Allan Cooper, Senators Kin^ and Hawes, and 
Frazier Hunt. 

A ' 

Following are the expressions of tribute and admiration 
gathered by The Herald from local leaders in politics, bus- 
iness, labor and religion. They are men who know Quezon 
the leader, the friend and the man. They are in most advan- 
tageous positions to tell us of the senate-president, they are 
ihen whose recollections, observations and opinions would 
be invaluable to the biographer. 

t ■ ■ 



nCN FRANCISCO pRTIGAS, 

Business Man and Lawyer: 

. ‘ ' • « ■ * * 

Vivid recollections of the days when Quezon was a stu- 
dent in the famous college of San Juan J 

first colorful acts as a member of the PWhppme ^ 
revived by Don Francisco Ortigas, a schoolmate o 
Quezon, a distinguished alumnus of the Letran College h 
self and a luminary in the profession. 

“From the year 1888 Quezon and I with 
were rooming together as boarders in Letran. 
was then one of the most brilliant in the college. ^ ^ _ 

of the year he was a medalist with the gra e o ..... 
liente, which entitled him to the yearly gran c • 
anapng those who obtained similar grades. Quez 
iDly copped the grand medal every year. 

“The subject in which Pres. Quezon excelled «^°st during 
his college days was physics. He liked it so 
was not contented with the college text alone. three 

recited his lessons he would give the opinion o 
other physics authors besides the author o __^noHzed 
studied. The physics medal of his class was m P 
by the president all the time he stayed in Le .. 

subject in which he outshined the others in the co g 
I believe, in methaphysics. It was in this 
began to show signs of a great future 
mastery and sound logic won for him the a 
respect of his college mates and the faculty mem ers. 



188 



historical bulletin 



‘‘He was never though what one might call a conscien- 
tious student. He was simply bright. I clearly remember^ 
that he used to chat and play during class hours, but the 
moment he was called upon to recite his lessons, he knew 
them very well, which shows that it required him only very 
little time to ingest what was taught him. 

“His only handicap in college, besides money, of which 
we were always short, was his conduct which was very far 
from being desirable. He was a naughty student, full of' 
pranks. He invariably disobeyed the regulations of the col- 
lege, which caused to him no little amount of trouble and 
annoyance. I remember one day when a sign wafe posted 
in a conspicuous place in the college prohibiting, under strict 
penalty, boys to pass from one hall to another through the 
windows. Pres. Quezon was not in the habit of passing that 
way, but just to contravene the order, he did so before a 
crowd of students. This was of course made known to the 
rector, who severely reprimanded him. 

On another occasion, Mr. Quezon was deprived of a 
quarterly medal in physics for another of his youthful pranks. 
The vice-rector through some of Pres. Quezon's companions 
suggested that he apologize for what he had done, assuring ^ 
him that the medal would be granted him if he did. This,' 
Quezon refused to do. I could then detect in him signs of 
future greatness, for whenever he was convinced that a thing 
was right, he never gave it up. 

He was a little fighter also. No matter the size of his 
adversary, he always gave him a good scrap to the delight 
of his friends and companions. He was never a bully though. 
He was ever in sympathy with the underdogs, so to speak, 
hence he was liked by the majority of the college mates. 

“I do not very well remember his doings after he left 
our alma mater. When he was admitted to the Philippine 
bar, however, he worked in the law firm of Del Pan, Fisher 
and myself. His salary then was P150.00 monthly. 

The first case he tackled in court was that in which 
15 or 16 ex-revolutionists were charged under the law of ban- 



THE MEASURES OF HIS GREATNESS 



.189 



clitry. The case was heard before Judge Sweeney in Manila, 
the fiscal being one Mr. Jorge. It was two days after the 
trial had started that I was told that the fiscal was determin- 
ed to file a criminal complaint against him for alleged threats 
made on certain witnesses of the government who were then 
kept inside Bilibid. I went immediately to the court and I 
found that what I was informed of was true. The fiscal was 
blowing against Pres. Quezon and threatening him with a 
criminal complaint. But the future senate head, with easy 
composure, replied smilingly that the fiscal could threaten 
him all he liked but ‘that he was not big enough to cower 
him.’ Judge Sweeney was a big-hearted, learned man. He 
liked the smartness, and the talent evinced by the young law- 
yer during the trial. The result was that 12 of those defended 
by him were set free. 

“At that time also it befell Mr. Quezon’s lot. to be the 
attorney of Tolentino, the famous author who was charged 
of sedition for his work Ayer, Hoy, y Manana. He acquitted 
himself brilliantly in that case, and his fame as a lawyer 
began to be spread all over the Philippines. 

“Two or three months after he passed the bar examina- 
tion he was assigned to Mindoro as fiscal, were dozens of 
persons were incarcerated as revolutionists. Before he went 
to Mindoro he came to me to consult about his new position. 

I advised him frankly that it was not the place for him, as 
most of the cases he would handle would be of criminal 
nature, which would not bring him big returns. Quezon, 
however, was determined to accept the position. He told me 
that he knew of the excesses committed against the poor pri- 
soners there, and that it was his duty to go there. Upon his 
arrival in Mindoro he set to studying the cases before him, 
and one by one he sent the prisoners to their respective 
homes. Judge Lindbargher, who was then the district Judge 
of Mindoro, took fancy of him, and worked for his transfer 
from Mindoro to Tayabas, where he stayed until he was elect- 
ed governor of the province. In Mindoro he was once charg- 
ed with a complaint, resulting in the sending of Judge Ross 
to that place for a special investigation. It was found out 



190 HISTORICAL BULLETIN 

that Quezon was strict and severe in the prosecution of his 
cases. Judge Ross upon his return to Manila submitted a 
report of the matter favorable to Quezon. 

“There is one quality Quezon posseses which few men 
rarely have — ^the power to attract the friendship of strangers. 
During the time he was fiscal of Tayabas he became very 
close friend of General Bandholdtz, as well as of General 
Harbord, then an assistant chief of the Philippine constabu- 
lary with the rank of colonel. The friendships he made 
with such prqrninent Americans here helped Quezon much, I 
understand, in the United States. Had Quezon devoted his 
life in the practice of the lawyer’s profession, I have no doubt 
that he would haye been one of the greatest if not the greatest 
lawyer of the Philippines.” 

DON MANUEL EARNSHAW, 

Former Resident Commissioner: 

Don Manuel Earnshaw, who was, for four years (1913- 
1917), a colleague of President Quezon as resident commis- 
sioner in Washington, recalled in vivid terms the great role 
President Quezon played while championing the cause of the 
Philippines in the United States. It is doubtful, he said, whe- 
ther any one could duplicate the great work of President 
Quezon in America at that time. In his mind, the greatest 
political concessions of the United States to the Philippine 
Islands were the result of Quezon’s ability and talent. It will 
be remembered that the Jones bill granting us the establish- 
ment of the Senate, the promise of independence and other 
rights, were secured during the interregnum of the Quezon- 
Earnshaw combination. Don Manuel Earnshaw, however, at- 
tributes to the President all the glory for that remarkable 
piece of legislation, the Jones Law. 

Says Mr. Earnshaw: 

“There can only be but one Quezon. I hope he has an 
equal among our people. He is the leader whom any nation 
or race could be proud of. During our four years of associa- 
tion in Washington, which, by the way were the happiest in 



191 



THE MEASURES OF HIS’ GREATNESS 



my life, I came to learn of his gr,eataess and patriotism. Re- 
presentative pf a subject people that he 'vyas, Quezon ’W^s 
afjmired and respected by those he came in contact with ip 
that capital. Whether in congress, in the White House, or 
in the department offices in Washington— wherever he wept— 
he was well received and well attended. Being his associates, 
I shared naturally the attention accorded him wherever we 
went together. 



“I never felt more proudly in belonging to the Filipino 
race than at the time Quezon made his appearances on the 
floor of congress to defend our cause. The praises which he 
evoked from the American legislators by his brilliant and 
masterful exposition of his plea, swelled my heart with pride 
as it never was before. Withoiit reflecting on the ability of 
the American congressmen against whom Quezon locked 
horns, so to speak, during his verbal squirmishes on the ^r 
of congress, I can say without fear of contradiction that Que- 
zon always got the best of it. This was but natural of course 
since they were debating on a subject in which Quezon was 
much at home. 



“I desire to speak more of Quezon, but I must refrain 
from doing it further as I am afraid I might be misinterpreted 
by those who see things always in the wrong light. May his 
lite be spared many more years for the use of his family 
and our dear Philippines.” 



DON VICENTE SINGSON ENCARNACION, 

Businessman, Lawyer, Former Senator: 

“President Quezon, because of the importance of the dif- 
ferent positions he has held during the last 25 years, has natu 
rally been criticized and even vigorously opposed and at times 
praised and commended. 

“But today when the country is undergoing an economic 
crisis more acute than what we have ever imagined, today 
when in the social horizon seems to loom a portentous omen 
that threatens to destroy our social structure, and today when 



192 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



both criticism and praise should cease in order not to disturb 
the serenity of his mind, and we Filipinos should give him 
our fullest cooperation, by making suggestions which we be- 
lieve will be of some usefulness, or by pointing to whatever 
danger we fear we might incur. • 

l 

“When a step or an act of his is capable of various intet- 
pretations, we should incline to believe those that are com- 
patible with honor, honorable intention, and good faith.” ' ' 

REV. FATHER SERAPIO TAMAYO, 

Rector of Sto. Tomas University; 

As a student, both at the San Juan de Uetran college and 
at the University of Santo Tomas where he took up his high' 
school and three years’ law courses respectively. President 
Quezon was always known among his schoolmates and pro- 
fessors as sobre saliente. I have always known him as a 
brilliant student. 

“Even in Roman law President Quezon obtained high 
marks, although the professor was extraordinarily strict. 
The professor had probably been well-impressed with the 
ability of the young student that he could not do otherwise 
but give him high marks. 

“The records that we have dugged up from our files show 
the kind of student that Quezon was. He finished many of 
the courses with medals showing excellence. 

As a boarder at the dormitory, he led an exemplary life. 
He was admitted for his scholastic attainments, his ability 
and leadership.” 

JUDGE JAMES ROSS, American Jui’ist: 

I have known Quezon for about 30 years, during which 
time I saw him rise from a provincial fiscal to the leadership 
of his people. President Quezon will be a great man in any 
country. And the Filipino people are fortunate in having 
such a man to manage their affairs. He has done splendid 
work for his country in every position he has held. 



THE MEASURES OF HIS ‘GREATNESS 19S 

-“He' is a iliagnetic personality and he possesses a bril-' 
liant mind and a courage to face any situation fearlessly. I 
expect, in times like this his leadership is badly , needed and 
he will supply such leadership. . I anxglad to know , that his 
health is improving and I, hope that he has before him many, 
more years of useful service to his. people. He has an extra- 
ordinary grasp of . subjects and. an alert mind 

• “He is a loyal and affectionate friend, with a lovable per-' 
sonality. He is also affectionate in his family relations.' H6 
likes the' company of his friends and his is liked too, for he 
has a magnetic personality. But for the sake of his country 
President Quezon sometimes cannot always be with such com- 
pany of which he is so fond. 

“President Quezon has sacrificed everything for his peo- 
ple. He could have been a brilliant lawyer and could have 
earned a lot of money but he never thought of it. He has 
given his whole life to the service of the country. 

“Mistakes? I can’t think of any mistake he has made. 
He seems to have an instinct for being right. As an enemy 
he is a dangerous one, for he is a fighter. He studies every 
question thoroughly. 

“What he dislikes most are dishonesty and hypocrisy — 
and pretence. He would destroy any crooked man in the 
government, no matter who he is.” 

TEODORO M. KALAW, 

Director of the National Library: 

“I began worshipping Quezon as a leader twenty-four 
years ago. My connections and familiarity with him, put me 
under advantageous circumstances to see Quezon, the man, 
the political figure, and the leader of boimdless resourceful- 
ness. Long before I had accompanied him to St. Petersburg 
in 1908 where he represented the Philippine government at the 
International Conference on Navigation, I had already pre- 
dicted, in my own queer way, that he would become great in 



194 HISTORICAL BULLETIN 

the near future. At last I have found out that I was not 
wrong. '■ 

' * V! 

President Quezon's personality is very commanding not 
only among the Filipinos but also among foreigners. He 
moves about, acts, speaks, and looks at you straight in the 
eye in a way that at an instant you feel his greatness, his 
superiority. I noticed this particularly among European peo- 
ptes whom we had chance to get in contact with during our 
trip to St. Petersburg back in 19,08. Our friends from all 
nation representing different traits, different attitudes, hailed 
President Quezon as a superior figure. 

President Quezon also has a way of making friendship. 
People are drawn to him and take him into their confidence. 
But while friends to him, they respect him and look up at 
him, more as their superior than as their equal." 

major JE.H. STEVENOT, Vice-President, 

Philippine Long Distance Telephone Co. 

'‘President Quezon as a leader would be a credit to any 
coimtry. He possesses the brilliant qualities so necessary to 
Raders who have the courage to express their convictions. 
He imderstands Americans and their institutions to a remark- 
able degree. While he has been very ill during the past three 
years, his mind today is clearer than it ever was, comprehend- 
ing economic as well as social and political problems with an 
extraordinary depth of vision. 

As a fiiend there is no one with a bigger heart in the 
world than he. 

My firm belief is that the people of the Philippines will 
not realize the value of President Quezon as a leader until he 
3S gone. Everyone should do his part to support him in his 
efforts to bring about a mutually satisfactory solution of the 
Philippine question. 

“The people of the Philippines should pray that President 
Quezon have many happy returns of the day and that they 
enjoy his unselfish leadership for many more years to come.^^ 



THE MEASURES OF HIS GREATNESS 



195 



MAYOR TOMAS EARNSilAW of Manila: 

cannot talk freely of President Quezon, due to the 
strong bonds of friendship which links us two — I was the 
sponsor of his marriage and a god-father of his son, Manolo 
but even if I were permitted to do so I should not be ^ble to 
find adequate words to praise his great accomplishments as 
a leader of the Filipino people. 

'‘President Quezon is one of the few in our race endowed 
with real greatness. In him exceptional talent and valor are 
united. His undaunted courage has always been present with 
him both in victory and defeat. His capacity for work has 
won for him the admiration of all those who know him. 

“It was in Washington, while I was a member of the 
second independence mission, that I came to observe him at 
close range. During more than two months we dined toge- 
ther in a hotel. Day and night I saw Quezon attending the 
business for which he was sent there by our people. The 
story of his successes in the United States Congress is already 
too well known for me to relate anew. But what the people 
little know was the hardships and the sacrifice which he 
endured there, especially on its financial side. 

“If there is any living Filipino who deserves the eternal 
gratitude of his people, that one is President Quezon. I wish 
for him many happy returns of the day, and may he live 
longer for the glory and happiness of our beloved country.” 

J. ROSENTHAL, American Businessman: 

President Quezon is a loving husband and a doting father. 
He does justice to everybody regardless of nationality and 
will never side with Filipinos in any controversy with other 
nationals if the Filipinos are wrong. 

“A great many Americans in the community doubt whe- 
ther the President is sincere in his desire for independence. 
I wish to emphatically say that the President, if possible, 
would be willing to make a covenant with regard to Filipihos 
getting independence, and he would gladly consider his woi’k 



196 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



done and he would gladly go to His Maker feeling all his am- 
hition in life has been accomplished. 

'• “The President is one of the most generous men I have 
come, in contact with, in helping people in financial distress. 
I know of many instances in which he has given financial aid 
when he really could not afford to do so. 

“As a friend he is a staunch one, as many heads of the 
departments can verify. I have known him intimately for 
more than 15 years — and he is the same great soul, big-heart- 
ed man today as he was when I first knew him. 

“On the occasion of his 54th birthday I wish him long 
life and happiness.” 

VICENTE L. DEL FIERRO: 

“President Manuel L. Quezon is one of the leading na- 
tional figures of the world today. It is statesmen of his type, 
who forget themselves and think only of their country and 
their people’s future that are needed today.” 

• These are the words of one of the most prominent Ame- 
rican oldtimers here who knows President Quezon intimately, 
from the time he was just finishing his law course in Santo 
T-omas University after undergoing all kinds of privations in 
the battlefield up to the present day when Mr. Quezon is 
regarded by Filipinos as the foremost leader of their race. 
It was F. Theo. Rogers, first secretary of the senate president 
and business manager of the Philippines Free Press, who said 
these words. 

Mr. Rogers and Mr. Quezon struck up a friendship way 
back in 1900 and from that time on they have been personal 
friends. As a result, Mr. Rogers had been privileged to watch 
the growth of Mr. Quezon’s career in public life, from the 
time he was provincial fiscal of Marinduque and 'Tayabas up 
to the present time. 

It is not strange that Mr. Rogers and Mr. Quezon should 
fall for each other. “I admire him,” Mr. Rogers repeated 
numberless times as he unfolded in our talk the landmarks 



THE MEASURES OF HIS' GREATNESS 



-m 



the career of the Philippines’ foremost statesman who 
tomorrow celebrates his 54th birthday with more than thirty 
years spent in the liberation fight for his people. It was a 
case of the West meeting the East despite Kipling’s never-the- 
twain-shall-meet. The New Englander in Mr. Rogers found 
beautiful things to appreciate in Mr. Quezon, the simpatico 
in the early days and even now, and between the two of them 
has been built loyalty that bridges race and time. 

Mr. Rogers, though a personal friend of most persons of 
consequences in the entire Philippines and of many notable 
and interesting figures in other lands readily singles out Sen- 
ate President Quezon as one of the leading statesman in the 
w'orld today. 

Mr. Rogers speaks from personal observation of Mr. Que- 
zon’s career for over thirty years and intimate association 
with him. Hearing Mr. Rogers speak of Mr. Quezon, you 
would think this American oldtimer (he came here in 1899 
with the 12th United States Volunteers, from Massachusetts), 
is- a Filipino. I believe Mr. Rogers is a Filipino in this respect, 
and I agree with the late Vicente Blasco Ibanez whom Mr. 
Rogers interviewed in Mentone in 1925, that Mr. Rogers is a 
Filipino-Ameriean journalist. For Mr. Rogers’ admiration of 
President Quezon, and his appreciation of his picturesque per- 
sonality, comes spontaneously from the heart and soul of an 
alien race. 

Mr. Rogers has travelled with Mr. Quezon. Eaten with 
hirn. Slept with him. Suffered with him. Rejoiced with 
him. 

It was Mr. Rogers who first “sold” Mr. Quezon to the 
world, to paraphrase a reminiscent phrase of the New Eng- 
lander. Shortly after the opening of the First Philippine As- 
sembly, that august body of Filipino intellectuals who laid the 
foundation of representative government here, of which Mr. 
Quezon was a member, Mr. Rogers was appointed secretary 
of Mr. Quezon. The following year, 1908, Mr. Quezon was 
appointed Philippine delegate to the International Navigation 
Conference in St. Petersburg, Russia, and the two went to 
that conference. 



19S 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



“President Quezon impressed every body with his chi- 
valry and colorful personality on his first world tour,” Mr. 
Rogers recalls. 

That trip, which covered the whole world, was the eye- 
opener for Mr. Quezon. Having suffered on the field of bat- 
tle for his country; and being a member of the First Philip- 
pine Assembly, the world tour proved both educational arid 
pleasurable for the then Assemblyman Quezon and he came 
back more determined than ever before to devote his life to 
the service of his motherland. 

In recalling this incident, I interrupted Mr. Rogers with 
a query as to whether it is true that Mr. Quezon had said, 
while they were in Russia, that he was the “Prince of the 
Philippines”, as a certain current anecdote would have it. 

The answer of Mr. Rogers lifted a legend long in my 
mind. “That is not true,” he explained. “Mr. Quezon never 
sails under false colors. This is how it happened. When we 
were in Moscow, we wanted very much to see the Romanoff 
crown jewels in the Kremlin but there was no way of achiev- 
ing this wish because only members of the royalty are allowed 
to see those treasures. We asked the hotel manager where 
we were staying how we could get into the closely guarded 
vaults that housed the three-billion-dollar fortune and we 
were told we had to get a pass from St. Petersburg. “Do ydu 
mean to say”, I told the hotel man within hearing of one of 
the guards, “that you would subject the Prince of the Phil- 
ippines to such indignity?” Somehow or other, the remark 
was overheard, and when I was asked again if it was true 
that my companion. President Quezon, was the Prince of the 
Philippines, I replied in the affirmative. It was intended 
more to gain time than anything else, but just the same, the 
Russians took it to heart. Any way, Mr. Quezon is a prince 
of good fellows and nobody can tell whether at some remote 
time, we could trace our origin to royalty.” 

That world trip definitely stamped Mr. Quezon as a na- 
tional leader. In that trip, he gained the respect and admira- 
tion of the President of the Russian Duma and other notable 



THE MEASURES OF HIS' GREATHESS 



199 



personalities. He impressed everybody that he came in con- 
tact ■with. 

During the interview, Mr. Rogers was seldom interrupted 
and, therefore, his impressions came willingly, naturally with- 
out any urging whatever. 

“From the first time I met him, I have been convinced 
that President Quezon is a true leader of his people. It is 
in his blood. You can not take it from him. It was born 
with him and will always stay with him. 

“Review the entire public career of President Quezon and 
you’ll not find a single instance in which he has left a doubt 
linger in the mind of his people. He is always frank, straight- 
forward, daring, dashing, honest. He is a born fighter and 
when he fights, he fights openly, courageously. He always 
fights for his convictions and almost in every instance, he 
wins. Take the case of the recent rumpus in the legislature 
over the pork barrel. When a Representative attacked Gov- 
ernor General Roosevelt for suspending the pork barrel, Mr. 
Quezon stood up and declared before the majority caucus 
that it was unfair that the governor general should be sub- 
jected to unjust accusation. He said that it was he who had 
suggested to the governor that the pork barrel might be sus- 
pended, and, therefore, if there was any one to be attacked, 
it was he and not the governor general. The courageous 
stand ended the fulminations.” 

Mr. Quezon has distinguished himself in every public 
career he has held. 

“He was a fearless fiscal. He was a tireless and far- 
sighted governor of Tayabas. That province owes its great- 
ness to him. He is a brilliant parliamentarian and was easily 
the most vivid personality in the First Assembly. 

“He is the greatest Resident Commissioner the Philippines 
ever had in Washington. 

“He is our greatest leader today.” 

The growth of Statesman Quezon has been steady because 
he has guided his people sanely, fearlessly. This comes from 



200 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



an innate, selfless love of country demonstrated in war dur- 
ing the revolution and in peace during the thirty years of 
devoted labor under the aegis of the Stars and Stripes. 

Mr. Rogers, viewing the career of his personal friend for 
the last three decades, firmly believes that Mr. Quezon would 
be a great leader in any country. It is his conviction that 
when it comes to the affection of a people for a national 
leader, Mr. Quezon has no equal in the world today except 
possibly Mahatma Gandhi. 

Like Mahatma Gandhi,” Mr. Rogers remarked, “he is 
sacrificing unselfishly for his people. Like Mahatma Gandhi 
he is guiding his people along the path of permanent happi- 
ness. He is immindful of himself in his devotion to them. 
He would even risk his position, his life to serve their inter- 
ests. 

“I am reminded of his now famous Three Proposals for 
the solution of the Philippine problem. It took a Quezon to 
tell the truth to the people. No other Filipino leader could, 
or would have done it. This brings us to the inevitable and 
telling fact that Quezon is a progressive statesman who sees, 
like a skipper sailing the rough seas, clearly ahead, unmindful 
of the waves trailing behind him. He is thinking not in terms 
of the present, not in terms of himself, but in terms of ten, 
fifteen, twenty, thirty years ahead. He is thinking of the 
future of his people. He would rather see them denounce 
him, if they may, rather than betray the trust they have in 
him. 

In recent years, because of his illness, Mr. Quezon has 
grown more noble, more cautious. This is the wisdom that 
comes with age. And quite apace, the love of his people for 
him has grown. They have paid the closest attention to the 
minutest bulletin about his health. 

They feel the need for his guiding spirit, stronger than 

ever. 

They repose their trust in him because they believe he 
is the leader who will give up everything for his people.” 



THE MEASURES OF HIS GREATNESS 



201 



President Quezon’s remaining in office despite his illness 
is a sterling proof of his desire to serve. He could very well 
retire now, Mr. Rogers said. But he sticks to his job because 
he feels his people need him now more than at any other time 
in their history. 

Mr. Rogers stands upon a dilemma as to whether it is 
wise for Mr. Quezon to remain at the helm of the Filipino 
participation in the government notwithstanding his illness. 
He has his fears that in Mr. Quezon’s desire to give his utmost 
best to the Filipino people, he may prematurely leave them. 

Such is the picture today of Manuel L. Quezon, states- 
man and patriot. 

WALTER ROBB, Editor, 

American Chamber of Commerce Journal: 

“All who know their Philippines or make an effort to 
know them have only the best of wishes for Senate President 
Manuel L. Quezon, whose ears would burn with conscious 
pride could he but overhear the gratifying conversation 
around many an American table when news of his birthday 
marks off another year for him — of which may he have many 
more and prosperous ones. 

“While the American community is dominantly a business 
one, and business men know no man is indispensable, the 
fact that Mr. Quezon is now but 54 years old and Imparts 
confidence; and it is a fact that his prolonged illness, which 
he now seems sure of throwing off, disturbed the thoughts 
and aroused the sympathies of Americans who do not know 
him personally and only judge him by what he does and the 
place he holds. 

“Newspaper men appreciate Mr. Quezon’s frankness. He 
makes them at ease and feels at ease with them. Within the 
bounds of prudence, he gives them information generously, 
he understands their anxiety to be as deep ‘in the know as 
possible and will always satisfy this anxiety if he can. “But 
men in general are most impressed by his conservatism, re- 



202 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



fleeting the same characteristic in his people. The most ‘hu- 
man’ side of him I ever observed was an occasion at his Sta. 
Ana home 14 years ago when he was getting ready to go to 
Washington and I was getting an interview from him for 
The Bulletin. It was his last morning in Manila, until he 
should return, and Tayabas folk, men of his native province, 
had taken possession of him. 

“The high and low were there to spread a banquet for 
him in the entresuelo of the house; and while he received 
officials and gave interviews and bethought himself tardily 
of things needed for his luggage, the preparations went on. 
I suppose the scene verified all the criticisms heard of late 
about the ‘personal’ character of political leadership in the 
Philippines, for after all it was homage to a chief — an emo- 
tional tribute to leadership. But at the same time I suppose 
these criticisms are very trite: great political leadership can 
be very ‘personal’, and there is hardly any other great kind 
at all — because no other kind gets to first base in the political 
game. 

“Like most other people I see Mr. Quezon very seldomly. 
Like nearly everybody, I follow his career mainly in the news- 
papers. And it is mainly reassuring.” 

A. V. H, HARTENDORP, Editor, 

Philippine Magazine: 

“No purer patriotism has ever been voiced than in Mr. 
Quezon’s opening address to the Philippine Senate a month 
ago in which he expressed the belle, that at this time, when 
the country is confronted with many complex problems, ‘the 
members of the Legislature will think and act only as Fili- 
pinos with the single purpose of serving the best interests 
of the country, without reference to political affiliations or 
doctrinal attachment, and laying aside all petty antagonisms’, 
and, speaking more specifically of the necessity of reorganiz- 
ing and simplifying the governmental machinery, advocated 
that such measures as might be found necessary be applied 
‘with out distinction’, holding that ‘no considerations of a 
personal or political nature should deviate us from this course.’ 



THE MEASUKES OF HIS GREATNESS 



203 



“No one could maintain that Mr. Quezon’s career has al- 
ways been disinterested; his life has been largely a struggle 
for power, for himself, for his party, and to that he has often 
had to sacrifice other considerations. But the fault has lain 
less in himself than in his milieu; he is a statesman among 
statesmen, and has to be a politician among politicians. 



“But right or wrong, in victory or in defeat, he is always 
Quezon, always either the conqueror or the unconquerable. 
A born leader of men he would be a leader anywhere. He 
will continue to be a leader until his last breath He is a 
leader by virtue of his personality. He has that almost ma- 
gical quality which makes it impossible for even 
downright enemies to hate him. He draws men to himse^ 
like few men in history have been able to do. n 
tion to that he has insight and vision, and, above all, courag , 

and an indomitable will. 



■■I can not boast the honor ot knowing 
I have never talked with him alone observa- 

even ten minutes. What I say 

tion of his public attitudes and ac s. criticism and as 

when I considered his leadership open „j,„e<wrist and I 

an editor, have frankly said so. arn ^ T,gen invited to 
am writing these paragraphs because strong 

do so by the editor o£ the PI, Ulppines Herald. But the strong 

sense of public responsibility and h,s 

to his own political interests in the 

has often exhibited, and especially at this time, m 

the admiration of even his severest cri ics. 

“What has Mr. Quezon personally to 
control of the principal party organization a reorganiz- 

the necessity for cutting the budget a mos i ^ the 
ing the government, reducing the salaries abolish^ 
positions of numerous functionaries, and ^ 

ing all “pork barrel’’ legislation, must ^evitably lead to th^ 
hostility and opposition of men less public-spirited than he 
and may even in loss of general popularity and strength of 

following? 



204 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



“The cynical may say that Mr. Quezon may have planned 
to use the opportunity presented by the need of reorganizing 
to eliminate those who oppose him and to strengthen his 
following. But practically speaking, Mr. Quezon can not 
even have hoped that the degree of his control over the 
situation would be sufficient to carry out any such maneu- 
ver. Others may say that it was just the irrepressible Que- 
zon in him that induced him to come out at this time after 
several years of virtual retirement, due to ill health, when 
he saw the game grow interesting and an opportunity to play 
a vital and dramatic part. 

Why did he not stay happily and safely in his pleasant 
Baguio retirement? Why should he not have left it to others 
to take charge of the highly necessary but disagreeable and 
dangerous work that confronted the leaders of the Legisla- 
ture? He could easily have pled the condition of his health. 



My own answer is ^patriotism. The hour calls impera- 
tively to the man, and the man steps forward. 

Mr. Quezon will be fifty-four years old tomorrow. I 
believe that it may be said of him that his fifty-fourth year 
IS one of his greatest. May every succeeding year be still 
greater until he is twice as old.” 

VICENTE G. BGNUAN, former Director of the 
Philippine Press Bureau: 



+• requested me to write a brief interpreta- 

tion of Manuel L. Quezon upon the occasion of the anniver- 
sary o his birth. This task would have been better entrusted 
to one who has had a longer connection, personal and offi- 
cial, with the President, for mine is a simpler and a more 
unpretentious nature. I have been associated with him, how- 
ever, rather intimately, during the last few years, in our inde- 
pendence campaign work in America, and I will merely re- 
late here three incidents that more than anything else f^ra- 
phically describes him. 

“When every one in the Philippines and those of us in 
the United States had given up all hope of preventing Nicho- 



THE MEASURES OF HIS GREATNESS 



205 



las Roosevelt from becoming vice governor of the Islands, 
President Quezon, upon arrival in Seattle on his way to Mon- 
rovia, wrote a simple letter of protest to the Secretary of 
War which succeeded in achieving what others who person- 
ally were on the ground failed to accomplish — the resigna- 
tion of Roosevelt from the vice governorship, or, to be exact, 
the withdrawal by President Hoover of his ad interim ap- 
ointment of Roosevelt and appointing him instead, minister 
of Austria. 

“It is now commonly known that President Quezon ex- 
pressed his determination to resign if the Administration in- 
sisted upon sending Roosevelt to the Philippines. The Le- 
gislative Mission then in the United States who met Mr. Que- 
zon in Seattle on its return to Manila earnestly advised Pres- 
ident Quezon not to persist in that determination because 
the Administration was set on sending Roosevelt to the Phil- 
ippines and his resignation would, therefore, be in danger of 
being accepted. But Mr. Quezon was unmoved. Convinced 
as he was of the rightness of his case, loyalty to the overlord- 
ship of reason which he knew would prevail if but firmly but 
respectfully presented to the authorities made him turn a 
deaf ear to the advice of the Mission. With his old time de- 
termination that seemed to grow in intensity as the body was 
giving way to the ravages of illness, tempered down by a 
statesmanship which to me reached its climax in the compo- 
sition of that letter, which will rank as one of the priceless 
documents in Philippine history, he took his own advice and 
acted accordingly. 

“When he said in the opening paragraph 

Let me at the outset disclaim any intention on our part to 
challenge the power of the President to appoint whomsoever he 
chooses. We are only exercising the right of petition, the use of 
which in this instance and in my case, considering the position I 
hold, becomes a duty, imposed alike by my loyalty to the Govern- 
ment of the United States and to the people of the Philippine 
Islands. I hope, therefore, that these representations will be 
accepted in the spirit in which they are made, 

he put the stamp of statesmanship in the document which, 
by the very nature of that opening observation no one could 



206 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



deny giving serious consideration to the plea that followed. 
After saying that upon re-reading Roosevelt’s book in an ef- 
fort to find a ground upon which he could stand to conform 
his views with those of the Administration regarding the ap- 
pointment, he was convinced more than ever that Roosevelt 
could not be accepted by the Filipinos. Then he said: 

I would request you, Mr. Secretary, to realize how humiliat- 
ing it will be for the Filipino people to have at the head of their 
Department of Public Instruction and, from time to time, as 
acting head of their Government, one who has branded them as 
dishonest and deceitful, and how extremely embarrassing it will 
be for the Filipinos in public life to deal officially and socially 
with one who has written of them with contempt. 

In recent years, I have cooperated, first with Governor 
Stimson and then with Governor Davis, to bring about a better 
understanding and more cordial relations between the people 
of the Philippines and the representatives of the Government 
of the United States in the Islands, with the result that not only 
have these relations very much improved but also the racial 
feeling, — which has always been the thorn in the Philippine prob- 
lem, — between Americans and Filipinos. You can, therefore, verv 
well understand my very serious concerned over this appoint- 
ment, which will surely revive racial antagonisms. 

Allow me, Mr. Secretary, to place these considerations before 
you, as the Chief of the Department in charge of the Philippine 
affairs, with the request that you lay them before the President. 

''This letter prevented Roosevelt from coming to the Phil- 
ippines. 

"In referring to this letter to me in Washington, he 
laughingly remarked: 'I was rather hard put in writing that 

letter because I had no one to help me. I did not know 
whether I was using the correct preposition or the correct 
construction, but I kept on until I finished and then mailed 
it. Yet, I think it turned out to be not such a bad letter 
after all.’ Those perusing the letter will agree that his ap- 
praisal of it is modest to the extreme. 

"Manuel L. Quezon is one of the best if not the best-read 
man in the Philippines today; he has dedicated his entire 
four years of illness to reading. Books of all kinds, ancient. 



THE MEASURES OF HIS' GREATNESS 



207 



mediaeval, modern — books just off the press — have passed 
through his hands and through his mind. He does not read 
them merely for pleasure or to w^hile away the long days 
during those four years; he reads to learn, like a student stu- 
dying his lesson. Mr. Quezon today has acquired a fullness 
of information, a roundliness of thought that have become a 
valuable asset to him and to the Filipino people now that he 
has again assumed active leadership. 

'^An American and a Filipino, both men of high profes- 
sional culture, called on President Quezon at his home in 
Washington during his last visit in the American capital. I 
was present. Conversation turned ‘on the economic affairs 
of the world, on Soviet Russia, bankrupt China, etc. During 
the early part of the conversation the two visitors talked on 
these subjects and it was apparent to me that they were 
making an almost painful effort to explain fully what they 
were trying to convey, as from an informed teacher to a learn- 
ing child. Then all of a sudden they became the listeners 
as the President cited facts, figures, books and authors in 
illustrating his points. Both went home acquiring instead of 
imparting knowledge. It is said of Woodrow Wilson, the 
scholar president, that when you are in his presence you are 
‘informed beyond your worth’. It is not exaggeration to 
jj^pply this to Mr. Quezon, not alone on questions in politics 
of which he is a master, but on literature and economics as 
well. For his four years of sequestration has made of him 
a highly cultured gentleman — one of the highest compliments 
that can be paid to any man. 

‘Tt is said of Manuel L. Quezon that his personality is 
his greatest attraction. My association with him in Wash- 
ington, the last time he was there, gave me the privilege of 
witnessing the unfolding and the magnetic attraction of that 
personality. Men high in the councils of the American gov- 
ernment used to go to him, not once merely to pay a courtesy 
call, but many times. Stimson, Hurley, General McArthur, 
official representatives of the President used to go to see 
him, either to spend a pleasant social afternoon or evening 
or to confer with him on important matters relating to the 



208 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Object that brought him to Washington. No other Filipino, 
in his capacity as an official of the Philippine government or 
merely as an individual, has ever been paid such distinction 
and deference. 

“Many have asked why Manuel L. Quezon has such per- 
sonality. The answer is that he has a large nature and a big 
heart that opens itself fully to anyone that captures his con- 
fidence. Men of small spirit and small natures need not 
even try to understand him. To such men a Manuel L. Que- 
zon is an enigma — a closed book.” 

SENATOR ELPIDIO QLIIRINO: 

“He is the warmest friend any one can find. If he really 
likes you he tells you so and he means it. And because he 
likes you, he tells you outright whether you are right or 
wrong no matter if it hurts. 

“As a public official he is courageous and clean-cut. He 
has a keen foresight. His highly developed application of 
the human nature has helped him in the solution of many 
important national questions. 

As a leader, you can fully trust him. He never bargains 
for a principle. He gives every one an opportunity to be 
heard or even to express disapproval of his policies. 

As an enemy, he is open, determined, but easily won 
over when convinced of his error. He is noble and kind- 
hearted and is never spiteful. 

As a resident commissioner, he has no peer. His work 
in America stands as one of the most brilliant chapters in 
the political history of this country. He was responsible for 
the enactment of the Jones Law, the present organic act of 
the Philippines.” 

ACTING SPEAKER ANTONIO DE LAS ALAS: 

Antonio de las Alas, acting speaker of the house of repre- 
sentatives, spoke briefly but highly of the qualities of Pres- 
ident Manuel L. Quezon as a friend, as a statesman, and as 



THE MEASURES OF HIS GREATNESS 



209 



a leader. He said that the country now more than ever needs 
the services of the senate head. 

Follows Mr. Alas’ statement: “Probably at no period of 
our history do we need President Quezon more than the pre- 
sent, when the country is facing very serious problems not 
only locally but also abroad. 

“President Quezon’s courage and leadership can be re- 
lied upon at this crucial period to guide us to the right path. 
As a friend he is imequalled, and as a statesman he ranks 
justly with the best of the world.’’ 

REPRESENTATIVE FRANCISCO VARONA: 

Manuel Quezon is the Man of Destiny in Philippine his- 
tory. Representative Francisco Varona, majority floor leader 
of the house of representatives told a Herald representative 
this morning when asked to give a statement on the occasion 
of Senate President Quezon’s birthday. 

“He has taken active, and in most cases, the principal 
part in all important political changes in our country. All 
these changes, as a matter of fact, were brought about through 
his efforts mainly with the supreme goal of restoring our 
former status as a free and independent nation. 

“There was the Jones bill, for example. It is, up to this 
time, the most important piece of legislation which our sen- 
ate head has won for his people. When former Governor 
General Wood sought to block our political aspirations by his 
reactionary policies, it took Quezon to lead the bitter fight 
for our vested rights. The outcome of that battle is now 
too well known to merit further explanation. 

“Now, there is the Hawes-Cutting bill, and the impend- 
ing action of the United States Congress on the measure. It 
is Quezon once more who is leading the campaign for free- 
dom and directing the movement in America. Locally, we 
are trying to overhaul our system of government. Again, it 
is Quezon at the head of the movement. The Filipino people 
are lucky to have such a leader as their champion.’’ 



210 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



SENATOR JOSE CLARIN, 

Dean of Legislators: 

“The so-called personal friends of Mr. Quezon should be 
classified — those who enjoy his friendship objectively, and 
those who enjoy his friendship subjectively. 

“To the first group President Quezon is a true and sin- 
cere friend always ready to do anything in his power for 
them. On the other hand, the second group may be said to 
enjoy only the president’s platonic friendship and cannot 
therefore consider themselves in the same class as the first 
group. 

“As a public official, I have always seen him on top of 
the heap and this has made him a national leader. 

“As national leader, besides his personal magnetism, Mr. 
Quezon has always had the courage of his convictions under 
every circumstances and this is why he has the full confidence 
of his followers and the respect of his adversaries. 

“Everything I have said about him as a friend can also 
be said of him as an enemy.” 

DR. HILARY CLAPP, Igorot Member, 

House of Representatives: 

“Speaking for the inarticulate inhabitants of the Moun- 
tain and other backward regions of the Philippines, I wish 
to say on the occasion of the observance of the 54th anni- 
versary of the birthday of the Senate President Quezon that 
today more than ever before we need a man of the qualities 
of our foremost leader — one who can rise, as he does, above 
party and sectional prejudices and always endeavor to achieve 
for the entire people greater progress, prosperity and happi- 
ness. 

President Quezon’s leadership means much to us, to the 
people of the region, which I represent. It is itself an as- 
surance that our people shall not be given the consideration 
that their problems deserve. Years ago we had often won- 
dered whether there was any among our leaders who could 



THE MEASURES OF HIS GREATNESS 



211 



lay aside even only for a while their concern for their res- 
pective districts to heed the inarticulate voice that comes 
from the mountains. 

“We had often felt anxious and at times sullen and des- 
perate. Out of my personal experience and knowledge I can 
say however we need no longer worry. We find in President 
Quezon the leader, the statesman and the friend to whom to 
bring our problems and from whom we can at least be as- 
sured of a ready hearing and a sympathetic effort to under- 
stand and to help us.” 

DR. ANTONIO SISON, 

Personal Physician of President Quezon: 

“President Quezon’s state of health has considerably im- 
proved and I can say that he is now almost his former self. 
He is well enough to work, but the whole trouble lies in the 
fact that he does not only work, but he overworks. 

“Frequently he holds meetings, attends conferences even 
as late as 2 o’clock in the afternoon without taking his lun- 
cheon. Working without lunch as late as 2 o’clock in the 
afternoon is bad enough for any strong man and you can just 
figure out what it can do to the President’s delicate health. 

“It is not that he ignores his physician’s orders. At least 
he never means to, but when engrossed in his work, he for- 
gets all about his health. Last week the President had to 
leave for Baguio to recuperate because of an attack of in- 
fluenza. After contracting the illness his fever had not yet 
entirely subsided when he was already receiving visitors and 
foregoing what the doctors prescribed for him because he 
had to attend to them. He did not have a relapse, thanks 
to his still strong recuperating power, but it was necessary 
for him to go somewhere for complete rest.” 

RUPERTO S. CRISTOBAL, President, 

Labor Congress: 

“We are counting each and all of us, we who form the 
big group of laborers in the Philippines, as among those who 



212 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



are heartily and happily congratulating the revered President 
of the Senate, Hon. Manuel L. Quezon, on the felicitous occa- 
sion of his 54th birthday. We consider President Quezon as 
the best inspiration and example to every Filipino who is 
fully determined to serve his country and his people, because 
he can ably handle the difficult and opposite tasks of leading 
and of being led. 

“During his varied and indefatigable labors for his coun- 
try from the time he made his first leap to national politics 
as a representative of Tayabas, then as resident commissioner 
of the Philippines to Washington, D.C., and lastly as Pres- 
ident of the Senate these many years he has fully shown that 
he is not only an able politician but also a sagacious leader 
who has the best interests of the working mass at heart. He 
was the first to arouse a sentiment for the working mass 
when he emmciated the historical and unforgettable way to 
‘awaken the Filipino youth’ so that they may face the realities 
^d develop the natural resources of our country. All the 
important labor laws have come from his unselfish dreams 
and visions, and if some of those enacted laws were not per- 
sonally introduced by him, it was through his learned advice 
and suggestions that they had come to be passed. 

In all labor movements and activities, his name stands 
out m bold relief as a courageous leader and a stout advo- 
cate. I was a humble witness to the great work he has done 
for the amelioration of the heart-breaking conditions of Fili- 
pinos presently living in Hawaii, and how he worked hard to 
find the best ways and means to save them from the clutches 
of hunger and death. I was also a witness to his magnani- 
mous labors to give laborers their own seats of honor in the 
highest executive body of the government — the Cabinet and 
the Council of State— which have been the subject of petty 
bickerings among labor leaders during these last days. 

“If there had been trivial dissentions and divisions among 
the working masses, those have not been brought about by 
the actions of the President of the Senate, but rather by the 
misunderstandings among some labor leaders who had not 



213 



fully understood and realized the well-meaning labor desires 
of President Quezon. 

“To the unselfish and sacrificing labors of President Que- 
zon to help our working masses by all means and in all ways, 
from passing legislations for their good to helping personally 
these sons of toil, may all the labor leaders of the coimtry be 
united in offering their felicitations on the occasion of his 
birthday anniversary. May he enjoy a sweeter and longer 
life so the country and the government may be more bene- 
fited by his sagacious and unselfish services.” 

FRANCISCO ZAMORA, Secretary to the Speaker: 

“President Quezon is a man with a heart of gold. 1 
found that out during the time when I was his secretary and 
all the years thereafter. If you are his friend, you can count 
on him, provided you do not abuse his friendship. He is 
frank enough to place you where you belong if you abuse his 
confidence.” 



WE DO NOT GATHER HERE TO GRIEVE * 



By Manuel A. Roxas 

WE DO NOT GATHER here to grieve or weep. Time 
has stanched our tears. The sorrow now in our hearts is 
not alone for him who lies in blissful sleep before us, but 
also for ourselves, the living, who yearn still for the strength 
and comfort of his presence. 

This was a man whom we loved with all devotion; this 
was a man whom we honored with all the gifts at our com- 
mand. Today we pay formal tribute to his mortal remains. 
Today our nation, the Republic of the Philippines, enshrines 
him as a hero on the altar of our love and gratitude. 

Manuel L. Quezon has at last returned to his native land. 
For him, it has been a long voyage home. But as he prepares to 
yield his body to the good earth which first nurtured him, 
we know that we will not inter, we cannot inter, the essence 
of his being. That essence is as much a part of us as the 
free air we breathe. We are a free people and a free nation, 
in large part, because of him. This Republic, its Government 
and its institutions are as much his works as they could be 
of any single man. These are his perpetual monument. Ac- 
ross the trackless and virgin territory of time, Manuel Que- 
zon’s wisdom led the way, through four critical decades, 
through two great world wars, to victory and finally to in- 
dependence. 

The entire world is similarly in his debt. To him it 
owes a portion of that flaming spirit of leadership which 
guided mankind through the valley of evil and darkness to 
salvation and redemption. In this larger sense, we cannot 
claim him for ourselves alone. His death took both a fa- 
ther from his country and a leader from the world. The 



delivered before the Joint Session of the Congress of 
the Philippines on July 28, 1946. Reprinted from Papers, Addresses 
and Other Writings of Manuel A. Roxas (Manila, 1954), pp. 157-165. 



214 



ROXAS—VfE DO NOT GATHER HERE TO GRIEVE 



215 



pain of loss is felt wherever men are free. In our sorrow we 
are one with all mankind. 

The sad bugle notes of death sounded for Manuel Que- 
zon even as the forces of world freedom gathered for their 
final forward thrust. The critical battles had been fought, 
his work was done. His strife had ended. Victory lay soon, 
ahead. But the leader of his people, the captain of our hosts 
was not to see the moment of triumph. In an alien but spi- 
ritually native land, in the land where he had helped arouse 
the legions of redemption, he died. On the beautiful wooded 
shores of Lake Saranac in New York, heartland of the nation 
he had learned to love second only to his own, the great soul 
which had clung so long to a frail and hard-spent body, joined 
the immortals of all ages. 

Perhaps the Almighty, in His surpassing goodness, saw 
fit to claim the life of Manuel Quezon, after his great work 
was ended, that he might be spared the trial and pain of 
seeing the cost his countrymen were to pay for liberty. Per- 
haps the Divine Mercy was extended that he might one day 
return home in glory, beloved and mourned, but blissfully 
blind to the scars of ruin spread across this grotto of tropic 
beauty, the land whose grace and charm he loved so well. 

In this critical epoch, he was the first of the mighty 
leaders of liberty to pass from the world scene. Eight brief 
months later, Manuel Quezon’s great and good friend, Frank- 
lin D. Roosevelt, joined him in death, on the very eve of those 
final triumphs which brought peace to mankind. But Frank- 
lin Roosevelt lived long enough to see the redemption of the 
pledges he had made to the Filipino people, to see Mac- 
Arthur’s men return in irresistible power to wrest Manila 
and the Philippines from the enemy. From Franklin Roose- 
velt, from that weary body, too, the mantle of life slipped, 
away. 

These two men, fast and devoted friends, had ascen^d 
beyond the limits of race and nation and reached the blind- 
ing heights of universality. . . one an American, one a Fili- 
pino. They were of the chosen race of benefactors of man- 
kind. 



216 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



It is difficult to evaluate the works of Manuel Quezon 
at this short space from death, because all of our present 
is in a sense a product of his past. The record of that past 
is a continuous canvas of our history in this century. In 
recalling his life, we recall the story of the modern growth of 
our nation. His climb to fame and leadership is a tale which 
be told to all our generations. The impetuous spirit which 
broke the bonds of personal poverty, which hurdled every 
obstacle because there was none great enough to stay him, 
is one of the proudest products of our race. His name is 
truly a glittering ornament of this nation. 

In Baler, that storied seacoast town of Tayabas, steeped 
in historic lore and crossed by ail the currents of his time, 
Manuel Quezon grew to manhood in the typical atmosphere 
of the Spanish era. His rebellious soul declined to bear the 
indigmties of alien rule and national inferiority. Scholarly 
in spirit, hungry for knowledge, and ambitious, yet he bridled 
angrily at the plight of his people. With the frank eyes of 
youth, he learned to distinguish the dignity of worth from 
the trappings of authority. Although bound to inaction by 
parental pledge, he was spiritually one with Rizal, with Boni- 
facio, with Del Pilar, and the other great patriots of that 
day. When the armies of revolution took the field in 1898 , 
he was quick to join the struggle for liberty. When the anta- 
gonist became not Spain but America, when it was feared 
that the Republic across the seas came but to replace the 
former tyrant, Quezon fought while there was yet hope, and 
in the jungles of Bataan suffered privations and dangers 
which years later he had new occasion to know. But it was 
not until American deeds and American policies had received 
the basic doubts in the questioning mind of Major Quezon 
that he obeyed his orders to surrender. 

Suddenly clapped into an American military prison and 
held without charge for four long months, and then as sud- 
denly released, Manuel Quezon was not conditioned to trust 
or love the new rulers of his land. The more credit to him, 
then, and to America, that in the vista he observed in the fol- 
lowing years he comprehended in the detail of events the 



ROXAS— WE DO NOT GATHER HERE TO GRIEVE 



217 



firm pattern of basic benevolence; he saw imported, from 
America not only economic goods for sale but the priceless 
wares of liberty, of justice and of democracy. He saw Ame- 
rican soldiers build hospitals and roads and bridges. He 
saw schools spring up, and Americans teaching the ways of 
freedom in them. He saw American judges dispense the 
law impartially between American and Filipino. He perceiv- 
ed the cult of fair play being preached and practiced by the 
conqueror. He heard from an American Civil Governor Wil- 
liam Howard Taft, that the Philippines were to be governed 
for the benefit of the Filipinos. A former revolutionist, Que- 
zon was named prosecutor, then Governor of his proud prov- 
ince. 

Elected to the first Philippine Assembly, an avowed ad- 
vocate of immediate and absolute independence, Manuel Que- 
zon revealed for the first time the great talents endowed 
him. . . the lightning speed of thought, the brilliance of in- 
tuition, the unerring judgment of decision, the unswerving 
devotion to principle and ideal, and the keen incisiveness 
which enabled him to distinguish between truth and illusion, 
between appearance and reality, between honesty and pre- 
tense. These were the faculties in rare and multifold combi- 
nation which marked Manuel Quezon for the role of leader- 
ship among his people. 

In 1912, having already spent some years in the United 
States Congress as Resident Commissioner and having mas- 
tered for his purpose the American language, he helped sec- 
ure from the Democratic Party a firm pledge of Philippine 
independence. By a scholarly presentation of the Philippine 
position, he won President-elect Woodrow Wilson to his side, 
and through personal persuasion, gained the interest and in- 
tercession of Representative Jones of Virginia. The historic 
product of those labors was the Jones Act of 1916 which pro- 
mised to the great wonder of the world, independence to the 
Philippines as soon as the Filipinos were ready to govern 
themselves. 

In the blazing glory of that accomplishment, Manuel 
Quezon returned to his homeland to receive a hero’s welcome 



218 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



such as few have ever witnessed. In triumph he was elevated 
to the supreme leadership of his party and of his people, a 
leadership he never lost in the 22 remaining years of his life. 
Seldom if ever has one man attained such power and influ- 
ence among his people and held it imchecked for so long. 
Yet it was not power held through force or intimidation; 
there was no Gestapo to retain him in his rule. It was a 
leadership exercised by the prestige of his person, by the 
stature of his accomplishments, by the dominating propor- 
tions of his talents, and by the unswerving loyalty of his 
followers. Few men in all history, unclothed in the purple 
of royalty, have equalled Manuel Quezon’s tenure as a peo- 
ple’s leader. It has no counterpart anywhere in the world 
in our time. How did he use this authority, this power, this 
influence? That is the statesman’s test, perhaps the answer 
to his greatness. He used it mildly, carefully and skillfully 
in the interests of his people, in the interests not of vested 
wealth which which sought his favor, not of the socially elite 
who courted him, but in the interests of the great trusting 
mass of people, inarticulate, plain and poor. To them he 
was devoted. For them he was a spokesman and a cham- 
pion. In their name he espoused, against the opposition of 
intrenched wealth and power, the cause of social justice. 
We, today, carry forward with renewed and steadfast resolve 
the program he so nobly advanced. . . the struggle against 
the inhumanity of man to man. We pledge in his name that 
we will not falter on the path he blazed so well. 

He feared no man; often he dared defeat; he was un- 
impressed by danger. Quick in his anger, and quick to for- 
give, warmly loving and cordially hating, enjoying ease, yet 
indefatigable in labor, stern and soft by speedy turn, senti- 
mental yet realistic, the unquestioned master of the spoken 
word, loving people so much that he hated solitude — this was 
the man behind the statesman. This was the sum of things 
which added up to that magic and unforgettable personality. 
This was the presence which inspired his followers, which 
awed or won over his enemies, which impressed presidents 
and kings, which delighted friends, which made him the 



ROXAS — WE DO NOT GATHER HERE TO GRIEVE 



219 



tender husband and the loving father that he was throughout 
his life. 

Manuel Quezon was no ordinary man. He was beloved 
by Providence. In his later political career, his decisions 
were occasionally inscrutable, but almost always right 
Tlirough the flat decade of the twenties, when the vessel of 
independence was becalmed in a sluggish sea, he kept up the 
flagging will of his countrymen, continued to beat the drums 
of freedom, and never once lost sight of his goal. 

As the tempo of events quickened in the world, Manuel 
Quezon was ready. With enthusiasm undimmed by a quar- 
ter century of public life, with energy apparently undiminish- 
ed by the drain of the dread illness which was so common 
among our people, he plunged into the crisis of his lifelong 
battle for independence. That battle, too, he won. 

It was in 1935 when an exulting people voiced an over- 
whelming will that Manuel Quezon be the first President of 
the Philippines. It seemed that he had reached the high 
plateau of his career. He toyed indulgently with the thought 
of retiring at the end of his term in office, to tend his health, 
to take his ease, to travel, to spend his reclining years in the 
warm and comforting circle of a devoted and cherished fa- 
mily. 

In his first historic term, he set the new Commonwealth 
well on the road to freedom. He obtained from President 
Roosevelt a pledge of special economic concessions after 
independence. He dreamed and designed the construction 
of a magnificent capital city, the crowning jewel of the fame 
that was to outlast him. He made a goodwill trip to Cuba 
and to Mexico, and in accents which rang clear in those 
lands, he told of his faith in America, in democracy, and in 
world imity. 

Then, from a narrow strip of land called the Polish 
Corridor,’ there burst the lightning of war. Guns grew loud- 
er; throughout Europe freedom was vanquished; a new tyran- 
ny ran rampant over the ancient seats of western civilization. 
In the Orient, deep out of the north China Sea, there rose 



220 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



the menacing clouds of war. Closer and closer they drew to 
the Philippines, still only a mark in the sky, but to the wise 
and practiced eye of Manuel Quezon, they tokened danger. 

The time for retirement of the leader was not yet come. 
This new danger had to be met. In the United States, ideo- 
logically pledged to the support of the western allies, Frank- 
lin D. Roosevelt was elected for an unprecedented third term. 
In the Philippines Manuel Quezon was chosen for his second. 
In the few remaining lands of freedom and peace, men girded 
their loins for battle. Our leader called on his countrymen 
to rally without question to the cause to which the United 
States v/as pledged— the sacred cause for which he had fought 
all his life, for justice and liberty. The youth who had fought 
America with desperate fury in 1898, poured out his eloquence 
and spent his magnificent spirit in support of that nation 
now. 

The rest of the story of Manuel Quezon is the history of 
Philippine participation in the war. When the mailed fist 
of Japan struck without warning, first at Pearl Harbor and 
then at Manila, Quezon’s choice was already made. It was 
not an easy choice. It was a choice previously faced by 
Norway, Denmark, Bulgaria, Hungary, Greece, Siam, and 
Malaya. It was a choice between resisting for the sake of 
principle, or yielding for the sake of relative safety. Not all 
these nations made the same choice. At that time the issue 
on which hung the future of the world was in grave doubt. 
The forces of evil were on the march; there were many men 
of impartial mind who thought the age of barbarism had al- 
ready won. But the lion heart of Manuel Quezon would ad- 
mit neither doubt nor despair. He threw, not without ques- 
tion but without hesitation, the force of eighteen million Fili- 
pinos into the struggle on the side of right, on the side of the 
United States. In a major sense, of course, Manuel Quezon’s 
choice was gathered from the hearts of his people. There 
was no question in their minds. There was no unwilling^ 
ness on their part. The die was cast. And when the time 
came, when he was asked to leave his beloved land, and to 
wage the fight from afar, he acceded, but with painful sor- 



ROXAS—WE do not gather here to grieve 221 

row. His heart ached at the thought of leaving his people 
to face their fate alone. First from Australia and then from 
Washington, he urged his countrymen to resist, to keep high 
their hopes, to maintain intact their faith in the eventual 
triumph of liberty. 

He plunged with all his heart and soul into his new 
task. . . on the one hand as supreme leader of the forces of 
resistance, and on the other as the eloquent advocate, for the 
gathering and launching of the offensive against Japan, for 
the rescue of our people from their brutal bondage. 

The flickering flame of physical vitality burned lower 
now that he was drawing from unseen reserves the last ele- 
ments of energy for his final work. The fragile body which 
supported with so much strain the explosive energy of a dy- 
namic mind served its fatal warning. But death was no 
stranger to Manuel Quezon. Often it had beckoned, nevei 
perched far distant from him. The sultry veil which those 
who live call death because they cannot see beyond it, drew 
closer to him. Still he fought it, refused it. But as to all, 
even so to Manuel Quezon, death finally came. The essential 
task accomplished, his glorious achievements lying in brilliant 
array behind him, the great soul, with the strong surge of 
the upward flying eagle, wrenched itself from its moital 
house. This life was ended. 

The American nation and the American people mourned 
him as one of their own. The leaders of state of many lands 
paid him tribute. The muffled drums which sounded as the 
funeral cortege wound its way through Arlington National 
Cemetery reverberated across distant waters. They were 
heard in the Philippines, and the millions here wept in uni- 
son. 

I remember that day. I was at morning mass in thw 
House of God when the tragic news was spread. Choked 
with grief, I prayed with all my heart for the repose of his 
soul, for the solace of his widow and his children, for the 
salvation of our people, smitten anew with this irreparable 
loss. 



224 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



thing to do, but the only thing to do under the circumstances. 
And thus it was that, after repeated consultations with his 
associates in the government, first in Marikina before depart- 
jus from IVIanila, and later in Corregidor, in Negros and in 
Mindanao, he finally resolved to go. 

Why were his associates so unanimously of the opinion 
that he should leave the Philippines rmder those circums- 
tances? Firstly, it was their conviction that nothing further 
could be, done to prevent the invasion and eventual occupa- 
tion of the Philippines. Secondly, it was clear to them that 
m order to be sustained and successful the resistance move- 
ment had to be directed from outside the orbit of enemy 
control. And thirdly, it was apparent in the light of inter- 
national law and military possibilities that the independence 
of the Philippines could come only from the United States, 
and that, obviously, the United States was the only place 
where we could continue the work of establishing that inde- 
pendence. 



The suggestion made somewhere that President Quezon 
should not have left the Philippines to prove his willingness 
o share the fate of his people, is a sentimental argument 
implications. Subjected to the ruthless 
will of tne conqueror. President Quezon would have been 
unjustly placed in a position where he either had to refuse 
to cooperate and perhaps meet the tragic fate of Jose Abad 
Santos— a loss which the country could not afford— or sub- 
mit to the enemy and head the list of puppet officials. It 
is my firm belief that President Quezon would have pre- 
ferred death to service under the hated enemy. But sup- 
posing that, instead of continuing his role as leader of the 
Resistance, he had chosen to be an instrument in the execu- 
tion of Japan s sinister designs, then he would have inflicted 
the cause of the Philippines in the United States an injury 
beyond repair. ^ 



By virtue of his official position as head of the nation, 
^ positive acts and unequivocal pronouncements 
before the war. President Quezon had to be, as indeed he 
was, the logical and supreme leader of our national resist- 



OSMEtvA— MANUEL L. QUEZON: IN MEMORIAM 225 

ance. In the Philippines as well as in America he was until 
his death the symbol of Filipino aspiration for freedom and 
independence. Our people in general, and our soldiers and 
guerrilleros in particular, accepted his leadership and backed 
it to the limit. Thus inspired by the gallant stand of his 
countrymen, before and after the fall of Bataan, President 
Quezon could make but one decision; place himself beyond 
the enemy’s reach and work in the United States for the 
prompt redemption of the Philippines and the early realiza- 
tion of its independence. By this decision our late President 
demonstrated both personal courage and a spirit of sacrifice 
hard to equal. He had been a sick man several years before 
the outbreak of the war, and for many months prior to 1941 
he had had to absent himself from office at the insistence 
of his physicians. Notwithstanding these handicaps, he tra- 
velled by airplane and by submarine — two means of trans- 
port to which he had the strongest aversion— in order to 
escape from the invader and be able to maintain in America 
the integrity of our constitutional government. 

The events are too recent to require a detailed recital. 
Suffice it to say that, under the leadership of President Que- 
zon, the Government of the Commonwealth functioned in 
Washington not only with the recognition of the United 
States, but of the other nations with which America is allied 
in this war. The Commonwealth, in a word, acquired an 
advanced political status because, anticipating the promised 
recognition of our independence, the American Government 
had taken the steps to invest us with international personal- 
ity. President Quezon was privileged to sign the United 
Nations Declaration as if he represented an already indepen- 
dent nation. We were admitted to membership in the United 
Nations, and we were accorded a seat in the Pacific War 
Council. As a result of his contacts with the Government in 
Washington, his repeated conferences with President Roose- 
velt, and his impassioned speeches in and outside the Cong- 
ress, he was able to focus the interest of the people of the 
United States on the problems of the Pacific, an interest 
which, before his arrival in Washington, had been centered 
in the European front, the front to which the resources of 



226 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



America were already committed. And thus it was that, even 
before the surrender of Germany, the problem of the recon- 
quest of the Philippines was brought to the fore and General 
MacArthur was able to return to Philippine soil to wage his 
brilliant campaign of liberation, earlier than originally anti- 
cipated. The success of American arms, ably assisted by the 
long suffering Filipino guerrillas and civilian volimteers, is 
a monument to the vision and faith of President Quezon. 

But the greatest achievement of the Quezon Adminis 
tration in Washington, one that excels any in this great lead- 
er’s long record of struggle for our independence, is the enact- 
ment by the American Congress on Jime 29, 1944, of the legis- 
lation providing for the establishment of bases in Philippine 
territory for the mutual protection of the United States and 
the Philippines and the maintenance of peace in the Pacific. 
The advantage of the security which this law known as Joint 
Resolution 93 provides for our independent existence and 
national integrity cannot be over-emphasized. As far as hu 
man foresight can reach, this protection insures for our pre- 
sent and future generations the peaceful enjoyment of the 
blessings of independence. If President Quezon, in his long 
and fruitful career, had done nothing more than this, it would 
already assure him of an imperishable place in our history 
and list him, besides, among mankind’s great benefactors ar 
one of the architects of that permanent universal peace so 
eagerly, patiently and wisely sought by the United Nations 
after the bitter experience of this war. 

As soon as the exigencies of the war should permit it— 
and I believe that that will be soon — the mortal remains of 
our beloved President will be brought to our soil that they 
may rest eternally in the bosom of his country. How much 
he would have loved to see again the dear and familiar sil- 
houette of our mountains even if, as he used to say shortly 
before his death, he had to close his eyes after and forever. 

He will not return to us again, as he used to, from his 
foreign travels in the triumphal days of his prodigious ca- 
reer vigorous and overflowing with patriotic ardor for the 
cause of causes, the cause of the liberty of his people. His 



OSMEnA— MANUEL L. QUEZON: IN MEMORIAM 227 

fighting days are over. But now the nation is ready to ac- 
cord him a greater tribute of love and admiration. As with 
Rizal, Bonifacio, Mabini and our other national heroes, we 
will erect him a monument worthy of his glory. The popu- 
lar gratitude will manifest itself in numberless other ways, 
for such is the way our people — always ready to recognize 
those who have served them ably and well. The Filipino 
nation is not an ungrateful nation: it is great, noble and mag- 
nanimous, and never yet has it failed to give recognition and 
recompense wherever these are due. 

And because such is the character of our people, their 
expressions of gratitude, I am sure, will not be limited to 
their late beloved leader, but will be extended as well to his 
loved ones, in particular to that noble and self-sacrificing 
partner of his life who shared with him not only his triumphs 
and glories but also his disappointments and sufferings. I 
believe I am faithfully interpreting the sentiment of our peo- 
ple when I say that it is our duty to assign to Madame Que- 
zon a life pension in keeping with her state and commensu- 
rate with her circumstances. It is my purpose to make a re- 
commendation to this effect to the Congress in the coming 
special session, in line with the practice in the United States 
of pensioning the widows of America’s Presidents. And after 
we have done all this, we shall have only partly settled the 
debt of gratitude that we shall forever owe that great and 
noble Statesman — Manuel L. Quezon. 



BEFORE THE MORTAL REMAINS OF 
MANUEL L. QUEZON * 

By Glare M. Recto 



Our lives are rivers 
Winding to the sea 
Which is our death; 

There go all earthly power 
Straightway and to be 
Consumed in death. 

THESE IMMORTAL LINES from the poet-philosopher 
effortlessly come to mind as we view the last remains of 
Manuel Luis Quezon, that paladin of patriots who consecrated 
his privileged mind and his passion for liberty to the cause 
of his people’s honor and welfare; that modem argonaut 
who after a hazardous quest acquired the golden fleece of 
power and glory to offer it to his country, the cherished 
lady of his dreams; that fine and gallant spirit, like a car- 
dinal of the renaissance, who in the same manner drank to 
the lees of the cup of life, that in mystic paroxysms confided 
the pain and grief of his soul to the God of all mercies. 

“Our lives are rivers winding to the sea which is death.” 
But the river of that fully rounded life did not wind up to 
the sea of death, to confound its richly laden waters with 
those of other streams, baser and unknown, in the common 
reservoir of oblivion and definitive nothingness. No. Far- 
ther and beyond death, beyond the end of that journey from 
which no traveller returns, life reasserts its rights signing a 
compact with immortality when it has been lived in its full 
plenitude for the attainment of the ends of an elevated call- 
ing. And so much so that Fame rendered tribute to Manuel 
Luis Quezon carving for him a niche in the pantheon of the 
elect, for the glory of his country, the lodestar, inspiration 
and pattern for future generations. 



* Oration delivered in Spanish at the necroloaipai cort 7 ,Vco 

^e U.S.T. Chapel on Jhly 29. 1948. Reprin?ef ?iom tL Aclmi^istra^^ 
Mag^azine, August 1948, pp. 8-10. Administration 



228 



HECTO— BEFORE THE REMAINS OF QUEZON 



229 



Providence, in its inscrutable designs, set aside for Ma- 
nuel Luis Quezon a land for his birth and a peculiar medium 
in which to live and develop to fulfill the predetermined man- 
date of destiny. 

It was not through the workings of mere chance that 
the Philippines became his native land in which at the time 
when he first saw the light of day an interdict of centuries 
weighed heavily upon the riches of the spirit and the trea- 
sures of the soil. It was not a casual act that since the days 
of his infancy his soul was stamped with the seal which was 
to distinguish him as consummate example of human gran- 
(^0^1* — not the soft and lethal breezes of conformity with the 
then existing state of things, but the vivifying gusts of rebel- 
lion which were then beginning to shake the foundations of 
the old colonial system. 

Nor was it a mere caprice of fate that Manuel Luis Que- 
zon should reach adolescence when the tempest of the revo- 
lution, unleased by the teachings of Rizal and Del Pilar, was 
roaring through the length and breadth of the archipelago, 
while the bolo of Bonifacio was projecting effulgent flames 
over the horizon and the cry of Balintawak echoed and re- 
echoed over hill and mountain bringing to the last cottage 
its message of redemption 

And finally, it was not in vain, that yielding in its in- 
fancy, to the torrent of a superior force, that first Republic 
which he himself had contributed to establish while fighting 
in the liberating forces of Aguinaldo, loyal to its ideals and 
faithful to the voice of its destiny, Manuel Luis Quezon, with 
Sergio Osmena and other young patriots plunged once again 
into the field of battle exchanging the soldier’s gun with the 
oratory and the pen of the statesman, to save the country s 
honor from chaos and the ignominy of defeat, redeeming for 
all time from oblivion, from desertion, and from complete 
abandonment the sacrosanct ideal of the revolution in order 
to keep it waving on high as the standard of liberty, a pledge 
of self-esteem and a symbol of protest against foreign do- 
mination. 



230 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



If Manuel Luis Quezon had been under other skies, if 
the various periods which called for the overflow of the 
wealth of his energy and to inflame the fervor of his patriot- 
ism had been different, if he had not been the eminent leader 
that he was of his country, his name would not be now and 
forever like those of Rizal, Washington, Bolivar and Koscius- 
ku, symbol and token of all the oppressed races that aspire 
and fight, that live and die for liberty. 

Like any one that comes upon the world emblazoned on 
the forehead with the sign of the elect, as a man who is bom 
predestined to lead and to guide men and nations, Manuel 
L. Quezon received from the Supreme Dispenser of gifts the 
priceless boon of clear and quick perception of the reason 
and philosophy of all things. The psychology of individuals 
and of groups did not hold any secrets for his penetrating 
intelligence, and for that reason his powers for proselytizing 
were immense and irresistible. He was, in truth, a highly 
inspired being and what others came to understand through 
meditation and study he perceived by mere intuition. The 
great projects and creative ideas, the interpretation of con- 
temporary events and the intentions of men — foes and friends 
alike — were revealed to him as if upon his head had descend- 
ed the golden flame of the Paraclete. 

He exercised his rights as a man in the fullest concept 
of the term; in spirit and matter. Conscious of the duality 
of his own nature, he gave unto clay what properly belonged 
to clay and to the soul that which was the patrimony of the 
soul. He loved everything that was worth loving, sublimat- 
ing everything which he considered the epitome of all loves 
on earth: love of country. And because his soul was preg- 
nant with the restlessness of the century and as he was com- 
mumcating to his age and generation his own restless spirit, 
and because his heart was the magnetic pole in which con- 
verged the people’s anxieties and fears, he infused all his acts 
with that inextinguishable passion of spirit, that indomitable 
finnness of will, which made of his life an eternal adolescence 
and one continuous battle for the most beautiful and the most 
sublime ideals, at times for the glory and the exultation of 



RECTO— BEFORE THE REMAINS OF QUEZON 



231 



triumph, at others for the mere necessity of fighting, search- 
ing for difficulties that did not manifest themselves on his 
way, in order to give himself the satisfaction of overcoming 
them; but at all times for the possession and attainment of 
that supreme good which was the pure and constant yearn- 
ing of his heart: the honor and happiness of his people. 

He felt as no one of his compatriots felt the pride of 
being a Filipino and calling himself a Filipino when in the 
midst of cosmopolitan groups, which were most incurably at- 
flicted by prejudice bom of what they claimed their lacial 
superiority. And he has left us the lesson and the example 
of that virtuous pride, which is not the arrogance of the bull 
frog of the fable, but a manifestation of the total absence of 
even the minutest trace of servility and adulation in our con- 
duct, and the serene dignity founded on the conviction that 
there are no superior races nor inferior peoples, but only 
degrees of culture and periods of civilization, that some ad; 
vance or retreat or remain stagnant in accordance with con- 
ditions that the political medium offers, and that as we have 
produced a Rizal, a Del Pilar, a Luna, a Mabini, a Quezon, 
an Arellano, an Anacleto del Rosario and other magTiificen 
examples of human greatness, in the arts, in the sciences, in 
politics, and in law, in the same manner we shall airive a 
that stage where other nations have already arrived if from 
now on we become conscious that we are a nation and we 
have a high destiny to fulfill, and that our advancement sha 
not be attained only through foreign benevolence but because 
of our own efforts, our confidence in ourselves, and our faith 
and hope in a brighter future. 

Manuel Luis Quezon quested for the flatteries of glory, 
because the possessor of the habiliments of power loved 
earthly pomp and grandeur, but whoever believes that his 
motive was only to satisfy his personal vanity would be com- 
pletely mistaken. All that was the external means, the aura 
of splendor, the dazzling apotheosis, with which he had to 
surround himself in order to adapt himself to his environ- 
ment and to prepare properly the scene for his actions. The 
joust was held in that century, and among men of that cen- 



232 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



tury, for the attainment of human objectives and in such a 
tournament, the knight could not present himself clothed in 
the rags of the penitent and reciting chapters from Ecclesias- 
ticus. 

The struggles which in the United States Manuel Luis 
Quezon fought for our independence constitute one of the 
greatest epics in the history of all nations for the consumma- 
tion of their liberty. He fought using his voice and his pen 
in the halls of Congress, in the party conventions, in confer- 
ence halls, in newspaper columns, in popular assemblies, in 
offices of political personages, and even in women’s boudoirs. 
He formed his circle of friends and enthusiastic admirers 
around him, enlisting them in his noble and patriotic cru- 
sade, and he lived with pomp and circumstance of an Oriental 
prince, and he made himself the arbiter of elegance that the 
world might see in him and not in the savage scantily covered 
with breechclouts the personification of the country which 
he represented. And thus under the witchery of his person- 
ality and the magic of his word, appeared one after another 
those historical landmarks which signified the progress of 
our pilgrimage to our Promised Land: first, the independence 
provisions in the platforms of political parties; then the Auto- 
nomy act in 1916; much later in 1934 the Independence Act, 
the Constitution of the Commonwealth; and finally the Re- 
public which on the fourth of July of the present year was 
born and became part and parcel of the international comity 
of nations. 

Manuel Luis Quezon left traces of his life upon that road 
of hazard and glory even to the extent of dying far from his 
native soil without seeing the end of the conflict which had 
cast him to distant shores, without attaining the greatest 
prize which he might have desired for himself: to behold, 
while his heart was being drowned in a turbulent sea of emo- 
tions, how his country s flag was hoisted majestically to wave 
free and sovereign in the sky, its sun and three stars more 
effulgent than those in the very firmament, sheltering in its 
folds the eternal yearnings of a people expressed in the im- 



HECTO— BEFORE THE REMAINS OF QUEZON 



233 



mortal verses of our national anthem: “Ne’er shall invaders 
trample thy sacred shores. . . 

What a poignant pain, what an oppressive anguish must 
have assailed Manuel Luis Quezon when he failed to see the 
realization of his dreams, that which we all cherish and which 
Rizal immortalized in his verses — to die under the skies of 
our counti’y, where the hours are sweet and where death is 
most pleasant! Wliat rejoicing must he felt by his spirit 
now when he sees from the serene precincts in which he now 
rests that his mortal flesh shall sleep in the enchanted land 
the sleep of eternity! 

The eminent leader returns to receive from this land of 
his affections the esteem and devotion of his compatriots. 
But he sees only pictures of desolation, of death and misery; 
the population decimated by the war, the coffers of the state 
in bankruptcy, the trade and commerce in alien hands, the 
agricultural fields lying fallow, the industries destroyed, peace 
and order disturbed, the patrimony of our children menaced, 
the national unity destroyed, the entire nation divided be- 
tween Tyrians and Trojans, the ancient virtues in complete 
bankruptcy and as the Dapitan exile had said, “the home des- 
troyed, the faith sold to others, and ruins all around. . . .” 

Noble leader, may you rest in the peace of your sepul- 
cher, and may you never be disturbed by the spectacle of so 
many moral ills and so much physical misery which now 
afflict us — sordid derelicts of the flood that followed the 
last tempest which imperialist nations unleashed upon our 
soil. We are reputed to be a nation of heroes but the entire 
nation is one vast necropolis. We have been liberated but 
our cities and towns have been left in shambles. We are in- 
dependent, but we are beggars for alien favors; we are citi- 
zens of a republic but we are still characterized by the habits 
and mentality of colonial peoples. To speak of Bataan is 
to speak of glory, loyalty and heroism, of the disappointment 
over vaunted altruism and the promises that were never 
fulfilled. Our dwellings are in deep mourning but not only 
because of the war dead but because of those who are still 
living. And total disenchantment gnaws at our hearts and 



234 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



beclouds our intelligence in the face of the serious affairs of 
our generation and the urgent questionings regarding the 
future to which we cannot find an adequate answer. 

Manuel Luis Quezon, architect of our liberty and father 
of our people: “This world is the pathway to the other which 
is the abode free from cares,” but while we tread upon it 
we pray to God to give us your faith, your passion and your 
courage, that we may feel the same sacred pride that you felt 
with respect to your country, and your race, that we may 
love one another in the face of the bitter animosities of hu- 
manity; that our leader of the present in whom we established 
and recognized the highest possible glory of our generation, 
to whom with justice you have given the legacy of your 
genius and whom you regarded as the most worthy among 
your successors to carry on your noble task, may lead us 
along the right path that we must follow through all the 
crises confronting us; and that our independence and our 
Republic, more than in the law and official proclamations, 
more than in the rhetoric of banquets may live with genuinely 
pulsating graces in our conscience and our conduct, in the 
conscience and conduct of others, to the end that our mar- 
tyrs may not be compelled to return to this earth to sacrifice 
their lives anew. 

Manuel Luis Quezon! It matters not that your mortal 
remains now rest beneath the soil! Your people will not 
seek for you among the dead! You live even in death! 



HE DID MUCH FOR COUNTRY 



By Pacifico A. Ortiz, S.J. 

TO HIS DYING DAY this was his cherished dream; to 
come back to the Philippines and to see her free. He is back 
with us at last — back from his last, his finest mission ^back 
to be gathered to us and to our forefathers forever. That he 
was a patriot and a leader, no one can deny. But I am sure 
I speak for every Filipino when I say that in our hearts 
there is more than mourning for the passing of a leader, 
there is a deep sense of personal loss for the passing of a 
well-loved friend. 

This is the true test of greatness: when people love you, 
not for what you can do for them, but for what you are. 
President Quezon did much for our country, did more per- 
haps than any other man, living or dead. That alone would 
make him our hero, but it takes more than that to make him 
our friend. It takes more than that to make us feel, as we 
do feel today, a deep sense of personal loss. It was the man 
himself that we loved, the man with a heart so generous, so 
loyal, so forgiving; the man with a spirit so noble, so fear- 
less, so m-agnificent. Not that he possessed no faults or 
failures. He had a human share of them. But he was brave 
enough to admit it. There was nothing sham or shallow 
about this man. You could see the depths of his soul through 
his eyes, and you knew exactly how you stood with him. 

In the shifting world of politics, he held fast to a strange 
code of honor. He was consistently attacked by his politieal 
opponents. He was consistently accused of every sort of 
crime and failure under the sun. He always enjoyed a good 
fight — but he fought clean. He never threw back mud and 
derision at anyone. He was a plumed knight. Such was his 
regard, for his fellowman. 

*** Oration delivered at the U.S.T. Chapel on August 1, 1946. Re- 
printed from the Quezon Memorial Book, pp. 126-129. 



235 



236 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 

It was perhaps this trait that made him the undisputed 
leader of his people, this trait which enabled him to make 
friends of political foes, and turn seeming defeat into vic- 
tory, this trait that united the country, as never before, under 
his leadership. For despite his explosive temper, there was 
enough Christian humility in his heart that made for meek- 
ness, and it is written: “The meek shall possess the land.” 

It was surely this trait — his love for his neighbor — that 
made him what he was: the champion of the poor, the friend 
of the workingman. No man has ever been blessed with 
more shining qualities of body and mind; no man has ever 
been showered with more honors and distinctions at home 
and abroad. But this man who walked with kings, never 
lost the common touch; this man whose words were listened 
to in the highest council of nations, never forgot his own 
father’s parting words: “Son, be good and just to your fellow- 
men. No matter how high your station in life may be, never 
forget that you came from poor parents and that you belong 
to the poor.” “ 

Yes, he belonged to the poor. As a young lawyer he 
started his career by defending the poor freely, without 
chaige. As a prosecuting attorney he protected the poor 
from the greed of the rich. Later, as President of the Com- 
monwealth, he championed their cause — the cause of Social 
Justice. And his crusade for social justice was no mere 
lip-service, no mere vote-getting slogan. It meant action. It 
meant giving the peasants a chance to own a home and a piece 
of land they could call their own. It meant creating econo- 
mic opportunities on the plains of Isabela, in the valleys of 
Koronadal, and ail over the land. It meant fighting for a 
just minimum wage for the laborer. It meant preaching the 
gospel of work and the dignity of labor. It meant above all, 
building up a strong, hard-working middle class, and broad- 
ening the base of our economic structure — for he was con- 
vinced that no democracy can succeed where the few are 
too rich, while the many are too poor. 

Today we are facing the same old problems. The war 
has only made them worse. But we can still solve them,. 



ORTIZ— HE DID MUCH FOR COUNTRY 



23T 



not the bloody, communist way, — not the high-handed, social- 
ist way, — but the Christian way, the democratic way, the way 
so nobly raised by our departed leader; with malice toward 
none, with charity for all; dispensing justice to the poor and 
to the rich alike, to labor and to capital alike — but always 
holding high the battle-cry of the common man — “Human 
rights above property rights.” 

He did not live long enough to give full substance to his 
dream. That too often is the tragic fate of those who blaze 
the trail. But that too is the other test of greatness: whe- 
ther one’s work, one’s life-di-eam can survive long after the 
dreamer is gone. In this sense also, this man was great.' 
The noble causes for which he so gallantly spent his life: 
the cause of freedom, of social justice, of equality before the ' 
law, of devotion to country, this our infant Republic, this 
our Philippines — these things for which he fought so nobly 
and so well, these things will not perish with his remains. 
They are sparks of his eternal spirit, and they will light the 
way for generations yet unborn. 

It is perhaps too early to pass judgment on the full sta- 
ture of this man. But I am sure that as generations come 
and go, and the long years loom in perspective, as new men 
and new leaders rise up and walk the stage of history — I am 
sure there will be two men, forever towering above the 
shifting scene, twin sentinels of our destiny, unequalled peaks 
of Malayan grandeur; Rizal and Quezon. Rizal’s death made 
us one, Quezon’s spirit made us free. To them as to no one 
else, we owe what we are today — a united nation, a free 
nation. 

As we mourn and pray over his mortal remains, it may 
be well for us to search into the hidden well-springs that 
made his life so rich, so noble, so beneficient. He loved free- ' 
dom and he fought to make his country free. The secret 
of it all was his deeply Christian spirit. That is why in his • 
autobiography, to imperialists who thought it was a danger- 
ous experiment to “shoot” democracy into the fabric of Or- 
iental minds, he could say: “you overlook the fact that more 
than three-hundred years before, the Spaniards did ‘shoot’. 



338 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



and successfully, the Christian religion into the souls of the 
Filipinos, and that Christianity had prepared us for demo- 
cracy, since Christ’s teachings are indeed the essence of de- 
mocratic ideals and principles.” 

He worked hard, he fought bravely, suffering and di- 
sease could not hold his spirit down. We wondered from 
what hidden source he drew strength to face the war. The 
secret of it all was his faith in prayer. “Ask and you shall 
receive, knock and it shall be opened unto you.” Doubts 
often assailed him, and even fear, whenever he had to make 
the great decisions of his life. So it was when he had to 
leave for Corregldor So it was when he had to leave Aus- 
tralia. So it was when he had to leave for America. But 
he always triumphed with the strength and the light from 
above. And he was never alone in prayer, there was his wife 
always, and his children — sharers of his joys and of his sor- 
rows unto the end. 

There is a glow as of eternal sunrise about the evening 
years of this man — the glow of Faith recaptured and re-lived. 
As he served Mass in the tunnels of Corregidor and in his 
chapel in Washington, as he received Holy Communion with 
his wife and children every morning, as he prayed the rosary 
with them when the lights were low, I wonder if ever for a 
moment, his mind which knew no rest, travelled back to the 
days of his childhood. . . Memories. 

Memories! — of the boy who left Baler to face life without 
anything but the heritage of faith and the courage of his 
ancestors. Memories! — of the impetuous youth fighting in 
the hills of Bataan for the freedom of his people. Memo- 
ries!— of the gallant speaker pleading for his country before 
the Congress of the United States. Memories!— of the states- 
man placed at the helm of the infant Commonwealth to chart 
and guide the destiny of his race. . . These were the memo- 
ries that kept him company as he put up a gallant fight for 
his life. They were no empty memories. They were the 
warp and woof in the fabric of our history. They were the 
pattern of our age-old struggle. A struggle, which as he lay 
in bed those last fifteen months, was still an unfinished 



ORTIZ— HE DID MUCH FOR COUNTRY 



239 



dream. That is what made it so hard for him! But it is 
well for us to know that he fought the good fight unto the 
end, and that his last thought was for us. “Turn on the 
radio,” he signalled to his doctor. That morning, over the 
radio came the news that MacArthur had landed on Sansapor, 
six-hundred miles from the Philippines. “Six-hundred miles’ 
he faintly, very faintly whispered — and for a moment, joy 
like a dying ember sparkled in his eyes. So near and yet so 
far! It was too much for his old heart to bear. He had a 
hemmorrhage — his last. Shortly after, without much suffer 
ins, comforted with all the Sacraments of the Chuich, he 
gave up his soul to God. 

Any nation could be proud of such a leader. Any coun- 
try would love to claim him as her ov/n. And he is ours 
forever!— My Friends, as we commit his body to the land 
which saw his birth and which he served so well, let it be 
with the prayer and the resolve to carry on the work to which 
he devoted his life: social justice, respect for the law, national 
unity And in his memory, let us strive to bind the nation s 
wounds let us close ranks behind our newly chosen leader. 



WE NEVER HAD A BETTER FRIEND * 



By Frank Murphy 



IT IS my sad but grateful errand to greet you on the 
occasion of the death of your beloved hero, Manuel L. Quezon. 
The government of the United States deeply mourns this 
occasion dedicated to the memory of a great man. We never 
had a better friend, or one who struggled harder to achieve 
independence and self-government for his people. He never 
violated his oath to the people of the United States and, in 
obedience to that oath, he came to our land, and perished in 
exile. One thing he never would tolerate would be the slight- 
est hint of violating his oath of office. One could not say a 
word to add to the stature — intellectual and spiritual stature 
of Manuel L. Quezon. That is an impossibility. We mio-ht 
as well attempt to retouch a masterpiece done by an imrrmr- 
tal. His life should be preached from every pulpit, will be 
taught in the schools and colleges. Every editor will write 
about it. It will be known to every citizen whether in the 
rural areas or in the urban communities of this land he 
loved and for which he perished. 



occasion go by without mentioning 
his history from childhood until that moment when death 
took him lightly by the hand. It reflects what is written in 
he Good Book that '‘life is a continuous warfare.'’ He never 
Imew for a moment, release from that duty of struggling for 
his people in order that they would achieve their goal of com- 
plete independence. We also notice this about him— that he 
never would tolerate for a moment the idea of his people not 
being the equal of any people on earth. And then something 
of the spirit of America went into him. My country grew 
to be great because people from every race or every religion 
came together. They could not forget it. They would not 



‘Oration delivered at the necrological services heiri -n- tvio 
Session of the Congress of the Philippines on July 28 1946 Reorinted 
from the Quezon Memorial Book, pp. 99-ioi. ^ ’ ’ ^®P^i*^ted 



240 



MURPHY— \VE NEVER HAD A BETTER FRIEND 241 

be separated. That made America’s might, America’s great- 
ness. Enemies, of course, hoped that that would cause dis- 
unity and division. I want to point out too that they had 
very few material possessions — they were the dispossessed. 
But they knew something of natural law. They knew that' 
natural law was born of divine law, and so in the declaration 
of independence it was made clear that all peoples were equal 
and that they have certain rights given to them by their 
Creator. Cicero knew that, Aristotle knew it, Blackstone, 
Abraham Lincoln knew that. And so it was with Manuel L. 
Quezon. He prepared his people. He knew that his people 
under divine law were entitled to their rights, while at the 
same time recognizing a duty to their country. We saw his 
fragile body, we saw his noble wife beside him during those 
critical days. He never flinched for a moment. Spirits like 
Manuel L. Quezon’s just don’t die. The structure passes on 
but the spirit will struggle on forever. 

The world, my friends, enters a new era. The hopes of 
man is this: that the principle of morality and justice cannot 
and will not fade. These principles of morality and justice 
must be the motivating force of our lives. They are prob- 
lems that require deeper insight and a more profound instinct 
than that of war. 

So the life of your great President for whom I had the 
greatest personal admiration should serve as an example to 
Americans and Filipinos alike. If the youth of this impo- 
verished land were to take a faltering step, I hope they will 
think first of the life of Manuel L. Quezon and be reawakened 
to your responsibility, to your sense of industry, to your sense 
of tenderness and kindness that make a nation great. I 
hope God will keep and bless you. 



MESSAGE OF GENERAL OF THE ARMY = 

By Douglas MacArthur 

IT IS a source of deepest regret that my duties in the 
occupation of Japan at this critical moment have not per- 
mitted me personally to be present reverently to pay homage 
at the final rites over the bier which contains the mortal 
remains of President Quezon. He was my dear friend of 
long years, and it was my privilege to share with him many 
of the varying conditions which have beset human life during 
our age. And in this tragic moment, as we close the scroll 
of his life and works and hearken to their profound and 
controlling influence upon the destiny of his people, I attest 
to and join in the applauding judgment of history of the path 
of duty he strode upon this earth. 

Of all men of all time, none truly merited the appelation 
of patriot-statesman. Few could, as he, replace the uniform 
of the soldier with the mantle of statescraft, yet maintain 
with voice and pen in undiminished vigor the crusading fight 
in the self-same cause for which he had fought by the violence 
of arms. 

Throughout his long years of public service, never did 
he compromise the principle which he thus espoused — never 
did he divert his gaze from the goal which he thus resolutely 
sought. That he lived to bring its realization in full sight 
bespeaks the unconquerable determination with which he 
endowed his lofty purpose. That his native land now stands 
as one of the free and independent nations of the world is 
responsive, more than to all else, to the indomitable con- 
science of his people a firm belief in their destiny as a race, 
and an unshakable conviction that they lacked not the capa- 
city fully to support independent sovereignty once attained. 



services held at the Joint Session 
of the Congress of tlie Philippines on July 28, 1946 Renrinted from 
the Quezon Memorial Book, pp. 107-109 ^ irom 



242 



MACARTHUR’S MESSAGE 



243 



Two years ago, while preparing to join in the final blow 
for his people's liberation, death forever closed his lips and 
stayed his pen, but the immortal spirit which sustains his 
soul remains forever a dominant influence upon the destiny 
of the Republic for which he gave so much. 

His hours of life were full — hours of peace and hours 
of war— of anguish and of joy— of defeat and of victory— and, 
as with all men, of failure and success — the rattle of mus- 
ketry as he fought through the unchartered mountain wilder- 
ness to seek by war what he later won by peace — the bitter 
gall of defeat and surrender— the University cloisters where 
he learned of Christianity, of Western culture, of tradition, 
and of the law— the shifting fortunes of political struggle as 
he rose steadily to the fame of position and power — those 
great crusades he conducted beyond the seas — his advocacy 
and his success in the cause of Philippine independence 
the clouds of war spreading over the Orient— the swirl of 
enemy bombers — the crash of death and blood and disaster — 
again the bitterness of defeat— then the exultation, with the 
rising tide of victory, as he saw our armies standing on the 
road^^back six-hundred miles from Philippine soil— followed 
by still waters and silence. 

His soul being before the seat of Almighty God, Judge 
of all men and of all things, Manuel Quezon’s mortal remains 
are now committed to the tender care of the people he loved 
so deeply and served so well — his cherished own. Father of 
this infant Republic, which he planned but never saw, he has 
returned — he has come home forever. 



ANECDOTES ABOUT QUEZON 



By Carlos Qiiirino 



MANUEL L. QUPJZON, one of the few great Filipino lead- 
ers to die in exile, occupies a definite niche in the pantheon of 
our heroes. Perhaps not quite on the same exalted level as 
Dr Jose Rizal, the greatest man produced by the Malay race 
but certainly in the same category of our other heroes like 
MMcelo del Pilar, Padre Jose Burgos, Graoiano Lopez Jaena, 
Andres Bonifacio and Apolinario Mabini. 

fVao produced by a fusion of the Malay and 

the Castilian, he inherited the shrewdness of the former and 
the volcanic temperament of the latter-accounting for the 
many seeming mconsistencies in his long political career. 
No Fihpino has equaled his oratorical prowess, and his in- 
tmtive knowledge of Filipino mass psychology led him from 
e political triumph to another without meeting a single 
defeat at the polls. Had he elected to remain in the islands 
in the last war, refused to collaborate with the enemv and 
executed for his defia„ce-would he have become a tero as 

of historf tha7r“ ‘S of those hypotheses 

history that can never be answered. But one thino- is 

hv^th^ Quezon was the most colorful personality produced 
oy this country in the past one-hundred years. 

tra personality are best illus- 

about hii-n ^ 1 anecdotes told by his contemporaries 
out him, and a few of these appear for the first time below. 

After the death of President Wilson, the Republicans 

“ehT„« rnTd^aTir 

aspTattons 



239-243^®^"”^®'^ Historical Bulletin, 1962, Vol. VI, No. 3, pp. 



244 



QUIRIA'O— ANECDOTES ABOUT QUEZON ) 245 

as governor general and the latter part of his term was mark- 
ed by his repeated clashes with Quezon. ■ n. . 

During Coolidge’s administration, Quezon made one of 
his trips to the United States to present the views of islanders 
regarding the acts of General Wood. The White House was 
irked by the native leader’s visit and kept him cooling off his 
heels in Washington for several days. 

Piqued by the aloof attitude of the American chief exe- 
cutive, Quezon left Washington for Philadelphia for the pur- 
pose of making it appear that he was not too anxious to seek 
an appointment. Once installed at the Adelphi Hotel in the 
Quaker City, he received a telephone call from W. Morgan 
Shuster in Washington relaying the information that Secretary 
of War Weeks had called up to find out on behalf of Coolidge 
how long Quezon wanted to interview the President. 

Quezon was taking a bath when the telephone call came, 
but wrapping a large towel around him he walked to the 
drawing room to talk to Shuster, who was a good and sym- 
pathetic friend of the Filipinos. When Quezon heard Sec- 
retary Week’s message he became furious, turned led, but 
managed to suppress his anger. 

“Tell Secretary Weeks for me,” he said slowly, measur- 
ing every word; “that if the President of the United States is 
not interested in Philippine affairs, all that I shall say to him 
is— T bring you the greetings of the Filipino people, Mr. Pres- 
ident. Good day!’ But if the President is interested, then 
it is up to him to determine the length of our conversation.” 

Coolidge granted Quezon half an hour for the conference. 

Quezon was an expert in gaining friends and loyal fol- 
lowers. Soon after his split with Osmena and Roxas over 
the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act, he tried to win over the late 
Vicente Vera, political leader of Sorsogon. Vera gave a skep- 
tical ear to Quezon’s blandishments. He had successfully 
warded off Osmena who had also been trying to get him as 
a follower. He was a stubborn man who cherished his poli- 
tical independence. 



246 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



“Look here, chico,” said Quezon. “Your leading oppo 
nent for leadership in this region is Jose Surbito — and h6’s 
an Osmeha man. If you go over to Osineha, I’ll take Surbito 
who, after all, is closely related to my former secretary, 
Felipito Buencamino. So you might as well join me.” 

Vera had no choice, no alternative, but to join Quezon 
in the political squabble that rent asunder local parties and 
caused a realignment of forces. 

During the Hare-Hawes-Cutting controversy, Quezon once 
visited the town of Tanavv’’an, Batangas, the bailiwick of Jose 
P. Laurel, one of the Osrox stalwarts. The crowd that ga- 
thered at the town plaza was fairly large, but decidedly luke- 
warm in its reception of the Senate President. Just before 
he got on the platform, Quezon saw a cross-eyed man ap 
preaching the stand. 

“Hey, putang ina mong duling,” he greeted the newcomer, 
“What are you doing here?” 

Quezon placed his arm around the shoulders of the cross- 
eyed man who smiled broadly in return. This touch of friend- 
liness thawed out the crowd, good-natured laughter rose, 
then cheers followed by loud applause. Needless to add, the 
political meeting was a success. 

“Who was that cross-eyed man whom you greeted, Mr. 
President?” asked one of his henchmen after the meeting. 

“I’ll be damned if I know his name,” replied Quezon. 
“This is the first tune I’ve ever seen him in my life!” 

After he became President of the Commonwealth, Que- 
zon was more careful in accepting invitations from civic 
organizations. Once, while in the U.S., he was asked by an 
Irish patriotic society to speak in New York City on St. 
Patrick’s Day. Congressman O’Malley had extended the invi- 
tation which the Filipino leader had accepted. 

“But I thought you made it a point never to accept such 
invitations,” protested one of his secretaries. 



QUIKIiVO— ANECDOTES ABOUT QUEZON 247 

“Yes/’ said Quezon. “But I have a reason — do you re- 
member that it was Cardinal Gibbons, an Irishman, who 
fought vigorously the grant of Philippine independence by 
the Congress of the United States?” 

As a matter of fact, the late Cardinal had even an encyr 
clical against it inserted in the Congressional Record. Fran- 
cis B. Harrison has recorded the incident in his book on tho 
Philippines. 

“ITl make a speech,” continued Quezon, “but itTl be one 
of the shortest I’ve ever made; it won’t take even two lines 
in a newspaper. The great majority of those who will hear 
it won’t understand, but a few will know what I really mean. 

Quezon attended the meeting, and when called upon to 
speak said these words: “On this day, I wish for Ireland 
exactly what the Irish have wished for the Filipinos!” Then 
he sat down, midst a thunderous applause, for the Irish were 
then agitating for an independent Eire. But a few of the 
old-time Irish leaders, who had successfully delayed Philip- 
pine independence many years ago and remembered it, were- 
wryly silent over Quezon’s remark. 

One sometimes wonders what the public career of El- 
pidio Quirino, former chief executive, would have been like 
had not Quezon lifted him from obscurity by appointing him 
as one of his private secretaries. An incident almost cut that 
budding career short. 

Quezon had an elderly assistant who was more of a gen- 
eral utility man than a secretary. He pronoimced English 
words with a decided Spanish accent, and became known, 
among his office associates as “teepe-writer” because that 
was the way he mispronounced the word “typewriter. But 
he knew the President’s character and had learned to ingra- 
tiate himself with the Filipino leader. 

One day, while Quezon was on a tour of the Bicol prov- 
inces, accompanied by Elpidio and other secretaries, he felt 
indisposed and wanted a certain prescription filled by the 
local druggist. Quezon gave the order to this elderly assist- 



248 HISTORICAL BULLETIN 

ant who hurried from the bedroom into the living room where 
he came across Elpidio. 

“Say, Elpidio,” he ordered, “have this prescription filled 
right away at the nearest apothecary in town.” 

“Why should I?” replied Quirino, drawing himself up to 
his full height. 

“Because it’s for the President.” 

“No! Do your own errands!” 

The assistant promptly reported to Quezon with the 
words: “Look, Mr. President, your secretary Quirino refuses 
to have this medical prescription filled out for you.” 

The Senate President flared up. His nostrils began qui- 
vering— an unfailing sign of anger. With them in the bed- 
roorn was another secretarial assistant, Abdon Llorente, who 
had just graduated from college and was still sporting a little 
mustache affected by the young bloods of that day. 

“Llorente,” thundered the Senate President. “Look for 
the first boat to Manila and put Quirino on it!” 

But young Llorente, despite being new in the service, was 
fully acquainted with his master’s fiery temper. He went to 
the pier, dawdled for a couple of hours to let Quezon’s anger 
subside, then reported that there were no ships available. 

“Did you go to the ship’s agents?” asked Quezon. 

NO’ sir, ’ admitted Llorente, then added with a smile: 
There will be a dance after the big political meeting where 
you will make a speech, senor presidente.” 

Now, if there were two weaknesses in Quezon’s character 
they were a predilection for making public speeches and dan- 
cing with the fair ladies. His interest thus diverted, Quezon 
promptly forgot about the incident with Quirino. 

Meanwhile, Llorente briefed Elpidio on what had happen- 
ed, and when Quezon called for the latter on the following 
day, Quirino had a ready answer for his behavior. 

President, I m ready at all times to obey your or- 
ders,” avowed Elpidio. “But I don’t want to be ordered 
around by subordinates.” 

Quezon, himself a proud and sensitive man, accepted the 
explanation as satisfactory. 



MANUEL L. QUEZON AND I - 



By Proceso E. Sebastian 



IT HAS BEEN a rare privilege for me to have known, 
worked with and served under all our Presidents, from Que- 
zon to Marcos: Quezon and Osmena during the Commonwealth 
regime; Laurel during the short-lived Japanese sponsored Re- 
public of the Philippines and Roxas, Quirino, Magsaysay, Gar- 
cia, Macapagal and Marcos since the establishment of the 
Republic of the Philippines, historically the third republic. 

Deeds are more eloquent than words. Judge a man by 
his acts and not by his words. A man’s character may be 
gleaned from the way he conducts himself. The life of any 
man, and especially that of great men, is full of incidents 
which illustrate his true nature, his character. I personally 
Icnow of many incidents which vividly portray the character 
of President Quezon. 

A few months before the general elections of 1928, Senate 
President Quezon and Speaker Roxas, with some cabinet 
members and other high officials, visited Cagayan, possibly 
to assess the political situation and endorse the candidates 
of the Nacionalista party. I was then the Provincial Gover- 
nor of Cagayan. Although I belonged to the Democrata Party, 
the opposition, I invited the provincial and municipal offi- 
cials, prominent persons and political leaders of the province 
to come to Tuguegarao to meet the Quezon-Roxas party. Pres- 
ident Quezon and Speaker Roxas had occasion to confer with 
the local officials and with the political leaders of the Na- 
cionalista Party. I do not know what transpired in their pri- 
vate conference with the local Nacionalista leaders. 

During the public meeting at the town plaza of Tugue- 
garao, after informing our distinguished visitors of the needs 
of the province and our request for help as stated by the pre- 



•' Reprinted from the 1978 Manuel L. Quezon Centennial Souvenir 
PrnoTain, pp. 36, 38, 40. 



249 



250 HISTORICAL BULLETIN ' ’ 

vious local speakers. President, Quezon got up and among 
other things said: 

“I am a great admirer of Governor Sebastian. He went 
with me to the U.S. as a member of the First Parliamentary 
Mission. I must confess that I have learned to like him and 
admire him. As you probably have read in the papers, when 
Governor Wood gave a luncheon at Malacahang in honor of 
the provincial governors, I asked Governor Sebastian to speak 
for the Governors.” 

“Governor Sebastian is not only a very competent and 
very able man, but” he continued, “he has a very BIG DE- 
FECT.” 

President Quezon paused to observe the effect of his 
words. The public was astounded. An ominous silence fol- 
lowed. President Quezon with his incomparable political as- 
tuteness, then released a bombshell saying: 

“Governor Sebastian has a big defect, because he is a 
Democrata... He should be a Nacionalista. If he were a 
Nacionalista, he would get more funds for you and more im- 
provements would come to your province. I have tried to 
convince him to join our party but he invariably answered 
that having been elected as a Democrata he should remain a 
Democrata. Let us admire him for his manly stand and for 
his loyalty to his party. Very few people have this courage. 

However, I wish to tell you that although he is a Demo- 
crata, if I were a voter of Cagayan, I would gladly vote for 
Governor Sebastian.” 

Such a frank statement coming from no other than Presr 
ident Quezon, who was also the President of the Nacionalista 
Party, was received with loud and defeaning cheers by the 
crowd, who responded with the words: “We will certainly 
vote for Sebastian again.” 

The above incident, small and insignificant as it may 
seern to a man of Quezon’s stature, clinched my reelection as 
provincial governor to the chagrin of my vulnerable opponent, 
former Governor Honorio Lasam of Tuguegarao. At the po- 



SEBASX/AiV— MANUEL L. QUEZON AND I 



251 



pular reception which I gave at my residence after the meet- 
ing, some Nacionalista leaders told the President that former 
Governor Lasam was disgusted, to which President Quezon 
retorted, “I have already sounded and talked to all leaders, 
w'ho openly admitted that the people of Cagayan would like 
to see Governor Sebastian reelected, because he has done 
very well. We should not thwart the people’s will.” 

Another incident which illustrates the character of Pres- 
ident Quezon was the case of Manuel Blanco, who was the 
Provincial Fiscal when I was the executive Judge of the Court 
of First Instance of Iloilo. 

One day. Asst. Fiscal Ignacio Debuque came to my office 
to show me a telegram from Malacanang instructing Fiscal 
Blanco to report on a certain case. Fiscal Blanco was then 
on vacation. So I told Assistant Fiscal Debuque to conduct 
the desired investigation and submit his report to Malaca- 
hang. I do not know what happened afterwards but the next 
thing I knew President Quezon had ordered the dismissal of 
Fiscal Blanco. 

A few weeks after this incident, I found myself in Mala- 
canang, and there met Fiscal Blanco, who was trying to see 
the President. When the President saw Blanco he flew into 
■a rage. After the explosive outburst, quite natural for an 
impulsive and a temperamental man like President Quezon, I 
■quietly told the President that Fiscal Blanco was at that time 
•on vacation and that it was Fiscal Debuque, who later became 
Judge of the Court of First Instance, who was then Acting 
Fiscal. The President turned to me and asked me why I had 
not informed him earlier of this. I explained that I had never 
been asked about the matter, and I never had a chance to 
visit Manila since this incident occurred. 

From his fit of anger, he arrived at a calm decision and 
the President announced that he will study the case further. 
A few days later. Fiscal Blanco was not only reinstated as 
Provincial Fiscal but was promoted by the President Judge- 
at-Large of the Court of First Instance. Judge Blanco died 
a. few years ago. Before he died, he blessed the memory of 
President Quezon. 



QUEZON AS I KNEW HIM « 



By Jose S. Laurel III 



MY KNOWLEDGE of President Manuel L. Quezon was de- 
rived mainly from the brief stint I served, when I was still a 
young man, as his junior military aide. That was during the 
period from 1938 to 1941, or, more correctly, during 2 years 
of this period. 

In 1934, while only 20 years of age, I was on my way to 
Rollins College in Florida, U.S.A., on a scholarship grant. 
When my ship stopped over in Hongkong, I was surprised to 
receive a cryptic telegram from my father instructing me to 
proceed directly to Japan and enroll instead at the Imperial 
Military Academy. I did so without question, as was expect- 
ed then of a good son, but also not without wonder. Later I 
was to find out that it was Quezon who had suggested the 
sudden change of plans. 



Quezon explained to my father that there were enough 
Filipino students going then to the United States and that in 
any case we knew enough about that country. By contrg^st, 
our knowledge of Japan was virtually nil. Quezon felt that 
Japan was the emerging power in Asia and that, therefore, 
we should know more about that country. My father agreed. 

Being the first Filipino to be admitted by what was then, 
the West Point of Japan, I must admit I had a difficult time 
specially during the initial years. But, as they say, hard work 
and perseverance finally willed out and in 1938 I was able 
to complete my course of study including the required tour 
of duty at the Imperial Guards Division. In the same year 
I was commissioned by the Commonwealth Government pro- 
bationary 3rd lieutenant in the Philippine Army. And it was 
in this capacity that I was soon enough pulled out from my 



* Reprinted from the 
Program, pp. 37, 39, 40. 



1048 Manuel L. Quezon Centennial Souvenir 



252 



LAUREL— QUEZON AS I KNEW HIM 253 

assignment with GHQ and detailed as the junior aide-de-camp 
to President Quezon, on his direct order. 

President Quezon was in 1938 already 60 years old, where- 
as I was only 23, less than half his age. Moreover, this was 
the President of the Philippines, my commander-in-chief, the 
domineering, temperamental, bushy-browed Quezon with 
whom even American governor-generals picked their words 
and trod ever so softly. You can, therefore, imagine the 
trepidation with which I approached my extraordinary as- 
signment. 

Yet, by and large, I was to find it a memorable and re- 
warding experience. My tour of duty as aide to Piesident 
Quezon is in fact one of my most treasured memories that I 
take much pride and joy in recollecting. My reason is that 
it gave me the rare opportunity of knowing one of the great- 
est figures of our race, to assess him at close range as an 
ordinary human being, with all his strengths and weaknesses 
and divested of the trappings of authority. 

My most enduring remembrance of Quezon is about his 
thoughtfulness. As I look back now, it seems that he was 
forever’ asking me how I was every time I reported for duty. 
I do not know if that was a reflection on my physique at the 
time — I weighed only 120 pounds then ^but in any case I 
was always deeply grateful for his constant concern for niy 
well-being. 

One would think that a man who had spent practically 
all his life in the rough-and-tumble of politics, and unavoidably 
made not a few enemies, would develop a kind of ruthless- 
ness, if only in self-defense. Yet, despite his exterior image, 
Quezon was surprisingly soft-hearted. One could easily glean 
this from his tenderness toward his wife, the self-effacing 
Dona Aurora, and their three children. Not equally percep- 
tible was his kindness toward others, including those with 
whom he did not see eye to eye. 

Quezon as I remember him had a deep sense of gratitude. 
During my daily association with him for all of two years, I 



‘254 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



was more often than not privy to his remarks and his con- 
versations. Yet I do not remember ever hearing him say 
anything unkind against any one to whom he owed some 
favor, whether great or small. Of these persons, he always 
spoke with warm affection. 

For all his well-publicized outbursts of temper, Quezon 
also had a contagious sense of humor. This was perhaps his 
best redeeming virtue — the counterfoil to his countless and 
terrifying Puheca!'' that often reverberated in Malacahang. 
Many were the times when I caught him in a good mood, and 
he would recount to me a few of his youthful escapades, usual- 
ly romantic. I would listen fascinated, with eyes wide with 
wonder and, yes, envy. 

For all his djmamic and energetic leadership, Quezon was 
in bad health. Apart from the lung ailment that was finally 
‘to claim his life, he had chronic coughs from which he suffer- 
ed innumerable and punishing attacks. During these attacks, 
I would carry him bodily to his bedroom, usually from the 
ground floor up a long and seemingly endless staircase. This 
was to me my heaviest duty, literally, for he had an inert 
weight of about 160 pounds. Yet I remember it now with 
pleasure. In lighter moments, Quezon would tease me about 
my build and even ask me to feel his own biceps. He was 
proud of his muscles. 

His real strength was, of course, not in his mucles but 
in his character, in his indomitable aspiration for the free- 
dom of his people, in his driving desire to fight for it. In 
fighting this good fight, he was in his own element, so to 
speak, and no adversary was too strong, no opponent too for- 
midable. FiVen the Americans respected him. Quezon was 
no brown lackey of Washington. I saw Quezon talk with a 
number of them, including the imperious General MacArthur, 
and he did so on equal terms, without fawning or submissive- 
ness or obsequiousness but always with ease and dignity, as 
befitted the leader of his nation. Those moments never fail- 
ed to fill me with deep pride. 



LAUREL— QUEZON AS I KNEW HIM 



255 



It is now forty years since that day when I first nervously 
reported to President Manuel L. Quezon as his junior military 
aide. I have known since then many* other leaders of our 
country, some of whom I also had the chance to observe at 
close range and to appraise for their all too-human qualities. 
I can say categorically that, in comparison, Quezon stands 
head and shoulders above all of them. He is the one I re- 
member best because I think he was the best. 



QUEZON, THE FATHEK - 
An interview with Nini Quezon Avanceha 



By Araceli T. Salazar 

WRITING ABOUT a well-established ‘legend’ has its draw- 
backs, this interviewer discovered. 

Talking about the same ‘legend’ even if the ‘legend’ hap- 
pens to be one’s father is also as disconcerting. 

This we could see from interviewing Mrs. Nini Quezon 
Avancena, velvet-eyed mother of eight, and daughter of the 
late President of the Philippine Commonwealth, Manuel L. 
Quezon. 

For what more can one add to the legend that was 
President Quezon? His fiery character, his brilliant career, 
his presidency, his fights for our Independence have been the 
subject of articles, of books, and even of plays for the past 
decades. 

And so, here we were, Mrs. Avancena and the writer, 
hopefully jabbing at points which could lead into something 
that had not yet been plumbed by others. Thus the gist of 
our interviev/: 

What would w’e try to talk about? Perhaps your father 
as a politician? 

Well, those around him, his aide-de-camps, the congress- 
men at that time, the newspapermen and others could tell 
you more about that part of my father’s life. Anyway, there 
is practically nothing we can say about my father that hasn’t 
been written in print, in that department.” 

What about Quezon, the father? 



7-9 Student Life, August 1942, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp 



256 



SALAZAR— QUEZON, THE FATHER 



257 



“My brother and I, everytime we're interviewed are ask- 
ed about that particular aspect of President Quezon's life, 
since that logically should be the part we could most author- 
itatively speak about." 

Or, maybe the anecdotes about him? 

“There are so many of them that off-hand I cannot think 
of anyone particularly that may prove of interest to you. 
But, perhaps in the course of our conversation, some good 
ones may crop up." 

So, we hopefully decided to talk about anything— any- 
thing concerning her father, the late President Manuel L. 
Quezon. 

How did President Quezon feel when he first stepped 
into the carpeted halls of Malacahang? If we recall our his- 
tory, he was the very first Filipino executive to occupy the 
Palace? 

A glimmer of remembrance, an anecdote coming out of 
the mists of recall, and Mrs. Avancena then gave us a rare 
insight into the mind of a man for whom the presidency of 
the nation was no mere accident; 

“In 1917 when the Governor General still resided in Ma- 
lacahang, my father visited him one day together with my 
aunt. As they were going up the steps, he told her in Taga- 
log: ‘Miling, the next time you will come up these steps, I 
shall be the occupant of this Palace.' His sister-in-law just 
shrugged it off. 

“But she had reason to remember because, true enough, 
the next time she went up these steps it was with my father 
and all of us going up Malacahang as the first Filipino exe- 
cutive's family to occupy it." 

Mrs. Avancena added however that this desire of Presid- 
ent Quezon to be president of the Philippines was just a 
means towards his most consuming passion — the independ- 
ence of the Philippines. Since his days in Congress, papers 
have followed him through his ‘good fight', minutely, down 



258 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



to his impassioned orations for independence in front of the 
-American Senate in Washington. That was the goal of his 
whole political career — everything else was geared towards 
that. 

At the very threshold of independence, even while Os- 
meha was preparing to wade through the shores of Leyte, 
President Quezon's dying thoughts at Lake Saranac were on 
the threat of destruction which Liberation might bring upon 
the Philippines. 

Mrs. Avanceha recalled how he kept repeating to Mrs. 
Quezon his wish that Japan might surrender before Mac- 
Arthur returned to the Philippines. ^Tn that way, the coun- 
try may not suffer great destruction." 

Although he did not live to see the Sun and Stars flut- 
ter where the Stars and Stripes used to flap, God spared 
him, too, from seeing the land over which the Sun and Stars 
waved — a land raked into ashes and rubble, free but terribly 
destroyed. 

He was one of the fightingest architects of the Philippine 
Independence. He lived for that. For this he became Pres- 
ident. Between that 'good fight' and taking care of the na- 
tion's needs, what time did he have left for the family? 

We knew this was a question which was most unfair for 
the members of a president's family. But we also knew this 
was a stock question which was inevitable. Mrs. Avanceha, 
however, was equal to the occasion when she answered: 

"My father was never too busy for us. We had a lot 
more private life than the families of present-day presidents. 
The people didn t think they owned every minute of the 
president s time, so long as he did his work well. When we 
were in Malacahang, it was more of a home than it is today. 
It was as if an ordinary father would have his office within 
his house. It was only on Sundays that visitors would 
stream in. The rest of the week he was 'at home' with us. 

"We could go around as if we were in our own house 
without strangers staring at us. We could ask our friends 



S^LAZylR— QUEZON, THE FATHER 259 

into our place like any ordinary teen-agers. We even went 
swimming at the Malacahang swimming pool in front of the 
Executive Building near Aviles. ' Although my father had the 
pool transferred afterwards to the park for reasons of pro- 
priety. He loved to see young people around.” 

Like any other Filipino father, however, he was strict 
with his girls, Nini and Baby (the late Maria Aurora). The 
youngest, Nonong, was then too young for socials. Looking 
back to her father’s care for his ‘budding teen-ager daugh- 
ters, Nini explained: 

‘‘We were not allowed to go out on dates, although we 
could receive all the visitors we wanted at home. He also 
didn’t like the idea of our going out to parties often. That 
he frowned upon.” 

Yet President Quezon was known to be one of the gayest, 
most fun-loving heads of states of the country. 

“Yes,” added Mrs. Avanceha, ‘‘We all except mother loved 
dancing. My father loved dancing very much. He occasion- 
ally went out dancing with my sister and me and our friends. 
He’d ask us to invite our friends and we’d all ‘step out’ to 
Jai-Alai or to other places. 

The job of hostessing which Mrs. Quezon did not relish so 
much was ‘assigned’ to elder daughter. Baby, accoiding to 
Mrs. Avanceha. 

‘‘I didn’t like to attend social functions either. And since 
Baby enjoyed it very much, we left it to her. Occasionally 
she’d complain to us about being left the burden of the 
socials. But they couldn’t pull me out of the palace. 

This, she recalled, occasioned the following incident 
whereby her father one day asked her to attend a social 
function with him. 

‘‘You know the President’s invitation is a command,” he 
told his daughter who was hedging. 

‘‘Are you inviting me as the President of the Philippines, 
or as my father?” she asked him jokingly. 



260 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Immediately President Quezon's eyes twinkled as he an- 
swered: ‘‘Since I know you hate these social functions, I am 
inviting you as a father, so you can refuse if you want to." 

She refused. She always remembers the fact that al- 
though President Quezon had a noted temper, he never used 
to unduly impose on his children. This did not detract from 
the fact that his influence on his children was tremendous. 
As a father, he was very thoughtful, affectionate, loving. 

The mere force of his character, however, has remained 
long after his death, not only influencing his surviving child- 
ren but imposing such on the course of our history as a 
nation that Quezon, unwittingly has laid the whole burden 
of gratitude upon an independent Filipino nation who re- 
members him this month, and all the years to come as the 
champion of Philippine rights. 



THE QUEZON-SALAZAR INCIDENT * 

By Leopoldo R. Serrano 

IT IS SAID that the world loves a fighter. And we 
should know that the great Manuel L. Quezon became the 
idol of his people because, as shown by his long record as a 
politician and leader and according to his autobiography 
titled The Good Fight, he was a fighter all his life. And he 
had a temper, too, which made his a formidable opponent, 
both his friends and adversaries admitted. 

Two anecdotes may be mentioned to explain further the 
two traits of Quezon mentioned in the foregoing paragraph. 

Once, his Chinese valet was dismissed without much ado 
by Quezon. The reason: the valet, seeing the set of false 
teeth of his master left somewhere in his room, took the 
initiative of cleaning it. But he was seen by Quezon, who 
at once flared up and, without giving him a chance to explain, 
told him to leave the house at once and never to show his 
face there again. 

But when the Celestial was packing his things, Quezon 
approached him, patted him on the back, and told him not 
to leave. Of course his valet was happy and he said: “I 
know, because when you are angry you are bog, bog, bog!” 

When still a young kid in Baler, he was reprimanded by 
his father for slapping a boy. He was told that when he had 
to hit one who did him wrong he must hit him with his fist. 

The incident on January 8, 1909, wherein Quezon and 
Hugo Salazar were the protagonists, clearly shows that the 
former would not tolerate any insult or attack on his char- 
acter. He would not rest until he obtained satisfaction. 

Hugo Salazar was the editor of La Democracia, the organ 
of the Federal Party and its successor, the Progresista Party. 



Reprinted from the Historical Bulletin, 1962, Vol. VI, No. 3, pp. 
249-252. 



261 



262 HISTORICAL BULLETIN i . 

Naturally, it was always ready to criticize, any questionable 
act or step taken by the leaders of' rival of the party it served, 
which was the Nacionalista Party. 

The incident between Quezon and Salazar, which gained 
nationwide popularity, was caused by some personal remarks 
by La Democracia about Quezon in its editorial column on 
January 7, 1909. Quezon felt quite justified in resenting such 
personal remarks. Quezon, it should be recalled, planned a 
visit to his province, accompanying General Bandholts, Col- 
onel Harbord, and Commissioner Gilbert. La Democracia 
questioned the propriety of the three ranking American offi- 
cials in the Philippine government in traveling with Quezon 
because of the alleged two cases in the court of Tayabas 
(now Quezon) in which he was involved. That trip, accord- 
ing to the organ of the opposition party, would create a feel- 
ing that would “tend to defeat the ends of justice” and that 
the chief of the Constabulary, General Bandholtz, would be 
showing “intervention in the political affairs of the country 
in contravention to the law.” 

The Cablenews American gave an account of the incident, 
which certainly gave our countrymen an idea of the now well- 
known Quezonian temper. It follows: 

) 

Early yesterday morning (January 8, 1909— S.) Sr. Villamor 
Mr. Quezon s attention to the article in question. ' ^ 

Did you see what La Democracia had to say about you?’' 
said he. 

'^No, I did not,” was the reply. ‘^What was it?” 

Sr. Villamor showed him the paper. ' 

“Caraniba!” exclaimed Sr. Quezon. “What the devil do they 
mean? You come with me right away and we’ll make them take 
it back!” 

( 

“You bet,” answered Sr. Villamor, “we’ll make them retract; 
you watch me.” 

They then proceeded to the office of La Democracia. Up 
the stairway they went without opposition and into the sanctum 
sanctorum of the editor. What followed can be better imagined 
than described. The scene, to accept the description of an eye- 



SERRANO — QUEZON-SALAZAR INCIDENT 263 

witness, was like the acrobatic feats of a car in a fit>.shut up in. 
a kitchen with a parrot thrown in. 

The result was a severe drubbing of Hugo Salazar, the editor 
of La Democracia, to the complete satisfaction of the. aggressor. 
Casualties: none killed; one wounded. 

But the Cablenews American’s account might contain 
some exaggeration. In fairness to Salazar and Quezon, their 
own versions of the incident should also be mentioned. They 
liad to give them, for their misunderstanding and quarrel 
were played up by the press and became the talk of the town. 

Salazar’s version was given by La Democracia in its issue 
on the same day the incident took place. It follows: 

This morning there occurred in our office an event that can- 
not be qualified and that has no precedent. 

About half past ten Sr. Quezon appeared here for the pur- 
pose of speaking with our editor, Sr. Salazar. Dr. Alemany 
happened to be present and received Sr. Quezon, telling him that 
Sr. Salazar would be in shortly. And so it happened. 

Our editor arrived and while he was talking with Sr. Quezon 
Dr. Alemany was conversing with Sres. Villamor and Lerma. 
Suddenly during the conversation that passed between Sr. Quezon 
and Sr. Salazar, our director was seen to fall to the floor, chair 
and all, brutally attacked by Sr. Quezon. 

Dr. Alemany separated them and led Quezon out of the 
room. The question arose out of an article that appeared in our 
column yesterday (January 7, 1909— S.) which Sr. Quezon believed 
to be an insult. We have nothing but words of protest against 
those who seek redress in this manner instead of taking their 
differences to the courts. . . 

Quezon’s version of the incident appeared in his lengthy 
communication to the editor of El Mercantil, the organ of the 
Spanish community here. In that communication, he ex- 
plained and justified his conduct in the editoriah office of La 
Democracia on the morning of January 7, 1909. Follows a 
reproduction of that commxmication by. an American after- 
noon daily in Manila in its issue three days after that event 
referred to: 



264 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



He (Quezon) declares that the editorial attack of the Pro- 
gresista organ was the culmination of a long series of slanderous 
references to his person, attacks that were especially venomous 
at a time when he was absent from the country (he was sent 
abroad by the government— S.) and unable to defend himself. 
These attacks he had persistently and patiently ignored, preferring 
to act as a gentleman instead of replying in kind. The editorial of 
January 7, Quezon says, capped the climax for deliberate false- 
hood and intent of defamation of character, and, while ordinarily 
a sincere disciple of the great apostle of the doctrine of non- 
resistance, he believes there is such a thing as stretching the 
tum-the-other-cheek injunction to a point impracticable in poli- 
tics — in short, he asserts that to remain silent after the outrageous 
insult offered him, would bear no other interpretation than that 
of a tacit admission of the truth of the slanderous allegations. 

Sehor Quezon denies that he assaulted Salazar, stating that 
Sehor Villamor bumped in at the critical moment separating 
himself and Salazar when he had hold of the latter’s collar and 
does not say whether he appreciates or deplores this interference. 
The statement made in La Democracia that Sehor Villamor had 
reproached him for his conduct is untrue, according to Quezon. 
Neither had Doctor Alemany taken a hand in the proceedings, 
for the very good reason ‘‘that he did not dare to.” 

In conclusion, Sehor Quezon says: “My conduct, dear Mr. 
Editor, was the effect of circumstances. I could not act other- 
wise. I could not ask for explanations, nor could I answer through 
the medium of the press, disproving the accusations, because I 
am not in the habit of descending to mixing up in newspaper 
discussions, nor have I time to do so, or to take a fellow before 
the courts of justice. 

“Excuse my long letter, which was prompted by my wish to 
let the public know, through the columns of your valuable paper 
1. that I have not attacked the managing director of La Demo- 
cracia but that all I did was to resent his provocation, and 2. that 
I respect and recognize the right of criticism of the press, which 
is one of the purest guarantees of liberty and justice, but that I 
condemn those who use this privilege to indulge in spiteful and 
rancorous personal attack.” 

Fearing that, due to that incident, Quezon would become 
persona non grata to the newspaper fraternity and his future 
career would suffer, the friends and supporters of Quezon 
made strong efforts to bring peace between him and the 
editor of the organ of the opposition party. In fact, the 



265 



SERRAIVO— QUEZON -SALAZAR INCIDENT 

Cablenews America, the American paper which had little love 
for the party that advocated independence for this country, 
capitalized on that incident and scored Quezon in the follow- 
ing harsh words: 

Lastima! That of all the native born in these islands so 
beloved of the sun, Manuel Quezon should have gone outside the 
law! How great grief he has caused his friends and admirers 
one can but see. Constabulary headquarters are redolent of mor- 
tifications. 

Can it be. . . that when the third most powerful man in the 
Philippines was supposed to have been pouring over volumes at 
the library in New York (Quezon went to New York during his 
trip abroad— S.), he was instead occupying a front seat beside the 
padded ring, and cheering on the champeen with the Tagalog for 
“Hit him in the slats”? . . . 

How sarcastic! But whether the step taken by Quezon 
to defend his honor is justifiable or not is left for the reader 
to decide. We should not, however, lose sight of this thing. 
(Quezon merely showed that he had his own way of getting 
even with his bitterest enemy or critic, who would spare no- 
thing to put him in bad light in the eyes of his countrymen. 
The Quezon-Salazar incident shows to us that Quezon had a 
temper. It also shows that he never forgot the advice of his 
father. 

But many of our leaders, like Quezon’s valet, understood 
Quezon, his impulsive nature, and so, they were able to get 
along alright with him and became his life-long friends. 



QUEZON, AS I KNEW HIM 
By Luis Serrano 

FUTURE HISTORIANS will probably write of President 
Manuel L. Quezon, whose 84th birthday anniversary the na- 
tion celebrates today, as the greatest president the Philip- 
pines has ever produced. He will be pointed out as the man 
who did more for the independence of his country than any 
other man before or after him. 

His fights in the halls of the United States Congress, 
from the time he was resident commissioner in 1909 until 
the passage of the Jones Law in 1916, and later in 1933, when 
his labors brought forth the Tydings-McDuffie Law which 
definitely set a date for Philippine independence, appear in 
the United States Congressional Record for all historians and 
future generations of Filipinos to ponder and admire. 

Stripped of the halo surrounding him because of his pat- 
riotic labors, what is really known about Quezon the man? 
What is known of the inner Quezon that impelled Public 
Official Quezon to do acts of generosity and kindness of which 
very few have come to public notice? What kind of a heart 
did Quezon have? 

If you attempt to judge Quezon from the official photo- 
graph which hangs on the wall of many a public office, you 
will likely form the opinion that he was a hard, severe, and 
harsh man to deal with. You will never be more mistaken 
in your life. Impulsive and even violent at times, but harsh 
and severe never. 

The story of the taking of that photograph is interesting 
in itself. It took more than a dozen sittings and the wasting 
of scores of negatives before Quezon finally stamped his OK. 
Manuel Arellano was Malacanang official photographer at the 



r,v. Sunday Times Magazine, August 19 , 1962 , 

pp. I, IZ-A, UCy. 5. 



266 



SERRANO— QUEZON AS I KNEW HIM 



267 



time. The then new President, in order to meet the demands 
of thousands of admirers, both here and abroad, for his pho- 
tograph, requested Arellano to take his picture. The photo- 
graphgr had to go to the palace many times to do his job. 
Of the numerous shots taken, Quezon selected the one that 
portrayed him as an austere, grave, tough-looking man who, 
at first glance, would brook no opposition to his slightest 
wish. Head erect, mouth firm, eyebrow superciliously raised 
—all this speaks of a man who would have his every wish 
obeyed. A dictator, in brief. 



But appearances are deceptive, and in the case of Que- 
zon’s picture, absolutely so. The picture camouflaged the 
real virtues of a golden heart that was Quezon’s. I shall try 
to illustrate this in the few incidents which I am going to 
relate. 

One of the greatest achievements of President Quezon, 
to my mind, was a negative one. He did not send a sing e 
man to the electric chair during his entire incumbency^ 
Chief Executive. He invariably commuted the death se 
to life imprisonment. While his official du y nrge i 
send a hardened criminal to his doom, his hear re e 
the thought of snuffing out the life of a fellow-man. _ 
lieved that the most hardened criminal, if given a 
would reform in the end. 

In January 1936 President Quezon dismissed eight se^oj 
cadets from the Philippine Military demy for 
Sometime later he made it known to the ar ^ cadets 
that he would interpose no objection if the s . men. 

were to be allowed to come into the army as 
They enlisted. From the ranks some rose 
erals. What would have happened to 
zon's heart were made of a different stu . 

When he was Senate president he J 

his hometown. He found out that most of th , 
land he had inherited from his father ^ mninlv 

ters who had come from different parts of the is ’ 
from the Ilocos provinces. He immediately or 



268 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



titles be issued to the squatters. Only 1,000 hectares was 
left to him after the issuance of the titles. 

In a later visit, this time as President of the Philippines, 
he discovered that the 2,000-hectare block he had given away 
was not enough for the settlers who had increased in number. 
He again issued orders to subdivide the remaining 1,000 hec- 
tares and issue the corresponding titles to the landless set- 
tlers. He and his heirs were left not even a square foot of 
land in Baler. 

It should be explained here that the 3,000-hectare tract he 
inherited had been granted to his father, school teacher Lucio 
Quezon, through informacion posesoria, a system of acquir- 
ing legal title to lands during Spanish times. 

Just before the last world war, he had a sizable farm in 
Arayat, Pampanga, which was his favorite weekend retreat 
with his family, Kaledian, which was the name he had given 
to the Arayat farm, was later subdivided and given away tc 
the tenants. Many Pampango families hold the Quezon fa- 
mily in grateful remembrance because of this generous act. 

I recall the incident, between President Quezon and his 
private secretary, Guillermo Cabrera. In a tense moment 
during a cabinet meeting, a fretful and uneasy Quezon blasted 
away at Cabrera with his favorite Spanish expletive that 
begins with the letter P. 

Cabrera, humiliated, pale and trembling, retired to his 
own office and forthwith wrote a letter of resignation. After 
the cabinet meeting Cabrera handed his resignation to the 
President. The President appeared surprised, but told Ca- 
brera that he would act on the matter later. 

The next day there was another cabinet meeting. As 
usual, Cabrera was there to take down notes of the proceed- 
ings. Before the surprised members of his official family, 
the President apologized to Cabrera for his behavior of the 
previous day. Later he asked Cabrera if he was satisfied. 
Of course, he was, and glad, too. Many years later, Quezon 
had Cabrera appointed as municipal judge of Manila. 



SERRANO— QUEZON AS I KNEW HIM 



269 



Inocentes Villegas, private secretary to Maj. Dwight D. 
Eisenhower, military assistant at Malacanang, underwent the 
same ordeal as Cabrera. For alleged intereference with the 
implementation of the compulsory military training act, Ville- 
gas got a terrible dressing-down from the President. The 
ignominy culminated in the President’s firing Villegas. 

The following day the President was informed by an 
adviser that Villegas was a civil service employe who could 
not be dismissed even by the President without due process 
of law. The President had Villegas recalled. Much later 
Eisenhower obtained a lieutenant’s commission in the Phil- 
ippine Army for Villegas. Ever heard of the name Eisen- 
hower? 

Then there was the case of a laborer whom President 
Quezon saw working hard in the Malacanang grounds after 
office hours. He thought that hard physical labor was too 
much for the frail-looking young man who appeared to have 
seen better days. He had seen better days. A biief intei- 
view resulted in the President’s sending the man to Execu- 
tive Secretary Jorge B. Vargas for a change of job. Vaigas 
appointed him to a clerical position. 

Incidentally, it may be mentioned here that President 
Quezon highly valued intellectual capacity, honesty and integ^- 
rity. They were the yardstick he used in the appointment 
of his first cabinet under the Commonwealth. Regional con- 
sideration was never a factor in the appointments. His iis 
cabinet (1935) was composed of Vice President Sergio os- 
meha of Cebu as secretary of public instruction, E ^ lo 
Quirino of Ilocos Sur as secretary of the interior, Jose u o 
of Negros Occidental as secretary of justice, Antonio e as 
Alas of Batangas as secretary of finance, Eulogio Rodriguez 
of Rizal as secretary of agriculture and natural resources, 
Mariano Jesus Cuenco of Cebu as secretary of public works 
and communications, Ramon Torres of Negros Occidental as 
secretary of labor, and Jorge B. Vargas of Negros Occidental 
as executive secretary. 



268 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



titles be issued to the squatters. Only 1,000 hectares was 
left to him after the issuance of the titles. 

In a later visit, this time as President of the Philippines, 
he discovered that the 2,000-hectare block he had given away 
was not enough for the settlers who had increased in number. 
He again issued orders to subdivide the remaining 1,000 hec- 
tares and issue the corresponding titles to the landless set- 
tlers. He and his heirs were left not even a square foot of 
land in Baler. 

It should be explained here that the 3,000-hectare tract he 
inherited had been granted to his father, school teacher Lucio 
Quezon, through informacion posesoria, a system of acquir- 
ing legal title to lands during Spanish times. 

Just before the last world war, he had a sizable farm in 
Arayat, Pampanga, which was his favorite weekend retreat 
with his family, Kaledian, which was the name he had given 
to the Arayat farm, was later subdivided and given away tc 
the tenants. Many Pampango families hold the Quezon fa- 
mily in grateful remembrance because of this generous act. 

I recall the incident, between President Quezon and his 
private secretary, Guillermo Cabrera. In a tense moment 
during a cabinet meeting, a fretful and uneasy Quezon blasted 
away at Cabrera with his favorite Spanish expletive that 
begins with the letter P. 

Cabrera, humiliated, pale and trembling, retired to his 
own office and forthwith wrote a letter of resignation. After 
the cabinet meeting Cabrera handed his resignation to the 
President. The President appeared surprised, but told Ca- 
brera that he would act on the matter later. 

The next day there was another cabinet meeting. As 
usual, Cabrera was there to take down notes of the proceed- 
ings. Before the surprised members of his official family, 
the President apologized to Cabrera for his behavior of the 
previous day. Later he asked Cabrera if he was satisfied. 
Of course, he was, and glad, too. Many years later, Quezon 
had Cabrera appointed as municipal judge of Manila. 



SERRANO— QUEZON AS I KNEW HIM 



269 



Inocentes Villegas, private secretary to Maj. Dwight D. 
Eisenhower, military assistant at Malacahang, underwent the 
same ordeal as Cabrera. For alleged intereference with the 
implementation of the compulsory military training act, Ville- 
gas got a terrible dressing-down from the President. The 
ignominy culminated in the President’s firing Villegas. 

The following day the President was informed by an 
adviser that Villegas was a civil service employe who could 
not be dismissed even by the President without due process 
of law. The President had Villegas recalled. Much later 
Eisenhower obtained a lieutenant’s commission in the Phil- 
ippine Army for Villegas. Ever heard of the name Eisen- 
hower? 

Then there was the case of a laborer whom President 
Quezon saw working hard in the Malacanang grounds after 
office hours. He thought that hard physical labor was too 
much for the frail-looking young man who appeared to have 
seen better days. He had seen better days. A brief intei- 
view resulted in the President’s sending the man to Execu- 
tive Secretary Jorge B. Vargas for a change of job. Vargas 
appointed him to a clerical position. 



Incidentally, it may be mentioned here that President 
Quezon highly valued intellectual capacity, honesty and integ- 
rity. They were the yardstick he used in the appointment 
of his first cabinet under the Commonwealth. Regional con- 
sideration was never a factor in the appointments. His fiist 
cabinet (1935) was composed of Vice President Sergio Os- 
meha of Cebu as secretary of public instruction, Elpidio 
Quirino of Ilocos Sur as secretary of the interior, Jose Yulo 
of Negros Occidental as secretary of justice, Antonio de las 
Alas of Batangas as secretary of finance, Eulogio Rodriguez 
of Rizal as secretary of agriculture and natural resources, 
Mariano Jesus Cuenco of Cebu as secretary of public works 



and communications, Ramon Torres of Negros Occidental as 
secretary of labor, and Jorge B. Vargas of Negros Occidental 
as executive secretary. 



270 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



You will notice that no cabinet member came from Ta- 
•yabas, Mr. Quezon's home province which later was named 
after him. 

It was the same with the 1940 cabinet. None came from 
Tayabas. Rafael Alunan of Negros Occidental was secretary 
of the interior; Manuel A. Roxas of Capiz was secretary of 
finance; Jose Abad Santos of Pampanga was secretary of 
justice; Benigno S. Aquino of Tarlac was secretary of agri- 
€ulture and natural resources; Mariano Jesus Cuenco of Cebu 
was retained as secretary of public works and communica- 
tions; Jorge C. Bocobo of Tarlac was secretary of public 
instruction; Jose Avelino of Samar was secretary of labor; 
Teofilo Sison of Pangasinan was secretary of national defense; 
and Jorge B. Vargas of Negros Occidental was executive sec- 
retary. 

President Quezon's closest confidant, adviser, and aide- 
de-camp was neither a relative nor a provincemate nor a 
political protegee. He was Manuel Nieto of Isabela, the 
same Nieto who after Quezon's death became Philippine am- 
bassador to Spain. 



DEEP SECRET OF QUEZON REVEALED 
FOR THE FIRST TIME^" 



By Vicente L. Del Fierro 

OUT OF THE dusty memory of the past, not foimd in any 
book about the great Manuel Luis Quezon, we are privileged 
to relate in the life of any great man of the 20th century. 

It is a story that happened 25 years ago, when Quezon 
was in full flush of his power as President of the Philippine 
Senate, when the now historic Quezon-Wood feud had only 
recently erupted into one of the most stirring chapters in the 
annals of our libertarian struggle. 

The legendary figure that is Quezon emerged from the 
Philippine revolution a hero in his own right. 

He made enemies as well as friends; in fact, he made 
bitter, life-long enemies; but he made more, steadfast, life- 
long friends. 

One such man — and here enters the narrator of the story, 
Atty. Victoriano Yamzon, first Filipino reporter in Enghs , 
the first Star Reporter of the Philippines was Santiago n 
tonio of Manila. 

Santiago Antonio, Yamzon told us at the lobby of 
Avenue Hotel recently while he became nostalgic over ^ 
newspaper career which has yet no peer and few equa s 
was one such devoted friend. 

In fact, Quezon, did so much for Santiago Antonio that 
the latter was ready to give his life for Quezon. 

There was a wide gap of years between the two. 

When they first met, Quezon was in his early twenties, 
and Santiago Antonio, in his late forties. 

In 1923, Santiago Antonio came upon some lega^ am- 
ounting to P20,000. He was childless and failing in hea t . 

* Reprinted from the Administration Magazine, August 1948, p. 50. 



271 



272 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 

Without much ado, he hired Yamzon as a lawyer, and he 
broached the idea of adopting Quezon as a son, giving him 
not only his name but also his earthly possessions. 

This could only be done by going to court. So, one early 
morning, Quezon, accompanied by Manuel Nieto and San- 
tiago Antonio, accompanied by Yamzon, entered the sala of 
Judge Anacleto Diaz in the Manila Court of First Instance. 
Right then and there, the learned judge approved the motion 
whereby Quezon, a great man, was adopted by a weak, and 
ailing old man, with full privilege of using the name of An- 
tonio as his last nomenclature. 

Immediately after, Quezon asked that the papers be 
removed from the docket of the court and placed in the 
National Archives. It is not known whether Quezon ever 
used the name Antonio which he could rightly and legally 
use as part of his name. 

“It was the rarest case of adoption I have ever known. 
I have not met a similar case in my practice. The usual 
way is for a strong or a rich man to adopt a weaker, and less 
powerful man. It is a story of human gratitude that is not 
only exemplary but magnificent,” Yamzon said. 



QUEZON, HIS SECRET' 



By Jesus M. Intengan 

I WATCHED President Quezon very carefully when he 
addressed the R.O.T.C. units last Monday afternoon intent on 
discovering the secret of his hold on the masses. How does 
he do it, I asked myself. 

And I decided to watch him as he spoke. 

President Quezon has a striking figure. He is a hand- 
some man. This is an important element. But he is not 
only handsome. He breathes masculinity. He does not ap- 
pear as he stands up to face his audience as a sissified, dan- 
dified personality, despite his meticulous care in dressing up. 
When he rises and surveys his public, the first impression 
one gets is that he is a he-man. 

Why? It is not because of his pose, chest out and neck 
somewhat stretched, nor of his self-confidence and pei ec 
poise. It is his clean-cut features, his mobile face which, 
seen from a distance, is as marblelesque as a bust fresh from 
the hands of a sculptor. “Mobile” and marblelesque seem 
contradictory and yet that is the only way his face can e 
described, the mobility referring to its sensitiveness to ex- 
press emotion, and the carefully and distinctly outline ea 
tures adjectivized as of marble. 

He speaks. His voice has some of the squeaky charactei 
that grates on the ears. There is nothing of 
setto that is effeminate. It is not a round rotund basso 
detracts your attention from his speech because o i s qua 
lity. It is a manly voice, neither soft nor stentorian, a voice 
which can be heard without calling attention to itse , an 
the hearer gets the words and the thought without the voice 
in anyway obtruding itself, into your attention. 



* Reprinted from the I’Mlippines Herald, January 21, 1937. 



273 



274 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



President Quezon is not an orator in the strict sense of 
the word. He does not arouse emotion. He shuns the flo- 
wery language. He despises the ornate style. There is no- 
tfiing literary in his speeches. He does not resort to the 
usual oratorical tricks of verbal “drums and cymbals” to 
pway his audience. But he is a debater par excellence. We 
don’t know of any Filipino who can effectively cross swords 
with him in a debate. 

This is the reason why President Quezon is at his best 
when provoked. When he is attacked or is attacking, he is 
ujnbeatable. His set speeches lack the fire of the Quezon 
fighting spirit. He is a master logician. No matter how in- 
volved or complex a proposition may be, his trained logician’s 
,mind can immediately boil it down to its fundamental pre- 
mises. 

And he has a surplus of common sense. He has no use 
for theories and theorists. His is a practical mind that re- 
fuses to be obscured by academic disquisitions and theoretic- 
al discussions. Endowed with a brilliant mind, he can read 
through volumes and assimilate only that which is pertinent 
to the subject that he is at the time studying. When Gover- 
nor Stimson brought up the subject of the amendment to the 
corporation law, Mr. Quezon sought advice from all sources 
and the then practising attorney Jose Yulo, Judge Ross and 
others brought to his house in Pasay innumerable treatises 
on corporation law. He read some of them and two days 
afterwards he astounded the lawyers by discussing the law 
with them as if he had-been a corporation lawyer all his life. 

When he spoke last Monday to the R.O.T.C. units, he was 
at his best, not because he was j'mad” as some put it when 
he is in his fighting mood, but because he was in effect 
arguing the case for the National Defense Plan, against the 
pacifists and defeatists. He was debating, ripping through 
arguments, fallacies and sophisms, and when he debates, you 
can see his rectilinear logic going straight through the speech 
like a white flame of acetylene fire. 



INTENGAN— QUEZON, HIS''SECRET 275 

And that is the secret of his hold on the masses. He 
knows when to attack and whom to attack, and when he 
attacks, it is no miss-and-hit proposition but always the bull’s 
eye. His language is so simple, his logic so unerring, his 
delivery so forceful that his audience is in the hollow of his 
hand. Besides, no living Filipino knows the psychology of 
his people, their strength and their weaknesses, especially- 
their weaknesses, better than President Quezon, and when he 
speaks no one can use such knowledge to a better advantage 
than he can. 

During the acrid controversy over the HHC law, a mam- 
moth student gathering was held at the Metropolitan Theater. 
His opponents saw to it that the first rows of the theater 
were occupied by their men, ready to hoot and hiss him at 
the slightest provocation. When President Quezon entered 
the theater and ascended the platform, his knowledge of 
human nature as well as his experience in political meetings 
made him feel that there was antagonism against him. 

One of the speakers was a young lady. The crowd, led 
by those planted in the front rows, began to heckle the em- 
barrassed young lady, and then boos and catcalls followed. 
President Quezon saw his opportunity, grabbed the mallet 
from the presiding officer, banged for order, looked at those 
in the front rows with his eagle eyes, and said in a stentorian 
voice: 

“Gentlemen: One of the foremost virtues of the Filipino 
race is that the Filipino knows how to respect the Filipino 
woman. I call on all of you to assert that Filipino virtue 
here today and show this young lady the respect that is her 
due.” 

He did not sit down. He remained standing, his eyes 
flashing fire, fixed at the public. Silence fell on the noisy 
crowd like* a huge pall. No one moved. The President had 
asserted his moral influence and superiority over the stu- 
dents. From then on he was master of the situation, and 
when his turn came to speak, he was given a wild ovation. 

There is only one Quezon in the Philippines today. It 
will take time before we get another one. 



QUEZON, THE PRESS PHOTOGRAPHERS’ FAVORITE' 



By Rodolfo M. De Juan 

WHATEVER may be saM for or against Manuel L. Que- 
zon, it can never be said that he was “mata pobre.” So aver 
the majority of Manila’s press photographers who, along 
with many members of the metropolitan press who have had 
the privilege of “covering” Quezon during his heyday, have 
come to worship the memory of their “best friend,” the ac- 
knowledged father of his country and the champion of Phil- 
ippine independence. 

Of course the press photographers admit the fact that 
Quezon, being human, had his faults. Significantly, it was 
primarily because of these “faults” that the late lamented 
leader had been endeared to the hearts of the press photo- 
graphers, if not his countrymen. 

The consensus among the lensmen is that Quezon knew 
he was top man and made no bones about it. Imperious 
and impulsive by nature, he brooked neither disobedience 
nor defiance from anybody, and would act swiftly and surely 
against any man alive who would dare to lift hand or voice 
in remonstrance to his wishes. Even the humblest menial 
at Malacanan Palace— who regarded Quezon with awe and 
respect and adulation bordering on hero-worship— did not 
escape the lashings of the Quezon tongue and the Quezon ire. 
But they knew the man so much that they were able to endure 
him for years and years on end, remaining faithful and loyal 
to him as ever, and even willing to sacrifice their lives for 
him if need be. “Just let him rant and rave,” they would 
tell you. "As soon as his ire had been spent, he would be 
his usual self again — the best of mortals if there ever was 
one.” 

Manila’s photographers who were assigned to “cover” 
him knew this only too well. And so they went about their 



® Reprinted from the Administration Magazine, August, 1948, pp. 
68-70. 



276 



DE JUAN— THE PHOTOGRAPHER’S FAVORITE 277 

daily grind, almost always on tenterhooks, expecting every 
hour on the hour some “palabas” or another “from the grand 
old man.” And they were not to be disappointed. For Que- 
zon, whose temper was wont to rise at the most imexpected 
moments, could always be depended upon to make things 
either “too hot” or “too cold” for the boys of the press. 

But there was one thing they can never forget about 
this man among men. In all his inspection tours, which took 
him to almost all parts of the country during his heyday, he 
made it a point to remember the boys— the press representa- 
tives and the press photographers — to look after their wel- 
fare, their accommodations, even their meals and “merienda.” 
That is one thing they can now crow about. If Quezon tra- 
velled in style, they, too, travelled practically in the same 
manner. It was not uncommon for him to wake up in the 
rmddle of the night, or at some odd hours during the day or 
evening, to find out whether the “periodistas” were well taken 
care of. 

Now there are press photographers and press photo- 
graphers. Press photographers have come and gone, but 
there are some members of the old guard who are still in 
harness, working for various papers in Manila. To name a 
few: Emil (“Fatso”) Maglalang (Malacanan), Jose Claudio 
and Honesto Vitug (Bulletin), Pedro Nario (Evening News), 
Maicial Valenzuela and Manuel Alcantara (Manila Times), 
Pio Carpio (Manila Chronicle), and others. At least two have 
since died, namely, Vicente Ferrer and Clodualdo Claudio, 
both of the pre-war DMHM Newspapers owned by Don Vi 
cente Madrigal. 

A talk with each of these pre-war press photographers 
pays forth rich dividends in Quezonian lore. 

Emilio (“Fatso”) Maglalang, official Malacanan photo- 
grapher, waxes nostalgic when and if you can get him to 
recall the good old days with Quezon. 

“My association with Don Manuel,” he says, “dates back 
to the hectic days when the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law split 



278 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



the whole country into two camps — the pros and the antis. I 
was then connected with a commercial photographic studio. 

“One day, I was called in as an extra in the Herald. Dr. 
Carlos P. Romulo, then publisher of the DMHM Newspapers, 
had me assigned to the Quezon beat. So I went over to Ma- 
lacanan, and somehow found myself inside the President's 
office, unnoticed, right when he was having a closed-door 
conference with the then Secretary Teofilo Sison. The con- 
ference was about over when President Quezon and Secretary 
Sison noticed me. The President raised his eyebrow in his 
characteristic way and demanded who I was. 

“ ‘Remember,' Quezon told me after I had identified my- 
self, ‘you are not a reporter, and you have not heard anything 
that was said here.’ I nodded, mumbled my assent, and hur- 
riedly made my exit. 

“I was supposed to be an extra only in the Herald for 
that day and thought no more about the incident. The next 
day, however, I learned that Dr. Romulo had ordered a mes- 
senger to scour the city for me. It seemed that President 
Quezon had called up Romulo that day and asked him to as- 
sign no other photographer to Malacahan but Maglalang— 
that s me. That’s how I got the chance to cover Quezon 
from then on until he died. And that’s one of the reasons 
I have since become almost a Malacanan fixture — covering a 
succession of Presidents, from Quezon and Osmena and Roxas 
down to President Elpidio Quirino.’’ 

Jose Claudio, the dean of Manila’s press photographers 
and the most famous of them all before the war, has a lot 
of memorable incidents with the late President Quezon. Clau- 
dio, who is now doing lens work for the Manila Daily Bul- 
letin along with Honesto Vitug, another Herald and Tribune 
veteran, was connected with the pre-war Tribune at the time. 
He reminisces as follows: 

I had a beautiful shot of Quezon at the piers just as he 
was being borne on a stretcher from the boat which had taken 
him to the Southern Islands during one of his inspection 
trips. Having noticed me taking the shot, Quezon yelled: 



DE JUAN— THE PHOTOGRAPHER'S FAVORITE 



27ft 



‘Arrest that man Claudio!’ Detectives and plainclothesmen 
forthwith converged on me. One of them even tried to wrest 
my camera away from me, but I dared them to confiscate my 
camera. I told them they could file whatever charges they 
wanted against me, but that I would not surrender my camera, 
to them. I further informed them that I was simply doing 
my duty, covering an assignment for my paper, and that’s 
that. 



“Later, I learned that the offending picture, beautiful as 
it was, was suppressed, following pleas for its suppression 
from the higher-ups.” 

Honesto Vitug, who has the distinction of being the only 
Filipino photographer to be picked by the Associated Press 
to cover the entire Far East shortly before the outbreak of 
the war, has a similar story to tell. He says: • 



“I took a beautiful picture of the President dancing 
a charming partner in Baguio. The President’s eagle eyes i 
not miss me as I was taking the shot. Shortly afterw^ ,• 
he approached me and quietly said: ‘"Vitug, see to it that a 
particular picture is not published.’ Of course I had no i ea 
why he didn’t want the picture published. His partner was. 
not only charming but also respectable, with not a whi o 
scandal attached to her name. Somehow or other, however, 
I forgot the Presidential injunction, and the picture foun i s; 
way into the pages of my newspaper. 



“The payoff came about a week later. As usiwl, I 
to Malacahan to cover the Presidential doings. ^ 

the time was waiting for a high government ^ rr.Qd« 

just arrived from the States. As soon as this o prAc- 

his way to the President's office, I followed him. 
ident forgot his visitor when he spotted me. 
kened as he yelled: ‘I told you not to publish that picture, 
Vituo'l Why did you?’ When I remained tongue-tied, ne 
roared on: ‘Now get out of here. And don’t show your face 



to me again!’ 



“But we knew how to handle the grand old man by that 
time. What I did was to keep out of his sight for sometime 



2^0 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



until I was sure that he had already forgotten the incident, 
f’or Quezon was one not to hold grudges forever — and we 
loved him for it.” 

About this trait of Quezon — of bawling out photographers 
left and right and telling them not to show their faces to 
him again — Marcial Valenzuela of the Manila Times (he was 
working for the Tribune during those good old days), has an 
interesting angle. Valenzuela says: 

“Why, he had me arrested once at the City Hall when 
my powder flash boomed right in the middle of a sentence in 
his speech. Naturally I was detained by police officers in 
one of the rooms in the City Hall. By the time the President 
had finished delivering his speech, however, and had left for 
the Palace without leaving further instructions as to the dis- 
position of my case, the police officers started scratching 
their heads, and finally had to let me go.” 

Valenzuela at another time had another brush with Que- 
zon. This time he was with another photographer, the late 
Claudio of the Herald, at the Jose Rizal Memorial Stadium 
where Quezon was scheduled to deliver a speech. Before start- 
ing his address, Quezon warned the photographers not to 
interrupt him when he was in the middle of a sentence be- 
cause that would distract him. Besides, he said, the flash 
powder annoyed him. 

“While we were waiting for an opportune moment,” 
Valenzuela relates, “Claudio was so nervous that he inadver- 
tently released the catch on the flash gun. So, with the 
inevitable boom of the flash powder, came the peremptory 
order from Quezon: 'Arrest those photogaphers!’ 

“To avoid ‘arrest’, Claudio and I laid flat on our sto- 
machs, lowered our cameras, and did not stand up until the 
President had finished his speech and had gone back to the 
Palace.” 

Valenzuela swells with pride every time he remembers 
that fact that when he was with the Quezon party in Tayabas, 
the late leader had entrusted to Marcial his (Quezon’s) hat, 
cane, and raincoat. 



DE JUAN— THE PHOTOGRAPHER'S FAVORITE 



281 



Pedro Narip of the Evening News — also formerly with 
the old Tribune — got his from Quezon in Baguio during a 
summer respite. “I certainly got a razzing from the old man 
when I took a picture of him as he was recuperating from 
anollness,” he says. 

Nario is also privy to that classic incident Quezon had 
had with the late Fr. Rector Tamayo of the U.S.T. According 
to this story, Quezon had requested Pr. Tamayo to see him. 
As soon as the good Father arrived at Mansion House, he was 
announced by the nurse to Quezon in this manner: “The 
priest is here’ (pronouncing ‘priest’ as if it were ‘press’.) 
Thinking that the press wanted to see him, Quezon, much 
annoyed, growled: “Tell the press to go to hell!’ Unfortunate- 
ly, Fr. Tamayo heard the remark, and left the Mansion House 
pronto. The slight misunderstanding, however, was cleared 
up later to the satisfaction of the good Father. 



THEY LOVED QUEZON* 



By Antonio L. Arizabal 



ONE WARM MORNING, from a window of his summer 
house in Mariquina where he was convalescing from an ill- 
ness, the late President Manuel L. Quezon watched with a 
mixed feeling of interest and curiosity a man bent with age. 
He was sweeping the dried leaves off the lawn of the Quezon 
home. Now and then, the aged gardener would lay down 
his broom to sit under one of the shade trees to rest. 

President Quezon summoned Apolonio Navata, his good 
man Friday, and inquired who the old man was and how long 
he had been in the employ of the family. Apolonio informed 
the President that the man was a convict, serving a life term 
at the insular penitentiary at Muntinglupa. He was assigned 
to the Quezon residence to help tend to the gardens. 

“Bring in that man here,” President Quezon ordered. 

The poor soul was frightened when he was summoned 
into the house. He thought he was going to be roundly scold- 
ed for loafing under the shade trees. He was trembling like 
a leaf when he appeared before Mr. Quezon. 

But Quezon allayed his fears immediately. The Presid- 
ent was all kindness as he asked the man who he was. 

The aged lifer said he was 71 years old and entered pri- 
son 31 years previously. He had killed a man for alienating 
his wife’s affection. 

After Quezon had dismissed the man, he called the late 
Jose Abad Santos, then secretary of justice, on the phone. 
He told Secretary Abad Santos to prepare the papers for the 
absolute pardon of the aged prisoner. 

“I want to sign that pardon today. The poor man should 
not remain a prisoner a day longer. He is too old and feeble 



15 1^* Reprinted from the Administration Magazine, August 1948, pp. 



282 



ARIZABAL—THEY LOVED QUEZON 



283 



he could not commit any more crime even if he -wanted to,” 
the President said. i 

Before the sun had set that day, the aged lifer was a 
free man. When President Quezon gave him his pardon pa- 
pers, the old man was so touched that tears rolled unbidden 
down his wrinkled cheeks. Practically sobbing in grateful- 
ness, he knelt and kissed Quezon’s hand. 

The President fished out a hundred pesos from his pocket 
and gave it to the man. The amount was more than enough 
to defray his expenses back to his hometown. Quezon also 
had the man brought to Manila in the Presidential car to 
enable him to catch the train. 

Such was the bigness of Quezon’s heart. 

Quezon was popular with the masses because he had 
had always their welfare at heart. His great concern was 
improving the lot of the working class. He embarked on a 
program of social justice which unfortunately was cut short 
by the war. 

Some of his political rivals then said it was all a vote- 
getting scheme. I do not believe it was that at all. He was 
not playing to any gallery when, in the privacy of his room 
at Malacanan, he flew into a rage and cursed a sailor because 
of a supreme court decision on a case involving claims for 
the compensation of a laborer who had been killed in line 
of duty. Quezon charged that the decision was not helping 
his social justice program any. 

What he said of some capitalists in particular was not 
fit to print. He said no money on earth could pay for the 
loss of a human life. 

“If any capitalist who refuses to pay compensation to 
the family of his laborer who gets killed in line of duty is 
willing to kill himself for PIO.OOO, I would put up the money 
this minute,” he shouted to a few friends. 

He sent the then Secretary of Labor Ramon Torres to 
Russia to study and observe ho-w the Soviets were solving 



284 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



their labor problems. When Secretary Torres returned to 
Manila and submitted his findings and observations, Mr. Que- 
zon raised this question. 

“Did you find the Russian working class happy under 
the set-up?” 

❖ # 

His deep concern for the masses, however, did not make 
Mr. Quezon allergic to capital and capitalists. Business and 
industrial leaders in the country found in Quezon their best 
friend. But in his close association with big business, there 
was nothing in his actuation that could be interpreted that 
he allowed himself to be the tool of vested interests. 

On the contrary, in the event of conflict of interests be- 
tween capital and labor, his sympathies were always with 
the latter. The court of industrial relations was his baby. 

During his entire stay in Malacanan, Quezon never want- 
ed to see soldiers in the palace grounds. He did not feel the 
need for any. Security guards then consisted of half a dozen 
policemen who took their respective posts at the gates. They 
acted more as guides to palace visitors than as watchdogs. 

It was Quezon’s habit to take a stroll on the palace 
grounds early every morning for exercise before breakfast. 
He would stop at the gates and engage the policemen on 
sentry duty in friendly conversation. He would inquire into 
their work and if their health agreed with it. And his perren- 
nial question was: 

“Is the palace providing you with good food?” 

:J: ili tli 

I had travelled with Quezon several times in the prov- 
inces. It was amazing how readily he could make himself 
feel at home everywhere. Housewives told me they would 
rather have President Quezon for a guest in their homes any 
time than any of the lesser lights in the government. 



ARIZABAL— THEY LOVED QUEZON 285 

They said that Quezon was the easiest man to entertain. 
He put his hosts at ease right off by telling them frankly 
what he wanted. His hosts did not have to fuss and keep' 
guessing what should be done to make him comfortable. 

He was not one to hesitate telling his hosts the food he 
wanted to eat. Invariably, the choice ran to two dishes— 
“sinigang” and “adobo”. Sometimes, “tinola” or “pesang 
dalag”. If he liged a particular dish, that was all he would 
order, and that was all he would touch. 

He travelled fast and dressed up with amazing speed. 
With his clothes all laid out, he could put on a tuxedo outfit 
in a couple of minutes. 

❖ 

It was remarkable how the late President Quezon could 
be the love and at the same time the despair of the boys of 
the press. When he was senate president, he gave the news- 
hawks the free run of his house on Roberts street in Pasay. 
There were nights when we roamed the gardens of his home 
up to midnight while waiting for him to return from a party. 
No matter how tired and sleepy he was, he was always ready 
to listen to questions and give appropriate replies. He never 
believed in letting the press wait unnecessarily. He realized 
the boys were always in a hurry and was accordingly willing 
to accommodate. He would summon reporters to his dining 
room and give interviews while eating. It was not unusual 
for him to see newspapermen even in his bedroom when he 
was too ill to get up to see the boys. 

I well remember one evening, during one of his informal 
press conferences when he interrupted himself in the midst 
of an announcement to congratulate me. I was taken by sur- 
prise and told him I did not know what the congratulations 
were for. 

“I read in the papers about your election as vice-presid- 
ent of the Manila Press Club,” he said. 

You could not help liking a man like that. Thoughtful 
about such little things. I do not remember of any other 



286 



historical bulletin 



government official having taken notice of that election. Mr. 
■Quezon’s was the one and only official slap on the back I 
received for it. 

But he was also our despair. Quezon had a temper as 
Unpredictable as the elements. The quick-tempered Quezon 
when annoyed or irritated could freeze the boys of the press 
■with one frigid look. He was one man I knew who could tell 
the entire press to go jump in the lake and get away with it. 
He had no inferiority complex. He did not mince words 
•yi?hen he bawled out foreign correspondents for dispatches 
they had sent abroad which he did not like. 

The press boys could easily detect it when such a storm 
was brewing. We could see it coming when his thick eye- 
brows met and his nose started to twitch. Even the most 
hardboiled senator would keep beyond shouting distance 
■w^hen he saw that signal. 

. I was a young reporter way back in 1925 when the late 
Tony Escoda, then city editor of the old Philippines Herald, as- 
signed me to the legislative beat. That time, policy-making- 
decisions were made at the caucuses of the Nacionalista 
Party held behind closed doors at the legislative building. 
Mr. Quezon had ordered that news about what took place at 
the caucus should come from him. 

I stumbled upon a big story one day of what took place 
in the caucus. Mr. Quezon, from whom I was expected to get 
a confirmation, was nowhere in the building. But the source 
was reliable and the story was too good to hold. The Herald 
ran the story the next morning, for it was then a morning- 
paper. 

Later in the day, I was at my desk as usual at the press 
gallery in the senate session hall. The session was ready to 
start. I had no premonition of any approaching tornado. 
•The next thing I knew, Mr. Quezon was shaking his right 
forefinger in my face. 

In the presence of all the senators and a packed gallery, 
Mr. Quezon roared: 



ARIZABAL—THEY loved QUEZON 



287 . 



“Who the hell authorized you to publish that news in 
your paper!” 

I remember having retorted rather weakly: “Mr. Presid- 
ent, if the story was incorrect, we will run a rectification.” 

“I do not give a d— n if the story was correct. You have 
no business publishing it. I am going to tell your editor to 
remove you from here. I will instruct the sergeant-at-arms 
to bar you from the session hall!” he shouted. 

There was nothing to do but to keep quiet and let him 
rave When I reached the office later, I told Tony Escoda 
what happened. I suggested that he assign someone to the 
senate in my place, at least for the time being, until the storm 

blew over. 

Tony Escoda said: “Do not let him scare you. When you 
get to know him better, you will realize he did not mean a 

thing he said/' 

I had my doubts. The gallery did not know that, and 
was I embarrassed! When I returned to the senate hall the 
the next day, I avoided meeting the President. I took a back 
seat in the press box. Evidently, the sergeant-at-arms did 
not notice me. But when the session was over and I was head- 
ing for the door, someone put an arm on my shoulder. It 
was the President and he was greeting me: “How are you, 
Arizabal?” 



It was said of the late President Quezon that he was a 
good enemy. I do not think he had any enemy at all. It used 
to amuse us to see President Quezon closeted with the former 
Senator Claro M. Recto, then minority leader of the Senate, 
either at his home in Pasay or at the Club Carambola, head- 
quarters of the Nacionalista Party, going over a speech the 
President was going to deliver the next day. Sometimes, the 
speech took pot shots at Recto’s party, the Old Democrata 

Party. 



288 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



In a big political fight, he asked for no quarter and gave 
none. But after the battle was over, he was quick to adrnit 
defeat or claim victory and to give credit where credit was 
due. He was always ready to forgive and forget. 

The Hare-Hawes Cutting Act split the old Nacionalista 
Party into two camps— the pros and the antis. Old Quezon 
men like the late President Roxas, Benigno Aquino, Laurel 
and Osias sided with the then Senator Osmeha in support Of 
the measures. Besides them, there were such brains as the 
late Rafael Palma, then prsident of the University of the Phil- 
ippines, and former Secretary of the Interior Teodoro Kalaw. 
Quezon was practically fighting them all singlehanded. 

A group of businessmen headed by former Senator Ra- 
mon Fernandez, a very close friend of President Quezon, went 
to his house in Pasay and appealed to him to give up the 
fight as it may cause him his life. 

Quezon said: “If it kills me, I will fight them all. This 
is the supreme test as to whether or not the people are with 
me.” 

It was a good fight. It was said that at the height of 
the campaign, Quezon told some friends that he could for- 
give Roxas and Aquino, but never Osias. The Ilocano soloh. 
was the noisiest of the campaigners on the Osmena side. 

Yet when Quezon won that fight, he left the door open 
for immediate reconciliation with the opposition. Roxas, who 
lost the speakership, was taken back into the government as 
head of the National Economic Council. Osias was drafted 
into the Department of Instruction and the rest, to the dis- 
gust of leading antis, occupied high posts in the government. 

It can not be said of Quezon that he was not loyal to 
his friends, opinions to the contrary notwithstanding. There 
are those who maintain that Quezon would sacrifice a friend 
to attain an objective. Nothing could be farther from the 
truth. It is true that Quezon would not lift a finger to save 
a bosom friend from jail and disgrace if he had betrayed a 
public trust. He could not stomach dishonesty. He would 



ARIZABAL— THEY LOVED QUEZON 



289 



not tolerate graft, and would stand for no whitewashing of 
any investigation of officials involved in defrauding the pub- 
lic. 

A friend who had conrtibuted to his political campaign 
funds in the first election for Presient of the Commonwealth 
sought to get back his investment in the form of some con- 
cessions involving public interest. Quezon sharply reminded 
him: 

“You are talking to the President of the Philippines now.” 



STORIES OF QUEZON * 



By Amante F. Paredes 



MODESTO D. BANTOLA, chief photographer of the Ma- 
lacanan public information office, used to 'accompany the late 
President Quezon in his trips to the provinces. The incidents 
described below and the pictures accompanying this article 
come from him. , 

Once the late President and then Major Rafael Jalandoni 
went to a barrio of Casiguran, Tayabas, near Baler. The 
President had to be carried ashore by four sturdy natives. 
As the President reached the shore, nearly all the natives 
fDumagats) ran off in different directions. He called the 
barrio lieutenant and the school teachers and told them to 
assemble all the people in the schoolhouse. 

When all the barrio folks had gathered on the school 
ground, he addressed them in fluent Tagalog. “How can I 
determine your needs if you run from me, as if I were a 
monster? I have come here to help you, not to scare you. 
We are all Filipinos and provincemates at that. . . .” 

Shouts of “Mabuhay ang Presidente” soon rent the air. 
To prove his friendship, he distributed money to the children 
of the Dumagats. 

There was also the time when President Quezon motored 
to San Fernando, Pampanga, upon the invitation of the late 
Pedro Abad Santos. He was to hear the demands of the 
tenants for better reforms. The late Jose Abad Santos, sec- 
retary of justice and brother of the peasant leader, accom- 
panied him. 

Pedro Abad Santos first addressed the crowd in Pam- 
pango. Near the middle of the speech. President Quezon 
noted that the people were restless. So he asked Justice 



‘ Reprinted from the Philippine Free Press, August 15, 1953, pp. 



290 



PAREDES— STORIES OF QUEZON 



291 



Abad Santos who was sitting beside him what his brother 
was saying. The late justice told him that his brother was 
exhorting the people to ask for reforms from the government. 
The President at once stood up and told the people in simple 
language about his social justice program. 

In the course of his campaign for the presidency, Que- 
zon went to Calapan, Mindoro. 

When he arrived at the town’s plaza where a sizable 
crowd had gathered, he noticed that there were placards 
being displayed which stated that they were all for his elec- 
tion as president of the Commonwealth government. 

When he ascended the improvised platform, the first 
thing that he told the people was to remove those placards 
from his sight. He told them that he knew all the time that 
the province of Mindoro was in favor of General Emilio 
Aguinaldo or Monsignor Aglipay as chief executive of the 
Commonwealth government. 

The crowd was surprised. The late President had caught 
the people off-guard that time. 

He continued: “Even though you do not elect me as 
your President, I will be glad, for I will devote my time to 
working with the farmers and the common people. I want 
to share your hardships. I am a man of the soil, and ready 
to cultivate the vast tracts of land in Mindoro. So if you do 
not want me to occupy the presidential position, give me 
right now a spade or a hoe and I will live here with you as 
a common farmer.” 

Mindoro, known at that time to be an oppositionist 
province, voted heavily for Quezon. 

Quezon was well liked by the Mohammedans. When he 
went to visit Mindanao, the people lined the road from Iligan 
to Dansalan to greet the highest executive of the land. 

Then, he spoke to the crowd that had gathered at the 
plaza of Dansalan. A high-ranking official from the place 
interpreted the speech of the President. When President 



292 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Quezon said something that was contrary to the conventions 
of the Mords, the interprter lowered his voice so the audience 
could not hear him. President Quezon noticed it. He cas- 
tigated the official, and said that he would take all the risk' 
if the people resented what he had just said. 

The President traveled unescorted when he visited Sulu. 
He loved to watch the Moros dive for the coins that he threw 
into the water. He commented that the Moros are the “bra- 
vest, most agile swimmers in the country.” 

President Quezon was once moved to pardon 17 prisoners 
when he saw the craftsmanship of the prisoners in making 
a table. That table now adorns the reception hall of Mala- 
nan palace. 

He commented: “These people should not be staying be- 
hind prison walls. They have talent for the improvement of 
native crafts in their respective towns.” 

These are but small incidents from the life of President 
Quezon as recalled by Modesto Bantola. But they help us 
to remember the vivid personality of the man whose birthday 
has been established as Citizenship Day, the man “who con- 
secrated himself to the ideal of producing a citizenry cons- 
cious of its rights and obligations and worthy of the traditions 
of a sound and lasting democracy.” 



“LET GEORGE DO IT’’ == 
By A. Oliver Flores 



AS THE FIRST Executive Secretary of his country, Jorge 
Vargas was close eye-witness to the momentous events that 
characterized the Quezon regime. As the President s confi- 
dante, Vargas handled all official papers that passed from 
Quezon to any of his cabinet members. All Presidential proc- 
lamations were left to Vargas for implementation, a procedure 
which gave birth to the phrase “Let George do it”. 

Having been in the midst of the movement toward poli- 
tical emancipation, Vargas cherishes many moments with his 
long-time boss with the quick decisions and even quicker 
temper. The following account of a Malacanang incident 
Vargas considers the most illusti’ative of the famous Quezon- 
ian choler: 

Every morning at six it was the habit of Mr. Quezon 
to go out for his favorite sport, horse riding. Since it took 
him almost an hour to prepare his riding togs, he made it a 
point to wake up an hour before he stepped out, or at five 
o’clock. 

i One morning the President’s valet woke up his master 
to remind him that it was time to dress up. After the valet 
had left, Quezon looked around and noted that it was still 
very dark. In groping his way around the room the President 
stumbled on something and hurt himself. 

“Adong!” he thundered. (Adong was the name of his Chi- 
nese valet.) The faithful butler came rushing back. 

“What’s the big idea of waking me up so early?” Quezon 
demanded. 

The butler replied that he was merely acting on his mas- 
ter’s order, that it was already five o’clock. 

.. * Reprinted from the Sunday Times Magazine, December 3, 1967, 
ppi 27. 



293 



294 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



“Five o’clock?” the President growled. “It must be only 
four o’clock. See how dark it is?” 

Adong said something about daylight-saving time. (Day- 
light saving time was a system in which clock were set an 
hour in advance. The idea was to give employes more free 
time after a working day, since they would he actually knock- 
ing off at four though their timepieces said five.) 

Quezon strode to a telephone and called up Vargas in 
his residence in Mandaluyong. 

“What’s this daylight saving system all about?” the Pres- 
ident demanded anew. 

“But Mr. President, you signed the order only a few days 
ago.” 

“I did? On whose advice?” Quezon wanted to know. 

“On Justice Secretary (Jose) Yulo’s suggestion, Mr. Pres- 
ident.” Vargas answered. 

“Have that d— thing revoked at once!” stormed the 
President. 

Vargas “survived” many a Quezonian explosion during 
his term from 1936 to the outbreak of World War II in Dec- 
ember, 1941, to become one of Quezon’s most esteemed 
friends. When the President had to leave Manila to seek 
refuge in Corregidor during the Japanese invasion of the 
Philippines, he instructed Vargas to take over the helm of 
government. In intrnational law, only national officials of 
a conquered country are subject to capture and incarcera- 
tion. To spare Vargas the order of confinement by the Ja- 
panese occupation authorities (the capture of Manila was 
imminent then), Quezon by telephone designated Vargas Ma- 
yor of Greater Manila. That made him a local official. 

Later, Vargas was made chairman of the Japanese-spon- 
sored Executive Commission. When the enemy went through 
the rituals of granting the Philippines her independence in 
October 1943, Jose P. Laurel was installed President. Vargas 



FLORES— ‘'LET GEORGE DO IT” 



295 



was appointed ambassador to Japan. There, in a foreign 
country, Vargas heard of the death of President Quezon in 
New York, on August 1, 1944. He had not been unprepared 
for the tragedy. Back home, Vargas had a secret short wave 
which kept him informed of doings in the United States. 
Quezon’s demise marked the end of a brilliant, if turbulent, 
era in Philippine politics. But to Vargas it was the end of 
a beautiful friendship. 



QUEZON’S WAR WITH THE UGLY AMERICANS 



By Jesus V. Merritt 

BENVENUTO CELLINI, the Italian philosopher and au- 
thor, said it is a' duty incumbent on the leader or heads of 
government “who have performed anything notable and 
praise-worthy to record on their own writings the events of 
their lives and times.” 

Of our Presidents, only Manuel L. Quezon appears to 
liave partially complied with this duty. Quezon had written 
.an autobiographical account, besides reams and reams of 
personal notes and correspondence of immense value to his- 
torical researchers, biographers and to posterity. In some 
unpublished notes and correspondences are bared hidden 
facets and complexes in his character and personality— re- 
vealing his “thickly forested interior,” his inner tensions, the 
passion, peeves and obsession of his life. It seems curious 
that the few ‘angry’ private and personal notes and letters 
extant have largely dealt on his reactions toward American 
discrimination of Filipinos and his implacable hatred of per- 
sons who threw their weight around as members of a super- 
ior race. 

Shortly before Henry Stimson came to the Philippines 
as governor-general, Quezon forewarned him of his animad- 
version toward certain type of American residents who had 
acquired the habit of looking down on the Filipinos and 
treating them in an extremely condescending fashion. He 
mentioned particularly the American old-timers who knew 
the Filipinos only as their old adversary in the Philippine- 
American war and the members of the American Chamber 
of Commerce of the Philippines. 

Quezon told Gov. Stimson in a letter dated February 
1, 1928: “This is not to say that there have not been Army 



Reprinted from the Sunday Times Magazine, August 15, 1965, pp 



296 



MERRITT— QUEZON AND THE UGLY AMERICANS 



297 



oliicers who have rendered very valuable service to the Phil-, 
ippine Government. The names of Harbord and Bandholt 
stand out prominently and in a lesser degree Rivers, Hershey 
and a few others. The average army officer who has seen 
military service in the Philippine Islands, in the old revolu- 
tionary days or in recent times, had only known the Filipinos, 
m. the first instance as his adversary in the field, and in the 
second instance his chauffeur, cook or muchacho in the 
barracks or Army post; with the result that in both instances, 
said Army officer had only acquired a feeling of contempt 
for the Filipinos; and to make it worst, their wives invariably 
share this feeling. And, by the way, Mrs. Dorey was known 
to be pronouncedly anti-Filipino.” 

Before Governor General Stimson left the United States 
to assume his new post in Manila, Senate President Quezon 
received the intelligence that the new executive was bring- 
ing along with him General Dorey, senior staff assistant dur- 
ing General Wood’s administration. (Mrs. Dorey referred to 
above is the wife of General Dorey). 

This infuriated the ailing leader and at a considerable 
risk to his health he jumped out of his bed to dictate a blis- 
tering note which may well go down as the “angriest”’ letter 
any American proconsul assigned to the Philippines had ever 
received from a native official. 

Without any preamble, Quezon opened the letter with 
the following punch lines: “I am writing this because Senator 
Osmeha brings me words from you to the effect that you are 
thinking of taking General Dorey back to the Philippines with 
you. I spent the whole night pounding over this matter, and 
I have come to but one conclusion: that if such a step is taken 
it will unnecessarily create an embarrassing situation.” (Bold 
by the author). 

Quezon went on to tell Stimson that the Philippine Le- 
gislature would be willing to provide an appropriation for 
the salaries of civilian advisers to the governor-general but 
not a dime for military men occupying civilian positions. He 
reminded the executive that the intervention of Army men 



298 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN i 



in the Philippine government was the major irritant that 
precipitated, the break between the late Governor Wood and 
the Filipino leaders led by Quezon. 

Further he added; “Senator Osmeha tells me that your 
reason for taking General Dorey along with you is to have 
someone explain to you the reasons why General Wood did 
this or did that. . . But, why, may I be allowed to ask, is 
it necessary to bring into your administration controversial 
issues of the past? 

“Your own memorandum suggesting a compromise, pro- 
perly counselled that the past be forgotten and a fresh start 
made. If you so advised us then, when it was difficult, hu- 
manly speaking, for warring parties to get together anew 
with a complete disregard of the past, why should you not 
take the same attitude now, when it was not only easier but 
more proper to do so, since yours is an entirely new admin- 
istration?” 

Then Quezon, in his own characteristic way, did the un- 
precedented thing: he sought to impose on the governor- 
general a condition precedent to the acceptance of General 
Dorey. 

“I don’t know,” the Filipino leader said patronizingly, 
“how far you have gone in your plan of bringing General 
Dorey with you. If you have gone so far that you cannot 
retrace your step without inconvenience. ... I would sug- 
gest that you take him (only) as your ADC (Aide-de-Camp). . . 
although even this will be construed and badly received by 
the people.” 

Quezon who is known as an adroit political poker-player 
in the attainment of his objective went still further and add- 
ed: “If you must take General Dorey, I believe, it would, per- 
haps, offset the disappointment of the people if Mr. Wright 
(Insular Auditor General) were at the same time, relieved 
from service in the islands.” Auditor Wright, it may be re- 
membered, was one more American whom Quezon genuinely 
hated for his alleged anti-Filipino stance. 



MERRITT— QUEZON AND THE UGLY AMERICANS 



299 



When Quezon went to Washington to testify before the 
US congressional committees on a certain bill involving 
Philippine affairs, he was surprised to see Auditor Wright 
in the committee room. 

Quezon was aroused like a March here and almost pro- 
voked an incident inside the committee room. In a strongly- 
worded letter dated Dec. 15, 1929, addressed to Gov. Stimson, 
President Quezon expressed surprise why “Mr. Wright has 
been permitted to come here and give us more trouble than 
he has given us in the past.” ,“It seems to me,” Quezon add- 
ed, “that the Auditor General of the Philippine Government 
and, such a narrow-minded man as Mr. Wright is, should be 
the last one to advise the Government of the United States 
as to the policies to be adopted with reference to the islands.” 

In another letter two days later, Quezon said: “You can 
imagine how I was provoked at seeing him in the meeting of 
the committee. ... I think Mr. Wright has the mania of 
greatness, a most dangerous state of mind for any official 
in a democracy, especially when dealing with a very sensitive 
people like the Filipinos. ... I was perhaps a little bit too 
aggressive with Mr. Wright but I firmly believe that he has 
been more responsible than anyone else for the unfortunate 
relations between Governor Wood and the Legislature.” 

A year later, Quezon had another opportunity to demons- 
trate his almost obsessive dislike for Americans who had 
shown themselves to be anti-Filipinos. This was when Pres- 
ident Hoover announced the appointment of Nicholas Roose- 
velt, author of the book. The Philippines — A Treasure and 
a Problem, as Vice Governor General of the Philippines. 
Quezon regarded the book as grossly offensive to the good 
name and racial pride of the Filipinos. 

Quezon vigorously protested the nomination of Roosevelt 
and so vitriolic was the language he used that the Secretary 
of War, Patrick Hurley, in a cablegram to Governor Dwight 
Davis let it be known that President Hoover resented Que- 
zon’s utterances as “suggestive of efforts to embarrass the 
due exercise by the President of his power of appointment. 



300 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



that they are peculiarly inappropriate, as it questions both 
the President’s constitutional prerogatives and his judgment.” 

In a letter datelined 193, E. Hillerest, Monrovia, Califor- 
nia, October 22, 1930, addressed to the Secretary of War, 
Quezon disavowed any intention cn his part to challenge the 
power of the President to appoint whomsoever he chooses. 
“We are only exercising the right of petition,” he said, “the 
use of which in this instance and in my case, considering the 
position I hold, becomes a duty, imposed alike by my loyalty 
to the Government of the United States and the people of the 
Philippine islands.” 

Then he added: “I would request you, Mr. Secretary, to 
realize how humiliating it will be for the Filipinos to have at 
the head of their Department of Public Instruction and, from 
time to time as acting head of their Government, one who has 
branded them as dishonest and deceitful, and how extremely 
embarrassing it will be for the Filipinos in public life to deal 
efficiently and socially with one who has written of them with 
contempt.” 

Nevertheless, President Hoover transmitted Roosevelt’s 
appointment to the U.S. Senate for confirmation. But, Que- 
zon personally campaigned among the American senators and 
succeeded in blocking the confirmation of the nomination. 



HOW QUEZON HANDLED GOVERNMENT CROOKS- 
By Rodrigo C. Lim 



NOW THAT President Garcia seems determined to weed 
out the scoundrels in the government service who have 
brought disrepute to his administration, it may be interest- 
ing to delve a little into past history and recall how, in his 
time, the late President Quezon handled such crooks. 

Being as old as the oldest profession in the world, graft 
was not unknown in the good old prewar days. It is true 
that the modern C.B. ten percenters, ACCFA tobacco up- 
graders, etc., were then unkown, but there were quite a num- 
ber of get-rich-quick Wallingfords in the different branches 
of the government who enriched themselves through their 
positions. 

Among others, there were judges and fiscals whose deci- 
sions were for sale to the highest bidders; P.C., and police 
officers who were on the payroll of vice operators; B.I.R. 
and customs men who, like their present counterparts, were 
leading princely lives through their under-the-table or fuera 
mirar operations, and others in various departments who 
were more concerned with making easy money than serving' 
the public. 

Although these grafting activities were not as scandalous 
as the postwar vintage, they were serious enough to deserve 
the attention of Quezon immediately upon his becoming' 
president of the Commonwealth. 

“I knew all about the racketeers in the service and was 
determined to get rid of them,” the late chief executive said 
in his autobiography, The Good Fight. 

M. L. Q. first made this determination known when, on 
the induction of Osmena, Quirino and Alas as secretaries of 



* Reprinted from the Philippine Free Press, March 26, 1960, pp 
26, 28, 30, 32. 



301 



302 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



public instruction, interior and finance, respectively, he dec- 
lared: “I expect this government six months from now to be 
the cleanest government that it can be made.” 

Now, how did the late President make good his word? 
How did he go about in his anti-graft war? Did he really 
go after the crooks without regard to personal or political 
considerations, or did he just play for the headlines? 

As a newspaperman, at that time, I had numerous occa- 
sions to bring to his attention cases of anomalies involving 
high personages in the government, some of them among his 
best friends. Talking with me one evening shortly before his 
inauguration, he asked for my cooperation by furnishing 
him with such information as would help him in weeding out 
the leeches in the government. 

“I will give no quarter to the crooks and grafters in the 
government,” M.L.Q. told me with vehemence that night. “I 
will expect only one norm of conduct from public officials,” 
he went on, “and that is absolute honesty and integrity. Any 
official found guilty of dereliction of duty or of enriching 
himself through his position shall be dismissed without cere- 
mony.” 

Elucidating further, the late President explained that the 
moment he was morally convinced that a government official 
was corrupt or otherwise unfit to continue holding a public 
trust, out he would go. 

Some of the incidents which I am revealing here for the 
first time show that Quezon was never disposed to compro- 
mise with crooks and grafters on the public pay roll; that in 
cases of conflict between his loyalty to his friends, relatives 
and political henchmen and his loyalty to his oath of office, 
he always placed the latter over and above the former. 

A good example of swift Quezonian justice when it came 
to upholding the standard of morality in the public service 
is the case of a certain prosecuting attorney in the depart- 
ment of justice. 



LIM— QUEZON AND GOVERNMENT CROOKS 303 

The fiscal, according to the writer’s information, had 
received from the offended parties in a case he was prose 
cuting a check for P7,000, supposedly for the expenses of 
srovernment witnesses. Because there was no way of check- 
ing upon the information, hanking records being strictly con- 
fidential, I decided to pass it on to the President. 

That was one of the few occasions on which I saw Que- 
zon really mad. 

“What business did this d — m fiscal have to get that 
money?” he asked. 

Without further ado, he grabbed the telephone and asked 
for the president of the Philippine National Bank. 

“Carmona, this is the President talking,” M.L.Q. almost 
shouted into the telephone. “Take your pencil and paper. 
I want you to find out right now who cashed this check,” 
and he gave the date, number, amount and name of the payee. 

After a few minutes the presidential telephone rang and 
the bank official confirmed my information. The check was 
endorsed and collected by the fiscal himself. Quezon then 
took the phone again, this time to tell the undersecretary of 
justice: “I want District Attorney So-and-So to resign right 
now.” 

The following day the papers announced the resignation 
of the fiscal for reasons of “ill health.” 

The next case that comes to my mind was that of a 
Malacahang Clinic physician whom Quezon dismissed despite 
the intervention of his wife. Dona Aurora. This physician, 
who is incidentally holding a high government position today, 
was accused in court of abducting a young lady patient. Al- 
though the trial of his case was a front-page sensation for 
days, the debonair doctor-Romeo had not been suspended 
contrary to the general practice then of suspending officials 
accused of crimes involving moral turpitude. 

I happened to mention the case while chatting with the 
President one day and, after hearing the facts, he took the 
telephone and called up the chief of the clinic. 



304 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



“This is the President talking,” he said, “I want you to 
dismiss right now Dr. So-and-So.” 

Quezon had hardly put down the receiver when his tele- 
phone rang. 

“Pero, hija,” I heard the president answer, “ese sin ver- 
guenza no debe estar un minuto mas en el servicio,” which 
meant, “But, dear, this shameless fellow should not stay a 
minute longer in the service.” 

The President himself told me later that it was Mrs. 
Quezon who tried to persuade him not to be hard on the 
physician. But “no dice” — the doctor was canned the same 
day. 

There was also the case of a justice of the peace from 
a central Luzon province whose proclivities for making easy 
money had been brought to Quezon’s attention. When this 
J.P. learned that he was scheduled to be fired, he sought the 
help of a high church official, who asked for an audience with 
the President. As far as the President was concerned, how- 
ever, there was nothing more to explain. There was ample 
evidence on file in Malacahang on the anomalies the J.P. had 
committed. So, despite the wire-pulling of the high church 
dignitary and of the J.P.’s brot'her who' was a ranking official 
of the department of justice, the J.P. was kicked out of the 
judiciary. 

Many prewar newspaper readers will undoubtedly recall 
the so-called immigration scandal that resulted in the mass 
suspension and, later, dismissal and transfer of practically 
all immigration officials and employees. Convinced after a 
quiet protracted investigation conducted by the Division of 
Investigation (D-I) of the vdnalities in the immigration office, 
Quezon one afternoon ordered the suspension of all the per- 
sonnel, from the chief to the last messenger. The D-I was 
made to take over the office. The immigration chief then 
was the nephew of the President’s wife, hut that did not save 
him from being suspended and transferred to another office 
later. 



LiM— QUEZON AND GOVERNMENT CROOKS 



305 



Many will also recall perhaps the case of a bureau of 
commerce director accused of neglience. A private merchant 
had been authorized to import rice, free of di^y, to relieve 
a shortage. It was understood that the rice was to be sold 
to the public at landed cost plus a certain margin of profit 
for the importer. To enable the importer to withdraw the 
rice from the customs, he had to get a certification from the 
commerce director as to the quantity authorized for importa- 
tion. However, the importer wanted to make some extra 
money and brought in more than the authorized quantity, 
and the director certified the padded quantity. Had the 
fraud not been discovered by an alert customs examiner the 
government would have been cheated of thousands of pesos 
in revenues. Quezon immediately suspended the director, 
despite the latter’s allegation that he signed the certificate 
without scrutinizing its contents. An ironical twist to the 
case was that the director received the notice of his suspen- 
sion at the very moment that he was dressing up for a state 
ball in Malacahang. He did not go to the affair, of course. 

Still fresh in my mind is the clean-up Quezon ordered in 
the bureau of customs and the Manila police department. 

t The Manila customhouse then, as now, was a crook’s 
paradise. Customs secretas, examiners, appraisers, etc., were 
living like Oriental potentates — with palatial mansions, flashy 
automobiles and queridas — on their PlOO or P200 monthly 
salaries. Their thieving operations were an open secret and, 
without being told by intelligence operatives, the President 
knew just how they went about their illegal activities. In no 
time, without fanfare, the undesirables in the customs ser- 
vice resigned one by one, having been confronted with evi- 
dence of their venalities gathered by a customs survey board 
headed by then Secretary of Finance Miguel Unson, one of 
the most brilliant and upright men we have ever had in the 
government service. They were given the choice of resign- 
ing and sure dismissal. In almost all cases, they preferred 
to resign. Incidentally, a good many of them made good 
after they started anew in private life. 



306 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



The Manila police department was also cleaned of its 
imdesirable characters soon after Quezon entered Malaca- 
hang. Acting on presidential orders, then City Mayor 
“Amang” Rodriguez and the late Col. Antonio C. Torres, 
chief of police, had the record of each and every member 
of the department scrutinized. After an honest-to-goodness 
probe by a special investigator. Assistant City Fiscal Francisco 
Albert, the force was swept clean of crooked elements, from 
police rookies to captains and majors. 

But the most memorable case in which Quezon showed 
beyond doubt that he held his loyalty to his oath of office 
over and above his loyalty to his friends, concerned one of 
his proteges, who was holding a key position in the Philippine 
National Bank. As general agent of another bank which was 
acting as trustee of a sugar central, this bank official was 
sued, with several others, in the Manila court of first instance 
by one of the central’s directors. Part of the complaint 
charged him with having “committed a series of irregulari- 
ties in the administration of said central which resulted in 
the plundering and looting of the central’s funds and pro- 
perties amounting to P72, 766.65.” 

Quezon was indignant on reading a copy of the court 
complaint which I showed to him. Quivering with anger, he 
picked up the telephone and ordered the banker to come to 
Malacahang — immediately. The Manila business world was 
surprised when the newspapers the following day announced 
the banker’s resignation because of “ill health”. The Pres- 
ident some time later told me that many of his friends had 
tried to persuade him to give the banker another chance — 
“but painful as it was, I had to stick to my decision. I could 
never subordinate the public interest to that of my friends,” 
he explained. 

Again comes to mind another case in which was involved 
the wife of a cabinet member then considered the closest to 
the presidential family. From the former “encargada” of 
the cabinet man’s wife I got hold of a little notebook in which 
were recorded the usurious transactions of the latter with 



LJM— QUEZON AND GOVERNMENT CROOKS 307 

market vendors. The President had just ordered an anti- 
usury campaign and I thought he would be interested to take 
a look at that little notebook. 

After hearing the “encargada” explain the entries in the 
little book, Quezon called for one of his legal assistants (who 
became executive secretary after the war) and told him; “I 
want you to go to the bottom of this case and prosecute her 
criminally if necessary.” 

The legal assistant found the charges against the cabi- 
net man’s wife true but considered them insufficient to war- 
rant the filing of a criminal complaint in court. Morally- 
convinced of the lady’s guilt after reading his assistant's 
confidential report, the President called the lady’s husband 
and told him to resign. He would have been out of the 
cabinet had not the war broken out. 

If there was anything of which Quezon was overzealous 
in protecting, it was the good name of his family and rela- 
tives. 

My very good friend, the late Assemblyman Oppus, once 
told me the story of how Quezon called for him one day and 
asked him to reveal how much his (Quezon’s) nephew, an 
assemblyman, had received from a mining group that was 
interested in killing a bill pending in the assembly. 

'T do not care to know how much the other assembly- 
men received,” the Leyte representative quoted Quezon as 
saying. “All I want to know is how much my nephew got.” 

There had been no money for the nephew, however, but 
the president’s inquiry showed his concern for the good name 
of his family. 



MY DAYS WITH QUEZON * 



By Jorge B. Vargas 
As told to Paulynn M. Paredes 

“I HAVEN’T TALKED to anyone about President Quezon 
for publication in a long time,” Jorge B. Vargas, President 
Quezon’s executive secretary, told us as we interviewed him 
at his Kawilihan residence on Shaw Boulevard, Mandaluyong, 
Rizal, late last month. 

Vargas, who is turning 78 this year, appeared fit for a 
man of his age. When we called on him, he was clad in 
tennis shorts and white shoes in preparation for his daily 
tennis game with friends at 4 p.m. that day. 

Still showing traces of the brilliance that made him the 
President’s closest friend, Vargas emphasized at the outset 
that “my only contacts with him (President Quezon) were 
on the official and government level.” 

“We were intimate to the extent of official business only. 
His private life I had no occasion nor was I expected to be 
involved with except as his personal requirements affected 
the office.” 

With a glimpse of nostalgia, Vargas fondly recalled the 
years he spent with President Quezon from 1911 up to 1941 
when the Chief Executive had to flee to the United States 
after the Japanese invasion of the Philippines. 

The mutual admiration between Quezon and Vargas be- 
gan when the latter, an AB student at the University of the 
Philippines, wrote a lengthy dissertation on “The Philosophy 
of the Filipino Peasant.” It was subsequently published in 
The Free Press and promptly stirred up a hornet’s nest. The 
Archbishop of Manila, then a member of the UP board, de- 
manded the investigation of the student for criticizing the 
church. 4 



* Reprinted from the Chronicle Magazine, August 17, 1968, pp. 
6-7. 



308 



VARGAS— UY DAYS WITH QUEZON 



309. 



“Nothing came out of it,” Vargas recalled, “but it gave 
me a lot of publicity. When Mr. Quezon, who was then 
nesident Commissioner to the US, came back on one of his 
trips home, he looked for this fellow Vargas and thought of 
taking me back to the US as his secretary. 

“However, because I was then an unknown provinciano 
with no connections, Mr. Quezon was persuaded to take in 
Maximo Kalaw instead. After the passage of the Jones Law 
(1916), (Quezon returned to the Philippines and became Pres- 
ident of the Senate. Among his first acts was to look for me 
again. Having finished my law then, I joined him.” 

When Quezon ascended the steps of Malacahang Palace 
in 1935 as President of the Philippine Commonwealth, Vargas 
was at his side. “It was a rather empty office we took over,” 
Mr. Vargas recalled. “The American officials had taken away 
all the competent personnel and left us with no assistants to 
rxxn the office.” 

It was under these circumstances that “we started, Mr. 
Quezon and I, the government of the Philippines.” 

I Through the years, Mr. Vargas went about his duties on 
administrative and executive matters, learning in the process 
how to accept the President's impulsiveness and discovering 
the eccentric man’s tender heart. Quezon, he said, handled 
political matters himself. 

Mr. Vargas shook with laughter as he recalled an incident 
about the Daylight Saving Time. He said Malacanang rang 
him up at 4 a.m. and told him that the President wanted to 
talk to him. “Mr. Quezon was not in the habit of calling 
this early, so I was alarmed,” Mr. Vargas recalled. 

“George, what in hell is this idea of making 4 o’clock 
5 o’clock in the morning?” Quezon’s familiar voice thundered 
through the wires. 

Mr. Vargas gently reminded him that it was through his 
presidential order that Daylight Saving Time was being imple- 
mented. “By Jove, you rescind this order right away!” Que- 
zon bellowed back. And that, recalled Vargas with a chuckle, 
marked the end of Daylight Saving Time in the Philippines. 



310 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



I As it turned out, Vargas discovered that Quezon, who 
used to wake up at five for his early morning riding exercises, 
was roused by his valet at the stroke of five (Daylight Saving 
Time). Because it was still four a.m. (standard time) and 
dark, the President stumbled in his room as he groped for 
the switch. Impulsively, he called his secretary for an ex- 
planation. 

“Mr. Quezon was very temperamental and very good at 
repartee,” Mr. Vargas said, “but he did not have a sharp 
tongue. No, he was not ironical, satirical nor acid. He did 
not mean to insult anyone. You just had to get used to him, 
that’s all.” 

Vargas then spoke about the dressing down he got in 
front of other people in Malacahang. “I immediately wrote 
a letter of resignation, sealed it in an envelope and handed 
it to the President. He immediately sensed it was my resig- 
nation. T don’t want to receive that letter. I don’t know 
what you are saying there. But I want you to stay,’ Mr. 
Quezon said.” And so Vargas stayed. 

“At another occasion, a high-ranking government official 
apparently felt offended because it was I and not the Pres- 
ident himself who gave him instructions. In anger, the offi- 
cial submitted his resignation thinking the President would 
not act on it. But the President divined the real reason and 
sent word to the offcial that he would accept it.” His bluff 
called, the official withdrew his resignation. 

Before his inauguration as President of the Common- 
wealth, Vargas recalled, there were many discussions between 
Quezon and the American High Commissioner on whether he 
would receive a 19 or a 21 -gun salute and whether the High 
Commissioner would come to see Quezon first or vice-versa. 
He only got a 19-gun salute but the High Commissioner vi- 
sited him first. 

The marriage of Manuel Quezon and Aurora Aragon 
could not be more interesting than from a firsthand witness. 
“In December, 1918,” Vargas began, “Mr. Quezon went to the 



VARGAS— MY DAYS WITH QUEZON 



311 



United States on the first Philippine Independence Mission. 
He went ahead with only a few of us to prepare the ground 
for the real Independence Mission. He took me, Manolo 
Nieto and several others. Accompanying us was Aurora Ara- 
gon, a cousin of the President who was tagging along. 

“In Hongkong, we had to wait for a boat to bring us 
to the United States. It was at this time when the President 
called me and said, ‘I have an appointment with the bishop 
at nine in the morning.’ The next morning I came to his 
room to remind him. ‘All right George, all right,’ he answer- 
ed. At 8:45 a.m., I went back. He was still in bed. ‘Mr. 
President, you have an appointment with the bishop at nine 
o’clock.’ All right George, all right.’ 

“I was getting nervous because he might miss his ap- 
pointment and I might get blamed. At five minutes to nine, 
I went back to his room and he was gone. None of us had 
an inkling about the purpose of his call on the bishop. Later, 
we learned that he went to see the bishop to ask him to offi- 
ciate at his marriage. The bishop wouldn’t marry him be- 
cause he was a Freemason. He got mad and went to the 
American Consulate and asked the Consul to officiate. He 
came back to the hotel and asked Aurora to go with him to 
shop for clothes since they were going to the United States. 
She agreed and went with him. When we heard that Mr. 
Quezon wanted to get married. Dr. Bustamante, who was 
cooking some adobo for the group, almost dropped the fry- 
ing pan in his hand. None of us had any idea whom the 
President was marrying. Personally, I thought his American 
sweetheart had come to Hongkong to marry him. We never 
suspected that it was the girl accompanying us that he would 
marry. 

“We accompanied the President and Aurora in their 
‘shopping’ and went straight to the American Consul’s office. 
So he got married on December 14, 1918. After that, we had 
to start calling her Dona Aurora/' 

Vargas remembers asking if Mrs. Quezon had knowm that 
she was getting married then. She answered that they had 



312 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



intended to get married sometime somewhere between Manila 
and the US but did know it would be in Hongkong. “Merely 
because the Bishop of Hongkong refused to marry him, he 
got married there,” said Vargas. “The next morning, the 
bishop apologized and begged Mr. Quezon that he be allowed 
to marry them in church.” 

Vargas said Quezon was popular among the common peo- 
ple because he treated everyone equally. Vargas recalled 
the Social Justice Program which Mr. Quezon originated. 
He also cited the model farm Quezon put up in Arayat to 
find out for himself the correct relationship that should exist 
between landlord and tenant. Another project for the bet- 
terment of the Filipino was the authorization to hold the 
sweepstakes races for the benefit of the Philippine Amateur 
Athletic Federation, since both Quezon and Vargas were 
interested in sports. When Quezon, himself a TB patient, 
saw a lot of the tubercular cases at Quezon Institute, he 
included the hospital as a beneficiary of the Sweepstakes 
drive. “By the way,” added Vargas, "the Sweepstakes Law 
included dog racing, too.” 

The unique partnership of Vargas and Quezon reached 
its peak in December, 1941, when the President was advised 
to leave the Philippines to avoid capture by the Japanese. 

“MacArthur thought it unthinkable and shocking to the 
world for the President of the Philippines to be captured. 
President Roosevelt also said that the President should not 
be allowed to be taken prisoner by the enemy. MacArthur 
begged, argued, and urged the President to leave Manila and 
go to Corregidor which at that time was supposed to be 
impregnable. Mr. Quezon hesitated. He believed that it 
was his duty to stay with his people during this time of suf- 
fering. You must have seen pictures of meetings under the 
mango trees and in the air-raid shelter of his Marikina house.” 

The question was: Should he go? And if he went, who 
would go with him? Mr. Vargas and Manuel Roxas acted 
as the go-betweens for MacArthur and the stubborn Presid- 



VARGAS— MY DAYS WITH QUEZON 



313 



ent. “Mr. Quezon didn’t want to talk to MacArthur. He 
didn’t want to see him. He was nervous at this time.” 

Finally, he was prevailed upon to leave with his family 
and other government officials and aides. With a heavy heart 
he embarked for Corregidor the afternoon before Christmas 
and left the government in the hands of his trusted Executive 
Secretary — Jorge B. Vargas. 

“I knew it was very very painful for him to leave at such 
a time,” reflected Mr. Vargas thoughtfully. 

Mr. Vargas could not go to Corregidor to see his Chief 
but he could communicate with him everyday by telephone. 
But then, on January 1, 1942, the Japanese entered Manila 
and all possible communication with Corregidor was cut off. 
The President and his family, together with Vice-President 
Osmeha, were subsequently brought by the US Armed Forces 
to the United States. The rest is history. 

In the Vargas living room hangs a magnificent portrait 
of the “little President” sitting on the Presidential chair be- 
side the President’s desk. A comment on the masterpiece 
drew a sigh from Mr. Vargas. 

“When Mr. Quezon left,” he reflected with a distant look 
in his eyes, “I never expected that it would be the last time 
I would see him. I thought the war would be over in three 
months. Those of us who were left at home kept the Pres- 
ident’s office intact, anticipating his return. I myself held 
office here in my residence. I did not want to occupy Mala- 
cafiang. 

“Then the Japanese came and asked me to take over the 
office. I refused. But they told me that if I did not do so, 
they would occupy it themselves.” Mr. Vargas paused to 
glance at the painting once more. “I had no choice,” he said 
sadly. 

Then, as if snapping out of his reminiscence, he added, 
“Would you include that?” 



NOT SO LONG AGO 



By Jose E. Romero 

AT THE BEGINNING of his term, President Quezon was 
obsessed with the idea of establishing an administration so 
honest and efficient that it would earn him the lasting recog- 
nition as a sort of George Washington of his country. More 
than this, he envisioned himself the leader of the whole South- 
east Asia region for emancipation and progress. 

I remember once, during the birthday of Mr. Carlos P. 
Romulo, Mr. Recto asked me to go with him to see Mr. 
Romulo. He did not have his car and so he wanted to go 
with me in my car to call on our friend, who was then living 
in Malate. Shortly after our arrival. President Quezon also 
arrived to greet Mr. Romulo. There were just the four of us 
in that early evening, and President Quezon waxed eloquent 
in expatiating on his dreams for a future great Philippines, 
and a Philippines that would be the leading country in this 
part of the world. This latter dream was not farfetched. 
We were the first country in Asia to be liberated from colo- 
nial rule, and we had the benefit of a culture that combined 
the Oriental, the Western and the Latin. We had had quite 
a good training in democractic government for 35 years. 

As already stated. President Quezon laid down as his 
policy “more government and less politics."" He also enun- 
ciated the principle of social justiceT In this connection, it 
might be said that this expression was by no means original 
with Senate President Quezon, as is generally supposed. 

Governor General Frank Murphy, in his inaugural ad- 
dress, had used this expression, and obviously fie was in turn 
influenced by Father Coughlin, the famous radio priest com- 
mentator of Detroit, the city of which Murphy was Mayor 
when he was appointed Governor General. Murphy, inci- 
dentally, was a Catholic. (Father Coughlin used this phrase 



* Reprinted from the Examiner, July 7, 1964, pp. 6, 19, 26. 



314 



ROMERO— NOT SO LONG AGO 



315 



lepeatedly. Although very eloquent, he was also somewhat 
radical. He attacked the Roosevelt administration and the 
Jews, and his case was even taken up to the Pope who, how- 
ever, said that jurisdiction over the priest was exercised by 
his bishop. He was first chided by his bishop in a prep 
statement, and finally silenced when he continued his radio 
broadcast.) One evening, at a caucus of leading assemblymen, 
which was also attended by Vice President Osmena and Mr. 
Roxas, President Quezon suggested that the assemblymen 
should have an organization not on the basis of parties, but 
on the basis of their public record, excluding from it those of 
doubtful reputation. It was a ticklish proposition, as it was 
not easy to draw a line separating the sheep from the goats. 
As I shall later explain, this idea was not implemented. 

President Quezon, who had a reputation for being dicta- 
torial, and who was altogether the wisest and most experienc- 
ed of our statesmen, could have had a cabinet of second-rate 
men, his personal favorites, who would do his bidding with- 
out 'question. However, he appointed to his cabinet only 
men of the highest reputation for ability and experience, men 
like Vice President Osmena as Secretary of Public Instruc- 
tion, Elpidio Quirino, Secretary of the Interior, Teofilo Sison, 
Secretary of National Defense, Ramon Torres, Secretary of 
Labor, Rafael Alunan, Secretary of Agriculture, Jose YulO, 
Secretary of Justice, Jorge Vargas, Executive Secretary, Jose 
Gil, Assistant Executive Secretary, and others of equal stand- 
ing and of impeccable and long public record of efficiency 
and integrity. No finer group of men could have been ap- 
pointed. 

It is a fact that President Quezon, who was then the 
greatest statesman of the nation, instead of having an over- 
bearing self-confidence, was imbued with a deep sense of 
humility. 

When he again threatened to break with Messrs. Osmena 
and Roxas (happily this did not materialize), he once told his 
friends that when he assumed the position of 'President, he 
thought that he could not carry on the government without 



316 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



the aid of these men, but that after some time in the office, 
he felt strong enough to carry on, if need be, without thern. 

In this respect, he followed the example of Abraham 
Lincoln, although when Lincoln assumed the Presidency, he 
was not outstanding in comparison with his colleagues, as 
President Quezon was. We will remember that President 
Lincoln appointed to his cabinet his rivals for the presidency 
— William H. Seward as Secretary of State, Samuel P. Chase, 
Secretary of the Treasury, Edward Stanton, Secretary of 
War, and other equally formidable rivals. In fact, in the be- 
ginmng his cabinet adopted a patronizing attitude towards 
their President and we all recall the case when Lincoln sub- 
mitted a proposal to his cabinet, which was opposed by the 
majority of them. Lincoln called for a vote. Almost every- 
body voted against him, whereupon Lincoln announced “The 
nays have it, but the motion is carried.” After that the sec- 
retaries had more respect for him. 

Some of President Quezon’s successors who departed 
from his example have foimd to their regret what a drag on 
the Executive second-rate men in the cabinet can be. Instead 
of being able to devote their time to matters of high policy, 
these Presidents have to be continually rushing to the defense 
of their secretaries, who do not command general admiration 
and respect. As a result, they are always burdened by de- 
tails. It is a sad thing for the public that when high officials 
start with a preconceived idea, they are not equal to the task, 
and that they have been catapulted into position of promi- 
nence just because they happen to be the fair-haired boys of 
the leader, or because they are close associates, or for other 
capricious reasons. The late President Kennedy appointed 
Secretary of Defense McNamara and Secretary of State Dean 
Rusk to the top-ranking positions in his cabinet without know- 
ing them well personally, only on the basis of their record 
for getting things done, and for their ability and experience. 
He appointed Secretary of the Treasury Mr. Dillon, although 
he had served under President Eisenhower. President Roose- 
velt appointed to his cabinet, two leading Republicans during 
the war, namely Henry Stimson as Secretary of War and 



ROMERO— NOT SO LONG AGO 



317 



Frank Knox as Secretary of the Navy. By their actions these 
Presidents earned the confidence of the public because these 
demonstrated that they were more interested in the welfare 
of the nation than in helping close associates, or in furthering 
their own future plans by putting in men whose primary 
concern would be to serve the political interests of their 
leader. 

It is a sad thing wh=n secreiar'es, even before they as- 
sume office, are already dubbed as mediocrities and become 
the subjects of ridicule. Nobody would have ridiculed such 
appointments as those of Osmeha, Aliman, Yulo, Torres, 
Sison — they commanded respect from all quarters. Their 
ideas were listened to with respect and they lifted a great 
burden from the President’s shoulders. 

However, since these chronicles try to be a truthful and 
candid record of the era they dwell on, it must be recorded 
that the idea of eschewing politics altogether was not, and 
probably could not, be perfectly implemented. I remember 
on one occasion, a certain assemblyman, a very partisan 
politician from Negros Occidental, complained to President 
Quezon about alleged unfair treatment his group was receiv- 
ing. In the course of the recital of his complaints, he said, 
“I am an anti to the very marrow of my bones.” When, 
upon hearing this, I saw the twinkle in President Quezon’s 
eyes, I felt at once that the idea of grouping legislators ac- 
cording to their character and reputation was going over- 
board. Neither did President Quezon entirely give up his 
suspicions against possible rivals in the future, or taking 
precautions, considering his tremendous popularity and po- 
wer, seemed hardly justified. 

The first problem to come up along this line was the role 
that Vice-President Osmena was to play in the administra- 
tion. President Quezon wanted to maintain the best of rela- 
tions with the Americans, since we still had an American 
High Commissioner and there were still many Americans 
working in the government, especially as teachers. The 
Director of Education was Dr. Luther B. Bewley, who is still 
with us. The Department of Public Instruction had always 



318 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



been occupied by the Vice-Governor Greneral before the Com- 
monwealth, and as a gesture of courtesy to this office as 
well as to the many American teachers still serving in the 
coimtry, President Quezon one day asked Director Bewley 
whether in the Director’s opinion, Dr. Bewley’s chief should 
be a prominent public official or one who rose from the 
ranks. 

Dr. Bewley was very broadminded in his views on this 
subject. He said that while there are advantages in placing 
at the head of the department a man who had long experience 
in the work of education, still he had to deal with public 
officials and politicians, and that when these bureaucrats 
deal with them, they are somewhat awkward at it. He there- 
fore suggested that the new Secretary of Education should 
be a man who was a prominent public figure, but who also 
had enough interest and experience in the work. 

As narrated to me by Dr. Bewley, President Quezon said, 
“But where can we find such man?” Dr. Bewley mentioned 
me. We had been in close contact ever since I was chairman 
of the Committee on Public Instruction of the House of Re- 
presentatives, his colleagues as ex-officio member of the 
Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines. Dr. 
Bewley said that President Quezon slapped his knee, and 
was greatly pleased with the idea. (In all these narratives 
I purposely mention the names of the participants, especially 
when they are still living, so that they might call my atten- 
tion to any inaccuracies that may creep into these chronicles.) 

When it came, however, to making the final decision. 
President Quezon felt that he had to give a cabinet position 
to his Vice-President, because, as he jokingly said with his 
droll sense of humor, “Otherwise the Vice-President will only 
be scratching his stomach and waiting for the President to 
die.” He doubtless felt that the department where the Vice- 
President could exert the least political influence was the 
Department of Education, which up to that time had been 
fortunately kept out of politics. Also, as it turned out, he 
needed me more as Floor Leader of the National Assembly. 



QUEZON’S GREATEST TRIUMPH* 



By Benvenuto R. Dino 

AT THE HEADQUARTERS of the Philippine government- 
in-exile a suite on the third floor of the Shoreham Hotel in 
Washington, D.C., President Manuel L. Quezon, who since 
early in the century had been fighting for his country’s com- 
plete independence, formulated plans for the final round of 
what he called the “good fight’’— which would achieve for 
him his life’s greatest triumph. He was a very sick man; 
for him time was running out. It was autumn of 1943. 

To him, Philippine independence was the only thing that 
mattered; it seemed everything else in this world— even life 
itself— was of little importance. Enhanced hy the valiant 
struggle of Filipino troops in Bataan and Corregidor, his 
presence in Washington, he believed, should help bring about 
his country’s liberation at the earliest possible time, and- 
above all— make the U.S. government come down to concrete 
terms for the implementation of Philippine independence. 

There was no question of whether or not the Philippines 
was entitled to this privilege. The U.S. Congress as early as 
1916 had passed the Jones Law committing the U.S. to grant 
independence to the Philippines “as soon as a stable govern- 
ment could be established. . . 

The Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law later set forth a date for 
Philippine independence. Quezon had opposed that law for 
not guaranteeing “full independence.” The law, in fact, pro- 
vided for the retention of military and naval establishments 
by the U.S. after proclamation of the future Philippine Repub- 
lic. Quezon argued that this should have been made sub- 
ject to the consent of the Philippine Republic. Otherwise, e 
reasoned, it would destroy the very essence of Philippine m 
dependence. 



» Reprinted from the Philippine Free Pre.ss, August 15, 1964, pp. 
36, 30-39, 57-58. 



319 



^20 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Sought by Quezon, a substitute law was enacted— the 
Tydings-McDuffie Law— which provided that retention of mi- 
litary bases by the U.S. in the Philippines should be depend- 
ent upon the consent of the Philippine Republic. This new 
law further established July 4, 1946, as the date for the grant- 
ing of independence. The Philippines, by the achievements 
of the Commonwealth, had shown that the country was ca- 
pable of a stable, reliable and responsible self-government. 

During the war, the Filipinos proved, by fighting for de- 
mocracy, that they deserved fair treatment. It was a hard- 
earned position of prestige, paid in blood. 

These were the facts that Quezon as President-in-exile 
sought to impress on the U.S. government. On June 2, 1942, 
shortly after his arrival in Washington, Quezon delivered a 
speech before the United States Congress. He practically 
demanded that the U.S. liberate and grant independence to 
the Philippines. 

A standing ovation followed Quezon’s address. The ap- 
plause echoed far and wide in the land of the free and, as 
Quezon later commented, “The attitude of the American peo- 
ple toward the Filipinos has greatly changed. The Filipinos 
were often abused in the past. But the stock of the Filipino 
is higher now than before Bataan.’’ 

Undoubtedly, Quezon had great faith in U.S. President 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Roosevelt’s wartime promise 
that “the Philippines would be redeemed and her indepen- 
dence established and protected’’ were words that Quezon 
made his own. 

Quezon threatened to resign as President-in-exiie of the 
Commonwealth when he learned that the U.S. was planning 
to by-pass the Philippines in the coimter-offensive against 
Japan. He learned of the plan through the grapevine during 
former Governor-General Forbes’ visit at his temporary head- 
quarters in Miami Beach, Florida. Fuming, Quezon thxmder- 
ed; “Governor, if that is the case, I shall dictate a telegram 
to the President of the United States, in your presence.” Then, 



DI;vO— QUEZON’S GREATEST TRIUMPH 



321 



still fuming, Quezon dictated: “If it is the policy of the higher 
authorities to by-pass the Philippines, delaying the liberation 
of my people, my services as President of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth govemment-in-exile, would be useless and futile. 
I hereby request that such plans should be changed, in favor 
of an earlier effort to reconquer the Philippines. Otherwise, 
I resign from my post as of this date.” 

Days later, a telegram was received from Washington: 
“Your request granted — sgd. F.D.R.” This was shortly after 
the U.S. Congress legislated that Quezon should continue in 
office, contrary to a provision of the Philippine Constitution 
limiting Quezon’s tenure of office to only eight years. Yet, 
Quezon appeared more than ready to relinquish that hard- 
earned extension of power. His threat led to an emergency 
meeting of the Pacific War Council, which abandoned long- 
prepared plans and drafted new ones for the sake of the 
President-in-exile of sixteen million people who had earned 
their birth-right with blood. 

Quezon’s threat was ostensibly a bluff. “You know po- 
ker, Dino,” he once said to me. “In politics, when you know 
that the stakes are high, but you see that your cards are 
good, you raise the stake and you grab the booty.” Quezon’s 
bluff evidently proved effective. He would have made good 
that bluff, because of the high stakes— his people’s liberation. 

The successful bluff proved, too, beyond all doubt, that 
Quezon was in a good vantage position to bargain for his 
country. This vantage position was clearly shown in a closed- 
door conference held on October 10, 1943 at the presidential 
suite on the third floor of the Shoreham Hotel. The meeting 
was called to discuss the date of Philippine independence. 

The statesmen sent by President Roosevelt to deal with 
Quezon on that sunny October morning were met by Col. 
Manuel Nieto, presidential aide, and Gen. Basilio J. Valdes, 
and led to the living room where Quezon awaited them, perch- 
ed on a stack of pillows, on the narrow bed that was his 
office. 



322 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



There was no question as to the nature and the granting 
of Philippine independence. The date, too — July 4, 1946 — 
had long been approved by an act of the U.S. Congress. But 
now there was a move among U.S. policy makers to postpone 
the date because of the war and the Japanese occupation. 

Quezon, fighting against an old enemy — tuberculosis — 
realized that here was another fight looming up. "Why,” he 
asked, “despite all the efforts we have made in this war, 
should the independence date be again postponed?” He call- 
ed the move “sloppy and ridiculous.” 

There, was no question, however, that Quezon would use 
all his skill in this fight. He summoned up all the strength 
left in him, although it might greatly hasten his death. Que- 
zon prepared himself by devouring books such as “My Ap- 
peal to the British” by Mahatma Gandhi and a collection of 
Churchill’s speeches. At the same time he devoured Hay- 
den’s The Philippines — A Study in National Development, 
to weigh and measure just exactly what the Americans 
thought of the F'ilipinos. As Quezon sat there for intermina- 
ble hours, and I read these books aloud to him, he would 
gaze at the ceiling, considering possibilities and counting his 
assets. 

There was no doubt at all that the prestige earned by 
the Filipino people by their brave stand in Bataan and Cor- 
regidor were the two aces in his hands. He know, too, that 
U.S. pledges were two sparkling kings. What about the im- 
opened cards on the table? He weighed all possibilities with 
care. 

Poker, which Quezon played with skill and charm, was 
inevitably what Quezon had in mind as he gazed up at the 
white-washed ceiling of his Shoreham bedroom. Suddenly, 
he would break into a smile and interrupt my reading. Un- 
willingly perhaps to tell me outright, he would bid me to 
continue. Finally, one night, he told me: “I shall lead them 
into the trap. Then I shall raise the stake and call all their 
bluffs. Just wait and see.” 



DIjVO— QUEZON’S GREATEST TRIUMPH 323 

Quezon, of course, knew what his opponents would do. 
He had friends among them, whose idiosyncrasies he knew. 
Some of them could he relied upon to support him. There 
was Henry L. Stimson, secretary of war, former secretary of 
state and governor general of the Philippines. There was 
Senator Hawes, co-author of the abortive Hare-Hawes-Cut- 
ting Law, who was now a very close confidant of Quezon. 

Quezon banked, too, on his Washington experience as 
former Resident Commissioner. Said he: “You know, all the 
best they (the Americans) have got there are known to me. 
I have heard them in debates; I have conversed with them 
in cloak rooms. I have been with them in formal parties and 
informal bull-sessions. I have discovered many of their faults 
and measured their weaknesses. My six years as Resident 
Commissioner were a training period for me and I think I 
can handle them.” 

Confident and smiling, Quezon awaited Roosevelt’s emis- 
saries on that sunny October morning. Earlier, Quezon had 
told me: “I want you to take shots of this historic conference. 
I want a document of it preserved for posterity.” I prepared 
my 166 mm. movie camera and waited. 

First came well-groomed, well-fed Judge Samuel Rosen- 
man. President Roosevelt’s special adviser. Carrying a brown 
leather briefcase, the stocky Rosenman had the air of a Wall 
Street executive coming to deal on behalf of his firm the 
United States government. The deal involved 115,707 square 
miles of real estate called the Philippine Islands. 

Following him, also escorted by Gen. Valdes and Col. 
Nieto, was hawk-nosed, leathery-faced Secretary of interior 
Harold Ickes. With him was his reliable aide. Undersecre- 
tary Fortas, who was in charge of territories and insular 
possessions. 

Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson, Quezon’s old friend, 
was ushered in. Slim and old, he still carried that stamp of 
patriarchal authority that he had when he was the fatherly 
governor general of the Islands. With him was Millard E. 



324 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Tydings, the suave senator from Maryland. Dressed in a 
cutaway suit the co-author of the Tydings-McDuffie Law seem- 
ed groomed for a very important state occasion. 

As Quezon’s guests were shown to their seats, I took my 
place near Quezon’s bed, toward the window. The President 
introduced me: “Gentlemen, this is my doctor.’’ Rosenman 
saw my movie camera and protested: “This is supposed to 
be a closed-door conference.’’ Quezon smilingly assured the 
worried White House adviser: “Don’t you worry. I assume 
the responsibility.” 

The conferees took their seats arranged about Quezon’s 
bed. Quezon looked like the seasoned poker player that he 
was as he regarded his guests. I pressed the trigger and my 
camera started to whirr. 

Judge Rosenman took out of his briefcase a piece of 
paper, which he read. It was a message from President 
Roosevelt saying, among other things, that Philippine inde- 
pendence would be granted after the Japs were driven out 
of the Islands. It further mentioned that military, air and 
naval bases would be retained in the Philippines, after the 
war. Hearing this, Quezon braced his elbows against the 
pillows behind him and proceeded to make a few remarks. 

Quezon, as it were, began to deal out the cards. He 
recalled that when President Roosevelt invited him to leave 
the Philippines at the outbreak of the war. General MacArthur 
told the US president that if Quezon should leave the Islands, 
Filipino resistance would automatically collapse. Thereupon 
Quezon wired Roosevelt that he would go instead to some 
unoccupied territory, from where he could tell Premier To jo 
to get out of the Islands. At that time, Tojo was making 
overtures about offering independence to the Philippines. 
It was his intention, Quezon further explained, to test Tojo’s 
sincerity. 

This was the secret strategy in Quezon’s mind during 
those dark days on Corregidor. And here was Quezon reveal- 
ing this secret for the first time. Quezon said that had Tojo 



DJivO— QUEZON'S GREATEST TRIUMPH 



325 



proved sincere, he would have requested President Roosevelt 
to pull out the American troops in the Philippines. With 
neither Japanese nor American troops present in the Islands, 
Quezon would have requested Roosevelt to declare the Phil- 
ippines independent. Roosevelt, however, said no to this 
strategy. Independence would have meant neutrality as a 
Philippine policy, and non-involvement in the conflict that was 
then enveloping the Pacific area. Quezon abided by Roose- 
velt's decision and chose to go into exile. 

Quezon said: “I have no objection to having our indepen- 
dence after the Japs are driven out of my country. How- 
ever, the Independence Law has fixed the date on July 4, 1946. 
According to the Independence Law, we should be indepen- 
dent by that date, whether the Japs are driven out or not.'' 

Stimson said: '*My greatest concern here is that I am 
worried that this immediate independence would have an 
adverse effect on the Filipinos." Stimson then gave the gist 
of his previous conferences with President Roosevelt. He 
said that if independence was given while the Japs were still 
in the Philippines, the Filipino people would think that they 
were being abandoned because their independence had neither 
neither security nor protection. 

Stimson's explanation was cut short by Quezon who 
snapped: ‘'Governor, are you through?" 

Stimson answered: ‘'I still have more to say." 

Quezon said: “You know that I have fought the whole 
world for you. When the question is about the effect of 
independence on the Filipinos, I am the man qualified to 
know that, more than any American or Filipino, I know the 
desires of my people. And besides, why should the element 
of Japanese presence in the Philippines be considered when, 
even if the war outlasts the year 1946, we shall be indepen- 
dent just the same, Japs or no Japs?" 

It was Rosenman's turn to speak. “That is a very im- 
portant point. Why should we think of the Japs' presence 
in the Philippines? If, even with the Japs still in the Phil- 



326 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



ippines, we have to give them their independence, why don’t 
we give it now?” Apparently, Rosenman was already batting 
for Quezon. 

Tydings said: “I should like to talk for only three minutes 
to make my position clear.” Then the senator from Mary- 
land recalled his conferences with President Quezon and with 
President Roosevelt. 

Rosenman cut in: “What about the military reserva- 
tions?” 

Quezon snapped: “If you yourselves include that pro- 
vision, the independence of the Philippines will be like that 
of Manchukuo. Let me ask you to put it there. I shall 
assume responsibility. If you agree, we can remove the 
thirty days’ time and say that the date of independence will 
be decided by negotiation or conference between the U.S. 
president and the president of the Commonwealth of the Phil- 
ippines, providing for the air and naval bases for the security 
and mutual protection of both the Philippines and the U.S. 
as well as the maintenance of peace and order in the Pacific.” 

Quezon’s point was clear and decisive. If the provision 
for the retention c^ U.S. bases in the Philippines after her 
independence was included in the resolution without the con- 
sent of the Philippine government, it would be tantamount 
to having a puppet-style independence. 

Quezon vindicated the rights of Philippine sovereignty. 
For, if the provision about military bases were to be included 
in the resolution only upon the behest and invitation of Pres- 
ident Quezon himself, the position of Philippine sovereignty 
would be greatly enhanced. It would imply recognition of 
the technicality that U.S. bases were in the Philippines only 
upon the consent of the Filipinos themselves. 

The emissaries of President Roosevelt certainly never 
expected to be outmaneuvered but Quezon had them corner- 
ed, on their own grounds, using their policies and rules 
against them. 



DI;^0— QUEZON’S GREATEST TRIUMPH 



327 



It was agreed, by everybody present that the date of 
Philippine independence should be honored, regardless of 
Japanese occupation; and that American military and naval 
bases should be retained in the Philippines after indepen- 
dence, but on the behest of the Pliilippine government itself, 
for the mutual protection of both the P.I. and the U.S., as 
well as for the maintenance of peace in the Pacific. Having 
lost the battle against the formidable bargainer that Quezon 
was, Ickes excused himself and left hurriedly to catch a train. 

Quezon, with an air of self-confident apology, told Ty- 
dings: “I defeated the law brought by Osmena and Roxas. 
But I will assume responsibility.” Tydings vmderstood, for 
he was the co-author of the law Quezon had sought, for a 
better deal. “I know,” answered Tydings, smiling. They 
were great friends, undoubtedly. 

After brisk pleasantries, the Americans left the scene of 
what was a conference debacle for them. Outside the pres- 
idential apartment. War Secretary Stimson said to his cona- 
panions: “What is important is to save the life of that man.” 
Perhaps the Americans hoped to be able to deal with Quezon 
again and outwit him in another round. Indeed, the value 
of Quezon's life was never more appreciated by the Americans 
than when they saw that he was a man to beg from— not a 
man to bargain with. 

Back at the Shoreham, there was some back-slapping as 
Vice-President Osmena assured his life-long opponent and 
rival: “Este es el mejor triunfo de -su vida.” 

It might be objected that Quezon employed arbitrary 
tactics. No one doubted, however, that Quezon’s acti^ 
were sincere, motivated as they were by an incompara e 
nationalism that his people would long remember wi pri e 
and gratitude. 

Indeed, the members of the Philippine government-in- 
exile had reason to congratulate themselves as they shared 
the triumph of their ailing president. However, there was 
no room for unalloyed rejoicing, for if Quezon was able to 
achieve this unprecedented victory, it was because of the 



328 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



strength of his legacy — the good name and prestige won by 
Filipino heroes is Bataan and Corregidor, men whom we 
could never forget. 



QUEZON’S PARTING WORDS'" 



By Jesus A. Villamor 

THE FIERY SUN had set more than two hours earlier. 
By now, I felt sure, it had dawned on another part of the 
globe — one where I wanted so much to be. 

It was December 4, 1943. I was aboard an overworked 
airliner enroute to Washington, D.C. Its estimated time of 
arrival, according to the schedule, was forty minutes from 
the moment I handed an empty cup of coffee to the pretty 
flight stewardess. I don’t recall now how many I had drain- 
ed since we left Chicago, Illinois, but this was certainly the 
lunptieth since we left San Francisco, California, ten hours 
ago. 

“You won’t be able to sleep tonight,’’ she said, smiling 
prettily. 

“Oh, I think I will,’’ I answered her. 

I wanted to add that if I could not sleep that night it 
would not be because of the coffee but because of the many 
things on my mind. But, that, I knew, although true, would 
be a foolish thing for me to say to such a charming girl who 
w^as only trying to be friendly. 

Outside it was indigo blue. More than a mile below us 
lay thousands of tiny, yellow lights many of which flashed 
staccato messages to the luminous stars shimng above. 

Inside the airplane it was bright and lively. Each of my 
predominantly distinguished looking fellow passengers mus 
have had something important to do in Washington it seem- 
ed we were all traveling on “priority tickets.’’ But the con 
versations were light, witty at times, stupid at other times, 
and, as would be expected because of the somber times, m- 
consequential. 

* Reprinted from the Sunday Times Maga/jne, April 19, 1964, pp 
20-23. 



329 



330 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



None of the passengers asked me to show him or her 
the contents of my Air Corps “navigation kit” — which served, 
as my brief case — and which I held close to me all the time, 
if anyone had done so I would have turned the request down. 
And if they had asked why and what were the contents, I 
would have answered unabashedly: “Dirty Laundry!” Actual- 
ly the kit contained a copy of a highly classified report I had 
submitted less than a week before to the Commander-in-Chief 
of the Allied Forces in the South West Pacific Area: General 
Douglas MacArthur. 

No one asked, either, why I was going to Washington. 
If anyone had I would have said I just wanted to get lost 
in the Pentagon. The truth was that I was to deliver in pei'- 
son that copy to the exiled President of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth: Manuel L. Quezon. 

Nevertheless, some odd questions were asked me by some 
fellow passengers. One, for instance, asked if I was really 
in the United States Air Corps since I was wearing its uni- 
form with all the appropriate insignias. I answered sarcas- 
tically but in a serious tone, no; that I was really with the 
Japanese Air Corps, was shot down and held as a prisoner 
for many months and had just recently escaped. I was 
looking at him straight in the eyes as I said that. He kept 
quiet and quickly went back to reading the magazine he had 
in his hand. 

Another curious passenger asked if I had been in Bataan. 
When I asked her where Bataan was, she replied with great 
fervor: “Why there where they fought like mad for you and 
me.” After a few seconds when she caught her breath again, 
she added with unconcealed disappointment of a frustrated 
eager-beaver: “I had hoped you were there too.” 

I closed my eyes for a moment, opened them again then 

looked at her icily. That ended our conversation and killed 
any chance of our becoming acquaintances. 

Our landing at Washington National Airport was normal 
for those feverish days — two or three sprightly bounces and 



VILLAMOR— QUEZON’S PARTING WORDS 



831 



the sound of tires screeching nervously as if the plane was 
telling the pilot, in a language only aviators understand, "you 
can’t do this to me.” 

At the bustling terminal a message waited for me. I was 
to take a limousine to the Shoreham Hotel. This was there, 
I had been told. President Quezon and his family were stay- 
ing. At the Shoreham’s reception desk another message was 
handed to me by the very-correct clerk. It said for me to 
"rest” that night and to call on President Quezon anytime 
the next day. 

I took the message literally; I slept till almost one the 
following afternoon. Then, after a refreshing shower and 
a delicious lunch, I walked up to the president’s suite in the 
east wing. In my hand was the report which I had taken 
out of the navigation kit but was still inside the double-enve- 
lope which had been sealed in Brisbane, Australia, where the 
General Headquarters (GHQ) of the Allied Command in the 
South West Pacific Area (SWPA) was located at the time. 

Even if I may have appeared cool and at ease externally,. 
I was quite tense and jittery inside. My greatest concern 
was: in what way would Quezon react? 

Manuel L. Quezon was one of those magnetic, especially- 
endowed . leaders every country is blessed with at one time 
or another. A dynamic personality, he brought imity to the 
Philippines and lighted the fire of energy in his people. What 
makes him unique and outstanding is that his popularity was 
not whipped up by outsiders. He needed no professiona 
■experts to apply their Madison Avenue techniques of propa 
ganda and personal build-up. 

He knew the problems and he attacked those problems in 
his own ways. Right or wrong, as only future generations 
would find out, the fact is Quezon, like other great nationa 
leaders, had clear-cut objectives and relentless drive for their 
attainment. 

Most Americans who knew him personally liked Quezon. 
A few did not. But whether Americans knew him or not, and 



332 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



whether they liked him or not, he was universally respected 
by Americans who had dealings of one sort or another with 
the Philippines. 

This meeting in Washington was not the first one I 
was going to have with the great Filipino President. I had 
had that honor many times — including the several times I 
saw him in Corregidor whenever I visited that island fortress 
from Bataan during the early part of 1942. The last time I 
saw him though was more than a year earlier — aroxmd the 
middle of 1942, shortly before his departure from Melbourne, 
Australia, for the United States. 

But it was at this talk we were scheduled to have — this 
crisp, wintry afternoon of December 5, 1943 — that I knew we 
had to tackle things which were far more serious than those- 
“plans” we last discussed in Australia for the development 
. of aviation in the Philippines “after the war” — as if the war 
then were already nearing its end! This time I knew there 
was no need for pretenses as we actually had to talk about 
matters which literally affected, in one way or another, ah 
most everyone in the Philippines. 

I was met at the door by Estefania “Fanny” Aldaba (now 
the widow of Luis Lim who was killed in an airplane crasli 
in Mindanao about two years ago), a charming and very ta- 
lented friend of the Quezon family. Her warm and friendly 
greeting was a prelude to a hearty welcome extended 'to me 
by the family and members of the staff of the President who- 
were gathered in the suite at the time. After many hand- 
shakes and embraces — ^including those from Ah Wong, the 
excellent cook and trusted companion of the Quezons — and 
amidst the noise from a barrage of questions from everyone,^ 
word finally came that the President was ready to see me. 

President Quezon was in his room, sitting up in bed. I 
had known, of course, that he was ill but I had no idea how 
really sick he was until I saw him. It seemed that the tuber- 
culosis which had been plaguing him for many years had 
finally gotten the upper hand. Despite his illness, the smile 
he displayed in seeing me showed he still had plenty of fire. 



VILLAMOR— QUEZON’S PARTING WORDS 



333 



My first minute alone with the President and Mrs. Quezon 
who had led me to the President’s room completely erased 
any doubt which I may have had regarding the way the dyna- 
mic President would react to what I was set to tell him. 
Despite the stark, hospital-like appearance of his room, some- 
thing heart-warming permeated the atmosphere the moment 
we shook hands, and I immediately lost all my misgivings. 

After a touching welcome from the President, the ever- 
thoughtful Mrs. Quezon right away asked to be excused— 
"Since I know you two have many important things to talk 
about,” she said smilingly as I escorted her to the door. 

As soon as Quezon and I were alone in the room, I hand- 
ed him the large Manila envelope which contained the 70-page, 
“legal-size,” copy of my report to the Commander-in-Chief of 
the Allied Forces in the SWPA. 

“Mr. President,” I said without any trace of emotion, 
“this is a copy of my report to General MacArthur about the 
situation in the Philippines. I was instructed to tell you that 
this is for your eyes only.” 

Quezon accepted the envelope without a word. He look- 
ed at it as if he were trying to guess what was inside. Then 
he smiled and his thin, drawn face lit up. 

“I am sure there is going to be a lot in this,” the Presid- 
ent finally remarked as he held in his two hands the still- 
sealed envelope. 

I merely nodded my head. 

“Let me see it,” he said, giving the envelope back to me. 

I quickly opened both the outside and inside envelopes 
and, wordlessly taking the report out, handed it to him. 

This was the report I had written upon arrival in Aus- 
tralia after having spent the first ten months of 1943 in the 
Philippines as head of the first group of the Allied Forces to 
return to the Pearl of the Orient Seas which had been devour- 
ed by the armed might of Japan. 



334 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



I had volunteered for this mission after I learned that 
the High Command of the Allied Forces knew absolutely no- 
thing of what was going on in the Philippines at the time. 
After volunteering for the assignment, I was immediately 
transferred from the Air Corps to the newly-created Allied 
Intelligence Bureau (AIB) which was under the Chief of 
Intelligence (G-2) of GHQ, SWPA. 

A few months later, after extensive training and elaborate 
planning, I led the group — called The Planet Party — that was 
to make that unfrogetable landing from the submarine USS 
Gudgeon, on the southern coast of Negros on January 14, 
1943. Ten months later I was taken by another US Navy 
submarine back to Australia. 

-f- 

Quezon immediately opened the volume and started read- 
ing the table of contents which listed the subjects under 
each of the six major parts of the report. 

Part I contained a summary of intelligence reports re- 
garding enemy forces then in the Philippines. Part II cover- 
ed a review of guerilla forces which existed in practically all 
parts of the country. Part III covered civil affairs in enemy 
occupied areas. Part IV was on civil affairs in the free areas. 
Part V discussed the modus operand! of intelligence nets of 
the enemy and of guerilla forces^ Part VI included miscella- 
neous matters such as the status of prisoners of war and of 
American internees, as well as the situation- regarding for- 
eigners— Chinese, Spanish, and others. 

After he went through that list, the President, still silent, 
leafed through the volume stopping here and there to read 
something which apparently caught his interest. It was 
while he was silently leafing through that report that I had 
a chance to observe him. 

What I saw frightened me. He was painfully thin and 
pale and the devastating effects of his illness were so clear 
I could but wonder, with a heavy heart, if he would see the 
end of war. 



VILLAMOR— QUEZON^S PARTING WORDS 335 

Finally he got to the last page of the report. There the 
President stopped and read — ^probably more than once, con- 
sidering the length of time it took him — the concluding words 
which I had written while thinking of the gallant efforts of 
so many unknowns. 

I had often heard of Quezon being a tough hombre. And 
I believed it without question. So it astounded me to see 
mist in his eyes as he closed the volume and laid it down. 

He laid his head back on the pillows propping him up, 
but did not speak. With the tips of the fingers of his right 
hand he stroked his forehead. Then, after what seemed like 
at least half an eternity, he turned to me and asked: Did 

General MacArthur read this report?'’ 

The question startled me. In preparing for my trip to 
Washington, and all throughout the journey from Brisbane, 
Australia, I had thought of just about all possible questions 
Quezon might ask me. And I prepared myself with all the 
facts and recollections possible so that I would be able to 
answer without hesitation any question. But I never thought 
he would ask me a question like that! 

' My heart sank. ‘T don't know, Mr. President," I replied 
truthfully. ^ 

It was only when the President asked me pointblank if 
the Commander-in-Chief of Allied Forces in SWPA had read 
the report that I realized the core of it all probably lay in the 
answer to that simple question. It was obvious that serious- 
ly ill as he was, Quezon's mind was as razor-sharp as it had 
always been, and that what he had long been noted to be a 
man who could see clearly through the fog of confusion was 
as applicable at that moment as it was throughout the years. 

Quezon apparently perceived how disheartened I was at 
the thought that there was a possibility General MacArthur 
had not even seen my report. 

‘Tt's not your fault," he said. ''I know who in head- 
quarters can make it hard for you for being a possible stum- 
bling block to their post-war aims." 



336 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



I did not speak. My mind was still so troubled with the 
dire possibility that Quezon’s question provoked that I did 
not get the full meaning of his statement till sometime later. 

“Go now,” he told me, as he settled back, giving the im- 
pression he wanted to rest, “forget all this and just enjoy 
yourself. I will see you tomorrow.” 

After that first day, Quezon and I had numerous talks 
regarding the whole situation in the Philippines. He read 
my report diligently. For obvious reasons he was especially 
interested in the part that covered guerrilla forces and civil 
affairs in both enemy-occupied and free areas. Again and 
again he expressed great regret that he was not in the Phil- 
ippines. It was obvious he deeply felt the fact that he had 
had to leave the people when they needed him most. 

There was no doubt in my mind that despite his physical 
deterioration, Quezon’s eagerness to do everything possible 
for the Philippines was undiminished. For example, I vividly 
remember how in talks about what he plaimed to do in the 
future for the welfare of the people, Quezon was always 
charged with excitement. 

But what concerned Quezon most was the way Philippine 
affairs were being handed by some key men in GHQ, SWPA. 
He, of course, could perceive with ease, in clarity and in 
depth, what a yoimg, fully devoted but amazingly naive mili- 
tary officer like me found too sweeping to comprehend. I, 
for instance, was completely appalled at how some individ- 
uals, wearing the same uniform I was proud to be in, and 
who held such high and responsible position in GHQ, could 
remain so callous as to veritably treat like putty so many who 
were engulfed in life or death struggles throughout the length 
and breath of the Philippines. 

Quezon and I talked at length about the matter during 
many of our meetings. But if I was disturbed to the point 
of demoralization, Quezon, on the other hand, was vexed to 
the point of infuriation. Many years later — about a decade 
and a half really, the time the Pentagon let me go through 
many valuable documents — I foimd out that someone I had 



VILLAMOR— QUEZON’S PARTING WORDS 337 

with the great President of the Philippines. A great tide of 
sadness swept over me. 

Suddenly I heard someone call; “Jess.” 

I turned and saw through some bushes a figure walking 
towards me. A moment or two later I recognized Serapio 
Canceran, the debonair and efficient private secretary of 
President Quezon. 

“The President wants to see you,” he said. 

I didn’t say anything. I merely started walking in his 
direction. Apparently Canceran had seen me wipe my eyes 
with a handkerchief which I had pulled out of my pocket. 

“What’s the matter,” he asked. 

“Nothing,” I replied, rather sharply. 

Wordlessly we walked towards the mansion which, from 
the exterior, looked like a small replica of Malaeanang, al- 
though inside it was a poor substitute. Canceran knocked 
softly on the door of the President’s room and, as if he knew 
an answer was not necessary or not to be expected, he opened 
it and entered. With his hand still on the door knob, facing 
the President, he said, “Sir, Major Villamor is here.” 

“Good,” I heard the President say. 

Canceran turned to me and nodded a signal for me to 
enter. As I walked past him, Canceran stepped out and I 
heard him close the door behind him. No one else was in 
the room. 

“Good afternoon, Mr. President,” I said as I paused, a 
few feet from his bed where a number of pillows proppe 
him up in a sitting position. 

Quezon smiled and pointed to a chair which I moved 
closer to his bed before sitting down. 

“You are leaving this afternoon, aren’t you?” 

“Yes Sir.” 

“One last thing,” he said, proudly pulling himself to as 
erect a position as his waning strength would allow him. 



338 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



“I want to tell you something now, Villamor,” he said 
slowly and solemnly, “which I don’t want you to ever for- 
get.” His dark eyes blazed. 

“I won’t forget, Mr. President,” I assured him, my whole 
being tensely awaiting his next words. 

“Tell our people when you get back,” he said, leaning 
towards me as if he wanted to make sure none of his words 
would fly away, “those— in headquarters will not get away 
with making fools of them!” 

A spasm of coughing suddenly overcame him and his 
whole body shook: I was then on. the edge of my seat as I 
helplessly watched him burning with anger and pain. After 
a long while, the coughing subsided. 

He continued, his voice trembling with emotion: “I will 
not let anyone wreck the future of our country.” 

His words were like volcanic explosions inside me. 

“Yes sir,” was all I could say as I stood up, chocked 
with feeling. 

I immediately felt a change in me. Those sparkling 
words of his came like rubies and diamonds to me. My lag- 
ging hopes suddenly burst aflame again. 

We talked on for a few more minutes. I must admit, 
however, that my mind kept running back "to his stirring 
instructions to me. And I think he knew that it had made 
a very deep impression on me because at the end, he clasped 
my right hand in both his hands as tightly as he could. 

“I swear to you, Villamor,” he said gravely, “I won’t let 
our people down.” 

“I know you won’t, Mr. President,” I said, my heart beat- 
ing as if it wanted to burst. 

Quezon smiled. “Good-bye, Villamor,” he said, softly. 

“Good-bye, Mr. President,” I replied as I stepped back. 
A few feet from his bed I stopped, snapped to attention, 
clicked my heels and saluted. 



VILLAAfOi?— QUEZON’S PARTING WORDS 



339 



He nodded. I brought my hand down. I turned and, 
without a word, left the room. 

I never saw President Quezon again. 

And his words never reached the Philippines. For there 
were some people in GHQ who saw to it that I would not be 
able to get back to the Islands for the rest of the war. And 
this despite the efforts of others in GHQ — ^including some 
who were in very high positions, like General Charles A. Wil- 
loughby who had wanted me sent back to the Philippines as 
soon as President Quezon was through with his talks with me. 

Quezon died before the glorious return, in knee-deep wa- 
ter on the shores of Leyte, of the unsurpassable General 
Douglas MacArthur. On that day I was again in Washington, 
D.C. (Hollandia, New Guinea was the farthest I got in my 
“return”) where I had again been sent on “temporary duty.” 

That evening I was in one of the cocktail lounges of the 
same Shoreham Hotel where Quezon and I had many memo- 
rable talks. I tried to drown then the memories and the 
thoughts that kept plugging in my mind. And I remembered 
vividly my last talk with the great Quezon and his stirring 
last words which never reached their destination. 



QUEZON THE UNKNOWN * 



By Jose A. Quirino 



MANUEL LUIS QUEZON, the star of Baler, was great 
not only because of the big things he did but also of the small 
things he performed with characteristic elan. 

Quezon learned his principles of life from his parents, 
Lucio Quezon and Maria Dolores Molina, both of whom were 
schoolteachers earning PI 2 a month. At the tender age of 
five, Manuel learned the catechism and how to pray the 
rosary from his mother. His father taught him certain prin- 
ciples which the fiery leader applied in later years. 

One day, young Manuel was walking in the rice fields of 
Baler with his father. Don Lucio, eis was his wont, was 
advising his son about certain pitfalls in life. To illustrate 
one of his points, Don Lucio pointed to a field of palay and 
said: “See those stalks, my son? They are straight yet grain- 
less. On the other hand,” he added, pointing to another 
field, “those stalks are bowed but full of grain. People are 
like rice stalks. Those who are proud and walk with heads 
high are the worthless ones, while those who are humble and 
walk with bowed heads are the real great.” 

Manuel's mother wanted him to be a minister of God. 
For this reason, he first took up theology at the University 
of Santo Tomas in 1902. But he shifted to law when the 
theology professor, a priest who was aware of Quezon’s repu- 
tation as a lover and a rabble rouser, said upon seeing the 
young man from Baler: “What are you doing in my class? 
You don't belong here — I don’t want you!” 

Quezon, the dutiful son, became a soldier in accordance 
with his father’s wishes. So lasting was the imprint of his 
father’s counsel that in later years the star of Baler titled his 
book. The Good Fight. 



* Reprinted from the Philippine Free Press, August 17, 1957, pp. 
26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 



340 



QUJR/A’O— QUEZON, THE UNKNOWN 



341 



Grateful Friend 

Like any other man, Quezon had his own human frailties. 
Ingratitude, however, was not one of them. This was drama- 
tically illustrated when he consented to be adopted through 
formal court proceedings by an old man from Pandacan 
(Manila), Santiago Antonio, who remained a bachelor up 
to his death. 

The ties between Quezon and Antonio started when the 
man from Baler came down from the hills after the capture 
of General Emilio Aguinaldo at Palanan, Isabela, in 1901. 
Then a major in the revolutionary forces, Quezon surrendered 
to the American detachment at Bataan, after which he was 
brought to Manila. He was then suffering from malaria. 
It was Ingkong Tiago, the old man, who nursed Quezon back 
to.' health and took care of him like a son. 

When Quezon rose to power, he did not forget Ingkong 
Tiago. He placed Antonio on his private pension list. The 
old man received a monthly stipened of P80 from Quezon’s 
personal funds. 

In 1926, Antonio, then over 70 years of age, discovered 
that he was to receive a cash legacy of over P10,000 from the 
estate of a deceased relative. Since he was already old and 
a tubercular at that, Ingkong Tiago knew that his days were 
numbered. Antonio, who knew that Quezon would not accept 
the money, consulted Atty. Victoriano Yamzon who advised 
him to adopt Quezon. When Quezon was told that the old 
man would like to adopt him, he blandly remarked: “The 
adoption proceedings would merely confirm the relationship 
between Don Santiago and me.” 

A few months after the adoption proceedings were finish- 
ed, the legal father of Quezon passed away. It was (Quezon 
who took care of his burial since the old man had no rela- 
tives. It is not known whether or not President Quezon 
received the P10,000 legacy because, in the first place, he did 
not know about it when he was adopted by the old man. 



342 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



To this day, very few people know that the full name of 
Quezon was Manuel Luis Quezon Antonio since few knew 
about the adoption of the late president by an old man. 

Gallant Blade 

Maj. Gen. Basilio J. Valdes, chief of staff of the Phil- 
ippine Army under Quezon and a confidant of the late pres- 
ident, relates the following anecdote about Quezon’s adven- 
tures and misadventures as a lover. 

During Quezon’s salad days, he used to visit his parents 
in Baler. The handsome Manoling proved to be irresistible 
to the pretty woman in his hometown. However, there was 
one girl who was not impressed by Quezon’s lovemaking. 
Ever the gallant blade, Manoling sought the help of a certain 
Aling Lilay, an old woman, who possessed a certain concoc- 
tion called gayuma, which, it was said, could make a man 
irresistible to all women. He called on the old woman and 
was given a sample of the mysterious potion. 

“What shall I do with this?” Quezon inquired. 

Aling Lilay’s instructions were brief and simple: “Place 
a few drops of this gayuma on your handkerchief, and when 
you pass in front of the girl, just shake the hanky and the 
girl will fall in your arms in complete ecstasy.” 

Quezon paid 50 centavos for the drug and followed Aling 
Lilay’s instructions to the letter. He saw the girl in a party 
seated next to her mother. He walked several times in front 
of her, each time shaking the handkerchief. But there was 
no response from the girl. From the way she looked at 
Quezon, she probably thought that there was something 
wrong with his head. The frustrated lover returned the 
gayuma to Aling Lilay and demanded the refund of his 50 
centavos. 

The Doting Father 

Despite the heavy burden imposed on him by affairs of 
state, Quezon always had time for his family. Before his 
children left for school in the morning, he would call them 



QUIRIAfO— QUEZON, THE UNKNOWN 343 

to his room and give them his blessings. He was never too 
busy to accompany his daughters to the NCAA basketball 
games at the Rizal Memorial Coliseum. His daughters al- 
ways ribbed him by cheering for La Salle, his son Nonong’s 
school, while he cheered for his alma mater, San Juan de 
Letran. 

At one time, it was decided that his daughters should 
study abroad. An exclusive school for girls in the United 
States was chosen and Quezon paid their tuition fees in ad- 
vance. All arrangements had been completed and Mrs. Que- 
zon accompanied the children on a trip to Europe preparatory 
to their going to the U.S. After a few days, however, Quezon 
felt lonesome without his family and cabled Mrs. Quezon “to 
come home with the children immediately.” 

Just before Quezon’s operation for an ailment at Johns 
Hopkins Hospital in 1934, he wrote farewell notes to his wife 
and children. (He thought his ailment was serious.) Writ- 
ten in Tagalog, the letters were full of tenderness and reflect- 
ed Quezon’s nature as a thoughtful husband and a loving 
father. To his children, he wrote: “Baby, Nini, Nonong, my 
beloved children: be good. Obey all the wishes of your 
mother and love one another. Pray for your father and for- 
give him.” 

To Dona Aurora, he wrote: “My sweetheart. My heart 
and life are yours alone. There is no wife that can compare 
with you in goodness. . .” 

Quezon was the first to initiate daylight-saving time. But 
after two months, he suspended the experiment because of an 
incident involving his shins. One of Quezon’s hobbies was 
horseback riding. Early every morning, he would ride his 
horse around the palace grounds together with some friends. 
One morning, Quezon rose earlier than usual. While groping 
his way in the dark, he hit a table with his shins. 

“Puneta!” the presidential voice could be heard all over 
Malacafiang. “No more DST. If this can happen to me, it 
must be happening to other people.” A few hours later, the 
President revoked his order providing for daylight-saving time. 



344 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Sometime in 1936, Quezon, accompanied by Senator Jose 
P. Laurel, then an associate justice of the Supreme Court, 
made an ocular inspection of the Bilibid Prisons compound. 
As the two were entering the gate of the penitentiary, five 
shabbily-dressed men were sweeping the cement floor. 

“What are you doing here?” inquired the Chief Executive 
in Tagalog. 

The men immediately told their story to Quezon. They 
said that they were cocheros or rig drivers who were caught 
by a policeman while converting the street into a public mid- 
xen. Quezon exploded: “Just for a thing like that you are 
310W being confined in jail?” The President then told one 
of the guards to fetch the director of prisons and then and 
there he pardoned the rig drivers. 

Cried at Times 

Despite his tough armor of cynicism, Quezon had a soft 
Aeart and he was known to have shed tears copiously on sad 
occasions. General Valdes relates one incident which proves 
this contention. 

“In 1924/' Valdes says, “when Quezon’s third daughter, 
J4enita, was taken seriously ill with tubercular meningitis, I 
was already a doctor of medicine and I volunteered to be on 
duty every night at the bedside of the child and to be in readi- 
xiess in case Of any emergency. Nenita died early in the 
morning of December 14, 1924. I still remember how Pres- 
ident Quezon cried when the fatal momen came. I sat with 
iiim and Mrs. Quezon at breakfast on the veranda of his house 
in Pasay. From that day on, my association with Quezon 
became more and more intimate. 

According to General Valdes, the man who attended Que- 
5ion during his last days, Quezon’s illness when he was in Cor- 
regidor was not entirely physical. “One night while I was 
seated next to his bed, the President said: ‘General, it is a 
crime to let out young men die this way. No help seems to 
come from the United States. Our boys are putting up a 
wonderful resistance but this is turning to be nothing but 



QU2R7ATO— QUEZON, THE UNKNOWN 



345 



a slaughter.’ He could not continue because he began to cry. 
The following day he called a meeting of the cabinet. He 
told the cabinet of a plan to telegraph President Roosevelt 
to do something to stop the slaughter.” The telegram was 
later sent and Roosevelt replied that the Philippines would 
be defended by the United States. Roosevelt’s message to 
Quezon said, among other things: “We shall not relax our 
efforts until the forces which are now marshalling outside 
the Philippine Islands return to the Philippines and drive the 
last remnant of the invaders from your soil.” 

Quezon, however, did not live to see that day. 



MANUEL L. QUEZON — AS I KNEW HIM ' 



By Phillip L. De Vault 



I WAS PRESIDENT QUEZON’S personal guard from the 
time he took over Malacanan in November 1935 until he left 
in December 1941, after war broke out. During that time I 
came to know him very well; he had a temper, but you 
couldn’t help liking that man. He was impulsive at times, 
but never mean, and always generous. A great guy. 

The way he took me on is typical of the way he did things 
when regulations or red-tape stood in the way. All Americans 
in the Philippine government service were due to be discharg- 
ed on January 1, 1936, and I had been thinking of what to do 
with myself then. One morning in November 1935, after Mr. 
Quezon had been in office only a few days, he asked me about 
the advisability of going to Baguio, on account of the ice- 
plant whistle had just blown a storm warning. The President 
wanted to know what it signified, and I said it signified bad 
enough weather. 

The trip was called off. I had then some letter which 
I laid on his desk and he started opening them and reading 
them one by one. Then he came to some papers which I laid 
there by mistake. They were diagrams I had been preparing 
myself. 

“What’s this?” he asked, frowning. 

“A burglar alarm system I designed. Sir,” I said. 

The presidential visage lighted up. 

“No, Sir. That is the burglar alarm system I am going 
to try to find a market for after I am discharged.” 

He pounded his desk angrily. 

“Who said to fire you?” he asked. 



* Reprinted from the Sunday Times Magazine, August 17, 1947. 



346 



DE VAULT— QUEZON — AS I KNEW HIM 347 

So I explained how, as an American, I would have to be 
leaving the service. 

“No, you don’t,” said the President. “As long as I am 
President, you be my guard.” 

Later, City Hail complained it had no more money to pay 
my salary — no appropriations. I approached the President 
with some diffirence, ready to resign my position. Again he 
poimded the table. “If they can’t pay you,” he said, “I will, 
out of my own pocket.” 

The President’s impatience with trifles was matched by 
quick and sometimes impulsive, if not whimsical, decisions. 
When General MacArthur arrived as head of the military 
mission, he brought with him seven of the latest Thompsons, 
the first to reach Manila, and handed them around as pre- 
sents. It happened later that one of the machines lay on my 
desk at the main door. I asked the President if I might 
take it. 

"Do you know how to use it?” he asked point-blank. 

“Yes, Sir,” I said. “I learned to use it in Chicago as 
somebody’s bodyguard.” 

“Then,” said the President with casual wave of his hand, 
^‘take it.” 

Soon after, I was with the President on board the Mayon 
for his inspection tour of Zamboanga and Davao; it was our 
first night out. The presidential suite consisted of two rooms 
adjoining the kitchen. As he left the bedroom open, 
was nothing between him and the rest of the ship but e 
curtain. I stretched myself on a cot in the next room. Pre y 
soon, Don Manuel noticed by presence, and he expelle a 
purple oath. “What in the name of such and such are you 
doing here?” 

“Guarding you. Sir,” I said springing-up. 

He let off an oath again. “Suppose I should get up in 
the middle of the night — ^you want me to trip on you an 
break my neck?” he asked. “Go to the top deck and sleep 
there.” 



348 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



I don't blame him. If I was guarded all the time, I 
would not enjoy it, either. 

At Zamboanga, President Quezon gave us the slip and 
went off all by himself to see the town. Worried, Major 
Nieto instructed me to find him. I went all over the place 
and finally caught up with him sitting atop an adobe wall, 
talking to a streetcleaner. The streetcleaner was just being 
polite, as he didn’t know who the man on the wall was. 

“You’re talking to President Manuel L. Quezon,’’ I in- 
formed him. Before the man could recover from his sur- 
prise, Don Manuel had bawled me out for talking out of turn. 

It turned out the President had been talking to the man 
and learned he was much underpaid after 30 years on the 
job. He was upped four grades. 



THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT: 

FROM MANILA TO WASHINGTON 

“ONE OF THE MOST epic series of desperate adventures 
ever undergone by a nation’s civilian leader in the history of 
war.” That was the description aptly given by General Doug- 
las MacArthur of the perilous journey made by President 
Manuel L. Quezon from Japanese-beseiged Manila to Wash- 
ington, via Corregidor, the Visayan Islands, Mindanao and 
Australia. 

“We travelled on the sea, under the sea and over the 
sea,” President Quezon once summarized. Again and again 
there was imminent danger in running the Japanese blockade. 
The President, who was strongly reluctant to leave Manila, 
bore the grave responsibility of his family and his staff. This, 
coupled with the poor state of his health at the time, increas- 
ed the hardships of the trip. Only his iron will to live to see 
the day of the redemption of the Philippines enabled him to 
reach Washington to continue the fight for the liberation of 
his country. 

At the outbreak of the Pacific war President Quezon was- 
in Baguio recupeating from a recurrence of an old illness. 
At 8:00 a.m., December 8, 1941, Japanese bombs were drop- 
ping on the United States Army Camp, John Hay, only a half 
mile from the President’s residence. 

He immediately motored the 160 miles to Manila to take 
charge of the Filipino resistance against the Japanese a re- 
_sistance which is still going on. In suburban Mariquina Pres- 
ident Quezon presided at meetings of his cabinet two or three 
times every 24-hour day and was in constant communication 
with MacArthur. The Commonwealth Government was do- 
ing everything possible to help the army of Filipinos and 
Americans under General MacArthur. 



* Reprinted from Philippines, March 15, 1943, Vol. Ill, No. 1, pp. 1-3. 



349 



350 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



Hard Decision 

After the Japanese had succeeded in landing at several 
places in Northern Luzon, and when it became evident that 
they could not be stopped from closing in on Manila, Mac- 
Arthur and the President discussed the question of declaring 
Manila an open city. MacArthur told the President that he 
•was transferring his headquarters to Corregidor and wanted 
the Chief Executive to go with him. He insisted that it was 
his duty to prevent the President’s capture by the Japanese 
and he could only do that by having him in Corregidor. Pres- 
ident Quezon objected. He thought it was his duty to remain 
with the civilian population. He even advanced a counter 
proposal — to leave Manila and go to some unoccupied prov- 
ince. The Cabinet, however, by unanimous decision, endors- 
ed MacArthur’s suggestion. 

All the members wanted to leave with him, but there 
was not enough space in the jampacked fortress. Only he, 
his family. Vice President Osmena, Chief Justice Santos, Ma- 
jor General Valdes, who had been designated Secretary of 
National Defense, and some members of the Executive Staff, 
could make the trip. 

On December 24 President Quezon was notified by Gen- 
eral MacArthur that the hour of departure had come. Even 
then, there was no despair. There was still the hope that 
help would soon come from the United States and the invad- 
er would be driven away in a few months. While President 
Quezon and his party were on their way to board the S.S. 
Mayon, which was waiting for them in the Bay, Manila har- 
bor was having its worst bombing of the war. The boat’s 
departure was held up for an hour because the chief engineer 
could not be located. When the party finally boarded the 
boat, they found High Commissioner Sayre and his party 
there. 

President Quezon’s health had worsened, but in the Cor- 
regidor tunnel he spent his long days in conference with Gen- 
eral MacArthur and the members of his Cabinet on the pro- 



THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 



351 



gress of the invasion and of the resistance gallantly put up by 
the combined American and Filipino forces. He acted daily 
on the incoming reports from unoccupied areas. 

Inauguration at Corregidor 

On Rizal Day, December 30, 1941, President Quezon and 
Vice President Osmeha began their second term. The simple 
but impressive ceremonies on Corregidor were witnessed by 
the United States High Commissioner and his family. Gen- 
eral MacArthur and his family. Army officers and nurses. 
The President devoted his inauguration address to reiterating 
his faith in eventual United Nations victory, promising that 
his people would fight with the United States until the end 
and encouraging the Filipinos in their defiance of Nipponese 
fury. 

That same day President Quezon declined an invitation 
from President Franklin D. Roosevelt to come to Washington. 
At that time he could have easily made the trip from the 
Philippines to Australia and then to the United States on a 
surface craft, as Singapore and Java were still holding and 
Japanese planes and ships were not in control of that area. 
But he still had much to do. The heroic stands at Bataan 
and Corregidor were to come. 

By the middle of February the lack of rice and foodstuffs 
had become acute. For weeks the men had been without 
sufficient food. General MacArthur, President Quezon and 
the Cabinet met and conferred. It was decided that the 
President could be of more help by going to the unoccupied 
province to organize some plan of bringing in food for the 
soldiers at Bataan and Corregidor and to keep up the morale 
of the civilian population. 

In accordance with this decision and with the approval 
of President Roosevelt, President Quezon’s party prepared to 
leave for the Visayan Islands. At dusk on February 20, an 
American submarine slipped through mine fields and an- 
chored at Corregidor. 



352 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



In secrecy the Quezon party boarded the submarine, 
which immediately groped its way through the mined waters 
around Corregidor into the open sea. When dawn came, how- 
ever, the submarine had to dive again. The submarine’s 
interior became intolerably hot. To President Quezon this 
part of his odyssey was the most uncomfortable. He turned 
down impatiently any suggestion to continue the trip to Ha- 
waii or Australia. Rather than stay an hour longer in a 
submerged submarine, he preferred to face the Japanese. 

Submarine Trip Ended 

At dawn on February 22, after 30-odd hours in the sub- 
marine, the Quezon party was at San Jose in Panay. From 
here President Quezon proceeded to Iloilo and conferred with 
local officials, including the provincial boards of Iloilo and 
Capiz, discussing with the resistance against the Japanese as 
long as possible. Two days later they moved from Iloilo to 
Negros Occidental. Meantime, attempts were made to send 
ships loaded with much needed food to the harried men of 
Bataan, but only one ship got through, the rest being sunk 
by the Japanese. 

Vice President Osmena and Major General Valdes then 
went to look Cebu over as a possible site for the Government. 
The appearance of an enemy cruiser summarily ended the 
project and the two officials returned to Negros. On their 
return it was decided that the seat of the Government should 
be transferred to Mindanao and, in order to find the best 
possible location, Colonel Soriano was sent to Mindanao 
with a letter to Maj. Gen. William F. Sharp, in command of 
the Visayan-Mindanao Force. 

When Colonel Soriano came back, he had a letter from 
General MacArthur whom he had seen in Mindanao. The 
letter informed President Quezon that by order of President 
Roosevelt, he, the General, was going to Australia. He urged 
President Quezon to join him in Australia and from there to 
direct the forces that would reconquer the Philippines. He 
told him also that on a certain day two or three PT boats 
would come and get President Quezon in Negros. The Pres- 



THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 



353 



ident read the letter through once and, in characteristic fa- 
shion, made his decision on the spot. 

The hazards of the proposed trip became apparent from 
the very beginning. Just before leaving. President Quezon 
received a telegram from General Wainy/right reporting that 
Japanese destroyers were in the waters that the Prsident was 
going to traverse. Nevertheless, the President went to the 
rendezvous to meet the officer in command of th PT boats 
and to tell him what General Wainwright had reported. He 
waited for more than two hours, and when they failed to ap- 
pear he decided to return to his temporary residence, leaving 
Vice President Osmeha and General Valdes to wait for the 
boats. 



Bulkeley Appears 

When the PT boats arrived and the officers found that 
the President had gone, they drove furiously over a 20-mile 
stretch to overtake him. Lt. Bulkeley pulled up in front of 
the President’s car. “We can make it tonight, sir, he said 
as he stopped toward the President in front of his car’s 
headlight. “It would be harder and riskier if we tried to 
come back later for you. I strongly urge you to come now.” 

President Quezon raised his eyebrows and gave one long 
look at the speaker. “I’ll go,” said he. 

Later in Washington he revealed that he was very much 
surprised to find Bulkeley so young. When he met him in 
Negros, Bulkeley had a long beard, but when he saw him 
again in Australia, the naval hero had shaven. 

“You know, he looked just like a boy,” the President told 
Washington correspondents. Half jokingly and half seriously 
he added: “If I had seen him like that on the night we vreve 
talking on the road near Bais, I wouldn’t have set foot on 
his boat. But that night, with those fearless eyes and that 
black beard, he looked as keen and able as an old Spanish 
pirate.” 



354 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



It was 3:15 in the morning when Bulkeley ordered En- 
sign George Cox, skipper of the PT-41 to get under way, and 
soon the overloaded little boat was roaring seaward. Hardy 
members of the party gripped handrails on the narrow deck. 
President Quezon stayed in the wheelhouse, and Mrs. Quezon 
prayed in the chartroom. 

PT Boat Incident 

After two hours, when the trip’s greatest peril was con- 
sidered over, the boat staggered under a violent jolt from the 
open sea. It was decided to let go a couple of torpedoes. 
It was a most risky enterprise to fire them, for one bursting 
air flask would blow up the ship. The long tense moment 
ended when two courageous torpedomen finished their job 
perfectly. The boat was wheeled sharply to avoid the run- 
ning torpedoes and continued the rest of the four-hour trip 
to Oroquieta, Mindanao, without a hitch, except for the un- 
usual roughness. 

Fifteen Navy men, armed to the teeth, leaped ashore as 
the boat touched the pier, and President Quezon came out 
of the open cockpit. He saw the men approach the village 
to clear it of any Japanese lurking there. The President was 
tired but his eyes were full of fire. 

The President, wearing two light leader jackets but no 
shirt, riding breeches but no boots, and leather bedroom slip- 
pers but no socks, stepped ashore, follov/ed by Mrs. Quezon, 
the Quezon children — Aurora, Zeneida, Manuel, Jr. — and the 
rest of the party. The big crowd which watched the landing 
failed to recognize their President, a fact which pleased the 
military and naval authorities who were doing their best to 
keep his departure to Australia a secret. 

President Quezon spent March 19 in Jimenez and the 
next two days in Dansalan on the shore of Lake Lanao, 2000 
feet above sea level. During his stay in Mindanao he desig- 
nated Brig. Gen. Manuel Roxas, who had asked to be allowed 
to remain in the Philippines, to act for the President in all the 
unoccupied areas. 



THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 



355 



On the night of March 22, President Quezon’s party mo- 
tored to Del Monte, a pineapple plantation from which they 
could easily reach the airfield. There they waited four days 
for the appearance of three Flying Fortresses from Australia. 

At 10 o’clock on the night of March 26 the Quezon party 
motored to the airfield. The cars, lighted only by the moon, 
moved slowly. 

Aboard Flying Fortress 

The Quezon party were helped into their places in the 
planes. The Flying Fortresses rose into the air and the lights 
on the airfield were turned off. The President of the Phil- 
ippines had seen the last of his native soil xintil the day of 
victory. 

The planes arrived in northern Australia the next morn- 
ing. President Quezon later said that he had never realized 
that that continent was so near the Philippines. The Quezon 
party breakfasted in Port Darwin. The eggs he had that 
morning were the best he had ever eaten, the President ob- 
served. 

The Flying Fortresses resumed their trip to southern 
Australia, two of them reaching Alice Springs in the after- 
noon. The plane bearing Vice President Osmena and Major 
Soriano was missing. President Quezon refused to go on 
with the trip until they were found, so he spent the night in 
a small hotel in Alice Springs. 

The missing plane ran short of gas above the Australian 
desert. The pilot grounded the plane to await rescue. The 
plane’s radio failed to work. After some tinkering with it, 
the crew succeeded the next morning in sending a flash be- 
fore it went dead again. That afternoon a rescue plane 
appeared. The Flying Fortress obtained enough gas to make 
the 50 miles to Alice Springs. 

The rest of the trip to Melbourne was velvet. President 
Quezon and his party were taken in a comfortable transport 
plane from the mid-desert town to Adelaide, where they 



356 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



boarded a train for Melbourne. General MacArthur was 
waiting for them at the station. President Quezon also met 
Governor Gowrie of Australia and Prime Minister Curtin, 
who expressed the admiration of the Australians for the gal- 
lant fight the Filipinos were putting up. Thy felt that the 
determined stand of the Filipinos was aiding Australia im- 
measurably by giving her more time to prepare her defenses. 

President Quezon soon realized that he could do much 
more for the Philippines in Washington than in Melbourne, 
so he decided to accept the invitation of the President of the 
United States. His party boarded a San Francisco-bound 
American transport, a one-time trans-pacific liner, escorted 
by a cruiser always within a half-mile. The transport voyage 
was comparatively smooth and uneventful, although the ship 
had to zigzag much of the way. 

At Work in Washington 

“One beautiful morning I sighted San Francisco’s Golden 
Gate, which I never expected to see again when I entered the 
tunnel of Corregidor,” President Quzon said, upon his arrival 
in Washington. 

In San Francisco President Quezon was met by Oscar 
Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior, and repre- 
sentatives of the Army and Navy. Aboard a special train 
sent by order of President Roosevelt, the Quezon party arrived 
in Washington on May 13, 1942. 

At the Union Station the Filipino leader was greeted by 
Franklin D. Roosevelt, Secretary of State Hull, Secretary of 
War Stimson, Secretary of Interior Ickes, Justices of the 
Supreme Court, Senators and Congressmen, and former Phil- 
ippine Governors General and High Commissioners. Presid- 
ent Quezon and his family were invited to spend the night at 
the White House. 

The next day when the Philippine and American flags 
were raised at the Philippine Commonwealth Building at 



THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 



357 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue the President of the Philippines 
was already at his desk. Malacahan Palace had been trans- 
ferred to Washington for the duration. 



A GOVERMENT IN EXILE* 



By Amante F. Paredes 

ON THE MORNING before Christmas of 1941, United 
States High Commissioner Francis B. Sayre, received an ur- 
gent phone call from the headquarters of General Douglas 
MacArthur. The officer at the other end of the line advised 
Sayre that the “fall of Manila in a few days was imminent’’. 
At about the same time, Malacanan was informed too, of the 
coming tragedy, and President Manuel L. Quezon was advised 
to transfer the seat of the Commonwealth government to 
Corregidor on the bay. Manila was under siege, and occa- 
sionally being raided by Japanese planes, the Japanese troops 
were nearing and the populace was on the edge of panic. 
USAFFE forces were withdrawing to the Bataan peninsula, 
under War Plan Orange 33: to delay the advance of the Japan- 
ese forces across Luzon, and to try to hold out till the counter- 
offensive starts. Four hours after that report was received, 
Sayre issued an statement: “In order to add to the security 
of the government, I am today temporarily transferring my 
office out of the City of Manila in accordance with General 
MacArthur’s direction, and in full agreement with the officials 
of the Commonwealth government. At the same time a por- 
tion of my staff will remain in Manila, charged with the duty 
of carrying on the functions of this office and looking after 
the welfare of all so far as military necessity permits. We 
will fight to the last man. We know that our fight is Ame- 
rica’s fight. America’s help is sure. There can be no sha- 
dow of question as to ultimate victory.” 

President Quezon immediately summoned his advisers 
and informed them of his decision to transfer the seat of 
government to Corregidor. With him on that day were Vice- 
President Sergio Osmena, Major General Basilio Valdes, Col- 
onel Manuel Roxas, Colonel Manuel Nieto, and Serapio Can- 
ceran, his private secretary. With this group, who was ins- 



» Reprinted from This Week, July 31, 1955, pp. 10-11. 



358 



PAREDES— GOVERNMENT IN EXILE 



359 



tructed to accompany Quezon, were Reverend Father Pacifico 
Ortiz, S.J.; Dr. Andreas Trepp, Majors Benvenuto Difio, Eg- 
midio Cruz, and Ah Dong, his Chinese valet. 

At one thirty in the afternoon of the twenty-fourth, fol- 
lowing a Japanese air attack on the port area, the American 
High Commissioner and his staff met President Quezon, his 
family, and his staff at the presidential landing beside the 
Manila Hotel. Here, a patrol-torpedo boat was waiting to 
take them to the S.S. Mayon outside the breakwater, on 
where they sailed the short but dangerous way to Corregidor. 

Claude Buss, executive assistant at the Commissioner’s 
office, was left behind to look after civilian welfare and de- 
fense. Sayre reminisced at the landing: “I could not help 
thinking back to the day, two years before, when I had landed 
on this same pier, amid nineteen-gxm salutes and waving flags 
and zooming planes overhead, to be greeted by the President 
and his Cabinet. Now, two years later. President Quezon and 
I met again at the same pier, between bombing raids in 
danger of our lives. . . .” On Christmas eve, after twenty- 
seven miles of open sea, the S.S. Mayon reached Corregidor, 
where Major General George C. Moore, commander of e 
island-fortress, met the presidential party. From the ’ 
they were conducted to Malinta tunnel, which was henceforth 
used as headquaters of the United States army and the go v- 
ernment-in-exile. A member of the party later wrote of life 
and times at Malinta tunnel: “We gave up all privacy along 
with the soft things of life. We ate at a common mess in the 
tunnel, slept in the tunnel, and worked there as long as the 
foul air and different working conditions would permit. . . . 
It became our custom to steal away from the fetid atmos- 
phere and oppressive sights of the tunnel every afternoon an 
hour or two before sundown, walk up the dusty road to our 
haven of refuge and there spread a blanket on the terrace 
and stretch our backs, drinking in the fresh air and the 
beauty of the serenity of the atmosphere. It was like fresh 
drafts of life, and it gave us new strength and resisting po- 
wer. . . as darkness settled down we could see the flashes 
of the Japanese guns answered by our own over Bataan, fol- 



360 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



lowed by the sounds of the explosions. On many nights the 
whole sky would be alight with flames from the havoc and 
destruction following the shelling. Some nights we were 
driven back to the tunnel by the stream of overhead shells, 
and that always meant an exciting dash.” 

The refugee government stayed in Corregidor for about 
two months. It was on this island-bastion overlooking Ba- 
taan peninsula where American and Filipino soldiers were 
feverishly preparing for the expected offensive by the Japan- 
ese, that President Quezon celebrated on the occasion the sec- 
ond inauguration of his induction to office on December 30, 
1941, after completing his six-year as chief executive. This 
was to be followed by two more years as provided for in the 
Constitution. Quezon sickly, took his oath of office before 
Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos in the presence of high dig- 
nitaries of the govemment-in-exile. He said in a voice choked 
■with emotion: “Today we are assuming for the second time 
the duties of the presidency under entirely different condi- 
tions. We are in the grip of war ... in the defenseless 
cities and towns air raids are killing women and children 
and destroying century-old churches, monasteries, and schools 
... at the present time we have but one task to fight with 
America for America and the Philippines. To their task we 
shall devote all our resources in men and materials. Ours is 
a great cause. We are fighting for human liberty and justice, 
for these principles of individual freedom which we all cherish 
and without which life would be worth nothing. Indeed, we 
are fighting for our own independence. It is to maintain 
that independence, these liberties and these freedom to banish 
fear and want among all peoples, and to establish a reign of 
justice for all the world, that we are sacrificing our lives and 
all that we possess. The war may be long-drawn and hard- 
fought, but with the determination of freedom-loving peoples 
everywhere to stamp out the rule of violence and terrorism, 
from the face of the earth, I am absolutely convinced that 
final and complete victory will be ours. . . .” He was fol- 
lowed by Commissioner Sayre and MacArthur, who reiterated 



PAREDES— GOVERNMENT IN EXILE 



361 



the support of the United States of the aims of the Common- 
wealth government. 

After the ceremonies, Quezon named the members of his 
wartime Cabinet: Vice President Sergio Osmena as secretary 
of instruction; Jose Abad Santos, secretary of justice; Gen. 
Basilio Valdes, secretary of national defense, public works 
and communications; Andres Soriano, secretary of finance, 
and Colonel Manuel Roxas, secretary to the President. A few 
days later while the Japanese were at the gates of Manila, 
President Quezon created a committee composed of Osmena, 
Abad Santos, and Valdes to negotiate with staff of the Ame- 
rican High Commissioner on how to dispose of the govern- 
ment funds in the vaults at Corregidor. At the conference 
it was decided to dump all coins into Manila Bay and to bum 
all treasury warrant notes, amounting to millions of pesos. 

During the first days at Corregidor, the high commis- 
sioner was able to contact Manila by military telephone in- 
forming the headquarters about the campaign movements in 
Luzon. On New Year’s eve, Corregidor received the last mes- 
sage from Mr. Buss, who reported that “every member of the 
staff was well and that the city was quiet.” The following 
morning, the Japanese occupied the city. 

Close to the fall of the capital city to the Japanese, Pres- 
ident Roosevelt, in a message to the Filipino people trans- 
nmtted by short-wave direct to Manila ,said: “To the People 
of the Philippines: News of your gallant struggle against the 
Japanese agressor has elicited the profound admiration of 
every American. As president of the United States, I know 
that I speak for all our people on this solemn occasion. The 
resources of the United States, of the British empire, of the 
Netherlands East Indies, and of the Chinese Republic have 
been dedicated by their people to the utter and complete de- 
feat of the Japanese war lords. In this great struggle of the 
Pacific, the loyal Americans of the Philippine Islands are 
cailed upon to play a crucial role. They have played and 
they are playing their part with the greatest gallantry. As 
President, I wish to express to them my feeling of sincere 
admiration for the fight they are now making. The people 



362. HISTORICAL BULLETIN 

of the United States will never forget what the people of the 
Philippine Islands are doing this day and the days to come. 
I give to the people of the Philippines my solemn pledge that 
their freedom will be redeemed and their independence estab- 
lished and protected. The entire resources, in men and in 
material of the United States stand behind that pledge. It 
is not for me or for the people of this coimtry to tell you 
where your duty lies. We are engaged in a great and com- 
mon cause. I count on every man and woman and child to 
do his duty. We will do ours.” 

Afterward, President Roosevelt sent a communication to 
General MacArthur, Sayre, Quezon, and the members of their 
respective staffs were to be evacuated to Australia and later 
to the United States, there to continue on the fight against 
the Japanese. That was on February 10, 1942. The follow- 
ing day, Sayre received another message from Roosevelt: 
“If conditions make it possible and there are sufficient ac- 
commodations you should evacuate your staff with you and 
your family.” 

When Quezon was first informed of President Roosevelt's 
decision he did not want to go for he wanted to finish the 
war beside his people. He wanted to die in his native land, 
if it would be necessary. But he was informed of three grave 
situations: that the country would eventually fall, sooner or 
later; he should direct the resistance movement outside enemy 
territory; and that in Washington, he could continue fighting 
for independence in the United States which was willing to 
give the Philippines its support. He consented with a heavy 
heart to leave. Osmena wrote: “This decision was not only 
wise, but the patriotic thing to do imder the circumstances. 
Prom the outbreak of the war in the Philippines in Decem- 
ber 1941, the question that taxed his mind was whether, as 
chief executive, it was not his duty to remain at the side of 
his people and share their fate. Not until after prolonged 
and painful deliberations did he finally decided to separate 
from his people temporarily.” 

Quezon brought with him historic documents. In an 
executive order, he named Colonel Roxas the representative 



PAREDES— GOVERNMENT IN EXILE 

of the Free Philippines in case he, Quezon, and Vice-President 
Osmeha should die in exile. Then he sent a message to the 
American people pledging the support of his government toi 
the cause of freedom. This was after he learned that his for- 
mer associates established an Executive Commission under 
the Japanese government. 

On the evening of February 20, President Quezon, his 
staff, and his family left Corregidor aboard the submarine 
Swordfish, commanded by Chester C. Smith. The party first 
sailed to San Jose de Buenavista in Antique, after a perilous 
sea-journey, avoiding the Japanese seacrafts that patrolled 
Philippine waters. They stayed in this peaceful town for 
two days; then the party motored to Iloilo, and stayed for 
sometime with the Lopez family. After taking lunch, they 
proceeded to Ajui, to the sugar centrals of the Elizaldes, 
where they boarded the S.S. Don Esteban for Guimaras island, 
north of the Iloilo river. 

From this island, the presidential party boarded the S.S. 
Priiicesa de Negros, which took them to San Carlos, Negros 
Occidental. The next day, they left San Carlos for Bais, 
where they stayed for seven weeks. From this temporary 
seat of the Commonwealth government, Quezon issued a pro- 
clamation: “I urge every Filipino to be of good cheer, to have 
faith in the patriotism and valor of our soldiers in the field. 
But above all trust America and our great beloved leader 
President Roosevelt. America is too great and too powerful 
to be vanquished in this conflict. I know she will not fail us.” 

On March 17 while the party was in Buenos Aires, Negros 
Occidental, they received a wire from MacArthur urging 
President Quezon to proceed to Australia, then headquarters 
of the United States' Armed Forces in the Pacific. The next 
day, they motored to Dumaguete where they boarded a boat 
for Mindanao. Reaching Oroquieta, the party proceeded to 
Dansalan where they were escorted to San Francisco del 
Monte in Bukidnon to wait for the planes that would bring 
them to Australia. Here in the midst of the sweet pineapple 
country. President Quezon met Roxas for the last time. 



364 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



A week later, three Flying Fortresses arrived at Bukid- 
non, and brought the party to Bachelor Field in Australia 
after an uninterrupted flight of nine hours. From Ale 
Springs, they chartered a commercial transport plane till 
Adelaide, where they took a train to Melbourne. In this city, 
Quezon was welcomed by MacArthur, Australian officials, and 
Filipino officers here who had escaped from fallen Bataan. 

On next month, Quezon left for the United States, arriv- 
ing there after eighteen days. On May 8, 1942, he conferred 
with President Roosevelt at the White House in Washington, 
D.C. Quezon’s permanent residence was at Shoreham Hotel, 
where the Filipino flag was displayed with its red field on 
top, to show that the coxmtry was at war. The meetings 
of the Cabinet were held here, too. Two more members 
of the official party were added later: Joaquin M. Elizalde 
as resident commissioner and Jaime Hernandez as auditor 
general. The offices of the Commonwealth-government-in- 
exile was located in a four-story building with a red roof at 
Massachusetts Avenue. 

There was a crisis for sometime among Filipino official- 
dom on November 15, 1943 when the term of Quezon expired, 
and Osmena prepared to assume the executive post. But it 
was fixed by the United States Congress through legal pro- 
cesses when it approved Joint Resolution No. 95 extending 
the terms of office of the chief executive of the Common- 
wealth government until such time that the President of the 
United States should proclaim the restoration of constitution- 
al processes, and the establishment of normal fimction of 
the government. Other achievements of Quezon and the 
members of his Cabinet included the passage and approval 
of Joint Resolutions Nos. 93 and 94, both approved on Jime 
29, 1944. The first act authorizes the President of the United 
States, eifter the defeat of Japan and establishment of consti- 
tutional processes in the Philippines to proclaim its indepen- 
dence on or before July 4, 1946; the second act creates the 
Commission for Philippine Rehabilitation composed of nine 
Filipinos and nine Americans to survey and formulate plans 



P^IREDES— GOVERNMENT IN EXILE 



365 



for the reconstruction of the country and the formulation 
of future trade relations between the two coimtries. 

But Quezon did not live to see the independence of the 
Philippines. On his farewell message delivered before his 
death on August 1, 1944, he said: “My beloved countrymen; 
Every day the hour of your liberation is drawing closer. . . 
the forces of the United States under General MacArthur and 
Admiral Nimitz are going forward, steadily, relentlessly. . . . 
I am truly proud of you . . . keep the banners of your faith 
flying. You must not falter now that the end of the long 
night of suffering is in sight. The day of deliverance is al- 
most here at last. We will soon be with you. We are on 
the onward marOh — to victory and to freedom.” 

A few hours after Quezon’s death, Osmeha was inducted 
President. The Manila Tribune, rmder supervision of the 
Japanese, wrote an editorial on August 4, 1944, on the death 
of Quezon; “Whatever be his sins and mistakes in the past, 
we cannot but deplore his death, specially knowing that he 
died in exile, far from his country and his people for whom 
he had labored for well nigh half a century . . . death has 
put finis to his career. As far as the Philippines is concerned, 
while we respect his memory, we accept the fact that his 
death also put an end to the agreements and compromises he 
had finally entered into with the American government, in 
the latter’s effort to keep a hold on Filipino s 5 onpathy in the 
war^ The curtain falls completely on the Commonwealth 
government in captivity.” 

But a turn of events brought the landing of the American 
forces in Leyte, on Octover 20, 1944. Three days later, the 
Commonwealth government was re-established in Tacloban, 
Leyte, three months after Quezon had died on Saranac Lake. 



FROM POVERTY TO PROMINENCE 
By Manuel Luis Quezon 



I WAS BORN a poor man, the son of a schoolteacher 
in one of the smallest towns in the Philippines, Baler. My 
father had, besides his salary, a two-hectare riceland which 
he cultivated. While I was a boy and during my early youth, 
my father saved as much as he could from his meager salary 
and from what he could get from his rice-field, only to have 
a few hundred pesos with which to give me an education. 
During those Spanish days, a Filipino family could live in a 
small town with four pesos a month and rice. Thus did my 
family live for years. At the age of five an aunt of mine 
started to teach me to read and write. My own father and 
mother, and the priest of my town later gave me primary 
instruction. At the age of nine I was brought by my father 
to Manila and began my secondary education at the San Juan 
de Letran College. First I lived in the Convent of San Fran- 
cisco serving as a room-and-mess boy for one priest, receiving 
no salary, except my board and room. I could not stay too 
long in this service, because, being too young, I could not do 
my work as a room-and-mess boy and at the same time study 
and go to college without hurting my health. I was then sent 
by my father to the house of an aunt of mine whereof for 
some pesos, I roomed and boarded. The house was located 
in Paco, too far from the Walled City for one who could only 
use his own feet as rneans of transportation. My classes 
started at seven o’clock in the morning and I had to get up 
very early to get to my class on time. Again this impaired 
my health and the following year I was taken by my father 
to San Juan de Letran as an intern. As an intern I remained 
until I graduated as A.B. with the highest honors. By this 
time the savings of my father had all been spent in my edu- 
cation. He owed money, and simply told me I had to stop 



Reprinted from the Sunday Tinses Magazine, August 13, 1967, 
pp. 26-29. 



366 



QUEZON— FROM POVERTY TO PROMINENCE 367 

my studies unless I could work my way through university 
education. I came to Manila, and spoke to my Dominican 
professors, who, by this time had become very fond of me, 
and told them of my situation. I wanted to be a lawyer but 
could not pay for my expenses. They secured a position for 
me as one of the helpers of the University of Santo Tomas 
with room and board and free tuition. Thus I was able to 
talte up the study of the law. Before finishing my law course, 
the revolution came, and soon after the hostilities between 
American and Filipino forces had started I joined the Filipino 
army and took part in the war. I remained in the field 
until all organized resistance to the authority of the United 
States had been wiped out. I came to Manila, penniless 
and sick; was put and kept in prison by the United States 
Army for six months. After my release from prison I stayed 
in the house of (Alejandro) Albert who had become my good 
friend during the revolution. With them I stayed without 
paying for my room and board for sometime. Then I fell 
sick and was admitted free of charge at San Juan de Dios 
hospital thanks to the good office of my Dominican professors 
and the generosity of Bishop Alcocer, then the Metropolitan 
of Manila. For a long time I was in the hospital until Dr. 
Singian brought me to his house to live with him free o 
charge, and to be taken care of by him and I got well. 

Then I was able to enter as clerk in the Monte de Piedad, 
at the modest salary of twenty-five pesos a month, live or 
a practically nominal sum at the house of an old coup e, 
until I passed the Bar examinations, with a very high gra e. 

Once a lawyer I did not go into politics at once. First 
I worked in the office of Judge Ortigas, the largest and 
highly reputed law firm in the country at the time, at 
invitation of Judge Ortigas himself who had known me as a 
student. I received a salary of P150.00 a month at that tirne 
a big salary for a lawyer who did not have any previous 
practice of the profession, and with the understanding that I 
could have my own clients and receive my own fees from 
them. I stayed in the firm for four months, received my 
monthly salary, won in the courts every single case alloted 



368 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



to me by the firm, had my own clients in assoiation with 
another lawyer from Iloilo named Gay, and made for me 
during that time about two thousand pesos from my practice 
with Mr. Gay. 

Then I had to go to Tayabas to file a civil suit to recover 
the land of my deceased father, which was unlawfully occu- 
pied by another party. In Tayabas, I soon began to have 
clients and seeing a good field there for my profession I came 
to Manila, severed my association with Mr. Gay and opened 
my law office in that province. Immediately some big cases, 
civil and criminal, were entrusted to me. I charged large 
fees to the rich and none whatever to the poor. I lost no 
cases. 

Then the position of Provincial Fiscal for Mindoro was 
offered to me by the Judge of First Instance of that District 
and the late Dr. Tavera, then a member of the Philippine 
Commission. I hesitated long before accepting the offer. 
I was making over a thousand pesos a month as a lawyer 
and the position of Fiscal of Mindoro gave only a salary of 
P150.00. I decided to accept the position as a call of public 
duty and accepted it. After six months as Fiscal of Mindoro 
I was promoted to Tayabas, without asking anybody for 
this promotion, served as Fiscal of Tayabas for six months, 
and then resigned to return to the practice of my profession. 
As Fiscal of Tayabas I had a legal royal battle with five best 
American lawyers of Manila at the time on some criminal 
charges for estafa which I presented against an American 
lawyer, then the owner of the most powerful American news- 
paper of Manila, The Cablenews, who tried to rob of their 
property a number of ignorant, but somewhat well-to-do 
Filipinos. I won the case, the lawyer was convicted and dis- 
barred, but he did not land in jail because he escaped from 
the country, thus forfeiting his bond. 

As an aftermath of this and for his own personal reasons, 
the then Governor of Mindoro, Captain Ofley, at my back 
brought administrative charges of all kinds against me for 
acts supposedly committed by me while I was Fiscal of Min- 



QUEZON— FROM POVERTY TO PROMINENCE 



369 



doro. Without being previously informed of the charges, 
an expert investigation was conducted to testify against me 
in my absence, and under the moral threat of my persecutor. 
Governor Ofley. All the serious charges were found abso- 
lutely groimdless, but some minor ones were declared proven, 
such as, for instance, that I had attacked physically some 
one. I was disgusted with the whole performance and ag- 
ainst the advice of Judge Ross, the then inspector of Fiscals 
who told the then Secretary of Justice, Judge Idle, in my 
presence, that I* was the best Provincial Fiscal, I resigned 
from the position. 

I practiced law in Tayabas and once more my law office 
had to decline many cases because I could not handle them. 
I made several thousand pesos as a lawyer, as everybody 
knovrs in Tayabas and then I entered the race for the Gov- 
ernorship of the province. And I did so on the insistent 
demands of the poor people of Tayabas. As a Fiscal and as 
a lawyer I had defended them against abuses of the imscru- 
pulous rich and the lawless government officials. They 
wanted me to render them a constant and effective service 
as Governor of the Province and I yielded to their demands. 
The richest, most powerful and influential families of the 
province fought me. The poor and the humble stood by me 
ajid I won, against my two rival candidates who both belong- 
ed to the cream of the society of Che province. 

I was elected, my election was protested, one of the 
grounds of the protest being that those who voted for me 
were the uneducated. My election was confirmed and I be- 
came Governor of the Province. 



’ RED-LETTER DAYS IN PRESIDENT 

MANUEL LUIS QUEZON’S LIFE 

Compiled by the Filipiniana Division, 

National Library 

1878— August 19— Birth of Manuel Luis Quezon 

1883 — ^First taught the three R’s by his parents and aunt 

1887— Enrolled at San Juan de Letran College. 

1889-1894 — Obtained highest grades during pre-college studies 
at San Juan de Letran College. 

1893 — Death of Quezon’s mother, Doha Maria. 

1894— February 19— Took examination for the degree of ba- 
chelor of Arts at University of Sto. Tomas. 

1894 — ^Feb. 24 — Awarded degree of Bachelor of Arts, summa 
cum laude at University of Sto. Tomas. 

1895— Commenced study of law at University of Sto. Tomas. 

1897 — Resumed study of law interrupted by Revolution ag- 
ainst Spain. 

1898 — Joined Aguinaldo’s Revolutionary Forces against United 
States. 

1899 — Promoted to Major and appointed Commander of the 
Second Company composed of guerrillas in Bataan. 

1899 — September — Surrendered to the Americans. 

1900— Falsely accused of complicity in the murder of a com- 
panion. Was imprisoned for six months by the UiS. 
Army. 

1901— Given free board and lodging by Santiago Antonio and 
his wife in their house in Pandacan, Manila. 

1902 — Decided to take up study of theology at the University 
of Sto. Tomas, but was prevented by an admirer of 
Quezon’s ability. 



370 



RED-LETTER DAYS IN QUEZON’S LIFE 



371 



1903 — February 20 — Applied to the Supreme Court for per- 
mission to take bar examination. 

1903 — April 16 — Took oath of a licensed lawyer. 

1903 — Sept. 19 — Accepted position of provincial fiscal for 
Mindoro. 

1903 — October — Personally filed a criminal case against Fa- 
bian Hernandez, arch-enemy of his late father, Lucio, 
for having falsified the latter’s signature and for hav- 
ing forcibly taken possession of his two-acre rice farm 
in Baler, Tayabas (now Quezon). 

1904 — March 12 — Promoted as fiscal of Tayabas. 

1904 — Piled 25 information for estafa against Francis J. Berry, 
a very influential American lawyer and publisher of 
Cablenews American. 

1904 — November 1 — ^Resigned as Fiscal of Tayabas. ' 

1906 — January 15— Entered politics with his election as coun- 
cilor of the municipality of Tayabas, in Tayabas prov-. 
ince. 

1906 — March 5 — Elected Provincial Governor of Tayabas. 

1907 — July 25 — Resigned as Provincial Governor of Tayabas 
to enter candidacy for a seat in the Philippine Assem- 
bly. Won over Domingo Lopez. 

1908 — July — When Governor Taft appointed Rafael Palma as 
member of the Nationalist Party in the Philippine Com- 
mission, Quezon, as the majority floorleader remained 
in the Assembly as Speaker Osmeha’s righthand man. 

1909 — May 15 to 1917— January 11— Held position of Junior 
Resident Commissioner of the Philippines to the Uni- 
ted States. During that period two important political 
concessions were given to Filipinos: granting of a Fili- 
pino majority in the Philippine Commission in 1913 
and the surrender of all legislative rights to Filipinos 
by the establishment of the Philippine Senate in 1916. 



372 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



1910 — May 14 — Made maiden speech as Junior Commissioner. 

1911 — Independence tour of influential New England States. 

1914 — Spoke before American Congress against Women Suf- 
frage. 

1916 — August 29 — Jones Bill passed by Congress, the fruit of 
the inspired efforts of Commissioner Quezon. 

1916-1935 — Held position of senator (President, Philippine 
Senate). 

1918 — Headed the Independence Mission to United States. 

1918 — December 14 — Civil marriage of Quezon to Aurora Ara- 
gon in Hongkong. 

1918 — ^December 17 — Church wedding of Quezon to Aurora 
solemnized by the Bishop of Hongkong in the Catholic 
Cathedral. 

1919 — September 23 — Birth of his first child, Maria Aurora. 

1920 — ^Leadership friction between him and Speaker Osmena 
grew to more tangible proportions. 

1921 — Defended the venture of the Philippine government into 
state socialism. 

1921 — April 9 — Birth of his second child, Maria Zeneida. 

1922 — Placed the Quezon-Osmeha leadership issue before the 
electorate in the June elections. 

1923— Legally adopted by Mang Tiago (Santiago Antonio), 
then 78 years old, and thus got the full legal name of 
Manuel Luis Quezon Antonio y Molina. 

1924 — April — Headed Legislative Mission to United States. 

1924 — December 14 — Death of his third child, Luisa Corazon 
Paz. 

1934— Departed for U.S. to present to Congress Independence 
formula later known as Tydings-McDuffie Act which 
was accepted by the Philippine Legislature. 



RED-LETTER DAYS IN QUEZON’S LIFE 



3T3 



1935 February — Left Manila to discuss U.S.-P.I. relations 

with Washington officials. 

1935 Invited General Douglas MacArthur, Chief of Staff of 

U.S. Army, to organize Philippine Army. 

1935 — ^March 23 — President Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed 
Constitution of the Philippines in White House in the 
presence of the Filipino delegation headed by Quezon. 

1935 — May 14 — Constitution ratified by Filipino electorate in 
a plebiscite. 

1935 — July 20 — Accepted the Coalition party nomination for 
the presidency of the Commonwealth. 

1935 — Sept. 17 — ^First presidential election for the Common- 
wealth held. 

1935 — Nov. 15 — ^Took oath of office as first President of the 
Philippine Commonwealth. 

1936 — Conferred the degree of Doctor of Laws by the Uni- 
versity of Santo Tomas. 

1937 — April 17 — Conferred the degree of Doctor of Laws by 
the Georgetown University. 

1940 — Quezon laid cornerstone of proposed national edifice 

site of future Philippine Capitol in Quezon City. 
Feature of occasion was placing of Commonwealth 
hronze capsule containing historical documents into 
cornerstone cavity. 

1941 — ^December 30 Assumption of his second term of office 

as President of the Commonwealth. 

1942— March 26— Left the PhUippines for Australia aboard 
one of three flying fortresses which MacArthur sent 
him. 

1942 — April 20 — Boarded the S.S. President Coolidge in Mel- 
bourne for the United States. 

1942— May 8— Arrived in San Francisco, California on Board 
the S.S. President Coolidge. 



374 



HISTORICAL BULLETIN 



1942 — June 14 — Signed the United Nations declaration, pn 
behalf of the Commonwealth government at an inter- 
national ceremony held in the presence of Roosevelt 
and the delegates of all signatory nations at the White 
House. With this signal privilege accorded Quezon, 
the Philippines became practically independent with 
an independence that was right there and then given 
international recognition. From then on, the Philip- 
pine flag was displayed together with the colors of the 
Allied powers in all public functions anywhere, and the 
Philippines was at the same time admitted as a mem- 
ber of the Pacific War Council whose meetings were 
attended by either Quezon or Osmena. 

1943 — March — Founded a monthly magazine which he him- 
self called the Philippines devoted to the extensive pub 
licizing of the varied activities of the Filipinos in the 
war. 

1944— June 29 — Enactment by the American Congress of the 
legislation providing for the establishment of bases in 
Philippine territory for the mutual protection of the 
United States and the Philippines and the ma'intenance 
of peace in the Pacific. Considered as the greatest 
achievement of the Quezon administration in Wash- 
ington. 

1944— August 1 — Died at Saranac, New York. 

1946 — August 1 — Quezon laid to rest. 













) 

1 







1 

1 

I 



( 

I 

I 





