August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE ESSAY CONTEST 

for 



First Prize 

P 5 0 . 0 0 

Second Prize 

F 2 5 . 0 0 

Third Prize 

F 1 0 . 0 0 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 
CLASSROOM RATES 

Special Classroom Rates are quoted to 
high school principals or instructors in English 
on six or more copies a month mailed to one 
address, paid in advance, and ordered direct 
from the publisher. 

One year Pi 80 for each subscription 

Six months. ... .90 for each subscription 
Four months . . .65 for each subscription 
Three months.. .50 for each subscription 

^ r 



HIGH SCHOOL 
STUDENTS 

The Philippine Magazine Essay Contest 
is open to all students regularly en- 
rolled in high school classes on the Philippine 
Magazine High School List as using the Ma- 
gazine in courses during the 1935-1936 term. 

The type of essay is not restricted, 
but essays must not exceed 1500 words in 
length. 

Essays must reach the Philippine Ma- 
gazine office not later than April 30, 1936. 
Each essay must be accompanied by the 
student's signed statement that the essay 
is original, not copied from any source, and 
never before published excepting in a school 
paper. The instructor's endorsement, not- 
ing name and address, must appear on the 
student's statement. 

No manuscripts will be returned. The 
prize-winning essays will be announced in 
the June, 1936, Philippine Magazine, and 
will be the property of the Magazine 
publisher. 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



217 Dasmarinas, Manila 
P. O. Box 2466 



PHILIPPINE 
M AG AZ I NE 

A. V. H. Hartendorp, Editor and Publisher 




Vol. XXXII 



CONTENTS FOR AUGUST, 1935 



No. 8 (328) 



Cover: 

Planting Rice 

Philippine Business and Finance 

News Summary 

Astronomical Data for August 

Pictorial Section: 

The Amazing Argentine — Mindanao through the Eyes of 
a Russian Artist — River Study 

Editorials: 

Mr. Quezon's Address — Mr. Osmena*s Address — The 
Improvement in Public Morale — "Clippers" — Vice- 
Governor Hayden's Fine Analysis of America's Prob- 
lems 

Cartoon: 

Clippers, 1835 and 1935 

The Amazing Argentine 

Silent Seas (Story) 

The Soul (Verse) 

Rota Days, IV 

A Short Cycle of Cathay, II 

Ballad of a Mother's Heart 

Secrets of the Barrio Fisherman 

Mang Julian: Elector (Story) 

Night in a Small Town (Verse) 

Poems 

Christ as an Historical Figure 

God's Hand (Verse) 

Abbreviations in Written Tagalog 

With Charity to All 

The Philippine Home: — Flower-Pot Gardening 

Like Sweet Sampaguitas (Verse) 

Four O'clock in the Editor's Office 

Index to Advertisers 



Manuel Arellano Cover 

J. Bartlett Richards 364 

366 

Weather Bureau 369 

371-374 

The Editor 375-377 

Pablo Amorsolo 377 

Marc T. Greene 378 

Edilberto K. Tiempo 379 

Josue Rem. Siat 379 

H. G. Hombostel 380 

Alice Franklin Bryant 381 

Jose La Villa Tierra 382 

Maximo Ramos 383 

Francisco C. Cleto 384 

C. Faigao 385 

Angela Manalang Gloria 385 

The Rev. Henry L. Irwin, S.J. . . 386 

Manuel E. Buenafe 386 

E. Arsenio Manuel 387 

Putakte and Bubuyog 389 

Mrs. Maria Masipag 390 

E. Pascua Alcabedas 391 

410 

413 



Entmred mt the Manila Post Office as Second Class Mail Matter 

EDITORIAL AND BUSINESS OFFICES 
Uy Yet Building, 217 Daamariikat, Manila 
P. O. Box 2466, Tekphooe 4-93-76 

H. G. HORNBOSTBL, 
Advertising and Circulation Manager 

Subscription rates: F3.00 in the Philippines, $3.00 elsewhere. The Magazine will be stopped without notice at 
the expiration of a subscription unless otherwise ordered. When informing the Publisher of a change in address, please 
give the old address as well as the new. Remittances should be made by money order. Advertising rates will be 
fimiished on application. 

Copyright, 1935, by A. V. H. Hartendorp. All Rights Reaerwd. 



363 



364 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 




Philippine Business 
and Finance 

By J. Bartlett Richards 
American Trade Commissioner 



BUSINESS conditions 
were mixed in June 
and it was difficult to dis- 
cern a trend. Coconut 
products had a bad month, 
lack of demand from the 
United States and failure 
of the anticipated reserve 
demand in Europe causing 
prices to toboggan from 
PIO at the beginning to 
P6.50 at the end of the 
month. Sugar continued 
quiet, with prices a little easy at the month-end. 
Abaca was firmer, with improving demand from all 
principal export markets. Rice was firm, with 
growers continuing to hold for higher prices. 

Among import markets, car and truck sales were 
very good, as were sales of parts. The tire trade 
was very dull, however. Most foodstuffs imports 
were lighter than in recent months, due to heavy 
stocks, but canned fish was an exception. The 
textile trade was very dull, Japanese as well as 
American importers complaining. Stocks are gen- 
erally heavy. 

Though imports are running about ten percent 
below last year's, the volume and value of inward 
bills for collection appears to be higher. Drafts 
are nearly all met promptly. Domestic collections 
are reported about the same, some banks and com- 
panies with a varied trade finding credit conditions 
about the same or slightly better than last year 
while others, especially some selling a more special- 
ized trade, find an unsatisfactory situation in some 
sections. 

Government revenues are running about the same 
as last year in the Internal Revenue Bureau and a 
little better in the Customs Bureau, but Port Works 
Special Fund revenues are very low due to small 
sugar shipments. Manila Railroad freight car- 
loadings in June were lower than in May but better 
for the first time this year than in the same period 
last year. Carloadings were very low in the first 
half of 1935, but the second half year should compare 
much more favorably with previous second half 
years. 

The Legislature met June 24, planning to stay in 
session about four weeks before adjourning to cam- 
paign for the National Assembly. The shadow of 
the approaching campaign is clearly overhanging 




EVERY MAN AGREES 

that a shirt which gives a 
feeling of comfort — and looks 
it — is the shirt for him. You 
can't beat a ROYAL ... for 
comfort, for appearance, for 
wear. 

SIZES up to 171/2 



RoyaL 



Royal Shirt 

STORE 

521 Rizal Ave., Manila 



the session and issues which might in any way be 
considered controversial, are not likely to be taken 
up. 

The Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands has 
decided that gold, other than United States gold 
coin, situated in the Philippines may be exported 
therefrom without the necessity of a license, pro- 
vided such gold is owned and exported by a person 
not domiciled in the United States. The decision 
was unanimous and was based on an interpretation 
of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934 and the provisional 
regulations issued by the United States Secretary 
of the Treasury. 

The Governor-General has appointed a committee 
made up of the Secretaries of Finance, Agriculture- 
Commerce, and Public Works-Communications to 
prepare for the joint trade conference with the 
United States, which is expected to take place shortly 
after the first of the year. The inter-departmental 
committee will be assisted by a technical or fact- 
finding committee, composed of Filipino and local 
American businessmen and trade experts. They 
will also be advised by tariff experts to be sent out 
from the United States. 

June sales of real estate, valued at P805,831, were 
so far the lowest for this year. The total for the 
first six months, however, shows a considerable 
improvement over the previous three years, as 
shown by the following half-year figures: 

1935 P7, 543,707 

1934 5,811,972 

1933 5,646,562 

1932 4,659.690 

The value of building permits for June amounted 
to only P148,150, which is slightly below the previous 
month and P30,000 below June last year. Total 
value of construction for the first six months of 1935 
amounted to Pi, 501, 000, compared with Pi, 544, 000 
for the corresponding period of 1934. 

Power production during June was only slightly 
below June last year. Production during June was 
estimated at 9,365,000 k.w.h. or a total of 55,738,000 
k.w.h. for the first six months of 1935, as compared 
with 59,463,000 k.w.h. for the first semester of last 
year. 

Registrations of new radio sets were considerably 
below May, being only 259 units, or a total of 2,316 
for the first six months, while cancellations during 
the month totaled 57 units, or 584 units for the first 
six months of 1935. 

Foreign Trade 
Imports were slightly higher in May than in April, 
while exports were substantially higher, due to 
larger shipments of hemp, copra, coconut oil and 
sugar. As a result, the balance of trade was favor- 
able by a substantial margin, only a little below that 
of May, 1934. For the first five months of 1935, 
exports totaled P72,619,521 and imports P64,145,- 
941, yielding a balance of trade favorable to the 
Philippines though not sufficiently so to offset the 
estimated adverse balance of invisible payments- 
Exports for the five months are only about half 
those for the same period last year. Imports are 
holding up better than had been expected and the 
total for the year will probably not be much behind 
last year's. 

Trade with the United States was very favorable 
in May and moderately favorable for the first five 
months, though the favorable balance was only a 
fraction of that for the same period of 1934. Trade 
with Japan was unfavorable, as usual, exports to 
Japan in the five months period being a little less 
than half the amount of imports from that country. 
There was a heavily favorable balance of trade with 
Spain in the five months period and also favorable 
balances with Great Britain, France and Italy. It 
is probable, however, that exports to Great Britain 
and France include some goods destined for other 
European countries and that the balance with some 
of those countries, such as Belgium, for example, 
may be less unfavorable than it appears from the 
figures. 

Import Trade — Imports in May were about nine 
percent higher than in April and about four percent 
over May last year. For the five months, imports 
were twelve percent below last year's. Cotton 
cloth was imported in good volume in May, as was 
machinery, but in each case the five months total 
is considerably behind last year's. Foodstuffs are 
keeping up fairly well as compared with last year, 
notably meat, but an increasingly large proportion 
of this is coming from Australia. Imports of to- 
bacco products, notably American cigarettes, con- 
tinue to increase, causing the Director of Plant 
Industry recently to call attention to the avail- 
ability of domestic cigarettes. 



Imports from the United States in May were 
about 13 percent over April and 7 percent over May, 
1934. For the first five months they were 14 per- 
cent under the same period of 1934. Imports from 
Japan were 10 percent over April and 20 percent 
over May, 1934, while imports for the first five 
months of 1935 were 8 percent over the same period 
of 1934. The American share was 66 percent and 
the Japanese share 12-1/2 percent of total imports in 
the first five months of 1935, while in the same period 
of 1934 the proportions were 68 percent and 10 per- 
cent, respectively. Imports from Japan apparently 
increased substantially in June and in the first week 
of July, judging from customs collections. 

Export Trade — Exports were 19 percent over April 
and only 6 percent under May, 1934. Now that the 
main sugar shipping season is about over, monthly 
comparisons of export figures should be less unfa- 
vorable in the future and 1935 exports should exceed 
1934 for the balance of the year, particularly in 
November and December, when the new crop sugar 
will be ready. Exports for the whole year 1935 will 
nevertheless be very substantially below 1934. For 
the first five months, exports were down 48 percent, 
or P65,814,000, due entirely to the drop of P74,388.- 
000 in sugar shipments. Abaca shipments for the 
five months were worth slightly less, but cordage 
exports were larger. Hats, cigars and molasses 
were down, but all coc«nut products, embroideries, 
leaf tobacco and lumber showed notable increases. 

The United States took nearly 89 percent of total 
exports in May, compared with 86 percent in May, 
1934, and 82 percent in the first five months, com- 
pared with 91 percent in the same period of 1934. 
Japan took 5 percent in the 1935 period and 2 percent 
in 1934. Exports to France and the Netherlands 
continued to fall off, due in part, apparently, to the 
protection afforded by the preference to Philippine 
copra in the American excise tax. 

Transportation 

Hihippinq 

Car (lot's. — Orient interport down a little from May 
but still very fair. A notable item was fresh man- 
goes shipped in substantial amounts to Hongkong 
and Shanghai in June as a result of the exchange. 
The United States Atlantic and Pacific Coasts con- 
tinue good except for sugar. Copra and coconut 
oil dropped off a little from May but are still good. 
Europe continues fair with lumber and hemp normal 
and copra cake good. There was one shipment of 
copra. Interisland lower than in May but still fair. 

Passev<jer TrnJHr. — Inward fairly good and should 
start picking up next month. Outward continues 
good although somewhat below May. Interisland 
good. 

Mnyula Railroad 

Revenue freight carloadings continue to decline 
with a weekly average of only 1,160 cars with a total 
tonnage of 11,877 tons for the four weeks ended June 
22, 1935, compared with an average of 1,243 with 
total tonnage of 13,082 tons for the preceding four 
weeks. Compared with the corresponding period 
of 1934, however, when the average was 1,050 cars 
with 9,606 tons, there is an improvement the first 
period this year, which has exceeded the corre- 
sponding period of last year. This is due to the fact 
that by this time last year all the sugarcane and most 
of the sugar have been moved, whereas this year 
sugar, though extremely limited in amount, has 
been moving very slowly with the result that there is 
still a considerable amount to be moved. The vol- 
ume of copra moved continues to run behind last 
year but should increase from now on. The volume 
of molasses is small. Other products were moved 
in about the same volume in the 1935 as in the 1934 
period, except lumber and timber and manufactures 
which showed substantial increases. For the 25 
weeks ended June 22, 1935, carloadings totaled 772,- 
748 tons, a 45 percent decrease from the 1,407,213 
tons loaded in the first 25 weeks of 1934, the decrease 
being due mainly to low movement of sugar, sugar- 
cane and molasses. 

The General Manager of the Manila Railroad 
Company predicts considerably improved business 
during the last half of this year and believes freight 
movement will exceed that for the last half of 1934. 
His optimism appears justified, as there should be 
more copra and coconuts available for shipment than 
in the first half of this year and more sugar, m Nov^ 
ember and December, than in the same period of 
1934. 
Aviation 

The Philippine Aerial Transport Company has 
inaugurated a regular weekly service between Ma- 



Atlas Assurance Company, 


The Employer's Liability 


Limited 


Assurance Corporation, Ltd. 


Continental Insurance Co. 


Orient Insurance Company 


GENERAL AGENTS 


Kneedler Bldg. No. 400 


• Telephone 2-24-28 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



365 




nila, Paracale, and Masbate to serve the new mining 
communities. 

Government Revenues 
In June, b«ing one of the months for the payment 
of income tax, tax receipts were substantial, amount- 
ing to P2, 713, 730, a two percent increase over the 
P2, 654, 260 received in June last year. Income tax 
received amounted to P2, 250, 276, or P50,000 more 
than in June last year. Incidental revenue, includ- 
iTig revenue from public forests and from United 
States internal revenue collected in the Philippines, 
was about the same as last year with the result that 
total collections of the Bureau of Internal Revenue 
were P2,888,046, compared with P2,834,738 in 
June last year. For the first half of 1935, collections 
of the Bureau of InternalRevenue totaled PlO, 954, 010 
or just P8,000 lower than for the first half of 1934 
(these figures represent collections of the Bureau of 
Internal Revenue in the city of Manila, which are 
nearly 75 percent of the total collections for the 
Islands. 

Customs collections continue to run ahead of last 
year, in spite of the small lower imports. For the 
first six months of 1935, customs collections are 
about five percent over the same period of 1934. In 
the first ten days of July this year, customs collec- 
tions are reported as amounting to about P590,000, 
compared with P376,000 for the same period last 
year, due, it would appear, to larger imports of 
dutiable Japanese goods. 

Internal revenue collections on imported mer- 
chandise continue to run ahead of last year due 
mainly to larger importation of cigarettes. High- 
way Special Fund collections were better in June but 
still run behind for the first six months last year. Port 
Works Fund collections for the first half of 1935 are 
less than half those for the first half of last year, due 
to limited exports of sugar. The total collections 
of the Bureau of Customs was six percent greater 
than in June last year but six percent less for the 
first half this year than for the first half of 1934. 
Collections from homestead fees, free patents and 
sales of land during the first half of 1935 totaled 
P271,743, an increase of P87,000 over the first half 
of 1934, according to the Bureau of Lands. The 
increase was apparently due largely to a campaign to 
collect all overdue accounts. 

Banking and Credit 
The banking situation remained quiet, with little 
demand for loans. Demana and time deposits 
increased slightly. Debits to individual accounts 
were larger than in May, when they were aTected 
by Easter holidays. Circulation fell off a little but 
is still ahead of last year, as most of the dollar checks 
sent out for sugar benefit payments find their way 
to the Insular Treasurer. Consolidated figures of 
all banks as of June 29. 1935, are at follows: 





Thousands of Pesos 




June 29 


June 1 


June 30 




1935 


1935 


1934 


Total resources 


241.072 


247,777 


242.087 


Cash on hand 


23,678 


25.063 


21.847 


Loans, discounts and 








overdrafts 


100.394 


101.186 


95.972 


Investments 


59.751 


59.657 


51,488 


Demand deposits ... 


54.123 


53.871 


59,260 


Time deposits 


81.049 


79,574 


77.031 



Freckles 




Secretly and Quickly RemovaU 

SUIInuin's Freckle Cream bleaches 
them out while yoa sleep. Leaves 
the skin soft and white— the com- 
plexion fresh, clear and natural. 
For 37 years thousands of users 
have endorsed it. So easy to use. 
The first jar proves its mafic worth. 

Stillman's 

Freckle Cream 

RsmsfTss T Whitens 
rr«ckl«s i ThsSUii 

In Spanish Stillman's Freckle Cream is cnlled 
"La Crema Bella Aurora" 
For 8ale at all good drug stores 
Stillmsn 8c Co.. Manufacturers 
Aurora. 111.. U. S. A. 



Net working capital, 

foreign banks 8,656 11,437 2,63§ 

Average weekly debits 
to individual ac- 
counts, four weeks 

ending 25.120 23.270 21,073 

Total net circulation . 105.856 108,939 100,658 
Total Government 

reserves 148,422 153,055 137.586 

The value of inward bills for collection was about 
the same in June as in May, but at least 20 percent 
over June of last year. Importers continue to meet 
drafts promptly, with only a few requests for exten- 
sions from some of the smaller importers. Letters 
of credit opened in June were considerably lower in 
value than in May. when they were exceptionally 
large, but about the same as in June last year. De- 
mand for travellers' letters of credit continues to 
fall off seasonably. 

Domestic collections continue about the same, 
some authorities reporting them a little better than 
last year. They appear to average about ten percent 
overdue 60 days or more, which is considered normal. 
Collections are reported slow in the Ilocos Provinces, 
Southern Luzon. Negros and Panay (Iloilo), gen- 
erally satisfactory elsewhere and very satisfactory 
in Manila. Some companies report the credit 
situation as becoming notably unsatisfactory in 
Negros and Iloilo. but this seems to apply to the 
tire and auto accessory trades more than to others. 

Sugar 

The market opened fairly strong, some export 
sugar being sold for P8.00 per picul. though most 
exporters were reluctant to pay over P7.80. Prices 
fell off to P7.50 in the third week, rose to P7.80 as a 
result of encouraging news from New York, but 
receded to P7.50 by the end of the month. Holders 
were generally reluctant to sell at these prices. Ship- 
ments to the United States during June amounted 
to 28,100 long tons of centrifugal and 7,171 long tons 
of refined sugar. Shipments since November 1 have 
been as follows: 

Long Tons 
Nov. 1.1934 to Nov. 1.1933 to 
June 30. 1935 June 30. 1934 

Centrifugal 254,845 1.047,741 

Refined 28.784 57.2 17 

Grand Total 283.629 l7l04,958 

Domestic consumption sugar continued easy, 
quotations falling to P7.00 per picul and some dis- 
tress sugar being offered as low as P6.70. Prices 
improved in the third week, washed sugar reaching 
P7.60 to P7.65 and ordinary centrifugal sugar P7.00, 
but fell off at the end of the month. 

Coconut Products 

Copra prices continued downward throughout 
June, falling steadily from P 10.00 for resecada at 
the first of the month to P6.50 at the close. Arrivals 
were not excessively large, although they substantial- 
ly exceeded those for June last year and also con- 
siderably exceeded May if the 55.000 sacks from tne 
Celebes are deducted from arrivals for that month. 
Manila arrivals totaled 260,729 sacks in June, an 
increase of 54,000 sacks over the 1934 figures, but 
stocks in Manila at the end of June were light. Ar- 
rivals in Cebu were heavy, totalling 322.660 sacks 
or 34.000 more in June last year and stocks are re- 
ported to be fairly large. Crop prospects are fair 
for July and good for August and September. They 
should be good for the balance of the year, barring 
serious damage by typhoons. 

The weakness of prices in June was apparently 
due to decreased demand from the United States, 
where buyers showed great agility in keeping their 
bids below the rapidly declining Philippine copra 
market. The anticipated reserve market in Europe 
proved of little help, as European buyers also re- 
duced their offers sufficiently to keep out of range. 
Mills purchased future contracts all the way down, 
however, and sellers are now sufficiently supplied 
with such contracts to keep them from the necessity 
of throwing their copra on the market immediately 
at what they consider excessively low prices. 

The coconut oil market naturally moved with the 
copra market, buyers consistently retreating before 
the reduced quotations of sellers auring the month. 
At the beginning of June mills were reluctant to 
accept the 4-1 2 cents ic.i.f. New York) offered by 
buyers but the price fell steadily and by the end of 
the month sellers were glad to get 3-12 cents but 
found no one interested at that price. Stocks in- 
creased in Manila and Cebu from 16.830 tons at the 
beginning of the month to 21,258 tons at the end of 
the month. It is the general impression that mills 
are not entirely happy about contracts purchased 
at prices considerably over the current price of 
copra, especially since supplies of copra are expected 
to increase in the next few months. Soap man- 
ufacturers have apparently found substitutes for 
coconut oil and are in no particular hurry to buy. 

Abaca (Manila Hemp) 

The market opened quiet, with buyers indifferent, 
but sellers refused to weaken. Increased demand 
from the United States for high and medium grades, 
with good inquiries for the lower grades from Japan, 
caused quotations to increase after the middle of 
the month. London showed little interest during 
most of the month but entered the market toward 
the close and made several purchases at advancing 
prices. The market was firm at the end of the 
month, with higher prices expected. 

Opening and closing prices in Manila (f.a.s.^ 
pesos per picul. for various grades, were reported 
as follows: 
Grade 

CD. 13.00. E. 11.00, F, 8.75. I. 7.25. J-1. 6.00. J-2. 
5.00, G, 5.25, H, 4.00, K, 4.00, L-1. 4.00, L-2, 3.00. 
Ml, 3.00. 




10 



Philippine Education Co., Inc. 

Distributors 



366 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 



Export*, at shown by the Fiber Inspection Serv- 
ice, were fairly heavy in June and considerably 
exceeded balings, with the result that stocks were 
decreased during the month. Balings in the first 
half of 1935 exceeded those for the same period of 

1934 by three percent, but the second quarter of 

1935 was below that period of 1934. 

The Collector of Customs has been instructed not 
to permit yarn, cordage, rope, etc., of Manila hemp 
or other hard fiber, to be shipped to the United 
States without a permit from the Governor-Generars 
Office. It has not yet been decided whether quotas 
are to be allotted on a basis of average shipments to 
the United States or spindle capacity. For the 
present, exporters will be granted permits up to the 
limit of their quota under the least favorable basis, 
which gives enough latitude to take care of all ex- 
ports until the decision is made. 

Rice 

With growers continuing to hold their rice to the 
extent they are able, in anticipation of higher prices, 
the rice market continued firm in June, with luxury 
rice increasing from !P5.10 to !P5.30 at the beginning 
of the month to P5.45-5.65 at the end, and P5.75- 
5 95 by July 10. Macans climbed steadily from 
P4. 55-4. 75 at the beginning to P4. 80-5. 00 at the end 
of June and continued up to P5. 10-5.30 by July 10. 
Palay opened at P2. 05-2. 20 and closed at F2.15- 
2.35, advancing by July 10 to P2. 25-2.40 per cavan 
of 44 kilos at buying points. The price is not yet 
sufficiently attractive to bring out large amounts, 
however. Saigon prices continue higher and im- 
ports have been small, consisting of special types 
demanded by the Chinese trade and amounting to 
only 2,176,561 kilos, valued at Pl78,322, in the 
first five months of 1935. Exports in the same period 
amounted to 1,855.210, valued at P172,198. 

Planting of the new crop is advancing slowly, due 
to lack of rains in June, indicating that the early 
crop will be of moderate size. Increased plantings 
are expected ultimately, due to the contraction of 
export crops. 

Tobacco 

The 1935 crop is beginning to come on to the 
market in Cagayan and Isabela, but growers and 
buyers found it difficult to agree on prices, with the 
result that few sales were made. Spain took a 
substantial quantity of leaf in June, bringing the 
total exports for that month up to 891,460 kilos 
compared with 184,651 kilos in May. 

June exports of cigars to the United States totaled 
18.462,931, exceeding the May figure by 3,446,000 
but falling below June, 1934, by 1.076,000 Exports 
toother countries totaled slightly under 500,000 in 
June, it is estimated. Exports to the United States 
in the first half of 1935 have totaled 768,638 kilos 
compared with 380,630 kilos in the first half of 1934. 

Imports of tobacco products in the first five 
months of 1935 were valued at P2,453,871, or shghtly 
under the P2, 782,363 at which cigar exports were 
valued. Import and export trade on these two 
items was almost entirely with the United States. 

Number 

Exports of logs and lumber continue to run far 
ahead of last year, the five months totals being as 
follows: 

Total 5 months 

Logs: 1934 1935 

Cubic meters 50,680 97.806 

Pesos 410,081 799,169 

Lumber: 

Cubic meters 34,426 46,657 

Pesos 1,048,870 1,298,564 

Lumber and timber exports were exceptionally 
heavy in April, according to detailed figures just 
received, totalling 15.573,520 board feet, valued at 
P511,936, compared with 5,858,408 board feet, 
valued at P255,165 in April, 1934. The largest 
increase was in exports to Japan and China, the 
former taking almost entirely logs and the latter 
both logs and lumber. Other countries also showed 
larger imports than in April last year. Mill pro- 
duction was 18,034,702 board feet in April, a 1,594,- 
000 board feet increase over April, 1934. Deliveries 
from the mills exceeded production by 2,000,000 
board feet but inventory is still large, being estim- 
ated at 31,054,327 board feet at the end of April. 

Mining 

With the addition of United Paracale to the list 
of producing companies, the number was swelled to 



an even dozen. Production during June, however, 
was slightly under May because Balatoc failed to 
reach its usual million peso mark and practically all 
other mines reported lower production as plants 
were being put in shape for the coming rainy season. 
With Paniqui figures not yet available, production 
for the other 11 mines amounted to P2, 516,353, 
compared with P2,<509.788 in May. June produc- 
tion by mines was as follows: 

Tons Milled Value 
Antamok Goldfields*. . . . 12,000 P 207,107 

Baguio Gold 4,059 69,181 

Balatoc 36,340 982,802 

Benguet Consolidated. . . 22.086 728,450 

Benguet Exploration ... . 2,067 34,469 

Demonstration Not available 90,1 1 1 

Ipo Gold 5.649 40,827 

Itogon 10,030 204,162 

I.X.L 32.600 

Suyoc Consolidated 2,949 75,644 

United Paracale 2,350 51,000 

Total 97.530 P2,516.353 

(♦)Part of this production was from Gold Creek 
ore —no official figures yet released as to how much. 

Production in the first half of 1935 totaled about 
P15, 000,000, and production for the year should 
exceed P30,000,000. The 1934 production, accord- 
ing to official figures released by the Division of 
Mines, was 10,504,920 fine grams of gold, valued at 
P23,823,365, and 6,612,915 fine grams of silver, 
valued at P272,060. Gold production for the past 
five years has been as follows: 

Fine Grams Pesos 

1930 5,574,335 7,409,598 

1931 5,661.072 7,524,867 

1932 7,598,341 10.200,167 

1933 9,214,868 16.190.795 

1934 10,504,920 24,095.425 

The Baluyut Mining Bill, intended to recognize 

definitely the legality of mining claims staked in 
forest reserves, was tabled in the Senate and action 
on it will probably be postponed at least to the ses- 
sion of the new Legislative Assembly. The bill had 
the backing of the Director of Forestry and legi- 
timate mining interests. 

The first manganese to be exported from the 
Philippines will be shipped to the United States by 
the Ilocos Manganese Mining Company, about the 
end of the month. There will be about 500 tons in 
the first shipment and other shipments are expected 
to follow. Another manganese mining company 
reports that it is ready to commence shipping as 
soon as a road is built to connect the mine with a 
port. 



News Summary 

The Philippines 

Jiuif 17. — The sugar office 
of the Agricultural Adjustment 
Administration in Manila starts 
releasing the second instalment 
of the sugar benefit payments. 
The first instalment amounted 
to about P8, 000, 000, and the 
second will be for a similar 
amount. The third and last 
will be paid after a check-up 
to determine whether planters 
have complied with the sugar 

limitation program. 

June IS. — Governor-General Frank Murphy 
urges that the Philippine National Bank follow a 
conservative policy and keep its assets as liquid as 
possible, declaring that it must be a pillar of strength 
to the new government, and warns against granting 
"individual favors or advantages". 

The Legislature in special session passes the bill 
advancing the opening of the regular session from 
July 17 to June 24. 

The committee on interior government of the 
House of Representatives decides that it would 
be unfair to the districts concerned to deprive them 
of representation by expelling the two Sakdal rep- 
resentatives until the court actually finds them 
guilty of sedition as charged in cases now pending. 

June 19.— H. J. H. Haas of the Royal Dutch 
Airlines, now in Manila, states that his company has 
no intention of establishing direct air connection 
with the Philippines, but that the sister companj', 





CALL ON US 

For the best playing cards procu- 
rable in Manila. Also for all things 
necessary for your Bridge parties. 

Philippine Education Co. 



101-103 Escolta 



Manila 



the Royal Netherland Indies Airways, is considering 
two possible air routes that would include the Philip- 
pines — one by way of Bangkok, Siam, and the other 
by way of Tarakan. Borneo. The- first is shorter, 
but the second more feasible. Mr. Haas is arranging 
for mail contracts with the Philippine postal author- 
ities. 

The failure of the Legislature to reach a decision 
in regard to the election law holds up the Bohol trip 
of Senate President Manuel L. Quezon, Sen. Sergio 
Osmefta, and others who had planned to escort the 
body of the late Sen. Jos6 A. Clarin to be buried in 
Bohol next Sunday. They plan to leave on Friday. 

The Board of Regents of the University of the 
Philippines appoints former President Rafael Palma 
professorial lecturer in legal ethics. 

The Governor-General suspends Dr. Elias Do- 
mingo, chief of the Insular Psychopathic Hospital, 
pending an investigation of the case of an unmarried 
young woman patient who gave birth to a child 
recently, considered evidence of an extremely lax 
administration. 

J line ^o. — Quezon receives an urgent plea by cable 
from textile exporters in New York, requesting that 
the Legislature enact an emergency law providing 
adequate protection for American textiles, pending 
an agreement on the permanent trade relations to be 
established. The cable states that sixty-five mem- 
bers of Congress have signed a request, which was 
mailed yesterday, for such action. The cablegram 
declares: "We shall deeply appreciate your coop- 
eration and assistance in our desperate situation 
with which you are familiar. Practically no business 
whatever has been coming from the Philippines. 
Action by the Philippine Legislature is absolutely 
necessary this season, otherwise our textile exports 
to the Philippines will completely disappear". The 
cablegram was read in the Senate and referred to 
the finance committee. 

The Senate passes the election bill in which the 
only important difference from the present law is 
said to be a provision empowering the Secretary of 
the Interior to appoint a fourth inspector for any 
party that may be formed and puts up candidates 
for the presidency and vice-presidency. Under the 
present law the party that poled the largest vote in a 
district in the preceding election is entitled to two 
inspectors and the party next highest to one inspec- 
tor. 

Sen. Claro M. Recto is designated Acting President 
of the Senate during the absence of Quezon in the 
South. 

June 21. — The House passes the election bill. 

The Governor-General signs the measure advanc- 
ing the opening date of the regular session of the 
Legislature. 

Dr. Leopoldo Pardo, alienist in charge of the 
women's department of the Insular Psychopathic 
Hospital, is suspended. 

Jos6 Abueg, alleged Sakdal leader, is arrested by 
the Constabulary on a charge of sedition in connec- 
tion with the May 2 uprising. An earlier sedition 
charge, brought last year, is also pending against 
him. 

June 22. — The Legislature passes the election bill 
and the special session ends. The regular session 
opens Monday. 

Jos6 Zurbito of Masbate, former governor, rep- 
resentative, and a delegate to the Constitutional 
Convention, dies, aged 50. 

June 24. — The Governor-General submits the 
1936 budget to the Legislature proposing an expen- 
diture of ^54,174,337,10 which leaves a surplus or 
P2, 000, 000 over the estimated income. 

The National Federation of Women's Clubs pro- 
tests to the Governor-General against the provision 




UNCLE SAM 
SHOE POLISH 

Makes old shoes 
look like new 

Philippine Distributors 

KUENZLE & STREIFF 

MANILA 
Cebu — Iloilo — Zamboanga 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



367 



in the election bill cancelling the right of the women 
to take part in the coming Commonwealth elections. 
They state they are ready to take the question to 
the courts if necessary. 

Secretary of Justice Jos^ Yulo renders a ruling 
declaring all "sweepstakes" or lotteries by private 
persons or entities illegal, pointing out that Act 4130 
authorizes the holding of sweepstakes only by the 
Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office created by 
that same law. 

June 26. — Two flying boats of the British Royal 
Air Corps stationed at Singapore, manned by seven 
officers and eleven men, arrive in Manila from Hong- 
kong after a flight of seven and a half hours. They 
are surveying a Hongkong -Singapore route by way 
of Manila and Labuan, Borneo. 

At a meeting presided over by General Emilio 
Aguinaldo, the National Socialist Party is formally 
organized, the Sakdal Party, headed by Jos^ Timog, 
and other minority groups including the Radical 
Party, headed by Rep. Alfonso Mendoza, the La- 
bor ista Party, headed by Pablo Manlapit, the Pam- 
panga Communists, headed by Abad Santos, the 
Philippine Fascists, headed by Miguel Cornejo, and 
the Civil Union, headed by Vicente Sotto, all takmg 
part. 

A committee of the House under the chairmanship 
of Rep. S. V. Cea opens hearings on the Monte de 
Piedad to investigate charges of irregularities in the 
management. 

June 26. — Major-Gencral Frank Parker returns 
from a tour of the Netherland Indies and the Malay 
Peninsula and comments on the progress in these 
regions. . . , 

Sen. Teofilo Sison, Secretary of the Interior, an- 
nounces that all holders of private lotteries for what- 
ever announced aim will be prosecuted in view of the 
opinion rendered by the Secretary of Justice. 

Former Judge Anastacio Teodoro, Aguinaldo 
leader, announces that Raymundo Melliza, of Molo, 
Iloilo, a former Associate Justice of the Supreme 
Court, will run for the vice-presidency of the Com- 
monwealth on the Aguinaldo ticket. 

June 28. — Quezon and Osmefta and their party 
return to Manila from a brief visit to the South 
during which they attended the funeral ceremonies of 
the late Senator Clarin. 

Judge M. C. Montemayor at Malolos, Bulacan, 
sentences 87 Sakdals, found guilty of sedition in con- 



DMC 



«CCl8TCRCO TRAOe 



CORDONNET 
D' ALSACE 




SEWING 

COTTON 

. . . a two cord, left twisted, brilliant cotton 
for machine or hand sewing. Especially created 
for worti on light materials. A strong, even 
and smooth-running thread, available in a fine 
selection of fast shades. May also be used 
for machine embroidery. Supplied in boxes of 
assorted colors .... 

Iiigli quality 
fast colors 



can be procured from all stores. If difficult to obtain, 
write to 

F. £ lUELUG. IHC, P. 0. B. 604. MANILA. 




nection with the May uprising to imprisonment for 
terms of from two to seventeen years. Some of the 
96 persons originally included in the charges, have 
been freed. 

June 29. — Aguinaldo, accompanied by former 
Senator Emiliano Tria Tirona and a small delega- 
tion, leaves for a short tour of Gebu, Leyte, and 
Samar. 

June. SO. — Bishop Gregorio Aglipay in a speech 
in Manila at the launching of the Republican Party 
with himself as candidate for the presidency states: 
"We wish to consolidate the liberal institutions 
Implanted here by America and put an end to caci- 
quisim and corruption". 

July I. — Arthur Rubinstein, noted polish pianist, 
arrives in Manila for a series of concerts. 

July 2. — The Senate accepts the resignation of 
Recto as senator and president pro tempore and 
elects Sen. Jos<^ Avelino as President pro tempore 
in his place. Sen. Arranz becomes the floor leader. 

July .i. — The Senate and the Cabinet adopt con- 
gratulatory resolutions in connection with the ap- 
pointment of Murphy to the high commissionership. 

The Governor-General dispatches a cable to the 
Secretary of War, urging the approval of the Dock- 
weiler bill which would restore Philippine coconut 
oil and oil extracted in the United States from Philip- 
pine copra from the excise tax provided the product 
is used for inedible or industrial purposes only. 

The Governor-General in a letter to Paredes urges 
the approval of the probation bill passed by the 
Senate at last year's session but not acted upon by 
the House for lack of time. 

Recto is inducted into office as Associate Justice 
of the Supreme Court, the Court now having a Fili- 
pino majority for the first time. 

July .;. — John R. Wilson, Secretary and Director 
of the American Chamber of Commerce, dies aged 
60. He came to the Philippines with the 17th U. S. 
Infantry in 1898, prepared the first real estate as- 
sessment in the City of Manila under the American 
government, organized the Land Registration Office, 
and was from 1905 to 1913 Assistant Director of 
Lands. 

July a. — The Governor-General in a letter ad- 
dressed to Quezon urges early legislative approval 
of the franchise requested by Pan American Airways, 
Inc. to establish and operate an air transport service 
between the Philippines and the United States and 
any other foreign country or countries. He men- 
tions the many obvious advantages of such a service 
and points out that neither exclusive privileges nor 
financial assistance is asked for, and that the prornpt 
grant of a franchise would "meet with satisfaction 
also in the United States". 

Captain Russell Maughan, for some years head 
of the Aeronautics Division of the Department of 
Public Works and Communications, leaves Manila 
to return to regular Army service in the United 
States. 

July 7. — Paredes in a campaign speech at San 
Fernando, La Union, states that the coalition is 
confined to the candidacies of Quezon and Osmefta 
for the presidency and vice-presidency of the Com- 
monwealth and that the "pro" and "anti" parties 
are still in existence. 

Melliza, candidate for the vice-presidency on the 
Aguinaldo ticket, arrives in Manila and states in an 
address that Aguinaldo, "if given a chance, may 
still save the country from the rascals". 

A number of members of the Siam National As- 
sembly arrive in Manila to promote trade relations. 

July S. — Sen. Gil Montilla, chairman of the com- 
mittee on franchises, introduces the Pan American 
Airways franchise bill. 

The Governor-General submits to the Legislature 
a public health and welfare program callinp. for 
^133,064 for the care of the mentally defective, 
P200,000 for the extension of community health 
nursing and special work, and ^100,000 for the 
extension of the activities of the Bureau of Pubhc 
Welfare to the provinces. 

The Senate passes a bill ceding the use of the Man- 
sion House at Baguio to the High Commissioner 
pending the construction of the Federal buildings. 

Lieut. William L. Lee of the U. S. Army is detailed 
o work with the Constabulary in establishing the 
Constabulary Air Corps. 

Twelve members of the Japanese Diet arrive in 
Manila from Davao and the Japanese mandated 
islands in the South Seas and are met by a joint 
committee of the Senate and House. 

July 9. — The Governor-General in a letter to 
Quezon and Paredes urges quick action on the tex- 
tile tariff, stating that while adjustment of trade 
relations between the United States and the Philip- 
pines is a mayor problem which will be a subject of 
future joint study and negotiation, the present sit- 
uation and trend in some segments of this trade are 
deserving of the immediate attention of the Legis- 
lature. On a quantity basis in textiles there has 
been a decline of 72 per cent of the total imports in 
1932 to 67 per cent in 1933 and 40 per cent in 1934, 
and during the first six months of this year, the 
United States share has gone down to 38 per cent. 
"This decline has been so marked as to attract wide 
attention in the United States. ... It is believed 
that a satisfactory adjustment of our trade relations 
with the United States would be materially aided 
and facilitated by an eflTective adjustment of import 
duties on textiles and other products that would 
afford prompt relief to American and Philippine 



A •/^arcia. 

^ ^ Photo Engraving 

32 Sta. Potenciana 



interests without subjecting other countries to un- 
fair treatment or imposing unreasonable and ex- 
tensive burdens on the consuming public. It has 
been suggested that it would be a fair solution of the 
textile problem, considering all interests concerned, 
if the products of the United States textile industry 
were restored approximately to the average position 
held by them in the Philippine market in the years 
immediately prior to 1934". 

July 10. — The Governor-General appoints two 
committees — the Philippine Inter-Departmental 
Committee, composed of the Secretary of Finance, 
the Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce, and 
the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, 
and the Technical Trade Committee, composed of 
Benito Razon, Rafael Alunan. Cornelio Balmaceda, 
Conrado Benitez, Kenneth B. Day, Guillermo Gomez, 
Vicente Madrigal, H. B. Pond, and J. Bartlett Ri- 
chards. He declares in a public statement: "The 
importance of the President's Joint Trade Con- 
ference, in which the Philippine committee will take 
part, is without parallel, for the decisions of the 
conference will be a mayor determinant of the eco- 
nomic stability, the standard of living, and the in- 
dustrial advance of the Philippines for years to come. 
We all suspect that Philippine and American eco- 
nomy are not nearly as antagonistic as some would 
have us believe. There is a distinct possibility of 
building a complementary economic relation between 
the two countries. Both the Philippines and the 
United States must enter the conference fully pre- 
pared with accurate facts and moderate conclusions, 
and both must set aside all exaggerated claims and 
must guard against distortion of the basic purpose 
for the accommodation of special interests. Where 
unwise or deterrent conditions are encountered, they 
should be admitted, and the correction diligently 
sought. Along with facts and figures there must be 
mental preparation. The situation will require for- 
bearance, openmindedness. and mutual confidence 
and good faith. I believe that the task is one of the 
most important ones which has confronted the Philip- 
pines in the present generation. I believe we de- 
finitely owe to the future people of the Islands its 
successful conclusion, for otherwise much of the 
social, political, and cultural advancement of the 
past thirty-six years in the Philippines will be lost". 

Sekijiro Fukuda, member of the Japanese group 
visiting Manila, states: "Japan believes it her hu- 
manitarian mission to produce cheap textiles for the 
middle and poor classes in all countries of the world. 
It is Japan's aim to produce cheap goods for the 
benefit of poor peoples all over the world and not 
only for profit." He declares that it would be "more 
to the interest of the Philippines that the ingress 
of Japanese textile products be unimpeded so that 
the cost of living would be maintained at a low level". 

Melliza, vice-presidential candidate, suddenly 
and without explanation, leaves Manila for his 
home in Iloilo. It is rumored there was a dispute 
about campaifcn funds. 

July l.i. — The House passes the budget bill of 
Serafin Marabut, chairman of the committee on 
appropriations, which provides for the continuance 
of the 1935 appropriations until after the National 
Assembly of the Commonwealth Government ap- 
proves a new appropriation law except for items that 
will be suppressed, such as the appropriation for the 
Senate which will discontinue to exist. 

The House passes a joint resolution authorizing 
the Governor-General on behalf of the Government 
to enter into negotiations with the owners of friar 
estates in Batangas, Laguna, ^ataan, Bulacan, and 
other places, towards the purchase of these lands. 

July 1.'). — The Senate passes the executive budget. 
Sen. Domingo Imperial, chairman of the finance 
committee, assailing the House emergency appro- 
priation bill as violating budgetary principles and 
confusing the government finances. 



DR. H. H. STEINMETZ 

TEL. 22744 
OFFICE: 124 PINPIN 



Mercolized Wax 

Glorifies the Skin 



Give your skin the beauty, smoothness 
and velvety-softness that accentuates the 
youth and individuahty of your face 
by using pure Mercolized Wax. Pat the 
Wax briskly all over your face, neck and 
arms each night as if it were an ordinary 
cold cream. It dissolves the discolored 
surface skin removing freckles, tan, liver 
spots, and other blemishes. Mercolized Wax 
brings out the hidden beauty of your skin. 
Powdered Saxolite reduces wrinkles and 
other age signs . Simply dissolve one ounce 
Saxolite in a half-pint witch Hazel and use 
as an astringent. At all drug and depart- 
ment stores. 



368 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 



The House approves the public works (pork barrel) 
bill of about F6,000,000. 

A delegation of the Republican (Aglipay) Party, 
headed by Ricardo Alejandro, Party President, and 
ex-Sen. Isabelo de los Reyes, call on the Governor- 
General and present a resolution requesting the an- 
nulment of the results of the plebiscite on the grounds 
that these do not represent the true sentiments of 
the people. The resolution declares it is not proper 
for the United States to conclude its altruistic labors 
of more than three decades with a legislative enact- 
ment so selfishly conceived as the Tydings-McDuffie 
Act, recites the beneficent results of American sover- 
eignty, states that the Filipinos have nothing but 
gratitude in their hearts, protests against the "un- 
fortunate leaders who were blind enough to accept 
the Tydings Act under which America will leave us 
at a time when we need her most", and charges them 
with having failed as their duty as defenders of the 
people's interests, declaring that they forgot that 
the Tydings Act "promises an independence impos- 
sible of achievement because it imposes conditions 
which no country can bear for ten years," and con- 
cludes that the Jones Law is "all we need for our 
continued welfare". The resolution arouses partic- 
ular interest because Bishop Aglipay stated in a 
campaign speech a few days ago that he is not in 
favor of independence in ten years or in from three 
to five years, but immediately. 

Ju//y lf>. — Benito Razon, President of the National 
Economic Protectionism Association, answering 
Vicente ViUamin's statement in Washington, de- 
clares that the organization is not anti-foreign, much 
less anti-American, and that it supports the consti- 
tutional provision giving Americans equal rights 
with Filipinos, but that it can not support the patron- 
age of American or foreign goods at the expense of 
Philippine goods. "Ncpa is committed to the task 
of popularizing locally made goods because the 
development of our industries will greatly depend 
upon the assurance of home markets". 

The House unseats Rep. Eligio Lagman and 
seats Maximo Dimson instead, disposing of a protest 
that has lain before the House for more than a yenr 
by a vote of 46 to 17. The election committee 
reported an even vote of 6399 for each and Rep. 
Manuel Roxas proposed that the House declare a 
failure of election from the First District of Pam- 
panga or else decide the case by lot, claiming that 
the House has no right to choose for the Pampanga 
constituents. Lagman protests against the "in- 
justice" done him and announces he will comeback 
to the National Assembly. 

Jos6 N. Abueg, reputed head of the Sakdals in 
Cavite^, accused of inciting sedition at a Sakdal meet- 
ing in General Trias on August 31 of last year, is 
sentenced to an indeterminate sentence of from two 
to four years. Filomeno Pordon, Ignacio Martinez, 
and Narciso Galvez, his co-accused, receive similar 
sentences. They appeal to the Supreme Court and 
are out on bail of Pi, 500 each. 

* The United States 
June 15. — The House of Representatives passes 
the Smith bill to restore the reductions made under 
the Economy Act in the pensions for service in the 
Spanish-American War, the Boxer Rebellion, and 
the Philippine Insurrection. The Bill now goes to 
the Senate. 

June /7.— Sen. W. H. King charges that Japan 
has violated the Nine-Power Pacific Treaty and the 
Kellogg Peace Pact and introduces a resolution 
empowering the foreign affairs committee to inquire 
into "the activities of Japan in China". 

Sen. Q. W. Norris proposes an amendment to the 
Constitution that would prohibit the Supreme Court 
from holding an act of Congress unconstitutional 
unless the decision is rendered by more than two- 
thirds of the justices and the action is started within 
six months of enactment. 

June IS. — The House passes the amendments to 
the Agricultural Adjustment Act, including the 
extension of the Jones-Costigan Sugar Control Act 
to December 31, 1937, designed principally to make 
the Act proof against a possible adverse decision 
of the Supreme Court. 

Sen. Key Pittman proposes a Senate investigation 
to determine whether Nine Power Treaty and the 
Kellogg Pact are being violated. 

Major Porfiro Zablan of the Philippine Constabu- 
lary is killed in an air accident at Kelly Field, San 
Antonio, Texas, where he was taking advanced 
courses in aviation. His death is a serious loss to 
the Constabulary. He was 43 years old and a native 
of Bacolor, Pampanga. 

June 19. — The House appropriation committee 
rejects the Administration's request for a $23,862,750 
appropriation for the Philippines, representing the 
Philippines' share in the "profit" accruing to the 
Treasury when the gold content of the dollar was 
reduced, and authorized by Congress on June 14, 
1934, although the actual appropriation was never 
made. The committee members state that no 
evidence has been presented to show that the Philip- 
pines was in any way injured or suffered loss. 

The House appropriations committee recommends 
an appropriation of $750,000 for the construction of 
a new United States building in Shanghai. 

June 20. — President Franklin D. Roosevelt in a 
special message to Congress unexpectedly and boldly 
urges a redistribution of wealth through higher 
taxes on the wealthy in order to check social unrest, 
stating that the people know that "vast personal 
incomes arise not only through ability or luck, but 
also because of opportunities to which the govern- 
ment contributes. It is the duty of the government 
to restrict such incomes by very high taxes". He 
advocates also the simplification of corporate struc- 
tures through the elimination of unnecessary holding 
companies, and asks for increased inheritance, gift, 
and personal and corporation income taxes. Pro- 
gressives in Congress state they will fight for the 
immediate adoption of the program, but it is said 
that the President is willing to leave the matter in 



abeyance and press it as a campaign issue in 1936. 

The Senate passes the social security bill 76 to 6 
^and the measure now goes back to the House for 
concurrence in Senate amendments. 

The House passes the Wagner labor disputes bill, 
already passed by the Senate, and the measure goes 
back there for concurrence in minor amendments. 

Rear Admiral Yates Stirling, commandant of the 
Brooklyn Navy Yard and formerly commander of 
the Pearl Harbor naval base, is censured by Secre- 
tary of the Navy Claude Swanson for a published 
article, written by him. The Secretary declares he 
believes it improper for naval officers "to make 
public controversial comment on international 
aflfairs which might be construed as offensive to 
foreign governments or their nationals". Admiral 
Stirling pointed out in his article that "United 
States ownership of the Philippines and British 
sovereignty in Borneo and what in effect amounts 
to a British protectorate over the Netherlands 
Indies, together with the formidable sea-power of the 
United States and Britain have made it inconvenient 
for Japanese imperialism to expand as logic appears 
to dictate. If full expansion could have been 
achieved to the southward, avoiding the extensive 
commitments in Asia, it would not have been man- 
datory for Japan to maintain so great and expensive 
an army. Japan's navy is not believed large enough 
for her to risk at this time a southward march of her 
industrious people. A greater navy therefore must 
certainly be Japan's dream, and all the power of 
insistence of her leaders doubtless will be mobilized 
to make that nation realize that their future lies in 
the seas and not in continental Asia. If this reason- 
ing is correct, then the Philippines must become 
Japan's primary objective. They must be amalga- 
mated with Japan before her armada can move on 
to further conquest southward. . . . The action of 
Japan will depend upon her relative strength on the 
seas of the Far East, not only with the United States 
but with other seapowers that might be interested in 
the fate of the Philippines." 

J une. 2 1 .- -S\.ocV. prices which tumbled upon publi- 
cation of the President's new high taxation proposals 
stage a good recovery and remain firm. 

J une 2.i.~ Sen. W. E. Borah expresses his support 
of the taxation program, stating it is sound econo- 
mically and morally, and claims it is absurd to call 
it a "share-the-wealth" program as it is nothing 
more than a "share-in-the-support" of the govern- 
ment. 

June 21t. — The President calls on Congress to 
enact at this session his new tax program, called by 
some "the tax-lhe-rich" program. 

The United States Fleet and Scouting Force is 
ordered to the North Pacific for rough water shooting 
practice, although the two divisions have but recently 
returned from extensive maneuvers with the rest 
of the fleet. 

June 2n. — V. E. Cheane, general traffic manager 
of Pan American Airways, Inc., announces that 
regular commercial flights between Alameda, Califor- 
nia, and Manila will start the last week of September 
or the first week in October. He says Manila will be 
the Far Eastern terminus until arrangements are 
made for landing in China. Passenger fares will be 
about twice the present steamship fare or under 
$1,000. 

The President signs the 1935-36 Navy Depart- 
ment supply bill, carrying $460,000,000 and a record 
peace-time outlay for new warship construction. 

The President nominates Governor-General Frank 
Murphy to become the first United States High 
Commissioner in the Philippines upon the inaugura- 
tion of the Commonwealth Government, and states 
in a cablegram to him, "You have richly merited 
this distinction because of your outstanding services 
as Governor-General, and I am confident that this 
appointment will be received with great satisfaction 
by the people of the United States and the Philip- 
pines". 

June Secretary of the Navy Swanson states 

that for the time being the United States will with- 
hold its decision on the inaugurating of a program of 
battleship replacement, although bids for the private 
construction of auxiliary warships will be opened 
shortly. By 1936 over half of the United States 
battleships will be obsolete according to naval treaty 
standards — that is, over twenty years old. Some 
of these ships have, however, been modernized. 

Sen. D. I. Walsh, Massachusetts Democrat, pres- 
ents a resolution in the Senate asking the President 
to "use his influence with the Philippine Legislature" 
to secure effective protection of American textiles 
in Philippine markets, until recently the largest 
single export outlet for American cotton goods, the 
American share of which has dropped from 75 per 
cent in 1932 to 25 per cent during the first four months 
of this year. "It is understood", declares the reso- 
lution, "that the Philippine government and people 
are sympathetic toward the belief that because of 
the unusual governmental relations and other bonds 
which have existed between the governments of the 
United States and the Islands, the products of 
American workmen are entitled to protection in the 
Islands against those foreign industries whose wages 
and living standards are not comparable to American 
standards". 

June 27. — The conference draft of the Wagner 
labor disputes bill is approved by both houses. 

June 29. — At the request of the President, John 
L. Lewis, head of the United Mine Workers, calls 
off the threatened nation-wide strike which would 
involve 450,000 men, for a period of thirty days. 
The strike was ordered after the collapse of new 
hour and wage negotiations that followed the Su- 
preme Court decision invalidating the National 
Recovery Act. 

June 30. — The Government completes the fiscal 
year with a deficit of $3,500,000,000, raising the 
public debt to $28,700,000,000. The deficit is, 
however, $1,369,000,000 less than was expected and 
the revenues total $3,800,000,000, or $89,000,000 



better than expected. Experts estimate the Pres- 
ident's new tax proposals would produce approxi- 
mately $1,000,000,000 more a year. 

July 1. — The House votes 216 to 146 against the 
motion to adopt the Senate version of the Wheeler- 
Rayburn holding company bill. Wall Street reacts 
gleefully, anticipating that this rebuff to the Pres- 
ident will prove a blow to his prestige and will likely 
affect the outcome of other bills opposed by the 
financial interests, including the labor dispute bill 
and the banking bill. 

The Senate confirms the appointment of Murphy 
as High Commissioner. 

Fred and Algene Keys, brothers, come down after 
653 hours and 33 minutes ^approximately 28 days) 
breaking the unofficial endurance airplane flight 
of 64 7-1/2 hours. Fear that their plane would 
disintegrate in mid-air as a result of nearly a month's 
uninterrupted performance, forced them to land. 
The name of the Meridian municipal air port was 
changed to Keys Field in recognition of the feat. 

Juh/ - The House for the second time ignores 
the President's request in passing its own version 
of the holding company bill, this time by a vote of 
323 to 81. The bill now goes to the Senate. The 
House also adopts a resolution calling for an investi- 
gation of charges of lobbying, a number of congress- 
men having declared that they were threatened with 
the withdrawal of civil works and relief funds unless 
they supported the Administration. 

July ,7. — The President signs the Wagner labor 
dispute bill guaranteeing labor the right to collective 
bargaining and setting up tribunals which will largely 
take the place of the NRA labor boards. 

Secretary of State Hull answers the appeal of 
Emperor Haile Selassie of Abyssinia suggesting in 
effect that the League of Nations which already has 
undertaken arbitration continue its efforts to reach 
a peaceful solution. The United States is "loath 
to believe that either Italy or Ethiopia would resort 
to other than pacific means or would permit any 
situation to arise which would be inconsistent with 
their commitments under the Kellogg-Briand Peace 
Pact. 

June 7. — The spirit of revolt in Congress against 
White House leadership is reported to be growing. 
Rep. Hamilton Fish of New York states: "For the 
last two years. White House agents have written 
legislation for Congress. . . . Irrespective of parti- 
sanship, it is the clear duty of Congress to put an 
end to all attempts, whether emanating from the 
White House or special interests, to write, control, 
and dominate legislation". 

July .9. - M. L. Seidman of the New York Board of 
Trade tells the House ways and means committee 
that the President's tax-on-wealth program is "con- 
fiscatory class legislation" and declares "experience 
demonstrates that excessive taxation on large in- 
comes will not produce revenue but will dry up 
sources of revenue". 

Henderson S. Martin, former Vice-Governor of 
the Philippines, dies at Beverley Hills, California, 
aged 72. 

July 11. — The Chamber of Commerce of the 
United States launches a furious attack on the 
President's tax program, calling it confiscatory and 
destructive and a "perversion of the taxing power". 

Secretary of State Hull tells the Italian Ambas- 
sador that the United States views Italian steps in 
Abyssinia with "extreme misgivings" and begins a 
series of discussions with diplomats of other coun- 
tries that signed the Kellogg Pact. 

The President signs the bill providing for the free 
transportation of indigent Filipinos at present in 
the United States back to the Philippines. The act 
asserts that it shall not be interpreted as authorizing 
mandatory deportation. 

Francis B. Sayrc, Assistant Secretary of State, 
chairman of the inter-departmental committee 
named to study the question of future economic 
relations between the United States and the Philip- 
pines, states, "There is no question that we will be 
able to reach a common meeting ground on trade 

problems " 

July 12. — The attempt of National Guardsmen 
at Tacoma, Washington, to halt a parade of striking 
lumbermen results in four hours of street fighting 
with the arrests of twenty or more men and the 
injury of scores. Tear gas was used. 

July The United States and Russia conclude 

a trade pact granting Russia the most favored nation 
benefits in treaties made with other countries. 

July l-'i. — Vicente Villamin, Filipino economist, 
states in Washington that the Nepa campaign waged 
in the Philippines (National Economic Protectionism 
Association) is "injurious to the larger economic 
interests of the Philippines", violating the spirit of 
the Philippine Commonwealth Constituticn which 
guarantees equal rights to Americans and Filipinos. 
The slogan should be, "Buy Filipino and American" 
because that is what Filipino self-interest dictates 
in the present circumstances. "We are trying to 
convince America that a reciprocal trade arrangement 
in the future, which would be the economic salvation 
of the Philippines, would be worth while. With the 
trade balance so uniformly and increasingly against 
the United States already, it is supremely incon- 
sistent to wage a campaign that would inevitably 
decrease American imports into the Islands. The 
activities of Nepa are a frontal attack upon that 
sector of Philippine economy that sends Filipino 
products to the United States duty free and provides 
the bulk of Filipino buying power and income of the 
government". 

Hundreds of Americans enlist in New York City 
for service in the Abyssinian army to aid Emperor 
Haile Selassie in the event of war with Italy, and 
American firms and individuals in Ethiopia have 
offered financial and military assistance. Similar 
movements are under way in other countries. 

July 15. — The Senate appropriations committee, 
like that of the House, in voting to report favorably 
the second deficiency bill, makes no provision for 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



369 



the payment of the Philippine claim for $23,862,750 
"profit" from the government's currency devalua- 
tion. It is argued that the United States would be 
setting a dangerous precedent in reimbursing the 
Philippines. 

July /^.— The United States Circuit Court of 
Appeals in Boston rules that the Agricultural Ad- 
justment Act processing tax is unconstitutional, 
basing this conclusion on the contention that Con- 
gress is not authorized to regulate production, this 
being within the control of the individual States, 
and that such legislation is an improper delegation 
of power. Sugar prices drop several points as a 
result of the decision, which will be appealed. 

Pedro Guevara, Philippine Resident Commissioner 
in the United States, announces that he will shortly 
sail for Manila, closing his career in Washing- 
ton after twelve years service. He will arrive in the 
Philippines over three weeks in advance of the Sep- 
tember 17 elections, but has announced no plan to 
seek a seat in the National Assembly. 

Other Countries 

June 10. — The United States Asiatic Fleet draws 
high praise from Chinese authorities after 600 officers 
and men put out a fire in the industrial district of 
Chefoo which the local firefighters were unable to 
control. 

June 17. — Continuous conferences are being held 
in Nanking between Chinese and Japanese officials 
and it is understood that the latter are pressing a 
written acceptance of the Japanese demands. 

Japanese newspaper dispatches state that the 
military in Manchukuo have decided that Gen, 
Sung Cheh-huan, Governor of Chahar province, 
must go, and that if Nanking does not remove him, 
the Japanese army will treat him and his army as 
bandits. The Japanese allege that Sung's troops 
have three times "invaded" Manchukuo. 

Sir Samuel Hoare, British foreign minister, tells 
the House of Commons that the North China situa- 
tion is confusing owing to conflicting reports and 
states that the government is negotiating with the 
Japanese and Chinese regarding the developments. 
He declares that the local Japanese commanders and 
not Tokyo is making the demands and that these 
are "not so extreme*' as originally reported. 

It is disclosed that Britain has sanctioned the 
construction of a navy by Germany up to 35 per cent 
of the underage British naval strength -which would 
give the German navy actually about 17 per cent 
of the British strength. France and Italy dispatch 
vigorous notes to Britain rejecting any prospective 
treaty revision which would restore Germany to 
the status of a major sea power and stating that if 
Britain agrees to a German tonnage equal to 35 per 
cent of Britain's they will consider themselves justi- 
fied in resuming full liberty of naval construction. 

June 18. — Reported that General Sung has been 
dismissed as Governor of Chahar. 



June 19. — Reported that the refusal of China to 
grant Japanese the right to operate a Tokyo to 
Canton air line, makes it difficult for the Chinese to 
grant permission to the Pan American Airways, Inc. 
to use Canton as a terminal, and that negotiations 
have therefore begun for possible use of Hongkong 
or Macao as a terminal. It is also suggested that 
the service terminate in Manila, leaving the con- 
necting service with the Asiatic mainland to be 
maintained by the China National Aviation Com- 
pany in which Pan America has stock. 

Australia's Commonwealth Council of Defense 
meets to consider plans for defense in view of the 
prospects of a tremendous armament race developing. 

The Anglo-German naval agreement is signed and 
becomes effective immediately. French officials 
express surprise at the apparent abrupt change in 
Britain's foreign policy from cooperation with France 
and Italy which former Premier Ramsay MacDonald 
sponsored. Premier Benito Mussolini states that 
in view of the British-German action, he will here- 
after not bother to consult other governments, but 
will act as he thinks best under the circumstances, 
and states that Britain's action in individually 
dealing with Germany the greatest blow to the 
prestige of the League of Nations since the withdrawal 
of Japan as a member. In view of the reaction in 
{Continuf^'l on pnov 



Astronomical Data for 
August, 1935 

By the Weather Bureau 



Sunrise and Sunset 

(C/./Mr Limh) 
Rises 

Aug. 4.. 5:39 a.m. 

Aug. 9.. 5:40 a.m. 

Aug. 14.. 5:41 a.m. 

Aug. 19.. 5:42 a.m. 

Aug. 24.. 5:43 a.m. 

Aug. 29.. 5:43 a.m. 



Moonrise and Moonset 

( I'pp- r Linih) 

Rises 

Augu-t 1 6:56 a.m. 

August 2 7:43 a.m. 

Au>;ust 3 8:28 a.m. 

August 4 9:14 a.m. 

August 5 10:00 a.m. 




Sets 

6:24 p.m. 
6:22 p.m. 
6:19 p.m. 
6:17 p.m. 
6:14 p.m. 
6:10 p.m. 



Sets 
7:35 p.m. 
8:10 p.m. 
8:44 p.m. 
9:19 p.m. 
9:55 p.m. 



August 6 10:49 a.m. 10:34 p.m. 

August 7. 11:40 a.m. 11:16 p.m. 

August 8 12:33 p.m. 

August 9 1:30 p.m. 12:04 a.m. 

August 10 2:28 p.m. 12:57 a.m. 

August 11 3:26 p.m. 1:55 a.m. 

August 12 4:23 p.m. 2:57 a.m. 

August 13 5:16 p.m. 4:01 a.m. 

August 14 6:06 p.m. 5:05 a.m. 

August 15 6:53 p.m. 6:06 a.m. 

August 16 7:38 p.m. 7:07 a.m. 

August 17 8:23 p.m. 8:07 a.m. 

August 18 9:09 p.m. 9:07 a.m. 

August 19 9:56 p.m. 10:07 a.m. 

August 20 10:45 p.m. 11:06 a.m. 

August 21 11:37 p.m. 12:05 p.m. 

August 22 1:03 p.m. 

August 23 12:31 a.m. 1:59 p.m. 

August 24 1:26 a.m. 2:50 p.m. 

August 25 2:20 a.m. 3:37 p.m. 

August 26 3:13 a.m. 4:20 p.m. 

August 27 4:03 a.m. 5:00 p.m. 

August 28 4:52 a.m. 5:36 p.m. 

August 29 5:39 a.m. 6:11 p.m. 

August 30 6:26 a.m. 6:46 p.m. 

August 31 7:11 a.m. 7:20 p.m. 

Phases of the Moon 

First Quarter on the 7th at 9:23 p.m. 

Full Moon on the 14th at 8:44 p.m. 

Last Quarter on the 21st at 11:17 a.m. 

New Moon on the 29th at 9:00 a.m. 

Apogee on the 3rd at 2:06 a.m. 

Perigee on the 15th at 4:06 p.m. 

Apogee on the 30th at. 10:18 a.m. 

The Planets for the 15th 
MERCURY rises at 6:09 a. m. and sets at 6:39 
p. m. The planet is too close to the Sun for observa- 
tion. 

VENUS rises at 7:52 a. m. and sets at 7:48 p. m. 
The Planet may be found in the western sky in the 
constellation of Virgo just after sundown. 

MARS rises at 11:08 a. m. and sets at 10:34 p. m. 
At 9:00 p. m. the planet may be found in the western 
sky in the constellation of Virgo. 

JUPITER rises at 11:33 a. m. and sets at 10:59 p. 
m. At 9:00 p. m. the planet may be found about 30° 
above the western horizon in the constellation of 
Libra. 

SATURN rises at 7:20 p. m. on the 14th and sets 
at 6:58 a. m. on the 15th. At 9:00 p. m. the planet 
may be foun<i very low in the eastern horizon in the 
constellation of Aquarius. 

The PrintMpal Bright Stars for 9:00 p. m. 
Xnrth the '/.,„,!}, South of thi 7.,nith 

Deneb in Cygnus Altair in Aquila 

Vega in Lyra Formalhaut in Piscis Aus- 

Arcturus in Bootis tralis 

Antarcs in Scorpius 



D U N L € P 

TIRES 
GIVE MORE MILEAGE 

DISTRIBUTORS 

Monserrat Enterprises Co.^ Ltd. 



477 A. MABINI 



TEL. 5-72-51 



We are also general sales representatives in the 
Philippines for standard mine and mill machinery 
and equipment. In our bodegas we have a full 
assortment of mine and mill supplies, and supplies 
for mine messes and stores. 

MARSMAN & CO., INC. 

Stewart Building* G. de los Reyes Building, 

Burnham Park Boulevard, ^ Plaza Cervantes, 

Tel. 287--P. O. Box. 18 Tel. 2-13-46— P. O. Box 297 

BAGUIO MANILA 




Hershey's Wins! 

This delicious breakfast cocoa — so rich 
in flavor, so nourishing —is the drink 
which wins approval of sturdy boys 
and girls. Give growing children this 
satisfying beverage every morning to 
prepare them for an active day, at 
school or play. 

Ask your dealer for 

Hershey^s Breakfast Cocoa 



370 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 



"^^^ITH the Compliments of a reader 
of the Philippine Magazine in appre- 
ciation of what it is doing for Philip- 
pine Literature and for the develop- 
ment of an intelligent public opinion. 



PHILIPPINE 
MAGAZINE 

Vol. XXXII AUGUST, 1935 No. 8 (328) 




371 



Mindanao 
Through the 
Eyes of a 
Russian Artist 





A Fortiiiit 



iik)sst)nis of jolo 



Love and a Flute 




372 



Drowned in Memories 



White 
C'o^k.itoos 
ot MoroLu:J 




A Camera s t ii d v 
by Manuel Arellano 



Moored on the Banks of the P a s i g 



374 



Editorials 



Senate-President Manuel L. Quezon's address 
delivered upon the occasion of his formal accept- 
ance on July 20 of the 
Mr. Quezon's Address nomination for Presi- 
dent of the Common- 
wealth, was undoubtedly the finest in his long 
political career. 

Simple and direct in style, and truly eloquent, responsible 
and conservative in tone, and comprehensive and wise 
in substance, it was an utterance of the highest type of 
forward-looking statesmanship. If Mr. Quezon is able 
to translate this address into action and to carry out his 
plans, an important step will have been taken toward the 
realization of the ideal of a strong and enduring Philippine 
Republic. 

He pledged himself to uphold democratic principles and 
safeguard individual rights as guaranteed in the Constitu- 
tion which he looks upon as **the expression of the sover- 
eignty and of the aggregate will of the Filipino people*'. 
He promised an honest and efficient administration of the 
affairs of the government under a civil service regime in 
which merit and character alone will be the qualification 
for office. He expressed himself in favor of a simple and 
economical government, and promised to keep the budget 
in balance and maintain the credit of the government. 
He criticised the demagogues who have told the people 
that there will be no taxes except upon the rich and pointed 
out that it is the primary duty of citizens to contribute to 
the support of the government, adding, however that 
taxation which does not take into consideration the re- 
lative financial ability of the taxpayer is unjust. He de- 
clared himself in favor of a complete revision of the taxa- 
tion system with the best technical advice available and 
promised to make a general reduction in the assessed value 
of real property in accordance with present price levels. 
He condemned the so-called pork-barrel system of allotting 
appropriations for public works as a waste of funds, and 
advocated the building of roads, schools, etc., in accordance 
with a carefully prepared plan systematically carried out. 

He declared that he stands by the educational policy 
enunciated in the Constitution and held that the State 
is in duty bound to maintain *'a complete and adequate 
system of public education**, and said that his attention 
will be especially devoted to making it possible for every 
child to go to school, and that plans for adult citizenship 
training will also be carried out. He expressed the opinion 



that the government should create a large number 
of scholarships for talented young men and women, 
so that poverty will not prevent their development. 
He said he is in favor of greater emphasis on 
vocational and agricultural training in the inter- 
mediate and high schools. 
He spoke of the importance of administering justice 
without fear or favor, and of maintaining the confidence 
of the people in the courts, stating that it is necessary that 
the utmost care be taken in the selection of justices of the 
peace, especially, since the courts of these men are often 
the only tribunals accessible to the masses of the people, 
and he pledged himself to do everything in his power to 
maintain them free from political or other extraneous 
influences. 

He stated that efforts should be made by the government 
to acquire the remaining large church estates and subdivide 
them into small lots for sale at a fair and just price to the 
tenants, and also declared that in certain place tenants are 
victims of unfair practices on the part of landlords which 
must be stopped. 

He stated that fortunately there exists no sharp cleavage 
between labor and capital here, but that this is no proof 
that this will always be the case and he advocated that steps 
be taken to prevent the exploitation and oppression of the 
workers. He declared that our laborers received higher 
wages and are better protected in their rights than laborers 
in other Oriental countries, but stated that we must go 
farther in this direction. He declared himself as believing 
in the institution of private property, but contended that 
whenever property rights come in conflict with human 
rights, the former should yield to the latter. ''Human life 
is the measure of all values and considerations of profit 
must give way to the supremacy of human existence**. 

He pointed out that "a change in the political status 
of a country always gives rise to fear and misgivings**, and 
that **not only among Americans and foreigners, but even 
among a few Filipinos, the impending political changes 
caused anxiety as to the future**. **There is no justifica- 
tion for these fears**, he asserted. **I give assurance that 
peace, order, law, and justice will reign supreme under 
the Commonwealth, and that the rights of foreigners and 
nationals alike will be safeguarded. Existing investments, 
whether foreign or national, will receive every inducement 
to stay, and outside capital will be welcomed. We cspc- 

(Continued on pa^e 408) 

375 




A fitting complement to Mr. Quezon's address was that of 
Mr. Osmena, the vice-presidential candidate under the coali- 
tion, delivered on the same oc- 
Mr, 08mefta'8 Address casion. While Mr. Quezon spoke 

of the future, Mr. Osmena out- 
lined the history of the independence movement. He spoke 
of the early workers for Philippine emancipation — Rizal, 
Del Pilar, Ponce, Lopez Jaena, the Luna brothers, Pangani- 
ban, and others, and of the ** tangible service rendered to the 
cause of our freedom by the obscure masses of the people", 
and by Andres Bonifacio, who stands **head and shoulders 
above the test, the great hero of our contemporary history". 
He spoke of the'*men of the revolution" setting up a **gov- 
ernment of our own in Malolos". There was no direct 
mention of General Emilio Aguinaldo, (also at this time a 
candidate for the presidency of the Commonwealth), but 
declared: **The leaders of the Revolution unconditionally 
surrendered to and recognized American sovereignty", 
and, he went on, '*as if this were not enough for the com- 
plete disaster of the popular ideals, the Federal Party pro- 
claimed the annexation of the Philippines to the United 
States as a national aspiration". 

Mr. Osmena pointed out that America **pursued a liberal 
policy in her administration of our affairs, resolving to 
preserve the Philippines for the Filipinos and voluntarily 
assuming the moral obligation of giving them opportunity 
to participate in the government". However, he stated, 
there were misconceptions then current — *'that the Fili- 
pinos were not prepared for a democratic government . . 
that there was no real homogeneous people . . . that they 
possessed no common, intelligent aspiration, and that if 
this existed, it certainly was not for independence. . . ." 

**Thus it was", continued Mr. Osmena, **that the people 
decided to launch their second revolution — the peaceful 
revolution which has brought us the Independence Law— by 
resuming in peace the work which was interrupted, at the 
same point where it was deserted . . . and embarking on a 
campaign of national revindication." 

*'The Cooper Act of 1902 gave birth to the represen- 
tative system with the establishment of a popular As- 
sembly vested with legislative powers ..." On the strength 
of the statement in an official report of William Howard 
Taft, then Secretary of War, that the Philippine Assembly 
was a success, that body * 'considered it opportune to ap- 
prove the first resolution declaring the actual capacity of 
the Filipino people for self-government and making of 
record the national aspiration for independence." 

**In 1916 an organic act more liberal than the Cooper 
Law was approved, but in retaining the appointive Gov- 
ernor-General in face of the elective Legislature, the new 
Law established a duality of powers in the government, 
thus creating a source of serious conflicts. ..." 

Mr. Osmena next reviewed the progress made in the Phil- 
ippines during the ensuing period and stated that after "this 
vast work of national reconstruction had been completed 
and the existence of a stable government in the country 
had become an established fact, the offensive for freedom 
advanced with greater determination and vision to a new 
front, the United States, On the new battle-line were 
entrenched the parliamentary missions which had to over- 
come the systematic opposition or the indifference which 
(Continued on. pn^e 409) 

376 



The emphasis both Mr. Osmena and Mr. Quezon lay on 
the fact that the independence issue has been settled in 

favor of the contentions of the 
The Improvement Filipinos for a third of a century, 
in Public Morale seems to promise a period that 

will be free from the political agita- 
tion that has done so much to retard development along any 
but political lines during past years, and the attention 
already being given to the economic problems of the coun- 
try by Filipino leaders would seem to be bound to result 
in a period of comparatively rapid economic development 
despite the untoward economic conditions in other parts 
of the world. 

Great increases in the export of our present money crops 
are probably not to be expected, although the efforts that 
will soon be directed toward establishing more obviously 
mutually advantageous trade relations between the Phil- 
ippines and the United States will undoubtedly have a 
stimulating effect. The linking of the Philippines to the 
United States by air, indicated for the near future, will 
also have important economic results. Increased invest- 
ments of local, American, and foreign capital, especially in 
our rapidly growing mining industry, and the building up 
of new local industries and markets, the carrying out of 
various colonization schemes, all these developments pro- 
mise a return of more general prosperity. 

The fact that the Filipino leaders are wise enough to 
understand the need for continued cooperation with the 
United States and are frank enough to say so, indeed mak- 
ing this a point to win in the important national elections, 
together with strong indications that United States leaders 
may be counted upon to meet the Filipino leaders half way, 
has done much to dissipate the fears and anxieties that 
have ruled here for many months, and confidence is being 
rapidly restored, in fact a feeling bordering on enthusiasm 
is becoming evident. It appears that the Commonwealth 
will shortly be inaugurated in a general atmosphere of 
hopefulness and good will. No one would have predicted 
this only a few months ago, and the credit is largely due to 
the wise statesmanship of the Filipino leaders. 



Governor-General Frank Murphy is reported to have 
advised Mr. Harold M. Bixby, one of the executives of the 

Pan American Airways who has been in 
'^Clippers" Manila for some time, that the company go 

ahead with its preparations for the inaugura- 
tion of the trans-Pacific air service, despite the fact that 
the Legislature did not during its last short session approve 
the franchise asked for, expressing confidence that that 
body will act favorably when the session is resumed in 
September, and it is to be hoped that this advice will be 
acted upon. 

The inauguration of the service had been set for late 
August or early September, and delay would have an un- 
fortunate psychological effect as well as costing the Philip- 
pines the large gains that might otherwise be made as a 
result, especially, of the faster mail transport. It is not 
generally known, for instance, that the interest paid on the 
values of certain commercial documents in transit amounts 
to a very large total each year. 




and possessed that '^peculiarly satisfying 
beauty which always belongs to the thing 
absolutely fitted for the purpose it is designed 
to fill". The majority of these ships were 
built in New England yards, and it is a satis- 
fying thought that the great air clippers of 
today, equally graceful and capable of a speed 
of 180 miles an hour, are also American. 



So much space has already been given to 
the addresses of Mr. Quezon and Mr. Osmena 
in these columns, that it is not possible to 
give an adequate review here of another not- 
able address delivered in Manila last month 

which, for its clear- 



Vice- Governor 
Hayden's Fine 
Analysis of 
America's Problems 



The drawing by Mr. Amorsolo reproduced on this page 
shows the peculiar American sailing ship of the nineteenth 
century known as the clipper, and one of the large Pan 
American transport planes that have been given the same 
name. The clipper ships might make as much as eighteen 
knots an hour and one ship established a record of 363 
miles in one day. (Encyclopedia Britannica). The origin 
of the word is believed by some authors to come from the 
expression **going at a clip", i. e. moving swiftly. Smaller 
vessels, known as Baltimore clippers, were famous as pri- 
vateers in the early wars of the United States, but the 
first large ship of the kind — the Ann McKim (494 tons) — 
was built in 1833, a little over a hundred years ago. The 
gold rush in California was responsible for the building of 
one hundred sixty clipper ships in four years, and they 
also played an important part in the China tea trade, as 
this commodity quickly loses its quality in the hold of a 
ship, and prizes were offered by merchants for the delivery 
at the earliest possible time of the first crop of the season. 
The opening of the Suez Canal and the improvement in 
steam-propelled boats put an end to these tea races. The 
clipper of the last century was a long, slender vessel, with 
a sharp, long bow, and with the three masts slanting back- 
wards and carrying rectangular sails. With its cloud of 
sails, this graceful vessel was a **sheer delight to the eye". 



Virgin land 



sighted analysis of 
American govern- 
mental problems, 
deserves the largest 
possible attention, 
especially in the United States. That an 
address of such significance and importance 
should be made here, ten thousand miles away 
from the national capital where these prob- 
lems come to a focus, may well be a matter of 
local pride. Reference is made to the Fourth 
of July address of Vice-Governor J. R. 
Hay den. 

Making no apology for discussing these problems 
here, as the "orderly and progressive readjustment of 
American life that is in progress concerns not only 
America, but the world, and . . . particularly the 
Philippines . . . [becausel the destiny of these Islands 
is linked directly with that of the United States", our 
able Vice-Governor, recognized as one of the leading 
American political economists, pointed out the mo- 
mentous changes that have taken place in the Amer- 
ican economy since the writing of the Constitution. 
He showed that for more than a century, America's 
. offered an apparently inexhaustible field for indivi- 
dual and national expansion ... a source of ever increasing wealth, 
on the whole evenly distributed and democratically subject to 
acquisition by personal effort ... a unique economic basis for the 
application of the political principles of liberty and democracy 
as enunciated in the Declaration of Independence . . . and embodied 
in the Constitution of 1787. . . . American economic organization . . . 
was such that a F>olitical philosophy and organization that exalted the 
individual and the neighborhood and their rights was readily workable. 
A relatively small proportion of the political and economic problems of 
Nineteenth Century America were national in character. . . . The 
greater part were state and local. Relatively speaking, there existed 
a local self-sufficiency in food, in the materials of industry and com- 
merce, in markets, in credit and finance." 

"This state and local economic indepcndenc«, which made political 
federalism possible," went on Mr. Hayden, however, "decreased pro- 
portionately to the development of the country and the utilization of 
its resources by the technique of modern industrial society. . . . The 
development of the natural resources of the United States entered a new 
phase about the end of the Nineteenth Century. It is significant that 
at about the same time the last of the vast public domain of the nation 
was opened for virtually free settlement. Since that time America 
has become essentially an industrial nation. A transformation far 
beyond the wildest imaginings of the original nation builders has oc- 
curred in the production and distribution of goods. . . . The individual 
American citizen and the local American group are no longer even 
moderately self-sufficient as to either the production, the distribution, 
or the consumption of goods .... Today the farmer must buy 
machinery, building materials, clothing, education, transportation. 
{Continued on page 406) 

377 



The Amazing Argentine 

By Marc T. Greene 



MORE than four centuries ago a boatload of sr* j 
adventurous sailors from a little town in T J| 
southern Spain skirted the lower coasts of ' Mm 
South America, following close upon the heels of 
Magellan and da Gama, until they came to what a. ^ 
seemed a vast inland sea. They sailed up it for 
two hundred miles, yet from either shore they were 
never able to discern the other. They concluded that 
it was without limits of length or breadth, possibly the 
long-sought passage to the fabulous Indies. But they 
explored no farther. Upon a stretch of flat, marshy land 
on the southern bank they established themselves in a 
small settlement which they named after the church at 
which they worshipped back in Spain, "La Ciudad della 
Nostra Senora de Buenos Aires," "The City of Our Lady 
of the Good Airs." 

Little existed there then to justify so romantic and 
gracious a name, nor did for three and a half centuries. 
The first settlement was abandoned, another established 
by other Spaniards and lost to the English years after 
in a fight in which the British general, Beresford, distin- 
guished himself by capturing the city with only two thou- 
sand men. But England failed to back him up and the 
Spanish with their Indian allies regained it. In 1810 it 
declared its independence of Spain, the Spanish monarchy 
having been destroyed by the Continental wars. Upon 
the Restoration, Ferdinand VII determined to punish all 
the Spanish Americas for their "disloyalty," but with the 
aid of the great soldier, San Martin, who shares with Bolivar 
the glory of South America's successful struggle for freedom 
from Spanish despotism, the Argentine maintained its 
independence. 

Now on the flats of the Plata, the "silver" river, there 
commenced to expand the future City of the Good Airs. 
And upon the fertile plains of the interior, the pampas, 
settled adventurers from all the world, even as they have 
been settling ever since. They bred horses from the basic 
Arab stock'which the first Spaniards had brought over, they 
planted corn and wheat, and presently they commenced 
cattle-raising. 

But the city itself was an ugly place, a settlement for 
purposes of trade only. It straggled across the flat country 
along and back from the "silver" river whose hue actually 
was, and still is, as saffron as the Yang Tsze Kiang's. The 
shores were so flat that no vessel could approach nearer 
than five miles, and everything had to be borne ashore in 
shallow lighters and then on the backs of men and horses. 
The city was one of shacks and tenths and mud -and -thatch 
houses, and in summer when the temperature sometimes 
exceeded 100 and the atmosphere was as steamy as a Turkish 
bath, epidemics of many sorts swept the "mushroom" 
city whose character so markedly belied its name. 

Then, and it was scarce three-quarters of a century ago, 
began the real development of this stupendous capital of 
the world*s most promising land, the building of the place 

378 



^ 'sa that presently should well and truly justify the 
• sonorous title of the first Spaniards. Far-sighted 
§M ] men, many of them British, discerned the possi- 
7k i bilities of this land of the richest soil in all the 
m world, a land where, as they say in the Argen- 

tine, "you can bury a stone overnight and it 
will sprout by morning." Pioneers of empire from every 
land, determined men and competent, replaced the refugees 
and outlaws and soldiers of fortune. Selected cattle were 
brought from Europe, chiefly from Britain and Holland, 
to develop the herds upon the great estancias that today 
produce what is, beyond all manner of doubt, the finest 
beef in the world. Systematic planting of maize and wheat 
and other cereals commenced. Alfalfa was sewn and the 
breeding of swine on a large scale undertaken. And among 
the first projects of the English was a railway system. It 
had its inception in 1854. Today it comprises more than 
22,000 miles. It is British in every detail, one more monu- 
ment to the pioneering enterprise of the race that always 
finishes what it undertakes. 

Meanwhile there came into being the new City of the 
Good Airs. It seemed to take form like an Arabian Nights 
fable become fact. Its growth was a greater marvel than 
San Francisco's out of the chaos of '49, and today it is 
one of the wonders of the world. Upwards of two and a 
half million people comprise its population, and they are 
of the blood of every nation and race. It is as cosmopolitan 
as Shanghai, yet it possesses the culture of Europe. From 
the commencement primarily a mart of trade and still 
that, the Argentine capital has not failed to keep pace in 
cultural development with material expansion, and that 
is perhaps the outstanding impression it makes upon the 
discerning visitor. Here Nordic and Latin alike have 
brought their artistic values, determined that this huge 
metropolis should not grow up a mere monument to material 
achievement. 

Here then in the far south, in the exact latitude of Auck- 
land, New Zealand, is a city of Continental Europe, a city 
of cultural development equalled by few in the Western 
Hemisphere, of expansive and far-sighted design, of archi- 
tectural beauty worthy of comparison with the Old World, 
of far-flung dimensions beyond all but two or three in either 
hemisphere, of Continental gaiety yet of British orderliness, 
of brilliance and commercial activity and material well- 
being. 

Buenos Aires comprises almost a quarter of the population 
of the Argentine Republic, this country which is more than 
four-fifths as large as all of Europe including the British 
isles, yet populated by less than 12,000,000 as against 
300,000,000 in Europe. Therein alone is revealed some- 
thing of its vast resources and its incomputable potential- 
ities. But we will go into that presently. Let us first 
glance a little farther at the wonderful capital, which in 
the thought of most foreigners is all that there is of the 
amazing Argentine. 

{Continued on pa^e 403) 



Silent Seas 



By Edilberto K. Tiempo 



T 



^WO days after the opening of school, we met. 
We met at about five minutes to seven just 
as she had crossed the little bridge near the 
Recreation Hall. She gave me a casual glance, but I 
looked at her longer than I should have. When we had 
passed each other, I wanted to look back to see if she 
looked as graceful when viewed from the rear as she was 
seen from the front. But I did not look back. Perhaps 
it was my man's pride. I can see her again on the campus 
or in the assembly, I thought. 

About five minutes to seven the next morning we met 
again near the Recreation Hall, now before she had crossed 
the little bridge. We looked at each other for a brief mo- 
ment and passed on. She was going to the Conservatory. 
I was going to the Science Building. 

I had wanted to see if she was using makeup because the 
morning before, I had imagined she used it. And her long 
brows might have been staved. This morning I saw that 
her brows were a natural endowment. I thought of 
her big black eyes which reminded one of long, dark nights 
which hide many things. But her eyes could not hide dark 
things. They were dreaming, idealistic eyes. 

I did not see her the next morning at five minutes to 
seven near the Recreation Hall. I was a little late. But 
we met near the corner, not far from the Conservatory. A 
faint shadow of a smile fluttered from the corners of her 
lips. You are late, her smile seemed to say. I also 
smiled. Her smile was like a faint ripple on the surface of 
dark, tranquil water. 

The following morning I reached the little bridge on 
time. She was just emerging from a path across the 
street, and was crossing the road to the campus. I told 
her in my smile. You are late. She understood me and 
answered. Yes, I am. Her smile was now more friendly. 

I thought of the girl, tall, graceful. Big black eyes like 
dark nights. Brows like young moons. A half-formed 
smile that awaited beautiful revealments. I thought of 
lonely shores. Of a home by the sea where the winds 
gently blow. And flowers and a blue sky. And a gentle 
river. Of long, dark nights under purple stars. 

I touched my hat when we met the next morning. She 
acknowledged my courtesy with a slight bow. But she did 
not smile. We always meet here every morning, she 
seemed to say with the slightest lift of her chin. Yes, we 
do, I answered. We passed on. 

I thought of her chin. How it could lift at the slightest 




angle, and yet tell that she was proud; she did not 
want me to think she wanted to meet me some min- 
utes to seven near the Recreation Hall every morning. 

The next morning I did not meet her because I 
did not want to. I also had some pride. I had 
thought the way she did. I had waited to read 
her thoughts in the lift of her chin. I should not have 
waited. 

I went to school fifteen minutes before seven. 

About five minutes to seven the first morning of the 
following week I saw her coming from the little bridge. 
Although she was not looking at me, I knew she had seen 
me coming. But before we met, I had turned into Millard 
Lane. I did not know that she looked at me, but I seemed 
to feel her eyes upon my back. I wanted to walk grace- 
fully, but the thought of her eyes made me feel awkward. 

I did not pass her the next morning because I took 
Millard Lane again. As I made the turn, she looked at 
me. Why? she questioned. I did not answer her. I 
wanted to lift my chin at the slightest angle as she had, 
but I did not know how. With my back towards her I 
felt like a fool. 

The next morning I did not see her. And the next, 
and the next. One week, two weeks, then three. I always 
took the old route, but she was not going that way any 
more, or, if she did, she went to school very much earlier 
than five minutes to seven. 

Then one beautiful morning I saw her coming down the 
old path. She had seen me coming although she pretended 
she had not. Millard Lane was ten meters from me. I 
felt a queer tumult within. I asked myself: Shall I take 
it, or not? Five meters from Millard Lane. I shall take 
Millard, I decided. To let you see! Five steps from 
Millard— three steps — one. 

But she saw me pass by Millard Lane. She dropped her 
eyes to the ground. Four meters from me she looked up at 
me. You did not take Millard, why? I did not know 
how to answer her. She understood I did not know how to 
answer her. She smiled, not now a half-formed, but nearly 
a full smile. 

FRIEND has told me that Angela comes from Suluan. 

Suluan is not found on an ordinary map. It is a 
very small island in the Pacific, forty-three kilometers 
southeast of Samar. Her father is a lighthouse keeper 
there. I do not know whether Angela knows my name and 
the place where I come from. But I hope to tell her soon. 



The Soul 

By Josue Rem. Siat 



THIS very quintessence 
Of being. 
Now God*s... now man's... now God's again... 
This beautiful Thing 
Beyond mortal decay or mortal sin. 
Is an instrument 



Divinely conceived and attuned, 
Whose chords respond to the touch 
Of sweetness or beauty. 
Of sorrow or pain. 
With vibrations audible 
Only to God. 



Rota Days 

By H. G. Hornbostel 
Illustrated by the Author . 



THE ancient quarry described in the June issue of 
the Philippine Magazine being ten kilometers from 
the village, and it being necessary to clear the jungle 
in order to take photographs, etc., I looked about for a 
camping place in the open nearby. As I had no tent 
or other equipment for camping, I was at a loss as to what 
to do. Not relishing the thought of hiking twenty kilo- 
meters a day with a large camera and other impedimenta, 
I explained the situation to Juan and his men. Rota has 
only one village — a village with- 
out a name, it simply being call- 
ed aongsong, which means * Vil- 
lage'* in the Chamorro tongue — 
and the people never remain out 
in the country overnight, so that 
there are no houses or even shel- 
ters at the small outlying plan- 
tations. 

One of the natives spoke up 
and said that we were not far 
from a cliff that falls steeply from 
the top of the plateau to the 
sea, and that in the face of this 
cliff there is a large cave which 
could be entered through an open- 
ing op the landward side. De- 
lighted to hear this, I asked to 
be taken to this cave as it was 
already late afternoon, and I was 
tired and hungry, and anxious 
to establish a base of operations 
nearby. The party started off 
and sure enough, after hacking 
our way for no more than a 

quarter of a kilometer we reached the entrance of the cave 
which is only some six feet high by fifteen broad. We saw 
that it widens out into several large chambers filled with 
stalactites and stalagmites. From these chambers passages 
lead to smaller chambers in which we heard the chirping of 
untold thousands of bats. 

All was darkness with the exception of the light from 
the landward entrance, but after a few moments we saw in 
front of us a dim glow of light for which we headed. This 
light came from the opening in the face of the cliff, and 
we found the mouth to be ideal as a dry, snug, and cool camp- 
ing place. The floor was smooth and level limestone, and 
just outside a very steep, narrow, but passable trail led 
to the base of the cliff. 

While I enjoyed the view of the adjacent coast line with 
its rugged cliffs bathed in the sunset glow, my men began 
to forage for their evening meal. Two of them started 
down the cliffs to catch langusta (large, clawless lobsters) 
in the crevices of the reefs below, and the other men pro- 
ceeded landwaid to hunt paniqui, the large fruit-bat or 
flying fox. They had brought a large net, similar to the net 
used by entomologists, only five times larger and stronger. 

380 




Bats — like a ghostly, quivering pillar of smoke 



I, being left alone, and thanking my lucky stars that these 
men had lost their fear for this tabooed locality due to my 
explaining to them just what the trinchera taotaomona 
(the quarry) signified, I cheerfully prepared our camp site 
for the night. 

I had only enough canned food with me for myself so 
that when the hunting and fishing parties returned with 
ten bats and with many lobsters, I was greatly pleased. 
Preparations for the evening meal began at once and both 

bats and lobsters were boiled 
together in an old iron pot which 
had been cached at the base of 
the cliff. The men then sat 
down and thoroughly enjoyed 
their feast. I ate some of the 
lobster, but none of the bat for 
the latter had been cooked with 
hide, hair, and entrails intact. 
I have often eaten paniqui but 
only after they had been skin- 
ned and cleaned and then fried 
as one would fry chicken. Pre- 
pared in this way they make a 
delicious dish. 

The men after their crude but 
satisfying meal showed all the 
reactions of well-being and 
bodily comfort which courses 
through one's body at such 
times, and prepared for the 
night. Dry wood had been col- 
lected, a fire built near the cave's 
entrance for warmth and light, 
and soon these children of nature 

were ready for sleep. 

I dozed off first and was awakened some time later by 
the noise made by one of the party apparently driving 
stakes around the entrance of the cave. Still later, wishing 
to relieve myself, I arose and walked to the entrance, stub- 
bing and badly bruising my toes against the stakes which, 
on close scrutiny, proved to be a line of crude wooden crosses. 
My companions believed in Jesus Christ but also in the 
power of evil ancestral spirits, and so in order to take no 
chances they had erected these Christian symbols against 
all evil. 

Right here, I should have reasoned thus — it's just too 
bad that I stubbed my toes, but after all my men are not to 
blame. In order to blame them, it would first be necessary 
to enlighten them, and I haven't the time for that. But 
unfortunately, as proved by subsequent events, the voice 
of reason was too weak; I took the crosses and like a child, 
to avenge my bruised toes, hurled them down and over 
the five-hundred foot cliff. Replenishing the fire, I noticed 
that it seemed to have prevented the bats from swarming 
out into the night with the result that just beyond the 
{Continued on page 400) 



A Short Cycle of Cathay 

By Alice Franklin Bryant 



Higher Education on Civilization Street ^ 

YEARS ago during the hottest season of the 
year scholars flocked to Canton, and each f 
one was locked into a small cell for several j 
days to write his examination. Many of them If 
failed in their examinations. Some died in the tiny cells. 
But those who passed were eligible for government posi- 
tions in which they garnered wealth and honor. 

When Western education was introduced, these rows of 
cells were torn down. Only two or three remain in the 
school gardens as a curiosity of the past. The bricks from 
the demolished cells were used in the buildings of the Govern- 
ment Higher Normal Street. Where hollow chested schol- 
ars used to foregather, primary school children are studying 
their lessons aloud, and middle school and college boys are 
playing ball and holding political meetings. 

At the time I was there there were more than two thou- 
sand enrolled, most of them in the primary and middle 
school departments. In the college classes about three 
hundred and fifty were enrolled; and it was in the latter 
that I taught. Although the school was co- educational, 
there was only a handful of women students. I had only 
two of them in two of my five classes. Fully half of my 
students were older than I. And, due to the custom of 
Chinese parents to marry their children at the age of seven- 
teen or eighteen, if they can possibly afford it, about half 
of them were married. 

However, when I entered the class room these contem- 
poraries of mine always rose in a body and bowed to me. 
This is a custom that makes a teacher feel rather exalted. 
But it seems to me that there is a certain element of hooey 
in it, for in no other country in the world do students pre- 
sume so far in interfering with the management of the 
schools and even of the country, and in many cases they 
have roughly handled unpopular teachers. But no cause 
for friction happened to arise in my classes, and I found 
the work enjoyable as the students were alert, eager to 
learn, and most of them were bright. 

I had them write their names in the Chinese ideographs on 
their papers and went over them with my Chinese teacher 
so that I would be sure to get the pronunciation correct. 
But I noticed numbers, also, written on the papers, and one 
boy suggested that it would be easier for me to call on the 
members of the class by number. Except for an American 
who taught conversation four hours a week, I was the only 
foreign teacher in the school. One day I visited a con- 
versation class and found that my compatriot was calling 
on **boy number six" to recite, and '*boy number twenty- 
seven**, and never bothered about learning names. 

The course in English phonetics put me in a slightly 
embarrassing situation. The use of the international pho- 
netic alphabet made me no trouble, as I was accustomed to 
using it for French phonetics. But the textbook was 
written from an altogether Oxfordian viewpoint, while I 
have never made any attempt to speak anything except 
a plain, garden variety of English that originated somewhere 
south of St. Louis. So I would say to the class, '*An 



educated Englishman would pronounce the word 
^^|K thus, in which case it should be transcribed into 
^\ ^ these phonetic symbols;'' writing them on the board, 
► # ] **But you will find that most Americans pronounce 
^^^^^ it so, in which case you should transcribe it 
into the symbols this way. I don't care which of 
these two pronunciations you use so long as you are ab- 
solutely consistent about it." And, for my part, I blithely 
and consistently continued speaking as I always had from 
my childhood days. 

Most of the students lived in the dormitories at the school. 
Tuition and room were free to all, and board was free to all 
the college students except the freshmen. Indeed, if one 
did not board at school, he was given by the government 
five dollars a month with which to buy his food. 

Even so, the government was becoming less bountiful 
with its students. When it first opened the Western style 
school, the people were skeptical of this new-fangled educa- 
tion. Therefore, to fill the new schools, the government 
offered free tuition, room, board, books, uniforms, servants, 
and eight taels a month for spending money. A barber 
was engaged to comb the students' hair. And twice a 
month examinations were given with cash prizes for those 
who made the highest grades. Modern education now en- 
joys such prestige that it is no longer necessary to offer 
these inducements. 

Hymn tunes played on small, portable organs pervaded 
the a^^mosphere at the normal school; and the band played 
''Nearer My God to Thee" at a ball game. Western music 
had come through missionary sources. But the general 
attitude at the school was not pious. Most of the students 
professed to identify all religion with superstition and 
thought it had no place in modem life. 

I was told that they were interested in free love. How- 
ever, I do not know whether this was generally true, as 
they never mentioned the subject to me; although, whenever 
the occasion arose, they did ask me all manner of questions 
from matters of politics and religion to whether I really 
did comb my hair every day. Many were, indeed, emphat- 
ic in condemning the Chinese marriage customs. One 
boy, in a theme, complained bitterly that he had been 
married so young to an ignorant village girl in whom he was 
not interested. '*The reason is," he added, ''that the 
people are barbarians!" I found it refreshing to come 
across this after the common linking of the term barbarian 
with the adjective Western. 

After teaching my classes at the normal school I usually 
walked home, most of the way through new, wide streets or 
"horse roads". These wide streets have their disadvantages, 
as they are often hot and dusty and noisy — the continual 
honking of automobiles drowning the cries of street vendors 
and the hey a hoa of the men and women carrying heavy 
burdens on shoulder poles. However, by the time my 
classes were finished, the heat and glare had abated, and 
I always found my homeward way interesting. Children 
in the street cried, * 'Foreign devil woman!" in friendly 
fashion, or shouted another sentence which might be tran- 

381 



slated freely, ''You big, rich guy, give me some money!** 

In Canton a foreign man attracted little attention, but a 
foreign woman still seemed to be a curiosity. If I stopped on 
the street to buy a few persimmons or oranges, so many 
people would gather to watch the transaction, that a police- 
man would barge up to disperse the crowd. 

The Study of Chinese and Other Diversions 
A STUDENT or teacher in China may carry a seem- 
ingly heavy schedule, and yet do comparatively 
little work. There are four reasons for this: holidays, 
student political meetings, strikes, and war. 

As for holidays, from the opening of school in September 
until wars and rumors of wars caused schools to close in 
January, we had holidays to celebrate the Moon Festival, 
Independence Day, Confucius* Birthday, return of the 
army from Kwangsi, "Double Night", Day of the Union 
of- North and South — although at that time North and 
South were not united — Revolt of Yunnan, and three 
days for Western New Year. If the schools had not closed, 
we would have had a longer vacation at Chinese New Year. 
Some of these holidays were not on the school calendar, 
but the students and teachers simply absented themselves 
unanimously from class on those days. The anniversary 
of the Revolt of Yunnan coincided with Christmas Day. 

Just before Christmas the Chinese editor of the English 
language paper announced on his front page that all teachers 
and pupils of government schools and all government 
employees would be celebrating the Revolt of Yunnan; 
while all foreigners, Chinese Christians, and Chinese con- 
nected with Mission institutions would be celebrating the 
birthday of the Prince of Peace. As for him, he was enough 
of a Christian to enjoy a holiday as much as anyone, so 
the paper would suspend publication for two days, one to 
celebrate the Revolt of Yunnan and one to celebrate 
Christmas. 



In the same paper appeared a page of timely advertise- 
ments. They announced: Tear not: behold'! If visit- 
ing Canton, do not be afr jid of not having a home. Come 
to the Oriental Hotel." 'Bring you tidings of great joy'. 
We shall in the years to come serve you with best goods at 
most reasonable price." 'Shall be to all people.' The 
Nanyang Brothers Tobacco Company is a Chinese company 
offering Chinese products to all people at home or abroad." 
*' 'The Great Light shone around about them'. The great 
light is the true light, and Chen Kwong [a department 
store] means true light." " 'The Wise men from the East'. 
Tung Shaan means East Mountain. Be wise and buy 
your lot early in Tung Shaan." 

While I was in Canton the students were not addicted 
to political meetings, but afterwards for at least a year 
or so they spent half their time on political meetings, pa- 
rades, and demonstrations, and rarely had time to attend 
classes. 

Student strikes are exceedingly common in China, the 
young people being easily led — usually in the wrong direc- 
tion. None occurred in the schools in which I was teaching. 
But I had taught only one day at the Normal School when 
I found myself a striker ! The teachers in that school went 
on strike because their salary was badly in arrears, and for 
three weeks there were no classes in the school. Mean- 
while the students continued to live in the dormitories, 
studying or amusing themselves as they pleased. No one 
knew how long the strike would last, and comparatively 
few went home to visit their parents, wives, and babies. 

War and "political conditions" have been the most 
serious hindrances to education in China. Taken all 
together these various interruptions seriously lower educa- 
tional standards. The worst examples of lowered standard 

{Continued on page 398) 



Ballad of a Mother's Heart 

By Jose La Villa Tierra 



'ipHE night was dark, for the moon was young, 

And the stars were asleep and rare; 
The clouds were thick, yet Youth went out 
To see his Maiden fair. 

*'Dear One," he pleaded as he knelt 

Before her feet, in tears, 
**My love is true; why have you kept 

Me wailing all these years?" 

The maiden looked at him, unmoved. 

It seemed, and whispered low: 
'^Persistent Youth, you have to prove 

By deeds your love is true.'* 

**There*s not a thing I would not do 

For you, Beloved," said he. 
"Then go;** said she, *'to your mother dear. 

And bring her heart to me.** 



Without another word, Youth left 

And went to his mother dear, 
And ope'd her breast and took her heart — 

He did not shed a tear! 

Then back to his Maiden fair he ran. 

Unmindful of the rain; 
But his feet slipped and he fell down 

And loud he groaned with pain. 

Still in his hand he held the price 
That would win his Maiden's hand; 

And he thought of his mother dear — 
So kind, so sweet, so fond. 

And then he heard a voice, not from 

His lips, but all apart: 
*'Get up,** it said, 'were you hurt. Child?' 

It was his mother's heart. 



382 



Secrets of the Barrio Fisherman 

By Maximo Ramos 



JUST as the barrio farmer has his planting 
secrets* *\ so the barrio fisherman has secrets 
of his own. Often, indeed, the barrio farmer 
and the b£:rrio fisherman are one and the same 
man, and is acquainted not only with secrets 
insuring success in farming and fishing, but in 
stock-raising, house-building, and gambling. With all 
these secrets known to him, the wonder grows that he is 
not more successful than he usually is! 

Lucky Materials 

The fisherman usually makes his traps of bamboo. For 
this purpose he prefers to use bamboo from a clump in 
which some bird has built its nest or which harbors other 
forms of animal life — lizards, snakes, rats, even black ants. 
Other lucky types of bamboo come from clumps that lean 
over a trail or against another clump, clumps that stand 
highest in the grove; those in which the leaves form clusters 
at the top; and finally those bamboo stalks which contain 
one or more joints of a strikingly different length than the 
joints above or below. He believes he will catch more fish 
in a trap made of these kinds of bamboo. 

For his nets and lines he prefers indigo as a dye, believing 
that this muddles the heads of the fish, causing them to be 
easier caught. 

Lucky Times 

He does not hurry with his lines. He doesn't buy a hook 
and prepare his line and walk straightway to the water. 
He keeps his new hooks immersed in wine for a few days 
before he uses them, and afterwards he never neglects 
to wet his hooks with wine each time he goes out. This he 
believes will protect his hooks from the spell of the mischiev- 
ous and thievish sprites which he knows as Kiba-an. 

There are lucky and unlucky days for fishing. He never 
begins work on a trap or net or line on the day following 
a cloudy night. He waits for a starry night, when the moon 
is full, and is adorned with a halo. After such a night his 
preparations will ensure a successful catch. 

There are however certain days which are lucky regard- 
less of the state of the weather the night before. These 
are Good Friday, Easter, and ''Judas Monday" which is 
the first Monday in August. Early in the morning of 
Good Friday or Easter, the fisherman cuts down the bamboo 
he wishes to use for constructing his traps and also procures 
the twine for his nets, and his hooks and lines. These he 
then buries in the street along which the religious procession 
will pass that evening, or under one of the arches leading 
toward the booth where the scene of the Resurrection will be 
enacted. After the procession or the performance, he 
digs the material up and starts to work. Judas Monday, 
however, is just as lucky and is preferred by him as there 
are no religious observances to take up his time. 

Of the seven days in the week, he believes that Sunday 
is the luckiest for him for he says that it is then that the 
sprites that inhabit the fishing holes are temporarily de- 
prived of their evil power by the mass performed on that 
day. 




A good day to go fishing is also the day follow- 
ing a night during which the moon showed a 
halo, or when a cock crowed in the neighbor- 
hood about supper time. These are two signs 
of plentiful waters. 



Lucky Charms 

There are a number of valuable charms known to the 
fisherman. Most common of them is the bill of the bideng, 
a small species of Kingfisher which is indeed a king fisher. 
He catches the poor bird — it must be full-grown and alive — 
and cuts off the tip of its bill, about a third of its total 
length, and then sets it free. He keeps the tip of the bill 
in a pouch and he has but to touch his hook with it to catch 
plenty of fish. 

If, some day, upon raising his hook out of the water, 
he discovers the eye of a fish sticking to it and nothing else, 
he blesses his stars for his luck. He has but to touch this 
eye to the hook when he baits it. The fish will bite and will 
be held fast. 

In the Easter night religious procession, a figure of the 
dead Christ, in a lighted glass cofBn set on a black-painted 
carriage is pulled through the streets. After the procession 
it is taken into the church and the foot end of the coffin 
is opened, whereupon the villagers, one after another, kiss 
the feet of the ef^gy over which a strong perfume has been 
sprinkled. The perfume bottle, with some of the perfume 
remaining, is hidden by the sacristan somewhere beside 
the holy figure. If, without purposely trying to find this 
bottle and without any apparent movements, some for- 
tunate one among the devout takes hold of it, he brings 
it home in triumph. He has merely to wet his hook with 
this perfume when he goes out, so he believes, to be assured 
of a plentiful catch. 

Sometimes the fisherman catches a large fish in the 
stomach of which he finds one or more hooks. He does not 
throw such a hook away, but ties it to the end of a stout 
line, for he believes that it will secure for him more and 
larger fish than a hook obtained in the ordinary manner. 

The ordinary pal tat or cat-fish is dark in color, but on 
rare occasions the fisherman catches a white one. This he 
does not kill, for it is a lucky fish. He keeps it in a jar of 
water, changing the water and feeding it frequently enough 
to keep it alive. Whenever the fish is unusually active, 
he believes that it is telling him to go fishing at once and 
anticipates coming home beneath the weight of a big catch. 

Good and Bad Omens 

If the fisherman in his sleep dreams of fighting or killing 
a dog, he considers it an omen of good fishing luck; also 
when he dreams of having been bitten by a snake. On the 
other hand, if he happens to sneeze on starting out on a 
fishing trip, he believes luck will be against him. Other 
bad omens are his recalling after he has gone down the 
ladder of his house that he has forgotten something; his 
meeting with a woman rather than a man first; his happen - 
Continued on page 397 



Mang Julian: Elector 



By Francisco C. Cleto 



'ANG JULIAN: elector; and friend of the 
Governor, I should add, considering Mang 
Julian said so himself. 
They were gathered — Mang Julian and the 
barrio political wiseacres — at theif usual hang-out, 
Inso's barber shop. In a barrio like Sabang, the 
barber shop is not merely a barber shop, but the civic, 
political, gossip, and recreation center, as well. 

The sun had long dropped from the vertical, but the day 
was still annoy ingly warm. 

Inso was cutting Tekio's month-growth of hair. Doro 
and Siso were absorbed in a game of dama. Mang Julian 
sat there fanning himself. The shop was' silent save for 
the muffled **trressek-trressek'* of the scissors. 

The silence was not to last for long, however. Mang 
Julian cleared his throat and everyone knew what to expect. 
The now sleepy Tekio, not desiring to be disturbed, tried 
to head off Mang Julian's speech with a long-drawn **ho- 
hum". To no avail. 

**I will vote for Governor Polido's reelection," Mang 
Julian announced, pausing to note the effect of his words, 
which, indeed, were surprising. 

But the others were not slow to understand and to put 
two and two together. Governor Polido, rabid **pro**; 
Mang Julian, allegedly rabid **anti"! If Mang Juttan was 
going to vote for Governor Polido, well, they thought they 
knew what had made Mang Julian come to that decision. 
Inso went to the door and spat, the buyo-reddened saliva 
quickly sinking into the thick dust. Tekio emitted 
another **ho-hum'* and shifted his body in the chair. Doro 
and Siso merely straightened their backs and continued 
playing. 

" Mang Julian was on to his friends. He said: **I know 
what you are thinking about my decision to vote for Gov- 
ernor Polido. But Tm telling you, it is not his wine and 
cigars — nor his back-slapping — that got me. Though I do 
not deny we had some drinks in his house in town last 
night and I went home richer by five cigars in my pocket. 
No. It is rather the Governor's open-mindedness that 
won me.** (Here the bolder Tekio cleared his throat loudly. 
**Ehem,** he said.) 

**I never knew the Governor as I know him now,** Mang 
Julian continued. **He is most fair-minded and amiable. 
Imagine me expounding to him my views, and he simply 
nodding and smiling. He did not say much. He did not 
contradict me. He listened to me, nodding and nodding, 
all smiles. And how well I did talk!*' 

Mang Julian paused. His audience was attentive, and 
he was pleased. 

He resiimed: **I think in the end I convinced the Governor 
with my anti-HHC arguments. But he won me with his 
personality. And when it finally comes to voting, what 
do arguments matter? It is the person of the candidate 
which counts, I say. We vote for the man, don*t we?** 

Thus Mang Julian talked and talked. About the Gov- 
ernor and their newly formed friendship. 

384 



In the meantime Inso had finished cutting Te- 
kio*s hair and Doro and Siso had stopped their 
game. The company prepared to disperse, Doro 
saying he had a carabao to catch, while Tekio 
said he had promised Candido they would have 
some cock-fight practice that afternoon. 
**Only one thing more, my friends, before we part,** said 
Mang Julian. "Governor Polido has named me his political 
leader number one in this barrio. It is up to me, he said, 
to get him a satisfactory majority, if not an overwhelming 
one. And 1*11 try my best if only for the sake of our friend- 
ship. I therefore count upon your votes, my friends, and 
those of your relatives and others you can convince. The 
Governor will be grateful to you. He will not forget. I 
shall have a special word with him for you.** 

They sallied forth out of the barber shop: Tekio, Doro, 
and Siso taking one direction, and Mang Julian taking 
another. Inso, at the door of his shop, inquired casually: 
**Are you doing anything this afternoon, Mang Julian?** 
''Nothing,** answered the Governor*s friend. "But 
tonight I am going to town to keep an appointment 
with the Governor at his house. I think we will discuss 
political matters. I will tell you what transpires at our 
conference.** 

"We envy you of the wine you will drink tonight in the 
Governor *s house, Mang Julian,** said Tekio. "But we 
will be content with a cigar each, if you will bring them for 
us.** 

"Oh, yes,** promised Mang Julian. 

Tekio, Doro, and Siso smiled. Inso winked at them. 



When the election returns announced the fact of Governor 
Polido *s reelection, Mang Julian was among the first who 
sent in their congratulations — no, Mang Julian delivered 
his in person. He also attended the banquet given in honor 
of the Governor. As a proof he came home very drunk. 
And he had a box of cigars for his friends. 

After the election, the barrio of Sabang settled down 
once more to normal life, but not Mang Julian. Not for a 
minute forgetting that the Governor was his personal friend, 
and knowing his appointment as Barrio Lieutenant was 
only a matter of time now, he allowed himself a certain 
amount of importance. He sported a new rattan cane 
whenever he showed himself outside his house, and when- 
ever he gave an opinion, he took it for granted that it would 
give finality to a discussion. 

Mang Julian was not the same man any more, even to 
his friends. Inso, the barber, was the first to speak of it to 
the others: "You should have seen how he handed me my 
fee yesterday,** he said, "And he gave me twenty-five 
centavos instead of the usual twenty**. 

This was how Mang Julian stood in the barrio until 
matters came to a head one day. It happened that a 
carabao belonging to Mang Julian had strayed and entered 
the rice seedbed of his neighbor Justo. The sprouting 
seedlings were trampled into the mud, and Justo asked 
Mang Julian to pay for the damage. Mang Julian dis- 
claimed any responsibility, saying the fault was not his. 



"You should build stronger fences," he told Justo. 

"But it is your carabao that has done the damage." 

"That does not alter the case. It might have been any- 
body's carabao." 

Justo went home very angry. Next morning, Mang 
Julian's own seedbed looked as if it had been the stamping 
ground of a herd of carabaos, — which it really had been, 
and Mang Julian knew whose carabaos. 

With vengeance in his heart Mang Julian came down 
upon Justo, and according to the latter's story, without 
any preliminaries struck him over the head with the rattan 
cane. Justo had backed away, found a piece of bamboo, 
and in the end Mang Julian came off the worse, and was 
forced to spend a week in the provincial hospital. 

Mang Julian's ire can be imagined. He literally escaped 
from the hospital to see his friend, the Governor, the sooner, 
to bring down that worthy's wrath on the head of the un- 
fortunate upstart, Justo. He went directly to the Gov- 
ernor's office in the Provincial Government building. The 
Governor was there but just then very busy. He was told 
to wait by the secretary. So he waited. He waited and 
waited. Near twelve o'clock the Governor's secretary 
came out. The Governor could not see Mang Julian now. 
Would he care to come back tomorrow? 

Next morning Mang Julian came back. But the same 
thing happened. He waited for a long time only to be told 
again that the Governor could not see him. "Very pres- 
sing" matters were occupying him. Tired of this, Mang 
Julian decided to go to see the Governor at his house the 
next day. 



He was met at the door by the Governor's wife. Yes, 
the Governor was in, but asleep. Would Mang Julian 
state his business so the Governor could be advised of it 
when he awoke? Yes? 

So Mang Julian told the Governor's wife what had 
happened to him and what he wanted the Governor to do. 

The Governor's wife was very sympathetic. Yes she 
would tell the Governor. She asked Mang Julian to come 
back that evening. He would be able to see the Governor 
personally then. 

When Mang Julian came back at about seven o'clock, 
the Governor's wife was very sorry. Her husband had just 
gone out to fill an engagement. She knew what trouble 
Mang Julian had gone through, but, could he come again 
some other time? 

Mang Julian turned to go. The Governor's wife closed 
the door. But Mang Julian did not go immediately. He 
stood thinking for a while on the porch. 

"Has he gone?" came a voice from behind the door. 

Mang Julian was startled. Why, it was Governor 
Polido's voice — Governor Polido whose wife had just told 
him that he had gone out to fill an engagement.* 

Mang Julian moved toward the door to knock again. 
But his hand never touched it. For suddenly, everything 
became clear to him. In a flash he understood all. 

"Never again; never again," he told the stars as he 
slowly, brokenly wended his way home — Mang Julian, 
the friend of the Governor. 



Night In A Small Town 

By C. Faigao 

HERE only the thin wind 
The deep silence mars; 
Here night seems always 
Spread thick with stars. 

I muse by my window. 
And a child am I 
Beneath roof of nipa. 
Beneath palm of sky. 

The dark roofs are coffins 
Neath heaven's blue bowl; 
The winds fling black dirges 
And the late dogs howl. 

The tree-tops aquiver 
Spell mystery, fear; 
Above them is splendor 
And beauty austere. 

O night for the going 
Of me on the tide! 
With Beauty above me, 
And Death by my side! 



Poems 

By Angela Manalang Gloria 

THERE are so many poems in my head 
All wanting to be seen. 
And some are bright in silver lace. 
And some are plumed with green. 

The gay and lovely ones pirouette 

Like dancers in my mind. 
And others, frail and wistful nuns. 

Tread somberly behind. 

The madcap inspirations, bent 

On flinging stars about. 
Contrive to break away before 

I know that they are out; 

While the ambitious fancies, dressed 

In proud, immprtal white, 
Look upwards all the time — and so 

They never come out right. 

But all of them, however perfect 

In my mind's retreat. 
Appear bewildered when released. 

And oh, so incomplete. 



385 



Christ as an Historical Figure 

By the Rev. Henry L. Irwin, S. J. 



WHY is Christ practically ignored by Roman 
historians of his own day? If such a figure 
existed, and if he occupied the center of 
the stage in Jerusalem as the Evangelists say he 
did, how is it there is not extant an account 
of his life and dramatic death, reported by 
letter to the Roman Emperor? The silence of secular 
history seems to point to only one conclusion: that Christ 
as an historical character made so little impression in his 
own day that secular history did not deem Him worthy of 
notice. 

First of all, in examining this question which periodically 
pops up as an argument against Christianity in rationalistic 
and atheistic literature, let us see just what contemporary 
history contains about Christ. We are not concerned here 
with historical references to Christianity, for of those there 
is an abundance from the end of the first century and on- 
wards, but we are interested in historical data bearing 
upon Christ as a personality, his activities and influence. 
Of course we have the narratives of the Evangelists and of 
St. Paul which are more minute than any other history of 
antiquity. In their accounts we learn of Christ intimately, 
we see and feel his personality as if he lived to-day. These 
documents stand out as the best authenticated works in 
all history. No other history has been subjected to so 
much scrutiny nor so carefully preserved from interpolation. 
Especially the four great Pauline Epistles (Rom., Gal.; I 
and* II Cor.) can hardly be overestimated by the student 
of Christ's life; they have at times been called the ''fifth 
gospel**; their authenticity has never been assailed by 
serious critics; their testimony is also earlier than that of 
the Gospels, at least most of the Gospels; it is the more 
valuable because it is incidental and undesigned; it is the 
testimony of a highly intellectual and cultured writer, who 
had been the greatest enemy of Jesus, who writes within 
twenty -five years of the events which he relates. 



But what about secular history? What does 
^^^^ ^^^^ of Christ? The non-Christian sources 
W^m for the historical truth of the Gospel account 
of Jesus Christ, are both few and polluted by 
hatred and prejudice. We need not delay over a 
writing entitled the ''Acts of Pilate", which must 
have existed in the second century (Justin, "Apol." I, 
35) and must have been used in pagan schools to warn boys 
against the belief of the Christians (*'Euseb. Hist. Eccl." I, 
IX; IX, V); nor need we inquire into the question whether 
there ever existed any authentic census tables of Quirinus. 
We possess at least the testimony of the Roman historian, 
Tacitus (A. D. 54-119). '*Nero, in order to stifle the rumor 
(as if he himself had set Rome on fire), ascribed it to those 
people who were hated for their wicked practices, and 
called by the vulgar Christians: these he punished ex- 
quisitely. The author of this name was Christ, who, 
in the reign of Tiberius, was brought to punishment 
by Pontius Pilate the procurator.'* 

Another Roman writer who shows his acquaintance with 
Christ is Suetonius (A. D. 75-160) who wrote of Christ 
(Chrestus) as a Jewish insurgent who stirred up sedition 
against Rome under the reign of Claudius. (A. D. 41-54) 
Of greater importance is the letter of Pliny the Younger 
to the Emperor Trojan (about A. D. 61-115), in which the 
Governor of Bithynia consults his imperial majesty as to 
how to deal with the Christians living within his jurisdic- 
tion. Christianity here appears no longer as a religion of 
criminals, as it does in the texts of Tacitus and Suetonius; 
Pliny acknowledges the high moral principles of the Chris- 
tians, admires their constancy in the Faith which he ap- 
pears to trace back to their worship of Christ. Describing 
the Christians he says: *'they were wont, on a stated day, 
to meet together before it was light, and to sing a hymn to 
Christ, as to a god, and to oblige themselves by a sacrament 
not to do anything that was ill.*' 

(Continued on page 394) 



God's Hand 

By Manuel E. Buenafe 

JN one cupped Hand 
God holds man. 

Why should man 
strive to pierce 
the void beyond 
this citadel? 

Within— there is love, 
beauty, strife, life; 
without — dark chaos. 

Why attempt 
Futility? 

In His Hand 
God holds man. 



386 



Abbreviations in Written Tagalog 



By E. Arsenio Manuel 




THIS article treats of abbreviations in written 
Tagalog as opposed to the natural, or * 'eu- 
phonic** abbreviations, as Professor H. O. 
Beyer of the University of the Philippines terms 
them, which were developed in oral speech long 
before the ancient Filipinos learned to write. 

To the casual student of Philippine languages, Tagalog 
abbreviations hardly exist. Tagalog grammars and dic- 
tionaries do not list, nor even mention, them, and indeed 
their appearance is very recent as Tagalog periodicals 
seem to show. In EI Pasig, a Spanish-Tagalog publication 
(1862-1863) and the first newspaper to print a native 
language, and in Diariong Tagalog, the first real Tagalog 
daily (1882), we do not find abbreviations in use except to 
a very limited extent, — and these being Spanish abbre- 
viations in fact. It was not until the outbreak of the 
Philippine revolution that quite a number appeared, and 
most of these are now obsolete. Tagalog abbreviations 
are probably not half a century old. The majority of the 
abbreviations enumerated in this article were conceived 
during the American regime and the present century. 

Besides the two periodicals already mentioned, the 
following were consulted in the preparation of the list of 
abbreviations discussed: EI Heraldo de la Revolucidn, 
Mulig Pagsilag, Taliba, Pagkakaisa, Mabuhay, Li- 
wayway, Sampaguita, and various Tagalog novels. 
The reader will no doubt encounter some abbreviations 
not included here, and it should be said that this article is 
not intended to be exhaustive. A few were intentionally 
discarded. 

Names of proper places are often abbreviated. K. P. 
stands for Kapuluang Pilipinas (Philippine Islands). 
S. P., used at the close of the Spanish regime until the early 
part of the twentieth century, is its other form, meaning 
Sankapuluang Pilipinas (Philippine Archipelago). Bdo. 
(Binondo), and Samp. (Sampalok), are well known districts 
of the City of Manila. It would appear, however, that 
Binondo is a Spanish corruption, the real Tagalog name 
being Binondok, which might properly be abbreviated, 
Bdk. Many names of provinces are shortened. For 
instance, Tay. stands for Tayabas; Bui., Bulakan; Bat., 
Batangan; B. E., Bagong Esiha, that is, Nueva Ecija 
Tagalized. Since several provincial names are Spanish in 
origin, they need not be given here. The names of towns 
are often abbreviated in the dailies: Big. for Bigan (Vigan); 
Kab. for Kabanatuan (Cabanatuan) ; Mai. for Malolos. 
The letters V and C do not exist in Tagalog as in the great 
majority of Philippine languages, which explains the slight 
ortographic changes. By lal. is meant lalawigan, prov- 
ince. 

Among associations the best known is the revolutionary 
K.K.K., which represents Kataastaasan Kagalang- 
galang na Katipunan Ng Mga Anak Ng Bay an (Highest 
and Most Respectable Association of the Sons of the People), 
or more popularly the Katipunan. While this is only 
locally known, the American K.K.K. (Ku Klux Klan) 



has attained such world-wide notoriety as to 
warrant mention in English dictionaries. Both 
are secret societies. The Katipunan*s progenitor, 
the Liga Filipina, less known, was intended by its 
founder, Jose Rizal, to be contracted thus: L. F. 
This is Spanish, however. Kapisanan, the 
Tagalog term for association, is itself written kap. in short. 
The Spanish word compania is kampanya Tagalized, but 
may be correctly translated as Kasama, Ka. 

Pang, is pangulo shortened. The writer has found 
instances where it is also used to stand for pangalawa {ng), 
that is, second or vice; and for pangkalahatan{g) , main 
or general, as in pang.tang. (general or main office). Where 
P is capitalized, it becomes Pangasinan (one of the prov- 
inces). The word kinatawan (agent, representative), on 
the other hand, is abbreviated in three ways: kin., kint., 
and kt. The first seems to be favored in general usage, 
although the third should be preferred, as it is the shortest 
and looks smart. Tang, is tanggapan (office, receiving 
room). Kataastaasang Hukuman correctly transcribes 
Supreme Court, and is Ktt. Hukuman in short. The 
writer has not come across an instance where hukuman is 
abbreviated; although it may be conveniently rendered by 
hk. There are several Tagalog names for offices and officers 
which have not as yet been abbreviated but should in some 
way be abridged for they are long; for instance, tagapa- 
matnugot, patnugot, or tagapagpaganap (director, 
chief, or manager), tagaingat-yaman or simply ingat- 
yaman (treasurer), kali him (secretary). 

There are several conventional forms of address in 
Tagalog. Miss which is brief enough to be abridged in 
English, does not adequately transcribe the Tagalog bini- 
bini, which is represented by Bb. Some write Bbg. with 
an otiose g. This letter is superfluous whether the term 
referred to is binibini or binibining, since no one abbreviates 
binibini when standing alone, and when prefixed to a lady's 
name, it invariably is pronounced with the nasal guttural. 
Ginang (mistress) is Gng. in short. Gg., its other form, 
is not widely used. Ginoo, which nearly corresponds to 
mister, is contracted with a capital G. Sometimes it is 
written Gg., which is not proper for analogous reason 
already adduced. GG., both letters capitalized, and used 
before an enumeration of a series of personal names, is the 
short for the plural. This is a rare form, probably following 
Latin practice. It has its counterpart in the French MM., 
messieurs, the singular being M., monsieur; and in the 
Spanish PP., padres, P., padre. During the Philippine 
revolution M. was also used before names of high officials of 
the government and it means maginoo, which approx- 
imates the English term, honorable; the plural being MM., 
mga maginoo(ng), written before a series of personal 
names. There is no abbreviation for the plural of binibini, 
since the prevailing usage in case of a series of maiden 
names is to prefix Bb. to every young lady's name, thus: 

[Continued on pa^e 391) 

3«7 



388 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 




HISTORY 

WILL TELL YOU THAT THE FINE PHYSIQUE, 
COURAGE, AND MENTAL ABILITIES BELONG TO 
THOSE NATIONS WHOSE DIET INCLUDES MILK. 

MILK IS NOT EXPENSIVE BECAUSE IT IS THE 
ONLY FOOD WHICH COMBINES NEARLY ALL 
THE ENERGY - GIVING AND BODY-BUILDING 
QUALITIES OF OTHER FOODS. 



YOU CAN BUY NO BETTER MILK THAN 

"BEAR" BRAND NATURAL SWISS MIIK 




With Charity To All 

By Putakte and Bubuyog 



A few days after the publication of the ^^^^^^ '(Z^i^ 
last issue of this magazine we received ^ ^^^^jQ j> 
the following communication: ^f^B^S^ 
**The undersigned insects, being deeply K^k^ 
concerned over the welfare and happiness of ^gu^^ 
these Islands, appeal to the recognized paytriotism and 
insect sense of Putakte and Bubuyog to cease their 
fratricidal competition. 

**In this hour of transcendent significance, when we stand 
on, or at least crawl over the threshold of a new era, your 
quarrel, to be quite frank with you, takes on the complexion 
of a farce that is almost human. People are beginning 
to believe the charges you hurl against each other in the 
heat of your uninsectlike dispute. Whoever heard of 
insects stooping to argument? 

"We appeal to the two great Hymenoptera, illustrious 
sons of the noble families of Vespidae and Apidae, to stop 
this fight and present to the nation a united front, ticket, 
or pocket, to put it in the language of men. Let us not 
imitate men ; let us not give them a chance to charge insects 
of *uninsectity* to other insects.** 

Here follows a long list of 606 signatures, of public- 
spirited insects representing all the families, orders, subor- 
ders, and disorders of the Arthropoda. Heading the list 
are the Lepisma Saccharina, both the Sinura and the Thy- 
sanura. Then come the Mantidae, the Phasmidae, the 
Blattidae, the Scutelleridae, the Pentalomidae, the Cyd- 
nidae, and the Sine die. There are also the Posadae, 
Madridae, Trinidae, Unsonidae Michelle, Smenidae, Rose- 
celle, Roxanidae, and Ginaldae. The list concludes with 
Leptysma Marginicolle. 

* * * 

We wish to express our warmest gratitude to our fellow 
insects for recalling us to our senses. In the heat of the 
political campaign, which is not an insect invention, we 
almost fell so low as to behave like humans. But insects 
is insects, thank Godae! So acting in perfect accord, which 
is not to be confused with a mere Coalition, we hereby 
offer ourselves as candidates for President and Vice-Pres- 
ident respectively, or vice versa. 

Putakte 
Bubuyog 

We affirm and reaffirm our intention of following the 
programme we have mapped out in our previous platform, 
to which we add the following planks: — 

17. We shall work for trade reciprcxrity between this country and 
the United States. We shall fight for the admission of the following 
Filipino products into the United States duty free: politicians, grafters, 
and debators and commencement orators. In return, we shall gladly 
admit into the Islands the following United States products dutyfree: 
Mac West, nudists (only the sightly ones), and dollars. 

18. We propose to prohibit the import of the following articles: 
Y.M.C A. secretaries, Greta Grarbo and Ramon Navarro films, Brisbane 
editorials and other "Brisbanalities", and pictures considered safe by 
the Board of Censors. 



19. We shall work for the protection and encou- 
ragement of the following native industries: graft; 
razor-blades and electric bulbs made in Germany, 
Japan, beauty parlors and fashion "academies", 
parades, "beauty" contests, and the Free Press. 

20. In order to avoid what happened during the recent Sakdal 
uprising when the people, according to an evening daily paper, were not 
asked "to join", the revolt, we propose to establish a Bureau of Revolts. 
It shall be the duty of this Bureau to announce throughout the country 
all prospective revolts; and no revolt shall be considered legal unless 
this Bureau has been duly notified. It shall also be the duty of this 
Bureau to determine the nature of the weapons to be used. The use . 
of weapons like home-made guns, bolos, and fists, which do not cause 
civilized slaughter, shall be absolutely banned. 

21. We shall establish a Society for the Suppression of Thought, 
Radical and Otherwise. The officers shall be: "Dr." Hilario Camino 
Moncado, Chairman; Governor Cailles, Executive Secretary; the 
Hon'ble Pedro de la Liana, Secretary of Propaganda; the Hon'ble 
Teofilo Sison, Secretary of Blah. The number of officers may be in- 
creased from time to time, but there shall be no members. Mr. Mc- 
Cullough Dick shall act as the Brain Trust of the organization. 

22. There shall be established a Bureau of Patriotism for the en- 
couragement and regulation of patriotic fervor. This Bureau shall see 
to it that patriotism be not merely "the last refuge of a scoundrel" 
as old Samuel Johnson said, but the one and only refuge. 

23. We swear on our word as non-gentlemen, that we shall not take 
part in, nor in any way aid or abet the perpetration of the Rigodon. 

24. We propose to grant women the right of suffrage. This right, 
however, shall be withdrawn immediately before each election and shall 
be restored immediately after the election. 

25. To develop the morale of the Commonwealth Army, each Com- 
pany, Regiment, and Brigade shall elect a sponsor in accordance with 
the practice of our model army, the U. P. Cadets. 

26. It is our intention to convert the Bureau of Non-Christian Tribes 
into a Department so it can extend its work to inlcude phases of national 
activities unjustly overlooked, viz. the Y.M.C.A., the Red Cross, the 
Anti-Tuberculosis Society, the National Charity Sweepstakes, the 
Legislature, etc., etc. 

27. Our Cabinet shall be: — Minister of Foreign Entanglements, 
Pedro Guevara; Minister of Interior Decoration, Recto; Minister of 
Puericulture and Unnatural Resources, Dr. Ines Villa; Minister of 
Private Works and Spirit Communications, "Dr." Hilario Moncado; 
Minister of "Justice", Governor Juan Cailles; Minister of Air and 
Weather, Dr. Camilo Osias; Minister of Offense, Colonel Antonio 
Torres; Minister of Capital, Ramon Torres; Minister of Veteranos, 
Actual and Prospective, General Emilio Aguinaldo; Minister of Non- 
Christian Tribes, ; Minister of Grafts and Watered 

Stocks, J. F. Wakan.* 

28. We shall work for the establishment of a Department of Vete- 
ranos which shall take care of ambitious young men, the hope of the 
Fatherland, who aspire to be veteranos. 

29. We propose to create a Bureau of Unemployment. Its duties 
shall be to see to it that our favorites, male and female, shall be pleasant- 
ly imem ployed. 

30. We propose to end the Filipino peril in Davaokuo, thus settling 
once for all the Davao problem. 



♦At first we thought of creatine a Department of Christian Tribes, but we 
had to abandon the plan due to our failure to find a man sufficiently Christian 
to head it. 

(To be continued) 

389 




390 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August. 1935 




The Philippine Home 

Edited by Mrs. Maria Masipag 

Flower Pot Gardening 

^HE other day I went to visit a 
friend of mine, the wife of a pro- 
minent official. They have a 
beautiful house in the Sampaloc District, 
with modern appointments, fine old Spanish furniture, highly 
polished and well taken care of, lovely hardwood floors and 
panelling, but the plants that were placed here and there in 
the sala and on the porch were deplorable in their neglect. 
I could see at the first glance that the potted palms were root- 
bound and needed larger pots and new soil, the begonias look- 
ed starved and straggly from moving them around. Begonias 
should not be moved from place to place, even though they 
are in pots. The leaves adjust themselves to a certain 
light coming from a certain direction, and unless one can 
supply the same identical grade of light from the same 
direction in the new location, they will become unsightly 
in trying to adjust themselves to the new conditions and will 
rot or wither. Potted begonias should have the soil chang- 
ed at least once a year. This soil should be well mixed 
with limestone rubble and a little bean cake. Daily wa- 
tering is essential, but care should be taken not to turn the 
hose on the plants full force as begonias are very delicate 
and can not stand rough treatment. Watering by hand 
should be resorted to with the flowering begonias, as the 
spraying with the hose rots the flowers and shakes them 
off the stems. Begonias should not be kept in the house 
over one day. Filtered sunlight is best for growing them, 
with the exception of the flowering kinds, which love the 
full light of the sun and gratefully return the proper treat- 
ment in an abundance of lovely blooms. 

Palms lend themselves excellently to potting as they will 
grow in comparatively dense shade, but they will also 
grow well, and even better, in full sunlight where they put 
out a much larger number of leaves than they do in the 
shade. Palms grown in the shade, on the other hand, 
have much darker foliage of a more intense green, but 
fewer leaves. They can stand remaining in pots for many 
years, unlike other trees, as they become more or less stunt- 
ed and manage to adjust themselves to a rather starved 
existence. Repotting once a year into a slightly larger pot 
with new soil, and the addition of a little fertilizer now and 
then, if it be only the water in which meat or fish has been 
washed, is sufficient to keep them healthy throughout 
many years. Once a week they should be well hosed to 
wash off the dust from the leaves, as otherwise the pores 
will be stopped up, which prevents the plant from breath- 
ing. A very pretty effect is obtained by planting creepers 
with them, which cover the base of the palms. 

Ferns are best planted in hanging baskets made of wood 
or wire filled with moss, peat moss, and rubble. They 
love water, and, if possible, the hose should be used on them 



every day. By using fertilizer quite frequently and ad- 
ditional moss or used tealeaves whenever the old moss is 
used up, they will keep fresh and healthy indefinitely. A 
very good fertilizer, particularly for potted plants is the 
locally manufactured **Fertilo*' sold by Parson's Hardware. 

I could mention many other plants that lend themselves 
to flower pot planting, but my space is limited and so I will 
just stress a feW points essential in all flower pot gardening. 

As the space which the plants have to spread their 
roots in is restricted, they need to be fed with fertilizer 
every once in a while and repotted as often as it seems neces- 
sary, which in most cases is about once a year, as otherwise 




KE 



He's reached an age when a liccle extra care will 
enable him ro rake his rightful place in the world. 

What he needs is milk, and plenty of it, giving 
him that additional vitality required hy a young 
growing body. 

Molico will guarantee you a ready supply of the 

purest and richest milk. 
Give him this, and he'll 
thank you in after years. 




MOUCO 

fuLL CREAM MILK POWDER 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



391 



the plants become rootbound. The leaves of all potted 
plants should be kept as much as possible free of dust 
and city soot, as these tend to stop up the pores and 
prevent the plant's from breathing. This again weakens 
them and the result is that they become receptive 
to all kinds of fungus diseases and other plant pests. 
They are hardly different in that respect from human 
beings and animals. Do not keep your potted plants 
in the house too long. Palms can stand to remain in 
the house for about a week, ferns for four days, and all 
other plants less, particularly flowering ones. When you 
put potted plants in the house they should be watered 
much less than when they are in the garden. 



Like Sweet Sampaguitas 

By E. Pascua Alcabedas 

LIKE our sweet sampaguitas blow. 
White in the midst of darkness. 
My friend, do thou aspire to grow; 
Like our sweet sampaguitas blow. 
The seed of beauty thine to sow; 

Then keep thy soul its whiteness: 
Like our sweet sampaguitas blow. 
White in the midst of darkness. 



Abbreviation in Written Tagalog 

{Continued from, page 387) 

Bb. Polintan, Bb. Gatmaitan, Bb. Punsalan, etc., and 
never mga Bb. Polintan, Gatmaitan, Punsalan, etc. It 
should be remarked that with regard to the male sex, both 
ways are permissible. The dignified and pleasant term 
kagalanggalang (honorable) is abridged Kgg. This 
is now accepted. Gat. translated as sir by Messrs. Sevilla 
and Verzosa,^ is not an abbreviation as it apparently is. 
It was a title of nobility in the ancient Tagalog social order. 
The same is true with lakan, of a lower class than gat. 
The latter has no English equivalent. 

Tagalog newspapers are agreed on the abbreviation of 
bilang (number) into big. In some instances pangulong 
tudling (editorial) is briefed pang, tud.; paunawa (notice), 
into paun.; tuntunin (article), tun; kautusan (regulation, 
rule), kaut.; lingguhan (weekly), ling. 

The preposition ng (of), which is in fact an abbreviated 
form of nang, has acquired a distinct signification entirely 
its own and must not be confused with the latter which 
should only be used as an adverb of time meaning while," 
'*when'* or **for'\ The article mga (plural the), is a curtailed 
form of manga, a form now seldom seen in written Taga- 
log. Ng and mga do not require a period. 

There are phrases in Tagalog speech which have readily 
lent themselves to abridgment. Ng umaga (in the morn- 
ing), rendered by n.u.; ng tanghali (noon), by n.t.; ng 



To CI can Teeth Quickly, Safely — Use 



Dr. West's Tooth Paste 

on your 

Dr. West's Tooth Brush 



nphe two go together. The com- 
bination results in the most 
efficient satisfactory care which 
you can give your teeth. 

Dr. West's Tooth Paste is a 
pleasing, cleansing dentifrice which 
removes stain and film — refreshes 
the whole mouth. 

The Dr. West's Tooth Brush 
makes a thorough job of teeth- 
cleaning. Its stiff, durable bris- 
tles are shaped with saw-tooth 
edges so that you can reach every 
part of every tooth. 

At All Dealers 




392 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 



hapon (in the afternoon), by n.h. ; ng gabi (in the evening), 
by n.g., are mostly adoptations from their Latin equivalents. 
One thing observable in English practice is that while the 
English continue using Latin abbreviations, English equi- 
valents are read into them. For instance, L (librae), ^, 
(solidi), d. (denarii), read pounds, shillings, and pence 
respectively; e.g. (exempli gratia), for example; i.e. (id est), 
that is, etc. This is never so in Tagalog. At iba pa, 
abbreviated at ibp., is never represented by etc. fet cetera), 
which reads **and so forth'*, or **and so on** in English. 
Ibp., which illustrates another rare form — two words joined 
together — has only its counterpart in its Latin equivalent. 
This form is only duplicated by mlda., may lagda (literally, 
there is a signature), of two words. 

Some abbreviations in current use in the latter part of 
the past century and continued up to a short period after 
the American occupation are of some philological interest. 
S.S., capitalized or in small letters, is used in complimentary 
endings and signifies aumasainyo, which may be roughly 
rendered by "your truly**. H.n.c, that is humahalic 
ng Camay, or h.s.i.c, halic aa inyong camay, is an 
adoptation from the Spanish complimentary ending; 
Q.S.M.B.(que su mano besa). The writer is not aware of 
an English equivalent, but it may be translated : who kisses 
your hand. The abbreviation took the forms of h.n.k., and 
h.s.i.k. later, following the new rules of spelling fervently 
advocated by T. H. Pardo de Tavera and Jos€ Rizal.' 

S.L.N, is frequently seen on crosses for the dead. It 
means aumalangit nawa (may he or she rest in heaven), 
corresponding to the Latin R.I.P., requiescat in pace. 



The abbreviation of sumalangit, one word, into two separate 
letters, S. L., is again rare. 

We can not close this short study without mentioning 
some foreign words which have become ^^naturalized** in 
spoken and written Tagalog, so to speak, and probably are 
bound to remain as distinct contributions to the language. 
Gob. gen. is the accepted short for gobsrnador heneral, 
certainly after its Spanish prototype — gobernador general — 
with only slight ortographic variation. So also reb., kol., 
Peb., Nob., Dis., and other names of the month, prop., pah., 
are understood to refer to reberendo (reverend), koronel 
(colonel), Pebrero (February), Nobiyembre (November), 
Disiyembre (December), propesor (professor), pahina 
(page), respectively. The word koponan (team, league), 
apparently is a Tagalog word. It is in fact derived or 
corrupted from the Spanish word copa (cup, chalice). 
A cup is usually at stake in athletic competitions. This 
explains its origin. 

There are no hard and fast rules in Tagalog abbreviation 
as in any other language. Most of these '^amputated** 
forms are arbitrary; others are dictated by the spur of the 
moment. The Tagalog poet, Jose Corazon de Jesus, in 
one of his poems, wrote: P. ng L., paunawa ng lumagda 
(note by the author), followed by the note. It looks 
awkward, however, and the writer has not encountered this 
form again. Indeed much of what has been enumerated 
here goes to show that a great deal depends upon usage and 
practice. The press is the originator of quite a lot of them. 

Only one observation which makes Tagalog abbreviation 
distinct from the rest need be stated. Where the root of 



Del Monte Brings 

This Delicious Fruit Salad 

O O L I N G , tempting, delightful— this 
pleasing combination of Del Monte 
Fruits for Salad! Ready to serve right from 
the Del Monte tin! You can always be 
sure of Del Monte's fine quality and lus- 
cious flavor. 

Busy house-wives find Del Monte prod- 
ucts a great saving in time. And they 
are always sure of the welcome Del Monte 
Foods command. 

Consult your dealer's shelves for a com- 
plete assortment of Del Monte Canned 
Fruits, Vegetables, Jams and Catsup, 




TOOD PRODUCTS 

At all dealers 




August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



393 




Artillery Drill 



npHIS IS WHAT COLONEL 

SALVADOR T. VILLA, 
COMMANDER OF THE 
CRACK UNIVERSITY OF 
THE PHILIPPINES CORPS 
OF CADETS, HAS TO 
SAY ABOUT THIS EX- 
CELLENT CLOTH. 



Insist upon GENUINE 



Omit: 



9Ht 



'01 



or 



REG. U.S. PAT. orr. 

36 inches wide in 29 Different Shades 
White — in 6 Different Widths 




Infantry Drill 



394 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 19J5 



the word is reduplicated the abbreviation may just double 
the root letter, preceded by the prefix stem letter as the 
case may be, as in Bb., Kgg. and Ktt. Since Tagalog is 
unusually rich in reduplicated words, which in many in- 
stances are long, as kamahalmahalan (most respected or 
most venerated), the observation made is worth remembering. 
The writer has not seen this word, standing alone, abbre- 
viated elsewhere, but following the principle enunciated, 
it may be rendered by kmm. 



I Jot6 N. Sevilla and Paul R. Verzosa, AQ Aklat fig Tagalog (Manila, 1923), p. 73. 
* The forms n.«.b.n.t. and l.m.p., also used in complimentary ending, but now 
archaic, have not been deciphered. 



Christ as an Historical Figure 

(Continued from page 386) 

With regard to the extant documents reputing to be 
Pilate's report to Tiberius, (Thilo, Cod. apocr. N. J. 1832, 
p. 803 ff.) and the letter of Lentulus to the Roman Senate, in 
which Christ's personal appearance is described and an 
account is given of his influence upon men, there is no doubt 
whatever as to their apocryphal character. 

Two other writers must also be named: the Syrian, Mara, 
in his epistle to his son Serapion, speaks of the ''wise King 
of the Jews, after whose death the Jews lost their kingdom, 
but who still lives in His laws.** The date bf the epistle is 
uncertain. Cureton, who edited it in 1855 ascribed it to 
the time of Marcus Aurelius; others, though without justi- 
fication, date it as far back as 73. The Romanized Jew, 



Josephus Flavius, patronized by the Roman Emperor 
(A. D. 37-94) alludes to Christ in two passages. He is 
referring to the death of St. James whom he describes as 
"the brother of Jesus, who was called Christ.** The second 
passage from the * 'Antiquities** of Josephus is the most 
notable of all the references to Christ. By some critics 
it is considered as wholly spurious, by another class of 
critics it is regarded as partly genuine, while a third class 
claims the whole to be genuine. The passage is as follows: 
About this time appeared Jesus, a wise man (if indeed 
it is right to call Him man, for he was a worker of astonish- 
ing deeds, a teacher of such men as receive the truth with 
joy), and He drew to Himself many Jews (and many also 
of the Greeks. This was the Christ) and when Pilate at 
the denunciation of those that are foremost among us, had 
condemned Him to the cress, those who had first loved Him 
did not abandon Him. (For He appeared to them alive 
again on the third day, the holy prophets having foretold 
this, and countless other marvels about Him.) The tribe 
of Christians named after him did not cease to this day.** 
(Antiquities XVUI; IH; 3) 

These are practically all the pagan contemporaneous 
references to Christ — few and unsatisfactory indeed! How 
is this sparcity of comment to be explained? The reason is 
simple enough. Christ's life and death was historically 
insignificant to non-Christian historians. Most Christians 
of to-day are apt to exaggerate the importance of Christ's 
influence during his own lifetime in the light of Christianity's 
future political and religious significance. Up till his last 
three years Christ's life was spent in obscurity as a car- 
penter of Nazareth; during his final years of public teach- 



Cleanliness in the Kitchen Means 
Good Health in the Home 

Use SAPOLIO for your daily cleansing tasks 



C APOLIO is the Best Cleanser for All Kitchen Utensils. 
^ It will make your pots and pans shine like polished sil- 
ver, and your steel cutlery will look like new after clean- 
ing with this wonderful Cleanser. 

Kettles of iron, tin or other ware, pots, pans, knives, 
forks, spoons, stove, sinks, in fact all metal surfaces are 
cleaned, more quickly, with less labor, and more econom- 
ically with SAPOLIO. 



Why SAPOLIO 

Prepare your food in 
CLEAN Utensils— serve 
it in CLEAN dishes— and 
you are taking the first 
and most important 
step toward Better 
Health for your family. 




SAPOLIO is sold by dealers all over the Philippines. 
Be sure you get the cake in the silver wrapper, with the 
blue band. There is no substitute for SAPOLIO. 



Use it daily for a clean home 



A 

New Subdivision 
opened up. 



"CUBAO HEIGHTS" 

at popular prices 




'Cubao Heights" looking towards Manila 

This means sometliing wiien 
it's done by the 



6S0 Ave. Rizal 



SAN JUAN HEIGHTS CO. 
Box 961 
Manila 



Tel. 21501 



396 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 



iDg, we find Him mingling with the poor, shunning all oc> 
casions to bring himself into public notice, hiding himself 
when the religious enthusiasm of the mob would crown him 
King. 

What importance did Pilate or the Romans attach to 
him? He was only another Jewish religious fanatic. Jeru- 
salem was full of religious sects — Pharisees, Sadducees, 
Herodians, Essenes, Therapeutae, Samaritans — they were 
forever quarrelling among themselves. Or suppose that 
Pilate really did consider Christ as an insurrectionist and 
had for that reason put Him to death. Were not petty 
rebellions almost the order of the day? Just shortly before 
Christ's crucifixion, JPilate's soldiers had brutally massacred 
thousands of Jews for a small rebellion against his decrees. 
The Bible narrative pictures Pilate as unwilling to condenm 
Christ to death. Why? Probably to manifest his contempt 
for the Jews whom he observed anxious to get rid of Christ 
out of jealousy. He only consented to the death sentence 
when the Jews^threatened to report him to Rome if he did 
not condemn Jesus^whom they called a rebel against Caesar. 
If that letter had been written! — Here would have been 
something for historians to record. A Roman g^ovemor 
removed from ofifice forjefusing to condemn Jesus, a Jewish 
rebel! But a letter from Pilate to Tiberius Caesar con- 
cerning the mere execution of a religious zealot — No! — no 



interest in that trivial detail for His Imperial Majesty. 
Why! it is probable that not even Pilate's slaughter of 
thousands a few months before would have come down to us 
as history, had not Josephus, the Jewish historian, com- 
mented on this massacre — as a mere incident — in the para> 
graph before he mentions Christ as quoted above. And as 
for the condenmation of an individual like Christ — it was 
perhaps just a small detail in Pilate's official day. We may 
imagine that after the incident he went into his place and 
endeavored to put the whole troublesome incident out of 
his head as soon as possible. 

Christianity's rise was of greatest historical importance — 
in fact the most momentous fact in all history. No other 
event so completely changed the world's equilibrium social- 
ly, politically, and morally. But when Christ died, what 
was Christianity? It consisted of eleven ignorant peasants 
as its teaching core and a handful, a few hundred followers, 
mostly all of the poorest and most uninfluential class. 
Christ and the very beginnings of Christianity were without 
historical interest, whereas the rise and spread of Christian- 
ity during the first three centuries culminating with the 
conversion of the Roman Emperor himself — that was the 
greatest of miracles in the moral order, the most astounding 
era in all history — the clearest proof of the divine personal- 
ity of its Founder. 




iDiir^r^EiF^ 

CAP^ IDLES 

many sizes 

many colors 

attractive 

low-priced 



PHILIPPINE 
EDUCATION CO. 



Main Floor 



101-103 Escolta 



Manila 



Here is a *'cow" you 
can keep in your kitchen! 




IT IS KLIM, the most reliable and convenient 
milk supply the world has yet produced. 
Klim is nothing but fine, pure milk — pow- 
dered. Only the water is removed to make it 
keep. And it does keep . . . anywhere . . • with- 
out refrigeration. 

Just add water to Klim, and taste it! You 
will discover that it has all the creamy, natural 
flavor of the finest milk that has ever passed 
your lips. And it has all the good milk 
nourishment! 

Klim is excellent for babies — approved by 
doctors everywhere. Try Klim today. If your 
dealer cannot supply you, send us his name and 
address. 

GETZ BROS. 

G. de lot Reyet Bld<. 



August, 1935 



P H I L I P P I NE MAGAZINE 



397 



Secrets of the Barrio Fisherman 

{Continued from page 383) 

ing to encounter a funeral procession; and the crossing of 
his path by a lizard or a bird— the salaksak, a species of 
Kingfisher larger than the bideng. In these events he 
usually returns and devotes the day to something other 
than fishing. 

Precautions 

The barrio fisherman also observes a number of interest- 
ing precautions. He does not, for instance, set his bamboo 
trap in the water without first ascertaining whether or not 
a Kiba-an inhabits the spot and, if so, whether it will tole- 
rate his placing the trap there. His procedure is as follows: 
About the time of sunset he drives a bamboo cross into the 
bottom, under water, in the place he has selected as a possible 
site for his trap. 

He leaves it there overnight and when, returning very 
early in the morning, he finds that the cross has been 
"knocked down", he looks for some other place, but if he 
finds the cross as he left it he goes ahead and sets the trap, 
leaving the cross, however, to keep any Kiba-an from steal- 
ing the fish. 

Another precaution the fisherman takes is never to allow 
himself to get angry when he starts to go fishing. He is 
also careful not to shake his things. Losing his temper 
or shaking his belongings, will cause the fish to be afraid 
of him, he thinks. 

If a neighbor of his happens to have died on a day he is 
bent on going fishing, he does not neglect to go and view 
the dead before he starts. On going night-fishing, he starts 
either before or after, but never during the time his wife 
or daughter is washing the dishes. 

If he has any ill-wishers, he does all he can to keep them 
from seeing him off, because such people can easily bring 



him bad luck by doing any of the following three, simple 
things. They can call out to him as he goes out of his gate: 
"Mine all the heads!" More secretly they can take a coco- 
nut-bowl ladle, scrape the inside of a pot with it, and then 
wave it at him. Most potent of all, an enemy can follow 
him down the street for a distance, and then, facing about 
in the direction opposite to which he is heading, bend over 
so deeply that the seat of his pants points to the sky. This 
practically guarantees that the fisherman will come home 
with an empty basket! 

Before stepping into the water, the fisherman mutters 
a short prayer, immediately after which he unsheaths 
his glistening bolo and describes a cross with it on the surface 
of the water. This he believes will drive away the Kiba-an 
which would otherwise keep scaring the fish away from his 
nets or hooks. 

He keeps very close watch over his newly set traps or 
lines in order to prevent some other dishonest fisherman 
from stealing the first catch . He believes that what happens 
to a thing from the very first, will continue to happen. 

And, finally, he docs not roast any of the first catch. He 
boils all of it, or, if he has to sell a part, he makes the buyer 
promise not to roast any of the fish. Roasting the first 
catch taken from a line, net, or trap will affect the durability 
as well as the catching capacity of his appliance^ he firmly 
believes. 



iSee the author's 
January, 1934. 



"Secrett of the Barrio Farmer", Philippine Maumine, 



SOUR . 

STOMACH ? 



PHILLIPS' 

MILK OF MAGNESIA 

About 2 hours after eating many people suffer from 
sour Stomach. This indicates an excess of acid which 
should be neutralized. There is nothing better than a 
tablespoonful of Phillips Milks of Magnesia in half a 
glass of water. This will neutralize 
the excess acid instantly and make 
you feel like a new person. For 
over 50 years Phillips Milk of 
Magnesia has been endorsed by 
physicians for men, women and 
children. Get a bottle today and 
learn the many important uses 
of this famous product! 



Now also in tabkts 
with delighlfal mint- 
flavor. Easy to carry 

IB purse or pocket. 

Magnesium 
Hydroxide 




m»>^ AGAINST 

IKFIUEKZA 

AMD 

COLDS 

Quick and safe relief 




Ibrmub:Q5Gm-Aspiriii + 0.05Gra.Caffeine per tablet. 



398 



PHILIPPIN 



E MAGAZINE 




You Are Certain 
Of Its Dependability 

TT IS important that you consider this 
^ when you select your refrigerator. 
Foods need protection during fair or bad 
weather. Electrolux, operated by GAS, 
gives you dependable protection. 



BLBCJJIOLUX 



RVNS ON KEROSENE FOR FARMS AND 
CAMPS. The kerosene-operated Elec- 
trolux offers all the advantages of city 
refrigeration and is obtainable at Er- 
langer & Galinger, Inc., Manila, Iloilo, 
Baguio, Bacolod and Cebu. 

MANILA CAS 
C€I3P€I3ATI€N 




A Short Cycle of Cathay 

{Continued from page 383) 

of which I know were cases where whole classes of students 
in some schools demanded — and obtained — permission to 
graduate a year ahead of time. One such case in Canton 
was in a medical school! 

During the various intermissions from teaching I spent 
a great deal of time studying Cantonese. Chinese has the 
reputation of being excessively difficult, but in some ways 
it is easier than the European languages. When studying 
it, one does not have to rack his brains over questions of 
tense, mood, number, person, and case. There is no 
grammar, and the word order is almost identical with 
the usual word order in English. 

In phonetics, for the first few days, I had difficulty with 
the ng sounds at the beginnings of words. And a sound 
like that of the French u might make trouble for some 
people. Otherwise Cantonese phonetics are easy. 

The world at large is inclined to regard the matter of 
Chinese tones as a profound mystery. But, if one approaches 
them without fear, the mystery is dispelled like the dews 
of early morn! Mandarin has four tones, while Cantonese 
boasts of ten. However, we use all of them in English to 
emphasize or give emotional content to our speech. For 
example, one tone sounds angry, another rises like a ques- 
tion, another is slow, mournful, and resigned. I mean, 
of course, that they sound that way to Occidentals. They 
do not have any emotional significance to the Chinese, 
but are simply integral and necessary elements of the 
words. 

The written language is unquestionably difficult. For 
anyone with the ambition to become a Chinese scholar 
it is a lifetime study. A grade school graduate should be 
able to read and write three thousand characters; a really 
well educated person, five thousand. But there are many 
additional thousands over which the weary scholar can 
burn the midnight oil. However, the ideographs are inter- 
esting as well as difficult and give Chinese writing a flavor 
and saltiness all its own. Consider, for a few random 
examples, the word for goody which consists of the radicals 
for woman and child; for givey a woman, a mouth, and a 
heart; angry, a woman and two men; peace or rest, a 
woman under a roof. A distinguished Oriental scholar 
told me, apropos of the last, that, when there was a woman 
in the house, somebody had rest, but it was not the woman. 

I did not attempt to learn to write the characters, but I 
learned to recognize more than two thousand. Street 
signs became intelligible, I could understand what people 
around me were saying, and life became more and more 
interesting. 

Naturally I did not spend all my time studying and 
teaching. Often I amused myself by wandering through 
the narrow old streets and looking at the beautiful embroid- 
eries, carved ivory, amber, and jade. The merchants 
were all delighted to find that I was teaching in the two 
Chinese schools and complimented me on my white talk'* 
or colloquial. If another foreigner was in the shop I visited, 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE 



MAGAZINE 



399 



I always waited until he left before buying anything, for 
even in rigidly **one price*' shops they gave me much 
lower prices. 

Then there were tea-parties, feasts, and weddings to 
attend. Often I was the only foreign guest at these affairs. 
My class at Chap Sun, upon learning that I had never 
attended a **big play", or Chinese opera, arranged a theater 
party for me. For five hours we sat in a large box opposite 
the stage and drank tea and ate melon seeds and fruit 
while we admired the gorgeous costumes and graceful and 
clever acting of the cast. It is the custom of Chinese 
schools to give feasts for the teachers. Chap Sun gave one 
on a flower boat on the river. Higher Normal had a feast 
to celebrate Western New Year. A Chinese feast is a 
sumptuous repast, and always consists of many courses 
including the famous and highly esteemed sharks' fins, 
birds' nest soup, and ancient eggs. 

I was interested in the solutions to the question of what 
to do with women at these festivities. At several wedding 
feasts I attended the women had their feast in the home, 
the men in a hotel. But if there were any foreign women 
and well educated Chinese women, they were taken to the 
hotel with the men. A good education seems to change 
radically the social position of a Chinese woman. There 
were six women at the feast at the Normal School — three 
primary school teachers, an instructor of physical educa- 
tion, a teacher of education, and I. We were given a table 
to ourselves in the same room with all the men teachers. 
However, two returned students came in late and headed 
straight for our table to take the two remaining places. 
Also a number of men came over at times to play the finger 
game with the primary teachers, the losers having to drink 
rice wine. There were many women at Chap Sun, as it 
had been started as a girls' school. So at the Chap Sun 
feast, the accommodations on the boat being limited, the 
women ate first, and then the men. There was a private 
dinner party given by a couple of returned students at 
which we all sat at one table, the men around one-half 
of the round table, the women around the other half. At 
one wedding I attended, I was taken, after the ceremony, 
into a large room to drink tea with the men — I the only 
woman in a roomful of grave, long-robed gentlemen. 

The most brilliant event I attended was a wedding in 
a home of great wealth. The ladies of the family observed 
the ceremony from the upstairs balcony across the court- 
yard from the room in which it was held. After the cere- 
mony I was taken into a reception room to see them. The 
silk-clad wives, daughters, and daughters '-in-law all wore 
pearls and diamonds, especially pearls, on their fingers 
and wrists, dangling from their ears, and at their throats. 
The back of their smoothly combed hair was covered with 
pearls and precious stones. 

The head of the house had eleven wives — he had had 
twelve, but one was dead — and sixteen children. He was 
a Confucian scholar, poet, and man of high taste. His 
family was said to have the most wonderful collections of 
orchids and pearls in South China. 

Some time later I was offered a position as tutor to the 
two eldest daughters of this family, a position that I would 
have found very interesting and enjoyable, I am sure. 
However, at that time, I did not feel free to accept it. 

(To be continued) 



DOES YOUR CHILD 

SQUINT? 




Ten to one the reason is that 
she's not getting enough light. 

^'Enough light" simply means suf- 
ficient illumination on the page 
she's reading to keep eyes from 
straining, from getting tired. Eyes 
get fatigued before you know it 
. . . they don't give warning in 
advance. The best way to keep 
that little forehead smooth is to 
have a lighting survey made in 
your home, by a lighting repre- 
sentative. Then you'll be sure 
your light is right. Just tele- 
phone 2-19-11 . . . we'll make an 
appointment ... no charge, of 
course— it's just a service. 



Manila Electric Company 



BETTER LIGHT— BETTER SIGHT 



400 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



Aug jat, lyjo 



B 



OIE'S EMULSION 

contains double the quantity of cod-liver oil 
of ordinary emulsions and 3 hypophosphites 
instead of 2, 



MADE FRESH IN MANILA 



A bottle lasts 
a child about 
3 weeks, and a 
tea spoonful 
night and 
morning con- 
tains more vi- 
tamins A and 
D for blood 
and bones 
than all the 
milk anyone 
can drink in a 
day. 



Cod-liver oil 500 
cc; acacia 125 
aa 5 Km.; syrup 
gm.; calc. hypo- 
phoB. 10 gm.; pot. 
die sod. hypophoB. 
6c flavoring s. q. 
1 liter, t 



ANTHNFECTIVE 

BONE-BUILDING 

STRENGTH-GIVING 

WARDS OFF 

Debility 
Anemia 




Nervous- 
ness 

Tubercu- 
losis 

Rickets 

Mental 
Fag 



During these two months your 
children face the hardest period of 
the school year, the rainy season. Let 
them have a teaspoonful of Boie^s 
Emulsion of Cod Liver Oil night and 
morning and cease worrying — Boie's 
Emulsion will pull them through with 
flying colors. 



SOLD BY GOOD DRUG STORES 
EVERYWHERE 

BOTICA BOIE 

MANILA 



Rota Days 

(Continued from page 380) 

fire's glare they were circling around like fantastic and 
gigantic bees and not getting anywhere. I lay down to 
rest again only to be awakened very rudely and suddenly 
by a loud crash. The fire had disappeared, we breathed 
in clouds of ashes, and thousands of bats in mass forma- 
tion were passing through the funnel-like cave entrance 
into the open, like the proverbial bats out of hell. So 
great was their number that their bodies reflected by the 
moonlight made this living mass appear like a great, ghostly, 
quivering pillar of smoke. The men jumped to their feet, 
pelted by the bodies of flying bats in rapid motion, and 
coughing from the smoke and dust, they made for the cave 
entrance. Reaching it, they crouched together, a compact 
mass of trembling, fearful humanity. Fortunately for 
my native friends, daylight was approaching over the vast 
Pacific at the rate of one thouss^nd miles per hour and 
would shortly consume the evils of the night like early 
morning mist. 

With the first light of dawn the men noticed that the 
crosses were missing, and this to them fully explained the 
unearthly happenings. They believed that the taotao 
mona (spirits of the people of before time) had removed 
the crosses and were then able to enter the cave, beat out 
the fire with a great stone, and release the bats. What 
happened was this: The fire's heat by contraction or it 
may have been expansion loosened a layer of soft limestone 
rock above it, and it fell with a loud crash upon the fire 
extinguishing it and scattering sparks, ashes, and dust. 
The bats having been imprisoned for the night, naturally, 
at once left in larger numbers and in a sharter time than 
they had ever done before. 

The early morning sun was now in the sky, the ozean 
below us, the long line of cliffs here and there intersected 
by chasms filled with glistening sand were all smiling in the 
early morning light, and I thought now was the best time 
to reason with my m^n and explain that the events of the 
night could be accounted for by cause and effect, but this 
I was not able to put over. They gathered their few be- 
longings and departed for the village to be once more, 
thanks to God, safe in the shadow of the village church 
and far from all the terrors of the night in tabooed territory 

The men having left, I placed my house in order, or 
rather I should say my cave, and found it good. For 
seven days, I was visited by Juan who brought me such 
supplies as the island afforded. My days were occupied 
in taking photographs, making sketches, and recording 
measurements of the quarry. My nights were pleasantly 
spent in profound and undisturbed slumber. I don't 
suppose that the life of a primitive cave man was very 
pleasant, but I must say that I enjoyed my cave. It must 
be, of course, remembered that I had many of the comforts 
of civilized man, and was in no danger from hostile men or 
prowling beasts, and also I was not beset by the many 
fears that continually haunted the cave man's life. 

Often on a clear day I looked southward to catch a glimpse 
of the island of Guam forty miles away. Guam was my 
home, there lived my family, there were my American 
and native friends, there were the comforts of modem life 
such as spring beds, modem plumbing, iced drinks, electric 
lights, abimdant and varied food, daily news from all the 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE 



MAGAZINE 



401 



world, clubs, books, and so forth. And here I was only 
forty miles distant, but curiously enough if I had been in 
New York or London I would have been closer to Guam 
than I was in Rota. The reason for this was that no com- 
munication existed, during the time of my visit at least, 
between these two islands; no mail, no cables, no radio — 
nothing. The modem Chamorros are afraid of the sea 
and do not venture far in their miserably built canoes, and 
even if they did the Japanese authorities would not allow 
them to attempt to sail to Guam, nor would the naval 
Government of Guam allow them to land. It was impos- 
sible even to communicate by mail except by way of Saipan 
(the Japanese island north of Rota and seat of the Govern- 
ment of the Marianas Islands) and from there the letter 
would be dispatched to Japan, and from there to Manila 
and from Manila to Guam, a total distance of about twenty 
seven hundred miles, but due to the infrequent sailings 
between these points, it would take three months for my 
letter to reach Guam and for me to receive an answer. 
Probably, in the year 1925, no other two islands so close 
together were yet so remote from each other as regards 
communication, and so different in the social and economic 
conditions of their respective peoples. Be that as it may, 
to be able to see one's home and not be able to communicate 
with it, is a condition not often met with. 

I was fortunate to have good weather during my stay 
in the cave so that I was able to finish my work and break 
camp a little sooner than I had expected. Juan was glad 
on the morning of the last day on location when he was told 
that I would return to town, as it seemed the entire popu- 
lation was much worried about the news that Japanese 
land surveyors were to visit the island soon, but enough 
of this now. What all this worry was about will be related 
later. 

It began to rain and it rained hard for several days. A 
typhoon at a distance was the cause, necessitating remain- 
ing indoors, and the enforced idleness produced the fol- 
lowing incident. I had forgotten to take my pipe when I 
left the cave, and upon reaching town rushed anxiously 
to the house of the only and first Japanese trader of Rota, 
to buy a pipe. I had my doubts about his having pipes 
among his trade goods and I was fully determined to walk 
through the storm back to the cave to retrieve my beloved 
briar in the event that no pipe could be had. Fortunately 
the trader had two dozen clay pipes which I bought on the 
spot, thinking that the twenty -four pipes would be pipe 
insurance against forgetfulness. Returning to the house 
I lit a pipe at once and settled down to comfortable day- 
dreaming, but the children of the house were too noisy to 
make day-dreaming of much consequence. One of the 
little girls in the room would now and again dash to her 
mother's side and scoop up a mass of soap suds from a wash 
tub over which her mother was working, fling the soap 
suds into the air, and shout and dance with joy. Her mother 
slapped her, thinking that all this annoyed me, whereupon 
the little girl commenced to cry and this was catching to 
the rest of the children. Something had to be done and 
that at once. My pipes were of clay and I conceived the 
idea of quieting the children with soap bubbles. The 
result was marvelous, so strange that I could hardly believe 
it, for after I had initiated them in this art, their surprise, 
marvel, and delight were such that I gradually came to 
realize that this was their first experience with soap bubbles. 



IS THE ORIGINAL 

FABRIC 

CRAYON, TOO 





School ctAfOtlS 

EIGHT COLORS 




CRAYOLA, the most widely used of all 
schoolroom crayons, is also the original fabric 
crayon. It has never been equalled for sten- 
ciling and other fabric design work. 

ARTISTA W&ter Colors mix easily, flow 
freely — and their colors are clear and brilliant. 
They are the ideal Water Colors for class- 
room use. 

U V A Blackboard Chalk Crayon is pure 
and gritless — making a clear, white mark that 
is easy to read and easy to erase. 

OUR ART SERVICE BUREAU 
will gladly suggest practiced fabric pro- 
jects or other craft work involving 
elementary design. 




BINNEY & SMITH CO. 



41 East 42nd St. 



New York 



Sole Makers of the Complete Gold Medal Line 
Including CRAYOLA Wax Crayon, PERMA Pres^ 
sed Crayon, ARTISTA Water Colors and ARTISTA 
Show Card Colors, UVA and other Quality Black- 
board Crayons. 





402 



PHILIPPIN 



£ MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 




GREAT Athletes I 

are made, not born! 

NOTHING is more important to the boy who wants 
to excel in sports than the Food he eats every day. 

Natural, balanced, whole grain foods like Quaker Oats 
form strong bones, build sinewy muscles, and supply abun- 
dant energy. Quaker Oats contains almost everything the i 
youthful body needs for growth and health. 

To obtain maximum nutritive results, eat Quaker Oats 
in some form every day. Quaker Oats adds rich nourish- 
ment and delightful flavour to soups, or it may be served 
as porridge or used in biscuits, cookies, and delicious, 
wholesome desserts. 

Economical, Quaker Oats now cooks in 232 minutes, 
thus saving time, energy, fuel. 



^^^m OUICK-COOKING 

^SB^^^I Cooks in 2V2 minutes— longer 
^sSrS?^ 1/ you prefer 



Even the old folks in Rota had never made soap bubbles. 
The news spread from house to house like wild-fire and soon 
the whole town, young and old, were blowing soap bubbles, 
and continued to blow them for days on end. I became a 
great hero in the eyes of the children forever more. The 
people of Rota do not smoke pipes but rude home-made 
cigars, so I was overrun with requests for clay pipes, and as 
I did not have the heart to refuse them, in less than an 
hour's time but one solitary pipe was left and to make 
matters worse, not being accustomed to clay pipes, mine 
slipped out of my mouth, fell to the floor, and was shattered. 
No smoke for me that night, and the next morning a twenty- 
kilometer hike through torrential rain and bad trails to 
recover my old pipe. For no one volunteered to make 
this trip for reasons stated heretofore. In defense of the 
people of Rota and of soap bubbles, I would like to remark 
that soap bubbles are exquisite things with their super - 
delicate colors, floating along, for, reflecting tints from 
other bodies in passage, they are one of nature's most 
beautiful manifestations. Yes, a soap bubble is to me a 
thing of beauty. It is a lovely gem spun of a marvelous 
fabric, and the memory will always be satisfying that I 
brought soap bubbles to the children of Rota. If one 
could have given those children diamonds instead of soap 
bubbles, they would not have been as well pleased. 

Six weeks had passed since my landing in Rota and the time 
was approaching for the call of the Saipan schooner. While 
packing my collections, consisting of archaeological, zo- 
ological, and botanical material, I was approached by the 
local Japanese Deputy Governor of the island and informed 
that he wished to have me take all my boxes and baggage 
to the custom house as soon as possible for he said it was 
a government order that all baggage must be taken there 
at least three days before sailing time. I had found, by 
sad experience, that all this meant that my material would 
be carefully unpacked and as carefully repacked, and all 
maps, notes, and photographs which were considered of 
possible value to enemy eyes would be removed. For 
instance, I had made a place-name map of Rota which 
consisted of a Geodetic Survey map printed in Japan 
on which I had written the native names of all localities. 
This was of interest to students only and has absolutely 
no military value, but if I had placed this map among my 
specimens it would have been removed, many days of work 
lost, and the desired data destroyed. Many photographs 
of no conceivable value except scientific would also have 
been removed. 

I devised a system that worked like a charm, making it 
possible for me to keep my valuable notes, maps, and 
photographs from being confiscated by the authorities. 
The primitive religion of Japan is known by the name of 
Shinto, in the last analysis a form of ancestor worship. 
It is not the official religion of Japan but it has a strong 
hold on all its people, and in consequence they do not pro- 
fane or even handle human skeletal remains if it can possibly 
be avoided. Acting on this knowledge, I placed all photo- 
graphic films, notes, and maps (first cutting the maps into 
small squares) inside the ancient skulls which I had col- 
lected in the caves and ancient tombs of the islands. At 
the base of the human skull there is a hole named the Fora- 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE 



MAGAZINE 



403 



men Magnum and through this large opening it is possible 
to pass notes and photo films into the cranium. To pre- 
vent movement 
and consequent 
suspicion, I then 
stuffed newspaper 
into the remain- 
ing empty space 
within the skull. 
So these ancient 
skulls became grim, 
but safe and effi- 
cient containers 
throughout my 
stay in the Maria- 
na Islands. 

{To be continued) 




The Amazing Argentine 

(Continued from page 378) 

Fifty years or less has the real Buenos Aires of today 
been in the making. Its vast dock system, modelled after 
those of London and Liverpool and almost as elaborate, 
is even younger. Yet today, even with the decrease in 
sea-going traffic during the past five years, you may note 
at any time forty or fifty large overseas vessels occupying 
the docks and basins, together with scores of smaller ones. 
And the docks of Buenos Aires, their approaches, the chan- 
nels which lead to them from the deeper part of the river, 
everything, had to be artificially created. There was not 
even an inlet to form the basis of a harbor. Great break- 
waters and sea-walls had to be built and basins dredged 
out inside them. From the outer gates to the deep water 
of the Plata long channels must be dug. These must be 
protected by enormous breakwaters, and constant dredging 
relied upon to prevent them from silting up in the rapid 
flow of this mighty, Andean -born silver*' river whose 
size, depth, and volume of water are second only to the 
Amazon. 

All this has been done. And today as you approach 
the city on the river flats to mark with amazement the vast 
area up and down the Plata that it covers, your liner stops 
at a distance while tow-boats take their places at bow and 
stem in order to guide the steamer and keep her in place 
through the long channel that, lighted like a city street at 
night, leads into the great docks of Buenos Aires. 

In these docks are loaded the three-quarters of a million 
tons of chilled and frozen meat that in normal times is the 
annual output of the Argentine, the four million tons of 
cereals, the three or four hundred thousand tons of que- 
bracho logs and the tannin that is extracted from them, 
the hides and the cattle by-products, the minerals and the 
hog by-products, and the sugar and the textile stuffs, Argen- 
tine foreign trade, fallen in 1933 to nearly fifty per cent of 
that of the peak year of 1928, is now once more definitely 
on the increase. 

But depression as understood elsewhere in the world 
has never been felt down here, either in the Argentine, or 
in Brazil of which I shall write later. This richly-pro- 
ducing country where less than one-sixth of the cultivable 



SOMETHING WE MUST KNOW.... 



Rhythm 



The Pope frowni* on all forms of contraroption because they prevent the 
birthof children, prime purposeof Roman Catholic matrimonv. A thorough- 
Roing realist, the Pope at the same time knows that many loving Catholics 
who fear to have children defy his pontifical frown. Therefore he decided 
that it is morally right and proper for Catholir couples to utiliio the wife's 
monthly rhythm of sterility and fertility as a natural method of contra- 
ception. 

The Pope gave nernus<)ioii to do so in his 1930 Encyclical on Marriage, 
Cm^ti Conuubii. Sain he: "Nor are those consider<»d as acting against nature 
who in their married life use their right in the proper manner, jilthough on 
account of natural reasons of time or of certain detects, new life cannot be 
brought forth." 

But not until last week did an influential body of U. S. Catholic doctors 
dare to discuss the subject boldly and receptively.* The group was Chicago's 
Cosmas A Damian Associates, guild of physicians and surgeons. Five 
hundred of them had scholarly Father John .\. t>'Mrien of the University 
of Illinois on hand to give them ecclesiastical approbation and Dr. Arthur 
Cicorge Miller, a leading 1'. S. investigator of the fertility-sterility rhythm, 
to give them practical instruction. 

This system of natural contraception is based on research by Professor 
Kyrusaku Ogino of Niigata, Japan, and Profe8s(»r Hermann Knaus of (Jra«, 
Austria. They observed that a woman is fertile only seven or eight days of 
her month and will rarely conceive outride that span. Professors Ogino and 
Knaus say, although not all investigators agree with them, that the fertile 
week always ends twelve days before menstruation begins. To love morally, 
canonically and practically a Catholic couple need practice continence only 
during the fertile week. 

Chief U. S. propagandist of the Ogino-Knaus system is Dr. Leon John 
Latr, 81, of Loyola t'niversity. He organiced the Lati Foundation to 
publish Thf Rhythm, "with Ecclesiastical Approbation," which has in three 
years sold 00,0(K) copies. 

The above article appeared in the June, 1935 issue 
of ^The Woman's World," edited by Dr. Maria Paz 
Mendoza-Guazon. 

A copy of RHYTHM will be mailed to you, post- 
paid, upon receipt of 1*2.75 in money order or stamps. 

PHILIPPINE EDUCATION CO. 

MANILA 



MODERN UGHTING 

House Wiring 
Electrical Installations 

TUNGSRAM 

Electric Bulbs 

ELMAC, INC. 



627 RIZAL AVE. 



MANILA 



404 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 



area is in use other than as cattle ranges, could hardly fail 
to provide sufficient for its population of barely 12,000,000. 
Little that is needed requires to be brought in, and so the 
balance of trade remains highly favorable and increasingly 
so. Nor has the depreciation of the peso greatly affected 
the economic condition of the people, though making 
Buenos Aires and the Argentine astonishingly inexpensive 
to the American or British visitor. The peso is now nearly 
four to the dollar and for ten to fifteen a day you live at 
hotels which are on a par with any anywhere. 

Everything not imported is proportionately inexpensive 
today in the Argentine, a very different state of things to 
a decade ago when all of South America was perhaps the 
most expensive part of the worl •! for visitors. Today it is 




Everyone ean now afford this 
Famous Special Film-Removing 
Tooth Paste 



THINK of paying a new low price 
^ for the tooth paste that still main- 
tains the same high standard of 
efficiency and safety I That's the 
good news that should make you 
want to buy Pepsodent Tooth Paste 
real soon. 

Seven out of ten people already realize 
that there couldn't be a finer, more 
scientific dentifrice. In 67 different 
countries Pepsodent is favorably 
known as the **special film-removing 
tooth paste. "Wherever dental hjrgiene 



is farthest advanced, the world over, 
thousands of dentists approve Pepso- 
dent and millions of people prefer it. 

And now, just think — if you have 
always used Pepsodent you'll welcome 
this chance to buy it for less. It is 
identical in formula and results as be- 
fore. To those who have never tried 
Pepsodent we suggest that you start 
using it now ... a/ this new low price. 
Once you see what Pepsodent can do, 
we believe that you will want to use 
it regularly twice a day. 



PEPSODENT 



THC SPECIAL FILM-RCMOVING TOOTH FASTE 



one of the cheapest, yet you find all the amenities of Europe, 
all the life of the Continental cities, food of the best, shops 
of Parisian character and many British including a branch 
of Harrod's, of London, that is one of the largest depart- 
ment-stores in the world. 

Along the famous Calle Florida, with its shops and cafes 
and restaurants, you find at the tea or cocktail hour one 
of the most remarkable of urban spectacles. Between 
four and eight o'clock, nine being the favored dining hour 
in Buenos Aires, all but foot traffic is barred from **the 
Florida." And it is then that you may gaze upon the 
famed * 'beauty parade" of Argentine women whose com- 
bined charm of looks and Parisian piquancy of style is 
perhaps not equalled anywhere in the world. Consimi- 
mate artists in make-up, artificial reinforcement of nature's 
gifts is confined to lips and the merest touch on the cheeks 
with the women of Buenos Aires. Thus their distinctive 
femininity is accentuated, rather than destroyed after the 
fashioned of the hard-faced, enamel-cheeked women of 
North America. But their outstanding charm is really 
traceable to their blended extraction, to the blood of the 
Latin and Nordic races mingled in the empire-builders 
of the Argentine. That, too, is the actual basis of Argen- 
tine culture, so marked as to astonish the new-comer. 
The makers of the modem Argentine have been Spanish 
and French and Italian, English and German and Scan- 
dinavian and Dutch, mostly the best of all these. It is 
that, really, which has made the amazing Argentine what 
it is today and which assures it a great future. 

Along the magnificent Avenida de Mayo in the evening 
you find one terrace restaurant after another and scores 
of sidewalk caf6s. Here until two o'clock in the morning 
is the life and gaiety of a great Continental city. Buenos 
Aires never seems to sleep. Its numerous night-clubs, 
of all types from the waterfront places along the **Barbary 
Coast" to the elaborate Club Tabaria, Club Florida, Club 
Paris, and so on, with their tango orchestras and their 
beautiful * 'hostesses" of all nationalities, none of which 
close until daylight, offer you a night life of color and variety. 
Here is a bit of Paris, a bit of Vienna, of Buda Pesth, Buca- 
rest, and Naples. You can dine as in London, Munich, or 
Rome; drink as in New York, Brussels, or Warsaw, and 
you can do it all today at half the price of any of them. 
Buenos Aires swarms with eating and drinking and dancing 
places, and if all of them are something short of excellent, 
many are that and none are mediocre. For the Argenti- 
neans, having the traditions of all Europe behind them 
as to the manner of pleasant living, reproduce it all in this 
city by the "silver" river and overlook nothing in the re- 
production. 

The railway systems of the Argentine were British - 
created and are still largely British-managed, though trained 
Argentineans are gradually replacing foreigners. Once 
out of the great city, whose suburbs seem endless, and you 
are among the estancias. The largest of these is the San 
Justo, whose acres number a quarter of a million, whose 
cattle are thirty thousand, hogs ten thousand, sheep and 
horses numberless. This and other ranches the Austra- 
lian commission here lately visited and marvelled at, 
at the richness of the soil, the matchless condition of the 
cattle, the thickness of the alfalfa, the measureless extent 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



405 



of the com grown without irrigation. Never, perhaps, 
until now had the character of the competition the Argentine 
presents in the exportation of chilled and frozen meat been 
really understood by Australians. Moreover, they found 
many of the Argentine ranches managed by their own people, 
so that in Argentine rivalry Australia not only competes 
with a nation which can almost be called an economic unit 
of the British Empire, so vast are English investments 
there, but it is also face to face with an industry largely 
managed by its own countrymen. 

For Britain is in the Argentine as she is in no other country 
outside her own political units. In every branch of the 
exporting industry she is vitally interested, and so she is 
in railroads, merchandising, even hotels and newspapers. 
Of the latter the English Buenos Aires Herald is the leading 
journal printed in English in Latin-America and its rival, 
the Standard, is the oldest. 

So that when it comes to the matter of favoring Australia 
and New Zealand in trade arrangements, chiefly as to meat, 
you see at once how difficult is England's position. Most 
of the 50,000 Britishers in the Argentine are dependent 
upon or closely associated with British investments and 
interests there. In favoring her Dominions as against 
the South American republic England would thertfore, to 
all intents and purposes, be aiding one economic unit as 
against another. The position is difficult and perplexing, 
for if Britain should discriminate against the Argentine 
to the point of causing a break in economic relations, ruin 
would face British people and British interests there. 

The Argentine is the land of the future, agriculturally 
at least, and there is room in it for millions of people, room 
and the best of opportunity for a livelihood. Inmiigration 
has averaged double emigration for some years but the 
number of incomers has been relatively small. Yet here, 
especially if you come from Europe or from America with 
their acreage of overworked land and their millions of 
harassed people uncertain of today and fearful of tomorrow, 
weakened of morale and sombre of aspect, you feel that you 
are in another world, a world of vitality, of confidence, of 
buoyant hope. To me, lately from the United States, it 
seemed like the America of long ago and very unlike the 
America of today. I know not if that other America will 
ever return. Certainly the prospects today are not over- 
bright. But here in the amazing Argentine it is another 
story, another society, indeed another world. You read 
it in the faces of the people. You see confidence in their 
eyes, contentment and assurance in their smiles, the spon- 
taneity that, generally speaking, no longer exists in America 
and Europe in their pleasure -making. 

For these and many other reasons it is a pleasure to visit 
brilliant, beautiful Buenos Aires and to see something of 
the rest of the Argentine today. But there is far more to 
it than that, if you are at all a thoughtful or a discerning 
visitor. There is the significance of this rich and relatively 
empty land, of what it offers to the present and holds for 
the future, of what it may presently mean to a tired and 
doubtful world. Merely a few short weeks in it are revi- 
vifying, freshening, encouraging, stimulating, making you 
to feel that there is something else even yet than depression 
and perplexity. And there is something else. There is 
the amazing Argentine. 




SUPER IKONTA 

Refined finish and rigid strength. Range finder 
embodied in Camera. One snap ready for instant 
use. Delayed- Action Compur Shutter. Speeds from 
one second to 1/250 second, Eveready case 
protecting vital parts 

Handsome Appearance 

Matches The 

Wonderful Construction 

PHOTO DEPARTMENT 
BOTICA BOIE 



High -Power 

Perfection 

Oil Burning COOK STOVES and RANGES 




LOOK FOR THE TRIANGLE 
TRADE MARK OF QUAUTY 



The best stove in the world. Has been selling in 
the P. I. for 30 years. Stocked in all sizes. A full 
stock of spare parts and replacement parts always 
in stock. For Catalogues and prices apply to 



T. J. WOLFF & CO. 



66 ESCOLTA 



p. O. BOX 920 



MANILA 



406 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 



Vice-Governor Hayden's Fine Address 

{Continued from page 377) 

amusement, and even much of his food The industrial worker, 

whether by hand or brain, is today almost entirely dependent upon the 
success of his company, his industry, and upon the condition of the 
complex national and international economic world of which he, even 
more than the farmer, is now an infinitesimally minute part. The 
same statement holds true for almost every other member of urban 
society, whether merchant, lawyer, doctor, teacher, clerk; taxi driver, 
capitalist, or what not. Each provides a highly specialized service to 
society in return for which he and his family are housed, fed, clothed, 
educated, and amused by the operation of the social-economic machine." 

Under existing conditions, therefore, said Mr. Hayden, "neither the 
urban nor the rural citizen is the master of his own fate, as was his 
grandfather, or even his father. 'Rugged individualism' was the vital 
force on a frontier farm or in a largely self- sufficient village. It is an 
anacronism in a modern metropolitan area or even on a Dakota wheat 

farm In America neither the individual, the country, the city, 

nor the state can control its own destiny as it could in 1776, 1868, or 
1914." 

Referring as an illustration to one employer, a large manufacturer^ 
who a few years ago decided to make a radical change in his product 
and closed down his plants and kept them closed for almost two years, 
throwing several hundred thousand employees out of work without 
warning and without recourse, bringing about want and despair and 
imperiling the economic and financial structure of a great city and a 
great state, Mr. Hayden said that under existing law this industrial- 
ist had the right to act as he did, "but his action in fact deprived his 
employees of the very rights and liberties that are set forth in the De- 
claration of Independence" and "his exercise of the power he had gained 
throupjh the operation of our modern industrial system was as arbi- 
trary, selfish, brutal, and devastating in effect as was the tyranny of 
any medieval monarch". 

Extreme specialization, modern science, and modem forms of organ- 
ization had by 1929 resulted in America in "the creation of goods in 
quantities! of quality, and at costs undreamed of during any previous 
period in history". "It also gave rise", said Mr. Hayden, "to pre- 
viously unheard of concentration of wealth and power in a small number 
of hands, yet prosperity was so great that the share of the common man 
enabled him to maintain a standard of living never before attainable by 
the masses of the people in any country." 

But then, six years ago, said Mr. Hayden, "something went seriously 
wrongr — no one seems to know just what. Whatever the cause, how- 
ever, the great industrial-, commercial-, agricultural-, financial 
organism upon which depended the income of the millions of Americans 
who served it, ceased to function smoothly. Soon it had virtually 
ceased to operate. The debacle reached its most dramatic and terrify- 
ing moment on the day that Franklin D. Roosevelt became President 
of the United States. Every bank was closed. Business was at a 
standstill. Confidence was shattered. Fear and uncertainty gripped 
the American people as never before. Even during the darkest hours 
of the war between the North and the South, the individual livelihood 
of the people and the ultimate stability of society was not so seriously 
endangered, or threatened by forces so far beyond understanding and 
control. In those days Americans came to a realization of the helpless- 
ness of the individual whose livelihood is as closely integrated with 
those of millions of his fellows as are the lives of most men in the modem 
industrial-state. ' * 

Mr. Hayden did not discuss the specific means by which the Roose- 
velt Administration sought to deal with the desperate situation in 
which the United States found itself early in 1933, as they "are known 
to all the world", but he drew a number of conclusions: among them 
that the people of the United States showed the soundness of their 
political instincts by selecting a great leader and virtually placing in 
his hands the destiny of the nation and by continuing to trust him even 
though he has been unable to perform miracles: that Americans of al- 
classcs have shown a remarkable capacity for cooperation; that all 
though it is too early to estimate the success of the efforts thus far made, 
we know that "certain imminent dangers of the first magnitude" have 
been averted, for although the number of "unemployed breadwinners 
reached the appalling figure of twelve million, there has been no starva- 
tion and virtually no rioting or rebellion against authority". "The 



significance of this fact," said Mr. Hayden, "is scarcely appreciated 
today. I believe, however, that during the past two years President 
Roosevelt and the good sense of our people have protected the United 
States from evils as great as those which would have accompanied the 
invasion of the country by a hostile army". 

"What can be said for the future?" asked Mr. Hayden. "When 
shall the millions come off" the 'dole' and go back to work?" His answer 
was not very helpful, for he said: "The answer is, *No one knows' ". 
To another question, Vice-Govemor Hayden gave a very definite and 
even startling answer. "When shall the farmer, the merchant, the 
banker, the manufacturer, the lumberman, the capitalist, the steel- 
maker, the broker, and all the rest again be allowed to operate their 
respective business and order their property as they see fit? When 
will the old time 'prosperity' return? The answer is 'Never'!" 

Mr. Hayden explains, "The United States can no more go back 
to predepression conditions than the world can go back to the days 
before the War, or than the middle-aged man can become a youth 
again. The conditions of the past can never be reconstructed, for 
which, on the whole, mankind may well be thankful. The time when 
in America the possessors of enormous wealth could use that wealth 
and its accompanying power as their own judgment dictated and 
individual conscience permitted has gone, and gone forever. The era 
when the gigantic forces called into being by the phenomenal develop- 
ment of Americ**s native riches could be left to the almost unre- 
stricted control of private individuals, has passed into history." 

"Is such a view treason to our national ideals? ... a betrayal of the 
political principles of 1776 and of our constitutional system?" asked Mr. 
Hayden, "Does it mean Socialism? Fascism? Communism?" He 
answered that these questions can not be answered with certainty, but 
stated that it is his conviction that "if the United States is to continue 
to serve those ideals of human welfare and human liberty for which the 
nation was founded, the nation itself must have a far greater voice in 
the direction of those instrumentalities upon which, in the modern 
world, the welfare— the very livelihood— of the people depends. All 
bars, legal or otherwise, that prevent such control must be removed." 

This bold statement naturally led the speaker to a reference to the 
recent Supreme Court decision which invalidated the National Indus- 
trial Recovery Act. "By judicial interpretation and direct amendment, 
our Constitution has been kept reasonably abreast of the social, econo- 
mic, and political realities of our national life. The recent momentous 
decision of the Supreme Court in the Schecter case has given rise to 
some fear that our constitutional structure may be too inflexible to 
permit the readjustment now necessary in our national economy to be 
made within the limits of our supreme law, and hence that the stability 
of our constitutional system itself may be in danger I believe, how- 
ever, that by further interpretation or amendment the Constitution 
will be so modified as to place the nation unquestionably in control of 
those elements in its life which under modem conditions are vital to the 
maintenance of the principles of human liberty and welfare that the 
original instrument of 1787 was intended to safeguard." 

"The 'New Deal', as 1 understand it," continued Mr. Hayden, "pro- 
poses to bring about such a readjustment between the economic, social, 
and political forces of the nation that the elemental rights of every man 
can be preserved under the conditions of modem life. This purpose is 
not out of harmony with traditional Americanism. Rather, its ac- 
complishment will make possible the perpetuation of those ideals of the 
Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of 1787." 

Mr. Hayden admitted that the views he expressed are not unani- 
mously held and that Americans may be divided over the purpose of 
President Roosevelt and the alterations that must be made in the 
economic-political system if they are to be achieved. The line of cleav- 
age will cut across party lines, he said, and perhaps may divide both 
of our major political parties, but he predicted that "before the struggle 
is over, our Constitution will have been altered and the pattem of our 
national life materially altered." But he expressed the confident 
belief that these changes will be brought about "through normal po- 
litical processes and without violence". "The process of change will be 
American and the results will be distinctively American,— the outcome 
of the application of our tested principles to the actualities of our new 
economic and social organization. The America that will emerge 
from the struggle will continue to hold that leadership among the 
nations of the world, thi position of leadership to which her material 
power and her moral greatness inevitably assign her". 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



407 



Grocery Store Directory 

THE CHINESE GROCERY ASSOCIATION 


Chua Limco 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
763 Sto. Gristo 


Cheng Chay & Co. 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
424 Sto. Gristo 


Hock Dian Ging 

Grocers and Garamels Manufacturing 
535 Sto. Gristo 


Ong Chuan & Co. 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
432 Sto. Gristo 


The Universal Grocery 

We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
305-307 Nueva, Manila 


O • ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ 

Sin Hap Hoo 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
445 Sto. Gristo St. 


Y Jo Grocery Store 

We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
321 Sto. Gristo 


Tan Ko & Co. 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
511 Sto. Gristo 


Hoc Suy Bi 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
1 342-344 Sto. Gristo 


Ching Jo Sing Grocery Store 

We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
1006 Gomercio St., Manila 


¥ ¥ • O 

Hiap San 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
340 Sto. Gristo 


Cheng Chuan Juat Grocery Store 

We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
1016 Gomercio St. 


¥^ 1 ¥ ^ 1 A 1 1. 

El Lucero del Alba 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
304-306 Galle Nueva 


Go Tec Juat Grocery Store 

We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
533 Sto. Gristo 


Chua Hiap Ho 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
357 Elcano 


v^nin^ v>iiiuaii 1 dy vjiuccry oiore 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
1028 Gomercio St. Manila, P. I. 


Liu Hoc Sing 

400-402 Santo Gristo Manila, P. 1. 
SE VENDE 
Comestibles y Semillas 


Ching Guan Heng Grocery Store 

We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
1034 Gomercio St. Manila, P. I. 


Lim Ka Co 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
414 Sto. Gristo Manila, P. I. 


Guan Chuan & Co. 

Grocery Store 
We carry a complete line of grocery goods 
526 Sto. Gristo St. Manila, P. I. 



408 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, ly^D 



Mr. Osmena's Address 

(Continued from page 376) 
at times was worse than the opposition itself. Despite 
the obstacles and difficulties they confronted, the members 
of these missions never lost heart or faith and continued 
the campaign without respite, until finally they were able 
to arouse the interest and sympathy of the American Con- 
gress.** 

**The decision of the Philippine question by Congress 
was not due solely to the influence of selfish interests, as 



some have said," asserted Mr.Osmena, "but principally to 
the moral forces which in America ultimately decide the 
big issues affecting human liberty. . . . We won, inch by 
inch, powers for the people and defended each gain from the 
onslaughts of reaction. . . . The pledge of independence 
which we failed to secure by force, we obtained in good will 
in negotiations with America conducted by the leaders of 
peace with the support of a people united in their demand 
for freedom. . . .** 

"The Independence Law of 1934**, concluded Mr. Os- 
mena, "gives us, though not exactly such a government as 
the name implies, the most complete authority to establish 
such a republican form of government as we may wish 
under a constitution drafted and approved by ourselves. 
But more than this, the Law not only decided the issue of 
the duality of powers in the government in favor of the 
people by bestowing upon the Filipinos the power to es- 
tablish the form of government they desire, but also 
provided — and this is the most important — a specific 
and definite process by which the Government of the Com- 
monwealth is to become an independent government in 
ten years. The Independence Law, therefore, brings to a 
close the controversy provoked by the question of our 
independence by definitely deciding it in favor of the Fili- 
pino people**. 



Mr. Quezon's Address 

{Continued from page 375) 

cially desire that new American capital should come and 
help in the development of the country*'. 

He stated that in due time the Philippines should apply 
for admission to the League of Nations and that we should 
urge the negotiation of a multilateral neutralization trea- 
ty, but that "we can not ignore present-day realities; we 
can not rely exclusively on these implements of peace for 
our national defense**. He therefore advocated prepared- 
ness for the national defense, not a large standing army, 
but a regular army "of sufficient size** and "a trained citi- 
zenry ready to be drafted into service in any emergency*'. 



Gift For Any Occasion 

You Could Send Your Relatives or 
Friends No More Acceptable Gift 
Than a Yearns Subscriptions to the 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 




Please send the Philippine Magazine for one year to 

(name) 

(addresi) 

I enclose F in payment 

• (name) 

• (address) 



WHEN OTHER REMEDIES HAVE FAILED 

TRY 

WATSONAL TAGUROL 



SKIN 

DISEASES 



Thousands of persons in the Philippines have been cured of their Skin Diseases 
(Herpes, Sama, Dhobie Itch, Freckles, Pimples, Rash, Itch, Paiioblanco, 
Ulcers, Old Sores, etc) by this wonderful balm. Its components have been 
considered by the Medical Profession as the most efficient in curing Skin 
Eruptions. If you suffer from some Skin infection do not delay, try 
WATSONAL TAGUROL at once! A "MADE IN THE PHILIPPINES" 
REMEDY. 

SOLD BY ALL DRUG STORES 

Tins y0.30 

Tubes f 0.50 

FORMULA: Bals. Peru, Phenol, Pine Tar, Menthol aa 1.5; Reaorcin, Camphor aa 3; sine 
oxide 5;Sulphur precip. 10; Acid salicyl 2.5 Alcohol 12.50 cc; Tagulaway 15 gm. 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



409 



*'For the proper planning of our defense and the organiza- 
tion and training of our regular and citizen army, I shall 
secure the best expert advice". 

He pointed out that our foreign relations will be under 
the control and supervision of the United States but that 
there is nothing in the Independence Act which prevents 
the Commonwealth from beginning to lay the foundations 
for our future relations with foreign nations", and declared 
that **we shall request the State Department at Washington 
to permit the Commonwealth to send men as attaches to 
American legations or embassies as well as to American 
consulates in order that these men may acquire knowledge 
and experience in the diplomatic service and provide our 
government with needed information concerning foreign 
trade". **It will be necessary and to our advantage besides 
to win the good will of and maintain friendly relations 
with other nations. But to accomplish this aim, mere 
protestations of good purposes are not enough. We must 
deal fairly with all nations and respect their rights. We 
must secure to every foreigner who lives with us full pro- 
tection of our laws. His life and property must be as safe 
among us as they are in his own land". 

As for our relations with America, Mr. Quezon stated: 
**It should be our constant endeavor to maintain the most 
friendly relations and closest collaboration with the United 
States. We owe much to America and are grateful to her. 
Our present economy is tied up with the free American 
market. Many of our industries depend for their existence 
on our reciprocal free trade relations with the United States, 
and we should try to maintain these trade relations if pos- 
sible, even after independence. I shall spare no effort to 
obtain the elimination of the export tax provided in the 
Independence Law. I shall work for the repeal of the 
excise tax on coconut oil. I shall endeavor to take such 
action as may be required to place our trade relations with 
the United States on a truly reciprocal basis, so that they 
may be continued after independence for the mutual ad- 
vantage of both countries." 

As to the ten-year transition period and ultimate inde- 
pendence, Mr. Quezon said: **The question of Philippine 
independence has been settled. The Independence Law 
sets the day for independence and prescribes the process 
leading to its consummation. We accepted the Independ- 
ence Law, we have approved a Constitution pursuant to 
its provisions, and the people by ratifying it with practical 
unanimity have agreed to the grant of independence under 
the terms and conditions prescribed by Congress. Inde- 
pendence, therefore, is no longer an issue. Insofar as the 
terms and conditions of independence are concerned, we 
made it plain when we accepted the Independence Law that 
we reserved the right to petition Congress for their modifi- 
cation with a view to making them less burdensome for our 
people and more adapted to the attainment of the purpose 
for which Congress intended them." **Meanwhile", con- 
tinued Mr. Quezon, "I consider it a most disturbing in- 
fluence which will retard our work of economic readjust- 
ment and reconstruction, for anyone to advocate now the 
shortening of the transition period. What the country 
direly needs today is a period of stability and business 
confidence so that we may proceed unhampered in the task 
of erecting our new government and building up the na- 
tional economy to increase the wealth of the nation; pro- 



mote commerce, agriculture, and industry; improve the 
condition of our wage-earners; and create economic oppor- 
tunities for all our citizens. We need to give capital reas- 
onable certainty as to those conditions which affect invest- 
ment; we need to assure the industries that are dependent 
upon the American market that no radical changes will 
take place which will bring about a sudden loss of the 



Dee C. Chuan & Sons 

LUMBER DEALERS 

SAWMILLS - - CALLE SOLER, MANILA 
SPECIALIZING IN 

YAKAL, GUIJO, IPIL 
APITONG, TANGUILE 
WHITE LAUAN 

Contractors & Builders 



OFFICES: 
16-24 Soler 
P. O. Box 474 • Manila • TeL 4-96-83 



MENTHOLATUM applUd gm^r- 
lOutly will quickly tooths th^ 
[pain. It it o r^iti^dy of rocog- 
nizod iiiorit. In dally um ihm 
world ovor. 



o 



invalu- 
obio for colds, 
burnt, cuts, but al way t 
insist on tho gonuino MEN- 
THOLATUM in Jars, tubos and tins. 



Formula: Menthol, 0.3 gm., Camphor 3 gm., Oil Eucalyptus 0.1 gm., Boric Acid 
8.5 gm.. Oil Pinus Pupillo 0.1 gm.» ExcipientB to make 30 gm. 

SPECIAL OPP£R TO TEACHERS ONLY! 
The Mentholatum Company» Buffalo, N. Y., U. 8. A. 
Kindly mail me, postage prepaid, a supply of Saints* pictures for school distribution; 

Name . . . . 

Teacher School 

Address 

Re^ueti mutt be on thie coupon and only one package viU be eem- to the eatne per eon. 



410 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 



market on which they depend; we need above all to provide 
economic security for the masses of our people which can 
only be accomplished through the maintenance of stable 
business conditions. I yield to no one in my fervent desire 
to see the Philippines independent as soon as possible, but 
I can not close my eyes to the fact that a difference of a few 
years may mean a great deal to the wellbeing of our people 
and the permanence of our national liberty. ... I pledge 
myself anew resolutely to take all the necessary steps lead- 
ing to the advent of independence, and to do everything 
in my power to make the Philippine Republic strong and 
enduring, and the blessings of liberty not only the cherish- 
ed possession of this generation, but the priceless heritage 
of the Filipino people for all time'*. 

Mr. Quezon may realize that the situation of the country 
is such that truth-telling is the best politics, yet there is 
here no demagoguery, no appeal to unreason and prejudice 
and passion. It is a frank and obviously sincere state- 
ment of the course Mr. Quezon has laid out for himself 
should he be elected President of the Commonwealth, 
a course that all intelligent citizens will endorse. 




leading drMf f 



• you will be delighted with 
this modern toilet soap. Fine, 
firm, white, lasts longer . .good 
for the skin, protects against 
body odors. 




Four O'clock 

In the Editor's Office 

On the cover of this month's issue of the 

\jl j ^^T H Philippine Magazine is reproduced a photograph 
A /A^H^S hy Mr. Manuel Arellano, noted Manila artist 
photographer. He is the brother of Juan Arc- 
llano, the architect, and his wife, Galia de Are- 
llano, is an opera singer. Mr. Arellano himself 
is a sound musical critic. 

When I received Marc T. Greene's article,' 'The 
Amazing Argentine,** I thought at first that I 
would not be able to use it, as South American 
articles fall outside of the scope of the Philippine Magazine as I conceive 
it. But upon reading the first few pages I knew that I would not be 
able to return it to him. And here it is, one of the finest articles among 
the many fine articles it has been my good fortune to publish during the 
past few years. And, after all, the history of Spanish America is in 
many respects similar to our history here and there are many bonds 
between the Philippines and South America. What Argentine with its 
population of 12,000,000, less than ours, has been able to accomplish, 
should be an object lesson to us. Another article by Mr. Greene on 
Brazil will follow shortly. I wrote Mr. Greene an appreciative letter, 
stressing his, to me, amazing productivity, for he writes for many im- 
portant newspapers and magazines. He replied to this, in part, as 
follows: "You give me too much credit for hard and sustained labor; 
as a matter of fact, I am as congenitally lazy as anybody you ever saw, 
and now and then go off somewhere and do nothing for a week or more. 
Even now I have just returned from several days in M^ine. But I 
have never ceased to enjoy writing and I am conscious of no real labor 
in the doing of it. My stuff is going very well now. Did you chance 
to see an article of mine in the March Asia? It was on the South Seas 
and made a good impression. It was copied by the Readers* Digest, 
which, to my surprise, paid me F25.00 for it." 

Edilberto K. Tiempo, author of the story, "Silent Seas", was born 
in Maasin, Leyte, in 1913, graduated from Maasin Institute, taught 
school for a year, and is now a student at Silliman University, Du- 
maguete. 

H. G. Hornbostel continues his inimitable series of articles on Rota 
Island in this issue. They have met with much appreciation, and I 
recently received a business letter from Mr. L. H. Thibault, General 
Manager of the Philippines Agency Service Company, New York, 
former Business Manager of the T-V-T newspapers, and former Editor 
of the now defunct Manila Times, which ended with this paragraph: 
"With best wishes for your continued success and a greeting to your 



A NEW 
PACKAGE 




"Treats a Cold For .lOj^" 

OUI-BRO-LAX 



Laxative Cold Tablets 



Headaches 

Influenza 

Colds 



Dengue 

Fever 

Chills 



Trial Size 10c. 
Family Size 40c. 
at all Boticas 



**It Does Not Affect The Heart!" 



FORMULA: Quinin. Brom. Phenophtal, aa 0.04 Capsic, CafTein., Quin. Sulph. aa 0.006 Senna. 0.03. 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



411 



distinguished colleague who seems to combine the qualities of business 
man, author, artist, and scientist — H. G. Hombostel, of course, I am. 
Sincerely yours, etc." 

Mr. Maximo Ramos, who is now back in his "home-town*', San 
Narciso, Zambales, wrote recently to remind me that I had had his 
article on the secrets of the barrio fisherman for over a year. It hap- 
pened that I had sent his article to the printers for inclusion in this 
number just a few days before. Mr. Ramos' article is not the only 
one, unfortunately, that has been awaiting publication for many, many 
months. It doesn't seem fair to the writers, but we are up against the 
physical fact of having more of material than of container. My main 
problem is not now how to get good Philippine literary material, but 
how to publish it all. 

Francisco C. Cleto, author of "Mang Julian: Elector", has written 
for a number of Philippine publications, but this is his first appearance 
in the Philippine Magazine. He was bom in 1912 in Naga, Camarines 
Sur. He has had to discontinue his pre law studies in the Far Eastern 
College, and is now employed in the Bureau of Audits. 

The Rev. Henry L. Irwin, S. J., is a member of the faculty of the 
Ateneo de Manila. 

Mr. E. Arsenio Manuel, a frequent contributor to the Philippine 
Magazine, is of scholarly inclinations. He states that Prof. H. Otley 
Beyer, of the University of the Philippines, awakened an interest in 
him in things Philippine. He is a senior in the National Law College, 
and an employee in the University of the Philippines Library. He states 
that some time ago he drew up a list of 55 subjects to write about, 
of which he has so far completed 6. He was born in Pulong Buli, NueVa 
Ecija, in 1909. 

Josue Rem. Siat is already well known to Philippine Magazine 
readers and is another poet whose work will be represented in Professor 
Siler's anthology of Philippine verse. He wrote me some months ago; 
"Recently Chance treated me to a most pleasant discovery at the 
National Library. On looking through the contents of an old volume 
of the Philippine Magazine, I came across your poem, 'Man*. I didn't 
know you wrote poetry, and 'Man' is stupendously conceived. Sub- 
jects like this appeal to me, and I envy you the piece. I'm six years 
late, but allow me to congratulate you on that little masterpiece". 
The poem Mr. Siat refers to was published in the October, 1929, issue. 



I had a notion that few people read the Table of Contents of the 
Magazine, but I was disabused of this by numerous telephone calls and 
letters calling my attention to an error in the June issue — the listing 
of La Villa Tierra's "Ballad of a Mother's Heart" which was not pub- 
lished in that issue. It was forced out at the last moment and the 
corresponding eliminations were not made in the Table of Contents — 



nor in the "Four O'Clock" column. It is published in this issue. Mrs. 
Francisca M. Corro, of Cebu, was one of those who wrote me about the 
matter. She said: "I am writing this because I have a liking for the 
poems published in the Magazine and want to read that poem. This 
is a taste which I developed during my senior year in the Sulu Pro- 
vincial High School where the Philippine Magazine is used in the En- 
glish classes as supplementary reading. I think it should be read by 
all high school students." 

The authorities of our Bureau of Education evidently think so, 
too, for recently Dr. Luther B. Bewley sent out the following circular: 

BUREAU OF EDUCATION 

Manila, June 6, 1935. 

Circular No. 21 
s. 1935 

PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE CONTINUED 
To Division Superintendents: 

The use of the Philippine Magazine to supplement the Scholastic 
for Fourth Year classes in English, which was placed on a trial basis 
during 1934-1935, will be continued. The magazine reading require- 
Bients indicated in Memorandum No. 22, s. 1934, will be followed. 

Luther B. Bewley, 

Director of Education. 

References: 

Memorandum (No. 22. s. 1934) 
General Letter: September 12. 1Q.34 
Allotment: l-4-5a-6-7-8-(C. 21.34) 

To be indirateJ in the I't-rpttmil hnirx undrr the fullowinn subjectti; 
Course of Study. ENGLISH 
Course of Study, LITERATURE 
MAGAZINE 



Better 
becauee 
it'e 
liquid 



023 



CORNS HURT? 

Whether they're old or new» 
shoes hurt corns. Kill 
that pain with 





The Drink!! 



Like True Friendship— It Is Always 
the Same!! It maintains its standard 
of quality, taste, and health" giving 
properties^ While over a glass of its 
sparkling goodness, old friendships 
are renewed and many ne)v ones 
made^ 




412 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 



I have noted a number of interesting coincidences in this column. 
Here is another one. A Magazine author wrote me: "Your check 
reached me on June 26 — my birthday. But I was not celebrating — we 
are too poor. I had thought that the complimentary 'author's copies' 
you sent me were recompense enough, and what a thrill they gave me 
after a sweating day with hammer and saw! I recalled N. V. M. 
Gonzales* confession that his Magazine checks sometimes went to pay 
the instalments on his mother's sewing machine. In my case, the 
ironey went for a greater necessity — rice." 

Mr. Charles E. Griffith, Music Editor of Silver, Burdett & Company, 
well known in the Philippines, wrote, in part; "It is a source of great 
regret that so much time has elapsed since my visits to the Philippines, 
and if I needed any method to keep my interest awake, I could think 
of no happier means than the regular arrival of the Philippine Maga- 
zine Inclosed is our check for $3.00 for the renewal " 

Mr. A. C. Kayanan, of Manila, himsdf a poet, called my attention 
to a poem by "Khufu" (Conrado S. Ramirez) in the Literary Appren- 
tice, Vol. VL, 1932-1933, as obviously being the "model" for a poem 
published under the name of Pedro M. de Leon in the April issue of 
the Philippine Magazine. 

"Love Story 
"By Khufu 

"I walked last summer into the barrio of Niyugan. 
A pretty girl was singing in a lighted door: 
Now a woman sits weeping at my darkened window; 
I walked last summer into the barrio of Niyugan . . . ." 

THIS Beauty Secret 

GAVE HER LIPS 

Natural Loveliness 



Many beautiful 
women never realize that ordi- 
nary lipsticks give their lips a 
conspicuous painted look that 
men dislike I Of course, to be 
your loveliest you must use lip- 
stick—but not paint. Sounds im- 
possible, but it can be done by 
using the lipstick that isn't paint. 
This lipstick, known as Tangee, 
intensifies the natural color in 
your own lips. 

In the stick Tangee looks 
orange. On your lips it changes 
to rose. The one shade of blush- 
rose most becoming to you. 
Tangee lasts all day too . . . and 
its cream base soothes and 
softens. 

Also Tangee Theairical, a 
deeper shade for evening use. 



"Tale 

"By Pedro M. de Leon 
"I serenaded last year in the barrio of Dawis. 
A very modest girl peeped out of a lighted window; 
Now a modest mother is singing in my lighted room: 
I serenaded last year in the barrio of Dawis." 

Possibly Mr. de Leon did not realize that this is plagiarism. "Pla- 
giarize" is defined as "to steal or purloin and use as one's own (the 
ideas, words, artistic productions, etc., of another); to use without due 
credit the ideas, expressions, or productions of (another)." 



Captein W. A. Callaway of the U. S. Army wrote: "I believe I have 
spoken of this before, but I would like to say again that through the 
medium of the Philippine Magazine (and this includes all its depart- 
ments) you are accomplishing something of value — of a value that 
reaches out beyond all local confines and that will also project itself 
forward in time. You have prep>ared the soil and more — you have 
embedded and nourished a root that should develop into a flowering 
perennial. ... I like your editorials and editorial policy, and like your 
acceptance and rejection of manuscripts (with both of which I am 
familiar) — they are clear, concise, incisive, and uncompromising." 
I confess I have to take a deep breath when I receive such generous 
praise. But I am only the conductor of the orchestra. I make a ges- 
ture in the direction of the numerous writers, professional and amateur, 
Filipinos and others of every rank, who are making the Philippine 



NEW 



STATIONERY 




UNTOOCNCO-Lipi Utt untouched 
are apt to have a faded look . . • 
make the face seem older. 

PMNTEO-Don't riek that painted 
look. It'i coariening and men ; 
don't like it. < 

TANQEE-Inteniifiei natural 
color, reitorei youthful appeal, 
ends that painted look. { 




CREMi ROUOE h^^^ 
changei color to ilHt| 
match your com- ^^Bi^ 
plezion. Waterproof. Greaseless. 
Its cream base protects akin. 



including 
the new 

Semi-note Paper 
Charming new styles 
for every purpose 



Philippine Education Go, 



Ground Floor 



SALES AGENTS: MULLER, MACLEAN as CO., INC. 
Insular Life Bldg., Manila 



August, 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



413 



Magazine what it is — it is perhaps not too much to say — one of the 
world's distinctive publications, uniquely Philippine, a country which 
itself, because of the rich and strange medley of elements and forces 
that contributed and still contribute to its development, is one of the 
most interesting in the world. 



INDEX TO ADVERTISERS 

Name Page 

Bear Brand Milk 388 

Binney & Smith Co 401 

Boie's Emulsion 400 

Botica Boie (Camera) 405 

Cafiaspirina 397 

Chinese Grocery Association, The 407 

D. M. C. Threads 367 

Dec C. Chuan & Sons 409 

Del Monte Canned Goods 392 

Dinner Candles 396 

Dr. West's Tooth Paste 391 

Dunlop Tires 369 

Elmac, Inc 403 

Elser, E. E 364 

Garcia. A 367 

Gets-It 411 

Getz Bros. & Co. (Klim) 396 

Hcrshey's Cocoa 369 

Indian Head Cloth 393 

Indoor Games 413 

Kuenzle & Streiff, Inc 366 



Name Page 

Liggett & Myers Tobacco Co. (Chesterfield 

Cigarette) Outside Back Cover 

Lysol Soap 410 

Manila Electric Co 399 

Manila Gas Corp 398 

Marsman & Co., Inc 369 

Mcntholatum 409 

Mercolized Wax 367 

Molico Milk Powder 390 

Ovaltine Inside Back Cover 

Pepsodent Tooth Paste 404 

Philippine Education Co., Inc 403-413 

PhiUip's Milk of Magnesia 397 

Playing Cards 366 

Quaker Oats 402 

Qui-Bro-Lax 410 

Rhythm 403 

San Juan Heights Co 395 

San Miguel Brewery 411 

Sapolio Soap 394 

Star Engraving Co 414 

Steinmetz, Dr. H. H 367 

Stationery 412 

Stillman's Freckle Cream 365 

Tangce 412 

Ticonderoga Pencils 365 

Watsonal Tagurol 408 

Wise & Co.. Inc 414 

Wolff & Co., T. J 405 



IPIRESIEr^Tlir^G TO YOU- 

now that rainy days are here again — 
• A famous group of Adult Games! 

Forget the rain. Do away with the tediousness indoors. Bring added comfort and homey cheer. 
Indulge in something recreational — educational. Nothing better than Indoor Games, of course. 



• A few suggestions : 



Bingo — Long popular at summer and winter resorts 


P 3.25 




Make-a-Million Card Game — Exciting new game 


2.45 




Pit — World's largest party game 


2.45 




Rook — The game of games 


2.25 






4.85 




Hearts— An exciting letter game 


.80 




Bridge Dice — Another exciting game of letters 


.45 






.80 




Baron Munchausen Game — Learned in less than a minute. , . 


.80 






1.50 






6.50 




Anagrams — Fun and fascination. Over 500 anagrams 


2.75 




Mah-Jongg — Ancient Chinese game P45.00 and 75.00 






.45 


up 




.75 


up 




8.20 




Chess — A game of pure skill 


2.10 


up 



(Combination Set: Dominoes, Checkers, Backgammon, Chess. Extremely handy P5.50) 

Particulars furnished gladly on request 

Philippine Education Company 

101-103 Escolta, Manila 



414 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



August, 1935 



News Summary 

(Continued from page 389) 

France and Italy, BriUln hat •rrawd a terie* of 
conference! with thoge countrict and R"****- ^. , 

June «0.— The Japanese military are continuing 
their policy of awing the Chinese by armed demon- 
•trationt in TienUin. Sham engagements are fre- 
quent, and armored cars loaded with Japanese sol- 
diers roar through the streets— sight-seeing , ac- 
cording to their officers. . n-««-«« tiav#. 

French officials say that Britain and Germany have 
absolutely destroyed the Washington naval agree- 
ments and that France will meet the German naval 
challenge now that "its hands are free . .. . 

June Italian sources reveal that Mussolini 
is determined to establish an Italian protectorate 
over Ethiopia and that he is turning a deaf car tottic 
explanation of Captain Anthony Eden, now in Rome, 
in regard to the Anglo-German naval jccofd- . 

Sir Arthur Balfour, prominent British industrialist 
and Vice-President of the International Chamber of 
Commerce, states before the convention of that 
organization in Paris that it is P<»»»o^« f.^'^f' 
nations using Japan's "industrial methods to 
compete with Japan in chcrtp products and that 
although Japanese competition may harass individual 
business, it has "great possibilities of international 

**^J?un"?«.^^oreign Minister Hoare tells the House 
of Commons that "as far as we aware, British 
interests and treaty rights in North China have not 
been affected by recent events. The situation docs 
not appear to require any special acticm . 

Reported that Mussolini is determined on a com- 
plete solution" of the Ethiopian Problem, by which 
he is understood to mean the raising of the Italian 
flag over Ethiopia. The efforts of Captain Eden to 
modify his warlike intentions are beheved to have 
had little effect. , , 

June 2^?.— Mutinous Chinese soldiers attempt to 
capture Peiping, but the move is suppressed by other 

'7tt*^Si\cmplati!)n of an airline service between 
Singapore, the Philippines, and Hongkong, the I m- 
perial Airways (British) has selected six for 
Aerodromes in Borneo at Kuching, Bmtulu, L«buan, 
Jesselton, and Kudat. The route would connect 

^^Pcssimtsm^irevails in official London as Britain is 
faced with a choice between tacitly aPP^ovrng an 
Italian war with Abyssinia or standing by the wit- 
ness the collapse of the League of Nations. It is 
openly discussed whether, if Britain <1«<^»<1«« 
pbrt the League, it will close the Suez Canal to Italy , 
thus necessitating the sending of Italian troops ana 
supplies around the Cape of Good Hope. Abyssinia 
protests against the action of Belgium banning 
prepaid shipments of arms to Abyssinia, and similar 
difficulties are being experienced with Chechoslovakia 
and France, Italy having recently voiced a vigorous 
protest fet tke action of European countries •ellmg 
arms and munitions to Ethiopia. Ov«r 100,000 
Italian troops are now in the Italian colonies bor- 
dering Ethiopia. The Italian P0P"»«t»<>P, *PP*fJ! 
to be in favor of the war, the causes including the 
"economic betterment already produced by.prepara- 
tion for war", relieving competition for Jobs and 
resulting in the expenditure of «ovcrnment funds, 
the belief that great mineral wealth exists m Ethiopia, 
the contention that Italy needs an outlet for »ts Popu- 
lation and that the highlands of Ethiopia are more 
favorable to settlement than the tropical -wamps of 
the existing Italian colonies, the Fascist n«w»P;P«J 
campaign exposing alleged horrible conditions of 
slavery and debasement in Ethiopia, and the claim 
of Mussolini that Italy has a colonising mission 
in Africa where it is behind Britain and France m 

' W^aptlin Ed?n tells the House of Co^ 
mons that he had suggested to Mussolini that Britain 
would cede a strip of British Somaliland giving 
Abyssinia access to the sea m ii.?«nfin1 
Abyssinian concessions to Italy. .^h^J 
refused. "Our methods were not dictated by our 
interests in Africa but by JP^'n.^'^^iP "J 
League. Only the gravity of the situation would 



justify the session of British territory without equi- 
valent return". Opposition leaders ^^^J^}^ 
know whether Parliament should be consulted b«Jo*« 
British territory is ceded to foretjgn powers. The 
Commons must trust the e»ecutive department In 
this matter", rejoins Foreign Minister H<5f«- . J; 
it is not prepared to trust the government, the whole 
basis of government is <*« Jtroyed. A very dangerous 

***TiV**Ras2an Ambassador to Japan delivers a 
formal protest against alleged trespassmg by Ja- 
oanese and Manchukuoan forces, involving infantry 
and cavalry and gun-boats, "with clearly Provocative 
aims and despite the protest to Tokyo last month 
over a simiUr incident in which one Russian soldier 

^"Jiy^a!— The Japanese Foreign Office transmits 
the Russian protests to General J- *L*J!!' 
mander of the Kwantung army, and in the mean- 
time minimises them, pointing out that they were 
m?de public in Moscow before being communicated 
to the Japanese government and were thus apparent- 
ly designed for publication and for the effect on pubhc 
opinion rather than as strictly diplomatic com- 
munications. As for the use of the term "grave 
consequences" contained in the Ru««ian communica- 
tions, "What are 'grave consequences ? asked the 
spokesman. The Russian press claims that the 
Japanese are deliberately Provocative and that 
QeVmany's alleged preparations for attacking Eu- 
ropean Russia place Russia in t rave peril of war. 

July Abyssinia appeals to the United States 
to find some way of persuading Italy to observe its 
commitments under the Kellogg Peace Pact. 

Italians at Geneva predict that if a "P^c wss on 
of the League is called to consider the Ethiopian 
Question. Italy will resign its membership. 

BritaiA is reported ready to lead European powers 
in blockading Italy if it declares war on Ethiopia 

The Japanese Ambassador presents five demands 
to Tani Yu-jen. Chinese Vice-Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, followini an article allegedly derogatory to 
the Emperor of Japan published in a Chinese period^ 
ical, Nlw Life. The demands "«^<*»•"V•;! ««n.V 
Dirictor of the Bureau of Social Affairs in the munic- 
ioality of Greater Shanghai; the abolition of the 
Kuomintang headquarters^ in Shanghai; •uppre.^ 
sion of the Blue Shirts, Chinei« fascist party, m 
Shanghai; an apology from the Chinese goycrnment 
for the article; «nd a guarantee that effective mcas^ 
ures will be taken to prevent similar occurrences 
in the future. ^ «.u^ 

July 5.— Paris reports are to the effect that the 
French government would refuse to JO*" B"tain at 
oresent in any coercive measures against Italy 
dl^lnld to restrain Mussolini in respect to Ethiopia 
The London Daily Telegraph states that a secret 
Italo-Franco protocol declares that France shall be 
uninterested in Abyssinia outside of the mainten- 
ance of its railway sone from Djibouti to Addis 
Ababa, this giving Mussolini an almost free hand^ 
French officials deny that such an understanding 
exists. 

J^^ly e.—The Chinese government agrees to sup- 
press the New Life weekly, to dismiss the entire press 
censorship committee at Shanghai, and to instruct 
the Kuomintang party offices throughout China to 
prevent the publication of "any matter to wh ch the 
jlpanese are likely to object". "The art.cle in 
question. 'Gossip about Emperors' , »tates the 
Japanese Embassy spokesman. ''«'<>J»;<1 »"^";»! 
public feeling" in Japan and among the Japanese 
in Shanghai. * ^ ^ 

Following the arrest and deportation of two Ja- 
panese after a shooting affair with a Mongolian 
border guard, the Manchukuo government is re- 
ported to be demanding the detention of those re^ 
sponsible for the arrest and for the right to establish 
corps of observers in Mongolian territory and to 
build telegraph lines for the purpose of keeping 
these observers in communication with Manchukuo. 

July 5.— Russian officials state that any Japanese 
attempts to establish military and economic control 
in Outer Mongolia will be strongly resisted. 

July p.— The Lecigue of Nations conciliation com- 
mission, meeting in Holland, suspends hearings 
indefinitely, the commissioners departing, after tne 
Italian delegates refuse to hear an Ethiopian witness. 



The Chinese editor of the New Life weekly is 
sentenced to fourteen months imprisonment at hard 
labor, the three Chinese judges deliberating less 
than ten minutes, although it is proved that he was 
not in Shan^ai when the article to which the Jap- 
anese object was published and Imew nothmg ofit 
until later. His paper has already been suppressed. 
The sentence leads to anti-Japanese thouts m tne 
courtroom and the defendant cries out. There is no 
justice in China!" Japanese present beat a Hasty 

'^JuTu H.— Ethiopia again appeals to the League on 
the basis of the break-down of the arbitration nego- 
tiations in Holland. 

Joseph Avenol, Secretarv of the League, proposes 
that Britain, France, and Italy confer on the subject 
of the Italo-Ethiopian crisis, basing the proposal 
on the Treaty of 1905 in which all three countries 
recognised and favored Abyssinian independence. 

The British Foreign Minister tells the House of 
Commons that although there is justice in some ot 
Italy's claims, Italy lacks sufficient cause to wage 
war on Ethiooia. «^ , . . i :« 

July /«.— Col. Alfred Dreyfus, prmcipal figure m 
a sensational trial in which he was convicted of having 
sold French military secrets, being later exhonerateo, 

dies in Paris, aged 75. . 

July As a result of three weeks of mcessant 
rain, the Yangtxe has risen to a point breaking all 
records since 1870. Hundreds of «»«are miles of 
land are under water, several thousand people have 
been drowned, and millions are homeless. 

Sir Herbert Samuel, Liberal P^^y leader, de- 
clares that "if the primitive troops of Ethiopia are 
mowed down by Italian machine guns, there will Pe a 
spontaneous outburst of indignation and resentment 
among the British people". , * ^ . • 

Chancellor Kurt Schuschnigg of Austria is injured 
in an automobile accident and his wife »• killed and 
his little son injured, and it is »««P«c<^<:<* .^^5 
tccring gear was tampered with. Austria is excited 
over the possibility of the restoration of the Haps- 
burgs which the Little Entente nations— Roumama. 
Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslovakia---considcr a 
threat to their boundaries as parts of their territories 
were formerly included in Austria -Hungary over 
which the Hapsburgs ruled. 

July 14— A Royal Dutch Airime transport plane 
crashes at the Schipol airdrome. Amsterdam, shortly 
after taking off, due to engine trouble. Six Persons 
arc killed, but thirteen other passengers managed to 
Xtav out of the plane which caught fire after the crash. 

/u/y 15.— Pope Pius, through the »«mi-official 
Church daily, Ohftervatore Romano, charges that Adon 
Hitler, German Fuhrer. has broken faith with the 
Vatican by disregarding the concordot whcreia 
promised noninterference with the Catholic Churchy 
The Pope especially attacks the government program 
of the sterilisation of the unfit, stating this is con- 
demned by divine law". 

The worst anti-Jewish demonstration in two years 
is staged in Berlin, inspired by the Swedish an ti 
Semitic cinematograph film, "Petterson and Binder , 
at which Jews whistled and booed. 

Five arc killed and many injured in noting m Bel- 
fast. Ireland, following the observance of Bastile 
Day The trouble started when Nationalists (Ca- 
tholics) armed with sticks and stones, broke up an 
Orangemen's parade. The Orangemen arc Protest- 
ants and arc loyal to the British crown. 

July The Yangtze begins to decline and ceases 
the terror of millions of people. It is estimated that 
over 40.000 have lost their lives. 

Revealed after the death yesterday of Col K. 
Tanaka, commander of the 5th Air Detachment in 
a forced landing, that twenty army and twenty -two 
navy airmen have lost their lives in air accidents in 
Japan since the first of the year The "severe train- 
ing" is given as the cause by the authorities. 



Most of the cuts in this issue of the 
Philippine Magazine were made by the 
STAR ENGRAVING CO 



670 RIsal Ave. 



Tel. 2-41-70 



August. 1935 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 




PERSNICKdirPfffiGY 

SHB WAS UN0ERWBI6HT -AN0 THE FUSSIEST EATER IN TOWN 




roVALTlNE ? you ^^CAN^ 
\ THAT SV«\S^ FOOO-DBiNK 

I'VE OtAO ABOUT 
^ SO OFTEN f 


Ul—A , 

( YE.5-AMD TME WAY n N| 
OFTtN vrtCPS " POOR i 
EATet?-^" £AT IS REALLY 1 
S'J«PR>siNC iris A j 

1 yuiLDER.TOO. 1 




i 
i 

!N i 





) YOO MEAB. 
.' «ME ACTUALUY 
A^KED FOR A»0«f / 
I COULD. MAB.OLY 
\^ BELIEVE MY EARV 



LET S StE — SHE WAD A 
BlC MlLPlHC OF /AEAT 
AND POTATOES, 3 5HCES 
OF BREAD, AND 2 CUPS OF 
OVALTINE. NOTHI WO "PICKV 
ABOUT MER APPtTITE NOW. 



Mothers! Here's How Ovaltine Helps 
To Make A Child Hungry 



Often Increasing Weight At 
Surprisingly Rapid Rate 



When a 
there a 
mav he 
to digc 



iihilJ seems 



and ' 



\ron t cat 
in do that 



ciintrar 

c two important thmgs v< 
!p First, give him food that is verv ( 
St Second, give him fcxid that cont 



These features are tremendously impor 
specialists will tell vou that a "pooi 
often a child with p<K)r or slow digc. 
stomach doesn't emptv s<K)n enough 
the feeling of hunger for the next me; 
w hy he shuns his regular food 



produce 
That's 



'Mt fooc K*[»2.rSv 



that Oval- 
important 



the appetite-producing Vitamm B 

It IS for these, amongst other viri 
tine IS gaining worH recognition a 
food for child bui:d>ng For Ovaltine is not only 
a good source of the appetite-producing Vitamin 
B — hut IS processed so that it digests verv quick- 
jv — even at times when digestion is impaired. 



But once appetite is stimulated in a scientific way 
— the old objection to everyday Unid gradually 
disappears— and weight is often added at a very 
remarkable rate. 

For the sake of your child try Ovaltine You 
can get it at any drug or grocery store— and 
results may surprise you. 




i:d A. Keller «c Co., Ltd., Dept. PM-8 
178 Juan I.una, Wuc Bldg., 
P. O. Bo« 313, Manila— Tc!. 4-9B-82. 

I enclose l*.2n to cover cost of packing and mailing. 
Send me your 3-day test package of Ovaltine. 



I Name I 

I Address | 

loV/lLTINE 

I Look For Nbw JLow Priceis | 

I AT ALL. STORES j 




© 1935, Liggett & Myers Tobacco Ga 



MCCUULOUGH PRINTING CO. 

Manila. P. I. 



