Ladies and Gentlemen 
Dear Comrades. 



We are gathered here today to pay reverent homage to the memory of 
a dear friend and respected superior who in the brief span of a few years 
has written History for his country and for the Democratic world. 

President Magsaysay is dead. This tragic news spread rapidly last 
Sunday afternoon filling our hearts with consternation and profound sad- 
ness. It seems as if Death in his capricious wanderings around the earth 
looks precisely for the man, whose absence will leave a big vacuum in our 
lives, perhaps to remind us from time to time that we are only transitory 
travelers in this world, and that it is necessary to fulfill our mission 
in such a way, that when we appear before the tribunal of God, we may be 
able to show that our conscience was placed at the service of justice; 
that our intelligence was consecrated to the service of truth and that 
our whole life had been dedicated to the peace, welfare and happiness of 
our people. 

One of the most distinguished members of the groups of veterans, our 
beloved President was marked by Fate to be a leader of men, carrying forth 
in battle as well as in peace the torch of liberty. With his personal 
enthusiasm and his untiring energy, he won the friendship, the loyalty, 
the faith and the unflinching support of men and women from all walks 
of life, from the sturdy field and factory worker to the men of letters 
and the rulers of commercial and industrial endeavor. 

President Magsaysay' s life was the best proof of the equal oppor- 
tunities which a Government of the people, such as ours, offers to the 
citizens to rise and shine to the limit of their own personal capabili- 
ties and worth. A , typical Filipino youth, raised by a typical Juan de 
la Cruz family, without the benefit of powerful connections, without 
the springing board of a family fortune, without the glamour of excep- 
tional precocious ness in early boyhood, Ramon Magsaysay rose in the 
world by dint of conscientious hard work in every endeavor to which he 
applied himself, whether as a mechanic or as a jungle fighter; as a 
member of our law-making body, or as head of our entire National Defense 
establishment, and finally as the first Magistrate of our Nation, He 
dedicated the best and fullest years of his life to the service of his 
country, and to the preservation of our Democratic way of life, in the 
firm conviction that Democracy is the patrimony of freedom-loving peo- 
ples, the torch which enlightens the world. 

His profound devotion to humanity and especially to the needs of 
the poor class will remain with us to comfort us in our great loss. 

His was the blind devotion to duty, when as a guerilla leader he faced 
a single enemy in body combat, or risked the fury of an alerted garrison 



in carrying out a mission to destroy an airfield, or when as Secretary 
of National Defense he forsook the comforts of home and the safety of 
his Manila office to take to the field at the height of the anti-dissident 
campaign, or when as President of the Philippines, he ignored the advise 
of his physicians to travel by land, sea or air, to contact the common 
man directly, to obtain first hand information on national problems, and 
then hasten back to clear his desk, and meet the numerous appointments 
which he insisted on attending to personally, 

His untimely death, leaves us, his friends and admirers, with a deep 
sense of irreparable loss. Paraphrasing Milton, I will say that "Death 
in good men is the golden key that opens the palace of eternity." 

It is human and magnificent to respect and revere great men like our 
beloved President. They hallow the nation to which they belong and lift 
up not only all who live in their time, but those who live after them. 

The great example in the life of Ramon Magsaysay will become the noble 
heritage of our race, and his illustrious deedvand noble thoughts, the 
most glorious of legacies to the Filipino people. His example will fill 
our hearts with the traditions and instincts of all that is most worthy 
and noble in life. 

I offer to his distinguished widow and to his beloved children, 
the heartfelt condolence of all the Veterans of the Philippines. May 
the love, the loyalty and the admiration of all those who knew him well, 
feelings that are immortal, serve to comfort you in your bereavement 
for all time to come. 



Delivered at the Necrological Services 
for President Ramon Magsaysay, 

March 20, 1957. 



