V 




I 



I 

t ' r . 

I . ' . 

1 



\ 




THREE YEARS OF 
ENEN I Y OCCUPATION 



THREE YEARS OF 



ENEMY OCCUPATION 

THE ISSUE OF 

POU rrCAL COLLABORA'nON 
IN THE 
PHILIPPINES 

• By Claro M. Redo 




PEOPLE'S PUBLISHERS 
MANILA, PHILIPPINES 
1946 







COPYRIGHT MARCH. 1946 
By 

PEOPLE'S PUBLISHERS 
Manila, Philippines 



No part of this book may be repro- 
duced in any form without the per- 
miflsion of the publishers. 



/m 

Any copy of this book not bearing 
the author’s signature and number 
will be considered as having originat- 
ed from an illegal source. • 





Printed in the Philippines by the McCullough Printing Company 



And wliy bolitilclesi tln»ii nn»te tliai is in tliy nei^libt>r*s 

<»ye. blit <*onsiilorest not tlio bi^nni tliat is in tliiiie own eye? 

— St- Matthew Tzll 



Xow is tlie time to refilaee hysteria with jiid;>'nient. 



— Eisenhower 




^0 

illanuel C^ue^on 
tf)c mcmorp of 
tofiose pojfitibc genius! anb 
pecrIc£!)S creatibc leabcrsif)ip bjill 
remain tfje burable toucf)S!tonc 
of Jfilipino s!elf=res(pect in 
anp concert of free peoples 






■/■■/■/v,,:.* : V.., 



y 




I 






f i 



EDITORIAL NOTE 



r tlE material used in this account does not pretend to include facts 
privy to the chief actors in the story of Philippine collah oration- 
This is neither the time nor the occasion to expect them. It remains to 
these actors individually to disclose them according as they are afforded 
the opportunity^at their trials or in their memoirs; and in the mass of 
surviving official or personal documents still in private hands that will 
form part of the heritage of subsequent investigators. 

All the facts presented here are only such facts as were and still 
are accessible to any ordinary private citizen literate enough to notice 
and recall them or interested enough to check them up if he is so dis- 
posed. It is the author s conviction that even with these facts alone as 
they are, which are available to all, it is sufficient to understand the 
collaboration question and be intelligent about it without necessarily 
aspiring to deify or crucify any fellow citizen, whatever the moral value 
of such an aspiration. 

The issue of political collaboration under the Japanese regime is 
the problem of recognizing and establishing a substantial basis on which 
to carry on with the imperishable heritage left by Rizal and other 
Filipino heroes without apology to anyone, in the world. The Filipinos 
stand or fall on what they themselves did when the wolves were around, 
so God help them. 



c 



F. M. 



INTRODUCTORY 



«^y^HREE Years of Enemy Occupation” by Claro M. Recto, former 
-L associate justice of our Supreme Court and President of the 
Philippine Constitutional Convention which wrote the Commonwealth 
Constitution, constitutes the first serious attempt by any responsible 
person anywhere to present a much debated question witli anything 
like utter dispassion and comprehensiveness of documentation. It is 
an achievement in sober research on the most, tragic and troublesome 
question of our time. The conclusions of the book are any intelligent 
reader's own responsibility and the Philippine Council, Institute of 
Pacific Relations, takes it in the nature of a public obligation to recom- 
mend a searching perusal of the work as a responsible means of under- 
standing what happened ,in the Philippines during the nightmare 
which, on the record, is known as the Japanese Conquest and Occupa- 
tion of the Philippines. 

CONRADO BENITEZ 

Chairman 

Insiituto of Pacific Relations 
Philippine Council 



Manila, February i, 1946 



CONTENTS 



1 Purpose and scope of this writing — Japan’s blueprint of 

^‘East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere” — Blueprint translated 
into action — Independence of Philippines part of Japan’s ' 
pre-existing well-laid out plan 1 

2 Military administration with Filipino participation — Que- 

zon’s last-minute instructions — Threatening proclamations 
of the Japanese Commander-in-Chief 7 

3 Japanese control over Filipino life complete and absolute — 

U. S. Congress takes notice 10 

4 Japanese policy of coercion, self-deception and make-believe, 

preparatory to unavoidable independence — Growth of re- 
sistance movement keeps pace — Collaboration in words 
only — Popular subscription for the purchase of a fighter 
plane, a fiasco — Blood-stained months — Independence had 
to be given . . A 15 

5 To jo’s visit — Swift, breath-taking events leading to comple- 

tion of the Philippines’ ‘‘co-prosperity” structure after 
Tokyo’s blueprint — The die is cast — The Republic is not 
to be a Japanese tool but a shield for the people — A pact 
of alliance and declaration of war on the Allied Powers, 
Japan’s ultimate objective 19 

6 The Pact of Alliance in the light of Japan’s Far Eastern 

Policy before and after Pearl Harbor 26 

7 Philippine- Japan Pact of Alliance after Axis pattern — also 

an imposed “made-in-Tokyo” treaty— It was a link in the 
chain of Japan-dictated treaties or pacts of alliance in 
East Asia — The well-known Axis method of “persuasion” 
in dealing with weak peoples — “Independence” and “pacts 
of alliance” an absolute necessity in the “international 
law” for Greater East Asia 31 

8 . Pact of Alliance immediately nullified and overruled by To- 

'jo’s pronouncements and by the “Joint Declaration of the 
Assembly of East Asiatic Nations” — Pact of Alliance 
tainted with bad faith on both sides, like the Legazpi-So- 
liman blood-compact and the Pact of Biak-na-bato — A 
case in point: Japan’s surrender and Mac Arthur’s iron 
rule in Japan — A treaty exacted through coercion and 
duress after V-E and V-J Day 36 

xiii 



CONTENTS 



9 The establishment of the Republic, the signing of the pact’ 
of alliance, and the declaration of a state of war, far from 
giving aid and comfort to Japan, resulted in detriment to 
her war efforts — The pact of alliance, a boomerang as 
Jananese propaganda — Treaties exacted through coercion 
not uncommon in the history of all nations 42 

^ 10 The declaration of a state of war not an off-shoot of the 
pact of alliance — Another product. of Japanese coercion — 

A declaration of war on paper only — Republic’s lukewarm 
attitude towards the war situation: it irks the Japanese — 

The declaration of a state of war was on legal and moral 
grounds void *‘ab initio” — ^With the simultaneous announce- 
ment that the declaration did not carry with it military 
conscription, it was a mere scrap of paper 49 

11 ^‘Makapili” replaces republic * 5G 

12 The Law of nations as interpreted and applied by the United ^ 

States — Fiction versus reality GO 

13 Patriots or traitors? — Osmeha’s Leyte speech — Japanese 

methods of coercion 09 

14 The Filipino leaders could not abandon the people to their 

fate during the ruthless enemy occupation — They went 

. , beyond the call of loyalty — Effective aid and support to 

the resistance movement 

15 Filipino leaders helped to strengthen the loyalty of the mas- 

ses — Military conscription would have thrown the w’hole 
country into a bloody revolution and resulted in wholesale 
massacre of Filipinos — What would have happened had 
these leaders refused to serve — Faith in America’s sense 
of fairness — Roosevelt’s directive and its interpretation and 
implementation — Products of democracy — Will not break 
faith with old loyalties 78 

16 Differences in points of view between Americans and Filipi- 

nos on the question of collaboration — Those who alone can 
pass judgment — It is easy to defy the enemy if one is thou- 
sands of miles away — The American point of view — The 
Filipino point of view — The conduct and actuations of the 
Filipino leaders cannot be judged by standards of post- 
liberation thinking — ^What would the Americans have 
done? — Not only the Americans in the Philippines at the 
time of Pearl Harbor but also the Filipinos were a sacri-, 
fice to America’s unpreparedness 85 

x;iv 



f 



V 



CONTENTS 

17 The conduct of the Filipino leaders should be examined in 

the same light as that of General Wainwright and other 
gallant American officers 

18 Loyalty to the Filipino people is loyalty to the United 

States 

19 The collaborators of 1901 • • 

20 The average Filipino’s reaction — iThe case of Denmark and 

Greece: a parallel — What they teach in American Mili- 
tary Schools on the subject of enemy collaboration — Les- 
son in democracy that the Filipino has been taught — Those 
who made national survival possible — The wreckers of 
national unity — The Filipino’s inescapable duty 

Appendix A 

THE COMMONWEALTH STAND ON COLLABORATION— A 
speech delivered by President Osmeha on November 2.3, 1944. .. 

Appendix B 

A HISTORIC DOCUMENT — Excerpts from the letter-memorial 
dated June 20, 1944, sent by Claro M. Recto, then Foreign Minis- 
ter of the Republic of the Philippines, to Ambassador S. Murata 

and Lt. Gen. T. Wati . . 

Appendix C 

TRUMAN, ICKES AND OSME5JA ON COLLABORATION — ^Com- 
munication from Secretary Ickes— Reply of President Osmeha— 

President Truman’s Directive 

Appendix D 

ASIATIC MONROEISM— A PREDICTION THAT CAME TRUE— 
The Recto-Kalaw debate in 1927 on the subject of “Asiatic Mon- 
roeism” 

Appendix E 

ORDERS OF SURRENDER — Issued by General Wainwright and 

other USAFFE officers . . 

Appendix F 

INDICTMENT AGAINST FILIPINOS ACTING AS JAPANESE 
DUMMIES — An excerpt from the speech delivered by Mr. Recto 

on March 21, 1936 

Appendix G 

A FILIPINO SENATOR’S (HON. RAMON TORRES) LETTER 
TO ICKES 



92 

96 

99 

103 

113 

115 

127 

131 

155 

159 

161 



XV 



CONTBNTS 



Appendix H 

THE LAW OF NATIONS PART OF THE LAW OF THE LAND 163 

Appendix I 

A TIMELY WARNING GIVEN BY MR. RECTO IN 1934 AGAINST 

JAPAN’S “ASIATIC MONROEISM” 177 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 181 

BIOGRAPHICAL 187 



XVI 



THREE YEARS OF 
ENEMY OCCUPATION 




.'I 

V ‘ ^ 



Purpose and scope of 
this ivriiiuy 



T he end of llie war against Japan lias brought in its train a multi- 
tude of problems in the Philippines whose satisfactory solution 
calls for the clearest vision and highest statesmanship of the present 
leaders. Rehabilitation is. of course, the most immediate of these pro- 
blems. But most tichlish and far-reaching in signilicance, because it 
affects the unity of the people, is the issue of collaboration. Upon 
how it is handled and solved shall in a great measure depend whether 
in many years to come the Filipinos will stand united or divided against 
themselves. 

Since the return of the victorious Americans, a smear campaign 
has been conducted against the group of Filipinos to whom the legacy 
of leadership during the interlude of Japanese occupation was left by 
President Quezon. It cannot but be noted with satisfaction that the 
real heroes of the resistance movement have preserved their equanimity 
and have shown a true sense of understanding; but oddly enough, men 
who during the occupation stayed in hiding for fear of facing the 
invader, or, while remaining in political anonymity, engaged in profit- 
able transactions even to the extent of trading wi th the enemy, came 
out upon the liberation and from their positions of power in which a 
new dispensation has placed them, fancying themselves the real lib- 
erators of their countr^^ began hurling charges of treason indiscrimin- 
ately against everyone who worked in the governments established here 
by the Japanese. Partisan sections of the local press, flushed with 
their newly recovered freedom, took up the cry which soon echoed in 
certain high official quarters in Washington. 

So far only the accusers, the neo-patriots of post-liberation vintage, 
have made themselves overly heard. The accused, whisked upon mili- 
tary orders to a distant penal colony, could only ponder what they 
believed was an unjust incarceration. Their individual cases will be 
tried and decided by courts of justice, and except by defenses properly 
presented before those courts they would not wish to influence that 
decision. 

1 




•1 

•-.I 

.] 

I 



'1 

.'4 






But the public, here and in the United States, before which as a 
class they have been indicted and condemned for treasonable collabora- 
tion, is entitled to look at the other side of the question. 

This book is not to plead in their behalf but to analyse, as dis- 
passionately and objectively as possible, for a better and fuller under- 
standing of the question of collaboration, certain facts and events which 
are within the knowledge of anyone who has followed conscientiously 
the recent and contemporary historical developments in the Far East, 
particularly Japan’s policies in her relations with the Philip|unes and 
the other neighboring countries before and after Pearl Harl3or and in 
the course of the Pacific war. 

Because of their very nature the acts of the Filipino officials during 
the Japanese occupation pertaining to their respective departments and 
offices are not treated here, nor the individual efforts of some or most 
of them, whether in their official capacity or beyond it, to help cind 
protect the people and to give aid and support to the resistance move- 
ment. 

Matters which are known only to them and which, if revealed, 
would bring to light the circumstances surrounding many of their im- 
portant actuations, are likewise excluded, although in a few instances 
they are given passing reference. Thus no discussion is made here of 
i^mportant facts in connection with the preparation of the constitution 
lor the republic; the signing of the pact of alliance; the declaration of 
the existence of a state of war; the conscription of Filipino labor; the 
general members of the Vargas and Laurel governments 

ibeir stern opposition to the organization ol 
the MAiv/\l ILIo and to the desire of the Japanese liigh command 
to have its heads included in the Laurel cabinet; the posting of military 
police guards at the homes and offices of the members of that cabinet 
shomy after the first bombing of Manila; the taking of the members 
ol that cabinet, urider military guard, to Baguio toward the end of the 
occupation; and the taking of Mr. Laurel and other Filipino officials 
to Japan, upon the withdrawal of General Yamashita’s forces to their 
mountain hideouts. 

Japim^s Mneprint of ^^East Asia 
Co Prosperity Sphere” 

Students of oriental history are familiar with, the complete Japanese 
program of conquest and domination prepared in advance for their Far 
hastern adventure. Inspired by dreams of destiny characteristic of 
lanaticai races, the Japanese had such confidence in their * divine 
mission that they felt no hesitation in revealing to the world their 
pattern of empire The actual beginnings of tliis divine consciousness 
are lost in the dim haze of the past. Perhaps the dubious victory 
won over Russia in 1903 gave it birth. Whatever started it. the process 
reached its crystallization iri 1927. when Baron Tanaha put in hlach 
and white what theretolore had been hut vague longings. Tn order to 



9 



« 



conquer tlie world, said Tanaka in liis famous memorial, Japan must 
first conquer China, and in order to conquer China she must first 
conquer Manchuria and Mongolia. Sooner or later, he continued, 
Japan woidd have to fight Soviet Russia, and one day she would 
have to clash with America. 

This was Japan s article of faith so boldly expressed in the 
Tanaka memorial. Not long cdter. Manchuria was conquered and 
the puj)pet state of Manchukuo came into being. 

At this point there was a slight revision in the Japanese plan. 
Until the early ihirlies the dream was avowedly one of world domina- 
tion. In 1952 General Araki, then Minister of War, had it in mind 
when he said that the spirit of the Japanese nation was a thing that 
must be propagated over the seven seas and extended over the five 
continents, and that anything . that might hinder its progress must be 
abolished, by force if necessary. The revision was obviously dictated 
by motives of prudence and expediency, for the ensuing trend of 
international events, in the shaping of which Japan had decided to 
take a hand, demanded that she present a concrete program which, on 
the surface at least, would appear attractive and workable in a world 
of fiercely divided loyalties. So the “Greater East Asia Co-prosperity 
Sphere” was conceived. 

In June 1940 Foreign Minister Arita crystallized this phase of 
Japan’s foreign policy in a radio address that he delivered. It seems 
to be, he said, a most natural step that peoples closely related with 
one another geographically, culturally and economically should first 
form a sphere of their own for co-existence and co-prosperity and 
establish peace and order within that sphere. The countries of East 
Asia and the regions of the South Seas, according to him. are geogra- 
phically, historically, racially and economically very closely related 
to one another, and the uniting of all these regions within a single 
sphere is a natural conclusion. 

After referring to the need for a stabilizing force in the sphere, 
he calmly volunteered Japan for the role, declaring that the destiny of 
these regions-^any development therein and any disposal thereof^is 
a matter of grave concern to Japan in view of her mission and re- 
sponsibility as the stabilizing force in East Asia. Soon after, on July 
23, 1940, Premier Konoye himself broadcast an address in the same 
vein, and said that in order to end the system under which Japan 
was dependent on other countries, it was important to forge close ties 
of economic cooperation with China and Manchukuo and “to further 
advance in the South Seas. 

Admiral Sokichi Takahashi, in his work “Japan’s Advance and 
the Southerrl Pacific, ” published in the same year, was even more 
explicit, and explained the meaning of the New Order in East Asia 
as an economic bloc with the linking of Japan, Manchukuo and China, 
and the inclusion in this bloc of all the southern Pacific region^Nether- 
lands East Indies. French Indo-China. the Philippines and others. 




3 



All these were authorized olTicial statements placing emphasis, so lar, 
on the economic aspect of the co-prosperity idea. Statements by other 
prominent Japanese outside the government were, however, more com- 
prehensive and of more far-reaching significance. Analysing the steps 
to be taken in organizing the sphere, Iwao F. Ayusawa, in July 1940. 
wrote that the nations in the sphere should pool their sovereignties and 
submit any dispute for settlement by the regional authority, meaning 
Japan; that defence should be collectively organized and placed under 
the control of this regional authority; and that plans should be wo rked 
out for the collective economic life of the region, including customs, 
currencies, banking, production, capital investments, exports and im- 
ports, migration and labor conditions. In August 1940. Kikomalsu 
Kawakami wrote that the “basic principles” *for ihe establishment of 
Japan’s “New World Order” were the following: “(1) Construction 
of blocs or regional empires by the powerful races; (2) the granting 
of mutual autonomous independence to the weak and smaller races; 
(3) a world peace based on an inter-bloc balance of power which will 
supersede the old racial or continental peace. ” 

Blueprint translated 
into action 

All items were thus minutely listed in the Japanese agenda even 
before the start of the Pacific War. The idea of a co-prosperity sphere 
among the countries of East Asia, divorced from the Ja]Danese pattern 
of empire, is morally unassailable.” But everybody knew that the 
term co-prosperity sphere”, as the Japanese envisaged it, was an ironic 
misnomer, and that what Japan had really up her sleeve was to bring 
the countries tliat were geographically within the “sphere ” under her 
iron heel politically, economically and in all other respects. 

Manchukuo and the Nanking regime were then already an objeef 
lesson. It was not long before Siam and French Indo-China s turn 
came. Japan got her cue in their case by a border incident belween 
the two countries in September 1940. Promptly Japan offered her 
good offices to mediate. How well Japan carried out her designs 
is graphically described in Time (February 10, 1941, p. 54) as follows. 

The Japanese cruiser Natori steamed into Saigon harbor. 
Off the southeast Indo-Chinese coast appeared two Japanese 
aircraft carriers, two cruisers and two torpedo boats. Planes from 
the carriers cruised low over the city. At an appointed hour six 
French and six Thai delegates were taken aboard the Natori, 
where seven white-uniformed Japanese officers headed by ihe 
Chief of the Japanese Military Mission in Indo-China Major Gen- 
eral Reishiro Sumita received them with bows and toothy smiles. 

Tea was served; then the delegates prepared to mediate. 
Belore either Thailand or Indo-China could present a claim or 
• grievance, Japan handed both a bill for her services as mediator^— 
to be paid in advance. She demanded: a virtual monopoly 

1 



over 



Inclo-Cliiiia s production ol rice, rubber und coal; a free band 
to exploit liido-Cliina s natural resources; military garrisons along 
llie Chinese frontier; Japanese inspectors at all Indo-Chinese 
customs houses; a naval base at strategic Camranh Bay and de- 
fense concessions at Saigon; air bases throughout Indo-China. 
From 1 hailand she demanded a naval base in the Gulf of Siam 
for a fleet of 15 battleships, cruisers and auxiliary craft. Unless 
the terms were accepted on the spot, it was intimated, naval 
units would go into action and invasion of both countries would 
follow. 1 he delegates signed. 

As may be noted, the bill presented by Japan for her work as me- 
diator* , and which, under the circumstances, Siam and Indo-China 
liad to pay, converted them both into Japanese vassal states. 

Japan was ready for the next kill in her expansionist program. 
Taking advantage of America’s unpreparedness and Britain s pre- 
occupation in Furope. she stealthily attacked Pearl Harbor 
an incredibly short time overran the Philippines, Hong-Kong, British 
Malaya, Burma. Singapore. Guam, Wake, the East Indies and the 
small islands of Oceania. The geographical prerequisite of the co-pros- 
perity sphere idea was realized. 

The next move, which Japan lost no time in announcing, was to 
promise independence to the conquered peonies, even as she 
solidating her control over them. For llic Greater Hast Asia o pros 
perity Sphere was. acrorclinq to the Japanese bhieprinL to he romposec 
of ostensibly independent states. Independence was to be t le sugnr 
coating to disguise the bitter pill inside. But ceceise 

only herself. Neither the conquered countries, like the Philippines, nor 
the rest of tlie world ever took her at her word. However, the plan had 
to be carried out, backed by the inexorable might of Japan at the time 
and by the pigheaded cocksureness of her colonial administrators. 

Iua<r>pcu€lencc of rhUippioes part 
of Japan^s pre-existing tvell-laid 
out plan 

It is against this backdrop that the independence forced on the 
Filipinos bv Japan must be considered. It was a foregone conclusion 
that, without in any way relinquishing her firm hold and control 
over the Philippines, acquired by the right and circumstance ot con- 
miest and prompted by motives of avarice, Janan would estab ish here 
the semblance of ah. independent republic. This was essential to lend 
color and give au III enlic note to her propaganda scheme 01 liberaung 
llie Philippines from ihe Amerirnns nncl accomplishing her new code ol 
internaUonal mornlity emhoclied in the co-prosperily sphere idea. 

At the same time Japan hnew that she could not. even as 
propagand.-^. simplv grant independence out of her unreciprocated 
avowals of benevolence and magnanimity. Tliat wotdd he much too 
altruistic and too transparent to be convincing. So she set a condition 



precedent ^that llie Filipinos should lirst understand Japan s true in- 
tentions and collaborate with her to the fullest extent-^ and then, faced 
with the fact that the Filipinos continued to be as hostile as ever, 
she kept announcing to the world that the condition was being 
fulfilled. 

Consequently, as early as January 21. 1942, scarcely three weeks 
after Manila was occupied, Tojo declared in a speech before the Diet 
that the Philippines would be granted “the honor of independence” 
provided that the condition already mentioned was met. 1 his an- 
nouncement was followed by voluminous propaganda handouts, con- 
sisting of statements by Japanese spokesmen and by prominent Filipi- 
nos, who were requested’’ to make their comments. Not once did 
the Filipinos or their leaders ask for or even hint at independence. 
Nor, in fact, did they welcome it, coming, as it did, from the Japanese, 
and knowing that it was at best independence in name only. 

But a “ gift ” from the master, masquerading as a “brother oriental ”, 
was not a thing to refuse. The officious character of the promise was 
evident from the fact that thousands of Filipino soldiers were even 
then shooting it out with the Japanese, and side by side with the 
Americans, in the battlefields of Bataan and Corregidor. It was an 
insult both to their intelligence and to their sensibilities to be offered 
independence at the time by the enemy. , 

As expressed in an editorial of the Tribune, then already a Japanese 
army organ, the promise made by Tojo was made at a moment when 
there was no necessity for him or for the Japanese government to 
make any such offer; and that he made it then when he did not have 

if more intensely to the strength and force of the policy 

of the Japanese empire towards the Philippines.” The same paper in 
the same editorial then put this question to the Filipinos: “ If. forty-four 

years ago, they accepted America’s promise of independence, now that 
t ey ind themselves in a similar situation, must they act differently? 

ere was a threat, if worded as an offer. Could the Filipinos conceiv- 
a y re use it. But they knew that whether refused or not, independ- 
ence was inevitable, since it was an essential part of the Japanese 
^ ^ establishment of the Greater East Asia Co-prosperity 



6 



Ifliliiavy mlministvution with Filipino 
pm^ticipaiion — Quezon^ s last-minute 
instructions — Threateniny proclamations 
of the Japanese Commamler-in-Chief 

O N January 2, 19^12. the CommancIer-in-CIiief of the Japanese Army 
issued a proclamation warning the inhabitants of the Philippines 
that offering resistance or commilling hostile acts against the 
anese forces in any manner, will lead the whole Philippines to ashes, 
and that ihosc who “dis/urh the minds of the officials and the people 
would be punished with death. On January 5, 1942, another pro- 
clamation was issued by the same commander-in-chief declaring the 
sovereignty of the United States over the Philippines completely 
terminated, and placing under martial law all the areas occupied by 
the Japanese army and establishing a military administration therein. 
J he same j^roclamation enjoined ‘the authorities and people 01 the 
Commonwealth to sever their relations with the United States, to 
obey faithfidly all commands of the Japanese army, to cooperate 
voluntarily (sic) with the army in its stationing and activities in the 
Philippines, and to suj^ply to it all its military needs when demanded 
It also directed “cdl public officials to remain in their present posts and 
to carry on their duties as before. It finally admonished the people o 
the Commonwealth to understand the real intentions of the Japanese 
army and not to be deceived by United States and British propaganda, 
not to disturb public peace in any way and not to sprec^ fabulous 
and wild rumors,’’ warning that such acts will be regarded as hostile 
and the offenders punished with death, according to martial law. 

On January 25, 1942. a provisional Council of State was 

created. It was preceded by an expression of acquiescence on the part 
of the Filipino leaders to obev the orders of the Japanese forces^ 
Avancena. Unson, Aguinaldo (Emilio), Fernandez (Ramon), Madrigal. 
Roces (Alejandro), Yulo, Laurel. Aquino, Paredes, Alunan, Vargas, 
Sison, Bocobo, Quirino (Elpidio), Alas, Rodriguez (Eulogio), Baluyut, 
Marabut, Zulueta (Jose), Sabido, Mendoza, Veloso, Guinto, Lavides. 

7 



fan (Domiiiador), Perez (Pugenio). :Sanidacl. Fabella, Arraiiz, Meniuez 
Recto. The only names missing were Quezon, Osinena, Roxas, 
and Abad Santos, who were no longer in Manila at the time, having left 
with the retreating army of General MacArthur, and Sumulong and 
Gabaldon, who were ill at the time. 

In compliance with your advice, these leaders responded to the 

irective or the Japanese Commander-in-Chief, who had summoned 

t lem to is eadquarters, and having in mind the great ideals, the frcc- 
c om an ^ happiness of our country, we are ready to obey to the best 

o our abi ity and within the means at our disposal the orders issucci 
y le mperial Japanese Forces for the maintenance of peace and 
or er an me prornolion of the well-being of our people under ihe 
apanese i itary Administration. Consequently.” lliey concluded. 

constituted ourselves into a provisional Philippine Council 
o a e an we are immediately proceeding to draft our Articles ol 
Urganization in line with Your Excellency’s advice.” 

n reality it was no advice. It was an order emanating from no 
ess an authority than the Commander-in-Chief of the Japanese army 

0 occupation. And these Filipino leaders had to obey, pursuant to 
e proclamations of the said commander-in-chief, just as tlie inhab- 

1 an s o a territory^ occupied by the United States Army would have 
o o ey ^^|hc peril of their lives the orders ol the American Com- 

man er in-L.hiet, whose power in such occupied territory is ‘ supreme 
I ^ ,’, ^^oi'ding to the U. S. Rules of Land Warfare. 1 hey 

. ^ oice ^General Homma stated at the time he was apprehended 

m okyo upon orders of General MacArthur. Homma. it will be 
remembered, was the Japanese Commander-in-Chief in the Philinnines 
When these Filipino leaders were summoned to serve under the Jap- 
anese military administration. 

Order No. i of the Japanese commander was a highly personalized 
command addressed to Mr. Vargas directing him to proceed with the 
organization of the Executive Commission, to be composed of si.x de- 
par ment^ to carry out all the orders to be issued by the Japanese 
orces. o insure cornpliance with such orders it was directed that 

eac epartment should have a Japanese adviser and Japanese assistant 
advisers. 

. officials who tooh part in the organ- 

iza ion o the Council of State or were appointed to the Commission 
e coercive nature of the military orders or the fear for their personal 
a ey i t ey iso Deyed the same was not the prime consideration that 
n uence eir attitude. They were actuated, perhaps in a greater 
y other more important motives. In the first place, it 
was eir cesire, which they had already unequivocally expressed, to 
wor or e maintenance of peace and order and- the promotion of the 
we l-being and happiness of the people. If to maintain peace and 
order is the right and the duty of an army of occupation under inter- 
na ^w, or the benefit of the inhabitants of the occupied territory, 

in order that the ordinary pursuits and business of society may not be 



Liimeccssarily clerari^cd, tlie refusal ol llie inhabitaiils to cuuperate tor 
lliat purpose could hardly have appeared reasonable and would have 
juslified the Japanese occupation army in employing harsher measures 
against them. 



In the second place. President Quezon, together with General 
MacArthur, had left last-minute instructions before their departure for 
Corregidor. 1 here is a considerable amount of speculation as to what 
precisely were those instructions, but in Colliers of July i, some 

light is thrown on the question by Royal Arch Ounnison, an American 
newspaperman who was in Manila when the Japanese entered the city 
on January 2 , iQq2. In his article Gunnison says: 

**ln effect. General MacArthur and President Quezon, who 
was also leaving for Corregidor. told Jorge Vargas and other 
Filipino leaclers left behind: go ahead. Do the best you can. 
Mahe what bargains you have to witli those people. Try to 
the Philippines (17.000.000 people) together in one piece. Try 
to [protect the people from Japans brutality and avarice. ^ 
have some tough decisions to mahe. But the job must be done. 
Do it for the future Philippines. ” 



Do it for the future Philippines. The men who were left behin 
tooh those words at their face value and on numerous occasions there- 
after found it necessaiy^ to abide by them even if in doing so they m 
vited possible misunderstanding on the part of the United States. 
instructions were repeated by President Quezon after his 
Australia, when he wired the provincial governor of Isabela, t iru o . 
Nakar, telling him to remain at his post to maintain peace an 
and to protect the civilian popidation until the Japanese too v o\er 
government, and in case he should be asked by the Japanese , ^ 
tinue performing his functions, to use his discretion consic ^in^, 
best interests of the people. The sajne advice was ^ 

Roosevelt to General Wainwright, and by General 1 ac r lu 
General Sharp, on the question of surrender: use your ju 



3 



Japanese control over Filipino 
life complete and absolute 

I N the meantime the Japanese stranglehold over the political, econ- 
A omic and ideological life of the Philippines was becoming tighter 
every day. Tojo had announced that * Japan aimed to combine and 
coordinate the strength of the one billion peoples of lEast Asia and 
speedily convert all available resources within the co-prosperity sphere 
into lighting strength. ' To give impetus to this overall objective, ihe 
reater ast Asia Construction Research Council was created in To- 
yo in February 1942, as a brain trust charged with the duly of deli- 
erating upon the ways and means of concretely realizing the cstablisb- 

tT’ defense of the entire East Asia, 

w ich implies the full utilization of the manpower and natural resources 
of each territoiy, and the development of the total economic power of 
the region. 

In September 1942. the Research Council was supplanted by the 
vy create Greater East Asia Ministry, in response to the expanded 
pi exploitation of the conquered territories, including the 

“h ^ basic policy behind the creation of this Ministry was 

^ successful end the Greater East Asia War and to insure 
success in the construction of Greater East Asia.” Among the more 
^ T assigned to this body were: the entire administrative 

or o governing the countries embraced within the sphere, matters 
P aining to the settlement of these countries and the development of 

matters relative to ihe industrial enterprises 
IS le t lerein by Japanese companies, cultural indoctrination of 
onqueie peoples, and cooperation with the militaiy forces on the 
po . n t le case of the Philippines the character and extent of Jap- 
I fb of ter the establishment of the republic were indicated 

^ ^ Japanese ambassador was under the Greater East 

sia inister, instead of under the Foreign Minister who handled 
loreign relations with really independent countries. 

10 



How were tlie policies laid down in Japan actually carried out 
in llic Pliilippines? By a series of orders, proclamations, notifications, 
instructions, etc., the entire country was placed at the disposal and 
under the control of the Japanese army of occupation. 



(a) Economic control. 

The production of rice, which constituted the ver>^ life-blood of 
the .nation, was drastically curtailed to give way to the production ot 
cotton. What rice-producing regions were spared were allotted in 
great part to the exclusive use of the Japanese forces, oimilarly sugar 
plantations were converted into cotton fields and what itt e sugar pro 
duce was allowed was manufactured into alcohol to supp 
dwindling fuel supply for Japanese cars, tanks and planes. ^ 
conut and abaca industries were likewise placed un er s ric co 
and devoted almost entirely to the needs of 

ing properties, whether of Americans or Filipinos. ere a\cn 
by Japanese mining companies and either operated y ^em , 
equipment confiscated and employed for other industria or mi 



purposes. 

In connection with the large scale developm^t of ^ . 

natural resources, it was the announced policy of Tokyo o carr> i 
through the numerous Japanese companies and organiza ions 
as agencies of the army. Thus Japanese corporations 
ciations sprang up like mushrooms, in addition ^"ose a r^ y ni 
oration before the war. Everyone who remained in the t li ippJ^^s 
during the dark days of the occupation is familiar with the graspin& 
tentacles of the giant industrial octopus which Japan let loose m 
country to suck the wealth of the land. 

In the economic activities more intimately affecting the daily lives 
of the people, the control was no less rigid. Scarcely three days alter 
the Japanese forces entered Manila, their commander-in-chiel ^ 

notification advising all persons engaged in practically every kin o 
business to report to the army headquarters, with the warning t la 
' life, property and interests of those not represented cannot be 
anteed. * From then on, military ordinances, proclamations, or ers, 
‘explanations ’, instructions, warnings , notifications , etc., w^e is 
sued one after another and brought everything under contro 
and bank deposits, corporations and corporate dividends, rea es a e, 
currency, transportation and communications, gasoline and ot ler mo or 
fuels, foodstuffs and other prime commodities, factories, machinery, 
insurance companies, shipping and fishing craft, etc., etc. 

(b) Thought control and training of youth for service in Japan’s Army 
and Navy. 

In the ideological field, the methods of thought-control 
more reactionary and repressive, considering the fact that the ri ipi- 
nos had been nurtured in an atmosphere in which every citizen was 
free to think and speak as he pleased and to worship God in his own 



11 



Wciy. iNewis publication vva^ lirst baiuiccl and then placed under 
strict censorship. Rules were prescribed for resumption of publicalion 
and a warning was issued tfiat violation thereof would be severely 
punished in accordance with military laws. As a consecjiience, all pre- 
war newspapers and publications, except those converted i nto armv 
organs, disappeared altogether. 

Early in 1942, the Japanese issued an order prescribing the basic 
princip es ol the new education. A proper understanding of the co- 
prosperity sphere and of the part of the Philippines in it was, of course. 

ie keystone ol those principles. Reliance upon the Unilcd Slates aiul 
1 eas imbibed from the West were abjured. The Japanese language 
became a prescribed course, eventually to supplant English as the nie- 
lum o school instruction. Textbooks were purged of all reference 
o menca and Britain, and the words “freedom ” and “democracy were 
c imina e . ooks in public and private libraries containing expres- 
sions o con ernnation of war were ordered confiscated. The then Com- 
rnissioner o Education forestalled this move by pointing out lhal inipe- 
rescripts and Japanese statesmen’s utterances, condemning war and 
g on peace, would have to be eliminated too. Radio sets were 

recon i lon^e to prevent the hearing of shortwave broadcasts from 
abroad. Even coeducation was prohibited. 

these repressive measures, the Japanese embarked 
Philinninr*^^[f^^^^7^ program of propaganda calculated to renovate 
sor ™ Corps of university and college profes- 

the invnd' opan, almost at the same time as the spearhead of 

the invading army, with a ready list of well-k nown Pilipino scholars 

nnrf Were hastily summoned to the army headquarters 

submit monographs and treatises on practically every 
I [PPtoe thought and culture. A research commission was 
nize un er the military administration in which all of these Pili- 
vvho^ were ca ed to rnembership, togetlier with the group of Japanese 
ihi<s ^ their mentors . In his speech at the inauguration of 

thnh Japanese Commandcr-in-Chief expressed the hope 

and bring the Filipino and the Japanese scholars 

wottU ^ closer cooperation and collaboration, and that they 

snh^»r« wing of the mighty edifice of the co-prosperity 

sphere that was being built.“ 

thniT^*^ schools and institutes were established, wherein 

ih ^ Eilipinos were recruited and trained for eventual service 
nrir^r^i ^panese cause. The prisoners of war were required to undergo, 
incHU 1^ f release a period of training and indoctrination in an 
PmnpL T eSAFFE men and to pledge loyally to the imperial 

orces. The^ was a Constabulary training academy for 
po ice service. There was a naval training school for prospec- 
ive sailors m the imperial navy. Then there were the cultural insti- 
u e a young rnen who were curious enough to discover 

of the much-touted Japanese way of life^the bushido; the 
^ ^ c rejuvenation of government employees: the Japanese 

12 



language schools; and a host of other study courses for people in all 
walks ol lile. Young sons of prominent Filipinos were picked out and 
sent Ip Japan to study in tlie lay colleges there. To refuse this mag- 
nanimous ’ olfer would have been considered a hostile act and proof 
of anti-Japanese sentiments. 

If the Filipinos, deep inside them, resisted the onslaughts of these 
propaganda forces and kept faith with their own loyalties, it was not 
because of half-heartedness in the Japanese efforts but because of their 
deep-rooted devotion to the cause of democracy and their unshaken 
belief that the Japanese way of life was far inferior to that which 
they had been taught and to which they had been accustomed, and 
that no matter how sweetly the Japanese chanted their refrain or co- 
prosperity. it was still the most obnoxious form of foreign domination 
to a freedom-loving people. 

(c) Religious reginienlalion and propaganda. 

The religious side of regimentation and propaganda was not rieg- 
lected. Because the great majority of Filipinos are Catholics, a Jap- 
anese Catholic bishop. Mgr. Taguti, and Catholic nuns were brought to 
tliis country. A halo of martyrdom and saintliness was created 
that Christian Japanese, Takayama Ukon, who came to die 1 hilip- 
pines as a refugee long ago and spent the remainder of his lile here. 
Catholics, Protestants, Jews, Mohammedans— all were called by the 
army headquarters and asked to make statements upholding the ^P" 
anese cause and pledging full cooperation to it. Typical of tl^ pledges 
exacted was that of a certain American bishop of one of the Protestant 
churches, in which he promised “to conform and urge the niembers o 
my church to conform to all commands, orders and regulations issuecl 
by the imperial Japanese army high command to place any ot the 
mission buildings and equipment at its disposal. And on the lirst 
anniversary of the outbreak of the war, December 8, 1942, the Jap- 
anese surpassed themselves when they announced the papal briel pro- 
claiming the Blessed Virgin of the Immaculate ponception patr^ess 

of the New Philippines, with the statement that it bespeaks His 
ness’ paternal thoughtfulness about the faith and welfare of the Fili- 
pinos and implies his sympathy with the justice of Japan s cause. 

In the political field, the changes were as great as the shift from 
a self-governing democracy to a military dictatorship could make them. 
All vestiges of the Commonwealth Government had to disappear when 
I he Japanese took over; and the organs of administration that were set 
up thereafter were according to the blueprint prepared in Tokyo. The 
Filipino official in the government never deceived himself: he knew he 
was a puppet, as Emperor Hirohito must know that he is also a puppet 
under General MacArthur. but he knew too that he had to be there as 
a buffer to cushion the shock of direct military rule and to prevent the 
reins of administration from falling into the hands of known Japano- 
philes, whose lack of principle and real attachment to Japan were 
familiar to all the people. 



13 



il was not until after several months of occupation tliat a clislincl 
political move was initiated, in preparation for the inevitable grant of 
independence. The voluntary dissolution of all political parties was 
ordered bv the Japanese. In a radio program to whicli the heads of 
the different parties were summoned, they announced that they had 
agreed to voluntarily dissolve^the Nacionalistas. the Democratas, the 
Oanaps, the Popular Front, the Young Philippines, and even the ven- 
erable and innocuous veterans organization under General Aguinaldo. 
After the formal approval. of this dissolution by the military adminis- 
tration, it ordered the organization of the KALIBAPI, supposed to rep- 
resent the people as a national service association— an exact counter- 
part of the National Service Association of Japan, the Concordia of 
Manchuhuo, the Java Service Association (Java hJoko Kiuai). the 
Hain Min Hui (New Peoples Society) of North Chi na. and the 
Dobama (National Service Association) of Burma. 

V. S. Congress takes notice 

The extent of Japanese control over all phases of Philippine life 
did not pass unnoticed by the United States Congress, which, in a 
joint resolution approved June 29, 1944, declared: 

Whereas the Japanese are now in possession a.nd control of 
^e land, peoples, business, communication, and inslilulions of the 
V^ommonwe^th of the Philippines, and because of these circum- 
stances the Filipino people are denied the free use and employ- 
ment ol the processes and political institutions jointly established 
f L United States and the Commonwealth 

ol the Philippines for the transaction of private and public busi- 
ness and for the maintenance of liberty, law and order, and justice 
in the Philippine Islands. 

Whereas by their possession and invasion the Japanese have 
attempted to frustrate the free processes to independence in the 
iiippines by substituting therefor their own puppet government 
w ich j^vas conceived in intrigue, horn in coercion, and reared 
primarily lor the purpose of Japanese selfishness and aggrandize- 
achieve the independence and freedom of the 

Filipino people. 



14 



4 



Jitpuuese poliei/ of coercion^ self-ciceeptioii and 
mithe-hcUeve^ prepefrci^ori/ to nnavoUlahle 
independenee — Growth of resistance 
movement heeps pace — 

CoUiihoration in wonls only 



T I IE stage was thus set for tlie fulfillment of Japan s oft-repeated 
promise ol independence. As tlie months went by the Japanese 
government conveniently found increasing’’ evidences of cooperation, 
no doubt as an excuse to accelerate the promised day. In reality, 
however, oilier than the perfunctory protestations of gratitude and the 
ironipl paeans ol^ praise for the “benevolence and magnanimity^” of 
the great empire, there were no such evidences of cooperation. The 
reaction ol the people, from the leaders down, to the Japanese efforts 
was so lukewarm that the Tribune had to embarh on an editorial cam- 
paign ol cajolery, exhortation and threat in order to evoke more en- 
tliusiasm. 1 hus, just after the Preparatory Commission for Philippine 
Independence was organized, the Tribune editorialized: “Is it not our 
own Ireedom. Is not the long fight for independence waged by our 
forefathers lor centuries to be climaxed by a magnificent victory this 
year, nay within a period counted in weeks? If we are not inspired, 
if we are not thrilled by the thought of independence so near at hand, 
then we are not the kind of Filipinos that produced Bonifacio and 
Rizal. In another editorial of the same paper: “Japan will offer 
brotherly assistance and guidance but it is up to the Filipinos them- 
selves to shake Iree from lethargy and to plunge heart and soul into 
the tremendous task of building up the New Philippines. ” And just 
after the manifesto exacted by the Japanese military command from 
the Council of State appealing to the guerrillas to cease their activi- 
ties, the Tr ibune deplored in another editorial: Statements and mani- 

festos are important . . However, tlie primary factor, without whicli 
iclepenclence will never be ours, is positive and decisive action. 

T TT IT-T .• /^ IJ 7 ,• .7. T T 



in 



1 1 x,.xx.^, vt: auiiuii 

real all-out collaboration. CoUaboralion I'epeatecl in words onlv means 
nothing. 



Ih 



The very men who held high positions in the Executive (Jommis 
sion came in for their share of the Tribune s editorial lamentation: *11 

we are to prepare for Philippine independence, we must catch the 
tempo of a more progressive, more assertive collaboration. By this we 
mfean that the Philippine participation should not leave most or all of 
the initiative in establishing complete peace and order and in im- 
proving the material and spiritual conditions throughout the country to 
the military administration.** The same tone was ever present in 
E. M.*s “Our Tomorrow ’ (a daily column in the Tribune purporting to 
be written by a Filipino, but in fact conducted by an American- 
educated Japanese newspaperman by the name of Emiru iMasatomi). 
of which the following is a sample: * If our authorities know the condi- 
tions which they must tackle, why is it that more initiative is not taken 
on our part to translate Nippon’s promise into fulfillment? If we really 
want independence, why be so passive about making the ^shortest pos- 
sible time* really the shortest possible? Unless we do something 
quickly and thoroughly in eliminating obstructionists, there is a danger 
that those becoming tired of waiting would be not only us but Nippon.** 

All this campaign, however, might as well have been a cry in the 
wilderness for all the response that it evoked. 

Popular subscription for the 
purchase of cf fighter plane^ a fiasco 

The Japanese, to be sure, received perhaps more than a fair meas- 
ure of vocal praises; so much indeed that one American in the United 
States was prompted to comment that their very extravagance might 
be interpreted as irony, and the Japanese army organ, the Tribune, 
called it editorially ‘noisy collaboration. ” But when it came to a call 
for concrete, tangible collaboration, the Filipino leaders played blind, 
deaf and dumb. An interesting instance of this was when, just after 
Tojo s visit in Manila where he reiterated the grant of Philippine in- 
dependence in the shortest possible time, some practical joker sent 
P3.00 mickey mouse” to the Manila Sinbunsya (The Tribune) witli 
the bright suggestion that a campaign be launched among the Filipinos 
to contribute for the purchase of a fighter plane as a gift to the Jaj:)- 
forces. It is, enthused the Tribune, not the modesty 
of the gift which counts, but the spirit in which it is given and the 
moral effect of the giving. ” After one week of high pressure adver- 
tising, the contributions reached the “staggering ” amount of PyoS.czi, 
two-thirds of which was given by Japanese firms and the rest by Fi- 
lipinos employed in those firms and in the Manila Sinbunsya itself. 
The odd centavo was evidently to emphasize the spirit of giving. It 
was known at the time that Kihara, supreme Japanese adviser of the 
Executive Commission, approached the Filipino officials with hints 
and veiled suggestions that they chip in their contributions to set an 
example to the rest of the people, but that none of them contributed. 
On the last day devoted to the campaign, the collection was from two 
persons— one Japanese civine P200.00 anri one Filipino conlrihiilinc 

16 



p 2 .ou. Alter that the allair hzzled out, but not, according to those 
who knew, before the Sinbunsya managers had been given a severe 
scolding by the military administration for such a face-losing brain- 
storm. It has never been known just how many American bombers 
were eventually downed by that fighter plane bought for PjoS.^i^the 
Tribune surprisingly failed to report it. 

Blooil-stainctl months 

Hand in hand, however, with their propaganda, the Japanese is- 
sued proclamation after proclamation giving stern warnings of severe 
penalties, usually death, to those caught and found guilty of non-col- 
laboration. One of the very first of these proclamations provided that 
“showing hostility to the Japanese forces, or disturbing the minds of 
the officials and the people, or disturbing the financial and economic 
conditions at the time, would be punished with death.** * Any person 
who rebels against the Japanese forces, who states false information 
or spreads wild rumors, who refuses to obey any orders of military 
necessity, or who commits acts other than those mentioned and against 
the interests of those forces,*’ was subject to the same capital penalty. 
Injury to a Japanese soldier would be paid for by the lives of ten 
minent persons in the vicinity unless the guilty party was found. 
number ol threats issued became, in time, a tiresome iteration. But 
to give point to them, the Japanese did not hesitate to publish, from 
time to time, lists of those who were executed because they failed to 
understand Japan s noble intentions. One day it was thirty or more 
Filipinos suspected of guerrilla activities; another day it would be a 
number of Chinese; and then again Filipinos; and so on through the 
blood-stained months. The lack of peace and order was such that 
the Japanese had to avail of prisoners of war, beginning with General 
Wainwright, to broadcast appeals to cease all * fruitless resistance 
against the invincible might * of Japan. Again and again the officers 
in the high command delivered speeches, accusing the Filipino ofli- 
cials themselves of non-cooperation and exhorting all the Filipinos to 
understand Japan s “noble motives But withal, discontent and re- 
sistance grew apace. 

fnclepeucleiicc fiacl to be given 

Nevertheless, the Philippines simply had to be given her inde- 
pendence. It was so nominated in the bond of the co-prosperity 
sphere. The Japanese must liberate the country from American dom- 
ination and proclaim its independence, if they had to kill every Filipino 
in doing it. So in spite of the continued loyalty of the people to the 
Americans and to the democratic way of life. Premier Tojo, in a 
speech before the Diet on January 28, 1943. affirmed that “substantial 
progress * was being made in the degree of cooperation by the Filipinos 
and in the restoration of internal peace and order, and formally an- 

17 



nouncecl that on condition that “furllier tangible evidences of coopcr- 
ation were actively demonstrated, Philippine independence woidd be 
tv given “in the shortest possible time.” Again followed the usual flurry 

of propaganda and exhortations by Japanese officials in the Philip- 
pines. The situation of peace and order was as it had been, in fad 
f ' worse, so much so that the Tribune, immediately after 1 ojo’s speech, 

• came out with the following editorial: “On the other hand, in the 

Philippines, it cannot be denied that disorders created by guerrilla 
groups turned bandits leave much to be desired in the way of a peace- 
"V ful reconstruction and creative collaboration. There are, it must be 

admitted, fence straddlers who appear to he collaborating noisi ly but 
\i. who are, in reality, retarding the speedy progress of reconstruction. 

- Also, there are those who collaborate with better intention than un- 

! derstanding and who unwittingly defeat the very ends we all desire 

to achieve.” 

( J In Manila, where the squat shadow of the dreaded hempei dark- 

ened every houseyard. restaurant and street corner, life was bare exist- 
ence and a problem of survival until the promised day of liberation. 
In the government, everybody kept tongue in cheek, from the highest 
^ officials— now dubbed collaborators— to the humblest clerks. Tlieir phil- 

„ osophy was simple. Not every man, woman and child could go to the 

' mountains and become a guerrillero. If the people were to be spared 

' ‘ the rigors of direct military rule, there had to be a government by Fili- 

I • pinos, and such government could either be in their hands, or, assuni- 

j ing that they could refuse to serve, in the hands of known pro-Jap- 

^ ane^ elements like Ramos and Ricarte. Well, they chose the least 

‘ of three evils, knowing that there was neither power, nor honor, nor 

peace of mind in the task they had to perform. In that work they were 
sustained only by the hope that it would not be forever; in fact that 
relief and liberation were on the way. In every government office, in. 
every corridor and washroom, the latest bit of news from the San 
Francisco radio was whispered daily and made it less irnbearable to 
pay lip-service to the conqueror, to carry his meatball flag in compid- 
sory parades and demonstrations, to bow to the imperial palace, to 
pray for the Japanese war dead, and to accept the mockery of inde- 
pendence that was so officiously offered. These government offices, 
under the very noses of the occupation forces, became in time veritable 
news agencies secretly disseminating much needed soul-warming in- 
populace. In fact it was some of the members of 
the Executive Commission who furnished much of that news from their 
shortwave radio receivers, so much so that at one time the Japanese 
^ military administration wrote a strong letter to Chairman Vargas Ccill- 

ing his attention to the information received by it to that effect and 
* warning the Commissioners concerned. 



18 



5 



Tojo’s visit — Sivift, brcath- 
tahiug events leitdinfj to completion 
of the I*li if ippi lies’ “co-prosperifi/” 
strnctnve after Tohyo^s blueprint 

I N May, 19^5. Premier 1 ojo visited lliis country. Once again the 
old refrain was Iieard from him: “that the Filipinos should fully 

comprehend the true intentions of Japan and impress upon their minds 
the glory and responsibility of participation in the sacred war of liber- 
ation and devote themselves to the task of reconstruction, thereby to 
win for themselves the honor of independence in the shortest possible 
time. 

In a mass meeting at the Luneta on May 6 , he declared that he 
*'sciw everywhere tangible evidences of the growing desire on the port 
of the Filipinos to cooperate with the Japanese government/* The 
words he used had a familiar ring; indeed, there was method in the 
self-deception. As anticipated, Tojo then concluded that he *\vas con- 
vinced more than ever of the propriety of early Philippine independ- 
ence/* Oddly enough, the day following that Luneta speech was 
declared Peace and Order Day to intensify the efforts to stop the 
growing spirit of resistance to the Japanese regime. 

Upon Tojo’s return to Japan, he again addressed the Diet and 
after restating Japan s immutable policy of freeing Greater East Asia 
and the various measures taken in perfect consistency with this funda- 
mental policy, announced that the Philippines would be accorded the 
honor of independence in the course of that year. From then on 
events moved swiftly. Two days after Tojo’s pronouncement, the Pre- 
paratory Commission for Philippine Independence was created upon 
orders of the Japanese Commander-in-Chief and charged with the pre- 
paration of the constitution. On July 17 of the same year, a military 
proclamation was issued relative to the punishment of persons carrying 
firearms and explosives without permit. On September 4, the consti- 
tution for the Republic was signed, and on September 7, it was ratified 
by a convention of KALIBAPI representatives. On September 20. the 

10 



delegates to the National Assembly were elected in the KALIBAPI 
way, and on September 25, the Assembly was inaugurated and it imme- 
diately proceeded to elect Jose P. Laurel President of the Republic. On 
September 29, the President-elect, with Chairman Vargas and Speaker 
Aquino, was called to Tokyo to be talked into signing a pact of alli- 
ance for all-out collaboration with Japan and into declaring war 
on the United States and Britain. On October 9, Syozo Murata, until 
then the supreme adviser to the Japanese Military Administration, was 
appointed Japanese Ambassador to the still unborn Republic of the 
Philippines. On October 12. Chairman Vargas issued his last order, 
upon instructions of the military authorities, governing the possession of 
firearms, including hand grenades and even bombs. (Peace and order 
indeed!) Two days afterwards, in the morning of October 14. inde- 
pendence was proclaimed and the Republic was inaugurated, and in 
the afternoon of the same day the “Japan-Philippinc Pact of Alliance 
was signed. 

The Philippine **co-prosperity*’ structure, after Tokyo s blueprint, 
was completed. 

Thus it may be seen that before the Pacific war started, an inde- 
pendent Philippines was already conceived in the minds of the Jap- 
anese leaders, many of whom were those who subsequently rushed 
its birth. For if there was to be a Greater East Asia Co-prosperity 
bnhere, and common defense and *full cooperation on the basis of 
equality and reciprocity for all East Asia, there had to be an “inde- 
pendent" Philippines as well as an “independent" Burma. Obviously 
there could be no brotherhood, with Japan in the role of elder brother, 
unless it be among ostensibly “sovereign" members. Burma had been 
given her independence" even earlier than the Philippines, so now 
they were added to the list made up of Manchukuo. Nanking China, 
Siam and French Indo-China. All this, as everybody knew, was 
pure propaganda, behind which Japan would continue exploiting these 
countries and literally bleeding their peoples dry. For there was noth- 
ing that, without the necessity of granting independence, the Japanese 
could not have exacted from the Filipinos as a conquered people, in 
the form of economic, political and military “cooperation." But they 
needed an independent Philippines for two main objectives: the com- 
pletion of the co-prosperity sphere plan— a block of ostensibly inde- 
pendent states, and pacts of alliance, which could be had only with 
such “independent" states. 

The die is cast — The Republic is not 
to be a Japanese tool but a 
. shielil for the people 

Since the Filipinos must be “independent" whether they liked it or 
not, and since it was inevitable that they should have a “republic”, be- 
cause it was so decreed in Japan s timetable of conquest, the Filipino 
leaders, faced with such a fait accompli, decided to take the bull by 

20 



the liorns, as it were, and make the most oi that 'independence * and 
that republic in order to preserve the nation and hold the people to- 
gether. using the “republic” as a shield to protect the people against 
Japan s encroachments, “brutalih^ and avarice,” to outsmart the Japan- 
ese at their own game, and to make the “republic” real enough to back- 
fire against the Japanese themselves. This grim determination was ex- 
pressed by one of Mr. Laurel’s ministers on the occasion of the cabinet 
members induction into office in these words which, cr^^ptic as they had 
to be under the circumstances, were comprehended by all in their full 
import: 

For us the die is cast, and we must go fonimrd, cost what it may. 
in order to defend against one and all the life and sovereignty of our 
republic, and the glory and majesty of our flag. For this republic, as 
you (President Laurel) said on a certain occasion, shall be a real 
republic only if we Filipinos know how to live and die for it . . . If 
the desire for power has been, throughout the ages, vanity of vanities 
and miserable tinsel, in these times (under the Japanese regime of 
abuses and atrocities) when the life of a man, whether humble or 
powerful, is worth no more than that of a barnyard fowl, it would 
signify in the wretch who harbored it, folly or madness. We have 
responded to your invitation from the same motives that impelled you 
to accept the highest magistracy of the nation against the counsels of 
egoism: the public service and the sincere desire to save the nation. . . 
More than once you will perhaps feel your faith weaken and your will 
fuller unon finding that the trust you have reposed in high altruistic 
ideals (Japan’s avowed “magnanimity and benevolence ), has been 
defrauded. and th e promises wh ich have been made in the name of a 
new morality in the law of nations (Japan’s much propagandized 
“moral justice ” in international relations) have not been fulfilled. . . ** 

The Minister who thus spoke, close on the heels of the inaugura- 
tion of the republic, did so in the name and on behalf of all his col- 
leagues. It is very significant that in the course of his speech he did 
not make the slightest mention of Japan, nor did he have a single 
word of gratitude or praise for the “benevolence” and “magnanimity ” of 
the “nation-leader ” of East Asia, nor did he utter any unfriendly allu- 
sion to the United States, nor did he make the most cursory reference to 
the war going on between Japan and the Allied powers, even if the 
Japan-Philippine pact of alliance had been signed only five days before. 
Least of all did he touch upon any promise or offer of aid and collal)- 
oration. On the contrar>^ the speech was full of forebodings and 
premonitions and subtly replete with mortifying allusions to the falsity 
and hypocrisy of the Japanese. And on top of all this, in the after- 
noon of the same day. he broadcast over station PIAM and gave a 
press statement, saying among other things, that “...it should be 
made clear that we Filipinos owe no allegiance to any foreign power; 
that the government of this Republic is a government by the Filipinos 
and for the Filipinos alone: that inn aro nnf at war with anv nation. . . 



21 



and that the Republic will earnestly and indefatiyably seek to uphold 
ihe honor and liberties of the people with gooclivill loward all who 
respect our souereignty and national integrity. . 

Ir will rhiis be seen that the republic instead of becoming a tool 
of the Japanese, as they intended became a w-eapon against them, 
as the Filipino leaders had in mind. And yet. ironically enough it is 
this same republic that is now being flaunted in the faces ol these 
leaders as evidence of their alleged collaboration. 



A pact of alliance and declaration of war 
on the Allied Powers, Jiipan’s 
ultimate objective 

The Japanese co-prosperity sphere propaganda screened an ulterior 
and altogether sinister aspect. Without the pretense of giving inde- 
pendence to the conquered territories. Japan could, as she had heen 
doing, exact from them the last ounce of political, economic, and mili- 
tary tribute. But she wanted something more--something which she 
knew she could not legally demand from a nation vanquis hed in war 
unless that nation was first given a sovereign status, even if in name 
on ly. This was a pact of military alliance and a declaration of war 
on the Allied powers e-the ultimate in propaganda value, even if with- 
out practical effect from the military point of view. 

The keynote of Japanese policy in this respect was struck by Ma- 
satoshi Matsushita, professor in Rikkyo University, in an article he 
wrote in January, 1943. The principle of joint defense, he said, must 
be the leitmotif of an international law for the Greater Hast A.sia Co- 
prosperity Sphere. In regard to the question of military collaboration, 
he added, there seem to be two different views: one is that the non- 
involved countries of a sphere must automatically enter into hostil- 
ities with the aggressor and the other is that they must only e.xtend all 
possible assistance to the involved country without resorting to w^ar 
against the aggressor. But. according to him. the intrinsic policy un- 
derlying the project of a greater East Asia endorses the first view; so 
an inteinational law for this region must include in its scope the 
authority to utilize the fuitural and manpower resources obtainable there. 
The same view was expressed as far back as 1940 when Iwao F. Ayu- 
sawa, in another article, wrote that one of the steps to be taken in 
organizing the new regional system was that defense should he col- 
lectively organized and placed under the control of ihe regional author- 
ity, in this case Japan. 

Local straws in the wind were the 7 ribune editorials constantly 
harping, long before independence, on one single theme— that the Phil- 
ippines must enter the war on the side of Japan. In November 1942, 
that ^paper sounded an editorial call that the Filipinos must toil,*' 
that they must fight, that they must be prepared even to die, like the 
Japanese warrior who smilingly offers his very life on the battlefield 
for the sake of the Emperor.” Another editorial reiterated that ‘‘the 



22 



I"ilipiiios must once affirm llieir readiness to collaborate with 

japan in fighting the war to a glorious finish,” and still another, that 
“they Iiave yearned for independence so long that there is danger of 
over-glorifying the freedom aspect of independence without mental pre- 
paredness to meet all responsibilities and obligations incident to inde- 
pendence,” and that “/hey must not fool themselves by entertaining the 
idea that independence was going to free them from the war,” because 
“such wishful thinking is cowardly. ” It was a theme that was 
sustained throughout but it evoked not one concrete response from the 
Fil i pi nos. 

All the propaganda build-up about the co-prosperity sphere, all 
the talk about the war being a sacred war of liberation, the grant of 
independence itself and the establishment of the republic, were calcu- 
lated to high-pressure the Philippines into signing a treaty of alliance 
with Japan and, immediately, into declaring war upon the United 
States and Britain. It was an objective that from the very beginning 
was foreseen and could not conceivably be forestalled or eva ded. 

The Tribune editorial of June lO, the ver>^ day Tojo stated 

before the Diet that Japan would grant independence to the Philip- 
pines in the course of that year, shows quite conclusively that the grant 
of sovereign status to the Philippines was only a means to have the 
Philippines, through a pact of alliance and a declaration of war, align 
herself with Japan and the other countries of East Asia for the pro- 
secution of the war. The said editorial, entitled “Privilege and Re- 
sponsibility,” reads: 

What is the position of the Philippines in this Asian Sphere? 
Let us consider wlial are (lie obligations and tlie responsibilities 
of the Fil ipino people within this sphere for every privilege has 
its concurrent responsibility. We must admit that co-prosperity 
can be achieved only through a co-existence based on the willing- 
ness to live or die together, sharing every fate together with the 
other peoples of the sphere. Only on this basis could w^e^or any 
other race^hope to share the privilege of co-prosperity. 

In other words, the peoples of the sphere are governed by a 
common destiny. 7 hey rise or fall together, and in this there is 
unity and strength. 

Some may be dreaming of independence of a “gi// independ- 
ence” variety, freedom which when attained \vould release the 
Philippines from further obligation. But such a viewpoint goes 
counter to the conscience of the true Asian Filipino. 

The war against Anglo-Saxon world tyranny must continue 
until it is wiped off the earth and there will be no let up in the 
stringency of wartime living and in the need of fortitude and 
determination until the final victory is attained. 

We must never forget that the Philippines is part and parcel 
of the Co-Prosperity Sphere, that we can claim no exemptions, 
and that we must be ready to live or die with Nippon and other 

23 



brother nations ot Oreater bast Asia. Only with this deternn 
nation can we ever achieve freedom or merit it. 

On the very day (August i, 1943) Burma was granted independ- 
ence by Japan, she signed a pact of offensive alliance with that coun- 
try and declared war against Britain and the United States. In all 
honesty, it must be said for Mr. Laurel, who as president was the con- 
stitutional authority to conclude the Japan-Philippine Pact of Alliance, 
that its terms concerning military collaboration were merely of a de- 
fensive nature, to become operative only in case of violation by a third 
party of the independence and territorial integrity of the Philippines; 
and that when the occasion contemplated by Japan came and the re- 
public was forced to declare the existence of a state of war, Mr. Laurel 
declared in the same breath that there would be no conscription of 
even a single Filipino into the Japanese armed forces. 



24 



■PS ms- 



> ,T ■.. **- 



The Pact of AUiaucc in the Ufiht of Japan^s 
Far Eastern PoUcy before ami 
after Pearl Harbor 



T he pact of alliance and its genesis are perhaps beyond the compre- 
hension of many of the poslliberation critics, who see it not as a 
slrihing il lustration of Japanese coercion but as a voluntary and machi- 
avelian desijjn on the part of the so-called collaborators to align them- 
selves and the country unreservedly with Japan. A glance at the 
history of Japanese Far Eastern policy in the years immediately pre- 
ceding the war and in the course of it will show the obvious error and 
unfairness of this view, for no nation that ever came under the sway 
of Japan had been able to resist her coercive demands or to ^void the 
conclusion of pacts of alliance and almost invariably joint mihtars' 
operations with her. 

(a) Japan and Korea 

First to come under Japanese control was Korea. The encroach- 
ment upon the latter’s independence and sovereignty Avas as insidious 
as. in the end, it was complete. In iSo^i. at the beginning ol the oino- 
Japanese war, Japan entered into a treaty of alliance with Korea, t le 
object of which was *‘to maintain the independence of Korea on a Hrm 
footing." This was affirmed in a Japanese-Russian agreement in iSqS. 
in which those two governments "recognized definitely the sovereignty 
and entire independence of Korea and pledged themselves mutualK 
to abstain from all direct interference in the internal affairs of that 
countr^^" Tn the Anglo-Japanese alliance of 1002. Japan reiterated 
her solicitude for Korea, avowing the same attitude for China, and 
declared herself mutuallv with Britain to be "entirely uninfluenced by 
any aggressive tendencies in either country. Tn 1904 Japan declared 
war against Russia, and in the imperial rescript issued for that pur- 
pose it was solemnly announced that the integrity of Ivorea is a 
matter of gravest concern to this Empire, . . . and that jhe separate 
existence of I^orea is essential to the safety of our realm. That was 



25 



on February lO. Thirteen days later, or on February 25. the Japanese 
octopus was reaching out its first sinister tentacle in the form of a 
protocol between Japan and Korea. It was there provided — very in- 
nocently^that the imperial government of Japan definitely guaran- 
teed the independence and territorial integrity of the Korean empire; 
and almost as innocently, that the imperial government of Japan 
shall, in a spirit of friendship, insure the safety and repose of the impe- 
rial house of Korea. But in the same protocol, it was also provided 
that for the purpose of maintaining a permanent and solid friend- 
ship between Japan and Korea and firmly establishing peace in the 
Far East, the Imperial Government of Korea shall place fidl con- 
fidence in the Imperial Government of Japan, and adopt the advice of 
the latter in regard to improvements in administration.” The first 
beachhead was thus established, and it remained for 'friendly” Japan 
to exploit it and expand her control. This she lost no time in doing, 
for the very next year, 1905. in the treaty renewing the Anglo-Japancse 
Alliance, Great Britain recognized Japan s paramount political, mili- 
tary and economic interests in Korea, and her right to take such meas- 
ures as she may deem proper, provided that such measures were not 
contrary to the principle of equal opportunities for the commerce and 
industry of all nations. The same rights were recognized by Russia 
in the treaty of Portsmouth in IQ05, ending the Russo-Japanese war. 
The two third-power stumbling blocks having thus been eliminated, 
one by amicable treaty and the other by war, Japan began to show' 
her strong hand vis-a-vis Korea. Tw^o months after the treaty of Ports- 
mouth, in November 19C>5» Jonan and Korea entered into a convention 
providing, for the purpose of strengthening the solidarity betw^een the 
tw'o empires, that the government of Japan will hereafter have con- 
trol and direction of the external relations and affairs of Korea.” Ac- 
cordingly, in 1906 Marquis Ito w^as made Japanese resident-general 
in Korea. In 1907 Japan prevented the representatives of the Korean 
Emperor from being given a hearing at the Hague Conference. In 
July of that year the Japanese control was further extended by another 
convention in wJiich the governments of the tw^o countries, ‘‘desiring 
soeedily to promote the wealth and strength of Korea and w^ith the 
object of promoting the prosperity of the Korean nation.” agreed: In 

all matters relating to the reform of the Korean administration the Ko- 
rean government shall receive instructions and guidance from the Jap- 
anese resident-general; in all appointments and removals of high 
officials the Korean government must obtain the consent of the res- 
ident-general; the Korean government shall appoint to be officials of 
Korea any Japanese subjects recommended by the resident-general; 
and the Korean government shall not appoint any foreigners to be 
officials of Korea without consulting the resident-general. 

Korea thus had become the merest colony of Japan, this wuth 
apparent consent and avowedly for the benefit of Korea. In 1908 
Prince Ito declared publicly that it was no part of Jcipan*s purpose 
to annex Korea. In 1909 the same Prince Ito declared that Korea 

26 



must be "amalgumaletr’ witb Japan. So on August^^. * 9 *°' ® treaty 
was signed between tlie two countries, in wliicb His ^ ^ 

llmperor of Korea makes complete and permanent cession to His a 
jeslv llie flmperor of Japan of all rights of sovereignty over t le lo e 
of Korea, and His Majesty llie Emperor of Japan accepts the cession 
and consents to the complete anrie.valion of K.orea to Ine "mpire o 
Japan.” On August 29. iQio Japan formally declared Korea anne.xec 
lo the dominions of His h'lajesty the Japanese Emperor. 

It can be said that in all history there has never been a grea er 
collaborator with Japan than the Emperor of Korea, for having, with- 
out being under military occupation by a conqueror, agreed to the tola 
extinction of his country s sovereign status. And yet. what t le Vorean 
Emperor did was what any other ruler of any other country %vho had 
to meet the enemv on the enemy’s terms would do under the circum- 
stances. not because of fear for personal safety but to spare the country 
and the people the wrath of a merciless overlord. . 

Situations there are in the life of nations where their rulers and 
leaders have no recourse except to play possum and bide I leir ime. 

It is in one such situation that Hirohito. MacArthurs great collabo - 
ator. now finds himself. He has acquiesced in MacArthur s order no 
to report further to his honorable ancestors, and has even disclaimecl 
l,°s «nCurics.ol<l ".livh.ilv." H« corlnlnly comply cvh.lever 

directives it may please MacArthur to issue in the luture. 

(l>) Japan and China 

The group of treaties and exchanges of notes between Japan anc 
China in 1013. in which China accepted practically all of the famous 
Twenty-One Demands, constituted the next glaring example of Jap- 
anese Far Eastern diplomacy. Those demands according to an Amer- 
ican author, were a smothering blanket of exclusive political and eco 
nomic privileges which Japan tried to cast over China and 'vliich. 
had she been entirely successful, would have reduced the celestu 
empire to a state of vassalage, originally presented, the demands 

were arranged in five groups. Grmip one called for Chinas fu 
assent to xvhatever disposition of the Gernnan rights in Miantung Japan 
should make at the end of the first world war; for a Qunese promise 
not to cede or lease any portion of Shantung to any thud power; and 
for the granting to Japan of widespread railway and commercial pri- 
vileges throughout the province. Group two perpetuated and strongly 
consolidated Japan’s special position in Manchuria and Eastern Inner 
Mongolia, and evoked China’s acquiescence therein. Oroup^ three 
demanded exclusive mining and industrial privileges in the Yangtse 
Valley, including joint Sino-Japanese ownership of the rich iron and 
steel mills, smelters, colliers and mineral deposits around Hankow, 
the industrial capital of China. Group four pledged China not to 
cede or lease to anv power any harbor or bay or any island along the 
Chinese coast, a demand calculated to obtain international recogni- 
^tion of the maritime province of Fukien (opposite Formosa) as a Jap- 
anese sphere of interest. Group five asked for widespread political 

27 



fights throughout C^hina proper which, if yranted, would have given 
the Japanese government supervisory control over Chinese social and 
political institutions from schools and churches to the Chinese govern- 
ment itself. If these demands were not accepted by China in their 
totality, it was not because of her tenacious opposition, for she lacked 
the strength to make that opposition effective, but because of the ob- 
jections of the United States and Creat Britain. As it was, however, 
China had to give extensive concessions, which *at one fell swoop 
brought Japan to a commanding position in China in which she might 
never have been able to buy her way in competition with Europe.” 



(c) Japan, Manchukuo and Nanking China 

In 1952 the puppet state of Manchukuo came into existence, as 
the upshot of the Manchuria incident of 1951 and the first phase of 
Japans China adventure. Since there was no necessity of a treaty 
of alliance, Japan signed with Manchukuo on September i/|. 19'52. a 
protocol in which the former recognized the new state while making 
it, in fact, a colony. As Professor Steiner wrote in 1940: *Manchii- 

kuo came to life in 1952... Since that time, Japan has steadily ad- 
hered to the fiction of independence of Moncliuhuo, but there is not 
the slightest phase of Manchurian lifc‘ — political, economic, military, 
diplomatic, social, or cullural^that is not controlled hy the Kwantiing 
Army, and thus made subservient to the policies of the prevailing mili- 
tary digue in Japan.” 

The second phase of the China adventure began in 1957 and re- 
establishment of the puppet national government of Wang 
Ching-wei jn Nanking. Having thus sponsored, as a consecpience of 
milita^ conquest, an ostensibly independent republic in China, Japan 
had Wang Ching-wei elected as its president on November 28, ipqo, 
and two days later had it enter into a treaty concerning the basic 
relations between them. That treaty opened with the ominous clause 
concerning mutual respect for sovereignty and territories, also present 
in the different treaties with Korea prior to her annexation to Japan, 
which was later to recur with characteristic repetitiousness in the 
e^bsequent treaties that Japan entered into with other conquered 
but supp^edly independent countries like the Philippines. The treaty 
Nv^ith the Nanking government embodied for the first time the principle 
or joint defen^, then already an integral part of the co-prosperity 
sphere idea. The rest of the provisions contained a long recital of 
the concession^ --political, economic and military-— which Japan had 
exacted Irom China. China agreed to the stationing of Japanese 
rriilitary lorces and naval units within her territory, and promised to 
allord positive and full facilities to Japan and Japanese subjects for 
the developrnent and utilization of her natural resources. The reha- 
bilitation and development of Chinese industries, finance, transportation 
and communication were provided for, with the assistance and co- 
operation of Japan; and China agreed to open her territory for domicile 
and business of Japanese subjects. On the same day that treaty was 
signed, the governments of Japan. China and Manrhukuo issued a 



joint cleclciFcition in which they a^ain pledged mutual respect lor sover* 
eigntv and lerrilorics, and. agreed to bring about general cooperation 
on a reciprocal basis, especially a good-neighbor friendship, common 
defense and economic cooperation. Nanking China declared war on 
the United States and Britain on January^ p. 1943 * 

(cl) Japan and French Inclo-China 

Vis-a-vis French Indo-Cliina and Siam. Japans close relations 
of friendship” began in 1940. As reported in an official Japanese 
account, the advance of the Japanese forces to French Indo-China in 
September 1940 was an e])och-making event in connection with the 
stabilization of Japan’s policy toward the South Seas region, and a 
great stride toward the construction of ihe greater East Asia Co-pros- 
perity Sphere, for close on the heels of the advancing forces the me- 
diation of the Siam-French Indo-China border incident was consum- 
mated. How that mediation was accomplished and at what cost to 
the disputants has alreadv been mentioned in an earlier part of this 
account. When asked afterwards in Washington whether accepting 
Japanese mediation was not equivalent to letting a fox arbitrate be- 
tween two rabbits in a cabbage patch, the Siamese Minister reportedly 
replied: “What would you do if you were a rabbit? 

Japan having ihus acquired hegemony in French Indo-China and 
Japanese troops being in actual military occupation there, the inevit- 
able Ireaty was in order. On July 20. iQ4t. therefore, a protocol was 
signed in wliich. after the usual protestations of respect for sovereignty 
and territorial integrity, the French and Japanese governments mutually 
promised military cooperalion for the joint defense of French Irjdo- 
China. It may be stated that France, who entered into the treat>\ had 
been a world power, with her head bowed momentarily in defeat. A 
masterpiece of irony was the statement of the Jananese government in 
connection with the treaty, that Japan intended to observe strictly her 
obligations arising from the various existing arrangements between 
Japan and France, especially the solemn promises respecting the ter- 
ritorial integrity and sovereignty of French Indo-China. and at the 
same time to endeavor for tlie promotion of the amicable relations 
subsisting between Japan and France, thereby realizing the common 
prosperity of the two countries. It would perhaps be superfluous to 
ash if Japan would have been so solicitous of the defense of French 
Indo-China had France been strong enough to take care of it herself. 
The aftermath of the treaty was in the nature of an anti-clima?^ when 
it was announced by the Japanese Imperial headc|uarters on EJecem- 
ber 12, 1941 that a military agreement had been concluded behveen 
Japan and French Indo-China at 8:50 p. m.. December 8. the date 
of Pearl Harbor, based on the common defense agreement of the pre- 
ceding July. 

(e) Japan and Siam 

Siam, the other disputant in the border incident of 1940. fared 
no better at the hands of Japan. After the outbreak of the war. Japan 

29 



secured the right of passage for Iier troops through Siamese territory. 
With those troops in occupation, a pact of alliance was entered into 
beKveen the two countries on December 21 , 194*. again on the basis 
of mutual respect for their independence and sovereignty. It was not, 
however, a defensive treat>^ but provided that in case either of the 
parties found herself in an armed conflict against one or more third 
powers, Siam or Japan shall immediately range herself on the side 
of the other ally and shall aid the latter with all political, economic 
and military means. Thus automatically Siam was at war with the 
Allied nations, although her formal declaration to the effect was not 
made until the following Januar\'^ 25. 

(f) Japan and Burma 

Regarding Burma Premier Tojo in his speech before the Diet on 
January 21, 1942, announced that the Japanese policy was the same 
as that relating to the Philippines. Thereafter the two countries were 
always mentioned side by side whenever Japan reiterated to them her 
promise of independence. On May 5, 1945. die Burmese preparatory 
comniission for independence was organized. On the following August 
1, independence was proclaimed and a treaty of offensive and defen- 
sive alliance was signed between Japan and Burma, in which they 
mutually pledged their cooperation'— military, political and economic — 
ror the successful prosecution of the war. On the same day. Burma 
declared war against the United States and Great F 3 ritain. 



30 



i^hiUppine-Japati Pact of AUUntce after 
Axis pattern — also an imposed “matle- 
itt-Tohtfo’^ treatp. It ivfis a linh in the 
chain of Japan-itictated treaties or 
pacts of allutnce in Eitst Asia 

O NE by one, willi llial relentless consistency referred to by Premier 
Tojo in llie beginning of tlie war, the countries of East Asia found 
themselves chained to Japan by treaties of alliance. It is in the light 
of these historical facts that the position of the Philippines must be 
considered. 

Shortly before the inauguration of the republic Mr. Laurel, Mr. 
Aquino and Mr. Vargas were called to Tokyo, presumably to be per- 
suaded* into signing an offensive and defensive treaty of alliance with 
Japan and declaring war against the United States and Great Britain, 
just as Burma did on the day of the ])roclamation of its independence. 
NIr. Laurel was able to evade not only a declaration of war on the 
L^nited States and Britain but also any commitment for all-out military 
cooperation such as had been exacted from Burma, but it was inevitable 
that some treaty must be signed. They returned on October 6. Six 
days later, that is, on October 12, Mr. Murata, who had been ap- 
pointed Ambassador to the Philippines before the inauguration of the 
republic, arrived from Japan with his whole staff, bringing with him 
the formal text of the pact which, without a single modification, was 
signed by Mr. Murata and President Laurel’s representative on Oct- 
ober 14, the same day the republic was inaugurated. There had been 
no previous negotiation, no opportunity for give and take, no com- 
promise. There could not have been any, because nobody had been 
authorized or appointed on the Filipino side to carry out such nego- 
tiation, and the Japanese were not in the habit of “negotiating with 
the conquered or dominated countries of East Asia. 



The well-Unotvn Axis methotl of '^^persuasion^' 
in dealing with weak peoples 

Tlie Japanese, well-known for their lack of imagination and ol 
inventiveness, yet famed for their ability to imitate, merely copied their 
nazi axis partner s methods of approach and persuasion ’ in their deal- 
ings with weak and helpless neighbors, from the signing of treaties, 
pacts, agreements and other instruments, formation of labor service 
organizations, Gestapo-Kempeitai overall control, to the dissolution of 
regular political parties and the establishment of semi-fascist national 
associations of the KALIBAPI type. 

At Munich, on September 29, 1938, Chamberlain and Daladier 
were terrorized by Hitler into giving away Sudentenland to him with- 
out even consulting the Czechs. 1 he accord was signed on Septem- 
ber 30, and on the same day the assent of the Czech gouernnient luas 
given as the only alternative to a desperate and hopeless defense. 
But that was only the beginning. After its dismemberment, Czecho- 
slovakia had still to appease the Fuehrer by bringing its general 
public and economic policies into conformity with German policy. 
President Benes, Hitler s bete noire, quickly resigned and afler an in- 
terval a non-entity, Emil Hacha, was elected to take his place. A labor 
service on the Nazi model was formed; the Communist party was dis- 
solved, the regular party organizations were merged into a semi-lascist 
National Union; freedom of press and assembly was restricted; and 
no obstacle was placed in the way of the Gestapo as it quickly des- 
cended into the Moldau Valley. Under Flitler’s pressure, Slovakia 
and Ukraine were given autonomy by the Czech parliament. But local' 
autonomy was not enough for the nazi-puppet politicians of Slovakia 
and Ruthenia. Nazi-inspired separatist movements started. 1 he Czech 
government in Prague took police action against the Slovakian 
separatists and here is what happened both to the Czechs and the 
Slovenes, according to Professor Steiner: 

Hitler thereupon summoned President Flacha to Berlin where he 
arrive in the evening of March 14. After a session with Flitler that 
lasted 4 a. m. on March i5--reminiscent of the Berchtesgaden 

session ol Hitler with Schuschnigg in February. iQjS^President Hacha 
signed an instrument begging Hitler to be so gracious as to take Bo- 
hemia and Moravia under his protection.* The gracious Fuehrer ac- 
ceded; the Carman troops which had already been ordered to march 
appeared in Prague within Kvo hours; Hitler himself followed shortly 
therealter and, on March 16, a formal proclamation was issued for the 
government of the protectorate of Bohemia-Moravia. Certain forms of 
autonomous government were left to President Hacha and his cabinet 
in Prague, but the proclamation made it clear that the head’ of the 
protectorate must enjoy the confidence of the German Fuehrer and that 
the administration of the protectorate must proceed in conformity with 
the political, militap; and economic requirements of the German Reich.* 
German troops took charge of the police; the German government as- 

82 




sumeci control of tlie foreign relations of Bohemia and Moravia; and 
Baron von Neiirath appeared in Prague as the first ‘Reich-Protecior/ 
For legal and political purposes, Bohemia and Moravia became integral 
parts of the territory of the German Reich, even though they retained 
the external appearance of autonomous areas. 

On March 13, while German troops were marching through 
Prague, Father Tiso requested Herr Hitler to take Slovakia under his 
protection. Instead of absorbing Slovakia into Germany, a German- 
Slovakian treaty of protectorate was signed on March 25, iQjQ . Under 
this arrangement. Slovakia enjoyed the stahis of a separate estate^— » 
and has been so recognized by a number of European countries^huf 
agreed to the maintenance of German garrisons and the conduct of 
Slovakian foreign affairs through Berlin. The German government 
agreed to ‘protect the territorial integrity of Slovakia— but when Hun- 
garian troops invaded the eastern frontier of Slovakia on the same 
day that the treaty was signed, Germany took no action and the Flun- 
garians were permitted to take a portion of Slovakia s territory under 
a convention of March 51. For practical purposes, Slovakia must be 
regarded as part of political Germany, even though Slovakia’s relation 
to Germany differs from that of Bohemia-Moravia. In August, 1Q59* 
German troops consolidated their position in Slovakia before moving 
into Poland.’’ 

The text of the so-called Japan-Philippine Pact of Alliance was 
drawn in Tokyo and brought here already in its final form, and lol- 
lows the general pattern of treaties exacted by Japan from the countries 
of East Asia with such stipidations as those providing for mutual 
respect for independence and territoricil integrity and political, econ- 
omic, and military cooperation. It is true that the pact was merely 
defensive in character, that the clause concerning military collabora- 
tion was conditional, and as a consequence, a declaration of war 
against the allied countries was averted, unlike the cases of Nanking 
China, Siam. French Indo-China and Burma; but this important dif- 
ference must have resulted from the information given by Mr. Laurel 
to the Japanese government that an offensive alliance wi 111 Japan would 
mean outright declaration of war against America, which, because it 
wou Id imply at that time military conscription of Filipinos, m iglit pre- 
cipitate chaos and revolution here, and that it would be immoral in 
the eyes of the world, and in their own eyes, for the Filipinos to fight 
against the Americans after they had been fighting side by side against 
the Japanese. 

Once Japan had decided to impose on the Philippines a treaty of 
alliance, the rest was a matter of course. The same coercive persuasion 
that Japan employed in having General Wainwright broadcast an 
appeal to his forces to cease all “fruitless resistance,’’ and having many 
of his captured officers and men sing their praises of the “invincible 
might’’ and the “magnanimity’’ of the Japanese troops against whom 
they had been fighting, proved equally effective in the political situa- 



33 



tion. Of course force had to be tempered by make-believe, and the 
threats made by the Japanese to Inspire fear were invariably accom- 
panied by protestations of noble motives. 

‘^^Indcpeiidcucc” anti ^^pacts of alliance^^ an 
ahsolutB necessity in the ^^int^rnational 
laic” for Greater East Asia 

To what extent it was inevitable for Burma, the Phili|)pines, Indo- 
China. Siam, and other Asiatic countries which, in the course of the 
Pacific war, found themselves at the mercy of Japan s military nii^?ht. 
to sign pacts of alliance pledging all-out collaboration with her, and to 
declare war on the Allied Powers, may be seen further from Foreign 
Minister Sigemitsu’s radio broadcast in August, 1Q43. when the con- 
stitution for the republic of the Philippines was being prepared, and 
from the statement made in the same year by Professor Matsushita, then 
a spokesman for the Tokyo Foreign Office, in an article entitled 
“Greater East Asia International Law.” Foreign Minister Sigemitsu 
said in his address that the two prerequisites for membership in the 
co-prosperity sphere were: ”... first, attainment of sovereignty and in- 
dependence through liberation: and secondly, establishment of concord 
and cooperation (in other words, conclusion of pacts of alliance) on the 
basis of equality and reciprocity.” And Professor Matsushita in his 
article wrote as follows: 

. . . The Japan-Manchoukuo protocol, the Sino-Japanese 
Basic Treaty and the Japan-Thai offensive and defensive alliance 
stipulate joint defence to preserve the combined integrity and the 
individual integrity of each of the high contracting parties. J he 
Wang administration of China has now declared war on the 
United States and Britain to protect the integrity of the continent 
as an important unit of greater East Asia. 

The International law as practised by the democratic na- 
tions has merely enabled them to form a superficial union among 
themselves to procure individual profits. This is the reason why 
if some of them become involved in war, other allies have the 
option to remain neutral. There does not exist any provision for 
joint action or joint defence in their order, which is, indeed, a 
serious flaw. In order to preclude the possihdity of such a non- 
collaboration, the principle of joint defence must be enforced to 
coordinate the defence activities of each nation of greater East 
Asia, thereby solidifying the life and living of the sphere itself. 

In case a country included in greater East Asia is attacked 
by or involved in hostilities with another country outside the 
sphere, all the remaining countries of the sphere, accepting such 
hostilities or attack as a direct menace to the safety of greater 
East Asia, must collaborate militarily with the attacked or in- 
volved partner with a view to restoring normalcy, x x x” 



34 







- ' 






It was in line with these pronouncements that the army organ (The 
Tribune) in an editorial written months before the proclamation of 
independence said that the Filipinos 'must not fool themselves with the 
idea that independence was going to free them from the war. 

It would be wrong, however, to say that the actuations of Mr. 
Laurel and the other Filipino leaders, in submitting to Japan s impo- 
sition in the matter of independence, pact of alliance, declaration of 
war. etc., were motivated merely by considerations of personal safety. 
The coercion employed was not directly against them as individuals 
but collectively on the country as a whole, the coercion implied in and 
attendant to any military occupation, and, in a higher degree, in the 
case of a ruthless one like that of the Japanese army, under which 
all the occupied areas of the Philippines were turned into a “huge 
concentration camp.” The refusal of these leaders to do the Japanese 
bidding certainly would not have deterred the Japanese from achiev- 
ing their ends, while entailing more disastrous consequences for the 
people. 



35 



8 



Pact of alliance immediately nullified ciiid overruled 
by Tojo^s pronouncements and by the ^^Joint 
Declaration of the Assembly of 
East Asiatic TVations^^ 

T any rate the pact was short-lived. It was signed on October 14. 

The exchange of ratifications was completed on October 20. And 
barely two weeks after, it was entirely nullified and overruled by the 
Congress of East Asiatic Nations convened in Tokyo on November 6 . 
The Joint Declaration which this Congress adopted had ihe effect of 
c anging the defensive character of the alliance into an offensive one 
and of considering the Philippines actually at war with the United 
otates and Britain before any declaration to that effect was ever made 
by her government. The Joint Declaration of East Asiatic Nations 
reads as follows: 



It is the basic principle for the establishment of world peace 
that the nations of the world have dach its proper place and enjoy 
prosperity in common through mutual aid and assistance. 

States of America and the British Empire have, 
in seeking their own. prosperity, oppressed other nations and peo- 
p es. Especially in East Asia, they indulged in insatiable ag- 
gression and exploitation, sought to satisfy their inordinate ambi- 
tion ol enslaving the entire region, and finally they came to me- 
nace seriously the stability of East Asja. Herein lies the cause 
ot the present war. 

L ^ountiies of Greater East Asia, with a view to contri- 

u ing o e cause of w^ld peace, undertake to cooperate toward 
prosecumg t e \\ ar of Greater East Asia to a successful conclu- 
sion, liberating their region from the yoke of British-American 
domination, assuring their self-existence and self-defense and con- 
structing a Greater East Asia in accordance with the following 
principles: 



36 




“i. The countries of Greater East Asia, through mutual co- 
operation, will ensure the stabiliK^ of their region and construct 
an order of common prosperity and well-being based on justice. 

*‘2. The countries of Greater East Asia will ensure the fra- 
ternity of the nations in their region by respecting one another s 
sovereignty and independence and practicing mutual assistance 
and amity. 

“5. The countries of Greater East Asia, by respecting one 
another’s traditions and developing the creative faculties of each 
race, will enhance the culture and civilization of Greater East 
Asia. 

4. The countries of Greater East Asia will endeavor to 
accelerate their economic development through close cooperation 
upon a basis of reciprocity and to promote thereby the general 
prosperity of their region. 

5. The countries of Greater East Asia will cultivate friendly 
relations with all the countries of the world and work for the 
abolition of racial discrimination, the promotion of cultural inter- 
course and the opening of the resources throughout the world and 
contribute thereby to the progress of mankind.” 

On the occasion of the adoption of this “Joint Declaration” Pre- 
mier Tojo spoke thus: 

“It is my belief that for all the peoples of Greater East Asia, 
the present war is a decisive struggle upon whose outcome de- 
pends their rise and fall. It is only by winning througli this war 
that they may ensure forever their existence in their Greater East 
Asian home and enjoy common prosperity and happiness, x x x 
I firmly believe that the other Greater East Asia nations whom 
you represent here are also grimly resolved to shatter the counter- 
offensives of their age-old enemies, America and Britain, by 
throwing their full weight into the field in concert with the Jap- 
anese nation and thereby secure lasting stability for Greater East 
Asia. XXX Today, the unity of the countries and peoples of 
Greater East Asia has been achieved, and they have embarked 
upon the gigantic enterprise of constructing a Greater East Asia 
for the common prosperity of all nations. This surely must be 
regarded as the grandest spectacle of human effort in modern 
times.” 

At tlie public rally held in Tokyo the day following the adoption 
of the “Joint Declaration”, Tojo announced that “fhe current war is 
not only Japan s war but is the war of all nations in this region. * 

In the said public rally, a resolution of the following tenor was 
approved, after it was proposed by Tojo himself: 

“Whereas, the various states and races of Greater East Asia 
are already emancipated from the centuries -long cruelty and op- 
pression of the Anglo-Americans, with the respective races at- 

37 



taining their proper places according to the lofty Oriental moral- 
ity, and are exerting their utmost in the sublime work of con- 
structing Greater East Asia; x x x 

“Whereas, our common enemy, Britain and the United 
States, are repeating their persistent counter-attacks for the wanton 
purpose of wresting Greater East Asia again from the peoples of 
Greater East Asia; 

“Let it be hereby resolved that the entire Greater East Asia 
should unite in the full realization of its common mission, call 
forth its total fighting strength for the complete attainment of the 
objectives of the Greater East Asia War as well as unshakable 
conviction in victory, and prevent Britain and the United States 
from encroaching and dominating East Asia and thus cooperate 
in the establishment of a new World Order.’* 

Even the resolution adopted by the East Asia Press Conference, 
which was held immediately after the East Asiatic nations assembly, 
virtually placed the Philippines in a state of war with the United States 
and Great Britain, a year before Mr. Laurel proclaimed its existence. 
The East Asia Press Conference resolution reads as follows: 

We hereby declare as follows: That we, the representatives 
of newspapers and fellow newspapermen of Greater East Asia 
have assembled to discuss the mission of newspapers for contribut- 
ing to the successful prosecution of the War of Greater East Asia 
and the construction of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity 
Sphere, x x x 

Recently the leaders of the various nations of Greater East 
ToIc>^o and issued to the world a Joint Declaration 
embodying the following five basic principles: mutual cooperation, 
independence and amity, enhancement of their cultures and civil- 
izations, promotion of economic prosperity, and contribution to the 
progress of mankind. These basic principles may be called the 
essence of the Greater East Asiatic spirit and this declaration is 
worthy ol becoming the Magna Charta for the establishment of 
permanent world peace. 

It is, indeed, our responsibility as newspapermen to bear 
part or the task of putting this Magna Charta into practice, en- 
arging it and causing it to thoroughly permeate through the blood 
ot the 1,000,000,000 peoples of Greater East Asia. 

^ ^ '^^ho stand as vanguard of the ideological warfare by 
virtue Ol our profession, do hereby resolve to devote ourselves to 
the great mission of developing world peace bv smashing Anglo- 
American trickery and intrigue through mutual collaboration and 
wholehearted endeavor among ourselves.” 

declarations and pronouncements, the Japan- 
Philippine I act of Alliance became, if it was not so already, a worth- 
less, meaningless, superfluous scrap of paper, and the declaration of a 

38 









stale of war by the Republic of llie Philippines, made a after, 

completely imnecessar>\ Even without the pact of alliance of Oct. 14* 
1Q45, therefore, or the proclamation of a state of war, on Septemb^ 22 , 
1944, the Philippines was made by japan her ally for offensive and de- 
fensive purposes, and forced into a state of war \vith jhe Umled otates 
and Britain since November 6, 1945» by virtue of the Joint Declaration 
of the Assembly of East Asiatic Nations . 



Pact of cflltance tainted icith had faith on 
both siiles^ like the hegazpi-Soliman 
hlooil-compact and the Pact of Biak-na-hato 

Aside from the considerations already set forth concerning the 
pact of alliance, it should also be stated that the pact was from the 
very beginning tainted with bad faith on both sides. While provid- 
ing for mutual respect for sovereignty^ and territorial integrity, the Jap- 
anese knew that the republic was not sovereign and never intended 
to accord respect to it. The Filipino officials, on their part, knew that 
fact too, and reciprocated Japan's bad faith by never really intend- 
ing to live up to the terms of the pact but rather to nullify it in every 
possible way. All these things were no secret either to the Japanese, 
the Filipinos, or to the Americans themselves. Every^one of them knew 
that the pact, “conceived in bad faith and born in coercion, was but 
a worthless scrap of paper. 

The pact of alliance was not much different from the blood com- 
pact in 1570 between Legazpi, on the one hand, and Rajahs Lakandula 
and Soliman, rulers of the then kingdoms of Tondo and Manila, respec- 
tively, on the other. That blood compact, while affirming friendship be- 
tween the parties, was intended by Legazpi to open the way" for Spanish 
domination here. Rajah Soliman, aware of that intention, entered 
the compact, as he probably" had to in order to forestall an impending 
Spanish attack, but with mental reservations, because he knew that 
his ideas of independence could not be reconciled with friendship for 
the foreigners, especially since such friendship meant his paying to 
them a tribute. In spite of the blood compact, therefore, he secretly 
planned a general assault against the forces of Legazpi, which, when 
it actually took place, resulted in defeat and in the occupation of 
Manila by the Spaniards. 

Another example is the Pact of Biak-na-Bato signed on Decem- 
ber 14 and 15, 1897 ^between the government of Spain, represented by 
Fernando Primo de Rivera, and of the Philippine revolutionary gov- 
ernment headed by Aguinaldo, represented by" Pedro A. Paterno. Ac- 
cording to a local historian, “the circumstances surrounding the sign- 
ing of the pact seemed to prove that the two parties had acted in 
bad faith. The government thought that paying the indemnity was 
much cheaper than continuing the war. while the revolutionists thought 
that with payment of indemnities they would be able to secure more 
arms and munitions for the resumption of war. 



39 



History is replete witli such examples of treaties or afjreemenls 
between strong and weak nations, which, because they were imposed 
by the former and backed by brute force, had been nullified by the 
latter through trickery and wiles. 

A case in point: Jtipun^s surrentJer ami 
Jfliic Arthur^ s iron rale in Japan 

The case of the so-called Japan-Philippine Pact ol Alliance may 
perhaps be further explained by citing as example ihe recent surrender 
of Japan. Once that surrender was decided upon as a residt of ihe 
hopelessness of the Japanese cause, it had to be carried out and the 
terms of the surrender signed, whether by Foreign Minister Sigemilsu 
Umezu, who had been designated by the Emperor for 
that purpose, or by any other representative of the Japanese govern- 
ment. It was not these men who were subjected to any particular 
duress or coercion — for what they did was merely a perfunctory and 
ministerial act^but the government as well as the people of Jcipan. 
who after the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, found 
themselves faced with the grim alternative of unconditional surrender 
or total destruction. By the same token, it may be said that the Fili- 
pino leaders who remained in the Philippines and who tried to make 
the best of a bad situation should not be any more responsible for 
their acts than those whose lack of foresight made it possible for that 
situation to arise. 

To carry the analogy a little further, the pact of cdliance was 
nothing more or less than a treaty dictated and imposed by a victo- 
rious power upon a vanquished nation, just as the United States is 
out in Japan the terms of the Potsdam declaration 
many fundamental changes, a radical revision 
ot the Japanese constitution, the abolition of state shintoism, and the 
ernperor s renunciation of his own “divinity,” with the difference that 
w li e the Japanese have to deal with a highly civilized and enlight- 
one people, the Filipinos at the time had to put up with forces that 
F^*^*’onsigeant, parochial, semi-feudal, oppressive and tyrannical, 
T ^ ^ United States is bending her efforts toward ef- 
ec ing w olesome changes into the political, economic and social 
s me ure o Japan in order that it may conform to democratic stand- 
Th ^ ^ ^nls, the Japanese in the Philippines, in desperation even 

en ecause the tide of the war had already smarted to turn against 

lem, were intent on ignoring and. overriding similar moral considera- 
lions , j 

A treaty exacteil through coercion 
and tluress iifter V-E and V-J Day 

Another instance to the point, and the more significant because it 
came after ^ "E and V-J Day of a treaty obtained through coercion and 
duress exerted not on any particular individual or group of individuals 



40 



but collectively, on a nation as a whole, and acquiesced in by the 
latter in order to spare itself the calamities implied in an attach and 
invasion by a powerful enemy, is the treah^ signed on New Year s 
Day (1946) between Great Britain and Siam, by which Siam agreed 
to make restitution and repudiate all measures she had taken pursuant 
to the declaration of war made by her upon Great Britain and the 
United States on January 25, 1942. The conclusion of this treaty 
was preceded by a British ultimatum couched in the following terms, 
as reported in a United Press dispatch of December 6, 1945- 

BANGKOK. Dec. 6 — (UP)— Britain has presented a series 
of new demands on Siam, it was learned today. 

The new demands include the following: 

1. Siam will remain under British rule until she is accepted 
into ihe United Nations; 

2. The British will hold control over all Siamese banks, busi- 
nesses, foreign exchange and commercial transactions; 

5. Exports of rice, tin, rubber and teak will be prohibited 
until there is no longer a world shortage in these commodities; 

4. The Siamese press, radio, telephone and telegraph will 
be placed under British censorship; 

5. Siam will be bound by any multilateral treaties made by 
Britain prior to December 7, 1941, whether or not Siam was orig- 
inally a party to the agreements. 

That this treaty was not freely negotiated on the part of Siam, but 
imposed on her by Great Britain, is evident from the very statement 
made after the signing of the treaty by M. E. Denning, political adviser 
to Lord Louis Mountbatten and Great Britain’s plenipotentiary. Ac- 
cording to a United Press report, Denning said: “The agreement means 
that Siam retains her freedom, her sovereignty and her independence, 
and that any future treaties and agreements which she may negotiate 
uyith Britain will be freely negotiated.” 



41 






9 

The estiihlishment of the Republic^ 
the signing of the pact of alliance^ 
and the declaration of cf state of tear, 
far from giving aid and comfort to Japan, 
resulted in iletriment to her tear efforts 

I T has been here shown that long before the establishment of the re- 
public on October 14, 1943, the Japanese army of occupation had 
acquired control of all aspects of Philippine life. If there was any- 
thing that had so far escaped such control, it could have been ex- 
tended with more facility directly by the Japanese military adminis- 
tration than through the government of an ostensibly independent 
republic. The actual extent of that control in the economic, military, 
ideological and political fields has been discussed. The military as- 
pect, which presumably the Japanese wanted to stress in giving in- 
dependence*’ to the Philippines and having the new republic sign a 
pact of alliance, needs further examination. 

The entire national economy, which of course was inseparable 
from the overall plan for the prosecution of the war by Japan, had 
already been mobilized by direct fiat of the army of occupation. In 
the strictly military sense, it was equally true that Japan could achieve 
and had already achieved, by her military administration here, more 
than she could ever hope to do under the republic. By virtue of the 
release of the Filipino war prisoners, Japan had secured from them an 
oath of loyalty to her armed forces. The military administration had 
established constabulary academies under the close and direct super- 
vision of army officers, apparently to train Filipinos for active police 
work. By force and deception, both the Japanese army and navy were 
recruiting Filipino laborers and then mahing them serve as yoin , or 
members of their auxiliary army. Neighborhood associations organized 
under Japanese orders were required in certain cases to send regu- 
larly a quota of male members to work in airfields and other militarx'^ 
installations. There was a seamen s institute and a naval school to 



42 










instruct and train young Filipinos for eventual service in the Japanese 
merchant marine and in the Japanese navy, res])ectively. All these 
activities were handled directly by the Japanese. 

The establishment of the republic did not enhance Japan s system 
of control. On the contrary, legal and technical difficulties were placed 
in the path of its execution. Talcing advantage of the proclamation 
of independence and claiming sovereignty for the new republic, the 
Filipino leaders began protesting against the practices and methods 
which the Japanese had been accustomed to carry’ out under their 
military administration. They protested against the impressing of Fili- 
pinos into military^ service. They ashed for the release of those who 
were originally enticed into working in the army and navy as civilian 
employees but later converted, into *yoin *. They protested against the 
forcible requisitioning of private houses for the use of military^ person- 
nel. Through the issuance of the amnesty proclamation by Mr. Laurel. 
m*any guerrillas were released from detention in Japanese prison camps 
and were thus afforded greater security’^ and freedom of movement while 
continuing to engage in their resistance activities. In the foregoing 
matters it may be said that the efforts of the new government met 
with some success. 

In other matters the situation remained much the same as it was 
before the republic was established. But while the Japanese continued 
to exercise blanket control, they had to go through certain formalities 
for the sake of appearances, as a concession to the pretended inde- 
pendence and sovereignty of the republic: and this opened the way 
for the dilly-dallying attitude of the Filipino officials, which meant 
loss of time for the Japanese, much to the detriment of their war ef- 
forts. 

For instance, with respect to natural resources, Japan had the 
right, recognized by international law in a military occupant, to ex- 
ploit and develop such resources, these being of the public domain, 
for the purpose of promoting her war efforts. That right she exer- 
cised to the fullest extent by direct military action. After independ- 
ence, the Japanese continued to exploit and utilize the natural re- 
sources of the country, but from the legal standpoint they had to re^on 
with the limitations provided for in the constitution of the republic, 
which required that the matter be the subject of agreement with the 
president. 

Under the constitution the Filipinos were supposed to enjoy cer- 
tain rights and immunities, the same as those enumerated in the bill 
of rights in the constitutions of the Commonwealth and of the United 
States. Unreasonable searches and summary arrests by Japanese sol- 
diers and military police, seizures of private properties without due 
process of law, military punishment of civilian offenders, involuntary 
service in army and navy construction works^all these were the sub- 
jects of energetic protests by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
republic, which on many occasions so embarrassed the Japanese that 

43 



they had to resort to trickery to deny such practices, as by securing 
through intimidation and duress, affidavits and other declarations of 
denial from those Filipinos in whose behalf the protests were nicicle. 

With regard to Japanese subjects in the Philippines, the military 
occupation bad placed them, by special proclamation, on the same 
footing as Filipino citizens insofar as certain rights reserved to the 
latter before the war were concerned. Upon the establishment of the 
republic, the Japanese returned as a matter of law to their former 
srati^, inasmuch as the limitations to the rights of foreigners under 
the Commonwealth Constitution were reproduced entirely in tlie Con 
stitution of the Republic. Another legal consequence of the new 
set-up was to place all Japanese, with the exception of officers and 
personnel of the army and navy, under the jurisdiction of Philippine 
laws, and to abrogate all military ordinances, regulations and pro- 
nouncements otherwise inconsistent with the constitution or repugnant 
to the sovereignty of the republic. For instance, the military ordin- 
ance imposing the death penalty on any Filipino who woidd kill or 
injure a Japanese soldier or civilian became obsolete since the inaugu- 
ration of the republic, and the military authorities were informed ac- 
cordingly. 



These innovations resulting from the establishment of the republic 
were true horn the strictly legal point of view. As a matter of fact, 
lowever, the supreme authority continued to be lodged in the Jaj)- 
anese armed lorces, and the Japanese persisted in living above and 
e>on the pale of Philippine laws while the Filipinos continued to 
e subjected to military control, and in many cases even to the whims 
and^lancies of Japanese civilians. The Filipinos, to a man, bitterly 
^ ^ I advent of independence and of the republic 

was little, if any, protection against the known rigours and atrocities 
occupying forces. All this goes to show that the grant 
ol independence and the establishment of the republic were intended 
nothing but a sham, a scheme of make-believe, 
f ^ was but tbe result of Japan’s pre-existing plan 

o establishing, for propaganda purposes, a co-prosperity sphere com- 
pose o countries which, though ostensibly independent, would be 
in rea ity her colonies and dependencies. It was also part of theit 
p an t at these independent” countries would be, as they were, forced 
o cone ude treaties of alliance with Japan, ranging from a joint- 
detense agreement in the case of the Philippi nes, supposed to become 
opera ive in the event of invasion of Philippine territory by a third 
povver, to outright offensive and defensive alliance coupled with im- 
mediate decimation of war in the cases of Nanking China, Siam, 
rench Indo-China and Burma, and implemented bv their active mili- 
tary cooperation with Japan for the prosecution of the war. 



As far as the Philippines was concerned, Japan derived no benefit 
whatever Irom the pact of alliance which she could not have derived 
without it. Direct military occupation was indeed a far more potent 
force than the pact for all purposes envisaged here by Japan. Tbe 



44 



fact that Article 4 of the Pact, which states that ‘the matters of detail 
necessary for I he execution of the present Pact shall he determined 
through consultations between the authorities concerned of the High 
contracting Parties/* was never put into execution, shows further not only 
the perfunctory^ character of the said Pact but also that it had never 
been intended for any material or practical accomplishment. Its con- 
templated value, on the part of Japan, was merely from the point of 
view of propaganda, and in this respect, as we shall presently see, it 
was an utter failure. 

The popular resolution which the .:|00.000 (this figure was fur- 
nished by the 7 rihune) people who attended the Luneta public rally 
on May 6, 19 ^ 15 , on the occasion of Tojo s visit, were made to approve 
unanimously^ had pledged a larger measure of cooperation with Japan 
than the Pact of All iance it self. 

1 lie text of that ‘‘popular ” resolution is as follows: 

“WHEREAS. in the brief span of one year since the com- 
plete and unconditional surrender of the United States Forces, 
the New Philippines had made tangible and positive progress 
toward national unity, spiritual rejuvenation, and economic re- 
habilitation as a result of the high ideals and enlightened poli- 
cies of the Imperial Japanese Government and the unfailing guid- 
ance and valuable assistance ol the ?^lilitarv Administration in 
the Phil ippines; 

WHEREAS, the personal visit to the Philippines of the 
foremost leader of Japan, Pn^mier General Hidehi Tozyo, whose 
utterances have always demonstrated a genuine love for the Phil- 
ippines and the Filipinos, is a momentous and historical event in 
the annals of our country; and 

“WHEREAS, the Great Empire of Japan, through the Im- 
perial Japanese Forces and the Military Administration in the 
Philippines, has always shown benevolent attitude towards the 
Filipinos and unselfish solicitude for their welfare: 

“NOW, THEREFORE. BE IT RESOLVED, that the Fi- 
lipino people formally and solemnly assembled at the Luneta in 
the City of Manila extend, as they hereby extend, a warm and 
cordial welcome to the illustrious Visitor, Premier General Hi- 
dehi Tozyo; and 

“BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that this solemn assem- 
bly express, as it hereby expresses, the firm determination of the 
Filipino people to exert their utmost to merit the honor of 
pendence, to extend their fullest collaboration in the successful 
prosecution of the Greater East Asia War until final victory is 
won by the Empire of Japan, and to surmount any obstacle that 
may be found in their path to freedom and nationhood; 

“BE IT FINALLY RESOLVED, that this solemn assembly 
express, as it hereby expresses, the undying gratitude of the Fili- 

45 



pino people for the chivalrous leadership of the Great Japanese 
Empire and its unprecedented benevolent policy towards the 
Philippines and the Filipinos." 

Nobody knew at the time who was the author of the resolution, 
but everybody knew that its preparation was directed by the Japanese 
military administration. It was read by the master of ceremonies at 
t e rally who then asked if the 400,000" people who composed the 
made-to-order audience approved it. There was a roar, but whether 
or approval or disapproval was not certain. At any rate the master 
ot cerernonies announced that the resolution had been unanimously 
approved, alter which Mr. Vargas presented its text to Premier Tojo. 

P not^d, that resolution pledged more to Japan than the 

ac o iance. For propaganda purposes it had even greater value, 
ecause 1 was ostensibly adopted by the Filipino people themselves, 
unlike the pact, which appears to have been concluded by the puppet 
ea o s a e and signed only by his representative. Are those 400,000 
Irilipinos assembled at the Luneta on May 6 , 1945. who were made to 
express their approval of the resolution, guilty of collaboration? 



The pact .of cclliciitce^ a hoomevana 
as Japanese propaganda 

^Hl^nce serve Japan s ends as an instru- 
them ^ regards to the Filipinos, it only convinced 

Kypocrisy of JapL’s solemn 
did rmh ^ the Sovereignty of the Philippines, because it 

' I ,f ^*^|rnize the abuses and atrocities committed by the Japanese 
an e in rmgemerat of the sovereign rights which the Philippines was 
suppose o ave if she were really independent. It increased the 
ee mg o ear, hatred, foreboding and distrust of the Filipinos to such 
^ extent t at as the months went by the size and determination of 
e resistance lorces were considerably augmented. The establishment 
^ ^ signing of the pact of alliance, therefore, had 

no other ellect than to increase the hostility of the Filipinos toward 
Japan, as is invariably the case when insult is added to injury. 

r .1 other countries of East Asia, the conclusion 

o le I ippine-Japan Pact of Alliance produced no better effect, be- 
cause everyone of these countries was familiar with Japanese policies 
I I truth about them. With regard to the outside 

world, the Puct as propaganda was equally futile. Japan s axis part- 
ners certainly did not need to be deceived. They were themselves past 
masters in the ways that Japan employed. Nazi Germany’s dictated 
treaties ol alliance and declarations of war on allied powers exacted 
from Bulgaria, Rumania, Hungary, and other nazi-conquered territo- 
ries were as well-known to Japan as Japan s dictated treaties of al- 
liance und declarations of war on allied powers exacted from the 
countries of East Asia were well-known to Nazi Germany. As to the 
United Nations, conscious even then of certain victory, they could not 



46 



liav^e been weakened, but only became the more determined to defeat 
Japan and luimble her completely for her arrogance. Besides, tlie 
United Nations, aware of the helpless situation in which the countries 
of East Asia found themselves under the sway of Japan s military 
might, knew that such treaties were not the expressions of the free 
will of those vanquished peoples but impositions of Japan s unopposed 
and relentless power. Furthermore, the means employed by Japan to 
exact that pact was neither new nor uncommon in international rela- 
tions. 

Treaties exacteil through coercion not 
unconinuni in the history of nations 

Mention has already been made of the Iiistory of the recent, post- 
V-J Day treaty between Great Britain and Siam. 

1 he fate of the small European countries like Rumania, Bulgaria 
and Finland, first vis-a-vis Nazi Germany, and later vis-a-vis Russia, 
and the fate of the Latin American republics vis-a-vis the United 
States, followed more or less the same pattern. In the first case the 
pressure employed was military; in the second it was diplomatic. But 
in both cases it was equally effective. Those small countries in Europe, 
which, as a result of Hitler’s blitzkrieg, became German satellites, were 
made to declare war against the Alliad powers. When in the wake 
of Russia’s powerful counter-offensive they passed under Russian mili- 
tary control, they 'were made to declare war on Nazi Germany and 
Japan. Argentina, which in fact had pro-Nazi leanings, tried to stand 
pat for a long time but through diplomatic pressure had to give in 
toward the end and declared war on Nazi Germany and Japan. 

Commodore Perry did not have to fire any of his guns to exact 
from the terrorized Japanese Shogun in iS5q the first treaty opening 
certain Japanese ports to American trade. It was enough that his 
black warships were posted conveniently in Yedo Bay. The method 
of ‘persuasion” proved effective. The Shogun yielded and became 
Perry’s “collaborator.” 

And yet the Filipinos under the Japanese occupation, who had 
lost completely the protection of the Commonwealth and of the United 
States, whose armies were thousands of miles away, and found them- 
selves helplessly pitted against the inexorable might of their conqueror, 
like sheep among a pack of wolves, were expected not to sign manifes- 
tos *’ and “appeals” they were ordered to sign; not to write the constitu- 
tion they were ordered to write; not to acquiesce in the independence 
and the “republic” made-to-order for the Philippines; not to enter into 
a so-called pact of alliance they were told to enter into; not to make 
the so-called declaration of war they were ordered to make. Official 
photographs taken by the Japanese propaganda corps on the occasions 
above, mentioned fail to show, it is alleged, that the Filipino leaders 
under the occupation executed those acts of collaboration at the point 
oF the bayonet. No eyiclence of duress indeed! 

47 



True there were Filipinos of acknowledged valor who would have 
chosen different means to save the country, such as hy defying the 
invader and resisting without fear whatever pressure might have been 
brought upon them. But these heroes were not then available. Some 
were in hiding, some lying low in perfect anonymity engaged in profit- 
able undertakings, some living abroad writing bed-time stories aboiil 
their heroic deeds. 



10 



The ileclavation of a state of war not an 
of f -shoot of the pact of aUiauee — Another 
proilact of Japanese coercion 



S OME would say llial if nolliing else, one concrete result arose from 
the pact of alliance, namely, the declaration by the republic of 
the existence of a state of war with the United States and Great Bri- 
tain. Even without it, however, Japan had been assuming all along 
that the Philippines was already in the war on her side. This was 
clear from the statements of Japanese leaders before and after the re- 
public was established and the pact was concluded. It was in fact 
implied in the Japanese idea of the co-prosperity sphere. How far that 
implication was translated into actual militarv cooperation depended 
solely on the ability of each member of the sphere to resist Japanese 
pressure. 



On December 8, 1942, that is, almost a year before independence 
was proclaimed and the Pact of Alliance signed, and almost two years 
lie lore the declaration of the existence of a state of war, Syozo Murata, 
then the highest adviser to the Japanese Military Administration, in a 
radio broadcast posed this question to the Filipinos: “Do you at any 
lime say to yourself that you are fighting together with Japan against 
the United States and Great Britain? Or are you inclined to say that 
Japan is doing the fighting and all that is necessary is to stand by and 
wait for whatever orders may come to you?** And he ended his mes- 
sage by reminding the Filipinos once again of the need for a dynamic 
outlook upon the great war. and to comprehend its significance, and to 
visualize its history-making consequences. “ 

In the same vein was the following editorial of the Tribune of 
December 22, 1942: 



With the rosy thoughts of Christmas and the Year-End sea- 
son overwhelming us, are we not forgetting that we are fighting 
a war? 



49 



Have not tlie war Year-KncI measures initialed by ibe Jap- 
anese, our friend, made us less conscious of llie existence of the 
Anglo-Saxons, our enemy? 

* ♦ * ♦ ♦ It 

We reiterate: We must once again affirm our readiness to 
collaborate witli Japan in fighting Our War to a glorious finish. 

On December 8, 1Q45* that is, a year before President Laurel was 
made to proclaim the existence of a state of war between the Philip- 
pines and the Allied Powers, General S. Kuroda, then the Commander- 
in-Chief of the Japanese Army in the Philippines, made the following 
statement: 

Greater East Asia War is not only Japan s war. It is neces- 
sary that the Filipino people recognize this fact with utmost 
clarity. In order for the Philippines to become a strong, just and 
a great independent nation, it is necessary that each and every 
Filipino should grasp firmly this undeniable reality. It is neces- 
sary here to elaborate upon the fact that only in the attainment 
of complete victory in the war through collaboration with Japan 
that the nations of Greater East Asia can really consolidate their 
independence. If there be a Filipino who believes 
that there will be no change in the development of the Philip- 
pines as an independent nation whether or not Japan wins or 
America wins in this war, there could be no greater error. 

That the existence of a pact of alliance with Japan was not the 
reason lor the cLclaration of a state of war between the Philippines 
and the United States and Great Britain, was evident from the Tribune 
editorial of September 29, 1944, which said in part: 

the war aims of the Philippine Republic are 
identical to those of Greater East Asia. Ho\Vever, our peculiar 
position at the present stage of the global conflict and as a recent 
eritrant into active warfare gives our war aims a distinct character 
which should be clarified and amplified in the eyes of the world 
and those in our country who may have missed its import and 
significance. After all, no nation just fights for no reason at all, 
and certainly the Philippines cannot afford to stake the life and 
blood of so young a nation without some great reason. 

At the outset, it is safe to assert, with little need of further 
proof, that our Pact of Alliance with Japan alone cannot be and 
has not been the whole reason for our declaring war on America 
dT-T- Everyone knows that immediately after the 

Philippines became an independent republic on October 14, 1943* 
our Government entered into that Pact; and yet, during all the 
followed its signing, neither Japan nor the 
Philippine Government saw the necessity for the Philippines to 
declare herself in a state of war with the common enemy. 

Independently of the Pact, however, when against the pro- 
testations of amity which our President addressed to the nations 



50 



of tlie world in general and the plea for respect of our territorial 
integrity and independent sovereignty^ addressed to America in 
particular, American planes in large numbers violated our sover- 
eignty and integrity^ several times earlier this month, the Filipi- 
nos were left no choice but to take the only honorable course 
already taken. 

A ileclavation of war on paper only 

At any^ rate, in the case of the Philippines, every^body^ knows just 
what Japan got out of the declaration of the existence of a state of war. 
It was exactly^ nothing. It was nothing more or less than a declara- 
tion of the existence of a state of war on paper, and just as worthless. 
Despite the relentless pressure brought to bear by the Japanese, the de- 
claration was not made until one y^ear after the pact was signed, and 
then only after the Americans had begun their round-the-clock bomb- 
ing of military" objectives in the Philippines preparatory" to actual land- 
ings, which came less than a month later. It was made with a simulta- 
neous declaration by Mr. Laurel that not one single Filipino would be 
conscrjiDted into the Japanese forces, or into a Philippine army" to fight 
with them. This in itself was a distinct achievement, considering by 
comparison the developments in the other countries of East Asia 
which came under the domination of Japan: the signing of an offensive 
and defensive treaty" of alliance by each of them, the simultaneous or 
otherwise early declarations of war against the United States and Great 
Britain, and the active military" aid given to the Japanese fighting for- 
^s. It must be remembered that Burma, not to speak of Siam, Indo- 
Ghina, Indonesia, Nanking China, Chandra Boses *Free India,’* 
raised, under Ba iVIaw s War First principle, a sizable army to fight 
on the side of Japan. 

Republic's luUewarnt attitude towanls the war 
situation — It irks the Japanese 

During that period of time when the Japanese High Command 
was exerting relentless pressure on President Laurel for a declaration 
of war against the United States and Great Britain, the Tribune em- 
barked on an editorial campaign toward that end to the extent of 
making mortifying allusions to the lukewarm attitude of the Filipino 
officials as compared with the courageous determination of Finland, 
Burma and Indonesia. ' Finland’s Determination and Ours was the 
title of the Tribune editorial of July 8, 1944, which reads in part: 

Several day"s ago, we commented editorially on the fate of a 
small, but honorable country"^Finland. Threatened by the power- 
ful forces of Soviet Russia, the small strip of territory" forming 
an obstruction to the tip of the Scandinavian peninsula, which 
would give the Red forces another point of attack on the Euro- 
pean continent, was given an ultimatum to bow submissively to 
the might of communistic necessity or be wiped off the map. 

51 



National honor and dignity dictated resistance against all 
odds, no matter what cost. In Finland’s hour of need, Germany 
came to the rescue and, loyal to all honorable allies, pledged to 
keep her word to collaborate with Finland militarily until victory 
shall have been achieved and Finland’s honor saved. 

Finland is a small nation, geographically, militarily, even eco- 
nomically. But Finland understands the true meaning of honor 
and national dignity; and, between an inexpensive dishonor and 
a fight to the death with honor, Finland finds no choice and acts 
with manful courage. 



The Tribune editorial of July 26, 1944, entitled “Our Sole Aim 
Now”, reads partly as follows: 

In our insularity, however, and on account of the presence 
here of some elements of ambiguous loyalties, we lose sight of 
our Oriental originality and racial heritage. We overlook so 
many vital and fundamental conditions of our birthright, matters 
most precious to the Filipino heroes whose memory we have 
learned to venerate. It is well that, now and then, we are pri- 
vileged to be reminded by fellow-Asians who keep the ideals of 
cdl proud East Asians aflame in their breasts, about these precious 
things that we are forgetting. 

is that no single East Asian faction or group has 
to obstruct the heroic efforts of one billion peoples to 
fight honorably for the emancipation and continued freedom of all 
peoples and nations in this part of the world from any further 
intervention or exploitation by the self-acclaimed “superior peo- 
ples of the world. Our common destiny must be achieved, God 
//^L^ billion East Asians fighting to the death in close 

collaboration. There are no ifs and buts, no alternative that can 
be taken with honor. 



n freedom as a nation is at stake. In the words of 

f ir n The long-cherished desire for independence was 

lullilled only on October 14, 1943. Mark you, independence did 
not come from America. It should be remembered that independ- 
ence cannot be realized by any country as a matter of gift or 
oouniy from another. A nation that is determined to be free must 
be able to defend its freedom and lay for itself the basis of its 
stability.” 

We peoples of the East are fighting for our national exist- 
ence, and for everything we hold dear. It is for us to pool our 
resources and stand together in this fight for freedom, undaunted 
by temporary sufferings and setbacks, till victory is achieved. 
This should be our sole aim now.” 

It is our sole aim. All things that stand in the way to the 
fulfillment of this aim must be sacrificed. 



And the same papers editorial of September 13, 1944. entitled 
“One Duty Before East Asia”, said among other things: 



52 



Tlie clearest and most succinct appreciation of the situation 
which all East Asians must face has been made by Nainggandaw 
Adipadi Ba Maw of Burma, in commenting upon Premier Koiso s 
speech to further stimidate the war efforts of East Indies. **After 
this,” declared the Adipadi, “there is only one duty^ before the 
East Asian peoples: it is to live and die together in the defense 
of our racial liberty and honor.” 

Speaking further, he said, “Free Asian nations will from this 
day onward guard the several gateways of East Asia; Burma in 
the west, the Philippines in the east, and Indonesia in the south. 

Wliat shall we do? We still recall President Laurel an- 
swering that question on the eve of his election as President of 
the Ind ependent Philippine Republic: “1 hat is a question to 
which the manly has only one answer. When a man is aggres- 
sed. it is manly to defend his honor.” 

The following day, September 14. 1944. the army mouthpiece in 
another editorial entitled Our Stand Becomes More Definite”, com- 
mented as follows: 

The logic of events has led up to this clarification of our 
^and as a worthy East Asian nation and an ally of Nippon. 
Only yesterday. Burma’s staunch leader and. like the President, 
a champion of East Asian freedom gained through victory of 
this war, was quoted as saying, ”there is only one duty before 
the East Asian peoples: it is to live and die together in the de- 
fense of our racial liberty and honor. Free Asian nations will 
from this day onward guard the several gateways of East Asia; 
Burma in the west, the Philippines in the east, and Indonesia in 
the south. The Indonesian leader (Dr. Soekarno) has, likewise, 
made the stand of his people for all-out collaboration in this war 
utimistahable. 

It is but natural that the President of the Republic represent- 
ing a people no less conscious of the ideals that this war is seek- 
ing to uphold and of the destiny of this nation now tipping the 
balance in this critical period, a people grateful for the many 
gifts thus far received, of which liberation and independence are 
foremost, should make a more definite stand of whole-hearted and 
more effective cooperation in the winning of the common war of 
East Asms billion peoples. 

The timid and the weak should here be reminded that there 
are many more ways of fighting a war than on the battlefield. 
Even Japan, herself, the leader-nation in the vanguard of this 
great struggle for the freedom of all East Asia, has not sent all 
her subjects to the warfront to fight with bullet and bayonet. 
There are those loyal and patriotic people who work in the foun- 
dries and the mines and the munitions factories. And there are 

53 



those no less patriotic women and children who stay at home and 
wage the national battle right on the home-front. 

In these many ways, the Filipinos can allocate themselves 
and see in what particular way every individual’s powers can 
best be employed so that, when the combined forces of all East 
consolidated and put into one total and sustained 
^TT shall be ours in the end to ensure the freedom of 

all. 

The declaration of a state of war was on legal 
and moral grounds void ^^ab initio^^ — With the 
simultaneous announcement that it did not 
carry with it niilitarg conscription^ it was a 
mere scrap of paper 

The existence of a state of war was declared when it coidd no 
ong^ be avoided without inviting the direst consequences in terms 
ol wholesale and merciless reprisals and without defeating the avowed 
purpose of the Filipino participation in the government to spare the 
destruction of Filipino lives. TTiey had only to remember that one of 
the earliest (January 2. 1942) proclamations of the Japanese Com- 
mander-in-Chief warned the inhabitants of the Philippines that **com- 
mitting hostile acts against the Japanese Forces in any manner *^not 

to obey their orders was to commit a hostile act^*'will lead the whole 
country to ashes.” 

. 1 such state of war would have been declared with or 

wit out any pact of alliance. If for some time the Japanese pressure 
cou be resisted, with actual American bombings of Philippine ter- 
ritory lurth^r refusal became impossible. But Mr. Laurel knew, as did 
his ministers and the members of his Council of State, just what the 
declaration was good for. 

As far as the Allied Powers were concerned, the declaration itself 
serve t em notice of its nullity. The declaration recited, as one of 
the considerations behind it. the fact that “the Republic of the Phil- 
ippines as entered into a Pact of Alliance with Japan, based on mu- 
ua respect of sovereignty and territories, to safeguard the territorial 
integrity and independence of the Philippines.” To anyone reading 
IS statement the phrase based on mutual respect of sovereignty and 
territories was pure surplusage, and was neither necessary nor mate- 
ria to the apparent purpose of the declaration. But it was expressly 
inserted in order to make it plain for all to see that inasmuch as Japan 
never accorded respect to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
^ f^ct known to the whole world in general and to 

the Allied Powers in particular^and therefore never fulfilled the basic 
condition of the pact, no obligations whatsoever on the part of the 
Philippines originated from or were created under said pact, and that 

•54 



if slie declared the existence of a state of war it was not because of 
llie null-and-void Pact of Alliance but because she was forced by 
Japan to do so. 

To give point and unqualified confirmation to that implied an- 
nouncement of the declaration s nullity, Mr. Laurel announced at the 
same time that the Filipinos would not fight and would not be called 
upon to fight on the side of the Japanese, and deliberately failed to 
submit the said declaration to the National Assembly for ratification, 
as required by the constitution of the republic. The Republic’s posi- 
tion was unmistakably clear and the intention of its higb officials evi- 
dent. They knew that the Americans, constitutionally minded as they 
are, would not but instantly perceive that, in failing to comply with 
a constitutional requirement affecting the validity" of the declaration in 
question, said officials intended to serve notice to the American people 
that the Republic was coerced by the Japanese into making it. 

Furthermore, that declaration was in the eyes of the Japanese 
themselves a mere joke. General Yamashita, who assumed command 
of the Japanese Army in the Philippines some time after this declara- 
tion of a state of war was made, reportedly commented on it on the 
occasion of a visit to President Laurel, saying that a declaration of war 
without military conscription was something that he could not under- 
stand. 



11 



“JUakapili” replaces republie 

T~*HE Japanese could suffer ifie oljstruclionisl and dilly-dallying lac- 
. 1“*^ nigh officials of the Laurel government for some time. 

JDut when this Attitude continued even in the face ol the ever growin«:j 
seriousness of the war situation, they finally came to realize lliat it 
would not be through said government that they could secure from 
the rihpinos any degree of cooperation in llie carrying out of ilieir 
war p ans ere. This non-collaboration allilude readied llie point 
ent Laurel even allowed as many as seventy-five percent 
o le consta ulaiy force, including officers as well as enlisted men 

an ers o lis own presidential guard, to desert and join tlie 

erri as carrying away with them a large quantity of firearms and 
ammuni ion, without doing anything to stop or prevent further deser- 
lons an without punishing the officers guilty of negligence or 
connivance. Muntinglupa Bilibid Prison was twice allowed to be 
rai e y the guerrillas in order to liberate the ]iolitical prisoners. 

^ V such a state of affairs the Japanese disarmed the remaining 

^ detachments and arrested and later executed those con- 

s a u ary o icers whom they believed to be in conspiracy with the 
deserters and placed Muntinglupa under their direct control. 

ih therefore, had to accomplish practical results along 

e me ot cooperation, they had to do away with the RepulDlic and 
R ^ machinery of their own, over and above and in lieu of the 
epu ic. ut no coup d etat was to be executed, no outward violence 
to e resorted to, in order to avoid unpleasant repercussions in Wash- 
ington, and even in Tokyo. The scheme had to be carried out smoothly 
and without Haw. 

“T completing the organization of the 

League of Patriotic Filipinos,” or MAKAPlLf. to be headed by Ra- 
mos, Kicarte and their political followers who were well-known for 
their pro-Japanese sentiments and whom the Japanese always trusted 
lor their sincere adherence and loyal cooperation to Japan. It is 
very signilicant that the declared paramount purpose of this organiza- 

56 



lion was the fulfillment of the obligations assumed by the Republic of 
the Philippines in the pact of alliance with the empire of Japan, by 
* col laborciting unreservedly and unstintedly with the Imperial Japanese 
Army and Navy in the Philippines in such ways and means as may 
in the judgment of the Imperial Japanese forces and the Association 
be deemed necessary and fruitful.” The implication was clear: the 
republic assumed certain obligations it did not wish or care to fulfill. 
The MAKAPILI would fulfill them for the republic and the republic 
would have nothing to do with the ways and means of carrying out 
the all-out collaboration between the Japanese forces and the MAKA- 
PILI. That would be the exclusive business of the MAKAPILI and the 
Imperial Japanese forces. The republic could not be trusted. The re- 
public had to be, as it was, left out of the entire scheme. 

That tlie object of the Japanese high command was to have 
the MAKAPILI replace the republic in the tash of according to the 
Japanese forces the much needed aid and assistance, is glaringly shown 
in the editorial published by the Japanese army mouthpiece. The 
Tribune, on the occasion of the official launching of the MAKAPILI. 
1 he editorial constituted not only a severe indictment of the republic 
for its inability to fulfill the national ideal of defending the freedom 
of the Phil ippines, but an exidlant expression of hope that the MA- 
KAPILI would succeed wliere the republic failed miserably. The edi- 
torial runs as follows: 

“MAKAPILI” IN THE VANGUARD 

The new association of patriotic Filipinos, hnown as Ma- 
hapili”, has been organized to fulfill the national ideal of de- 
fending the freedom of the Republic of the Philippines, in essence 
the same as lliat which fired Lapu-Lapu to launch a handful 
ol poorly armed Filipinos against Magellan in the shallow waters 
of Mactan and gave courage to a war-weary band of Filipino 
revolutionaries under Aguinaldo to pit their strength against De- 
wey’s navy and Generals Anderson and Merritt’s superior army. 

Lest the abstract-oratory of a superficial past envelop the true 
meaning of “defending our freedom” to a confused present, we 
will attempt to clothe the expression in the more concrete terms 
of present-day necessity. 

Since the Republic cannot pride itself with having the nec- 
essary army, navy and air forces of a warring nation in full dress, 
the passive thing to do would have been to rely wholly upon 
the splendid organization and spirit of the Nippon forces to de- 
fend our shores against American invasion. True it is that Japan 
alone can cope with the situation. Both as a matter of neces- 
sity and as a matter of fulfilling the terms of a sacred treaty of 
alliance, Japan is called upon to do so. In fact she has been 
doing so all along. 



57 



But the national self-resnect and the ardor of our Iradilional 
patriotism do not allow the Filipinos— or that element among us, 
at any rate, who have not lost the fire of the eternal flame^ — to 
just sit by while our cities and civilian centers are being bombed 
and burned and our helpless fellow-countrymen driven to untold 
economic misery or otherwise mercifully saved by shrapnel and 
machinegun strafing from further torture. Hence, the Makapili. 

Now, how to defend our freedom under the circumstances. 
Defending our freedom does not necessarily consist in organizing 
mechanized divisions, manufacturing thousands of planes and 
manning them with expert Frlinino aviators and paratroops, build- 
ing a first-class navy overnight. There are other ways, just as 
there are various ways to skin a cat. 

Preserving peace and order within our territory would be 
quite as important a phase of defending our freedom as actually 
meeting the enemy in the forefront. Preserving peace and order 
is the basic condition upon which we have to premise our na- 
tional self-preservation. The reason is too obvious to require an 
elaborate explanation: suffice it to say that if the enemy from 
within— the economic saboteurs, the rumor-mongers, the terrorists, 
confederates of American domination who wish 
to deliver Philippine freedom to the enemy for a consideration- 
should succeed in destroying the nation, there would be no nation 
to enjoy the freedom which this war is keeping to snatch and 
preserve for the inhabitants of this sphere. 

Another phase of safeguarding that freedom and very closely 
related to the peace and order movement is the question of sec- 
uring sufficient foodstuffs for the nation. A hungry people can- 
not have or enjoy peace and order, or have much energy to want 
to be free. Hence, will the Makapili mobilize the entire nation 
for food production and the procurement of essential supplies so 
necessary in winning the war. 

There are many ways, let us repeat, of defending our free- 
dom. And any Filipino with courage, vision, and patriotism may 
• P^^ce and a participation in the Makapili and there remain 
in the vanguard in defense of our freedom. 

(The Tribune, Saturday. Dec. Q. 1Q44, p. 6) 

At the official launching of the MAKA^PILI, its “Tandis” or sup- 
reme head, in his inaugural address brazenly declared that the MAKA- 
PILI would be independent of the republic and subject only to the 
authority of the Japanese Commander-in-Chief. General Yamashita 
and the members of his staff were present on that occasion, presiding 
over the affair, and were visibly exultant over Ramos* manifestation. 
When President Laurel s turn to speak came, he rose angrily and pick- 
ing the gauntlet thrown by Ramos, in a thundering voice said; 

58 



* There is only one Republic of the Philippines, to which we 
owe allegiance, and which we must defend with our sinews and 
blood. This Republic is the one of which I happen to be the 
President. 

“As long as I hold and exercise the authorih% 1 cannot con- 
sent or permit any organization, political in character, by indivi- 
dual Filipinos or groups of Filipinos, to exist unless that organ- 
ization is subject to the authority and control of that Republic. 

“ In the interest of self-preservation, and even of the conser- 
vation of the joint understanding of Japanese and Filipinos in 
establishing that Republic, we cannot afford to permit the exist- 
ence of any Filipino organization which should be beyond the 
control of, or independent from, the overwhelming authority of 
the independent government of that Republic. Otherwise, the 
result would be disintegration and eventual destruction of that 
government.” 

That was on December S, 1944. Two weehs later, or on Decem- 
ber 22. in order that the MAKAPILI might be given free hand in run- 
ning the entire government in Manila and provinces for the benefit 
and aid of the Japanese forces, President Laurel and all the members 
ol his cabinet, and Chief Justice Yulo. Speaker Aquino, Generals 
Roxas, Francisco, and Capinpin, were whisked to Baguio under heavy 
military guard to be kept there as virtual prisoners, until Messrs. Laurel, 
Aquino and Osias, and General Capinpin were taken to Tokyo and 
the rest managed to escape from Baguio and crossed to the American 
lines. 

The formation of the MAKAPILI by the Japanese High Com- 
mand and its induction into power to replace the republic proves, 
mqre conclusively than any other evidence, the fulfillment by the of- 
ficials of the republic of the pledge they made to themselves and 
to their people, in the beginning of the republic, that they would use 
it to protect the people and comfort them in their misery and to out- 
smart the Japanese at their own game by thwarting and sabotaging 
their war efforts as much as possible. 



59 



12 



The law of nations as interpreted 
and applied by the United States 

of the incomprehensible aspects of the collaboration issue is 
that those who on the one hand condemn the Filipino leaders who 
were rorced to serve in the two governments during the Japanese occu- 
pation, are prone to excuse, on the other hand, the employees who 
served in minor or subordinate positions. They forget that if some 
ind ot government was necessary at all, because “order was to be 
preserved, police regulations maintained, crime prosecuted, properly 
protected, contracts enforced, marriages celebrated, estates settled, and 
ranster and descent of property regulated precisely as in time of peace,*’ 
such government could not exist with only subordinate employees but 
necessarily with officials above them. 

If justice was to be administered, the courts of first instance had 
to lunction; but they could not function without judges, because cases 
(^uld not be heard and decided by mere clerks and stenographers. 

^ *L ^ decisions of these courts were to be reviewed by a higher 
court, both und^ the constitution of the Republic and under the Con- 
^itution or the Commonwealth, there had to be necessarily a Supreme 
^ourt, and in the Supreme Court a Chief Justice. By the same token 
other departments of the government were necessary, “in order that the 
ordinary pursuits and business of society may not be unnecessarily de- 
ranged, and as each of them had to function under a chief (whether 
called Secretary. Commissioner or Minister), so all of them should be 
under the supervision of one head in order that their different functions 
could be coordinated. 

When the first Council of State and the Executive Commission 
were organized upon orders of the Commander-in-Chief of the Japanese 
lorces, there was not the slightest indication that the persons to con- 
stitute those bodies would be called upon to execute acts of a political 
nature. Neither the letter signed by the thirty odd members of the 
original Council of Stale nor Order No. i addressed to IVTr. Vargas, 

60 



nor the latter s statement to the press immediately thereafter, show that 
they would be made to do anything with a political color. But, as ex- 
pressed by Professor Hyde in his International Law Chiefly as Inter- 
preted and Applied by the United States” (iQ45 Edition), ‘‘the occupant 
is likely to regard himself as clothed with freedom to endeavor to im- 
pregnate the people who inhabit the area concerned with his own 
political ideology and to make the endeavor successful by various forms 
of pressure exerted upon enemy officials who are permitted to retain 
the exercise of normal governmental functions. They had been 

in office for some time when orders or directives began to be is- 
sued by the Commander-in-Chief and by the Director of the military 
administration, enjoining upon them the execution of political acts, 
such as making speeches, broadcasts and press statements on the sub- 
ject of the co-prosperity sphere and germane Japanese propaganda te- 
nets, or on the subject of the dissolution of all political parties to give 
way lor the organization of the KALIBAPI, and other acts which cul- 
minated in the proclamation of independence and the establishment of 
the republic. 

They coidd not then withdraw without appearing openly as 
pro-Americans, anti-orientals. tinti-Japanese. and enemies of the free- 
dom of Asia cind of the independence of the Philippines, and with- 
out incurring the grave consequences that such open attitude entailed. 
For the Japanese not only would have imposed punitive measures upon 
them, but would have chosen, to take their places, other men who 
would prove more tractable and yielding, if not actually of pro-Japanese 
inclinations and turn of mind, with calamitous results for the people. 

Had their services not been available.” President Osmena declared, 
”... the result would have been calamitous and the injuries in- 
flicted to our body politic beyond cure.” 

These Filipino leaders could not have foreseen at the time they were 
told to serve in the provisional Council of State or in the Philippine 
Executive Commission that they would be eventually required to do 
such acts of political complexion, as this is not countenanced by in- 
ternational law. But one thing is the prohibition to a belligerent 
from doing certain acts, and quite another thing is the helpless sit- 
uation of the inhabitants who are forced to obey orders which the 
law of nations does not allow. The Hague regulations in fact 
penalize a nation that violates the laws of war. A belligerent 
party which violates the provisions of said regulations (with re- 
spect to the laws and customs of war on land) shall, if the case de- 
mands, be liable to pay compensation. It shall be responsible for acts 
committed by persons forming part of its armed forces. I\o penalty 
of course is imposed upon the inhabitants who are compelled to obey 
orders in violation of such regulations. It may be noted that all the 
prohibitions and injunctions in the Hague Regulations are addressed 
to the belligerent and not to the helpless inhabitants of the occupied 
territory. Thus it is prohibited for any army of occupation to compel 
the inhabitants of such territory to take the oath of allegiance to the 

61 



Kostile power but if in spite of the prohibition the army of occupation 
does compel the inhabitants, the responsibility is not theirs but of the 
belligerent. 

It seems to have been laid down as a poslulale by certain official 
quarters both in the Philippines and in Washington that mere occu- 
pancy of high positions in the governments established by the Japanese 
during their occupation constituted collaboration in the treasonable 
sense, this is the a priori assumption in the directives calling for a 
ZT f • Congress and in other posi- 

hTl.cI and economic life of the nation. From 

I i . ° view^ ^and justice can be achieved only by paving 

heed to the lavv-this is an erroneous assumption. It ignores the rights. 

Tnd^nbl^Ti' ^ ^ occupaut and the corresponding rights 

if '°r of tlie territory occupied. It fails to 

nnrl fliJ* f f ^ under military coercion by the enemy 

and their total lack of protection from the legitimate government. 

18 iSos' if ll’o Secretary of War on July 

i^' that the first effect of the military occupation of the 

thefnhab severance of the former political relations of 

ihni “if. * f ^ establishment of a new political power.” and 

•inrl irr. ^ ° military occupant are absolute and supreme 

itants ” operate upon the political condition of the inhab- 

“thp fin ’ ^ ^ because, according to Rrofessor Hyde, opere citato, 
power tn^Tv <Juring the period of occupancy, deprived of 

the relinn * s right as such. . . This deprivation of power and 

e relinquish of it to the occupant are a direct effect of his achieve- 

honpfl vvuli ^ nations accepts the result as a fact to be rec- 

nf less of the merits of his cause... In consequence 

h occupation the inhabitants of the district find themselves 

^ ^ n new and peculiar relationship to an alien ruler to whom 

^ imposes penalties for disobedience, the law of 
whirK^'/^l ^o long as he does not violate those restrictions 

form^nf '''' Doubtless he enjoys the right to displace all 

hrmair aathoray and to assume at will, to sucn Lent as 

nL? f . -iK functions of government. If the occu- 

rhirl in internationally illegal con- 

undpr h* persons or property within the district 

rirtH / / 7 sovereign is believed to possess a solid 

d^and MI reparation upon the restoration of peace.^^ Art- 
f r ^ Regulations provides that once the authority 

ol the legitimate power has passed into the hands of the occu- 

pan . the latter shall tahe all steps in his power to reestablish 

n pf.p® public order and safety.” Mr. Justice 

• Ii * */p**^^ Supreme Court, in his concurring opinion 

in the Pejaba case (Peralta us Director of Prisons. G. R. No. L-49). 

\ ‘ Manual of Rules of Land Warfare, says 

a in a ^nr 3e ween indeperident nations the army of occupation 

has the right to enact laws and take measures hostile to its enemy. 



62 



for Us purpose was to harass and subdue the latter, and it is not 
bound to respect or preserve the rights of the citizens of the occupied 
territory' under their constitution. ’ The army of occupation may ap- 
point its own officials for every department of the military adminis- 
tration and of every rank, or authorize the loccil authorities to continue 
the exercise of their functions, or retain the existing administration 
under the general direction of an official of the occupant army. Ac- 
cording to Halleck, quoted by Mr. Justice Feria speaking for the Phil- 
ippine Supreme Court in the Go Kim Cham case (Go Kim Cham us. 
Tan Keh and Judge Dizon, G. R. No. L-3), such a government is 
a government imposed by the laws of war, and so far as it concerns 
the inhabitants of such terriloiy\ or the rest of the world, those laws 
alone determine the legality or illegality of its acts. Ihe foregoing 
on the side of the military occupant. On the side of the inhabitants 
of the occupied territory^ Hall (hileniational Law) states that inca- 
pacity on the part of a state to protect its subjects so far sets them 
free to do the best they can for themselves as to render valid any 
bargain actually made by them.” The U. S. Rules of Land War- 
fare provide that it is their duty “to carry on their peaceful pursuits;, 
to behave in an absolutely peaceful manner; to take no part whatever 
in the hostilities carried on; to refrain from all injurious acts towcud 
the troops or in respect of their operations; and to render strict obedi- 
ence to the officials of the occupant.” d his is so^ because, as stated 
by Lawrence (Principles of International Law), the protection and 
good treatment accorded to non-combatants (in enemy-occupied terii- 
tory) is conditional on their good behavior; they must not perform acts 
of war against the invaders while purporting to live under them as 
peaceful civilians; an inhabitant of an occupied territory who 
off stragglers, kills sentinels or gives information to the commander 
of his countr>^’s armies, may be, and probably is. an ardent and de- 
voted patriot, but the usages of war condemn him to death, and the 
safety of the invader may demand his execution. 

It is an accepted principle of international law, declared by the 
best known writers on the subject and by both the Supreme Gourt 
of the United States and the Supreme Court of the Philippines, that 
the power to protect is the foundation of the duty of allegiance, t lat 
therefore, when a state ceases to be able to protect a portion o its 
subjects, it loses its claim upon their allegiance, and they eit ler 1 
rectly pass under a temporary or qualified allegiance to the coriqueror, 
or, as it is also put, being able, in their state of freedom, to en er in o 
a compact with the invader, they tacitly agree to acknowledge his 
sovereignty in consideration of the relinquishment by him of the ex- 
treme rights of war which he holds over their lives and property (Hall, 
p. 467; Kluber, Sec. 256; De Martens, Precis, Sec. 280; Shanks us, 
Dupont, 5 Peters, 246; II Halleck, pp. 462-464; iv Calvo, Sec. 2166); 
that political laws are suspended during the militar^^ occupation of a 
conquered territory, and as a necessary consequence of such occupation 
and domination, the political relations of its people to their ormer 

63 



government are, for the time heing, severed, that is, interrupted or 
suspended so the occupation continues, and the inhabitants 

owe temporary allegiance to the occupant, the allegiance to the gov- 
ernment cle being temporarily suspended (New Orleans us. New 
York Mail Steamship Co.. 20 Wall. 387, 22 U.S. L. ed. 559. citing 
Halleck on International Law and Laws of War, at p. 780, sec. 4; 
Leitensdorler us. Webb. 15 U.S. L. ed. 891; The Fanui. 5 C. Rob. 
106, Shanks us. Dupont, 7 U.S. L. ed. 666); that, by way of histo- 
rical exanyile, the territory of Castine, by the conquest and occupa- 
tion by Oreat Britain, passed under the temporary allegiance and 
^vereignty ol the British sovereign; that the sovereignty ol the United 
States over the territory was suspended during such occupation, so 
that the cf the United States could not be rightfully enforced 

there, or be obligatory upon the inhabitants who remained and sub- 
mitted to ^he conquerors, and the inhabitants cannot be afterwards 
punished jor having acquiesced in the authority that has gained con- 
irol ouertlie place (U. S. us. Rice, the Castine case, Wheaton’s Rep. 
iv. 246, Fleming us. Page, Howard, ix. 605, Cross us. Harrison. Ho- 
ward, xvi. 164; Go Kim Cham us. Tan Keh, supra). 

The following is quoted further from Professor Plyde’s work: 



Possessed of exclusive power to enact laws and administer them, 
t e occupant must regard the exercise by the hostile government of 
t e egis ative or judicial functions, as well as those of an executive or 
a ministrative character, as in defiance of his authority, except as it is 
un er a en with his sanction or cooperation. . . In fulfilling his obli- 
ga ion to restore and ensure, as far as possible, public order and safety, 
G IS gwen latitude with respect to choice of means and mode of 

piocG ure. 1 his freedom may be partly due to the circumstance that 
e occupant IS obliged to consider as a principal object the security, 
support, etriciency and success of his own force in a hostile land in- 
labited by nationals of the enemy. . . The fact needs to be emphasized 
a o resist the assertion of authority by the occupant is essentially 
un aw u . n compelling the inhabitants to give assurance, as by an 
appropria e oat , that they will desist from acts of resistance, the occu- 
pan is mere y acquiring a pledge of obedience to the law, and one 
c IS w lo y unrelated to and consistent with the allegiance of the 
pledgors to their own sovereign . . It may be observed that what the 
cc pan enac s oi ecrees in the exercise of its legislative power must 

^ under occupation, notwithstanding 

the fact that it contradicts and is defiant of the will of the ternlorial sov- 
ereign as exemplified in its then existing legislation. . . The possession 
by the be hgerent occupant of the right to control, maintain or modify 
e aws a are to obtain within the occupied area is an exclusive 
erritoria sovereign driven therefrom cannot compete with 
it on an cuen plane It must ever be borne in mind that the law is sin- 
Q * * lus, ij t e latter attempts interference, its action is a mere 
manifestation of belligerent effort to weaken the enemy. It has no bear- 



64 






"i-f' 



ing upon the legal quality of what the occupant exacts, while it retains 
control. I liLis» if the absent territorial sovereign, through some quasi- 
legislative decree, forbids its nationals to comply with what the occu- 
pant has ordained, obedience to such command within the occupied 
territory would not safeguard the individual from prosecution by the 
occupant . . . The right to pass upon the lawfulness of an act must 
necessarily be the exclusive possession of a single sovereign. Other- 
wise, as has oftentimes been observed, diflering legal consequences 
might be annexed to the same act, rendering it both lawful and un- 
lawful. The right must also, therefore, in every case, belong to that 
sovereign or political power which exercises cont vol over the place where 
the particular act is committed.** 

Tile following passage from “Digest of International Law’ (1945 
edition) by the Honorable Green H. Hackworth, Legal Adviser to the 
Department of State, is quoted by Professor Hyde in his book, wi tK 
reference to tlie broad righls of a belligerent occupant: ‘W military 

occupant, especially one who has conquered and subjugated a country, 
has supreme power over the territory occupied, and to all intents and 
purposes, is the sovereign during the period of occupation. 1 he belli- 
gerent mililary occupant, for example, possesses an unquestioned right 
to regidate all intercourse between the territory under his control and 
the outside world.’’ 

General MacArthur probably had these principles in mind when 
he issued his proclamation of October 2j, IQ44, in which he declared 
the laws now existing in the statute books of the Commonwealth 
of the Phil ippines and the regulations pursuant thereto... in full 
lorce and ellect and legally binding upon the people of the Philip- 
pines, but only “in areas Iree of enemy occupation and control, im- 
plying clearly that' as to other areas not yet free the only source of 
power and authority was the military occupant. 

In the light of these rules and principles, the first Council of 
State, the Executive Commission and the Republic, established by 
orders of the government of Japan or by her army of occupation in 
the Philippines, were legal instrumentalities under international law, 
and the Filipinos who constituted them in obedience to such orders 
and pursuant to specific instructions left with them by President Que- 
zon were not wrongdoers and were not guilty of any criminal offense. 
What is right and lawful for a military occupant to order cannot be 
wrong and unlawful for the inhabitants of an occupied territory to 
obey, for as declared in the Go Kim Cham case, a law that enjoins 
a person to do something will not at the same time empower another 
to undo the same,’’ because, as stated by Professor Hyde, “otherwise, 
as has oftentimes been observed, differing legal consequences might be 
annexed to the same act, rendering it both lawful and unlawful,’’ to 
avoid which result “the right to pass upon the lawfulness of an act 
must necessarily be the exclusive possession of a single sovereign,’’ 
the one which exercises control over the place where the particular 

65 



act is committed,” in other words, the military occupant, wlio, accord- 
ing to the Legal Adviser to the Department of State, “to all intents 
and purposes, is the sovereign during the period of occupation.” Mr. 
Justice de Joya, in his concurring opinion in the Co Kim Cham 
case, expresses his view more explicitly in these words: “It is. there- 

fore, evident that the estahlishment of the government under the 
so-called Republic of the Philippines , during the Japanese occupa- 
tion, respecting the laws in force in the country and permitting the 
local courts to function and administer such laws, was in accordance 
with the rules and principles of International Law, because the mili- 
tary occupant is in duty bound to establish in the territory under mili- 
tary occupation governmental agencies for the preservation of peace 
and order and for the proper administration of justice.” Mr. Justice 
beria, speaking lor the Philippine Supreme Court in the Go Kim Cham 
case, states: As a necessary consequence of such occupation and do- 

mination. the political relations of its people to their former govern- 
ment are Jor the time being severed. But for their protection and be- 
neht, and the protection and benefit of others not in the military service, 
or. in other words, in order that the ordinary pursuits and business of 
society may not be unnecessarily deranged, the municipal laws, that is. 
sue as a ect private rights of persons and property and provide for 
the punishment of crime, are generally allowed to continue in force, 
and to be administered by the ordinary tribunals as they were admin- 
istered belore the occupation. They are considered as continuing, un- 
less suspended or superseded by the occupying belligerent." (Dow vs. 
Johnson, too U S. 158. 23 US. L. ed. 632.) It is a logical conclu- 
sion Irom what has been here set forth that the legality under inter- 
national law of the Republic and, by the same token, of the Executive 
Commission and the Council of State, extends to the holding of office 
in those governmental agencies as well as to the doing of acts in the 
pertormance of duties incident to such office, no matter how much the 
establishment of such agencies, the holding of office therein or the 
execution of certain acts “contradicted or were defiant of the will of 
the territorial sovereign (the Commonwealth and the U. S. Govern- 
ments) as exemplified in its then existing legislation.” 

These well-settled principles must have equally been taken into ac- 
Th I h MacArthur when, immediately before leaving Manila 

hh^V • Commissioner and the highest Common- 

wea th o hcials for Bataan or Corregidor, he issued and caused to be 
published a proclamation on December 27, 1941, which read as fol- 



In order to spare the metropolitan area from the possible 
ravages ol attack, Manila is hereby declared an Open City with- 
out the characteristics of a military objective. In order that no 
^xcuse may be gii^n for possible mistake, the American High 
Commissioner the Commonwealth Government and all combatant 
military installations will be withdrawn from its environs as ra- 
pidly as possible. The Municipal Gov^ernment will continue to 

66 



function with its Police Powers reinforced by Constabulary^ Troops, 
so that the normal protection for life and property^ may be pre- 
served. Citizens are requested to maintain obedience to the con- 
stituted authorities and to continue the normal process of busi- 
ness. ’ 

The text of this proclamation lends itself to only one reasonable 
conclusion, namely, that aside from ensuring the protection of life and 
property through the agencies of the municipal government, it envi- 
saged even then the existence of a ' constituted authority * other than 
that municipal government obedience to which, because it was the 
people’s own. General MacArthur did not have to enjoin upon them. 
Considering that the Japanese forces were almost at the gates of the 
undefended City of Manila at the time, and that therefore its early 
occupation was already certain. General MacArthur must have re- 
ferred to the military occupant in speaking of such authority and, 
familiar as he is with the laws of land warfare, in order to insure 
the safety of the inhabitants admonished them to maintain obedience 
to it. and to continue the normal process of business, which obviously 
was not possibly in the brief, hectic interlude between the withdrawal 
of the American and Commonwealth authorities and the entry of the 
Japanese forces. 

Fiction versus reality 

It is a legal truism that allegiance and protection are reciprocal. 
And so far no American has dared to say that the Filipinos continued 
to receive the protection of the United States during the Japanese 
occupation. In fact High Commissioner McNutt has been frank 
enough to assert that America “failed miserably in her duty to protect 
the Filipino people against external aggression ’. 

But certain Filipino sycophants, in an effort to out-American 
the Americans themselves, neither blush nor hesitate to proclaim the 
theory of continuous protection^this monstruous distortion of the truths 
in support of their proposition that allegiance to the de jure sovereign 
was never suspended here during the enemy occupation. To them it 
matters little or not at all that Manila was declared an open city and 
its inhabitants thereby delivered, defenceless and unprotected, to the 
ruthless enemy; that our forces retreated to Bataan and Corregidor 
where they surrendered finally; that from the beginning to the end of 
the occupation hundreds of thousands of Filipinos were killed by the 
Japanese and countless women and children raped and butchered, and 
that American internees in Philippine concentration camps were tor- 
tured or starved to death and made to suffer nameless indignities. In 
the “legal’’ contemplation of this new brand of internationalists, 
all those victims were enjoying the continuous protection of the United 
States and of the Commonwealth when such irretrievable calamity 
befell them. 



These internationalists refuse to perceive that if the American 
forces that liberated Manila were not able to prevent the massacre of 
almost a hundred thousand city inhabitants by the Japanese it was 
unthinkable that during the three years of unmolested enemy occupation 
the United States, and the Commonwealth for that matter, could extend 
protection from a distance of eight thousand miles. 

Abad Santos, Nakar, Elizalde, Ozamis, Pirovano, Lim, Segundo, 
de Jesus, Ramirez, Enriquez, Baja, Vinzons, Moran, Roces, Cruz, Du- 
mawal, De Santos, Fajardo, Bautista, Arguilla, the Escodas, and a 
host of other Filipino patriots and martyrs were shot or beheaded while 
under this newly discovered kind of protection. Some of them were 
killed for mere refusal to serve in the government established by the 
Japanese; others for their aggressive partisan activities. All of them, 
however, were actuated by their own judgments as to the way of 
serving the country and the people and not by their belief in any 
protection that the bJnited States or the Commonwealth could give 
them at the time. They knew rather that there could be no such pro- 
tection, but that knowledge did not make them deviate from their chosen 
P^-th of duty. After all men have the right to differ in the election of 
means to serve their country, and their differences do not divide them 
into patriots and traitors. 

f public service (which, irrespective 

ol the choice ot means, cannot be denied even by the most bigoted), if 
to protect not themselves but their countrymen from the enemy’s cruelty 
t ley had decided to feign cooperation, they would have iDeen branded 
as traitors by our novel variety of internationalists and hounded to jail 
or to the gallows. 

In one case the fiction of continuous protection did not save them 
trom death; and in the other case the same fiction would now have 
been seized upon to send them to the same fate. Sad irony indeed! 

U f ^ diey and numberless other Filipinos have died at the 

an so t e Japanese, for however attractive and convenient such a 
eory may now seem, it did not diminish one whit the brutal and irre- 
voca e rea dies of the enemy rule; and not all the king’s horses and 
not all the king s men will bring its victims back to life or ever make 
them whole again. 



68 



13 



Patriots or traitors? — Ostneha^s Lef/tc speech 

T here is no denying that there were a few among the Filipinos 
wlio, lor reasons of their own, went beyond the inelucta e neces 
sity imposed by the situation, to afford aid, comfort anc sustenance o 
the enemy. 1 hose few will undoubtedly receive what is ue t lem. res 
iclent Osmena has promised that ever>^^ c^e would be examinee im 
partially and decided on its own merits. The ° 

ever, would make of all those who remained in the Pii ippines o c 
the masses of the population guilty of that most heinous crime^-' 

Those who now face trial have kept their silence anc in no 
entered into the spirited discussion going on. For they <now m 
hearts the truth about their deeds and their motivations, anc ar^ ^ 
fident that after the passionate bitterness of the clisc^ussion las ^ , 
the question will be judged in the cold hght of reason. 

Osmena himself, in his speech in Leyte on TSovember 1044- 
viously approved by the Secretary of War, declared. 

“But in our praise of the guerrillas we should not 
ful of the loyal civilian population that was left behind to lace 
the ire of the invader and support the guerrillas. It was not 
possible for all to evade the enemv: the fate 
jority was to bear the manacles of enslavement. 
this has given rise to different ntlitudes and ac ions m relation 
to the Japanese rule causing some misunderslanc mgs 
people. This state of affairs has created one of the most . er . 
problems with wbicli our govcrnmenl is eon ronlec . 

“We cannot close our eyes to ibe realities of the Japanese 
occupation. It is cruel and barsh. An f 

been imposed on the Filipino people by ibe sword and ‘be m l. a 
misfortune of American and Filipino arms left tbe ^lajor ly ol 
eighteen million Filipinos no other recourse but to submit to c 
despotic regime if they were to survive. Not all public olhc.als 
could tal<e to the hills to carry on the heroic struggle, borne had 

G9 



to remain in their posts to maintain a semblance of governmenl. 
to protect the population from the oppressor to the extent possible 
by human ingenuity and to comfort the people in their misery. 
Had their services not been available the Japanese would either 
have themselves governed directly and completely or utilized un- 
scrupulous Filipino followers capable of any treason to their peo- 
ple. The result would have been calamitous and the injuries 
to our body politic beyond cure. 

The problem under consideration must be solved with justice 
and dignity. Every case should be examined impartially and 
decided on its own merits. Persons holding public office during 
enemy occupation, for the most part, fall within three catego- 
ries: ^“ose prompted by a desire to protect the people, th ose ac- 
tuated by fear of enemy reprisals, and those motivated by dis- 
loyalty to our government and cause. The motives which caused 
the retention of the office and conduct while in office rather than 
the sole lact of its occupation, will be the criteria upon which 
such persons will be judged." 



The men who held hiph offices during the occupation and who 
are now charged with collaboration know to which of the three cate- 
gories they respectively belong. They were, and had been for many 
years, arnong the handful of chosen leaders to whom the people natu- 
rally looked up for guidance during that critical period. It is unfair to 
pass hasty, ill-considered judgment upon them; nor is it easy. Even 
the highly emotional French, with their consuming hatred for all those 
and worked with the Germans, hesitate to pass sweep- 
ing judgments on the men who stayed and worked in the Vichv gov- 
ernmen . uring a debate on the issue of collaboration in France, 
When a Socialist assemblyman shouted an accusation against a Min- 
ister ot State of the de Gaulle government, who had helped the Vichy 
regime to power in 1940, General de Gaulle himself rose quickly and 
angrily m defense of his Minister, and said: “With regard to the 
rama o *940. t ere were many differences then between men and 
ho Vichy then, but many who were there be- 

«ibl f serving their country in their own way. It was pos- 

Ihere ! ] conceptions of serving one’s country. Today 

on y one thing that counts: acts and service to the country.” 

ninn ^ ^ "'^re picked by the Japanese to make up the Fili- 

pino participation during the occupation had been known to them long 
belore the war as the nation’s acknowledged leaders. It was natural 

lelvo, Japanese should directly address them- 

se ves. in the same manner that General MacArthur addresses him- 
self now to the Japanese leaders. It was an entirely different matter 
in the case of those who did not compose the front rank in the field of 
politics and public administration: they could, as so many of them 
did give prete.xts for declining to serve in the governments sponsored 
by the Japanese, a declination which in fact some of them were able 



70 



lo nitikc llirou^Ii lliese ver>^ leaders, who afforded them protection from 
what would otherwise have been compulsory service. 

At the same time, the Japanese were clever enough not to call 
to the government service those Filipinos with well-known pro-Jap- 
anese leanings, like Professor Maximo Kalaw. President of the Philip- 
j^ine-Japan Association and rabid advocate of Asiatic monroeism under 
Japan (the precursor of the co-prosperity sphere). General Ricarte, Be- 
nigno Ramos, and others. The Ja])anese knew that by leaving out 
men, they woidd have a kind of reserve force upon which they could 
draw at any time, not necessarily for service in the government but in 
other matters highly conducive to their ends for which they could not 
possibly muster other men. 

It was only after the lapse of two years, when they became im- 
patient w^ith the lukew'arm and passive attitude of top-ranking Fili- 
pino officials, that the Japanese not only placed heavy military police 
guards on each and every important member of Mr. Laurel s govern- 
ment, but endeavored to set up a new^ extraofficial machinery among 
the Filipinos over and above the legitimate government, for militant 
collaboration with Japan. Thus the MAKAPIIJS came into exist- 
ence, wuth Ricarte and Ramos at the head of the organization. Those 
who w^ere present at the official launching of the MAKAPILIS will 
still remember Ramos’ brazen threat, hurled deliberately in the pres- 
ence of the Japanese Commander-in-Chief and President Laurel, to 
hang in a public plaza all Rej^ublic officials, high or low\ wLom he 
should find traitorous to the cause of Japan. 

Japanese methoils of coercion 

One need not point out the methods of coercion wdiich the Jap- 
anese w^ere so adept in employing. The pressure w^as collective, in the 
sense that it w^as not exerted on any designated individual, but it w^as 
nonetheless inexorable. As stated by President Osmena in his recent 
Capas memorial address, 'all the occupied area of the Philippines w'as 
Capas, a huqe concentration camp wJiere the Filipino could pit only 
his spirit and faith against the brutal might of the invader. 

The Japanese Commander-in-Chief’s announcement after the fall 
of Singapore w^as an eloquent example of the effectiveness of this 
collective coercion: “VVe have no intention of conquering anv Asia- 

tic people. The best proof of this has already been made before the 
steady gaze of all the countries of the w^orld in actual deed in Man- 
chukuo. New China, Indo-China. Thailand and other countries wJio 
had realized the true meaning of Japan’s mission in the Far East. 
All of you Asiatic peoples must therefore realize that this is your best 
opportunity to achieve the freedom and independence wJiich you have 
so long desired. As long as you reciprocate accordingly, the Japanese 
forces will help you in estahlishing an Asia for the Asiatics in your 
part of the Orient. But if you fail to understand the tine and lofty 
purpose of Japan and instead obstruct the successful prosecution of 

71 



ifiG militciry nctivitics of the lmperio.1 Japcinese forces^ whoever you ore, 
we shall come and crush you with our might and power, and thus 
compel you to realize by means of force the true significance and 
meaning of our mission in the Far East.” 

An appropriate comment on tlie foregoin^^ words expressed I)v a 
Kaughty and unopposed conqueror is the following passage from the 
book entitled “Military Government and Marlial Law” by Major 
Birkheimer of the United States Army, perhaps the most autlmritalive 
work that has ever been written to this date on the subject: 

There is no mystery regarding the foundation upon whici) 
the dufy of temporary allegiance rests. Upon this point tlie Ian- ^ 
guage of the Supreme Court is ver>^ emphatic. Wlien tlie regular 
government is driven out and no longer can secure the people 
in those rights which government principally is instituted to main- 
tain, their allegiance is for the time in abeyance, and, in a modi- 
lied lorm, is transferred to that government^ — ^even though it be 
founded on overpowering adverse military force^which can and 
does, either \\dioIly or partially, secure them in those rights. Nor 
does it signify that the inhabitants do not by visible signs join 
with dimr military ruler in arranging the details of his r/oi^ern- 
ment. Their covenant is implied; but it is none the less binding 
because U consi^s in silent acquiescence in the new order of 
things. y\ hat the conqueror does from generosity is in deroga- 
tion of his strict rights. And whatever may be his motives, the 
result IS apt to he far more beneficial to the conquered than to 
himself, tie is dictaling, they accepting, terms. Happy their lot 
willing to concede to them many immunities from 
the hard fortunes of war. From any other than a humanitarian 
view it is matter of indifference to him whether or not they arc 
protected m their rights of life and property; to them it is a mat- 
ter of vital importance. He is there to enforce his will and is 
a e to do it; they must accept what he offers. I3y remaining with 
their properly in territory which he alone governs, thev impliedly, 
under the laws of war, accede to his terms; and while they live 
his rule and receive the benefits of that law and order 
which he institutes and maintains, they owe to him that transient 
duty of obedience which is called ‘temporary allegiance.* 

L L- could be more disastrous to the interests of in- 

habitants of occupied territory than for them to be made to be- 
fnvader is there by sufferance, and has no rights 
which they are bound to respect. They are not in a position to 
^sume such lofty ground. To do it is simply to court disaster. 
Uj this they may rest assured: the military goueimment, if need 
be, will enforce obedience. If the peopfe^their regular govern- 
ment evicted— proceed toward the invader as if he were a mere 
intruder, whom they may treat with contumely, they will probahlv 
have cause to regret their presumption. It may cost millions of 









dollars, the devastation of fair provinces^ the destruction of flour- 
isl\incf towns, and many hundred lives to bring them to a realiz- 
ing sense of their error, but the experience will be theirs, and one 
which they will not wish repeated. Wbat evidence the incidents 
of llie Franco-German War of 1S70-71 bear to this fact! Yet, 
ibat was ibe contest of force conducted between tbe most refined, 
enlightened nations... 

^ Equally unfortunate in its effects, if it be acted upon, is the 
proposition that the vanquished State retains, with reference to 
inliabitants of occupied territory, the rights of sovereignty in all its 
plenitude, and that they must obey its mandates- This is purely 
chimerical. They are under no obligations to recognize the au- 
thority of a State which can only command their services without 
the power to protect them if they obey. 7 o do this is but to invite 
severest measures of repression on the port of the military govern- 
mental authorities.** 



73 



14 



The Filipino leatlers could not iibamlon 
the people to their fate iluring the 
ruthless enemy occupation 



S OIVIE would say that these leaders were ojDportunists who desired 
power and distinction in being in the government at the time, which 
could not but be the puppet government that it was. But most of 
mese men Avere Known for their discernment, wisdom and experience. 
They knew, better than most, the true implications of Japanese domina- 
tion; they knew that there was neither glory nor power in their posi- 
tions, and that in terms of material returns, staying out of the govern- 
ment certainly would be for most of them more profitable. Indeed, at 
no time in the history of the country was employment in the govern- 
ment service so fraught with real sacrifice and risk and so viewed with 
suspicion, that those who managed to stay out of it had every reason 
to congratulate themselves and thank their lucky stars. But it was 
pre-ordained that the acknowledged leaders of the country had to re- 
main in their posts, and those who did, true to their names, saw a 
point and a purpose in thus staying, namely, to be in the service of 
t eir the most trying days of their national existence. They 

lelt it hardly patriotic to beat it to the woods, to balk and back out, 
to rest on their oars when the going got tough and their countrymen 
needed most their guidance and protection and counsel. For they 
knew that it was just a matter of time, just a matter of a little more 
painful waiting, as they were confident, like everybody else, that the 
nited States, no matter how hard and rough the going might be- 
come, ^'nuld eventually uncoil herself and strike back to ultimate vic- 
tory. They knew that their lip-service to the Japanese cause and their 
apparent willingness to give what Japan could and would have taken 
anyway would not detract an iota from the fighting strength of the 
United States, while actually they meant for the people the difference 
between extinction and survival until the day that strength could sound 
their liberation. For, as expressed by one of Mr. T^aurel s ministers when 



74 



they were inducted into office, if the nation he lost, everything would 
he lost wi ill it. including those who believed themselves secure in their 
retirement and abstention. 

Perhaps these men. now ignominiously dubbed collaborators by 
a vocal few of our people, found inspiration and guidance in the words 
of Rizal. spohen by old Tasio. the Sage, to young Ibarra. “Why can 
we not do as that weak stalk laden with flowers and buds does?’’ 
asked the Sage, pointing to a beautiful jasmine plant. ‘The wind 
blows and shakes it and it bows its head as if to hide its precious 
load. If the stalk sh oidd hold itself erect it would be broken, its flowers 
woidd be scattered by the wind, and its buds would be blighted. The 
wind passes by and the stalk raises itself erect, proud of its treasure, 
yet who will blame it for having bowed before necessity'? There you 
see that gigantic kiipaug, which majestically waves its light foliage 
wherein the eagle builds its nest. 1 have brought it from the forest 
as a weak sapling and braced its stem for months with slender pieces 
of bamboo. If 1 had transplanted it large and full of life, it is certain 
that it woidd not have lived here, for the wind would have thrown it 
down before its roots could have fixed themselves in the soil, before 
it coidd have become accustomed to its surroundings, and before it 
could have secured sufficient nourishment for its size and height. So 
you, transplanted from Europe to this stony soil, may end. if you do 
not seek support and do not humble yourself. You are among evil 
conditions, alone, elevated, the ground shakes, the sky presages a storm, 
and the top of your familv tree has shown that it draws the thunder- 
bolt. It is not courage, but foolhardiness, to fight alone against all 
that exists. No one censures the pilot who makes for a port at the 
first gust of the whirlwind. To stoop as the bullet passes by is not 
cowardly^— it is worse to defy it only to fall, never to rise again. ” 

The philosophy expressed above by Rizal s old Tasio, projected 
into tbe realities of military occupation by a conquering enemy, finds 
its counterpart in the language of Major Birkheimer of the United 
States Army (“Military Government and Martial Law’’, p. 69 ). Speak- 
ing of the theory of temporary allegiance as indicating the relation of 
the inhabitants (of the occupied territory) to the military government, 
this author says: 

The condition is one of fact. The conqueror, not the van- 
quished, is dictating terms. His extreme rights under the cus- 
toms of war are very severe... Every great war of even the 
last quarter of a centuIy^ to say nothing of former ones, has fur- 
nished numberless instances of this. Until recently this enforce- 
ment of extreme rights was the rule. Now, as a condition run- 
ning pari passu with the abatement on the part of the conqueror 
from his extreme rights under the customs of war, the people of 
the country impliedly covenant that they will not pursue a line of 
conduct or enter into military combinations prejudicial to the mili- 

75 



tary interest of the conqueror whose forbearance they accept. 
Call this implied covenant, prayed for by I he conquered and 
their interested advocates, temporary allegiance, mutual engage- 
ments, or what not, the name does not change the fact.” 

They tvent heyonti the call of loyalty 

Por an impartial appraisal of the collaboration issue it is neces- 
sary to pry open the lid which covers the acts that, out of the public 
eye. the so-called political collaborators did to help the United States 
and to keep the morale of the Pilipino people from breaking. 

Under international law, which recognizes the reciprocal nature 
of allegiance and protection and imposes upon the inhabitants of an 
enemy-occupied territory the obligation to render strict obedience to 
the occupant, and which gives validity to whatever bargain they find 
Ft necessary to make with the enemy by reason of the inabilitv of their 
government to protect them, the Pilipino leaders who were 'left here 
would have been iustified if they had simply served in the govern- 
ments established by the Japanese and complied with the latter’s or- 
ders unqualifiedly and to the letter. Por legally speaking their alleg- 
mnee and obligations to the United States and to the Commonwealth 
Uovernment were suspended and their loyalty did not demand of them 
to do otherwise. And as a matter of fact, they were under instruc- 
lons o resi ent Quezon^the veracity of which has been certilied 
by American corresponclents-“to make wlial bargains ibev bad to with 
the Japanese and to protect the people from Japan’s brutality and 
avarice. et, they not only did not renounce tbeir allegiance laut 
wen eyon the call of loyalty and placed as many obstacles as they 
cou to t e Japanese war efforts and helped in diverse ways tbe 
American cause to tbe extent of committing acts wbicb the United 
a es Kules ol Land Warfare would call 'war treason ” or war crimes 
against the government of tbe military occupant. 

Effective aid and support to the 
vesistance movement 

Not unknown to many Pilipinos and even to some Americans w^as 
e connection of mpst of the members of the Philippine Executive 
ommission and of the Laurel government with guerrilla organizations, 
par icu ar y with their intelligence men. Monetary contributions, medi- 
cmes an va uable rnilitary information kept a steady flow from one 
Without the direct and indirect protection of the 
high officials in the government it is doubtful if the underground re- 
sistance movement could have thrived so well. Por they knew who 
t le were and what they were doing. They knew too that 

a mos a o the employees under them w^ere in one w^ay or another 
connected with the resistance movement. When a minister of the 
Laurel cabinet wrote a memorial recounting and protesting against the 
Japanese atrocities and abuses and portraying the republic as a sham, 
ostensibly as a confidential communication to certain high Japanese 

76 







oflicials in order to lull the suspicion of tlie Japanese army, partic- 
ularly tlie military police, but in realih’ as anti-Japanese propaganda for ^ 
the people and the resistance forces, the centers of distribution of copies 
of the memorial were tlie courts and other government offices. Cer- 
tainly all ill is would not have been possible under a government headed 
by collaborators. Many American internees can testify to the assist- 
ance they received, not only in the form of money sent to them in 
secret but also in efforts oj^enly made to have the sick and infirm 
among them released from the concentration camps. Guerrillas were 
encouraged and slrenglhened by the knowledge that the high officials 
were with them, so much so that whenever they were arrested by the 
Japanese, their families would seek the intercession of Mr. Laurel and 
his ministers, and if the latter s efforts for their release were not alto- 
gether successful, at least material help was extended to their depend- 
ents. especially in the needy cases. 




77 



15 



Filipino leaders helped to strengthen the loyalty 
of the masses— Ulilitiiry conscription teould have 
throtvn the whole country into ct bloody 
revolution and resulted in wholesale 
massacre of Filipinos 

^ I ^ HESE Filipino leaders, if they were really collaborating with the 
Japanese, woulcl have yielded to the pressure brought upon them 
to conscript the Filipino youth into the Japanese forces or into a Pliilip- 
pine Army to tjie Japanese. The Burmese had clone just such 

a thing, under Ba Maw’s “War First’’ slogan, and had raised a siz- 
able army to ight on the side of Japan. Or like the Indonesians 
under Or. ooekarno, they would have utilized such a force, irrespec- 
tive or the defeat of Japan, to offer resistance to the return of the 
mericans and earnestly defend the integrity of the republic which 
t e Japanese had established. It is, however, their misfortune that 
seemingly ori account of their loyalty they have not received the same 
respect that both the Americans and the British accorded to Dr. Soe- 
karno and his intransigeant Indonesian nationalist army. 

p.T. would be said of course that any attempt on the part of these 
i ipinos to conscript an army would have been unsuccessful, consid- 
ering the loyalty of the masses of the people. But this is in a way 
begging the question. These Filipino leaders not only did nothing 
to weaken l^bot loyalty, but directly and indirectly helped to strengthen 
of these men^— the members of the Council of State, of the 
I . Executive Commission and of the Laurel government^were 

highly educated, and not only seasoned politicians possessed of the 
technique of a. successful approach to the masses of the people, but 
also acknowledged trusted leaders of the people for over a generation, 
d he t^ulk of the people looked up to them. It was in fact in emula- 
tion of the spirit of sacrifice of these leaders that thousands of govern- 
ment personnel returned to their jobs. If they had really wanted to 
support the Japanese, as they are now accused of having done, they 
could have swayed by intense, earnest propaganda a considerable 

78 



portion of I lie country. One lias only to look at tlie example of Be- 
nigno Ramos — a common demagogue, without any background of edu- 
cation, culture or political experience— and see how almost single- 
handed and in spite of the vigorous if secret efforts of the Laurel gov- 
•ernmenl to thwart him, he was able to organize his GANAPS into a 
military' force twenty-thousand or more strong, protected and armed 
by the Japanese. It woidd seem plain to see that if these Filipino 
leaders then had in lact desired to aid the enemy, they could have 
organized an army a hundred times more imposing than Ramos GA- 
NAPS. But they did none of these things, because they never fore- 
swore their loyalty and allegiance to their own country and to the 
United States and because they could never reconcile themselves with 
the barbaric ways of the invaders. They knew that, being loyal to their 
own country, they could not be disloyal to the United States. They 
knew that the histor>^ of the Philippines is linked with the best tradi- 
tions of the American people, and that its future was predicated on 
lurther assistance by and continuous association with the United 
States. That is why they did not do what they could and would have 
done if they had really desired to aid the Japanese, but on the con- 
trary. they did everything possible under the difficult circumstances 
in which they were to help the cause of liberation. 

In any event, granting that on account of the loyalty of the masses 
conscription of Filipinos ‘ into the Japanese army or into a Filipino 
army to fight with the Japanese would have been a failure, yet it 
must be admitted that had Nlr. Laurel issued an order for military con- 
scription, the carrying out of such order, by no other means than force 
to be actually exerted by the Japanese army because of that very 
loyalty of the masses, woidd have thrown the whole country into a 
bloody rev^olution, the relentless repression of which by the Japanese 
would have residted in a wholesale massacre of the Filipinos. 

^Yhat wouUl have happened had these 
leatlers refused to serve 

Another possibility still, if these Filipino leaders did not have the 
wellare find safety of the people foremost in their consideration, would 
have been for them to refuse service in the government, supposing that 
they could have done so. and leave that government to be organized 
and administered by Ramos and his followers, who did so well as 
lifth columnists before and during the first stages of the war and as 
Pcirt of the Japanese forces later on. This renegade group 
vvould have been aided in its task by other pro-Japanese elements, like 
General Ricarte. In fact, even after the Philippine Executive Com- 
mission was organized, and after the Laurel government took over, 
Ramos and Ricarte never ceased their activities and intrigues, encour- 
aged by young officers and some junior generals and admirals of the 
Japanese army and navy, with the end in view of executing a coup 
cl etat and securing for themselves the reins of government. It is per- 
haps not generally known that on one or two occasions they almost 



79 



succeeded in their scheme, if it had not been for the timely warning 
given by one who seemed to enjoy the confidence of Mr. Laurel and 
of Ramos organization. In the end, they succeeded to a certain 
extent when the Japanese took Laurel and his ministers to Baguio. If 
they liad been left from the beginning to set up the hind of regime of 
their own choosing, then indeed Filipino aid and adlierence to the 
enemy would have been effective, and the misery and suffering of the 
people would have been multiplied a thousandfold. 

Filith in America’s sense of fairttess 

The men who prevented these dire possibilities do not care for 
reward or gratitude. All that they ask and expect as due them is 
fairness. Ihey knew Irom the beginning that theirs was a thankless 
task, which the people expected them to do. on the strength of their 
ong record of honest, efficient and unquestioned leadership in ihe pub- 
lic service. But they think that they have a right to the just and under- 
standing attitude of the American people. They believe that those of 
their countrymen who alone are in a position to know and appreciate 
the events and conditions here during the occupation should be allowed 
as lar as possible to judge for themselves the issue of collaboration, 
without the least hint of pressure from the American government. 

Washington directives, although given with the best of intentions, 
tar from c arilying the issue, have had the effect of confusing the Fili- 
pino peop e, i not of actually sowing the seeds of dissension among 
them. It the United States must give the Philippines aid for relief and 
reconslruclTon, as by all moral and legal rules she is bound to do. let 
It be because o[ her consciousness of that duty and her solicitude for 
the weltare or our people, and not as a reward for their mutual bicker- 
ings ana dissensions. Otherwise the price that the Filipinos have so 

^ ^ T T^T ^^d for the peace which they hoped 

would follow would be in vain. 

Roosevelt’s ilirective ciiicl its inter- 
pretation €ind implementation 

I alk the declaration made by President Roosevelt in igqij 

that certain 1-ilipinos should be removed from positions of influence 
in the political and economic life of the country was not and could 
not have been intended by him to exclude them altogether and for 
all time trom such positions President Roosevelt envisaged the libera- 
tion ot the I hilippines before the victorious tennination of the war 
with Japan, precisely as a necessary intermediate step toward that end. 
He must have foreseen at the time that the period between the libera- 
lion of the 1 hilippines and the final victory in the Pacific against 
Japan woiild be more or less protracted, because the rapid complete 
collapse of the Japanese naval forces, the atomic bomb and other 
factors were not then a certainty. In that interlude, it must have been 
his opinion that for military reasons and so that nothing might con- 

80 



ceivably interfere with the successful prosecution of the war against 
Japan, \vith the Philippines as the American operational base, it 
would be necessary to neutralize the political and economic influence 
of those who. Irom superficial indications, collaborated with the Jap- 
anese. 

In principle, the policy enunciated by President Roosevelt was 
sound. In the first place it^ purpose, that of military security, was 
unassailable. In the second place, he must have believed that the 
Filipino leaders, or some of them, were really collaborating with the 
enemy, because except for the distorted Japanese propaganda which 
falsely pictured, for j^urely Japanese ends, the existence of complete 
harmony between ihem and the Filipinos, the Philippines was com- 
pletely blacked-out from the rest of the world. The underground re- 
sistance forces themselves who were in constant contact with America 
might have been laboring, at that time when the Republic had just 
been organized, under a misapprehension of the acts and real moti- 
vations of those Filipino leaders; or more probably, they were perfectly 
aware and were convinced of the loyalty of most of them, yet purposely 
did not relay the truth to the Americans in the United States in order 
to protect those loyal leaders from Japanese ire if the truth were told 
or found out. 

In any event, it is preposterous to assume that President Roosevelt 
intended, without more reliable evidence at hand, to interdict the Fili- 
pino leaders under suspicion perpetually from the political and economic 
life of the Philippines. In its relations with the United States this 
country was, as it is now, on the eve of its independence, and in fact, 
according to President Roosevelt himself in his message to Congress 
on October 6, 1945, **the United States, in practice, regards the Philip- 
pines as having now the same status as the governments of other in- 
dependent nations^in fact all the attributes of complete and respected 
nationhood. ” Such interdiction of the Filipino leaders by virtue of 
an American executive fiat would therefore be of doubtful legality and 
practicability, aside from being entirely undemocratic and un-Amer- 
ican. 

It is significant that President Roosevelt did not mention treason 
or disloyalty to the United States or to the Philippines. It is possible 
that in his heart he was convinced of the sad and terrible plight of the 
Filipino people and the necessity for whatever they had to do in order 
to survive. Perhaps he was aware of the legal implications of the 
military occupation of the Philippines by the enemy. At any rate, he 
was not concerned with the question of treason, as it must have been 
his opinion that whether or not treason was committed in certain in- 
stances would be for the Commonwealth Government to decide and 
judge as soon as it could be reestablished here. His declaration was 
issued only to insure as much as possible the prosecution of the war 
against Japan and the safety of the American forces. It was there- 
fore from the point of view of American military operations alone that 



81 






he considered it necessary to remove from positions of political or eco- 
nomic influence those Filipinos against whom there was any suspicion 
of having collaborated with the enemy. For indeed, whether or not 
they were guilty of treason, whether their motive was in reality to pro- 
tect the Filipino people, whether under international law they were not 
only justified but in duty bound to do what they did under tlie in- 
exorable circumstances brought about by the enemy occupation, still 
while the war was going on they should not be allowed to occupy such 
positions of influence as mi ght somehow interfere with the American 
war effort in the Philippines, if not actually at least in the sense 
that it might be exploited by the enemy for propaganda purposes. 
Even if they were not chargeable with treason, their innocence was 
immaterial in that connection. 



It was in contemplation of President Roosevelt s statement that 
General MacArthur issued the following proclamation on December 
29, 1944. after the retaking of Leyte: 



L is before me that certain citizens of 

the 1 hilippines voluntarily have given aid, comfort and susten- 
ance to the enemy in violation of allegiance due the Governments 
and Commonwealth of the Philippines; 



\VHEREAS militaiy necessity requires that such persons he 
remove from any opportunity to threaten the secunty of our mili- 
tary forces or the success of our militaiy operations; 

.L T^.^^^^ORE, I, Douglas MacArthur, General ol 

^ 1. States Army, as Commander-in-Chief, South- 

west Pacihc Area, hereby do publish and declare it to be my 
purpose to rernove such persons, when apprehended, from any 
position of political and economic influence in the Philippines 
nh ^ restraint for the duration of the war; where- 

iurfrt \ ^ them to the Philippine Government for its 

J ctgment upon their respective cases.” 



of nolfhiml ^ therefore that the removal of those suspecte( 

fluence T positions of political and economic in 

to last nnl f I necessity, and was expressly intende( 

to last only tor the duration of the war. 



e actual implementation of President Roosevelt s declaration, 
however went beyond the limits that he intended. For certainly re- 
moya o certain persons from positions of influence could not mean 
their apprehension and confinement; and yet. when the Filipino lead- 
ers passed over to the American lines after escaping from the Japanese 
A 1 lives^not apprehended in the sense of General 

MacArthur s proclamation^they were held in custody and banished 
to a distant penal colony. 



82 



Bill now llial llie war has ceased and tlie reasons of military sec- 
urity which alone must have prompted President Roosevelt to issue 
his statement no longer obtain, it seems idle and unjust to use it as 
argument for insisting that the Filipino leaders during the Japanese 
occupation should not and cannot take part in the great political and 
e'conomic issues affecting the nation today, notwithstanding the fact 
that their cases have not yet been judicially decided and in almost all 
instances charges against them have not even been presented. The 
position to this effect taken by some quarters, both in the Philippines 
and in the United States, stretches the statement of President Roosevelt 
on the question of collaboration far beyond what he intended. It ig- 
nores and violates the basic declaration of the American Congress in 
its Joint Resolution of June 2 Q. 194.4, that “the Government of the 
United States has solemnly guaranteed to the people of the Philippine 
Islands the right to be completelv free and independent and to select, 
by a free ballot, without any kind of inducement or coercion whatso- 
ever, those who shall hold the elective offices in such government and 
exercise the power and authority thereof, which solemn guaranties have 
been temporarily made impossible of fulfillment due to the wantonly 
treacherous and surprise attack on the free people of the Philippine 
Islands.” 

Proilucts of tlcmoct^acy — Will not break 
faith tvith oUl loyalties 

The circumstances under which these Filipino leaders branded 
as collaborators rose to prominence in public life may conduce to a 
clearer understanding of their real convictions. They are men reared 
in the atmosphere of democracy and freedom^the very things for which 
America stands and fought. On the other hand, they knew that Japan 
was a semi-feudal, war-like nation steeped in traditions which no Fili- 
pino could appreciate or comprehend. Even the most backward among 
our people felt that their way of life was much better and superior 
to the near state of slavery of the Japanese soldiers. The disastrous 
results of the Japanese campaign to spread their culture and language 
here bear witness to this fact. These leaders were mostlv common men 
who attained national prominence under the favorable conditions 
whi ch only democracy can render possible^-^conditions brought about 
by American sovereignty and with American guidance and instruction. 
They were, as are all Filipinos, ardent believers in the four freedoms 
enunciated by President Roosevelt. They had come to adopt American 
ways of living and of thinking, and adhered to the best of Amer- 
ican principles. They were familiar with the American policies in the 
Philippines, and by contrast, with the Japanese policies in Korea, For- 
mosa, Manchuria and China. Some of them had been particularly 
assiduous students of world affairs and foresaw, as early as 1927, the 
calamitous consequences for the Philippines of a Japanese Monroe 
Doctrine^a foresight that was borne out in every detail during the 

83 



years that followed in Japans conquest of the different countries of 
East Asia. They had been making strong pronouncements against 
Japanese economic penetration in the Philippines and condemning 
those few Filipinos who trafficked with their citizenship to become 
dummies and stooges for Japanese enterprises. They were witnesses 
to Japanese abuses and brutalities from the very first day of Manila’s 
occupation. They knew, if we may repeat this statement, that there 
was neither power nor glory in holding official positions under the 
Japanese regime. That these men should in so short a time callously 
turn their backs on all the things they believed in and embrace all 
those that they abjured is something that common sense finds quite 
hard to accept. 



84 



IHfierences in points of view between 
Americans ami Filipinos on the 
question of coUahoi^ation 

F or three and a halF years under the Japanese rule the Filipinos suf- 
fered a I ivinj? death. T liey came to expect that each day would be 
their last upon this earth. They went through nameless tortures and 
indignities. Flunger was to them a physical, gnawing pain, to whi ch 
hundreds succumbed daily in the streets, in the internment and prison 
camps, in the filthy dungeons of the military^ police. The American 
planes that began to come in September 1944, sweeping and irresist- 
ible, caused damage to civilian properties and casualties among the 
I ^ore of them were to meet death on the beaches 

bombed and shelled by Americans, in contested areas in the path of 
their advancing forces and, finallv. in the terrible holocaust that re- 
duced Manila and oilier cities and towns into rubble and ashes. Still, 
the Filipinos kept their faith. For their loyalty to the United Stales 
T price in countless innocent men. women and 

children abused and butchered by the Japanese, in thousands of homes 
destroyed; but even that was not too much to pay for redemption and, 
they hoped, for the peace that was to follow. 

However, it seems that peace and concord arc not for them. Openly 
or behind the scenes, forces are selfishly at work pulling wires that may 
plunge the country into more suffering and more misery. Now that 
the Filipinos need more than ever to be united, they hurl accusations 
and recriminations against one another, the bitterness of which is in 
no way assuaged by the American leaders who, having expressed con- 
cern for their present situation, should be among the first to deplore 
the existence of internal dissension here. These men against whom 
principally the accusations are made have so far kept their silence. In 
their hearts they still preserve the solicitude that, during all their years 
of public service, they have felt for the country and for the people; 
and in tlie spirit of true leadersliip tliat tfiose years have instilled in 

85 



them, they did not wish to make matters worse hy accepting? their ac- 
cusers’ challenge to a public discussion, which would be unavoidably 
fraught with passion and prejudice. 

Those who alone can pass jutlgment — It is easy to 
tlefy the enemy if one is thousands of miles away 

They have unquestioning faith in the judgment of their country- 
men who remained here with them under the Japanese rule and saw 
at first hand their acts and inner motivations. The man in the street, 
the humble farmer in the field, the employee in the government, the 
true guerrilla who fought and suffered a thousand hardships not be- 
cause of ambition for personal glory and post-liberation political power, 
but because of pure desire to help the American cause; yes, the Amer- 
ican prisoner of war and civilian internee--these are the ones who are 
in a position to pass correct judgment upon these leaders, because to- 
gether they inseparably underwent, bore the brunt of, and pulled 
through three long years of Japanese hell on earth. Not those who 
were able to escape abroad to engage in profitable undertakings or 
who fled to the mountains not to fight the enemy but for reasons of 
personal safety, and lived there in comparative comfort and ease of 
mind, coming out of their self-exile and hiding enriched and acclaimed 
as heroes and superpatriots, only after the Japanese had all but sur- 
rendered to the returning victorious American armies. And certainly 
not those who are without that virtue of humility which is the begin- 
ning of wisdom^those pharisees who themselves served in the two 
puppet governments and their instrumentalities if only in a subordinate 
capacity and then retired when they found that the buy-and-sell mart 
was more profitable, and now appear, after the Japanese have been 
driven out, in heroes’ and patriots’ clothing, because in their peacock s 
vanity they fail to perceive that they too have feet of clay. 

At this juncture, it seems opportune to remind ourselves of the 
words of a French physician, a member of the French underground, 
to Demaree Bess, who quoted the statement in his article Which 
Way Will France Go? appearing in the Saturday Evening Post s 
issue of November i 8 , 1944: ’Frenchmen who lived abroad came back 
here with preconceived notions about so-called collaboration, notions 
which are now being altered. It was easy, in New York or London, 
to be openly defiant of Germans, and it was tempting for the emigres 
to be self-righteous when they first returned home. But as they talk 
with those of us who stayed here, they are beginning to understand 
better what it meant to live under German occupation. The over- 
whelming majority of Frenchmen never left France, and their judg- 
ments about who were and who were not collaborators are beginning 
to prevail. ” 

The American point of view 

Washington high officials and the rest of the American people 
who throughout the war remained in the security of their homes thou- 
sands of miles away cannot begin to appreciate the utter misery and 

86 



clefenselessness of llie Filipinos in the face of the unexampled bru- 
tality and lach of j^rinciple of the Japanese conqueror. They can- 
not truly understand the bargainings, the evasions, the temporizings 
and the show ol aj^parcnt cooperation with which the Filipinos had 
to placate the ruthless invader until America could organize and bring 
bach here her mighty armed forces. At best, the American point of 
view wi ih respect to the Philippines could not but be purelv objective, 
so much so that according to Admiral Richardson, fonner Pacific Fleet 
Commander, in his recent testimony before the Pearl Flarbor Investigat- 
ing Committee. President Roosevelt told him in 1040 that he (the 
President) doubted whether the United States would enter the war 
even if Japan attached the Philippines, but that the Japanese could 
not always avoid mahing mistahes. That mistahe was the attach on 
Pearl Flarbor. 

At the hearings before the Congressional Committee investigating 
Pearl Flarbor it has been disclosed that in the high command confer- 
ence Iieia in February 1941, General George C. Marshall, then and 
until recently Chief of Staff, made the following statement: **\Ve really 
have two active defense issues— the Panama Canal and Honolulu. 
They are the two great outposts of our defense. We have some troops 
in tlie Philippines but the Philippines are so weah they could not be 
defended against any first class power. They would have to be sacri- 
ficed.^ General Marshall testified also before the committee saying 
tliat he hnew of no agreement before the war committing the United 
States to war unless she was attacked. ’ 

After these meaningful revelations, paradoxical though it may 
sound, we Filipinos should feel happy that the Japanese made the 
mistake of attacking Pearl Flarbor. J hat mistake decided the fate of 
Filipino democracy and civilization. Flad the Japanese attack been 
directed against the Philippines alone, the Filipinos, out of their loyalty 
to America, would probably have been in the tragic situation of fight- 
ing America s war without America even being a belligerent. That, 
as the Americans would say, would have left the Filipinos hanging 
out on a limb. And with America out of the war, the Philippines, 
after a futile resistance which could have lasted months only, would 
have been definitely incorporated into the Japanese empire, not even as 
an ostensibly sovereign member of the co-prosperity sphere, because 
such propaganda stunt w’ould have been superfluous, but as a mere 
colonial possession like Ivorea and Formosci. 

But Pearl I larbor w’as attcicked and America entered the war. It 
was not America, however, but the Philippines that became the goiy^ 
battlefield of the war. and for over three years was virtually converted 
into one big prison cam]). It was not American cities that were de- 
stroyed, American homes burned, fields laid waste, food supplies con- 
fiscated, private belongings looted, population decimated by the action 
of the ruthless enemy. No American in the United States was de- 
prived of his home and thrown into the street; or ever lived in stark, 
abiding fear of the Japanese s])y and military ])olice: or found himself 

87 



between “non-cooperation* and the enemy torture-chamber: or felt the 
sting of a slap in bis face, the cold steel of a bayonet in his entrails, 
tbe pain of burning flesh, or any of the countless torture methods 
employed by the Japanese. It was only natural that the primary con- 
cern of tbe United States should be to win the war and to save as 
many American lives as possible in the process. The retahing of the 
Philippines was not an end in itself but part of an overall strategic 
plan. And when it came to the final execution of that plan, tlie 
objective approach toward the plight of the Filipinos had to be main- 
tained, even at the cost of almost completelv obliterating ISJanila and 
other cities and towns and hilling thousands of civilians as a result 
of the intense bombing and shelling. 

The Filipino point of viete 

On the other hand, the Filipino leaders who were left here dur- 
ing the occupation could not, for the very reason that they are Fili- 
pinos, adopt the same detached attitude toward their countrv. They 
had to tax their ingenuity and mahe the most of their practical wisdom 
to rneet the grave implications of the enemy invasion and occupation, 
in the face of the defenselessness and bewilderment of the people. 
They had to feign cooperation and pretend to play into the hands 
"vvily enemy because tbe latter was not only suspicious but 
already convinced that the Filipinos were just waiting for the oppor- 
strihe bach. True they wished, as fervently as did 
^ L themselves, an American victorv. But at the same time, 

while they could not plan to bring about that victory they had to 
face perplexing problems that were immediate and no less urgent, 
^^^hile their faith in the ultimate triumph of A.merican arms never 
faltered, they had to plan not for a month or two of enemy rule but 
for a protracted period that might well drag for many years. For 
America was, by her own admission, hopelessly unprepared, and the 
prodigious scientific achievements and productive power that were to 
eventually in her favor were not then reasonably fore- 
seeable in the near future. In the midst of those terrible realities this 
f of Filipino leaders was entrusted with the lash of looking 

after the well-being of their own people and trying to save the country 
Irom abject misery, even possible extinction. Flow well and effectively 
they went about that task, ^only those whom they served are compe- 
tent to judge, not those in* whose very selfishness the enemy found 
comfort and assistance. President Osmena himself, in his Leyte 
speech, said that there were those among the men who held public 
office during the Japanese occupation who were prompted by a desire 
to protect the people and comfort them in their misery, and to prevent 
the Japanese from governing directly and completely or utilizing un- 
scrupulous Filipino followers capable of any treason to their people. 

So, while the Filipinos who headed the government under the 
Japanese occupation, intent as thev were upon speeding up the libera- 
tion of the Philippines, were exultant over the formation of guerrilla 
units, because these meant so much to the American war strategy, 

88 






7 * >* 



ihey could not, on llie oilier liand, feel so happy when the umvittin^ 
exploits of some of the guerrillas brought about reprisals and death 
to whole communities of innocent people. And while the Americans, 
unaware of the real nature and character of the events here, could 
close their eyes to the countless robberies, rapes and murders commit- 
ted by lawless elements in the name of the resistance movement bu 
really prompted by lust and personal vengeance, if not Irom motives o 
banditry pure and simple, these Filipino leaders could not so callous y 
ignore them but, being powerless to repress diem elfectively, at eas 
had to morally condemn them, because such horrible crimes an a uses 
had for their victims thousands of Filipinos and in the end wea ene 
the power of resistance of our people against the common enemy. 

The couiluct and actuations of the Filipino leaders can- 
not be juilgetl by standards of post-liberation thmUtny 

Some would say that for all their good intentions the efforts of 
these Filipino leaders were of no avail, as they were not ^bl^ 
vent the enslavement of the people. Considering the implacable enmi 
and bitter resentment between the Japanese and the masses o 

the people, which was daily coming to a crisis, and ^be deep distms 
professed by the Japanese toward the Filipino officials, it is 
whether any group of men could have done better in the interest o leir 
people. It is a matter ol public knowledge that there \yas at tie time a 
current saying among the Japanese to the effect that with the exception 
of Ricarle and Ramos and their followers, the Filipinos were ninety- inc 
per cent pro-Americans and five per cent liars. Under those circum- 
stances their efforts to ]irolect the people could not meet with eminent 
success. But that fact does not make them criminals; and it is unfair to 
judge their actuations at the lime, when the nation was dazed by defeat 
and everything was chaos and confusion, through the perspective of 
victory and by the present standards of post-liberation thinking. 
started with hopefulness in the efficacy of what they had expected to 
do, but they could not then know the relentless character of Japanese 
bestiality and double-dealing they had to put up with later on, and 
which progressively became worse as the Japanese realized more and 
more the hostility and double-crossing tactics of the Filipinos, officials 
and masses alike. At any rate the events of the last two months of 
the occupation have shown that if there had been no pretense of co- 
operation the indiscriminate slaughter of the Filipinos would have been 
carried out from the beginning and there would have been only a hand- 
ful of them left to liberate in the end. 

What tvoultl the Americans have done? 

It would be interesting, from the academic point of view, to know 
what would have happened if the Japanese had pressed their initial 
success at Pearl Flarbor and actually occupied Flawaii or some part or 
the American mainland along the Pacific coast. Would the Ameri- 
cans in those places have shown an absolutely uncompromising stand 

89 




and resisted the enemy to the last unarmed and defenseless man? Or 
while biding their time would they have also temporized and bar- 
gained for terns that would give them at least a reasonable chance 
ol survival? 1 he Americans in the Philippines, both soldiers and civi- 
lians, who surrenaerecl to the Japanese or were captured or interned, 
did exactly this, belf-preserx'ation, individual or national, is an instinct 
common to men of all races and to all countries of the world. 

If the war had been between the Philippines and Jat>an as the 
principal belligerents the plipinos would probably have found some 
rneasure ot j^otection in that very status. But the war was between 
the United bUates and Japan, and the Philippines became involved 
only because it was under American sovereignty, ft was a silualion 
that was exploited to the fullest extent by the Japanese and made llie 
basis or theh propaganda that the Filipinos were not their enemies 
but brother Orientals whom they had come to free. At ihe same time 
it was used to justily the measures of coercion and punishment lliey 
employed, because if the Filipinos were not enemies they could not 
plead meir pro-rilipinism as an excuse for openly refusing to cooj^erale 
with ^h^ Japanese. Such refusal meant, in the Japanese eyes, only 
one things -sympathy for and attachment lo the Americans, and ihis in 
turn meant certain torture or death. 



Not only the Americans in the Philippines at the 
time of Pearl Harbor bat also the Filipinos were 
a sacrifice to Americans nnprepareilness 

The problems thus faced al ihe time by these Filipinos now ac- 
cused ot political collaboration were, from the subjective point of view, 
much more difficult than those faced by the Americans who were con- 
cerned exclusively with the conduct and strategy of the war. The dif- 
erence is so patent that one is led to wonder whether American public 
opinion, as represented by Washington officials and certain sectors of 
the American press, is perhaps unconsciously fortified in its condem- 
nation ot these so-called political collaboralionisls by the belief that 
1 le moral fibre of a Filipino is weaker than that of an American, so 
t at where one would be betraying his country by certain acts under 
a giveri situation the other would be incapable of intending such be- 
trayal by ^ets under a similar situation. Nothing else can 

explain why those brave American soldiers who surrendered to the 
Japanese in the Philippines and who were forced to make statements 
nlainly pro-Japanese or tending to give comfort to the enemy, should 
{i?T. l*^*^*^^ I acclaimed as the heroes they really are, while the 
i ilipinos who were forced to make similar statements are now accused 
ol having given aid and comfort to the enemy and are condemned in 
the eyes of the world even before they are accorded a trial. There is 
som^vhere the purpose of exacting a higher measure of loyalty from 
the Filipinos than from America’s own nationals. No other explana- 
tion can be conceived of why General Wainwright. and the other 
American generals and officers under his command, for instance, were, 
as President Truman said, a sacrifice to America s state of unprepared- 



90 



hi^. 



ness, while the Filipinos who perforce had to deal and bargain with 
the Japanese on account of that very unpreparedness should now be 
called traitors. WMiile it is true that these Americans were prisoners 
of war, from the standpoint of freedom to act. both they and the Fili- 
pinos were not free agents: they were both under ])iessure, taking orders 
from the erstwhile conquerors. In a sense the pressure exerted on the 
Filipinos was greater, because while an American could not be prop- 
erly requested to make a pro-Japanese or an anti-American statement, 
a Filipino who woidd decline to make not an anti-Filipino but a pro- 
Japanese or an anti-American statement would appear in the eyes oi 
the Japanese as pro-American and, therefore, an enemy of Japan. 



91 



17 



IxLtinettr *«"*'«*** *'*««*'* *»« 

Watnwt tglit ami other gallant American officers 

useless sacrifice of human life ...”— so 
“T^ I General Wainwright's surrender on May 7 , 

1942. I he decision on my part.” it continues, “was forced upon me by 

S?'' " A<Wre».eJ lo Ge„cal"si,arp, i\ 

r.Se o( c™ S iL “l1'ATr"‘‘'rf "■ '"“i 

State and Pkd.ppin, Government., puni.Kable ,vlth deall,. but that 
compliance with the said orders “will save your honor and your life 
and assure the safety of your family and friends.” 

• bro^casting his general order of surrender General Wain- 

wright directed General Francisco. Col. Pugh and Lt. Silhavy to pro- 
'A ^^yrying with them for clistrihution printed copies of 

T r^T*T ^ with a shorter one, which he had Francisco sign, in 
the following words: 

“To any Constabulary officer: 

f ^^J^rsign^ of Constabulary upon instructions 

C.r i ri ^Ph'.h • Wainwright, U.S.A., senior American offi- 
n the 1 hihppines, is now in Legaspi to transmit to you an 
J surrender to take effect immediately. You are hereby 
ordered by me that upon receipt of this message to send a repre- 
sen a ive to egaspi, Naga, Labo or Sorsogon, whichever is near- 
est to you, where I shall proceed to meet you. 

The safety of your fellow-countrymen will be jeopardized 
it you do not carry out these instructions. 

“Your representative will be protected by the Japanese Army, 
pend him under a flag of truce and there will be no danger to 
his person. 



92 



1 liis mission produced the desired result, bringing about the sur- 
render of constabulary^ forces in Palawan and in Legaspi. 

In Porinosa later. General Wainwright allegedly made another 
forced slatement^lhat ‘Japan was attaining a posilion which can 
hardly be reduced by any power or powers of the world; ^ that Japan s 
idea of a co-prosperity sphere was “a dream come true; and that it 
is quite natural lor Japan to head East Asia and the United States the 
new world. ’ 

Lieutenant-Colonel Hugh Straughn, guerrilla chieftain in the Phil- 
ippines. soon after his capture by the Japanese said that he regretted 
having been the cause of so much misery and suffering among the 
people, and that if he had means of getting word to his followers, he 
would tell them to come out of their hiding places and join their coun- 
trymen in the peaceful pursuits of normal life. Lieutenant-Colonel 
Thorpe, another American guerrilla commander, after he was captured 
not only issued an order to his men to surrender but advised the people 
of the futility of further resistance, which according to him only brought 
sufferings and unnecessary^ misery^ for no beneficial result, and praised 
the exemplary treatment given to prisoners by the Japanese forces. 
In an article which he allegedly wrote after his capture (Tribune, Jan- 
uary' 21 , 1945) he said: 



*\Ve had been expanding our armaments with a view to 
threatening Japan. Our real object was to subdue her, *the 
of East Asia, without having actually to fight against her. But 
our plan failed miserably and when the war broke out we found, 
contrary to our expectation, that we could not beat Japan and 
that we were losing in the fight. 

‘For the purpose of stirring up enmity^ against Japan a great 
deal of false propaganda was launched saying that the Japanese 
forces were an army^ of barbarians and savages who would com- 
mit outrages and abuses in their campaign in the Philippines 
against the huge defensive force recently organized by the Amer- 
ican Commander-in-Chief. Japan was pictured in this propagan- 
da as an aggressor imperialist nation, while the virtues of Amer- 
ican democracy and liberalism were greatly exaggerated. Appar- 
ently these moves were essential to making the colored race oi 
the Philippines fight against the Japanese who belonged 
same Asiatic race. Perhaps it was realized that should the rili- 
pinos see the truth of the situation that they are Asiatics t 
selves they might look upon the Occidentals with hostility t us 
bringing to naught the efforts exercised by the United States and 
England to enlist their aid in the war. 



It is a great disgrace and shame to the Anrerican forces which 
considered themselves the strongest in the world and proudly 
boasted that they could annihilate Japan in hvo weeks of war 
that they should be thrown into confusion and eventually^ de- 
feated by the Japanese forces. 



93 



“The indomitable fighting spirit, the dealliless courage, the 
invincible might of the Japanese soldiers cire almost beyond ima- 
gination. 1 now know the reason for the strength of the Jap- 
anese soldiers. It 1 ies not only in the fact that they have received 
and been trained under the most rigid discipline and that they cire 
better equipped, but also because they are possessed of strong 
spiritual power, the spirit that has inspired martyrs and heroes and 
a firm conviction of certain victory. 

The American authorities had promised us more than ten 
tirnes to send reinforcements, but they did not keep their word at 
all. Filled with vain hope we had exerted ourselves to no avail. 
It is a great pity that the desperate conduct and activities of the 
guerrilla bands, resulting from the heartlessness of the American 
government, have caused the persecution of innocent people. 

“I also deeply regret that the guerrillas have at last been 
transformed into common thieves and have been guilty of threat- 
ening the life of the provincial inhabitants. I also realized that 
we were too weak to turn our defeat into victory and that we have 
become powerless to function effectively as a tactical unit. 

rilln overwhelmed with pity for those guer- 

natr otr^^I of robbers, for those false 

tion to iT out purpose and without hope in their opposi- 

inpviHKl diers, now find themselves facing defeat and 

I find their vengeance on law-abiding people, 

collanspd^*^ ^ ^ .1 ponder on why our guerrilla bands 

I TL- r reasons are: (i) Our alienation from the 

L * rnost important item and it was brought about 

rlif> * ^ ^ ^ plunder, intimidations, and kidnapping of which 

innocent and law-abiding people were the victims. . . 

lL t ^ concentration camps I have been well treated by 

finnrr^^^bU l^^ve come to understand the real signi- 

icance of the Bushido. VVe had always believed that surrender 

0 rpf ^P^oese orces meant nothing but death. We now re- 

Unifpd spread such false propaganda. As an officer of the 

such ^ f been one of those who had broadcast 

f^ivpn ^ L^f conclusion, I wish to confess I have 

tII \U V since I received cordial treatment from 

all the Japanese soldiers 

forcpd frnm a heroes. Their statements were 

bit frnm enemy, and that did not detract a 

nrenarpdnp^TJ ” or they were all a sacrifice to American un- 

T .1 . I all entitled to the reward of a grateful nation, 

and that reward, so richly deserved, was as lavishly given. 

Philippine Council of 
a e an o er i ipino leaders under the Japanese occupation were 

94 




forced l^y llio same viclorious enemy lo issue appeals urging the guer- 
rillas lo slop llicir aclivilics. I lie “manifeslo of February, 1Q45* 
sucli an appeal, issued in order lo appease llie Japanese military who 
were ihrealening. in view of the increasing slrenglK of the resistance 
movement, lo conduct punitive expeditions and mopping up operations 
in all parts of the country, which would have resulted in indiscriminate 
massacre and torture of countless elements of the civilian population, 
who undeniably were active supporters and sympathizers of the resist- 
ance movement. 

For lliiit, as well as for some oilier declarations also exacted by 
jiressure. — ^such as innocuous stereotyped words of praise for Japan s 
magnanimity and benevolence. which according lo one American 
commentator were so extravagant that they might be interpreted as 
irony^ — these leaders were arrested for adherence to the enemy and 
branded as opportunistic helots. Is it because thev are Filipinos? 
That woidd be hardly fair. Wainwright, Sharp, Straughn, Thorpe, 
Cush ing, Hill small, Baker and many other comrades-in-arms would un- 
derstand the plight in which these Filipino leaders found themselves 
and their country. General Wainwright was perhaps thinking of 
their plight when he said a few weeks ago that ‘the Filipinos were 
one Iiiin cl rod pcrccnl loved * and* that ‘‘//ley are fust as good Americans 
as you or /,” for it was much the same situation in which he was placed 
and which after his liberation prompted him to thank the American 
people for t^hat “generous understanding ’ that is now denied to the 
Filipino leaders who found themselves in the same dire predicament. 



95 



18 



Loytilty to the Filipino people 
is loytilty to the United States 

TN assessing the acts of the Filipino leaders during the Japanese occu- 
A pation, the inquiry must be directed to whether or not they re- 
mained loyal to their own people. Allegiance to the United States 
or to the Commonwealth of the Philippines cannot be divorced and 
viewed in complete detachment from such loyalty; and once it is ad- 
mitted, as it must be upon impartial appraisal, that those leaders in all 
their olficial actuations had in their hearts only the welfare and safety 
or the people under the trying circumstances of enemy rule, their 
loyalty to their own government and to the United States is beyond 
question. This is so unless it be contended, contrary^ to all democratic 
concepts and notions, that the people exist for the state and not the 
state for the people. 

^o^Jltions which prevailed in the Philippines after the re- 
rea and linal surrender of the Filipino-American forces are now 
nown to all. President Osmena himself, in his speech in Leyte upon 
IS re urn, has made this brief but eloquent description and has there- 
y inci y confirmed President Quezon’s instructions to the Fili- 
pino ea ers to remain in their positions, to do what they could, and 
to bargain with the enemy in order to protect the people: “After the 
all ot bataan and Corregidor and the tragic defeat of the Allied armies 
in sia, our people found themselves pitted against the might of 
apan . . . vVe cannot close our eyes to the realities of the Japanese 
occupation. t is cruel and harsh. An arbitrary government has been 
imposed on the Fil^ino people by the sword and the initial misfortune 
P Filipino arms left the majority of the eighteen mil- 

ion I ipinos no other recourse but to submit to a despotic regime if 
ey were to survive. Not all public officials could take to the hills to 
carry on the heroic struggle. Some had to remain in their posts to 
rnaintain a semblance of government, to protect the population from 
the oppressor to the extent possible by human ingenuity and to com- 
lort the people in their misery. Had their services not been available. 

96 



the Japanese would either have themselves governed directly and com- 
pletely or utilized unscrupulous Filipino followers capable of any trea- 
son to their people. 1l he result would have been calamitous and the 
injuries inflicted to our body politic beyond cure.’* 

1 he leaders who were left here were faced with precisely the 
situation just described. It was for them to use their best judgment 
and discretion in order to give, as far as was humanly possible, that 
protection to the people which their own government and the govern- 
ment of the United States had been rendered powerless to provi de. 

Apart from President Quezon s instructions there were other 
sources in which they found guidance and inspiration. For they had 
inherited a great American legacy which, in defining the basis of 
Philippine-American relations, makes the happiness and well-being of 
the Filipino people the paramount consideration, and justifies the es- 
tablishment of American sovereignty here only as a means to accom- 
plish that noble purpose. They remembered President McKinley s in- 
struction to the Philippine Commission headed bv William Howard 
Taft, in which he said that the government which they were estab- 
lishing here is designed not for our satisfaction or for the expression 
of our theoretical views, hut for the happiness, peace and prosperity 
of the people of the Philippine Islands . . .’’ and that there are cer- 
tain practical rules of government which we have found to be essential 
to the preservation of the great principles of libert>^ and law, and that 
these principles and these ndes of government must be established 
and maintained in their islands for the sake of their liberty and hap- 
piness. President Wilson, in his message to the Filipino people 
through Governor Flarrison, gave voice to the same high purpose when 
he said: We regard ourselves as trustees acting not for the advantage 

of the United States, but for the benefit of the people of the Philip- 
pine Islands.** The Jones Law itself, which gave the first definite 
promise of independence, declares that it was never the intention of 
the people of the United States to make the war with Spain a war of 
conquest or for territorial aggrandizement and that it has always been 
their purpose * to withdraw their sovereignty over the Philippines and 
to recognize their independence as soon as a stable government can 
be established therein. . 

The welfare and happiness of the Filipino people and, for that 
ultimate purpose, their training in the arts of self-government under 
the guidance of the United States, have always been the only de- 
clared justification for the implantation of American sovereignty’^ in 
this country. If because of that sovereignty, therefore, the Filipino lead- 
ers owe allegiance to the United States, such obligation has been ful- 
filled by a sincere endeavor on their part to protect their own people 
from the cruel enemy. And if, in their efforts to do so, the exigencies 
of the situation compelled them to feign cooperation with that enemy, 
for otherwise those efforts would have been worse than futile, such 
apparent cooperation cannot mean disloyalty to the United States. 

97 



Others, with the same end in view, might have chosen different 
means, as it is in the means where men usually differ. But for the 
Filipino leaders at the time the choice was plain. They were cer- 
tain that the United States was never in any danger of defeat, that 
it was only a matter of time before final victor^’^ would be achieved, 
and that whatever they did could not affect in any way that out- 
come of the conflict while it might mean the difference between 
death and life to their people for whom iheir choice of means had 
been rriade. And since what they did to protect tlie people from Jap- 
anese brutcdity and avarice was made necessary because of tlie loss 
of that protection which it was the duty of the United States to provide, 
and was. in their considered judgment, the means most conducive to 
the ends envisaged by the Americans themselves, that is. the wel- 
fare and safety of the Filipinos, it would be cibsurd to accuse these 
leaders of disloyalty to the United States just because their endeavors 
did not meet with the expected measure of success. 



98 



The coUahorators of 1901 



C OLLABORATION is nothing new in Philippine histo^3^ It is the 
fate of weak peoples to be forced into submission to stronger powers 
and for purposes of their own appear to collaborate with the latter. 
Not to go as far back as Rajah Humabon, who collaborated with 
Magellan, and Rajah Lakandula, who collaborated with Legazpi, in 
the early days of the Spanish regime, there were among the Filipino 
leaders during the war of independence against the United States at 
the turn of the century what some present-day critics would also call 
political collaborators. And they were certainly real ones. Under the 
military regime then existing (1901), many prominent Filipinos ac- 
cepted important positions in the government. Arellano, Torres, Me- 
lliza, Araullo, Rianzares Bautista, and Llorente were appointed to the 
judiciary. It was also during that period that the American author- 
ities organized the provincial and the municipal governments, in which 
the Filipinos were given a large participation. Several prominent Fili- 
pinos were appointed to the Philippine Commission, namely, Pardo 
de Tavera, principal founder and first president of the Federal Part>^* 
L.egarda, also of the same party; and Luzuriaga, ‘who played an im- 
portant role in the organization of the republic of Negros. * The 
formal and solemn induction of these officials into ollice took place 
on September 1, igoi. Araneta and Sumulong were appointed to 
that body some time later. It will be remembered that the Federal 
party got its name from the fact that the principal plank in its plat- 
form advocated outright annexation of the Philippines to the United 
States under a status of full membership in the Union. This, of course, 
did not materialize. 

As has been pointed out these men accepted their positions dur- 
ing the existence of the American military regime even as the patriots 
were still in the mountains fighting for independence. It is true that 
Aguinaldo and some other generals of the revolution had either sur- 
rendered or been captured. Aguinaldo was captured on March 24, 
1901. and on the following April 1 took the oath of allegiance to the 

99 












jl 




i' 



United States, swore loyalty to the American flag and renounced his 
connection with the still existing revolutionary government. 1 hen on 
the 19th of the same month he issued a manifesto to the Filipino peo- 
asking them to lay down their arms. But other revolutionary 
leade^, among them General Miguel Malvar, General Miguel Lukhan 
and ^General Mariano Noriel, three of our greatest soldiers at that 
time, continued to offer resistance. General Lukban was captured only 
in February, 1902; General Noriel laid down his arms in March, and 
General Malvar surrendered in April of the same year. Even after 
that, however, hostilities did not cease, as until 1906 the Filipino guer- 
rillas \vere active, although their activities were outlawed as “bando- 
lerismo or brigandage, just as the resistance movement during the 
Japanese occupation was termed banditry by the Japanese. Such men 
^ Sakay, Carreon, Montalan, Ola, de Vega, Villafuerte, Natividad, 
iJespida, Estacio, Porto and Felizardo carried on the guerrilla war- 
lare for nmny years, but naturally, their cause having been finally 
deleated, their names are not now held in grateful remembrance. Not 
only ^hat, but some of them, for their activities and for abuses which 
their followers committed^abuses which seem to be an unavoidable 
concomitant of resistance movements everywhere^were tried by Phil- 
sentenced to death and hanged (U.S. vs. Sakay, et al, 
8 ^56). Had the independence movement triumphed, however; 

ad some first-class third-party power, for instance, come to the aid of 
the revolutionists and dislodged the American forces in the Philippines, 
those would have been acclaimed as heroes, with back pay and 

everything, because for all their shortcomings and perhaps unwar- 
mnted excesses, they were in the main actuated by patriotic motives. 
J hey were not a gang of bandits but a military organization with 
officers up to the rank of general. The papers they carried and pre- 
sented in court as part of their evidence show that the acts for which 
they were punished were calculated to aid their military efforts. But 
they served a lost cause and they had to pay the penalty. 



I ^ conceivable, and veiled warnings had been in fad 

roppe by the Japanese during the occupation, that if they had won 
^ Filipinos whom they would have liquidated 

were t e high officials in the government. For the Japanese strongly 
an ng t y suspected the truth that those officials were really obstruct- 
ing apan s war efforts and that their activities to that end were all 
the more effective and insidious because of their positions. 

The men now accused of collaboration with the Japanese did nol 
raw essons rorn their forbears of the revolution because the circum- 
s ances un er which the latter cooperated with the American army 
iL ?*^^L**^\**^^ were very different. It was then a foregone conclusion 
^ J lu . military forces here could not possibly be expelled 

and that the occupation would ripen, as it did, into permanent im- 
plantation of American sovereignty over the Philippines. Those col- 
laborators, therefore, in accepting to serve in the government estab- 
lished by the military occupant, were not merely playing for time. 



100 












They were there for good. I Key were convinced of the advantages 
for the country in passing under the tutelage of the United States and 
consequently were sincere in their collaboration. There was a unit>^ 
of ideals and aims, and, therefore, of efforts between them and the 
Americans. They shared common concepts of democracy and to them 
the famous McKinley Instructions to the Taft Commission were a most 
eloquent message embodying the American way of life and mode of 
thinking. It was therefore with a sincerity of purpose that they ap- 
pealed to the Filipino people to lay down their arms, live in peace, 
accept willingly the realities of the situation, and earnestly cooperate 
with the American regime. They were collaborators at heart, in fact 
and in name. 

On the other hand, the Filipino leaders during the Japanese occu- 
pation had no such ideas, feelings and motivation. knew that 

the occupation was but temporar>\ for they were sure m ultimate Amer- 
ican victor\'^ and were only biding their time until the Philippines could 
be liberated. To them the Japanese way of life was a repulsive 
reared as they were in an atmosphere of democracy and freedom. 1 heir 
beliefs, their political ideals, their education, their own personal inter- 
ests, and the welfare of their countr>^ cried out against Japan s ambi- 
tion to dominate and exploit the Asiatic peoples under the cloak ol 
her co-prosperity slogan, and against almost everything else that the 
Japanese stood for. They, therefore, did not collaborate with the ap- 
anese. On the Gont^a^>^ underneath the superficial show ol coo]^r- 
ation demanded of them by the situation, they did their best to sabo- 
tage the Japanese war efforts. They were forced to campaign lor 
peace and order, but they limited themselves to condemning outlaws 
and bandits, while maintaining contact with, and aiding and encourag- 
ing in diverse ways, the real underground resistance forces. And when 
the Americans came back, they crossed over to their lines as soon as 
it was possible for them to do so. 

During the revolution there were irreconcilable elements arnong the 
Filipino leaders who wanted no compromise with the United S^tes 
but demanded complete independence. They were ^ 

Apolinario Mabini, Pablo Ocampo. Julian Gerona. Pio del Pd^^* 
temio Ricarte. Mariano Llanera. and Maxinm Hizon. General Arthur 
MacArthur. father of the liberator of the Philippines and conqueror 
of Japan, then the Commander-in-Chief of the American lorces here, 
rounded up those uncompromising leaders for reasons of mi itary sec- 
urity and deported them to Guam. Their deportation was perhaps 
justified in the eyes of the American army of occupation in view ol 
the general attitude of the Filipino people, who had been Hghtmg lor 
independence and whose sympathies therefore were lertile grounds lor 
the anti-American agitation of those men. 

Upon the triumphant return to the Philippines of General Douglas 
MacArthur’s forces, the same lot fell upon the Filipino leaders who 
served in the governments during the occupation. They were banis le to 
Iwahig, avowedly also for reasons of military security, althoug ea^en 

101 



knows how they coulc! have been a menace to that security wlien pre- 
cisely, to show that they were awaiting, as anxiously as any other 
Filipino, the return of General MacArthur’s armies, they managed to 
escape, at their first opportunity and at the risk of their lives and the 
lives of their families, from the areas controlled by the Japanese and for 
days and nights trekked through forests and mountains in order to 
reach the American lines. History has indeed a curious and often 
ironical way of repeating itself. 



1Q2 



20 



The uvcratfc Filipino’s reaction 

T he average Filipino, wlio reads Kis newspapers and tliinks that 
the war being over lie is entitled to the peace he has been await- 
ing so long, is today a confused, bewildered man. He hears everywhere 
a heated discussion of the question of collaboration and reads that its 
outcome will probably decide whether or not he can get all the aid 
which he has been led to expect from America to help him rebuild 
his home, or to select at the polls freely the men who should lead the 
country in this great hour of need. He learns that the United States 
has rewarded her valiant generals and other soldiers who fought here 
against overwhelming Japanese superiority, only to surrender and be 
confined: he reads President Trumans statement that these brave men 
were a sacrifice to our state of unpreparedness.’’ And he loots around 
at his devastated countTy, laid waste by the battles for his liberation, 
and wonders whether perhaps that country, and those of his leaders 
who are now' accused of treason, had not been a similar sacrifice. He 
feels keenly why a gallant American officer, wJio could only thank the 
American people for their generous understanding of his surrender and 
of the declarations forced from his lips by the Japanese, has been ac- 
claimed by them in his true stature as a hero. wJiile the Filioinos w' ho 
found themselves in the same predicament as he did now live under 
the shadow^ of criminal prosecution. 

This simple but w^orldly-wise Filipino reads of Siam, welcomed 
back bv America into the communitv of nations as a free, sovereign 
and independent country, ” her actual and open hostilities against Bri- 
tain and the United States notwithstanding: he hears of the Siamese 
declaration of w^ar^ — -perhaps not merely a document of Japanese pro- 
paganda, but a statement translated into open w^arfare^simply set 
aside and declared null and void, and this act concurred in by 
America because, as Secretary Byrnes said, the declaration of w^ar 
did not represent the w^ill of the Siamese people. He remembers too 
that while the Japanese in their distrust of the Filipinos never allowed 
their students to enroll in military and naval schools in Japan, they 

103 




did allow and encourage the Burmese to do so; and in this connection 
he recalls Burma's declaration of war against the United Stales and 
Britain, her so-called “War First’’ principle, the mobilization of the 
entire Burmese nation for the prosecution of the war in cooperation 
with Japan, the organization of the Burmese army not merely for the 
defense of the country but for offensive purposes as well, and, puz- 
zled, reads also of the Burmese leader. U Aung San. who commanded 
that army, becoming at the eleventh hour Commander-in-Chief of the 
Burmese forces which cooperated with the Allies, a free man, advo- 
cating a “Potsdam Conference’’ of Asiatic peonies to achieve freedom 
from Britain within the shortest possible time. He learns that the other 
Burmese puppets, U Ba On and U A Aye, Ministers in Ba Maw’s 
government, are equally engaged in political activities, with Britain 
apparently ignoring their previous collaboration with the Japanese. 

He reads about Dr. Soebarno, President of the Japanese-sponsored 
Republic of Indonesia, a real collaborator with Japan if ever there was 
one. having raised armies to fight side by side with the Japanese, and of 
Sarat Chandra Bose, brother of Subhas Chandra Rose, engaged in 
anti-British activities during the war with Japan, not only free but 
active again as leaders of their own peoples in their fight for freedom 
and independence. 

u indeed, no collaboration issue in Burma, Indonesia, and 

British Malaya, while in India only those Indian officers in the British 
Army who later on passed over to the Indian National Army of Subhas 
Chandra Bose were held for court-martial. 

He reads in the issue of Time for January 14, 1946. a significant 
account o the court-martial of three Indian Army officers ivho had 
oug ^ wit t e Japanese against Britain. The trial occasioned nro- 
es noting hy the Indians, in which thirty persons were billed. The 
handed down, satisfied the legal conscience of 
e ritish. but at the same time presumably recognized the fact that 
U was Britain s unpreparedness that brought about a situation that 
T T.^ possible, and that, from the point of view of the 

ndians the accused were not traitors hut patriots who fought for what 

difnot For evidently thev 

nat on Vh^* claim the defense of duress, but stood 

anff R what they did was. while unquestionably 

thev we^ "^^^try. So while technically 

tpnrf^d waging a war against the State” and sen- 

r»Pn:^T transportation for life (banishment to a 

p CO oriy or bfe), cashiering and forfeiture of arrears of pay and 
a owances, the British Commander-in-Chief. in the same decision, 

remi e e sentence completely and declared that the accused were 
now tree men. 

Reading the account further, our average Filipino learns that there 
was a^^neral jubilation in India over the outcome of the trial. Time 
says: Ihe trio in the docb saluted jauntily, brobe into broad smiles 

as they marched out. Soon telephones were jangling joyously all over 

104 



d 



Oellii. Crowds gathered in the streets. In a friend s jampached house 
the three patriots (not traitors now) were garlanded with flowers. Said 
they in a formal statement: ‘This has been a victory for India. 

He cannot but contrast this case with the case of the FilijDino 
leaders now accused of collaboration. For while admittedly those 
Indian officers in the British Army genuinely cooperated with the Jap- 
anese and actually fought on their side against the British, these Fili- 
pino leaders, finding themselves and their people under enemy coer- 
cion. remained true to their old loyalties, yet had to feign cooperation 
with the enemy in order to protect the people and alleviate their situa- 
tion, and at the same time did as much as they could under the circum- 
stances to sabotage the enemy s war efforts. And yet, while the British 
have adopted a realistic and long-range view of the entire question in 
India, it seems that some official quarters in the United States are in- 
clined to adopt a purely legalistic view^which, by way, is not even 
tenable under international law— and to exact in a spirit of incompre- 
hensible vindictiveness, the pound of flesh, without regard to the stark 
realities of the Japanese occupation, or of any other military occupa- 
tion, for that matter, to America’s share of responsibility for her un- 
preparedness, to the constants of Philippine-American relations in the 
future, and— most important of all— to the basic requirements of uniW 
among the Filipinos, which must be attained if their devastated and 
impoverished countr>^ is to be reconstructed and rehabilitated from the 
ravages of the war. 

As the average Filipino reads of these developments in those 
countries— former fellow-members in Japan’s co-prosperity sphere— he 
asks himself: Are the Filipinos, leaders and common men alike, dif- 

ferent from the Siamese, the Burmese, the Indonesians and the Indians, 
so as to deserv^e a different treahnent and to call for a distinct approach 
with respect to the subject of collaboration? 

The case of Denmark and Greece — A parallel 

His bewilderment becomes almost complete unbelief as he reads 
of developments in Denmark and Greece. In Denmark, he learns, the 
leaders adopted much the same policy, nerhaps more “cooperationist 
in appearance, under the Germans as that followed by the Filipinos 
under the Japanese, and subsequently received the generous under- 
standing of the Danish people and the Allied nations alike. 

The last Prime Minister was Erik Scavenius, an astute real- 
istic politician who took pride in the title of cynic. He argued, 
with perfect sincerity, that Denmark s best long-term hope lay in 
playing possum. He, therefore, condemned the saboteurs, calling 
them “a lawless mob ” and gangsters . 

Scavenius got the King to issue proclamations against sabo- 
tage and even leading trade unionists echoed his warnings to 
save Danish institutions and land values. But the Freedom 
Council , the Danish underground organization, with members 

105 



from all political parties, did not follow Scaveniiis. It lliouglit 
it more important to save tfie Danish soul. Saholafje continued. 

This spirit did not mean that Denmark was divided in its 
opposition to the Germans. No serious Dane ever called Sca- 
venius a quisling or accused him of being kind to the Germans. 
They knew he was kind to nobody. The spirit rather reflected 
the difference of opinion in all democratic countries as to the 
revolutionary implications of the war. 

(“Denmark’ by Hans Bendi.x. from LIFE) 

In Greece, this average Filipino learns. Archbishop Damaskinos, 
who was called to power by the Germans after his old opponent, Chry- 
santos de Trebizonde, had refused to swear in the first quisling Pre- 
Greece s Regent today with the help and support 
ol the victorious British. Damaskinos. like most of the Filipino lead- 
ers w TO ser\7^ed under the Japanese regime, was no mere stooge for 
the invader: he used his power to aid. although not directly, the Greek 
^ovement; he used his philantrophies to save the men in 
e ^ ^ ^ Jews,^ those men who were interned by the German 

occupa ion orces. Damaskinos, judged by standards which some 
men would advocate here, was a puppet and a traitor, for he came' 
o power un er G^man occupation, to take the place of the uncom- 
promising patriot, Chrysantos de Trebizonde. 

^mericatt MiUtary Schools on 
the subject of enemy collabotHttion 

As this average Filipino ponders over Washington directives and 
pronouncements respecting collaboration in the Philippines, he conies 
Jh?nt texthooh entitled "Military Aid to Civil Power". 

enl cTu has been prepared for the Gen- 

e^e T Leavenworth. Kansas." and "is designed 

Stat^7 f officers of the Armv of the United 

current f '‘T ‘^e Laws of War. and in the application of 
MnTl T 'o situations involvina Military Government. 

Lent on 7/ Pomestic Dislurhances." To his complete amaze- 
in direef ^ of this book he finds the following passage, xvhich is 

offirinT current American opinion regarding the Filipino 

otticials during enemy occupation: 

k. Mexico has a law which forbids any of her officials from 
accepting oHice or executing authority under a military conqueror. 

IS, ot course would be very embarrassing to the invading army, 
flT ^ ^ would injure Mexico more than her enemy. In 

e rai^o-1 russian War, various instructions were given by the 
"rench Government to local officials in the east to flee or not to 
accept any position of authority under the Germans. It is be- 
T T such instructions were given during 

the World W^ar (I), for it is known that after the war France 

106 



decorated some of llie local officials who had remained at their 
posts during the German occupation and performed their duties 
in a manner most beneficial to the inhabitants. 

Lessons in iletnocract/ that the Filipino has been taught 

The Filipino has been taught to believe in the inviolability^ of cer- 
tain rights of man, such as the right to liberty^ under due process of 
law and the right to be presumed innocent until his guilt is proven. 
He has been told that this war was fought for high democratic ideals 
and principles and that once victory^ is won he can again feel secure 
in the guaranties of his constitution. It is, therefore, difficult for him 
to understand why some of his countrymen — the very’ ones whom he 
has considered for many^ years as the leaders of his people, who abided 
with him during the grim nightmare of Japanese rule, have been 
thrown in jail and banished to a malaria-ridden penal station for 
reasons of military^ security^’* that is, for them not to jeopardize the 
military’ operations of MacArthur’s army’ of liberation, and are con- 
sidered as convicted criminals^ — their bank accounts were ordered frpzen 
by’ means not much different from the odious bill of attainder— before 
any formal indictment has been filed against them and even before the 
court which his government has constituted to try’ them has had the 
opportunity’ to receive the charges and begin the trial. This, he per- 
ceives, is not due process of law. 

According to the American textboohs that he has studied in school, 
he should have complete freedom as a citizen to choose his own lead- 
ers and to decide who shall administer his government. His choice 
and decision may be wrong, but that is beside the question: his right 
to make them is inherent and inalienable. In the words of one of 
the great exponents of American democracy’, William Jennings Bry’an, 
“the people have a right to make their own mistakes.” 

The ordinary’ Filipino is, therefore, disappointed to read about the 
sweeping and indiscriminating directives from Washington ordering 
the removal of certain leaders from positions of influence in the poli- 
tical life of the nation, because he believes that they’ constitute undue 
interference with a right which should be his alone. He thinks that 
they are attempts to influence the mind of the Peoples Court on the 
question of collaboration, and, therefore, tend to defeat the principle 
of the independence of the judiciary’ consecrated in his and in the Amer- 
ican Constitution. 

After all, he recalls that the cases of the political detainees 
been turned over by’ the military authorities to the Commonwealth 
Government without the latter asking for them, a token indeed of 
trust and confidence in the competence of the Filipinos to handle the 
said cases. But he thinks it rather odd that, even before the instru- 
mentalities created to prosecute and try’ said cases have started their 
work, directives should come from \Vashington seemingly charging 
neglect or dereliction of dufy In the matter of prosecuting and trying 
the said cases. 



107 



Those who made national survival possible 

thoughts that undermine confidence in constituted 
authority arm breeds disunity among the people. This average Fili- 
pino s back at the events during the Japanese occupation, and 
realizes that it the nation survived without more sufferings and mis- 
ortunes than it has actually undergone, it* was not because of the 
deeds or orie man or group of men. but because of the united efforts, 
great ^*^d little, of practically all the elements of the people, begin- 
ning with President Quezon and Vice-President Osmena, who, in 
leaving for the United States, were able to establish a symbolic gov- 
ernment ot the Commonwealth there, which maintained valuable con- 
tact with the American government and people and kept alive their 
interest m me problems of Philippine liberation and post-wiir reha- 
bilitatioii. hven in the darkest period of the occupation, deep in their 
hearts the bilipinos were grateful to Providence for having spared 
those Kvo leaders Irom the Japanese and thus enabled them to carry 
srcred fbes"" Wnmg^^ freedom, like the Vestals of old keeping the 

the occunation. iKe credit is due not to 
x.als and con.^ -asses, intellect- 

fortitude nr ^hke, for their unfailing hope and tenacious 

against ;hrT ''^’ ‘V which the weapons 

with food and^m^ hammered and forged. They helped sustain. 

enemy in the field n ^ — eir part, those men and women fought the 

sahotaced his n ^ engaged in intelligence worh against him and 
offices ^of the machine, from private homes to the high 

his designs or m diverse other ways tried to chechmate 

the Japanese**«n??‘*^ only the men with rifles, who exchanged shots with 
mLy Zu Lds «P resistance forces There were 

lages vvmW • ^ ^ towns and small vil- 

ehing out their 'h offices or private enterprises, or simplv 

Even those who "'"V" ^^'S^tf^ets. who just as effectively resisted, 
hept the steadv ^r attended to their own affairs but by doing so 

deal!. In tnJ farmers tl.n small 

enrich themselves Z the other prime commodities, who did not 

unwittinelv but v, H t of their countrymen—did their part 

to attend to well as a great many others, were able 

Filinino offirJal^*^ through the facilities afforded them by the 

administered thV^ ^ government, whether executives or judges, who 
social and regulations necessary for a well-ordered 

f fh * L relief to the needy, provided 

or e SIC an e infirm, gave employment to released war pri- 
soners, ^ crimes (not war crimes committed against the enemy 

occupan u common crimes against a well-ordered society), endea- 

108 













voreci to protect the people from Japanese abuses and atrocities, and 
gave help and encouragement to those in the resistance forces. All 
these different elements were as gears that meshed together in coor- 
dinated unity, the breaking of even one of which would have caused 
a breakdown of the entire machiner^^ 

The tvvechers of national unity 

Ironically enough, it is men who did not belong to these elements 
who now try to wreck that unity. They are the very" men who lacked 
the moral courage to take up the challenge of the enemy’s rule and who, 
rather than face him in order to protect and comfort the people, escaped 
abroad, or went into hiding in the mountains, or in comparative ano- 
nymity managed to look after and promote their own personal interests, 
coining out only upon the liberation to proclaim themselves the high 
priests of the newly-regained political faith. 

It is easy indeed to be patriotic in an atmosphere of freedom, and 
to parade one s valor after the enemy has gone. To these patriots and 
heroes it matters not that they breed confusion and disunit>\ because, 
having fed at the new trough of political power, they think that con- 
fusion cirjd disunity will help them keep it. They, therefore, created the 
issue of collaboration” and vilify those they call ‘collaborators ’ wi th 
all the aspersions at their command. And some of them, having real- 
ized that their smear campaign in the Philippines has not produced 
among the people the results that they desired, have carried the cam- 
paign to the United States, where apparently they have been accorded 
a warmer reception, being the only ones who have made themselves 
heard. 

Even now the seeds of dissension they have sown are beginning 
to bear fruit. Little do they realize that unity is as necessary now as 
ever before. For as President Osmena has said, “It would be tragic, 
indeed, if at this last stage of our crucial struggle for nationhood we 
should fall apart and be divided against ourselves. We have had 
enough misfortunes and sufferings in this war; we cannot bear any- 
more.’ 

The Filipino^s inescapahle duty 

And yet, to borrow the words of a great contemporary American 
writer, “a united effort is possible only among a people who have taken 
themselves in hand, have written off the losses of the past, and have 
seen that their common concern in so great a crisis transcends all their 
separate interests. In the name of patriotism much evil has been done 
in this world. Yet there come periods in the history of peoples when 
they must resort to their common loyalties and there remember that 
beneath all their differences is a common life. This is such a pe- 
riod. This is a time when the nation is at war not with an enemy 
outside but with encroaching disorder and chaos, and it may well be 
asked of every man that he keep order in his own spirit, and shut the 
door in no other man’s face. ” 



THE END 

109 



Appendix “A” 

THE COMMONWEALTH STAND ON COLLABORATION 

By President Osmena 

A Speech Delivered November 23rd, 1944., Over The Voice of Freedom 

^INCE my return to the Philippines a month ago, it has been my good 
foi-tune to meet a number of guerrilla leaders. The world will long 
remember the •epic stand of the guerrillas. After the fall of Bataan and 
Corregidor and the tragic defeat of the Allied armies in Asia, our people 
found themselves pitted against the might of Japan. Then the guerrilla 
movement came into being. It was the people^s continued fight against the 
invaders. The guerrillas almost without arms at the beginning, hungry 
and unclothed, gave battle to the enemy from every nook and corner of 
the land. For three seemingly interminable years and despite unbelieve- 
able hardships, they carried the torch of freedom, confident that America 
wo'uld not fail them and that MacArthur would fulfill his pledge to return. 

Our nation is justly proud of the guerrillas and the Philippine Gov- 
ernment shall see to it that they are properly rewarded. We have taken 
the initial step of in^brporating all guerrillas recognized by the Military 
Command inio the Philippine Army, with United Stdtes Army pay. 

But in oty.' praise of the guerrilla^ we should not be forgetful of the 
loyal civilian population that was left behind to face the ire of the invader 
and support the guerrillas. It was not possible for all to evade the enemy: 
the fate of the immense majority was to bear the manacles of enslavement. 
Unfortunately, this has given rise to different attitudes and actions in re- 
lation to the Japanese laile causing some misunderstandings among our 
people. This state of affairs has created one of the most serious problems 
with which our Government is confronted. 

We cannot close our eyes to the realities of the Japanese occupation. 
It is cruel and harsh. An arbitrary government has been imposed on the 
Filipino people ^y the sword and the initial misfortune of American and 
. Filipino f\rms left the majority of eighteen million Filipinos no other re- 
course J)ut to submit to a despotic regime if they were to survive. Not 
all public officials could take to the hills to carry on the heroic struggle. 
Some had to remain in their posts to maintain a semblance of government, 
to protect the population from the oppressor to the extent possible by 
human ingenuity and to comfoi*t the people in their misery. Had their 
services not been available, the Japanese would either have themselves gov- 
erned directly and completely or utilized unscrupulous Filipino followers 
capable of any treason to their people. The result would have been cala- 
mitous and the injuries inflicted to our body politic beyond cure. • 

The problem under consideration must be solved with justice and 
dignity. Every case should be examined impartially and decided on its 
own merits. Persons holding public office during enemy occupation, for 
the most part, fall within three categories : those prompted by' a desire to 
protect the people, those actuated by fear of enemy reprisals, and th?ise 

113 




motivated by disloyalty to our government and cause. The motives which 
caused the retention of the office and conduct while in office, rather than 
the sole fact of its occupation, ought to be the criterion upon which such 
persons will be judged. 

Those charged with giving aid and comfort to the enemy, whether 
office holders or private citizens, with being traitors and disloyal to the 
governments of the Philippines and of the United States will be dealt 
with in accordance with law. But for the common good and our national 
welfare, I appeal to all the citizens of the Philippines to support their 
government in meeting its responsibilities by lawful procedures. Persons 
in possession of information on act of disloyalty to the Commonwealth 
Government or that of the United States should report it to the author- 
ities.^ But under no circumstances should any person or group take the 
law into their own hands. 

Ouis is a constitutional government, ours is a community educated 
^01 ms of a Christian civilization. Due respect for the law, rigid 
a eience to those principles established in civilized countries, complete 
o e lence to the decisions of the courts — all these involve forms of char- 
ac ei and high moral attributes that are the possession of enlightened 
coun iis,s like ours. On the threshold of occupying a sovereign place in 
e conceit of free nations, we must live up to our responsibilities. We 
us pioye oui ability to maintain domestic peace and our capacity to 
on ^ Justice. Precisely when the eyes of the civilized world are focused 
ze we cannot allow acts of personal revenge and misguided 

o cast a leflection on our civilization and our ability to maintain 
an or er y government. Ours is a government by law; the splendour 
o 1 s majesty must never be dimmed in our land. 

The dignity and courage of the Filipino people in the face of cala- 
mity have elicited the admiration of the world. With a long tradition of 
peace, the Filipino nevertheless faced war bravely. He died heroically 
when death was demanded of him by the exigencies of battle. Under the 
yianny of the Japanese he toiled to survive. But when the forces of re- 
emption weie compelled to rain death on his home and destroy his prop- 
er y in Older to dislodge the enemy, he was never heard to complain. He 
lea ize that the price of freedom is high and was ready to pay the cost, 
io-day he labors on the wharfs of Tacloban, tills the fields of Leyte and 
ren eis vast service everywhere without hesitation or I’egrets, with the 
ent usiasm of a human being who is again free to shape his destiny. 

As a people we have come of age. We must move forward, just and 
irm but merciful and humane, closely united, animated by the same social 
aspirations to happiness, bound together as a political State by the wise 
dispositions of our Constitution and our laws. God helping me, I shall 
strive to this end. 



114 



Appendix “B” 



A HISTORIC DOCUMENT 

EXCERPTS FROM THE LETTER-MEMORIAL DATED JUNE 20, 19.44 
SENT BY CLARO M. RECTO, THEN FOREIGN MINISTER OF 
THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES, TO AMBASSADOR S. 
MURATA AND LIEUTENANT-GENERAL T. WATI OF THE IM- 
PERIAL JAPANESE ARMY IN THE PHILIPPINES. 

The loiter from which the following excerpts are 
taken xvas written at a time when the Japanese reign 
of terror, prior to the landing of the Americans, was at 
its height, when the dreaded “kempei ” had opened a 
new bloody chapter in their career of torture and mur- 
der, and the Japanese army and navy in the Philip- 
pines were forcibly dispossessing civilians of their 
homes and throwing them out into the streets. 

In that crescendo of crime and iniquity the author, 
who was then Foreign Minister in the Laurel govern- 
ment, dared raise his voice in protest. His letter is a 
vigorous indictment against the Japanese. Brutally 
frank in expression, gory in detail, and thinly disguised 
in its insinuations that the government of the ' Repub- 
lic , much less the Filipinos themselves, could not con- 
ceivably be expected to take the side of Japan in the 
coming showdown with the United States, the letter 
necessarily had to be cloaked in some parts with diplo- 
matic circumlocutions so as not to offend unduly the 
well-known Japanese sensibilities. 

Hence the seeming avowals of an ultimate desire for 
conciliation between the Filipinos and the Japanese, 
despite the fact, known to everybody at the time, that 
the enmity between them was already so deep and so 
bitter as to render any attempt to assuage it on the 
part of the Filipinos worse than futile. 

For the method employed^the fencers thrust and 
parry^the author is eminently qualified. It is known 
only too well to those who, in the halls of the legisla- 
ture or in the columns of the press, have been "touche** 
by his worded rapier and succumbed even before be- 
coming aware that they have been hit. It is even 
suspected that, being a student of the life and works of 

115 



Dr. Rizal, the author emulated, in a comparable u^ay, 
the method of masked attack used by that great hero in 
his *‘Noli Me Tangere** and **El Filibusterismo \ which 
became the bible of the Philippine revolution against 
Spain. 

Primarily intended as propaganda for the people 
and the resistance forces, to bolster their determination 
and morale by depicting the Japanese as they really 
were and the independence which they forced upon the 
Filipinos as a mockery, the letter was addressed to two 
of the top-ranking Japanese officials in the Philippines 
— one' the Ambassador and the other a member of the 
General Staff r-^in order to lull any suspicions wh ich the 
Japanese military as a whole might have. It was, at 
the same time, a last peaceful resort to alleviate and 
minimize the sufferings of the Filipinos at the hands 
of the military occupant. 

How far the attempt succeeded in this last object 
the editor has no means of knowing. But as one of the 
suffering public at the time, he can say that the letter 
was received with considerable if secret enthusiasm by 
the people and those in the resistance movement. Every- 
body divined at once the true motives of the author. 
Mimeographed copies of this letter have been widely 
distributed all over the Philippines by those in the said 
movement, who immediately perceived its tremendous 
propaganda value. 

Whatever the letter did accomplish, it cannot but 
e c eaj to the reader, particularly if he was in the 
hdippines during the occupation, that to have written 

required the highest courage and the deepest feeling 
for the welfare and happiness of the people. 

— EditoFs Note. 



J IS deeply to be regretted that, notwithstanding the liberal policies 
ai own by the Tokyo Government and carried out in their larger 
aspects by its able lepresentatives here, little has been accomplished, as 
a matter of fact, to eliminate the feeling of distrust and hostility which 
a consider able portion of our people continue to entertain towards the 
present regime. This fact requires a word of explanation lest the Jap- 

116 







anese Governmant, unaware of the real reasons behind the present attitude 
of this portion of the Filipino people, should come to regard all of them, 
in general, as ungrateful, unwilling or unable to appreciate Tokyo^s libe- 
ral policies towards the Philippines. For the Filipinos are an innately 
grateful people, and it would be unjust to accuse them of ingratitude 
simply because they have so far not shown the degree of cooperation 
which Japan had expected of them. 

The explanation seems to be simple enough. It may be found, in 
the first place, in the psychology of the common people, not only in this 
country but everywhere. Here as elsewhere the common man is less con- 
cerned with high policies, great issues or abstract principles than with 
matters that intimately affect him, his livelihood, his individual rights, the 
welfare of his family and of the small community to which he belongs. 
If he is treated with discrimination, arrogance and cruelty, if he is throivn 
nut of his house 'ivithout any other place of his own where to go, if his 
property is confiscated without what he believes to he just compensation, 
or if he is driven to desperation as a result of the present situation, he 
finds himself losing faith in the Republic and feeling aggrieved against 
Japan. It is then quite difficult to hnpress him with the display of his 
country*s flag, with generous donations of clothing and medicines, or with 
such liberal policies as condonation of Armv loans to the Republic, the 
restoration of public properties to his government, the. establishment of 
a new Philippine currency replacing the military scrip now in use on a 
basis of parity with the yen, etc. These high matters of government 
policy interest the man in the street or the barrio folk but little if 
at all. The real determinants of his attitpde and conduct tow^ards Japan 
and the Japanese continue to be the incidents of everyday life, the things 
that happen to him, to his family, to his friends, and to his neighbors. 
For the Filipino is both simple and worldly-wise. He bases his judgment 
on the things he sees around him however seemingly unimportant these 
may be. A little act of kindness and consideration is worth to him in- 
calculably more than a thousand words of propaganda. 

Nor is the situation among the more enlightened classes any better. 
One would think that being more reasonable and less sentimental than the 
common masses, they would be more inclined to Judge matters solely on a 
plan of abstract issues and principles. The truth, however, is that while 
the educated Filipino who sees the kind of treatment that is meted out to 
him and his neighbors may be less emotional and violent in his reactions, 
he is nonetheless deeply affected. With him the violent emotional reac- 
tion of the common man becomes a coolly reasoned conviction. Precisely 
because he is educated, his sensibilities are more easily violated by acts 
of injustice, cruelty, discrimination, offensive behavior, and lack of con- 
sideration. Moreover, he is better able to distinguish beUveen truth and 
projmganda, sincerity and pretense. He knoivs ivhat independence means 
and what an independent country shoidd be, if it were truly independent. 
He knoivs the intimate relationship beUveen political sovereignty and eco- 
nomic indep)endence. He understands much better the difference between 

117 



xvord and deed, between promise and realization, hetiveen principle and 
action. 

In view of these facts, we cannot but admit that one of the most im- 
portant and pressing problems which confront the Filipino leaders today 
is how to convince the people of the reality of Philippine videpe7idence 
in order that they may all support the Government of the Republic and 
cooperate with the Japanese Forces by livmg in peace, and eiigaging in 
usefid and productive activities. 

When independence was proclaimed in October, 1943, a great many 
of those who doubted Japan^s true intentions towards the Philippines 
showed a willingness to change their attitude. They had high hopes for 
the newly established Republic, and expected to see a material improvement 
in the conditions then existing, particularly in the relations between Jap- 
anese and Filipinos, and between the Japanese and the Philippine author- 
ities. There was, nevertheless, a good portion of the Filipino people ivho 
fea^'ed that Philippine independence ivould not be 7 'eal but tvas behig de- 
cla7'ed merely for propaga7ida purposes. 

From the time the Republic was established, therefore, it has been 
the constant endeavor of the Filinino leaders to promote and maintain 
its prestige in the eyes of their own people, and to have it exercise as 
much as possible the powers and prerogatives to which the government 
of a sovereign state is entitled, saving only the limitations arising from 
the exigencies of the war situation as defined in the Pact of Alliance 
between the Philippines and Japan. To this end, we have appealed to our 
p3ople, trying to convince them that the independence of our country is 
real, that Japan's intentions in sponsoring and recognizing it were sincere, 
and that therefore they should have faith in their Government, assisting 
it in the work that it is doing, and cooperating to the fullest extent with 
the Japanese authorities in the Philippines for the accomplishment of the 
noble purpose envisaged in the said Pact of Alliance. 

If tho Filipino leaders have not thus far been as successful in their 
efforts as might be desired, their failure is due to a number of causes, 
many of them traceable to certain practices which should have been dis- 
contmued after our independence was declared. Foremost among these is 
^ ^ of treatment to which, from the very beginning of the occupation 
of the Philippines, a great number of our people have been subjected. In 
order to better appreciate the hann that has been done as a result of such 
tieatmenu, an understanding of the Filipino character and psychology is 
necessary. One of the distinguishing traits of the Filipino is his deep 
sense of gratitude and obligation. He is very eager to make friends and 
would even sacrifice principle in the name of friendship. But he is an 
extiemely sensitive individual, sensitive to an act of kindness and genero- 
sity as well as to slight insult or injury. A kind act touches both his 
sense of gi’atitude and loyalty and he will not feel at ease until he has 
reciprocated it in even greater measure than he has received. This was 
shown by the attitude of the Filipinos upon the outbreak of the Greater 
East Asia War. Believhig that Ame7'ica had been khid and gene 7 'ous to 



118 



them and that therefore they had a debt of gratitude totvarde that coun- 
try, and that in fighting by her side they were fighting for the independ- 
ence of the Philipphies, the Filipinos did not hesitate to throw their Jot 
tvith the Americans in the first stages of the war. Irrespective of what 
one may say as to whether or not the virtue in this case was misplaced, 
the virtue itself remains a sound and admirable trait. As a matter of 
fact, it can or should become the basis for the establishment of enduring 
friendly relations between the Japanese and Filipino peoples. For to the 
extent that Japan will treat the Filipinos with justice and understanding, 
to that extent also will she receive the full measure of Filipino gratitude 
and loyalty. Needless to say, a contraiy policy is bound to produce a 
contraiy result, for the ^Filipinos are, as I have already stated, a sensitive 
people. An in fury done to him, to his family, to his friends or to his 
counti'ymen will breed in him a feeling of bittemiess and hostility that will 
not be easy to eradicate. 

Another basic trait of the Filipinos is their pride of race and nation- 
ality. They resent an affront to their dignity as a people and as indiv- 
iduals. In this respect they are not unlike the Japanese. Japan’s appeal 
to the Filipinos on the ground of racial affinity and equality touches a 
responsive chord in their hearts, and a concrete manifestation of the avow’- 
als to this effect, both in act and in deed, would prove to be one of the 
most potent factors making for enduring friendship between the two peo- 
ples. Thus acts of discrimination should be avoided, and if a Japanese 
treats a Filipino with arrogance, or if a Japanese goes unpunished for a 
wi*ong done to a Filipino, or if more severe punishment is imposed upon 
a Filipino wrongdoer than is imposed upon a Japanese who commits a 
similar offense, or if when a Filipino is unjustly maltreated by Japanese 
civilians he can neither retaliate nor act in simple self-defense and there- 
foi’^ must nurse in his heart a sense of helpless resentment and anger: 
and if the Filipinos see that Japanese subjects not in the Armed Forces 
nor in the service of the Embassy act as if they are complq.tely exempt 
from the operation of Philippine laws and under an authority over and 
above that of the Republic, or if they see that the militaiy authorities 
exercise unlimited jurisdiction over the lives and properties of Filipino 
citizens in total disregard of the prestige and authority of the Govern- 
ment of the Republic, — all these make the Filipinos doubt the sense of 
fairness of the Japanese and breed in them the belief that the principles 
of state sovereignty and of racial equality and reciprocity do not apply 
to the relations between Japanese and Filipinos in the Philippines. 

It is regrettable that the basic psychological traits of our people have 
not been appreciated. Knowledge of them might have avoided ..the use 
of methods which, while perhaps effective in dealing with the peoples of 
other countries, are not suited to the nature, education, and character of 
the Filipinos. 

The practice, for instance, of slapping Filipinos in the face, of tying 
them to posts or making them kneel in public, at times in the heat of the 
sun, or beating them — this upon the slightest fault, mistake or provocation, 

119 






or without any other reason than failure to understand each other^s lan- 
guage, — is certain to create resentment on the part not only of the victim 
but also of the members of his family, his friends, and the general public. 
Even more serious is the practice of inflicting cruel, unusual and exces- 
sive punishment upon persons arrested on mere suspicion, during their in- 
vestigation and before their guilt has been established. There have even 
been cases wherein, because of overcrowding in public places, such as street 
cars, some Japanese, military or civilian, who were inadvertently jostled 
or pushed, immediately slapped or beat the persons they thought guilty 
of pushing them. 

Thousands of cases have been reported of people being either burned 
alive, killed at the point of bayonet, beheaded, beaten without mercy, or 
otherwise subjected to various niethods of physical torture, without dis- 
tinction as to age or sex. Women and children below fifteen years are 
known to have been among those who w’ere the victims of such punish- 
ment. On many occasions, these killings and punishments were purposely 
done in public. In my home-town alone, Tiaong, Tayabas, over one hun- 
dred were summarily executed during the “zonification’* of the people 
there shortly before the inauguration of the Republic. The same thing 
was done in Lopez, Tayabas, where not less than this number of people 
were put to death as recently as March, 1944 , upon no evidence but the 
1C enti ication by a secret infonner. The cases of these municipalities are 
meie y cited as typical instances of what are common occurrences in other 
municipalities all over the Islands. The unfortunate thing about all this 
a m many cases the victims are really innocent of any crime but 
aie punis ^ merely upon suspicion or upon false denunciation by infor- 
mers w 0 harboi some private or personal grudge against them, or if 
ey are gui t-y at all, do not deserve the excessive penalties inflicted upon 
them. Many have no fault at all except the fact that they have sons or 
10 eis who aie members of ‘‘guerrilla^^ bands, or that they have given 
00 or tempoiaiy shelter to the latter, under threat of death or physical 
injuiies. If they do not die as a result of the punishment — many do — 
ey are released maimed, crippled, sick and naturally with a feeling of 
1 injustice done to them, a feeling that is 

, y theii families and friends and by those who have knowledge 
01 such things. 

Many also aie the cases wherein people have been arrested taken for 
then disappear completely. No information is ever given 
o eii le atives as to their whereabouts and the nature of the charges 
against t ern. While the Philippine Government justifiably feels that it 
as a ue: t to intervene and ought to intervene in matters which involve 
the ives and welfare of its citizens, it has not even gone to that extent but 
as meie y tiied to help the people who come to it for assistance in secur- 
ing infoimation concerning those whose disappearance has been reported 
after having been arrested by the Japanese authorities. In many cases, 
however, no information whatever concerning their whereabouts or the 
nature of the charges against them could be obtained. 

120 



The proclamation of the independence of the Philippines and the es- ^ 

tablishment of the Government of the Republic have not minimized these ^ 

occurrences. They used to be done before and they have continued and * 

continue to be done now. Most of the to\vns in the provinces are still 
actually governed by the commanders of the local Japanese garrisons, who 
treat the municipal mayors as their subordinates even to the extent of v 

beating them publicly, and who continue to arrest and punish people with- -.r 

out advising either the local civil authorities or the national government, 
and naturally without turning over the accused persons to the authorities 
of the Republic. The only sign of independence is the display of the Fili- . 

pino flag. Even Japanese civilians consider themselves above Philippine j- 

laws, and Filipinos working in Japanese companies are punished sum- 
marily by their employers instead of being turned over to the appropriate 
Philippine authorities. 

Because of all these, a considerable number of Filipinos believe that i 

the basic principles underlying the Joint Declaration of Greater East Asia 
and the Pact of Alliance have been nullified in actual practice. For they 
know that in both these documents the basic condition of the collabora- 
tion between the Philippines and Japan is mutual respect of sovereignty. 

And to the extent that such respect has not been observed, to that extent 
also do these Filipinos feel that these documents have lost intrinsic force 
and value. 

Another matter that needs to be mentioned is the practice of exacting 
collective responsibility for individual acts. If a ‘^guerrilla” happens, foi 
instance, to ride in a carretela vith other peace-loving and law-abiding ^ 

citizens who are completely unaware of the former’s identity, and that 
‘‘guerrilla” is arrested, all those who, by pure accident, are riding with 
him, are also arrested and punished in the same way. Or, when a “guer- ' 

rilla” is discovered and arrested in one of the small roadside eating places 
icarinderia) in the provinces, the owner of the place and all those who 
happen to be eating there at the time are also arrested and punished. 

Similarly, entire barrios and municipalities have been placed in concentra- 
tion, or their inhabitants exterminated, because they have been unable to 
prevent “guerrillas” from ambushing and attacking Japanese soldiers pas 
sing there, or because some “guerrillas” happened to repair to the place ^ 

and Exacted food or other commodities of the innocent folk, who found 
themselves helpless because of the threats or coeixiion emploved. Often- 
times there is no distinction between innocent and guilty, between old and 
young, or between strong or weak, to such an extent that there have been 
instances where women and children below fifteen have died as a result 
of the concentration, excessive punishments and outright executions. In 
fact, the innocents are usually the only ones who suffer, because the cul- 
pi’its manage to get out or otherwise escape punishment. While in other 
countries the exaction of collective responsibility may be justified, in the 
Philippines it is hardly so, because for hundreds of years the Filipinos 
have been an individualistic people. Besides the fact that they are Ma- 
lays who are by nature individualistic, their contact with the highly indi- 

121 






vidualistic Spaniards and Americans has further developed this racial 
trait. The Filipino does not usually concern himself with the affairs of 
his neighbor and consequently does not feel that he should be held to 
account for them. Admitting that there is need to change this Filipino 
trait, it seams unreasonable to expect that this change can be effected 
in a day or a year by forcible and violent methods. It will take a long 
time and a great deal of training before the Filipinos can learn to live 
and think and act collectively, and thus to them the punishment of the 
group for a misdeed of some of them is hard to understand and consti- 
tutes a grave foiTn of injustice. The Filipinos must be treated with un- 
derstanding and patient indulgence if their efforts at re-orientation are 
to succeed. 

One other thing which constitutes a source of mounting dissatisfac- 
tion among the people, particularly in the City *of Manila, is the fact that 
many of them have been and are being ordered to evacuate their homes 
so that the same may be occupied by personnel of the Imperial Japanese 
Aimy and Navy. While in the beginning the needs of the Army and 
Navy foi accommodation were attended to with dispatch and with as little 
inconvenience as possible to the house owners and tenants, the situation 
has come to such a point that it is no longer possible to do so \vithout 
actually driving them out into the streets, with no place where they could 
bv. shwlteied. It is not a question of unwillingness but of physical impos- 
sibility for the people to vacate their homes and transfer to others. It is 
of common knowledge that the housing situation in Manila is already very 
acute, and hence further demands for evacuation of private resid- 
ences can only mean that great numbers of people must stay homeless. 
The Government has received numerous appeals for assistance in this con- 
nection, but unless the military and naval authorities themselves take the 
necessaiy steps to remedy the situation, no solution to these appeals is 
humanly possible. 

provinces, large tracts of land have been taken over for 
e p anting of cotton, horai rice, or for the construction of airfields and 
ot ei militaiy installations, in most cases without compensation or even 
a word of explanation given to the owners. If the land taken over is 

property, no question can possibly arise, since 
e vepublic is only too willing to provide every facility for Japanese 
miitaiy operations, and where the property belongs to wealthy people, 
sue summary procedure causes no serious injury and may be tolerated. 
In the majority of cases, however, the lands thus taken over belong to 
sma aimers who own nothing else except such lands on which they are 
comp etely dependent for their livelihood. It is believed that in such cases 
a moie tactful policy should be followed by giving the necessary explana- 
tion to the small landowners and making arrangements so that they may 
be compensated for the use of their property either by the Japanese Gov- 
ernment or the Government of the Republic, as the case may be. 

The incidents and practices which I have described are the cause 
of constant requests for assistance received by the Philippine Government 
from the people concerned, and in making representations in their behalf 

122 



to the Japanese authorities, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs finds itself 
in the strange role of an 'embassy trying, none too successfully, to protect 
its nationals in the foreign counti'y to which it is accredited. 

It is for the foregoing reasons that many Filipinos seem to have but 
little faith in their government today. They doubt the reality of their 
country's independence. They consider it as hardly anything more than 
the display of the Filipino flag, since independence has not minimized the 
rigors of military rule, particularly in the provinces. They believe that 
the sovereignty of the Republic which Japan has solemnly pledged to re- 
spect, both under the principles embodied in the Joint Declaration of Greater 
East Asia and the provisions of the Pact of Alliance, is not receiving the 
consideration it deserves from those who can best give it reality and 
substance by their own example. Even in Manila the people believe that 
independence has meaning only for those in the high councils of the gov- 
ernment, but none for the ordinary citizens. It becomes, therefore, an in- 
creasingly difficult task for the Filipino leaders to convince their people 
of the noble intentions of Japan in waging the present war and of the 
sincerity of the pronouncements of the Japanese leaders that Japan came 
to the Philippines not as conqueror but as liberator. It is difficult for 
many Filipinos to conceive of Japan as it really is — a nation with a high 
culture and advanced civilization — because not having been to Japan and 
not knowing enough of its history, literature or the spirit of its people, 
they have nothing on which to formulate their opinions except what they 
actually see and experience in the Philippines, the treatment that they 
receive at the hands of some Japanese, the injuries that they suffer, the 
personal indignities to which they are subjected, the inability of their 
Government to accord them adequate protection and the consequent em- 
barrasment which the Republic has to suffer. . . 

* ‘ ♦ * * ♦ ♦ 

In this connection, it may be recalled how snontaneous was the re- 
sponse of the Filipinos to the early pronouncements of the Japanese lead- 
ers who came to the Philippines — that Asia is for the Asians, that Japan 
entered the war for the liberation of the Orient, and that the purpose 
of the Japanese expedition here was to emancipate the Filipinos, to let 
them establish ^‘the Philippines for the Filipinos’^ as a member of the Co- 
Prosperity Sphere, and to have them enjoy their own prosperity and cul- 
ture. They had high hopes for the new regime that was ushered in 
under such noble and lofty principles. Their enthusiasm, however, was 
gradually dampened, and they suffered disappointment after disanpoint- 
ment on account of the variance between those attractive pronouncements 
and the events which they actually saw happening and which still continue 
to happen. If the ‘^guerrillas’’ have not been diminished, if indeed some 
of our youth have chosen to join the ranks and shown signs lately of 
activities which are distinctly political in character, it must be because 
of such disappointment and the doubt engendered in their minds as to 
the sincerity of the pronouncements that gave them so much hope before. 



123 



' \ I ^ ■ • < ' ' 



Hundreds of cases where Filipinos were the victims of the happenings 
to which I have referred have come to the attention of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. Needless to say, many hundreds more and even thou- 
sands of similar cases have never been reported to the Philippine author- 
ities either because the aggrieved parties were afraid of reprisals or 
because they have come to the conclusion that this Republic is impotent 
to offer protection to its own citizens, and, thinking it impossible to obtain 
any redress or satisfaction, have prefeiu'ed to suffer in silence. • But they 
are matters of common knowledge and are the subject of daily talks 
among the people. 

Where innocent and law-abiding private citizens are involved the 
prestige of the Philippine Government suffers from the fact that these 
persons, their relatives and friends are thereafter convinced that this Gov- 
ernment has neither power nor courage to intervene in behalf of its citi- 
zens. Cases involving government officials and employees are even more 
significant because the maltreatment of govemment officials constitutes, 
in the eyes at least of our people, a serious reflection on the prestige and 
authoiity of the Government itself. How, in these circumstances, can we 
demand that our people respect and have confidence in the Government 
Renublic when they see that the duly authorized representatives 
of this Government receive such scant consideration on the part of cer- 
tain Japanese elements in the Philippines? Is it not natural for a great 
poition of oui people to believe that this Government is only a puppet, 
aving no independent authority of its own, seeing that it is often subject 
to dictation if not violent interference by the Japanese authorities? 

Cases of this nature become all the more serious when they involve 
the arrest of high ranking authorities of the Government. Without going 
to the extent of claiming that such officials should be exempt from the 
operation of military law, it seems reasonable to propose that the arrest 
of all such officials be done only with the knowledge and consent of the 
President of the Republic of the Philippines. The arrest sometime ago 
ot Ur. Jose B. L. Reyes, Assistant Solicitor-General and Legal Adviser 
to the President, is a case in point. Regardless of the merits of this 
fu ^ D? would have been expedient at least to have consulted 

e lesi ent on the matter in order to find the best means of doing what 
was necessaiy to be done without bringing needless embai'rassment upon 
*■ „!. of the Republic. For, certainly, the damage that one such 

official can do to the present regime is little compared to the grave in- 
jury that the entire Government must suffer whenever it is thus rudely 
Ignored and humiliated before the eyes of its own people. 

♦ ♦ , 

* * sjc :»t 

The question suggests its own remedy. Under the terms of the Pact 
of Alliance, the Filipino people are called upon to render the closest pos- 
sible economic, political and military collaboration with Japan for the 
purpose of safeguarding the territorial integrity and independence of the 
Republic. As far as the resources of the nation are concerned these have 

124 



been placed entirely at the disposal of the Japanese Government. But in 
order to create a united and resolute attitude among the Filipinos in sup- 
port of the Pact, it is necessary to convince and persuade them that they 
have a country to defend and an independence to safeguard, and that the 
basic principle of the Pact of Alliance — mutual respect for sovereignty 
and territory — is fully observed and upheld. They must be made to feel 
that this country belongs to them, that they are masters in their own 
land, that the independence which they have proclaimed and which Japan 
has recognized is real and authentic. For how, otherwise, would it be 
possible to induce the Filipino people, or any people for that matter, to 
defend a country that they may not call their own, or to safeguard an 
independence that does not exist? 

In other words, the Filipino must be given a real stake in the war. 
He must be given something concrete to fight for — his land, his home, 
his honor, his freedom and independence, the sovereignty of his Republic — 
something that will invest with living substance such high principles as 
Asia for the Asians or such large ideals as the establishment of the Co- 
Prosperity Sphere. 

An invidious comparison is often made between the single-minded and 
passionate determination of the Japanese people and the disunited and 
rukewarm attitude of the Filipino people, implying that there must be 
something fundamentally wrong with the Filipinos. There is no truth 
in this however. The Filipinos fought for their freedom against over- 
whelming odds during four centuries of their history. And they will do 
so again, valiantly and without counting the cost, with a determination 
not less passionate than that of any other people, whenever they are con- 
vinced that it is their freedom and their honor they are fighting for. 
Consider the attitude and conduct of the Filipinos upon the outbreak of 
the war in East Asia. The Filipinos fought on the side of America — 
for what? Certainly not to further the interests and ambitions of America 
in the Orient, but to defend a land where they had enjoyed a measure of 
dignity and freedom, and to assure the independence which had been pro- 
mised to them at a future time. If the Filipinos willingly fought for a 
dignity and freedom which was far from complete and for an independ- 
ence which lay far in the future, with what greater readiness would they 
not fight to defend a dignity and freedom which is complete and an inde- 
pendence which is both actual and real? 

^ * H. * * * 



125 






Appendix “C’ 

TRUMAN. ICKES AND OSMENA ON COLLABORATION 

1. COMMUNICATION FROM SECRETARY ICKES 



“Washington, D. C. 

“September 11, 1945 

“Hon. Sergio Osmeha 
“President of the Philippines 
“Manila 

“Both official and press reports indicate that a substantial number 
of persons who adhered to the enemy and gave him aid and comfort 
through their service in the puppet governments during invasion are now 
holding import«ant offices in various branches of the Commonwealth Gov- 
ernment including judiciary. I am informed that you intend to release 
numerous persons against whom evidence was collected by the United 
States Army. Your attention is invited to the statement of President 
Roosevelt on June 29, 1944, that those who have collaborated with the 
enemy must be removed from authority and influence over the political 
and economic life of the country. It was intended that this statement 
would serve as a guide to the policy of the Commonwealth and that the 
Commonwealth would find the means of effectively investigating charges 
and speedily trying the offenders before courts or tribunals composed of 
judges of unquestioned loyalty. I deem it essential that this task be com- 
pleted before the holding of the next Commonwealth general elections and 
I would call the attention of your Government to the probable reluctance 
with which funds may be appropriated for relief rehabilitation and sup- 
port of the Commonwealth Government if it becomes generally believed 
that that government has failed diligently and firmly to convict and 
punish those guilty of collaboration. 



“HAROLD L. ICKES 
**Secretary of the Interior^* 



127 



2. REPLY OF PRESIDENT OSMEl^A 



‘‘Manila, Sept. 12, 1945 

“Hon. Harold L. Ickes 
“Secretary of the Interior 
“Washington, D. C. 

In reply to your telegram of September eleven I desire to state 
that infoimation given you that I intend to release numerous persons 
against whom evidence was collected by the U. S. Army is erroneous stop 
Persons kept in detention by Counter Intelligence Corps of U. S. Army 
and later delivered" to the Commonwealth Government have been ordered 
etained by me even beyond the period of six hour’s permitted by the cri- 
mina aws of the Philippines stop A few of them have bean temporarily 
le eased on bail as determined by the Department of Justice pending pre- 
sentation of charges against them and their trial before the courts stop 
e 1 ippine Congress has enacted a law creating a special court to try 
a persons accused of collaboration with the enemy stop The judges of 
IS court will be persons who never served in any capacity under the 
puppet governments and the prosecutors are chiefly recruited from Army 
ju ge a voeates and guerrilla leaders stop Doubtless the prosecution of 
wilTh collaborators will be diligently conducted and those found guilty 
nev°r ^ Punished in accordance with law paragraph We have 

nev.i knowingly reinstated any official whom the U. S. Anny authorities 

continul collaboration stop Several officials and employees who 

act aeain-s'Tth di Posts during the puppet regime but committed no hostile 
bv me in le ^ American Government have been reinstated 

the CountPi Judicial branches after they had been cleared by 

bar shortlv ^ expressed in a speech I delivered last Novem- 

suitation wit^ I " Leyte and after con- 

collaboration hetd"in wIsh-’*T conferences on the subject of 

by me and lai-nv k ^^^^'^Ston with Secretary of War Stimson first 
tially approved ecietary Hernandez this Leyte speech was substan- 

enunciated by PresicLnt^T^^ pursuance of the policy 

y resident Roosevelt on the subject. 

“SERGIO OSME5JA.” 



J- PRESIDENT TRUMAN’S DIRECTIVE 



HILE the mass of the Filipino people and many of their leaders re- 
■ . ® aunc y loyal during invasion and rendered invaluable as- 

sis ance o oui arms, it is necessary to admit that many persons sei’ved 
under the puppet government’s sponsored by the enemy. 

128 



Some of these, especially those engagred in health and educational 
work, remained at posts of duty with an evident intention to sustain the 
physical and cultural welfare of their people. Others of the clerical and 
custodial services continued in office in order to earn their accustomed 
livelihood and participated in no way in enemy policy. 

But, regretably, a number of persons prominent in the political life 
of the country assisted the enemy in the foimiulation and enforcement of 
his political policies and the spread of his propaganda. Others in the 
field of trade and finance seized upon the occasion to enrich themselves 
in property and money at the expense of their counti’ymien. 

Reports have appeared in the press which indicate that a number of 
persons who gave aid and comfort to the enemy are now holding impor- 
tant offices in the Commonwealth government. Reports further indicate 
that the Commonwealth Government is only beginning to investigate, 
charge, and try the offenders. 

It is essential that this task be completed before the holding of the 
next Commonwealth general election. Considering that disloyalty to the 
Commonwealth is disloyalty to the United States, I request that you send 
experienced personnel to the Philippines to discover the status and to re- 
commend such action as may be appropriately taken by the United States. 
Such recommendations should be made through the United States High 
Commissioner to the Philippine Islands. 

I am further requesting that the secretaries of War and Navy direct 
the staffs of their intelligence sections to cooperate \vith you and make 
available to you all records and evidence bearing on this important pro- 
blem. Representatives of the Federal bureau of Investigation assigned to 
the Philippines should be directed to report through the United States 
High Commissioner in connection with this and other operations in the 
Philippine Islands. 



129 



Appendix ‘‘D’’ 



ASIATIC MONROEISM” 

A PREDICTION THAT CAME TRUE 



THE RECTO-KALAW DEBATE IN 1927 ON THE SUBJECT OF 
“ASIATIC MONROEISMS 

** Asiatic Monroeism**, the predecessor of Japan s East Asia Co- 
Prosperity Sphere**, uias the subject of a lively political debate carried 
on through the TVT (Tribune, Yanguardia, Taliba) publications in the 
year 1927 between Prof. Maximo M. Kalaw, then Dean of the College 
of liberal arts and professor of Political Science in the University of the 
Philippines, and Attorney Claro M. Pecto. then the leader of the oppo- 
sition in the Philippine House of Pepresentatives. The debate started 
with an article by Mr. Pecto, entitled ^‘Philippine independence and the 
balance of Power in the Far East,** of which the following are excerpts: 

He He * * * * 

An imperialistic Japan or an imperiatistic China cannot for this 
reason be considered out of tune in our picture of the future. The Chinese 
are much too busy with their domestic strife to be an immediate menace 
to their neighbors or to the world. Nor will China, for some time to come, 
be in a position to lead any Pan-Asiatic movement for the exclusion of 
the whites from the paradise of the Pacific. Being scarcely able to help 
herself, she will not be able to help others. But Japan, which has an 
admirable national discipline and a lofty, pure patriotism that have made 
her one of the first powders of the world and the first in the East, has 
annexed Korea and Formosa (the latter by cession on the part of China), 
and has established a foothold in a goodly portion of Chinese territorv. I 
refer particularly to Manchuria, where the disorganization of the Peking 
Government and the Russian debacle after 1917 have helped to strengthen 
the political and economic sway of Japan. 

It is true that when Japan annexed Korea and Fonnosa, she alleged 
reasons of national security, because the occupation of these two coun- 
tries by a western power would have imperilled her integrity and inde- 
pendence. She invoked the same reasons when she presented the famous 
twenty-one demands to China, alleging that in view of the chaos that 
prevailed in the neighboring republic, a third power might seize one 01 
more of the strategic points thereof and from them menace Japan diiectly. 
But these explanations did not satisfy the world, much less the Koreans 
and the Chinese, and the accusation still exists that the real motive of 
Japan was not, in the case of Korea, to check Russian advance, but to 
acquire new territories to take care of her surplus population and supply 
her with, raw materials, which the soil of Japan produces in limited quan- 
tities or not at all, and in the case of China, to acquire a good market 

131 



for her industrial products. This need for new territories continues to be 
one of the most pressing problems by which Japan is confronted, because 
Korea and Japan are excessively populated and, on the other hand, the 
United States, Australia, and New Zealand have established unsurmount- 
able barriers against immigration of Japanese. Even in East Siberia, 
Manchuria, and Mongolia, Japan encounters not only an obstacle in Russia 
but also the annoying opposition of the United States, which country, while 
it enforces the Monroe Doctrine on the continent of America, demands 
the policy of the open door in the Far East. 

When Japan finds herself without a market for her manufactured 
products owing to ever higher pi'otective tariff barriers of Europe and 
America; when she feels herself smothering under the density of her popu- 
lationy which foreign exclusion latvs prevent from emigrating ; and when 
she can no longer hear the weight of taxation, which increases in direct 
proportion to the groiving volume of her naval budget, because the dis- 
armament conferences have so far been itnahle to stop the powers in their 
mad race for amnament, it tvill not be surpmsing if she then decides to 
expand along the line of least resistance, where she will find an independ' 
ent Philippines lohose defenceless coasts are wide open to any one desiring 
to enter. 

On the other hand, China, as soon as she has finally settled her most 
important domestic problems, such as the definite reconstitution of her 
government and the straightening out of her finances, will be a powerful 
new factor that we must consider with regard to our security from the 
outside. The density of China’s population will force it to overflow the 
Chinese frontiers. Chinese immigration, if not circumscribed within 
proper limits, will be one of the most difficult problems that will con- 
front our country. As in the United States, it will not be a racial pro- 
blem but an essentially economic problem. The Chinese, whose business 
ability far surpasses ours (it has been seen in practice that where a 
Chinese has established his business and a Filipino in competition, the 
latter has always been compelled to close shop, though his customers 
were all Filipinos), will become the absolute owners of our trade, and as 
legards competition in hianual labor, the Chinese laborer, owing to his 
lower standard of living and his better habits of social discipline, will 
end by driving the native from field and shop. This will be the origin 
of serious social problems which are liable to imperil the stability of our 
national structure. 

There cannot be any talk of exclusion laws, because such laws can be 
enacted only by a country which has a navy, like the United States, with 
which to enforce such laws by terror or intimidation. Moreover, any inci- 
dent in which a Chinese or Japanese loses his life will be sufficient to 
bi ing about intervention on the part of the country concerned, with its 
sequel of naval demonstrations, the landing of troops, punitive expeditions, 
and pecuniary indemnities, if not loss of territory or of the national inde- 
pendence. 



An Asiatic Monroeism will, therefore, bring with it no advantages, 
but serious disadvantages as far as the Philippines is concerned. For- 
tunately, in view of the policy which the United States has decidedly 
adopted in this hemisphere, we may discard Asiatic Monroeism as a per- 
manent solution to the problems of the FaV East. Neither the United 
States nor the British dominions in the Pacific will consent to it. As to 
domination of the East by the western powers, this is a supposition that 
must also de eliminated, because Japan and China will fight to the bitter 
end to prevent it, and the United States and Great Britain will not care 
to engage in a war so costly and of such uncertain results, the unjust 
provocation of which on their part would destroy their prestige in the 
eyes of the world. 

The best plan, not only as regards world peace but also as far as 
the future of the Philippines is concerned, seems to be to create a balance 
in the Pacific between the powers of the East and those of the West which 
have large economic interests here, stich as the United States and Great 
Britain, a balance of power similar to that which has existed and exists 
in Europe, and which in that old continent* has served to insure the inde- 
pendence and integrity of the small states. But that balance of power in 
the East will have to be established not only without sacrificing the sover- 
eignty of small countries like the Philippines, but on the condition that 
such sovereignty shall be respected and preserved, in the interest of the 
powers themselves, in order to prevent any of them from obtaining ad- 
vantages to the prejudice of the others. 

The powers must maintain the balance in the Far East on the basis 
of the independence of the Philippines and of the other countries of Asia. 
They must extend to our countiy the doctrine of the open door which they 
preached for China, the basic conditions of which are respect for her 
sovereignty and the maintenance of her territorial integrity. 

We do not want the white race to 't'lde the Far East; but we do not ^ 
ivant, either, to have an Asiatic Monroe Doctrine established here under 
the leadership of Japan or China, because tve do not ivant to be absorbed 
by any power of the East, as certain small republics of Central and South 
America have been or will be absorbed by the United States. Just as the 
motto '‘America for the Americans'' became in time "America for the 
United States of America," so, we fear, the slogan "Asia for the Asiatics 
will in practice be replaced by "Asia for Japan" or "Asia for China, as 
the case may be. We desire the Western influence to remain in the Fai 
East, but only to the extent necessary to effectively check any improper 
influence by China and Japan. 

The United States, Great Britain, and the British dominions in the’ 
Pacific will be able, if they so desire, to play the part of the regulator in 
the Far East. 

August, 1927. 

A jew clays after the preceding article appeared in the newspapers 
^Tribune *, ‘Vanguardia * and 'Taliba , Professor Kalaw published in 

133 



■ 










the same newspapers an article entitled ''An Asiatic Monroe Doctrine 
us. The Balance of Power \ in which he dissented from the views ex- 
pressed in Mr. Recto s article. Professor Kalaw condensed his conclu- 
sions in the following paragraphs: 

‘‘The balance of power has at times prevented war or postponed war; 
but it has also caused wars and terrible wars. Unnatural alliances, in- 
trigues, territorial ambitions, secret treaties, and competitive armaments 
are the by-products of the system. It has many times sacrificed the fate 
of small nations. It has often become a cloak under which sovereigns or 
peoples have committed the most atrocious crimes. 

With Asia left to the Asiatics, may we not conceive of other probable 
balances of power among Asiatic nations themselves? May not other na- 
tions still submerged, like Java and India and an enlarged Siam be, toge- 
ther with an independent Philippines, of sufficient strength to offset the 
possible aggressive ambitions of China or Japan? 

I see no other course of action of the Philippines except to be with 
Asia. Geographically and racially we belong to Asia. We must stand 
by her; we must have faith in her. I, for one, believe that given the 
time and opportunity, Asia can take care of herself. 

Across the consciousness of the entire continent from the barren wastes 
of .^.rabia to the sunny fields of Japan, the widting can be plainly read. 
White domination must go. 

We have come to the end of the white man^s world domination,^ says 
Upton Close. ‘We have come to the beginning of the white and colored 
man s joint world in which each shall have control in his own house and 
a proportionate say in the general convocation of humanity.' 

Even if we wish it, we cannot detain Asia in her march towards free- 
om. And we cannot afford to be branded a traitor to her cause, for 
it is also our cause.” 

September, 1927. 



Professor Kalaw elicited from Ally. Recto a rejoinder in the form 
of an article entitled The Wolf and the lambs in Asiatic Monroeism , 
excerpts from which follow: 

The other day, a distinguished professor of the State University, 
c im ing to the summit of his political erudition, announced, after sending 
greetings of geographical fraternity to Afghanistan and to the republic 
ot Kemal Pasha, the coming end of the rule of the white race in the East, 
same thing for which the Japanese have been asking 
since the treaty of Portsmouth: a Monroe doctrine for Asia. 

His Asiatic enthusiasm kept him from perceiving that the Monroeism 
u mean, and will never mean, “Asia for the Asiatics," 

but Asia for Japan" or for the leading Asiatic power of the future, which 
may be China and possibly Russia, a country which is becoming more of 
an Asiatic than an European Power every day, not only because the 
laigei portion of its territory lies now in Asia but also because its new 

134 



social and political structure has isolated it from Europe and it has for 
this reason introduced itself into Persia, Afghanistan, India, and China, 
thanks to the tremendous force of proselytism and expansion of its at- 
tractive system of thought . 

At present and for some time to come, an Asiatic Monroe Doctrine 
can mean nothing else but Asia for Japan, This truth is so evident that 
until the distinguished professor conceived the intrepid idea of proclaim- 
ing that pompous doctrine, no one had dared to do so except the Japanese, 
to w'hom it synthetizes their decided aspiratio7i to mde the Pacific to the 
exclusion of the white nations and with the submission of the otner Orien- 
tals, of whom the Japanese are at least a century ahead as far as militaiy 
preparedness and industrial and economic development are concerned. 

I fear that for the .Filipinos, Asiatic Monroeism will never be more 
than a hollow, high-sounding phrase, such as the American Monroe Doc- 
trine must be to a person from Honduras or Nicaragua. American Mon- 
roeism has saved the republics of Central and South America from Euio- 
pean interference: but we know that it has not saved them from inter- 
ference by the United States. Asiatic Monroeism loill be a mere substitu- 
tion of the rule in Asia by the Japanese, or perhaps the Chinese or possibly 
the Soviets. Given a propitious opportunity, Japanese imperialism has 
shown itself to be more aggressive than the imperialism of the United 
States. What shall we gain by the change? 

When Monroe formulated his famous doctrine in 1823, its character 
and tendency appeared to be merely defensive. But the rapid and extra- 
ordinary glx)^vth of the United States caused those who governed the 
nation, irrespective of political affiliation, to adopt an aggressive policy 
of expansion, and we have seen how in less than a century that doctrine 
has become the most faithful ally of North American imperialism in its 
advance southward. 

With such a magnificent precedent, the distinguished professor of 
political science of the State University still advocates the establishment 
of a Monroe doctrine for Asia as the best solution to the problem of 
external security of the Philippines when the Islands shall have become 
independent. 

But even supposing that* the development of American Monroeism 
has been entirely compatible with the integrity and independence of the 
countries in which it has made its action and influence felt, it still le- 
mains to be shown whether, in case an Asiatic Monroe Doctrine is^ estab- 
lished, the poiver constiUiting itself into the leader of Asia tvill limit its 
leadership to the legitimate activities of commerce, or whether it^ ivill be 
guilty of outrages against the political sovereignty and territorial integrity 
of the small peoples of this continent, 

Japan being the first poiuer in the East at the present time, Asiatic 
Monroeism must be considered in terms of the leadership of that country, 
with the understanding that a similar situation will ensue if, at some 
future time, such leadership is transfeiTed to China or to any other Asia 
tic power, because, as I said in my first article, imperialism is not the 

135 



exclusive attribute of any race or nation, but is a natural consequence 
of the development of energetic and aggressive nations, who feel they are 
stifling within their fiontiers and must seek an outlet elsewhere for their 
surplus population and dynamic force. 

The foreign policy of Japan with regard to China svtice the heg inning 
of the great war gives us an idea of what its foreign policy is likely to 
he later with reference to the other peoples of Asia that are in the path 
of her commercial expa'nsion. 

In November, 1914, Count Okuma made the following declaration be- 
fore the world: 



I believe that in two or three centuries there will be only 
a few governing powers in the world. The others will be governed 
by them and will render homage to the mighty. In other words, only 
foui or live nations will complete their development and the others 
will be joined to them by accession.’' 

Obviously for reasons of delicacy, Count Okuma did not mention Japan 
as one of the five nations which, according to him, will rule the world, 
he Jo ‘'r J only the names of four of them, it is evident that 

T ‘^onntny was the fifth of those powers. 

Tire. J t ’ advantage of the European strife and the 

EastJ enable to occupy themselves with Far 

twenty-one demands, total 
the eirm' ^ Would practically have made of China a colony of 

bcGTi i- ^ ^ conclusion of the (first) world war, Japan has 

V eTdinn ^ Shantu J to China, 

tht States, which insisted on 

the S ® however, be affirmed that 

of hoT- niri policy of Japan signifies a definite renunciation 

ests” in extending her sphere of ‘^special inter- 

neriali«ii-iV shows that the chief obstacle to Japan’s vertiginous im- 

cSlv of powers, espe- 

from this latifi^] these powers are ousted 

lies in the 'wn / 7 -Asiatic Monroe Doctrine, the Philippines, which 
it by Court nl "" expansion, ivill fulfill the destiny assigned to 

to mle th i^omage to the mighty and to allow the strongest 

It i/nnf ^^^^^ors in political science are headed for? 

not come to argument that the Japanese will 

here. It Hop 4 - ^ because of the unfavorable climatic conditions 

time been Japanese residing here have at any 

nhvsical Pnncff , of our climate are not the best suited to the 

territorv is to J^P^nese, on the day the latter feel that their 

will not have ° them, as they have already begun to feel, they 

overcome Concerning the climate, but, being unable to 

, . . . exclusion laws of America and of the British 

ominions m e acific, they will direct their expansion towards coun- 



136 



tries adjacent to theirs where resistance is easily overcome. One must 
not forget that Formosa is much closer to the Philippines than to Japan. 
Our professor of political science tells the Japanese to go to Borneo or 
Celebes; but I fear the Japanese will not heed this amiable suggestion 
of the Filipino professor but will prefer to come to the Philippines, where 
their general export trade, their fishing industry along our coasts, and 
their hemp plantations in the South are, thanks to a silently tenacious 
effort, acquiring considerable proportions. 

The Japanese are very circumspect. Can it not be surmised that if 
they have preferred until now not to emigrate to the Islands in large 
numbers, it is because they do not want to lay their cards on the table 
before it is time? Japan can afford to wait a while and make the nec- 
essary arrangements to have her population adjust itself to the capacity 
of her present territory. But when the tension reaches its maximum and 
peaceful solutions no longer suffice, it will not be strange if Japan should 
adopt the course imposed upon her by her national needs, in spite of any 
power, especially a small one, that may stand in her way. 



In referring to the powers that, in a future not far removed, will 
assume control of affairs in Asia, our professor of political science forgets 
to include Russia, although the most absorbing event of the present time is 
the success of Soviet diplomacy and propaganda throughout the East, par' 
ticularly in China, ivhose aggressive nationalism is nourished by the mod- 
ern Bolshevist ideas. 

It must be acknowledged that the sagacious diplomacy of Moscow has 
ousted the old chancelleries of the Occidental from their traditional strong- 
holds. Abraham Adolph Jaffe and his group of able propagandists have 
apparently taken hold of the mentality of young China and inspired the 
leaders of the great Chinese nationalistic movement against the impe- 
rialism and the privileges of the Europeans. Moscow has even stationed 
in China military strategists who are engaged in training the young men 
in the arts of modern, warfare. Bolshevik gold has played a part in the 
work of organizing the local committees, and constant shipments of arms 
ai*e coming in from Moscow. The boycott of Bidtish goods throughout 
South China, which has done considerable harm not only to British com- 
merce but also to British prestige in the East, seems to have been in- 
spired and organized by the Soviet advisers of Chinese nationalism. 

The theories of communism have not yet found acceptance in China, 
because Russian propaganda is concentrating its attacks upon the impe- 
rialism and privileges of the white nations; but all that is yet to come. 
The proletariat of China is exceedingly numerous and has suffered more 
than any other class under the old dogma of capitalism, and it is quite 
possible that Soviet doctrines will completely upset the social and indus- 
trial organization of China. Russian propaganda tends, in the last analy- 
sis, to destroy the old capitalistic regime, wherever it may be, and it will 
not be very long before we see in China, after the question of the western 
privileges is solved, the opening of this second and more important chapter 

137 



of communist propaganda in the East. Russia understands, of course, 
that the success of this campaign depends upon the previous destruction 
of the influence and the political and territorial privileges of the Euro- 
peans, who, through their commercial and diplomatic agents, set up annoy- 
ing obstacles in the path of her propaganda. 

China and Russia, separately or jointly, are notv plainly visible behind 
Ja2mn, which indisputably holds the center of the stage at this time, as 
20ossible champions in the future of an Asiatic Monroe Doctrine if that idea 
ever materializes. The Philippines will be beset, on the one hand, by the 
major problem of Chinese immigration, the solution of which is not to be 
conjectured at this time, and, on the other hand, by the avalanche of com- 
munistic ideas which would undermine the foundation of the traditional 
system of property which is the corner-stone of the present civilization. 
All this would happen if western influence were completely swept away 
from Asia by the great Pan-Asiatic movement directed and fostered by 
Soviet Russia. 



Are we prepared to face these two great contingencies? Or will the 
events of the future surprise us like a thief in the night and find us ut- 
terly unprepared? If the conflict were to be decided by parliamentary 
debate or by academic or legal discussion, we could be hopeful of success, 
because that is where we excel. But the matter will be fought out 
in the economic field and on the field of battle, too, because war has often 
been the natural sequel to a conflict of economic interests. In a contest 
like that we would be put hors de combat in the first encounter. It is 
not necessary to say a word about military preparedness. We have none 
of the means of defence known in ancient or modern warfare. Since the 
United States is not preparing us in this important aspect of our national 
defence, which makes one doubt the good faith of her purposes in the 
Philippines, it is certain that when that great Republic decides to leave 
oui country, either of its own accord or under the pressure of new intei- 
national complications, we shall find ourselves completely defenceless in 
front of dangerously armed nations, whose populations will then be over- 
flowing their frontiers. 

What can you expect, in the economic struggles of the present, of a 
nation like ours which, with the exception of a dozen individuals, is com- 
posed of politicians, lawyers, professors, academicians, holders of college 
egiees of all sorts, public employees, in one word men strong in theory 
ut not in practice? We are, no doubt, an intelligent people, endowed with 
a marvelous power of assimilation, capable of learning in a short time 
w at we are taught; but the influence of Spanish scholasticism on one hand 
an our political condition on the other have kept our aptitudes on the 
naiiow path of the liberal professions, with the result that our people, 
strong in the exclusively academic education of the middle ages, find 
themselves an anachronism in the midst of the present century struggles, 
which are essentially struggles for economic supremacy. Past masters, 
nemine discrepante, in the disciplines of Aristotle and St. Thomas, we 

138 



have hardly the rudiments of the empyrical knowledge which is necessary 
in order to triumph in the struggles of modern times. This situation has 
brought about the national disequilibrium which we all deplore but cannot 
remedy, and which consists in our living in a feudal castle of the finest 
theories, while the national wealth represented by our commerce and in- 
dustry is almost entirely in the hands of foreigners. 

If, after we have regained our independence, and while our military 
and economic preparation goes on, the necessary balance of power between 
equally strong rival forces is not maintained, our nationality, that is, the 
ensemble of the political, cultural and economic values of our country, will 
perish at the hands of the power or powers having the supremacy in the 
East. God will have to work a miracle if under such circumstances the 
law of the survival of the fittest will not once more prevail. 



A league or entente between the Philippines, Java, and Siam, as pro- 
posed by our professor of political science, for the purpose of neutralizing 
any possible policy of aggression on the part of China, Russia or Japan, 
would no doubt be very interesting, but would have the disadvantage that it 
would not be taken seriously. 



We liberal spirits hail with rejoicing the dawn of a nciv day for the 
2}eox)les of Asia, because we desire to see an end to the secidar domination, 
the insulting arrogance, and the false caste privileges of tl\e *'ivhite man*^ 
in the East, But ice small peoples of Asia desire something more: our 
compute freedom, and for this reason we detest the idea that other Orient- 
als may afterivards do to us what the Occidentals did before. The domin- 
ation of Asiatics by Occidentals is no more odious than that of Asiatics by 
Asiatics, 

But the termination of the rule of the white race in the East is one 
thing, and the maintenance here of its culture and its commerce, on a 
basis of equality of rights and opportunities, in order to preserve the nec- 
essary equilibrium between those two great agencies of civilization, the 
East and the West, is another. The “splendid isolation^^ which at one 
time characterized the British policy in the Old World has become inde- 
fensible since the air lines accomplished the marvel of reducing the size 
of our planet one hundred times and destroyed the legend of the impreg- 
nability of certain territories. 

In order that Asiatic Monroeism may be a blessing for the small 
nations of Asia and at the same time a safeguard of the peace of the 
world, it must presuppose the preservation in this hemisphere of the level- 
ling influence of the West — the balance to which I have referred — so long 
as the frontiers are not abolished and so long as the plan of consolidating 



all peoples into one world state to replace the present fragmentary organ- 
ization of nations has not materialized. 

September, 1927. 



Professor Kalaw fired back wilh another article, "Recto’s Asiatic 

Wolf vs. The Den of Beasts of Europe", of which the following is a 
resume: 

1 if we were to admit metaphorically that Japan would 

u wolf, could not cause one tenth of the ravages caused 

by the Den of Wild Beasts of Europe. 

We Asiatics owe Japan a service of inestimable value. Her victory 
ovei a white nation, Russia, at a time when all Asia was frightened and 
apparently cowed by the incomparable beasts of the West, marked the 
awn 0 a new hope, a hope that was kindled in the hearts of all Asiatics 
and from which sprang the present continental uprising against the rule 
of the whites. 

two articles of the leader of the minority there seems to be 
eyi enced a fear of immediate and absolute independence, which is the 
platform of his party and of the majority party. If I may be permitted 
to voice a different opinion, I would say that complete and immediate inde- 
pendence would be safe at present. The European powers ai’e all on the 
e ensive in Asia and would not dare to plan new conquests. The best 
they could expect would be to keep what they now have a little longer. 

apan as changed her policy and is now striving to gain the friendship 
o her neighbors, and China will probably be busy straightening out her 
domestic affairs for the next twenty or thirty years. The best guaranty 
of independence will be the Filipinos themselves. If wa protect foreign 
lives and property here and our people shows the same patriotism as in 
the past, no nation will dare touch us. 

Sept. 1927. 



reply to the second article of Professor Kalaw, a third article. 

1 ,, ^ Professor and the firecracker of immediate inde- 

pen ence , from which the following passages are taken, was published 
by Mr. Recto in the above mentioned newspapers: 

renlv to it debate concluded with my second article and the 

lone-er cnrifm' professor. But my distinguished opponent, no 

into tha flah httnaelf to the question at issue, has introduced confusion 

Oc“dent.f and antir «!>»* I ■»» I>‘- 

tions on thp nrnhl I have with my pessimistic lucubra- 

^ Pacific furnished an excellent argument to 

the enemies of our cause. 

I ^hall pass ovei the pro-European and also over the anti- Japanese 
charge, though nothing that I have said with regard to Asiatic Monroe- 

140 



ism justifies the rash accusations of the professor of political science. My 
words “We liberal spirits hail with rejoicing the dawn of a new day for 
the peoples of Asia, because we desire to see an end to the secular domina- 
tion, the insulting arrogance, and the false caste privileges of the ‘white 
man’ in the East,” have been construed as “a weakness for the Occidental 
powers” and “a petition that these remain in Asia.” And because I said 
that “the national needs of Japan will determine the course of her expan- 
sion” and that “unfortunately the Philippines are in the path of her com- 
mercial expansion,” some one has deemed it necessary to warn us “to be 
fair to Japan.” 



There are persons who close their eyes to danger, in the belief that 
it is sufficient not to look at it in order to make it disappear. There are 
others, however, who prefer to look it square in the face in order to meas- 
ure its strength and to parry the blow or mitigate its effects. 

The yellow peril is a real peril, even though our doctors of political 
science refuse to, or cannot, sec it. It is recognized by the IFeste?*?! powers, 
and I fad to understand how it can he overlooked by 21s 2 vho may be said 
to be living on the outskirts of Japan. This affirmation cannot be consid- 
ered an offence to the people of the great Asiatic empire. The danger 
does not consist precisely in Japan being aggressive by instinct or on ac- 
count of the education she has received from the Occidentals. It lies 
rather 211 our oivn 2veakness, in our not being in condition to emerge any- 
where near successfully from one of those modern contests in 2vhich a 
people can become involved against its will, because nothing is more sus- 
ceptible of complications and entanglements than international relations. 
This is where the real danger lies as far as we are concerned. A weak 
and wealthy neighbor is too great a temptation for a vigorous neighbor 
with a voracious appetite. If we were strong in the military and econ- 
omic sense, we should have nothing to fear, even though we had neighbors 
with aggressive tendencies. A hurricane is a danger to the poor dweller 
in a nipa hut but not to the man who lives in a building of reinforced con- 
crete. The Philippines is a nipa hut in the path of the formidable typhoon 
which, according to the political barometers, is sweeping or is about to 
sweep the Pacific. What shall loe do, 2ve 2vJio dwell in so frail a house? 
The doctors of political science, after peering into the futture, counsel us 
to rest easy because nothing can happen to us. 



There are Filipinos who desire the liberty of their country because 
they do not believe in any danger from outside and imagine they will not 
be required to pay any price for independence, but will be able to enjoy 
it in comfort, carefree, in the dolce far n.iente of irresponsibility. They 
would probably not desire independence if they knew that the danger is 
real and that the price must be paid. There are others, on the other hand, 
who are anxious to see their country free, though they are aware of the 
encircling danger, because they are ready to pay any price for liberty. 



Our esteemed professor has voluntarily catalogued himself as belonging 
to the group first mentioned. 

Frankly, I believe that no more effective argument could be advanced 
in favor of immediate independence for the Philippines than the danger 
of foreign aggression, whether it come from Japan, or from China, or 
from some other direction. Since that danger will not be momentary, but 
permanent, it will some day be necessary to face it with determination. 
In our present state of dependence we shall never be prepared for this 
eventuality. The United States is not doing anything to that effect, and 
our leaders do not see the timeliness of preparing a program of national 
defense for the construction of armaments and the training of the men 
who will have to wield the arms. If the United States decides to leave 
our country at any time, she will, if the present state of affairs continues, 
leave us without the most elementary means of maintaining the security 
of our coast line. 

On the other hand, if granted independence now, we shall be in a 
situation to get to work immediately and our people, if called upon to 
create an adequate system of national defence, will respond promptly with 
that patriotism and spirit of sacrifice which have been put to the test on 
more than one occasion. 

It would be childish to try to convince those Americans who point out 
the Japanese danger as a reason against our independence, that such 
danger does not exist, because such an argument would show our lack of 
political maturity and our ignorance of the events that are going on around 
us. It would be more proper to admit the existence of that danger and 
to ask the AmeHcans, on our 'party what the sov&i'eign coiinti'y is doing by 
way of enabling us to face it when we alone shall be responsible for our 
destiny. If America is not doing anything, she had better leave us as 
soon as possible in order that we may do it ourselves. If we become vic- 
tims of aggression while we are getting ready, we shall have paid for our 
liberty the same price that other nations have paid for theirs. 



I said m my second article, which called forth a second reply from 
toe professor of political science: “Neither the domination of Asiatic by 
Occidental nor that of Asiatic by Asiatic." In this phrase I attempted to 
restate the policy which, in my humble judgment, should thereafter govern 
e leations between whites and Asiatics in our continent. But the pi'o- 
tessor, after comparing the wild beasts of Europe with the Asiatic wolf, 
has given the preference to the latter. As far as I am concerned, this is 
a choice between wild beasts; and, to say the truth, the idea of being de- 
vouie ei er y the beasts of Europe or by the Asiatic wolf is not a 
p easant one. I do not say that it would be to our interest if they devoured 
each other, because such a desire would be inhuman and selfish. But let 
them at least keep a watchful eye on each other in order that their rival 
instincts may neutralize each other. A great thinker has said that in the 
present state of the relations between nations, one must create interests 
rather than affections in order to triumph or survive. 



Of course, Japan cannot possess herself of all of Asia, even if she is 
allowed to roam at will on the Asiatic continent. This idea consoles the 
professor of political science, because India, Afghanistan, Arabia, Asiatic 
Turkey, Java, China, and Siam will be free from the Asiatic w’olf. As it 
appears, our professor is considerably w^orried over the future of those 
nations of Asia. It is his geographical love w’hich extends to the last foot 
of Asiatic soil. The professor does not seem to worry overmuch about the 
fate of the Philippines so long as the future of those other nations of 
Asia is assured. Howevci'y it occurs to me tJmt if Japan, yielding to the 
'jyi'essure of a national need, decides, once freed from the annoying inter- 
ference of the Occident, to expand to some ‘jxirt of Asia, she will not go 
first to hidia, Arabia, or Afghanistan, but there is no doubt that the first 
territory she will overnin will be the Philippines. This, of course, is a 
thing of small importance to an Asiatic Monroeist w'hose devotion extends 
to the vast plains of India and Afghanistan. 



According to our professor, the victory of Japan over Russia in 1905 
must be a source of pride to Asiatics and is a debt to the empire of the 
Mikado w^hich they must acknowdedge. To be just, we have to credit the 
Asiatic wdth his share of that victory and the Occidental wdth his, be- 
cause it was made possible by the active collaboration of the Occident. 
Asia is fighting Europe with Occidental weapons. The so-called aw’^aken- 
ing of Asia is the result of its westernization. The leaders of Young Tur- 
key come from European institutions. Ghandi, the Indian leader, was 
educated in London. The students who are the soul of Chinese nationalism 
and who direct the great movement to abolish European privileges received 
their education in American universities. The Japanese leaders are Euro- 
pean-trained; Tan Malacca himself is a product of a Dutch university.* 

With particular reference to Japan, it must be confessed that she was 
built up as a first-rate military and economic power on western founda- 
tions. Before Perry’s visit, Japan was living in the middle ages. Upon 
seeing the American squadron and the modern mechanical inventions which 
the great commodore brought with him, Japan realized her backwardness 
and decided to join the great movement of civilization. 

I am astonished at the temeHty with which our professor affirms that 
Japan leamied nothing but depredations front the Occident. Predatory 
acts being instinctive, they need not be learned from anybody. The Jap- 
anese themselves acknowdedge that the American commodore opened the 
door of modern times to their country. If the scruples of the Mikado had 
prevailed over the wise counsel of the Shogun, Japan would now be just 
another ‘‘sphere of influence” of an Occidental power. 

Japan carried her western educatdon to the extent of germanizing her 
army and patterning her political institutions after those of England. In 
economic respects, she soon assimilated all the industrial progress of the 
Occident. Japan’s efforts in the brief space of half a century have been 
superhuman and her achievements are unparalleled in the history of any 
country. 



343 




Notwithstanding her western training, Japan would not have waged 
war against Russia had it not been for the Anglo-Japanese alliance. 
And once the war was under way, Japan would have found it difficult to 
carry it on successfully if it had not been for the moral and financial aid 
of Great Britain and the sympathetic neutrality of the United States. 
There was the circumstance that the activities of Russia in Manchuria 
had resulted in animosity towards the government of the Czar on the part 
of the two powers mentioned. If the war had continued after Portemouth, 
its final outcome might have been different. Japan was so near exhaus- 
tion at the time the Portsmouth conference was held that the Russian 
general, aware of this, begged the Czar to continue the war. The inter- 
vention of Piesident Roosevelt and other prominent Americans prevented 
resumption of hostilities, to the great advantage of Japan. 



Our professor maintains that Japan has completely changed her Asia- 
tic policy. But it does not seem to be out of place to inquire until when 
Japan will continue with this new policv. He admits that this change is 
^lefly due to the termination of the alliance of Japan with Great Britain. 
But he does not say that it is also due, in part, to pressure brought to 
beai by the United States. The change, therefore, rather than being volun- 
tary has been imposed by circumstances. Japan is passing through such 
teiiible and trying domestic crises and the burden of her foreign debt is 
so great,, that she does not consider herself in a position to follow an 
sf^^to 'hnv ° Orient. The restitution of Shantung does not 

must hav= h natural sympathy for China. The reason 

Xi ia^ whi^WV,^^l prevented Japan from keeping South Man- 

chu la, hich she had secured from China in 1895 by the treaty of Shi- 

monoseki. As may be observed, the Occidental powers have often obstructed 
the imperialistic career of Japan in Asia. 

0/ a«rac«OM inaugurated by Japan in China cannot 
V. i,-\ indication of her future Asiatic policy- The stages 

fessor In tL ^"‘='^*^t/*ngdom do not justify the optimism of our pro- 
with Korea China agreements entered into by Japan 
perdence a’nd r’> "I 18^4 to 1902, the inde- 

and recognized Th””^ integrity of Korea were invariably guaranteed 
declaration that ‘ti, rescript of February 1904 still carried the 

serious importa f ^pendent existence of Korea was a matter of most 
rea was independent existence of Ko- 

tween Japan and Empire.” The protocol signed be- 

later continupH same month and year although a few days 

of Korea ” but *ii® “independence and territorial integrity 

“will ado’nt th ^ 1 provided that the government of Korea 

jio^rPPTYiPTit Cl* AX. ^ ^^^^^wing year, 1905, another, more advanced 

“Tanan ah 11 h between Japan and Korea, which provided that 

Japan shall hereafter have the control and management of the foreign 



144 



affairs and relations of Korea/^ In 1906 Marquis Ito was appointed Res- 
ident General in Korea, and in 1907 Japan prevented the representatives 
of the Emperor of Korea from being: given a hearing at the Hague Con- 
ference. In July 1907, another agreement was signed between Japan and 
Korea, stipulating that ‘‘in all matters relative to the reform of the Korean 
administration, the government of Korea will receive the instructions and 
advice of the Japanese resident-general, and that appointments and re- 
movals of high officials of the Korean government will not be made with- 
out the consent of said resident-general.” As late as 1908, Prince Ito 
stated publicly that it was not Japan’s purpose to annex Korea; but the 
following year, the same Prince Ito declared that Korea “must amalgamate 
with Japan.” Finally, in 1910, Japan and Korea signed the famous treaty 
which put an end to the independence of the latter by “the cession by the 
Emperor of Korea to the Emperor of Japan of all his rights of sovereignty 
over the entire Korean territory.” And seven days later Japan formally 
declared that she had annexed Korea to her dominions. 

In view of this cnlightenivg precedent y even if Japan should formally 
declarey lohich she has not done, that she intends to respect the independ- 
ence and integrity of the Philippines, there woidd he good reasons to 
receive such a declaration with reserve. There must not he a repetition 
here of what happened in Korea, and the best thing to do is to lay aside 
all optimism, and Asiatic enthusiasm and prepare our people for the con- 
tingencies of the future. 

Count Okuma’s declaration, quoted by our professor, that “Japan has 
no designs of appropriating more territory or of despoiling China,” is 
rather ancient. In fact, it was made in August 1914. The statement of 
the same count which I quoted in my second article and which is a clear 
exposition of the imperialistic policy of the Empire was made by him in 
November 1914. This will show our professor how the Count changed his 
opinion in three months, and that during such short time “much water 
has run over the national mill of Japan.” 



My esteemed opponent affirms boldly that from my first article to 
my second there has been a change of theory, because in the former I 
advocated the continuation of the Occidental political power in the East, 
while in the latter I demanded its termination. No doubt the professor 
understood the following paragraph in my first article as a desire on my 
part that the whito race continue ruling: the East: 

“We do not want the white race to rule the Far East; but we do 
not want, either, to have an Asiatic Monroeism established here 
under the leadership of Japan or China, because we do not want to 
be absorbed by any power of the East, as certain small republics of 
Central and South America have been or will be absorbed by the 
United States, in the name of the American Monroe Doctrine.” 

I note that there has been a very visible change in the ideology of 
our professor. The idea of Asiatic Monroeism no longer prevails in his 
second article, but he speaks instead of a Pan-Asiatic League, which is an 

145 



entirely different formula. I am not opposed to a Pan-Asiatic League as 
the professor wants to convey, provided it is formed on the basis of equality 
of rights and of the recognition of the independence and territorial inte- 
grity of all countries holding membership in the League. But it is not 
sufficient to conceive the organization of that League if nobody is willing 
to convert it into reality. When shall we begin to form it? Because if, 
as the professor insinuates, the solution of the Philippine problem depends 
upon our closer identification with Asia, that League should be formed as 
soon as possible. But how? The professor does not tell us, and I have 
no idea how it is to be started. Some of the Asiatic peoples are sovereign* 
nations while others are dependent. A league among the latter would not 
go very far. If we approach the former, for instance Japan, they will 
certainly not pay any attention to us, in order to avoid conflicts and fric- 
tion with the United States, which might produce “grave consequences.’^ 
We are not a free agent in this respect, nor is Japan or any of the other 
Asiatic nations. Consequently, any plan for a Pan-Asiatic League is im- 
practicable for the present. Such a League will have to be headed by 
Japan if it is to be any good, but it remains to be seen whether Japan 
will take up the cudgels for her weaker neighbors and defy the United 
States in the Philippines, Great Britain in India, France in Indo-China, 
Holland in Java, and all the powers having “special interests” in China. 
If Japan is not ready to make that international move, the Filipinos, the 
Indians, and the Javanese are much less so. The plan of our professor 
thus presents the small difficulty of being impracticable. 

Rather than have faith in Asia^ let us have faith hi ourselves^ in the 
knowledge that our emancipation will be exclusively our work, as will he 
the maintenance of our independence when ive obtain it. Our present agh 
tation for liberty must be coupled with a program of national defence which 
shotdd be formulated as soon as possible. The formulation of such a pro- 
gram will be a courteous invitation to the United States to lay her cards 
on the table. We must begin now to familiarize our people with the idea 
that their present anxieties and sacrifices for the attainment of our inde- 
pendence are but prelude to still greater anxieties and sacrifices if we 
will maintain independence with honor and dignitv. 

September, 1927. 



f A Kalaw in turn published another article, **My Formula 

of n Asiatic Monroe Doctnne" a digest of which reads as follows 

.V of the Monroe Doctrine that really exists today, witl 

acquiescence of the South-American nations, is that America, botl 
North and South, is for the Americans only. 

rnodern Monroe Doctrine. My difference of opinion witl 
y d ersary is probably due to the fact that he had the old doctrine ir 
mmd while I was thinking of the new. The modern doctrine is to nij 
mind the only one which exists, because Asia is for the Asiatics the same 
as America is for the Americans. 



146 



As an initial step towards that doctrine, practically all of Asia must, 
of course, be free. The real Asiatic Monroe Doctrine would then be an 
Asia free from the European and American powers, organized into a 
league or corporation for the purpose of preventing any reconquest in the 
future by Europe or America. This entente, league, or confederation, or 
whatever you may want to call it, will provide for mutual defence in case 
of foreign aggression and will safeguard all the States of Asia, big or 
small, from interference by their neighbors. It will guarantee to each 
State the power to determine its domestic policy, such as immigration and 
commerce. It need not necessarily be anti-Occidental in culture, because 
some nations will be more Occidental in culture than others. There will 
not be an isolation from the West in commerce, because no nation can live 
isolated in commerce. In one word, it will be a Pan-Asiatic brotherhood, 
confederated in order to meet the West. It will strive to meet the West 
in a spirit of friendship or, in case of necessity, in a spirit of conflict. 
That there are many obstacles to this plan, we must admit. There 
will be problems of population, of immigration, of mutual mistrust; but in 
the face of a common enemy, because the West will continue to be a 
threatening foe, a great part of these obstacles will disappear. Such is 
my conviction. Decades may pass before this becomes a complete reality; 
but it is our duty to begin to think of such hypothesis. 

Sept. 1927. 



I o Prof. K.alaw*s ^formula of an Asiatic Monroe doctrine as dev- 
eloped in the preceding digest I^lr. Recto replied with another article 
entitled *The Historical Criterion and the Pan-Asiatic League. Ex- 
cerpts from this article of Mr. Recto are reproduced below: 

My distinguished antagonist synthetizes his formula of an “Asiatic 
Monroe Doctrine’’ in the following words: 

“As an initial step towards that doctrine, all Asia must be free. 
Then the true Monroe Doctrine (Asiatic Monroe Doctrine) will be an 
Asia free from the European and American powers, to prevent a 
reconquest by Europe or America in the future. This entente y 
league, or confederation, or whatever you may want to call it, will 
provide for mutual defence in case of foreign aggression and will 
safeguard all the States of Asia, big or little, from interference by 
their neighbors.- It will guarantee to each State the power to deter- 
mine its domestic policy, such as immigration and commerce . . . 
It will be a Pan-Asiatic brotherhood, confederated to meet the 
West . . . 

The professor of political science believes that a few decades will 
suffice to carry out this vast program. Everybody is entitled to be opti- 
mistic, and so is the professor; but I am afraid that this happy event will 
not come to pass in this world of ours, where humanity is striving and 
contending, not because the liberation of the peoples of Asia is something 
impossible or remote, but because the idea of the professor that those 

147 



peoples, freed from western rule, will live together in peace, in a federa- 
tion, w'ithout mutual interferences or aggressions, must be catalogued un- 
der the same chapter as Plato's '‘Republic,” Thomas More's “Utopia,” 
and the more modern “League of Nations” of Wilson, or the “World 
State” of Wells. 



Our professor desires to revive for Asia the plan of confederation 
that had been tried many times in Europe without result. Nanoleon failed, 
and so did Alexander I, and after him Nicholas II, and lastly Wilson with 
his “League of Nations.” Will our distinguished professor be more for- 
tunate with his similar project of a “Pan- Asiatic Confederation?” 

Christianity has not been able to induce mankind to fraternize, and 
our professor will encounter no small difficulties in his attempt to get the 
Asiatic peoples to fraternize. Geographical proximity has never been a 
guaranty of sincere and useful companionship or of good will and concord 
between nations. Experience has shown that the nearer nations live to 
each other, the more conflicting are their interests and problems. Front- 
iers are nothing but sinister barriers closing the roads of the w'orld to 
the peace and happiness of nations. Let the professor consider the exam- 
ples offered in the course of history by the European nations — from the 
greatest powers to the small Balkan States which until the World War 
were a wasps' nest in perpetual ferment — by the South American republics, 
by the United States and Mexico, by China and Japan. As many times 
as it has been attempted to establish the “Confederation of Europe” just 
as many times has the attempt failed. Bolivar's dream of making one 
country of all the American republics of Iberian origin was shattered by 
the flood of rancors among the eighteen states into which the former Span- 
ish colonies in the New World had disintegrated. The Christ of the Andes 
extends his loving arms over a race of one origin, one tradition, one lan- 
guage, and the same beliefs, but split into hostile states and impoverished 
by incessant differences brought about by geographical contiguity. 

The South American countries are burdened with costly military ap- 
propriations, and arm themselves, not for self-defence against Europe, but 
o ^^end themselves against each other. What good does it do them that 
onioe Doctiine protects them from European aggression, when they 
ave arm anyway in order to protect themselves from their neighbors? 
-p criterion of history cannot be relied upon to support our 

o essoi S I ea of a “Pan-Asiatic Confederation,” he will have to leave 
^ ^ ation to chance or to supernatural forces, for which neither the 
prevision of statesmen nor the effort of nations is necessary. Unfortun- 
m Paradise, that of tradition, and one Arcadia, 

n ^ cgend, and the fervent invocation of our professor will not 

call them back to life on the continent of Asia. 



But one of the most curious aspects of our professor’s plan is that his 
“Pan-Asiatic Copfederation’’ is not to be formed until after all Asia is 

148 



free from the European and American powers. What would be the use 
of it then? To meet the West, says the professor. This means that while 
the West is here, inflicting' upon us the heavy burden of its rule, a league 
of all Asiatic peoples is unnecessary. That Pan-Asiatic Lea|;ue or Con- 
federation is to be formed not in order to eliminate a real and present 
evil — the present rule of the white race over Asia — but to protect us from 
a remote danger — the possibility that the white race vnll return after we 
Asiatics have conquered our liberty. The proposition seems to lack logic. 
For, if the Westierners leave Asia, it will be either because they want to 
go or because the awakening of national consciousness in Asia, coupled 
with the development of her material resources, will force the white nations 
to give up their secular rule on this continent. In either case, the peril 
of their returning will be so remote that there will be no necessity for a 
Pan-Asiatic- League to guard against it. 



Let us say Asia is free now and we have a brand-new Pan-Asiatic 
League. There arises, as one of the first problems that the League must 
solve, that of the population of Japan which her territory can no longer 
accommodate. The problems of each of the members of the League would 
have no reason for being. Since we have shut the doors of Asia to the 
West with our cry of '‘Asia for the Asiatics,'' we cannot decentJy ask any 
of the western countries, say Brazil or the United States, to open their 
doors to Japanese immigration. We therefore have to solve this problem 
at home, that is, within the League. How shall we do it? 

The Asiatic countries most directly affected will be Russia, China, 
and the Philippines. Russia and China would be ready to counsel any 
solution that would respect the integrity of their territory and their na- 
tional interests in general. In exchange for Japan's leaving them alone 
in Manchuria, Siberia, and Mongolia, they would not interfere with any 
plan which Japan may adopt in this respect. It would be the height of 
credulity to expect the Russians, the Chinese, or the Afghans to provoke 
Japan or make her their enemy if that country decided to take the Phil- 
ippines as she took Korea in 1910. Probably the great Asiatic powers of 
the Confederation would even agree among themselves that such a course 
is the best way to solve at one stroke the problem posed by the density 
of the population of Japan and eliminate a serious state of affairs that 
would otherwise keep the League in a constant state of worry. What do 
we have in common with the Indians, the Russians, the Turks, the Ara- 
bians, the Afghans, aside from the accident of geographical propinquity, 
that would make them side with us against so powerful a country as 
Japan? As always, the chain would break by the weakest link, and the 
"Pan-Asiatic Confederation" conceived by our professor would, in practice, 
be something like the "Confederation of Europe" during the first quarter 
of the nineteenth century, which was directed and managed exclusively 
by the council of the big powers. As far as the small countries of Asia 
are concerned, the Western master would merely have been replaced by 
an Asiatic master, and the part which ive should play in the 'Tan-Asiatic 

149 



League against the WesV* would bo that of the clay pot which, in a well 
remembered tale, wanted to form an alliance with the iron pot. 

The case of Korea, where there are laws penalizing: ‘Vlang:erous 
thouerht^’ and where the Koreans are not allowed to withdraw from their 
private bank deposits amounts in excess of one hundred pesos without a 
previous official investigation regarding the use to be made of the money, 
as told to Professor Benitez by a Korean at the last Pan-Asiatic Confer- 
ence that met in Hawaii, should convince us that we must guard not only 
against the nations of the West but against the nations of all the cardinal 
points, because international relations, regardless of geographical accid- 
ents, are governed by interests and not by affections, and because, as 
Washington said in his famous political testament, *‘it is folly for a nation 
to expect disinterested favors from another, because all that a nation re- 
ceives as a favor is sooner or later repaid with part of its independence.’^ 
Let us abandon all Asiatic optimism and be guided by these words of 
Clemenceau: “I only have one illusion: France and one disillusion: 
Humanity.” 

October, 1927. 



Professor Kalaw ifien published his fourth article, entitled The 
Resume of Our Discussion and the New Critical History**, of which 
the following are extracts: 

I shall make a resume of the different views enunciated from time to 
time in Representative Recto’s articles and mine. In his first article he 
argued that the best plan for the future of the Philippines seems to be 
the creation of a balance in the Pacific with the presence of the western 
powers, such as the United States and England. Then he said that the 
latter power must maintain the balance in the Far East on the basis of 
an independent Philippines. He evidently did not desire to say anything 
about the evacuation of Asia by the European powers. In my answer I 
said. Supposing the balance of power is the only possible arrangement 
after independence, could there not be sufficient balance between the Asia- 
tic powers themselves, as between Japan and China or Soviet Russia, or 
between the nations at present inconspicuous and Japan?’ From beginning 
o en , t e essence of Representative Recto’s first article is that he desires 
the western nations to remain in Asia. 

October, 1927. 



In reply, Mr. Recto published his fifth article, entitled **The Alche- 
mists of the Professonal Chair and Their Philosophers* Stone**, from 
which the following is reproduced: 

I have invoked the authority of historical facts in support of my 
contention that the proposed ‘‘Pan-Asiatic League’^ which our professor 
has seen fit to substitute for his “Asiatic Monroe Doctrine” will not give 

150 



any result, just as similar plans tried in Europe, and in South America 
for the confederation of the republics there, failed to give any. 

Our professor defends his plan with theoretical arguments taken from 
two American writers, the first of whom is the author of an epitome of 
history and the second is a professor. He cannot use historical precedents 
because his new thesis that ^'history does not repeat, itself” does not 
authorize any other arguments than those derived from imagination. 

The professor says that the moral superiority of the Oriental peoples 
will make the proposed confederation a success. Because “the Oriental 
nations which have produced all the principal religions of the world and 
are consequently a body of peoples of firmly established moral principles, 
can arrive at an understanding by virtue of which the peoples of different 
traditions and nationalities in this continent will be able to live in peace 
and continue developing their respective national characteristics.” 

The alleged moral superiority of the Orientals consists, according to 
the professor’s statement in the paragraph above copied, in the historical 
fact that the principal religions originated in the East. 

Of course, religion has an influence on the morality of a people. But 
the fact that a pure and lofty religion had its origin in the midst of one 
particular people is not in itself sufficient reason for considering that 
people endowed with firm moral principles. Religion builds up and raises 
the morals of a people through obedience to its dogmas and the practice of 
its teachings. If it could be demonstrated that the Orientals practice their 
religious beliefs better than the people of other continents practise theirs, 
then the professor’s thesis might be maintained, otherwise it would fall 
by its base. We have prevented the spread of the Christian religion 
throughout the Orient, and the people among whom that religion origin- 
ated, the Jews, deny the divinity of its founder. And yet we have become 
proselytes of Islam, Budhism, and Confucianism, and have embraced reli- 
gious systems the morals and dogmas of which are inferior to those of 
the Christian religion. Does the professor deduce from this that we 
Orientals “are a body of peoples with firmly established moral principles?” 

Of course, morally we are not worse than the Occidentals; but it is 
not less trvfe that we are not better. The Divine Potter made us all of 
the same brittle and crude clay. Given the opportunity, we have shown 
the same love of war, plundering, and looting that dominated and dom- 
inates the Westerners. Let the professor remember that in the thirteenth 
and fourteenth centuries, the Mongols ruled almost all of Asia and the 
entire eastern part of Europe, and if indeed they brought their civiliza- 
tion to the conquered peoples, it was like\vise at the cost of the latter’s 
despoliation; that the Huns committed all sorts of depredations in the Old 
World in the fifth century, their greatest leader, Attila, even establishing 
his headquarters in the plains of Hungary; and that the Turks subju- 
gated the whole of Southern Europe for a period of several centuries. Is 
that the superior morality of the oriental peoples? 



The most serious obstacle in the way of the success of the League 
from the point of view of our country lies in our geographical situation 

151 



and our peculiar conditions in relation to the other nations that would 
compose the League. We have strong, greedy, and needy neighbors and 
we are a weak people with a rather large territory that is sparsely po- 
pidated and has abundant natural resources. Stronger than right and 
moral law the biological law of the absorption of the weak by the strong 
works out in all cases with the same precision as the law of gravitg. 1 
repeat what I have said before, that the relations between nations are 
governed by interest and not by affection, and that geographical vicinity 
is a cause of conflicts o'ather than a guaranty of finendship. We can not 
reasonably ignore the precedeiit of Korea, the annexation of which to the 
empire of the Mikado is in no way compatible with the dictates of that 
morality which, according to the strange theory of our professor, is the 
characteristic that distinguishes the Omentals from the Occidentals. He 
will say again that the case of Korea ivill not be repeated in the Philip- 
pines, because history does not repeat itself. And if it does? 

, It will be: a grievous misfortune for our country and a cause for re- 
morse on the part of those who have been cultivating Pan-Asiatic dreams. 

October, 1927. 



i rofessor Kalaw made no further reply, and so the debate was 
ended with the above article of Mr. Recto. 



I'^Ir. Recto collected his above articles in 1950 in a printed pam- 
phlet entitled Asiatic Monroeism**, which of course was prohibited** 
material during Japanese occupation. 

President Rafael Palma of the University of the Philippines ex- 
pressed his opinion on this debate in a letter he wrote to Mr. Recto, 
from which me c[uote the folloiving paragraphs: 

Your debate with Dr. Kalaw, which takes up most of the book, is sat- 
urated with deep political philosophy and views on the future. I like it 
ecause of its seiiousness. It is time that our intellectuals drop mere 
oweiy literature and occupy itself with vaster and more serious sub- 
jects. That the question of how the safety of the future Philippine State 
can e best guaranteed in the development of Asia is such a theme can 
not be doubted, and for this reason it cannot be discussed by a merely 
literary method and by shallow talents, but must be considered scientific- 
ally by acute, properly trained minds. 

This is, in my opinion, the real merit of the debate. It leaves aside 
t e common piocedure of imaginative and aprioristic argumentation and 
c ooses instead the path of historical and biological investigation. If I 
may be peimitted to state my opinion of the book, I would say that your 
side of the debate offers greater advantages than that of Dl\ Kalaw, 
because it is based on a positive, I might say brutal, interpretation of 
history, while Dr. Kalaw’s side has the disadvantage of being founded on 

152 



something* still rather uncertain and fragile, the more or less conscious 
but vague aspiration of humanity toward a better condition. History 
can be interpreted in two ways: as life is and as it should be. You uphold 
the first criterion and Dr. Kalaw the second. Therefore, while your argu- 
ments rest on a solid foundation, on consummated facts which show the 
process of natural selection in all the orders of life, Dr. Kalaw has to 
take his interpretations from the modern sources of law and justice, the 
foundations of which are not yet well established in the human heart. 

Whoever may be right, I am very glad that the controversy has taken 
place, as it has set us to thinking of the great problems that the future 
has in store for us. And I rejoice still more that the controversy has been 
carried on a lofty plane, free from all personal allusions and narrowmind- 
edness, by which many of our current debates are characterized and which 
frequently betray poor reasoning and lack of solid preparation on the 
part of the debater. 




■ / 




Appendix “E'' 



ORDERS OF SURRENDER 

Issued by Gcji. Warnwright and other USAFFE officers 



HEADQUARTERS 

United States Forces in the Philippines 
Fort Mills, P. I. 



7 May, 1942 



Subject: Surrender 

Xo : Major General William F. Sharp, Jr. 



Commanding: Visayan-Mindanao 
Forces 



To put a stop to future useless sacrifice of human life on the Forti- 
fied Islands, yesterday I tendered to Lieutenant General Homma, the Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the Imperial Japanese Forces in the Philippines, the 
surrender of the four harbor forts of Manila Bay. 

General Homma declined to accept my surrender unless it included 
the forces under your command. It became apparent that the gairisons 
of these forts would be eventually destroyed by aerial and aitillery bom- 
bardment and by infantry supported by tanks, which have overwhelmed 

Corregidor. . i 4 . t j 

After leaving General Homma ^\^th no agreement between us I de- 
cided to accept in the name of humanity his proposal and tendered^! 
midnight, 6-7 May, 1942, to the senior Japanese officer on Corregidor, 
the formal surrender of all American and Filipino Army troops in the 
Philippines. You will therefore be guided accordingly, and will repeat 
will surrender all troops under your command both in the Visayan Islands 
and Mindanao to the proper Japanese officer. This decision on my part, 
you will realize, was forced upon me by means entirely beyond my contiol. 

Colonel Jesse T. Tray wick, Jr., G. S. C. my Assistant Chief of Staff, 
G-3, who will deliver this to you is fully empowered to act for me. You 
are ihereby ordered by me as the senior American Army officer in the 
Philippine Islands to scrupulously carry out the provisions of this letter, 
as well as such additional instructions as Colonel Traywick may give you 

in my name. • 

You will repeat the complete text of this letter and of such othei in- 
structions as Colonel Traywick may give you by radio to General Mac- 
Arthur. Let me emphasize that there must be on your* part no thought 
of disregarding these instructions. Failure to fully and honestly caiiy 
them out can have only the most disastrous results. 



J. M. WAINWRIGHT 
Lieutenant General, U. S. Army 



156 




HEADQUARTERS 
VISAYAN-MINDANAO FORCES 
CYP Malaybalay, Mindanao 

May 11, 1942 

To all Comniandars Visayan Islands: 

General Chynoweth 
Colonel Hilsman 
Colonel Christie 
Colonel Cornell 
Captain Blancas 

All landmines or other explosives of any description will be immedi- 
ately removed from highways, bridges and any other places where they 
might cause damage to Japanese troops particularly they will be removed 
in twenty-four hours stop where it is impractical to remove such obstruc- 
tions without destroying structures or highways they will be clearly marked 
dangei in the presence thereof stop no retreat no destruction of prop- 
erty military or civilian will be countenanced stop all officers are enjoined 
to carefully instruct those under them and any with whom they come in 
contact to stiictly observe the provisions above stop any violations of this 
order will be dealt with summarily stop all members of the armed forces 
will be directed to report to the places designated in the orders furnished 
the sector commanders not later than, the dates specified therein stop those 
absent on those dates will be considered as deserters and will be so re^ 
ported to the Japanese authorities stop until the ariival of the Japanese 
forces you aie responsible for the proper rationing of your troops stop the 
Japanese army will treat the officers and enlisted men according to In- 
ternational Law, except when they would be against the law stop courteous 
and prompt obedience to the Japanese army and their orders is absolutely 
necessary. 

W. F. SHARP 
Major General, U. S. Army 
Commanding 



headquarters NEGROS SECTOR, 
Fabrica, Negros Occidental, May 20, 1942 



COPY Furnished, Sub-Sector Commanders, 
orma ion, guidance and immediate compliance, 
by telegram when demolition has been removed. 



Negros Sector, for in- 
Notify this Headquarters 
Acknowledge. 



(SGD.) ROGER HILSMAN 
Colonel, Inf. USA 
Commanding 



156 




r" 

MESSAGE TO ALL FILIPINO OFFICERS AND MEN 

I 

1. Direct written orders have been received by me from General Sharp, 
and authorized by General MacArthur for me to surrender the Forces 
of Negros. 

2. These orders have been obeyed by this Headquarters and as a 

* member of this command you also must obey them. 

3. Failure to surrender classifies you as: 

a. Deserter by Philippine and U. S. Governments — 

' Penalty — Death 

b. Outlaw by Imperial Japanese Army. — 

Penalty — Death 

4. By terms of the agreement the Imperial Japanese Army has been 
furnished : 

a. Your name and home address. 

I b. Your present location. 

c. The arms and ammunition you have. 

5. By surrendering you will draw full pay until you are mustered out 
of the Service and you will be entitled to all bonus and insurance privi- 
leges from USAFFE. You will also be recognized as an HONORABLE 
prisoner of War by the Philippine Government, USAFFE and by the 
Imperial Japanese Army and treated as such. 

6. Half of the Officers and Men have already reported to Fabrica 
and are well t.reated. 

7. Report in PERSON with your arms and ammunition to Cadre Bar- 
racks in Fabrica BEFORE midnight Wednesday, May 27th. 

8. By complying with these orders you ^vill SAVE YOUR HONOR, 
YOUR LIFE and ASSURE the safety of your family and friends. 

ROGER HILSMAN 
Colonel, Inf — USA 
Commanding 



157 




Appendix ‘T’’ 



INDICTMENT AGAINST FILIPINOS ACTING AS JAPANESE 

DUMMIES 

EXCERPT FROM THE SPEECH DELIVERED BY MR. RECTO WHEN 
HE WAS CONFERRED THE DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF LAWS 
(HONORIS CAUSA) BY THE UNIVERSITY OF MANILA, MARCH 
24, 1936. 

A true constitutional government is not possible, nor can we hope for 
the success expected of it if the great mass of the citizenry through ignor- 
ance, indifference, or lack of civic spirit, not only hold themselves aloof 
from the fundamental activities of the government, but also suffer and 
permit that the objectives of the government in accordance with an avowed 
policy are neglected, ignored or thwarted. We had in the not distant past, 
among others, the problem of the nationalization of our coastwise shipping 
service and our fishing industry, and the exploitation of the public lands 
in Mindanao. Foreign ships have occasionally anpeared under fictitious 
Philippine registry. The fishing industry along the seacoasts, within our 
jurisdietional waters, is controlled by foreign capital which, if I am not 
misinformed, operates under licenses issued to Filipino citizens. In the 
gi'eat Island of the South, vast tracts of land, applied for either by pur- 
chase or by lease by Filipino citizens, have been leased or subleased to 
foreigners for purposes of exploitation for 25 to 50 years. We have igno- 
miniously bartered away the privileges of citizenship; we have trafficked 
in things sacied which, under our code of honor as citizens, should be 
placed beyond the pale of commerce. A dip into the future would make 
us realize, with the pang of premonition, the grave and deplorable conse- 
quences resulting from such acts to our national honor, sovereignty, the 
control of our sources of wealth, and our territorial integrity. 



Appendix “G” 

A FIUPINO SENATOR'S LETTER TO ICKES 

CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES 
' SENATE 

Manila, December 29, 1946 

The Honorable 

The Secretary of Interior 

Washington, D. C.* 

S i'r : 

I am addressing* you as head of the Department in the United States 
Government that is directly concerned with Philippine affairs. I am aware 
of your reminder to the Commonwealth Government several months ago 
for the prompt prosecution of those who in any way cooperated -with, and 
the exclusion from the government service of those wTio served in any 
capacity under any of the governmental set-ups under the eagis of the 
Japanese in the Philippines. 

Then yesterday, December 28, 1945, the following news item appeared 
on the front page of the Manila “Evening News*^ under the heading “U. S., 
MANILA POLICIES CLASH”: 

“A discrepancy was noted by certain quarters today in the poli- 
cies followed by Washington and Manila respectively in the anoint- 
ment to important government positions. While Manila is gradually 
al 'orbing into the government some individuals who served under 
the Japanese, Washington seems determined to keep them out regard- 
less of the actual record; while the Commonwealth seems to include 
to the policy that service under the Japanese is not per se collabora- 
tion, Washington appears to insist that it is.” 

I beg leave to ask how can this stern policy be reconciled with the 
policy which seems to be the one favored and suggested ^ the “Military 
Aid to Civil Power”, a text book which according to its Introduction, has 
been “prepared for The General Service Schools, Fort Leavenworth, Kan- 
sas”, and “is designed to serve as a practical guide for officers of the 
Army of the United States in administering the Laws of War, and in the 
application of correct legal principles to situations involving Military Gov- 
ernment, Martial Law, and Domestic Disturbances”. This book has been 
widely perused by both Army officers and Civil Government officials in 
the Philippines in the hectic days in 1941 when this country was getting 
ready for the impending war with Japan. I am quoting from page 65 of 
said book: 

“k. Mexico has a law which forbids any of her officials from 
accepting office or executing authority under a military conqueror. 
This, of course, would be very embarrassing to the invading army, 
but such a rule would injure Mexico more than her enemy. In the 
Franco-Prussian War, various instructions were given by the French 
Government to local officials in the east to flee or not to accept any 

161 



position of authority under the Germans. It is believed to be un- 
likely that any such instructions were given during the World War, 
for it is known that after the war France decorated some of the 
local officials who has remained at their posts during the German 
occupation and performed their duties in a manner most beneficial 
to the inhabitants.^' 

A clarification from your office of this matter will do much to restore 
the peace of mind among my people so necessary in these troubled days of 
reconstruction and rehabilitation of my country ravaged by war. 

The writer has not been a collaborator, did not engage in any kind 
of business, on the contrary suffered great losses, during enemy occupa- 
tion, and is under no charge whatsoever by either the U. S. Army Counter- 
Intelligence Corps or the Office of Prosecutors of the Philippines People’s 
Court. 

Very respectfully, 

RAMON TORRES 
Senator 



% 




162 



Appendix “H” 

I'HE LAW OF NATIONS PART OF THE LAW OF THE LAND 

1. UNITED STATES 

a. The law of nations is the ‘‘usage of all civilized nations.” United 
States V. de la Maza Arredondo, 6 Pet. 691, 8 U. S. (L. ed.) 547. 

b. The law of nations is to be tried by the test of general usage. 
The Antelope, 10 Wheat. 66, 6 U. S. (L. ed.) 268. 

c. International law is founded upon mutuality and reciprocity. Hil- 
ton V. Guyot, 169 U. S. 113, 16 Sup. Ct. Rep. 139, 40 U. S. (L. ed.) 95. 

d. In the absence of a treaty or statute, questions of international 
law are to be determined by such aid as the courts can obtain from judicial 
decisions, from the works of jurists and commentators, and from the acts 
and usages of civilized nations. Hilton v. Guyot, 169 U. S. 113, 16 Sup. 
Ct. Rep. 139, 40 U. S. (L. ed.) 95. 

e. The works of jurists and commentators on the subject of inter- 
national law are resorted to by judicial tribunals, not for the speculations 
of their authors concerning what the law ought to be, but for trustworthy 
evidence of what the law really is. The Paquete Habana, 175 U S. 677, 
20 Sup. Ct. Rep. 290, 44 U. S. (L. ed.) 320. 

f. International law, including what is usually called private inter- 
national law or the conflict of laws, and concerning the rights of persons 
within the territory and dominion of one nation, by reason of acts, private 
or public, done within the dominions of another nation, is part of our law, 
and must be ascertained and administered by the courts of justice as often 
as such questions are presented in litigation between man and man, duly 
submitted to their determination. Hilton v. Guyot, 169 U. S. 113, 16 Sup. 
Ct. Rep. 139, 40 U. S. (L. ed.) 95. 

g. International law is part of the law of the United States and must 
be ascertained and administered by the courts of justice of appropriate 
jurisdiction as often as questions of right depending upon it are duly 
presented for their detei’mination. The Habana, 176 U. S. 677, 20 Sup. 
Ct. Rep. 290, 44 U. S. (L. ed.) 320. 

h. International law is no alien in the Federal Supreme Court but is 
part of the law to be ascertained and administered by the courts of justice 
of appropriate jurisdiction as often as questions of right depending upon 
it are duly presented for their determination. Kansas v. Colorado, 206 
U. S. 46, 27 Sup. Ct. Rep. 665, 61 U. S. (L. ed.) 956. 

i. Political rights do not stand upon the mere doctrines of municipal 
law applicable to ordinary transactions, but upon the more general prin- 
ciples of the law of nations. Shanks v. Dupont, 3 Pet. 242, 7 U. S (L. ed.) 
666 . 

j. The inhabitants of a conquered territory change their allegiance 
and their relation to theii* former sovereign is dissolved. Leitensdorfer v. 
Webb, 20 How. 176, 16 U. S. (L. ed.) 891. 

k. The transfer of territory from one nation to another does not 
change the relations of the inhabitants with each other although it dissolves 

163 



their relations with their former sovereign and creates a new relation be- 
tween them and the government which has acquired their territory. Amer- 
ican Ins. Co. V. Canter (American Ins. Co. v. 356 Bales of Cotton) 1 Pet. 
511, 7 U. S. (L. ed.) 242. 

l. . Where people change their allegiance, their relation to their former 
sovereign is dissolved; their relations to each other and their rights of 
property remain undisturbed. United States v. Percheman, 7 Pet. 51, 8 
U. S. (L. ed.) 604; Leitensdorfer v. Webb, 20 How. 176, 15 U. S. (L. ed.) 
891; United States v. Le Gardiur De Repentigny, (United States v. De 
Depentigny, 5 Wall. 211, 18 U. S. (L. ed.) 627. 

m. Conquered territory, while in hostile possession of the conqueror 
is part of his territory as regards all other nations and belongs to him 
as exclusively as the territory within his borders, the relation which such 
territory bears to him W'hile so held by force of his arms not being de- 
pendent upon the law of nations, but upon his own laws. Fleming v. Page, 

9 How. 603, 13 U. S. (L. ed.) 276; U. S. vs. Rice, 4 Wheaton, 246. 

n. All former laws, ordinances and regulations in conflict with the 
political character, institutions and Constitution of a new Government as- 
suming jurisdiction over territory, are at once displaced. Chicago, R. I. 
& P. R. Co. v. McGlinn, 114 U. S. 542, 5 Sup. Ct. Rep. 1005, 29 U. S. (L. 
ed.) 270. 

o. De facto governments are of several degrees, the highest of which 
is when the usurping government expels the regular authorities from their 
customary seats and functions, and establishes itself in their place. An- 
other description of government, called also by publicists a government de 
facto, but which might perhaps be aptly denominated a government of 
paramount force, is one whose existence is maintained by active militar^^ 
power within the territories and against the rightful authority of an estab- 
lished and lawful government, and which, while it exists, must necessarily 
be obeyed in civil ^matters by private citizens, who, by acts of obedience 
rendered in submission to such force, do not become responsible as wrong- 
doers for those acts, though not warranted by the laws of the rightful 
government. Although such governments are usually administered directly 
by military authority, they may be administered also by civil authority 
supported more or less directly by military force. Thorington v. Smith, 8 
Wall. 1, 19 U. S. (L. ed.) 361. 

p. A government de facto in firm possession of any country is clothed, 
while it exists, with the same rights, powers and duties, both at home and 
abroad, as a goverment de jure. Phillips v. Payne, 92 U, S. 130, 23 U. S. 
(L. ed.) 649. 

q. Although the City of New Orleans W’as conquered and taken pos- 
session of in a civil war waged on the part of the United States to put 
down an insurrection and restore the supremacy of the National Govern- 
ment in the Confederate States, that government had the same power and 
rights in territory held by conquest as if the territory had belonged to a 
foreign country and had been subjugated in a foreign war. The Prize 
cases, 2 Black, 636 (67 U. S. XVII., 459) ; Mrs. Alexander's Cotton, 2 

164 



Wall., 417 (69 XVII., 919); Manran v. Ins. Co., 6 Wall., 1 (76 U. S., 
XVIII, 836). In such cases the conquering power has a right to displace 
the pre-existing authority, and to assume, to such extent as it may deem 
proper, the exercise by itself of all the powers and functions of govern- 
inent. It may appoint all the necessary officers and clothe them with de- 
signated powers, larger or smaller, according to its pleasure. It may 
prescribe the revenues to be paid, and apply them to its own use or other- 
wise. It may do anything necessary to strengthen itself and weaken the 
enemy. There is no limit to the powers that may be exerted in such cases, 
save those which are found in the laws and usages of vrar. These prin- 
ciples have the sanction of all publicists who have considered the subject. 
City of New Orleans, Appl., v. The New York Mail Steamship Company. 
(See S. C., 20 Wall., 287-403.) 

r. The Confederate government was never acknowledged by the 
United States as a dc facto govei'iiinent in the sense that adherents to it 
in war against the government de jure did not incur the penalties of trea- 
son. From a very early period of the Civil War to its close, it was re- 
ga/rded as simply the military representative of the insurrection against 
the authority of the United States. Thorington v. Smith (Ala. 1869) 
8 Wall. 1, 19 L. ed., 361. See also Sprott v. U. S. (Ct. Cl, 1874) 20 Wall. 
464, 22 L. ed., 371. 2 USCA 339. 

s. The capture and possession of James Island in February, 1780, 
and of Charleston on the 11th of May in the same year, by the British 
troops, was not an absolute change of the allegiance of the qaptured in- 
habitants. They owed allegiance to the conquerors during their occupation; 
but it was temporary allegiance, which did not destroy, but only sus- 
pended their former allegiance. (Shanks et al. v. Dupont et al., U. S. 7 
L. ed., 666, 667.) 

t. It has been held by this court, that^ persons residing in the rebel 
states at any time during the civil war must be considered as enemies, 
during .such residence, without regard to their personal sentiments or dis- 
positions. Prize Cases, 2 Black 687, 17 L. ed 476, 483: Mrs. Alexander’s 
Cotton, 2 Wall., 404, 17 L. ed., 915; The Venice, 2 Wall., 258, 17 L. ed., 866. 

u. The rule which declares that war makes all the citizens and sub- 
jects of one belligerent, enemies of the government and of all the citizens 
and subjects of the other, applies equally to civil and international wars. 
(The Venice, 17 L. ed., 866.) 

V. By the conquest and military occupation of Castine, the enemy 
acquired that firm possession which enabled him to exercise the fullest 
rights of sovereignty over that place. The sovereignty of the United 
States over the territory was, of course, s^uspended, and the laws of the 
United States could no longer he rightfully enforced there, or be obligatory 
upon the inhabitants who remained and submitted to the conquerors. By 
the surrender the inhabitants passed under a temporary allegiance to the 
British government, and were bound by such laws, and such only as it chose 
to recognize and impose. From the nature of the case, no other laws 
could be obligatory upon them, for %vhei'e there is no p7'otection o)' allegi- 



165 



ance or sovereignty, there can he no claim to obedience, U. S. v. Rice, 4 L. 
ed., 662, 564, 4 Wheaton, 246. 

w. It is true that, when Tampico had been captured, and the State 
of Tamaulipas subjugated, other nations were bound to regard the country, 
while our possession continued, as the territory of the United States, and 
to respect.it as such... While it was occupied by our troops, they were 
in an enemy's country, and not in their own ; the inhabitants were still 
foreigners and enemies, and owed to the United States nothing more than the 
submission and obedience, sometimes called temvorary allegiance, which is 
due from a conquered enemy, when he surrenders to a force which he is 
unable to resist. Fleming, et al. v. Page, 13 L. ed., 276, p. 281. 

X. Upon the acquisition, in the year 1846, by the arms of the United 
States, of the Territory of New Mexico, the civil government of this Ter- 
ritory having been overthrown, the officer. General Kearney, holding pos- 
session for the United States, in virtue of the power of conquest and occu- 
pancy, and in obedience to the duty of maintaining the security of the inha- 
bitants^ in their persons and property, ordained, under the sanction and 
authority of the United States, a provisional or temporary government for 
the acquired country. By this substitution of a new sunremacy, although 
the former political relations of the inhabitants were dissolved, their private 
relations, their rights vested under the government of thir former allegi- 
ance, or those arising from contract or usage, remained in full force and 
unchanged, except so far as they were in their nature and character foun^d 
to be in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States, or 
with any regulations which the conquering and occupying authority should 
ordain. Amongst the consequences which would be necessarily incident to 
the change of sovereignty, would be the appointment or control of the 
agents by whom and the modes in which the government of the occupant 
should be administered — this result being indispensable, in order to secure 
those o jects for which such a government is usually established. 

is the principle of the law of nations, as expounded by the high- 
^t authorities. In the case of The Fama, in the 6 C. Rob., 106, Sir Wil- 
it to be **the settled principle of the law of nations, that 
le in la itants of a conquered territory change their allegiance, and their 
re a ion to their former sovereign is dissolved; but their relations to each 
o ..r, an their rights of property not taken from them by the orders of 
he conqueror, remain undisturbed." So, too, it is laid down by Vattel, 
00 , cap. 13, sec. 200, that conqueror lays his hands on the posses- 

sions of the State, whilst private persons are permitted to retain theirs; 

ey suffer but indirectly by the war, and to them the result is, that they 
only change masters." Leitensdorfar v. Webb, 16 U. S. L. ed., 891. 

Commanding generals may cause the magistrates and civil officers 
o t e hostile country to take the oath of temporary allegiance or an oath 
of fidelity to their own victorious government or rules, and they may expel 
every one who declines to do so. But whether they do so or not, the people 
and their civil officers owe strict obedience to them as long as they hold 
sway over the district or country, at the peril of their lives. Par. 26, IN- 

166 



STRUCTIONS FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF ARMIES OF THE UNIT- 
ED STATES IN THE FIELD, General Orders No. 100, Adjutant-Gen- 
ei-ars Office; prepared by Francis Lieber, LL.D., and revised by a Board of 
Officers of the United States Army. 

2. PHILIPPINES 

The Philippines renounces war as an instrument of national 
policy and atlopts the generally accepted principles of inter- 
national law as part of the law of the nation* Constitution of 
the Philippines, Art. MI, Section 3. 

By the Supreme Court, thru Mr. Justice Feria, in Go Kim Cham v. 
\^aldes 1 an Keh et ah, G. R. No. L- 5 , and Peralta v. Director of Pri- 
sons, G. R. No. L-4g: 

a. On January 2, 1942, the Imperial Japanese Forces of Occupation 
occupied the City of Manila, and on the following day their Commander- 
in-Chisf proclaimed *‘the Military Administration under martial law over 
the districts occupied by the Army.” In said proclamation, it was also 
provided that **so far as the Military Administration permits, all the laws 
in force in the Philippines, as well as executive and judicial institutions, 
shall continue to be effective for the time being as in the past,” and ‘‘all 
public officials shall remain in their present posts and carry on faithfully 
their duties as before.” 

b. A civil government or central administrative organization under 
the name of “Philippine Executive Commission” was organized by Order 
No. 1 issued on January 23, 1942, by the Commander-in- Chief of the Jap- 
anese Forces in the Philippines. Mr. Jorge B. Vargas, who was appointed 
Chairman thereof, was instructed to proceed to the immediate coordina- 
tion of the existing central administrative organs and of judicial courts, 
based upon what had existed theretofore, with the approval of the said 
Commandar-in-Chief, who was to exercise (direct jurisdiction) over the 
judicial courts. 

c. The Philippine Executive Commission, which was organized by Or- 
der No. 1, issued on January 23, 1942 by the Commander of the Japanese 
Forces, was a civil government established by the military forces of occu- 
pation and therefore a de facto government. It was not different from, 
the government established by the British in Castine, Maine, or by the 
United States in Tampico, Mexico. The fact that the Philippine Executive . 
Commission was a civil and not a military government and was run by 
Filipinos and not by Japanese nationals, is of no consequence. 

d. The so-called Republic of the Philippines, apparently established 
and organized as a sovereign state independent from any other govern- 
ment by the Filipino people, was, in truth and reality, a government estab- 
lished by the belligerent occupant of the Japanese Forces of Occupation. 
It was of the same character as the Philippine Executive Commission, and 
the ultimate source of its authority was the same — the Japanese military 
government. General MacArthur in his proclamation of October 23, 1944^ 

167 



stated that “under enemy duress, a so-called government styled as ‘Republic 
of the Philippines’ was established on October 14, 1943, based upon neither 
the free expression of the peoples’ will nor the sanction of the govern- 
ment of the United States. 

e. There are three (3) kinds of de facto government, 

1. The first kind of de facto government is that which gets posses- 
sion and control of, or usurps, by force or by the voice of the majority, 
the rightful legal government and maintains itself against the will of the 
latter, such as the government of England under the Commonwealth, first 
by parliament and later by Cromwell as Protector. 2. The second kind is 
that which is established and maintained by military forces who invade and 
occupy a territory of the enemy in the course of war, and which is deno- 
minated a government of paramount force, as the cases of Castine, Maine, 
which was reduced to British possession in the war of 1812 and of Tam- 
pico, Mexico, occupied during the war with Mexico by the troops of the 
United States. 3. The third kind is that established as an independent 
government by the inhabitants of a country who rise in insurrection 
against the parent state, such as the government of Southern Confederacy 
in revolt against the Union during the war of secession. 

f. The distinguishing characteristics of the de facto government of 
the second kind: (1) That its existence is maintained by active military 
power within the territories, and against the rightful authority of an 
established and lawful government; and (2) That while it exists it must 
necessarily be obeyed in civil matters by private citizens who, by acts 
of obedience rendered in submission to such force, do not become respon- 
sible, as wrongdoers, for those acts, though not warranted by the laws of 
the rightful government. Actual governments of these sort are estab- 
lished under duress differing greatly in extent and conditions. They are 

administered by military authority, but they may be administered 
a so y civil authority, supported more or less directly by military force. 

g. One example of this sort of government is found in the case of 
as me, in Maine, reduced to British possession in the war of 1812. . . 
f rp * ^ice, 4 Wheaton, 253). A like example is found in the case 

TT occupied during the war with Mexico by the troops of the 

united States (Fleming v. Page, 9 Howard, 614). These were cases of 
mporary possession of territory by lawful and regular governments at 
war wit a country of which the territory so possessed was part. 

Philippine Executive Commission which was organized by 
Order No. 1, issued on January 23, 1942, by the Commander-in-Chief of 
the Imperial Japanese Forces and the so-called Republic of the Philippines 
were e facto goveimments of the 2d kind (of paramount force) as the gov- 
ernment established in Castine, Maine, during its occupation by the British 
forces and as that of Tampico, Mexico, occupied during* the war with that 
country by the United States army. 

i. Under the Japanese occupation the belligerent occupant was to- 
tally independent of the constitution and laws of the Philippines in car- 
rying out the administration of this country during the occupation. 

168 



j. The doctrine laid down by the United States Supreme Court in 
cases involving the validity of judicial and legislative acts of the Confe- 
derate States, considered as de facto government of the third kind, does 
not apply to the acts of the so-called Republic of the Philippines which 
was a de facto government of the second kind (paramount force). 

k. By the military occupation of Castine, Maine, the sovereignty 
■of the United States in that territory was, of course, suspended and the 
laws of the United States could no longer be rightfully enforced there or 
be obligatory upon the inhabitants who remained and submitted to the 
helligerent occupant. By the surrender the inhabitants passed under tem- 
poraiy allegiance to the British government and were bound by such laws 
and such only as it chose to recognize and impose. (United States v. Rice. 
4 Wheaton, 246). 

l. In carrying out the administration over the occupied territory and 
its inhabitants, the belligerent occupants is totally independent of the con- 
stitution and the laws of the territory, since occupation is an aim of war- 
fare, and the maintenance and safety of his forces, and the purpose of 
war, .stand in the foreground of his interest and must be promoted under 
all circumstances or conditions (Oppenheim, International Law, Vol. 2, 6th 
Edition, Revised 1944, p. 342.) 

m. The invader deals freely with the relations of the inhabitants 
of the occupied territory towards himself... for his security also, he 
declares certain acts, not forbidden by the ordinary laws of the country, 
to be punishable; and he so far suspends the laws which guard personal 
liberty as is required for the summa^'y punishment of any one doing' such 
acts. (HalTs International Law, seventh ed., p. 500). 

n. The laws to be enforced by the occupant consist of, first, the 
territorial law in general, as that which stands to the public order and 
social and commercial life of the district in a relation of mutual adapta- 
tion, so that any needless displacement of it would defeat the object which 
the invader is enjoined to have in view, and secondly, such variations of 
the territorial law as may be required by real necessity and are not ex- 
pressly prohibited by any of the rules which will come before us. Such 
variations will naturally be greatest in what concerns the relation of the 
communities and individuals within the district to the invading army and 
its followers, it being necessary for the protection of the latter, and for 
the unhindered prosecution of the war by them, that acts committed to 
their detriment shall not only lose what justification the territorial law 
might give them as committed against enemies, but shall be repressed 
more . severely than the territorial law would repress acts committed 
against fellow subjects. Indeed the entire relation between the invaders 
and the invaded, so far as it may fall within the criminal department 
whether by the intrinsic nature of the acts done or in consequence of the 
regulations made by the invaders, may be considered as taken out of the 
territorial law referred to what is called martial law.^* (Westlake, Inter- 
national Law, Part II, War, p. 96.) 

169 



o. The bslligerent occupant may promulgate such new laws and reg* 
ulations as military necessity demands, and in this class will be included 
those laws which come into being as a result of military rule; that is, 
those which establish new crimes and offenses incident to a state of war 
and are necessary for the control of the country and the protection of 
the army, for the principal object of the occupant is to provide for the 
security of the invading army and to contribute to its support and effi- 
ciency and the success of its operations (United States’ Rules of Land 
Warfare, published in 1940, pp. 76-77.) 

p. The crimes against national security and the law of nation and 
the crimes of public order are all of political complexion because the acts 
constituting those offenses are punished as political offenses for public 
rather than for private reason and during the Japanese occupation all 
acts in aid or favor of the enemy are directly against the welfare, safety 
and security of the belligerent occupant. 

q. “To the extent to which the legal power of the occupant is ad- 
mitted he can make law for the duration of his occupation. Like any 
other legislator he is morally subject to the duty of giving sufficient notice, 
when required by military necessity and so far as practically carrying out 
his will can be distinguished from punishment, but always remembering 
that to punish for breach of a regulation a person who was justifiably 
ignorant of it would be outrageous. But the law made by the occupant 
within his admitted power, whether morally justifiable or not, will bind 
any member of the occupied population as against any other member of 
it, and will bind as between them all and their national government, so far 
as it produces an effect during the occupation. When the occupation comes 
to an end and the authority of the national government is restored, either 
by the progress of operations during the war or by the conclusion of a 
peace, no redress can be had for what has been actually carried out but 
nothing ^further can follow from the occupant’s legislation. 

r. In general, the acts of the occupant possess legal validity, and 

under international law should not be abrogated by the subsequent gov- 
einment. But this rule does not necessarily apply to acts that exceed 
the occupant’s power (e. g., alienation of the domains of the State or the 
sovereign), to sentences for 'war treason* and 'war crimes,* to acts of a 
po itical ^aracter, and to those that operate beyond the period of occu- 
pa ion. hen occupation ceases, no reparation is legally due for what 
245 ) ^ carried out.** (Wheaton’s International Law, supra, p. 

s. According to the precepts of the Hague Conventions, as the belli- 

geren as the right and is burdened with the duty to insure public order 

and safety during his military occupation, he possesses all the powers of 
a de facto government, and he can suspend the old laws and promulgate 
new ones and make such changes in the old as he may see fit, but he is 
enjoined to respect, unless absolutely prevented by the circumstances pre- 
vailing in the occupied territory, the municipal laws in force in the country, 

^ that is, those laws which enforce public order and regulate the social and 
commercial life of the country. • On the other hand, laws of a political 

170 



nature or affecting political relations, such as among others, the right of 
assembly, the right to bear arms, the freedom of the press, and the right 
to travel freely in the territory occupied, are considered as suspended or 
in abeyance during the military occupation. Although the local and civil 
administration of justice is suspended as a matter of course as soon as a 
country is militarily ‘occupied, it is not usual for the invader to take the 
whole administration into his own hands. In practice, the local ordinary 
tribunals are authorized to continue administering justice; and the judges 
and other judicial officers are kept in their posts if they accept the author- 
ity of the belligerent occupant or are required to continue in their positions 
under the supervision of the military or civil authorities appointed by 
the Commander-in-Chief of the occupant. These principles and practice 
have the sanction of all publicists who have considered the subject, and 
have asserted by the Supreme Court and applied by the Presidents of the 
United States. 

t. ‘‘The right of one belligerent to occupy and govern the territory 
of the enemy while in its military possession, is one of the incidents of 
w?ir, and flows directly from the right to conquer. We, therefore, do not 
look to the Constitution or political institutions of the conqueror, for 
authority to establish a government for the territory of the enemy in his 
possession, during its military occupation, nor for the rules by which the 
powers of such government are regulated and limited. Such authority and 
such rules are derived directly from the laws of war, as established by 
the usage of the world, and confirmed by the writings of publicists and 
decisions of courte — in fine, from the law of nations... The municipal 
laws of a conquered territory, or the laws which regulate private rights, 
continue in force during military occupation, except so far as they are 
suspended or changed by the acts of the conqueror... He, nevertheless, 
has all the powers of a dc facto government, and can at his pleasure 
either change the existing laws or make new ones.” (Halleck, Interna- 
tional Law, Vol. 2, p. 444.) 

u. The powers of a militai'y occupant are absolute and supreme and 
immediately opsrate upon the political conditions of the inhabitants. (Pre- 
sident McKinley, in his Executive Order to the Secretary of War of May 
19, 1898, relating to the occupation of the Philippines by United States 
forces.) 

V. “The existence of a state of insurrection and war did not loosen 
the bonds of society, or do away with civil government or the regular ad- 
ministration of the laws. Order was to be preserved, police regulations 
maintained,, crime prosecuted, property protected, contracts enforced, mar- 
riages celebrated, estates settled, and the transfer and descent of property 
regulated, precisely as in the time of peace x x x (Williams v. Bruffy, 96 
U. S. 176, 192.) 

w. “What occurred or was done in respect of such matters under the 
authority of the laws of these local de facto governments should not be 
disregarded or held to be invalid merely because those governments were 
organized in hostility to the Union established by the National Constitu- 

171 



tion; this, because the existence of war between the United States and the 
Confederate States did not relieve those who were within the insurrec- 
tionary lines from the necessity of civil obedience, nor destroy the bonds 
of society, nor do away with civil government or the regular administra- 
tion of the lav.s, and because transactions in the ordinary course of civil 
society as organized within the enemy's territory, although they may have 
indirectly or remotely promoted the ends of the de facto or unlawful gov- 
ernment organized to effect a dissolution of the Union, were without 
blame ‘except when proved to have been entered into with actual intent 
to further invasion or insurrection.'" (Baldy v. Hunter, 171 U. S. 388, 
400.) 

X. “The government established over an enemy's territory during 
the military occupation may exercise all the powers given by the laws of 
war to the conqueror over the conquered, and is subject to all restrictions 
which that code imposes. It is of little consequence whether such govern- 
ment be j-lled a military or civil government. Its character is the same 
and the source of its authority the same. In either case it is a govern- 
ment imposed by the laws of war, and so far as it concerns the inhabit- 
ants of such territory or the rest of the world, those laws alone determine 
the legality or illegality of its acts." (Halleck, International Law, Vol. 
2, p. 466.) 

y. Not only the Hague Regulations, but also the principles of in- 
ternational law, as they result from the usages established between civil- 
ized nations, the laws of humanity and the requirement of the public con- 
science, constitute or form the law of nations (Preamble of the Hague 
Conventions; Westlake, International Law, 2nd Ed., part II, p. 81.) 

z. When the Commander-in-Chief of the Japanese Imperial Forces 
proclaimed on January 23, 1942, “the military administration under mar- 
tial law over the territory occupied by the said army in order that all 
laws now in force in the Commonwealth, as well as executive and judicial 
institution, shall continue to be effective for the time being as in the past," 
and “all public officials shall remain in their present posts and carry on 
faithfully their duties as before," he followed the practices and precepts 
of the law of nation. 

By Mr. Justice Ozaeta, concurring with the majority, in Peralta 
vs. Director of Prisons, G. R. No. L-49. 

a. The so-called Republic of the Philippines is not a government 
established by the Filipino people in rebellion against the Commonwealth 
and the sovereignty of the United States. 

b. The decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States declaring 
invalid Acts of a rebel state or of the Confederacy which were in fur- 
therance or support of rebellion against the United States or which im- 
paired the rights of citizens under the Constitution, rests on the proposi- 
tion that the Union is perpetual and indissoluble and that obligation of 
allegiance to the state, and obedience to her laws, subject to the Consti- 
tution of the United States remained unimpaired during the War of Se- 

172 



cession. (See Texas vs. White, 74 UI S. 700, 19 L. ed., 227, 237; Wil- 
liams vs. Bruffy, 96 U. S. 176, 24 L. ed., 7ia). 

c. An invaded and occupied territory in the course of war between 
two independent nations is possessed temporarily by a lawful government 
at w’ar with the country of which the territory so possessed is a part, 
and during their possession the obligations of the inhabitants to theii 
country are suspended although not abrogated. (U. S. vs. Rice, 4 Wheaton 
253, Fleming vs. Page, 9 How. 614; Baldy vs. Hunter, 171 U. S. 388, 43 
L. ed., 208, 210.) 

d. ‘^The rule stated by Vattel, that the justice of the cause between 
two enemies being by the law of nations reputed to be equal, w'hatsoevei 
is permitted to the one in virtue of war is also permitted to the othei, 
applies to cases of regular war between independent nations. It has no 
application to the case of a war between an established government and 
insurgents seeking to withdraw themselves from its jurisdiction or to 
overthrow its authority.’^ (Williams vs. Bruffy, 24 U. S. (L. ed.) 716.) 

e. In a war between independent nations ‘^the rights of the occu- 
pant as a law-giver have broad scope.*’ He may ‘‘suspend the existing 
laws and promulgate new ones when the exigencies of the military service 
demand such action. According to the Rules of Land Warfare he will 
naturally alter or suspend all. laws which affect the welfare of his com- 
mand.” (Hyde, International Law, Vol. 2, p. 367.) 

f. In a war between independent nations the army .of occupation has 
the right to enact laws and, take measures hostile to its enemy, for its 
purpose is to harass and subdue the latter; and it is not bound to respect 
or preserve the rights of the citizens of the occupied territory under their 
Constitution. 

g. It is a matter of contemporary history and common knowledge 
that the Japanese Military authorities in the Philippines never treated 
the Republic of the Philippines as an independent government after its 
inauguration, they continued to impose their wUl on its executive offi- 
cials when their interests so required; the Japanese Military Police ar- 
rested and punished various high officials of said government including 
First Assistant Solicitor-General, and paid no attention to the protests 
and representations made on their behalf by the President of the Republic, 
and as a climax of their continual impositions, in December, 1944, the Jap- 
anese military authorities placed the President and the members of his 
Cabinet under the protective custody of the military police, and on the 
22d of that month forced them to leave the seat of government in Manila 
and hide with them in the mountains, 

h. While in theory and for the purpose of propaganda Japan pro- 
fessed to be a benefactor and liberator of the Filipinos, in practice she 
continued to enslave and oppress the Filipinos, as she saw that the lattei 
remained loyal to the United States notwithstanding Japan’s grant of inde- 
pendence to the Philippines. 

i. The Filipinos merely feigned cooperation "with the Japanese as 
their only means of self-preservation and those who could stay beyond 

173 



V 



1 



the reach of the Japanese AiTny of occupation manifested their hostility by 
harrassing and attacking that army. 



j. The Republic of the Philippines was a mere instrumentality of 
the Commander-in-Chief of the Japanese anny as military occupant, and 
all the official acts of that Republic must be deemed emanated from the 
powers of the said occupant. 

k. In consequence of hi§ acquisition of the power to control the 
territory concerned, the occupant enjoys the right and is burdened with 
the duty to take all the measures within his power to restore and insure 
public order and safety. In so doing he is given great latitude with 
respect to choice of means and mode of procedure. This freedom may be 
partly due to the circumstance that the occupant is obliged to consider 
as a principal object the security, support, efficiency and success of his 
own force in a hostile land inhabited by nationals of the enemy. . (Hyd6, 
International Law, Vol. 2, pp. 366, 367-368.) 



1. ‘Tf occupation is merely ^ phase in military operations, and im- 
plies no change in the legal position of the invader with respect to the‘ 
occupied territory and its inhabitants, the rights which he possesses over 
theni are those which in the special circumstances represent his general 
right to do whatever acts are necessary for the prosecution of his war; 
m other words he has the right of exercising such control, and such con- 
trol only, within the occupied territory, as is required for his safety and 
the success of his operations .. . On occupying a country an invader at 
once invests himself with absolute authority; and the fact of occupation 
raws wi it as of course the substitution of his will' for previously exist- 
ing law whenever such substitution is reasonably needed, and also the 
replacement of the actual civil and judicial administration by military 
jurisdiction. In its exercise however this ultimate authority is governed 
^ 1 ion that the invader, • having only a right to such control as 

Dower wftVn r success of his operations, must use his 

and wifii ^ \ iwiits defined by the fundamental notion of occupation, 

Sen i ^^f^rence to its transient character. He is therefore for- 
privata suspend laws affecting property and 

munRv ^ 

499.) ^ Treaties on International Law, 7th ed., pp. 498- 



y Mr. justice De Joya, concurring with the majority, in Peralta 

T ^ 1 ^ L-4Q, & Go Kim Cham vs, Valdes 

I an Keh et al, G. R. No. L-5. 



place^ the^nrplv^l!^ territory, the conquering power has a right to dis- 
deem nrorw^r fv. authority, and to assume to such extent as it may 

pmmpnf 14 - ^ ^^ercise by itself of all the powers and functions of gov- 

dPCTcrnof’^ ^ appoint all the necessary officers and clothe them with 
vpnnoQ f powers, according to its pleasure. It may prescribe the re- 
^ apply them to its own use or otherwise. It may 

do anything necessary to strengthen itself and weaken the enemy. There 



174 



r 



is no limit to the powers that may be exerted in such cases, save those 
which are found in the laws and customs and usages of war. (Cross v. 

Harrison, 16 How. 164; Leitensdorfer v. Webb, 20 Id. 176; etc.). 

b. It is generally the better course for the inhabitants of the ter- 

ritory, under military occupation, that they should continue to carry on 
the ordinary administration under the invader; but the latter has no right 
to force them to do so. If they decline, his only right, and it is lalso 
his duty, is to replace them by appointees of his o^vn, so far as neces- 
sary for maintaining order and the continuance of the daily life of the 
territory; other purposes, as those of the superior judicial offices, can * 

bide their time. (Westlake, International Law, Part II War, 2d Ed., pp. I 

121-126.) j 

Though the fact of occupation imposes no duties upon the inhabitants i 

, of the occupied territory, the invader himself is not left equally free. As ; 

it is a consequence of his acts that the regular government of the country 
is suspended, he is bound to take whatever means are required for the 
security of public order; and as his presence, so long as it is based upon | 

occupation, is confessedly temporary, and his rights of control spring only | 

from the necessity of the case, he is also bound to alter or override the 
existing laws as little as possible. (Hall, International Law, 6th Ed., p. 

476.) 

c. The government established here under the Philippine Executive 
Commission was more in consonance with the general practice among civil- 
ized nations, in establishing governments for the maintenance of peace 
and order and the administration of justice, in territories of the enemy 
under military occupation; because said government was of a temporary 
character. 

d. The government subsequently established under the so-called Phil- | 

ippine Republic, with a new constitution, was also of the naiure of a ;1 

de facto government, in accordance with International Law, as it was estab- | 

iished under the authority of the military occupant and supported by the 

armed forces of the latter. But it was somewhat different from that 
established under the Philippine Executive Commission, because the former 
apparently, at least, had the semblance of permanency, which, however, is | 

unusual in the practices among civilized nations, under similar circum- I 

stances^ 

e. tinder military occupation, the original national character of the 
soil and of the inhabitants of the territory remains unaltered ; and although 
the invader is invested with quasi-sovereignty, which gives him a claim 
as o:f right to the obedience of the conquered population, nevertheless, its 
exercise is limited by the qualification which has gradually become estab- 
Iished, that he must not, as a general rule, modify the permanent institu- 
tions of the country. (Hall, International Law, 6th Ed., p. 460.) 

• f. As International Law is an integral part of our laws, it must be 
ascertained and administered by this Court, whenever questions of right 
depending upon it are presented for our determination, sitting as an in- 

175 



t6rnd.tionsil 5 is wfell ^ domestic Tribunal (Kansas vs. Colorado, 185 U. S. 
146, 22 Sup. Ct. 552, 46 L. ed., 838.) 

g. Since International Law is a body of rules actually accepted by 
nations as regulating their mutual relations, the proof of the existence of 
a given rule is to be found in the consent of nations to abide by that rule; 
and this consent is evidenced chiefly by the usages and customs of nations, 
and to ascertain what these usages and customs are, the universal prac- 
tice is to turn to the writings of publicists and to the decisions of the 
highest courts of the different countries of the world. (The Habana, 175 
U. S. 677, 20 Sup. Ct. 290, 44 L. Ed., 320.) 

h. The Hague Convention of 1899, respecting laws and customs of 
war on land, expressly declares that: 

‘‘Art. XLII. Territory is considered occupied when it is actually 
placed under the authority of the hostile army. 

“The occupation applies only to the territory where such author- 
ity is established, and in a position to assert itself. 

“Article XLIII. The authority of the legitimate power having 
'actually passed into the hands of the occupant, the latter shall take 
all steps in his power to reestablish and insure, as far as possible, 
public order and safety, while respecting, unless absolutely prevented, 
the laws in force in the country.” (32 Stat. II, 1821.) 

The above provisions of the Hague Convention have been adopted by 
the nations giving adherence to them, among which is the United States 
of America (32 Stdt. II, 1821.) 

i. The Commander-in-Chief of the invading forces of military occu- 
pant may exercise governmental authority, but only when in actual pos- 
session of the enemy’s territory, and this authority will be exercised upon 
principles of International Law (New Orleans vs. Steamship Co. (1874) 
20 Wall. 387; Kelly vs. Sanders (1878) 99 U. S. 441; Macleod vs. U. S-., 
229 U. S. 416, 33 Sup. Ct. 955, 57 L. Ed., 1260; II Oppenheim on Inter- 
national Law, sec. 167). 

j. The Philippines was under Japanes^e military occupation, from 
ay, 1942, up to the time of the reconquest by the armed forces of the 

United States of the Island of Luzon, in February, 1945. 

k. The establishment of the government under the so-called Philip- 
pine Republic, during Japanese occupation, respecting the laws in force 
in the country, and permitting the local courts to function and administer 
such laws, as proclaimed in the City of Manila, by the Commander-in-Chief 
of the Japanese Imperial Forces, on January 3, 1942, was in accordance 
with the rules and principles of International Law. 

l. The Confederate States were a de facto government in the sense 
that its citizens were bound to render the government obedience in civil 
matters, and did not become responsible, as wrongdoers, for such acts of 
obedience (Thorington vs. Smith, 8 Wall, (U. S.) 9, 19 L. Ed., 361.) 

176 



t 



\ 



m. The government established in the Philippines, during Japanese 
occupation, would seem to fall under the following definition of dc facto 
government given by the Supreme Court of the United States: 

**But there is another description of government, called also by 
publicists a government de facto, but which might, perhaps, be more 
aptly denominated a government of paramount force. Its distin- 
guishing characteristics are (1) that its existence is maintained by 
active military power within the territories, and against the right- 
ful authority of an established and lawful government; and (2) that 
while it exists it must necessarily be obeyed in civil matters by pri- 
vate citizens who, by acts of obedience rendered in submission to 
such force, do not become responsible, as wrongdoers, for those acts, 
though not warranted by the laws of the rightful government. Ac- 
tual governments of this sort are established over districts differ- 
ing greatly in extent and conditions. They are usually administered 
directly by military authority, but they may be administered also,, 
by civil authority, supported more or less directly by military force.’* 
(Macleod v. United States (1913), 229 U. S. 416.) 



177 



APPENDIX ‘‘P' 

A TIMELY WARNING GIVEN BY MR. RECTO IN 1934 
AGAINST JAPAN’S “ASIATIC MONROEISM” 

In August 1934, Mr. Recto, then the President of the Philippine 
Constitutional Convention just convened for the preparation and draft- 
ing of the Commonwealth Constitution, in an address delivered before 
the Manila Rotary Club in the presence of the Japanese Consul-General, 
discussed the American Monroe Doctrine and Japan's Asiatic Monroeism, 
saying in part: 

‘'But we are in the Pacific and the real danger for us, that 
danger that impends and against which the Filipino people must he 
ready to muster all their resources as well as their statesmanship 
and patmotisniy is not the economic collaboration of America which 
W3 should foster and stimulate hut such other economic ascendancy, 
siLch Monroeism which in viexo of geographical factors will mean for 
us and our posterity our economic pauperism and our political extinc- 
tion. This danger is real and we must he ready to meet it with 
courage and detemnmationl* 

The day following the delivery of Mr. Recto’s address, the THhune, 
an independent and at the time the most influential newspaper in Manila, 
published the following editorial comment: 

“Those who have thought of the position of these islands in 
the Far East and of- the political explosions in this part of the 
world, will find in these words of President Recto an echo of their 
own conclusions on what may befall this country. And his and 
their fear is reasoned out of history in the making in Eastern Asia 
since the opening of the century. 

“Moreover it has been a history of domination and expansion 
not merely reaching out our threshold but actually our gate. Thus, 
President Recto said, the danger is real. 

“There has been a reluctance among the other Filipino leaders 
to speak as President Recto has spoken. It may be that they have 
not the fear for the future of this country that so engross him. 
Or perhaps they have not the vision that is his. Or, very likely, 
they have chosen to let things go unheeded as the best policy. 

“But in view of the imminence of independence, President Rec- 
to’s open and direct assertion of a fate that can be only “our 
economic pauperism and political extinction”, if disturbing, is point- 
edly the practical stand. In common honesty if not as a matter 
of sagacity and statecraft, the people should be told of the real 
danger. 

“The people should not be led to their freedom with their eyes 
closed to this reality or with their leaders running away from it,” 



179 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



I • 



1 




t 










■J\ - ■ 




)\v 



1 




t 






I 

u 






I 



f " 

h 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Jp OR the discussion of the events and ths general situation in the Phil- 
ippines during the Japanese occupation, the author has relied mainly 
on the contemporary news publications in Manila, namely, the Official 
Journal of the Jananese Military Administration (Vols. I to XIII), The 
Tribune (Manila Sinbunsya), and the daily sheets released by the Domei 
News Agency. The particular issues of these publications from which 
the materials used in this article have been taken are not mentioned ex- 
cept in a fe\y instances, because they are altogether too numerous to be 
individually listed and because unless one had actually remained and lived 
in the territory under effective military occupation by the enemy, one can- 
not form a fairly accurate picture of ths conditions at the time by an 
objective perusal, in retrospect, of the contents of the aforesaid publica- 
tions. 

The other sources of materials used are given below; 

1. ‘‘Greater East Asia International Law*^ by Masatoshi Matsushita. 
Contemporary Japan^ Vol. XII, No. 1, January 1943. 

2. “The - New World Order: a Japanese View’’ by Iwao P. Ajmsawa. 
Contemporary Japan, Vol. XII, No. 7, July 1940. 

3. “The Tanaka Memorandum, 1927” — International Politics, by Schu- 
man. 



4. 

5. 

6 . 
‘7. 
8 . 
9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 



17 . 



“General Sadao Araki, Minister of W'ar, in Kaikosha, July, 1932” — 
International Politics, by Schuman. 

Address by Premier Konoye, July 23, 1940. Contemporary Japan, 
Vol. IX, No. 8, August 1940. 

Address by Foreign Minister Arita, June 29, 1940. Contemporary 
Japan, Vol. IX, No. 8, August 1940. 

“Japan’s i^vance and the Southem Pacific” bv Armiral Sokichi Ta- 
kahashi. Pacific Affairs, Vol. XIV, No. 2, June 1941. 

Pacific” by William Magistretti. Pacific 
Affairs, Vol. XIV, No. 2, June 1941. 

“Tow^'d World Peace” by Yosuke. Matsuoka. Contemporary Japan, 
Vol. IX, No. 12, December 1940. ^ 

Drive Behind Japan’s National Policies” By Galen H. Fisher. 
Pacific Affairs, Vol. XIII, No. 12, December 1940. 

The Axis Project of World Order” by Shigetomo Sayegusa. Con- 
temporary Japan, Vol. XI, No. 9, September 1942. 

“Manchukuo in Co-prosperity Sphere” by Honroku Yoshuka. Con- 
temporary Japan, Vol. XII, No. 4, April 1943. 

“Role of Recent Economic Agreements” by T. Takagaki. Contem- 
porary Japan, Vol. XII, No. 4, April 1943. 

Southern Policy” by T. Miyake. Contemporary Japan, Vol. 
XII, No. 5, May 1943. 

“Contemporary Politics in the Far East” by Stanley K. Hornbeck. 
Japan^anchukuo Treaty of September 15, 1932; Sino-Japanese Trea- 
Relations of November 30, 1940; Japan-China-Manchukuo 
Joint Declaration of November 30, 1940; Japan-Indo-China Joint De- 
July 29, 1941* Japan-Thailand Military Alliance Pact 
of Dec^ber 21, 1941 — Japan Year Book of 1942-1943. Sino-Japanese 
Joint Declaration — The Tribune, January 10, 1943. Japan-Burma 
Pact of Alliance and declaration of war bn United States and Great 
Britain of August 1, 1943 — Domei News, August 1, 1943. 

“The Far Eastern Policy of the United States” by A. Whitney Gris- 
wold. 



183 



18. 

19. 

20 . 
21 . 
22 . 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 



36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 



“War and Diplomacy^’ by Roy Takeuchi. 

“How Japan Plans to Win” by Clark Lee, Collier'Sy May 22, 1943; 
The Trihuue, September 3, 1943. 

Collier's, July 1, 1944 (Article by Royal Arch Gunnison). 

Time, February 10, 1941. 

Time, January 8, 1945. 

“Denmark” by Hans Bendix. Life, , 1945. 

Newsweek, Pacific Edition, Manila, December 3, 1945, and Daily Pad- 
fican, November 20, 1945. 

“The Chaos of Collaboration” by Chris Edwards. Philippine' Amer- 
ican, November, 1945. 

“International Law and Laws of War” by Halleck. 

“Principles of Intemational Law” by Lawrence. 

“International Law” by Hall. 

The Hague Convention of 1907. 



Joint Resolution of the U. S. Congress, June 29, 1944. Official Ga- 
zette (Philippines), April 1945. 

U. S. Basic Manual of Rules of Land Warfare (1940). 

President McKinley’s Instructions to the Secretary of War, Julv 18, 
1898, People v. Perfecto, 43 Phil. 898. 

Go Kim Cham ys. Eusebio Valdez Tan Keh and Judge Dizon. G. R. 
No. L-5 (Decision of the Philippine Supreme Court, July, 1946). 

Peralta vs. Director of Prisons, G. R. No. L-49 (Decision of the Phil- 
ippine Supreme Court, October, 1945) 

Shanks vs. Du Pont, 7 U. S. 666; New Orleans vs. New York Mail 

Leitensdorfer vs. Webb, 15 U. S. 891; 
ine rama, 5 C. Rob. 106; U. S. vs. Rice, Wheaton’s IV, 246; Fleming 
vs. Page, Howard IX, 603; Dow vs. Johnson, 100 U. S. 158. 

The Social Cancer” (Noli Me tangere) by Dr. Jose Rizal. 

Surrender issued by Gen. Wainwright on May 7, 1942, to 
n. bnarp. Commander of the Visayan-Mindanao Forces. 

Order of Surrender issued by Gen. Sharp on May 11, 1942, to all com- 
manders m the Visayan Islands. 

to All Filipino Officers and Men” ordering them to sur- 
, issued by Col. Roger Hillsman, Commander in Negros. 

Thorpe, captured guerrilla commander, 
me Tribune, January 21, 1943. 

Speech of Col. Thorpe. The Tribune, January 31, 1943. 

in ^ K.- Baker, captured guerrilla commander 

in i^uzon. The Tribune, January 31, 1943. 

Wainwright in Formosa after his surrender. The 
inbune, June 24, 1943. 

■ Hugh Straughn, captured guerrilla commander. 
The Tribune, August 7, 1943. 

Osmena in Leyte on October 23, 1944. Official 
Gazette (Philippines), April, 1945. 

Cushing, District Commander of the guerrilla 
lorces in Pangasman. The Tribune, March 13, 1943. 

“Interpretations” by Walter Lippman, 1931. 

Instractions of President Quezon sent by Telegram to Governors 
Quirino and Visaya, thru Col. Nakar, April 18, 1942. 



184 



49. Statement of Gen. George C. Marshall at the high command confer- 
ence in February, 1941. The Manila Times, December 8, 1945. 

50. ‘‘Asiatic Monroeism'* by Claro M. Recto (English Edition, 1930). 

51. “Principles and Problems of International Relations" by H. Arthur 
Steiner (1940). 

52. “Philippine History" by E. M. Alip (1940). 

53. “Which Way Will France Go?" by Demaree Bess, Saturday Evening 
Post, November 18, 1944. 

54. Memorial addressed to Japanese Ambassador Syozo Murata and Lt. 
Gan. W”ati of the Japanese Army on June 20, 1944 by Claro M. Recto, 
Foreign Minister in the Laurel Government. 

55. President Osmeha's speech in Capas on November 30, 1945. Manila 
Chronicle, December 1, 1945. 

56. Daily Pacifican, Nov. 20, 1945, and Jan. 3, 1946. 

57. Evening Neivs, Dec. 6, 1945. 

58. “Military Aid to Civil Power" (A textbook for the General Service 
Schools, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas). 

59. Hackworth (Legal adviser to the Department of State), “Digest of 
International Law", as quoted by Prof. Hyde. 

60. Hyde, “International Law, Chiefly as Interpreted and Applied by the 
United States" (1945 Edition). 

61. Time magazine. Issue of Jan. 14, 1946. 

62. “Military Government and Martial Law" by Major William Birk- 
heimer, U.S.A. 






I 




185 






i 

r 



I 



I* 



K 



jvr 



17 % 

V ) 
\ 




I 







\ 






ijuuippi I 

) 



BIOGRAPHICAL 



CL.ARO M. RECrO 



Born, February 8, 1890, in Tiaong, Tayabas. , 

A.B. degree, Ateneo de Manila, 1909. ' » 

LL.M. degree. University of Sto. Tomas, 1914. 

Admitted to the Philippine Bar and licensed to practice law, 1914. 

Appointed legal advi.ser to the First Philippine Senate, 1916. 

Elected Member, House of R<fpresentatives for the Third District of Ba- 
tangas, 1919. 

Minority Floor Leader, House of Representatives, 1919-1922. 

Reelected for a second three-year term, House of Representatives, 1922. 

Minority Floor Loader, House of Representatives, 1922-1925. 

Member, Parliamentary Independence Mission to the U. S., 1924. 

Admitted to the Bar of the United States Supreme Court, 1924. 

Reelected for the third time. House of Representatives, 1926. 

Minority Floor Leader, House of Representatives, 1925-1928. 

Elected Senator for a 6-year term for the Fifth Senatorial District com- 
prising <-he Provinces of Batangas, Tayabas, Cavite, Mindoro and Ma- 
rinduque to succeed Mr. Jose P. Laurel, 1931. (President Quezon was 
then the senior senator for this same district.) 

Minority Floor Leader, Senate, 1931-1934. 

Elected Delegate to the Constitutional Convention, 1934. 

Unanimously chosen President, Constitutional Convention, 1934. 

Majority Floor Leader and President Pro-tempore, Senate, 1934 

Presided over the Constitutional Convention, 1934-1935. 

Signed the Commonwealth Constitution as President of the Constitutional 
Convention, February 8, 1936. 

Presented the Commonwealth Constitution to President Roosevelt for the 
latter^s approval and signature, 1935. 

Appointed by President Roosevelt Associate Justice of the Philippine -- 
Supreme Court to fill the vacancy left by Justice Thos. A. Street, 1935. 

Resigned as President Pro-Tempore of the Senate and as Senator and in- 
ducted into the Supreme Court, 1936, 

Conferred the degree of LL.D. (Honoris Causa), Manila University. 1936. 

Resigned post in Supreme Court to resume law practice, 1936. 

Elected Senator at the National Elections of November, 1941, having polled 
the highest number of votes among the 24 elected Senators. 



189 



