
Mar. 30,1945 



By the men 
men in ti 



5 it 10 Centavos 
3d 1/10 Guilder 






Manifans clean up the rubble in a downtown business street A 105-mm howitzer outfit sets up on the Santo Tomas Univer- 

after the Japs fired these American-owned department stores. sity grounds to fire on Jap artillery positions in the city. 








p 


k 


r ~ ' 



















A Filipino gathers up a box of belongings to evacuate as night falls on the burning city 



When the battle for Manila 
became the first big -city 
combat in the Pacific, two 
YANK photographers, bgt. 
Dick Hanley and CpI. Roger 
Wrenn took these pictures of 
the tires and the rums 



By Sgt. H. N. 0L1PHANT 
YANK Staff Correspondent 

M ANILA— It was just beginning to get light. 
Ragged red streaks stabbed the morning 
sky over Manila. But it wasn’t the sun- 
rise. Manila was burning. 

The nervous put-put-put of a Nambu light 
machine gun stuttered through the thick silence 
of a broad tree-lined street. Four enlisted men 
and a first lieutenant, crouching so low their 
chins almost scraped the pavement, scurried over 
the curb and flopped on the driveway of a mod- 
ern, neat-looking gas station. The sign on one 
of the pumps said “Texaco”, and over the en- 
trance to the little office another sign said “ice 
cold Coca Cola sold here.” 

One of the men with the lieutenant said. “I 
think they’re in that house on the corner. Keep 
an eye peeled on the window in the middle. 
I’m going to try something.” He crawled 
around to the far side of the service station, 
took his helmet ofT, attached it to his entrenching 
tool and pushed it cautiously toward the edge of 
the building. Instantly the Nambu opened up. 

“That’s the spot all right,” the lieutenant 
said. “Grenades, fellows, let’s go.” 

He and the other men darted into the concrete 



alleyway behind the service station and inched 
toward the house on the corner. Seconds later 
there were three quick shattering explosions, 
Under a smoking tangle of splintered lumber 
and broken plaster lay three dead Japs. 

The street was suddenly silent. The only 
sounds came from the heart of the city farther 
south. They were the sounds of roaring flames. 

A few Filipino civilians poked their heads 
tentatively out of doors and windows in our 
block. A couple of pink-shirted, white-trous- 
ered young men ventured out into the open. 
Others followed quickly. Soon the street, utterly, 
deserted a moment before, was jammed with a 
noisy, chattering, grinning, cheering mob of 
Filipinos, Chinese and Spanish Mestizos, almost 
all of them making the victory sign and yelling 
“OK, Joe!” to every soldier they passed. 

The battle for Manila, first big-city combat in 
the Pacific, was on in earnest and we were get- 
ting an impromptu, if frequently interrupted, 
welcome while the fighting raged. We were 
patted enthusiastically on our backs and grinned 
at by hundreds of motley, disorganized, happy 
people who braved sniper and mortar fire to 
demonstrate their happiness. 

Not all of the people, however, were grinning 
and cheering. Here and there, jostled by the 
indifferent crowd, were thin, glazed-eyed old 





A section of downtown Manila is a sprawling moss ot ruins and rootless wans a 
artillery duels. The picture was token from the top floor of the Tribune building. 



men and women, dressed in patched colored rags, 
and on some of the faces of the younger people 
you could see tight-lipped bitterness and sorrow. 

One old fcouple and their son, a short, wiry 
young man with high cheek bones and wide 
thickly calloused bare feet, approached us. The 
son was sullen. “My wife and daughter are 
back there in our house/* he said bitterly. “The 
house is no more. The whole block has been 
blown up and burned to the ground. We could 
do nothing; nothing. We could hear Maria 
screaming.” 

Before we could say anything, the hollow 
pop of a Jap .256 rifle sent the crowd scurrying 
for cover. Machine-gun fire spat out in the 
block ahead. The old couple and their son were 
swallowed up in the rushing stream of fright- 
ened, running people. Jap 20-mms started pound- 
ing a big stone building several blocks away. 

Shells were hitting closer. We ducked into 
a narrow hallway. A pretty, light-skinned 
woman, dressed in a white spotless kimona, 
with gleaming scarlet dragons on the sleeves, 
was standing near the door in the rear. She 
was scolding a little boy who was crying and 
pulling at her kimona. She pushed the child 
away and yelled, “Get away from me, you 
little Jap bastard/* 

When she noticed us standing there, she acted 
as if nothing had happened. “Manila was once 
the most beautiful city in the world/* she said 
with a queer smile. The boy started to whim- 
per and tug at the woman again. She shoved 
the. child away. “His father was a Jap/’ she 
said. The queer smile was still on her face. 

It got quiet again so we went back into the 
street and started walking toward the stubby 
dirt-covered towers of Santo Tomas University. 
We got to the thick stone wall that surrounds 
the University grounds when the Japs began 
to throw mortar and more 20-mms. An MP stand- 
ing at the gate said, “That goddam piece ain’t 
a quarter of a mile from here. Why don’t them 
spotters get on the ball?” 

The crowd pressed closer together on the 
jammed sidewalks. Others were standing by 
the iron gate of the University entrance. One 
woman, clutching an iron bar said, “They won’t 
let ine in. My husband is in there.” Suddenly 
it was eerie quiet again. And suddenly the 
crowd started going again to wherever they 
were moving before the shelling. 

We went into a two-story wooden house near 
the corner. From the upstairs window we got 
our first big view of Manila. There wasn’t much 
to see. The whole downtown section was 
smothered in roaring black billows of smoke'. 
The shelling started again. A sprawling wooden 
structure diagonally across the street got a 
direct hit. Minutes later it was a mass of gigan- 
tic crackling flames. We ran downstairs. On 
the porch was a black-haired girl about 16 years 
old. She sat very still, watching the fire, ex- 
pressionlessly. The Filipino who lived in the 
house tried to comfort her, offered her a drink 
of rum. But the girl said nothing, simply stared 
at the blaze. “Her father and baby brother,” 
the Filipino said, “they are in the house.” 

It was beginning to get dark. As we went 
down the street away from the path of the fire, 
we saw a dirty unshaved major talking to four 
or five GIs. The major’s eyes were red-rimmed 
and his hands trembled violently as he lifted 
a cigarette to his mouth but he was smiling and 
talking amiably to the men. “We got that Jap 
bastard,” he said. “He won’t shell this area 
anymore. A Filipino led a squad right to the 
spot. It was a Jap 20-mm .” 

One of the GIs said, “Well, maybe we can get 
a little shuteye tonight for a change.” 

A middle-aged sober-looking Filipino in a 
white linen suit and pink straw hat came up to 
the major and said, “Have you heard any news 
about the war in Europe?” The major almost 
swallowed his cigarette. “How do you like 
that,” he roared. “The man asks me if I’ve 
heard any news about the war in Europe and 
for three days and nights I haven’t been able 
to find out any news about fighting four blocks 
ahead of me!” 

The sky was getting dark. The day was 
almost over. A red chaos swirled in the sky 
above Manila, but it wasn’t tne sunset. 




The British will be demobilized according to age and length of service only. The Americans consider numerous other factors. 



By Sgt. BILL DAVIDSON 
YANK Staff Correspondent 

W ith the British 2d Army in Holland — 
This British tank outfit was set *up in a 
grove of trees bordering a German ceme- 
tery"on the Waal River, which a few miles far- 
ther upstream becomes the Rhine. Every hour or 
so, the troop CO would get a command by radio 
and the M4s would drop a few rounds of indirect 
fire into the village about 3,000 yards away, from 
which sporadic 88 fire was coming. 

The rest of the time, the men took it. easy in 
the six-foot dugouts they had scooped out under 
the nose of each tank and lined with straw and 
covered with timber. They sat around near their 
stoves, reading month-old London newspapers 
and making tea. 

Every once in a while a yell came from the 
troop sergeant’s dugout. “Clifford! Ward!” the 
sergeant called this time. “It’s your chance to 
look.” Two men crawled out of their hole and 
ducked across to the sergeant’s where a big chart 
was spread out on the floor. Right there in the 
front lines, two at a time, men were figuring out 
their priorities under the British demobilization 
plan, which will go into effect after the war with 
Germany ends. 

The British demobilization plan is simple 
enough to be explained in the chart, called for 
some unknown reason “The Army Race Card for 
Release” This peculiar title has given rise to 
fome very corny gags, like ‘Til take 2 to 1 on 
getting out for the 1948 Derby at Epsom Downs. ’ 
You look at this chart and in two minutes you 
can figure out your discharge priority. Age and 
length of service are the only factors that count. 
Down the left-hand column are dates of birth, 
including all the years from “1894 and earlier 
down to 1931. Across the top of the chart are 
month and year headings indicating the start of 
war service. These run from September and Oc- 
tober 1939 to November and December 1945. All 
vou have to do is run your finger down the verti- 
cal column until you come to the year of your 
Hirth and then across the chart horizontally until 
on come to the column headed by the year and 
Z ^nth you entered the British Army. Right there 
- V our group number for release. 

Thus a man born in 1914 and called up in No- 
vember 1939 be ea V n . 0 Td who waTcalled up in 

SSr'U he ... .8, wiU be in 



group No. 42, a low priority. A man of 38 who 
enlisted for the Battle of Britain in 1940 will be 
in group No. 15, which will get out almost at 
once. There are few citizen-soldiers in the British 
Army who rate higher than group No. 12. The 
only people in group No. 1 are those born in 1894 
and earlier, and they are No. 1 all the way 
across even if they enlisted yesterday. 

The British plan, like ours, assumes that when 
the war with Germany is over, we will not need 
all our manpower to fight the Japanese in the 
Pacific, and that a certain number of soldiers can 
be returned to civilian life. But in a booklet 
called “Show Me the Way to Go Home,” the Brit- 
ish Army Education Service makes clear that 
“the final episode will be the surrender of Japan. 
Until the final whistle blows, the motto for fight- 
ing men must be ‘eye on the ball.’ Not until 
Japan is beaten can we use the words ‘final de- 
mobilization*.” 

When the war with Germany is over, the Al- 
lied high command will decide just how many 
British soldiers are needed to continue the fight 
against Japan and just how many can be re- 
leased. When the number that can be released is 
determined, release group No. 1 will be demobi- 
lized and then other release groups in order until 
the demobilization quota is filled. No matter 
where he is in the world, a man in any group 
called will get on a ship and go back to England. 
There he will enter the “dispersal center” nearest 
his home and sppnd 24 hours getting paid and 
drawing a suit of civilian" clothes. Once released 
he will enter Class Z Reserve, the last to be 
called back in the event of a new emergency. 
Each discharged serviceman will get eight weeks’ 



British Casualties: 1,095,652 

I ONDON— In the five years in which the British 
H Commonwealth of Nations has been in the war, 
its people have suffered 1,095,652 casualties.* Of 
these, 925,963 have been in the* armed forces— 
242,995 killed, 311,500 wounded, 80,603 missing, 
290,865 prisoners of war. 

The total casualties in the British Merchant Navy 
‘were 33,573, of which 2^,629 were killed. And 
during those years 57,298 civiligns were killed dur- 
ing air raids, and 78,818 were injured. 



furlough with pay plus an 
extra day’s furlough with 
pay for every month he 
spent overseas. 

The British plan differs 
from the American in cer- 
tain major respects. First, 
the scheme applies to officers 
as well as to enlisted men. 
Our point system is con- 
cerned with GIs only. 

Secondly, the British de- 
mobilization plan operates 
without regard to military 
essentiality. In our plan, a 
soldier can have all the 
points in the Army, but if he 
is necessary to the Army’s 
continuing work, he stays in. 
Although the details have 
not yet been announced, the 
arrangement probably will 
be for the American theater 
commanders to publish lists 
of the essential military oc- 
cupations; that is, the men 
who are required to remain 
in the Army for the Japan 
phase. The British feel they 
can replace any man, how- 
ever essential his job, so 
their point system can oper- 
ate unrestricted. 

At a Royal Armored troop 
bull-session on the demo- 
bilization plan — the British 
are great at that sort of current-affairs discussion 
— an Eighth Army officer with the Africa Star, 
Capt. Jock Campbell, asked: “To what extent 
will it be up to the commanding officers to say if 
a man can be released or not?” 

A War Office representative gave the answer: 
“You, the commanding officer, have no say in the 
case of individuals. If a soldier, when due for 
release, is in a key position, a replacement will 
be sent to take over. The soldier’s release will 
not be delayed.” 

The British realize releases will break up in- 
dividual units that might otherwise be shifted to 
"the Pacific intact. They are worried less about 
this now than they were before Caen. At Caen 
whole regiments were shattered by the fierce 
fighting. It was then the British found that merg 
ing two or even three beat-up outfits often pro- 
duced a unit as good as or better than the origi- 
nals. They see no reason why this system 
.shouldn’t work after demobilization starts, too. 

T he principal difference between the British 
and American plans is that in the British no 
credit is given for overseas time, battle stars, 
children or decorations; just age and length of 
service count. The British figure that since almost 
everyone in their army has been overseas any- 
way, everything evens up in the end. But there 
is a good deal of discussion about this. Squawks 
come from younger men who have sweated out 
five years’ combat time, and from older men with 
dependents. The War Office answers: 

“The only two factors now are age and service. 
Neither factor w<tfl change. Right now, we al- 
ready have group numbers marked on each sol- 
dier’s index card at the War Office central card- 
index. The day hostilities with Germany cease, 
we can start running cards through the machine. 
And within a week, the first men will be on their 
way out of the army. 

“However, once we start bringing in things 
like combat time and overseas service, wjiich 
vary from man to man and from day to day, we 
can’t even start figuring until hostilities end and 
we will have to employ an army of clerks to do 
the calculations on each man. We have studied 
the American plan, which includes these varia- 
bles^ — dependents, decorations and battle stars. 
The American plan itiay look fancier and fairer, 
but we feel it is more complicated and difficult 
to put into operation, and that men will be re- 
leased sooner our way.” 



PAGi 5 









Negroes in Combat 



When you're under bottle conditions and it's a toss-up 
whose neck is next , there isn't any worrying about the 
differences in the color of your skins; at least that's 
what Negro GIs learned on two European fronts. 



Pvt. Charlie Rattler of Jefferson, Tex., a fighter on the Western Front, strikes a pose with his bazooka. 



In France 



By Sgt. RALPH MARTIN 
Stars & Stripes Correspondent 



W ith the Seventh Army, Western Front — 
The generals had some medals to hand 
out, but not all of the guys could come. 
Some of them were still up in front digging in 
their three-inch guns, some of them were in the 
hospital, some of them were dead. 

The six who were there stobd stiffly at attention 
in their war-dirtied combat suits, their tired faces 
drained of feeling, their eyes staring straight 
ahead. The general was telling them why they 
were getting the medals. 

They knew why. You don’t forget things like 
Climbach. 

Because you had to be crazy to move in on 
Climbach — everybody said so. You just don’t try 
to position your guns in a flat valley when you’ve 
got big Kraut guns sitting smuggly on two rugged 
ridges flanking the town 300 yards away, and 
when you’ve got Nazi 88-gunners parked on the 
town’s high ground right next to some Mark IV 
tanks, and when you’ve got the nearby woods 
lousy with mortars and machine-gun nests — and 
all of it, the whole German artillery book, zeroed 
in on a single road, waiting for you to come out 
so the Germans can start pulling lanyards. 

But somebody had to do it. In this 103d Divi- 
sion sector, Climbach was the last Nazi strong- 
point before the Siegfried Line. And the Nazis 



told everybody they liked Climbach; they planned 
to stay there for the winter. 

So the 103d Division created Task Force Black- 
shear, consisting of a platoon of Engineers, a com- 
pany of Infantry from the 411th Regiment, seven 
medium tanks and a platoon of towed three-inch 
TDs from the 614th. The tactic was for the TD 
platoon of four guns to keep all the German bat- 
teries occupied while the Infantry infiltrated into 
the town around the flanks. 

Leading the task-force column through the 
woods was the CO of C Company of the TDs. 
He wasn’t supposed to be there; he just wanted 
to be. Somebody said it was because he was self- 
conscious about being a Negro. But somebody 
else said it was just because he was that kind of 
a guy; because he had lots of guts. 

It wasn’t long before some of his guts were 
spilling into the sticky mud near the thin road. 
Not only did his vehicle run over a mine but it 
also got smacked square by an 88. Then a machine 
gun opened up on him. When his executive officer 
raced through this shellfire to evacuate him min- 
utes later, he was still alive, somehow. 

Down in the valley, the medics were soon just 
as busy as the gun crews. 

Ten-man crews can’t last long when they’re 
sitting in an open field getting so much fire that 
nobody knows what’s coming from where. 

They didn’t last. 

Less than an hour later, single soldiers were 
doing full crews’ work — loading, aiming, firing 
and then racing back to a half-track to hop be- 
hind a .50-caliber to cut down Krauts trying to 
sneak through the woods. One of those single 



soldiers was Platoon Sgt. William Tabron. (He 
got the Bronze Star.) Tabron kept going until a 
tank shell knocked out his gun. It wasn’t until the 
next morning that he noticed his foot had been 
bloodied by shrapnel. 

But Tabron was lucky; he’s still alive. 

Maybe 30 minutes later (nobody looks at his 
watch during a battle), there was only one gun 
still shooting. It was 75 yards from three other j 
knocked-out guns, and the Krauts couldn’t seem! 
to get at it because it was in a slight draw. Shells' 
kept plopping all around it, just missing. One 
near-miss blew up a half-track 25 yards away.' 

It was hot and close, and everybody kept won- 
dering how much longer — who would be next? 
Still sweating it out was the gun commander, 
Sgt. Dillard Booker from the Bronx, N. Y. So 
was his CO, 1st Lt. Thomas Mitchell, and so were 
a couple of other boys. (Booker got the Bronze 
Star and Mitchell the Silver Star.) Mitchell was 
racing around as fast as he did when he broke the 
Alabama track record for the quarter-mile dash 
back in his days as a college athlete. He was 
helping shoot guns, evacuating wounded, point- 
ing out enemy gun positions. 

Somehow (call it a mild miracle if you wish), 
this three-inch-gun crew kept shooting. They' 
silenced two loud-barking tanks at the town’s 1 
outskirts. .Then they picked up a muzzle blast" 
from a camouflaged house and threw in three 
rounds of HE until the gun stopped firing. Be- 
fore the three other guns were knocked out, they 
h&d accounted for some 88s and had swept the 
woods fairly clean of German MG and mortar 
positions. But there was still plenty of small- i 
arms fire, coming much too close. 

Then the TD boys ran out of ammo. 

“We felt stark, stripped naked,” said Booker. 
“We figured this was it.’’ 

But it wasn’t. The tanks were still hopelessly 
mired in the mud, too far in the rear to do any 
good, but three BAR boys from the Infantry 
company volunteered to come up and act as 
flank security for the gun. (Two were soon cas- 
ualties) . The crew flattened out and popped 
away with their Mis and carbines into the 
sniper-filled woods. They killed lots of Krauts ir 
this interval. 

Meanwhile T-5 Robert Harris of Kansas Citj 
was getting ready to move out his ammo trucl 
and head toward the front in a hurry. He wa* 
waved down by the task-force commander. 

‘You can’t go up there right now,” said the 
colonel. “The artillery fire is too heavy.” i 

When a colonel talks like that to a corpora^ 
there usually is no room for argument. But T-5 
Harris didn’t argue; he didn’t have time. He jus 
yelled: Get the hell out of my way.* I , m taking 

this up to my buddies.” (The colonel laughs 
when he tells the story now.) 

Driving straight through shellfire, Harris g ot 
his truck within 25 yards of Booker’s gun before 
it bogged down in gooey mud. Then Harris, soon? 
joined by others, made trip after trip luggi n & 

. 54-pound ammo boxes to the gun position. 

By dusk, all anyone could 'hear was the splay, 
tering of small-arms fire within the town itself* < 
The stiffest fighting the doughfeet had was m 
the graveyard where the Germans had dug them- 
selves in. When the short pitched battle was 
over the Germans were still in the graveyard, 
now waiting to be covered up. 

If you asked the doughfeet about it, they’d tell 
you the TDs deserve credit for taking the town* 

If you asked the TD’s 3d Platoon, they tell y° u 
that they had more than 50 percent casualties, 




iosu three guns, two half-tracks, an armored car 
ana two jeeps. 

If you asked the 614th TD Battalion CO, Lt. 
Frank Pritchard of Lansing, Mich., he’d tell 
you, “If you only knew how goddam proud I am 
of my boys.” He was one of six white officers — 
all the rest were Negroes. In the last war, Pritch- 
ard was a buck sergeant. 

they’re all proud of the 614th, from the divi- 
sion CG down. The division CG is supposed to 
have said he’d fight like hell if anyone tried to 
take the 614th TD away from him. 

T his isn t just words. And it isn’t just top brass. 

Hitler would have a hemorrhage if he could 
see the white boys of the 411th Infantry bull-ses- 
sioning, going out on mixed patrols, sleeping in 
the same bombed building, sweating out the same 
chow line with Negro GIs. 

And the white boys of the 411th are mostly 
Southern boys. 

The Negroes come from the South, too. Not 
only that, but the C Company CO, 1st Lt. Walter 
Smith, will be the first to tell you that his boys 
aren’t specially picked as in some outfits, that 
most of them are uneducated farmhands from 
North Carolina. 

He’ll tell you, too, that a few of his boys are 
trouble-making screw-ups who drink too much, 
that lots of his boys were almost scared into con- 
stipation during their first baptism of shellfire 
when they fought in Germany alongside the 3d 
Cavalry Group. In other words, he’ll tell you 
that his outfit is just like any other outfit. He’s 
got a small percentage who were never meant 
to be soldiers, but most of the boys are good boys 
— and good soldiers, with plenty of guts. 

“You get used to war,” he said slowly. “You 
get used to everything.” 

He was no longer talking about Climbach and 
Germany; he was talking about back in Cher- 
bourg. He * was remembering all those * Negro 
port-battalion boys who came to him and begged 
to be transferred into a fighting outfit. They were 
willing to take busts — anything. They didn’t want 
to hear any more white soldiers ask why there 
weren’t more Negro troops in the front lines. 

“I thought every soldier knew that it’s up to 
the Army to decide who goes where,” said Smith. 

“Maybe if people just didn’t worry about us 
being something special.” He was groping for 
words. “Maybe if somebody could come up here 
and see how we’ve been fighting and killing and 
dying, how it doesn’t seem to matter a damn 
what your color is 

Smith broke off quickly. There was a short, 
strained silence, and then he laughed. It was a 
warm, rich laugh. He remembered something 
that had happened only last week when the out- 
fit was moving toward the front. He had noticed 
quite a liberal sprinkling of white soldiers in 
several of the trucks and asked the first sergeant 
if they were hitchhikers. 

“No, sir,” said the sergeant “They’re part of 
our gun crews.” 

After he finished the story, the lieutenant sat 
there quietly for a minute, with a wonderful 
wide smile on his face. 

“You know,” he said, “maybe we’re just a 
bunch of battle virgins compared with some out- 
fits, but we’ve sure been learning a hell of a lot 
of things about people.” 



lit Italy 



By Sgt. AUGUST iOEB 
YANK Stoff Correspondent 

W ith the 5th Army, Italy — Cpl. Charles 
Orrett, a 33-year-old artillery scout who 
describes, his pre-service profession as 
“operator of duck and dodge games,” ducked and 
dodged three German shells that hit hishattery. 
There was a fourth shell he didn’t see. That one 
got him in the lung and back. 

After 30 days in a hospital in Leghorn, Cpl. 
Orrett had a choice of being reclassified or of 
going back to his old outfit. “That was easy to 
decile,” he said. “My outfit is a Field Artillery 
battalion of the 92d Division, and I couldnt do 
hotter I know what I’m talking about because I 
came to the 92d from another outfit I've felt like 
a different man since I got into the 92d. 

Orrett’s outfit is the only division m Europe 
uv hose ranks are made up entirely of Negroes. Its 
Buffalo shoulder patch is envied by hun- 




In Italy, Lt. Gen. Mark Clark pins a Combat Infantryman Badge on Sgt. Nolan 
J. Reed of St. Louis, Mo., a member of the Fifth Army's 92d Division. 



dreds of other Negroes 
in other units. It was 
worn by the 92d Division 
of the first World War, 
also a Negro unit. Every- 
body else in the 92d agrees 
that Cpl. Orrett made 
the right decision back in 
that Leghorn hospital. 

Pvt. Charles Bowden of 
Bocky Mount, N. C., a 
wireman in the same bat- 
talion, is one of the men 
who agrees. He and Or- 
rett and most of their 
friends have been with 
the battalion since it was 
activated in November 
1942 at Camp Breckin- 
ridge, Ky. He went to 
Arkansas and Arizona, 
and then on Louisiana 
maneuvers, and finally to 
Italy as part of the com- 
plete 92d Division under 
command of Maj. Gen. 

Edward M. Almond. 

“Our training back home was rough,” said 
-Bowden, “but now we know why. On this front 
a man must be in top shape. He’s no good if he 
limps around. There’s no way to catch a ride up 
here, and you might have to march 25 miles. If 
you’ve done it back home, it’s a little easier here.” 

Bowden ought to know what he’s talking about 
because, according to Orrett and others, he has 
one of the riskiest jobs in the battalion — string- 
ing wire under the eyes of the Germans. He has 
been out with forward observation parties several 
times and has stayed so long everybody felt cer- 
tain he had been captured. He always came back 
though, guided, his friends think, by the smell of 
S/Sgt. Ezekiel Butt’s cookery. 

Cpl. B. C. McClain, a gunner from St. Louis, Mo., 
is another man who now knows the value of the 
endless drill they put him through back in the 
States. He now thinks automatically in the once- 
terrifying metric system. Sgt. Maurice Walker, a 
23-year-old radio operator from Washington, 
D. C., said something in praise of the outfit’s fire 
direction. McClain agreed and added: “And we 
can get ready to fire in 15 minutes or less.” 

Walker said he thought the outfit had been 
very lucky in getting the officers it did. “I think 
I speak for most of the men in saying that it 
doesn’t matter to us whether the officers are 
white or Negro,” he said. “Color means nothing 
at the front Everybody has a rough life, and 
that does a lot to bring the men together. The 
important thing is not what color an officer is 
but whether he knows his job. If he does, he’ll 
get the respect of his men. Most of our officers 
are regular.” 

The proportion of Negro officers in the 92d has 
been rising steadily. When Gen. Almond took 
command of the division all the officers were 
white. Now two-thirds are Negroes. There are 
three Negro lieutenant colonels, two of them in 
command of all-Negro Field Artillery battalions 
and the third the division chaplain. 

The outfit’s white CO, Lt. Col. Robert C. Ross 
of New York City, came in for a great deal of 
praise. Sgt. Walker said whether, an officer came 
from the North or from the South has nothing to 
do with his effectiveness. The others agreed with 
him and mentioned Lt. Bradley of Mississippi, 
Lt. Kibbie of North Carolina and Lt. Davidson 
of Georgia as some of the Southern officers who 
have the respect of the men. 

“The front,” said Walker, “is a great leveling 
force. There’s a great deal more actual democracy 
up there than in garrisons back in the States, 
where people have time to get into arguments 
about things like the seating arrangements on 
busses.” 

McClain frowned at the mention of busses. 
“I was on one in Alexandria, La., coming back 
from a furlough,” he said. “There were no seats 
in the back part that was reserved for colored 
people, -and two white soldiers up front made 
room for me. When I sat down, the driver stopped 
the bus and told me to go to the back. I couldn’t 
squeeze through the crowd, but that made no dif- 
ference’ the driver thought it was something to 
argue about.” 

Cpl. Orrett compared his treatment at the Leg- 
horn hospital with the situation at Fort Eustis, 
Va. “I was born in Toronto, of West Indian par- 
ents,” he said, “and spent my early life in 
Jamaica, in the British West Indies. Then I went 



to New York with my parents and went to school 
and worked there. I never knew what discrimina- 
tion meant until I went to Fort Eustis, where 
there were three big post movies, one for colored 
soldiers and two for. white and colored. After the 
few rows reserved for us in the two mixed 
theaters were filled we couldn’t get in. 

“When I was being treated for my wounds in 
Leghorn, there was no such thing as white and 
colored. Everybody was alike. Fighting together 
and suffering together brings people closer. I 
think most people are too pessimistic about race 
relations after the war. The white American 
soldier has learned what artificial barriers of any 
sort mean and will be just as determined as the 
colored soldier to do away with them later. Of 
course, the demagogues may try to stir things up, 
but I don’t think they’ll get very far with the 
veterans of this war. The veterans will be smarter 
than the demagogues think.” 

M ost of the men have thought about what the 
future will bring them and how such plans 
as the GI Bill of Rights will affect them. “After 
the war,” said Sgt. Walker, “I’d like to take an 
advanced course in radio under the Bill. I’d stand 
more of a chance then of getting a good job. I’d 
say that most of the men in this outfit are inter- 
ested in learning a trade, so they won’t be thrown 
on the unskilled labor market for sale to the 
lowest bidder.” 

Cpl. Orrett, with a wife, an 11 -year-old son and 
an 8-year-old daughter back in Harlem, has simi- 
lar plans. He wants to study and become a radio 
repairman in Harlem, where “everybody knows 
me, including the people who lost.” 

Orrett was talking about his days as a policy 
collector. “It was so lucrative, so bright, so en- 
ticing,” he said, sighing, “that I never thought 
much about making an honest living. It was an 
easy life — sometimes $80 a day for doing nothing.” 
The men in the outfit have had privileges in 
Italy they never had back in the States. But that 
hasn’t lessened their feeling of homesickness. 

“It isn’t just wanting to get back to our fami- 
lies,” said Cpl. Orrett. “It’s because we feel more 
than ever that the U.S.A. is the best place in the 
world for us to live.” 



His War Effort 

| UZON — Faint rumors of a changing Nip- 
ponese outlook toward the war are 
heard these days now and then. The 40th 
Division QM Company are giving these 
rumors some credence. The company lined 
up 50-odd laborers late one afternoon to 
stock rations. The laborers worked faithfully 
all night. In the morning when they lined 
up for their wages— one can of meat — a 
couple of CIC men and a guerrilla jolted 
one laborer out of line and hauied him away 
to the town clink. In the light of day his 
crime was obvious. He was a Jap, out of 
uniform. 

"Good little worker, too," they said. 

. — YANK Staff Correipondent 




The DC-6 finer, similar to 
the Army's C-54, is ex- 
pected to be one of the 
principal passenger planes 
right after the war ends. 



The aviation industry promises a 
New Y ork-to-London trip in 12 hours 
to tost the passengers only 4 cents a mile • 



ton-miles, contrasted with 3V£ million in 1940. 









1 ir\ rf ri nmopt i r» 






By Pfc. IRA HENRY FREEMAN 
YANK Staff Writer 

Y ou’ve just finished dinner in the airport? res- 
taurant at New York when the last call for 
passengers on the 8 p.m. London express 
comes over the PA. As you walk through the 
bustling administration building, you recall that 
every 45 seconds there’s a transport leaving or 
landing at this big field. 

The four-engine, double-decked plane you go 
aboard is far larger than the transports the Army 
used during the war; it takes a crew of 11 to run 
her. About 100 passengers get on— some in the 
day coach with you, the rest in the sleeper cabin, 
which has Pullman-type berths. 

After your ship has left the two-mile runway, 
you’re surprised by the lack of vibration and 
noise. You stop a cute stewardess and ask how 
high the plane is. Twenty thousand feet, she 
says. Your ears are not ringing; you have no 
trouble breathing, no distress when you move. 
That’s because the cabin is pressurized to the 
atmosphere of 8,000 feet, she tells you; at 8,000 
it was pressurized to sea level. 

Time doesn’t drag. You find a fellow-traveling 
slick chick and buy her a drink in the lounge on 
the lower deck. Toward midnight there’s a brief 
refueling stop at Botwood, Newfoundland. Then 
you let your soft, reclining chair way back and 
fall asleep, while the transport runs down its 
easting at 300 mph. 

Up in the substratosphere, sunlight in your eyes 
wakes you very early. The crowded washroom 
reminds you of a Pullman. Later, while you are 
eating breakfast from a tray the stewardess has 
brought, the plane sits down for a quick call at 
Foynes, Eire. In about an hour and a half, dark 
forest patches give way to buildings; an occasion- 
al ribbon of road to a web of highways. Someone 
says that the smoke-fog climd there hides London. 

When you quit the plane at Croydon for the 
bus into London, you are just 12 hours out of 
New York, although the time difference makes it 
1 p.m. in Britain. Only half a day of your two- 
week vacation has been lost in traveling. Your 
ticket cost $148, or $266 round-trip. 

All this and Paris, too — only 45 minutes and 
four bucks farther on. 

¥ hat is no Buck Rogers vision of the next gen- 
eration. It is a composite preview of what the 
American aviation industry and public agencies 
are seriously preparing for immediately after 
the war — as early as 1946 if the Government per- 
mits, whether Japan is finished off by then or not. 

The giant planes to make possible this cannon- 
ball service across oceans and continents are al- 
ready designed; 225, costing a total of $160 mil- 
lion, are contracted for. The manufacturers say 
that if the Government thought it wise to release 
materials, they could get the first new airliners 
ready by next summer. 

Construction of Idlewild Airport, larger than 
any existing field and No. 1 of a string capable 
of handling the mammoth ships, has been started 
in New York. Tables of long-distance passenger 
fares, not much above pre-war tourist steamship 
rates, have already been submitted to the Federal 
Government for approval. 

Like a lot of other things, development of air 
transportation has been both hindered and helped 
by the war. In pre-war days, there were 358 
transports on domestic routes, with 18 companies 
competing over perhaps 31,000 miles of scheduled 
flights. In the foreign service, there was only one 
American company, Pan American Airways, the 
world’s largest, with 100 planes assigned to 98,000 
route-miles in 56 countries. 

In 1941 the leading airlines were ordering 
larger planes and planning extensions of service, 
faster travel and cheaper rates. The attack on 
Pearl Harbor* knocked all their plans into a steel 
hat. The Army and Navy transport services 
grabbed hundreds of planes from commercial 
lines and ripped out chairs to make room for 
bucket seats or cargo. All transport planes pro- 
duced after that were GI. 

The commercial transports just before the war 
were mostly Douglas DC-3s (known in military 
service as C-47s % and C-53s) — two-engine 21-pas- 
senger planes weighing 13 tons and having an 
average cruising speed of 180 mph. There were 
also some four-engine transports — like the Boe- 
ing Clipper B-314, a 42-ton 72-passenger flying 
boat, and the Boeing Stratoliner B-307, a 33-pas- 
senger land plane used on overseas routes. 

For the Army’s Air Transport Command, a fleet 



of many thousand transports has been manufac- 
tured since Pearl Harbor, 70 percent of them 
DC-3s. The Government airplane-procurement 
program has progressed so well that about 200 
planes — mostly DC-3s — already have been re- 
turned to civilian lines. 

During the war, the ATC has spread a network 
of nearly 125,000 air miles over the globe. Today, 
only four years after commercial trans-Atlantic 
service was inaugurated, the ATC flies the North 
Atlantic both ways on one-hour headway 
throughout the year. The Navy Air Transport 
Service, while a much smaller operation, also de- 
serves a great deal of the credit for our aviation 
development since Pearl Harbor. 

Naturally, experience gained in the three years 
of war has resulted in advances in airport light- 
ing, weather forecasting and navigation by radio 
beams and radar, all of which should pay off 
after the war in more and safer night flying as 
well as blind thick-weather flying. As for speed, 
leaders of the industry boast right now that no 
place with a landing field need be more than 60 
hours’ flying time away from any other place on 
the habitable earth. 

As a matter of fact, the economic and political 
problems of post-war aviation may be tougher 
to solve than the purely technical problems. This 
was brought out at the recent international con- 
ference in Chicago, to which 52 nations sent dele- 
gates to discuss the best and fairest means of 
handling global nonmilitary air traffic? The 
American position was that commercial rates, 
routes and schedules should be set everywhere 
by open competition among the nations. Some 
European delegates, the British particularly, ex- 
pressed fear that our head start in aviation would 
give us a competitive advantage that other coun- 
tries could not overcome. These delegates pro- 
posed that the post-war field be divided in ad- 
vance so that all competitors could be sure of 
having a look-in. Whatever the final solution, 
it seems clear that no nation wants to see the 
rush for post-war aviation business develop into 
a cutthroat game, which would be a source of 
friction among friendly countries. 

Post-War Volume of Travel 

T he Civil Aeronautics Administration calls for 
1,827 first-class air stations in the continental 
United States after the war. There are now 286 
cities certified for big-plane stops, but only 112 of 
these are in good condition. * No existing com- 
mercial airport could accommodate the enormous 
land planes scheduled for 1947 and after. 

Only five years after the end of the war, do- 
mestic air travel will be seven times the * 1940 
business, and 1,500 planes will be needed, accord- 
ing to Dr. D. H. Davenport, director of business 
research for the Curtiss-Wright Corporation. 
Freight, he thinks, will amount to 110 million 



senger and cargo Carrier, will add 40 percent to 
its pre-war total of 8,450 miles, calling at 
87 cities in 32 states. United Air Lines, Trans- 
continental & Western Air Inc., Eastern Air Lines 
and other important companies all propose simi- 
lar expansion of their domestic service; some, 
in addition, plan to enter or expand their inter- 
national service. 

Besides the many thousands of miles of routes 
in the States, Canada and Alaska, the Civil Aero- 
nautics Board has mapped 20 major routes total-, 
ing 140,000 miles of foreign airways it wants 
American planes to fly with passengers and 
freight after the war. L. Welch Pogue, chairman 
of the CAB, says that “perhaps most of the over- 
seas passenger business will be in the air.” 

It is estimated that 105,000 passengers a year 
will travel between Europe and the United States 
by 1950 — as many as 14,000 monthly during the 
warm season. Ten years from now, 230,000 round 
trips are expected to be clocked annually across 
the North Atlantic, constituting half of all inter- 
national air travel. 

Seventeen of the great ships as yet unbuilt 
are scheduled to make 50 departures a week 
for Pan American Airways alone from New York, 
Baltimore, Washington, Boston, Detroit and Chi- 
cago for European cities during the peak of a 
post-war summer vacation period. 

Just as before the war, three-quarters of all 
airline customers are expected to be Americans. 
Thirty-seven percent- will travel on family busi- 
ness and 44 percent on holiday; the rest on com- 
mercial, diplomatic and miscellaneous missions. 

The scramble for this business is already on; 
everybody wants to get into the act. More than 
370 American concerns have applied for fran- 
chises to give service over foreign and domestic 
airways. These include not only airlines but also 
steamship companies, railroads and even bus 
lines, one of which wants to run helicopter shut- 
tles as an “extension of service.” 

Thirty soldiers, ranging in grade from private 
to lieutenant in the AAF and ATC, have formed 
the Norseman Air Transport to give 50 New Eng- 
land towns air service totaling 2,500 miles after 
the war. The boys plan to buy 34 planes from 
GI surplus, and only war veterans will be able 
to get jobs with them. 

T Post-War Speeds and Fares 

he primary reason more people have not 
flown up to now is the high cost of air travel 
rgger, faster planes will mean lower fares. Tb e 
key to aviation progress in the post-war world 
is big, fast planes; the whole transport industry 
is concentrating on increased size. 

With the addition of only a few of the proposed 
high-speed 100-passenger packets, Pan American 



PAGE 8 



\7V 



Airways, for example, could increase its pas- 
senger capacity in Latin America 100 times, or 
five times the greatest volume carried by sea and 
air combined in the best pre-war year. Freight 
capacity would be increased 18 times the 1941 
volume. Pan American also figures that three 
100 -seat planes could carry twice as many pas- 
sengers between California and Hawaii as ever 
traveled by sea and air in the best year up to 1939. 

The 200 new planes ordered from manufac- 
turers for post-war delivery to domestic trans- 
port lines will take 9,300 passengers in day-coach 
seats, 30 percent more than all 18 domestic fleets 
combined could carry in pre-war days. The full 
list of 225 post-war planes ordered so far will 
have an aggregate capacity 60 to 75 percent 
greater than the entire pre-war fleet. 

Besides, the new planes will be able to aver- 
age 13 hours aloft daily, compared with 10 hours 
for pre-war ships, and to run 900 hours be- 
tween engine overhauls as against 700 in 1940. 
This extra stamina has the same effect as more 
or larger planes. 

By raising the average cruising speed of the 



YANK The Army Weekly * MAR. 30, 1945 



post-war planes from the 180 mph of the pre-war 
DC-3 to 250, 300 or even 340 mph, the world 
shrinks astonishingly. In a special study for the 
Brookings Institution, Dr. J. Parker van Zandt 
declared that before long “no place on earth will 
be more than two days away.” 

Look at these space-eaters: 

The Douglas Aircraft Company Inc. claims for 
its proposed DC -6 a coast-to-coast schedule of 
8 V 2 hours with a full pay load, as against 17 hours 
for today’s DC-3. Fast trains take three days now. 
In a DC- 6 , Chicago would be brought within 2 
hours 40 minutes of New York. The DC -6 would 
roar into London from New York in 11 hours 56 
minutes, including two intermediate stops. The 
latest commercial record is 14V2 hours, while be- 
fore the war the flight took 26 ¥2 hours. On the 
Queen Mary , you bounced for AV 2 days, at best, 
between New York and Southampton. 

The Boeing Aircraft Company asserts that the 
Stratocruiser, a commercial adaptation of its 
B-29, would make it possible to leave New York 
after lunch and have dinner on the West Coast, 
or to board the plane in New York after break- 
fast and arrive in London before bedtime, even 
counting the difference in time. 



National Airlines has filed a schedule with the 
CAB which calls for a flight between New York 
and Miami in the DC-4 in 4% hoarsasagainst 
nearly twice that time with present equipment. 

On the proposed Douglas DC-7 or the immense 
Lockheed Constitution, you could wingoverthe 
2,500 miles of open water between the Golden 
Gate and Honolulu in half the 16% hours it 
takes now. Steamship time is five days. 

The great planes would make the long journey 
from New York to Calcutta in 40 hours lO 
minutes, instead of nearly six days as at present. 
They would go rolling down to Rio in less than 20 
hours, clipping 46 hours 10 minutes off the prese 
time. They would whisk you from San Francisco 
to Manila in 23 hours (a five-day trip by pre- 
Pearl Harbor plane) or to Australia or New Zea- 
land in one day flat; from New York to Beimuda 
in 3% hours. 



B ut how about the moola for all this global 
gallivanting? Listen to Juan Trippe, Pan 
American Airways’ president: “In the air age we 
are entering, no American who works will find 
world travel beyond his means. ... We propose 
to move boldly ahead to provide mass transpor- 



' 

itir Travel After the War 



v 




Johannesburg#* 



Karachi 



AFRICA 

Brazzaville 



Hanoi 



AUSTRALIA 



Cairo 



Teheran 



Canton 



Shanghai 



Istanbul, 



Sydney 



| Athens © Tripoli 
; /Tunis 

•^Berlinl ' •Algiers 



Moscow# 



Mukden 



Leningrad# 



Vladivostok 



Greenland 



Botwood 



NORTH AMERICA 



Minneapolis#^^ J 
Chicago* #< 
t Charleston 

p New Orleans#^ 
* Brownsville* Jp ' 



Barreiras 
Bello Horizonte 



Manaoi 



Barranquilla 

£®j*SOUTH AMERICA \ 
%^^^^^lauitos 



Mexko City 



Asuncion 



Buenos 

Aires 



J Monrovia 



;dledonici 



ATLANTIC 

OCEAN 



Fortaleza O' 



Bermuda' if 



Los Angeles^ 



Porto A(e< 



Antofagasta 



Victoria . 

Rio De Janeiro 
Sao Paulo \ 



Montevideo 






YANK The Army Weekly • MAR. 30, 1945 



tation for the businessman and tourist at low 
rates unique in air transportation.” 

In general, aviation authorities are looking 
forward to passenger fares of 3 to 7 cents a mile 
soon after the war. The Glenn L. Martin Com- 
pany boasts that its short-range Mercury 202 
could make money on 2% cents a passenger-mile, 
while C. L. Egtvedt, chairman of Boeing, believes 
the Stratocruiser should operate at 2 cents. No 
established airline, however, yet proposes to do 
business at such bargain prices. 

Passenger rates in the U. S. now are under 5 
cents a mile, or 10 percent less than before the 
war. Rates on American airlines are 5% cents 
in Mexico, 8 cents elsewhere in Latin America, 
and range from 9 to 17 cents on other foreign 
trips. Before the war, Atlantic and Pacific fares 
were 9 to 11 cents a mile — the longer the trip 
the cheaper the rate. 

Pan American Airways has filed a prospectus 
with the Federal Government offering a fare of 
$148, or 4 cents a mile, for the 3,460 airline miles 
between New York and London on its post-war 
four-engine 100-passenger ships. American Air- 
ways has announced a prospective fare on a DC-6 
of $235, or 6% cents a mile. The present fare is 
$572, or 17 cents a mile; before the war it was 
$375, or 11 cents a mile. Minimum first-class fare 
on the Queen Mary. tor the New York-Southamp- 
ton run in 1939 was $316; third class was $107.50. 
On other first-class or cabin-class Cunarders and 
French liners, the fare was around $282. 

So, although the airlines intend to undercut 
first-class, and perhaps second-class, steamship 
fares, probably the airplane will not be the lead- 
ing means of trans-Atlantic travel until its fares 
better third-class steamship rates. A 10-hour 
dash to London for a hundred bucks, which one 
airline hopes for eventually, would pack ’em in. % 

The present price of the 2,500-mile flight be- 
tween Los Angeles or San Francisco and Hono- 
lulu is $278, about one-third above pre-war 
prices. Pan American proposes to carry you after 
the war on the new' Clippers for $96. The 1939 
steamship fare was $125 for first class and $85 
for cabin class. 

All the airlines will allow a 10-percent reduc- 
tion for round trips. Berths will cost up to 25 per- 
cent of the fares in addition. 

The domestic lines have not been able to fore- 
cast their post-war rates, because they cannot 
guess what the volume of air travel within the 
States will be. It is admitted that planes won’t 
become the favorite mode of travel until the 
current fare of slightly under 5 cents a mile is 
lowered within challenging distance of the ap- 
proximate 2 cents-a-mile railroad fare and 1 % 
cents-a-mile bus fare. 



Th,s model shows how the great Idfewild Airport will look when ready 
. r t pOS !'£ ar Constructed on the shores of Jamaica Bay, on the out- 

kirts of New York City, it will have a series of runways totaling 13 ' 2 miles. 




Post-War Planes 

T he new transport planes you will see in civil- 
ian traffic right after the war will not be jet- 
propelled, silent and vibrationless, taking off 
without runways. And they won’t be helicopters 
rising straight up from roofs of downtown office 
buildings, or rockets shooting through the strato- 
sphere out of sight at two miles per second. In 
sober fact, a great proportion of the first post- 
war transports will be simply new DC-3s, DC-4s, 
and CW-20Es. The enduring popularity of the 
DC-3 is attested by Pan American’s plans to have 
it comprise half its post-war fleet of 100 planes. 

Sixty-two Douglas DC-4s at $380,000 apiece 
already have been ordered by various airlines. 
As the C-54, this plane has logged 6,000 ocean 
crossings for the ATC with few accidents. Weigh- 
ing over 35 tons, it will carry 44 passengers in 
coach seats or 22 in berths, plus a crew of five. 
Its four Pratt & Whitney engines of 1,450 hp each 
give it a cruising speed of 239 mph. Its length is 
94 feet, wing span 117% feet, height 27% feet. 
The interior of one C-54 recently was redone to 
show how it would look as a civilian DC-4 — and 
then, after one day, fixed up for GI duty again. 

Orders have been placed for about 30 Curtiss- 
Wright CW-20Es, which also have been success- 
ful in the ATC as C-46 Commandos. They are 
24-tonners, driven by four 1,100-hp Wright Cy- 
clone engines at a 242-mph cruising speed with 
36 to 42 passengers. Construction cost is $300,000. 

But airlines want custom-made planes, rather 
than machines returned from the ATC. The latter 
have had very hard usage. Besides, reconversion 
of a DC-3 to civilian purposes costs $40,000, one- 
third its origipal price. That’s considered too 
much to spend on a second-hand plane. 

These smallest of the new transports are in- 
tended for short hauls, especially in the States, 
and for feeder lines into long-range express 
routes. For*, that kind of service, Douglas also 
has designed the Skybus, a little lighter than the 
DC-3 but carrying 24 passengers and cruising at 
226 mph on its two engines. Its cost is about 
$15,000 under that of a DC-3. 

Similarly, Martin offers its two-engine Mer- 
cury, with a capacity of 30 passengers, a cruising 
speed of 250 mph and a range of 250 to ,700 miles. 
The fir^t cost is $300,000. 

By 1946, or 1947 anyway, the Douglas DC-6, a 
slightly larger, faster version of the DC-4, and 
the Lockheed Constellation, about 10 percent 
heavier than the DC-6, should be coming off the 
assembly lines. These planes are intended for 
coast-to-coast express and even transocean flights 
until the still bigger "types are ready. Eventually 
they will be used for intermediate ranges. 

The DC-6 is 100% feet 
long, has a wing span 
equal to that of the DC-4 
and a height 1%- feet 
greater. Its weight tops 
40 tons. It gets a 316-mph 
cruising speed from four 
Pratt & Whitney engines 
of 2,100 hp each and has 
a range of 3,540 miles. 
At least 50 passengers 
can be accommodated by 
day and 24 in berths at 
night, plus a crew of six. 
Sixty-eight DC-6s, cost- 
ing $580,000 per job, have 
been ordered. 

Airlines also have 
signed for 40 Constella- 
tions, costing $727,000 
apiece. One Constellation 
was completed just be- 
fore the war but never 
reached commercial serv- 
ice. Howard Hughes of 
TWA showed it off by 
piloting it to a transcon- 
tinental speed record of 
6% hours. Its weight is 
more than 45 tons, and it 
will seat 56 day-coach 
passengers on domestic 
routes and 40 on trans- 
ocean trips, or accommo- 
date 30 in berths. Like 
the DC-6, the Constella- 
tion requires a crew of 
six. Its four Wright 2,200- 
hp engines give it a 
cruising speed of 322 mph. 



The really big stuff among currently planned 
transport planes— the Douglas DC -7 and Lock- 
heed Constitution— will not be ready until some 
time after 1947. Twenty-six DC-7s have been 
ordered at a total outlay of $36,400,000; one is 
partly constructed at the Long Beach (Calif.) 
plant of Douglas. No Constitutions have yet been 
contracted for (unless secretly), but it is known 
that at least one airline is counting on them to 
realize projected international schedules. No 
commercial airport in the world has runways 
adequate for such ponderous air vessels. 

Weighing in at 81 tons, the DC-7 is seven times 
the size of the DC-3 and nearly twice as big as 
tHe Boeing B-314 seaplane. Its wing span exceeds 
the height of a 16-story building. Two cabins will 
seat 108 passengers maximum, but on 3,500-mile 
transocean flights, for which the ship is specifi- 
cally intended, only 95 passengers will be ac- 
cepted by day and 79 (with 20 in berths) by night. 
The crew of 10 has a separate flight deck. The 
cargo holds take 1,169 cubic feet of pay load. 
Four engines delivering 14,000 hp pull the gi- 
gantic liner forward at 296-mph cruising speed. 

If the DC-7 is colossal, the Constitution is 
supercolossal. Its gross weight is 92 tons. The 
wings are so thick a mechanic can walk right 
inside them. A maximum of 149 passengers can 
be carried, although on long over-water hops 
only 128 will be taken by day, 119 (with 30 
berths) by night. More than 2,000 cubic feet of 
cargo space are provided. To operate this $2,029,- 
488 leviathan, a crew of 11 — four pilots, three 
stewards, two radiomen, a navigator, and an en- 
gineer— is required. The plane has the same 
power plant as the DC-7, but its greater tonnage 
reduces its average cruising speed by 8 mph. 

Not yet sold to anybody are designs for Boe- 
ing’s 377 Stratocruiser, commercial adaptations 
of Martin’s Mars and some “dream ships.” The 
Stratocruiser is a commercial development of 
Boeing’s Superfortress. In a test last January, 
an Army transport version flew across the 
country in 6 hours 9 minutes, said to be a new 
record. At 60 tons, it is the largest land trans- 
port actually built. Its wing span is 141 feet 
3 inches, the same as the B-29, but its length, 
110 feet 4 inches, is 12 feet greater. The striking 
feature is a double-decked fuselage which can 
be fitted in three ways — for 100 passengers in 
day-coach seats; for 72 Pullman seats making up 
into 36 berths, plus dressing rooms' and an ob- 
servation lounge for 14 persons; or for 25,000 
pounds of freight. 

Its four engines of 2,200 hp each are said to 
give a cruising speed of 340 mph, although the 
ship averaged 380 mph in its record flight; its 
fuel tanks allow a range of 3,500 miles. The 
manufacturer declares that a crew of only five 
is needed on transcontinental trips — pilot, co- 
pi ot, engineer-radioman and two stewards. For 
transocean flights, a navigator and one steward 
wouM be added. Boeing’s claims to speed are 
higher, and to comprehensive operating costs 
lower, than those of its competitors. 

O n the DC-6 and larger types, cabins will be 
air -conditioned and pressurized, making 
tw “Jhalators unnecessary at high altitudes. 

'u SU u? ted against cold, heat, noise 
™iw b n° n by .j >lankets o£ fibreglass. Electric- 
galleys will provide hot meals freshly prepared; 

hf,r»;T ar ? 0ll ?° f free f00d is expected to con- 
1 A ii r! t GaSt Un ! d fares are brought way down, 
li^ r„ t , Wa . r Plaaes wil1 use more plastics and 
win oorntr 0 reduce weight. Heating devices 
b u 8 °* wings - Most °ew planes will 
be da y coaches; a few, all-sleepers; more, com- 

somi^Ara 01 b °u tl l' A1 ! passenger Planes will carry 
as 'freighters''^ 1 6 3 ^ m3y be USed exclusively 

Except for possible commercial use of the 
b?^’nH°f War ?! r P lanes apparently are going to 
farina Ajrlmes seem unanimous in pre- 

flvin«l th ? Se ^r S m ? re econ ?mical and lighter than 
rp rnf f b ° ats ' Martm alone among the major con- 
Th f °^ Sees a great future for the seaplane. 
h J be . f £ ars ’ 6 l ^. ton s of flying boat and the 
_,f§ k “ nk ° f air Plane in the world, is oper- 
M y . he Navy for heavy long-distance cargo. 
Martin is making 20 more of these bully boys for 
the Navy and insists the type would be practical 
in post-war commercial freight work 

w;L^° nly i 1 years ag0 that Wilbur and Orville 
Wright on the beach at Kittyhawk, N. C., got a 
heavier-than-air contraption off the ground for 
59 seconds. Now look at the damn thing— it will 
fly around the world in four days with eight stops! 








4 ^ &/m 






This screwball cameraman clicks 
his shutter at Bast Asia's most 
photogenic figures, but his heart 
belongs to a U. S. gas station. 

By Sgt. DAVE RICHARDSON 
YANK Staff Correspondent 

N orthern Burma — If there's a zanier screw- 
ball in all of China, Burma or India than 
T-5 Tommy Amer of Los Angeles, Calif., 
Adm. Lord Louis Mountbatten would like to 
know who he could be. 

So would Ann Sheridan, Jinx Falkenburg, an 
entire Signal Photographic Company, assorted 
generals and colonels, and at least two platoons 
of Chinese infantry. 

As a matter of fact, most of these people still 
don't know just who Amer is supposed to be. 

The other day, as Amer waddled his 5^foot-5, 
100-pound anatomy around, a place named Mo- 
mauk during the battle for Bhamo, a colonel 
spotted him. 

“What tribe are you a member of, son?" asked 
the colonel, eyeing his bronzed face, “the Sioux?" 

A little while later some Chinese soldiers hap- 
pened to see the squint-eyed Amer walk by. 
Taking him for one of their own men in. Amer- 
ican uniform, they spouted a long Chinese greet- 
ing at *him. 

On another occasion a general patted Amer 
on the back and declared, “You Japanese-Amer- 
ican boys in our Army deserve a lot of credit." 

And when some American infantrymen passed 
him on the trail a couple of weeks ago, they 
figured from his face and his hodge-podge uni- 
form that he was one of the Kachin hill people of 
Burma, so they yelled “Ka-ja-ee (hello)" at him. 

To all such ignorant characters, Amer throws 
a stock retort, combining Chinese and Southern 
greetings, rendered with a Dixie accent. 

‘Habla how. yo-all!" he replies. This con- 
founds them even more. 

According to his service record, Amer is a 
Chinese- American serving as a still photographer 
for the U. S. Army Signal Corps. But there are 
some who wonder if maybe Amer didn’t have the 
clerk who made up his service record fooled, too. 

When he was assigned to take pictures of Lord 
Mountbatten's trip to Myitkyina some months ago 
he wore his usual green fatigues, a wide-brimmed 
Gurkha felt hat, two guns, three cameras, flash- 
bulbs sticking out of every pocket and a wide 
grin The admiral looked him over with grow- 
ing astonishment and asked where he came from. 
“Los Angeles, Calif., sir," said Amer. 

“Well well," smiled Mountbattan. I have 
sDent some time in Hollywood, myself. I sup- 
pose you used to work as a Hollywood photog- 
before you joined the Army." 

‘•No sir ’’ replied Amer. “Only been to Holly- 
wood twice in my life- I handled the gas pump 
in a service station. ’ 

Thil admission'in itself has made Amer unique 
among GI photographers, for it s the custom m 
this civilian army, where everybody claims he 
thl a* least S100 a week in civilian life, for 
Tny photographer who happens to hail from the 
wL Coast to say with an air of nonchalance 
an# superiority, “Oh, I’m from Hollywood,” thus 

o=iahlishing his genius among fellow GIs. 

XSer is actually proud that he used to work 



in a service station and not as a professional 
in ® s , “when I left to join the Army, 
he°says “I owned one-fifth of the station. But 
they write me that I own more of it-one- 
sricth of it. Geez, I hope this don’t mean 111 run 

1 n When°^nx 3 Fal kenbu rg and Pat O’Brien came 
/h .rma with a USO troupe, Amer soon had 
posing for pin-up cheesecake pictures. Jinx 



to Burma 
Jinx 



liked the pictures so well 
that she told Amer she 
would get him a good 
publicity photographer's 
job, come the Armistice. 

“Sorry, ma’am," said 
Amer, “but I'm going 
back to the gas pump.” 

No one seems to know 
how Amer ever got into 
Army photography in the 
first place, except that GI 
classification often does 
queer things. But he has 
picked up photography so 
fast that his pictures of 
brass hats and celebrities 
— which are his specialty 
— have appeared in news- 
papers all over the States. 

One of these pictures, 
of Ann Sheridan hugging 
a veteran of Merrill’s Ma- 
rauders, won Amer a life^ 
long friend. The ex-Ma- 
rauder had been so over- c 
whelmed with the chance 
to meet an honest-to-God 
screen sweetheart that he 
hauled out one of his two 
hard-won Jap flags and 
edged through a crowd of 
GIs to give it to her. 

Ann was so grateful 
that she spontaneously 
threw her arms around 
the soldier. Amer was 
changing film nearby at 
the time, and he saw that 
the hug would make a 
whale of a picture. So he 
asked Ann to repeat the 
hug and hold it until he 
could click the shutter. 

Ann did it again — for several long minutes as 
Amer fussed with his flashbulbs and camera ad- 
justments. Finally he flashed the picture. 

Afterward the GI came up to Amer and ex- . 
claimed: “Gee, that was wonderful. I’ll remem- 
ber that embrace the rest of my life. I don't know 
how to thank you." Amer knew how — he got the 
GI's other Jap flag. 

Amer loves to -needle the brass. Once a staff 
officer who is in the habit of confronting corre- 
spondents and phptographers with, the words, “I 
used to be a newspaperman once myself,” heard 
Amer was from Los Angeles and looked him up. 

“Did you ever work for a newspaper in L.A.?” 
the officer asked. “You know, I used to be a re- 
porter on the Times.” 

“You did, sir?” piped Amer. “I worked for the 
Times myself, for a while.” And just when the 
officer was about to ask when he worked there 
and who he knew, Amer added, “Yeah, I used to 
sell it on the street.” 

His buddies in the Signal Photographic Com- 
pany call Amer the Flashbulb King, for he uses 
flash bulbs as plentifully in taking his pictures as 
Mae West uses sex to make hers. 

Once when he was shooting some pictures in 
a mess hall, one of his bulbs exploded, showering 
tiny pieces of glass into half a dozen GIs’ 
mess kits. By that time it was too late for them 
to get any more chow, so they weren't very 
happy about the whole thing. The ever-grinning 
Amer took in the situation, then yelled, “ Habla 
how , yo-all!” and ended the assignment by beat- 
ing a hasty retreat. For two days 0 afterward he 
refused to shoot a flash picture. 

“I felt just like a pilot after a crack-up,” he 
recalls. V But I finally managed to pull myself 
together again.” 

Of course, if any of his pictures are ever out 
of focus or overexposed or blanks, Amer shrugs 



the matter off to his CO with, “What can you 
expect from a gas-station attendant?” 

His picture captions are as remarkable as his 
personality. For instance, “Well, well, look at 
that little lamb; it is wearing a Jap battle flag 
that these boys killed a Jap to get.” Or “At this 
point one sniper gave them more trouble than 
all the enemy forces. The sniper is no more — w r e 
got the bastard.” Or “Here is the place we almost 
got our fanny blown to hell.” Or “These Ameri- 
can infantrymen walking back for a rest are full 
of smile and joy.” 

In his talkative moments, which occur several 
times every hour, Amer never tires of telling how 
he snafued a whole division on Tennessee maneu- 
vers, or how a clerk once thought his name 
Amer was an abbreviation for “American na- 
tionality,” or how he got a Purple Heart in the 
Myitkyina battle for a tiny face burn from a 
shell that burst only 15 yards away. 

I n his spare time, when he's not out in the 
middle of the Irrawaddy River fishing from an 
Air Force life raft, Amer studies a War Depart- 
ment booklet entitled, “How To Speak Chinese." 

“All the time I’m getting picked up by Chinese 
MPs for wearing an American uniform,” he ex- 
plains, “and it’s always tough to talk my way 
out of it because I don't talk their kind of Chi- 
nese. You see, my folks were born in Canton, 
which has a language all its own.” 

At rare intervals, Amer does run across a Chi- 
nese soldier who speaks his language. Last week 
he met a Chinese colonel from Canton. “You 
say your name is Amer?” asked the colonel. “Ail, 
yes, I knew the Amers well. You used to be 
smugglers in Canton, didn't you?" 

“That just shows you the troubles I have,” 
moans Amer, fingering a flashbulb. “Even people 
from Canton.” 



PAG i II 




ENGINE 



From McGonnagall camp at edge of Muidrow 
Glacier the trek led toward Mount McKinley. 



Wherever possible, the party hauled supplies with snow 
jeeps. When going got rough, men had to drag the jeeps. 



. toughest and e xpe- 

m oon»atn-c^ m Al , asko - s re . 

>■, J ° o h ; e 

We was one 

of Anchorage. H to 

ho volunteered to that 

eCk ? e ea° Mount McKm- 
' sak V.ahest mountain 
■rica s hig . . by 

' H ' StOrY t0 beV.nc 

known to oe - 

Ancho-9* •• f «" 
two Northwes 

civilian passeng*- 
of them bound tc 
..os found <*••* 



^(siE of the 
geroos 
iitions ever 
:orded in these P 
f/t Greany 
of 42 Gts vr 
reach the wr 
crashed on a pe 

5ey, North Ame; 

20,300 feet) 

Grant Pearson 

tional Pot 

ford Was 
Museum 
ship crasl 
on instru 
banks, i 
Airlines P>'‘ 
and 16 G»s 
the States 



rW’s chief 
shburn c. 
of Nature 

,hed, it 
iments from 
Aboard v/cre 



12 160-foot peak where plane crashed, grinding one 
,, then plunging 1,500 feet to o stop near precipice. 



elded the shattered fuselage 
but no bodies were recovered 



Three days' digging yi 
under 10 feet of snow, 



Mont. 

and 



Gale (left) of Anaconda, 
3 S ts with Grant Pearson 



S/Sgt. I*™ 

noncorh, r 





YANK The Army Weekly • MAR. BO, 1945 



Mail Call 



Paratroop Boots 

Dear YANK: 

We are the victims of a circumstance which we 
believe we have the right to bitch about. Being 
paratroopers and taking the risks involved in jump- 
ing, we believe we deserve the exclusive right to wear 
the distinctive uniform of our branch of the service. 

Since we arrived here in New Guinea we have 
had trouble getting boots, and a lot of us have made 
as many as seven jumps in GI shoes. Just recently 
we have been issued with one pair of jump boots 
per man with the admonition that they are to be 
worn only during off-duty hours, because they can’t 
be replaced once they are worn out. If this situation 
was the result of a shortage in the production of 
boots or transportation difficulties, it would be a 
different matter, but it isn’t. Most of the Red Cross 
workers, Wacs, Army nurses, some unauthorized 
infantrymen and a damned good percentage of the 
base commandos can get them. Wny can’t we? 

I can hear someone saying they are engineer boots. 
No, they aren’t. It’s easy to tell the difference. Be- 
sides, some of us get engineer boots as substitutes. 

If these fellows want to wear the jump suits and 
boots, why 'don’t they become paratroopers instead 
of depriving another soldier of his equipment? The 
Paratroops can usually use a few replacements. 
They are either too lazy to lace their leggings or 
they aren’t willing to labor for the fruit. 

Now Guinea — CpI. WILLIAM G. REVEL* 

* Also signed by three others. 

... Of all the men wearing Infantry boots here 
in the Philippines very few of them are infantrymen. 
We would like to know why the non-combat troops 
have a prority on all equipment — to mention the 
boots for one — which is vital to the frontline man? 

APO 32 — Pfc. THEODORE ROSE Jr. 

. . . How come our combat unit can’t get the 
equipment that we really need— -the Infantry boots 
and pistols? The base troops sure as hell manage 
to get them! I for one and a few others right in 
my company carry bazookas and flame throwers 
but we can’t get pistols to carry with them as 
authorized. Yet damn near every base soldier around 
here has a pistol which he . . . does not need. Does 
the Army call that supplying their combat troops? 

Philippines —Pfc. VICTOR A. PILGRIM 



Romeo at Large. 

Dear YANK: 

My letter entitled by you “Paging Dorothy Dix” 
made me laugh when I read it. [Henry had three 
blondes and two brunettes on the string at one time 
and didn’t know which way to turn. — Ed.] It ran 
through my outfit like wildfire. However, I would 
like to state that the situation is solved. . . . Two 
of the girls are engaged and one married, and the 
other two don’t write any more, making me a free 
lancer again. The situation here has changed, 
also. There are pretty dark-eyed senoritas all 
around us, and friendly, too. I am now planning 
on an American-Pilipino marriage with a sweet 
young lovely which is right down the line of our 
good neighbor policy. Solution solved for now — 
thank God. 

Philippines —Pic. HENRY ANDRE 

Education 

Dear YANK: / 

Wc would like to add one more sentence to Pvt. 
Bellamy’s “Education At Home.” [A previous letter 
claimed the only way to solve the problem of Ger- 
many was to educate the German POWs not to be 
prejudiced and try to make them understand that 
they are not superior to others. Bellamy added 
“ • - - why not educate some Americans in the very 
same idea?’’— Ed.] 

The sentence to add is, “While you are starting 
education at home why not start right here in 
the Army?” 

Philippines —CpI. LeROY GLOVER Jr.* 

♦Also signed by Pfc. A. Hasben, CpIs. J. Smart, A. Smith. 

The Old Army Game 

Dear YANK: 

After 17 months in the Army (nine overseas) I 
am still asking myself or anyone else this same 
question: Why do so many GIs try to see how little 
they can do instead of how much? Why is it so 
hard for them to realize that it is for their own 
good to be doing something rather than nothing. 
It’s a habit that may stick after they get out 
This is meant for technicians in responsible 
positions more than for combat men, many of whom 
do try to improve themselves in their spare time. 
And I do not mean that they should not have any 
leisure time at all . . . but to do all they can and 
their best. It is their own benefit and satisfaction 
at stake as well as the war effort. 

I may be accused of bucking, but it’s just my 
philosophy of living. As someone has written, “Life 
is . judged by the deeds you do, not by the time 
you live.” 

APO 70 — Pfr N. B. WATSON 



"Rommel, Count Your Men " 

Dear YANK: 

You're a fine old rag and a high-flying rag and 
all that sort of thing and I like you as do we all, 
but some things get my goat— like reading carelessly 
written claims and contentions. 

In regard to the article in YANK, “Rommel — 
Count Your Men,” by 6gt. Bill Davidson, some of 
the details just don’t jell. About that unofficial 
record of three rounds in 40 seconds — well, Sgt. 
Davidson is correct in saying it is unofficial. As a 
matter of fact, it’s damn unofficial. My battery in 
the immortal 43d Division, during the Munda affair, 
fired 10 rounds in 87 seconds and didn’t even brag 
about it. Now, please don’t think I’m walking 
around with a chip on my shoulder. The PA 
battalion of which he speaks is no doubt a good one 
and they’ve got a good piece of material. But you’ve 
got to show me where a 155-mm howitzer can hit 
a tank at 16,000 yards with premeditated intention 
to do so. 

My best wishes to the 333d PA, but don’t forget, 
the five W’s of the reporting profession [Who, What, 
Where, When and hoW. — Ed.] and try to be accu- 
rate in detail. 

Incidentally, during a battalion 10-round concen- 
trating, our battery completed the fire in 90 seconds 
with No. 3 piece, finishing in 87 seconds. 

• N#w Guinea —CpI. SAMUEL H. KAPLAN 

... I wonder if Sgt. Bill Davidson in his recent 
article “Rommel — Count Your Men” did not make a 
mistake when he wrote “I watched the men set a 
new unofficial record by firing three rounds in a 
little over 40 seconds.” Maybe it would interest Sgt. 
Davidson that our gun crews can put out six rounds 
per minute by using the very same gun. 

This is not to discredit the 333d Field Artillery 
Battalion mentioned in the article for Fm sure that 
they are dam good. If three rounds in a little over 
40 seconds is record time for the ETO then I say 
hats off to the artillery outfits of the Pacific theater. 

America! —CpI. ROLAND GIASSON 

Opera Pin-ups / 

Dear YANK: 

This is a request for a page of pin-ups of opera 
stars and a little reading on what is happening at 
Carnegie and the Met. Photos of Jeanette Mc- 
Donald, Helen Jepson, and also a few Australian 
artists— Marjorie Lawrence, Strella Wilson, Gladys 
Moncrieff and a few others will be appreciated. 

N - E * I- —Pfc. JIMMIE DORSEY 

• Anyone elso want pin-ups with cadenzas 7 



Mustering-Out Pay 

Dear YANK: 



Among the average GIs, one of the many problems 
is mustering-out pay. The guys who are left back 
in the States when this is all over should be entitled 
only to the regular pay which the Army has figured 
out for mustering-out. But the men who crossed 
the ocean should get at least a dollar a day for 
every day they had to spend overseas, that is besides 
the regular $300 pay which was promised them. 
Then, fellows who have seen combat should get 
two dollars for every day they were in the theater 
of operations plus the $300, because after all, they 
are the boys who had to make most sacrifices.' 

—CpI. RENO COCCHINI 



N, E. I. 




Palau Crab 

Dear YANK: \ 

I read about crabs on New Georgia, then 1 
saw them “in person” here. We have here whJ 
we cafi the 45-caliber crab. He is 
hermit crab who is not issued a shell at bSh 
but has to live in some small sea shell 
grows bigger he finds a bigger shell andus^it 
I don’t know how It happened, but th£ pS“ 
lar crab got too big for the shell he was ustoi 
and went in search of a new one It 
sea shells were scarce, so he choL^^^J 
best thing, a .45-caliber shell, and stuckhis tail 
in it, carrying it at a jaunty angle. So nowT 
goes trucking down the beach with a nW 
strong, shiny brass bungalow that will last wu 
some GI character makes us police mtk 
brass. This is a true story and IUl swe a r P u^? e 
all the Bibles In the chaplain’s office 4 on 

Pa,au -CpI. W. N. RHODES 




Assorted Suggestions 

Dear YANK: 

Here Is an idea I believe would be a help to the 
boys on the frontline. We’re doing a lot of perspiring 
and we have no way of replenishing the salt in our 
bodies. I’ve seen some men knocked out from the 

^Why* can’t two or three salt tablets be added to 
each can of C ration biscuits and each unit of K 
rations? At times C and K rations are eaten for 
quite a period. 

Philippines —Pfc. MELVIN R. KOERNER 

0 ... When an overseas GI returns to the States, 

let fife furlough time become accrued. The average 
GI will have approximately two and a half to three 
months leave due him. If the GI is returning before 
peace either in the ETO or the SWPA, let him have 
his accrued furlough time before reclassification. 
His assignment ordinarily will be in the United 
States and the importance of that job would not 
suffer materially by his having taken the furlough 
time. If the GI returns to the States after peace 
has been declared, why not let him have his acc 
leave in the six months’ period he must serve 
the end of the war? 

Without a doubt the Army will endeavor to 
many servicemen in order to carry on in 
various tasks. A two— or three — month, furlough 
the returning GI would give him ample time to look 
over the homefront and it would not interfere with 
the present regulation calling for the GI’s service. 
Philippines —1st Sgt. D. CLEVELAND 

. . . Free postage service to members of the 
Armed Forces was provided except for air-mail 
letters. This exception in the postal regulations 
makes granting of this privilege to servicemen over- 
seas of slight value. 

From New Guinea there is a time difference in 
excess of one month between regular and air-mail 
service. Our battalion by actual check has had an 
average of two free letters mailed to every 1,500 
sent via air-mail. It is believed that this situation 
is representative of many other units. Therefore, 
if the powers-that-be l^ck home wish to provide 
the men overseas with a free postage privilege let 
us have it for air-mail service. 

New Guinea — T-3 SAMUEL SCHLESINGER 

. . . Here’s a suggestion I hope isn’t taken the 
wrong way. If the brewing companies would drop 
an opener in every case of beer which is sent over- 
seas, it would be appreciated very much. 

Indi * —Sgt ED G. GENTRY 

What To Do About the Japs 

Dear YANK: 

1 read recently that the United States ratified 
the Geneva Prisoners of War Convention, whereas 
the Japanese Government did not ratify it hut 
merely stated that it would observe the rules as 
far as possible. The Japanese certainly have proved 
Nfy ,? ot deserving of the humane treatment 
accorded them by the rules of this convention. Since 
they are not on record as having agreed to observe 
^,"5? towards toe signatories myidea is this: 

411686 onl y with the countries 
who ratified the convention? 

New Guinea — M/Sgt. C. S. MATTHEWS 

• T ‘ ,H or P? ral A - Queenan asked what to do with 
by-passed on neutralized islands. My 

been^ninif r!f 4 , 8tay there aaA rot. Paving 

been close to combat lines in the past vear I have 

doubtful pleasure of seetaTsK of toe 
cut off from their supply. These 
wh^tl&J^ served over here shordd know 

blockade* 1 is * * dpUbt 016 ^ &t Navy 

as* afe*® 

“ls * — 

islands AU ^f a ^ n i SO ? dler cleaning up a lot of these 
CdT losing i hope thl letter will gi«* 

pm.§ u SK£ * ■"* , 

N * E ' *• —Pvt. LOUIS H. STOli * 

Bet 

Dear YANK: 

tury y we^SL ^£3* an argument about the cen- 

living in m ! oday - 1 claim 11181 w f 

that we h!! 01 century and my buddy clatos 
me who Sn the 19th century. Now, 

,77 ft ° oollects the 10 bucks we bet? 

y —Pvt. EDWARD W. SCHULff 

monly" d °‘ bU ’ V °“ °“ 9hf fo ashamed to Uk* *• 

Dratted Grandfathers 

Dear YANK: 

quStion on^TC^Wh^? 4 ! demobilization there is 
grandfathers^ 6 ** rha4 18 ^i* 1 ® done for toe drafted 

N ' E ' ’ — T-5 RODGER DAVIES 

^, aw5 . no classification for grandfefb* rt 

7riu J ° ?r Demobilization Plan, but wo imagine fW 

drett.2 ,?^ ndfathe 7 r" «» «— preference ** 

he i, 1 f ?T p,y bocausa a men h a father before 

mosi fam;C ' * rtat ’ 5 *• * 



PAGE 14 





When the battle for Manila 
became the first big -city 
combat in the Pacific, two 
YANK photographers, 5 gt. 

Dick Hanley and CpI. Roger 
Wrenn took these pictures of 
the fires and the ruins 



A Filipino gathers up a box of belongings to evacuate as night falls on the burning city 



By Sat. H. N. OLIPHANT alleyway behind the service station and inched 

7 * toward the house on the corner. Seconds later 

YANK Staff Correspondent there were three quick shattering explosions, 

Under a smoking tangle of splintered lumber 
ANILA — It was just beginning to get light. and broken plaster lay three dead Japs. 

Ragged red streaks stabbed the morning The street was suddenly silent. The ' only 
sky over Manila. But it wasn’t the sun- sounds came from the heart of the city farther 
rise. Manila was burning. south. They were the sounds of roaring flames. 

The nervous put-put-put of a N.ambu light \ f ew Filipino civilians poked their heads 
machine gun stuttered through the thick silence tentatively out of doors and windows in our 
of a broad tree-lined street. Four enlisted men block. A couple of pink-shirted, white-trous- 

and a first lieutenant, crouching so low their ered young men ventured out into the open, 

chins almost scraped the pavement, scurried over Others followed quickly. Soon the street, utterly 
the curb and flopped on the driveway of a mod- deserted a moment before, was jammed with a 

ern, neat-looking gas station. The sign on one noisy, chattering, grinning, cheering mob of 

of the pumps said “Texafco”, and over the en- Filipinos, Chinese and Spanish Mestizos, almost 

trance to the little office another sign said “ice a ll of them making the victory sign and yelling 

cold Coca Cola sold here.” ! “OK, Joe!” to every soldier they passed. 

One of the men with the lieutenant said, “I The battle for Manila, first big-city combat in 
think they’re in that house on the corner. Keep the Pacific, was on in earnest and we were get- 

an eye peeled on the window in the middle. ting an impromptu, if frequently interrupted, 

Pm going to try something.” He crawled welcome while the fighting raged. We were 

around to the far side of the service station, patted enthusiastically on our backs and grinned 

took his helmet off, attached it to his entrenching at by hundreds of motley, disorganized, happy 

tool and pushed it cautiously toward the edge of people who braved sniper and mortar fire to 

the building. Instantly the Nambu opened up. demonstrate their happiness.' 

“That’s the spot all right,” the lieutenant Not all of the people, however, were grinning 
said “Grenades, fellows, let’s go.” and cheering. Here and there, jostled by the 

He and the other men darted into the concrete indifferent crowd, were thin, glazed-eyed old 






A section of downtown Manila is a sprawling mass of ruins and roofless walls after the 
artillery duels. The picture was taken from the top floor of the Tribune building. 




men and women, dressed in patched colored rags, 
and on some of the faces of the younger people 
you could see tight-lipped bitterness and sorrow. 

One old couple and their son, a short, wiry 
young man with high cheek bones and wide 
thickly calloused bare feet, approached us. The. 
son was sullen. “My wife and daughter are 
back there in our house,” he said bitterly. “The 
house is no more. The whole block has been 
blown up and burned to the ground. We could 
do nothing; nothing. We could hear Maria 
screaming.” 

Before we could say anything, the hollow 
pop of a Jap .256 rifle sent the crowd scurrying 
for cover. Machine-gun fire spat out in the 
block ahead. The old couple and their son were 
swallowed up in the rushing stream of fright- 
ened, running people. Jap 20-mms started pound- 
ing a big stone building several blocks away. 

Shells were hitting closer. We ducked into 
a narrow hallway. A pretty, light-skinned 
woman, dressed in a white spotless kimona, 
with gleaming scarlet dragons on the sleeves, 
was standing near the door in the rear. She 
was scolding a little boy who was crying and 
pulling at her kimona. She pushed the child 
away and yelled, “Get away from me, you 
little Jap bastard.” 

When she noticed us standing there, she acted 
as if nothing had happened. “Manila was once 
the most beautiful city in the world,” she said 
with a queer smile.. The boy started to whim- 
per and tug at the woman again. She shoved 
the child away. “His father was a Jap,” she 
said. The queer smile was still on her face. 

It got quiet again so we went back into the 
street and started walking toward the stubby 
dirt-covered towers of Santo Tomas University. 
We got to the thick stone wall that surrounds 
the University grounds when the Japs began 
to throw mortar and more 20-mms. An MP stand- 
ing at the. gate said, “That goddam piece ain’t 
a quarter of a mile from here. Why don’t them 
spotters get on the ball?” 

The crowd pressed closer together on the 
jammed sidewalks. Others were standing by 
the iron gate of the University entrance. One 
woman, clutching an iron bar said, “They won’t 
let me in. My husband is in there.” Suddenly 
it was eerie quiet again. And suddenly the 
crowd started going again to wherever they 
were moving before the shelling. 

We went into a two-story wooden house "near 
the corner. From the upstairs window we got 
our first big view of Manila. There wasn’t much 
to see. The whole downtown section was 
smothered in roaring black billows of smoke. 
The shelling started again. A sprawling wooden 
structure .diagonally across the street got a 
direct hit. Minutes later it was a mass of gigan- 
tic crackling flames. We ran downstairs. On 
the porch was a black-haired girl about 16 years 
old. She sat very still, watching the fire, ex- 
pressionlessly. The Filipino who lived in the 
house tried to comfort her, offered her a drink 
of rum. But the girl said nothing, simply stared 
at the blaze. “Her father and baby brother,” 
the Filipino said, “they are in the house.” 

It was beginning to get dark. As we went 
down the street away from the path of the fire, 
we saw a dirty unshaved major talking to four 
or five GIs. The major’s eyes were red-rimmed 
and his hands trembled violently as he lifted 
a cigarette to his mouth but he was smiling and 
talking amiably to the men. “We got that Jap 
bastard,” he said. “He won’t shell this area 
anymore. A Filipino led a squad right to the 
spot. It was a Jap 20-mm.” 

One of the GIs said, “Well, maybe we can get 
a little shuteye tonight for a change.” 

A middle-aged sober-looking Filipino in a 
white linen suit and pink straw hat came up to 
the major and said, “Have you heard any news 
about the war in Europe?” The major almost 
swallowed his cigarette. “How do you like 
that,” he roared. “The man asks me if I’ve 
heard any news about the war in Europe and 
for three days and nights I haven’t been able 
to find out any news about fighting four blocks 
ahead of me!” 

The sky was getting dark. The day was 
almost over. A red chaos swirled in the sky 
above Manila, but it wasn’t tne sunset. 



