1 Aq uino 

I MANAGEMENT 

OfThe 



PRESIDENCY 




* Foundations for Policy Making 



Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




Foundations for Policy Making 



Published by the 
Presidential Management Staff 
Office of the President 
Manila, Philippines 
June 1992 



Project Director 

Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 

EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Chairman 

Secretary Aniceto Sobrepena 
Members 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 
Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 
Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong 

Production Manager 

Director Nicanor Torres 

Production Support 

Felicitas Estrella 

Office of Special Concerns - PMS 
Writers/Researchers 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez {lead ivriter) 

Asst. Secretary Manny Gaite 

Director Celia Alba 

Lucille Ortile 

Minerva Generalao 

Jun Abad 

Asst. Director Oyet Siacunco 

Editorial Consultants 

Hugo Yonzonlll 
Guia Tecson Prado 
Minerva Quemuel 

Book Design 

Fusion Media 

Special Thanks 
Photos 

Photo Lab - Office of the Press Secretary 
Undersecretary Lourdes Siytangco 

Logo 

Philippine Information Agency 
Editorial and Visual Office - PMS 



Printing 

NEDA Secretariat - APO 



Foreword 



"OURS IS A government that came to power borne on the shoulders of our 
people; we must, therefore, govern on the basis of that same people power". 

These were the very words of President Corazon C. Aquino - words that laid 
the foundation of the highest office of the land. For six years and four months, her 
people-powered presidency reflected itself in the very nature of the executive branch 
and on the implementation of several projects closest to the President's heart; clos- 
est, because they touched the warp and woof of our people's aspirations. 

To document in part her people-powered presidency, we have compiled this 
series of volumes titled The Aquino Management of the Presidency. This volume is 
the first part of the series and attempts to outline the evolution of the support offices 
and the various management tools and technology employed in the decision-mak- 
ing and decision dissemination processes in the Office of the President. The second 
part of the series provides a chronicle of some specific undertakings initiated by the 
Office of the President which, now, constitute part of the legacies of the Aquino 
government. The third part of the series is a summation of the Aquino government's 
performance during its six years in office. 

This volume, "Foundations for Policy Making", offers a glimpse at the inner 
workings of and the people in the Office of the President. It also shows the many 



technologies and processes utilized to set directions and policy thrusts of the Aquino 
administration. 



This series of volumes, The Aquino Management of the Presidency , is by no 
means a complete coverage of the legacies of the Aquino presidency. Some of those 
not documented here are contained in materials better covered by other line agen- 
cies or academic groups. 

Some of President Aquino's legacies, however, will find no archive to preserve 
them for posterity. One would have to look at the faces and listen to the hearts of the 
people she touched in order to find them. 



Aniceto M. Sobrepena 

Cabinet Secretan/ 
and 

Head, Presidential Management Staff 



Contents 



I. ORGANIZING MANAGEMENT SUPPORT 

Streamlining The Bureaucracy 4 
The Cabinet Consultation Process 6 

The Cabinet • Other Presidential Advisory and Consultative 

Bodies 

The Legislative Agenda Formulation Process 18 

The Legislative Liaison System • Presidential Meetings with 
Leaders of Congress 

3 



II. CONVERGENCE OF EXECUTIVE MINDS 

Building A Consensus 25 

A Motley Of Personalities 27 

Managing The Cabinet Consultation Process 29 

The Conference Management Technology 29 

23 

III. PRESIDENTIAL INITIATIVES 

Enhancing Governmental Management 35 

The Committee on Energizing tlie Bureaucracy • Problem 
Solving Sessions • Panibagong Sigla 2000 • Memorandum of 
Undertaking: Public Sector Welfare and Development Program 

Setting Goals And Presidential Priorities 43 

Program to Re focus Orientation to the Poor (PRO- Poor) • 
Improved Administration of Justice • Promotion of Public 
Ethics and Accountability 

34 

IV. EVALUATING SYSTEMS 

The Agency Mandate Review 50 

Stop, Start And Continue Doing: Towards A More Focused 

Implementation Of Department Mandate 53 
The Transition Program 53 

50 



THE WORKING PRESIDENCY 

Photos of the President and the men and women behind her at 
work 



56 



1 



Organizing 
Management 
Support 



hen Corazon C. Aquino took over 
the reins of government in Febru- 
ary 1986, she was confronted 
with enormous problems that the dicta- 
tor left behind. The government coffers 
were empty. The economy was on a dive. 
The military was politicized. Democratic 
institutions and processes were savaged. 
To make matters worse, she inherited an 
uninspired bureaucracy that was primed 
to respond only to the ways of an au- 
thoritarian hand. 

Six years later, the "walang alam" 
housewife, as her predecessor derisively 



called her, successfully completed her 
term - with democratic institutions and 
processes reestablished, military rehabili- 
tated, bureaucracy energized, and 
economy turned around. 

And yet, the presidency was far from 
what Corazon Aquino had been trained 
to handle. She simply was a housewife 
who had been thrust by fate to lead her 
country out of the devastation of a 14- 
year plunderous dictatorship. It was an 
overwhelming task, even for an expert. 
But President Aquino proved equal to 
the job. 




4 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Her recognition of her initial limita- 
tions as well as her instinctive manage- 
ment style served well her sincere desire 
to do what must be done. Immediately 
upon assuming office, she sought guid- 
ance and assistance from her old allies in 
the fight against the dictatorship. Her 
first Cabinet was a mix of human rights 
lawyers, businessmen, street parliamen- 
tarians, and with an old Marcos associ- 
ate - the leader of the mutiny that trig- 
gered People Power - thrown in. It was 
a logical and practical move. She could 
not afford obstruction in the spadework 
that needed to be done to solve the coun- 
try's problems. She had to have men and 
women she knew and trusted around 
her. The question of matching expertise 
to specific tasks at hand had to take a 
back seat, at first. 

President Aquino could have 
claimed for herself the vast powers of the 
dictator. She was sworn into office in 
February 1986 under the Marcos Con- 
stitution of 1973 with its infamous 
Amendment No. 6, which allowed the 
President to do practically anything. She 
used it, only to turn it against itself: Proc- 
lamation No. 3 on March 25, 1986 abol- | 
ished the 1973 Constitution and the 
Batasang Pambansa and established the 
Freedom Constitution. With this move, | 
President Aquino started the dismantling I 
of the Marcos dictatorship machinery. ! 



Although the Freedom Constitution 
also gave her a wide latitude of power, 
President Aquino used it prudently and 
only to facilitate the immediate task of 
rehabilitating government. One of her 
first acts under the Freedom Constitution 
was to appoint 50 men and women 
widely representative of the citizenry and 
of known integrity to a Constitutional 
Commission. By February 1987, a new 
Constitution had been overwhelmingly 
ratified by the people of the Philippines. 
In May of the same year, the first elec- 
toral exercise under the new Constitution 
was held. The swearing in of the new 
Congress on July 25, 1987 may have 
marked the end of President Aquino's 
emergency powers, but it put the coun- 
try on the road to genuine democracy. 

From day one to the day she turned 
over the task of governance to her suc- 
cessor, President Aquino adhered to a 
system of management reflective of the 
People Power that propelled her into the 
presidency. Her approach was personal, 
consultative, and populist. 



Joker Arroyo, the first Executive Sec- 
retary, was appalled at the extent power 
was centralized in the Office of the Presi- 
dent, known as the OP. Aside from hav- 



Streamlining The Bureaucracy 



Foundations for Policy Making 



5 



ing numerous attached agencies and in- 
stitutions, it was vested with approving 
authority on almost any government ac- 
tivity. "The Office of the President is one 
big travel agency", he was prompted to 
say when he found out that all govern- 
ment personnel were required to secure 
a travel authority from Malacanang. 
Likewise, all government contracts ex- 
ceeding P2 million and all negotiated con- 
tracts regardless of amount had to be ap- 
proved by the OP. It was obvious that 
this concentration of power was one tool 
used by the dictator in keeping tight con- 
trol on government. 

Thus, one of the first things the 
Aquino administration did was to ration- 
alize the bureaucracy. While still operat- 
ing under the Freedom Constitution, 
President Aquino created the Presiden- 
tial Commission on Government Reor- 
ganization or PCGR. The operative word 
was decentralization and the primary 
target was the OP. 

As a result of the reorganization, vari- 
ous entities formerly attached to the OP 
were either abolished, privatized, 
granted a measure of autonomy, or 
transferred to the appropriate govern- 
mental department. The same was done, 
on a minor scale, with other line depart- 
ments except for Imelda Marcos 7 giant 
Ministry of Human Settlements which 
was dismantled. 



The reorganization addressed the 
strategic matter of improving the 
delivery of frontline services. As the 
PCGR puts it: "More than anywhere 
else in the broad spectrum of govern- 
ment functions, activities, and processes, 
it is in services that the people's judgment 
of government efficiency is based. It is 
also here, to a large extent, that a sup- 
portive or a critical attitude towards gov- 
ernment will be formed. This is because 
frontline inefficiencies are direct and per- 
; sonal to the affected individual". Proper 
! delivery of frontline services "will result 
in the solution of other problems major 
in themselves, thus enabling the establish- 
ment of a more productive, more effi- 
! cient, and more responsive government 
; machinery". And as an aid to promoting 
I bureaucratic efficiency, the Agency Man- 
| date Review (AMR) - a continuing proc- 
| ess of policy issues and thrusts evalua- 
| Hon at agency level - was initiated. 

It was at this stage that the founda- 
tions for the eventual devolution of pow- 
I ers to local government units (LGUs) 
! were laid. Among the immediate reforms 
was the transfer of the granting of gov- 
| ernment employees' travel authority to 
; their respective Department Secretaries. 
The OP approved travel authority only 
for Department Secretaries, Undersecre- 
taries, and Assistant Secretaries. Depart- 
ment Secretaries were also empowered 



6 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



to approve bidded infrastructure con- 
tracts regardless of amount. The ceiling 
for securing presidential approval on ne- 
gotiated contracts was raised to PI 00 
million in the case of the Departments of 
Public Works and Highways (DPWH) 
and Transportation and Communication 
(DOTC), and P50 million in the case of 
the other departments and government 
corporations. 

The process of devolution was 
pursued by the Aquino administration 
throughout its term: from the 
reorganizations, to the Cabinet Decen- 
tralization Project in 1988 wherein five 
provinces were piloted for the decentral- 
ization of certain department functions 
and responsibilities, to the passage of 
the Local Government Code in 1991 
which gave local government units the 
power of self-determination on local 
matters. 

The President showed her bias for 
participative democracy by sharing 
much of the authority and responsibility 
of governance with her Advisers and De- 
partment Secretaries. She entrusted the 
Secretaries with a wide latitude of pow- 
ers. This grant of powers was evident in 
the non-interference by the President on 
the policies and standard operations of 
Departments. 



By streamlining the bureaucracy 
through devolution and decentralization, 
President Aquino gave body to the spirit 
of People Power. But that was only the 
more visible manifestation of her use of 
consultative and participative manage- 
ment in the exercise of governance. What 
follows, in this volume, is a glimpse at 
the inner workings of the Office of the 
President under Corazon Aquino, at the 
end of which, an understanding may be 
gained of the ways of democratic rule. 



While it is true that President Aquino 
came into the presidency with little 
preparation for the job, her situation 
could not have been much different from 
any other person who had occupied the 
post. No training in the world assures un- 
qualified success in such a complicated 
task as the governance of a nation. But in 
the early days of her term, President 
Aquino was patronizingly viewed by her 
detractors as somebody ignorant of the 
ways of power and, therefore, not fit to 
steer the country. Her preference for call- 
ing on advisers for guidance, a fact she 
did not bother to hide, further increased 
their derision. 

Still, she proved to be the wiser one. 

President Aquino called on several 
individuals and advisory bodies, both pri- 



The Cabinet Consultation Process 



Foundations for Policy Making 



7 



vate and governmental, for guidance in 
the course of her policy making. They 
were friends and allies and were recog- 
nized experts in their respective fields. 

The whole exercise of policy making 
in the Aquino administration employed 
the Cabinet Consultation Process. It was 
a tool of management that evolved out 
of President Aquino's personal manage- 
ment style, commitment to democratic 
principles, and populist orientation. The 
Office of the President was the primary 
user of the process which, nevertheless, 
encompassed the whole executive de- 
partment. 

The Cabinet 

The President as the Chief Executive 
of the government is tasked with the prin- 
cipal responsibility of managing the de- 
velopmental concerns of the public. As 
such, the President exercises direct con- 
trol over all the departments, commis- 
sions, and agencies of the national gov- 
ernment and general supervision over the 
local governments. 

In view of the numerous concerns of 
the presidency and for purposes of effi- 
ciency, expediency, and/or coordina- 
tion, the President is empowered to cre- 
ate executive committees, councils, or 



boards to help advise on policy or super- 
vise implementation of policy decisions. 
One such advisory body is the Cabinet, 
traditionally the premier brain trust of 
the Philippine presidency. 

The Cabinet is the collegiate body in 
the executive branch of government 
which has, by its organizational nature, 
first-line access to the President. Com- 
posed of Secretaries of line departments 
and various other Secretaries with or 
without portfolio, it is the executive's pri- 
mary administrative and policy imple- 
menting arm. 

But the composition of the Cabinet 
and its works are at the pleasure of the 
President. An autocratic presidency may 
choose not to convene the Cabinet and 
singlehandedly rule the State. Still an- 
other may choose to call on only some of 
the Cabinet members for help in minis- 
tering to the affairs of the Executive. The 
Aquino presidency, however, chose to 
manage government in the style of 
participative democracy - sharing much 
of the authority and responsibility of gov- 
ernance with the entire Cabinet. 

With the pressing situation that Presi- 
dent Aquino faced, the role and functions 
of her Cabinet had never been more pro- 
nounced and challenging. Unlike in the 
dictatorial regime of the past, during 



8 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



which the Cabinet was hardly consulted 
in policy and decision making, the Cabi- 
net under President Aquino was the prin- 
cipal adviser. Aside from the Department 
Secretaries, it included the heads of the 
National Economic and Development 
Authority or NEDA and Presidential 
Management Staff or PMS, the Director 
General of the National Security Coun- 
cil, the Press Secretary, the Cabinet Sec- 
retary, and various other Presidential 
Advisers and Assistants who were ex- 
perts on specific areas of concern. 

The Cabinet under President Aquino 
performed three principal functions. 
First, it served as a coordination and in- 
tegration mechanism whereby presiden- 
tial decisions were immediately relayed 
throughout the government structure for 
a unified and consistent implementation; 
second, it served as a venue for the pres- 
entation of different opinions and posi- 
tions on policy issues upon which presi- 
dential decisions were based; and third, 
it served as medium of information ex- 
change and feedback. 

In the first years of the Aquino ad- 
ministration, the Cabinet sat as often as 
once a week to discuss the numerous 
problems that confronted the nation. 
During the first meetings, discussions 
were focused on the state of resources of 
the government, such as the budget, the 



physical assets including aircraft and 
vehicles, and the general economic situ- 
ation of the country. Also high in the pri- 
ority of the Cabinet were the immediate 
measures that responded to the clamor 
of the people, like oil price cuts and price 
controls on prime commodities. 

As the Aquino administration gained 
stronger hold on the affairs of the State, 
Cabinet meetings became less frequent. 
Since the consolidation stage had been 
successfully passed, concentration was 
increasingly directed at policy implemen- 
tation which necessitated hands-on in- 
volvement of the Secretaries in their re- 
spective Departments or assignments. 

The Cabinet held a total of 1 85 meet- 
ings in the six years of the Aquino ad- 
ministration. The President chaired al- 
most all the meetings, except for the few 
times when she had to attend to some 
other important matters. On such occa- 
sions, she opened the meetings and then 
came back after fulfilling her commit- 
ment. 

There were times when the Cabinet 
needed to deliberate on pressing con- 
cerns in greater lengths, which were not 
possible during regular meetings. Thus, 
Cabinet workshops were organized as the 
need arose. All in all, there were six 
such workshops held by the Aquino Cabi- 
net. 



Foundations for Policy Making 



9 



Cabinet Workshops held under the 
Aquino Administration 

1 . Cabinet Team-Building Workshop 
October 10, 1987- Guesthouse 

2. Workshop on the Legislative Agenda for the Executive Branch and the State of 

the Nation Address 
July 16, 1988 - State Dining Room 

3. Cabinet Strategic Planning Workshop 
August 1 8, 25, and 26, 1 989 

4. Cabinet Workshop on Plan Updating 
October 13 and 20,1989 

5. Workshop Addressing the National Emergency Situation 
June 2,1990 

6. Kabisig Workshop 
June 27,1990 



The Executive Secretary: 

Among the President's men, the Ex- 
ecutive Secretary, also known as the "Lit- 
tle President", is primus inter pares - 
first among equals. He is the President's ! 
principal in-house adviser and, by law, 
authorized to act for and in behalf of the 
President. Although of equal rank to the 
other Secretaries, it is only the Executive 
Secretary who can, "by authority of the 
President", reverse a decision made by a 
fellow Secretary. 

The title of Executive Secretary was 
used from the time of President Quezon j 
until 1975 when President Marcos estab- I 
lished the Presidential Assistant System I 



and the position of Executive Secretary 
became known as Presidential Executive 
Assistant. In 1986, the old title of Execu- 
tive Secretary was restored by President 
Aquino. 

The position of Executive Secretary 
defies definition. Each of those who had 
occupied this post in the pre- Aquino era 

- from Jorge Vargas to Amelito Mutuc, 
Fortunato de Leon, Rafael Salas, 
Alejandro Melchor, and Ernesto Maceda 

- had their own interpretation on how to 
discharge his duties. While the adminis- 
trative code clearly spells out the role and 
functions of the Executive Secretary, its 
character still depended largely on the 
Chief Executive's management style as 



10 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



well as the nature of his relationship with 
the person occupying the position. For 
this reason, the Executive Secretary's 
participation in the executive branch may 
range from that of simply being a pencil- 
pusher and paper processor to that of 
consensus-builder and issues manager. 

But regardless of the extent of the Ex- 
ecutive Secretary's powers as the Presi- 
dent allowed, he is widely perceived to 
be the Chief Executive's alter ego. Very 
often, he becomes buffer between the 
President and any unfavorable feedback 
that may result from some unpopular 
executive act. It is the Executive Secre- 
tary who faces public ire, sparing his boss 
from unnecessary erosion of public trust. 

President Aquino had five Executive 
Secretaries in the span of her six-year 
term: Joker Arroyo (February 1986-Sep- 
temberl987), Catalino Macaraig (Sep- 
tember 17, 1987-December 14, 1990) 
Oscar Orbos (December 15, 1990-July 7, 
1991), Magdangal Elma (July 8 1991- 
July 14, 1991), and Franklin Drilo'n (July 
15, 1991 - June 1992). These frequent 
changes in Executive Secretaries may be 
understood in light of the volatile politi- 
cal conditions prevailing during the 
Aquino years. The country was in a state 
of transition and numerous destabilizing 
factors, most serious of which were the 
attempted coups d'etat, were at work. 



The President had to change the people 
in her Cabinet as the situation demanded. 

Each of the five Executive Secretar- 
ies had distinct personalities and man- 
agement styles which, nevertheless, 
proved appropriate to the period in 
which they served. Arroyo was decisive 
and fiery - just the type to face the de- 
mands of a revolutionary team. Catalino 
Macaraig was a low-key pencil pusher 
who unobtrusively pursued the Presi- 
dent's agenda with least controversy. 
Oscar Orbos led a high-profile, people- 
friendly, PR campaign for the presidency 
at the height of the Gulf Crisis, while 
Franklin Drilon was the action man who 
saw to the implementation of the Aquino 
administration's thrusts. 

The Office of the Executive Secretary 
is unique, in the sense that it has both line 
and staff functions. Its staff function per- 
tains to its duties to the President, while 
its line function pertains to its manage- 
ment of the OP and its attached agen- 
cies. 

In the OP common staff support, 
there were bodies that provided techni- 
cal as well as administrative support to 
the President and the Cabinet. 

The general government adminis- 
trative staff provided support on mat- 



Foundations for Policy Making 



ters concerning general government ad- 
ministration relative to the operation of 
the national government including the 
provision of legal and administrative 
services, staff work on political and leg- 
islative matters, information and assist- 
ance to the general public, and measures 
towards the resolution of complaints 
against public officials and employees 
brought to the attention of the OP. It also 
assisted the Executive Secretary in the re- 
view of the various presidential issuances 
- Executive Orders, Proclamations, 
Memorandum Orders, Administrative 
Orders - submitted to and emanating 
from the OP. 

The Cabinet Secretariat, headed by 
a Cabinet Secretary, was the support 
body concerned with all Cabinet needs - 
from agenda setting to materials prepa- 
ration and/or collation, records keeping, 
information dissemination of Cabinet de- 
cisions and actions to concerned depart- 
ments/agencies/entities, interdepart- 
mental coordination on the implementa- 
tion of executive actions and decisions, 
and all other functions and powers as di- 
rected by the President. The Cabinet Sec- 
retariat also served about 16 permanent 
committees in addition to a number of 
ad hoc committees and interagency 
working groups. In order to adequately 
respond to the demands of these func- 
tions, three major units were created: the 



Technical Affairs Staff, the Conference 
Affairs Staff, and the Administrative 
Support Staff. In view of all its duties and 
responsibilities, the Cabinet Secretariat, 
therefore, was the support body most 
closely involved in the Cabinet Consulta- 
tion Process. 

The Cabinet Consultation Process as 
well as the various systems instituted in 
support of it by the then Cabinet Secre- 
tariat could well be said to be the main 
factor why there was stability in execu- 
tive department operations despite the 
numerous Cabinet changes in the Aquino 
administration. The dynamic impetus 
for governmental reforms was sustained 
because systems and procedures had 
been well laid out. 

The Cabinet Secretariat under the 
Aquino administration developed be- 
yond the supra-clerical body it used to 
be into a strategic office central to the 
policy-making functions of the OP. To 
begin with, the Cabinet Secretary was 
given the rank and emolument of a mem- 
ber of the Cabinet. 

Most of the management systems em- 
ployed by the executive office had their 
origins in the Cabinet Secretariat. This 
evolution of the Cabinet Secretariat is un- 
derstandable when viewed in the context 
of the Aquino style of leadership. She was 
consultative, a consensus-builder, and 



12 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



very determined to pursue the reforms 
her policies had set Such qualities 
needed an efficient staff support and sys- 
tem directly linked to her closest advi- 
sory body, the Cabinet. 

The Presidential Management Staff 

or PMS, on the other hand, is the sup- 
port body in the OP responsible for the 
management of the national development 
process. It administered various OP 
funds and conceptualized special 
projects for the OP. From the PMS came 
the technical staff support necessary for 
the implementation of presidential initia- 
tives and projects. 

In January 1991, during the incum- 
bency of Executive Secretary Oscar 
Orbos, the Cabinet Secretariat was ab- 
sorbed by the PMS. 

The Cabinet Clusters: 

In 1987, at the time when the Cabinet 
had just undergone a reorganization due 
to the resignations of some members who 
ran in the national elections, the President 
felt the need for tighter interfacing among 
Cabinet members on related concerns. 
She instructed then Cabinet Secretary 
Jose de Jesus to devise a system that 
would address this need. 

Cabinet Secretary de Jesus came up 
with the Cabinet Cluster System which 



involved the grouping of the Cabinet into 
clusters whose members had common or 
complementary concerns. When the sys- 
tem was first implemented, it was com- 
posed of three clusters: Cluster A or the 
Economic Development Cluster, Cluster 
B or the Sociocultural Development Clus- 
ter, and Cluster C or the General Gov- 
ernment Cluster. 

With the ultimate objective of improv- 
ing delivery of services and ensuring ef- 
ficiency in its pursuit, the Cabinet Clus- 
ter System had the following operational 
goals: 1) to serve as advisory commit- 
tees of the President and the Cabinet by 
recommending measures on policy and 
operational matters for their considera- 
tion; 2) to identify problems that con- 
strain effective delivery of frontline serv- 
ices, and formulate and coordinate the 
implementation of strategies addressing 
these problems; 3) to assist in the formu- 
lation and review of legislative matters; 
and 4) to provide opportunities for re- 
flection and brainstorming on govern- 
ment direction. 

The Clusters proved to be effective 
venues for discussion of interdepartmen- 
tal positions and threshing out conflicts. 
Joint meetings of concerned Clusters were 
also held in cases where the issues to be 
resolved cut across sectors. 



Foundations for Policy Making 



13 



There were times, however, when the 
expected bias of a Secretary for his or 
her constituency prevented successful 
resolutions in the Clusters. The existence 
of other fora which addressed similar 
concerns and which had the same mem- 
ber-agencies as the Clusters also lessened 
the effectivity of the system. These situa- 
tions were addressed through direct 
presidential intervention and through the 
rationalization of certain Clusters. 

Consistent with her personal ap- 
proach to management, President 
Aquino even held one-on-one sessions 
with Cluster heads when some vital mat- 
ters had to be resolved. 

The Clusters were later reconstituted | 
into five groups in order to narrow focus 
on its areas of concern. The Economic De- 
velopment Cluster was divided into Ru- 
ral Development (Cluster A), Industrial 
Development (Cluster B), and Economic 
Development (Cluster D). The Sociocul- 
tural Cluster became Cluster C, while the | 
General Government Cluster was 
refocused and renamed Security and Po- 
litical Development (Cluster E). 

Clusters were deactivated as the need 
for interfacing in certain areas lessened, 
except for Cluster E, since issues concern- 
ing Security and Political Development | 



J remained critical throughout President 
Aquino's term. 

The Cabinet Assistance System: 

In order to manage the time of the 
Cabinet better, the Cabinet Assistance 
System (CAS) was established in 1987. A 
unique innovation of the Aquino presi- 
dency, it was essentially a technical and 
recommendatory clearinghouse for the 
Cabinet. Composed of Undersecretaries 
designated by their Department heads, 
it generated agenda for Cabinet meet- 
ings, helped facilitate the implementation 
and monitoring of presidential decisions, 
and resolved interdepartment policy 
conflicts, elevating to the Cabinet only the 
unresolved ones. 

The CAS had its roots in 1986 when 
then Deputy Executive Secretary 
Fulgencio Factoran conceptualized the 
creation of a body that would help facili- 
tate efficient and effective Cabinet dis- 
cussions. As Secretary Factoran puts it: 
"During the very early days of this ad- 
ministration, when government was run- 
ning exclusively on good inten- 
tions there was clearly a need to clean 

up our act during Cabinet meetings. Dis- 
cussions were not substantive enough, as 
the members of the Cabinet were not ef- 
ficiently prepared and updated on the 
matters at hand. Oftentimes, discussions 



14 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



became mired in the details which should 

have been cleared beforehand It was 

clear that more preparations were 
needed to be done". Thus, on November 
27, 1986, he convened a group of repre- 
sentatives from various departments at 
the Philippine Columbian to flesh out the 
concept. What resulted was a system 
composed of Cabinet Assistants who 
helped plan and prepare the Cabinet 
agenda ahead of time, briefed their re- 
spective Department heads on matters 
m the agenda before the meeting, and as- 
sisted in the implementation of Cabinet 
decisions in their respective departments. 

On December 1, 1986, Fulgencio 
Factoran was designated Cabinet Secre- 
tary and proceeded to informally oper- 
ate the system. In June 1987, the CAS 
was officially constituted through 
Memorandum Order No. 96. The Cabi- 
net Secretary was designated as its Chair- 
man. 

As the CAS' contribution to the Presi- 
dent's and the Cabinet members' deci- 
sion-making process became more pro- 
nounced, additional functions were 

handed to the CAS. On top of its respon- 
sibility in facilitating Cabinet discussions, 
it was given the function of formulating 
the legislative agenda whereby it re- 
viewed and prioritized all the bills en- 
dorsed to the OP or those that were to be 



certified as administration or urgent bills. 
The President's confidence in the CAS 
was such that during Cabinet discussions 
on certain legislative measures, she 
would ask: "Has the CAS reviewed this?" 

The rapport that developed between 
a Cabinet member and his Cabinet As- 
sistant was critical in the achievement of 
an effective Cabinet Consultation Proc- 
j ess. Some of the more successful part- 
nerships were those of Health Secretary 
Alfredo Bengzon and Undersecretary 
Mario Taguiwalo, Social Welfare and 
Development Secretary Mita Pardo de 
Tavera and Undersecretary Cora de 
Leon, Science and Technology Secretary 
Ceferino Follosco and Assistant Secretary 
Amelia Ancog, Public Works and High- 
ways Secretary Fiorello Estuar and Un- 
dersecretary Teodoro Encarnacion, 
Transportation and Communications 
Secretary Reinerio Reyes and Undersec- 
retary Josef ina Lichauco, and Education 
Secretary Lourdes Quisumbing and Un- 
dersecretary Victor Ordonez. 

Rapport among the Cabinet Assist- 
ants also developed to such an extent that 
it contributed greatly to interdepartment 
cooperation in the implementation of 
policy decisions. Moreover, the open-line 
access to the OP that the CAS encour- 
aged updated the Cabinet Assistants on 
latest policy developments and helped 



Foundations for Policy Making 



15 



them gain a wider perspective of their 
departments' roles in the policy thrusts. 
This up-down and lateral interaction 
made for a cohesive implementing arm 
of the Cabinet. 

In December 1989, the Aquino ad- 
ministration's thrust shifted from policy 
review and formulation to aggressive im- 
plementation of priority programs and 
projects. The CAS accordingly shifted its 
focus from policy orientation to policy 
operationalization which resulted in the 
Cabinet Assistants' increased involve- 
ment in their respective Departments. 
Subsequently, the CAS was abolished by 
EO 446 which reorganized the OP. 

The Cabinet Officers for Regional 
Development: 

Overcentralized decision making at 
the national level had caused a chain re- 
action of serious institutional paralysis at 
the regional and local levels and delayed 
efficient public services delivery over the 
past decades. Thus, sometime in late 
1987, a select group of Cabinet members 
and other specialists in government held 
a series of discussions at the Development 
Academy of the Philippines to find a 
mechan ism that would resolve the situa- 
tion. Then Cabinet Secretary de Jesus con- 
vened these meetings. 



Before the end of 1987, a consensus 
was reached to propose a concept of as- 
signing a Cabinet member to be respon- 
sible for a region. To be called Cabinet 
Officers for Regional Development or 
CORDs, they would serve as the repre- 
sentative of the President and act on mat- 
ters requiring the national government's 
attention. 

Further discussions were held in early 
1988 wherein some Cabinet members and 
government officials objected to the con- 
cept. Health Secretary Alfredo Bengzon 
opposed it on the ground that the addi- 
tional task would eat up significant ex- 
ecutive time and, therefore, diminish their 
effectivity as heads of their respective de- 
partments. Some NEDA officials thought 
that it ran contrary to the government 
policy of decentralization and local au- 
tonomy. Further consultations, however, 
produced a well-defined and limited role 
for the CORDs that would not contra- 
dict other objectives of development ad- 
ministration. 

It was agreed that each CORD would 
coordinate with various agencies and lo- 
cal government units to facilitate deci- 
sions or responses from the national level. 
Despite initial reservations, merit was 
found in the idea of the CORD, being in 
effect the President's extensions in the 
field, as one direct bottom-to-top linkage. 



16 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Administrative Order No. 55, signed 
on February 9, 1988, created the CORD 
System. The NED A Regional Offices pro- 
vided technical support to CORD re- 
gional visits, while the Special Concerns 
Staff of the Office of the Cabinet Secre- 
tary served as the overall secretariat at 
the national level. 

Whenever possible, Cabinet members 
were assigned to the regions where they 
came from. The exception was the Sec- 
retary of Public Works and Highways 
who was not assigned to any region since 
he was, of course, the most sought-after 
department head by local officials. 

The CORD system became a timely 
innovation in the Aquino administration 
a* it was activated at a period when 
President Aquino and her Cabinet were 
being accused of hiding in their 
Malacanang ivory tower. In many in- 
stances, the CORD was successful in 
bringing the Executive down to the grass- 
roots. For instance, the CORDs helped lo- 
cal government units prepare their feasi- 
bility studies which facilitated their offi- 
cial development assistance. 

The CORD system also provided 
valuable feedback mechanism. By being 
there, the CORDs got firsthand informa- 
tion on the effectivity of government in 
their areas of assignment. Direct benefi- 



ciaries of such feedback were the Na- 
tional Reconciliation and Development 
Program (NRDP) on the peace process, 
the Local Communities Assistance Pro- 
gram (LCAP), and the Pilot Decentrali- 
zation Program. 

The success of the CORD system var- 
ied depending on the interest and capa- 
bility of the CORDs in carrying out their 
responsibilities. Trade and Industry Sec- 
retary Jose Concepcion Jr. devoted a lot 
of time and talent as CORD for Region 
IV. This region became the most progres- 
sive alternative industrial site outside of 
Metro Manila. Defense Secretary Fidel 
Ramos, who served in Western Mindanao 
or Region IX, proved that the promotion 
of security required not only military but 
mainly economic solutions. He coordi- 
nated activities which ranged from the 
continuing program for Special Develop- 
ment Areas to launching "floating health 
centers" in coordination with the Depart- 
ment of Health. 

Other Presidential Advisory And 
Consultative Bodies 

Apart from the Cabinet, the President 
also consulted with other advisory bod- 
ies constituted to tackle specific concerns 
that were either urgent or of strategic im- 
portance. 



Foundations for Policy Making 



17 



NEDA Board: 

The NEDA Board is the independent 
planning agency of government prima- 
rily responsible for formulating, coordi- 
nating, and integrating social and eco- 
nomic policies, plans, and programs to- 
wards the achievement of growth and 
development. It is composed of the Presi- 
dent as Chairman and selected Depart- 
ment heads as members. The NEDA 
Board meets regularly once a month or 
as frequently as necessary to discharge 
its functions and responsibilities. 

Joint Legislative-Executive Foreign 
Debt Council: 

The persisting issue surrounding the 
management of foreign debts necessi- 
tated the establishment of a forum in 
which positions of various sectors were 
considered in formulating the strategies 
and approaches to the foreign debt prob- 
lem. Thus, the Aquino administration 
formed the Joint Legislative-Executive 
Foreign Debt Council or JLEFDC. 

In order to fulfill its task of providing 
a venue for evaluating the foreign debt 
problem, the JLEFDC undertook in- 
depth and continuing studies on the is- 
sue, its impact on national development, 
and the possible policy options and strat- 
egies. The JLEFDC was also tasked with 



enhancing coordination between the leg- 
islative and executive branches of gov- 
ernment and with facilitating nationwide 
consultations and public hearings. 

Council of State: 

Through Executive Order No. 305 
dated September 9, 1987, the President 
created the Council of State for the pur- 
pose of receiving reliable information and 
competent advice on pressing problems 
and issues of national interest. In this re- 
gard, except for some permanent mem- 
bers like the President, the Vice President, 
the Senate President, the Speaker of the 
House, the Executive Secretary, the Sec- 
retary of National Defense and the Chief 
of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Phil- 
ippines, the composition of the Council 
varies according to the matter on hand. 
Membership is flexible in that it is not lim- 
ited to government; persons from the pri- 
vate sector are also considered. Further- 
more, based on presidential directive, in- 
vitations are open to those who held op- 
posing views and orientation. 

The President convened the Council 
of State twice during her term. The first 
time, on September 10, 1987, was to dis- 
cuss the peace and order situation, par- 
ticularly the civilian and military rela- 
tionship, communication problems, in- 
dustrial peace, and the alleviation of 



18 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



poverty. The second time was on Sep- 
tember 6, 1991, to gather views on the 
proposed RP-US Treaty of Friendship, 
Cooperation and Security which was fac- 
ing imminent rejection from the Senate. 
The administration, citing reasons of do- 
mestic political and economic stability as 
well as regional and global unity, was 
pushing for ratification. 

Coordinating Council for the 
Philippine Assistance Program: 

The growing need for more financial 
assistance to achieve objectives of sus- 
tainable economic growth became pro- 
nounced in late 1988. The Multilateral 
Aid Initiative (MAI) program of the 
United States and various other financial 
support from other developed countries 
had already been coming in, but concern 
over its slow utilization rate was raised 
by the donors, particularly the United 
States and Japan. 

Thus, the Task Force on the Philip- 
pine Aid Plan was created in order to fast 
track the mobilization and utilization of 
this support from the international com- 
munity, also known collectively as Offi- 
cial Development Assistance (ODA). The 
Task Force, chaired by the Executive Sec- 
retary and composed of selected mem- 
bers of the Cabinet, was later reconsti- 
tuted into the Coordinating Council for 



the Philippine Assistance Program 
(CCPAP). Significantly, the reconstituted 
CCPAP included representatives from 
both Houses of Congress and the private 
sector. 

Presidential Agrarian Reform Council: 

The Presidential Agrarian Reform 
Council (PARC) coordinated and main- 
tained the implementation of the Com- 
prehensive Agrarian Reform Program 
(CARP), a major social justice program. 
It was chaired by the President and co- 
chaired by the Secretary of the Depart- 
ment of Agrarian Reform (DAR). Its 
members included the Department of 
Agriculture (DA), Department of Justice 
(DOJ), Department of Public Works and 
Highways (DPWH), Land Bank of the 
Philippines (LBP), Department of Budget 
Management (DBM), Department of 
Trade and Industry (DTI), Department 
of Interior and Local Government 
(DILG), Department of Labor and Em- 
ployment (DOLE), and the National 
Irrigation Administration. 

The Legislative Agenda Formulation 
Process 

After giving up her sole law-making 
powers through the 1987 elections, Presi- 
dent Aquino turned her attention on the 
present need for executive-legislative li- 



Foundations for Policy Making 



19 



aison that would ensure passage of her 
legislative agenda. Thus, in the August 
12, 1987 Cabinet meeting, the President 
approved the Legislative Agenda Formu- 
lation Process. 

The salient points of the process 
adopted were as follow: 1) Cabinet 
members were asked to submit proposed 
legislations to the Office of the President; 
2) the Cabinet Secretariat created a mas- 
ter list and a computerized databank 
containing key information on the pro- 
posed legislation; and 3) the CAS plenary 
reviewed the recommendations of the 
CAS Committees and prepared a list of 
priority bills to be submitted to the Presi- 
dent and the Cabinet. 

The criteria for selecting priority bills 
to be included in the President's legisla- 
tive agenda were the following: 1 ) these 
must address the problems either of in- 
surgency/peace and order, poverty and 
inequality, energizing the bureaucracy 
and improving the delivery of services, 
graft and corruption, and asserting ci- 
vilian supremacy over the military; 2) 
these must be consistent with the relevant 
provisions of the Constitution; 3) these 
must promote or operationalize the ob- 
jectives of the Medium-Term Philippine 
Development Plan; 4) these must be filed 
within the next three to six months; and 
5) these must be ready to be presented to 



the Cabinet in the form of draft bills after 
concerned agencies had been consulted. 

The Legislative Liaison System 

In the Cabinet meeting of October 5, 
1988, the President approved the crea- 
tion of the Presidential Legislative Liai- 
son Office-Legislative Liaison System 
(PLLO-LLS). Each department was di- 
rected to designate a legislative liaison 
officer, preferably with a rank not lower 
than Assistant Secretary, who was called 
Department Legislative Liaison Officer 
or DLLO. The work of the DLLOs in- 
cluded promoting passage of bills in the 
President's Agenda, facilitating the re- 
quests of the legislators, and attending 
hearings of legislative committees. The 
President designated Flerida Ruth 
Romero and Jesus V. Ayala as 
Malacanang liaison officers to the Sen- 
ate and the House of Representatives, re- 
spectively. 

The Department liaison officers, 
however, campaigned not only for the 
common minimum legislative agenda 
but for other administrative bills which 
required the immediate attention of Con- 
gress to complement the programs and 
projects of the executive branch. These 
bills included those for the imposition of 
sin taxes, the implementation of the 
Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Pro- 



20 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



gram or CARP, and the establishment of 
provincial centers for science and tech- 
nology in all provinces of the Philippines. 

Besides pushing the legislative 
agenda of the President, the PLLO-LLS 
also studied the substance and monitored 
the status of some 35,407 bills, 2,501 reso- 
lutions, and 70 concurrent resolutions 
filed in the House of Representatives and 
did likewise to some 1,960 bills, 1,342 
resolutions, and 61 concurrent resolu- 
tions in the Senate. Of these myriad leg- 
islative propositions, the PLLO-LLS | 
identified the "innocuous", the "friendly", 
and the "unfriendly" ones on the basis of 
relevance and timeliness for appropriate 
action. By way of directly and indirectly 
providing the necessary technical exper- 
tise and critical linkages with the con- 
cerned executive departments, the 
PLLO-LLS assisted in the passage of 11 2 
bills of national application and 589 bills 
of local application initiated by members 
of Congress. 

Worth noting were the areas of con- 
flict in the executive-legislative relation- 
ship. For instance, requests for the re- 
lease of budgetary appropriations for 
numerous local projects emanating from 
Congress, such as infrastructure pro- 
grams, gave rise to some animosity. But 
despite this, the President never wavered 
in pursuing the realization of these ini- 



tiatives. Happily, the PLLO-LLS crea- 
tively devised a system to evaluate the 
viability and validity of individual re- 
quests and effectively match each project 
to the development programs of the 
President. While such projects admit- 
tedly tended to provide their respective 
sponsor-legislators some concrete politi- 
cal mileage, the accessibility of the ex- 
ecutive line department via the PLLO- 
LLS had been strongly perceived as in- 
dicative of the President's support. 
Hence, local bills were enacted to gener- 
ate the greatest impact on the image of 
the Presidency. 

Conversely, a pro-active approach 
was adopted by the DLLOs in blocking 
the passage of legislative measures that 
had adverse effects on programs of gov- 
ernment. Using diplomacy rooted in per- 
sonal rapport with the power centers of 
Congress and in established network with 
the Secretariat, the PLLOs-LLS pre- 
vented the advance to plenary considera- 
tion of the dreaded reorganization of the 
whole bureaucracy via a repeal of Ex- 
ecutive Order No. 292, otherwise known 
as the Administrative Code of 1987. 
Thousands of civil servants would have 
been thrown into total disarray had the 
scheme pushed through; said final re- 
port of the House Committee on Reor- 
ganization was "killed" at the committee 
level. 



Foundations for Policy Making 



21 



On several occasions, the PLLO-LLS 
spearheaded task forces to draw consen- 
sus among agencies that would be af- 
fected by the passage of certain 
legislations. Where the formulated con- 
certed stand ran counter to the intention 
of the proposed measure, plans were 
mapped out and efforts were consoli- 
dated for effective opposition. 

To generate support for the presiden- 
tial appointees during the public hear- 
ings by the Commission on Appoint- 
ments, the PLLO-LLS explored all the 
available venues and conferred with any 
and all within the spheres of power and 
influence for expediency. In the same 
manner, to quelch opposition and con- 
vert the same into support for the posi- 
tion taken by the President on certain is- 
sues, one-on-one approach was adopted 
and a head count was actually made as 
in the cases of: the ratification of the RP- 
US Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation 
and Security; the foiled attempt to un- 
seat the Speaker of the House of Repre- 
sentatives; attempt to override the presi- 
dential veto regarding certain items in the 
1992 General Appropriations Act such | 
as suspension of payment on loan con- 
tracted for the Bataan Nuclear Power 
Plant; and when the President requested 
for emergency powers in the aftermath 
of the defeated 1989 rebellion. Lobby- 
ing, in those instances, involved shuttling 



between Malacanang and Congress for 
point-by-point reassessment of position. 

In the face of irreconcilable differ- 
ences with Congress, the position of the 
President or of the executive branch was 
reinforced in press releases and bolstered 
by support from opinion leaders to lessen 
the impact of public acquiescence to the 
decision of Congress. However, when 
the position taken by the President or the 
executive branch can not be subjected to 
any compromise because the proposed 
law would have undermined the integ- 
rity of the presidency or may have led to 
administrative havoc in the bureaucracy, 
a veto was recommended. To date, the 
President had vetoed 15 bills of national 
application and eight bills of local appli- 
cation. The PLLO-LLS undertook the 
necessary steps as it acted as a buffer fol- 
lowing transmittal of the President's veto 
messages to Congress. 

Presidential Meetings With Lenders 
Of Congress 

The responsibility of liaising with 
Congress, however, was not entirely del- 
egated to the Legislative Liaison System. 
The President herself was actively in- 
volved in promoting a harmonious and 
effective working relationship with Con- 
gress. The President led the workshops 
with her Cabinet in the formulation of a 



22 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



legislative agenda for the Executive | 
branch. After the workshops, she would 
assign the Cabinet Secretariat to convene 
a Technical Working Group which would 
include the Chief-of-Staff of the Armed 
Forces, the Senate President, the Speaker 
of the House, the Majority Floor Lead- 
ers of both Houses and other key techni- 
cal people in the legislative branch. The 



output of the Technical Working Group 
was a proposed common minimum leg- 
islative agenda. 

After the technical groundwork had 
been laid, the President would invite the 
leaders of both Houses of Congress to a 
meeting to generate support for the pro- 
posed common minimum legislative 
agenda. 



2 



Convergence 
of 

Executive 
Minds 



The first half of the Aquino admin- 
istration was a period for policy 
setting and agenda prioritization. 
To attend to this concern, the President 
and the Cabinet held frequent meetings 
and consultations. Cabinet plenary 
meetings were held twice a month, while 
both the CORD and the NEDA Board met 
once a month. The monthly calendar of 
the President and the Cabinet, thus, went 
as follows: Cabinet plenary meetings on 
the first and third Wednesdays of the 
month; CORD meeting on the second 
Wednesday; and NEDA Board meeting 
on the last Wednesday of the month. The 



President presided over the meetings of 
these three fora. 

Later on, the creation of several spe- 
cialized bodies and fora streamlined dis- 
cussions at Cabinet en banc and provided 
for more effective venues for focused 
discussions of national issues and con- 
cerns. For instance, before convening a 
Cabinet plenary meeting to discuss issues 
concerning peace and security, Cabinet 
Cluster E may first take up the matter 
at level. If an issue concerns regional op- 
erations, then, most likely, the CORD is 
convened instead of the Cabinet en banc. 



24 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



to make follow-ups, finalize agreements, 
discuss compromises, present proposals, 
lobby for one's position, settle issues, and 
resolve interdepartmental conflicts. Ex- 
ecutive Secretary Franklin Drilon, Public 
Works and Highways Secretary de Jesus, 
Environment and Natural Resources 
Secretary Factoran, Agriculture Secre- 
tary Dominguez, Science and Technol- 
ogy Secretary Follosco, Health Secretary 
Bengzon, and Social and Economic Plan- 
ning Secretary Monsod had made good 
use of such sessions. 



Until the middle of 1990, Cabinet meet- 
ings, including those of the CORD and 
the NED A Board, were held in the morn- 
ing, beginning at 9:30. Henceforth, it was 
moved to an afternoon schedule starting 
at 4:00 o'clock. The change in schedule 
was brought about by a clamor among 
Cabinet members that a morning sched- 
ule left them harrassed and rushing to 
their succeeding appointments for the 
day. 

Meetings presided over by the 
President started promptly. The official 
family was aware of the President's pen- 
chant for promptness, thus, it rarely hap- 
pened that anyone came late for her 
meetings. 

For the Cabinet en banc, the CORD, 
and the NEDA Board, a session for 
interagency consultation was provided 
30 minutes before the start of the formal 
meeting. Although this session was in- 
formal, it had proven to be an effective 
forum for group or one-on-one huddle 
among Cabinet members. Topics dis- 
cussed varied from the morning's head- 
lines and immediate events, such as one's 
guesting on a television talk show, to per- 
ennial concerns and problems, such as 
strikes, traffic, flood, potholes, and black- 
outs. But more than the usual exchange 
of stories and pleasantries, this period 
was utilized by some Cabinet members 



Since the President started a tradition 
of saying a prayer before calling her 
meetings to order, Cabinet members 
took turns in leading the prayers, which 
requested for God's grace and wisdom 
as the President and the Cabinet 
endeavored to address the concerns of 
the country and the populace. 

The meetings proceeded with the re- 
view of the conclusions of the previous 
meeting. A long pause usually accom- 
panied this review. On the side, the min- 
utes officer would quietly sit waiting for 
the body to approve the minutes. 

The major part of the meeting was 
spent discussing the main agenda items. 
On the average, meetings took up three 
major items. The President introduced 
the presentor who was given 15 minutes 



Foundations for Policy Making 



25 



to make his presentation. The best pres- 
entations were always saved for the 
President and the Cabinet. Meticulous 
preparations were undertaken to come 
up with the most impressive props and 
visual aids. 

The first storyboard presentation 
was made by Secretary de Jesus on his 
report to the Cabinet in August 1987 on 
the Accomplishments of the Presidential 
Committee on Public Ethics and Ac- 
countability (PCPEA). The presentation 
made a very good impression that the 
technology had since become a favorite 
during Cabinet presentations. 

How did Cabinet members prepare 
themselves for their presentation? 
Former Budget Secretary Gem Carague, 
for instance, made sure that he rehearsed 
his presentation a day before his sched- 
ule. Secretary Factoran was known to 
be very meticulous and personally saw 
through the details in preparing his pres- 
entation. Secretary Fidel Ramos, on the 
other hand, could competently prepare 
for a presentation complete with sophis- 
ticated props even with a 24-hour notice. 
At one time, Social Welfare Secretary 
Mita Pardo de Tavera, during the pres- 
entation of the Agency Thrust and Policy 
Issues of the Department of Social Wel- 
fare and Development (DSWD), distrib- 
uted packages of the Department's 



| Ready- to-Eat Food for disaster victims. 
The Cabinet members partook of the food 
packages which consisted of beans, rice, 
I and sausages. The President and the 
I Cabinet members applauded the depart- 
| ments for innovations in presentations. 

The tone of cabinet meetings were 
usually determined by the issues being 
discussed. Arguments and deliberations 
varied from being spirited, to intense, 
emotional, passionate, and serious. By 
! and large, arguments were honest at- 
j tempts to arrive at sound decisions. 

The President encouraged debates 
and discussions. The concensus builder 
that she is, she allowed issues to be de- 
bated before she rendered her decisions, 
j Sharing her views about the tedious proc- 
ess of review that preceded the issuance 
of the Executive Order on the Agrarian 
Reform Program, the President 
| capsulized her thoughts on the matter: "I 
j do not mind getting the flak for my deci- 
| sions as long as I am convinced and con- 
! fident that it is the answer. Your job, 
! therefore, is to convince me". 

Building A Consensus 

Differences in opinion, beliefs, and 
principles were often the cause of heated 
arguments and emotional discussions 
I during meetings. 



26 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



One source of argument at the 
Cabinet was the tendency of a member 
to be biased towards one's turf and con- 
stituents. A Cabinet member's position 
was always to look at a proposal or 
course of action in terms of its impact to 
one's department or sector. "Conflict of 
interest" was evident between the 
Department of Labor and Employment 
(DOLE) and the Department of Trade 
and Industry (DTI) over the proposed 
industrial estates and the small 
entrepreneural thrust of Kalakalan 20; 
DOLE and the Department of Foreign 
Affairs (DFA) over the deployment of do- 
mestic helpers abroad; National Power 
Corporation (NPC) and the Department 
of Environment and Natural Resources 
(DENR) over the operation of the Calaca 
Coal Plant. 

At worst, differences in policies and 
opinions affected the relationship of Cabi- 
net members, as in the case of two Sec- 
retaries whose irreconcilable differences 
over population policy and family plan- 
ning resulted to their estrangement. 
Needless to say, the population issue was 
perhaps the most emotionally charged 
issue the Cabinet had ever discussed. 

But what was it about population 
that made it such a controversial item? 
The basic argument was founded on the 
fundamental issue of whether or not the 



! government should adopt a more aggres- 
sive position as regards population con- 
! trol considering the 2.5 percent popula- 
; tion growth rate of the Philippines, or 
; continue with the current policy an- 
■ chored on responsible parenthood. Until 
I now, there remains an impasse in gov- 
| ernment decision on this issue. 

The Cabinet also argued a lot on 
; proposals which required funding. 
I Having inherited a bankrupt economy, 
i resources were scarce and priorities 
| had to be clearly defined. As a rule, a 
; proponent agency or department was 
expected to be able to identify possible 
alternative sources of funding for its pro- 
gram. An example of this was the crea- 
tive approval adopted by the DECS be- 
cause of financial constraints. Schemes 
such as subcontracting with private 
schools and adopting three shift classes 
I were resorted to in the implementation 
| of the Free Secondary Education Pro- 
gram of government. 

The implications and inconsistencies 
of specific proposals to major policies of 
government were also a source of argu- 
ment among the Cabinet members. For 
instance, it was difficult to get the ap- 
proval of the President and the Cabinet 
; on proposals that called for the creation 
: of new agencies or offices as these ran 
counter to the government policy of trim- 



Foundations for Policy Making 



27 



ming and streamlining the bureaucracy. 
As an example, despite the endorsement 
by the CAS, the President and the Cabi- 
net rejected the proposal to create a De- 
partment of Housing and Urban Devel- 
opment. While it agreed on the basic 
principles of the housing and urban de- 
velopment program, the Cabinet's deci- 
sion was to leave the determination on 
the program's implementing mechanism 
to Congress. 

Similarly, the proposal to expand the 
functions of, and increase the budget of, 
the DSWD so that it could take on .the 
role of a lead agency on the poverty alle- 
viation efforts of the government was re- 
jected by the Cabinet. 

Mainly because of the President's 
style in facilitating and moderating her 
meetings, everybody was free to present 
an opinion or position. The President 
based her decisions on the issues raised, 
arguments presented, and recommenda- 
tions made in the meeting. While there 
were no written rules, once decisions 
were made and agreed upon, everybody 
was bound to abide by them. 

i 

The President also kept her official 
family abreast of events and develop- 
ments involving the presidency so that I 
they were updated and "spoke with one 
voice". 



A Motley Of Personalities 

Cabinet members came and went but 
they left behind an interesting mosaic of 
a Cabinet made up of diverse and vary- 
ing personalities. 

The first two years of the Aquino ad- 
ministration saw her Cabinet discussing 
policy issues aimed at laying down the 
grounds for the administration's agenda. 
The early days of the Aquino adminis- 
tration saw a group of Cabinet members 
who, on the basis of their respective prin- 
ciples and opinions, could be classified 
as follows: the "liberal thinkers" which 
included the likes of Secretaries Joker 
Arroyo, Bobbit Sanchez, Rene Saguisag, 
and Solita Monsod; the "conservative 
thinkers" which included Secretaries Jose 
Concepcion, Fidel Ramos, Mita Pardo de 
Tavera, and Jaime Ongpin; and, finally, 
the "pragmatists" which included Secre- 
taries Alran Bengzon, Ping de Jesus, and 
Fulgencio Factoran. 

Sharp differences of opinion on fun- 
damental issues such as the release of po- 
litical prisoners, profit sharing, popula- 
tion policy, and foreign debt and debt 
servicing, brought about a lot of drama 
and heavy discussion during the first 
years of the Cabinet. 

On her fourth year as President, how- 
ever, confident that her administration 



28 



The Aquino Ma nagement of the Presidency 



had already firmed up its policies and 
priorities, President Aquino declared that 
the remaining two years of her term 
should be devoted to the implementation 
of action-oriented interventions. At this 
time, there had been a notable change in 
the composition of the President's Cabi- 
net. Following several revamps and re- 
organization, the President's primary 
consideration in her choice of a Cabinet 
member was clearly partial to one ob- 
jective: Will this official support my 
agenda? 

Around this time, too, Cabinet dis- 
cussions were no longer focused on fun- 
damental and structural policy issues. 
The concerns had shifted to procedural 
issues, particularly those directed at pro- 
gram implementation. To effectively ad- 
dress this thrust, the Cabinet Consulta- 
tion Process underwent some changes 
that included the reduction in the number 
of meetings and consultations as well as 
the deactivation of some bodies and fora, 
such as the Cabinet Clusters and the CAS 
to provide the department officials more 
time to attend to their specific agency 
concerns. 

Ultimately, it could be said that the 
diversity and mixture of her chief advis- 
ers worked favorably for the President 
in that she was able to draw varied, 
though sometimes conflicting points of 



view. With their various perspectives on 
specific issues, the President was pro- 
vided with a wide array of options, rich- 
ness of knowledge, and depth of analy- 
ses on a given issue. 

During the CAS Workshop on Pov- 
erty Alleviation held in September 1989, 
DOTC Undersecretary Romeo de Vera 
raised an issue regarding the objectives 
of the workshop which was to plan out a 
specific program that will directly ad- 
dress the concerns of the bottom 30 per- 
cent of the population, or what is referred 
to as the "poorest of the poor". He ar- 
gued that if the administration was sin- 
cere in its effort to address the issue of 
poverty, then it had to seriously look at 
the root cause of the problem. A neces- 
sary intervention, therefore, was to un- 
dertake a review of government policies 
which were biased against the poor. His 
position was premised on the fact that 
unless policy issues were first addressed, 
then poverty programs and projects were 
nothing more than stop-gap measures 
and surface interventions. 

Serious arguments ensued and 
pushed its way until dinner. By the time 
the next session began, a compromise 
was reached: the workshop noted the 
need to address the macro policies af- 
fecting poverty as a separate but neces- 
sary track towards the country's efforts 
on poverty alleviation. 



Foundations for Policy Making 



29 



Managing The Cabinet Consultation 
Process 

Managing and facilitating the Cabi- 
net Consultation Process is no mean job. 
Being the highest level of policy review 
and decision making, there is no room 
for error. The goal is to ensure that the 
President and the Cabinet are provided 
with high quality and timely assistance 
and services, primary concerns of the 
Cabinet Secretary. 

The Aquino administration had three 
able and competent Cabinet Secretaries 
in the person of Secretary Fulgencio 
Factoran (December 1986 to April 1987), 
Secretary Jose de Jesus (April 1987 to 
January 1990), and Secretary Aniceto 
Sobrepena (from January 1990 to Janu- 
ary 1991, then August 1991 to June 
1992). 

Secretary Factoran had a short stint 
but he was instrumental in providing the 
ground work for a systematic, organized, 
and orderly Cabinet Consultation Proc- 
ess. Specifically, he was responsible for 
setting up the CAS and the Cabinet Clus- 
ters. 

Under the direction of Secretary de 
Jesus, more systems and procedures 
were introduced - such as the CORD, 
CORD-RDC, Cabinet Action Committee 



for Implementation Assistance (CACIA), 
Problem Solving Session with the Presi- 
dent - to facilitate consultations within 
the Cabinet. The CAS Standing Commit- 
I tees were created and the Cabinet Clus- 
ters were reconstituted to respond to the 
challenges of the times. 

Secretary Sobrepena's service to the 
Cabinet Consultation Process spanned 
five years, first as Cabinet Undersecre- 
tary to Secretary de Jesus from April 
1987 to January 1990, then as Cabinet 
Secretary from January 1990 until June 
of 1992. 

To be able to provide the best serv- 
' ices for the President and the Cabinet, the 
I team of Secretary de Jesus and Secretary 
I Sobrepena embarked on the reorganiza- 
i tion of the Cabinet Secretariat with the 
j sole objective of making it an effective 
support staff of the highest policy advi- 
sory body of government. Together, they 
! introduced initiatives to substantiate the 
I works of the Cabinet and its support 
mechanisms. Among these was the Con- 
ference Management Technology. 

I 

! The Conference Management 
! Technology 

The Conference Management Tech- 
I nology included Standard Operating 



30 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Procedures (SOPs) for the management 
of the meetings of the Cabinet and its sup- 
port mechanisms. The SOPs detailed 
the rules and procedures in staging meet- 
ings and conferences. It included guide- 
lines for the various activities relative to 
the major stages of preparations for 
meetings such as preconference, actual 
conference, and postconference activities. 

Part of conference management was 
the preparation of important papers and 
documents to facilitate discussions at the 
meeting. Aside from the briefs, discus- 
sion papers, and postmeeting docu- 
mentations, the Cabinet Secretariat pre- 
pared a document called discussion flow. \ 
A discussion flow was a guide or an aid 
for the chairperson on the conduct of 
meetings. It aimed to effect a better man- 
agement of the meeting by providing the 
chairperson with the guide on the se- 1 
quence of activities, the topics to be dis- 
cussed, and the issues and decision ar- 
eas being required. In other words, it de- 1 
fined and prioritized the discussions to j 
maximize deliberations on the agenda 1 
topic. 

j 

For the President, the discussion flow 
provided her with information on the 
agenda items to be discussed and alerted 
her on contentious issues and the agen- 
cies responsible as well as the necessary 
decisions that may be undertaken. 



The Conference Management Tech- 
nology likewise provided for a compo- 
nent called Experience Learning Appli- 
cation (ELA). Immediately after a meet- 
ing, concerned staff reflected on what 
happened during the meeting. The fol- 
lowing questions were asked: 

o Were the objectives of the meet- 
ing achieved? 

o What unexpected events hap- 
pened that should not have hap- 
pened? 

o What went beautifully right? 

The objective of this "postmortem" 
exercise was to review positive aspects 
of the meeting, determine what could be 
learned from it, analyze what went 
wrong, and evolve measures to prevent 
it from happening again. 

Complementary initiatives were also 
provided along the following areas: 

o Agenda Planning and Forecasting 

The Cabinet Secretariat developed a 
system for planning and preparing the 
agenda of the Cabinet and its support 
mechanisms, such as the Cabinet Clus- 
ters, the CORD, the CAS, and the CAS 



Foundations for Policy Making 



31 



Committees. This was the agenda fore- 
cast which was essentially a schedule of 
issues and concerns that needed to be 
taken up at the Cabinet Consultation 
Process within a specified period of time. 

The agenda forecast included day- 
to-day issues such as those referred by 
various departments, urgent and press- 
ing issues, and instructions from the 
President. It also included issues, prob- 
lems, and events identified by the Cabi- 
net Secretariat in anticipation of forth- 
coming events. For instance, in prepara- 
tion for the opening of schools in 
June, an action plan to address concerns 
that were most likely to occur during this 
period should be in the February calen- 
dar of the Cabinet Process. Around this 
time, too, the Cabinet should have been 
discussing the preparations for the Labor 
Day celebration. 

Included likewise were updates on 
the status of major programs and 
projects. This included the monitoring 
of the status of landmark programs, such 
as the CARP, the Program to Refocus 
Orientation for the Poor (PRO-POOR), 
the Local Government Code, Agency 
Performance Review, and Improvement 
in the Delivery of Frontline Services. 

To ensure that the agenda of the 
Cabinet and its support mechanisms I 



were relevant and timely, the Cabinet 
Secretariat adopted an issue monitoring 
system which involved the tracking of is- 
sues raised by media and the various sec- 
tors; instructions and pronouncements of 
the President; and current critical events. 
These were also fed into the agenda fore- 
cast. 

o Agreements Monitoring 

To make sure that agreements 
reached at the various fora of the Cabi- 
net consultation process were imple- 
mented, these were entered into the 
agreements monitoring databank devised 
by the Cabinet Secretariat. These in- 
cluded status of each agreement, 
particulary the ones which required 
regular monitoring and updating. 

o Action Summary 

To facilitate quick action on decisions 
reached at the meetings, the Cabinet Sec- 
retariat released an action summary 
highlighting the major decisions, 
agreements, and instructions at a meet- 
ing. It was released to the members 
within 36 hours after each meeting. 

Several systems and procedures 
were also introduced to enhance the 
work of the Cabinet and its support 
mechanisms. 



32 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



A Cabinet fax network was set up in 
1989 to expedite the transmission and ex- 
change of documents between and 
among the various departments. 

Moreover, communication facilities, 
such as the use of a two-way radio was 
initiated so that Cabinet members could 
exchange faster and quicker. 

Relatedly, the Cabinet Communica- 
tion Network (CNN) was established to 
promote cooperation and interdepart- 
mental liaisoning among the staff of Cabi- 
net members who were directly involved 
in Cabinet matters. 

The degree of success of a meeting 
depended, to a great extent, on the 
preparations done. Preparing for meet- 
ings involved a hundred and one details, 
from the scheduling of meetings to the 
preparation of discussion papers to the 
packaging of folders and the calling of 
meeting attendees. 

Aside from the Cabinet, the Cabinet 
Secretariat served about 16 permanent 
committees in addition to a number of 
ad hoc committees and interagency 
working groups for the period 1986 to 
1992. 

"A lean and mean staff" was the 
policy set forth by the two Cabinet Sec- 



retaries. The Cabinet Secretariat sailed 
off with barely 20 staff members in the 
middle of 1986. The technology avail- 
able was limited to a computer and a 
printer. 

As of 1990, 25 staff members were 
effectively involved in the Cabinet Con- 
sultation Process both undertaking tech- 
nical, administrative, and secretariat 
services. More computers were acquired 
to facilitate and enhance the work of the 
staff. In addition, the Cabinet Secretariat 
installed a Local Area Network (LAN) 
System to improve data and information 
sharing within the Cabinet Secretariat 
and thereby expedite the work and ac- 
tivities of the staff. 

To ensure and maintain a com- 
petent staff, the Cabinet Secretariat 
conducted regular staff develop- 
ment workhops and trainings to improve 
on skills, as well as team-building 
seminars to promote interpersonal rela- 
tions. 

Moreover, the Cabinet Secretariat 
also conducted immersion activities to 
provide the staff with opportunities to re- 
late to the social milieu and immerse 
themselves in the life and culture of the 
presidency's clientele, such as the 
fisherfolk, farmers, artisans, craftsmen, 
I and small-scale entrepreneurs. 



Foundations for Policy Making 



33 



The success and effectiveness of a 
system is based on an interplay of 
various factors. The systems and 
mechanisms continue to evolve and ad- 
just to challenges, learning and improv- 



ing each time. Thefactthattheseareavail- 
able not only get things done or decided, 
but most importantly, they provide the 
fora for the full discussion and debate of 
the issues. 



3 

Presidential 
Initiatives 



The Aquino presidency adhered to 
certain fundamental imperatives 
that guided its conduct of 
public administration. These impera- 
tives were commitment to social 
justice through poverty alleviation and 
better administration of justice; and 
through transparency, restoration of 
public trust and confidence in govern- 
ment. 

To ensure that these fundamental im- 
peratives were achieved at the earliest 
possible time, the Aquino administration 
attended to certain management con- 



| cerns to improve the level of efficiency in 
| public service delivery. 

In operational terms, the basic man- 
agement objectives pursued by the 
Aquino presidency were the adoption of 
better project management practices 
and the clear definition of policy agenda 
and presidential priorities. The first was 
addressed through such measures as 
problem-solving sessions on specific 
projects at various levels of the govern- 
ment as well as the launching of a com- 
prehensive program to institutionalize a 
more streamlined bureaucracy. The sec- 



Foundations for Policy Making 



35 



ond was met by setting an agenda for 
governmental machinery to address the 
basic problem of inequality. 

Enhancing Governmental 
Management 

The Committee On Energizing The 
Bureaucracy 

For a more systematic, comprehen- 
sive, and continuing improvement of the 
government bureaucracy, a set of ac- 
tivities to energize it was launched in 
1988. The main proponent of these was 
the Committee on Energizing the Bu- 
reaucracy (CEB) which was created un- 
der the CAS as a standing Committee. 
Health Undersecretary Taguiwalo 
served as Chairman of the Committee. 

The primary objective of the CEB was 
to ensure consistent attention and focus 
on matters pertaining to the bureaucracy 
and recommend appropriate doable 
steps to address existing gaps in policies 
and programs. 

Undersecretary Taguiwalo states in 
his paper entitled "Wielding the Bureauc- 
racy" presented to the Cabinet Strategic 
Planning Workshop in 1 988: 'The goal is 
that at some point ahead, we shall have 
a civil service organization that demands 



and elicits from each civil servant the full 
creative expression of individual free- 
dom and responsibility for attaining na- 
tional goals, while each civil servant re- 
sponds in kind by assuming personal re- 
sponsibility for his own performance as 
well as for his organization's perform- 
ance". The article continues, "We look for 
the day when each civil servant becomes 
true to himself only when he is true to 
this task, when each individual civil serv- 

| ant embodies the goals, ideals and vision 

! of his organization". 

The Technical Affairs Staff of the 
Cabinet Secretariat served as the secre- 
tariat to the CEB by developing and pre- 
paring the framework for the CEB work 
program. 

One of the projects implemented by 
the CEB was the review of frontline serv- 
ices. A total of 11 critical frontline serv- 
ices were reviewed and evaluated by the 
CAS and the CEB. Among these were 
the passport processing (DFA); driver's 
licensing (LTO-DOTC); investigation 
services (DOJ); land titling (DOJ and 
NALTDRA); duty exemption and import 
clearance (NEDA); processing of docu- 
i ments of OCWs (POEA); NBI clearance; 
and, facilitation of investment applica- 
tions (DTI). The review also focused on 
the efficiency of revenue-generating 
agencies, namely: BIR, BOC, and EIIB. 



36 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The heads of these agencies were 
asked to present to the CEB, the CAS, 
and finally to the President and the Cabi- 
net the status of measures and innova- 
tions that they introduced in their offices. 
The reforms included simplification and 
reduction in the number of steps, signa- 
tories, and requirements. Results of the 
simplification of systems and procedures 
showed a dramatic improvement in the 
delivery of frontline services. 

Among the major policy and man- 
agement initiatives which went through 
the CEB included the proposed Civil 
Service Code which was certified as an 
administration bill, and the Performance 
Contract for Government Officials which 
was adopted by the Cabinet. The con- 
duct of Regional Development Council 
(RDC) - Agency Consultation in order to 
reconcile the annual national budget 
proposals of government agencies with 
the different regions was a practice sug- 
gested by the CEB. 

In 1989, coordination and interface 
of the CEB and the Development Admin- 
istration Committee (DAC), an 
interagency body under NED A, was ef- 
fected to achieve consistency in policy 
recommendations and other measures 
being adopted, nonduplication of work 
program, and desirable sequencing of 



administrative innovations and govern- 
ment reforms to reinforce each other. 

The Office of the President also 
tasked the Development Academy of the 
Philippines to formulate and implement 
a continuing training program for gov- 
ernment executives called the "Manag- 
ing the Bureaucracy for Results", or 
MBR. On the occasion of the first MBR 
batch graduation, President Aquino gave 
the following instructions: M I want the 
public income statement to show a profit, 
a just return on the tremendous invest- 
ment in taxpayers' money that is being 
made. Next, let us focus on our activi- 
ties let us make it easy for our clients 

to avail of our services. Graft and cor- 
ruption grows with discretion and regu- 
latory functions. I support the initiative 
to Do Away with Red Tape, in which the 
public will be asked to rank each depart- 
ment according to the complexity and 
length of their procedures, and its insist- 
ence on regulating the private economy. 
The most complex will be the first to be 
trimmed on the chopping block". 

Moreover, through a joint collabora- 
tion between the Civil Service Commis- 
sion and the U.P. College of Public Ad- 
ministration, a roundtable discussion on 
"Redefining the Discipline of Public Ad- 
ministration" was held on November 6, 
1989. 



Foundations for Policy Making 



37 



The CAS, through its Committee on 
Energizing the Bureaucracy was also 
tasked to implement the review process 
for all executive departments. 

With the assistance of the Develop- 
ment Academy of the Philippines (DAP) 
and the CSC, the CAS-CEB also em- 
barked on an extensive review of agency 
mandates. A study group was convened 
to develop the guidelines relative to the 
definition of departments' mandates and 
identification and prioritization of 
agency functions and activities. 

Problem-Solving Sessions 

An "alert memo" from Budget Sec- 
retary Guillermo Carague to then Cabi- 
net Secretary Jose de Jesus on May 10, 
1988 expressed concern over the wors- 
ening delays in project implementation. 
Out of 20 very large, foreign-funded 
projects being implemented by the gov- 
ernment, the alert memo identified at 
least 1 0 projects as delayed. The subject 
was immediately taken up in the next 
Cabinet meeting where President Aquino 
issued instructions to reverse the situa- 
tion. 

The proposal to immediately hold 
Problem-Solving Sessions or PSS was | 

approved by the President. All PSS were 
held in the regions under the auspices of ! 



the Regional Development Councils 
(RDCs), the first series of which were un- 
dertaken by the Cabinet Action Com- 
mittee on Implementation Assistant 
(CACIA) from 1988-89. 

The CACIA, main implementor of the 
PSS, was composed of the Cabinet Sec- 
retary, Secretary of Budget and Manage- 
ment, NEDA Director-General, Presi- 
I dential Adviser on Public Resource Utili- 
i zation, and the CORD for each region. 
The Office of the Cabinet Secretary 
served as the overall coordinator and sec- 
retariat to the CACIA. 

Standard operating procedures of 
CACIA usually began with interagency 
consultations at the national level to dis- 
cuss the problems and issues identified 
by the RDCs. Then, regional PSS were 
held by CACIA with all concerned RDC 
members. Finally, a Cabinet-level field 
visit to project sites were conducted. 
CACI/Vwas successful and a valued PSS 
implementor since CACIA members had 
power and authority to make on-the-spot 
decisions or clarify positions on specific 
policy issues. 

For every PSS, CACIA submitted a 
comprehensive report covering 1) gen- 
eral problem areas for policy decisions, 
and 2) agency-specific problem areas for 
j resolution. Pre-implementation, during 



38 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



implementation, and post-implementa- 
tion policy and operational gaps were 
also identified. The report contained 
what CACIA had accomplished and iden- 
tified further actions from concerned 
agencies. 

Various other interventions were ini- 
tiated by the CACIA as an offshoot of 
PSS. 

Institutional development at the re- 
gional and local levels were advanced 
with the formulation and adoption of the 
Regional Project Monitoring and Evalu- 
ation System (RPMES) which CACIA in- 
troduced during its regional consulta- 
tions with RDCs. The System prescribed 
a standard monitoring and evaluation 
system for all development projects (eco- 
nomic, social, infrastructure, etc.) which 
included projects contained in the Re- 
gional Development Investment Program 
(RDIP) and other foreign and locally- 
funded projects not included in the RDIP 
but which were implemented at the re- 
gional level. All Project Monitoring Com- 
mittees at various levels created through 
Memorandum Order No. 175 assumed 
the lead role. 

Another institutional development 
measure supported by CACIA was the 
adoption of the Framework and Meth- 
odology for Identifying/Prioritizing 



Projects in the RDIP. This operational 
methodology of project prioritization 
took effect after the Integrated Area De- 
velopment (IAD) project packages and 
their respective project components were 
identified. 

TheF 'resident's Regional Consultations: 

As a follow-through initiative, the 
President presided over consultative 
meetings with representatives from re- 
gions in 1 990 and 1 991 . Presidential Re- 
gional Consultations (PRC) started as 
a forum to allow local officials from the 
regions to directly bring the most serious 
developmental concerns of their constitu- 
encies to the President's attention. These 
I meetings were originally called PSS Part 
' II since these were primarily conceived 
as venues for identifying and resolving 
policy and procedural problems affect- 
ing regional development. 

In the first sessions, discussions 
centered on requests for national assist- 
ance to relieve basic "lacks", i.e., lack of 
project funds, lack of roads, lack of 
schools, etc. In succeeding months, how- 
ever, the PRC evolved into a slightly dif- 
ferent, albeit, more positive arena for 
discussions where not only problems 
were taken up but also the accomplish- 
ments and contributions of the respective 
regions to national development. 



Foundations for Policy Making 



39 



These meetings were increasingly 
used by the President to solicit regional 
cooperation and support for her major 
programs and projects. For instance, 
President Aquino's call for unity and 
greater cooperation as envisioned under 
the KABISIG Program was spelled out 
during her PSS with Region III Likewise, 
the President's appeal for calm and so- 
briety immediately after the July 1990 
earthquake was made during her session 
with the officials of Region I. 

In retrospect, therefore, the PRCs 
which were initially conceived tobea mere 
clearinghouse for problems and com- 
plaints, unwittingly became a strategic 
vehicle for greater state advocacy and 
consolidation toward a more effective 
grassroots-based development agenda. 

The PRC/PSS involved two stages: 
the first consisted of the identification 
and prioritization of issues at the local 
levels; while the second was where local 
officials presented their issues to the 
President for resolution. 

The PRC/PSS process was initiated 
by the Regional Development Councils 
in coordination with their respective 
CORDs, by conducting preliminary con- 
sultations in the region. A total of 17 re- 
gional consultations with the President 
were held in 1 990 and 1 991 . 



Panibagoitg Sigla 2000 

Pursuant to Cabinet Resolution No. 
1, s. 1991, Panibagong Sigla 2000 (PS 
2000) was launched in March 1991 as a 
I government-wide campaign to revitalize 
j the Philippine public service. The follow- 
ing concerns were addressed by PS 2000: 
1) gaps in government policies and pro- 
grams; 2) institutionalization of reforms 
j through the active participation of gov- 
; ernment employees in making the bu- 
| reaucracy more responsive and support- 
i ive of the objectives embodied in the Phil- 
I ippine Development Plan; and 3) prepa- 
j ration of the public service for the chal- 
lenges and opportunities in the year 2000. 
| Cabinet Resolution No. 1 enjoined heads 
j of government offices to actively support 
| and participate in the various activities 
j and programs of PS 2000. 

One of the objectives of PS 2000 was 
! to build a data and suggestion base which 
| would be used to develop a reform pack- 
I age for the bureaucracy. Towards this 
I end, PS 2000 implemented a three-track 
program. The first track involved the or- 
ganization of 13 Task Forces whose main 
! function was to study the following iden- 
| tified priority areas of PS 2000 on a 
macro perspective: 1) recruitment and 
i selection; 2) performance appraisal; 3) 
unionism; 4) managerial effectiveness; 5) 
! human resource development; 6) alter- 



40 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



native modes of service delivery; 7) in- 
centives and disincentives; 8) administra- 
tive rules and regulations; 9) retirement 
and separation; 10) compensation and 
position classification; 11) frontline serv- 
ices; 12) local government bureaucracy; 
and 13) cutting wastage in government. 

Each Task Force formulated and im- 
plemented their respective programs and 
strategies. Various forms of consultation 
e.g., roundtable discussions, surveys, 
brainstorming sessions, and symposia 
were conducted by the Task Forces. For 
example, the First Congress of Senior 
Government Executives was convened on 
May 31, 1991. The participants to the 
said Congress came up with recommen- 
dations on the issues presented by the 
Task Force convenors. To improve 
frontline services, the senior government 
executives recommended the improve- 
ment of working conditions and work at- 
titudes of employees delivering frontline 
services and provision of an incentive sys- 
tem, both monetary and nonmonetary, 
and the establishment of better coordi- 
nation and liaison between and among 
concerned government agencies, among 
others. 

The second track covered the con- 
duct of employee assemblies at the 
agency and regional levels with PS 2000 
as the agenda. Government employees 



who participated in these assemblies 
identified problems hindering the effec- 
tive delivery of public service as well as 
suggested solutions to solve these prob- 
lems. These employee assemblies culmi- 
nated in the 2nd National Congress of 
Workers in Government held on Septem- 
ber 18-19, 1991. The outputs during the 
agency and regional assemblies served 
as the main document for discussion in 
the National Congress of Workers. The 
output of the National Congress, con- 
tained in a document entitled 
PS 2000: The Workers' Agenda, in- 
cluded an action plan for public service 
reforms. The Workers Agenda was sub- 
mitted to the Department Secretaries for 
consideration and possible implementa- 
tion, and to the Speaker of the House and 
Senate President for inclusion in the leg- 
islative agenda. 

The third track was implemented to 
allow employees and private individu- 
als to give their ideas and suggestions di- 
rectly to the PS 2000 Secretariat. Issues 
and recommendations raised by the em- 
ployees at various PS 2000 fora and let- 
ters sent by private individuals to PS 
2000 also served as inputs to the Task 
Forces in preparing issue papers on their 
respective areas of concern. The issue pa- 
pers contained the following: challenges/ 
opportunities of each area taking into ac- 
count the environment, the client system, 



Foundations for Policy Making 



41 



the technology, the practitioners; the 
three most significant problems and likely 
causes; present practices at government 
and agency levels for maintenance, re- 
finements, and wide application; and 
recommendations for immediate execu- 
tive action or inclusion in the legislative 
agenda. 

PS 2000 was formally terminated in 
June 1992. Among others, PS 2000 can 
be credited for providing the venue 
through which various sectors such as 
government officials and employees, aca- 
deme, NGOs and private individuals, 
and elected local officials were consulted 
on major concerns affecting the whole bu- 
reaucracy. The organization of Task 
Forces as vehicles to evolve proposals for 
reforms and innovations in government 
provided opportunities for the active in- 
volvement of senior officials and public 
sector unions. 

These consultations resulted in the 
formulation of Panibagong Sigla 2000: 
Shaping the Future of Philippine Pub- 
lic Service, a document which sets new 
directions and lays proposed policies for 
the revitalization of the public service. 
Through these efforts, it is hoped that by 
the year 2000 and even beyond, the Phil- 
ippine public service would be a dynamic 
institution imbued with a client- focused 
service culture. The said document was 



endorsed by President Aquino to incom- 
ing President Ramos. 

Memorandum Of Undertaking: A 
Public Sector Welfare And 
Development Program 

The welfare of public servants had 
always been among the top priorities of 
the Aquino government. In the light of the 
increasing costof living, thesocioeconomic 
and political situation, and the painful 
truth of poverty confronting most of the 
government workers, the national gov- 
ernment assumed a significant role in im- 
proving thequality of life of its employees. 

The 1987 Constitution provides for 
the establishment of public sector union- 
ism to allow government workers to col- 
lectively articulate their terms for better 
employment and equal exercise of rights 
with its private sector counterparts. Pur- 
suant to this, the Compensation Review 
Panel (CRP), representing employee as- 
sociations in government, formally nego- 
tiated with the government representa- 
tives in November 1990. 

Responding to this clamor, the na- 
tional government entered into a Memo- 
randum of Undertaking (MOU) for Im- 
proved Public Service with the govern- 
ment workers through the CRP on April 



42 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



30, 1991 . The undertaking, effective May 
1, 1991 to April 30, 1992, subject to re- 
newal, was envisioned to promote the 
economic well-being and functioning ca- 
pacity of state employees by augment- 
ing their income-earning ability through 
the institutionalization of self-help 
mechanism. The agreement sought to 
provide additional benefits to govern- 
ment workers that will encourage greater 
resolve towards increased productivity 
and better discipline through improved 
working standards by both those who 
manage the bureaucracy and those who 
compose its rank-and-file. 

On the part of the national govern- 
ment, Administrative Order No. 225 was 
issued implementing the following pro- 
visions of the Memorandum of Under- 
taking: 1) P7.2 billion Personnel Emer- 
gency Relief Allowance (PERA) for gov- 
ernment employees below Salary Grade 
24 effective January 1 991 ; 2) PI 0 million 
from the President's Social Fund as seed 
money for the Government Employees' 
Cooperative; 3) monetization of leave 
credits equivalent to the annual vacation 
leave earned by a government employee; 

4) formation of a Joint Council which will 
recommend to the President the appoint- 
ment of qualified rank-and-file govern- 
ment workers to the boards of GOCCs; 

5) designation of a health and welfare of- 
ficer in every government department or 



I agency who will develop employee wel- 
I fare programs within existing budgetary 
I limits; 6) P50 million educational loan 
j fund from the GSIS for government em- 
| ployees and their dependents; and 7) 
| creation of the Public Sector Compensa- 
tion Review Panel that will review com- 
pensation and other benefits of govern- 
ment workers. 

Among the government's commit- 
I ments, all, except the formal constitution 
| of the Joint Council tasked to recommend 
to the President the appointment of 
qualified rank-and-file government em- 
i ployees to the Boards of GOCCs, have 
been acted upon. All monetary benefits 
I were at once released. The P10 million 
seed fund had been made available to 
government cooperatives to finance live- 
lihood projects and enterprises of gov- 
ernment workers. 

On the other hand, the government 
workers agreed to adhere to legal means 
of redressing grievances and to avoid 
work stoppages that prejudice service 
delivery; establish individual standards 
of output and behavior to improve per- 
formance; observe the Code of Conduct 
and Ethical Standards for Government 
| Officials; support programs to improve 
I the quality of life and accelerate service 
I delivery; report and document irregu- 
I larities, fiscal, or otherwise; observe po- 



Foundations for Policy Making 



43 



litical neutrality and nonpartisanship in 
the delivery of vital services; and partici- 
pate in the development of government 
employees through responsible union- 
ism. 

The MOU has indeed been instru- 
mental in providing economic assistance 
to government workers as well as moti- 
vating them to be more productive and 
efficient so much so that the CRP will 
renegotiate for another MOU with the 
Ramos government. 

Setting Goals And Presidential 
Priorities 

Presidential initiatives were not only 
directed at accelerating implementation 
of existing or proposed programs or poli- 
cies. They were also undertaken to set 
direction or basic agenda for presiden- 
tial priorities. The following describes at 
least three areas where specific presiden- 
tial attention was focused: 1) the PRO- 
Poor program, 2) improved administra- 
tion of justice, and 3) promotion of pub- 
lic ethics and accountability. 

Program To Refocus Orientation 
To The Poor (PRO-Poor) 

The need to alleviate poverty stems 
from the principles of upholding the right 



to life and respecting human rights. The 
goal of uplifting the lot of the poor also 
emanates from the recognition that hu- 
man resources are the most important 
assets of any society. 

It was, therefore, a matter of urgent 
concern for the Aquino administration 
when the 1988 Family Income Survey 
concluded that the bottom 30 percent of 
the Filipino population were not benefit- 
ing from the programs and projects of 
the government. Moreover, the same 
survey showed that low-income families 
lacked productive assets or control over 
such assets, had little knowledge in their 
productive activities, had limited finan- 
cial and human capital, and received 
minimal social services. 

In July 1 989, during the joint CORDs 
and RDC chairmen meeting with the 
President, the latter instructed the RDCs 
to review all government programs be- 
ing implemented in the regions to deter- 
mine whether these programs were re- 
ally benefiting the poor and to recom- 
mend refocusing of priorities and targets, 
as may be necessary. 

In a parallel effort, a workshop 
among senior agency planners was held 
in October 1989 which formulated the 
Program to Refocus Orientation to the 
Poor. Prior to this, in September 1989, a 



44 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



CAS Workshop on Poverty Alleviation 
had been held wherein it was stressed 
that policy issues should be first ad- 
dressed in order to make clear directions 
of programs and projects. In December 
1989, the President issued Executive Or- 
der No. 370 launching the Program. 

PRO-Poor is a deliberate effort by the 
Aquino presidency to direct the attention 
of all implementing agencies of the na- 
tional government to the problem of pov- 
erty. It was envisioned to be a collective 
endeavor to better orchestrate the deliv- 
ery of basic services all over the country. 
The goal of the PRO-Poor initiative was 
to ensure that the programmed projects 
were indeed delivered to the identified 
Low Income Municipalities (LIM) at the 
earliest possible time. 

Specifically, the Program aimed: 1) 
to accelerate socioeconomic develop- 
ment in the rural areas through affirma- 
tive programs of actions; 2) to benefit 
the most depressed municipalities; 3) to 
pursue coordinated delivery of govern- 
ment services; and 4) to undertake local 
institution building. A total of 450 mu- 
nicipalities were covered by the program 
through a phased implementation from 
1990-92. In 1990, 169 municipalities had 
been included in the program. 

In preparing for the framework of the 
program, workshops were initiated to 



provide appreciation of the extent of the 
regional poverty situation and trigger, on 
the part of the regional line agencies and 
local government units, the adoption of 
poverty-focused program and project 
development processes. 

Executive Order No. 370 directed 17 
line agencies of the government to par- 
ticipate in the Program. Of the total, 
eight agencies maintained municipal 
presence level while the remaining nine 
agencies maintained presence either on 
a regional, provincial, or municipal level. 
A PRO-Poor Standing Committee was 
created composed of senior level officials 
from the 17 line agencies and chaired by 
the Presidential Adviser on Rural Devel- 
opment. In addition, an Executive Com- 
mittee was created to attend to the im- 
mediate needs of the Program. Moreo- 
ver, a Program Secretariat at the Office 
of the President was created to provide 
staff support. 

At the municipal level, the Program 
utilized existing structures, i.e. Munici- 
pal Development Councils (MDCs), 
whenever possible. In municipalities 
where MDCs were not operative, mu- 
nicipal action teams were established. 
These teams were headed by the mayors 
and composed of municipal officers of 
line agencies with the DILG municipal of- 
I fice as secretariat. 



Foundarions for Policy Making 



45 



The second level of program imple- 
mentation assumed that additional 
resources (i.e., in terms of additional 
num-ber of projects, increase in area cov- 
erage and program offering) would be 
made available by line agencies to select- 
ed LIMs. However, increases in re- 
sources did not mean new appropria- 
tions. The Program depended on exist- 
ing line agency resources released from 
its original budgetary appropriations 
and made available for realignment to 
the Program. 

Successive cycles of an Expanded 
Agency Program and Coordinated Serv- 
ices Delivery were intended to build up 
capability for an eventual Integrated Mu- 
nicipal Planning and Implementation 
Program which was the long-term goal 
of PRO-Poor. 

Improved Administration Of Justice 

The administration of justice through 
the rule of law is the bedrock of demo- 
cratic institutions. It is a responsibility 
shared by the entire machinery of gov- 
ernment. The judiciary is charged with 
speedy case-flow and the prompt deliv- 
ery of judicial services. While the legisla- 
tive is tasked with updating the legal sys- 
tem by continually instituting law re- 
forms, the executive branch is expected 
to enhance prosecutory services, extend 
the reach of the citizens' legal assistance 



I office, improve the services of law en- 
! forcement agencies, and expand alterna- 
j tive dispute resolution mechanisms. Ef- 
forts to improve the administration of 
justice for each and every citizen, there- 
fore, must address the whole govern- 
ment system. 

On February 2, 1988, the Integrated 
Bar of the Philippines made a presenta- 
j Hon before the members of the Supreme 
| Court on their research findings on the 
I causes of slow case processing. Their re- 
port indicated that 1) only 30 percent of 
all cases filed demanding 80 percent of 
judges' time go through full blown trial; 
and 2) trial period was the longest phase 
of case-processing time. For criminal 
cases, it ranged from 15 to 894 days. 
For civil cases, it ranged from 148 to 913 
days, with some case even taking 10 to 
20 years to resolve. Postponement was 
the primary cause of delay in the trial 
period for both criminal and civil cases. 

On April 4, 1988, during a 
Malacanang Executive Staff meeting, 
President Aquino issued a directive to 
address the problems related to the ad- 
ministration of justice. Specifically, the 
President wanted following problems 
addressed: a) delay in the disposition of 
cases; b) graft and corruption in the ju- 
diciary; c) limited access of the poor to 
legal services; d) incompetence and ig- 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



and the Cabinet in coordinating the ef- 
forts of the various departments in fight- 
ing graft and corruption and in promot- 
ing the ethical standards of public serv- 
ice in the executive branch. Then Cabi- 
net Secretary Jose P. De Jesus served as 
the chairman of the interagency presi- 
dential body. 

One of the first activities undertaken 
by the PCPEA was the conduct of a sys- 
tematic study on the government's ca- 
pability to investigate and prosecute err- 
ing public officials and employees. Based 
on the study, the PCPEA recommended 
a three-pronged approach to strengthen 
the government's anti-corruption pro- 
grams, namely: 1) strengthen the inves- 
tigation and prosecution capability of the 
government, primarily through the crea- 
tion of the Office of the Ombudsman; 2) 
exhaust available administrative sanc- 
tions for more immediate preventive and 
punitive response to erring public serv- 
ants; and 3) promote active community 
involvement in partnership with govern- 
ment, in curbing irregularities in the pub- 
lic sector. 

Other activities undertaken by the 
Presidential Committee included the fol- 
lowing: 1) acted on public complaints 
and other graft and corruption charges 
against government officials; 2) coordi- 
nated the activities of the Anti-Graft Ac- 



tion Center and Action Officers in vari- 
ous departments; 3) evaluated the 
effectivity of Action Plans of various de- 
partments; and 4) participated in the de- 
liberations of the bill creating the Office 
of the Ombudsman. 

The PCPEA prepared the ground- 
work for the creation of the Office of the 
Ombudsman which came into existence 
pursuant to a constitutional mandate on 
May 12, 1987. The Committee gave a 
series of briefings for the incoming Om- 
budsman, Conrado Vasquez, on the on- 
going anti-graft initiatives which might 
be continued by the latter's office. Presi- 
dent Aquino, herself, instructed the Com- 
mittee to help look for an office for the 
Ombudsman. The PCPEA then prepared 
its terminal report and ceased to exist. 

The PCPEA is a case where the 
Office of the President intervened to ad- 
dress a major area of public concern. In 
this case, a Committee had to be created 
to fill in the vacuum prior to the estab- 
lishment of the Office of the Ombuds- 
man. If only to assure the general pub- 
lic that the government is not indifferent 
to the question of public accountability, 
particularly in the period immediately 
after witnessing the excesses of authori- 
tarian government, the Presidential 
Committee has already achieved its 
role. 



Foundations for Policy Making 



49 



On February 20, 1989, President 
Aquino signed into law Republic Act 
6713, otherwise known as the Code of 
Conduct and Ethical Standards for Pub- 
lic Officials and Employees. The impact 
of the Code may not be immediate, but 



with persistence and leadership by ex- 
ample, the internalization of set ethical 
standards provided by the law will have 
lasting effect in the promotion of integ- 
rity in public service long after the term 
of the Aquino administration. 



4 

Evaluating 
Systems 



Hand in hand with the various 
management systems and tech- 
nologies that the Aquino admin- 
istration utilized towards the realization 
of its agenda of action, evaluating tools 
were used. These served as valuable 
planning and feedback mechanisms that 
enabled the executive branch not only to 
clarify and attain its goals but also to 
leave a legacy of smooth transition for 
the next administration. 

The Agency Mandate Review 

Another major initiative toward en- 
ergizing the bureaucracy was the con- 



duct of the Agency Mandate Review 
(AMR) which was aimed at stream- 
lining government reorganization, activi- 
ties, and operations. This initiative 
was not a totally new process. It was 
part of the continuing process that be- 
gan with the government-wide reorgani- 
zation following the February revolution: 
the review of agency thrusts and policy 
issues and the regular medium term 
planning exercises undertaken by the 
agencies under the Development Ad- 
ministration Framework of the National 
Economic and Development Authority 
(NEDA). 



Foundations for Policy Making 



51 



In her speech at the Managing the 
Bureaucracy for Results (MBR) gradua- 
tion rites in June 1 988, President Aquino 
said: "Each department should focus on 
its mandate. Between now and the year's 
end, I want each department to review 
its mandate and channel its energy re- 
sources exclusively to that. If its mandate 
is agriculture or natural resources, then 
clearly it should involve itself with noth- 
ing more than promoting agricultural 
productivity or conserving the national 
patrimony. I am asking the Department 
Secretaries to submit to me a list of things 
that their departments should stop do- 
ing, continue doing, or go into - in line 
with their respective mandates. We shall 
judge their performance against it ... I 
want you to clarify your mandate, de- 
fine your appropriate function and 
thereby justify your continued incum- 
bency". 

The President's statement to her de- 
partment heads in her State of the Na- 
tion Address in July 1988 also added to ! 
the urgency and importance of the task: 
"... produce concrete results on your de- 
partment programs - or you are out". 
Clarity of mission was not only desirable, 
it was, in fact, indispensable. 

The overreaching goal of the exercise 
was the greater clarification and crystal- 
lization of the Department vision for the 



Secretary and his key staff. With a clearer 
and more focused vision, the Depart- 
ment should have been able to: 

o conserve its resources for doing 
quality work along key functions only; 

o be held accountable by the Presi- 
dent for its performance in identified 
i "must" programs and projects consistent 
I with its key functions; 

o energize its staff and mobilize 
support from its partner institutions in 
a more focused and consistent manner; 
| and 

o achieve more observable and 
greater impact on its clientele, and thus 
enhance the overall credibility of the gov- 
ernment. 

Towards this end, the Cabinet Assist- 
ance System, through its committee on 
Energizing the Bureaucracy, was tasked 
to undertake the procedure for the re- 
view process which involved all execu- 
tive departments. With the assistance of 
the Development Academy of the Phil- 
ippines and the Civil Service Commis- 
sion, the CAS-CEB embarked on an ex- 
tensive review of agency mandates. A 
study group was convened to develop 
the guidelines relative to the definition of 
department mandates and the identifi- 
cation and prioritization of agency func- 



52 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



tions and activities pursuant to the fol- 
lowing objectives: 

o A clear definition of the depart- 
ment's mandate and mission that will 
answer in concise and measurable terms 
the question: What business should the 
department be in? 

o Identification of the department's 
essential services, policy concerns,and 
programs consistent with the redefined 
mandate and mission. 

o Identification of the department's 
peripheral functions which will be 
stopped or diminished. 

The review which took about two 
months to complete, from June to July 
1988, covered all departments beginning 
with the "showcase" departments: two 
agencies that focused principally on serv- 
ice delivery, namely, the DPWH and the 
DSWD; two agencies focused principally 
on regulation, promotion, and advocacy, 
i e., the DOJ and the DOLE; and two 
agencies with a fair mix of both, namely, 
the DA and the DOTC. 

Indeed, it is worth noting that the 
most significant accomplishment of the 
AMR was in the area of enhancing 
interdepartamental coordination and in- 
terfacing - a major factor in the success- 



ful implementation of government pro- 
grams and projects. 

For instance, through the review 
process, department commitments were 
identified and clarified as regards the im- 
plementation of the Comprehensive 
Agrarian Reform Program (CARP), a 
landmark legislation of the Aquino ad- 
ministration. With the DAR assuming the 
role of overall management and respon- 
sibility for the program, other concerned 
departments resolved and committed to 
provide the necessary support services 
to the program. For its part, the DOJ 
had attended to the reorganization of the 
National Land Titles and Deeds Regis- 
tration and Administration (NALTDRA) 
to improve its land registration machin- 
ery, thereby meeting the needs and de- 
mands attendant to the implementation 
of CARP. Such demands included the 
processing and verification of documents 
relative to the issuance of decrees of reg- 
istration and issuance of titles of lands 
covered by CARP, the identification and 
delineation of boundaries of ancestral 
lands, and the determination of the right- 
ful occupants. On one hand, the DA had 
adjusted its policies to provide ample 
support to the implementation of the 
program. This included, among others, 
the facilitation of market access, and the 
I implementation of empowerment pro- 
j gram for the program beneficiaries. On 



Foundations for Policy Making 



53 



the other hand, the DPVVH had commit- ; ess was characterized by the identifica- 



ted to attend to the infrastructure sup 
port of the program. 

As a symbolic gesture, departments 
concerned with agricultural and rural 
development had signed a Memorandum 
of Agreement to forge cooperation and 
linkage from the national down to the lo- 
cal level, thus, effecting better coordina- 
tion in the implementation of government 
programs and projects. 

Another important milestone accom- 
plished by the exercise was the delinea- 
tion and clarification of the functions and 
responsibilities of the DSWD and the 
DOH regarding the population issue. As 
a result of the review, DSWD was man- 
dated to take care of the overall popula- 
tion development program, while DOH 
was tasked to attend to the family plan- 
ning component of the population pro- 
gram. 



tion of activities that each department 
should stop, start, or continue doing. 

Under the "start" list, for instance, the 
DOJ committed to, and worked on de- 
veloping the capability of the National 
Bureau of Investigation (NBI) to issue 
clearance certificates not only in the Ma- 
nila central office but also in several stra- 
tegic areas. 

Under its "continue doing" list, the 
DPWH endeavored to complete the pro- 
vision of safe water facilities to 90 per- 
cent of the rural population before the 
: end of the Aquino administration. Corol- 
' lary to this, the DPWH committed to fin- 
I ish the construction of safe school- 
buidings to house a minimum of 40 stu- 
dents per room. 

The review and evaluation process 
which the DFA undertook was focused 
mainly on the area of consular services 
and was very visible as it involved a 
frontline service felt by the many over- 
seas contract workers. 



Stop, Stairt And Continue: Towards 
A More Focused Implementation 
Of Department Mandate 

The mandate review enabled the de- 
partments and agencies to set clear, fo- 
cused, and streamlined procedures in the 
operationalization of their respective 
mandates and missions. The review proc- | tion, President Aquino directed the for- 



The Transition Program 

To ensure a smooth and orderly 
transfer of power to the next administra- 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



mulation of a transition program. Con- 
sequently, the first-ever comprehensive 
program for transition was conceptual- 
ized and approved by the President in 
anticipation of events and scenarios fol- 
lowing the end of her term. 

The transition program involved 
three tracks, namely: 1) effective man- 
agement of the macro-political and eco- 
nomic situation in the first half of 1992; 

2) provision of technical and administra- 
tive assistance to ensure an orderly be- 
ginning for the next administration; and, 

3) documentation of the accomplish- 
ments and legacies of the Aquino admin- 
istration. Executive Secretary Franklin 
Drilon is in charge of the three tracks, as- 
sisted by Cabinet Cluster E, and the Presi- 
dential Management Staff Head for 
Tracks 2 and 3. 

Comprehensive transition manage- 
ment plans for Tracks 2 and 3 covering 
the implementing structures, specific 
outputs and responsible agencies, guide- 
lines for preparing reports and timeta- 
bles for submission of outputs were 
drawn up. 

Under Track 2, Organizational Tran- 
sition Reports were prepared by each de- 
partment and agency containing major 
accomplishments and pending issues re- 



quiring immediate action by the incom- 
ing head of office. Concerned govern- 
ment agencies also prepared Special 
Transition Reports providing information 
to the new President and Cabinet mem- 
bers on critical pending matters affect- 
ing the economy or national security, e.g., 
rationalization of the government corpo- 
rate sector, government reorganization, 
comprehensive agrarian reform pro- 
gram. 

For Track 3, a record of the major 
legacies of the Aquino administration 
was produced for distribution to local 
and foreign media, libraries, embassies, 
research, and other institutions. The 
record included a videotape and a pub- 
lication series highlighting the most sig- 
nificant accomplishments of the presi- 
dency. 

As part of the transition, the Cabinet 
Office Automation System which linked 
Cabinet members with the Malacanang 
computer system was established and 
made operational. Likewise, special 
briefings for the new President and the 
new members of the Cabinet were 
planned to familiarize them with the 
workings of the bureaucracy, Congress, 
and media. 

To ensure continuity and stability of 
I government operations, the transition 



Foundations for Policy Making 



55 



plan also provided for the preparation 
of a "red book" or the list of political ap- 
pointments that can be made by the new 
President, and a "blue book" or a data- 
base of career executive service officers. 



j An explanation of the President's ap- 
pointing powers as provided for in the 
Constitution and the rules and regula- 
tions of the Civil Service Commission 
were also presented. 



President Aquino confers with Senate President 
Jovito Salonga and House Speaker Ramon V. Mitra 
before addressing delegates to the ASEAN Inter- 
Parliamentary Organization (AIPO) 10th Working 
Committee and General Assembly at the Manila 

Hotel's Fiesta Pavilion. 



President Aquino together with Vice President Salva- 
dor H. Laurel, Executive Secretary Joker P. Arroyo, 
and Cabinet Secretary Jose de Jesus during a dia- 
logue on Aug. 26, 1986 with local officials and 
congressmen of Region III. 




President Aquino receives from Cecilia Muhoz Palma, 
president of the Constitutional Commission, Pilipino 
and English versions of the draft Constitution in 
simple turn-over ceremonies on Oct. 15 at 
Malacanang's Heroes Hall. 





President Aquino signs Republic Act 
6734 creating an Autonomous region in 
Muslim Mindanao. Looking on from 
left, (seated) are Senate President 
Jovito Salonga, Representatives 
Celestino Martinez and Guimo 
Matalam. Behind them are members of 
the congressional committee that 
worked on the Organic Act. 



Below: 

The President convenes a meeting 
with the elected officials of the Au- 
tonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao 
on November 6, 1990 in Cotabato City 
to discuss their proposed program for 

their region. 



X 




President Aquino is joined by Senate President 
Jovito Salonga, Speaker Ramon Mitra, Executive 
Secretary Drilon, Interior and Local Governments 
Secretary Luis Santos and local officials during the 
signing of the Local Goverment Code at the Heroes 
Hall in Malacahang on October 10, 1991. 



/ 



The President banters with governors. 



President Aquino with 
Philippine National Oil 
Company (PNOC) presi- 
dent Manuel Estrella 
upon arrival at the 
Petron Bataan Refinery 
grounds in Limay, 
Bataan. Also in photo is 
PNOC chairman 
Benjamin Diokno. 






President Aquino 
smells a leaf of lagundi, 
a bronchodilator and 
analgesic-antipyretic 
herb, during the inau- 
guration of the Cota- 
bato Herbal Pharma- 
ceutical Processing 
Facility in Cotabato 
City on November 15, 
1988. 



President Aquino in- 
spects progress of the 
construction of the 35 
Km. road connecting 
Lopez and Catanauan, 
Quezon. 





Above: 



The President in a prawn farm with 
Gov. Bitay Lacson. 



President Aquino inspects a dressed 
chicken during a tour at the newly 
inaugurated P32 million chicken dressing 
processing plant of the Agro-Food 
Processing and Development Corporation 
(AFPDC) at Balagtas, Bulacan. 




President Aquino tries 
the new Automated 
Telephone Assistance 
System (AT AS) during 
its launching at the 34th 
anniversary rites of the 
Social Security System 
(SSS). 




President Aquino is 
shown with Carmelita 
Salgado, Foundation for 
Professional Training, Inc. 
(FTPI) president and 
Evangeline Sayas, princi- 
pal of the Anihan Rural 
Center for Professional 
Development (ARCPD) 
upon her arrival at 
Calamba, Laguna on Nov. 

29, 1990. 

Below: 

President Aquino attends 
the inauguration of a P25 
million post-harvest 
facility and warehouse in 
Cabiao, Nueva Ecija on 
April 29, 1992. In photo 
are: (from left) Fr. Rene 
Mangahas, president 
of the Alay Tangkilik 
Foundation, Inc. (ATFI) 
and Technology and 
Livelihood Resource 
Center (TLRC) group 
manager Sylvia Ordonez. 



f 





President Corazon C. Aquino plants the 
symbolic first tree that launched the National 
Reforestation Program on June 6, 1986 at the 
National Parks and Wildlife Nature Center in 
Quezon City. One hundred million trees are 
expected to be planted by some 2 million Boy 
Scouts and 28 million teachers and students in 
this nationwide reforestation efforts- 



President Aquino 
inaugurates the Bongao 
water system during her 
visit to Tawi-Tawi on 
May 15, 1989. The 
system delivers potable 
water to 700 households 
24 hours a day and will 
benefit an additional 
300 households by year 
end. 




President Aquino assisted by Japanese Ambassador Kiyoshi Sumiya, 
unveils the marker of the new Bureau of Food and Drugs' offices and 
laboratories in Alabang, Muntinlupa, Rizal during the inauguration of the 
multi-million peso modern complex on April 30, 1989. Seen at left is 
Health Secretary Alfredo Bengzon. 





Above. President Aquino drops the first coin to 
symbolize the launching of the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources' (DENR) 
CONSERVATION PROGRAM, a project involving 
the solicitation of coin donations for the conservation 
of rare and endangered plants and animals at the 
start of a Cabinet meeting. Looking on are 
DENR Secretary Fulgencio Factoran, Jr. (behind the 
President), and Secretaries (L-R) Vicente Jayme 
of Finance, Carlos Dominguez of Agriculture and 
Food, Rainerio Reyes of Transportation and 
Communications, Franklin Drilon of Labor and 
Employment, and Jose Concepcion, Jr. of Trade 
and Industry. 





WELCOME 



CvtiAuiiaiiotv 



forBICOL 

UKIVERSITr-f MUEVA CACERES 

JULY 16.1987 

PJ" 





Executive Order 35U p rebe| 
lines for granting am "*7 and mayors 
returnees with governors an pg| _ 

during a meeting at! JWgJ ,IEDA . 
ace. In photo are (from pu bl,c 
Director General f P 1 **? gstuar (partly 
Works Secretary Fiorello E * * tary 
hidden), Local < Severn, ngnt 
Luis Santos, Executive =» t Secre - 
Catalino Macaraig, Jr '^ue of Gover- 
tary Jose de Jesus, League o 
noTs President Governor J£W 
Vlllafuerto Defenw Swwto y ||ermo 



The President in Bicol to meet with 
local leaders and residents. 




President Aquino wit- 
nessed the signing of the 
memorandum of agree- 
ment launching the $100 
million Countryside Loan 
Fund. Signing for govern- 
ment is Finance Secretary 
Jesus Estanislao (left of 
President) and Land Bank 
President Deogracias 
Vistan (extreme right). 

President Aquino 
views an Exhibit 
prepared by the 
National Housing 
Authority (NHA) on the 
17 slum improvement 
projects it will under- 
take in Metro Manila. 
With the President is 
NHA General Manager 
Lito Atienza. 






President Aquino meets the officials of the Philippine Business for Social 
Progress (PBSP) who presented her with an 18-month accomplishment 
report on the Samar Integrated Development Program (SIDP) of the 
government on Nov. 11, 1991. The report focuses mainly on the poverty 
alleviation and livelihood program of the private sector in Samar. In 
photo with the President are; (from left) Ma. Luisa Perez-Rubio, PBSP 
president; Andres Soriano III, PBSP chairman and chairman of San 
Miguel Corporation; Press Secretary Tomas Gomez III, SIDP executive 
director and Agriculture Undersecretary Dante Barboza. 

A streetchild leads the invocation during the program for beneficiaries of 
the streetchildren program of the PSF held at the Heroes Hall in 
Malacanang last January 21, 1992. The President's streetchildren pro- 
gram has received a total amount of P40.3 M from the PSF. 



pi 





President Aquino signs a memoran- 
dum of Clarification and Service Con- 
tract with Adrian Loader, Shell Explo- 
ration Philippines president (second 
from right) and Carlos Contreras, 
Occidental Exploration Philippines 
general manager (extreme right) for the 
exploration and possible development 
and utilization of natural gas from the 
Camago field in Palawan. Also in 
photo are (from left) Presidential 
Assistant for Energy Affairs Wenceslao 
de la Paz and Executive Secre- 
tary Oscar Orbos. 



President Aquino signs into law RA 
7042 otherwise known as the Foreign 
Investment Act of 1991 liberalizing the 
entry of foreign investment to the 
country. Among the witnesses to the 
signing are: (from left) Senator 
Vicente Paterno, Senate President 
Jovito Salonga, Representatives 
Margarito Teves and Emigdio 
Tanjuatco. 




President Aquino looks at chemical products 
made from coconut during a tour of booths 
showcasing Filipino chemical technology at the 

Manila Garden Hotel on Feb. 9, 1989. The 
President viewed the exhibits after addressing 
members of the Philippine Institute of Chemical 
Engineers (PICHE), which is celebrating 
its 50th year. 




President Aquino witnesses on Sept. 18, 1987 the signing of the $270 million 
assistance from the Italian government to the Philippines by Senator Gilberto 
Bonalumi, Italian Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs, and Director General Solita 
Monsod of NEDA. Also witnessing the signing are Acting Secretary of Foreign 
Affairs Manuel Yan and Italian Ambassador Mario Crema. 



President Corazon C. Aquino meets with (L-R) Senate President Jovito 
Salonga, Vice President Salvador Laurel, Ambassador Emmanuel Pelaez and 
other members of the Senate, the House and the military at the State Dining 
Room where they agreed to organize the Regional Consultative Commission 
which will assist and participate in the enactment of the organic act for the 
autonomous government in Mindanao. 




President Aquino receives a report on the debt reduc- 
tion package proposed by the Philippines and re- 
ceived favorably by its American commercial creauo 
banks from Central Bank Gov. Jose Cuisia (left) ana 
Finance Undersecretary Tomas Apacible (extreme 

right). The package is expected to save the 
Philippines more than $2.3 billion over the " e , xt ^ t 
years in interest relief, and reduce the country s aeo 
stock by more than $1.5 billion. Also in photo (^f ^" 
ond from right) is Executive Secretary Franklin urnor . 



ft ,7"^-Ua 



ROM SPHKtll 

4»IE It, 1391 

^3 



The President graces Kabisig National Assembly. 



£ r esid ent Aquino examines a tent shown to her by 
OUs 'r»g and Urban Coordinating Council (HUDOW 
c hairman Teodoro Katigbak (left) during the 
Ce lebration of the "Kabisig Housing Month at 

.! U,alac afiang on June 24, 1991. The tent is part : of tne 
evacuation kits" distributed by the Project Silungan 
^d the HUDCC, Social Security System, Governmem 
Service insurance System to victims of Mt. Pmatut>o. 
L °oking on are (from left) Zorayda Alonzo, cniei 
executive of Pag-ibig Fund; Renato Valencia, ss>» 
Administrator and Bulacan Governor Roberto 
Pagdanganan, director general of Kabisig. 




President Aquino unveils the marker of the P10 million Magsaysay bridge 
in Dagupan, Pangasinan during the inauguration rites in the city. The 
bridge collapsed at the height of the July 1990 earthquake and was 
rebuilt by government in 11 months. In photo (from left) are former 
Defense Secretary Fidel Ramos, Rep. Jose de Venecia, Public Works 
secretary Jose de Jesus, Dagupan Mayor Liberato Reyna, Senator 
Alberto Romulo and other well-wishers. 

Dr!! id i e . nt J AqUino ' with Senary Carague, PMS Head Sobrepena, and 
Kress Undersecretary Paredes, inspects the relief goods for lahar victims 
in the various municipalities of Tarlac 





PMS Head Aniceto "Chito" SobrepeHa presents a program P r °P° 
livelihood projects in areas affected by the Mt. Pinatubo erupn°» 




President Aquino swears into office retired Supreme Court Assoc. Justice 
Conrado M. Vasquez as Ombudsman. 



Pres. Aquino welcomes Justice Irene R. Cortes, adviser of the' Phil. Women's 
Judges Association during a courtesy call in Malacanang on Sept. 13, 1991. 
The President reiterated her call for the speedy administration of justice in the 
country to her guests (1-r) Justice Lorna dela Fuente, Justice Amuerfina 
Melencio-Herrera, president of the Association and Justice Carolina Grino- 
Aquino. 








President Aquino inspects one of the 52 courtrooms of the P111 million 
Quezon City Hall of Justice which she inaugurated on Jan 24, 1992. The five 
2SI°y Q 9 Hal1 ot Justice stands on a 1.3 hectare lot beside the Q" eZ °" C '7 are 
tfr a V d Jv S cons 'dered the biggest in the country today. With the Pres aen 
Jfrom left) Archbishop Jaime Cardinal Sin, QC Mayor Brigido Simon, Jr. a 
^nief Justice Andres Narvasa. 





Inauguration of Tagum-Mati Road on May 4, 1992. 



President Aquino inspects one of the brand new buses to be fielded 
under the "Hatid Sundo Bus" service, a Kabisig project of the Department 
of Transportation and Communications (DOTC), Metro Manila Transit 
Corp. (MMTC) and the Metro Manila Jaycees. 





President Aquino is greeted by Manila Archbishop 
Jaime Cardinal Sin upon her arrival at the P 36 '/~ 
million EDSA-Ortigas Avenue Interchange P r °J e £ l : 
The Interchange project of the Department of Pudii^ 
Works and Highways (DPWH) was inaugurated 
on February 25, 1992. 





President Aquino admires the facilities of the newly 
inaugurated Department of Education building at the 
P. Gomez Elementary School. The P11 million 
three-storey building has 22 classrooms. With the 
President are (from left) Education Secretary Isidro 
Carino, Reps. Pablo Ocampo and Narciso Monfort 
and P. Gomez Principal Imelda G. Castro. 




A schoolbuilding funded by the President's Social 
Fund which draws its resources from PAC^oun. 



President Aquino is shown in photo with Fidel 
Ramos, her chosen successor, vice presidential 
bet Lito Osmena and the senatorial ticket of the 
LAKAS-NUCD at the Bacolod Convention Plaza 
Ballroom where she endorsed them to the political 
leaders of Negros Occidental on 
February 26, 1992. 



