11-295 



- 462 - 



patiently and with dignity, if they strove to lift themselves up the United States 

undoubtedly would set them free. They believed us. Their faith is unshaken today. 

To destroy their hopes would be immoral, illogical, inhuman and a blunder that 

28 

history one day inevitably would put right. 

INDEPENDENCE MEANS COMPLETE SEVERANCB_OF TIBS UITE U.S.? YES! 

According to Col. Henry L. Stirason (who became Governor-General of the 
Philippines, 1938-1939 - ABS), our connection with America, once ended, would be 
ended forever. 

That is exactly what the people of the Philippines expect, allegations to 
the contrary notwithstanding. Our demand for immediate, absolute and complete in- 
dependence means that we are prepared to assume all the burdens and responsibili- 
ties, all the attendant risks of independence and national existence. When the 
consummation of that happy event shall have come, we shall treasure in our hearts 
a feeling of gratitude toward the American people for having given us the great- 
est boon that one country may expect from another - the priceless boon of indepen- 

29 

dence . 

:iLQ HU RLS_CKALLE^ 

I say this without hesitation: the Filipino people have arrived at that 
state of civilization where they have established a government under which people 
can live peacefully and improve themselves materially; and if anyone doubts that 
word, I challenge him. 

I challenge him to let the government of the United States grant Philippine 
independence tomorrow and we will show you what kind of a government we can es- 
tablish. Unfortunately that is the only way we can prove to you this fact. You 
know that old saying, "You cannot prove that you know how to swim unless you are 
swimming." How can we prove that we know how to govern ourselves unless we are 
really allowed to govern ourselves? 

In my opinion that is the most immediate problem that the American people 
have to face, to establish in the Philippines such a government where the respon- 
sibility and power may be located in either the American governor or in the Fili- 
pino people, and after you have done that you ought to take the next step - 

30 

grant Philippine independence. 

AFTER 30 YE ARS, P.I. INDEPENDENCE STILL A gggA|^3EtfAILS_QUJZ0U_ 

There seems to bo very little realization in this country (U.S.) of the 
fact that the United States has now been in the Philippines for a period of thirty 
years. And that, although on the very first day of American occupation President 

23/ Ibid. , p. 772. 

2C|/ Article, "Quezon Declares Independence is the Real Issue," The Philippine 
Republic, October 1926. Ibid. . p. 783. 

,3.0/ Speech at Columbia University, USA, November 27, 1927. QP, MR#29, TNL. 



KcKinley announced it' ; to be. the policy of this covintry to grant the Filipino 
people their independence - a policy reaffirmed and reiterated by Roosevelt, 
Taft, Wilson, and confirmed in the Act of Congress of 1916, we are no nearer now •" 
to the execution of •.that announced policy than we were when first enunciated. 

So it is high time that thoughtful Americans should pause and take notice 
of this fact if the performance of their government were- to harmonize with its 
commitments. 

PH ILIPPINE PROBLEM I S- 'A HUMAN PROBLEM, SAYS QUEZON ' 

I am going to tell you that the Filipinos arc ordinary human beings, with 

the vices and the virtues of human beings. That is why I say that the Philippine ■• 

problem is a human problem. We- are dealing with human beings. We are not as highly 

educated as some very highly educated people in Europe, but wc are highly educated 

and in some cases more highly educated than some independent people even in this 

32 

country and in Europe. 

GIVE INDEPENDENCE TO FILIPINOS B^0RB_IT^S_T00_ LATE 

I hope that- they (the U.S. government ) will give to the Filipino people 

today - now - before it is too late, sufficient recognition of their just rights 

that the Filipino people in the years to come will always feel toward America 

a sense of real gratitude and affection. I hope the completion of our rights is - 

not so long delayed as it was. I hope it stands so well that the Filipino peopls 

33 

may appreciate its meaning that it was done with love. 

EK&VB PHILIPP ICS TO FILIPINOS , THE N TRADE WITH TKEK - QUEZON : - ' 

If you leave the Philippines tomorrow and give the Philippines back to tho 

Filipino people, you will have given the most conclusive evidence that you have 

no designs upon any country in the Far East, and that all you want is to trade 

with them on the basis of fair dealings. As every American businessman knows, - 

the only successful businessman, in the end, is the man who does his business on 

34 

the basis of fairness. 

AMERICANS CAN'T L OVE OUR COUNTRY ITORE THAN WE DO , _SAYS_C^UEZO IT_ 

The Filipinos are o\ir people, the blood of our blood, and the Philippines 
is our country where for centuries our ancestors have lived and died. It is there - 

U7 Add .ress before the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Phila- 
delphia, November 25, 1927. In: The Philippine Republic. Vol. V, No. 2, 
March 15, 1928. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 803. 

22/ Columbia University speech, supra. 

22/ Speech before the Filipino Association in Chicago, Illinois, November 29, 1927< 
QP, MR#29, TNL. 

34/ Speech on Philippine independence at the Hippodrome Theatre, Baltimore , 
Maryland, December 4, 1927. Ibid. 



II-297 

— 464 - 

*here we have spent our youth, where we have been working in our old days. It is 
there where we will be buried, it is there where our children and the ohildren 
of our children will live and die. 

Can they (the Americans) pretend to love that country more than we love it 
how can they? How can they say it? If we are advocating independence under the 
circumstances that we advocate it, if they honestly believe that we have intel- 
ligence enough to know what is bad and what is good for us, they ought to agree 
that the best thing for the Philippine Islands is to grant them independence. 35 - 
*£gSBg-£*Og» ^ MORE YEARS SANS U.S. PROTECTIO N - QUEZON 

For the period of 300 years our people have lived without the help of the 
tnited States, and I do not see any reason why TO cannot live 300 more years with- 
out the protection of the United States. 36 

The Philippines is prepared to lose the protection of American tariff in 
exchange for freedom. 01 

The Filipinos recognize America's right to protect herself from the conroe- 
tition which Philippine goods and labor have created in this country (U.S.). But 
it must also be stated that lo_^seJgriff on our products and to exlude our 
Poo^JU^ 

ssosgnjggas^^ f ree of dutv •; — 

^^S&^SSJs^l^^^^b may cpmo^nd^ as_Jlpng__as they please "in 

j ustifiable only when a, - 
p lied to a foreig n country. " "~" 

Therefo re, the only i^aoraj^ou^s^for Am erica to take in m a _ connects 
is to make us a f orei g n^^mtry ttrougt^ grant of inde pendence. Since to be" 
i ree has been the age-old desire of the Filipinos, and it may be fulfilled inci- 
dent to the enactment of this tariff legislation, we are most emphatically for 
such legislation. Besides, we are convinced more than ever that immediate inde- 
pendence will not only be politically beneficial to us but in the long run will 
-rive less injurious economic effect than the indefinite continuation of the pre- 
sent status for the very simple reason that the economic relations between Ame- 
rica and the Philippines will then be not subject to change by Congress at any 

35/ Press statement, 1927, n.d.m. Ibid. 

2§J Remarks in a debate on the Philippine question with William S. Clow, Chicero 

lT. X *t S T n - r d n me f ber ° f the Council on Forei en Rations, December 1, 1927. 
I*' SheJkimAaJiT^^ l6 , 1928 . Hivera Collection, Vol. II, pi 817. 

^ ASS °f ated ¥e *™*y 25, 1928, commenting on the move 

tons! Ibid! °p 819 * StatSS ° f Philippine su ^ ar t0 500,000 



11-298 

- 46$ - 

.moment. 

f£3Z0N SAYS WE MU3T_SgTTLE PHILIPP INE QUESTION NOW! 

No task of any importance is without peril, and the launching into the 
:-;orld of a new nation - so great and so noble - must, of course, have it S own. 
Tut what of it? Are we to be frightened out of doing the right thing because of'"' 
oome real or fancied danger? 

* * * 

I am confident that American and Filipino statesmanship in common counsel 
■•ad in a spirit of friendly cooperation, guided by high ideals, can find a way 
out of the difficulties, wisely and rightly. 

* *- * 

My appeal, then, to the people of the United States is this: Let us settle 

the Philippine question now and let us settle it right, in accordance with the 

■39 

'flighted word of America. 

i JA MAKES SURE OF SUCCESS OF F IGHT FOR iaDgP?i]:fl)li!KCB 

I am not interested in promoting either my own politi *s or the 

fortunes of my party. I am interested in insuring the success ^ our fight for 
independence - a success which can only be attained by the united effort of the 
Filipino people, by talcing out of local politics the cause of independence, by ? 
stopping the opposition forces from launching charges of insincerity against the 
party which has been carrying on this campaign- these/long years in all ear- 
nestness and with all the means at its command. 40 

g£^g^^n^-gg^ITICSjnTK_IiroEPEfn)E?JCE CAUSS i j^«_TELLS_0PP0SITI0N_ 

We have been accused of betraying our trust, of having compromised and 
abandoned the cause of independence, and while the country has given no heed to 
these false charges it is time that we should try to find some way of stopping 
this unseemly and highly prejudicial spectacle of playing politics with the 
national cause. 

^U^^S^VICj^O^OW_TO_ACHIB^_ ONE'S IDEAL 

It is one thing to havu an ideal and another to attain it. Practical men 
.fill always get the most that they can rather than take the stand of getting all 
that they want or nothing. 

* * * 



2&/ Article, "Tariff or Freedom," distributed by the A ssociated Pres s and the 
Cosmos Newspaper Syndicate through the Philippine "press Bureau. In: The 
Ph ilippin e Republic, Vol. VI, No. 3, April 1929. Ibid. , p. 834. ' 

12/ Message to the .American people on the Philippine question, 1929, n.d.m. 
-iP, MR#31, TNL. 

40/ Press statement, 1929, n.d.m. Ibid. . 

11/ Ibid. • ■ ■ 



11-299 



- 466 - 



They believe in it, as a question of fundamental right, but they are em- 
ploying the methods that, in their opinion, are more effective according to cir- 
cumstance. ^ 2 

SENATE PRESIDENT APPEALS FOR NATIONAL UNITY TO ACHIEVE INDEPENDENCE 



With an earnestness born of our love for what is dearest to the Filipinos, 
our well-being and liberty, we beseech our people to lay aside for a while all 
party squabbles and discords of every nature to make possible the union of all 
the live forces of the country in a common effort to set the Philippines free. ^ 

^EZ0N_N0^A^RAID_OF_DIFFICU 

I am not discouraged by difficulties and obstacles, not even by reverses. 
The only thing that I am afraid of is that ray conscience may some day accuse me 
of having failed to do that which is my duty to do. ct, ' 

My heart is saddened by the thought of an indefinite separation from you, 

as I bid you farewell, with faith in God and the sense of justice of the Ameri- - 
44 

can people. 

FILIPINOS V/ AIIT IHDEPEl:g)EITCE_IN AMY FORK, ASSERTS QUEZON 

I would like to tell you now (addressing U.S. Senator William King in 1951 - 
ASS), as plainly as language can make it, that we have not changed front and would 



take independence now in any form. 



45 



■^^UJ^^S_TII^^OS/^^ jmiiSDQK ABOVE EVERYTHING ELSE 

I am, as you know, temporarily at least, the chosen leader of the Filipino 
people and it is my duty to seek the best for the people whom I represent. 

If the choice is between wealth without freedom and freedom with starvation, 
I choose the latter. 

Naturally if we could have freedom without poverty we are not such fools 
as not to welcome it. 

QU EZON ' S INDEPENDENCE STAND THAT BECAME CONTROVERSIAL 



My stand on Philippine independence is as follows: 

First, immediate establishment of an independent government, with free trade 
between America and the Philippines for a period of 10 years. 

Second, immediate establishment of an autonomous government with all the 

4.2/ Press statement, 192y, n.d.m. up, MR#31 , TNL. 

4J3/ Press statement, October 23, 192Q. Ibid . 

4j/ Message to the Filipino people, August 2, 1930. ^id. 

45/ Memorandum on the conference with Senator King, June 13, 1931. Quoted in 
Theodore Friend, pp. cit . f p. 74. 

46/ Ibid. QP, KR#32, TNL. 



11-300 



- 467 - 



consequent powers. 

Third, if neither of these plans protecting Philippine economic interests 

shall be acceptable to the U.S. Congress, I said that the Filipino people would, 

as a matter of course, accept any law granting independence even under the most 

47 

burdensome conditions. 

.J'RSE, INDEPENDENT AND PROSPEROUS PHILIPPINES COMES FIRST - NLQ 



A free and independent 1 but prosperous Philippines comes first, oven if it 
should mean some waiting, but between independence without prosperity and prospe- 
rity without assurance of freedom at some future time, I would unhesitatingly 

AO 

accept the former. 

THERE IS NO ALT ERNATI VE TO PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE , SAYS MLQ 



I believe in all sincerity, with the best interests of our people at heart 
that the only wise and patriotic course left open to us is to strive for immediat 
and complete independence, with all its great burdens and responsibilities both a 
a fulfillment of our sacred and undying aspirations as a people, and as a way out 
of the present uncertainty which hampers our national life, dwarfs our progress, 
and fills our hearts with fears and doubts as to our future. ^ 

VERDICT CIM IISTORY: EITHER SLAKE OR GLORY 

I stand before you, and my acts are open to a searching re-view by all, and 

to the serene and independent inquiry of an introspective generation which afte r 

us shall come, uninfluenced by common associ ations and common memories with us, 
. , 

t o pass judgment upon our public records to our shame or gl ory. 
*iC330N SAYS OUR SALVATION OR DOCK IS IN CUR HANDS 



Our salvation l ies solely in our hands, just as our doom can be brought 

; ■- 

about only by ourselves . 

INXJgPENDENC| = IS = AB OyE _ANY PRICE, ASSERTS QUEZON 

VJg are unalterably committed to complete independence. We have a long list 
of heroes who have fought and died for their country. In loyalty to them wg de- 
mand what they sought. No matter how good are the intentions of another nation, : 
no matter how unselfish or altruistic, misunderstandings are bound to arise when 
it attempts to hold authority over another alien people. Independence is above 



47/ Report on his trip to the United States, November 9, 1931 . Ibid . 

4j3/ Same report as quoted in Governor-General Dwight F. Davis' radiogram to 
the U.S. Secretary of War in Washington, D.C., November 13 » 1931* 
Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 855. 

49/ Speech on Philippine independence, 1931, n.d.m. t*P, hR#32, TNL. 

52/ Speech in the Senate, August 1, 1933. CjP> KR#34, TNL. 

£i/ Speech on the occasion of his 56th birthday, August 19 , 1934. 
QP, I1R#36, TNL,; 



11-301 

-4 468 - 

price not only to individuals but also to nations, and we are willing to assume 

52 

all the risks in order to attain it. 

vjOffZON STRONGLY AGAINST PROTECTORATE STATUS UNDE R U.S. 

Once more I wish to say most emphatically that I am against American pro- 
tectorate. It is idle to talk about it because even if everybody in the Philip- 
pines were for it, America would not consider it for a minute. I think I know 
as well as anybody the attitude of the American people on this question. They 
are willing to let us have either our own sovereignty and independence or remain 
under American sovereignty. 

We chose the former and they gave it to us. But America under no circums- 
tances will ever agree to let us have our own sovereignty and independence and 
yet continue to assume responsibility for our protection against the world. There 

is a saying which Americans use to express their attitude on this subject; "You 

53 

can't have your cake and oat it too." This is the American point of view. 



FRffSDOM FR OM FOREIGN IMT3R FERBNCE , INTERHAL REBELLION 

If we are prepared to defend our country, we will be free from foreign mo- 
lestation; if we are just to our people, we wil l be free from internal rebellion - 
'inat is the whole problem - the club in one hand and the bread in the other. 

JILrPINOS_READY TO ACCEPT RESP ONSIBILITIES OF IMPENDENCE 

If I didn.' t believe that the Filipinos were vailing to accept the respon- 
sibilities of independence, I would be ashamed to call myself a Filipino. 

The whole philosophy of the national defense program of the Philippine Is- 
lands is to make of a Filip5.no soldier, when he has got to fight, a better soldier 

55 

and in peace, a better citizen. 

jUEZON'S LIFE AMBITION; FREE, PROSPEROUS PHILIPPINES 



I have stamped practically all the important activities of the government 
with a social purpose, because I believe intensely in the principle that it is 
the duty of the State, not only to keep order, administer justice, and safeguard 
individual rights and property, but also to promote the people's welfare, assuring 
to everyone an equal economic opportunity, wholesome living condition, a chance 
to work for a decent livelihood, a fair share in the fruits of the country's 



52/ Interview with S. J. Woo If of the New York Times. May 16, 1935. Rivera 
Collection, Vol. Ill, pp. 1156-1157. 

5 3/ Press statement on the subject of American protectorate by President-elect 
Quezon. In: "Independence is Filipinos' Goal - Quezon," The Tribune. 
September 23, 1935. Ibid. , p. 1189. 

2l/ Press statement, January 22, 1937. Quoted in Theodore Friend, ,ojd. cit . . 
p. 151. 

5 5/ Speech on compulsory military training after independence, April 3> 1937. 
QP, MR#40, TML. 



11-302 



- 469 - 



material progress, and the enjoyment of a standard of living in accordance with 

the basic needs of self-respecting, intelligent men. 

My ambition is to give to every Filipino the opportunity to acquire 

through toil his necessities in food, clothing and shelter, together with reason- 

' ""e comforts, and a leisure which will permit cultural self -improvement and 

56 

->-ticipation in the blessings of an enlightened civilization. 



; !;'']!■! REEXAMINATION OF PHILIPPINE QUESTION 15 TREASON 



I have no objection to re-examination, whether realistic or idealistic, 
-.-■•en the re-examination is based upon the fear that we nay not be economically 

If -sufficient or upon the fear that wo may not be sufficiently strong to defend 
ourselves against foreign aggression. 

But when re-examination is based upon the assumption that we will not 
know how to establish or maintain in tho Philippines a democracy, .when the re- 
examination is based upon the belief, theory or assumption that we will be more 
free under American rule than wc will bo under our own, then I will say that it 

57 

is almost treason. 
LEIJJSJSE^ 

As the head of the state and the leader of our party, I advise you to 
guard against temptations to divide yourselves in groups or blocks that will tend 
to weaken your unity of purpose and action and which, at times, may make you lose 

sight of the general interests of the nation and see only the particular interests 

° 58 
of the groups or bloc to which you belong. 

LIBERTY IS GREATEST PO SSaSSIONJK LIFE - qJgZON 

Liberty is th e greatest possess ion in life and no one should sacrifice li - 
berty even wb<-» m so sacri ficing it , it would result in one's own good, for once 
T , r r . ;xd.ve recognized the right of anyone to regulate our life on tho ground that 
it is for our good, we have sot the precedent for that one to regulate our own 

life , when, in his opin ion, it is for our own good, even if it i s not so in our 

' 59 : : 

e stimati on. 

PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE ASSURED DESPITE PRECARIOUS WORLD SITUATION 



These arc fateful days in which we live. Vital forces are reshaping poli- 
tical and social institutions the world over. Fear and want are afflicting the 
human race. Hon and women everywhere are scanning the future for security and a 



'jS/ Address before the faculties and student bodies of public and private 
schools, colleges and universities, August 19, 1938. QP, MR 7 f41 , TNL. 

TlJ Draft of speech before the Civil Liberties Union, 1958, n.d.m. ' Ibid. 

52/ Message to the Second National Assembly, January 24, 1959. QP» MR#42, TNL. 

29/ Speech before the National Commission of Labor, Manila, June 5, 1939. Ibid. 



11-303 

- 470 - 

more promising life. 

In the midst of this great crisis, our duty is clear. By a solemn covenant 
Tilth America, the advent of our national independence is assured. We must pre- 
pare for it j we must not procrastinate; we must not falter. Trusting in Divine 
Providence we must move forward firmly and courageously to achieve our long- 
cherished ideal - the establishment of the Philippine Republic - and to secure 

for our people prosperity, happiness and freedom under the shelter of peaSe and 
60 

democracy. 

, -IE l fflg s F^TI^_^^pAT^U^^F_LOERTY AND JUSTICE^ SAYS HLQ 

At the present time- we have but one task - to fight with America for 
America and the Philippines. To this task we shall devote all our resources in 
.; ion and materials. Ours is a great cause. VJo arc fig hting for human liberty a nd 
j ustice, for those pr inciples of individual fre edom which we all cherish and with- 
out which life would not be worth living . 

Indeed, we are fighting for our own independence. It is to maintain this 
independence, these liberties and freedoms, to banish fear and want among all 
peoples, and to establish a reign of justice for all the world, that we are 
sacrificing our lives and all that we possess. 

The war may be long-drawn and hard-fought, but with the detorriinr 4 "' on of fr 

.> 

dom-loving peoples everywhere to stamp out the rule of violence and on the^ism fro::i 

64 

t.,ie face of the earth, I am absolutely convinced that final and complexe victory 
will bo ours. ^ 

qLT5Z0NJTOREJH?TJ^ THAN EVACUATING T O U.S. 

I have carefully considered the telegram(of General George C. Marshall, U.S. 
Army chief of staff, inviting Quezon to evacuate to the United States - ABS). I 
have come to the conclusion that insofar as the suggested trip to the United 
8ta.tes is concerned, I have no preference. I am willing to do what the govern- 
ment of the United States may think will be more helpful for the successful 
prosecution of the war. My immediate concern is to secure prompt and adequate 

help from the United States, because our soldiers at the front and the Filipino 

62 

people in general have placed their trust in this indispensable help. 
HY AKBITION_IS TO SECURE FREED OM L WJ5LFARE OF H Y P EOPLE - ^ J BZOIJ 

I am getting ol d. Hy da ys arc numbered. i"y interest i n government and 
our country c an no lo nger be colored by pe rsonal ambition. T hroughout the cour se 

60/ Message to the Second National Assembly, January 51 , 1941 . Rivera Collection, 
Vol. V, p. 2290. 

61,/ Second inaugural address, Corrcgidor, December 30, 1941 . Ibid. . p. 2361 . 

62/ Reply to Gon. Marshall's telegram, from Quoson's quarters in the Malinta 
tunnel, Corregidor, January 1, 1942. Ibid. , p. 2363. 



11-304 



- m - 



of ay public career our people have showered mo generously with all the honora 
i o which any n a n may aspire. If I now remain in -public life, it is merely because 
I believe the people have demanded my services during these perilous times in 
o rder that we might in su re our safety and happines s. 

My greatest ambition now is to secure the welfare and freedom of our peop le . 
and to safeguard fo r you, the youth of the Philip pines, a free country where y ou 
na y work and be happy, togethe r with my own children whose future and welfare is 
my responsibility and greatest ambition. ^ 

I share your sadness - more deeply, perhaps, than you can realize. 

But our emotion of grief is transcended by your determination and confidence 
burning in your breasts. It is an undying determination that, though the Japanese 
invader may for a brief moment conquer, to some extent, your lands and your bodies, 
your minds and souls remain unconquered and unbroken. Free. And behind this spi- 
rit, there lives in all of us a confidence that the day of liberation is surely 
coming. The great and free people of the United States will not permit you to 
romain in bondage. 

Led by their noble statesmen and generals, they will rescue the Philippines:. 

They will break the Japanese, yoke which now oppresses you. 

Stand firm, hold on to your faith, the forces of freedom are on the march.' 

64 

'j?;.io day approaches when you shall joyously welcome them to our shores. 
"R»IBER TKJ3 PHILIPPI NES!" QUE ZON TEL LS U.S. SENATE 

Gentleman of the Senate, since I arrived in this country, I have learned 

that there is a war slogan, "Remember Pearl Harbor!" I approve and fully under- . 

stand the slogan. The attack upon Pearl Harbor aroused every red-blooded and 

patriotic American to a point where he can never be satisfied with anything less 

than the definite and complete defeat of Japan. (Applause. ) 

* -* *- 

I am not in this country to persuade you to send forces at once to the Phi- 
lippines to drive the invader out of my beloved fatherland. Nor will I try to con-* 
vine© you that the Pacific is more important than the European war or the Atlantic 
theatres of war... (But) you will always have in mind, I on sure, that only in 
the Philippines has your flag (the Stars and Stripes) been hauled down and re- 
placed by the flag of the Rising Sun. 

In view of this tragic event, I do hope that the American people in this 
hour of their great responsibility to the world will always keep before then the 

62/ Speech on the Emergency Powers Act and preparations for civilian defense, 
1941 , n.d.ci. OP, MR#45» TNL., 

6J/ Special broadcast to the Philippines upon Quezon's arrival in tho United 
States, Hay 1942. Ibid. 



II-305 

- 472 _ -pi!! 

n ° n0ry ° f th ° doVOtion and orifices of the people of the Philippines. Let me ask 
your people to adopt still another slogan - "Remember the Philippines! " (Prolonged 
applause.) 5 

But the faith of my people will never waver. In the bitterness of temporary 
servitude, they carry the cross in their hearts, knowing that the day approaches 
when the barbarians will be ousted. And they will rejoice in knowing that on both" 
sides of the Pacific, in the nations fighting for then and their freedom, the 
principle of religious freedom and a cordial relationship with the Holy Father 
are integral parts of their way of life. 66 

The battle record of the Filipino people in this war bears glorious tes- 
timony to the difference between freedom and oppression, between the principle of 
human equality and the exploded idea of racial superiority. 67 

Ue offer to the world the record of the Philippines as an answer to anyone 
««> would consider the Atlantic Charter illusory and impractical. It is a sign- ■ ' 
post for. all mankind to read. It is the actual evidence of what can and sbould ' 
bo done, everywhere and for every people. It points to a goal that can be reached, 
nowover long and hard the road may be. 68 

The record of the Filipino people in this war has been written in blood, ' 
and it is a record of which you and I can be proud. It is a record of unflinching 
loyalty to the United States, a record of heroic deeds. It is a record without 
parallel in the Orient and , I nay add, in the history of colonialism. 69 

1 05 . 0 U jj) Z 0 il DICTUM 
■yjSaOH FIRMLY FOR FILIPIKO GQVlD Rm^ EVEK IF RUN TiTTfR TTWT.T. 

I would rather have the Philippine Legislature abolished and have the Go- 1 
vernor-General (referring to Leonard Wood - ABS) govern alone. There has been 
n o p arty in^power^since he assumed his post because he is the power, the only 

§5/ Speech in the U.S. Senate, June 4, 1942. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, 
PP» Ootf— o09. 

^ S ! r f hT 1 v r intGrchan e' e of diplomatic representatives between China 

and the Vatican, October 28, 1942. Op, KR#45, THL. 

62/ Address at the Commonwealth Day program, Washington, D.C., November 15, 1941. 
68/ Ibid. 

63J Speech befor e the Maryland Bar Association, Baltimore, Maryland, January 16, 




11-306 

- 475 - 

I would prefer a government n m like hell by Filipinos to nnn run 
Ayn von by Americans, because no natter how bad, a Filipin o g overnment night be 
i/.. p roved . 1 

^I'-I^WgaraD BY FILIPI170S J^^TH^_m^OVERi.]ED BYALgggl ■ ' 

When wo have our unfettered self-rule, I dare say we shall make mistakes r .. : 
mt in that respect we shall not be original or monopolistic. It is bv o ur p^- 
::03 that wo sha11 loarn . Ancrica has aided us to learn much of the art of go- 
' • rr -' ;ant » but wo can " j aotor that art only by self -practice. In politics, as in 
law or medicine or music or painting, concrete achievement is not in the sciiolas- 
tic sphere, but only in the sphere of scholasticism applied. And, anyway, even 
in the United States and in England, democracy is still on trial. 

?*-^.k£^ r J°iLth^ by the Filipinos than 

'.■.■ oil-governed by the Ariorir^n^. 2 '-^ 

Concerning Mr. Oman's statement that he preferred a "government run like 
h011 by Filipinos t0 onG mn likG heavon by Americans," he probably intended to 
imply that he would choose a government of i'ilipinos by Filipinos to a government " 
of Filipinos by any other race, even Americans. 

He probably meant no more and no less than what Dr. Jacob Gould Schurman, 
then president of Cornell University, upon being sent to the Philippines in 1899 
by President HcKinloy, said: "/my decent kind of government of Filipinos • by Filipinos 
is better than the best government of Filipinos by Americans." 3 
QffaON UQULD RATHER have FILIPINOS IIAKB TKBIR OWN MIST AKES 

It is disappointing enough to the Filipino people not to have achieved 
their independence after thirty years of American occupation, when it was promised 
them from the very first day of your arrival in the Islands. It is still more 
disappointing that, after these thirty years, they are not even allowed to manage 
their domestic affairs, when the' Cuban people, who had as much or less preparation 
for self-government as the Filipinos, are now enjoying their independence and liston- 
ing to speeches by President Coolidge regarding equal rights of small and big na- * 1 
tions, and how^h^ettex.i_t_is_ for the people to ma ke their own mistake th,„ j 
tojiarojonoje^ :Jhat, then, would be the feeling ■! 

~~— !-----!__!!!? le if thSy Wer ° t0 SGe their P resQnt liaitod powers of 

J In: T.eodoro K. Kalaw's autobiography (MS), pp. 259-260. Quoted in Theodore 
1'nend, op., cit . , Fn. 19, p. 40; 

~ J ^°^! i ri^ nt ! rVi0W v W ^ h T f dUard i riCG Bel1 f0r thG Chicago Daily Jf ww . 1925. 
( -ivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 769. 

'1/ Statement by Clyde H. Tavonner, editor and publisher, The Philippine Republic . 
October 1926. Ibid. , pp. 785-786. 



11-307 

- 47* - 

government still further reduced? ^ 

I would rather have a government run like hell by Filipinos than a govern- 
ment run like heaven by any foreigner. But that is not an admission that a govorn - 
i xmt run by Filipinos will be a government run like hell. Much less can it be an 
■ . driission that a government r u n by Americans can ever be a government run like 
haavon, or by any foreign countr y for t hat matter . 

We have had four years of our government - the government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines - a government run by Filipinos, and I challenge any- 
body, American, foreigner or Filipino, to tell me that thi3 is a government run 
like hell. 

I say that this is the best government wo ever had in the Philippines, and 

6 

I will give facts to prove this to you. 

rjJSZQX DICTUM THAT 7J3HT AROITKD 'riORED: GOTERHMaZU? RP LI KE HELL! 

I have listened to a speech warning our people against independence, on 
the ground that every liberty you (addressing the crowd at the Ateneo auditorium - 
ABS) now enjoy may bo lost, while under the American Flag you are not denied any 
individual liberty. 

''To one has outdone me in giving due credit to the government and people of 
the United States for what they have done in the Philippines. But I cannot per- 
mit any one to say in my presence that our people have enjoyed greater freedom 
under the American administration, or that our people will not enjoy their free- 
dom under an independent Philippines, as much as they have enjoyed it under the 
American flag. 

It is true, and I am proud of it, that I once said, "I would rather have 
a government run like hell by Filipinos than a government run like heaven by Ame- 
ricans." 

I want to tell you that I have, in my life, made no other remark which wont 
around the world but that. There had been no paper in the United States, including 
a village paper, which did not print that statement, and I also had seen it printed 
in many newspapers in Europe. I would rather have a government run like hell by 
F ilipinos than a government run like heaven by any foreigner. I said that once; 
1 say it again, and I will always^ say i t as long as I live. (Applause.) 

it/ Memorandum dictated from his sickbed in the Monravia Sanatorium, California, 
against the doctor's orders, as reported in the Manila Tribune. August 16, 
1928. Ibid. , p. 813. ~ ""~ ~ " 

5/ Untitled speech, 1938, n.d.m. qP, KR#41, TNL. 

2/ Ibid. 

l/ Speech at the CLU-sponsorod inter-university oratorical contest, Ateneo audi- 
torium, Docember 9, 1939. Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, pp. 2188-2189. 



11-308 

- 475 - 

106. QUEZON HOUSE-CLEANING 
ILPILO CFI JUDGE g^ l|§3^F0RJjISC0NDUCT = ni = 0F|IC| 

This is an administrative case against the Honorable Ger.onino Paredes, judge 
of the Court of First Instance of Iloilo, filed before the Supreme Court^of the 
Philippine Islands, involving charges of serious misconduct in office. The.Su- .'• 
\iroi:ie Court ordered the investigation of the charges and, after the respondent 
judge had been heard in his own defense, the Supreme Court found hin guilty of 
-.cts and omissions constituting serious nisconduct which justified his removal - 
i' vom office. The Court, however, recommends to the Chief Executive that in view 
of the services rendered in the past by the respondent judge, he be permitted to 
resign within a reasonable time, and upon his failure to do so; his removal be ; ,f < re- 
ordered, if the Chief Executive believes that the public interest so requires. ' •■ 

■ * •* -ji- 
lt is, of course, evident that despite the findings of the Supreme Court, 
the Chief Executive is not bound to remove a judge, if the conclusions of the 
Chief Executive as to the guilt of the respondent are not in accord with the 
conclusions arrived at by the Supreme Court. But nay the Chief Executive permit 

c judge to resign after he has heen found guilty of serious nisconduct by the ' 

Supreme Court and the Chief Executive concurs in the opinion? If this may be done 
under the law, is it a good policy to do so? 

This administration cannot overlook the fact that it is establishing pre- 
cedents for a new government, and when the law gives it power or discretion for 
talcing one action or another, it should adopt that course which in the long run 
will bo more productive of public good... But leaving aside the question of whe- 
ther the Chief Executive is empowered under the law to accept the resignation of . 
the respondent judge, is it good and sound policy to do so? Would it best servo 
the interests of the administration of justice? 

The answer can only be in the negative. 

-x- * * 

This administration is determined to raise the standard of judiciary 
to the highest level. O ur judg es must nerit t he resp ect and confidence of the 
people a nd this can only be accomp lished if they are men of the highest integrity 
a nd unque s t i o nod no ra 1 character, co urte ous, ki ndly and considerate of other 
peo ple ' 3 rights and feelings , even of tho se wh o have to appear bo foro tlv?n_ to_ 
bo tried of the most ser ious charges; in fine, men of unimpeachable chg: icter 
and of the broadest human sympathies. 

In view of the findings of the Supreme Court of the Philippines that the 
respondent judgq is guilty of grave misconduct which justifies his removal from 
office,, with which we concur after a careful and thorough study of the entire re- 
cord of the administrative case, and believing that the public interest so requires, 
it is hereby ordered that the said respondent Honorable Geronimo Paredes be 



11-309. 

- 476 - 

removed forthwith from his position as judge of the Court of First Instance, 
Seventeenth Judicial District. ^ 

HEALTH DIRBCTORJ^ JAH ]DO_SUSraHmm _IN INT EREST OF PUBLIC SERVICE 

The papers submitted to this Office and the verbal statements of the wit- 
nesses in connection therewith, having established, prima facie, that Dr. Jacobo 
Pajardo - 

(1 ) In the case of the leper Antero Anana has, through the improper use 
of his authority as Director of Health, permitted members of his family to ob- 
tain financial advantages from the said leper, including the sale of an insurance 
policy by his son, the indirect sale of jewelry by his wife, and the obtaining of 
contributions from said leper for newspaper subscriptions for the purpose of get- 
ting votes for his daughter in a newspaper popularity contest; and has further- 
acre received certain sums of money from the said' leper in consideration of cer- 
tain undue privileges granted by him as Director of Health; 

(2) In the case of Hrs. Evarista Vda. de Roque, has made improper use of 
his influence over the said party who is the widow of a former subordinate, for 
the purpose of inducing the latter to part with the retirement pay received by 
her upon the death of her husband by means of a loan given to a son of the res- 
pondent, without tho said loan having been paid to this date, and, instead, has 
compelled the said party to accept onerous conditions in the payment of said 
loan by himself; and 

(3) In the case of the Health Officers' Association, has failed to account 
to this late date for tho funds of said association turned over to him by the 
treasurer in the year 1927, notwithstanding the fact that said association has 
long ceased to exist; 

The Director of Civil Service is hereby ordered to conduct the immediate 
investigation, of .all these- charges and ±0.. report to the President the. results of. 
said investigation.. 

* * * 

In the interest of the public service, pending the conduct of said inves- 
tigation, Dr. Jacobo Pajardo is hereby suspended from his position as Director 

2 

of Health, effective immediately. 
Syj-ffiR_GOVERNOR SUSPENDED FOR ACTS OF OPPRESSION 

This is an administrative case against Hon. Pedro R. Arteche, pre incial 
governor of Samar, for various acts of oppression and misconduct in office in 
which the former secretary of the interior (Teofilo Sison) submitted the 

l/ Administrative Order No. 2, "Re: the Honorable Geronimo Parodes, judge of 
the Court of First Instance, Seventeenth Judicial District," January 30, 
1936. Quezon Messages. V 0 1. 2, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 743-745. 

2/ Administrative Order Ho. 13, "Re: Charges Against Dr. Jacobo Pajardo, 
Director of Health," June 24, 1936. Ibid. . pp. 761-762. 



II-310 

- 477 - 

following findings: 

"This Department concurs in the findings cf the special investigate* that 
tae respondent is guilty cf systematic persecution, extravagancy in the use cf 
,~ fUMa ' « th. n,anage n ent of the provincial Jail, and 

Elding sessions of the provincial hoard without notice to nenber Vicente A. Dira. 

# * * 

The present secretary of the interior (nlpidio quirino) is of the opinion 
that governor nrteche should he suspended for one ,onth and therefore so record 



* * -x- 



■•hUBQ. of authority is a vor yserio us fault in any pub lic official, whethe! . 
a^tavo.or eloctivc, M d the Hgh.r 

5i_ Ju. Chief sacutave B ay.j a ve^ericus - co nseouor.cos in th., f^ZT ^ 

-f-ici T° TT^ g ° Vern ° r U ChnrgSd " ith « a puhlic - '. 

-an the .„,ad butldang one Nicolasa . », 10 ia ^ to J 

, rose, during office hours and while the pupils cf the Davao ! t tu 

r tfc0ir ° U *"» in ^ buiMi "- « idling and unduly inter- 
ring an the assignments of M bcrs of the nunicipal pelico vice-souad of Davao 
-spa e the warning by the Department of the Interior net to do so/thus givil! 

aso to suspicion that ho is protecting gaoling dens and prostitution houses In 
t,o municipality; (,) unduly influencing, through threats, nenbors of the muniei- 

al ouncil of Davao to pass resolutions and ordinances according tc his ^ 

2tl 1MPr ° Per 7 ° f Pr0Tin0ial S0Term,Cnt * *™*o«* 

tacn to persons who are not entitled to official transportation. 

tc the '' °T Ul r ° rt °" ° f r00 ° ri b? 3 ° Cr0tarJ ' 01 «« hi,,' 

the conclusion that the respondent governor is guilty ef the above charges. 

J O0mri ^ in the nain, these faults were committed while the gever- 

nnr was under tho inf.luonoo of lim W T »« * 

-ndation thir th ■ n . ' ' therefore, concurring in the record ' 

atl ° n that th ° rOS P ondont pernor be suspended fror, office innediately for 
a Ponod of two months, with warning that any irregularity conoitted by him' in /■'' 
tli ° fU ^ rG Wil1 bc Bufficiont ground for his removal from the service. 4 

^ trovSel^f'l" ° rd6r 12 ' " Sus P^i^ froa office Hon. Pedro R. Artoohe, 
SunTIS loir o° r ° f0r aCtG ° f °PP rG ^i°n and misconduct," ' 

June 24, 1936. Quezon- Messrs,. Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 759-760! 

vinc?^ f tiV ° ° rd ° r n ifo - 14 > "Suspending Hon. Sebastian T. Gonoroso, pro- 
SSl? pp! llT-m. aVa °' f ° raCtS ° f - scond -t in office," Juno 25^936. 



11-31 1 

- 478 - 

|^0g0g\3PDISCT/JRCBD FOR IMMORALITY 

It has been found that the respondent, notwithstanding the fact that he i £ 
carried, maintained illicit relations with one Maria Mestiola, as a result of 
raich a child was born; that these illicit relations have become a common know- 
ledge in his municipality; that the .conduct of a .justice of the pea ce should bo - 
above reproach and his life should be such as to insure public _r6^nnj L j^^- 

f °r tho_gffico ho holds; and that to ret ain in a position of trust and * 
responsibility a nan who is inrinra^3^nj^ry_to_ public policy and is condu- 
o± yc to destroying the people's faith in the v ery ones called upon to administoi- 
ju stice . 

Respondent was discharged fron his position for the good of the service. 5 
KATHOG, SORSOGON JP DISMISSED FOR aEGLIG3NCE AMD KISCOMDUCT 

Fron the investigation conducted by the department of justice in the pre- 
sent administrative case, it appears that two of the charges have been proven 
beyond question: (a) that the respondent is again guilty of serious negligence 
and, (b) that his personal conduct is unbecoming a public official. F or these 
reasons, Victorio P. Gratela, justice of the peace of Matnog, Sorsogon, is hope- 
by ordered dismissed fron the office of justice of the peace. 6 

^^i-^^ ^ I M^ ggl^^DISKISSaD FOR inHORALIT? 

From the report of the investigation conducted by the department of jus-, 
tico, it conclusively appears that the respondent is leading an immoral life. 

The conduct of a justice of the peace should be above reproach and' his 
life should be such as to insure public respect and estimation for the office he 
holds, and to retain in a position of trust and responsibility a man who is 
immoral is contrary to public policy and is conducive to destroying the people's 
faith in the very ones called upon to administer justice. For these reasons, 
Vicente Roco is hereby ordered dismissed from his office as justice of the peace , 
of Naga, Camarincs Sur. 

The suspension was ordered pending final determination of charges filed 
against Hon. Domingo Magbalon, provincial governor of Masbate, for falsification 
of public records, and to prevent the possible exercise of official authority to 

5/ Administrative Order Eb. 17, "Re Administrative case against Justice of the' 
leaco Bernardo Alindogan of Kagallanes, Sorsogon," July 31, 1936. Ibid.. 
P« 767. *" •—*—** 

6/ Administrative Order No. 18, "Removing from office Justice of the Peace 
victorio P. Gratela of Matnog, Sorsogon," August 12, 1936. Ibid. , p. 768. 

1/ Administrative Order Ho. 20, "Removing from office Justice of the Peace 

Vicente Roco of Maga, Camarincs Sur, for immoral conduct," August 25, 1936. 
Ibid. , p. 771. G ' 



11-312 

- 479 - 

oppress, intinidate or coerce prospective witnesses against him. 8 
Z,^QAHGA = GgYERgOR^S = |U^3NS ICF IS LIF TED 

Governor Felipe L. Rarnos of Zamboanga was suspended for six months for: 
(a) trafficking or selling of office; (b) extorting money from subordinates and 
requesting loans from commercial firms and merchants; and (c) using his office 
or talcing advantage of his official position to hinder the administration of 
ju3tj.ce . Having completed his suspension without pay, he is thereby restored 
to duty. ^ 

The suspension of Governor Domingo Hagbalon of Hasbate was ordered "tem- 
porarily lifted effective immediately until resumption of the trial, without 
prejudice to such action as the decision of the court or administrative pro-- -. 
ceedings that may be taken should warrant..." 

As suspension undergone is not disciplinary in character, payment of sa- 
lary during the period of suspension is hereby ordered. 10 

gIggCTOR_^_HjjM^ FAJARDO 'S RESIGNATION IS ACCEPTED 

Dr. Fajardo was accused of having committed certain irregularities in the 
performance of his duties. The Commissioner of Civil Service made an exhaustive 
investigation of all the charges presented against Dr. Fajardo and the papers were 
subsequently referred by me to the Secretary of Public Instruction, who also very 
carefully reviewed all the facts submitted by the investigator. 

I have personally gone thoroughly over the records of the case and I am 
satisfied that the charges affecting Dr. Fajardo' s honesty have not been proven. 
There was no evidence to support the complaint that Dr. Fajardo had accepted a 
bribe from Antero Azana, a leper who was at that time detained in the San Lazaro 
hospital in Manila. It was conclusively shown that on the date when it was claimed 
Dr. Fajardo received the bribe he was absent from Manila. I am also satisfied that 
the charge in which it is alleged that the wife of Dr. Fajardo had sold some 
pieces of jewelry to leper Antero Azana is unfounded. 

However, the sum total of the facts recorded in the investigation has con- 
vinced mc that his withdrawal from the government will be in the best interests 
of thG health service, and since Dr. Fajardo had signified his desire to. subait \ 

6/ Administrative Order H 0 . 24, "Suspending Eon. Domingo Hagbalon, provincial 
governor of Hasbate, against whom charges are pending and designating Mr. 
l'rancisco S. Titong as acting governor," September 17, 1936. Ibid. . p. 775. 

2/ Administrative Order N 0 . 23, "Ordering that six months of the suspension 
being undergone by Governor Felipe L. Ramos of Zamboanga be without pay, 
and restoring him to duty," November 10, 1936. Ibid. . p. 784. 

10/ Administrative Order No. 27, "Restoring Hon. Domingo Hagbalon, governor of , . '< 
Masbate, to duty during the period of postponement of trial, effective , 
immediately, " November 10, 1936. Ibid. . p. 983. 



11-313 



- 480 - 



his resignation as director of health and had actually presented it before the v 
px-esent investigation was started, but had withheld it only in view of the • no 
charges against him which he first wanted investigated, action on said resigna- 
tion was temporarily held in abeyance. Now that the investigation has been com- 
pleted and the findings are as I have stated above, I deer, it advisable to accent 

Dr. Fajardo's resignation which he desires to be considered, and I do hereby ac- 
... 11 

ccpt it. . 
LSJSLO JTP DISMIS SED FOR^IMO RALITY 

This is an administrative case against Justice of the Peace Nicanor T. 
Halibas, of Ganassi, Bacolod, Madulu, Madamba, Pualas, and Munungan, Lanao, who 
is charged with immorality. 

Prom the report of the investigation conducted by the provincial fiscal 
of Lanao, it conclusively appears that before the respondent was appointed to his 
iresent position, he had maintained illicit relations with on Victoria Gonzaga . . f * 
and when the latter gave birth, ho refused to give support to their offspring 
and married another woman. 

To retain in a position of trust and responsibility a man who is immoral ... 

is contrary to public policy and is conducive to destroying the people's faith 

in the very ones called upon to administer justice. Llien the respondent was 

appointed justice of the peace, I was not aware of his immoral conduct, otherwise. 

12 

jic would not have boon appointed as such. 
CAGAYAN JP SUSPiSHDi-iD PGR PARTIALITY 

The report of investigation in the administrative case against Auxilliary 
Justice of the Peace Quirino Galicia of Sanchez Hira, Cagayan, discloses the fact, 
that on March 31, 1936, the respondent issued a search warrant against H. C. 
Wahlgron for the purpose of discovering and seizing unlicensed revolvers alleged 
to be in the possession of said V/ahlgren; and that respondent's only basis for 
issuing the search warrant was the affidavit presented to him by Dee Hong Luc, .. 
the applicant for its issuance, and the affidavits of two other persons. Al- 
though the evidence available on the record does not conclusively show that the 
search warrant under consideration was issued without corresponding application 
and proofs showing probable cause, yet it can be safely stated that the respon- 
dent had shown partiality in granting the petition of Dee.". Hong Lue, as evidenced, 
by the fact that he himself took particular interest in the preparation of the 
application and other papers in connection with the issuance of the search war- 
rant, and for that purpose, he- (respondent) wont to the place where Dee Hong Luo 

1±/ Administrative Order No. 31, "Accepting Dr. Fajardo's resignation," 
January 9, 1937. Ibid. , p. 1153. 

12/ Administrative Order No. 36, "Dismissing Justice of the Peace Nicanor Halibas 
of Ganassi, Bacolod, Madulu, Kadanba, Pualas, and Mumungan, province of Lanao 
from Office"; City of New York, USA (for the City of Manila), Juno 14, 1937. 
Ibid. , p. 1159. 



II-314 



- m - 



was residing using the automobile of the latter. The respondent also personally 
directed the chief of police of Sanchez Ilira to serve the search warrant, but no 
unlicensed firearm was after all found in tfahlgren's possession. ^ 

cjji/>ai^ ^mt_jp^ m^s^TOR_TO^R^B of law 

In view of the foregoing (result of a thorough and careful investigation 
of the administrative charge filed - ABS), and considering the danger of entrust- 
ing the administration of .justice to the hands of officials vrho are ignorant of 
\;hc- elementary principles of law, and upon the recommendation of the undersecre- 
tary of .justice, Felix B. Panis is hereby ordered dismissed from the office of 

.justice of the peace of Tigaon and Sagnay, Canarines Sur, for the good of the 
14 

i.iorv.ico. 

POLILLO, TAYABAS JP DISMI SSED FO R BEING "ALCOHOLIC PARANOID" 

The department of justice has reported to this office that the respondent 
Justice of the Peace 3dilberto Rina of Polillo, Tayabas (now Quezon province) 
dismissed in Criminal Case No. 476 and acquitted the accused in Criminal Case 
ft '0. 477, without justifiable cause. It was also reported that the respondent is 
Buffering from "alcoholic paranoid." 

Upon the recommendation of the undersecretary of justice, this Office cn 
July 16, 1937, requested the respondent to tender his resignation froa the office 
of justice of the peace of Polillo, Tayabas, within a period of thirty days from 
the receipt of the said letter, and warned him that if he fails to do so, this 
Office will order his removal. 

In view of the failure of the respondent to tender his resignation, either 
to the judge of the Court of First Instance of Tayabas or to the Secretary of 
Justice, as required, and considering that his further continuance in office will 
have a demoralizing effect in his community, the respondent should not be allowed 
to 3tay in the judiciary. Edilberto Rina is hereby ordered dismissed from the 
office of justice of the peace of Polillo, Tayabas, for the good of the service. 

After reviewing the report of investigation in the administrative case 
against Auxilliary Justice of the Peace Hilaricn Caldoron of Zaragoza, Nueva 
iicija, it appears that the respondent is found guilty by the judge of the. Court 
of First Instance who investigated the case, of the following: (l) that the 

12/ Administrative Order (To. 37, "Suspending Auxilliary Justice. of the Peace 
Quirino C. Galicia, of Sanchez Mira, Cagayan, from office"; City of New 
fork, USA (for the City of Manila), June 14, 1937. Ibid. . p. 1160. 

Ijy Administrative Order Wo. 38, "Dismissing Justice of the Peace Felix B. 
Panis, of Tigaon and Sagnay, Camarines Sur, from office"; City of New 
York, USA (for the City of Manila), June 14, 1937. Ibid . . p. 1162. 

15/ Administrative Order Ho. 47, "Dismissing Justice of the Peace Edilberto Rina 
of Polillo, Tayabas, from office"; September 15, 1937. Ibid. . p. 1176. 



11-315 ; 

- 488 - 

respondent took active part in the general elections of 1931 and 1935, in viola- 
tion of the provisions of section 449 of the Administrative Code; and (2) that 
••o was found guilty of unjust vexation against one Josef ina Lindain while she 
'.an in respondent's rice -ill and sentenced to pay a fine of ten pesos by the 
district judge. 

Considering the seriousness of the irregularities committed by the respon- 
dent, and upon the recommendation of the undersecretary of justice, Eilarion Cal- 
leron is hereby ordered dismissed from his office as auxiliary justice of the 
■ep.ee of Zaragcaa, Nueva Bcija, for the good of the service. 16 

The respondent (Sixto Ribino) was charged with having committed the follow- 
ing while he was acting justice of the peace of Ronblon, same province: (l ) 
negligence and laziness in the performance of his official duties; (2) imposition 
of illegal and excessive penalties through abuse of discretion; and (3) issuance ■ 
ox" unjust orders and rulings. 

From the investigation conducted by the District Judge in the present ad- 
.anistrative case, it appears that all the above charges have been proved beyond : 
question. All of these irregularities committed by the respondent make his con- 
tinuance in office, highly undesirable. To retain in a position of trust and res-: 
,k nubility in the public service a man who abuses the power given him by law 
and is negligent in the performance of his official duties is contrary to public - 
policy and lowers the standard required to be maintained by government officials. 17 
g^BATE JP TOLD TO HSSIGjT FOR IGK0RA3CB OF LAW 

This case involves three administrative complaints against Jose 1. Almariey ' 
justice of the peace of Masbato, Masbate. In the first complaint, the respondent 
was charged with acting in bad faith and with political consideration in issuing 
orders of injunction in two civil cases against complainant, the Hon. Doming ' 
•agbalon, provincial governor of Kasbate. 

In the second complaint, the respondent was charged by one Raymundo Lin 
with trying a criminal case for serious physical injuries in which the complain- 
ant was the offended party, notwithstanding the fact that said case was beyond 
the jurisdiction of his court, and in maliciously acquitting the accused therein ^ 
of the crime charged. ' *■ 

In the last complaint, the respondent was charged with having acted sum- . 
qarily and without jus tifiable cause in ordering the complainant, the Hon. Jose 

1.0/ Administrative Order No. 59, "Dismissing Auxiliary Justice of the Peace 

nilarion Calderon of Zaragoza, Nueva Ecija, from office," October 25, 1937. 
J- bid. . p. 1182. ' 

VjJ Administrative Order No. 51 , "Dismissing Justice of the Peace Sixto S. 

^abino of San Fernando, Cajidiocan, and Magdiwang, Ronblon, from office," 
October 26, 1937. Ibid. . p. 1183. 



11-31 6 

- 483 - 



Ma. Aagustia who was then acting provincial governor of Kasbate, to leave the 
court room during the trial of a criminal case for estafa against one Agapito 
Guadayo . 



The now government has been fearless in imposing disciplinary punishment 
on public officials found guilty of corruption or neglect of duty. The firmness 
with which the Commonwealth government has demanded a high standard of integrity 
from its officials has greatly increased the public confidence. 19 
fflSIftfl/iTION OR EXPULSION FOR KRRIN& TOP OFFICIALS, PLEDG-ES QUEZON 

I am going to change the policy heretofore adopted by the government that 
when some officials of the government, who are occupying: responsible positions, 
commit a fault - unless it is of a criminal nature - they are merely transferred 
from a big province to a smaller one or suspended from office. 

If a responsible official commits a grievous act under my administration, 
he will be punished by only one method; he will either be compelled to resign or ' 
be expelled from the service. Why? Because an official occupying a responsibl y 
position cannot remain in that positinn^af^hejia s shown his negligence, his 
inefficiency or his 1 a ck_of_inte grity, and when you pu nish an official occupying 
^responsible po3ition_by_trangf 'erring hir from a large to a smaller province , 
you arc p uni s h j^h^^ sendi ng to that province 

an inefficient or an irresponsible offic ial. . 20 

EL^L^Ig^_I^'ICIEyCY, CORRUPTION IN COMMENT, SAYS QUE ZON 

It is therefore essential to the perpetuation of our democratic institutions 
that our government be an effective instrument for the promotion of the public . 
vrolfare, free from the baneful effects of inefficiency and corruption. If we 
should succeed in this, we would be contributing to the preservation of democracy 
in the world. 

107. QUEZON H U K 0 R 
gJLg HjL-fc* i-MgRICAN SOLDE3RJMM10 H AWAY FR OM Hill - BHICH? 

I remember the days when my great ambition was to kill an American soldier, 
and my constant fear was to be killed also by an American soldier. 
_ It^is ver y h ard for no to say now which of the two emotions was stronger. 

J_8/ Administrative O rd er No. 53, "Requiring Jose L. Almario to resign from 
office as justice of the peace of Masbato, Kasbate," November 12, 1937. 
■*-bid t . p. 1185. 

12/ Report to the Congress of the United Statt-a, 1937, n.d.m. QP, HR&O, TNI. 

20/ Speech before provincial treasurers, Kalacanan, February 22, 1938. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, p. 1707. 

21/ Message to the Second National Assembly, January 24, 1939. OjP, KR#42, TNL. 



II-517 

■ * 484 - 

I only remember that the second emotion kept me running through the mountains and 
in thus running I had very littlo opportunity of satisfying the first one. 1 

i™MIL£ILlI~lIiiLI21^ilJJI^i°02l TS _oi; sugar? 

The tine has cone when the Filipino people must decide whether they shall 
be the nastcrs of their own destiny or not. If we are not willing to assume -all ■ 
the responsibilities of a free people, then lot us quit talking about freedom 
and independence and let us sell our birthright for one million tons of sugarl 2 ' 
P&3SIDi2KTIAL Cfl/IP ON HAN WHO IS LAZY TO VJORK 



A nan who does not like to work, has no right to relax; he is relaxing 
all the tine! 5 

JJJZQti LIKBS COMPANY OF MEN AND iJOIEN - NOT MEN ' S WOMEN! 



I have never boon a nan's nan. I like the company of men to work, or to 
;.lay a gane of poker or bridge. Outside of those two occasions I prefer the ccn- 
r:.ny of women - but, of course, not of men's women! ^ 

HUsaiPBBT's s tory of a salary-.si3be3r and a real worker 



I will tell you a story. many young men have cone to ne to ask for a job. 
"What can you do?" I asked. 

"Oh, everything," was their reply. 

"What do you mean? You are a marvelous fellow! " 

I just want a salary to support myself," they answered. 

You are not looking for a job, you are looking for a salary. I am going tc 
:;:ivo you a job if you can show me that you really want to work. Go to the Mayor 
of Manila and tell him to give you a job as street sweeper; then come back to mo." 

None, net one of them, has come back to me yet. (Laughter.) 

On the other hand, one morning while I was walking on the Palace grounds 
I saw a clean, nice-looking young man carrying a heavy piece of wood. H e was bare- 
footed. % attention was attracted, so I called him. "Why are you working?" I 
asked . 

"I have to make a living, Mr. President," he answered. 
"How much do you get?" 
■ "One peso a day, sir." 
"Have you boon to school?" 



\J Speech at the Willard Hotel, Washington ,D , C . , February 27, 1937 . 
Lkozon Megsagas. Vol. 2, Part I, .TBVFF, p. 55. 

2/ Speech broadcast from Washington, D.C., April 4, 1937. Ibid. . p. 91. 

2/ Speech at a press conference, : October 27, 1937.. r jP, MR#40, TNL« 

Speech before the Gridiron Club, 1937, n.d.m. Ibid . 



11-318 



- 485 - 



"Yes, sir, I an in the high school." 

"Why do you have to work this way; do you not have a father and a mother?" 
"I have, Mr. President, but my father lost his job sometime ago, so he 
and I have to work." 

Then I told him to leave his work and see Secretary Vargas. I told Secre- 
tary Vargas to give hin a better work. Now that boy has a fine job; that boy is' 
t -oing to be a nan; and as long as I can, I will help hin. He did not cone to r.o 
for a job; but he needed work to help his father. 

Now and then I get dozens of letters recommending some boys for jobs. I 
asked then to cone to no. They thought that I an an easy fellow and I give work 
to everybody who cones to no. I have a very soft heart but I have a strong will- 
power, and 1 will not help a boy to bocoue lazy and easy-going. It is not good 
for hin. I like to see boys sweep the streets; I did that work. You know I 
worked in the ricefields; I waited at tables; I did a lot of odd things. I 
passed nights without any food. So why can't others do what I myself did? 5 

i-JLQ'S HUMOROUS STORY SEKDS CROTO ROCKI NG WITH LAUGIITBiR 

I an now feeling tired, but I will say a few ncre words before I close. 
' 2lia nornin &* ^asenblynan Sanidad had shown nc so nany things that I almost died " 
of exhaustion before I arrived here. (Laughter.) 

The Governor said that this is not the proper occasion for hia to reveal 
the needs of the people of Abra. What is the proper occasion then? (Laughter.) 
I have come to find out what you want. But I suppose your Governor meant this: 
"nr. President, I don't have to ask you anything, because we have a man in the 
national Assembly who knows how and what to ask. So why waste our time? 1 ' 

Ho is right. Only a month ago, at the consideration of the appropriations 
for members of the National Assembly at a meeting of the council of state, Floor 
Leader Quintin Paredos was able to get several thousands of pesos for Abra, and ; 
he easily got the appropriation - just as if he had merely asked me a cigarette. 
(Laughter. ) 

So you don't have to ask mo anything , and I don't -have to promise you 
anything. You can rest assured that when you need something, provided that the 
government has the authority and the means to give it, you will always have it 
whether or not you open your mouth. (Applause.) That will always be true as long 
as I am the President of the Philippines. (Laughter.) 

So that I may be certain of remaining President during the next two 3'ears, 
I am going to stop talking new. (Applause.) 6 



H/ Speech, "Building the Character of the Youth," at the Zamboanga Normal 
School, Zamboanga City, August 25, 1938. Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, 
p. 1872. 

6/ Speech, "Cooperation Between the Chief Executive and the National Assembly," 
Bangued, Abra, April 23, 1939. Ibid. , p. 3034. 



.11-319 

- 486 - 

108. Q U Jii Z 0 ]? ILLNESS 
FROM HIS SICKBED ML Q CONTIHUES FIGHT F OR I!fl)E3?3 M)BKCE , BUCKS TOO MEASURES 

There are pending on the floor of the U.S. Senate two bills affecting the 
■Philippine Islands, S. 2292 and S. 2787. The first proposes to have the Congress, 
of the United States appropriate $125,000 from the funds collected in the United 
.States from internal revenue taxes levied upon articles and raerchandise coming 
to this country from the Philippine Islands (now turned over in its entirety to 
the Philippine treasury for general appropriation by the Philippine Legislature), 
and giving the Governor-General authority to expend some for the employment of 
technical advisers and assistants with out t he necessity of further appropriation 
b y the Philippine Legislature and w ithout submit ting appoi ntments to the Philip- 
pine Sonato;_ the other authorizes the Governor-General to appoint governors for 
the so-called Mohammedan and non-Christian provinces witho ut the c onsent of t he 
Philipp ine Senate . 

As nay bo readily seen these bills are reactionary in that they cu rtail 
the right of our Le gislature t o appropriate and the power of the Senate to con- 
firn . a J]I oin t "- ienta ' Enactment of these bills is not only contrary to the official 
•■'lodge made by the government of the United States to grant the Filipinos ©very- 
increasing measures of self-government, with independence as the ultimate goal, 
but also to the oft-repeated policy of both the Republican and Democratic parties 
as expressed not only in their respective platforms but also by their respective 
leaders in authority. 

It would be most unfortunate and unjust if Congress should enact these 
measures. ^ 

My plans for the future? At present I have only one definite plan. Within 
a few days I shall submit my report (on his trip to the United States - ABS) to 
the Legislature. After that everything depends on my health. I may rejoin my 
colleagues in the Senate, if I am able to do so. I may go away for a rest. After 
my report has been submitted, I shall be in the hands of my physicians - unless 
the people need me. 

* *- * 

Haggard and emaciated, his health almost entirely sacrificed to his task, 
Senate President Quezon has returned (from a one-man unofficial independence mis- 
sion to America - ABS). His last words tell the whole story. What little is left 
of that health is at the disposal of his people - if they need him. 

Xj Memorandum dictated from ; his ; sickbed in the Monrovia Sanatorium, California, 
against the doctor's orders, as reported in the Ma nila Tribu ne, August 16, 
1928. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 808-813. 

2/ End of an unidentified newspaper clipping, October 1931. Ibid. . p. 846. 



11-320 

- 487 - 

g^g M gjgI£HI2i = gg£AIJSB = 0F_ILL HEALTH, 

Because of the state of my health which grows worse every day, I find my- 
self obliged to present my resignation as president of the Senate. 

Allow me to take advantage of this opportunity to express my profound gra- 
t,tude to the senators, to the majority as well as the minority, for their cour- 
tesy and cooperation, and my sincere congratulations for their valuable service 
to the country. To Senator OsmeHa, who, in my absence, acted zealously, disinte- 
restedly and with the best ability as president of the Senate, my cordial folici- 
tations and my personal gratitude. 3 

gw,wwria,aiB»i»i m ,, t || B , mnm ». m ^ 

^ f T y l la h0aV * n '° ° an,t ™ *"> ~ litiea aeparate fro, issues 

■hat affect our country - our people? «,at are „ but tools, to help the people 
reach the goal they desire? H,y, then, should we alio* ourselves to be swayed by 
personal dislikes that should have no place where the people's welfare » at staPe* 

MZ . conscience j s cloflr I _ went to the np itM-St atee and. d am<ta „ < n 
B»*^LXBi^MUtou^^ P mtM .. WJ 

— tlT n « T fl irt J ft „ mtt, find T Inww thwt «. t w ^ T m 
A M 0n;y fortu ne,^, family .has - civ hnnl th, 

-if I can persuade the people, in discussing our cause, to leave political 
considerations aaide; if I can convince the. that our idea! of ,1 30 

SiP-re d . tnat cannot - m J .sXj^tJ ! o_t^t^.,b^_art. v prciud ic.es. * " 

aaaa am was 12 iss., sacs amum ma. 

Statement of yueaon's physicians published in the Manila Tribune . November ' 

1 » 



10, 1931: 



A consultation on the subject of Senate President Quezon's condition was 
-Id on Sunday, November 8, by the undersigned. It was decided at the consultation 
that Lr. Quezon's pulmonary lesion is in a more or less latent state, without any 
.xst.nct evidence of activity, However, his general health is greatly impaired. ' 
T n he left Manila (for the .nited States - ABS) several .onths ago, he weighed 
1,0 pounds, ioday.he weighs 118, having lost 12 P ounds. It was further decided 
-hat he must have complete repose and that he be relieved of his work. All those 
^Li^!!^i!ii!J!! OVery should P e ™" him to have the rest he needs." - 
2/ Letter to the Senate, November 7, 1931 . Ibid,,, pp. 848-849. 

ssissvssi? 1 critSis z r 0 f r si h i s sickbed in r ° piy to f °™ er s ^ 

m ^7 s s Dlt ^ er criticism of the Quezon report to the Philippine Legislature 
Vol" 11™°%™* t0 UnitCd StateS ' N ° Vember 29 ' 1931 ' cSle^tion, 



11-321 

- 488 - 

(Sgd.) Homer B. Whitney, Andreas B. Trepp, and Antonio G. Sison. 5 
1 09. QUEZON INDEPENDENCE STAND 

Mr. Chairman, it would be a lack:of candor for me to say that the Clarke 
amendment (granting Philippine independence in not less than two but not more 
than four years - ABS) constitutes, in my opinion, the best and wisest way of 
disposing of the Philippine question. I think I could propose a better solution, 
or, at least one that would better safeguard the interests of my people and be ' 
rore satisfactory to thorn. But, as a practical man, I must deal with conditions, 
and so, there being no other proposal for Philippine independence which could pos- 
sibly have any chance of getting through, I _ am for the Clarke amendment body ^ 
soul. (Applause on the Democratic side.) ~ 

The Gub stantial merit of the Clarke amendment lies in the fact that it pro- 
vides for the establishment, within a short period of time, of an independent ' 
,UIi PP ine government, a government that will be of, for and by the Filipino people 
absolutely free from any foreign control and interference, a government which it 
- ° Ur f ° ndest ambiti °n to have, as it is our God-given right to establish, the 
only kind of government under which we can live happily and contented. (Applause.) 

By the enactment of the Jones Law in 1916 which, in its preamble, states 
that it is the purpose of the United States to grant the Philippines their inde- 
pendence as soon as a stable government can be established therein, and by the 
acceptance by the Filipino people of the terms of this Act, a solemn covenant was 
ontdred into between the people of the United States , on the one hand, and the Fili- 
pino people, on the other, whereby we bound ourselves to carry out the provisions 
of that Act and bring about a situation that would make possible the establishment 
of a stable government, while you (the American people - ABS) bound yourselves to . 
grant us independence as soon as this condition came into existence in the Islands. 

We have faithfully complied with the terms and provisions of this Act. V7o 
organised a government in accordance with its terms; we elected the Legislature 
provided therein, a legislature which has now been functioning for seven years; 
<:,nd not gnlyj^^ g overnment is already 

?£^iahod_andJgJ^ fully performed Qur part 

"l.il^covenari ^n d^ t o do your part g 

It is beside the point to argue whether or not it would be advantageous 
economically or otherwise to grant the Philippines independence. The one single 
^S^JL^^L^L ^J^ havo a stable government in the Philippines or a stable 
5/ Ibid. , p. 847. 

1/ Speech, "The Japanese Menace," in the U.S. House of Representatives, 
day 1, 1916. Ibid_., V 0 i. I, pp . 357-361 . 



11-322 

- 489 - 

/•ov ernment can be established therein . If so, as we must emphatically assei-c, - 

and. have time and again demonstrated, it is our belief that your plighted word 

2 

jives you no alternative but the granting of independence. 

Rep. BEEDY: It has been intimated to me more than once that your leaders 
arc corning here and demanding independence immediately because of political pres- 
sure, which makes it incumbent upon you to do so, but that as a matter of fact, 
you would fear the consequences of immediate independence not only in an economic 
way, but in a political way, and that you would be delighted, having apparently 
met the demands of your people, to have us postpone the date of your independence, 
Do you yourself know anything about that? 

QUEZON: Mr. Chairman, the best proof of the pudding is in the eating. If 
you should enact a bill providing for immediate independence, you will find out 
whether our leaders wanted immediate independence or not. 

Rep. BEEDY: I want you to answer my question. 

Rep. MACLAFEERTY: That is a fair question. 

QUEZON: Of course, wc want immediate independence, and it is not true that 
wo c ame here only for poli tical ^ggdiency. But granted that it is true that the 
political leaders do not want immediate independence, but that they are advoca- 
ting it simply because they are afraid of their constituency, I want to ask is 
■gPJLfoifl f act the best proof that th_e_ people of the Phili ppine Islands w ant in- 
aflUfiaaa Pce , if hop th q^ r. J^ UuaJhags^tfl. ^dKQfiatfl. JJl*.J2£IL against thn-ir win? Af tor 
all, it is not what the politicians think or say that ought to govern democracy; 
it is what the people want. If the leaders did not want independence, but felt 
that the people wanted it to such an extent that they were compelled to fight for 
independence, then I think you should give the people what they want. 

Rep. BEEDY; And you believe your people want independence today, and you 
want it, do you? 

QUEZON : Yes, sir. 3 

^gA_gOMg^IANgE WITH PROHISEJjILL BE A GREAT MORAL EXAMPLE 



If America will act now to carry out its pledge to the Filipino people (to 
grant independence as soon as a stable government can be established in the Phi- 
lippines - A3S), its action will serve as a great moral example to the entire 
world and will be in the interest of world peace. 



* * * 



The present conditions in the Islands are unsatisfactory to all, and it is 



2/ statement before the Committee on Insular Affairs, U.S. House of Representa- 
tives, May 5, 1924. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 742. 

'if Transcript of record taken at the hearing before the Committee on Insular 
Affairs, U.B. House of Representatives, May 5* 1924. Ibid. , p. 746. 



11-323 

- 490 - 

,\ot likely that this situation can be improved very much until the independence 
question is settled once and for all. ^ 

';i"S3Z0iI. DENIES FILIPINOS NO LONGER DESIRE INDEPENDENCE 



As president of the Philippine Senate and in my capacity as head of the 
"'hilippine independence mission to the United States, I wish to say emphatically 
:hat the Filipino people are as anxious as over for their independence, and that 
t'-a Filipino leaders, including myself, have not changed front on this question. 

As far as I am concerned, m y mission in the United States, in the language 
.2lL^]ie_reaolj^ijm . of Jhe_Philipp ine Legislature, by which authority I am here, is 
"to petition, the Government and Congress of th e United States for the early grant- 
ing_Qf independence Jbg_the^hiddj^n^^ and I am doing 

part to carry it. ^ 

I:Xq'8 THRBI2-P0B1T PROPOSAL ON PHILIPPINE QUES TION 

1 . Immediate establishment of an independent government with free trade 
::..-) two en America and the Philippines for a period of 10 years, limiting the amount 
of sugar entering the United States free of duty to one million tons and oil to 
the amount exported at present, and the restrictions of Filipino labor immigra- 
tion into the United States. 

2. If unacceptable, immediate establishment of an autonomous government 
with all consequent powers, including that of enacting measures necessary to meet 
the responsibilities of an independent government when independence is granted, • 
with restrictions necessary to safeguard the interests of American sovereignty 

in the Philippines. Within such a period of 10 years, trade relations between the 
liniced States and the Philippines and the labor immigration into the United States, 
will be the same as proposed in the preceding paragraph. At the end of 10 years, 
the Filipino people will decide by means of a plebiscite if it desires to continue 
with such a government or prefers to have one that is absolutely independent. In 
the latter case, American sovereignty will bo immediately withdrawn from the 
Islands. 

3. In the event that this is not acceptible, the Filipino people will 
welcome any bill granting Philippine independence in any form. 6 



4/ Speech before the Platfor--. Committee of the Third Progressive Party, Hollenden 
Hotel, Cleveland, Ohio, 1924. In: The Philippine Republic, August-September • 
1924. i bid. . p. 761 . ; 

5/ Letter to the Dallas jlo^in^Jtfews , dated June 29, 1931, in answer to the 

paper's Hay 23rd editorial saying that the Filipino people and their leaders 
have turned around and no longer desire independence. Ibid. . pp. 838-839. 

6/ Proposal presented before political leaders in Washington in mid-1931 , as 
quoted in Carlos Quirino, Quezon: Nan of Destiny. Wisconsin State Historical 
Library, 1935, pp. 64-65. Ibid. , p. 842. 



H-324 

- 491 - 

mere_i3_n o , change in m y. 3tand.qf_J_oda, Y . f rom mv stand of yesterday nr gf 
t^ity. -fivo years , ^ ■J.J^J^faj^ofl^oju^co mplete and im^djato i^^' . 
l«I^,.J_3Md_ti^_in.^ 

When I said that wg need ton years for readjustment, I offered it as one 
of the three proposals which we would be willing to accept, if we could get it. . 

i£-muamajL^^ have^^t^ndG^ 

The question is one that no longer admits of personal recriminations. It 
no longer revolves about the old question of who is the patriot and who the traitoi 
the JJcmocrata or the Hacionalista. Tl^^sUon^j,^ end the present 
l'.-j£t^an^ t o end o ur ^j^sont^^ nattor how lightlv it fn11a on 

,2ur_^hpuld^^^ fcTo mugt ^ wQrk ^ 

solution - but the solution will never be attained by stubbornness, by defiance, 
lb is not to bo found in making a political football of the independence question. 
"° faC ° th ° faCtS « Each of us has a responsibility to shoulder. In coming 

out, openly, I EO rvod notice on all that I am ready to shoulder nine! 7 

110. qUEZOU ON M A H 0 L A P U S 

As I said once, these (young) people who are preaching social justice arc 
gettmg far ahead of me. I listened to a wonderful speech delivered at an orato- 
rical contest held last night. As I listened to (Raul) Kanglapus , every fiber of 
my being was touched. 

That is the effect of what I am saying: these follows are going a little 
bit too far. And if that spo.ch were delivered in the native dialect before ton^to 
of Nuova Kcxja or Pampanga, you can be sure that there would be a revolution the 
next day. 

Just imagine, he said that people have been robbed of their lands. Then he 
poxnted out how these lands came into the possession of the cncomcndcro.c Of 
course, this took place during the Spanish regime. All these ugly things were 
aaid by Kanglapus who was educated by the Jesuits, and the Jesuits were the ones 
who were believed to be responsible for the robbery of these lands. 1 (Laughter.) 
^jj^^lgB^J:.^ ™^ LIK E HAWOLAPUS CAN H AKE ^VO LTT^r 

Just three or four days ago, I went to investigate the complaint of the 
tenants of th e Gua d^lupejSstate. They have been living in that place since time 

17 rs: sss g,^ ^£%z£r» - s ~° 

17 ^r k , 



11-325 



- 492 - 



immemorial ; thoir ancestors had also lived there; yet these tenants have- been re- 
quired to pay for two to four pesos per square meter for the land which they occupy 

This hacienda belongs to the Augustinian order. A historical marker in the 
Church of Guadalupe states that it was built in 1 560 - a few years after the 
Spaniards arrived in the Philippines. Evidently, those Augustinian friars took a 
banc a and glided along the river until they saw that place and decided to stay 
there; and the friars became the landowners! 

Certainly, these tenants are the owners of the land, and yet they now find 
themselves aliens to that land. So when I heard Manglapus deliver that magnificent 
speech, I was surprised. Those Jesuits should not have permitted that boy to de- 
nounce what the friars did. They knew what the speech was and still they allowed 
him. And the boy was no fool - he prefers to mention "encomonderos" instead of 
"friars" although these words mean the same thing. 

And they tell me that this Manglapus is the son of a rich father. If we can 

get several young men like Manglapus and have them deliver that speech, we will 

2 

surely have a revolution in the Philippines. 

111. QUEZON ON RIZAL 
.^•imCA^SHA^p^S^S^roiAL^I^^^H, 3AYS_q T JEZ0N 

Jose Rizal was court-martialed and executed by a firing squad in 1896. The 
Spanish regime had sentenced him to death for the sole crime of loving freedom 
and advocating it for his people. 

Vlhen the American government in Manila made the anniversary of his martyr- 
don a national holiday, it became clear at once that in American eyes he was not 
only without guilt, but, rather, worthy of public recognition - that his devotion 
to the cause of freedom was as good in the eyes of the American people as it wa3 
in that of the Filipino people. 

•* * * 

He (Rizal) w as one of the noblest c haracters that the human race has ever 
p roduced. H e was the very personification of Kipling's "If." \ 

---H£-° 2in^I^ijQOggggggi!g s MERGER OF EAST AMD WEST 

Filipino civilization represents the merger of the East and West. In the 
Philippines they have met on an equal footing, and the best of each has inter- 
mingled. We have been enriched by this fusion. 

Clearly, if we are to establish a world of peace after this war, human 
beings of all nations must learn to understand and respect one another. The West 
must try to understand and respect the East, and the East must try to do the sane 
for the West. 

We of the Philippines can help by serving as the meeting-ground, as the 
2/ Ibid. , pp. 2198-2199. 

l/ Speech, "Joso Rizal and the Sun of Liberty," broadcast from Washington, D.C., 
December 20, 1942. Ibid. . Vol. V, p. 2418. 



11-326 



- 49? - 



interpreter between the East and 'Jest. This will be our contribution to the free 
world of tomorrow. 

Rapidly, wc are approaching a crossroad in history. For us, the Filipinos, 
our road runs east and west. And there, in the East, where the sun rises, we see 
already the glimmerings of dawn. Already' the; gloon of night is softening and soon 

the new day will break, flooding us all with the bright sun of liberty. 

2 

Then the dream of Rizal will come time. 

As we commemorate Rival's martyrdom this year, while our country is under 
the heel of the invader and our people are actually under the iron control of a 
foreign army, some may ask if our sacrifices and sufferings, the imprisonment and 
the death of our beloved ones, all these hardships and daily dangers of our fightin 
men still resisting the enemy, are too much or too unbearable. 

To this question, the answer has been given by Rizal himself - an answer 
that applies to every Filipino individually as well as to all our people collect- 
ively. Risal suffered in exile and in prison, and ;rave his own life for the libe rty 
o f our peopl e and coun try. No Filipino livin.? tod ay, and no Filipino vet unborn , 
can ffive a life more pr ecious, more valuable, t han t he life Rizal gladly sacrifi ced 

Let us, therefore, vow once again that we shall fight unto death for our. 
country's freedom and independence. 

112. Q UEZOB-OSHSNA C 0 L L I S I 0 N 

I foresaw that the day would come when a serious conflict between the Senate 
(headed by Tucson - ABS) and the leader of the party in power in the government 
(.Speaker Sergio Osmena - ABS) would come, and that the result of such a conflict 
would create a crisis in the party. 

Experience during the last five years has shown me positively that if I con- 
tinue to occupy the post of president of the Senate, I am liable, in defense of 
my principles that you and I deem sacred, to threaten the peace of the party and 
under such circumstances I cannot continue. 

The presidency of the Senate as a post does not appeal to me. I saw in' it 
an opportunity for service, but now there is dissension, misunderstanding, suspi- 
cion, and so I must go. ^ 

I did not look for the conflict. The conflict was thrust upon me. A recent 
2/ Ibid. 

'2/ Quezon last message from Washington, D.C., on Rizal Day, December 30, 1943. 
Hardly seven months later, on August 1, 1944, he died at Saranac Lake, Few 
York. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2492. 

l/ Speech in the Senate, date inadvertently omitted, but later published in the 
Philippine Review. Vol. VI, Nob. 10-12, October-December 1921. Ibid. . Vol. II, 
pp. 565-570. 



11-327 

— 

arrival from the United States, the Filipino knew that I had to undergo medical 
treatment, that my health was broken, and that I needed rest. I tried to avoid it 
because I knew that it was going to mean fight, and I did not want conflict, I 
wanted harmony, peace. 

The conflict came in spite of myself. Confronted by it, I had to defend the 

2 

principles which I sincerely believed were just. 
I-l^JPOLITJC^LJ^ 

What a beautiful spectacle for the country to behold political fights limited 
to discussion of principles and eliminating personalities! What a magnificent spec- 
tacle for the people to see political opponents eating on the same banquet tables, 
united by links of affection and friendship! Much as I regret .it, this seems to 
be something unknown here. Every time that the people see the Speaker (Osmena) 
and myself together, immediately the talk goes the rounds that our political dif- 
ferences have been patched up. When we had toasted each other at a banquet in the 
.vyuntamicnto, all the people said, there was peace between the two, not knowing 
that the next day a big bomb was going to explode! ^ 

I would not descend to the level of the Speaker from Cebu when ho practical- 
ly branded mo a liar; I shall limit myself to refreshing his weakened memory... 
I do not know, Mr. President, why I pay but little attention to the strategy of 
words. I always act in good faith and without ■ untoward purposes, and I am not 
drawn to the. subtleties of recondite language. Now, however, chastened by some 
disagreeable experiences, I am more on' my guard, and scrutinize the contents of 
a document before signing it. ^ 

The trouble with you (addressing Speaker Osmena - ABS) is that you take 
the game of politics too seriously. You look too far behind you and too far alisad 
of you. Our people do not understand that. All they want is to have the present 
problem solved, and solved with the least pain. That is all. 5 

^^ ^I^YO^_Sg_^^| ; JgyEH SUBMIT TO HUMILIATION 

Never in my life have I yielded to the indignity of a humiliation. The man 
has not yet been born who can make me forget what is due to myself, nor is there 
under the heaven any price, however great, that can make me even for a moment 

Speech, "My Loyalty to Ply Party Ends...," at the Manila Grand Opera House, 
February 18, 1922. Ibid. . p. 577. 

2/ Loyalty to Party speech, De la Liana and Icasiano, on,, cit . . p. 8. Also in 
.Rivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 576-577. 

Quezon's answer to Osmena, De la Liana and Icasiano, aunra. p. 22. 
5/ Kalaw US, pp. 352-355. Quoted in Theodore Friend, o_&. cit. . p. 52.' 



11-328 

" 495 ~ 

eschew the dictates of human dignity. It is for this reason that I would not give, 
-over will give, my vote of confidence to him whom I had in public accused indi- 
vidually and clearly, in private conversations and in the presence of other per- 
rons, of being a traitor to the cause of the country, not even to keep my position, 
nor to become chief magistrate of the nation. 6 

The Nacionalista Party and the entire Filipino people know how faithfully 
I have served my party colleagues. Everybody knows how I fought for them within 
and without the ranks, and that I never hesitated- to come to the fore to defend 
the party's ideals and its men. I want to recall at this moment, with satisfaction 
and without regret, how I have always supported and defended him (referring to 
Speaker Osmena - AB3) with all sincerity and even as strongly as his strongest sup- 
porters could have done. I defended the party at least as much as the staunchest " 
Nacionalista and the most dyed-in-the-wool Uniporsonaliata. 

But the party never has been and never will be the people. My lovaltv t " 
J2arty_. ends whsro ny ], nv n1t y to jiY__cou ntrv be«ina. Even if it were not the Naci 
lista Party, let it be any other party, from the moment that my convictions do . • 
coincide with the ideal for which the party stands, I consider it my duty to lo 
it. A man to be ^^^f^\^i\m3.M.o»U Put his convictions into notice. pro- 
fess them with f ai th,_ defend Jhem_v f itli courage., h appen what roav. 7 

Political parties are nothing but instruments in democracies, and when the 
interests of the country are made subservient to the interests of a party, then 
that party no longer serves the ends for which it was organised. And I wish to add 
that ray adhesion to the party, g roa t as is my desire to further its interests, is 
second to the interests of the country. 8 

aUgZOQ BCQUgTS ROM AM D WHY HE JQIH ED IJACIOIJALISTA PARTY 



This is a day of transcendental importance to mo. I am going to take a step 
the consequences of which I have foreseen, but the result of which God alone knows. 
Prom the time I entered public office I fought under the banner of the Nacionalista 
Party. I affiliated with it at a time when the only words written on its flag wore: 
Immediate Independence. I affiliated with it when the struggle we carried on during 
^li~=~~!!L!— L frGSh ln my Hind aM 1 thou S ht " °y solemn duty to form 

6/ Quezon to Osmena in Hare-Rawes-Cutting Act controversy, De la Liana and Ica- 
siano, supra . p. 16. 

1/ Speech, "My Loyalty to My Party Ends...," at the Manila Grand Opera House, 
Icbruary 18, 1922. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 576-577. 

m? eC £? in thG Senate > date inadvertently omitted, but later published in 
_ lhe Philippine Revie w, Uos.. 10-12, October-December 1921. Ibid. , pp. 565-570. 



11-329 

- 496 - 

p 



*rt of a political organization to defend the very same ideals for which the nd- 
diors of the Revolution fought and fell* 9 

£g^lgg.^gTYj;Og_PRIIJCIPLHS, NOT CONVENIENCE 



The politician who does not have any patriotic purpose but his personal ag- 
grandisement in entering politics, who is only after his personal convenience and 
nothing else, is surely after a job, a position. Can I find a position in the Phi- 
lippine government and within the gift of the Filipino people higher than that of 
^resident of the Senate, the highest position to which a Filipino could be sent by 
M. countrymen? If I wanted to perpetuate myself in power, is there anything bette 
ior ne than to ronain in tho ;'• ^ionnlista Party? 

But no! I t0 tafcSV risky side. I prefer to be in a new party that 

T ° rSaniZ<!d ' * hat " m Sa0rifi0 °' *0 sane is true ,ith 

those „ho are with «... They are fitting for their eonvietion, not for their «n- 
vonaenoe. One shouM not bolon e to a party only te eoeupy a position. Ho should bo 
a neabor of a party te defend the ideals of that party and then assumes position 

pes" ™ b0 *° bCtt ° r aef ° nd 140810 ° f thB >-» * «ans of his 

ilai^M jjLjigSJPOL ITICAL TOES FOR T1IETB MMv - 

Alas, ho* »e have fallen into evil days! By their eonfession ours is no,: tho 
and Wled g e that oertain .en who have earned tho reputation of statesmen, before 
a satuataon that retires of then the utaost eeriousness in their sets and the 

"IT" fT 0 * ln "'"u " 01 ' dS ' W °" ° rat0ry ° f a ~ t0 «- -ola- 

nation of the public. 1 

113. OUBZON-aUHUIOHG CONTROVERSY 
a^gOH PLLS OF ''P ^^ jriLIPIiiO HOUSE A3D n«nnPAnv«. 

Wo, the Filipino people, were living in a big house of America as mere ser- 
vants lhat was at the time Judge Juan Sumulong was in the Philippine Commission. 
Tnen the Democratic administration in American came to power and told the Filipi- 
no-, You can build your own house." That is what the Jones Law said and under the 
law we could choose the materials and the architects, the only condition was that 
- were not to burn our own house because the bigger house (America) might also 
oa burned. 

Governor-General Harrison said that we had built a house as strong as any 
other nation. So President Wilson recommended to the U.S. Congress that the Fili- 
Pino house having been built, the Filipinos could live therein. 
=^=!i!l=!!!i^l I i ard:Lng ^ e P^iican) came to power and said: "This house 

2/ Loyalty to Party speech, supra, p. 576. 

12/ De la Liana and Icasiano, op. cit^., pp . 6-7. 

11/ Ibid ., p. 18. 



11-330 



- 497 - 



was built under Democratic administration. I want our architects to find out the 
strength of the building." So he sent the Wood-Forbes Mission (in March 1921 - ABS) 
-'i'iis Mission thought that Americans alone would criticize our house. But Wood and 
• rbes were glad to find out that our own brothers, blinded by partisanship, cri- 
ticized the house built by the whole Filipino people. 

The Democratas (headed by Judge Sunulong and Ruperto Montinola - ABS), in 
;;..:oir hatred towards the party in power, told the Wood-Forbes Mission that the 
. lijerials of the house wore rotten. The Wood-Forbes Mission did not ask the party 
:in power. Hence, the Mission nade recommendations against Philippine independence 
i.n.d against autonomy (under the Jones Act - ABS ) . 1 

SiSATB PR ESIDED AifSWERS SUI-IULONG'S "KEPTY-STCIIACH " TIRADE 

Judge Sunulong says no nation can walk on an empty stomach. But I say every 
nation can walk on an empty stomach if it knows its own rights. But no nation can 
.Lor deser ves to - ABS) walk on a full stomach if it does not understand self- 
re snect. dignity a nd liberty .. 

I want to say that as a legislator, when I vote for money for your educa- 
tion (addressing his audience composed mostly of students - ABS) in the public 
schools and the university I do so in order that you may learn to love the liber- 
ties of your own people. Public spirit, first and foremost. 

Our, people have their di gnity not in their stomach but in tbMr..hearj-.aj. 2 

Judge Sunulong speaks of economic independence as necessary before politi- 
cal independence. He does not know the phrase for he is not the inventor. The ' 
phrase was previously used by Taft, Forbes, Worcester and other imperialists. 

If he means by economic independence that the government should not be in 
debt I wish to say all governments are in debt. If he means that there should be 
wealth of the nation, how big a wealth is necessary? Most independent nations to- 
day are poor. If he means that there should be many millionaires while the poor 
people starve, then I do not want economic independence. America herself has no 
economic independence when she became politically independent. The Americans said, 
"Qive us liberty first of all!" They did not say, "Give us bread!" 5 

I wish to God we could eliminate party politics from the independence ques- 
tion. Politics has no place in a question as vital as this one. I thought that 
now, more than ever before, wo would thrust aside party considerations and think 
only of the good of the people. We face our most critical period, and there should 

\J Extemporaneous speech delivered at the Manila Grand Opera House, September 23, 
1923, in answer to Sunulong' s attacks against the defects of the Jones Act. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 728-729. 

ZJ Ibid. , p. 730. 

y ibid. 



II-331 

- 498 - 

bo no Donoerataa and no JTacionalista Consolidados at this time. 

What was there for no to gain in coning out as frankly as I did in ny re- 
port? Those statements - I was not compelled to nako then. Those Proposals - I 
did not have to reveal then. I could have stuck to the tine-honored nethods 
mouthed the oft-re P eated rituals. But I told the; people the truth - nothing but 
the truth - because I believed that the tine had cone ,hon they should know the 
truth - when we should face our cannon problem, not as Dernocratas nor as Haoiona- ' 
ixetas, but as Filipinos, with nothing in nind but the welfare of the Fili pino 
people. 

I have always emphasized that we would not sacrifice our freedom for econo- 
mic considerations. To show that this has been ny stand in the united States ir 
all ny conferences, I. wish. to quote verbatim/statement I nade in a conference which 
I had with Senator (William) King who, as everybody knows, is for immediate inde- 
pendence. I used more or less the sane language in every other conference and 
thus avoided the impression that I was saying one thing to some and another thin-, 
to others. Senator King asked , me if it was true, as reported by some papers in 
tae United States, that the Filipino people or their loaders has changed their 
stand on the question of independence. 

My reply was this: ^feftoFih^o p eople are today as a aB i™,« of 

220£l3_j«^^^ Insofar M x an concerned, Tir^ 3 ire 

of ny lifo has been the liberty of ny country; and as the head of the majority 
party, feeling as I do on ny conscience all the weight of the responsibility that 
I have assumed before the people, I have also to think of its material well-being/ 
and, therefore, the prospect of an abrupt severance of the economic relations bet- 
ween America and the Philippines, as proposed by oertain American interests, is 
keeping me worried. 

IfXcan^btain the independence oLmv__oeo_ p_le under favorable conditions. 
Sttioutj^^ 

j^LlLXi^ai^^ of pr cpuntrv nnw> 

®&SS*J2£^^ that - n the 

aSMj&2£2^ 2 . ar e to becg e Jj^g^wp^^ select the f-i^t , n „^ 5 

47 W'^ttef rt°t^ th % S !, nate Presidont *™ his sick bod in reply to Sunu- 

trip to til SnJS^S 8 ;- ° f f C " iUeZOn rGP ° rt t0 the Le ^^ature onhls recent 
trip to the United States, November 29, 1931. Ibid. . pp. 850-851. 

pLless!on Q oTS,i nS r rS f^™?* Sumulon S," ^om a newspaper clipping in 
IT. 853-8?4? y * A * Aterrado ' dated Member 2 9 , 1931. Ibid?. 



11-332 

- 499 - 

114. QUEZOfT-WOOD CONTROVERSY 

The President of the United States whose veto power is derived not only 
iron the Constitution but also from the fact that he is elected by the people, exor- 
cises it only when the policy involved in a measure is fundamentally objectionable 
to him. The practice has been when something objectionable is found in a bill, 
to sign it, stating at the sane time the objections of the Executive, so as to 
,: ; .vo Congress opportunity to consider then: at a proper time. 1 

SgI^3_PRESIDEICT HIIJTS WOOD-FILIPINOS COOFERATIOII MAY BECOME IM POSSIBLE 

Permit me to inform you (addressing Governor-General Wood - AES) in all 
sincerity that there is a growing feeling among our people that the views of the 
Filipino officials in this government, the secretaries of the departments included, 
hrvo very little, if any, weight with you. 

If this feeling is allowed to stand, it would be very difficult to preserve 
the utmost cooperation of the Filipinos, when they become convinced that you have 
little confidence either in their loyalty or ability. 2 

There is a difference of opinion between the Governor-General (Leonard Wood - 
A3S) and the Philippine Legislature. This arises out of the anomalous form of go- 
vernment in effect here. There are two heads of . government and the responsibility 
is divided. 

The Governor-General is here as the supreme representative of the sovereign 
power, the United States, and is responsible to the American people alone. The 
Legislature is composed of elected representatives of the Filipino people. They 
are not responsible to the Governor-General. They are responsible to the people aloao 

What I said in my speeches during my tour of the southern provinces is that 
the Governor-General should not exercise the prerogative of his office in matters ' 
that are purely domestic. 

fgON_Bii!UAI LS FOOD'S INTSRt'ERjiL'JfCE IN WORK OF LOWER OFFICIALS 



What we are defending is a fundamental principle of government involved in 
the interference by the Governor-General (.Leonard Wood) in those cases the respon- 
sibility for which is specifically vested by law in the secretaries of departments 
or chiefs of bureaus. 

In the c °nley case the Governor-General ignored completely the authority 



i/ Letter to Governor-General Wood written on board the USS Apo. March 21. 1923. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 722. 

2/ Ibid. 

2/ Caballero and Concepcion, op_. cit . , p. 239. Also in Rivera Collection, 
supra, p. 723. 



11-333 



- 500 - 



and responsibility of the Mayor of the City of Manila and the Secretary of tho In- 
terior by reinstating Conley in spite of Section 2447 of the Administrative Code. ' 

[Note: Ray Conley, an American detective in the Manila police department, 
was suspended by Secretary of the Interior Jose P. Laurel as a result of adminis- 
trative charges filed against him. Governor General Wood intervened and ordered 
Laurel to reinstate Conley, whereupon Laurel obeyed and then resigned, Protesting 
against Wood's high-handed policy, Senate President Cjueaon led the Filipino clob- 
bers of the Council of State and the Cabinet in a mass resignation, causing tho 
famous "Cabinet Crisis of 1923." - ABS] 

ViEiiiff qPBZON Alp COKPA HY STOOD T HEIR GROU ND AGAIIiST HOOD 

Tho Philippine Legislature, or at least the Coalition majority, will disre- 
gard entirely all recommendations Governor-General Wood may make in his message 
to that body. 

ed 

We will not pass any measure he recommends because he has disregard the 
Council of State and has not asked the advice of the department secretaries in ■' 
oreparing his message. 

•pgZO W_TBLL S U.P. STUDENTS UL TIMA TE AIM IK WOOD CON TROVERSY 

I am betraying no secret if I tell you that our ultimate aim in sustaining 
the controversy between the Governor-General (Leonard Wood) and the leaders of 
the Filipino participation in the government, which culminated in the present cri- 
sis, is to make tho Governor-General of the Philippines a mere figurehead. 

It is unpatriotic for any Filipino to stand by Governor-General Wood in 
his policies. ^ 

The absurdity of letting Washington or its representatives in the Philip- 
pines fix the policies of this government on purely local affairs, especially fi- 
nancial and economic, is that our policies would then be determined not by our 
electorate whose own interests are at stake, but by the electorate of the United 
States. 

In the case of the bank, the railroad, and other business enterprises created 
by the Legislature, the Legislature went further than merely creating them. It kept 
them under its own control by placing the supreme authority of their management 
in the hands of the Board of Control, the majority of which is composed of the 

4y Press statement after the resignation of the Filipino members of the Wood Ca- 
binet and Council of State on July 17, 1923. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 726. 

5/ Speech quoted in D. R. Williams, The United States and the Philippines , 
n.p.d.p., p. 211. Ibid. . p. 727. • 

6/ Speech before the student body of the University of the Philippines, also 
quoted in Williams, supr a, Ibid. 



11-334 

- 50X - 



presidents of both houses of the Legislature. 

While the B oard 0 f Control has supreme authority over the bank, yet the C- 
vernor-Goneral, in the use of his executive powers, nay order the closing of the 
bank. But I can assure you that while there is money in the treasury, the Philip- 
pine Legislature will open another bank, 7 

-jOODW^^O^CCDP^rnOL|! "FILIPINO HOUSE, " SAYS* CJJ1SZ0K 



Continuing his "parable" of the Filipino House, Quezon said: 
When General v 00 d became Governor-General he Wanted to be the architect, 
the carpenter and verything, disregarding the Legislature, If we had not oppoL 
hiu perhaps all the bureau chiefs would at present be Americans. He wanted to oc- 
cupy the whole house. So the Filipinos in the government declared a strike. Us 
in the Wood Cabinet Crisis of 1923 - ABS). We thought the strike would be unani- 
mous but there were soao Filipinos (referring to the "Democratas" - ABS) who did 
not join. 

The house wo bui lt is for our posterity . Wood h™« „ ot ^ ni]r naflfla Dn , 
O&ttest&mL^^^ F ilipinos, know w*p* ih^i 

.<:£.jUiou3e_wt L npj^ liberty. We svore to 

iiSi?]2liL±L?jLX^^ is why we 

cannot recognise the Governor-General ' s claim. 

The Commission of Independence asked for Wood's recall for ueddling in our 
own affairs. But two voices wore heard: those of Hontinola and Sunulong who said 
that the Governor-General is right in interfering with our house. 8 
■flgaOH ISSUES LAUDATORY STATEMENT Off WOOD'S DEATH 

It is with deep regret and sorrow that I heard of the death of Governor- 
General Wood. Everybody knows that General Wood and myself have disagreed on al- 
most every fundamental issue affecting the Philippines, from the question of inde- 
pendence and the interpretation of the Jones Law to the disposition of public 
domain,, the administration of government-owned companies and other subjects.. 

But during all of these years I have never hand any disagreeable incident 
of a personal nature with him. I admired in Mm the courage with which he fought 
for his ideas, and ho never resented the frankness with which I expressed to hi* 
my views when we were not in accord. He was always courteous to no. He was a 
hard-working Chief Executive and very determined in his purpose to do the right 
thing as he saw it. 

gj^L£Sg§gg ^_P ggI.PS MALAGAS - LEGISLATURE COOP ERATIO N 

Cooperation (with Governor-General Henry L. Stimson, 1928-1929, successor 
1/ P. 727. 

8/ Extemporaneous speech at the Manila Grand Opera House, September 23, 1923, 
^answer to Judge Summons's criticism of defects of the Jones Act. 

3j Quoted in Caballero and Concepcion, op_. cit. . p. 274. Ibid. , p. 779. 



11-355 



- 502 - 

to the late Governor-General Wood - ABS) means not the right of the Chief Executive 
to command and the duty of the Legislature to obey, but rather the duty of both 
mutually to respect the powers and prerogatives of each and to 3eek through a 
frank and full interchange of views on a conmon ground for action. 10 

115. QUEZON PARTYLESS DEMOCRACY 

'^^^HH^i^L^^^^^I^-^^g-^^ SHORTCOMINGS 

' The indictment '.against democracy is that it has failed to produce efficient 
government, and, like the old monarchies, or aristocracies, that it has permitted 
the concentration of wealth in the hands of a privileged class at the expense of 
starving millions. But, as I already observed, the shortcomings of democracy do 
not destroy the, yir tuali ty. of its pri nciples. The b est ins t lament devised for th e 
attainment of human happ iness is doomed to failure if misus ed, misdirected or i im- 
properly handled. Not even the bloo d of martyrs shed upon the battlefields and 
the scaffold will sa ve it. 1 

•TTSZOH Ii mSTS DEMOCR ACY CAN EXIST SA2J 3 POLITICAL PA RTIES 

The first fetish that we must discard is the discredited theory that demo- 
cracy cannot exist without political parties. In the very nature of things, tho 
struggle for power between contending political parties creates partisan spirit/ 
and partisan spirit_is_ in compatible with ^ood government.. Only in very rare ins- 
tances can there be found men actively interested in party politics who arc cap- 
able of disregarding party interests and subordinating them to the interests of 
the people at large. 

I have been in public office uninterruptedly since 1906 (since 1904 when 
■iUCKon became fiscal of Hindoro - ABS) holding different positions. Prom my ex- 
perience, I can truthfully say that patriotic men - even true patriots - are some- 
times swayed by party passions and, wittingly or unwittingly, they jeopardize the 
public good for party considerations. 2 

This concept of the need of a majority and minority party is as wrong as ~ 
saying that in order that a home may be governed well, it is necessary that there 
should be a division, that there should be fighting all the time in the family. 

A nation is like a family, multintiftrl n t h ousandfold, and just as it is 
impossible for a family to be happy o r to make progress when there is division 
among its members, when fath er and mother and children are at cross-purposes, so 



10/ Inaugural address upon his reelection as senator from the fifth district, 
1928. Ibid., pp.. 822-324. 

|/ Speech on the essence of democracy at the University of the Philippines, 
July 16, 1940. Ibid. .Vol. V, p. 2230. 

£/ Ipid - 



11-336 

- 503 - 

if; it impossible for a nation t o grow strong and accomplish great ends if the 

■l aople are always divided, if they are taught t o belicvo that patriotism means 

. . . 3 
'.'n.vision. 

iJiRiESTRIC'JED LIBERTY INIMICAL TO DEMOCRACY, SAYS QUEZON 



The second slogan that must bo thrown overboard is the theory that in a 
Monocracy individual liberty must not be restricted. Liberty is, of. course, ono of 
fcho nost precious rights - natural rights - of nan. But civilization has mado 
tvo gross only at the expense of individual liberty. The freest man is the savage, 
fehe nan who lives in the fastness of the mountains, recognizing no rule except 
hiss own will, no power except physical strength. 

The most cultured nan is not the nan who boasts of his freedom to do as ho 
;-leacos, but the nan who is capable of considering at all times the comfort of 
others even at the expense of his own comfort. 

Liberty ne eds restr aint. The e xercise of liberty is good for the people only 
when it is accomp anied by -serf -restrain: It is the abuse of liberty which is today 
causing t he di s appearance of lib erty in many par ts of the world. ^ 

i;3?C3KAT ION, DISCTJSSIUZT SSSffrTIAL iO DEMOCRACY, not parties 



Hl^J^jS^QnAijLl^ political parti es, but information , 

discussi o n; but discuss ion and w ithout animosity, cond uct ed in a spirit of 
coo peration and not destruction. And not until people learn to cooperate rather 
than fight one anothe r wil l democracy succeed i n achieving the t rue e nds of go od 



5 

government . 



^0CRACY_ASJ^HG^7Jn:SM MUST 3E ADAPTED TO HILIEU 



I urge you to study and master the philosophy of democracy. Its logic and 
wisdom are unassailable. It is broad and resilient enough to permit its adaptation 
to the exigencies of progress and the tines. It is here that statesmanship is in 
great demand, for unless this adaptation is made properly and in tine, democracy 
cannot function efficiently and effectively. In this task, preconceived notions 
of individual freedom and property rights should not be allowed to obstruct reforms. 

J .. r e qu a t „, .look upon de nioc_racy a s a living organism wh ich can thrive only if it 
iit-fi-AftPtod to its environment. Unle ss our democracy can show this capacity for 
change and improvement, it win s u pplanted by autocratic rule. To avoid this 
is our common d u ty and our trust. ^ 

^^OQgjjgTU^g_^^Y_yg^T BEST GOVERNMENT GOVERNS LEAST 

When I spoke of restrictions on individual liberty and freedom, I had no 
2/ Ibid. , p. 2232. 
4/ Jbid. . p. 2233. 
5/ Ibid. 

£/ Jbid.. p. 2234. 



11-337 



- 504 - 



intention of emphasizing the restrictions on political or individual freedom. I 

said that only as preparation for what I was going to say further and which I con- 

ier to be the most important thing in a democracy today - the limitation of the 
eights of the individual or of a corporation to satisfy his or its greed and to 
:.: doit the working class. I called attention to the fact that the old concept of 
.::.iocracy - that the best government is the government that governs least - was 
.n obsolete theory. 

I said "enlightened appreciation of, and respect for, human values must 
load to the complete renovation of outmoded concepts regarding property rights.' 1 
/ho old theory of democracy that the best government is one that governs the least,., 
is averse to any form of invasion of individual freedom and to any attempt on the 
part of the government to regulate business or industry or the relationship bet- 
ween capital and labor. Boundless individualism, unrestricted competition, freedom 
to use labor as a chattel to be treated and paid for as the employer may wish, havo 

resulted in the accumulation of wealth in a few hands and the impoverishment of 

7 

large masses of the people. 

flSSiflB CHIE F RECALLS TIME WHE N DEMOCRACY EXISTED LIT H&ME ONLY 

There was a time when democratic governments existed only in name but not 
in fact, when the nobility was the ruling class, or when the groat captains of in--, 
■".us try in democratic America hsd virtual control of all the sources of power in 
■ fcho United States. 

Yes, in those days and in accordance with the old books,. which are precisely 
the books that I advised the students of this university to close and leave un- 
touched in the libraries, social justice was not the business of government. 8 

DEMOCRACY IS A FARCE W ITHOUT SOCIAL JUSTICE, ASSERTS TPEZOH 

Democracy is inconceivable, democracy is a farce, where there is no social 
.-justice, when governments do not consider it their prime duty to look after the 
bent interests of the common man. 

Make no mistake about it. Laugh at every beautiful or eloquent speech on 
democracy if democracy does not mean the responsibility of the government for the 
well-being of the governed. And, moreover, it is precisely because the so-called 
democratic governments, up to a few years ago and even today, are wasting their 
time discussing the ways of life instead of enacting measures and enforcing them ' 
so that every man, woman and child in the world will live like human beings; it 
is precise l y because there is so much talk about the_ ways of li fe a nd very little 
^"'l-^at.that democracy is going to the do^s. ^ 

jj Speech, "A Partyless Government in a Democracy," at the open forum of the 

D.P. Alumni Association, August 7, 1940. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2239- 
2240. 

§J . Ibid. , p. 2240. . |: .. 
11/ Ibid . 



11-338 

- 505 - 

g^glgAj^gmBgpADBg POLITICAL PARTIE3TW EYES OP PEOPLE 



Don't you see what political parties are doing here and elsewhere? Don't you 
:h0 that P° litical P artie ^ are selfish, are always seeking their own interests and 
tneir own good, and forgetting the interests of the people? Don't you see that 
every day? Don't you look down upon the politicians? Don't you, professors of the 
University of the Philippines, sit here in your classrooms, satisfied with your- 
selves and thanking God that you do not belong to the class of politicians? 

Well, if political parties are necessary, if they are good, politicians 
ought to be revered instead of being treated contemptuously as you are doing now. 
i said to newspapermen during a recent press conference: "If political parties are 
good, why don't you join some political party?" If political parties are necessary, 
every citizen should belong to one or else be considered a bad citizen. 



* * * 



You see there are evils in political parties. We are suffering from them, 
dvcn I - the head of a political organization, the party in power in the Philippines 
a* President of the Philippines suffer from such evils. That is a reality. Are we 
just going to sit and say, "All right, let us go ahead." 

Well, I don't believe in that attitude. l_never compromised with evil. T 

you to tnat en d, for it i s for gQurjSgoda. 1 ° ■ 

^SartzlegsjEove^^ 
c ontrary to ^ Ste^^ 

s uccessful, presup pose agjiducatad^^ rnaioritv Q ~ f th „ 

■ooo plo are endowed w it h more than .o rdlnaLSivic vir tues . so that they wi ll t,ko 
^■aSgaSiUBj^^ an independent " ' 

■^'^^ 

£2iMji lPJL0g-P niL0S0PHIES. e conomic int ere sts justify PAR TIES 

The rMson_dJfetre of political parties, the fact that alone can justify 
tneir existence, is the conflict of political philosophies or divergence of econo- ' 
mxc mterests among the people, which in turn dictates different governmental po- 
licies. 



12/ Ibid. , p. 2246. 

11/ Speech on the elimination of partisanship in a democracy, at the Far Eaatern 
crSf'TNr 8 ' 1940 ' C ° llection ' Vol « V > i. 2252? IlLin 



11-339 



- 506 - 



But in the purely political field, the race today between contending par- 
ties generally consists in the effort of each of them to prove that one is more in 
earnest than the others in the advocacy of true popular rule. The conflict is no 

longer between those who believe in the government from above and those who es- 

1 2 

pouse the cause of popular rule. 

~~~=Ii2~M!~I!I~^ LEADERS ' 

We have been indoctrinated in the need of political parties in a democracy; 

and, as a result, our political leaders have kept partisan strife alive, which 

would have rent asunder our national ties and prevented the early consummation of 

our ideal to become an independent nation, if the Filipino people, wiser than their 

political leaders, had not maintained their unity of purpose in the midst of sui- 

1 3 

cidal party strife. 

ESSEUCE OF DEMOCRACY REMAINS THE SAKE, BUT FORKS ARE INFINITE 



The essence of de mocracy i3_goy_ernment of t he people, by the people, and 
fo r the people. Bjrt _J^jorms. SiL3£®£i££&ZLa3£S-i&W£§* depe nding upon the geniun 
o Qhe particulaj .., ii^ E3^jrii^^ E ^_j^And the b est form of democracy, let it be 

b eing and happi ne ss of all the people. 1 

4U3Z0K CITES CASES M BSBS DSKiCaACY EXISTS WITHOUT TOO STRONG PARTIES 



It is simply not true that without two well-balanced political parties thoro 
is no democracy. The existence of but one political party where the organization of 
other political parties is not prohibited by law or by the will of a dictator, , is 
usually due to some cause which has united the people under one banner, and the 
union persisted long after the cause had ceased to exist. 

In the case of the Southern States (in America - ABS), for instance, the con- 
flict on the doctrine of State rights with reference to slavery and secession 
united the people in those states under the banner of the Democratic Party and, 
although this issue was decided by force of arms in the Civil War and has long 
since been dead, the Southerners still look with abhorrence upon the idea of be- 
longing to the Republican Party. 

Again, in the case of Southern Ireland, during all the years of the fight 
for home rule, there was only one party in that country. 15 

If you call a one-party system that which outlaws any other party except 
- t ^f™^L^™° Wer ' then b0th ±n laW and in fact ' vre d0 not have a one-party Pystem. 
12/ Ibid. , p. 2252? i ... ;; 

.13/ Ibid. , p. 2254. 

1 1 i 

H/ M>i P. 2255. 

JJI/ Ibid,. : ' ! : 



11-340 

- 507 - 

(But) the Ifecionalista Party is, for all practical purposes, the only 
national party that we have because it is the only party that owes its existence 
■bo the national cause of independence, and because for the immense majority of 
the Filipinos it embodies our historical struggle for the achievement of that 
national ideal. 

But, whenever issues arise within the Nacionalista Party, these issues aro 
.ict patched up by the leaders of the party through mutual compromises or conces- 
sions, but are taken to the electorate, and only after the electorate has rendered 
Its verdict are these compromises and concessions made between the leaders of 
the- party for the sake of preserving national unity and invariably in accordance 
.v'ith the popular verdict. 

We are a united people in every respect. There is no fundamental issue of 
national character in which our views are irreconciliable. For this reason, poli- 
tical parties are unnecessary but because ws haye^be^indoc trinated for so long 
i n the need , of polit ic yuesstjeQ^ would see m to be rash to try _ 

and experim e iit^iojLwit h a partyless g overnmen t, vie must first educate the whlin' 
mind to look upon party organizations as unnecessary . 16 

116. Q U .G Z ON RE T R ACTIO iff 

;£^0N, 3 3rd DBGRBlii MASON, R32TITRH5 TO CA THOLIC FOLD 

Came the day when I began to feel a complete desolation in spite of the ma- 
terial goods which I enjoyed, and I looked for the cause thereof and found it in 
m laCk of faith in the supernatural life, that is, im my lack of religion. After . 
much hesitation I decided to take steps tending towards professing a religion, if 
it wore all possible for me to believe in one. 

As a Mason I believed in the theory that all religions are the same and that 
therefore, one could adopt whatever religion satisfied one's conscience. Although 
Masonic ideas had led me completely away from the Catholic religion, I nevertheless 
chose to obtain instruction in Catholicism in preference to any other religion, be- 
cause, this being the Faith of my wife and children, if I could in conscience em- ' 
brace it again, it was evident that if all of us, the head as well as the members 
of my family, were to profess and practice the same religion, it would contribute 
to the religious solidarity of my family. I was, however, decided on adopting 
another religion, if my conscience were to prove unable to accept the dogmas and 
precepts of the Catholic Church. 

In such a frame of mind, I asked certain ministers of the Catholic Church 
to help me in regaining the Faith which I had professed by virtue of my baptism, 
and these answered my call for help. It cost us a lot of work and time, but with 
the help of Divine Grace, I at last believe now that Jesus Christ is 

ny God and Redeemer, and also that the Catholic Church founded by Him is the repo- 
sitory of His doctrine. 



IS/ Ibid., p. 2260. . 



■11-341 

- 508 - 



I am therefore prepared to re-enter my old Church, and I fervently desire to 
re-admitted therein. I want to be a Catholic again, to live and die in my Faith, 
-is is my prayer to God and I humbly trust that H e , in His infinite mercy, will ' 
grant it to tie. 1laj 

117. QUEZON: THE M A N 
E-LQ'S PBELIHG FOR I^EPEiTOBMCEi I NSPIRED BY ITA TICI-TAL SPIRIT 

I have been fortunate enough to bo associated with all classes of Filipinos. 
1 haVe min S led with ^e poor and the rich. Moreover, I have witnessed from my 
childhood this growing sentiment of nationality and desire for independence. I have 
been reared by the same feeling. When I express the feelings of the people I am 
:-u.iro that I am not wrong because I am expressing ray own feelings; and when I express 
■ay own feelings I know that I am expressing those of my people because mine have bee 
inspired by the national spirit that pervades the atmosphere throughout the Islands! 

. Mr. Chairman, I have already staked too much in this noble task (of secu- 
ring Philippine independence - ABS) to which I have consecrated my life to permit 
■nyBelf to hesitate as to my cou r se, now that the goal is within sight. 

.mja ery k * n * of ^ivajn^a^^^ing m yself in manv/gatfl^ T V y Q hflfln ^ 
months confine A.JL^.^^o^^^ar 1 _I.hav e been for B long fim a „ m , w 
^.flJE^ljLJlf-J«teJ!^^ in^mount ains during thns* ^ +w 

~ Bold ^ ^aii^Xili^^ in this o m mtrv (U.S.1 with 

^^»tjyid_j^ my nati vG lBnA wm , w +ho ~_ 

.bite r of its o wn destiny. 2 

Mg^J gjjgS qp&iON ;;AIiTS_T0 BECOME PRIVATE CITIZEN 

Now that a decisive battle has been won (the passage of the -Jones bill - 
A3S) and the further work to be done is comparatively easier, I am going to show 
how attached I am to my office and. how fearful I am of losing it (as charged by 
his critics - ABS.) 

I shall not seek reelection (as Philippine Resident Commissioner to Washing-, 
ton, B.C.). I do not want this or any other public office. I can manage to live, 
: rad much more to my liking, as a private citizen. The only reason why I sought 

1_(a}/ Letter, original in Spanish, to Archbishop Michael J. O'Doherty of Manila, 
dated August IS, 1930, signed by Quezon and attested to by Mrs. Aurora A. 
Quezon and Carmen Pena. In: Quesonian Review, Vol. I, No. 9, August 30, 1947. 
Rivera Collection, \T 0 1. II, pp. 831-333. ' 

lib]/ Speech, "Freedom Belayed Hakes Filipinos Discontented," before the Philippine 
oociety m New York City, June 10, 1913. In: The Filipino P fln m» . Vol. I, ' 
No. 9, May 1913. Ibid, . pp. 157-159. — • 

^ ?nf! Ch ' T r A K ° ly CausG '" in th e U -S. House of Representatives, September 28, 
1914. Ibid. , pp. 207-216. 



11-342 



~ 509 ~ 



this place is because I wanted to be of service to my country, not because of the 
honor or the salary attaching to it. Once (during the Philippine-American War - 
A3S) I served my country when there was nothing but hunger, fatigue, every kind 
of hardships, and danger to my life in the service. 

Mr* Speaker, my people have been too generous with me. I owe them more 
than I shall ever be able to repay, no matter what I might have done or might do ' 
in the future for them. In leaving my present office I do not propose to abandon 
my duty of cooperating in the work still to be done until the Islands are complete- 
ly free. I am only going to occupy that place whore, in. my opinion, I can more 

affectively help; which, for the present,, at least, seems to me to be that of a 
3 

private citizen. 
jUEZOr §_TEGUGHTS_CJ_^ 

It is the interest of the people, which we have to safeguard, and it is the 
people as a whole whom we have to serve. 

# * * 

The voice of the people is the voice of God only when it expresses judgment 
formed within the safe channels of serene, reflection. 

•a * * 

Nothing breeds more confusion, in '.society than a constant change in legisla- 
tion. 

# * * . 
When a political party obtains the majority of the popular vote, it acquires 

the whole power of the government .and, with that power the responsibility. 

# * * 

It is not sufficient qualification for appointment to an administrative or 
any other position that the candidate belongs tc the party that has carried off the 
victory at the polls. It is also necessary that integrity, intelligence, patriotism, 
and diligence render him really worthy of the office which he desires to occupy. 

# * * 

In no case must we ever place party interests before the interests of the 
country. ^ 

MLQ ESCHEWS PERSONAL AGGRANDIZEMENT TN SiWHTTWtl PITRT.TH nWTC.y. 

My conduct in the past shows that I have no ambition merely to satisfy a 
desire for personal aggrandizement. 

When I had the Jones bill approved by the Congress of the United . States, and 
taking into consideration that its preamble involved the idea that some years must 
pass before we are given our independence, I decided that my further stay in the 

2/ Speech, "Solemn Pledge of a Great People," in the U.S. House of Representatives, 
August 18, 1916. Rivera Collection, Vol. ,1, p. 366. 

4/ Inaugural address as president of the Philippine Senate. Ibid. . p. 430. 



11-343 



- 520 - 



United States would not be necessary and I decided not to be a candidate for re- 
sident commissioner. 

I made up my mind to retire to private life. I did not believe then, as I 
do not now believe, that men should seek public office for the sake of the con- 
venience, power and prestige that office gives. A public office is necessary because 
it is an instrument for public service. And so when the Jones Law was passed I 
thought that the greatest public service that I could give my country was no longer 
in the United States. I came back to the Philippines intent upon leaving public 
office. I was elected senator before I arrived. * And then I was later elected 
by my colleagues as president of the Senate. 

[* Quezon arrived in the Philippines from the United States on September 
27, 1916. The election for the Senate, the first election under the Jones Law, took 
place six days later on October 3rd. What he probably meant was that he waa nomi- 
nated and assured of his election before he arrived, as evidenced by the fact that 
ne was elected in the fifth senatorial district without going out to campaign. - AJ3S 

SENATE JPRBSJTO^^ 

My alleged expulsion from the Asociacion de Veteranos de la Revolucion is 
a farce, While I am' a veteran, I have never affiliated myself with the association, 
nnd from the time General Aguinaldo, for purely personal motives, came out in 
support of Governor-General Wood (in the Cabinet Crisis of 1Q23 - ABS) I have con- 
sidered my connection with it not only an inconsistency but a betrayal of public 
trust on ny part. ^ 

■-;liaZOU;S_^MIJ^^ A BOUT _ANJI0TOj_ 

When U.S. Secretary of War Davis asked Philippines Senate President Quezon 
how much time he would like for his conference vrith President Coolidge, the Senate 
head replied: 

"Well, it depends. If the President will not find interest in what I have 
to say, and only listens for the sake of official courtesy, one minute will be suf- 
ficient. I will simply say: 'Good morning, Mr. President. I bring you greetings fror 
the Philippines.' And that will end it. 3 u t if the President wishes to hear me, 
which I feel sure he does, I will require much more time." 

The conference lasted nearly an hour, indicating that the President was 

7 

interested, and listened to Mr. Quezon most attentively. 

kLQ HOT WEDDED TO SENATE AND NACIOI^IST| = PA^Y = ^^mNCY_ . 

I am not wedded to the presidency of the Senate, nor to the leadership of 

V Speech in the Senate, date inadvertently omitted, but later published in 
The Philippine Review. Vol. .VI, Uos. 10-12, October-December 1921. Ibid,. , 

PP. 565-570. ' ~~ :!.: ; ... 

6/ Quoted in Caballero and Concepcion, op., cit . , p. 268. Ibid. . p. 779. 

jj Brief item in The Philippine Republic. Vol. -4, No. 10, November 1927. 
Ibid. . Vol. II, p. 795. 

! - 



11-344 

- 511 - 

the Nacionalista Party. I can live and bo happy without either position or both. 

But I cannot part with my conscience for having been recreant to my duties, or for 
h aving lost ray self -respect. T hc loss of self-re sp ect or peace of mind' is too 
heavy a penalty to pay for political power or riches. 

Mary Magdalene was pardoned by the Savior because he knew how real was the 
change that took palce in her heart, but the society in which she lived did not, 
and for that reason did not take her back into its bosom. . . The government which 

Q 

cannot read into a man's soul cannot afford to take chances. 
rii^ATE_CHIEF^PROTESJS^AGAINST_i:iCHOI^ ROOSEVELT 1 S APPOINTMENT 

Let me at the outset disclaim any intention on our part to challenge the 
power of the (U.S.) President to appoint whomsoever he chooses. We are only exer- 
cising the right of petition. 

He (Nicholas Roosevelt) has formed the opinion, and has repeatedly expressed 
it, that the Filipinos are just out of barbarism, with no conception of the moral 
value of honesty and truth, with no idea of fair play. Moreover, his main thought 

is wholly inconsistent with what I conceived to be the American policy, as dis- 
tinguished from the English and Dutch, regarding subject colonies. He would govern 
us according to the Dutch plan in Java and not in accordance with Secretary (Elihu) 
Root's written instructions to the Taft Commission. And we have a clear insight 
into his mental leanings when we see him reviving the old Roman name "proconsul" 
and applying it to present-day governors of colonial dependencies. 

I would request you, Mr. Secretary, to realize how humiliating it will be 
for the Filipino people to have at the head of their Department of Public Ins- 
truction and, from time to time, as acting head of their government, one who has 
branded them dishonest and deceitful, and how extremely embarrassing it will be 
for the Filipinos in public life to deal officially and socially with one who has 
'written of them with contempt. 

You can, therefore, very well understand my serious concern over this ap- 
pointment (of Nicholas Roosevelt as Vice Governor-General and concurrently Secre- 
tary of Public Instruction - ABS) which will surely revive racial antagonism. ^ 

Jil|2N!S_C0NCflPTJ^ 

The courageous statesman sees the facts as they are, and thinks more of 
the future than of the present, more of our children than of ourselves. 10 . 

ffl: '20N_F0R_ GO V^iRNOR-GEI ^.i: .L? RU MOR P ROijPTLY SCOTCHED 

"Mr. Quezon smiled when asked as to the rumor that he was being considered 

2/ lMia.f P. 825. 

Sj Letter to U.S. Secretary of War Patrick J. Hurley, written by Quezon upon • 
his arrival in Washington, August 25, 1930. Ibid. . pp. 836-837. 

10/ Statement in The Philippine Republic. Vol. VII, No. 7, August 1930. 
Ibid. . p. 840. 



II-345 

- 512 _ 

by the (Washington) administration as a possibility for the governor-generalship. 

"'That is another of those rumors. It is a joke,"' he remarked. Then, 
growing serious, -I have told thorn in Washington, and I say it now; I shall never 
occupy any position to which I an not elected by the people.'" 11 
I_ AM SgBKIMg_FQ_PLAUDiTS - QUEZON 

Statement of Senate President q UGZOn after reading the Opposition's barbed 
cements on his report to the Philippine Legislature concerning his trip to the 
i.nited States, October 1931 : 

"I am seeking no plaudits. My only aim is to serve the people, promote the* 
welfare, and secure their rights, so that once secured, they may enjoy those 
rights with perfect safety." 1 

gUJJ^ALL I CAN FOR M PEOPLE IgOBR r an _ MLQ 

JQlSaiiasjrou^^ coupled w . th . t 

— — z^z^ T~^i^~ :, 

■^feJ^grt^SEotu^ but - he 'spoke mor e softU-T 

inja£t«L2^^ jh^affe ction of his people as I haVe 

/i^L ^'-t I can b efore I go. ' 0 " ~ ~- - 

If it is true that the Secretary of War (Patrick J. Hurley - ABS) has dedal 
oofore the U.S. House Committee on Insular Affairs, and reported by the United 
'reas, that the Filipino people are incapable of governing themselves, he has 
;>aao a statement that is both offensive to our people and unsupported by facts. 

We are far more capable of governing ourselves than many independent people ' 
Nothing would make the Filipinos more determined to get their independence 
chan the denial of their capacity for self -government, because this means that 
their association with America can only rest upon the relationship between the 
rulor and his subject. Such an association will never be willingly accented by , 
eulf -respecting people. Under such a situation all Filipinos will unite in pre- 
^rnng economic hardship with independence to economic prosperity with subjection. 

a&-gaja3JL JioJ^c rific_e. freedom to p rn^^+y^ 

I have been willing to accept limitation on our imports and immigration, 
provided this was done as a part of a program definitely setting a date for the 
granting of independence in the near future. ' 

ISL a % , <£Z£ m oct.*., 193, . 

J- 2 -/ Ibid. , p. 847. 

^ S o°o °c° i 1 ; L0UiS „ J * ^ S ° haiCk ' 2 DeCenber 1931 ' °^ ted Theodoro 
1AWltl > 2J2.' cit . . p. 64. 



•s 



any 



11-346 



- 513 - 



But to retain the Philippines under the American flag for an indefinite 
period and at the sane tine deny us the rights and privileges that others enjoy 
under that flag, would be an injustice and an abuse of power upon a helpless people. 

I cannot conceive that the American nation would over countenance such a 

>>olicy, which would make the United States deviate from its traditional fairness 

1 4 

and altruism in dealing with other peoples. 

[Note: The U.S. Secretary of War subsequently informed Quezon that ho nuvor 
said the Filipinos were incapable of self -government. He added: "Do not let any- 
Misstatements in the papers mislead you into believing that I have ceased to be 
your friend and the friend of the Filipino people." - ABS.] 

lilt) A BORN_OTTj[MIST i _jWT_Cj£N 

I am a born optimist. But, there are things in the world today that tinge 

my optimism with concern. The world is changing; thought is changing; institutions 

believed to be eternal are tottering. Some have fallen. And we are in the nidst of 

all the change. Ue cannot escape its effects... 

■* # * 

Today the world is in a state of upheaval, of change, reacting to two sig- 
nificant movements in government, both characterized by a form of despotism, yet 
each diametrically opposed to the other. On the one hand, we have the one-man des- 
potism in Italy, where Mussolini: by sheer force of character and will is in con- 
trol of the government. On the other, hand, we have a people's despotism, as in 
Russia, where a section of the people, the masses, are driving the rest of the 
>eople in zealous pdhoronco to an idea. 



r>_ „ r . , __ 

'}■* * * 



They also bring about changes in -thought , new tendencies in ideas and ideal 
And thi3 upheaval, those new tendencies, these new currents of thought, are felt 

1 5 

in the Philippines. 
Q u li52NJ[^S_COnFOIJ^ABLE^ 

My concern is that every man and woman in this beautiful land of our 

nax live a comfortable, if modest, and happy life. The stability of every govcrn- 

16 

nont depends upon the contentment of the masses. 

IJLQ FEELS HIGHLY HONOitED WITU HIS NOMINATION AS PRESIDENT 

A party nomination for the highest office within the gift of the people is 
in itself a great distinction, but when the nomination comes under such auspiciour 

i47~Tresrstatem^nt~in the Manila Dailv Bulletin and the Tribune i February 12, 
1932. Ouoted in full by Acting Governor General George C. Butte in his wire 
to the Secretary of ' T ar in Washington, D.C. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, 
pp. 886-887. 

15/ Statement on his 54th birthday, August 19, 1932. Quoted in Quirino, Quezon , 

on. cit. . pp. 68-69. Ibid. , p. 929. 
16/ Opening address to the Senate, July 1 6, 1934. OP, MR#36, TNL. 



11-347 



- 514 - 



circumstances as have attended that which i3 now proffered to ine, I regard it as 
the greatest honor that can be afforded to any public nan short alone of his actual 
election to the Presidency. 

* * * 

I, therefore, Mr. Chairman, nake public announcement that I accept the 

nomination for the Presidency which has been tendered to no, deeming it my bounden 

duty to do so, and I accept it with the most profound sense of the responsibilitjr . 

17 

that it entails and the deepest of gratitude. 

PRESIDENT ADVISES INDONESIANS TO MAKE A LCT OF POISE TO BE FREE! 

How should you go about getting independence? Open all the windows and shut- 
ters, then take away your guards. Hold your meetings in the open and in front of 
the Dutch themselves... Hake a hell of a lot of noise! And if you do that long 
enough, you will eventually got what you want. ^ 

CHIiSF E XEC UTI VE REVEALS OWN WARJ5XPBRIENCE FOR COUNTRY'S SAKE 

I want to tell you, young men, I an not asking anything of you that I my- 
self have not already done. As a matter of fact, I an not asking from you a 
hundredth part of what I myself have done. I an asking you to undergo military 
training for a few months each year for a limited number of years. You will be 
taken for training in places where there are barracks, good food, and good shelter. 
Every one of you will learn how to use a gun effectively. That means that in case 
of a fight you have at least an equal chance with the follow who is fighting you, 
which is a groat thing. 

You know what mine was? I was for two years in the field. I was not put up 
in any military barracks. \Jq roved the mountains barefooted; sleeping many a night 
in the mud and without shelter. There was no one to prepare our food and many a 
time we had nothing to eat but guavas. I finally fell sick with malaria from the 
effects of which I suffered for ten years. 

But I did not get anything out of it. I did not even become a good soldier. 
J'obody taught me how to handle my rifle - and the rifle was terrible, old, and 
with poor ammunition. I could not hit anybody 500 yards from me. There was no 
equal chance for us in the fight with the American soldiers. The time cane when 
our best defense was our legs! 

For two years I had to undergo all kinds of hardships, nights without 
sleep, days without food, and no place to rest in - all this in the service of 
our country. 

Will you, my dear young men, do loss for your country than I and many 
others did? Of course, I know your answer. I know that every young fellow will 
toll me, "Mr. President, I will be proud, not only glad, to undergo military 

12/ Speech on accepting his nomination as President of the Philippines, July 20, 
1935. Quezon Messages. V 0 i. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, p. 235. 

13/ Carlos Quirino, Quezon . _qp_. cit . . pp. 35-36. 



11-348 

- 5X5 - 

training, so that I may write ny name in the history of our country as a patriot! 
(Applause) 

If I were asked now to express ny judgment upon ny administration, ny 
answer would be that it is a disappointing administration. My friends and politic, 
enemies alike have been disappointed. My friends sometimes have expected no to 
oavo then fron certain troubles into which they themselves have voluntarily gone. 
Other friends believe that it is ny duty to give them everything that is in the 
government . ; ■ 

^iM.^M^SLAMS^^J^J^J^IkJ^L^l time 

My task is not only to set up the government of the Commonwealth that will 
last for ten years, but to lay the foundations for the government of an inde- 
pendent state that will last as long as the world endures, and, therefore, it is 
ny duty to foresee the future and to adopt a course that will neet the problems 
of the new day. 

The tine is past when we can blissfully ignore the lot of the man and 
woman who till the soil or who work in. the factories. The tine., is past when any 
government can feel secure without the full support and cooperation of the nasses 
of the people - cooperation coning not ; fron a sense of duty only, nuch less fron 
fear, but cooperation which is the result of devotion and loyalty to their 
government engendered by a sense of satisf action and happiness which their govern- 
nent has inspired for then. ^ 

l^IU JI^l ^O. ..SHOOT P0ttg_F^gg S DBMAm^JTTMTTnv; . 



1 do not want to have to use (the Philippine Amy) to sho°t down Filipinos 
who go out to the field, because they are convince that they are not getting 
justice either fron the government or fron their fellow citizens. I never want to 
do that. God save ne from doing that! 

I an asking everybody now to get together and try to inprove the conditions 
in the Philippines so that such feelings of discontent as now exist nay be re- 
placed by a feeling of contentment and happiness. I have instructed Judge Zulue- 
ta and the Secretary of Labor to go to Negros and start investigating the wages 
that are being paid to laborers, and we are going to go ahead and find out how 
the laborers on the farms and in the factories are being treated. We are going 
!---!!_^!, aUth0rity vestcd in this government to secure justice for these fellows 

^ Pebru£rvl8 bl iq % SCr ? Ce ™r S 7 *^ 7 V*" G °-™ 2 nt,« in Ilagan, Isabela, 
^coruary 28, 1936. Rxvera Collection, Vol. Ill, pp. 1291-1299. 

- W P^r^SmVp! fot 1 " R0tary : Clu ^ ^ 4 ' ^6. Quezon M 0S3a ^„ Vol . 2 , 

21/ Speech on social justice on the occasion of the first anniversary of the 
Connonwealth, November 15, 1936. Ibid. , p. 143. 



11-349 

- 516 - 

if and when it is necessary. 22 

kjg^jg^Jg-Ojg^ICATB D TO A N6B LE ATM - QUEZON 



A , life led withou t ocM^t H worthln ,s,. and only thn* m». ^ y, 

tndaLbghjaa^^.that those who nay cor ner na y think of 11H " 

^~~f^^ and that U 

not the Ixfe of the artist nor of the public nan. 23 

^M'EilEIE^LI^il^l^MiELy^^-BOjLS. abut 

As our teat approached the landing place, the roar of , 9 guns in salute to 
";? dGnt ° f th ° was hoard, and as I landed, soldiers of the Uni- 

ted States Amy were there presenting ares to no - to no, the nan who only a few 
years ago was a prisoner of that amy! 

I want to tell you, ladies and g ont len o„, I was thrilled. I was thrilled to 
aces the E roatness and s enorosity of Africa, 0.3 preeentod in the act. Her own 

TTZ'^Zir^ ^ ~ «** 1 *** ^ — - - — ; 

to 1 " ^ *° ^-a^aection^ I would sen, even g ~~ v— - 
.to ,iail if he violated the law^ ^ — 

^^^^ 

,„ ' ?0inS t0 3XCrCi3e thc Po-or of. the government under the' l ? w, 

I"! n W±th ^ P ° Wer 1 W n ° fc0dy - Can bC in ^ - y in the exercise of 

^on or in the performance of ny duty. I know the liait of ny authopity 

'---d the extent of ny duties. 27 . 

as _J^J^ President for twelve years of any country and do his duty 

^ ~ in Hollywood, California, 

^ IK Pp t . t 4 1 6-47 M ° rf Ast ° ria H0tGl ' ffw York Ci ^> y 2 °> 1937. 

^ ^^^^^"pfist ^ PMlippines in Malacanan ' ' 

<&/ Ibid. 



11-350 

_ 5X7 _ 

well without succumbing physically to the weight of the burderw 

■ * * * 

I have reached a point where in the ordinary course of life my days are 
counted and it would be the height of folly for no to sacrifice everything j in- 
eluding the success of ray administration, to aero love of power. 

; i^0Q_UI j™iTg_G0AL; JUSTICE FOR ?00R_.AgD_mg 

' My greatest concern in life has always been to secure for the poor p eople 
of the Philippines a better treatment than they have received from tine immemo rial 

The freedom of my country and the impro vem ent of the lot of tho common 
people have been the dream of my boyhood and the ambition of my manhood . 

* -x- # 

Justice is a surer foundation for the stability of a state than force . 29 
F1 MILLION CAR FOR MEXICAN RESIDENT? HERE THEY'LL HURD3R HE! - QUEZON 

I was in Mexico recently... I sent word to the Mexican ambassador that I 
was coming as a tourist and for that reason did not desire to be received with. the 
honors due me as head of state. I said the same thing to the (U.S.) Secretary of 
State. However, when I arrived at the Mexican frontier, I found the Mexican people 
-raiting for me and with them a military detachment ready to receive mo with tho 
honor** due me as President of the Philippines. 

Of course, the presidential car was there to receive me. It cost the Hexica 
government $500,000 or Fl, 000, 000. Just think of it! If I bought a presidential ca 
worth F-20,000 those of the Popular Front would murder me! 50 

P3BSIDEHT QUEZON'S CONCEPT OF R E/iRTNG-lip A GOOD SON 

You have heard me criticize tho luxurious manner of living of our present- 
day youth. That is not the fault of the children; it is the fault of the parents. 
It is the parents who give them the money. I am te lling fathers that the best way 
to sliow a son that they love him is to compel h im to suffer what the father has 
suffered; to make him work before ho learns how to spend, money . Let him learn to 
earn money, then let him spend it. It is the duty of tho father to provide every- 
thing necessary for life, exclusive of luxuries. If the son wants luxuries, let 
him work, let him learn to earn money, and if he is unable to make a living, let 
him go to the devil. Don't let us permit our sons sport a fine car or give a 
sumptuous dance. And we must demostrate with deeds what we toll them. Some parents 
h urt their own children _by gettin g them accustomed to q l ife of luxury. 51 

20/ Press statement commenting on the movement to draft him for a second term as 
President, 1937, n.d.m. Ibid. :; 

22/ Speech before the National Assembly, 1937,. n.d.m. Ibid. 

20/ Speech at the San Juan de Letran College, November 7, 1937. Quezon Messages. 
Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 161-162. ' 

21/ Ibid. , pp. 170-171. 



H-351 

LA W ENACTED AUTHORIZING QUEZON TO ACCEPT CHINA DECORATION 



For the purpose of promoting international friendship and understanding, Eia 

Excellency Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, is hereby authorized to 

accopt the decoration known as the "Order of the Brilliant Jade," conferred upon 

him by the National Government of the Republic of China, and to wear the corres- 

32 

ponding insignia of the Order. ' 
QUEZON VOWS HE WILL NEVER TOLERATE ANY ABUSE OP POWER 



I have been in politics all ny life. No man can know the exigencies of po- 
litics better than I do; and no nan can synpathize better with these exigencies 
under pressure of politics than I. But there are certain things that I will never 
tolerate, because they cannot be tolerated .under any circumstances and one of them 
is abuse of power. 

When any official of the government abuses the power vested in him, I shall 
deal with hin rigidly. I nay close my eyes on little favors that are made hers and 
there when they do not constitute an illegal act. But every time ah abuse of power: 
is committed by anybody, and I do not care who he may be, I am going to deal with 
hin drastically. ^ 

i l.^^ -i!^_Ig_TO_BE_REppEpD FOR GOOD TH INGS DONE I N LIFE 

For a PQA there can be nothi ng m ore sublime than to be remembered, after 
death, for the good he has done to a ll. Conversely, there is nothing more bitter 
to contemplate than that a person, resting peacefully in his grave, should be 
remembered with contempt and execrat ion for the errors and iniquities committed 
by hin in life. ^ 

QPZON'S AMBITION; TO ACHIEVE THE BEST HE CAN FOR COMMON WELFARE 

There are only two things which a person must think of and remember; that 
we desire to live long, though we he poor, so wo night live in the memory of our 
compatriots and descendants; or that we be remembered, in bitterness, for the 
wrongs we might have committed . 

I suppose you all know my idea that if a man dies, he is dead; but whil e 
he is living he m ust think of a life beyond the grave. I have mentioned this so 
that you may know what I cherish in my heart and keep uppermost in mind, which 



22/ Commonwealth Act No. 252, "An Act Authorizing His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon, 
President of the Philippines, to Accept the Decoration Known as the 'Order of 
the Brilliant Jade,' Conferred Upon Hin by the National Government of the 
Republic of China," December 21, 1937. Ibid. . p. 585. 

22/ Speech on government policies and relation between the national government 
and the provinces,. Malacanan, February 14, 1938. Quezon Messages. Vol. 4, 
Part I, JBVFF, p. 8. ' ~ '* ™~*™"* 

2AJ Speech before a delegation of laborers, Malacanan, February 17, 1938. 
Ibid. , p. 18. 



H-352 



- 519 - 



i s aaito oIsp but to t^e best T rnn fn* &e ^■ i.i^ , x ^ doing 

that through the exercise of extensive powers conferred upon me as President of 
the Philippines. ?0 

larao^sgsro jtELmmMjm mm mmmm^ 

I arn sincerely telling you that my heart is with you, and although ny ideas 
at txmes do not coincide with yours, ny heart is always inclined towards you. 
We must, therefore, put our hearts as well as our minds to work in order that ther 
may be mutual understanding. And never forget that I always remember you 

^wealth, or hofor. h. ! o.ayesjf alacanan , you w ill have ... ,^ 



My heart is with -hh Q 



with the 



.poor better thmi the rjcb ^Tho^ich does not n.^, m . 



poor needs mi , 
37 



wants. The 
to help hin. 

gj^SERVAMT QUEZON VQttS TO YJIKTiTOB / <to L0T 0F P00R 



id it is by loving M n first thn* T „i 



the 
thine Jie 
Ll_be_able 



I /IT Md 1 " "» tto *»* »» «• now. When I 

»a« a student I eontinually lacked aany of the neeeseities ef life, and I had 
aLaoet ne noney for ny studies 8n4 ay z 

»U year present p lis ht far whioh I desire „„thin E better than to s ive you a 
comfortable livelihood. 38 7 




55/ ibid,. Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, p. 1698. 
25/ Ibid-, pp. 1698-1699. 

«»f SiS! pf 5^ encnt of * he Eight-Hour-Labor Law, eto., February 23, 



11-353 



- 520 - 



intimate friend, so tha t mv conscience and mv soul will not reproach ne. 

That is why I told you that there is no more burdensome post than that of 
President of the Philippines. _ 

GIVING LABOR PROPERTY - THAT'S QUEZON BRAND OF " COMTIUNISM" 



Bear in mind that there is no labor leader who can surpass me in my desire 
to promote your welfare. What I don't have I wish to possess. This makes me a 
"communist." But I am a "commu nist" in the sense that I .would like to see the poor 
laborer enjoy perfect fr eedom to live his life in his own way and to acquire pro- 
perty; I don't belong to that type of communists who propose to seize what is not 
theirs, that which they have not acquired by the sweat of their brow. 

I do not approve of this, because it is not fair to a man who owns some- 
thing, for which he has spent a lot of time and energy, to be despoiled of his pro- 
perty by one who has neither put any capital nor labor into it. A person who is 
indolent and does nothing but wait for the time to eat and drink must not be clas- 
sified as/ property owner. It is likeiri.se unreasonable to despoil a person of his 
property - which I will not suffer to happen - because it is a gross and flagrant 
violation of the dictates of reason and right. ^° 

^AJKjDF^THEJTOME 

11 1 rav RVmPathies are with the man ? ,n d women and their children who ea r n. 
their livelihood by the swoat of the ir brow. It is nv daily hope and praver that 
. their lot may be improved, an d that thev may all en.iov the use of those commodi- 
ties that have become almos t priuc necessities in our dav. And " it is my ambition 
which I do not consider at all impracticable, that in this beloved country of ours, 
so rich in natural resources, our national economy may be so readjusted that it 
will permit all who can and desire to work, to live a life of relative comfort. 

But every reasonable man should see that the task is gigantic, almost chi- 
merical, and that it will require for its accomplishments all the patience, wis- 
dom, fairness, sense of proportion, and a practical mind - by which I mean, of 
one that can counterbalance and harmonize high ideals and high purposes with 
realities. ^ 1 

Sliiiil^^Ezoj^Tj^^cR iterion_onj;riend^ip 

Everybody i3 mv friend ^ bu t nobody in particular is my friend. Every one 
who complies with h is duty is my friend, but nobody who violates the law or neg- 
lects to do his duty i3 my friend. ^ 2 

12/ Speech before labor representatives at k alacanan, February 23, 1938. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, p. 171 7. 

40/ Ibid. , p. 1718. 

11/ Press statement on labor conflicts and their settlement, April 30, 1938. 
Quezon Messagoa T Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, p. 640. 

4.2/ Speech at Tacloban, Leyte, June 10, 1938. Ibid. , p. 74. 



H-354 



- 321 - 



IzJJ : J^i^^-£ 1 i°I;i^MLL_^?_^?_^_^ ffi 'UNIST - QUEZON 



My frionds. my w oll-knovm sympathy for the masses of our people, my desire 
t hat the wealth of my country bo not accumulated in the hands of a few individua ls 
bu t distributed among the great naasoa of the population, are not only duo to hu - 
m an sentioent that rakes ray heart pro out to the poor; they are also due to a rea - 
li stic view of what is best in the long run for the nation as a whole, I am for 
the proletariat, b ut I an not a communist. I an in favor of the proletariat bc - 
.9 ause as you increase tho^buy ing power of the passes you multiply enormously the 
wea lth of the country. 4 "^ 

3LHAgJD0jj!^ - MLQ ' S EP ITAPH? 



My country men, there is no nan in the Philippines who has received so many 
fa vors from his countrymen as I have. There are few men in the whole world who 
have received the loyalty of their people for such a long time as I have and there 
is nothing that I can do to pay < it hack except to serve you unselfishly, devote dly 
wi th all my mind and heart, and that is what I want to do. (Applause.) 

And I have no hatre d for anybody: I have helped even ay worst political 
enemies. I have lov e for all tho s e who were with me and those who were against m o. 
(Applause.) 

1 have no more ambit ion to amass greater political power. I have all that 
I want. My sole ambition is to do justic e to everybody, to g ive you a g" od govern- 
apn t that will be remembered by our chi l dren as an hone st an d fair government. 
(Applause . ) It is ray sole hope that on the day I step out of the presi dency, you t 
my people, will sav T "He has done the best he could for our own interest." 44 

i^Jiiil^Ili-I^-gI^^^g^Igg_^_Mg_ E PHY> SAY S QUEZON 

T here js no merit in doing jus tice to a friend because vour heart tells vou 
to do it; thp^ qa3 fa ngrlt_i_a in do ing .justice to an onemv in spite of the fact that 
he is your enemy. 4 ^ 

The difference between a civilized person and a savage is that the former 
considers the feelings, the rights, the ideas, and the thoughts of those with 
whom he lives and yet he refrains from exercising some of his rights in order 
not to inconvenience those who live in his community. Whereas, a savage does not 
care about the other people; he will do what will please him if he has the physical 
power to do it. 46 



42/ Speech at Maasin, Leyte, June 1,2,. 1938. Ibid, . p. 90. 

44/ Speech at Ormoc, Leyte, June 13., 1938. .Ibid. Also in Rivera Collection, 
Vol. IV, pp. 1793-1794. 

15/ Ibid. . QP, MR#41 , TNL. 

46/ Speech at the Zamboanga Normal School,' ; Zanboanga City, August 25, 1938. 
Quezon Me ssages. V ol. 4, Part I, JBVPF/ p. 167. 



c:inrv;.:afii-, 



11-355 

_ 522 _ 

qnaZONOH TRU TjgULNESS: IQ^DI^Eg ENCE BETWEEN LIAR AND THIEF 

To uphold truth is one of the most iiiportant duties of a rational and civi- 
lized nan, if not the most important. Truth alone can serve as basis for organized 

society. I'o no a liar is .just as bad as a crook: there is absolutely no diffe- 

47 

r anee between the liar and the thief. 

MLQ STRggg.gS_DIGNITY_CF WORK, SAYS LOVE OF WORK E NNOBL ING 

Work is what dignifies a person; do any kind of work. The nan who sweeps the 
streets is a much more respectable citizen than the nan who possesses some wealth 
but does nothing except gamble. The nan who tills the soil is a much bigger nan 
than he who occupies a high -position in the government but is a grafter and an 
exploiter of his people . 

It is not the kind of work that we do or the position that we occupy which 
ennobles us but it is our love for work and our desire and honesty in doing that 
work well. That is what a nohle work is; it makes no difference what we are. If 
we do our work well, if we render the service that we are expected to give, we 
can be proud of ourselves no natter how lowly the position we occupy in society is. 

i-:L T I ^M==£~- TTR L M0T QF SLims BUT 0F I,IB - T ¥ITH HIG H IDBA LS 

I an not building a country of saints; no. let the priests do that. I am 
trying to teach then - "(the Filipino people - ABS) to be men and women with ideals 
of public morality, truthfulness, honesty, and laboriousness. ^ 

'j^m^w^ m = m = ^^g : ^^^v^^ s<iQ workers' homes in tondo 

The conditions under which our laboring class and the poor live, present a 
problem which we should not fail to heed. Our dfficials should study and remedy 
the situation and, as for ne, I consider it an honorable duty to remedy it in the 
shortest tine possible. 

Almost every day I see the deplorable condition of the places where our 
laborers live. Oftentimes, as early as five o'clock in the norning I walk and go 
to plac es in the city where laborers live, to enable myself to see actually where 
and how their houses are constructed. These visits which generally take me to 
Pandacan. Tondo and other places, really touch ne. 

I really feel in nv heart the pitiful conditions under which the laborers 
and their families live - so entirely devoid of the comforts of life, their 
houses located in muddy places or built above stagnant pools which perhaps never 
dry up except during the hot season. ^° 

42/ Speech at the Cagayan High School, Cagayan, Misamis Oriental, August 27, 1938. 
; iP, MR#40, TI'TL. Quezon Messages , supra, p. 186. 

48/ Ibid ., p. 189. 

42/ Ibid. , p. 191. 

5.0/ Speech at barrio Vitas, Tondo, Manila, October 17, 1938. Quezon Messages . 
Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 224-225. 



11-356 

- 52? - 

DEKP FBELING^F_^^I^B_^ELS_QUEZON_TO GIVE_BES^GQVERMBMT_POSSIBLB 

My desire to give to the Philippines the best government of which we are 
capable is inspired by more than nerely the considerations that should actuate a 
nan who is elevated to the presidency of a free country* I feel that my duty in 
this regard is nore imperative, because of my deep feeling of gratitude to our 
people for the unstinted support that they have given me in the past and the un- 
swerving faith and trust that they have reposed upon me throughout the long years 
of ;ny public service and leadership in our struggle for self-government. 

I feel keenly that I owe it to them, to give the country not only an effi- 
cient government, but also one under which they will find opportunities and pro- 
pitious conditions for social contentment and individual happiness. This is my 
uppermost thought and ambition as I start the second half of my administration. 

I'VE DONE MY BEST TO SAFEGUAR D PEOPLE'S LIB ERTIES, HAPPINESS - MLQ 

I look back with satisfaction upon the first three years of the Commonwealth 
government, believing firmly that 'wc have made a good beginning and have laid the 
foundation for future progress. I am not aware of many things in which we covild 
have done better; I am convinced that, in all respects, I tried to do the best I 
could for the public welfare, sparing neither effort nor ray health in the ta3k, 

My fervent wish is that at the end of my administration, the people would 
feel that I had done everything within my power to safeguard their liberties and 
happiness, that I had been faithful to their trust, that I had been .just and right- 
eous to all, and that I had administered their affairs according to my best lights 
both of heart and mind, under the guidance of a Divine Providence whose aid and 
blessings I invoke continuously for. the security and welfare of our country. 

JuliiZ OIJiAYS^LAZ Y I-I/JT Jfnj^jnJIK^LYJLO^ EVERYTHING; 

My greatest ambition is to be able to help improve the living conditions of 
the laboring class, but no man or government can help you in this regard unless 
you first help yourselves. 

The first thing that is necessary is that you should work and work conscien- 
tiously. Don't think that you can spend your time scratching your head or playing 
with a cock in your hand, and the government will take care of you. The man wh o 
do es not want to work cannot be helped by any government, and even if we were to 
gi ve that man a piece of land free, he would ultimately lose his land; he would 
sell or spend it in other ways, and since he is not working the dav will como. 
when ho will lose everything . 

The man who desires protection from the government must 'first comply with 
his duties to the government and the community in which he lives. And above all 
those duties, the most important .is that he should work. Tho man who wants his 

51 / Speech on the aims of the administration, November 26, 1938. Ibid . .. p. 252 f 
52/ Ibid. , pp. 252-253. 



11-357 



- 524 - 

rights respected must first respect the rights of others. 55 

It is not because I an an eneny of the capitalists and landowners ijhat I 
side with you now. No, indeed; I have no enemy. My responsibility to my position 
?' g_ a responsibility to all, I have a duty t o defend the rights of the property 
WI2j-2£L likewise those pf.tho.joor. 1 favor the laboring class not because I 
desire to grab the property of the rich; I side with them owing to the fact that 
in order that the rich may enjoy peace and his logitimate share, he must give what 
rightfully belongs to his laborers. 54 

^^^^^^^^^^^^[ijm^amij^tmim unanswered 



The usurious practice of lending money should be stopped now! What interest 
can a hungry and miserable man, who has nothing to cat, give? 55 

^L^ggPflES PEOPLE HE WILL TAKE' CARE OF ffli^Tffi mn?TPT/,T.g 

Your municipal mayors are the heads of your towns; your governor is the 
executive of your province. It is necessary that you respect them. If thev conn-it 
fla y wrong, file c harges agai nst the erring of fi c j a i a and I win take care of them 5( 
7 MMhB-2IESim^S_UdJD IS THEIRS AS LONG AS THEY WORK 

* 

Work hard and well. Consider the land you are working as your own, and as 
long as you comply with your part of the contract, you can rest assured of its 
uae as long as you desire it. ^ 

J£L^^=M = .;£I^_GET i _Q^ZON ASSURES PEOPLE 



W hen you ne od_agciQthing. provided *h» f rn^ ^ ont 0 f the Commonwealth has the 
^.Itho rity and the _means^,o, gi ve it, vo u will always h.nve it whether vn U open vour " 
aaatlLor_ n6t That will always be true ... in,, no t ^ ^ i .dent of the Phi- 

lippines. ^ 

^2L^gJIi^j™^N jfjrJEgt, HOPES Kirj£R_WQgI£_;jOT_SO SCOTFREE 

I did not come here for some tine because, to tell the truth, I was tre- 
mendously shocked by the crime that had been committed when the late Representative 
(Julio) Nalundasan was murdered. 

52/ geech ^^^^ants^of Hacienda Buenavista, San Miguel, Bulacan, February 1, 

54/ Speech before a large group of laborers at San Fernando, Pampanga, February 14, 
19^9. Rivera Collection, V 0 1. IV, p . 199^ 6 ' 

55/ Ibid. , p. 1994. 

56/ Ibid., Quezon Messages, Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, p. 25, 

52/ Speech at Kaledian Farm, an estate owned by the Quezon family in Arayat, 
Pampanga, March JO, 1959. Ibid. , p. 63. arayat, 

58/ Speech at the public plaza of Bangued, Abra, April 23, 1939. IMd., p. 79. 



11-358 

- 525 ~ 

Murders are not unusual things, they happen everywhere. And I hoped and 
prayed that the murderer would not go unpunished. I even expected the people of 
the province themselves would make every effort to have the author of the crime 

59 

detected and punished. 
MLQ PLEDGBS_HEJ£ELL_^^ 

J will nnt Inavfi my aiif.rPRsnr i n qfcLLCjQ r-rmty-hanrl fir! , mnffh lean 1 RflVft ±hi3 
t TmrffytiPipn't: nf tho Philippine - y jien it aha 11 hp-ira honnmo i nrinpftnn'Rnt. in 1 346 - . 

T Tj ° r r " h1n " ir1 itfl hflndHi the.. 1flr.fr nf funds -i n thfl trnnmirv . 

nnHfir how rnic.h it nay affnnt tho surinn a.q nf my arlni pj strati nn . PVfin 1£ 
■jt Hhmilfl mean the rli f f m-nnnn hntwnnn a Si i ^jOaaf-UJ President and a faillirn. T 

wpiilri p-rvrfR-r to Iwvr nv offin» an d he pointed out as ,? nan whn had. failp . fi rath or 

60 

than have the JjjJa i XS o£ the Phi 1 i ppi.nnr, oxnopod to bankruT)tfiV », 

S 

PRESIDENT MORE INTERESTED IN COUNTRY' FUTURE THAN IN HIS OWN 



I an not interested in what I, myself, may do now; I am not interested in 
what the future might write about me for what I had accomplished during my tern 
of office. T am more j ntei- p ptprl in the future nf o nr r>nnntry, and T will nnt 

aacrj-f-icfl that fntm-n n-r subject j± JiD.jTjay-.xiak-£i?x whatever tnnpnrary vir . tmy T 

n ay in n diixLag my nrlni ni ntrati nn. Hence, I am not going to take any chances. If 

the income of the government is to be reduced substantially, I shall start closing 

the treasury so that my successor in office and, more so, the government of the 

Philippines will remain on solid foundation and be able to withstand the hard tiroes 

61 

that may come or which may likely come. 
QUEZON'S CONCEPT OF H ONOR IS /JOVE LIFE ITSELF 

A nan who has no concent of honor r who does not know that honor is above 

l ife itself, should never wear the uniform of a soldier. I have only that messa ge 

to give you: They only are fit to live those who are not afraid to die, and a nan 

62 

i s only entitled to live so long as he lives with honor. 
ML0^S_LAST AMBITION: TO BE I^tiM^IUj^WITHJ^BCTION_ 

My fellow countrymen, our common concern is to preservo democracy in the 
Philippines, and in framing our constitution and enacting our laws we should be 
guided not so much by what has been done by other people as by our own experiences 
and our own idiosyncracies and characteristics. We cannot merely copy the form 
of government that has been successful for it is not difficult to imagine that 



5,9/ Speech at the public plaza of Laoag, Hocos Norte, April 26, 1939. Ibid, .p. 79. 

60/ Speech at the farewell banquet for Floor Leader Quintin Paredes, Malacanan, 
Park, May 22, 1939. Ibid. , p. 130. 

H/ ibid. . CP, MR#42, Tl'JL. 

62/ Address at the graduation exercises of the ROTC, Philippine Army, Camp Dau, 
Pampanga, May 29, 1939. Quezon- Messages. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, p. 137. 



I 



II-359 



- 526 - 



what has been a success in the United States, for instance, nay be a failure in the 
Philippines, got only in the last years of av political life, but also of nv na- 
tural life that I have rece j jrgj from the hands of our People all the honor, all 
the p ower a Filipino can receive under t he form of government that we have. Thn r?, 
i s no longer a n y mystery, as far as I am co n cerned, in the glamor and pleasure 
that qovornnental au thority has. My remaining anbition is to be remembered hv nnr 
people as one who tried to recipro cate the evidences of affection that thov have 
given no. 

l^ii£EI=LiiEiiiILM^£L?^2™^I^-Ii2s over bulacan folk 



Countrymen, I shall now plant rice. (Applause.) Rice planting is a serious 
task, although I am telling you that my rice planting at this moment will just be 
a joke, because this noble work does not belong to us who are quite advanced in 



years. 



A few years ago I planted rice seedlings in ay hacienda (in Arayat, Pan- 
panga - ABS), and the consequence was that I nearly died of exhaustion. It is 
really a difficult task - a task which should only be performed by young men 
and women for their bones are still soft and they can stoop without feeling any 
pain in the back. But an old person gets easily tired and fatigued in planting" ri c 
.i^AN_DE_.LA CRUZ FIHDS A CHAMPION IN MANTIBT. T.. omagnw 

When did Juan de la Cruz ever have any chance at social justice if not only 
upon the establishment of the Commonwealth? Under the American rule, a law in 
this country authorised the imprisonment of the kasama (tenant) who left his land- 
lord while still pecuniarily obligated to the latter. But it was Manuel L. Quezon, 
let me tell you, who did away with that law. Is that freedom? VJould that be free- 
dom - allowing a poor tao who owes his landlord to be sent to jail - which you so 
proudly claim the Filipino people enjoyed under the former regime? 65 

^ig™ = ^|^SJ|HOST^LTyKmjIA^ 

The most cultured man is not the man who boasts of his freedom to do as he 
pleases, but the man who is capable of considering all the time the comfort of 
others even at the expense of his own comfort. It is not the man who insists on 
being attended first that shows the better side of his culture and education, but 
the man who is ready to yield his place to a lady or to another nan. It is not 
the man who holds on to the first bread that is served, but the man who permits 

^ Qp e °MR 7 f42 t ^ J1 proposal to ths Constitution, July 7, 1939. 

^ £n°?™°? th ° Tf ° f thG f±rst Rice Plant ^S °ay in the Philippines, 
™ l^c ^Tr,' Bulacan ' Julv 9i 1939. Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, 

657 Speech at the CLU-sponsored inter-university oratorical contest, Ateneo 
auditorium, December 9, 1939. Ibid. , p. 2189. 



II-36Q 

- 527 - 

the other guests to serve themselves first, that shows his culture, ^ 

^!Lli£=IIlJ=lI-----Sg^-^^ YS BEAT S_F0R P OOR FOLKS 

The anivcrsary of ay birthday always brings back to my nind memories of the 
place of my birth - my parents, brothers, sisters, relatives and townsmen. I see 
ay humble origin: we were all poor. My father and mother were school teachers each 
earning twelve pesos a month. Outside of school hours, my father attended to his ' 
small farm - less than three hectares in area. In youth, my playmates wore sons 
of poor families, poorer than ourselves. Many of these playmates of mine are still 
living, in good health and physically strong, but they are just as poor as their 
parents were. 

Those thoughts, the memories of my youthful days, bring both emotions and 

sentiments which linger the whole year around, and arc the moving force behind my 

acts as a public servant. They explain why I enjoy the company and conversation of 

the common people and why, sometimes, I 3pend hours chatting with them in their 

huts and barrios. They explain why my heart beat3 for the poor and my mind abhors 

the sight of millions of men, women and children bereft of the necessities of life, 

67 

while others swim in abundance and luxury! 
I, WILL MOT FAIL THEM - QUEZON 

I am profoundly grateful to the people of the Philippines for their confi- 
dence and trust. With the help of God. I will not fail them. 68 

118. q U E Z 0 N » S " U L T I II 0 A D I 0 S " 

!l^Z ON^S_TTO_FiiRE'JELL MESSAGES^ r ■ 

(Translated from the Tagalog original) 

.... . October 23, 1934 

TO THE FILIPINO NATION: ' • ■ ■■ 

I have served you, land that I love, to the full extent of my capacity. You 
in turn have shown me a true and sincere faith. I will never forget till the last 
beat of ray heart what you have shown me. I regre t that I cannot bo with you i n 
t he fortunate hour when you will be who lly free. B ut you arc almost thoro and 
h ave to go but a short way . 

So that the lives that were given up for you be not brought to naught and 
so that you as well as your sons may profit from the freedom that you will very 
soon receive, my last words to you are: 

1 ) Value your honor, freedom and independence, fight for them to the last. 

2) Always remember that you are one nation and your unity is the source 
of your strength, peace and happiness. 

66/ Speech before the U.P. Student Council, July 16, 194-0. OP, MR#44, TNL. 

67/ Message on his 62nd birthday, August 19, 1940. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, 
pp. 2261-2262. 

68/ Statement on the occasion of his ro-electicn as President of the Philippines, 
November 11, 1941 . O fficial Gazette. Vol. 40, No. 20, November 15, 194t , 
p. 3955. ^lso in Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2328. 



11-361 

- 528 - 



3) Do not pay heed to evil counsel, couched in beautiful words by those 
who w 13 h lor nothing but self -aggrandizement. 

4) Regard America as the true ally of the Philippines and adopt the poll, 
oy never to quarrel with America. 

5) Beware of Japan. Let us not be wanting in fair dealing with her but we 
suould never p Gmi t ourselves to be under her. ,e will not profit from it. 

6 Be at peace with every nation, but fro, anyone except America aslc nctt 
7) Be nundful of our indebtedness ' to Spain. The Spaniards have an affecti 



i or us. 



Farewell, dear Motherland. Pray to God for no v 

He is most powerful and He is tho ■ r ° P ° Se yOUP h ° P ° 

P am and He iq the origin and source of happiness. No nation will 

My God, bless my native land. 

F&mulL L. ojCJjjJZON 

* * * 

TO HI FAMILY: *~ r : " :0 

„ October 23, 1934 

My sweetheart: 

...:r err - 

operation. ' f " M ° n ° th ° re MUld "«™ P«*««4 tho 

are nottl'tT/ 111 tnk ° Pla °° tt ' e *— • » * »n that you 

..re not here so that you na y ho saved f ro D „orry and trouble ^ you J 

«hon I am already well by tho help of Oo d. * 11 kn °'* 

hind of operation • , 7 " " th ° " Mt ° f a11 ^ «*» 

them a should " ^ 1 ** * ** *» * =»* powerful. Novor- 

lo a should any eventuality happen te ,e, I leave to you the earo of our 

; it c :ir; ; ooaua ° u - « » «■ -» ™ ^ 

yet it » ° " d ° aiCOtl;a ay lif ° 40 m — t. eur children, and 

m i;: ; £a ;: nc t,M ™ ** ~«- - — *» •» 

riod J „ Make thiS lett ° r ™ ri ' l0ne bocaueo 1 »<* »« »or- 

i::^; r:: t e ° p ~ 1 - - - - — - - «■ — * 

and lifl 0 ^" E ° a " " y faUltS - "' y l0TC «* »- »» »™ ohan £ od. My heart 
" r t n ■ r, y0 V l0n °- "° — — ™ - m hindnoaa and in 

aay beeause at eoaes from tho deepeat part ef ny soul, 
you nll Pray , f ° r an °' ChUdren - ?My f ° r "' *»' 1 - ««*««. facing 
^i^i!Lil2Lf! a - » f •»«». and I „in never ferret to „atch ever you 



11-362 



- 529 - 



end through the Almighty to deliver you fron all evil. 

Farewell - ray life, 
MANUEL 

Baby, Nini, Nonong: 

Ky beloved children, > 

Be good. Obey the wishes of your Mother and love one another. 
Pray for your Father and forgive him. 
Till heaven, my loved ono3. 

Your Father. 

This will not be placed in the nails if the result of the operation is 
successful. 

Sane 

[Note: The two farewell Messages of President Quezon wore first published 
in the Philippines Free Press , .on July 26, 1947, nearly 13 years after they had been 
written on October 23, 1934, or two days before a major operation for kidney stone 
in his gall bladder at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland. - ABS. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2515-2518.] 

119. r b ..l i g i 0 it 
^J^^J^ ^njojel jsi osj3 noral_f orcb for good 

I an deeply convinced that religion is a moral force of incalculable value 
for good. Lot me avow publicly the firm conviction that faith in God and the 
.practice of one's religious belief keeps a nan, perhaps more than any other consi- 
deration, within the bounds of law and helps him in the performance of his duties, 
wigs is not to say, o f course, that an at heist or a man without religion may not 
be a good citizen. I t is, how ever, tru e' that a people who profess collectively some 
religion and who honestly nnrt i ntelligently practise that religion which thev pro- 
fess, are in little danger of social disorder and disintegration . 1 

I designated Father Edwin Ronan as ny adviser in the organization of that 
branch of the Philippine Army known as the Chaplain's Service. Father Ronan had 
occasion not only to see, but also to practise in Europe during the World War and 
among the American Expeditionary Forces, this essential principle of (religious 
tolerance - ABS). With his great tact and ability, his tolerance for other 
people's opinions and beliefs, he will be a living example of what we oxpect from 
the chaplains of the Army. 

I am not giving hin a commission in the Philippine Army for he may not bo 
commissioned - being an American, not a Filipino citizen. But as my adviser, and 
for^the purpose of insuring the effectiveness of his help in this work, I am 

lZ fetter to Ma J. Gen. Paulino Santos, chief of staff, Philippine Army, on Father 
Mwin Ronan as organizer of the Philippine Army Chaplain's Service, September 
^ W37. Quezon Mftfi an ffft p t Vol . ^ P.n^ t, JBVFF, p. 283. 



11-363 



- 530 - 



authorizing him to use the unif orm of the Amy if and whenever necessary with the 

insignia of major. I am giving him the salary and emoluments corresponding to this 
2 

rank. 

^yjG^OQ gjiRCISES ^ Q^gOME_IIg LUENCE Off KAN, SAYS QUEZON 

I am one of those who believe that religion exercises a wholesome influence 
upon man, both as an individual and as a citizen. I believe this to bo undeniably- 
true in the case of my own people. Of course, a nan should love and practise 
righteousness upon its own appeal to his mind and to his heart - that is, to his 
conscience. And he should perform his obligations because it i3 his duty to do so. 
And it is conceivable that there may be men, without believing in God or profes- 
sing any religion, to be righteous and good citizens . But how hard it must be to 
practise self-sacrifice to the extent of giving up one's life for his country or 
his fellowmen in a heroic performance of a duty unless he believes God and has 
faith in the hereafter . 

^E^CTgNT_ON_^LIGJO PS _Igs TR g C TI0IJ III PUBLIC SCHOOLS 

In a country like the Philippines, where we have so many religions, and 
where every religion is entitled to an equal recognition by the government, to 
make religious instruction a part of the curriculum will be to bring chaos to 
the school. ^ 

JTg^QAN TS RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION ISSUE SETTLED ONCE AND FPU ALL 

I regard the controversies that have arisen in relation to the bill on re- 
ligious instruction of such seriousness and importance that it would be well for 
the whole nation and all the parties involved that they be settled now and forever. 
These controversies are pregnant with the seeds of popular dissension and I trust 
that the 1'Iational Assembly will cooperate with me in my earnest endeavor to guard 
our country against the bitter strifes that have arisen in other nations due to 
similar or allied causes. Let us not, by our refusal to face these dangers, merely 
postpone the inevitable conflict which, notwithstanding the sound and patriotic 
purposes of those engaged therein, will inevitably degenerate into a religious 
struggle with all the accompanying evils. ^ 

CHI|!FJ||jC^ 

In consonance with most constitutions recognizing religious freedom and the 
separation of Church and Stats, our Constitution expressly prohibits the use of 

2J Ibid. , pp. 281-282. 

Press statement on the trip of Archbishop Michael J. O'Doherty of Manila to 
Bucharest, Hungary, March 21, 1938. Ibid. . Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, p. 638. 

(J Speech in Cebu City, June 14, 1938. Ibid. , p. 109. 

5/ Message to the National Assembly, July 25, 1938. Ibid. , pp. 518-519. 



11-36$ 



-531 - 



any public property, directly or indirectly, in the interest of any religion. Takin 
into consideration all these provisions of the Constitution, the conclusion is in- 
escapable that the precept relating to religious instruction does not provide a 
limitation to rights that otherwise exist undor the Constitution, but is permissive 
in nature and establishes a privilege which otherwise would not exist. This fact, 
by every rule of statutory construction, conpcls the strictest interpretation of 
r/ach provisions. This was ny conviction when I vetoed the measure. ^ 

I'l/V S PERSONAL _STArJP_ON_pLIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 

It may not be aniss to reiterate that I an one of those who believe that xe- 
ligious instruction is not only good but also necessary for children of -school 
ago. As I stated in ny veto message,.; I consider religion as a groat force for 
good. It is stabilizing in its influence. It is good for the individual and good 
for the body politic. I believe also that the primary duty to teach religipn de- 
volves on the parents, if and when those parents profess a religion. Of course, it 
is a part of the essential functions of a church to teach religion to its faithful. 

I am prepared to give every facility for the teaching of religion to the youth of 

7 

our country in accordance with the laws of the land. 

Much as I believe that religious instruction is necessary for our vouth. and, 

therefore, much as I sympathize with the idea that somehow the government should 

promote t he teac hing of religion. I must emphatically state that if this can bo 

don e only by undermining or in any way violating the doctrine of the separation o f 

Church and S tate. I am irrevocably opposed to it. This attitude is dictate d by what 

I consider my duty under the Constitution and by ny own personal convictions. After 

all the obligation to teach religion .resides in the parents and the Church, and 

should they comply with this duty, the spiritual need of the people in this respect 

would amphy be provided for. A gove rnment th at au thorizes opti onal relig ious ins- 
t^ctjoa . in the publ ic sc hools, as it is , done in, t he Philippines, with the limita - 
tions imposed bv the Cons titution, is a l ready supplementing in no inconsequential 
way th at d uty of the pare nts an d cf the Church . With the opportunities we offer in 
the public schools at present, the government cannot be blamed if religion is not 
.more generally taught. 

120. S C H 0 L A H 3 H I P 

0j^I.gI^^ = 0ps_^O[JLD __p EIICOUIIAGED TO TAK E ACADEMIC CA REjJR 

University or college education should not be the ambition of every young 
man and young woman. Only those intellectually gifted should have that ambition. 
This is particularly applicable to the children of poor parents. While poverty is 
not in itself sufficient reason for denying anyone the prosecution of higher 
studies, yet only those poor students with extraordinary talents and wilj. power 
should be encouraged to follow an academic career. The government itself night 
provide scholarship for those deserving students. 

6/ Ibid. , p. 519. 
1/ Ibid. , p. 520. 
8/ Ibid. , p. 521. 

l/ Speech at the commencement exercises of the University of the Philippines, . 
April 4, 1939. Quezon Messages. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFP, p. 66. 



11-365 . 

- 532 - 

121 . SCIENCE 
pg_P^_EMP IIASlS _ON -^^H_^U^ITY_OF_M^K^_PRACTITIONERS 

It cannot be denied that money is of prime importance in the administration 

of public health. However, we should not lose sight of the fact that the quality 
and training of medical practitioners and of public health officials, as well as 

their interest in the welfare of others, are of equal if not of greater import- 
ance. ^ 

* * * 

I do hereby create and constitute a committee to study the qualifications 

2 

of foreign physicians who may desire to practice medicine in the Philippines. 
GOVERNMENT GIVES DUE RECOGNITION TO WORK OF SCIENTISTS 

I know the little attention and help 'that the government has given the few 
men assigned to do research work. . . In our bureaucratic government, attention 
has been focused on the occupants of higher positions, regardless of whether their 
work is less important than that of their subordinates. However, in as much as all 
good governments are bureaucratic in form, I have to stand by it. 

As you know, I am a revolutionist by nature, and my government is a revolu- 
tionary bureaucratic government; therefore, I want you to realize that any import- 
ance this government gives to a man in the service is measured not by his rank in 
office but by the importance of the service which he renders. 

So it makes no difference to me how you rate in the official hierarchy. The 
government will give full recognition to your work, no matter how humble your of- 
ficial position may be. I want to give every encouragement to our scientists who 
3 

do research work. 

The practice of medicine is, of course, a profession. But it is more than 
that. It is also an avocation; for the man who follows this profession must be ins- 
pired by motives other than merely to earn a livelihood. He who has no innate love 
for humanity beyond and above that which the average human heart feels has no 

business to belong to your fraternity. The doctor who can disregard the call of a 
patient without compunction, simply because that patient cannot pay as much as he 
think3 he should be paid for his service, is a disgrace to the profession. 

\J Press statement on public health and sanitation, April 22, 1938. Quezon 
Messages, Vol. 4, Part I, J3VFF, p. 644. 

2/ Administrative Order No. 88, "Creating a Committee to Pass upon the Qualifi- 
cations of Foreign Physicians, considered as Experts, Who Desire to Practice- 
Medicine in the Philippines," March 2, 1939. Ibid., Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, 
p. 1300. 

3_/ Speech on government recognition of scientific research in the Philippines, 
at Malacanan, March 2, 1939. Ib jd. , p. 53. 

47 Speech at the annual convention of the Philippine Islands Medical Association, 
May 2, 1939. Ibid., p. 113. 



11-366 

- 553 - 

SCIENCE HAS PROGRESSE D BECA USE OP MEN MHO HAVE DARED POW ERS THAT BE 

Science, whether exact science or not, has made progress only because there 
had been men who dared the powers that be at one time or another, even dared, not 
only the public opinion but also the accepted scientific theory of the day, to pro- 
found and express their own convictions. Science has made progress because some 
men had insisted that the world was round even when they were undergoing hunger and 
privation and were being burned at the stake. 

122. SELF-RULE 

j.:F AFFIRMS FILIPINO ABILITY TO RUL E THEMSELVES 

In the Philippines I do belong to a political party that defends the right 
of every people to be free. The IJacionalista Party is the party that believes, 
affirms and demonstrates the ability. of the Filipino people to govern themselves, 
and also asserts their right to be free and independent. 1 

£^ZOff^INTERPRETS "PHILIPPINES FOR FILIP INOS" P OLICY 

The provision of the Organic Act creating the Philippine .Assembly, which 
excludes everybody from acquiring public lands, except Filipino citizens, is the one 
provision that convinced the Filipino people that the policy of the American govarn- 
nent in the Phil-' _,_.ie Islands is a policy of self-denial and altruism, or, as it 
has been officially termed, the policy of "the Philippines for the Filipinos." 2 

IgHkE^^ELil^—^^L 1 ^ 0F KVERY PEOPLE - gUEg gg 

I repeat, and I mean every word of it, that intellectual advancement, public 
improvements, and material prosperity alone will not make the Filipinos happy and 
contented under alien rule nor induce them to concede the necessity of that rule. 
If any man thinks that he can purchase the Filipino people with material prosperity 
and intellectual advancement, and so make them forgot their rights as men and as a 
nation, he is utterly mistaken. 

Ask the bird if it prefers a golden cage to the air and the sunshine; or a3k 
Patrick Henry to explain his choice between liberty and life. 

s .gl. f ~govarnrient is the birthri^h t of every people regardle ss of how that 

right in aagxsiaad, 5 

IiL^JS^gTSjraLIPINOS '_ RIGHT TO GOVERN OR H IS-GOVERH 

I am a nationalist Reader. 1 bri eve in , the , r i fft -1 ' T I R 1 i - q t thnftry that ovary 

5j Speech at the open forum of the U.P. Alumni Association, August 7, |940. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2245. 

V Speech in the U.S. House of Representatives, 1912, n.d.m. QP, MR#22, TNL. 

2j Speech in the U.S. House of Representatives, May 15, 1912. Rivera Collection, 
Vol. I, p. 94. 

5./ Speech on the Philippine bill in the U.S. House of Representatives, October 
1, 1914. Ifcid., pp. 217-227. 



11-367 

- 53* _ 

oeople have the right to govern or oven misgovern themselves . I say that Gve ry pec 
pie who can establish a government under which they may peacefully live and improv 
themselves, are capable of self-government. ^ 

GOV ERNMENT RIM NEIT HER LIKE HELL NOR HEAVEN 

I would rathe r have a government run lik e hell by Filipinos than a govern- 
ment run like hea ven by taericans . Of course, the Filipinos will never run a 
ijovornment like hell; and I suppose that while you have a superior government here 
you cannot run a government like heaven yet, either. ^ 

^---iE-^J!^ DEMONSTRATED THEIR AJ3ILITY_T0 RUN OWN GOVERNMENT 

V/e have really given, in every possible way, evidences of our capacity to 
carry on not only a central government in the Philippine Islands, but also a ■ 
governmental system in the different municipalities of the archipelago. V/e have 
some very efficient and patriotic officials in the government elected by the peo- 
ple. We have some that are not so efficient and not so patriotic, but I suppose 
that is not the exclusive prerogative of the Filipino people. One thing I can tell 
you: so far we have not had in the cabinet any member investigated, nor any member 
of the House or the Senate sent to jail. 6 

Of course, our government is not a perfect one, but when we are given in- 
dependence we will have a perfect government, as far as that can be accomplished 
by any nation. I would like any one to point out to mo a government that is per- 
fect today. But we can have and we will have a government which, on the whole, 
will be carrying on the business of the people to their profit and advantage, and 
I think that is all we can hope for. ^ 

FILIPINOS HAVE THE RIGII ^0_g}£g THE MSELVES , ASS ERTS QUEZON 

The Filipino people are held responsible for the government of the Philip- 
pines to the extent that their very national liberty is at stake. Thoy have there- 
for every right to expect, and every duty to demand that they be allowed to direct 
.and control this government, so that if they fail, they should, at least, fail 
through their own fault and not because of others' fault. 8 



4/ Speech at the Columbia University, USA, November 27, 1927. QP, MR#29, TNL, 

V Speech at the Hamilton Club, Chicago, Illinois, November 29, 1927. Ibj£. 

6/ Speech on Philippine independence at the Hippodrome Theater, Baltimore, 
Maryland, December 4, 1927. TbJA- 

2/ IbM. 

3/ Speech before the student body, National University, 1931, n.d.m. QP, MR# 
32 f TNL « 



11-368 

- 535 - 

CAP ACITY OF FILIPINOS TO SET UP AND MAINTAIN OM GOVE RNMENT 

The political capacity of the Filipino people to sot up and maintain an 
independent government, republican as well as democratic in form and substance, hat 

Q 

been amply tested and satisfactorily proven. 
B RITISHER HAS FATTH IN GOV ERNMENT RUN BY FILIPINO S 

I think that it was a Britisher, a very prominent businessman in Manila, 
who was among the first foreigners to express absolute faith and confidence in the 
future of the Philippines under a government managed by the Filipinos. 

We sincerely believe that the presence of England in the Far East is in the 
interest of peace and civilization. ^ 1 ; 

AFFIRMS F -MTH IN FILIPINO CAPACITY TO 5JRM0UNT OBSTACLES 

In every line of human endeavor and in every phase of national existence we 
have equally important problems to solve, and similar difficulties to overcome. To 
stand alone as a free nation, we must be self-reliant and capable of self defense. 
Wo must bo self-sufficient, insofar as this term implies a balance of earning power 
against necessary expenditure. We must be prepared to assure the progressive edu- 
cation and training of our less favored classes, and to raise their standard of 
living to a level compatible with a free citizenry in a true democracy. We must 
bo prepared to carry on our own relationships with other countries and, finally, 
wc must develop our complete resources to the continuous benefit of all our people. 
Again and again I have expressed my confidence in the capacity of the Filipino 
people to meet and overcome these tests. 11 

FILIPI NO C iP iCITY F O R SELF-RULE AM PLY DEMON STRATED 

On the threshold of the fourth year of the Commonwealth, the Philippines 

finds herself full of the spirit of thankfulness for having boon the fortunate 

recipient of Almighty's bounty during the year that has closed. Experiencing 

progress that is a compliment to the proven ability of the Filipinos for self-rule, 

the end of 1938 found the Commonwealth government well established politically 

and economically, having undergone no serious social setbacks that would have 

impeded the national growth of a young country that is fast acquiring the blossings 

12 

of complete liberty. 
FILIP INOS^VI NDICA^ 

We Filipinos are a symbol to the whole world, not only of the spirit of 

V Speech over the Columbia Broadcasting Station, January 26,1934. QP, MR#36, TNL. 

JLQ/ Welcome speech on the occasion of the visit of Lord Rothermere, October 12, 
1936. OP, MR#38, TNL. 

ll/ Address at the graduation exercises of the Filipino air pilots, Camp Murphy, 
October 30, 1937. .Quezon Messages . Vol, 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 155. 

12/ Speech before the National Assembly, 1939, n.d.m. QP, MR#43, TNL. 



11-369 



- 536 - 



personal sacrifice through which this war must be won, but also of those principle 
of mutual respect and equality among nations which are basic postwar aims of the 
United Nations. 

The Filipino people have for all time vindicated the policy of self-deter- 
mination and have lighted a guiding beacon for the postwar world which is now in 
13 

the making. 

123. SELF-SACRIFICE 
:^KSJ; 1 ^D^S_F^ PU3LIC_0F FICE TO ESCHEW SELFISH_ INTERESTS 

We should be unworthy of the liberties and rights granted us by the Jones 
Act were we to make use of them for the promotion of selfish interests. The desire 
to hold public office is a laudable one when it is prompted by the desire to serve 
the public interests. The candidate or political party, however, that is prompted 
by selfish motives alone is guilty of defrauding the nation. The people must in 
each case weigh in the balance the purity of the intentions of those who solicit 
their votes. 

No sacrifice, whether it be personal or national, made at present or in the 
future for the welfare of our children, should ever be too groat, for whatever is 
good for our children must necessarily be good also for our country. 2 

MQRE_SACRIFIC ES N EEDED ON EV E OF EMERGING NAT IONHOOD 

Our aim will always be the welfare of the people as a whole. T 0 attain this 
objective, we shall, if necessary, continue to sacrifice for the common benefit* 
The sacrifices made in the' past laid the foundations for our national life. I am 
afraid that much more of the spirit of self-sacrifice will be required of us in 
the Philippines today. We are emerging into nationhood under most adverse . cir- 
cumstances. It is necessary that wc bear in mind constantly our objective of 
saving our country above all things else, and that in order to save it we must 
demand personal sacrifice of every man and woman of this country. ^ 

NO_PEOPLE WORTH A D*HN U NLESS THEY LEARN HOW TO DIE 

You have been reading only of death and destruction in Europe. You 



12/ Article, "Philippines in the War," in the Pearl Harbor anniversary issue of 
the Army and Navy Journal, December 7, 1942. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, 
p. 2415. - 

eech at a public banquet held in Quezon's honor at the Hotel do Franco, 
Sta. Cruz, upon hi3 triumphal return from the United States, September 23, 
1916. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 425. 

2j Message on Child Health Day, August 17, 1934. OP, MR#36, THL. 

2/ Speech at the Senior Teachers' Assembly, Teachers' Camp, Baguio, May 22, 
!936. Quezon Magjaaggja, Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 98-99. 



II- 370 

- 537 _ 

have soon it in the movies. You do not realize yet that you may see it right here, 
end you are not getting ready for it. Nobody i3 getting ready for it. Nobody is 
telling you that you must get ready for it. I am not telling you that war will 
come. It may never come. I hope it will not come. But if it should come, it will 
be a good thing for all of us, for we will learn to suffer and to die. A nd no 
people are worth a damn unless they know how to suffer and know how to die . I 
wish these educators of ours hero will start telling you to write poems or speecho 
speaking of your duty to work and to suffer, or, if necessary, to lay down your 
lives for our country. That is life. ^ 

tlY "./HOLE LIFE IS D EVOTED TO ALL - QjEgUij 

I am an old man and about to die, but I am leaving my children behind me, 
children who are as young if not younger than you are, I would not today be able 
to face these fruits of my own soul and flesh if I did not know that my whole life 
has been devoted to their happiness, freedom and security. And I could not have 
done this for them without doing it also for you. They cannot be free if the rest 
of you are slaves. 

124. SEP A R A T I 0 N . 0 F P 0 W E R S 

^JKERICAN GOVERNOR GE NERAL, P HILIPPINE SEE. VIE IN STALEMATE? 

We cannot judge the ability of the Filipino people for self-government- by 
what is taking place in the government of the Philippines today, nor can you have 
the opportunity of solving how much can you do in the Philippine Islands undar 
tho present law, because while the Legislature cannot enact laws without the 
approval of the Governor-General, the latter cannot do certain things without tho 
consent of the Philippine Senate, and cannot 1 enact laws without the approval of 
the Legislature. 1 

P HILI P PINE SENATE HAS POW ER OF CONFIRMATION 

We have approved every appointment made by the Governor-General which we 
thought we should approve. V/e have felt that we are as much bound by our oath to 
exercise our own discretion as to whether appointments should be confirmed, as 
the Governor-General is, in making his appointments, but, unfortunately, there have 
boon 3ome cases where we did not feel that we should not confirm the appointments. 
However, wo have not disapproved any appointment made by the Governor-General on 
political grounds. If we have disapproved an appointment, it was because wo either 
did not think that the man had the ability or the character required for the 
position. I can cite a few instances which will prove that the Philippine Senate 
has acted in good faith and in the best interests of the government. 

So, in tho exercise of the power of confirmation, we have oniy declined 

V Speech on National Heroes Day, November 28, 1941. QP, MR#45, TNL. 
5/ liisl., Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2441-2442. 

V Speech at the Columbia University, USA, November 27, 1927. QP, MR#29, MO" 



11-371 

- 538 - 

to approve . such appointments as we felt it was our duty so to do. If you deny 
the Senate this right you might as well deprive it of the power to confirm 
appointments. ^ 

"FULLE TIN" STORY FALSE, MISCH IE VOUS - QUEZON 

The news appearing in this morning's 3jille£in to the effect that "the 

office of the American High Commissioner has turned thumbs down on the proposals 

to float bonds in the Philippines for insular public works projects," is false as 

3 

it is mischievous. 

LEADERSHIP HOT INCOMPAT IBLE WI TH SEPARATION OF POWERS 

There is no government on earth that could run if the theory wefe ad- 

vanced that the National .Assembly or the legislative department should oppose 

everything that the Chief Executive recommends. There must be leadership somewhere 

in the government and that leadership is not incompatible with the separation of 
4 

powers. 

SEP ARATION OF POWERS DOES NOT RULE OU T COORDINATION 

For the separation to exist in theory as well as in practice, it is not 
essential that there be constant friction between those departments. On the con- 
trary, in order that this theory of government can succeed, there must be coor- 
dination in the exercise of the powers of the three departments, because it is 

only through coordination that an effective and efficient government can be given 

5 

to the country. 

125. 3 0 C I \ L ' J USTICE 
SOCj^g ^JTJST ICT^JlORIi! BENEFICENT IF BONE SPONT ANEOUSLY 

It is our boast that wo are the only Christian nation in the Far Bast. Our 
boast will be an empty one if we do not show in actual practice that we are Christ- 
inns. Christianity's highest teaching is to love our fellowmen. Let us love by 
helping him and his family live, happy and contented. 

If I were allowed to make a plea as I celebrate my (58th) birthday today 
I would unhesitatingly ask everyone who is listening to me to join in one con- 
certed effort to improve the living conditions of our masses. It is my primary 
concern because I would like to see it done spontaneously by those in a position 

2j Speech before the U.S. Senate Committee on Territories and Insular Possessions, 
December 16, 1927. Ibid.. 

2/ Press statement on a Bulletin story, August 3, 1936. QP, MR#38, TNL. 

V Speech at a press conference, November 17, 1937. QP, MR#40, TNL. 

V Speech at the farewell banquet in honor of Hon. Quintin Paredos, majority 
floor leader of the Second National Assembly, Malacanan Park, May 22, 1939. 
Que son Ho.^gog, Vol. 5, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 125. 



11-372 



- 539 - 



to do so without our having to impose it by legislation. Socii 

inoro beneficent if it comes as a matter of sentiment and not r : -' 

tl.&VS RIGHT TO LIVE IS SOCIETY'S DUTY TO UPHOLD, SAYS MLQ 

The first and most fundamental right of man is his right to live. This 

right imposes upon a well-organized society the duty to provide him with the means 

for his existence. If other countries around us fail in this primary duty, it is 

2 

no good excuse for us to evade it. 

SOCIAL JUSTICE HAMPERED BY STRUGGLE BDT\fEBN "HAVE S" AJ T D "HAVE NOTS" 

The struggle that we see everywhere is between those who have and those 

who have not; the former trying to keep everything they have, mindless of the 

misery of those who have not, the latter trying to take away everything from those 

who have, forgetting that they have worked for it and are entitled to the fruit of 

3 

thejr labor, whether manual or mental. 

G IVE PART OF YOUR PRO PERTY TO COMMUIIITY, RETAIN THE REST - QUEZON 

It is time for us to sound the warning: Let no one believe that he can stil: 
continue exploiting his fellowmen without in the end suffering from it. He who own? 
had better give a part of what he own 3 to- th e c ommunity in which he lives if ho 
wan ts to co nse rve the re st for himself. ^ 

MLQ S TRESSES LINK BgTjjEE H SOCIAL JUSTICE, NATIONAL D EFENSE 

If we give the laborers good wages, if we give the farmhands the just parti- 
cipation which they deserve, if we treat the poor with the same respect as we do 
the rich and if, at the same time; we teach our youth, besides their rights and 
duties of citizenship, the use of modern weapons for defense, we shall have here 
an ideal country in the world - a country which every nation will respect and 
which nobody would dare invade, a country where we can lead a happy life - happy, 
because we shall feel the protective influence of the reign of social justice and 
the satisfaction of seeing our compatriots all equally happy and prosperous. - 

TUII-J GOALS ; NAT I OF 'L DEFENSE AUD SOCI AL JUSTICE 

Let's have the capacity and be in readiness to defend our shores against 
foreign foes and at the same time establish and maintain social justice. 

l/ Birthday address, over radio station KZRM, Manila, August 19, 1936. jQu&aojQ. 

Saaaagfteii v 0 i. 2, Part 1, jbvff, p . 118. 

2/ Speech, "Underfed Because Underpaid," .August 19, 1936. Do la Liana and 
Icasiano, op.. jsiJi. , p. 128. 

2/ Speech on the first anniversary of the Commonwealth, Malacanan, November 15, 
1936. Q uo son Hflafiflgfta i v ol. 2, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 144. 

5/ Speech at a banquet for national officials, Malacanan, January 20, 1937. 

. Quezon Messages, Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 33. 
W 2Z>2&., OP, MR#39, TEL. 



II- 373 

- 540 - 

SO CIAL JUSTICE A CONSTITUTIONAL MANDATE 

Social justice is a constitutional mandate which has constantly received 

7 

first attention from my administration* 
ONV/AR D MARCH. OF SO CIAL JUSTICE IS UNSTOPPABLE 

Let no one fool himself into believing that any man or group of men or any 
class can successfully oppose the onward march of justice. Once started there is 

Q 

no power that can stop or hold it back. 
SOCIAL JUSTICE IS ENSHRINED IN CONSTITUTION 

Our Constitution embodies the living ideas of our time. It contains the 
solemn declaration that "the promotion of social justice to insure the well-being 
and economic security of all the people should be the concern of the State." And 
to enable the State to perform this sacred duty, it invests the government with 
extraordinary powers so that it may enact and execute laws designed to promote 

the well-being of the people and to insure justice in the relationship between 

9 

capital and labor. 

QUEZON'S SOLEM N COV ENANT WITH PEOPLE; DO JUSTICE TO EVERY M.-ffl 

"Do justice to every man" - that is the solemn covenant that I have entered 
into with our people when I took my oath of office as President of the Philippines. 
These words "do justice to every man" which arc found in my oath, do not, of 
course, mean that the President of the Philippines has been vested with any judi- 
cial power to adjudicate cases between the government and its citizens, or bet- 
ween the citizens themselves. The judicial power is vested exclusively in the 
Supreme Court and in the inferior courts now already created or which may be 
created by the National Assembly. But the words "do justice to every man" mean 
that the Chief Executive must always be alert and vigilant, so that justice may 
reign supreme over this land, and this he can accomplish only by a careful and 
conscientious exercise of his power to appoint members of the judiciary, end by 
his readiness to take action, in the manner prescribed by law, against judgos who 
may be derelict in the performance of their duties, or, short of committing mal- 
feasance in office, to arraign them at the bar of public opinion, whenever in his 
opinion the denunciation of any wrongful act, even though performed in good faith, 
would be in the public interest. 10 

Message on the opening of the people's homesite in Mariquina, Rizal, 1937, 
n.d.m. QP, MR#40, TNL. 

3/ Press statemoht on the movement to draft him for a second term as President, 
1937, n.d.m. Ibi&. 

2/ Speech on the principles of law and justice at the University of Sto. Toaas, 
October 2, 1937. Quezon Meqsage_ft, Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVTF, pp. 141-142. 

10/ pp. 143-144. 



11-374 

- 5U - 

QUEZON ADMINISTRATION IS COMMITTED TO SOCIAL J TJSSgCg 

My administration ia committed, by its pro-election platform, to ameliorate 
the lot of the common man. The Constitution impose 3 upon this government the in- 
escapable duty of promoting social justice. Is the head of this government, it is 
my duty to exert my influence to secure the cooperation of every branch of the 
government to redeem our pledge and, above all, to carry into effect the mandate 
of the Constitution. Were I to keep silent in the face of what I consider a dis- 
regard of rights vouchsafed by the Constitution and the laws, not only would I 
be recreant to my duty but also the people would lose faith in their government. 
This must not and shall not happen, if I can help it. ^ 

SOCI AL JUSTICE A CLEAR, CATEGORICAL II ANDATE OF CONSTITUTION 

The promotion of social justice by the State is a clear and categorical 
mandate of our Constitution. Our platform imposes upon us the high duty of enactin, 
measures that will improve the living conditions of the laborer and of carrying 
these measures into effect. We must see that laws are enacted which will not per- 
mit the exploitation of the employee by his employer and which will leave no loop- 
holes that may be used to defeat the ends of justice. We must rely for the securit; 
of this new nation, not so much upon the might of brutal force, but upon the un- 
divided loyalty of every citizen to the government - a loyalty founded upon in- 
dividual consciousness that this : government is his, and that it exists only for 

12 

his protection, for his liberty, and for his happiness. 
ML Q_ AP PEALS TO ALL TO INSURE SOCIAL JUSTICE 

It is high time that all the branches of the government cooperate with one 
another, and with them the whole community and every good-h'earted man and woman, 
so that at last in this dear land of ours social justice - real justice - in the 
relations of man to man, may reign supreme. 

Our people are patient and law-abiding. They love peace. They have not 

lost their faith either in the executive, the legislative or the judicial branch 

of the government. As the government is now in the hands of their own countrymen, 

they have become hopeful and are placing the realization of their dream for a 

better day in our clearor understanding of their lot, our better knowledge of 

conditions prevailing in the country, and in what should be the natural craving 

of our hearts to serve them with all the power at our command - they are the flesh 

1^ 

of our flesh, the blood of our blood. 

OPPORTUNITY TO CREATE NATION; SANS POVERTY, PRIVIL EGED CLASS 

Gentlemen of the National Assembly, allow me to emphasize tho need of 
11/ IbjLd.., p. 152. 

12/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 18, 1937. IbA&,, p. 224. 

13/ 



11-375 . 

- 542 - 

giving the common man in the Philippines the benefits that the citizen of every 
Progressive democracy is entitled to receive. AjHB8E£si^^ 
t hat no past or eoml ng^or^o^hn^had. or will ever have - t hat of creating a 
naticn^^^o^ ^ b0 no p ri vj1^d Plm whore pov P rt v I ij ffiJBtoQJCU , 
wh ore every oJM^ IL^m^^^^^ the <w ^ ^ ^ 

t^ porform his duti o s^nd to. MLaLiltU^^ consciences ... 

living in this haflBttjad.j B Oi aMg jL3 i «& 14 

30LiiTI0N OF SOCIA ILLS IS RE TEST_nv DEMOCRACY 

Wo arc earnestly concerned with social justice. Without a strict applicatio, 
of social justice to all elements of the community, general satisfaction of the 
people with their government is impossible to achieve. Here, in the just and 
equitable solution of social problems, is the real test of the sufficiency of de- 
mocracy to meet present-day conditions of society. 15 

^BJ^m§_0B^A0LES IK_CjJtRYING_OUT SOCI AL JUSTICE POLIC Y 

In order that we may be able to carry out successfully our policy of social 
justice, we need the cooperation not only of the public in general, but also of 
capital and labor themselves. Every movement of labor that creates an embarassing 
situation to the government is an obstacle that labor itself places in our way to 
expedite the march of progress in the realization of our policy. 16 
S ^jWUS TICE DOES NOT MEAN COH HUNISM - QUEZON 

Social justice does not mean dispossessing the rich of his lawful property 
and distributing that property among the unemployed. Social justice, in other word*, 
does not mean Communism . . . Social justice involves all; it means justice for 
every constituent element in the country. 17 

Sj sa £^ a ^^g^M^gigEj_so^^_^ TiCT to labore rs 

Any government capable of consulting the feelings of the workingmen will be 
a just and stable government. . . It is the duty of all not to tolerate bad prac- 
tices in our country, hence I will not tolerate them, while I am at the helm of 
our government. 18 

■iV Ibid . . pp. 228-229 

15/ Message to the First National Assembly, January 24, 1938. Quaaon MesgAgaa. 
v ol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 257. ™ M " aaaflsaa* 

2£j Press statement on the decision of strikers of gasoline companies to abide 
by the decision of the Court of Industrial Relations, February 5, 1938. 
i-BA&. , p. 634, 

2jJ Speech at Malacanan, February 14, 1938. JMA-t p. 9 

23/ Speech at a luncheon in honor of the representatives of labor under the 
leadership of Cresenciano Torres, Malacanan, February 17, 1938. p. 



11-576 

- 543 - 

SOCIiL JUSTICE MB,affS JUSTICE TO EACH iND EVERY SOCIAL GROUP " ' 



If there is going to be faith in the justice and impartially of this govern- 
ment in cases arising between capital and labor, or between the different constituen 
parts of the community, we must at all times not only act justly and impartially, 
hut also be careful that our actions have no appearance of partiality. Social 
justice can only mean justice to each and every social group. If my administration 
in placing special emphasis on the need for ameliorating the conditions of the 
laboring class, it is not because we are against the capitalists or the rich, but 
it is because the laboring class in the Philippines has not received its due, and 
therefore stands in need of the help and protection of the government in order 
that its rights may be properly recognized and accorded. y ' J/ 

^T.'BZO^^S KS^ RIOH NOT CH :)RITY_ BUT_ JUSTICE_FX)R_THE_POOR 

He who governs with his heart and not with his mind is liable to do in- 
justice and also to make mistakes. We must govern with our mind; therefore, when' 
I proclaim social justice I mean .justice.. I am not asking the rich to give charity 

to the poor. I am asking them to do justice to the poor, while I want the poor to 

20 

recognize the rights of the rich. 

Social justice does not mean favoring the poor whether he is right or wrong. 

Social justice means treating justly every man and every class. That moans social 

21 

.-justice, and treating them justly moans giving each man or class its due, 
£^I^_Ig_l'Ig|^ rT 2|Jg^ 1 iy oj _g 1P TOVER1JIIEHT, SAYS QUEZON 

I want you to know that I have but one purpose in the exorcise of the autho- 
rity and in the performance of the duties of my office - to do justice to the poor 
and the rich alike. Jujytl sc. _alo.ns.-aan . juati-fy, J&£^ejuj3.tQase. jit_a.gnvftrTininnt. -.'lad 
justice j?) the fir at nhjfi c tj - m . ajL-goj z&rjmojit. It is ray hope that every official of 
this province, from the sub-governor to the mayor, down to the last -tjen ie nfre del 

JSL8ZZ1&, will realize that he can cooperate with my administration only by not com- 

2? 

mitting abuses and permitting no one to commit them. 

Quezon insists social j ustice is for everybody 

Social justice means justice for everybody. It doo3 not mean justice for 



23/ Letter to Secretary of the Interior Elpidio Quirino on the dismissal of 

the chief of police of Janiuay, Iloilo, and of a secret service agent of the 
City of Iloilo, February 14, 1938. .Ibid., p. 564. 

20/ Speech at a tea party in honor of coconut planters and municipal mayors, 
Malacanan, February 19, 1938. Ibj,&. , p. 37. £Lso in QP, MR#40, TNL. 

2l/ IMj.., QP, MRfftl, THL.' 

22/ Speech at the public plaza of Virac, Catanduanes, June 8, 1938. .QuejaQA 
Messages. Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 67-68. 



11-377 

- 544 - 

the rich or injustice for the poor; that, also, would not "be justice. It does not 
mean justice for the N a cionalista Party alone and not justice for the Prente Po- 
pular. It means justice for everybody, for our friends and for our enemies - 
justice for those we lovo and justice for those we hate* T here %a no merit in 
doing .justice to a friend because your hn»rt ten a yon to dp -it; +ho mn-H t Ls in 
■jgjffi -justice *° an enemy in spite of the fact that he is vour enemy . 
QU EZON'S UNFLA GGING EFFORTS TO PROM OTE SOCI AL JUSTICE 

In the field of public welfare, I have been unflagging in my effort to pro- 
mote social justice and to ameliorate social conditions among the masses of our 
people. The attainment of these objective depends not only upon economic and moral 
factors, but also upon the people themselves, for only through productive work can 
social standards be improved. 

SOCIALJ^TK^_IS_JUSTICE_ro RICH AND POOR 

I want to give labor this warning: The government has formulated a program 
of social justice and is determined to carry it out. But social justice means 
justice for laborers and employers, the poor and the rich alike. Over and above 
th e interest of any class or gro u p, is the interest of the people; and in uphold- 
ing the supremacy of public Jajferefrt there, will hfl nn hnaitntlnn aud.Jio compromise. 
I shall use all the power in my hand towards this end in the firm belief that in 
doing so, I am keeping faith with democratic ideals and institutions and promoting 
the orderly development of our national life for the benefit of all, most especial- 
ly of the laboring masses themselves. 

?' AT I ON CAN ENDURE ONLY IF SOCIAL JUSTICE IS GIVEN TO ALL 



We cannot be the servants of a privileged class. Ve are the servants of the 
whole people and we shall not permit any injustice to be done. 

We are living in an age in which civilized society can only endure if justice 
is accorded equally to the rich and to the poor. Those who have can only hope to 
kee p their possess ions indefinitely, if they, .share part of their profits with those . 
w ho work for them. This is a ques tion of justice,, r>pt of chjgcity .. A m an i.s more 

e ntitled to the fruits of his labor than th e proprietor to t. h« rent of his prn- 

.26 
perty. 

/iR - c ^ ^ JjgfF iL SYS 1^ M 2^0. T - B — H ;J - -—- - 0VBRi - l ^i l ^-~- Q : 1 ^-^ T 

It has been my most earnest endeavor to ameliorate and to secure for tho 



23/ Speech in Ormoc, Leyte, June 15, 1938. Ibid.., pp. 99-100. .Also in QP, MR#41, 
TNL . . 

2.4/ Address before the faculties and student bodies of public and private schools, 
colleges and universities, August 19, 1938. QP, MR#41, TNL. 

25/ Press statement on labor terrorism and social justice, August 27, 1938. 
Quezon Mess^e^ Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 693-694. 

t : 

23/ Speech at inauguration of Iloilo City. (Date inadvertently omitted, ) Qu^flon 
Meaaagea, Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. : 120.;. 



11-378 

- 5*5 - 

workingmen just and equitable treatment. However, the labor problem is a very com- 
plicated one, for it is interwoven with many phases of our daily life and century- 
old traditions. We have to change an archaic system which we have inherited from 
our ancestors and which has grown out of social conditions which cannot now be 
tolerated. But it is not merely a matter of enacting progressive laws which have 
proven successful in other countries; our task - and it is a difficult task - re- 
quires that we adapt thorn intelligently and constructively to our social and eco- 
nomic structure, lest we so disorganize our industries as to bring about a total 
;conomic collapse which, in the end, will do more harm to the laboring class it- 
self than to the other elements of our community. ^ 

T TORCIi! » G ® ASSURE SOCI AL, POLITIC/I, STABILITY 

It is impossible to have our political and social institutions atabilized 
unless we. dispense justice to everybody. Jus tice alone can maintain the stability 
of any country durin g these dava: force cannot, rln -it . I n order that the people may 
give their loyal support to the government, in order that the people themselves 
.nay constitute the best guarantee for peace and order, it is necessary that wo 
render justice to the people. The government alone cannot do justice to the people 
it needs the cooperation and help of all the elements of the community. Everybody 
must rea lize that the most selfish interests domand that you should do good to 
others in order that others m av do good to vou . . . Only the people of thoso count- 
rios who consider it their duty to do good to others will not go through the blood- 
trials that others have passed. 

QUEZON'S GOAL: T O GIVE EVERY H 'Jj A DECENT LIVELIHOOD 

This is our ultimate goal: That the political rights vouchsafed to all our 
people by the Constitution be made real and effective by affording to every person 
willing to work the opportunity to earn a decent livelihood. 2 ^ 

FOUNDATION eg SOCIAL JUSTICE HOIG P ERMANENT , ENDURING 

We have to rebuild our national structure on the solid and permanent founda- 
tion of social justice. Laws alone will not do it. We have to fight against pre- 
judices, wrong notions, and outworn customs and traditions. Wo have to preach the 
fundamental principles of Christianity, and make them the underlying philosophy of 
our political and social institutions. ^° 

21/ Speech at the celebration of the Collective Labor Movement, Angeles, Pampanga, 
(Date inadvertently omitted.) Q uezon Messages , Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, Pp . 
218-219. 

28/ Speech at the City of Bacolod, Occidental Negros, October 19, 1938. Ibid . . 
pp. 234-235. 

2£j/ Message to the National Assembly on the state of the nation, January 24, 1939. 
to sen Mpflfiflgftft, v ol. 5, Part 1, JBVFF,. p. 245. 

20/ Message to the Second National Assembly, January 24, 1939. Ibid . f p. 246. 



11-379 

- 546 - 

QUE ZON'S PRIMORDIAL .AIM; TO .TMELIOR/3E LOT^OFJJDRKimiJT 

I am tolling you frankly that my pronordial aim in lifo is to help my Im- 
poverished (iountrvr jon. especially the farmhands and f actory laborers. If during jny_ 
yhn-i nitration I c ould give_._cojafjLr_t. JtoJtbfl. JJ L £a nf tno 1 qborors, I would more tha n 
nnnaiddr i t as divine luck, because I then would have had an opportunity to help 
my people. If you want to see what I have been wishing for night and day - that 
our nation be peaceful, our people progressive and happy, and the lot of the poor 
class ameliorated - then lend me your cooperation and do not commit any disturbance 
or any untoward act. Give the government sufficient time to uphold your rights. Do 
not believe any person who tells you that by being obdurate and by going against 
the law or the government, your rights would be respected. You will not got any- 

, . 31 
thing by so doing. 

I DON'T WAN T TO ACHIEVE SOCI 'J, JUSTICE 'J .G^OJ[^__gjy£.fflgZOg 

My countrymen, for your rights to be respected, for you to attain what is 

your due, and for you to improve your livelihood, it is not necessary for me to 

supply you with guns. I am confident that, through my administration, your rights 

will be upheld in the courts. I shall always adopt measures designed to maintain 

peace and order. If I were to give you guns, it would seem as if we were having 

a civil war here. What will other nations say about us if they learn that social 

justice has triumphed in our country only because all the people have been armed 
32 

with guns? 

FOR THE RICH TO LIVE IN PE iCS , _ TKBY_SH'^ 

In order that we can expect every laborer to love and defend his country, 
it is necessary that we make him feel and realize that he enjoys, /a moderately 
prosperous existence. It is not that I am siding with the laborers because I am 
an enemy of the capitalists or landowners. No! I have no enemies. My responsibility 
to my position is my responsibility to all. I have a duty to protect the rights of 
the property owners as well as those of the "have nots"; I am not favoring the 
workingman because I wish to grab the property of the rich; I side with him be- 
cause I believe that, for the well-to-do t o live in p eace and on joy what rightful- 

-— -y^ 

l y belongs to them, they sho uld give the labo rers thei r due share. 
EVERYONE G ETS WiHT HE DESERV ES l'^pSR_g0Cj/J^_JU5TICB 

Social justice does not give preference to anyone, be he rich, poor, wise, 
or in authority. It grants to everyone his due. More 30, it does not mean that 
all that you may desire will be given to you. You should realize that you are not 



31/ Speech at Barrio Cruz-na-Daan, San Rafael, Bulacan, January 31, 1939. XbM* . 
p. 13. 

32/ Speech at San Fernando, Pampanga, February 14, 1939. Itt&*» PP» 22-23. 
.22/ Ibid ., pp. 27-28. 



11-580 



- 547 - 



the Only ones profiting by social justice, because you are the ones who do not re- 
ceive benefits* Social justice moans that you should receive only what you rightly 
deserve; social justice does not mean that if you have no property you will be 

given a piece of land, or that the land of a landlord be seized from him and given 
34 

to you. 

GOVERNMENT SET TO JMELIOR.'JE LOT OF WORKINGM'JT 

That there is need of improving the working and living conditions of the 
wage earner in the Philippines, be he a factory or a farm laborer, can hardly be 
iisputed; that in many instances injustices and abuses are being committed against 
the workingman and the peasant, is an undeniable fact; that the income of the la- 
borer is too low to permit a substantial improvement of his living conditions is 
generally admitted. To correct those injustices and abuses and to ameliorate the 
lot of the masses are the prime concern of my administration. 

CONCEPT OF P RIVATE PROPERTY REVISED UNDER SOCIAL JUSTICE 

Social justice cannot bo achieved by constitutional precepts or legislative 
enactments alone. We must radically jrevise our conce pt of private propert y by em— 
- ohasizing the social respon sibilities of wealth. We must indoctrinate every citi- 
z en with the ethical principle . thajfc j;e_ , h jL, s br Q th5K .'.j3 .Ko.e. pq J. We must arouse 
and foster the individual's responsibility to the community of which he is a part. • 
These are no vain words. We may forget these duties only at the cost of our peace 

rr£? 

and tranquility and, in the end, even of our national liberty. 

WH.lT WILL BE COUNTRY ' 5 FUTURE IF RICH WALLOW IN LUXURIES, POOR IN VI CES? 

A farmer in this country will not prosper, be he granted what is due him 

for his labor, unless he learns to save money. The thing that impoverishes us 

Filipinos, rich and noor alike , js extra vagance. The difference lies only in the 

ways the rich and the poor s quander their money. The rich pamper themselves with 

luxur i es , , , sash , n , a auto m obi l e a n h a/aiJbifl&. „lwiefu grnnri , pa . s t„i mflFu .. »t . n . . whiln thr . 

poor indulge themselves in vicos, such as gam b ling, cockfighting, and town fiestas. 

What has the future to offer a person who has the prospensity of squandering money 

37 

when he has but little to squander? 

PEOPLE MUST RE ALIZE GOVERNMENT'S EFFO RT S TO IMP ROV E THEIR LOT 

It is necessary that hu (the poor m«n) enjoy economic amelioration. It is 
also necessary that he understand and feel that he is being aided by the government 

57 una., p. 31. 

25/ Speech on the government policy regarding industrial and agrarian conflicts, 
March 11, 1939. IbiA* » p. 55. 

2s/ Speech at the 29th commencement exercises of the University of the Philippines, 
April 4, 1939. Ulii., p. 66. 

22/ Speech in Cabanatuan, Nuova Ecija, April 30, 1939. U&jLr P« 100. 



11-381 

- 548 - 

in the protection of his rights and prerogatives; that his country is giving him 

happiness; and that he docs not exist as a mere slave. 
IMTB OF WORLD iff ST.&E IN ^PPLIG.^ONJ^_gOCm_JUSTI^ 

Whnthnr or not vou bol iove in Christian ity, remember that the fate of the 
whole huna n race is at stake j^Jh^j^lj^atj^o^o eial justice . Man has como 
o~f age. The spread of knowledge .and the progress, of science and invention have 
brought about the enlightnment of tho puoplo. The average man knows that his right 
to live is as sacred as that of any other, even if the latter were born with a 

39 

silver spoon in his mouth. 

S OCIAL JUSTI CE H I GTiLIGl^SJl^-T^J^^^^g 

Social justice has been a major concern of our government during tho last 
five years. To accomplish this objective, we have, among other things, set a 
minimum wage scale in public works, created tho Court of Industrial Relations to . 
settle labor-capital disputes, organized the National Land Settlement Adminis- 
tration to. help the pooror classes transfer from congested districts to unoccupied 
areas, purchased haciendas to bo subdivided and resold to tho tenants, embarked 
on housing schemes, for workers and low-salariod employees, intensified the campaign 
against usury, revised the system of taxation so that the tax burden would bo borne 
by those best able to carry it, passed legislation to protect tho rights of te- 
nants, appointed officials to defend the poor, encouraged this organization of as- 
sociations for marketing and purchasing among producers and consumers, and ox- 

, ^ . 40 
tended aid and credit to small farmers and businessmen. 

126. SOCIAL REVOLUTION 
SOCIAL JUSTICE NEEDED TO FORESTALL _TODREjjXjLmOH 

The condition of the laboring class deserves our special attontion. No 
duty of ours is more important than this. The world is witnessing a revolution 
against the established order. The pooror classes think that they do not receive 
the attention and the benefit to which they are entitled from the government and 
from the society in which they live. 

We are indeed fortunate in that our country is free from abject misery 
such as is known in other countries, and the people are not oppressed. There is, 
therefore, no general discontent. There are no indications of a threatening social 
upheaval. But we must act with foresight. We must anticipate what just domands the 
laborers in the fields and in the factories may wish to make and try to meet them 
now. We must not begrudge then their rights and we must do what we can to assure 



32/ Speech in Cabanatuan, July 16, 1939. > P* 1 55. 

32/ Speech on the anniversary of his 62nd birthday, August 19, 1940. OP, MR#44, 
TNL. 

407 Message to tho Second National Assembly, January 31, 1941. Rivera Collection, 
Vol. V, p. 2277. 



11-382 

- 949 - 

their well-being. ^" 

REVOLUTION FROM TOP M .IKES BLOODY REVOLUTION U NNECESSARY 

.As a great statesman would have it, the revolution on tho streets can be 

avoided only by effecting a revolution in tho high spheres where governmental 

2 

policies .ire shaped and put into practice. 

C.i)EZ0N_F0R PEACEFUL, GO VTJffljlfflKT-INSPIRED SOCIAL REVOLUTION 

The government is now trying to make what night be termed a social revolu- 
tion, I call it a social revolution because we are attempting to change some 
established practices in our economic life. It is better that this social revolu- 
tion be started by the government, because a revolution started by the government 
will always be peaceful, being in fact an evolution, a rapid evolution. If we 

wait for this change in our national economic life to come from tho masses, we 

3 

will have a real revolution. 

127. SOCIAL SECURITY 
GSIS ^ SOLUa'IO N^TQ PENSION, RETIREMENT FUND PROBLEM 

Since the inauguration of tho present government, the administration has 

been deeply concerned with the precarious condition of the finances of the various 

s 

pension systems now in operation. A thorough siirvey of theso systom made in 1929 
revealed the fact that they were insolvent in the following amounts: 

1. The Teachers' Retirement and Disability Fund, in tho sum of J»45,0OO,OOO 
as of December 31, 1929, such figure having reached the sum of 1M,000,000 on 
December 31, 1935; 

2. The Health Pension and Retirement Fund, in the sum of i'7, 500,000 as of 
December 31, 1929, and P12,000,000 on December 31, 1935; and 

3. The Pension and Retirement Fund of the Philippine Constabulary in the 

j> 

sum of ¥10, 500,000 on December 31, 1929, and 17,000,000 on December 31, 1935. 

The above figures, showing the financial condition of the three pension 
funds in 1929, were given by the Bureau of Efficiency of the United States Govern- 
ment. 

* * * 

This measure (GSIS) seeks to establish a system to substitute the pension 
systems recommended to be aboln shed, but with general application to the entire 
government service. It establishes a compulsory and automatic insurance system. 
Each member of the system contributes three per centum of his monthly basic 

2j Speech in the Senate, October 6, 1932. Rivera Collection, Vol. 11, pp. 932- 
934. 

2/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. QP, KR#39, ™" 

2/ Speech before coconut planters and municipal mayors, Malacanan, February 19, 
1938. QP, MR#4l, TNL, JMso in Quezon Messages, Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 36. 



II- 583 

- 550 ~ 

salary or compensation, which is deducted monthly from his salary or compensation, 
and the national government, or other subdivisions and agencies who are members 
thereof, or have joined the system, contribute an amount equivalent to the total 
of the contributions of its employees. . . To each of such contributor, a policy 
of insurance is issued, with a face value equal to what six per centum of his 
annual basic salary (or five per centum thereof, in the case of officers and en- 
listed men of the Philippine Array) as annual premium may purchase. 

The measure vests the administration of the Act and the investment of the 
fund so established, in a board to be known as the Government Service Insurance 
Board. ^ 

QUEZON PROPOSES MORE EQUITABLE BASIS OF ARMY RETIR EMENT 

It is proper that the commissioned officers of the United States Army who 
join the Philippine Army should be given such longevity privileges as are autho- 
rized for the officers of the former Philippine Constabulary now in our Army in 
order to place them all on the same footing as regards pay and allowances, 

I believe, however, that the section of this bill which would include 
service in the United States Army in determining rights of retirement from the 
Philippine Army would result not only in the payment of two full pensions, one 
from the United States and the other from the Philippines, in certain cases for 
the same length of service, but would also in effect require payment of pensions 
on service not rendered to the Philippine government. I, therefore, propose to 
recommend that this provision of the Act be either repealed or amended so as to 

provide a more equitable basis for the retirement of officers of the United States 

p 

.Army joining the Philippine) Army. 

RESTO RATION OF O LD PENSIONS AM ACT OF S IMPLE JUSTIC E 

The law restoring the old pensions paid to those who had already retired 

from the service and were receiving pensions when the former pension systems were 

abolished is an act of simple justice. It is not only a matter of fundamental 

policy for the government to make good every obligation it undertakes, but it is 

also in the long run the soundest and most beneficial policy for the nation it- 

3 

self that avows it and inflexibly adheres to it. 

128. SPORTS 

FRIENDSHIP, GOODWILL* ?iB0VE ATHLETIC LAURELS 

Each athlete will strain every muscle to honor his flag. But over and above 
the friendly rivalry to conquer laurels must be placed international friendship 

1/ Message to the First National Assembly .on the G3IS, October 19, 1936. IlasL. 

Vol. 2, Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 337-338. 
2j Memorandum for the Chief of Staff, Philippine Army (Date inadvertently omitted. 

IJ2L4. , PP. 456-457. 

2/ Press statement on the restoration of old pensions to retirod employees, 
September 2, 1937. SimSL. Messages , Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 329. 



II- 384 

- 551 - 



and goodwill. 



RECO MMENDS FUND FOR P.1QF IN P REP. NATION FOR TOKYO OLYM PIAD 

I have the honor to submit for your (National Assembly's) consideration 
the attached bill appropriating the sum of ^25,000 as aid to the Philippine /ma- 
tour Athletic Federation (P.'ilF) for the promotion of athletics and/or athletic 
competition in the schools and other civic institutions of the Philippines. The 
next World Olympiad will be hold in Japan in 1940, and it is desirable that our 

2 

young men and women should train c-nrly for this important international event. 

129. S T A T E AND INDIVID U A L 
GOOD O F STATE P.a/JOTT UNDER NEW POLITIC, J, PHIL OS OPHY 

The philosophy (of Thomas Jefferson - ABS) places the individual abore 
every other consideration. His inalienable right to lifo, property end the pursuit 
of happiness is the main objective of government as interpreted by the framers of 
the American Constitution. 

The Constitution of the Philippines entirely reverses this political phi- 
losophy. Under our Constitution wh?t is paramount is not the individual; it is 
the good of the Stato, not the good of the individual, that must prevail. Thus 
under our Constitution, it is provided in Article II, Declaration of Principles, 
paragraph 2: "The defense of the State is a prime duty of government, and in the 
fulfillment of this duty all citizens may be required by law to render personal 
military or civil service." 

130. STRIKES 
STRIKE, THOUGH USEFUL, CAUSES SUFFERING TO STRIKERS /JTD PUBLIC 

Strikes have been, in the past and up to the present time, the weapon used 
by labor to secure recognition for its rights. At best, the strike by its very 
nature will inevitably bring harm to the strikers themselves. It deprives them of 
their wages during the time that the strike lasts, and oven when the strike is 
successful they suffer during the strike hardships that might have been avoided. 
Particularly in the Philippines, strikes are always seriously prejudicial to the 
strikers because there are no labor organizations in our country with funds to 
provide the strikers with means for their daily subsistence while the strike lasts. 
However, it is true that at the time when governments were prone to take the side 
of capital or when they were reluctant to listen sympathetically to the claims 
or grievances of labor even if they were fully justified, to strike was the only 



ilaV Speech at the opening of the Far Eastern Olympiad, Hay 12, 1934. OP, MR#36, 
TNL. 

2j Message to the First National .AnfKwhly, Oo^ofoor oc, lojC. .Gnfi/vm J>Ip an sp-cj a. 
Vol. Z, Part I, JBVJf'f', p. 354. 

l(b)/ Speech at the Senior Teachers' Assembly, Baguio, May 22, 1936. Ibid.^. pp.- 

92-'VS. " ' • 



11-385 

- 552 _ 

recourse of labor in order to secure justice. * 
WILDCAT STRIKES CAN'T EXPECT SYMPA TH Y FROM GOVERNMENT 

Every strike in the Philippines that is declared before the strikers pre- 
sent their complaint to the Department of Labor or to the Court of Industrial Re- 
lations is, for such failure to use the means created by law to secure justice, 
prima facie a defiance against the government or an expression of lack of con- 
fidence in the government. Therefore, I desire to make public that my attitude 
toward strikes of this natiire is unsymphathetic, and that if labor takes the law 
into its own hands as it is the case if strikes are declared without first noti- 
fying the Department of Labor or the Court of Industrial Relations, it cannot 
expect sympathy from the government and it has to face the consequences of the • 
action. ^ 

WARNSjgAINST GENERAL , SYM PATHY STRI KES THAT' MEfi ACE PEACE, ORDER 

If a strike is declared by any labor organization before tho laborers have 
presented their grievances to the Department of Labor, the government will pro- 
tect by force, if necessary, any individual or organization that may offer to do 
tho work of the strikers. And if the strike concerns those public services that 
immediately affect the well-being of the people, should the situation demand it, 
the government itself will assume the responsibility of providing the men needed 
to take the place of the strikers. I will particularly take precautionary measures 
against general or sympathy strikes which may menace peace and order and the " 
public welfare. 

STRIKE_LS_L^AWFUL_BUT IT HURT S LABORERS , GENERAL PU3LI C 

A strike is a weapon which laborers can employ within the bounds of law. It 
is not prohibited here; but a strike is a weapon that not only hurts whomsoever 
it is used upon, but also those who are actually using it. And you should especial- 
ly consider that although one could plan a strike, yet from its effects the suf- 
ferers would bo not only labor and capital but also the public at large; more so 
if a strike were to be staged against public utilities, such as .transportation 
or electricity, or even an estate where rice tenants declare a strike. Such 
strikes make the townspeople suffer most; hence, as much as possible, I request 
you all not to resort to such method. ^ 

V Press statement on labor conflicts and their settlement, April 30, 1938. 
Quezon Maaaagaa, Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 641-642. 

2/ iMd.., p. 642. 

2/ Radio speech at Malacanan, March 11, 1930. Quezon Messages ,. Vol. 5, Part 1, 
JBVFF, p. 59. 

4/ Speech upon induction into office of Jose Avelino as secretary of labor, 
May 1, 1939. Uiid.., pp. 109-110. , 



11-386 

- 555 - 

A 17lt SUBVERSION 
Q^ZOj^BKOMCES^SBLF- SEEKING UNS CRUPULOUS LABOR JQI TUTORS 

Lot us beware of men who deliberately, for political or selfish aims, stir 
up discontent among the masses. They preach subversive doctrines, speak of evils 
and abuses that do not exist, or magnify those which often are inevitable in de- 
mocracies. These men are the worse enemies of society, more dangerous to the com- 
munity than ordinary criminals. They have no sympathy for the people, but are more 
self-seokors, intent only in securing either pecuniary or political advantage for 
themselves. 

SUBVERSIVE DOCTRINE CANVT THRIVE UNDER A .TTJKT maim. 

She fro s t fp^nfl n ti PTL it f- -BCjicfl-ia-jiQ.t th at wh-ich is ia ill l o n tasxa IX is 

that whic h is the resul t of .justice and contentm ent. No subversive doctrine can 
thrive her e if our working ^ ^^_j^Toa^^i_ 3 nj__^^v ory laborer is given 

his, duo It_ i_3_ the best guarantee for the preservation of our government 
and our natio n. 

G R^NTING^OF AMNESTY MAY BE C ONSTR UED AS GOVERNMENT m -iVT-m SS 

The events of the last few days which disclose the existenco of concerted 
action on the part of some individuals to cause a general destruction of property 
by setting fires thereto with the use of bombs or otherwise, make me feel that 
the lawless elements of the community should be made to realize that the govern- 
ment cannot countenance any such defiance of its authority. The granting of ge- 
neral amnesty at this time may be construed by those lawless elements as a ten- 
dency to threat leniently offenses of this nature, if not an indication of weak- 
ness, and for this reason, much to my regret, I am constrainod to defer action 
on my announced intention to grant such general amnesty. 3 

INFORMATION BOARD TO COUNTERACT SUBVERSIVE PROP/gAMD/i 

Commonwealth Act No. 185, approved on November 13, 1936, created the Na- 
tional Information Board, composed of the Secretary of the Interior as chairman, 
and the Soeretarios of Agriculture and Commerce and of labor as members. 

This essential activity of the government constitutes ono of the effective 
moans of preventing or counteracting subversive or communistic propaganda among 
the uninformed, misinformed or misguided elements. 4 



V Speech on accepting his nomination as President of Philippines, July 20, 1935, 
IbM't v ol. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, p. 239. 

2j Address on higher wages for Filipino laborers, broadcast over station KZRM, 
August 19, 1936. Quezon Mos«Mm flr Vol. 2, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 118. 

2/ Letter to Assemblyman Grogorio Perfocto on the decree of gonoral amnesty to 
political offenders, October 9, 1936. Ibid.., p. 328. 

4/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. QP, MR#39, TBI. 



11-387 

- 554 ~ 

y jBZGOmE AGAINST ANY DOCTRINE, BUT WOULD FIGHT LABOR AGIT.ffORS 

I am not against any philosophy that would preach any social or oconomic 
doctrino. But I am against, uncompromisingly against, any and all individuals thai 
would pit one class of 30cioty against another, or would seek to promote and attai 
their selfish ends through acts of violence or would try to cajole the people intc 
cmbservionco through terrorism. Nothing can do raore harm to the cause of labor thf 
the blind schemes of 3olf-soeking radicals. 

i'Rg^ Dg^W.lRHS^ L^JjOR^glTATORS AND MISGUIDED FOLLOWERS 

I am calling upon every law-abiding citizen to cooperate with the govornmen 
in it3 efforts to maintain peace and order and to carry out the social justice 
program. I advise everybody to refrain from carrying on any movement through pro- 

• 

paganda or otherwise that night result in arousing the people to commit acts of 
violence and lawlessness. I warn those labor leaders who are engaged in this kind 
of activities that their continuance in this pernicious agitation is done at their 
own risk. The consequences of their activities are such as to warrant the govern- 
ment in the exercise of its police power henceforth to deal with them drastically 
Mid with the severity which the circumstances demand and the law authorizes. As 
for the misguided people who follow, these false leaders with the full knowledge of 
the consequences of their act3, I want to tell them that I am setting a deadline 
beyond which any man or group of men nay go with the certainty that they will bo 
net by the forces of the government. ^ 

132. S U G A R INDUSTRY 

SUGAR INDU STRY GET S ALL BENEFITS FR Ul'l TRADE WITH U.S. 

No industry in the Philippines is being benefitod by our trade relations 
with America nearly so much as the sugar industry. There have sprung in Nogros, 
Iloilo and Pampanga, in the last few years, millionaires as we havo novor had be- 
fore. They have palaces, automobiles, and live a life of comfort and luxury here 
and abroad. 

I am not criticizing them; it i3 their privilege to spend their money as 
they please. I am merely stating a fact, for I want to point out that wo are doing 
everything we con, not only to prevent the collapse but also to maintain in full 
blast the prosperity of the sugar industry. 

But the government deman ds t hat this, .pro sperity be shared with the working- 
men in the sugar fields and in the sugar ce nt rals. Very little, if any, of the 

hj Press statement on labor terrorism and social justice, August 27, 1938. £140 zon 
ikaaaeas, Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 693. 

6/ Speech on government policy regarding industrial and agrarian conflicts, March 
11, 1939. Ibid., Vol. 5, Par.t 1, JBVFF, p. 58. 



II- 388 . 

- 555 - 

immense profits of the suggr i nriug+.ry has gono into the pockets of labor . 1 

^lEZONGIVE S WARNING TO HEARTLE SS SUGAR BARONS 

I say, in all earnestness, to the owners of sugar centrals and to the pro- 
prietors of sugar lands that unless thoy raise the wages of thoir laborers and 

treat them better, the government and the country may lose interest in tho defense 

o 

. of the sugar industry. 

I an informed that several thousands of sugar planters have not yet re- 
ceived the full .amount of benefit payment to which they are entitled under tho 
contracts which they have signed with the United States sugar authorities, in con- 
nection with the reduction of tho sugar production in the Philippines. Tho amount 
involved, I understand, is around $3,000,000 and the number of planters affected 
i( 3 around 15,000. . . It is believed that there exists a binding obligation on tho 
pert of the United States Government to reimburse all these planters with tho 
losses which they have suffered by reason of the reduction of their crops in the 
amount wHioh has been fixed by the government itself. I would, therefore, urgently 
request that proper representation be made to your government so that the rights 
of these planters may be properly protected. 5 

DESCRIBES AS GRaAT_EG0N0HIG_W.^TS SUg^jg^IZIgE^POLICY 

I believe that the seizure and destruction of such excess (under the Sugar 
Limitation Act) is a great economic waste, considering that such sugar may pro- 
fitably be devoted to other useful purposes not inconsistent with tho policy 
contained in the law. I, therefore, recommend that the President of the Philip- 
pines be authorized to dispose of sugar in a manner not inconsistent with such a 
policy, 4 

KfILIPPIHE^SJ£iffl_^IIt riSTRjffIOH I S CREATED 

"Whereas, Commonwealth Act No. 236, approved on September 16, 1937, autho- 
rizes the President of the Philippines to create a new office or agency for tho 
purpose of making allotments of any quota established for the Philippines pursuant 
to the provisions of the United States Sugar Act of 1937 and of enforcing Act No. 

V Speech on the creation of chartered cities and social justice, at tho inaugu- 

of I loilo c ity, August 25, 1935. Quezon Messes. Vol. 3, Part 1, 
JBVFF, pp. 119-120. 

2/ JEfcid., p. 120. 

2/ Letter on benefit payments to sugar planters affected by the Sugar Limitation 
Act, addressed to U.S. High Commissioner Frank Murphy, Manila, January 11, 
3 -936. . Ibid*, Vol. 2, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 416. 

V Hess age to tho First National Assembly on tho disposal of excess sugar, 
September 15, 1936. Ibj^., p. 249. 



11-389 

- 356 - 

4166, as amended: 

"Therefore, pursuant to the authority herein stated, it is hereby ordered 

that: 

"(l) There is established in the Office of the President of the Philip- 
pines an office to be known as the 'Philippine Sugar Administration, ' which shall 
consist of the following throe divisions and / or such others as the exigencies 
of the service nay require from time to time: (a) Export Division, (b) Domestic 
Division, and (c) Field Service Division. 

"(2) The Philippine Sugar Administration shall be under tho general super- 
vision and control of a chief who shall be appointed by the President of the Phi- 
lippines and whose title shall be Philippine Sugar Administrator. 

* * * 

(5) The Philippine Sugar Administrator shall make the allocation of any 
United States quota established for the Philippines pursuant to the Sugar Act of 

1937 on the basis specified in section 6 (d) of Public Act No. 127, approved 
March 24, 1934; and shall establish the quota for domestic, reserve and or other 
export sugar and make the allocations thereof among tho mills, plantation oxners, 
and planters, pursuant to the provisions of Act 4166, as amended . . . ^ 

133. TAXATION 

Governments can be supported only through taxation. It is a primary duty 
of citizens to contribute to tho support of the government, but taxation that does 
not take into consideration the relative financial ability of the taxpayer is un- 
just. I advocate that the burdens of the state be equitably distributed in pro- 
portion to the means and capabilities of the taxpayer. 1 

TAXATION B.A SBD STRICTLY Oh ABILITY TO PA Y 

I favor, moreover, a revision of our taxation system downward to socure 

social justice and to apply rigidly the canon of "ability to pay" to small farm 

2 

owners and small wage earners. 

COOPERATE WI TH GOVERN MENT BY PAYING TAXES. SAYS QUEZON 

I want to be frank with you, and I say that if I find that all you do is 

to ask for money, you will get nothing at all. I wish every one to cooperate in 

every way, and the one most important way for you to cooperate with your govern- 
ment is to pay yoiir taxes. Take note of that - your government. 

5/ Executive Order No. 118, "Creating a Philippine Sugar Administration," Sep- 
tember 16, 1937. 1, ljvj{. ./ Vol. 3, Fart II, JBVFP, pp. 663-665. 

l/ Speech on accepting his nomination as President of the Philippines, July 20, 
1935. wuezon MaflJBLflgaflt Vol..l, Sp. Rev. Sd., JBVFI', p. 237. 

2/ Campaign speech, 1935, n.A.m. op, MR# 38, TNL. ■ . ^ 

V Spooch in Tuguogarao, Cagayan, February 28* 3aaafiILJaflaflgaa» T °l« *<# 

Part 1, JBVFP, p. 43. 



II- 390 

- 557 - 

uco"u.'i •« ■■■-.-•■■...*•■ . - m .t~ 

M/JT ^g_^ gg_NOT_PjYJI I^T/JE-S IS NO PATRIOT_BOT_LT_ffl 

•■^J^gflJi^gJ^^ ho loves his pooplo and is 

ready to Aie for his cou ntrv,^ut_dQQ a not Pav hi* t» TO ». js, a l i„r sad not „ 

.nisi* 

^I^N^jm^^^MMG^PBOPLE^S MONEY FOR_PjiyATE_INDIVIDU,\LS 

Woro the Philippine treasury in siteh a fcuoyafft C(Hidtfii6ft t<5 tie' aSfpiy- fifeie 

to cope with all the requirements of public interest, we might perhaps indulge in 
acts of generosity; but the condition of the treasury is such that, in order to 
moot the pressing demands upon it for the welfare and security of our people, we 
arc. compelled to raise new taxes and increase some of the old ones. That the tax- 
payers may ungrudgingly pay these taxes, we must givo them every assurance that 
the revenues of the government will only be spent to promote the national in- .. 
torosts. 

— — g^ gPjg^IO^DO^ S NOT_INCLUde_INHERIT ^ CE T .IX 

The religious organizations are already exempted from the payment of taxes 
on their properties that .are devoted exclusively to worship, but roligious or- 
ganizations may and do have properties that are not exclusively devoted to wor- 
ship, and to exempt these donations from payment of inhoritanco taxes we may 
oxompt religious organizations from paying tax on property which is not primarily 
devoted to worship. 

EXEMPTION OF "TUIU" LANDOWNERS WILL PTOHOTOJP-Y EV 1SI0N 

I believe that exempting the owners of the land where ia gathered 

from the payment of this tax, as proposed in the bill, would open a way for 
evading payment of the tax because the dealers may claim that the iuj* is gathered 
from their own lands. ' 

TAXATION IS MEASURE 0F_CITTmj' n bb»po^twtt.t»pv 

One of the purposes of taxation is to make the man who pays feel his res- 
ponsibility for the government of his country. 



V Speech in C a piz, April 11, 1936. Ibid ., p. 85. 

V Message to the First National Assembly on Vetoing Bill No. 492, ""Extending 
Financial Aid to Arnaiz and Calvo, Manila-Madrid Fliers," July 21. 1936 
I&l&.t p. 367. * ' 

6/ Letter to Issemblyman Maximo Kalaw, chairman, ways and means committee, Na- 
tional .Assembly, August 10, 1936. Ib^d. , pp. 222-223. 

1/ Message to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 2222, "Excluding 
xuba Landowners, Who Sell their Own Products, from the Definition of 'Retail 
Dealers in Tuba, Etc.," November 20, 1936. , p. 388. 



11-391 



_ 558 _ 



I would not tax people who have no employment or people who are working as 

laborers, hut who are not working everyday hut only two days a week, or something 

8 

like that; but I would impose a tax on those whose jobs are steady. 
QUEZON STAN DS FIRM ON TAXATION BASED ON ABILITY TO PAY 

From now on, no tax shall be collected that will not be based on the abilitj 
of the tax-paying public to pay. Until now the poor arc heavily taxed in our 
country. The rich may say that they are paying more taxes, because they are paying 
thousands of pesos in taxes sometimes, but I am prepared to agree with anybody 
who is paying this much that if he gnvu me the wealth from which he derives his 
income to pay his taxes to the government, I would pay taxes twice as much. What 
the rich pay for t axes are only taken from the ir surplus, but the poor get t he i r 
money to pay their taxes from their means of subsistence and the subsist ence of 
t heir families . I do not mean to 3 ay that the poor should not pay any taxes. The 
sacred duty of the citizens is to support their government. iVhat I mean to say is 
that the taxes that they should pay must be based on their ability to pay. ^ 

ijEQUjTE^JIONE^, JTOD JUST T AXATION IMP ERATIVE 

It is not only necessary that taxes be adequate in amount, it is necessary ■ 
that they be just. In order that they be just, we should be guidod by elemental 
principles of honesty which cannot be questioned. That is a first obligation. If 
the gover nment is honest in its demands on its citizens, it has the right to de- 
mand equal honesty from its citizens in return . That is a second obligation. And. 
in order that we may be guided by honesty rather than by guesswork, I have sought 
for tax studies which should be considered with respect to our taxation system. 10 
TAXATION TO PREVEN T WE ALTH ACCUM UL \TI0N IN HANDS OF FEW 

I advise against raising the income tax in the Philippines to anything near 
what is being collected in the United States. We are in the formative period of 
our national economy and we should not discourage the investment of capital. But 
we must increase the income tax because it is inexcusably low. Moreover, this is 
the time to adopt the policy of avoiding the accumulation of wealth in a few hands 
and to force the return of excessive income to the public through the medium of 
government services supported by these taxes. It is in the caae* of porporatiion, 
inheritance and income taxes that the government must bear in mind the need of re- 
verting to the nation large amounts of wealth that may be accumulated in a few 
hands. 

8/ Speech at a press conference, November 3, 1937. QP, MR//40, TNL, 

3/ Speech on the abolition of the cedula tax and national defense, November 15, 
1 937. Quezon Mea HW p-ep r Vol. 3, : Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 176-177. 

JLQ/ State-of-the-nation address before the National Assembly, January 15» 1938. 
QP, MRH1, TNL. 

li/lbjid. 



II- 392 

- 559 - 

BQUIT 1BLE LICE N^^jEES FQR_IJE1^£JD EjCPERIL'KCED PROFESSION' S 

It is evidently unfair that a new lawyer or a new doctor should be made to 
pay the same amount of license fee as the most experienced and accredited in the 
profession are paying. 12 

The sales tax is not paid by the merchant but by the public who buys the 
■articles for its consumption. The merchants, in paying the sales tax of l£ % for 
every sale that they make, no matter how many times, are only acting as a col- 
lector for the government, and the real person who pays the tax is the last pur- 
chaser, the consumer. The sales tax, moreover, is not only unjust to the poor, .it 
also is injurious to the healthy growth of the business. 13 

J^U^DJ^TJ0£ ; £^4^£EST_S0t^E^F^INJUSTICE 

The present system of taxation in the Philippines is a source of the greate 

injustice from which our people suffer - - -yr^ - - that our burdens 

„ f , , , , I act that the Commonwealt 

art: 7th ^ - * ^ — of subsi *" 

arxng in mxnd the .ncome of W r.ch . ^ rnings of tbe laborin , 

class, it ls a fact that the richer the taxpayer, ^.^^e contributes pro- 
portionally to the maintenance of the government. The picture of distribution of 
taxes in the Philippines is this: the poor wage earners as a class carry the 
heaviest burden, then comes the middle class, and lastly the upper class. This 
wealthy upper class constitutes a very small percentage of our population. 14 

The taxes from the poor have built our bridges and our provincial buildings. 
They have made possible the Commonwealth which we now enjoy. It is their contri- 
butions that have given us security. They have paid for our courts of justice. 
They have preserved our health. They are maintaining our military establishments. 
They have made the Philippines a safe and comfortable place in which to dwell. 15 
QUEZON ENUMERATES VARIOUS USES OF T X CTION 

Taxation is imposed in the interest of the nation; to keep peace and main- 
tain order; to repel invasion; to improve the. living conditions of the people, to 
educate them; to promote agriculture, industry and trade. 

The power to tax may also be used to prevent the accumulation of vast 
wealth in a few hands. This is not to deny the right of property of the individual, 

12/ IbJLi. 
12/ IM£. 

is/ ma. 



II- 393 

- 560 - 

but it is to affirm that this right nay be limitod by the State when social well- 
being demands it. ^ 

QUEZON SAYS TAXATION BURDEN RESTS HEAVILY ON POOR, LI GHTLY ON RICH 

Our tax system, unlike , our political system, is still a heritage of earlier 
centuries, out of harmony with those principles which should guide progressive 
nations today. Tho Filipino people have one of the most progressive constitutions 
in the world. That Constitution is. built not only on the principle of political 
equality but also on the added principle of social justice. 

It remains for us to parallel our achievement in the realm of political 

science by a similar achievement in the field of economic and social justice. 

The present system of taxation in the Philippines is a source of great 

r 

injustice from which our people suffer. It may properly be said that our budens 

17 

of taxation rest most heavily upon the masses, and very lightly upon tho rich. 
COMMONWEALTH SUPPORTED L .*BGELY BY TAXES FROM POOR - QUEZON 

There is no escape from the; fact that the Commonwealth is supported in 
large part by those who are already on a low margin of subsistence. 

In forty years time wo have taken from these classes a sum which approximate - 

the accumulated wealth of the entiro Philippines, agricultural as well as industrial 

Within tho past generation these consumption taxes have rebuilt the Commonwealth. 

It is tho centavos of the millions that have created the conditions which have made 

our industries possible. Almost alone the masses have built tho Commonwealth by 

their sacrifices. This has been going on for more than three hundred years. 

It is not alone social justice, it i3 ordinary justice that demands cor- 

18 

rcctipn of this age-long injustice. 

PHILIPPINE BUSINESS COMES LARGE LY FRO M BA RR ING POWER OF MA SSES 

If the recommendations I made in this message are carried out by the Na- 
tional Assembly, we shall have gone far in our efforts to lay down the foundations 
of a nation wherein each citizen will contribute his part in the maintenance of 
the government in proportion to his ability or resources, "s we reduce the burden 
that is being unduly placed upon the masses of our people, on the one hand, and 
give them the wage that they are entitled to earn, on the other, we shall ultimate- 
ly raise the standard of living as we reduce its cost, and thereby increase the 
purchasing power of the wage earner. 

We are liable to forget the fact that the business of a country does not 
come from great incomes that a few individuals residing in that country may make, 

1§/ Message to the First National Assembly on revision of the system of taxation, 
January 24, 1938. Quezon Messages . Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 257-258. 

12/ liii., PP. 258-259. 

Ig/ Message to the First National Assembly, January 24, 1938. Ibid,., p. 260. 



11-394 

- 561 - 

19 • 

b\it from the earning power of the masses. 

TAX SPENT NOT FOR BENEFIT OF O NE GROUP BUT FOR ALL PEOPLE 

The tax is being spent for the welfare of the whole country, which is as 

it should bo; a tax after all should not be collected only to be given back to 

the people who paid it, for if that wore the case, then it would be better not 

to collect the tax at all. It really look3 unfair that the people who pay the 

tax are the ones specifically deprived of the benefits that may bo derived from 

20 

the use of the money collected from that tax. 
QUEZ0N_FO R RATIONALIZ ATIO N OF NEW THEORIES ON TAXATION 

Our system of taxation should be in accord with the policy to which we are 
committed - a just distribution of the tax burden upon the principle of ability 
to pay. 

The imposition of new taxes is always a serious matter, especially if it 
means a fundamental change in the policies underlying the public revenue system. 
The adoption of new theories of taxation already accepted in progressive countries 
as well as by competent students of public finance, is not the only question which 
should merit consideration. Equally important, and in our particular case, pro- 
bably more so, is the rationalization of these theories in regard to the parti- 
cular social and economic organization of our people, so that they may not in 
practice bring greater evils than those they are intended to remedy. 2 * 

^ZZII£I~L=^=j2LgIg^ EM TO_RjJSB_IgTONl^^]FOR_COUiITRY ' S NEEDS 

The power to tax can be and should be used both to produce revenues for the 
government, and as an instrument to mold and direct the social and economic or- 
ganization of the country. If, however, this latter function is to bo accomplished 
successfully, with the least possible inconvenience or injury either to individual 
or the body politic, this great power should be employed only after a careful 
deliberation. Everyone should realize that the people of the Philippines are, 
absolutely as well as relatively, among the least taxed people in the world. On 
the other hand, we cannot stagnate; we must make progress. There are other es- 
sential activities which the government should undertake and which have not so 
far been done for lack of funds. We must, therefore, insure a larger income for 
the government, within limits, of course, of the economic capacity of the country 
to provide that income. This means that we must not only revise our system of 

taxation to conform with the principle of ability to pay, but also with a view to 

22 

increasing our revenues. 
23/ Ibid., P. 265. 

2Qj Speech before coconut planters and municipal mayors, Malacanan, February 19» 
1958. IbU., p. 27. 

22/ Message to the National Assembly, July 25, 1938. Ibj.4 . , p. 516. 

22/ Ibid ., p. 517. 



11-395 

- 562 - 

SHOW YOUR P ATRIOTISM BY P ffING RESIDENCE T.g 

I want to ask you to show your sense of patriotism by paying your residence 

tax. It is the tax which you must pay to prove that you are a citizen of a free 

country; and it is a tax that you pay justly and fairly; it is a tax that will 

.■.solve our problem of providing instruction to the sons of the poor not only in the 

23 

oities and towns but also in the barrios of the Philippines. 
P..VY YOUR TAX IN RETURN FOR OPPO RTUNITY TO LIVE .AND WORK 

The government has no right to demand a tax from a citizen whom the govern- 
ment cannot even give/^ne opportunity to work, but when the government can give to 
the mnn or woman a chance to work, then it is the duty of that man or woman to 

give a part, an infinitesimal part, of what he or she is earning for the main- 

24 

tonance of the government. 

QUEZON ON FUND RAISING M ETHODS OTHER TK 'ti TAXATION 

If the National Assembly is of the opinion that there must be 3ome method 
of raising fund3 other than by way of taxation to attend to purely welfare service. 
I suggest that some other system be adopted with less objectionable features and 
with some assurance of bringing in funds from outside sources. 

134. TEACHING PROFESSION 

QUEZON EXPLAI NS DUAL MISSION OF FIL IPINO TEAC HERS 

Teachers in our public school system have a dual mission in promoting the 
national welfare. As educators, thoy are concerned, of course, with the intellec- 
tual development of students, so that not only nay each enjoy the cultural, social 
and oconomic advantages accruing to the enlightened individual, but also in order 
that each may be of greater usefulness to our country. 

The teacher is furthermore responsible for the inculcation in student 
bodies of sound principles of governmental functions, for informing them' of the 
privileges and obligations of citizenship, and for training young nen and women in 
the performance of essential civic duties. This second phase of the teacher's 
mission is of particular importance at present because of current and impending 
changes in our scheme of government. 

The principal effect of these changes i3 to confer upon our peoplo a greater 
degree of independence than thoy have heretofore enjoyod in the dotormination of 
their own destinies, and to transfer to them a correspondingly greater degree of 
responsibility for tho performance of duties devolving upon a sovereign power. 

23/ Speech at the cornerstone laying of B a rrio Obrero, Tondo, Juno 28, 1939. 
QP, MR#42, TNL. 

23/ Mossagr to tho National Assembly, n.d.ci. .. Quezon , Messages . Vol. 2, Part 1, 
JBVFF, p. 219. 



11-396 

- 563 - 

Within ton years this responsibility will bo complete. ^ 
T EACHERS B EST INSTRUME NT TO PROMULGATE N ATION'S IDEALS 

The teachers of the Philippine Islands are the best material wo have for 

the inculcation of the political philosophy of our nation in the mind of our youth, 

and I hope that everyone of you will praach that philosophy, not only in the school 

where it is your plain duty under the Constitution to instill the spirit of good 

citizenship in our children, but also in your respective communities. For you are 

the army upon which wo have to depend if the ideas and ideals of our nation are to 
2 

. iccood. 

?RjSIiaJi^JSCT S TO PROTECT STUDENTS FROM UNSCRUPULOUS PROFESSORS 

Complaints have reached me to tho effect that certain professors of tho 
University of the Philippines practically compel their students to buy books or 
mimeographed notes that they themselves have written on the subjects thoy toach. 

. I consider such practice as fundamentally wrong, especially as some of 
those books and notes appear to be mere compilations and do not scorn to have con- 
tributed anything now to the subjects which they deal. A professor can havo no 
reason to expect his students to read what he publishes unless ho can offor them 
• something now and meritorious or which is not roadily available in authoritative 
publications. I understand, too, that the prices exacted for such books or mi- 
meographed notes are, if not exorbitant, ontiroly out of proportion to thoir 

worth to such an extent that mere profit, it is alleged, seems to bo the animating 

3 ■ 

purpose. 

HONESTY, INTEGRITY MORE IMPORT \ NT TH.'J? TEACHING EXPERTISE 

A professor s hould always bear in mind that h is oxamplo no loss than his 

toaching_ffhQul.cL sojy.c.^s_ a gulflti fox liia. ginilfi. .til, .faUfiK. Obvioitslv. knowledge 

of subject matter is an essential requirement, but honesty and integrity aro. in 

my estimation, of even greater value . The influence of a dishonest professor over 

the yout h, at this impressio nable afie, is ver y da maging and it s consequences 

4 

cannot be foreseen . 

QUEZON FOR RAISING ST/J TD.ARD OF TEACH ING I N ALL SCHOOLS 

I cannot pormit the continuance of tho policy horotoforo followod of em- 
ploying noriprofessionally trained teachers. Instead of allowing tho standard of 

Address at the Teachers' Convention in Baguio, April 1936. QP, MR#38, TiJL. 

Address before the Senior Teacher's Assembly, Baguio, May 22, 1936. Quezon , 
MosBBgQH. Vol. 2, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 99. 

2/ Letter to tho Secretary of Public Instruction and chairman of the board of 
rogonts, University of tho Philippines, November 18, 1937. Ibid. . 
Vol. 3, Psirt 1, JBVFF, p. 307. 

lJ Uti&., p. 308. 



11-397 



- 564 - 



our publio schools to go down, it should he our aim to raise it, and I shall de- 
mand strict responsibility from the Department of Public Instruction if in the 
future persons who are not fully competent to do the work are omployod as teachers 
I think it is unfair to the children themselves and practically a waste of public 
funds to open new schools without properly trained personnel to teach. 5 

MLQ EMPHASIZES ROLE OF SCH OOLS IN NATION BUITiuTNft 

Wealth alono cannot give strength and endurance to a country, Richos alone 
will not bring happiness to any person. But what will insure happiness to us is 
the thought that we are doing right by our follownen and that they are not being 
remiss in their dealings with us. Hence, for our country to enjoy the blessings of 
a peaceful and happy existence, we must continue enjoining the schools to impress 
upon the minds of our young people the strict performance of their duties as citi- 
zens. 

I 

j^l!^_P^ ^^J^^ S inTH_G0TORL7ENT_S0UGHT 

Teachers can be made a powerful factor in helping the government. I do not 
want them to consider themselves apart or independent of the everyday life of the 
community in which they live. I do not want thou to consider that their work is 
just to teach. They should take interest in the activities of the children and 
their parents, in connection with a study of their mental and emotional reactions. 
Of course, I do not want them to bo involved in politics. That is not the business 
of teachers. I want them to study -and find out what is going on, what is to bo 
done, what the government is trying to do and not simply say "yes" to what the 
government is doing. 7 

155. TENANT-LANDLORD RELATIONS 
FOUR-POINT PROPOSAL O N RIC E TEN H NCY Q UESTION 

My four-point proposal on the rice tenancy quostion follows: 

1. Provision for written contracts in the dialect betwoon owner and tenant. 

2. It should prohibit loans or advances at exorbitant rates, and provide 
for properly witnessed evidence, in the dialect of such loans. 

3. It should require an annual accounting in writing to bo rondorod by tho 
landlord to the tenant at the end of the agricultural year. 

4. It should require a division of tho produce immediately after the harvest. 



V Message to the Second National Assembly, November 10, 1939. Ibid . r Vol. 5, 
Part 1, JBVFF, p. 374. 

§/ Speech on the fourth anniversary of the Commonwealth, November 15, 1939. 
AbicL, pp. 2L;5-214. - • 

l/ Speech at a luncheon in honor of division superintendents of the Bureau of 
Education, Malacanan Park, December 10, 1939. HlXsL., p. 235. 

1/ Message to the Philippine Legislature, September 21, 1932. QP, MR//32, TBI. 



II- 398 

_ 565 _ 

GO VERNMENT TO PROTECT TENETS FROM L.1NDLORD ABUSES 

It is the duty of tho government to protect tho workingmen against abuses 
and exploitation to secure then fair wages and reasonable return for their labor, ' 

UNFAIR TREATMENT O F TENANTS R ESULTS IN S0CI.1L UNREST 

There is one measure which would have given no the greatest satisfaction 
tc recommend for enactment at this time, and that is, legislation that would solv > 
once and for all the problem of the relationship between tenants and landrvnors, 
especially in tho large estates ... It is well to bear in mind, however, that 
the mere acquisition of these estates by the government may not after all solve 
the social and labor questions that they have produced. 

The problem involved in tho relationship between tenants and landowners, 
whether within large or small estates, owned by individuals or by corporations, ' 
public or private, transcends in importance practically all other social problems' 
of the Philippines. Lack of fairness in the treatment of tho workingman in the 
field necessarily results in social unrest. I have no doubt that if we could se- 
cure for every tenant or field hand what in equity should come to him, as his 
share in the products of his toil, there would be more contentment amongst the 
poorer classes of our people, ^ 

^-2 L^- TO ^^ ^L^ L^ T E^ I0N T0 ■■fl R - / ft*-W PR OBLEMS 

The welfare of the masses of our people has been ono of the greatest concerns 
of this government and to that end special attention is being given to all agrarian 
problems with a view to settling once and for all the relations which should obtain 
between landlord and tenant in all the rural communities. ^ 

PROBLEMS OF TENANCY, USURY, L ANDLORD _ j3USES_CITED 

The Rice Share Tenancy Law was enforced in the provinces of Bulacan, Panpang 
Nueva Ecija, Tarlac and Pangasinan in the early part of the year (l937) t n.d has 
since afforded a remarkable relief in the tense situation then prevailing in the 
rice producting regions of C G ntral Luzon. 

But it should be noted that eliminating usurious and other abusive practices 
under the tenancy system cannot, in itself, be expected to settle completely the 
unrest obtaining among the tenants. 

PRESIDENT VOWS ABUSIVE LANDOWNER W ILL BE PROSECUTED 

A landowner who commits abuses and doo3 not treat his laborers justly 

2/ Speech on accepting his nomination as President of the Philippines, July 20, 
1935. Quezon MoHR»^na r Vol. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, p. 239. 

2/ Congratulatory speech, December 21, 1935. p. 112. 

4/ Address en accomplishments during the first quarter of the Commonwealth, 
February 19, 1936. Quezon M o hb wares,. Vol. 2, Part 1, J3VFF, p. 38. 

5/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. QJV MR#39, TNL.- 



11-599 



- 566 - 



should be prosecuted. The government will lose its moral influence over the la- 

6 

borers if they can sec that it protects those who commit abuses. 
KLQ WAR NS TBNjjjTS T HAT PROVOC UE URS WILL BE FIRST TO RUN AWAY 

If you are not willing to obey the laws and the decisions of the courts 
and you are determined to defy the government, you better get a bolo and go to th-: 
mountains, for the government will not tolerate your violations of the laws or 
disobedience to the decisions of the courts nor your defiance to the government,, 
Let me advise you, however, that before you follow the advice of anybody who en- 
courages you to disobey the law or decisions of the courts or to defy the govern- 
ment, you should bear in mind that the majority of those who give you such advice, 
when the showdown comes, will run away and leave you alone. It is in your own in- 
terest and for your own well-being that you should have peace and order here; that 
you should live as good citizens should live. It is impossible for you to prosper 

: ■ 7 

and to have a happy life unless you fulfill your obligations to the community. 
/JETER TENANCY ACT FARMERS SH OULD BB PROVIDED CREDIT FA CILITIES 

The strict enforcement of the present Tenancy Law alone will not automa- 
tically solve our agrarian problems. With the enforcement of the Tenancy Law, it 
will also be necessary to provide credit facilities not only to landowners but 
also to tenants. In addition, now methods of farming must bo adopted to increase 
• production and insure the maximum benefits that the land can yield. 

Even if the government were to take every foot of arable land in the Phi- 
lippines and distribute it without compensation to the present occupants, the 
tenants would find in the end that their situation had not been materially and 
permanently improved, and in some cases they would perhaps find that they woro 
in a worse condition, unless they were at the same time granted hotter crodit 
facilities and they themselves worked harder, more consistently and intelligently 
than they are doing at present. 8 

FORCIBLE SEIZURE OF CRO PS BY TENANT OR LANDLORD U NLAWFUL 

With regard to the controversy on the farm, the practice of forcibly 
taking crops, either by the tenant or landowner, without the consent of the other 
party must be stopped. If necessary, I shall use force to prevent it in the future. 
The gathering of armed men will bo considered as a threat to commit violonce, and 
any such groups will be dispersed by force in case of resistance or refusal to 

£/ Spe ech before municipal mayors in San Fernando, Pampanga, June 1, 1938. 
Quaunn Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 66. 

U Speech before the tenants of Hacienda Buenavista, /February 1, 1939. QP, MR# 
42, TNL. 

8/ Speech over KZRM and KZIB, Manila, March 11, 1939. Quezon Messages . Vol. 5, 
Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 56-57. 



11-400 

- 567 ~ 

g 

obey the order of authorized government agents. . .>■.. jf c-< 

ML Q GIVES FULL FREEDOM TO HIS OWN TENANTS IN ARAYAT 

Here you will be free to be a communist, socialist) or a Popular Front 
supporter* Although I am a Nacionaiista> yet you need not belong to my party or 
vote for our candidates* The fact that you belong to another party will not be 
sufficient cause for me to send you away. 

But remember, I shall do nothing for the man who does not work* Nobody 
has the right to live at the expense of others. 

Let us be real partners. Let U3 bear in mind that what is good for you is 
also good for me, and what is good for me is good for you, too. With this under- 
standing, we shall not only be partners but also friends. ^ 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE STRESSES S OCI AL RESPONSIBILITIES OF WEALTH 

But social justice cannot be achieved by constitutional precepts or le- 
gislative enactments alone. We must radically revise our concept of private pro- 
perty by emphasizing the social responsibilities of wealth. We must indoctrinate 
every citizen with the ethical principle that he is his brother's keeper. We must 
arouse and foster the individual's responsibility to the community of which he is 
a part. These are no vain words. We may forget these duties only at the cost of 
our peace and tranquility and, in the end, even of our national liberty. 11 

TESm_FBE^TO BE COME SAKDALI3TA, SOCI ALIST OR COMMUNIST 

A tenant, however, should not be expelled from the land as long as he ful- 
fills his farm job. Sometimes landowners oust their farmers or quarrel with them 
simply because the latter do not belong to their own political patties. 

On party matters, a landowner should not interfere with his tenants, but 
instead, he should give them freedom to become Sakdalistas, socialists, or com- 
munists. ALso, after finishing their day's work on the field, he should allow 
thorn to attend the meetings of the various associations with which they are af- 
filiated. 12 

RE SORT TO FORCE WILL INVALID.gE TENANTS' RIGHT - MLQ 

Of all measures that I believe we should best adopt in regard to the re- 
lations between landlords and tenants, the most important that you should impress 
in your minds and hearts is that you should not resort to the use of force in 
defending your rights, and should always recognize the rights of the landowners. 

V Ibid.,, p. 59. 

10/ Speech before his own tenants in Arayat, Pampanga, March 30. 1939. Ibid. , 
p. 63. 

II/ Speech at the University of the Philippines, April 4, 1939. QP, MR#42, TNL. 
12/ Speech b?fore landowners of Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija, April 30, 1939. Ibid . 



11-401 



_ 56a _ 



If you resort to force, oven if you are in the right, your having done so 
would be sufficient to invalidate your own right. So you better not grab any por- 
tion of the produce of the land without telling your landlords about it. You 
should share, the harvest proportionately with them. If anyone is wronged, ho 
should present his petition to the municipal officials. If you will do that, rest 

assured that I shall never allow the landowners to grab even a grain of rice from 

13 

that which rightly belongs to you. 

QUEZO N DES CRIBE S TENANCY AS VIABLE PARTNERSHIP 

The word "tenancy" means that the landowner and the tenant who works the 
land aro partners. It is not proper for either of the two to think that one is 
the sxiperior of the other. They are partners; that is to say, they are partners 
in a single job. The landowner contributes his land and his share of the expenses. 
The contributions of the farmer are his labor and his corresponding share in what- 
ever expenses which should be mutually paid by them. What is gained by one is • 
also the gain of both. Hence, if this fact is taken into consideration by both 
the landowner and the tenant, and if they treat each other fairly, in the manner 
that is most proper for any two good partners, we may hope that all tenancy 
troubles, not only here in Nuuva Ecija, but also those in some other regions of 
the Philippines, will be terminated. ^ 

PRESIDENT DEFINES RIGHTS OF T E N.4NT -AND L/.HD0WNER 

/i landowner ought to realize that if no one worked his land he would not 
raise anything on it, as the main cause of its being made to produce crops- is the 
diligence of the tenant. He ought to keep in mind, therefore, that the farmer has 
a right to profit by his labor, and it is not right for anyone to deprive him of 
even a single grain of his due share in the harvest. 

Likewise, a f armor must consider the fact that he cannot plant anything if 

there is no land for him to cultivate. Precisely, the farmer should also keep in 

mind that the landowner ought to make some profit from the money he invested in 

his land, and should not aim to get more than that which corresponds to his labor. 

He must consider the fact that the landowner has a right to claim his legitimate 

1*5 

share in the produce of the land. 

TEH/JIT, L.1HD0WNER SHOULD MUTU/iLLY HELP EACH OTHER 

What the landowner and the farmer should concern themselves with, first 
of all, that which pertains to their mutual benefit. They ought to get along 
•together very well and mutually help each other properly; if not, tho land of the 

. .,. i . .. r . 

' : " U "" r ' r! " : 
15/ Ibid, . : ^*»* 



11-402 

- 569 - 

landowner and the labor of the farmer would not result in anything, and in the 
long run, both would be the losers. ^ 

TBIUNT IS PARTNER OF LANDOWN E R II? AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION 

In the amendment to the Tenancy Law, the landowner cannot eject his tenant 
as long as the latter complies with their agreement on matters relating to farm 
tenancy. The purpose of the law is to show the landowner and the tenant that the 
so called "tenant" is not a slave, whom the landowner can dismiss outright with- 
out sufficient cause or reason. Do you know the meaning of the word " tenant "\kqs.gs 
"Tenant" means a partner in the possession, cultivation, care of, and profits 
from the land. 

On the other hand, the farmer can leave the land he is tilling if he so 

desires, and the landowner cannot stop him. The reason behind this is that the 

17 

landowner would not die of hunger even if no one worked on his land. 
RICE TE NANCY ACT IN FULL FORCE MTD EFFECT IN IL0IL0 PROVI NCE 

For the purpose of regulating the relations between landlords and tenants 

and of preventing serious controversies in the province of Iloilo, I, Manuel L, 

Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the provisions of Act No. 

4054, otherwiso known as The Philippine Rice Share Tenancy Act, as amended, to bo 

in full force and effect from and after the date of this proclamation in the pro- 
18 

vince of Iloilo. 

136. TOURISM 
ML I) CITES FIRST STEPS TOWARD PRO MOTING TO URIS M 

There are a few things that we have to do before we seriously attempt the 

business of attracting tourists to the Philippines. The first is to have not only 

in Manila but in certain places in the Philippines good hotels. Vfe also have to 

1\ a) 

improve our means of transportation and communication and other facilities. 

137. TRADE 
3 f -D EFFECTS OF FREE TR ADE ON PHILIPPINE ECONOMIC LIFE 

It must be remembered that the Filipino people, from the very beginning, 

foresaw the ultimate/ effects of free trade with the United States upon their 
economic life. Mb) 



IS/ Ibid . 

A2/ Speech in Cabanatuan, Nueva Bcija, July 16, 1939. QuQRPTl MeflSflKeg* Vol. 5, 
Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 151-152. 

IS/ Proclamation No. 427, "Declaring the Provisions of the Philippine Rice Share 
Tenancy Act, as amended, to bo in full force and effect in tho Province of 
Iloilo," August 5, 1939. IMA*, p. 652. 

lLl)/ p ress conference at Malaoanan, July 10, 1936. OP, MR#38, TNL. 

l(b)/ Statement at a conference with U.S. Secrotary of War Patrick J» Hurley, 
1931, n.d.m. QP, HR#31, TNL . 



II- 403 

- m - 

QUEZON SEEKS NEW OU TLETS FO R PHILIPPINE EXPORTS 

We must mako ever e"ffort to seek now outlets for our oxports so that we. 
shall not depend entirely on the United States; but we must see to it also that 

2 

in trading with other countries the balance is not always decidedly against us* 
PR EE_TR/gE O NCE A BLESSING, BUT NOW .\ MAJOR PROBLEM 

Any chango in the government of any country in the world is always accompa- 
nied by economic and social disruption* . especially the chango, • , ■/ 
which is about to take place in our country, from political and economic dependence 
to complete freedom. Our economic dependence upon the United States, thru the es- 
tablishment of free trade, has been, indeed, a blessing but now, paradoxically, 
its beneficial effects constitute our greatest obstacle in forming the' new na- 
tion. ' 

138. TYPINGS- MCDUFFIE A C T 
jTAWES ^M IT£TH^_ m£jGES_ IN T-M INDE PENDENCE LAW ARE FOR BETTER 

Every broadminded man, therefore, should welcome the changes that have 
been approved by the United States Congress in response to the significant mes- 
sage of President Franklin D» Roosevelt* 

There are three such changes, -namely: 

First, that military reservations by the United States in the Philippines 
will be given up upon the establishment u- ;ho Philippine Republic; 

Second, that naval bases and fueling stations will bo the subject of fu- 
ture negotiations between the United States and the future Philippine Republic; 

and 

Third, the elimination of the prerequisite that the Commonwealth Consti- 
tution shall, at the expiration of the transition period, be first amended in 
several respects. 

While the main features of the Hare-H a wos-Cutting Act have been re-enacted, 
I am glad to admit, as anyone would, that these changes are for the better. 1 

QUEZON'S ACHIEVEMENTS SUMMARIZED IN STATEMENT OF FA CT S 

Hxai. The Osrox (Osmena - Roxas) mission not only refused to cooperate 
with the Quezon delegation but they did everything they could to make the dele- 
gation fail. They insisted that the United States Congress should not enact any 
new legislation on the Philippines. They also worked so that the HHC l aw may be 
kept intact and thoy opposed all amendments to it. All they wanted done was extend 

2j Opening address in the Senate, July 16, 1934. QP, MR//36, TNL. 
2/ Untitled speech, 1938, n.d..m. QP-, MR#41, TNL. 

1/ Statement by Harry B. H a we;s, co-author of the Hare-H awes-Cutting Act, date- 
lined Washington, March 27, 1934. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 1090-1091. 



11-404 

- 571 - 



the time for its acceptance. - ' 

3esoM. The enactment of the Tydings-McDuffie Independence Art is the re- 
sult of - 

(a) The rejection by the Philippine Legislature of the HHC law; 

(b) The request of the Legislature that a new legislation be enacted; 

(c) The protest of Senate President Quezon against the plan of Senator 
Tydings of merely extending the time for the acceptance of the HH6 law, a plan 
that had the cordial approval of Resident Commissioner Camilo Osias and the Osrox 
faction, 

Third. Commissioner Osias had as much to do with the enactment of the 
Tydings-McDuffie Independence , ct as the man in the moon, for all he did was to 
discredit the Quezon delegation and ask for the extension of the HHfl l aw> 
was enjoying the Pacific ozone on board a steamer when the Tydings-McDuffie l aw 
was introduced. 

Haittfll. Before consulting with anybody, either in Washington or in the 
Philippines as to what step to take in connection with the Philippine question, 
Senator T ydings , .after his initial conference with President Quezon, dealt first 
with Mr, 0 p on<a and considered his prior agreement essential. 2 
TYDINGS CITES T HREE M ".JO R CH ANGE TTff T-M INDEPENDENCE Lm 

The new law, known as the Tydings-McDuffie Act, differs from the old in a 
few particulars, to wit - 

1. The title makes it clear that the independence which the Islands will 
have at the expiration of the transition period will be complete. 

2. £L1 military reservations will be relinquished by the United States, 
the U.S. President not being empowered by the new law to redesignate and retain 
them. 

3. Whatever naval bases and fueling stations the United States may retain 
after independence will be the subject of future negotiations between the United 
States and the Philippine Republic. 

Senate President Quezon has shown commendable broad-mindedness in the • 
negotiations concerning the new law. 3 

139. UNIVERSITY OP THE PHILIPPINES 
M4jg ^li_gg?_ gIffgST ST/JTD4RD O F UNI VERSITY EDUCATION 

President Quezon stressed the fact that it is his belief that the prime 
duty of the State, insofar as education is concerned, is to give elementary 

Zj Article, "Osrox Group Tried to Defeat Every Effort of Quezon to Give P I Rcl 
Complete Freedom But Leader Fought Hard and Got a N ew L V° Ph ! l! 
28ttU, June 2, 1934. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. ig^ lO^ . 

2/ Jews item, "U.S. Leaders Giro Quezon Credit for Better P.I. Law " 

JmU PPines He r/ aa , June 1934.. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 1088-1089. 



11-405 

" 572 - 

instruction to the youth of the land and that if the State is to maintain a uni- 
versity, such university must serve a definite purpose which is to set the highest 
standard of university education. To maintain such a high standard, the Presi- 
dent said that he feels it is necessary that the U.P. board of regents be given 
a more effective control in the running of the institution. He further declared 
that the university should stress quality rather than quantity. 1 

The State is not - obligated to give higher education. Its principal duty is 
to give elementary instruction to the youth of the land. If the State must support 
and maintain a university, such university must have a definite aim. which, to my 
mind, is to set the highest standard of university education. 2 
U.P. MUST JUSTIFY ITS EXISTEN CE BY TURN ING OUT GOOD LEADERS 

Unless the University of the Philippines can justify its existence by actual- 
ly rendering a service to the country that private universities cannot render at 
present, I would favor the abolition of the university. To my mind this service 
can only bo one, and that is to sot a high standard for our private universities 
and colleges and to turn out well-trained material that will be outstanding leaders 
in each field of activity where technical knowledge is required* 

I have many times stated my position on this matter, namely, I am not in- 
terested in seeing thousands upon thousands of graduates from the University of 
the Philippines whose knowledge, acquired in this institution, cannot even serve 
as a basis for the hope that, through their own efforts, they may become in time 
proficient in their chosen professions, I would rather see only a few graduates 
every year from the University of the Philippines but who have left the univer- 
sity with character and knowledge that will fit them, by dint of their own efforts, 
to become leaders of their respective callings. ' 

ST/TE UNIV ER^Y_IS_I HTENDED TO 3E HIGHEST SE jg? OF LESSENING 

The University of the Philippines is intended to be our highest seat of 
learning. It is called upon to set the highest standards in the most important 
professions. It is to be the model of the Filipino mind and the great laboratory 
for the study of the grave social problems which are the preoccupation of our 
age. It is to produce men of character and wisdom trained in the arts and the 
sciences, who are to assume leadership in those political and social activities 



l/ Press statement on giving ample powers to the U.P, board of regonts, November 
11, 1937. Quezon Message,^ Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 342. 

2/ Ibid. OP, MR#40, TNL. 

2/ Message to the First National Assembly on changes in appropriations for the 
University of the Philippines, November 17, 1937. Quezon Mosflflgsa,, Vol. 3, 
Part 1, JBVFF, p. 249. 



11-406 



- 573 - 



which are vital to the state. 

Unless the University of the Philippines is able to accomplish these aims, 
it may as well be abolished. The expenditures of the people's money for its main- 
tenance cannot be justified if the academic standards are not to rise higher thar 
those of private universities supported exclusively from tuition fees. 4 
IL-Pi-SXPECTEP TO SET PACE_I^TECHN0L00ICAL BDUC^TTQN 

At this particular time, the country looks up to the University of the 
." 1 hilippines for the technological leadership which it needs in our efforts toward 
economic development upon the most efficient mid scientific bases* Of the es- 
sentials in economic progress, we have in abundance natural resources, raw ma- 
terials, labor, and capital. What the country lacks now and lacks badly are 
scientific men who are not only informed of the technological advancement achieve 
in other countries, but are also able to apply this technology to the promotion 
and development of our own industries, and are capable of contributing to the im- 
provement of scientific knowledge in the world. This is particularly needed in 
agriculture, chemistry, economics, medicine and engineering. So far has science 
conquered nature that today economic supremacy is largely dependent upon techno- 
logical proficiency. The scale of wages and living standards in different nations 
are in a large part likewise dependent upon it. We cannot hope to build up a 
strong and stable economic structure in the Philippines without the assistance of 
such technical men. ^ 

H^SB T 0 SET UNIFORM ST^D/ JJ) O F SALLIE S IgJJ.P. 

I believe that it is most unwise to maintain a uniform standard of salario 
for the members of the faculty of the University of the Philippines. Universities 
of recognized standing in the United Status and other countries do not adhere to 
definite salary schedules. In each case, the governing body determines the policy 
to be pursued and the salary to be given a professor. The same rule is necessary 
for the University of the Philippines, if wo want to build up a strong faculty 
that will make of the university not only an institution of the highest academic 
prestiga, but also one which will render the utmost service to tho nation. 6 

140. WOMAN SUFFRAGE 
QUEZON I^"_^V0g_0F WQH/j? SUFMUGE_5n T CB_lQ14 1 

I agree entirely with you that the Filipino women are equally as intelligej 
educated and responsible citizens as the men. Moreover, I assert that our greatos- 
hope for tho future lies in our splendid womanhood. 

I therefore do not in the least object to the extension of women suffrage 

—==~ — -= - — ; -at3^=fr . • - 

V ibii., p". 250. 

5/ IbidL., pp. 250-251. • 
& IbJ^., pp. 252-253. 



11-407 



- 57* - 



in the Philippines, and if the power of legislation solely resided in me I would 
not hesitate to give them the right of suffrage, but provided first that they 
shall have expressed their desire to vote and not until then. The woman suffrage 
question is not yet an issue in Philippine politics and, therefore, I cannot say 
whet is the current opinion of our women on this question. ^ 

SE NATE PRESIDENT CITES LO GIC OF GR/JJTI ITG TOM.ffl SUFFRAGE 

The Filipino public is not only composed of men but also of women, and if 
the allegation that women are more important than men, to which theory I gladly 
subscribe, why not give the woman the privilege of the ballot the same as the man? 

There is no reason why man should .arbitrarily express the political views 
of the family when his other half disagrees with him. Whether she agrees or not 
with her husband on political questions* the woman should be given the liberty 
and freedom to express her own views through the ballot. 

It is not fair that women, who do not marry and whose fathers are dead, 

are thus left unpresented at the polls and without a voice in the government, es- 

2 

pocially if they have property. 

EffiiSIBENT SIGNS WOMAN SUFFRAGE BILL P.15SED BY H.fflON/I, ASSEMBLY 

The bill which I have just signed gives thu women of our country the op- 
portunity to determine for themselves whether they will exercise the right to 
vote. 

I personally have always been in favor of woman suffrage, that 16 to 3fiy, 
I have always believed that women have the right to vote, for I could see no i - 

reason why a right recognized in men should not be recognized in women. 

* * * 

It is imperative that the right to vote be granted to Filipino women if wo 

do not want to treat them as slaves. 

However, I do not believe the exercise on the part of the women of the 

right to vote is going to be of vital significance in the ordinary course of 

3 

politics in the Philippines. 

WOM EN M U ST VOTE TO I M PROVE OUR SOCIAL CONDITIONS 

Some women fear that their participation in politics may moan a deviation 
from that course of conduct which is demanded by the high concept that we have 
of womanhood. 

V Quezon to Mrs. Richard Coke Burleson of W. 45th Street, New York City, July 
15, 1914. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 195. 

(Note: Filipino women finally obtained the right of suffrage after the 
plebiscite held on April 50, 1937. - ABS.) 

2j Speech at a woman suffrage mooting at . Malac.anan under the auspicos of Mrs. 
Francis Burton Harrison, November 7, 191$. Ibj,d. . p. 528. 

2/ Speech on the signing of the woman suffrage bill at Malacanan, Septembor 30, 
1936. QP, MR#38, TNL. 



11-408 

- 575 _ 

It ia a quostion not only of convincing all tho women to vote, but also of 
pointing out that it is their duty to do so in order that they may contribute to 
tho improvement of politics as well as of social conditions in our country. Women 
have a keener sense of justice than men. ^ 

guaZ0I^IgJJi S_PLEBI ,SGITE FO R WON Mi SUFFRAGE 

I desire to make an earnest appeal in favor of woman suffrage, which will 
be decided by the qualified women of the country in a plebiscite to be held on 
April 30, 1937. 

Almost every democratic country in the world today has woman suffrage; the 
Philippines cannot afford to be an exception. 

The common people, the farm laborers, the factory workers, and the small 
employees will be the first ones to be benefited by the extension of the vote to ' 
women, because the majority of these new electors, as in the case of the majority 
of male electors, belong to the class above mentioned, and, therefore, their in- 
fluence in the government will be greater and doubtless will be exerted in favor 
of measures and legislation that will promote their well-being. 5 
PRESIDENT SETS PLEBISCIT E ON WOMAN SUFFRAGE 

"Whereas, section one, Article V, of the Constitution of the Philippines 
partly provides that the right of suffrage shall be extended to women if, in a 
plebiscite which shall be held for that purpose within two years after the adoption 
of the Constitution, not less than 500,000 women possessing the necessary quali- 
fications shall vote affirmatively on the question; and 

"Whereas, in compliance with the above mandate of the Constitution, Common- 
wealth Act No. 134 was enacted, setting Friday, April 30, 1937, as the date for 
the holding of a plebiscite for the ratification or rejection by the women of tho 
Philippines of the proposed woman suffrage; 

"Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, pur- 
suant to the provisions of section 30 of the Revised Administrative Code, and 
upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, do hereby declare Friday, 
.'pril 30, 1937, a special public holiday throughout the Philippines ■ to give the 
women of the Philippines all the opportunity and facilities to enable them to 
express their will upon the question of woman suffrage." 6 



^ C^hf t ^ h %?-?* h Bienni ^ ^^ention of the National Federation of Women's 
^lubs of the Philippines, November 25, 1936. Ibid . 

^ IZVC^^v^^ snffTage ' January 21 ' 1957 - SasaanJkaaagga, vol. 3, 
V ?oT±Z^°^'Jf\^ ^ ^ iday ' April 50 ' 1 ? 57 ' a s P ecial Public 

holiday, dty of Washington (for tho City of Manila), April 12, 1937. Ibid. 



Part II, p. 787. 
January 26, 1978 
Kawit, Cavite 



Ill - 1 



576 - 



• PART III 

QUEZON B I B L I 0 G EA f H I 
Contents 

SECTION ONE - QUEZON AS PRESIDENT 
OP THE PHILIPPINES 



. ' ■ ' 

A. Administrative Orders : '" i ' <tv ~" 

B. Commonwealth Acts , 0Xlk*C~ 

* 

C. Executive Orders 

D. .General Orders 

E. Messages 
P. Proclamations 
G. Speeches 



SECTION THREE - QUEZON IN PERIODICAL 
LITERATURE 



SECTION TWO - QUEZON IN BOOKS : '111. ~ \ * , 



'■'■■'} >'■' ; V ••fcO ■"WS.rVu" 'i-J'l t S« : V^rf < "!>.t.i?.;J.j : Oit;* <;f 



f 



i 



r- t ' nir 



' • • •.. >i< .jjr tt^-r- win- 

.: I B L.I C U 11 ': 



'f W'jn TJfjv'r.irf ' 



PART III 

QUEZON BIBLIOGRAPHY 



A. ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS 

1956 Jan. 29 Administrative Order No. 1 - Discharging from military. service cer+- 
*vf n cadets of the Philippine Military Academy. M essngeq of th ,e_ ^T3f fr 
Adjaiii. Manila: Bureau of Printing, 1937. Vol. 2, Part I, pp. 741- 
742. Available at the Jorge B. Vargas Filipiniana Foundation, Man- 
daluyong, Metro Manila. Hereinafter to be referred to as Quezon M w - 
, SB ge^ , f JBVFP. 

Jan. 30 No. 2 - Removing the Honorable Geronimo Parades, Judge of the Court 
of First Instance, 17th Judicial District. Quezon Mfiaaagga, 
* Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 743-745. 
." - Feb. 4 No. 3 - Prescribing forms of letterheads for use by departments, bu- 
reaus, offices, and subdivisions of the Philippine Government, 
PP. 746-747. 

Feb. 11 No. 4 - Authorizing the Commonwealth Insurance Company to become a 
surety upon judicial, firearms, customs, and supply bonds. 
j£hJL&., pp. 748-749. 

Feb. 15 No. 5 - Discharging Auxiliary Justice of the Peace Carlos B. Lanuza 

of Ramos, Tarlac. IbjL4., p. 750. 
Feb. 24 No. 6 .- Amending the Order of Issue of Metropolitan Water District 
thirty-jrear 5 per cent bonds. JEJjifU, pp. 751-752. 
''! Apr. 23 No. 7 - Constituting a committee to reappraise the government proper- 
ties located in. the Government Center Reservation^ City of • 
Baguio, leased to the Manila Railroad' Co. , and appointing the members, 
thereof. IbM., PP. 753-754. 
May 11 No. 8 - Directing the immediate discontinuance of, and' penalizing, 
the practice of collecting contributions from employees for 
the purpose of making presents to some high government officials., 
Ibid.., p. 755. 

May 12 No. 9 - Appointing an experimental station committee. ibjLA., p. 756..' '"' 
May 18 No. 10 - Constituting an anniversary oommittee and appointing the 

members thereof to formulate plans and devise ways and means ■ 
for the. appropriate celebration of November 15th. ibj,&., p. 757. 
Jun. 4 No. 11 - Prohibiting the taking part of officials and employees in 

beauty, popularity and other contests. IbjL4., p. 758. ' 
Jun. 24 i»o. 12 - suspending from office Honorable Pedro 2, Arteohe, Proving '■ 
cial. Governor of Samar, for act of oppression and miscon- 
duct, pp. 759-760. » 
Jun. 24^ No. 13 - Suspending Dr. Jacobo Fajardo, Director of Health. iftUUt ' 
• PP. 761-762. 



: III - 3 

- 578- 

1936 Jun. 25 No. 14 - Suspending Hon. Sebastian T. Gene ro so, Provincial Governor 

of Davao, for acts of misconduct in office. Xteid.. , pp. 76>- 

764. 

" Jun. 29 No". 15 - Prohibiting the award of additional work for the completion 

of any project without competitive bidding. Ijjii. , p. 765. 
' 11 Jun. 30 No. 16 - Designating the place where bids for public works contracts 

shall be filed and prescribing the procedure for opening 'of 
sealed proposals. ■ IbjuA. , P« 766. 
" Jul, 31 Ho, 17 - Discharging Justice of the Peace Bernardo Alindogan of Ma- ': 

gallanes, Sorsogon. Ibid., p. 767. 
" Aug. 12 No. 18 - Removing Justice of the Peace Victorio P. Gratela of Katnog, 

Sorsogon, from office. IJjiA- » P» 768, 
" Aug. 18 No. 19 - Releasing part of the 5 per cent required reserve of the 

' Department of Agriculture and Commerce, taken from salary 
savings, and making the same available for the purchase or construct- 
ion of a coastguard or revenue cutter, including other expenses inci- 
dental thereto. I_bJ^., pp. 769-770. 
" Aug. 25 No. 20 - Removing Justice of the Peace Vicente Roco of Nag a , c amari- 

/ * nes our, from office for immoral conduct. .Ibid..,' p. 771. 

" Sept. 1 No. 21 - Reprimanding Hon. Pedro R. Arteche, Provincial Governor of 

ijatuar, for irregularity committed in office. IbM. » P» 772. 
" Sept. 9 No. 22 - Suspending Justice of, the Peace Mateo M. Taguba, of Cauayan, 

Isabels, from office. Ib^dy, p. 773. 
" Sept. 15 No. 23 - Suspending Justice of he Peace Teodoro A. Aviles of Ormoc, 

Leyte, from office. JJp&sL*., p. 774. 
" Sept. 17 No. 24 - Suspending Hon. ^omingo Hsgbalon, Provincial Governor of Mas- 
bate, against whom charges are pending and designating Mr. . 
r Francisco S. Titoif ae Acting Governor during sfafcd suspension. . Ibji-A. » ' 

p. 775. 

11 Oot. 31 No. 25 - Authorizing the heads of departments to release from the un- 
expended balances in the appropriations of the respective 
bureaus and offices under them such sums as may be neoeasary for the 
payment of increases in salaries and wages pursuant to Executive Or- ' 
ders Nos. 49 and 50. Ij?ld.., pp. 776-701. 
" Nov. 2 No. 26 - Removing Justice of th< . ice Crispin Labaria of Oroquieta, 

Occidental Misamis, from office. .ThiA. , P« 782. 
" Nov. 10 No. 27 - Restoring Hon. Domingo Hagbalon, Provincial Governor of Mas- 
bate, to duty during the period of postponement of trial, 
effective immediately, ryj.., p. ' 783. 
" I*ov. 10 No. 28 -. Ordering that six months of the suspension being undergone. 

by Governor Felipe* Ii. Ramos of Sambo anga be without pay, . .d 
restoring him to duty. 'IJ&.4*., p. 784. 



• , ' f ■ .. . . 

• Ill - 4 

- 57$- V ' 

1936 Nov. 25 Ho. 29 - Postponing the sale of the lot of the Metropolitan Water 

District bonds, valued at f'500,000, scheduled to take pl e ,- 
on December 1, 1936. IbJ-.d., pp. 785-786. 

1937 Jan. 8 No. 30 - .Amending -Administrative Order No. 4, dated February 11, k9% 

authorizing, the Commonwealth Insurance Company to become r 
surety upon judicial, firearms, customs, and supply and internal re- 
venue bonds. JJaJLA. , pp. 1151-1152. 
Jan. 9 No. .31 - Accepting the resignation of Dr. Jacobo Fajardo, Director 

of the Bureau of H Ga lth. Ibj,d,. f p. 1153. 
Jan. 22 N 0 . 32 - Directing the Court of Industrial Relations to conduct an 
immediate investigation of all^Tacts relating to the sugar 
industry and to determine the necessity of adopting a minimum wage 
or share for laborers or tenants working in the sugar-producing aro PR 
JJ&.4., p. 1154. 

" Jan. 22 No. 33.- Directing the Court of Industrial Relations to conduct an 

immediate investigation of all facts relating to the cigar 
and cigarette industry and to determine 1h.e necessity of adopting a 
minimum wage for laborers working in the cigar and cigarette factorio 
IbjjU, p. 17.55. 

Jan. 23 No. 34 - Outlining the procedure to be followed in establishing or 
changing boundaries of political subdivisions of the PhiJ 
ippines. IbjLd,,, p. 1156. 

Jun * 14 Wcu 35 ~ ^'ther amending .Administrative Order No. 4, dated February 
v 11, 1936, as amended by .Administrative Order No. 30, dated 

January 8, 1937 . . . authorizing the Commonwealth Insurance Co., tr 
become a surety upon official recognizances, stipulations, bonds, and 
undertakings, under such conditions and in such manner as provided 
by law. Issued in the City of New York, U.S.A., (for the City of Ma- 
nila). IMA., pp. 1157-1153. t ' 
Jun. 14 No. 36 - Dismissing Justice of the Peace Nicanor T. Halibas, of G-a- 
nassi, Bacolod, Mandalu, Madamba, Pualas, and Mumungan, 
province of Lanao, from office, Issued in the City of N ew Yort, .U.S.A. 
(for the City of Manila). Tt&&, , p.1159. 
Jun. 14 No. 37 - Suspending Auxiliary Justice of the Peace qui r i no c. Gali- 
cia » of Sanchez Mira, Cagayan, from office. Issued in th' 
City of New York, U.S.A., (for the City of Manila). Ibi.4., pp. 1160 ' 
1161. 

Jun. 14 No. 38 - Dismissing Justice of the Peace Felix B. Fanis, of Ti g80 n 
and Sognay, Camarines Sur, from office. Issued in the City 
of New York, U.S..A., (for the City of Manila). IbdJ,., p. 1162. 
Jun. 27. No. 39 - Allotments for the payment o^ -inc^ases -in salaries and 
wages authorized in .Administrative Brder No. 25. Issued 
in the City of Washington, D.C., (for the City of M*anila). IfeiAi, 
pp. 1163-1164. 



III - 5 

- 580. 

1937 Aug. 24 No. 40 - Filling of positions and promotions in the Givil Service - 

• ' X5&&-, p. 1165. 

Aug. 24 No. 41 - Authorizing the Taha'calera insurance Company to become a 

* surety upon official recognizances, stipulations, bonds; 
and undertakings. IJ?M.» pp. 1166-1167. 

Aug, 28 No. 42 -Requiring heads of departments to furnish the Commissioner 
of the Budget with copies of plantillss. and appointments 
of personnel issued or approved by them, and regulating the special 
assignment of personnel. .Ibid.., pp. 1168-1169. 
" Aug. 30 No. 43 - Prescribing supplementary rules and regulations governing th. 

arrest of soldiers of the United States Army or members of 
the United States Navy and Marines and their delivery to the cus- 
tody of the Commanding Officer of the- nearest military, naval, or 
marine station of the United States. IbJ4,. , p. 1170. 
Sept. 13 No. 44- Creating a committee to study the effects of recent earth- 
quakes on buildings and to recommend building regulations 
that should be adopted by the Government. IbjLd.., p. 1171. 
Sept. 14 . No. 45 - Postponing the sale of the fifth lot of the Metropolitan' 

• Water District bonds, valued at '?500,000, scheduled to tat., 
place on November 1, 1937 to April 1, 1938. IbjU. t pp. 1172-1173. 1 • 
Sept. 15 No. 46 - Prescribing rules regarding the practice of officials end. 

employees of the. government to discuss or clarify all dif- 
ferences of opinion on public matters in press. IbM., pp. 1174- 
.1175. . 
Sept. 21 No. 47 - Dismissing Justice of the Peace Edilberto Riha of Polillo, 

Tayabas, from office. , p. 1176. 

Oct. 4 No. 48 - Delimiting the respective responsibilities of the Secretary 
* of "tbe Interior, the Secretary of Finance, and other De- 

partment Heads in the supervision and control of the personnel and 
the 

finances of/ provincial, city, end municipal governments. ibid.., pp. 
1177-1179. 

" Oct. 7 No. 49 - Creating a Landed jJs j itea Survey Committee. IbjJ,., pp. 

1180-1181. 

Oct. 25 No. 50 - Dismissing Auxiliary justice' of the Peaoe Hilarion Oaldercn 

of Zaragoza, Nueva Eoija, from office. Ibjift . . p. 1182. 
Oct. 26 No. 51 - Dismissing Justice of the Peace Sixto S. Rabino of San ftr- 

nando, Cajidiocan and Magdiwang, Romblon, from- office. 
IJM., P. 1183. 

11 Nov. 3:9 No. 52 - Craating a committee to study the proposed establishment o+' 

a foreign trade zone at, the Port of Manila. P» 1184- 

" Nov. 20 No. 53 - Requiring Jose 1. Almario to resign from o£fioe as Justice 

of- the Peace of Masbate, Masbate. IbjJl., pp. 1185-1186. 



- Sfll- 



III - 6 



1937 Dec. 23 No. 54 - Creating a committee to seleot sitee and study plans for 

the proposed archives and museum^buildings and the trans- 
fer of the aquarium to a new site. Ibid.,,, pp. 1187-1188. 
Dec. 27 Wo, 55 - Requiring . that request for authority to fill new positions 

be supported by data justifying the necessity therefor. 
* a $bU*f py 1189. 

" D«c, 29 Wo. 56 - Creating homesteaders' allocation committees in Agusan, Du- 

kidnon, Cotabato, D a vao, Lanao, Sulu, and Zamboanga. 

p. 1190. 

Dec, 29 Wo. 57 - Creating a board to revise the Philippine merchant marine- 
regulations. JM-A., pp. 1191-1192. 
1938 Jan. 13 No. 58 - Appointment of Ramon J. Fernandez asvchairman of the com-. 

mittee to study the proposed establishment 1 of a foreign , 
trade zone at the Port of Manila. .PjJ^zj^Mj^aaASSa, Vol. 4, Part I, 
JBVPF, p, 1678. 

Jan. 14 No. 59 - Acquisition of public lands, forest concessions, leases, . 

license agreements, fishpond permits, commercial fishing 
boat licenses, mining and oil concessions, or any license o*r permi'- 
for the exploitation of any natural resources in Mindanao and Sulu 
by officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Army, national or 
provincial officials and employees in said region, ifeid.., pp. 1679,- 
1680. . 

Peb, 15 No. 60 - Dismissing Eliseo G. Dayao from office as justice of the 
peace of Pikit, Pagalungan, Silik, Carmen, Kabacan, 3ala- 
tican, Danisilan, Kidapawan, and Kitubud, province of " Cotabato.. .Ibi^. 
/ pp. 1681-1682.. . 
Mar. 2 No. 61 - Removing Provincial Treasurer Zoilo Tolentinoof Surigao 

from office for cause. IJ&A. , pp. 1683-1684. 
war, 2 no, 62 - Requiring that additional laborers to be. employed in any 
work to be undertaken by any bureau, office, subdivision, 
branch or dependency of the Commonwealth Government to be taken 
from those registered with the National Relief Administration. 
J-kU., p. 1685. 

Mar, 17 No. 63 - Pilling positions and promotions and observance of senior- 
ity rule in the Civil Service. I_bJLA., p. 1686. 

Apr. 9 No. 64 - Creating a committee to look into the advisability of '. 

continuing the use of the military head-gear. IbjUi., p. 

1687. 

Apr, 22 No. 65 - Creating a committee on improvement of the electrioal po- 
wer transmission system in the City of Manila. IMjU, p. 

1688. . 

May 11 No. 66 - Promulgating, rules and regulations governing the appoint- 
ment of government ponsionados'. IbjLA., pp. I689-I696. 



• ' III - 7 

- 582- 

1938 May 26 No. 67 - Creating the Philippine .Airways Board. 2MA., p. 1697. 
11 Jun. 3 No. 68 - Requiring Provincial Treasurer Ceferino R. Dino, of Al- 

bay, to resign from office. Ibjjl., pp. 1698-1699. 
" Jun. 22 No. 69 - Directing the Court- of Industrial Relations to conduct 

* 

an immediate investigation of all facts relating to pri- 
vate industrial and commercial, enterprises in end around Manila in 
order to detormine the necessity of adopting a minimum wage for la- 
borers working therein. .IbjiJ,., p. 1700. 
" Jun. 22 No. 70 - Creating the Manila Beautiful Committee. Ibj^., p. 1701. 
" Jun. 24 No. 71 - Creating an advisory body tothe National Relief Adminis- 
trator. JMA't p. 1702. 
" Jun. 24 No. 72 - Requiring Assistant Provincial Fiscal Svaristo Carmona of 

CfgRjrnn to r»sign from o-f-f-io^. JJ&JL. , n. 1703. 
" Jun. 24 No. 73 - Creating a committee to study and report on the advisabili 

ty of the present rate charged by the Manila Railroad Com- 
pany for the carriage of mail over its lines. JMA- 1 P'« 1704. 
. Jul. 26 No. 74 - Creating a committee to study and report on the proposed 

acquisition of tabulating equipment for the Commission, of 
the Census. jtfeiA.* Pf 1705. 
Aug. 1 No. 75 - Exonerating Pablo L. Torres, Mayor of Lipa, Batangas, .from 
charges of irregularity in office. J.bicL,,, pp. 1706-1707* 
" Sept. 12 No. 76 - Revoking the suspension of Provincial 3oard Member Enri- 
que Medina of IJegros Oriental, pp. 1708-1709. 
Sept. 15 Bo. 77 - In re: the Honorable Geronimo Parades, Ex-Judge of the • ' 
Court of First Instance, 17th Judicial District, ibid.., ■'. 

P. 1710. 

" Sept. 27 No. 78 - Creating a Commonwealth triumphal arch' committee. Ib^., 

p. 1711. / 
" 3 e pt.27 No. 79 - Exonerating Mr. Ray Hurley, census expert in the Office of 

the President from certain charges. Xbld.., pp. 1712-1714. 
" Oot. 13 No. 80 - Requiring Auxiliary Justice of the Peace Wanis! Corro of 

Barugo, L 0 yto, to resign from office. IJ&d.., p. 1715. 
" Nov. 19 No. 81 - Creating a committer, to arrange for and take charge of the 

participation of the Commonwealth of the Philippines in 
tho ^oldon Gate International Exposition. Ibjjl., p. 1716. 
" Nov. 28 No. 82 - In re: Ceferino R. Difio, former provincial treasurer of. 

Albay. IbM. , p. 1717. 
11 Dec. 23 No. 83 - Siixomjrating Under-Secretary of Finance Guillermo Gomez from 

the charges filed against him- in his capacity as Acting 
Insul»r Collector of Customs; ' ji&A. , pp. 1718-1720." 
Dec. 28 No. 84 - Restoring the name of the Philippine Constabulary Band,. 
IfeLd., P. 1721. '' ."" 



.4-7 III - 8 

- 585- 

1939 Jan. 23 No. 85 - Amendment to tho authorityj^^insurance arid surety compa- 
nies to become sureties upon official recognizances, sti- ' 
pulations, bonds, and undertakings. j^e.zcju3^aaggs,, Vol. 5, Part I,- 
JBVFF, p.' 1297. 

" Jon. 23 No. 86 - -Amending Admin strative Order I' r o. 71, dated June 24, 1938, 

creating an advisory board to the National Relief Adminis- 
tration. IbjjU, p. 12981 
" • Jan. 23 No. 87 - Requiring that all communications in writing intended for tl 

executive department ■ of tho Government be transmitted di- 
rectly to the head of the department concerned. £bi&. , p. 1299. 
" Mar. 6 No. 88 - Creating a 'committee to pass upon tho qualifications of fo- 
reign physicians, considered as experts, who desire to prac- 
tice., medicine in the Philippines. Ib_ld.. , p. 1300. 
" Apr. 11 ho.- 89 - Creating a committee to determine the cause or causes .of 

damage to ftie North Jetty, Port of Log as pi, Albay province. 
IbjWU, p. 1301. 

" Apr. 11 No. 90 - Removing the disqualifications of former Justice of the 

Pe ace Lucio Jacob and, restoring him to full civil and poli- 
tical rights. IbiAo p. 1302. 
Apr. 18 No. 91 - Dismissing Justice of the Peace Marcelo G. Ramos of Las Fi- 
nes, Rizal, and disqualifying him from holding public office 
IfeAaL.. PP. 1303-1304. 
" Apr. 21 No. 92 - Dismissing Justico of the Peace Ciriaco Sahagun of San Fe- 
lipe, Zambales, from office. IbJJ,., pp. 1305-1306. 
" Apr. 21 No. 93 - Creating a committee to conduct the necessary investigations 

and to. draft revised regulations to further insure the safe- 
ty of life and property in the handling of explosives at the Port of 
Manila and its transportation to and from storage magazines located 
in the vicinity of the City of Manila. Ibiil., p. 1307. 
" Apr. 28 No. 94 - Requiring promptness in the dispatch by the various exe- 
cutive departments of correspondence from the office of the 
President of the Philippines, especially those involving the foreign 
relations of the Commonwealth Government and those relating to pe- 
titions from persons sewking government protection and redress of 
grievances. IMA., pp. 1308-^1309. 
" May 3 No. 95 - Dosignating Brigadier General Vicente Lim as Deputy Chief 

of Staff of the Philippine Army. IhM., p. 1310. 
" May 30 N 0 . 96 - Creating President Roosevelt's Poliomyelitis •Committee. 

.IJaLsl., p. 1311. ... 
11 Jul. 10 No. 97 - Creating a committee to make tho necessary studies and to 

submit recommendations . of tho necessity or advisability of 
(1) extending Manila Railroad Company lines to the 'South Port Area; 
(2) constructing the proposed cargo shed between Piers 5 and 7; 



Ill - 9 

- 584 - 



(3) establishing a fenced Cup ns zone in South Port Area; and (4.) 
improving the present system of examination and handling of cargo. 
Ibid.-, pp. 1312-1313. 
1939 Jul. 13 No. 98 - Authorizing Government officers and employees to become 

members of Consumers' Cooperative Associations. IbjLd., p. 

1314. • 

Jul. 21 No. 99 - Creating a committee to study the advisability of a com- 
promise settlement ~f case No. 2427 of the Court of First 
Instanoe of Iloilo, "In re estate, of Francisco R. Santos, deceas" '* 
- - XbM., p. 1315. 

" Jul. 28 No. 100 - In re administrative case against Assistant Provincial 

Fiscal Mariano G. ALagar, of Vigan, Hocos Sur. JbJUt,-' 
pp. 1316-1318. . • 

Aug. 27 No. 101 - Extending to October 31, 1939, the period within which 

the committee of a compromise settlement of case No. 24?' 
of the Court of First Instance of Iloilo, "In re estate .Of Francis 
co R. Santos, dBceased," may submit its findings and recommendat: 
£PX<\i t p. 1319. 

" • S 0 pt.U No. 102 - Reprimanding Provincial Treasurer Saturnino David, of . T 

guna. IbjL4«, pp. 1320-1321. 
" Sept. 18 No. 103 - Creating a committee to investigate the matter of the u. 

of divers in the province of Pampanga. Ibjji., pp. 1322- 

1323. " 

t- * 

"• Sept. 30 No. 104 - Authorizing the Rizal Surety and Insurance Company to, 

become a surety upon official recognizances, stipule -'• 
bonds, and undertakings . Had.. , pp. 1324- 1325. 
Oct. 2 No. 105 - Suspending Honorable Agustin Pintang, provincial governor 

of Isabela. Ibjjl., p. 1326. 
Oct. 2 No. 106 - Creating a committee to study and recommend to the Pres-' 

ident of the Philippines the suspension, either wholly 
or partially, of the Eight-Hour Labor Law. IbjJ,., p. 1327. 
Oct. 2 No. 107 - Creating an Emergeny Control Board. Ibj^., p. 1328. 
Oct. 20 N 0 . 108 - Administrative inve ligation of Govo rn or Ramon Samonte ■ 

of Cavite. IbJLsi., pp. 1328-1330. 
" Nov. 3 'No. 109 - Creating a Joint Educational Survey Committee, Ifci&.V 
' PP. 1331-1332. 

" Nov. 17 N 0 . 110 - Creating an advisory body on unemployment. ihiA.,,p. • 

1333. 

Dec. 20 No. Ill - Authorizing the sale of t he' third lot of the Metropo- 
litan Uater District bonds, valued at ?500,000 which, wa. 
postponed indefinitely by virtue of Administrative brder. No. 29, 
dated November 25, 1936. pp. 1334-1335. " 



¥ !; ' - in - 10 

1939 Dec. 29 No. 112 - Reprimanding Gervasio Ramirez, provincial treasurer of 

Tarlac, for negligence. JMA> t PP» 1336-1337. 
" Dec. 29 No. 113 - Dismissing Justice of the Peace Honorato de Leon, of Hnn- 

kayan, Kibungan, and Bakun, Mountain Province, for cause. 
IhA&. , pp. 1338-1340. 
" Dec. 29 No. 114 - Suspending Register of Deeds Mauro Valenciano of the prov- 

i ince of iilbay, for negligence. Ih^d.. , p. 1341. 
" Dec. 29 No. 115 - Reprimanding Provincial Treasurer Baldomero Perez of Ilo- 

cos Norte and fining him one month's pay. PP» 1342- 

1344. 

" Dec* 29 No. 116 - Requiring Justico of the Peace Jorge C. Cascayan, of Villa- 

roal, Samar, to resign from office. JiMd.. , p. 1345, 

1940 Jan. 10 No. 117 - Suspending Isidro J. Si Sonf chiaf of the Fire Department 

of the City of Cebu, for failure to pay just debt. Malg- 

" Jan. 25 No. 118 - Dismissing Justice of the Peace Deogracias Bunyi of Man-. 

daluyong, Rizal. PJ^^aJLJl^^te., V 0 1. 38, No. 16, pp. 
281-282. '. - 

M Feb, 3 No. 119 - Di sns j. sa ing Juetice of tie Peace Isidro Ibay of Urdaneta, . 

Pangasinan, for causo. IJtfjl.» K o. 21, p. 408. 
" Feb. 10 No. 120 -' Suspending Provincial Treasurer Lorenzo Palileo of Davao 

pending investigation of charges filed against him, UfcW • . 
No. 22, p. 429. 

" Mar. 19 No, 121 - Creating a committee to find ways and means to finanoe • 

the construction of houses in the lands owned by the 
People's Homesite Corporation in Quezon City. Ibj^,, No. 39, P« 868. 
" Mar. 19 No. 122 - Creating a committee to draft rules and regulations gov- 
erning the sale of lots in the lands owned" by the p eople*s 
Homesite Corporation in Quezon City. Ibid.. 
" - Apr. 15 No. 123 - City of Manila, Philippines 4t per cent loan of 1940 

(due 1970 ) third series. JJAAm No, 51, p. 1105. 
*, Apr. 15 No. 124 - Dismissing Councilor Donato C, Endriga of the. City of Da- I 

vao, for the good of the service* I&iA., No. 52, p. 1122. 
Apr. 25 No. 125 - Order of Issue, City of Cebu, thirty-year At per cent 

bonds. IbiA., No. 56, p. 1182. 

" Jun. 6 No. 126 - Dropping the charges against Mr. Romualdo C. Quimpo, . 

special agent of the chief executive and detailed as ,.' 

privato secretary t6 the Secretory of the Interior, for lack of • 
evidence. Ibid.., Noi 79, p. 1637. 
" Jun, 6 No. 127 - Remov5.ng Hermenigildo Atienza as a member of the Muni- 
cipal Board, and suspending Board President Euataquio 
, Balagtas and BootxU Members Teofilo Mendoza, Valeriana Fugoso, 

Bartolome Gatmaitan, Inigo Bd. Regalado, Agatori Gecilib and h ateo 



■-io 



_ 586 _ 



III - 11 



Herrera, all of the City of Manila. IJiisi, » '*o„ 84, pp. 1767-1768. 
1940 Jun. 7 No. 128 - Mending Administrative Order No. 10?. Ibjji,, No. 85, 

p. 1791. 

" Jun. 7 No. 129 - Changing the date for the submission of copies of plan- 

tillas of . personnel to the Commissioner. of the Budget. 
No. 86, p. 1016. 

" Jul. 22 No. 130 - Administrative case against .Assistant City Fiscal Delfin 

A. Vi 0 i a> 0 f iWia. ToJ£., No. 92, pp. 1984-1985. 

" Aug. 5 No. 131 - Requiring Justice of the Peace Fernando Barrion of Balaysn 

and Calaca, Batangas, to resign his office. Ibid - , No. 
99, p. 2162. 

" Aug. 27 No, 132 - Order of Issue, Philippines 4 per cent loan of 1940 (due 

1970/1950) first series, Metropolitan Water District Com- 
monwealth Act No. 528. Ibid.., No. 108, pp. 2378-2379. 
11 Aug, 29 No. 133 - Order of Issue, City of D a vao, thirty-year 4r per cent 

bonds. IbJWl. , No. 112, pp. 2482-2483. 
" Sept. 26 No. 134 - Requiring J ustice of tie Peace Serapio J. Datoc of Pagadis/i, 

Diras, Tukuran and Cebuano Barracks, province of Zambr"" T 
to resign his office. JJsiii., No. 129, p. 3031. 
" Oot. 8 No. 135 - Dismissing Justioe of tie Peace Santiago Inquimboy of Mon-' 

. talban, Rizfil. ibjji. , No. 130, pp. 3069-5070. > . 
" Oot. 8 No, 136 - Reprimanding Justice cf the Peace Vicente .Aquino of I 14r 

gan, ^andulog, and Kapi, province of ^anao. I bjj.fl . , 3To» . 
131, P. 3100. 

• " Nov. 7 No. 137 - Amending Administrative • Order No. 123, dated April 15, ■ • 

1940, authorizing th issue and sale of bonds known as 
"City of Manila, of 1940 (due 1970) third series". IMA., No. 139, 
P. 3336. 

" Nov. 20 No. 138 - Suspending Register of Deeds n iguel Viloria of La Union, 

for discourteous conduct. Ibid,. , No. 151, p. 3612» 
" Nov. 29 N 0 . 139 - Transfering Justice of the Peace Valorio V. Royira of 

Saquiran, Sungob, Pitsaan, and Bubong, province of Sulu, 
and reprimanding him for conduct unbecoming a public official. 
Ibid.., No. 152, p. 3646. 
1941 Feb. 19 No. 140 - Creating a committee to make studies, of, .and submit re- 
commendation on the preliminary plans prepared by the 
Bureau of Public Works for utilizing the Old Bilibid Prison build- 
ings and lots in the City of Manila. QXSJjli&k Gutter v °l. 39. 
No. 27, p. 634. 

" Jan. 10 No. 141 - Prescribing regulations governing tho handling of re- 
tirement papers and delivery of warrants covering the 
payment of retirement gratuities. llsilAS^^iSsMSiJL^liXs^* 



Ill - 12 

-587 _ 



Jun. 24 No, 142 - Creating a committee to investigate and appraise the cl;-' 

of the Laguna vr ater Power Co., Inc., relating to' the Ca- 
liraya Project. Qf£XsXaX.ii^.tJiS.t v °l. 40, No. 2, p. 194, Available 
at the Jorge B. Vargas Filipiniana Foundation, Mandaluyong, w etro 
w anila. 

Jun. 27 No. 143 - fixing uniform rate meals to be authorized for National 

Government employees stationad in Manila rendering over- 
time work. I_bi&. , p. 194. 
Jul. 2 No.. 144 - Authorizing the committee created to~ investigate the mat- 
ter of the use of rivers to also investigate and report 
on the pollution of streams, and revising, for this purpose, Adminis 
trative Order No. 103, as amended by .Administrative Order No, 126, 
P. 195. . 
Jul. 14 No. 145 - Abolishing the committee created by Administrative Order 

No. 81, dated November 19, 1939» to arrange- for and to 
take charge *of tie participation of the Commonwealth of the Philippic 
in the Golden Gate International E xposition, «nd transferring its 
assets to the. Philippine Exposition Commission. Xbii., No. 3, p. v 37 
Jul. 24 No. 146 - Order of Issue, Philippines 4t per cent loan of 1941 (due 

197l), Commonwealth Act Ho. 618. Ibid.., No.- 5, pp. 874- 

875. ■ 

Jul. 25 No. 147 - Requiring Justice of the Peace Felisberto 'A. Brooo of " . 

trava, Negros Occidental, to resign his office. Ibid., p. 

876. 

Aug. 26 No. 148 - Further amending Admi'iis trative Order No. 123, dated .April 

15, 1940, authorizing the issue and sale of bonds known 
as City of Manila loan of 1940 (due 1970) third series.. JtfeU., No. 
9, p.. 1813. 

Sept. 5 N 0 . 149 - °reating a committee to study and dovj.se measures that 
should be adopted for the protection of the archives of 
the National Government in case of emergency. IbJL4., No. 11. p. 
2243. 

Sept. 10 No. 150 - Authorizing the Par Eastern Surety and Insurance Co., Inc. 

to become a surety upon official recognizances, stipula- 
tions, bonds, and undertakings. Ibid.. , p. 2243. 
.Sopt.13 No. 151 - Requiring Justice of the Peace Iiufino Gonzales of San 

Fabian, Pangasinan, to rosign his office. Ibid,. , No. 12 5 

2242. 

Sept. 15 No. 1^2 - Enjoining strict conrnlinnoe with the provisions of para- 
graph 5 of Civil Service Rule LX in the matter of recom 
mendations for promotions, ibid,. » p. 2444. 

Sept. 22 No. 153 - Requiring •Auxiliary Justice of the Peace Teofilo Buzon 

of Hilongos, ^eyte, to resign. Ibid.., No. 13., pp. 2601-2 f • 



Ill - 1.3 

-588 _ 

1941 Sept. 22 No. 154 - Requiring Justice rf thu '^eao: ;:-steban Rivera of San Fe- 
lipe, Sfanbales, to resign. S&sL.f p. 2603. 
" Sept. 24 No. 155 - Suspending Provincial Governor Saturnino Benito of Albcy, 

for abuse of authority. JbJL&., No. 14, p. 2788, 
" Oct. 24 No. 156 - Requiring Justice of the Peace arsenic Acurantes of Kati, 

Davao, to res5gn his office for causo. Ibj^. , No,. 18, 
pp. 3627-3628. 

" Qct. 27 No. 157 - Philippines 4? per cent collateral loan of 1942 (due 1972) 

province and twelve municipalities of Rizal. jbjjl. , p. 

3629. 

" Oct. 31 No. 158 - Further amending ..Administrative Order No. 123, dated April 

15, 1940, as amended -by Administrative Order No. 137, da- 
ted November 7, 1940, and Administrative Order No. 148, dated August 
25, 1941, authorizing the issue and sale of bonds known as City of 
Manila loan of 1940 (due 1970) third series. Ibid,., No. 19, pp. 
3799-3801. 

" Nov. 15 N 0 . 159 - Order of Issue, Philippines 4t per cent loan of 1942 ■(*■- 

1972/1952), second series, Metropolitan Water District- 
Commonwealth Act No. 528. IhM., p. 3802. 
" Nov, 14 No. 160 - Prohibiting -tho expenditure and/or substitution of tb.2 

amounts constituting the items of "Savings to bo made" r 
quired in the current General Appropriation Act. Jbjji. , No. 21,- 
p. 4116. 

" Nov. 29 No. 161 - Revoking- Administrative Order No. 142, dated June ?.A 

1941, creating a com r'.t too to investigate and appraise tnv 
claim of tho Laguna T - r ater Powe Co., Inc., relating to the Caliraya 
Project. No. 22, p. 428;. 

" Nov. 26 No. 162 - Creating an Inaugural Committee. IbJs4«, P- 4290. 
" Pec, 6 -"o. I63 - Creating a committee to study and recommend the disconti- 

nuance of non-essential services during the period of tho 
emergency and other means of rrtBBBBing savings in the authorized 
appropriations in order to provide funds for the protection and 
defenses of the civilian poi- .ation. Hal^c^^CjaiQBA^ 
" Dec. 19 No. 164 - Removing Justice of toe Peace Vicente Cab .Hero of *anta- 

bangan, "ueva Bcija, for cause. fiTf ipAfil. Sk&RSAXQ.* v ol. 
No. 25, pp. 4724-4725. 
" Dec. 19 No. 165 - Disraissi n«: Justice of the Peace Felipe Santa ,Juana of 

Stor Nino, Samar, for immorality. Ibj&. , p. 4726. 
■ " Dec. 10 No. 166 - Order of Issue, Philippines 4t per cent loan of 1942. 

(due 1972), C omm onwealth Act. No. 618* J^., p. 4727.' 
" Dec. 12 No. 167 - Authorizing the payment of three months salary in ad- 
vance to officers and employees of the government. Djiil. , 

p. 4728. 



Ill - 14 

589 

B. ccm&mM&L'm ACTS 

935 Dee. 21 Commonwealth Ao't No. 1 - An Act to provide for the National Defense 
of the Philippines, penalizing certain violations thereof, appro-, 
priating funds therefor, and other purposes. Quezo n Messages Vol. 
I, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, pp. 117 - 155. 
55 Dec. 23 No." 2 - An Act creating the National Sconemic Council, prescribing 

its powers and duties, appropriating funds therefor, and . 
for other purposes. Ibid., p. 156. . ' / .. 

" Dec. 31 No. 3 - An Act to amend certain provisions of the Revised Adminis- 
trative Code on the judiciary by reducing the number of 
justices of the Supreme Court and creating the Court of Appeals 
and defining their respective jurisdictions appropriating funds 
therefor, and for other purposes. Ibid. . pp. 157-166. 
Dec. 31 No. 4 - An Act to provide funds to be loaned to the Kanila Railroad 
Company for the purchase or redemption before maturity of 
certain outstanding Kanila Railroad Company First Mortgage. Southern 
Lines fcur per cent gold bonds due llay 1 , 1935, and for other pur- 
poses. Ibid., pp. 167-168. 
Dec. 31 No. 5 ^An Act giving the President for a limited period authority 
to effect urgent reforms and changes in the different exe- 
cutive departments, bureaus, and .off ices of the government for pur- 
poses of economy and efficiency, creating a Government Survey Board 
and appropriating the necessary funds therefor, and for other pur- 
poses. Ibid ., pp. 169-170. 
Dec. 31 No. 6 - An Act authorizing the Philippine National Bank to write 

up the value of certain assets which had been considered as 
losses and written off in pursu moe of Aot No.. 3174, to pay 'the 
government an equivalent amount therefor, and for other purposes. 
' IjPid. , p. 1 71 . 

Dec. 31 No. 7 - An Act to create a National Loan and Investment Board, 

defining its powers, and '?b?" other purposes. Ibid. , pp. 172 

174. 

Dec. 31 No. 8 - An Act appropriating the sum of £500,000 out of 'the 60 
par centum available for investigation, improvement of 
ports of the 'Pert i/orks Fund 1 created by Act No. 3592, to be " 
transferred to the general fund to reimburse in part the payments 
made in prior years from the general fund for the interests and 
sinking funds of the bonds issued by virtue of Act No. 2S08 ! :': • 
and the interests and sinking funds for the year 1936 of the 
bonds issued by virtue cf Act No. 3417. Ibid ., p. 175, o?. 

■i ' 



. • ■ in - 15 

- 59a 

■m. lie. 5417. .3&W.. p. 175. 
Doo. 51 No. 9 - Jin Act to amend section 1 of Act No. 4227, entitled 'An Jet 
authorizing the payment of transportation and other inciden- 1 
al expenses of the officers of the Govornment of the United States 
and other guests of the Philippine Government, including their fa- 
milies, to attend the inauguration of the Government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines and appropriating funds therefor,' una- 
mended by Act No. 4248, by increasing to P29O,0O0, the sum autho- 
rized therein,' and for other purposes. IMA., p. 176. 
Deo. 31 No. 10 - An Aot to provide for the appointment, qualifications, com- 
pensation and expenses of the Resident Commissioner of the 
Philippines to the United States, appropriate funds therefor and for 
other purposes. IMA., pp. 177-178. - 
Deo. 31 No. 11 - An Act to vest in the President of the Philippines or in 
such person or persons as he may designate, fro'm time to 
time, all powers over the government business companies heretofore 
vested by law in the 3 0a rd of Control or committee authorized by law 
to present the stock held by the government in such companies, aid • 
for other purposes. IMA., p. 179, 
Dec. 31 No. 12 - An Act appropriating the sum of P100,000 for the extermi- 
nation or control of lqcusts to be expanded in the manner 
and purposes specified in Act No. 3924, and for the control of bud-, 
rot and other coconut pest, and for other purposes. IMA., p. 180. 
Dec. 31 No. 13 _ An Act to appropriate the sum of P100,000 for the relief 
and rehabilitation of indigent sufferers from typhoons, 
floods, other public calamities, and for other purposes. IMA.» p. 
181. ' «. . 

■r • r . = ' • w ' 

Dec. 31 No. 14 - An Aot fixing the salary of the Speaker of the National " 

Assembly at P12,000 per annum. .IMA., p". 182. 
Dec. 31 No. 15 _ An Act to appropriate the sum of P30,000 for the operation 
and maintenance of tho Junior College of Liberal Arte, of 
the University of the Philippines in tho municipality of Cebu, du- 
ring the fiscal year 1936. IMA., p. 183. 
Dee. 31 No. 16 - An .lot appropriating the sum of P60,000, or so muoh there- 
of as may be necessary to defray the expenses of *a HH^ 
no Atheletic Delegation to the Eleventh Olympiad. IMA«> P» 184. 
Dec. 31 No. 17 - An Act designating tho date for the opening of the regu- 
lar session of the National Assembly. IMA., p. 185. 
Dec. 31 No. 18 - An Act to amend section 13 of Act No. 4197, entitled 'An 
Act to facilitate and promote the occupation and cultiva- 
tion of public land at present unoccupied by the establishment of 
settlement distriots, appropriate the sum of Pi, 000, 000 for said 
purposes, ' by making the fund available for the construction, and 
maintenance of roads and bridges.. IMA. , p. 186. 



Ill - 16 



1936 Jan. 2 Ho. 19 - .An Act to amtrnd section 2-B of /.ct No. 4187. as authorized 

and amended by section 1 of Act No. 4231 , and for other 
purposes. Ib^d,. , pp. 187-192. 
M Jul. 11 No. 20 - An Act authorizing the President of the Philippines to ord r 

the institution of expropriation proceedings or to enter 
into negotiations for the purposes of acquiring portions of large 
landed estates used as homesites and reselling them at cost to their 
.l2PJia occupants, appropriating funds therefor, and for other pur- 
poses. itaftgwOMtfwesai Vol. 2, Part II, JBVFF, p. 29. 
" Jul. 20 No. 21 - An Act providing for special elections to fill vacancies 

in tho National Assembly.* Ibid.. , pp. 30-31. 
" Jul. 28 No. 22 - An **ot.to amend section 2605 of the Revised Administratis 

Code, by authorizing tho President of the Philippines to 
designate any officer or employee or suitable person not in the ser r 
vice as Acting Provincial Governor, under certain conditions, and for 
other purposes. IbJLd.. , pp. 32-33. "* ' ■ * 

" Aug. 31 No. 23 - An Act appropriating an additional sum of F84,999 for the 

expenses of the Bureau of Health for the operation and 
maintenance of the National Psychopathic Hospital during the period 
from August 1 to December 31, 1936, subject to oortain exceptions, 
including salaries of personnel, sundry expenses, furniture and 
ment, and the improvement of th-; servj.ee in the institution. XbAd-, 
• pp. 34-36, 

" Aug. 31 No. 24 - An Act to amend section 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 11. rfeiiU, 

P« 37. • 

" . Aug. 31 No, 25'- An Act authorizing th' President of the Philippines to use 

any unexpended balance of any appropriation, or part thereof 
provided for under section 98 of Commonwealth Act No. 1, to cover 
deficits in the appropriations for the construction of mobilization 
and training centers provided in the same section of the said Act. 
I&d't P. 38. 

" Sept. 8 No. 26 - An Aot changing the name of the Municipality of Quingua, 
k province of , Bulacan* to that of Plaridel, in memory of the 

patriot, Marcelo H. del Pil-i:. Ibid,., p, 39. 
" Sept. 8 No. 27 - An Act changing the name of the barrio of San Francisco, 

municipality of Zaragoza, province of Nueva Bcija, to 
that of General Luna. .Ibid.. , p.' 40. 
" Sept. 8 No. 28 - An Act changing the name of the barrio of Payompon, mun-''-' 

pality of Sablayan, province of Mindoro, to that of Buen . 
vista. I MA , f p. 41. 
" Sept. 8 No. 29 - An Act changing tho name of the barrio of Gumalpong, mun- 
icipality of Baco, province of Kindoro, to that -of. San- 
ta Rosa. IbjLsU, p. 42. 



- 592. 



III - 17 



Sept. 8 No, 30 - Jin Act to amend suctions 34, 36, end 77 of A .ct No. 2874 

known as "The Public Land Act". JJjid>j pp. 43-45* 
Sept. 14 No. 31 - An .\ci to authorize the President of fhe Philippines to 
" present decoration to Antonio Arnaiz and to Juan Calvo 
for their extraordinary and historical flight from Manila to Madrid 
and appropriating funds therefor. IbjL4« » P» 46. 
Sept. 15 Kb. 32 - An Act providing for the subdivision and sale of all the 
portions of the friar land estates remaining undisposed 
of. ^qA. , p. 47. 

Sept. 22 No. 33 - An Act authorizing tho President of the Philippines to 

receive and accept donations of money made for the Nation- 
al Defense and to prescribe the rules and regulations under which 
the donated money may be expended by the Philippine Army. Ibid- f 
p» 48. 

Sept. 30 No. 34 - An Act to provide for the holding of a plebiscite on the 

question of woman suffrage, ibid.. , pp. 49-53. 
Oct. 6 No. 35 - An Act to amend sections 1, 2, 6, and 7' of Act No. 4181, 
as amended, in order to consolidate all taxes .on real 
property and the penalties thereon due but unpaid for the year 1935 
and'previous years, to provide time and manner of payment of said 
taxos, and setting aside forfeitures heretofore effected. liid.. , 
pp. 54-55. 

Oct. 7 ' Eb. 36 - An Aot to amend section 1 of Act "o. 3597, as amended by- 
Act No. 3855, authorizing the construction of national 
government buildings and the alteration and improvement of the of- 
ficial residences of tho President of the Philippines in the Cities 
of Manila and Baguio, and providing funds therefor. jjbjiA-r .p. 56. 
Oct. 7 No. 37 - An Act increasing the rates of salaries and wages of low- 
paid employees and common laborers of tho National Gov- 
ernment to the minimum rates fixed by tho President under Executive 
s 

Orders No. 49 and 50, dated August 19th and 24th, respeotiVoly, 
1936, and appropriating the necessary funds to oover the amount 
of the increases for the period from September 1 to December 31, 
1936. Ibid., pp. 57-58. 
Oct. 12 No. 38 - An Act appropriating funds for the necessary expenses of 
the Government of the Philippines during the fiscal year 
ending December 31, 1937. JJ?M«» PP« 59-372. 
Oct. 12 No. 39 - An Act creating the City of Zamboanga. Ibid., pp. 373- 
409. 

Oct. 12 No. 40 - An Act to revive civil case No. 47549 of the Court of 

First Instance of Manila, by repealing section 2 of Aot 
No. 4260. Ibjji., p. 410. 



p ~ 5 III - 18 

- 593- 

1936 Oct. 12 No. 41 - An Act authorizing the provincial, municipal, and oity 

governments to appropriate funds to purchase real or 
personal property and to donate the same to the National Govern- 
ment for the use of the Philippine Army. Ibid,. , p. 411* 
" Oct. 13 No.. 42 - Jin -Act to amend section 2617 of the Revised .Administra- 
tive Code. , p. 412. 
" Oct. 13 No. 43 - An Act to amend subsection (a) of section 2 and to re- 
peal section 6 of Act No. 4184, entitled " "n Act -to pro- 
vide for laborers' dwelling, appropriate funds therefor and for 
other purposes". IbjLd. , p. 413. 
. " Oct. 13 No. 44 - An Aot applying the general provisions of the -^lection 

Law to the election of assemblymon from the provinces of 
Lanao, Cotabato, and Sulu. Ibid,. , p. 414. 
. " Oct. 13 No. 45 - An Act to amend section 436 of the Election L aw, being 

chapter 18 of Act No. 2711, known as the Revised Adminis- 
trative Code. Ibid.., pp. 415-416. 
" Oct. 13 No. 46 - An .let to amend sections 1 and 6 of Act No. 3748, entitled 

"An Act to penalize fraudulent advertising, mislabeling, 
or misbranding of any product, stock, bonds, etc.", by amplifying 
the scope of section 1 and raising the minimum penalty provided 
for in suction 6. Ibjj4. , pp. 417-418. 
* Oct. 13 No. 47 - An Act to amend section i, paragraph A (c): Cebu, items 

No. 28 and 34; and section 2 of Act No. 4180, otherwise 
known as the Public Works Act. Ibid.., pp. 419-420. 
" Oct. 13 No. 48 - An Act to amend section 1, paragraph A (0): Antique, 

item No. 9; Bohol, item Ho. 1; Cebu, itoms No. 1, 3, 31, 
36, 37, 38, 39f tnd 43} Mountain Province, item No. 11; and sec- 
tion 1 , paragraph B (f): Camarines Sur, item No. 1 of Act No. 4241, 
otherwise known as the Public 'forks Act. JMA't PP» 421-422. 
* Oct. 13 No. 49 - An Act designating the 16th day of October of each year 

as thu datu for the opening of the regular session of 
the National Assembly. IbJjJ,. , p. 423. 
" Oct. 14 No. 50 - -In -"ct directing the Secretary of Agriculture and Com- 
merce, the Philippine National Bank, and the National 
Development Company to establish, operate, and maintain ware- 
houses for copra and other marketable products. Ibid * t PP« 424*- 
425. 

" Oct. 16 No. 51 - An Act creating the City of D a vao. Ibjjl. , pp. 426-461. 
" Oot. 16 No. 52 - An Act amending article 150 of the Revised Penal -Code. 

IM&*t p. 462. 

" Oct. 17 No. 53 - An Act- to provide that the testimony of a lessee or te- 
nant shall be accepted, in certain cases, as p rjffln ffflc je 
evidence on the terms of his contract with the owner of the land. 



- 394" 

iJjiA.. P- 463. 

1936 Oct. 17 No; 54 - •in Act authorizing tho establishment of a board of doou- 

ments to have ohargo of: the examination and disposal of 
old documents, public records, and papers in the different bureaus 
and offices of the Government, and defining its duties. Ibjji. , pp, 
464-465. ' 

" Oct. 17 No. 55 - -An Act to amend section 1 of Act No.' 3736, by providing 

that the provisions of tho said Act shall not apply to 
cases involving liability for any tax, duty, or charge collectible 
under any law administered by the Bureau of Internal Revenue. 
» P» 466. 

" Oct. 17 No. 56 - An Act to amend setions 878, 883, and 2692 of Act No. 

2711, known as the Revised Administrative Code. IbA&., 
pp. 467-468. 

" Oct. 20 No. 57 - An Act \ establishing a form of government for the City of 

• Iloilo. I_bii., pp. 46S-517 f 

" Oct. 20 No. 58 - An Act creating the City of Cebu. ibjji,, pp. 518-576. 

" Oct. 20 No. 59 - An Act authorizing the Manila Railroad Company of the 

Philippine Islands to discontinue and abandon its raiL- 
road lines between: (a) the municipalities of Pasig (Rosario) and 
Hontalban, province of Rizal; (b) the railroad station at Paco, 
Manila and the municipality of Naic, province ofCavito; (c) the 
municipalities of Batangas, and B a uan, province of Batangas, and 
(d) the municipalities of Legaspi and Tabaco, province of Albay. 
IJSsU.., p. 577. 

" Oct. 20 No. 60 - An Act to amend certain sections of Act No. 2832 entitled 

"An Act creating a public corporation denominated the Met- 
ropolitan Water District, prescribing its functions and activities, 
and for other purposes," as amended by Acts No. 3109 and 4079. 
IJ?5£., PP. 578-579. 

" Oct. 20 No. 61 - An Act to appropriate the sum of J^ljOOO for the operation 

and maintenance of the institution established in Vel- 
fareville under Act N 0 . 4209. IbJkd.. , pp. 580-581. 
" Oct, 20 No. 62 - An Act to amend soction 4 of Act No, 36l3» commonly 

known as tho Marriage Law, by authorizing the presiding 
judge and appellate judges of tho Court of Appeals to solemnize 
marriages, .IbjLd.. , p. 582. 
" Oct. 21 No. 63 - An Act providing for the ways in- which Philippine citizen- 
ship maj^lost or reacquired. tMA> t PP» 583^^4* 
" Oct. 21 No. 64 - An Aot to amend section 4 of Act No. 1870, entitled "An 

-let for the purpose of founding a university of the 
Philippine islands giving it oorporate existenoe, providing for 



• III - 20 

- 595 - 

a board of regents, defining the board s responsibilities and du- 
ties, providing higher and professional instruction, end for other 
purposes, " as amended. Ibjji. , pp. 5B5-586. 
1936 Oct. 22 No. 65 - An Act to declare that Public Act No. 521, known as "Car- 
riage of goods by sea Act," enacted by the Seventy-Fourth 
Congress of the United Gtatos, be accepted, as it is hereby accept- 
ed by the National .Assembly. Jbjjl. , pp. 587-588. 
" . Oct. 22 No. 66 - An 'ict providing for the verification free Of charge by 

justices of the peace as notaries ex officio, and for the 
registration free of charge by registers of deeds, of instruments • 
concerning agricultural or crop loans not exceeding F200 mado to 
small farmers by the Philippine National Bank. IbJLjU > P« 589» 
" Oct, 23 No. 67 - An Act making appropriations for public works ^bjji. , 

pp. 590-666.' 

" Oct. 23. No. 68 - An Act to provide for an officer to act as president of 

the Philippines under sections 7 and 9> Artiolo VII. of 
the Constitution. Ibjy,. , p. 667. 

" Oct. 23 No. 69 - An Act to amend sections 39 and 40 of the National Dofense 

Act. Ibjd « f P« 660. 

" Oct. 23 No. 70 - An Act repealing aection 6 and amending sections 69 fiiiu 

76 of Commonwealth Act ~ : h. 1, known as the National De- 
fense Act. J_bj»d.. , pp. 669-670. ^> 
" Oct.. 23 No. 71 - 'in Act to amend sections 89 and 90 of Commonwealth Act 

No. i, known as the N.-rcional Defense Act providing for 
grades and pay of air mechanic :, in the Army of the Philippines. ' 
IMA*, PP. 671-673. 

" Oct. 23 No. 72 '- An Act to provide th-t notaries public shall forward at, 

certain periods copies of all documents acknowledged be- 
fore them to the clerk of the corresponding Court of First Ins- 
tance and for punishment in the event of failure to comply with 
the provisions of sections 246 and 247 of the Revised Adminis- 
trative Code. IbjJL. , pp. 674 -675. 
M Oct. 23 No. 73 - An Act prohibiting the killing, hunting, wounding or 

taking away of Bubalus mindorensis, commonly known as 
tamaraw. rb£d.. , p. 676. 

Oct. 24 No. 74 - .In Act to provide that any general revision of the ■ assess- 
ments for any municipality or municipalities by the prov- 
incial assessor of the respective province during the year 1936 
shall become effective as of January first of that year. IMS. , 
• P. 677. 

" Oct. 24 No. 75 - An Act abolishing the Bureau of non-Christian Tribo§ 

and making the necessary provisions for the administra- 



*~* / 996 ni -21 



tive adjustments resulting therefrom, including the creation of 
the positions of Commissioner for Mindanao and Sulu. IbjL&., pp. 
678-679. * 
1936 Oct. 24 No. 76 - /in Act to amend the Revised Administrative Code so as to 

abolisl > tho limitation upon the power of the municipal 
^ board of Manila to tax and fix the license fee on dealers in new 
automobiles or accessories or both and on retail dealers in new 
merchandise which are not yet subject to the payment of any muii- 
• cipal tax. IfeM. » p. 680. , • 

Oct. 26 Ho. 77 - An Act to amend sections 6, 8, 15, arid 19 of Act So. 

4166. ibjuU, pp. 681-683. 
Oct. 26 No. 78 - An Act transferring to tie Secretary of Finance .the powers 
OTd ^^vision heretofore exercised by the Seorotary of • 
the Interior over the financial affairs and financial agencies of • 
provincial, municipal, and city governments/ IbJLi., p. 684. 
Oct. 26 No. 79 - An Act declaring the Honorable Francis Burton Harrfison, 
former Governor-General of the Philippines, a 'citizen of 
. the Philippines, and conferring upon him all the rights, duties, x 
privileges and prerogatives of Filipino citizenship. Ibid.., pp. 
685-666. " 

•Odt. 26 No. 80 - An Act creating the Office of Adult Woation, enumera- 
ting its duties, defining its objectives, and providing • • 
funds for its operation. I.bU., pp . 687-688. 
Oct. 26 No. 81 - An Act amending section 8 of Act No. 2489, entitled "An 
Act authorizing special compensation, credits, aifa moC£^ 
•fication in the sentence of prisoners as a reward for exceptional 
conduct and workmanship, and for other purposes. Ibj^. , p. 689. 
Oct. 26^ No. 82 - An Act to amend paragraph (f) of section 1765 of Act 

No. 2711, known as the .Administrative Code. IfeM., p. 690. 
Oct. 26 No. 83 - An Act to regulate the sale of securities, to create ' 
a securities and exchange commission, to enforce the pro- 
visions of the same, and to appropriate funds therefor. 
pp. '691-732. 

Oct. 26 No. 84 - An Act to provide compensation or allowances to employ- 
ees of tho municipal governments in case of injury,' 
death, or sickness incurred in performance of duty, by amending 
section 699 of the Administrative Code. I bid.. , pp. 738-739. 
Oct. 26 No. 85 - An Act to create ^the positions of provincial agricultu- 
ral supervisors and local agricultural supervisors and 
to amend the Revised Administrative Code accordingly. Ibjd . f pp.' 
740-745. V ' 

Oct.. 26 No. 86 - An Act to amend sections 1, 2, and 3, of AQt N 0 . 2758, ' 



I 



• . • . Ill - 22 

- 597. 

entitled "-fin Act providing for the establishment of stock herds 
and farms for the same, appropriate funds therefor, and for other 
purposes, 1 ' as amended by Act No. 3632, and to, also amend section 
4 of the latter amendatory act, so as to extend the operation of 
said acts not only to broeding stations, and slaughterhouses, but 
also the experiments and rese'rches on the manufacture, preserva- 
tion, and utilization of animal products. Ibi£. , pp. 746-748. . 
1936 Oct. 26 No. 87 - An Act giving the President authority to administer the 

irrigation systems constructed by the Government under 
Act No. 2152, as amended, and to effect adjustments in the pay-,, 
monts of irrigation charges, to suspend pending Judicial proceed- 
ings for the collection of unpaid charges and penalties, and to 
. grant the "right of repurchase. IbjJ,. , pp. -749-750. 
Oct. 26 No. 88 - An Act to provide for the organization and maintenance of 

a state police force. 'jbjLA. , pp. 751-754. 
Oct. 26 No. 89 - An Aot to define the powers of the provincial sheriff and 
of the courts in connection with the removal of improve- 
ments in ejectment cases. }MA> t p. 755. 
Oct. 26 No. 90 - An Act to appropriate the sum of Pi, 500,000 for the re- 
lief of communities and indigent sufferers from typhoons, 
floods, or other public calamities. IbjUl. 1 p. 756. 
Oct.' 26 No. 91 - An Act to fix the standard time of the Philippines, and 

to authorize the President of the Philippines to establish 
a daylight-savings time therein. Ibj^. , p. 757. 
Oct. 27 No. 92 - /m Act authorizing the appointment of register of deeds* for 
third, fourth, and fifch-class provinoes. JB&A., p. 758. 
" Oct. 27 No. 93 - An Act to amend section 86 of the Corporation Law, simpli- 
fying the procedure for the disposition, of freight, goods, 
or luggage transported by a railroad corporation, and abandoned* 
by its owner. £bi&. , pp. 759-760. 
" Oct. 27 No. 94 - An Act to coordinate the information and publicity agen- 
cies of the Government, and to provide funds therefor. 
.Mm PP. 761-762. 
Oct. 27 No. 95 - An Act authorizing the Philippine National Bank, the. Na- 
tional Development Company, and the Secretary of Agricul- 
ture and Commerce to establish and maintain warehouses for tobaoco 
and other marketable products. Ibjjl. , pp. 763-764. 
" Oct. 27 No. 96 - An Act to amend the Revised Administrative Code so as 

to authorize provinces with toll roads or bridges financed 
from loans or bond issues, to obtain loan, without interest and 
for public works only, in an amount equivalent to collections in 
excess of that required for the payment- of annual interest and' 
sinking fund charges on said loans or bonds and for the repair and 



- 598. 



Ill - 23 



and maintenance of such roads or bridges. 2j2iiU> pp. 765-767. 
1936 Oct. 27 ^o. 97 - An -ict to regulate the commercial use of airplanes ope- 
rated by aviation schools and by companies holding a . 
franchise. I_bjj.£L. » p. 767. 
" ■ Oct. 27 No. 98 - .in Act to authorize the President of the Philippines to 

effect urgent reforms and changes in radio broadcasting; ' 
to nationalize or acquire tha same, and to cr6ate a radio board. 
UU» PP. 768-769. 

■Oct. 27 No. 99 - An Act to amend article 80. of Act No. 3815* ' entitled 'tAn '• 
Act revising the -Penal Code end. othor penal laws," as» amend- 
ed by .tot "No. 4117, pp. 770-772. 
" Oct. 28 N 0 « 100 - aa Act to further anond section 1838 of -tot No. 2711, 

known as the Revised Administrative Code, as amended by 
Act No. 3820. TbJA., pp. 773-774. 
" Oct. 28 No. 101 - An tot to amend setion 207 of Act No. 2711 known as the 

Administrative Code, as amended by Act No. 4057 and .tot 
No. 4179. Mm PP. 775-776.' 
" Oct. 29 No. 102 - An Act to remit arrears in the cedula tax and penalties, 

provided the tax for the year 1937 is paid before the 
first of May of that year. IJ&d.. - p. 777. - 
Oct. 29 No. 103 - 'An tot to afford protection of labor by creating a oourt 

of industrial rolatior.3 empowered to fix minimum wages, 
for laborers and maximum rentals to be paid by tenants and to en- 1 
force compulsory arbitration becwuen employers or landlords, and 
employees or tenants, respectively; and by prescribing penalties 
for the violation of its order, , J-JsosL., pp. 778-789. 
11 Oct! 29 No. 104 - An Act authorizing the Secretary of Labor to promulgate 

and enforce rules, regulations, and orders for the safety 
of persons employed in mines, quarries, metallurgical operations 
and other enterprises. .^bJLsL. , pp. 790-792. 
" Oct. 29 No. 105 - An- Act appropriating the sum of 175,000 for the subdivi-' 

sion of all the portions of the friar lands estates re- 
maining undisposed of. jEJzJJU , p. 793. 
" Oct. 29 No. 106 - An Act to amend section 1536 of tot No. 271.1, as amend- 
ed, relating to the inheritance tax. ^bj^. , pp. 794- 

799. 

" Oct. 29 No. 107 - to Act to amend Act No. 3997 by transferring the duty 

• to collect the radio registration fees provided for in 
said Act, and extending the application of all special and gene- 
ral administrative provisions of law relative to assessment, re- 
mission, collection and refund of internal-revenue taxes to the 
collection of said fees. ^bjuL. , pp. 800-801. 



III- 24 

- 599- 

1936 Oct. 30 No. 108 - An Act to punish acta of evasion of the laws on tho na- 
tionalization of certain rights, franchises or priveleges. 
1WU, pp. 802-803. 

" Oct. 30 No. 109 - An -In Act to attend sections 2, 4, and 5 of Commonwealth 

Act No. 7, entitled "An Act to oroate a national loan 
and investment board, defining its powers, and for other purposes." 
IMA*., pp. 804-806. 

" Oct. 30 No. 110 - .'ict appropriating the sum of P100,000 for the purpose 

of -carrying out tho campaign for the extermination . or 
control of locust3, to.be expended in the manner and purposes spe- 
cified in Act No. 3924, and for the control of budrot and other co- 
oonut pests. IbjLA., p, 007. 
" Oct. 31 No. Ill - An Act to create a public corporation to be known as 

the Boy Scouts of tho Philippines, and to define its po- 
wers and purposes.. IJaiA., pp. 808-811. 
" Oct* 31 No. 112 - An Act authorizing tho investment of the Postal Savings 

Bank Fund, tho Teachers' Retirement and Disability Fund, 
and the 3an Lazaro Estate Fund under the jurisdiction and control 
of the National Loan and Investment Board in advances to the Nation- 
al Government for the construction of toll bridges, providing for 
their payment, and appropriating the necessary funds to cover any 
deficiency in the payment of such advances. IbjUU, pp. 812-813, 
Nov. 1 No. 113 «■ An Act to nroond section 2 of Act No. 3292, as smonded by 

section 1 of Act No. 4176, by requiring that tho entries 
in journals and ledgers kept in a language oih.r- thrai a native lan- 
guage, Jnglioh- or up-nish ahnll o,y translated into a native language, 
by the bookkeeper or manager who shall certify under -oath as to 
. the correctness of said translation, IbJUi.. , pp. 814-815. 
" Nov. 3 No. 114 - .An Act to amend the a arriago Law, so as t.o grant fad- • 

lities for securing marriage licenses* among other pur- 
pose. IbJ v 4., pp. 816-819. 
Nov. 3 No. 115 - An Act to araond sections 67, 69, and 70 of Aot No.- 4003, 

otherwise known as the Fisheries .'let. £hi£. , pp. 820- 
821. . , 

" Nov. 3 No. 116 - An Act to make the Rico and Corn Fund created by Aot 

No. 2818, as amended, available for loans not only to 
agricultural credit cooperative associations, organized under Act 
No. 3425, 6s amended, to make the fund a revolving, fund, to autho- 
rize the National Loan and Investment Beard to issue rules and re- 
gulations, and to provide exemption from court fees and legal 
charges and the manner of publishing notices of sale. IbJjU, pp. 
822-824. . 
Nov. 3 No. 117 - An Act to amend sections 1, 3, 7, 8, 10, 17, and 21 of 



- 600 ~ 



III - 25 



.let No. 2833, as amended by ..eta No. 2926, 3026, 3605, 
and 3761, regarding income tax. Ibid,., pp. 825-833. 
1936. Nov. 3 Ho. 118 - ..In Act creating a spocial fund known as Philippine Live- 
stock Promotion Fund for tho development of the Philip- 
pine livestock industry through the introduction, propagation and 
distribution -of pure-brod and improved breeding stations. 
pp. 834-835. 

Nov. 3 No. 119 - An Act to appropriate P250,000 for the reforestation and 

afforestation of vmtersheds, denuded areas and cogon or 
open lands within forest reserves, communal forests, national parks 
and timberlahds, sand dunes, and other public forest lands in. the 
Philippines. JJriLd., pp. 836-837. 
Nov. 3 No. 120 - .In Act creating tho National Power Corporatidn, prescribing 

its powers and activities, appropriating the necessary 
funds therefor, and reserving tho unappropriated public waters for 
its use. , pp. 838-845. 

" Nov. 3 w o. 121 - An Act to appropriate funds for the purchase of primary 

textbooks for ttheliureau of Education. IbJLd... p. 846. 
" Nov. 3 No. 122 - An Act to amend section 1495 of Act No. 2711, known as 

tho Administrative Code, as amended by Acts No. 3248, 
3274, 3526, and 4058, levying a specific tax on motor spirits- and 
alloting the proceeds for the maintenance, improvement and construct- 
ion of highways. J_bj v d., pp. 847-849. 
Nov. 3 No. 123 - -'Ji Act to amend section 8, article 2, ohapter 2, and 

section 73, article 2, chapter 4 of Act No. 3992, known 
as tho hevisod Motor Vehicle .uav. pp. 850-853. 

" Nov. 3 No. 124 - An Act to amend section 487 of Act Ho. 2711, known as 

the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, Jbj.sU t P» 

854. 

H Nov. 5 No. 125 - An Act to create a revolving fund of P2, 000, 000 for the 

' construction of waterworks in the Philippines; Ifr Ad. t 
pp. 855-860. 

H Nov. 5 No'. 126 - An Act to appropriate the 3um of I>3,270 out of any funds 

in tho Philippine treasury not otherwise appropriated, 
for the purchase of equipment, supplies, and the conversion into 
a 30cond-class weather station of the present weather station in ' 
Borongan, Samar. IJ&d., , p. 861. 
Nov. 5 No. 127 - An Act to provide an emergency fund for elementary class- 
es and to rogulato the expenditure thereof, ibid.*., p. 

862. 

11 Nov. 5 N 0 . 128 - An Act to impose a percentage tax on tho gross receipts 

of theaters, cinematographs, concert Ralls, oircuses, 
cabarets, race tracks, and other places of amusement* liii., pp. . 



^13 - , . 

Ill - 26 

-601 - 

863-864. 

1936 Nov. 5 No. 129 - An Act to amend certain sections of Commonwealth Act N 0 , 

58, entitled "An Act creating the City of Cebu." 
pp. 865-872. •■ 

Nov. 6 No. 130 - An Act to amend section 1 of Act No. 3592 known as the 

Port Works Fund Act, and to provide for the disbursement 
of said fund so as to include the cost of the investigation, cons- 
truction, improvement and maintenance of buoys, lighthouses, and 
other aids to marine navigation, and for airports and landing fields 
of the Commonwealth Government, including the purchase and mainte- 
nance of the nccossary equipment for those purposes. PP. 
873-874. 

Nov. 6 No. 131 - An Act to consider students while on trainee instruction 

or regular active duty training, in regular attendance 
in their schools or colleges, entitling them to special examination ' 
in the year or course in which they were called for trainee instruct- 
ion and active duty training, and to promotion to the next higher 
year course upon passing such examination. p. 875. 

Nov. 6 No. 132 - An Act to amend Act No. 3636 prescribing. the form for 

bills on electric lightf and power franchises,' so as to 
conform to the Constitution, and to require, previous to the grant- 
ing of a franchise, the filing petition to that effect together 
with one or more certificates of/ public necessity and convenience, 
pp. 876-878. 

Nov. 6 ■ No. 133 - An Act to amend Act No, 2508, as amended. JJ^.', p *. 879. 
Nov. 7 No. 134 - An Act appropriating the sum of P50,000 for the control 

and eradication of foot-and-mouth disease and other con- 
tagious animal diseases at present threatening the livesto ok indus- 
try of the country. Il&d.., p. 890. . 
Nov. 7 No. 135 - /in ^t amending section 1487 of Act No. 2711, known as 

the Administrative Code, as amended, for the purpose of 
revising the specific tax of fermented liquors provided therein, 
p. 891. 

I W0V * 7 Np * 136 - ^ ;ict creating the Bureau of Mines. JJtfj*., pp. 892-896. 
Nov. 7 No. 137 - An Act to provide for the conservation, disposition, and 

development of mineral lands and minerals. J_bJ^. , pp.. 897-9<=; 
Nov. 7 No. 138 - An Act to give native products and domestio ontities the 

preference in the purchase of articles for. the Government. 
1^. pp. 958-960. 
Nov. 7 No. 139 - An Act to amend Act No. 4240 entitled ".'in ./lot to revise, 

amend, and consolidate all laws governing horse races, 
limit the same to certain special datos, prohibit any person or 
body of persons other than that conducting a horse race from main- 



i'-lA 



- 602_ 



ni - 27 



taining or using a totalizer or system of betting or gambling on 
suoh race, provide penalties for the vidlation hereof, and for 
other purposes. , pp. 963-964. 

1936 Nov. 7 No, 140 - An .Act to amend section 4 of Act No. 4121, so as to plac<j 

the administration of existing Philippine Immigration 
laws under tho jurisdiction and executive supervision of the Depart- 
ment of Labor. JJaA. , pp. 961-962. " 
" Nov. 7 No. 141 - /m Act to amend and compile tho laws relative -to lands 

of .the public domain. Ibjyi. , pp. 965-1009. 
" Nov. 7 No. 142 - ,m .act to regulate the use of aliases. Ibj^d. , p. 1010. 
" Nov. 7 No. 143 -' An Act to Amend Act No. 2711, commonly known as tho Admi- 
nistrative Oodo of 1917, by inserting section 2561 (a) 
between sections 2561 and 2562 thereof. p. loll. 

" Nov. 7 No. 144 - /in Act to amend sections 1624, 1679, 1680, 1686, and 2465, 

of the Administrative Code, as amended. Jjjii. , pp» 1012- 

1018. 

" Nov. 7 No.' 145 - An Act to amend certain sections of artiolos 3, 4, 5, 

and 6 of chapter 9 of the Revised Administrative Code, 
as amended, so as to reorganize the courts of first instance. IbjLsU , 
pp. 1019-1027. 

11 Nov. 7 No* 146 - An Act to reorganize the Public Servioe Commission, pres- 
cribe its powers and duties, define and regulate publio 
servioes, provide and fix the rates and quota of expenses to be 
paid by the same, and for other purposes. JJsLA.» pp. 1028-1057. , 
NoV. 7 No. 147 - An Act to stabilize f prices of buntal fiber's, by direct- 
ing and authorizing ti i National Development Company to 
fix the minimum unit price thereof, and to appropriate the sum of 
^500,000 for the purchase by tho National Development Company of the 
fiber in excess of domestic demands. IbJ„d.. , p. 1058. 
n Nov. 8 No. 148 - An Act to amend section 4 of Act No. 1285 so as to with- 

draw, from agents of the Society for the Prevention of 
oruelty to iinimals of the Philippines tho power and authority to 
make arrests for vi^i ntlons of tho law against cruolty to ani- 
mals and for the protection oi animals and to abolish the privilege' 
granted the said society to charo in tho amount of the fines col- 
lected for such violations. Ibid.., p. 1059. 
" Nov. 8 N 0 . 149 - An Act to appropriate the sum of 5*1, 100,000, of whioh ' 

sum the amount ■» s appropriated for the pur- 

chase of the Ayiu*.. ^uj.^xioo jJtu.jLoa.nti, uuu - _aa>,\juO as contribution 
from the National GovornraenVto ihu City of Manila for the oona- 
truction of an adequate city hall, and to abolish the contribution 
to tho government of said city as provided in section 2442 of the 
Revised Administrative Code. Ibj^., pp. 1060-1061. 



- 603 - 



III - 28 



1936 Nov. 8 No. 150 - An Act to pro' 13 for the payment of longevity pay to 

commissioned officers of the Army of the 'United States 
joining the Army of the Philippines and to include servioe in the 
-tany of the United States and/or in the United States Military or 
Naval Academy in determining the pay and rights of retirement of 
commissioned officers in the Amy of the Philippines. pp. 
1062-1063. 

Nov. 8 No 151 - am Act appropriating the sum of P47,OQO for the construct- 
ion and repair 0 f certain dams inside the friar lands es- 
tates, p. 1064. 
Nov. 9 No. 152 - An Act to declare the second Sunday of January of every 

year "Unknown Citizens' Bay' 1 ' in honor of all unknown-pat- 
riotic Filipino citizen? , p. 1065. 
" Nov. 9 No. 153 - An Act to impose punishment upon any public official who 

shall, without the consent of the National Assembly, ac- 
cept any present, emolument, office or title from a foreign state, 
excepting honors or titles of a religious, academic or scientific 
nature. Ibid., p. 1066. 
Nov. 9 No. 154 - Arx Act to amend section 2 of Act No. 4240, entitled "An 

Act to revise, amend, and to consolidate all laws govern- 
ing horse races, limit the same t, certain special dates, prohibit 
any person or body of persons oth ,r than that conducting a horse 
race from maintaining or using a totalizer or system of betting or 
gambling on such race, provide penalties for the violation hereof, 
and for other purposes." IbJ^., P . 1067. . 
Nov. 9 No. 155 - An Act to amend Act A , 4142, so as to grant chartered' 

cities, municipalities, and municipal districts, unree- 
trained power to fix reasonable slaughter foes to be charged, on ''■ 
animals slaughtered in public slaughterhouses. Said., p. 1068.' 
Nov. 9 No. 156 - An Act authorizing the Philippine .Inti-Tuberculosis So-' 

ciety to hold horse races, with betting, for charitable 
and civic purposes and to promote horse breeding in these islands. 
IfcM., pp. 1069-1070. * 
Nov. 9 -No. 157 - An Act amending artr.de 315, paragraph 2 of the Revised 

Penal Code. Ibjy,., p. 1071. 
Nov. 9 No. 158 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 57, entitled "An 

Act establishing a form of government for the City of. 
Iloilo." XbM., pp. 1072-1123. 
Nov. 9 No. 159 - An Act to authorize the participation of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines in the International Exposition 
to be held at Paris, during the year 1937. IbJUU, pp. 1124-1125. 
Nov. 9 No. 160 - An Act to authorize the participation of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines in the International Exposi- 



- «*-" ni-29 

( . tion to be held at Nagoya, Japan, during the year 1937. 

pp. 1126-1127. " 

1936- Nov. 9 No. 161 - An Act to provide for the establishment of three leper 

colonies in Luzon and to appropriate the Bum of P500, 
000 for the purpose. Ibid., p. U28. 
Nov. 9 No. 162 - An Act amending section 499 of act No. 2711, otherwise 

known as the Revised Administrative Code, regarding the 
right of military authorities to reject intruders from military 
reservations. Ifeil. , p, 1129. 
Nov. 9 No. 163 - An Act to amend section 947 of the Revised "'dministrativ,. 

Code.reluti.vo to the authority of thu President of tho 
Philippines to invest the Director of Health with special powers 
in certain cases. £bjji., pp. 1130-1131. 
Nov. 9 No, 164 - .»n Act reverting to the unappropriated general fund in 

the Philippine treasury all amounts collected by the Bo- 
hol and Cagayan Filipino colonies established under Act No.. 2254. 
DtiJL., p. 1132. 

Nov. 9 No. 165 - An Act limiting the rate of salary or wage which an .-em- 
ployee or laborer of the government marine railway and • 
repair shops employed under Act No. 4111 may receive. JJbid., .'■ 
P. 1133. ' 
Nov. 12 No. 166 - An Act appropriating funds for the survey and subdivi- 
sion of all public agricultural lands lying parallel to, 
and extending within three kiloiroters from, both 'sides of any A - 
lie highway. Ibjy.., p. 1134. . vQ>^ 

Nov. 12 No. 167 - An Act to amend secti. . .1 2 of Act No. ^582, entitled "An 

Act to create a board of censorship for moving pictures 
and define its functions," in order to authorize said Board. to ap- 
point such representatives or agents as may be necessary to carry 
out the provisions of said Act , Ibid.. , pp. 1135-1136. 
N^v. 12 No. 168 - An Act providing for the promotion and development of 

civil aviation in the Philippines, creating the Bureau 
of aeronautics, and defining it3 powers, duties, and" function,. 
£h&., pp. 1137-1145. * 
Nov. 12 No. 169 - An let appropriating -the sum of ?50,000 to be expended 

under th« dirwotion of th« President of the Philippines 
for the purpose of identifying and appropriately marking the 
historic antiquities in the Philippines ■, or preserving, or ac- 
quiring the same. Ibjjl. , pp. 1146-1147. 
Nov. 12,. No. 170 - Census Act of 1936. I&U. , pp. 1148-1164. 
Nov. 12 No. 171 - An : Act adopting the Spanish colonial type of architectur 

on all buildings to be constructed, altered, or repair 8 in 
the District of Intfamuros, City of Manila. Dji&., p. li65. 



-«5- 111 " 50 

1936 Nov. 12 No. 172 - An Act authorizing public defenders of the Department 

of Labor and any agent of the Bureau of Labor thereunto 
especially deputed by the Secretary of Labor, the Under-Secretary 
or Director of Labor, to administer oaths, issue subpoenas and 
take testimony. Ibj^., p. 1166. 
Nov,- 12 No. 173 - An Act to appropriate funds for additional equipment for 

the Bureau of Printing to print textbooks prepared and 
furnished by the Bureau of Education or manuscripts acquired by 
tho Govjrnriont. I_ v ".d A ,.p. 1167. 
" Nov. 12 No. 174 _ .An .lot to amend paragraph 6 of subsection 2 of section 1 

of Acts No. 1510, 2836, and 3399, to authorize the Mani- 
la Railroad Company of the Philippine Islands to oonstruct; toll 
viaducts, toll bridges, and toll tunnels. Ibid,., pp. II68-II69. 
Nov. 13 No. 175 - An Act to amend section 1151 of Act No. 2711, known as th 

Administrative Code, as amended by Aot No. 3106, by add- 
ing Jose Panganiban (formerly Mambulao) and Aparri as ports of 
entry, and providing necessary funds therefor. pp. 1170- 

1172. 

Nov. 13 No. 176 - An Act to amend section 31 of Act. No. 2152 as amended V 

section 12 of Act No. 3^23. Jbi£., pp. 1173-1174. 
Nov. 13 0. 177 - An Act amending and repealing some of the provisional 

chapter 27 of Act No. 2711, commonly known as the Admi- 
. nistrative Code, of 1917, and providing funds to defray the r-?"- 
sary expenses due to the extension of the Civil Service Law to 

t 

all branches and subdivisions o :' the Government. Ihfafri, pp. 1175- 
1104. , 
Nov. 13 No. 178 - An Act amending sections 7, 15, 23, and 29 of Act No. 

4054, entitled "An Act to promote tho well-being of te- . 
nants (aparoeros) in agricultural lands devoted to the, product- 
ion of rice and to regulate the relations between them and the 
landlords of said lands, and for other purposes." Thj&,, pp. 
1185-1186. v 
Nov. 13 No. 179 - An Act ore. 4 - 4 - of investigation under the 

Commission of Civil S G rvice for the purpose of carry- 
ing into effect the provisions of Executive Order No. 39 of tfie 
President of the Philippines, and appropriating funds for the ./ 
necessary expenses thereof. JJ&sL. , pp. 1187-1188. 
Nov. 13 No. 180 - .An Act to amend sections 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 12 of 

Act No. 2706, as amended by Act No. 3075} to repeal • 
section 17 of Aot No. 4007, known as "The reorganization Law of 
1932"; 'and to establish the Offioe of Private Education to be ^ 
hoaded by the Director of Private ^ducat-Ion. I bftfl . f p|o. 1189- 
1193. • 



. ' ■ III 4 31 

- 606 - 

> . ■ . 

^1936 Nov, 13 No. 181 - * Actuating a division of investigation Under the- 

Department of Justice, defining its powers and duties, 
and appropriating the necessary funds therefor. Ib^. , pp# 1194 . ' 
1195 • 

» Nov, 13 No. 182 - An Act to create a public corporation to be known 

the National Development Company, to define its powers 
and duties, to appropriate the necessary funds therefor, repeal- 
m . ine therob y *>ts No. 2849 and 2873. flAH. , pp. 11 9 6-1200. 

Nov. 13 No. 183 -.An ..let appropriating tho sum of P25.00O a& aid to tie 

Philippine Amateur ithletio Federation for the promotion 
of athletics and/or athletic competition in the schools and other • 
civic institutions of the Philippines. IbjLd.. , P . 1201. 
Nov. 13 ITo. 184 - An Act to establish a National Language Institute and. " 
b define its powers and duties. II^. , pp . 1202-1205. * 

. Nov. 13 No. 185 - An Act to .amend sections 1, 2, and 3 of Commonwealth 
.Art No. 94, entitled "An Act to coordinate the inform- 
ation 'and publicity agencies .of the Government and to provide 
funds therefor," and to insert a new section after section 3 of' 
^ said let, to be known as section 3(a). JC^U., pp . 1206-1207. ' 

Nov. 14 No. 186 - to Act to create and establish a government service in-' ' 

surance system, to provide for its administration, and 
it u „ *° the funds therefor. IMA.,, pp. 1208-1221. 

Nov. 14 No. 187 - An tot to provide for the liquidation of the T eaoh ers' ' 
- ^ Retirement and Disability Fund, established by Act No. 

3050, as amended, for the disposition of the prooeefflT^jereof, 
and the payment of a reduced pension in lieu of the pension therein ' 
provided. iMdy, pp. 1222-1228. 
Nov. 14 No. 188 - ,,i„ Act to provide for the liquidation of tho Pension' 

and Retirement Fund of the Philippine Constabulary • 
created by Act No. 1638, as amended, and the payment of reduced 
pensions to certain beneficiaries thereof, and to appropriate-'^ 
the necessary funds therefor. pp. 1229-1232. 

" Nov." 14 No. 189 - An Act to provi.de for the liquidation of the Health 

Pension and Retirement Fund created by Ao.t No. 3173, ' 
as amended, and the payment of reduced pensions to indigent beni- 
. ficiaries thereof, and to appropriate the necessary funds there- 

for. Ibid..,, pp. 1233-1237." . , 

Nov. 14 No. 190 - An Act to establish a retirement system for the Phil- 

ippine Army an^ to appropriate funds therefor. Ifcii.* 
pp. 1238-1240. ' 

Nov. 14 No. 191 - An Act authorizing the President of tie Philippines 

to negotiate with the President of the United States for 
an economic- trade conference, and providing funds therefor. Ibid. r p. 



1241. 

1936 Nov. 14" No. 192 - An Act to create a public corporation to be known as 

the national Produce Exchange, authorizing the same to 
establish produce exchanges for agricultural products, and to 
appropriate the necessary funds therefor. Ibid,, pp . 1242-1246. 
'» Nov. 14 No. 193 - An Act appropriating additional 'funds ta defray travel- 
ing expenses to homeseekers. Ib£_d., p. 1247. 
Nov, 18 No. 194 - An let to provide for the decision of ties in elections 

for members of the National Assembly. IbJU. , p, 1248. 
Nov. 18 No. 1P5 . , n ^ t0 ^ stictim w of vt N ^ ^ othMwlfle 

known as the Revised /administrative Code, and section 
3 of Act Ho. 3097. IMA., pp. 1249-1250. 
Nov. 18 No. 196 - An Act amending section 1172 of Act N 0 . 2711, known as 

the Administrative Code of 1 9 17, as amended by Acts No. 
• 2912 and 3084. JMA. , p. 1251. 

" Nov. 18 No. 197 _ An Act to amend fh, « 4. 

amend the first paragraph of section 442 of 

Code , U4 20 ° 2 ' " ™ <ma "* > ° f the Kort ^ '"Mnl.trativ, 

lode. XMA., pp. i254. 1255i 

m.v,,, f '■ nd nU " d0ll ' el ° moi » ls ^e year l93 s, ^ 

Provide for the cont ln » woo ln offioe of ^ ^ ^ 

Nov. 18 No. ^ - ^.^^ aiok leaya ^ w t(> ^ ^ w 

Survey. IJjjji., p. l 2 r;Y. 
Nov. 18 No. 201 - An Act amending sections 2, 3, and 4 and repealing 

section 2 of Act No. 25 80, entitled "An Act providing 
for the publication and recording in the Bureau of Posts the 
nana, and post-office addresses of editors, publishers, managers, 
owners, and stockholders of newspaper publications, and for other 
purposes. Ibj&., PP . 1258-1259. 
N 0V . 18 . No , _ , m ^ mondine ^ M2 ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

3815 known as the. Revised Penal Code of the Philippine 
Islands. Ibjji., pp. 1260-1262. 
Nov. 18 No. 203 -An Act to amend paragraph (m) of section 1464 of the 

Revised Administrative Code, by increasing the fixed 
tax on retail leaf-tobacco dealers from ?20 to P 3 0 per annua, ibid." 
p. 1263. ' 

Nov. 18 No. 204 - An Act to amend section 4 of Commonwealth Act No. 67 so 



'.V50 . 

. . - 606 . ' 111 - 35 

as to authorize the -immediate release of the sums of 

money appropriated as to items ? A r in ^ic ,. 

/ . a.i;ems <i, 4, 5, 10, and 15, subsection E, 

W of the said Act, for the maintenance, repair, improvement and 
extension of river control works on the Pampanga River, in Pam- 
panga.. Agno, in Pangasinan; O'Donnel, in Tarlac; Angat, in Bulacan; 
and Pampanga, in *W a iScija. IbjU., p. 1264. 
19,6 Nov. 20 *. 205 - An Act to amend section 2 of Act Ho. 3070, extendingdts 

provisions so as to prevent the wso of registered contain 
ers when the owner has reserved the ownership, and requires a deoo- 
sit for the roturn thereof. IMA., p. 1265. 
Nov, 20 N 0 . 206 - An Act to amend section 6 of .Act No. 4051, known as the 

Retirement Gratuity Act, as amended by .let "0. 4258. 
• JMA., pp. 1226-1267. 
Nov. 20 No. 207 - An.Aot to amend sections 2727 and 2728 of the Administra- 
tive Code, by imposing a penalty on 'any person found in 
possession of articles subject to specific tax, the tax on which 
has not been paid; by providing for an increased penalty for sub- 
^ sequent unlawful removal of such . articles. Ibid,,pp. 1268-1269. 

Nov. 20 No. 208 - An Act amending sections 7 and 34 of Commonwealth Act 

No. 39. IbJL4., pp. 1270-1271. 
Nov. 20 No. 209 - An Act amending sections 7 and 34 of Commonwealth Act " 

No. 51. pp. 1272-1273. 

Nov. 20 No. 210 - An Act to amend further sections 3, 8, 13, i 4 , l6 , Z% 

24, 25, and 39 of Act No. 3428, commonly known as the 
Workmen's Compensation Act, as amended by Act No. 3812* • 
pp. 1274-1281. 

Nov. 21 No. 211 - An Act to fix a minirmm daily wage for laborers employed ' 

in public works, and providing penalties for the viola-' 
tion hereof. IbjJ.., pp. 1282-1283. 
Nov. 21 No*. 212 - An Act to further amend section 1 of Act Ho. 3300 as 

amended. Ibid.., p. 1284. 
Nov. 21 No. 213 An Act to define and^egulnte legitimate labor org*. 

nizations. Ibid.., pp „ 1285-1286. . ; 

Nov. 21 No. 214 -. An Act appropriating funds for the establishment of 

the extensJg^o^og^ll^a^gg 1 ^^ 2^&ffl*feff5P«> 
in all post offices without such facilities. IfcUL., PP. 1287- 
1288. .* 

Nov. 21 No. 215 - An Act to amend sections 1457, 1459, 1464,. 1466, and 

1473 of Act No. 2711, commonly known as the Revised r, 
Administrative Code. XtiXA' , pp. 1289-1291. 
Nov. 24 No. 216 - An Act to provide for the issuance of bonds of the Gov- 
ernment of the 'Commonwealth of the Philippines in the 
amount of P1,000,000, to create a, revolving fund for publio mar- 
kets out of the proceeds of the sale of such bonds, and for other 



pwpoeds. XUA., pp. 1292-1295.. 

6 ?OV '" 24 No ' 217 " M Act t0 *»aad articloa 61, 70 and 71" of the Revised 

Penal Code. pp. 1296-1299. 

•Nov. 29 No. 218> An Act to grant an. extension of 30 days to the Taya- 

bas Light and Power Company, Incorporated, to comply 
with the requirements of Act Ho. 3649 granting the said company 
a franchise for electric light, heat, and power, in Tayabas, prov- 
ince of Tayabas .Ibid., p. 1300. 
Nov. 29 No. 219 - An Act to extend to all associations of whatever class 

or form the restrictions, limitations, .and prohibitions 
of existing laws upon corporations . , p k 1301. 

Nov. 29 No. 220 - An Act to amend chapter 13 (Leave Law) of Act Ho. .2711, 

as amended, abolishing the additional leave of the jus- 
tices of the Supreme Court, the extended leave of the judges of 
the Court of Appeals and Court of First Instance and teachers, 
and the accrued leave of other officers and employees? increasing 
the vacation leave and creating the sick leave. ■ J&ft. , pp . 1302- 
1307. 

Nov. 29 No. 221.- An" Act to amend sections 3 and 21 of Act N 0 . 4271, en- 
titled "An Act granting a franchise to Philippine Aerial 
Taxi Company, Incorporated, to operate an air transport service * 

in the Philippines, and for other purposes." Ibii., pp. 1308-' 
1309. 

Nov.- 29 No. 222 - An Act to amend sections 3 and 21 of Act No. 4272, en- 
• titled "An Act granting a franchise to Uoilo-Negros . 
Air Express Company, Incorporated, to operate an air transport ... 
service in the Philippines and for other purposes." JhA&., pp.. 
1310-1311. 

Nov. 29 No. 223 - An Act providing for the award of air mailcontract 

and appropriating the necessary funds therefor. XbM., pp 

1312-1313. 

Nov. 29 No. 224 - An Act to amend section 2562 and to insert four new' 

sections between section 2562 and 2563 of Act No. 
2711, known as the Revised Administrative Code, pp. 
1314-1316. 

Nov. 30 No. 225 - An Act remitting the bond of i'4867.99 furnished by the 

Luzon Surety Compraiy, Incorporated, in behalf of Bu- 
genio Uy Tuising in the case of People versus EugaitLo Uy Tuising. 
IkUi., pp. 1317-1318. 
Nov. 30 No. 226 - An Act to amend section 2199 of Act No. 2711, as a- 

memded by -Act No. 3115. p. 1319. •' 

Nov. 30 H 0 . 227 - An Act to authorize the holding of charity, lotteries 

create a public corporation to attend to it, and de- . 



Ill - 35 

- 630. 

fine its powers. Ibid., pp. 1320-1323. ' 
1936 Nov. 30 . No. 228.- . ta *t to authorize the Director of the National" lib- 
rary to i negotiate and consummate the purchase of Prof- 
essor Craig's copyright in the book "Rizal's Own Story of His 
Life" together with his present collection of Philippine mate- 
rials and his unpublished writings and studies about the Phil- 
ippines, and to appropriate funds for the purpose. IfcU,, P* 
1324. • _ 

. " Nov. 30 No. 229 - .'m Act authorizing the transfer of any amount from one" 

t 

• munici P al fun & to another, whenever the public inter-. '" 
ests so. require. IJiicU, p , 1325. •' ■' 

Nov. 30 230 - An Act authorizing ..the transfer of '.any amount from one 

provincial fund to another whenever the public interests 
so require. £bid. , p. 1326, , 

1937 Her. 9 No. 231 - An Act to amend paragraph 269 of ' section 8 of the let, 

entitled "An Act to raise revenues for the Philippine 
Islands, and for other purposes," spproved by the Congress. of . the 
United States on August 5, 1909, as amended. IMA.., p. 1327. 
Mar. 9 No. 232 - An Act amending further section 14 of the Philippine 

Tariff Act of 1909, as amended, so as to exempt natural 
rock asphalt from the payment of wharfage charges. IbJUL., p. 132* 
S Q pt.l5 No. 233- An Act to provide for the holding of elections of pro- 
vincial, city, and municipal officers amond for said pur- 
pose certain sections of the Administrative Code on elections 
and kindred matters. ifcuusaiUjSWSflfiWlf v ol. 3, Part II/ JBVPP, pp . 
3-29. ' • 

Sept. 15 No. 234 - An Act appropriating the sum of PI, 200,000 as aid for 

the establishment and maintenance of new olomentary u 
classes. Il&d.., p. 30. • •. : 

Sept. 16 No. 235 - An Act to amend article 195 of the Revised Penal Code. ' ■■ 

IMA., pp. 31-32. 

. Sept. 16 No. 236 - /in Act authorizing the President of the Philippines to 

designate any department, bureau, office or instrumentar 
lity of the National Government, or to create a new/o^fice'or 
agency for the purpose of making allotments of any quota estab- 
lished for the Philippines pursuant to the provisions of the 
United States Sugar Act of 1937, on tho basis specified in sec- 
tion 6 (d) of Public Law Wo. 127, approved March 24, 1934, and 
of enforcing Act No. 4166, as amended by Commonwealth Ao't No. 
77, and providing the necessary funds therefor. Ib.i&. , PP» .33-34. 
Sept. 23 No. 237 - An Act to provide for the restoration and payment of • 

all annuiti.es due to persons retired under and pursuant' 
to the terms and provisions ©f "Acts Ho. 3050, 3173 and article 



- 611- 



III - 36 



3 of ohapter 35 of the Administrative Code, each aa amended in 
effect prior to November 1, 1936. IbJJi., pp. 35-37. 
Nov. 15 No. 238 - .in Act providing for the abolition of the cedula tax. 

IkU., p. 38. 

Nov. 29 No. 239 - In Act to appropriate the sum of F500,000 for the 

relief of communities and indigent sufferers from ty- 
phoons, floods, or other public calamities. pp. 39-40. 
Dec. 8 No. 240 - An Act appropriating the sum of f>5,050, 000 for olemen- 

tary school buildings. Ibj^., pp. 41-149. 
Dec. 9 No.. 241 - An Act to appropriate F5, 000,000 to be distributed by 

the Secretary of Finance among the province s./c^Srea 06 
cities, municipalities and municipal districts on the basis of 
the yearly average of their shares in .the procoods of the cedula 
tax collected during the yo.-s-s 1933, 1934, 1935, 1936, and 1937, 
to compensate the said branches of the government for the loss 
from their revenues on account of the abolition of. the oedula tax. 
J.bM., pp. 150-151. 
Dec. 9 No. 242 - An Act providing for an annual grant of PI, 000,000 

from the "."ational Government to the City of Manila. 
J&M., p. 152. 

Dec. 10 No. 243 - An Act to amend sections 1457 and 1459 of the Adminis- 
trative Code, as amended by Commonwealth .lot No. 215. 
JJiiA*, pp. 153-154. * 
Dec. 10 No. 244 - An Act setting the fourth Monday of January of each " 

yoar, as the day for the opening of the regular session 
of the National Assembly. JJji^ , p. 155. 
Dec. 17 No. 245 - .An Act appropriating funds for the operation of the 

Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines du- ' 
ring the fiscal year ending December 31, 1938. 3^., pp. 156- 
547. 

Dec. 17 No. 246 - * Act prescribing the form of the Budget and regulating 

the expenditure of authorized appropriations. Ibid., 
pp. 548-575. 

Dec. 17 No. 247 - ,in Act to make the provisions of section 2097 of the 

Administrative Code applicable to the provincial boards 
of \bra, Camarines Norte, Marinduquo, Maabato „nd Romblon, and ' 
repealing the second paragraph of the said section. Ibid.., p . 
576. 

Dec. 17 No. 248 - An Act extending to officers and employees retired ' 

under the provisions of Act N 0 . 2589 the privoleges 
granted by Commonwealth ..Act No. 206 to offioers and employees 
^ retired under .Act No. 4051. Ibjjl., p. 577. 

ec 17 No. 249 - An Act amending the Administrative Code so as to trans- 



fer to the Seoretary of the Interior the authority to 
approve changes in the names provided by municipal oounoila for 
streets, avenues, and other public places. Ibi&., p. 578. 
1937 I>eo. 17 No. 250 - Jin .Act amending sections 27 and 28, and the first pa- 
ragraph of section 29 of the Charter of the City of 
Zamboanga, so as to authorize the payment 3 0 f the taxes on real 
estate in the said city, placing the additional tax as penalty 
at two per centum for each full month of deliquency due, and to 
permit remission of such taxes. IbjLd.., pp. 579-582. 
'*. Dec. 17 No. 251 - An .let to amend section 1473. of the Administrative 

Co do, as amended by Commonwealth .Act No k 215. Ibid . f 
PP- 583-584. 

" Doc. 21 No. 252 - .to Act authorizing His Excellency, Manuel L. Quezon, 

President of the Philippines, to accept the decoration 
known as the "Order of the Brilliant Jade", conferred upon him 
by the National Government of the Republic of China. Ibii., p. 
585. . 

1938 Feb,. 26 No. 253 - An -Act emending further paragraph 64 of group 2, class 

IV, of section 8 of the Philippine Tariff .let of 1909, 
. as amended, so as to extend the froo entry of woods, barks, roots 
and similar natural products, for dyeing or tanning. IfciA., f^C^Pf- 
587. 

" Mar* 4 No. 254 - to Act to amend 3eotions 1 and 2 of Commonwealth Act. 

No. 103. 3u£zj)AJleJlsj^e_a, Vol, 4, Part II, JBVFP, pp. 
3-5. . V 

Mar. 9 No. 255 - .to Act providing for the abolition of road tax. Ibifl . f 

p. 6. 

Mar. 17 No. 256 - .to Act confirming the commitments of tho Commonwealth 

of tho Philippines under tho international agreement 
regarding the regulation of production and marketing of sugar 
and the protocol annexed thereto, both signed in London on May 
6, 1937, m&., pp. 7-41. 

Mar. 25 No. 257 - .to .Act authorizing the President of the Philippines to 

release and order tho expenditure of a sum not exceed- 
ing 40 per 'centum of the total amount recommended for appro- 
priation in the public works bill attached to the message of the 
President to the National Assembly dated February 1, 1938, to 
enable the Government to commence at once the execution of the 
projects listed in the said bill. IJb&L., pp. 42-43. 

Mar. 31 No. 258 - .to Act to grant the"llagan Slectrio and Ice Plant, Inc., 

an oxtension of thirty days to comply with certain 
conditions of the franchise!. Ihi£., p.. 44. . 

■Apr. 7 No. 259 - -to Aotto amend certain provisions of tho Administra- 



3-2$ 

III - 38 

- 613- 

■ to «, J 1 " 6 C °, d0 ' 03 amended ^ ° 0mm0nWOalth ** *>• 3, relating 
to he^Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals and to appropriate 

1938 „r 18 N L CSrry ^ PUrP ° SeS there ° f " »• «-»• 

1938 ,pr. 18 No. 260 - An , ct to mend seotion x Qf ^ fc> ^ 

and to appropriate an additional amount of P2,000,000 
or so much thereof as may be necessary, for the purpose of fully 
carrying out the provisions of said let. IbJU., p . 51 
4*. 21 No. 261 - An ., ct to ma& section ^ q{ ^ ^ 

P. 52. 

*r. 21 No. 262 - .In Act authorising Hajor-General Basilic J. Valdes and 

Captain Ciriaco Carillo, to accept such medals, . orders, 
or decorations as have been tendered them by foreign governments " 
in appreciation of services rendered. p . 53. 

Apr. 21 No. 263 - An Act authorizing Felipe Cuaderno, .Assistant Director 

of Posts, to accept the decoration conferred upon him 
by His Majesty, the King of Egypt. Ibj^. , p . 54. 
"• ^r. 22 No. 2*4 -An Act to amend articles 143,' 144, and 145 of the 

„ Re ^ sed ?en ^ °ode. IJad,, pp. 55-56. 

^ 20 *>. 265 - An Act t0 complete ^ teiegr . ph 

^ . Privileges to the Commission of the Census. p. 

Hay 20 No. 266 - An Acf appropriating the sum of Pi, 300,000 for the 

relief of communities end indigent persons who are suf- 
ferers from typhoons, floods, or other public calamities, and of 
the unemployed and other persons deserving of material aid. md. 
p. 58. **** K 

Jun. 2 No. 267 - An Act to amend section- 61 of Commonwealth Act No. 1, 

known as the National Defense Act. p . 59. 

Jun. 2 No. 268 - An Act to amend further section 1 of Act No. -3597 as 

amended. Ijtfjl. , p. 60. 
Jun. 2 No. 269 - An Act to amend section 1 9 66 of the .Administrative' 

t Code. Jttli., P. 61. 
Jun. 2 No. 270 - An Act to amend section 21 of the Admini strati vo Cods. 

p. 62. 

Jun. 2 No. 271 - An Act to amend Act No. 4113, entitled" "An Act to 

prescribe certain provisions concerning tenancy con- " 
tracts on land planted to sugar cane," so as to include farm ' 
laborers, commonly called "paki adores". p. 63. 

Jun. 2 No. 272 - 4b Act to amend sections 91 and 92 of Commonwealth Act 

No * 1 » known as National Defense Act, p. 6.4. 

un. 3 No. 273 - An .let to impose a more severe penalty for the crime 
of theft of large cattle. IbjLd.., p. 65. 
Jun. 3 No. 274 - An Act penalizing the sale og disposition of imported 

eggs the shells of which are not plainly marked "import- 



614 - 



III - 39 



ed" as herein provided. U&d.., p» 66. ^ 
1938 Jun. 3 No. 275 - -An Act to amend section 22. of Act No. 2152. 

pp. 67-68. .,''*. 

" Jun. 3 No. '276 - An Act to authorize the filing in the proper court, 

under certain conditions, of certain claims of title 
to parcels of land, by virtue of judicial decisions rondored 
within the 15 years next preceding the approval of this Act. 
UAd., pp. 69-70. 

" Jun, 3 No, 277 - An Act to consider the late Mariano Buyson Lampa of 

Pampanga, Judge of i^irst Instance, retired under Act 
. No. 2589, as amondod. JJojU, p. 71. 
" Jun. 3 No. 278 -An Act to amend section 1946 of the' Administrative 

Code. XiaifL., pp. 72-73. 
" Jun. 3 No. 279 - An Act to provide that preference in dispatching shall 

be given to cases involving conflicts between capital 
. and labor. Ibjl4., p. 74. ' , 

" Jun. 3 No, 280 - 7m Act penalizing the construction or maintenance of 

"cottas". JMA»t p. 75. 
" Jun. 3 No. 281 - An Act to further amend section. 682 of Act No. 2711, ' 

as amended by section 16 of Commonwealth Aot No. 177, 
so as to extend the temporary appointment of teachers until the 
end of the school semester. IbJ^. , pp. 76-77. 
" Jun. 3 No. 282 -^An Act to secure the United States against loss or da- 
mage to any military or naval stores, supplies, and e- 
quipment loaned to the Commonwelath of the Philippines. IMd.., 
P. 78. ' 

" Jun. 3 No. 283 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 83 known as- Secu- 
rities Act, by inserting section 21-a, and amending 
section 28 thereof. IbJ^. , pp. 79-81. 
" Jun« 3 No. 284 - An Act fixing tho minimum indemnity in all cases of 

civil liability for the death of a person at P2,000. 
IMA», P. 82. 

" Jun. 3 No. 285 - An Act abolishing the Manila Harbor Board, making the 

necessary provisions for the administrative adjustments 
resulting therefrom, and appropriating funds therefor, ibid.., 
P. 83. 

" Jun. 3 No. 286 - An Act authorizing the President of the Philippines 

to extend the present territorial limits of the City 
of Bnguio. Ibid. , p. 84. 
" Jun. 3 No. 287 - An Aot to transfer to tie Securities and Exchange Com-. 

mission the powers, duties and functions of the. Bureau 
of Commerce in connection with the registration of corporations 
and associations and to authorize the Securities and Bxohango 



Ill » 40 

- 6X5- 

Commission to enforce the provisions of all laws affecting such 
■ entities. IJ&sl., pp. 85-86. 
jun. 3 No. 288 - An Act to provide pension for veterans of Philippine 

revolutions or wars. IJtfA., pp; 87-88. 
Jun. 9 No. 289 - An Act providing a fixed unit of weight . in the trading 
■ at wholesale and retail of unfermented unstemmed loaf 
tobacco and prescribing penaltiea for violations thereof. JJ&L., 
p. 89. 

Jun. 9 No. 290 - An Act to amend section 5 of the Securities Act, so -as 
. to include certificates or titles issued to its mem- 
bers by charitable or mutual aid and benefit societies or asso- 
ciations in the class of exempt securities under the provisions 
of the said Act. rbjLd.. , p. 90. 
Jun. 9 - No, 291 - An Act to grant an extension of thirty days to the Oc- 

mis Electric Service Company to comply with the require- 
ments of law in connection with a franchise for electric light, 
• heat and power service, in Oroquieta, Occidental Hisamis. Ibid.., ' 
P. 91. 

Jun. 9 No. 292 - An Act amending sections 45 and 47 of Commonwealth 

lot No. 141, entitled "An let to amend and compile 
the law relative to lands of public domain." pp. 92-93. 

Jun. 9 No. 293 - An Act to amend section 1198 of the Administrative 

Code. Ibj^., pp. 94-95. 
Jun. 9 No. 294 - An Act to regulate th-; practice of mechanical engineer- 
ing in the Philippine, to provide for licensing the 
operating personnel in mochani sal plants and for other purposes. 
IbM. # pp. 96-118. 

* 

Jun. 9 No. 295 - An Act authorizing the City of D a vao to pay the sa- 
laries of Mayor Santiago Artiaga and City Treasurer 
Jose Elayda. Ibj&., p. 119. 
Jun. 9 No. 296 - An Act to provide for the transfer of the branoh of 

the College of Liboral Arts, University of the Phil- ' 
ippinos, in Vi ga n, to tho City of Baguio, Mountain Provinoe, 
and to provide funds to cover the expenses incident to such 
transfer. Uaid., p. 120. 
Jun. 9 Wo. 297 - An Act to amend section 70 of Act Ho. 4003, known 

as the "Fisheries Act", as ameridod by Commonwealth 
■ Act No. 115;, , PP. 12: "".22, 

Jun. 9 No. 298 - An Act to amend subsection (d) of section 2614 of 

the Administrative Codo._.Ibjji. , pp. 123-124. 
Jun. 9 No. 299 - An Act to amend section 220 of the Administrative Code, 

increasing the salaries of justices of the peace, and 
providing funds therefor. !]£&., pp. 125-126. 



B-28 , 

_616_ 111 -^1 

1938 Jun. 9 No. 300 - An Act appropriating fundg ^ ^ ^ 

ernment of the Commonwealth of the Philippine a during the 
fiscal year ending December 31, 1939. Ibid., pp. l27 -563. 
Jun. 9 No. 301 - 4n Act placing the Philippine Charity Sweepstake Office 
■ • • _ on an equal footing" with private corporations. Ibid., 

PP. 564-567. 

• Jun. 9 No. 302.- An Act gating the "Metropolitan Radio Corporation" a 

franchise to construct, maintain, and operate stations 
for the transmission and reception of wireless messages. flfcU, pp. 
pp. 568-573. 

- ^n. 9 -No. 303 - An Act providing for the' time of payment of salaries and 

wages of laborers and employees; prohibiting the forcing, 
compelling, or obliging of any employee or laborer to purchase mer- 
chandise, commodities, or any other personal property under certain 
conditions, and the payment of the salary or wages of an employee or 
laborer by means of tokens or objects other than the legal tender " 
currency of the Philippines; prescribing penalties for violations 
hereof . Ibid. , pp . 574^576, 

^. 9 No. 304 - .In Act to provide for the reforestation and afforestation 
of watersheds, denuded areas and cogon or open lands with- 
in forest reserves, communal forests, national parks and timber- 
lands, sand dunes, «d other publi. forest lands, in the Philippines, 
and providing the necessary funds therefor. Ibid,, pp. 577-578. 
Jun. 9 No. 305 - An Act to anend sections 2 and 3 of Act No. 3582, enti- 
tled "4n Act to create , board of censorship for moving 
Pictures and defining its funct: as, as amended by Commonwealth ' 
•Act No. 167. Ibid.,, pp. 579-580, 
Jun. 9 No. 306 - An Act to allow the acceptance of deposits of mortgage ■ 
and savings banks as security for loans, amending to 
that effect section 105 of the Corporation L aw . IbJLd., p. 581. ' 
Jun. 9 No. 307 - An Act authorising the President of the Philippines on 

behalf of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to Supple- " 
ment and amend the agreement heretofore executed between the Gov- 
ernment of the Philippine Islands and the Atlantic, Gulf and Pa- 
cific Company of Manila, pursuant to Act: No. 3056. Hid., p . 582. 
Jun. 9 No. 308 -. An Act to amend paragraph numbered 4, under D-IV S pe --'' 
cial -Appropriations, section 2, pages 59-60, English . 
version, of Commonwealth Act No. 245 pertaining to the appropria- ' 
tion of the' Department of the Interior. IbJLd. , pp. 583-584. 
Jun. 9 No. 309 - An Act to amend sections 68 and 62 of Commonwealth Act 
No. 137, known as the "Mining Act", ibid., pp , 585-586. 
Jun. 9 No/ 310 - An Act punishing the transfer of private agricultural : 



Hi - 42 

617 ~ 

land to disqualified persons in violation of the Consti- 
tution of the Philippines. IbjL4., p. 587, 
1933 *xn. 9 N o. 311 - In Act to amend sections 2, 3, 4, and 5 of Commonwealth 

Act No. 182 which creates the N a ti 0 nal Developement Com- 
pany. Hb&&*, pp. 588-592. 
Jun, S N 0 . 312 - An Act to amend paragraph (d) of section 22 of Commonwealth 
Act No. 1, in order to fix the rank of the Chief of Staff 
and his term of office, .IbjLd.. , p. 593. 
* Jun, 9 No f 313 - An ^ct authorizing tho establishment of regional national 

vocational trade schools of the Philippine Sohool of Ar-\- ; i 
rsoA Trarlus type and regional national vocntiowal agricultural high 
schools of tho Central Luzon Agricultural High School type and 
the proper support and expansion of such schools after they have 
been established. JLbjjL,, p. 594. 
Jun, 9 No. 314 - An Act to amend section 2 of Aot No. 3116, as amended, 

entitled "An Act to authorize the Governor-General to pur-, 
chase on behalf of the Government of the Philippine Islands, 70,000 
sharos af the capital stock of the Manila Railroad Company of the 
Philippine Islands, and to provide funds for paying tho price of 
said shares." IbJ v cI. , p. 595, 
Jun. 9 No. 315 - An Act providing for an additional appropriation of 

S>600,000 for the revolving fund of the Bureau of PrinHn<v 
to be used exclusively in the printing and binding of census forms 
and census volumes, and' providing for their distribution and sale, 
p. 596. 

Jun. 9 No. 316 - An Act to amend sectic 1 2 of Commonwealth Aot N 0 . 32, en- 
titled ".to .Act providing for tho subdivision and said 
of all portions of the Friar Lands Estates remaining undisposed 
of.'" Ibi^., PP. 597-598. 
" Jun. 9 No. 317 _ An Act to amend section 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 211-. 

•liid,., p. 599. 

" *>"un. 9 No. 318 - An Act to awond section *5 of Act No. 2612, entitled 

"An let creating the Philippine National Bank," as amend- " 
ed by A«t Ho. 2938. 2JaX&., pp. 600-601. 
" Jun, 9 No. 519 - An. Act providng that all retirement gratuities of offi-' 

cere and employees granted, retirsaent under the provi- 
sions if Act No. 2589, «r amended, shall be paid from the respect- 
ive funds from which the salaries of the sait retired officers : 
and employees wore being paid at tho time of retirement, Ijjti*, 
p.. 602. 

Jun. 9 No. 320 - /in Act prescribing certain additional functions of the 
General Auditing Office. Ifcjji. , pp. 603-605, 
" Jun. 9 No, 321 - An Act to authorize the President of the Philippines to 



*• III - 43 

- 618 _ 

declare any area or zone in the Philippines as a nation- 
al defense zone, to prohibit entry therein except to certain . 
classes of persons, and to prescribe penalties for the violation 
thereof. IbjU., p. 606. 
1938 Jun. 9 No. 322 - An Act amending sections 2029 and 2031 of Ihe Revised 

Administrative Code. IfejU. , pp. 607-608. 
•" Jun. 16 No. 323 - An Act to emend section 8 of Ac* No. 4166, as amended. 

£ai.d. , pp. 609-610. 

Jun. 18 No. 324 - An Act to amend certain provirions of Act No. 3961, en- 
titled "An Act tq provide frco emergency medical treat- 
ment for employees and laborers of commercial, industrial, and ag- 
^ ricultural establishments, in certain cases, provide penalties 
for the violation hereof, and for other purposes." Ibj&., pp, 
611-614. 

Jun. 18 No. 325 - An Act transferring the audit of the books and accounts 

of public services from the Public Service Commission 
to the General kditing Office. Ij,^, , pp . 615-617. 
Jun. 18 No. 326 - An Act creating the City of Bacolod. , pp. 618- . 

657. 

Jun. 18 No. 327 - An Act fixing the time within which the Auditor General 

shall render his decisions and prescribing the manner 
of appeal therefrom. htiA* , " pp. 658-659. 
Jun. 18 No. 328 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 67, entitled "An 

Act making apppropria' Ions for public works." 
pp. 660-661. 

Jun. 18 No. 329 - An <ict to amend items of appropriation under section 1," 

paragraph A of Commonwealth Act No. 240, Ib jLd . . pp. 

662-667. 

Jun. 18 No. 330 - An Act . appropriating P96,351,300 for public works. !)&&■... 

pp. 668-851. 

Jun. 18 No. 331 - An Act providing gratuity to- justices of the peace who 

were separated from the service as a result of the ope- 
ration of the Constitution, and the reorganization of the justice 
of the peace of courts, etc. IbM. , pp. 852-854. 
Jun. 18 No. 332 - An Act to establish the National Abaca and Other Fiber 

Corporation, Ib.id,. , pp. 855-858. 
Jun, 18 No. 333 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 184, entitled "An 

Act to establish a national language institute and de- 
fine its powers and duties." IbjjU , pp. 859-861. 
Jun. 19 No. 334 - An Act to amend section 11 of Act No. 2508, as amended 

by Commonwealth Act No. 133. ikU., p. 862. 
Jun. 19 No. 335 - An Act to ren.uno a street at present called "Mangahan" 



- $19- 



III - 44 



• in the City of Manila, as "Pedro duevarra" . , p. 

863. * 

Jun. 19 No. 336 - An Aot changing the name of "Majon Elementary School 1 !, in* 

Malolos, Bulacan, to "Baraaoain Memorial Elementary 
School." p. 864. 

Jun. 21 No. 337 - .to Act authorizing the City of Cebu to issue bonds to 

provide funds for the construction of necessary sower 
• facilities in said city, and authorizing also a national government 

bond issue secured by said city bonds. IbjLd. , pp. 865-868, 
Jun. 21 No. 338 - .in .Act to incorporate the City of Tagaytay, and for 

other purposes. IbJ.fl. , PP. 869-900. 
Jun. 21 No, 339 - An Act appropriating Pi, 000 for the construction of the 

Biri Elementary School, Calbiga, Ssnmr, 'JJjii. , ' p. 901; 
Jun. 21 No. 340 - An Act creating an animal utilization service in the 

Bureau of .animal Industry and appropriating funds for 
its establishmentj^equipm. nt, maintenance, and operation. Xbjji,., 
pp. 902-903. 

Jun. 22 No. 341 - '/in Act to amend sections 4, 5, 6, and 7 of Act No, 3997, 

as amended by Commonweal th Act No. 107. JDlUi., PP» 904- 

908. 

Jun. 23 No. 342 - An Act amending several sections of Act No. 3105, entitled 

".In Act regulating the practice of publio accounting} 
creating a board of accountancy; providing for examination for the 
granting of certificate's «nd the regi strati nn of -certified accOunt- 
• ants; for the suspension or revelation of certificates, and for 
other purposes" as amended, and 'or other purposes. £&A* » pp. 
909-912. 

Jun. 23 No. .343 - An Act to abolish the State Police Force, to reorganize 

the Philippine Constabulary into a national police force 
and providing funds therefor. pp. 913-916. 

Jun. 24 No. 344 - An Act to amend section 11 of Commonwealth Act No. 120, 

entitled "An Act creating the National Power Corporate., 
prescribing its powers and activities, appropripting the necessary 
funds therefor, and reserving the unappropriated publio waters for 
its use." IbjJL-, p. 917. 
Aug. 17 No. 345 - .-in Act repealing section 6 of Commonwealth Act No. 300, 

en+-\^- A " , - x —- — -o+^nxr funds for the operation 
of the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines during 
the fiscal year ending December 31, 1939." P. 918. 

Aug. 17 No. 346 - An Act providing for an additional appropriation of 

P2, 100, 000 to carry out the provisions. of Commonwealth 
Act No. 170. IJjiA., p. .919. 



_ 620 _ 



III - 45 



" jus: 19 *• 348 - * fct -■* — •* : MM the 

° f end Judges-at-large of , first instance, 

to alter the ti.ee end places of holding oourta'ln certain dia- 

of first T T fU ^ ° f 1— - ^s-at-large . 

of first instance. Ib^, pp . 922 -926 

" ^ 349 - * - • .t--^ meter laborator, to carr, 

„ , ° U * the P™**™ °f the Public Service Act on meter test- 
ing and providing tot, ^ .. , v _ 

retire from't^lTT' Pr ° Tln ° ial ^ * ^ 

md *° th0M " h ° »"» operated therefrom 
result of the operation of the Constitution. . ^ pp . 929 _ 

» ** * ,o. 35 l - , ta , ot authorizlns tM pM3ident ^ ^ 

0aU for "1 «»ard and erecute contracts for tha ex- 

ploration excitation and development „f petroleum and natural gee 

ZlT. ln pri " at8 Md putll ° lmds inths pi — - pp! 

22 *. 352 - . ta ,ct amandiug aeotion 16 of ,.ot Bo . *«. , Mtui ^ 

Ibid o« 0re< ' tin ' r PhiUp:liM "^""l *«*." «s amended. 
APlflt.t p. 935. 

*«. 22 No. 35? - An Act authorising and smpowering the B 0a rd of Regents of 

the University of the Philippines to fix the oompe nsation 
and salaries of members of the faculties, officers, and employees 
of said institution. J^, p . 936 . 5107668 

^ "°- 354 ~ Act WW**** ,80,000 to compensate the Mountain 
Province for the loss in its revenue on account of the 
abolition of the road tax. Ibid.,., P . 937. 
**. 22 No. 355 - Jta Act to amend several sections of Commonwealth Act No. . 

103 creating the Court of Industrial Relations. ' jw^ 
pp. 938-941. ****** 

22 No. 356 - An Act specifying how national aid could be obtained by 
any. province for the construction, equipment, maintenance 
and operation of provincial hospitals. IbJLd.. , pp. 942-944-. 
^g. 22 No. 357 - The Election Code. pp . 9 45-1040. 

22 No. 358 - An Act to authorise in certain cases the taking over and 

operation by the Government of public utilities or business 
^ ooupled with a public interests; etc. IbJ^, pp . 1041-1043. - 

ug.. 22 No. 359 - .In Act amending Commonwealth Act. No. 288, entitled . Via 
Act to provide pension for veterans of the Philippine 



. en. 111 - 46 ; 

revolutione of wars." JJaii., pp ; 1044-1045. ■ . 
1938 Aug. 22 No. 360 - An Act to amend further section 1 of .let So. 3597, as 

amended. IJaji., p . 1046. 
•V. Aug. 22 No. 361 - An Act to amend 2466 and 2468 of the Administrative Code. 

IkU. , pp. 1047-1048. 
Aug. 22 No. 362 - An Act to amend seotion 1917 of the Administrative Code. 
Ibid*., p. 1049. . 

" Aug. 23 No. 363 - An Act authorizing the ' White Cross, Inc., to hold horse 

races, with betting, for charitable and civic purposes 
and to promote horse breeding in the Philippines. Ibid. f p. 1050. 
Aug. 23 No. 364 - An Act to repeal Section 3 of Act No. 3352, as amended, 

known as the City Lowland Improvement Act. Ibid ., p. 

1051. 

Aug. 23 No. 365 - -In. Act to amend soctions 1 and 12 of Act N 0 . 3846 requi- 
ring a license for the establishment and/or operation, of 
radio receiving stations used for commercial purposes. Ibid.., p.. 
1052. 

Aug. 23 No. 366 - An Act to amend paragraph (e) of section 2560 of the 

Administrative Code. IbJ.^., p. 1053. 
Aug. 23 No.- 367 - An Aot transferring the National Library from the National 

Assembly to the Department of Publio Instruction, and for 
. other purposes. Ibid. r p. 1054. 
teg. 23 No. 368 - An Act to provide for a revolving fund for laborers tene- 
ment houses. Ibid . f p c 1055. . 
Aug. e23 No. 369 - An Act appropriating n, 800,000 from the excise fax to 

reimburse the amount tppropriated for the construction 
of irrigation systems. IbJui., p. 1056. 
Aug. 23 No. 370 - An Act to consider tho late Pedro Ma. Sison of Pangasi- 

nan, judge of first instance, retired, and to provide 
for the payment of a gratuity «to his widow. Ibid . f '' p.^1057. 
Aug, 23 No. 371 - An Act granting compensation to. the widow of legitimate 

children under 21 years of ago of the late Lieutenant- 
Colonel James B. Ord of the United States Army. Ibid. f p. 1058. 
11 Aug. 23 No. 372 - An Act to amend section 3 of Commonwealth Aot No* 156, 

entitled "An Act authorizing the Philippine Anti-Tuber^ 
culosis Society to hold horso races, with betting, for eharitabla 
and civic purposes and to promote horse breeding in these Islands." 
SblsU, p. 1059. 

" Aug. 23 No. 373 - An Act changing the official fiscal year from the period 

January 1st to December 31st of the calendar year to the 
period from July 1st of each calendar year immediately 'following. 
Ibid'., pp. 1060-1061. ' 



- 622 - 



in -fa 



1958 Jug. .23 No. 574 - An Act to amend paragraph (4), general provisions, 

section 7 of Commonwealth Act No. 246, entitled * 
".An Act prescribing the form of the budget and regulating the 
expenditure of authorized appropriations." Ibid.,, pp. 10§2- 
1063. 

" Aug. 25 No. 375 - An Act to amend section 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 241, 

appropriating P5, 000, 000 to be distributed by the Secre- 
tary of Finance among the provinces, subprovinces, chartered ci- 
ties, municipalities, and municipal districts as aid to them on ac- 
count of the abolition of the cedula tax. Ifryri,. r pp. 1064-1065. 
" Aug. 23 No, 376 - An Act to amend item 11, under the subheading "IV- 

"Spocial and General Purposes," heading "B-Offico of the 
President," of the General Appropriation Act of 1939, so as to 
make the appropriation authorized in 3aid item available for ex- 
penditure upon approval of tho Appropriation Act. Ibid., p. 1066. 
" Aug. 23 No. 377 - An Aot. to amend Commonwealth Act No. 67, entitlod "An 

Act making appropriations for public works," as amended. 
U&d^, p. 1067. 

" Aug. 23 No. 378 - An Act authorizing the President of the Philippines to 

enter into negotiations with owners of landed estates in 
. tho Phillippinos for tho purpose of loaning suoh estates and to 
sublet the same to bona fide occupants or qualified persons, appro- 
priating funds therefor. Ibid,. , p, 1068. 
" Aug, 23 No. 379 - An Act requiring the branding and registration of large 

animals imported into the Philippines and prescribing 
penalties for the violation of hhe same. Ibid. , p. IO69. ' ' 
" Aug. 23 No. 380 - An Act requiring tho manager or person in charge of any 

authorize sweepstake,, lottery or other similar scheme 
for the distribution of prizes, to deduct the income tax due from 
winners of the prises and to pay the amount so deducted to the 
Collector of Internal Revenue, Ibid.., pp. 1070-1071. 
" Aug. 23 No. 381 - An Act providing for tho support of primary -and inter*' 

mediate education . Id. for other purposes. Ibid ,., pp. 

1072-1073. 

n Sopt. 5 No. 382 - An Act to adopt the original authentic 1 form of the 

* Philippine National Anthem and to appropriate funds for 

its printing and' free distribution. Ibid . , p. 1074. 
" Sept. 5 No. 383 - An Act to punish the dumping into any river of refuse, 

waste matter or substances of any kind whatsoever that 
' may bring about the rise or filling in of river beds or cause arti- 

ficial alluvial formations. IM&., £. 1075. 
" Sept. 5 No. 584 - An Act amending several sections of tet~.~Bo. 2832, the 

law croating tho Metropolitan. w ater District. Ibjjjjt, 
pp. 1076-1079. 



- 625 - 



III - 48 



1938 Sept. 5 No. 385 - to Act to -amend aevoral sections of Commonwealth Aot 

No. 1, known as the National Defense Act, as amended, 
pp. 1080-1091. 

»• Sept. 5 No. 386 - An Act granting to the Philippine Press Wireless,. Inc., 

a franchise to construct, maintain, and operate in the 
Philippines stations for the reception and transmission of wire- 
less long distance messages , pictures or other matter pertaining 
to the press. I b i d .. > pp. 1092-1097. 
, Sept. 5 No. 387 - ,An Act granting to the United Tr...z- Associations a fran- 
chise to construct, maintain and operate in the Philip- 
pine stations for the reception and transmission of wireless long 
distance messages, pictures or other matter pertaining to the press 
liil., pp. 1098-1103. 
M Sept. 5 No. 388 - An Act appropriating the sum of 5?22,500 to carry out 

the purposes of Commonwealth Act No. 325 during the fis- 
cal year 1939. M»j P. 1104. 

# 

" Sept. 5 No. 389 - An Act authorizing' the City of Davao to issue bonds to 

provide funds for the construction of sewer facilities 
and other permanent improvementse Ib^d.,, pp. 1105-1109. 
" Sept. 5 No. 390 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 330, appropria- 
ting P96, 351,000 for pv.blio works, IbjLi., PP. 1110-T'" ,r 
" Septi 5 No. 391 - An Act to further amend section 2 of Commonwealth £ct 

No. 7, creating a Nat 3 jnal Loan and Investment Boardi 
ihi&j., pp. 1116-1118. 
" Sept. 5 No. 392 - An Act authorizing tl ■■■ use of a portion of the income 

from the operatinn w . maintenance of the arrastre ser- 
vice at the port of Manila, fo: the payment of the necessary, ope- 
rating expenses of said servio , and for the purchase of furniture 
and equipment needed by same. SJgA. , 1119-1120. 
" Sept. 5 No. 393 - An Act authorizing the erection of a Commonwealth 

triumphal arch in Mimila to commemorate the inaugura- 
tion of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. Ibid.., pp. 1121-1122, 
" Sept. 5 No. 394 - An Act amending ArvLole VII, chapter 52 of the Adminis- 
trative Code, regarding the Philippine Postal Savings 
Bank. IbJLd^, pp. 1123-1127. 
" Sept.. 5 No. 395 - An Act to amend the last itom of the subheading "V- 

Summary" of the appropriation for the National Library 
made in Commonwealth Act . No. 245. Ibid.., p. 1128. 
" Sept. 5 No. 396 -• .in Act providing for the levying of special assess- 
ments to covar the cost of the construction, improve- 
ment or repair of national roads within the City of Manila. 
Ibii., pp. 1129-1132. 



♦ - 6U - 



III - 49 



3 Sept. 6 No. 397 - An Act amending section 6 and paragraph (g) of section 

11 of Commonwealth Act No. 338, known as the Charter of 
- the City of Tagaytay. , p. 1133-1134. 

Sept. 7 No. 398 - An Act creating the Cancer Institute. Ibid. r pp. 1135- 

1136. 

Sept. 12 No. 399 - An Act to prohibit building and loan associations to 

take or receive directly or indirectly in money or^other 
property, a higher rate of interest than twelve per cent -per annum. 
IkisL-r pp. 1137-1139. 
Sept. 12 No. 400 - An Act providing for the payment of indemnities and pen- 
sions in cases of accident, during the training of trai- 
nees or reservists of the Philippine Army. Ibid . f p. 1140. 
Sept. 12 No. 401 - An Act to appropriate funds for the establishment of 

post-graduate courses and fellowships in medicine in the 
College of Medicine, University of the Philippines. Ibid., p. 1141. 
Sept. 13 No. 402 - /in Act to provide for the classification of civilian 

positions and standardization of salaries in the Govern- 
ment. Ibid.., pp. 1142-1155. ' 
Sept.13 No. 403 - An Act to create a revolving fund of P10,0O0,000 for 

the construction of permanent public markets and slaugh- 
^ ter-houses and waterworks in the Philippines. Ihid.., pp. 1156-1160. 

Sept.13 No. 404 - An Act to amend certain sections of Commonwealth Act No. 

326, entitled "An Act creating the City of Bacolod. 11 
liii., pp. 1161-1169. 
Sept.13 No, 405 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 240, as amended. 

Xl?ld.„> pp. 1170-1171 o 
Sept.13 No. 406 - An Act amending section 1290 ^of the Administrative Code 

so as to give the Collector of Customs discretionary 
power to impose surcharges. IMd.» P. 1172. 
Sept. 14 No. 407 - An Act amending section 1 of the franchise of the Philip- 
pine Long Distance Telephone Company. Ibid.., pp. 1173- ' 

1176. 

Sept. 14 No. 408 - An Act establishing a system of military justice for 

persons subject dio military law, Ibid . f pp. 1177-1217, 
Sept. 14 No. 409 - An Act to designate the provincial fiscals of provinces 

whose capitals have been converted into oitiep, city 
, attorneys ex officio thereof, with additional compensation, and to 
provide for the appointment of assistant city. attorneys thereat. 
Ibid.., p. 1218. 

Sept. 15 No. 410 - An Act to amend the Revised Administrative Code by inser- 
ting a new section regarding salaries of offioials of 
the City of B a guio. Ibid.., p. 1219. 



III - 50 

- 625 - 

1958 Sept. 15 No. 411 - Jin tot amending section 1487 of the Administrative Code, 

by restoring the specific tax on fermented liquors to 
its former rate. Ibid.., p. 1220. 
" Sept. 15 No. 412 - An Act to reduce the cadastral coat due from landowners 

in cadastral surveys undertaken by private corpora- 
tions and to appropriate funds for the purpose. Ibid. f p. 1121.. 
1939 *ar. 7 No. 413 - An Act appropriating the sum of T 500, 000 for the pur- 
pose of providing additional government services, per- 
sonnel, and facilities for law enforcement. Quezon Hesfl*gpa r 
Vol. 5, Part II, JBVFF, p . 3. 
" Mar. 13 No. 414 r An Act providing funds so that the President of the 

Philippines may continue the negotiations already 
started between the United States and the Philippines with a 
view to adjusting the economic and trade relations between the 
two countries. Ibid. f p. 4. 
Hay. 22 No. 415 - An Act to appropriate P2, 975,000 to compensate the pro- 
vinces, subprovinces, chartered cities, municipalities, 
and municipal districts for £he loss in revenue on account of the 
abolition of the cedula tax. IbjU., p. 5. 
May 22 No. 416 - An Act appropriating the sum of P2, 740, 000 to .bo reim- 
bursed to the Department of the Interior and the local 
governments for the expenses borne by them for the second regu- 
lar election of members of the National .Assembly, and to cover 
the unpaid expenses for the plebiscite on women suffrage in 
1937. !Md. f p. 6. 

" May 22 N 0 . 417 - Aa Act increasing the penalty for robbery or theft of 

mail matter, by amending articles 302, and 310, as 
i amended, of the Revised Penal Code. Ibid.., pp. 7-8. 

" May 22 No. 418 - An Act appropriating the amount of P250,000, out of 

the oil excise tax funds in the national treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, to be used for hastening the agronomical ■ 
survey of the Philippines. Ibid*, p. 9. 
May. 22 No. 419- An Act to exempt all cases of summary settlement of 

estates of deceased persons and guardianship procee- 
dings in which the gross value of the estate involved doos not 
exceed F300, from the payment of filing fees and other expenses, 
liii., p. 10. 

n May 31 No. 420 — An Act to authorize the conversion into a corporation 

of the instrumentality or agency in charge of sublea- 
sing landed estates acquired through lease or purchase under 
Commonwealth Act No. 378. Ibid,., pp. 11-12. 



B-58 

_ 626 . 111 - 51 

1939 May 31 No, 421 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 108, entitled 

"An .let to punish acts of ovaaion of the laws on the 
nationalization of cortain rights, franchises or privileges," 

• ibid-., pp, 13-14. 

» Ma, 51 No. 422 - in Act exempting municipalities and municipal districts 

from the payment of docket fees for criminal cases, 
including violations of municipal ordinances, in justice of the 
peace courts. Ibjy.., pp. 15-16. 
May 31 No. 423 - An .let providing for the execution of" public works or ' 
public improvements in oharterod cities. Ibid fl f p. 17. 
" May 31 No. 424 - An Act to designate district engineers of provinces 

whoso capitals have boon converted into cities, city, 
engineers, .ox officio with additional compensation, placing all 
city engineers, including that of the city of Manila, under the 
supervision and control of the Director of Public Works, fixing . 
the salary of the oity engineer of Manila,, and providing for k. 
the appointment of assistant engineers, superintendents, and ' 
other employees of chartered cities. Ibj^., pp. 18-19.. " ?n . 
May 31 No. 425 - An Act modifying the manner, form and amount . of tho^ " , 
bond of the* clerk of 'the Court of Appeals, amending^ . 
for this purpose, section 145-M of the Administrative Code, as 
amended by Commonwealth Acts Nos. 3 and 259. Ibid. f pp. 20-21, 
May 31 No. 426 - An Act to amend section 62 of Commonwealth Act No. 57, 

as amended by Commonwealth 'Act ITo. 158. IbJjU, p, 22. 
May 31 No. 427 - An Act relieving all provinces, municipalities, and 
municipal districts and tho cities of Zamboanga and 
Davao from the payment of sheriff fees. p. 23. 

May 51 No. 4 28 - An Act authorizing the city of B a colod to issue bonds 
for the purpose of providing funds to construct a. city 
hall, the necessary sewer facilities and other permanent improve- 
ments in said oity, and authorizing also a national government 
bond issue secured by said city bonds. Ibid. f pp. 24-28. 
May 31 No, 429 - An Act to authorize the President of the Philippines .to 
negotiate with the President of the United States regar- 
ding the assignment of Filipinos to United States embassies or 
consulates in foreign countries, appropriating funds . therefor, 
liii*., p. 29. 

May 51 No. 450 - An Act to create tho Department of National Defense and 
the Department of Health and Public Welfare. Ibid, p 

PP. 30-51. 

May 51 Ho. 431 - An Act to give the board of documents discretionary po- 
wer to delegate to its duly authorized representatives 



, III - 52 

-637 - 

its authority to witness the burning of condemned records, 
2tt&*f P. 32. 

1939 May 31 No. 432 - .In Act to amend section 62 of General Orders No. 58, 

known as the Code of Criminal Procedure, providing for 
the taking depositions or written sworn statements of material 
witnesses who have to leave the Philippines with no definite 
date of returning thereto and their admission as evidence in the 
trial of a case, under certain conditions. Ibjdi r PP. 33-34. 
" May 31 No. 433 - An Act to suspend the granting of geological explore-. 

tion and petroleum drilling -leases under Act No. 2932. 
Ibid.,., p. 35. 

" May 31 No. 434 - An Act vesting in the treasurer of the Philippines ap- 
propriating the necessary funds to carry out the pur- 
poses thereof. Ibid,., p. 36. 
" May 31 No. 435 - An Act to add another subsection to section 7 of Com- 
monwealth Act No. 246, commonly known as tho "Budget 
Act" providing for tho temporary. employment of substitute offi- 
cers or members of the crew of government vessels. Ibj4 . f p, 37, 
May 31 No. 436 - An Act to amend sections 1 and 3 of Commonwealth Act 

No. 304» entitled "An Act to provide for the refores- 
tation and afforestation of watersheds, denuded areas, and. cogon 
or open lands within forest reserves, communal forests, national 
parks, and timberlands, sand dunes, and other public forest lands, 
in the Philippines, and providing the nocossary funds therefor." 
Ibid*, PP. 38-39. 

May 31 No, 437 - An Act prohibiting tho investment of. any fund of a 

corporation in any other corporation or in any business 
other than that for which it wes organized unless* oertain require- 
ments are fulfilled, amending for that purpose the Corporation 
Law, as amended. Ibid , ., f - pp. 40-41. - 
" May 31 No.- 438 - An Act to amend subsection (m) of section 2 of .let No, - 

2832, entitled "An Act creating a publio corporation 
denominated the Metropolitan Water District, prescribing its 
functions and activities, and for other purposes," as amended. 
IMJL., P. 42* 

" M sy 31 . No. 439 - An Act to amend Commonwealth A c t No. .350 by extending 

the period for filing applications thereunder. JJaj&tt 

P. 43. 

" May 31 No. 440 -■ An Act to designate the register of deeds of provinces 

whose capitals have been converted into cities, as city 

3 

register of deed ex' officio thereof, with additional compensation, 
JJlAsU P. 44. 



£ • « 

in - 53 

- 628 - 

1939 June 3 No. 441 - An Act creating the N + 4 , r 

tion tv- J the NaWo »^ Settlement Administra- 

■ tlon » ItaLiU pp. 45-48. 

Juno 3 No. 442 - .In Act. to direct rh« + 

PW1 / ° Ct thd transfQr of ^e University of the 

Fhilipp inos to a site outside of the City of Manila 
appropriating funds therefor, pp . ^ 

- 3 44, - An Act to .end section 4 -Tj^. ^ 

p-ippine~: t:™ e cwter ° f th ° -~ — 

" June 3 No. 444 - Eight Hour Labor L aw l bid „ ' 

" June 3 No, 445 - m Ah- ♦ . PP * 5> * ' 

396 I*" 3Ub3eCti0n ° f SeCti - 1 «* * 
. 3961 « PP. 51-56. 

June 8 No. 446 _ /«•••„+ 

- ..ct appropriating fu „ d3 for the operation ^ 

the fiscal ^ °* «- Philippine during 

■° fl "oal year ending June 30 5Qin th.. ««Mg 

» June 8 So. 447 . j. ,w*° ♦? C£U *-' pp - 57 - 45 '' 

^ ™ of the administrative 

448 m .,ot to .prohibit the oonstruotlon of obstruotloM 

Was for violation of lant,ln « and prescribing p.nal- 

Jume 8 No. 449 - V 1 « ^ P - «*• 

« nT * th0rlainS th ° tbi Philippine, to" 

conduot negotiations for tha .no.ri.j*. 

operation by the Government of tL P h l ' 

Metric 0^. the d ol ° f «* ' 

* j, wit, iianiia tra3 Corporation . the PVM t 

^tsnoe .oiephone Company. a„ d ray othor pubL^t ■ 
whose .anient md oporatl<)n fcj ^ ^ J - 

retired by public interest. p . 457 . 1115 

*- 3 Ho. 450 - in ,.ct to provide for the promotion of the livestock 

, industry through the establishment, equipment, maintenance 
2 ~n of breeding stations end stoch f_ for livoetoT 

uMeT V o r° dS th —-- °™ry castration of 

undes.rable livestock end prescribing penalties for violation of its 
provisions. Ija^, pp . 458.455. 

*"* 8 "°- " * *«» ^gislative service office of the 

PP. 460,461 """^ *"* Prefer. M., 

^ne 8 No. 452 - Pasture W Act. ' fl^ pp. 462-465. ' ' : ' ' 

une 8 No. 453 - .in dot authorising the President of the Philippines for 
a limited period to abolish the National Information' 
Board end to effect adjustments of the personnel of the Departments 
cf the Interior, .Igrioulturo and. Commerce, and Labor, to change 
the designations of any office or position; and to consolidate any 



item or part of items of appropriation for salaries and wages 
with any other item or items or parts thereof in said Departments. 
U&Uf pp. 466-467. 

1939 June 8 No. 454 - in Act to amend various sections of Commonwealth Act 

No. 146, known as the Public Service Act. Ibid . f pp. 

,468-472. 

» June 8 No. 455 - An Act to amend sections 337, 338, and 340 of the Admi- 
nistrative Code. Ibid. f pp. 473-474. ' • 
» June 8 No. 456 - An Act to amend sections 1 9 , 20, and 118 of Commonwealth 

Act No. 141, commonly known as the Public Land Act. 
IMA., PP. 475-476. 
June 8 No. 457 - An Act to amend further section 1 of Act No. 3597, as 

• amended. Ibid^, p. 477. 
- June 9 No. 458 - An Act to provide for the establishment of a Wrve 

bank in the Philippines. Ibid. f pp. 478-498. 
June 9 No. 459 - An Act creating the Agricultural and Industrial Bank. 

IMA-, pp. 499-517. 
June 9 No. 460 - An Act. to raise the amount that may be loaned by the 

National Bank for agricultural purposes from 60 to 75 
per cent of its capital and surplus, by amending Act No. 2938, 
as amended by Act No. 4170. IbJ&, , pp. 518-519. 
V June 9 No. 461 - An Act to regulate the relations between landowner, and 

tenant and to provide for compulsory arbitration of any 
controversy arising between them, Ibi&., pp. 520-521. 
June 14 No. 462 - An Act to amend sections 27 and 28 and the first para- 
graph of section 29 of the Charter of the City of D a vao, 
relative to taxes on real eBtato in the said city. Ibid. f • 
pp. 522-524. 

June 14 No. 463 - An .Act to increase the maximum period within which the 

payment of loans of municipal funds may be made; Ibid. . 

. p. 525. 

June 14 No. 464 - An Act to remit, under certain conditions, unpaid taxes 

and penalties on forfeited real property. IbJLd. . , p. 526. 
June 14 No, 465 - An Act to impose a residence tax. Ifcy^, pp. 527-532. 
June 15 No. 466 - An Act to revise, amend and codify the internal revenue 

laws of the Philippines. IbJji., pp. 533-737. 
June 15 No. 467 - An Act appropriating additional funds for the operation 

of the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philip* 
pines during the fiscal year 1940. JM&>t pp. 738-750. 
" June 15 No. 468 - An Act to create an advance fund of ?2',000,000 to fi- 
nance a general revision of real property assessments 
in the provinces. IbjjL., pp. 751-752. 



a-te . ill - 55 

1939 June. 15 No. 469 - An -lot appropriating F8,180,000 for public worics. 

Ikl&w pp. 753-861. 

" June 16 No. 470 - Assessment Law. pp . 862-887. 

» June 16 No. 471 - An Act to amend Act No. 4003, entitled "An' "Act to 

amend and compile the 'law relating to fish and other 
aquatic resources of the Philippine Islands, and for other purpo^ 

sos." ibii., pp. 888^905. 

'• June 16, No. 472 - An Act rousing the general authority of municipal coun- 
cils and municipal district councils 'to levy taxes, 
subject to certain limitptions. IbjUi, pp . 906-909. 
June 17 No. 473 - An Act to provido for the acquisition of Philippine 

citizenship by naturalization, and to repeal Acts No. 
2927 and 3448. Jbjd,,, pp. 910-919. ' 
June 17 No. 474 - An Act to amend certain items and to insert others' un- 
der section 1, paragraph A, and to amend section three 
of Commonwealth Act No. 240. T&£. , pp> 920-922. 
June 17 No. 475 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act N 0 . 330, entitledV'An 

*ct appropriating ?96,351, 300 for public works." 
ikikr pp. 923-930. 
June 18 No. 476 - An Act to repeal Act No. 1639. UH**, p. 931. . " 
June 18 No. 477 - An Act to include "all deputy governors and special agents. 

of the specially organized provinces among officers "em- 
braced in unclassified service. p. 932. 
June 18 No. 478 - An Act to name "Comandante Quezon Highway" the road from 

Balanga to Bagao,' Province of Bataan. Ibid . f p. 933. 
June 18 No. 479 - An Act authorizing the payment of per diems to vioe ■ 

mayors and councilors of the municipalities of specially 
organized provinces and of the municipal districts of all provin- 
ces. IJad.., p. 934.. 
" June 18 No. 480 - An Act transferring the administration and general 

supervision of the Pilar Irrigation System from the mu- 
nicipality of Pi.lar, Province of B a taan, to the District Engineer 
of the said province. Ib ^d. . , p. 935. 
" June 18 No. 481 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 294, knoim as the 

Mechanical Engineering Law. Ibid^ pp. 936-939, 
June 18 No. 482 - An Act authorizing His Excellency, M p nuel L. Quezon, 

President of the Philippines, to accept the d6o6ratiofr • 
knovjn as the "Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown of Italy") 
conferred upon him by His Majesty, the King of Italy, I^bid , , p. 940. 
■ " June 18 No. 483 - An Act authorizing His Excellency, Manuel L. Quezon, - 

President of the Philippines, to aocept the gift consis- 
ting of arms of Mexican manufacture tendered him by the Govern- 



- 631 - 



III - 56 



Tnent of Mexico. Ibid.., p. 941. 
1939 June 18 No. 484 - An Act to amend sections 1, 3, and 4 of Commonwealth Act 

No. 156, entitled "An Act authorizing the Philippine 
Anti-Tuberculosis Society to hold horse races, with betting, for 
charitable and civic purposes and to promote horse breeding ±n 
this Islands." r&i£., pp. 942-943. 
»' June 18 No,. 485 - An Act to permit bets in the game of basque pelota. 

p. 944. 

'« June 18 No. 486 £ An Act to grant Esperanza Lucerna a franchise for an 

~ electric light, ho a t and power system in Hog, Occiden- 

tal Nogros. Ibid., p. 945. * 
» June 18 No. 487 - An Act to grant the Co' bate Light and Power Company/ 

^corporated, a franchise for an electric light, heat 
and power system in Cotabato,' Cotabato. Ibid. , p. 946. 
" Juno 18 No. 488 - An Act authorizing Roman Baluyot to sell, convey, as- 
sign, or otherwise transi jr. his franchise and all pro- 
perty and rights acquired under Act No. 3880, in favor of the 
Riverside Electric Company, Inc. Ibid , f p. 947. 
June. 18 No. 489 - An Act to amend section 7 of Commonwealth Act No. 57, . 

as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 158. Ibj d.. f p. 948. 
June 18 No. 490 - An Act to grant regularly appointed municipal officers 

and employees vacation and sick leave, by amending 
sections 284 and 285-A of the Administrative Code, as amended by 
Commonwealth Act No. 220. IbM,.., pp. 949-950. 
June 18 No. 491 - An Act to amend certaia sections of Act No. 2590, en-' 

titiled "An Act for th) protection of game and fish. 
I&£m., PP. 951-955. ' ' . 

Sept. 19 No. 492 - An Act to submit ^to tho Filipino people-, for approval or 

disapproval, tho amendments to tho Constitution of the 
Philippines and to the ordinance apponded thereto proposed by 
tho National Assembly in Resolutions adopted on September 15, 1939, 
and to appropriate funds thorofor. Ibj^, pp. 956-958. 
Sept. 30 No. 495 - An Act ( _jropriating x'2, 550,000 for public primary clas- 
ses throughout the Philippines. IfeM., p. 959. 
Sept. 30 No. 494 - An Act to authorize tho President of the Philippines to 

, suspend, until the date of adjournment of the next regu- 
lar session of tho National Assembly, either wholly or partially, 
tho operation of Commonwealth Act No. 444, commonly known as the 
Eight- Hour Labor Law. .IbjLdj., p. 96O. 
Sept. 30 No. 495 - An Act to amond section 4 of Commonwealth Act No. 120. ' 

IbM*, PP. 961-962. 
Sept. 30 No. 496 ^ An Act to authorize tho President of the Philippines ** 



- 632 - 

* 



III - 57 



for a limited poriod, in viowof thd existence of a 
stato of national emergency, to take over, for use or operation 
by the government , any public service or enterprise, to presoribe 
penalties for interfering with the exorciso by the Govornment of 
its authority thereunder,, and to appropriate the necessary funds 
therefor, pp. 963-965. 

Sept. 30 No. 497 - /.n '/fct to amend • section 1417 of the Administrative Code. 

1HAm P- 966.- 

Sept, 30 No. 498 - An Act to declare, in view of the oxistonoo of actio- 
nal omergency, a national policy in connection there- 
with, and to authorize the Prosidont of the Philippines for a 
limited poriod to promulgate rules and regulations and to take 
other necessary steps to effectuate such policy, prescribing 
penalties -for violations of the rules and regulations issued by . 
the President, and providing appropriation therefor. Ibid. r . 
pp. 967-968. 

Sept. 30 No. 499 - An Act to regulate for a limited poriod, in view of 

the existence of a state of national emergency, the 
transfer of vessels and of shipping facilities and to provide pe- 
nalties for the violation thereof-. Ibjjk., pp. -969-971. 
Sept. 30 No. 500.- An Act to authorize the President, in view of the erLa-. '. 

tence of state of national emergency, to decrease expen- 
• ditures of the Bxocutive Department of the National Government 
through' the suspension or abandonemont of servioes, activities, 
or operations of no immediate n.-.essity. Ibid . f p. 972. 
Sept. 30 No. 501 - An Act appropriating the sum of P100,000 for the ad- 
justments of the personnel and othor changes in the 
Department of Labor as contemplated' in Commonwealth Act No. 453, 
Ibjjix, P. 973. 

Oot. 12 No. 502 - An Act to create Quuaon City. IMiU, pp. 974-1005. 
Oct. 16 No. 503 - An Act to amend certain sections of the National 

Internal Revenue Code. IbjjU., pp. 1006-1010. 
Oct. 16 No. 504 - An Act creating fifteen additional positions of judges- 

of first instance and the necessary subordinate person- 
nel, fixing their respective duties and salaries, and appropria- 
ting funds therefor. IbM,., pp, 1011-1012. 
Oct.. 27 No. 505 -' »-* ' -•o^l.th Act No. 248, entitled ■ 

"An Act appropriating the sum of ?5, 050,000 for ele- V . 
mentary school buildings." XbiiU.» p. 1013. 
Oct. 27 No. 506 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 330 entitled "Aa 

Act appropriating F96, 351, 300 for public works," . 
JUiifli, :pp. 1014-1017. 



- 633 - 



III - 58 



1939 Oct. -27 No. 507 - /In Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 67 entitled "An 

Act making appropriations for public works," as amen- 
ded, p. 1018. 

Oct. 27 No. 508 - An Act to amond Commonwealth Act No. 469 entitled 

"An Act appropriating P8, 180,000 for public works." 
IM&a., pp. 1019-1028. 
Nov. 10 No. 509 - An Act appropriating f>1.371,150 as additional fund for 

the immediate opening and maintenance of now public 
primary classes throughout the Philippines. IbAsU p. 1029. 
Nov. 14 No. 510' - An Act to authorize the President of the Philippines 

cither directly or through any Department, bureau, 0 
office, or instrumentality of the National Government which he 
may designate for the purpose', to take charge of the allocation, ■ 
reallocation, and administration of quotas established for the 
Philippines by Public Act No. 127 of the Congress of the United 
States, approved March 24, 1934, as amended by Public Act No* 
300 of the Congress of the United States, approved August 7,1939. 
pp. 1030-1031. 

Deo. 12 No. 511 - An Act to carry out the provisions ' of section 6 of 

Public Act No. 127 of the Congress of the United States, 
approved March 24, 1934, as amended by Public Act No. 300 of the 
Congress of the United States, approved August 7, 1939, regarding 
export taxes, by providing for the imposition and collection of 
an export tax on Philippine articles exported to the United States 
and the disposition of the funds derived from said tax. Ibid;, r 
pp. 1032-1035. 

Dec. 22 No. 512 - An Act to amend certain sections of the Philippine 

Tariff Act of 1909, as amended, for the purpose of 
raising revenue. Ibid. , p. 1036. 
1940 Feb. 8 No. 513 - An Act appropriating P 500, 000 to -be advanced to muni- 
cipalities and municipal districts for the maintenance ' 
of intermediate schools. ^XcSj^Jbg&ltju Vol. 3.8.. N 0<t 5^ 

Mar. 12 N 0 . 514 - An Act to amend the second paragraph of feeetion 233 of 

the Administrative Code. Ibjjji.j. p. 
Mar. 22 No. 515 - An Act to amend Sec. 4205, entitled "An Aot authori- 
zing the municipality of .Iloilo, in the province of 
Iloilo, to issue bonds for the purpose of providing funds to cons- 
truct necessary sower facility in said municipality, and authori- 
zing also an insular government bond Issue secured by said muni- 
cipal bonds, and for other purposes." Ibifl. ,, .t>. 1121. , 
Apr. 18 No. 516 - .In Act to amend subsection (u) of Seo. 84 of Common- 
wealth Act No. 466, otherwise known as the National 
Internal Rovenue Code. 9X£^^JiS^Jii^JIoU 38, No. 60, p. 1245. 



- 634 - 



III - 59 



1940 Apr. 25 No. 517 - An Act to submit to the Filipino people, for approval 

or disapproval, the amendments to the Constitution of 
the Philippines and the ordinance appended thereto, proposed by 
the National Assembly in its Resolution No. 38, adopted on Sep- 
tember 15, 1939 and as amended by its "Resolution No. 73, adopted 
on April 11, 1940, and to appropriate funds therefore, Offloi^l 

£aaa£ia*Voi. 38, No. 6i, Pp . 1265-1267. 



" May 


7 


No. 


518 


- An Act to establish the National Coconut Corporation, 

P,f fistm , SaagjLtajL Vol. 38, No. 71, pp. 1467-1468. 


" May 


7 


No. 


519 


- An Act to establish the National T 0 b a cco Corporation, 
IMixf pp. 1469. 


» May 


7 


No, 


520 


- An Act creating the City of p a bi 0 . Offic^ 0^. 
jaatfea, Vol. 38, No. 115, pp. 2557-2573. .'• 


. •" May 


7 


No. 


521 


- An Act appropriating amounts from the coconut oil ex- 
cise tax fund collected on -and aftor January 1, 1939, 






for the 


period from January 1, 1939 to June 30, 1940. Officii 



s .fi & 9,j& U . Vol. 38, No. 116, pp. 2597-2599. 
May 7 No. 522 - An Act to amend Sec. 1 of Act No. 3799. Ibid^, pp. 2599. 
May 10 No. 523 - An Act to amend Sec. 255 of the National Internal Revenue 

Code, ma., p. 2599. 

" May 10 No, 524 - An Act amending Sec. 1 of Commonwealth Act No, 464, 

entitled "An Act to remit, under certain conditions,' 
unpaid taxes and penalties of forfeited real property," to pro- 
vide a new time limit for the payment of the taxes corresponding 
to the years ninoteen hundred and thirty-eight and nineteen 
hundred and thirty-nino. Ib_id_,. f p. 2600. 
" May 10 No. 525 - An Act to repeal subsection (b) of Section 184 and to 

amend subsection (a) of Section 185 of Commonwealth Act 
No, 486. Ibldj,,, p. 2600. 
" May 10 No. 526 - An Aot to amend Section 204 of the National Internal 

Revenue. Code. PJXLci^l^aaalfefU. Vol, 38, No. 117, . 

p. 2625. 

" May 11 No. 527 - An Aot changing the name of the municipality of Bondo, 

proyinco of T ay abas, to that of "/;urora", Ibj dt, p. 2625, 
" May 11 No. 528 - Jin Act to provide for the issue of bonds of tho Govern- 
ment of the Philippines the proceeds of sale of whioh 
will be used for tho purchaso of an equivalent amount of bonds 
of the Metropolitan Water District., IbJ-sU,, pp. 2625-2626, 
" M ay 11 No. 529 - An Act amending Sections 3,, 6 ".and 7 of Commonwealth Act 

No. 168, known as the Civil Aviation Law, and inserting 
Section 6 and one-half in tho same. IJjiiU., pp. 2626-2627. 
1 May 11 No. 530 — An Act changing the procedure in tho assessment of roal 



B4? III - 60 

- 635 - 

property for taxation purposes, by requiring the owner 
•to file a sworn statement as to tho roal value thereof and crea- 
ting a Central Board of Tax Appeals. Ibid.' f p. 2627. 
1940 May. 11 No. 531 - An Act changing tho name of the barrio of dalocon&n, 

municipality of Tolong, province of Oriontal Nogros, 
to that of San Francisco. Official Snzotto. Vol. 33, No. 118, 
p. 2649. 

» May 26 Ho. 532 - An Act to fix the salary of the Auditor Goneral at 

P15,000 per annum. . IMd... *<u. . 

» May 26 No. 533 - An Act to amend paragraph (d) of Section 2550 arid Sec- 
tion 2552 of tho Administrative Code as amended, so as 
to vest tho mayor of the City of Baguio with voto power and the 
council of 3aid city with power to override voto. Ifrj.<Ui pp.. 
2649-'2650. 

'» Hay 26 Uo. 534 - An Act to declare ineffective tho roduotion of the as- 
sessed value of all penaanont plants and/or troes on 
any taxable real property in any province by fifty per cent pen- 
ding tho new assessment therein, and to repeal tho proviso con- 
tained in the second paragraph of Section 53 of Commonwealth Act 
No. 470 known as the "Assessment Law." UlisL., P» 2650. 
'» May 26 No. 535 - An Act to exempt certain persons from the requirement 

make a declaration of intention, prior to filing an 
application for naturalization, amending thereby Section 6 of . 
Commonwealth Act No. 473. -Ibid. , p. 2650. 
" May 26 No. 536 - An Act authorizing tho retirement of justice of the 

supremo court and making appropriation for 'the payment 
of a retirement gratuity. Official Gazotte.. Vol. 38, No. 119 » 
pp. 2685-2686. 

n May 26 No, 537 - An Act to amend Section 2465 of the Administrative Code, 

as amended, to standardize tho salaries of assistant 
fiscals for tho City of Manila. ISid*, pp. 2686-2687. 
11 May 26 No. 538 - Ley quo susponde los efoctos do toda accion do desar 

hucio incoada contra los inquilinos o terrateniontos 
de haciendas o capollanias que ol gobiorno trato de adquirir 
medianto compra o expropiacion forzosa. J&XsUx. P» 2 68 7 • 
" May 26 No7 539 - An Act authorizing tho President of the Philippines to 

acquire private 'lands for resale in small lots; pro- 
viding for the creation of an agency to carry out the purposes 
of this Act; and sotting aside funds and authorising the issuance 
of bonds for the payment of said lands. Ibi&L, pp. 2687-2688., 



B-4B III - 61 

- 636 _ 

1940 M ay 26 No. 540 - An Act to alter the times and places of holding sessions 

of Courts of First Instance in the nrovinees of Isabela, 
Nueva Vizcaya, C a piz, and Surigao, by amending certain paragraphs 
of Section 161 of the Administrative Code, as amended. Ibid. . 
p. 2688. .' 
w May 26 No, 541 - An Act to regulate the awarding of contracts for the 

construction or repair of public works. Official 
GazoJite., Vol. 38, No. 120, p. 2715. 
" May 26 No. 542 - An Act to create a corporation to bo known as the Girl 

Scouts of the Philippines, and to define its powers and 
purposes. IbJLsU, P« 2716. * 
» May 26 No. 543 - An Act to amend Section 1659 of the Administrative Code. 

IBULlp PP. 2716-2717. 
» May 26 No. 544 - An Act to create oight positions of district attorneys, 

appropriating tho necessary funds therefor. Ibid., , p. 

2717. 

* May 26' No. .555 - : - An Act amending the Administrative Code to increase the 

number of judges of first instance, to .regroup some of 
the provinces for judicial purposes, and appropriating the neces- 
sary funds therefor. Ibid n t pp. 2717-2718. 
" May 26 No. 546 - An Act to amend Sections 2 and 4 of Act No. 4130 as 

• amended by regulating presentation, registration, and 
, entry of race horses, and making available certain portion of its 
prooeeds for the payment of ponsions to veterans of Philippine, 
revolution or wars. 9££XsiaUiB^jAsts. v ol. 38, No. 121, . 
pp. 2747-2748. 

" May 26 No. 547 - An Act creating the City of Cavito. Ibid. P pp. 2748-2764. 
" May 26 No. 548 - An Act to regulate and control the use of and traffic on 

national roads as well as constructions along the same, 
prescribing penalties for the violation thereof. Official Gazette. 
Vol. 38, No. 122, p. 2803. 
" Hay 26 No. 549 - An Act creating the position of deputy commissioner of 

the budget and appropriating the necessary amount there- 
for. Ibidf, pp. 2803-2804. 
" May 26 No. 550 - An Act to authorize the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes 

Office to hold special sweepstakes races tho proceeds 
of which shall be used to finance the holding of an exposition in 
tho Philippines in 1941. IMd^, p. 2804. 
" May 26 No. 551 _ An Act to authorize the Presidont of tho Philippines to * 

enter into a compromise in tho case of arising out of the 
probate of the will of the late Don Francisco R. Santos. Ibid , P f 
p. 2804. 



B-vJ 



III - 62 

- 677 - 



1940 May 26 No. 552 - -fin Act appropriating amounts from the cooonut oil 

excise tax fund collected on and after January 1, 1939> 
for the fiscal year ending Juno 30, 1941. Ibld. f pp. 2804-2807. 
» May 26 No. 553 - An Act to authorize the President of the Philippines to 

permit the entry by the National Development Company of 
all . or portions of roserved lands or mineral . rights in lands* 

offioinJ. SaaajAa^-Voi. 38,. No. 123, p. 2833. • 

" Hay 26 No. 554 - An Act to liquidate the Municipal Loan Fund, the Private 

Suryoyor's Loan Fund, and the Friar Lands/ Loan Funds* • 
I-taA.., P. 2833. 

" Juno 6 No. 555 - An Act appropriating funds for the Operation of the 

Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines du- 
ring the fiscal year ending June 30, 1941. Ma Aflcnftan . Compilation . 
" June 7 No. 556 - An Act to amend Act No. 3992, .known as 'VThe Revised 

Motor Vehicle Law", as amended. Ibjd- 
" June 7 No. 557 - An Act to amend Section 4 of Commonwealth Act No. 465, 

otherwise known as the Residence Tax Law. Ibid. 
" June 7 No. 558 - An .let to amend Sections 1 and 2 of Commonwealth Act ... 

No. 150, entitled "An Act to provide for the payment 
of longevity pay to commissioned officers of the Army of the 
United States joining the Army of the Philippines and to include 
service in the Army of the United States and/or in the United 
States Military or Naval Academy in determining the pay and 
rights of retirement of commissioned . of ficers in the Army of the 
Philippines. JLbiiU. 

" June 7 No. 559 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 103» as amended. 

Ibid. . 

" June 7 No. 560 - Ley que establece garantias para evitar el frauds eh 
* " la claso de las maderas aserradas ofrecidas en venta. 

" June 7 No. 561 - An -let to create a Department of Health and Welfare' in 

the City of Manila, to define its powers and duties, 
amending for this purpose, certain sections of Chapter 60 of the 
Administrative Code. Qffici.nl Gazette. Vol. 38, No. 125, pp. 2893- 
2894. 

" June 7 No. 562 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 330 entitled 

"An Act appropriating P96,351,3O0 for public works." 
IttlL.. P.< 2895. 

" June 7 No. 563 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 240 entitled "An 

Act appropriating the sum of i>5, 050,000 for elementary 
school buildings." Ibid. , p. 2895. 
- " June 7 No. 564 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 469 entitled M An 

Act appropriating P8, 180,000 for public woeks," as 



III - 63 

- 638 - 



amended. IbJ,d^, pp. 2895-2897. 
1940 June 7 Ho. 565 - Jin Act providing for tho organization of cooperative 

associations authorizing the croation of an agency or 
designation of an instrumontality of the government to promote 
and superviso the said associations, and providing funds fori* . 
tho promotion and supervision of the same. Ibid. , p. 2897. 
» June 7 H o. ■ 566 - An .let appropriating P6, 100, 000 for public works. 

°ffl.Sinl G flWtifo,u Vol. 38, No. 126, pp. 2921-2943, 
" June 7 , No. 567 - An 'Act to adjust and stabilize the sugar industry and- 

to raise revenue for the purpose by increasing the tax 
in the owners of sugar lands held by others under lease or other 
contract granting the right to use said lands for a consideration. 
Pj£teialJiaga&&«. y ol. 38, N 0 . 127, p. 2963. 
" June 7 No. 568 - An Act to amend Commonwealth Act No. 57, known as tho 

Charter of the City of Iloilo, as amended by Common- 
wealth Act No. 158, by increasing the salaries of tho city trea- 
surer, the chief of police and firo department, and the clerk of 
the municipal court of tho said city. Ibid. r pp. 2964-2965. 
" June 7 No. 569 - An «ct to amend sections 4, 11, 9, 13, 18, 19, 21, 22, 

23, "25, 27, 29, 31, 49, 50, 52, 56, 59, 61, 71, 72, 73, 
76, 78, 79, 84, 89, 85, 07, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 94, and 
97 as Commonwealth J*ct No. 1, as amended, known as tho "National 
Defense Act", repealing Section 24 thereof and inserting two new 
sections in the said act to be known as Sections 78-A and 90-B. 
HoAjl, PP. 2965-2972. . 
" June 7 No. 570 - Ley que declare oficval el Idioma N a cional Filipino 

desde el cuatro do Julio de mil novaciontos cuarenta 
seis. PJ31clflX^azeJL^ Vol. 30, No. 128, p. 2999. 
" June 7 No. 571 - An Act to amend Sec" '.on 1 of Act No. 3846 entitled 

"An Act providing for tho regulation of radio stations 
and radio communications in the Philippine ;Islands, and for other 
purposes," requiring tho grant of a franchise from the National 
Assembly for the establishment and/or operation of radio broad- 
casting stations. IfeisU, pp. 2999-3000. 
* June 8 No. 572 - Ley que cambia el nombre del distrito municipal de Dalig, 

provincia de Isabela, por el de "Aurora." Ibid P f p. 3000. 
" June 8 No. 573 - An Act changing the name of the barrio of Macauang, 

municipality of Naujan, province of Mindoro, to that 
of Aurora. IbM*., p. 3000. 
" June 8 No. 574 - Ley que cambia el nombre. del barrio de Longos, Pilllla, 

Rizal, con el de Malaya. UlisLt, p. 3000. 
" June 8 No. 575 - An Act changing the name of the barrio of Batobato, 



June 8 



June 8 



. ,. Ill - 64 

-639 - 

'•-•municipality of Cuyo, province of Palawan, to that of 

Los Angeles. Om^i^G^^^ Vol> ^ fc- 129> p> ^ . 

1940 June 8 No. ,576 - An Act changing the name of the barrio of Nueva Cove- 

ta, in Burgos, Ilocos Sur, to Luna. Ibid. f p. 3029. 
•« June 8 No. 577 - An Act authorizing His Excellency, Manuel L. Quezon, 

President of the Philippines, to accept the decoration 
known as the "Grand 'C roix de i/Ordere de la Courone", conferred 
upon him by His Majesty, Leopold III, King of the Belgians. 
Ha£*.t p. 3030. 

No. 578 - An Act to amend Article 152 of the Revised .fenal «ode, 

so as to include teachers, professors, and persons 
charge with the supervision of public or duly recognized private 
schools, colleges, and universities, within the term "persons in 
authority". IbisU, p. 3050. 

No. 579- An Act changing the name of the barrio of Balugo, muni- 
cipality .of the Guinayangan, province of Tayabas, to 
that of Laurel. IbjjL.,, p. 505O. • 
June 8 No. 580 - Ley que concede a la "Gotabato Light and Power Com- 
pany, Inc." un plazo d<i treinta dias desde la apro- 
bacion de esta ley para aceptar la franquioia ooncedida'a la 
misma on ley de la mancomunicada numero cuatrocientos ochenta 
y siete. QfXlS^^^ei^ Vol, 38, No. 130, p. 3059. 
June 8 No. 581 - Ley que suprime los arfcuales gobiernos munioipales y 

el gobiorno provincial de Romblon ■ y en su lugar de • 
Grean cuatro municipios especir.les. HqAju, pp. 3059-3069. 
June 8 No. 582 - An Act changing the ; ame of the 'barrio Bucao-buoao, 

municipality of D a o, province of Antique, to that ,of 
Ysulat. Oj^SSXliL^LoJi^ Vol„ 38, No. 131, p. 3097. 
June 8 No. 583 - An Aot to amend Secbion 674 of the Admj ni strative Code, 

as amended. IJdjL,.. pp. 3097-3098. 
June 8 No. 584 - An Act to extend the effects of the provisions .of Act 
€f No. 4166, entitled "An Act to provido for the limits*' 

tion, regulation, and allocation of sugar produoed in the ftiilip- 
pine Islands, and for the procossing and marketing thereof, and ' 
for other purposes," as amended. IbJJj,., p. 3098. 
June 8 No. 585 - Ah Act to . control and regulate the immigration of 

aliens into the Philippines. Ibi d. , p. 3098. 
~ug. 7 No. 586 - An Act providing for the revision of the system of 

public primary education. (Prof. Juan F. Rivera, 
"Quezon in Action, " a six- volume collection of Quezoniana, 
University of the Philippines Main Library, Diliman, Quezon City. 
Vbl t pp. , Hereinafter to bo referred to as Rivera 



* 

Collection. BlIXsMLJktwtfa. Vol. 38, No. 142, pp. 3399-3401. 
Aug, 7 No : . 587 - An Act providing for primary and intermediate schools 

fund. liisL, P. 3401. 
Aug. 12 No. 588 - An Act authorizing the Prosident of the Philippines to 

make temporary appointments. Ibid. f p. 3401. 
Aug. 19 No. 589 - Jn Act providing t.-x appropriate school ritual. ' 

0££i£l AJsM&ttjk. Vol. 38, No. 143, p. 3425. 
Jug. 19 No. 590 - .In Act providing for the sale of the Singalong Proper 

gation Station. Ibid,,, p. 3425. 
Aug. 19 No. 591 - An Act creating the Bureau of Census and Statistics. 

pp. 3426-3427. 

Aug. 19 No. 592 - An Act creating the City of Dans al an. OffJLflia] SaBBAtS. , 

Vol. 38, Wo. 152, pp. 3637-3646. 
Aug. 19 No. 593 - An Act suspending requirements to fill sugar tax 

returns for 1930-1940 crop sugar lands owners under 
lease. SflftrtnJJbafljttfl^ Vol. 38, No. 153, p. 3667,. 
Aug. 19 No. 594 •» An Act providing for the retirement gratuity to the 

estate of the late. Lorenzo Palileo. Ibid. f p. 3667. 
Aug. 19 No." 595 - An Act to authori ze the Philippine Charity Sweepstake 

Office to hold sweepstake races for the benefit of 3ov 
Scouts and Philippine Athletic Federation. Ibid., p. 3668. 
Aug. 19 : Ho.- 596— An Act authorizing the justice of trie peace and regis- 
ter of deeds to verify and register, respectively, free 
of charge, mortgages executed b" cooperative associations'. 
iMiUt P. 3668. 

Aug. 19 No. 597 - An Act abolishing f ranking privologe granted to the 

Philippine Army. Ibid,., p. 3668, 
Aug. IQ No, 59a - An Act creating the Hivil Service Board of Appeals. 

Oj;ficlal..Gaze.tte. t , Vol. 38, No. 154, pp. 3689-3690. 
Aug. 19 No. 599 - An Act providing for special assessment upon real 

properties boardering national roads. Ibid , . r 
pp. 3690-3691. 

Aug. 19 No. 600 - An Act providing f < r the emergency powers of the 

President, ibid,,., p. 3691. 
Aug. 19 No. 601 - An Act regulating the operation of the places of 

amusement. JLkisL., p. 3692. 
Aug. 19 No. 602 - An Act modifying the description of the Coat-of-Arms. 

IMsU, p. '3692. 

Aug, 22 No, 603 - An Act providing for the increase of the inspection 

fee of abaca. Off icial Sfl SS»1& &j u Vol* 39, No. 4, 
PP. 73-74. . 

Aug. 22 No. 604 - An Act amending the charter of the City of Iloilo. 

IM.CU, PP. 74-75. 



- Ml .. 111 " 66 

1940 Aig. 22 No, 605 - An Act providing for veterans pension. Ibid'., pp. 75-76. 
» Aug. 22 No. 606 - An Act regulating the transfer of vossels. Ibid.. 

pp. 76-77: 

" iug, 22 No. 607 - An. Act providing for the organization of -the Commission 

on Election. Official, SftfigAW. 7 " 1 , 39, No.. 5, 
pp. 91-92.- 

» Aug. 22 No. 608 - An Act to establish rice share tenancy. Ihftfl ft r p. 92. 
" Aug. 22 No. 609 - An Act providing for the school construction fund 

. amendment. JJaisL^ p. 92. 
" Aug. 29 No. 610 - An Act amonding Commonwealth Act No-. 330. Ibid., p, 92, 
" Aug. 29 No. 611 - .An Act amending Commonweelth Act No. 469 1 . Ibid. f p, 92. 
" Aug. 29 No. 612 - An Act amending Commonwealth Act N 0 . 566. Officii ■ 

g fl »Mfl i. v ol. 39, No. 6, pp. in-113. 
" Aug. 29 No. 613 - An Act to establish the Immigration Law. Ibid. r pp. 113- 

121. 

1941 Feb. 23 No, 614 - An Act amending further Sec. 18 of the Administrative 

Code,, as amended by *»ct No. 4258 and by Commonwealth 
Act No. 602. W &hCJtiif^sm2i2j£l2njL 
" May 5 No. 615 - An Act to amend Sections 121 and 122 of the Public Land 

Act. flffjLaia^Gflaaiia*. v oi. 39, n 0 . 74, p. 1797. 

" June 4 No . 616 - An Act to punish espionage and other offenses against 

the national security. Officia l Gazette. Vol. AO, 
No. 1, pp. 27-33. 

" June 4 No. 617 - An Act providing uniform units of volume or weight in 

tradings in rice and polay. , Ibjd 1 lf p. 34. 
M June 5 No, 618 - An Act to provide for the issue of bonds of the' Govern- 
- . mont of tho Commonwealth of the Philippines for replace- 

ment of the amount to be transferred from the government center 
fund reserve to the unencumbered surplus of the general fund, for 
the construction of public improvements, and for such other pur- 
poses as may be authorized by law. l M flj>_f pp. 34-36. ' 
" June 5 No, 619 - An Act to provide for a new time limit for the payment 

of the taxes corresponding to the years 1938, and 1939. 
P- 36. 

" June 6. No. 620 - An Act to amend Section 1 of Commonwealth Act No, 600, 

ZM&l, PP. 37-38. 

" June 6 No. 621 - An Act to oriend Section 14 of Act No. 3896, entitled 

"An Act to authorizo the organization of Rural Banks 
in the Philippine Islands and for othor purposes." J&idj., p. 38. 
" June 7 No. 622 - An Act to include the City of Baguio among the cities 

relieved from the payment of sheriff feoa. Ibid^ r p, 39. 
" June 7 No. 623 - to Act to authorize the payment of retirement gratui- 



. Ill - 67 

- 642 — ' 

r -"M-®* t° officers and employees of chartered cities, 

emending thereby Act No. 4183. Ibld. 1f pp. "39.46. . 
19U June 7 Ho. 624 - An Act appropriating tho sum of P10,000,000 for ci- 
vilian defense. Ib id. , p. 40. 

» June 7 No. 625 - Ley quo sefiala la forma en que debera de deolararse 

k 

la opcion a la ciudadania Pilipina de hi jo" de mader de 
oiudadania Filipina. Ibid. r pp. 40-41. x 
" June 7 No. 626 - An Act to penalize any violation of Section 17, Ar- 
ticle VI, or subsection (2), Section 11, Article VII, 
of the Constitution of the Philippines. Ibid,, p. 41. 
June 7 No. 627 - An Act appropriating amounts from the coconut dil 

excise tax fund collected on and after January 1, 1939, 
for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1942. Ibid , . ,, pp. 41-48. 
" June 10 No. 628 - An Act creating a oode committee. I&jU,. pp. 48-49. 
» June 10 No. 629 - An Act to designate the provincial sheriff in provin- 
ces whore there aro chartered cities as sheriff ex- 
officio thereof, with additional compensation. Ibid. r p. 49, ' 
" June 10 No.. 630 - An Act amending Act No. 3673 and repealing Act Mb. 

4031 and Commonwealth .Acts No. 166 and 347, 
I&sLi*. pp. 49-51. 

w June 10 No. 631- Ley que sefiala un nuevo plazo para presentacioh de 

solicitudes de retiro de acuerdo con* la loy numcro 
dos mil quinientos ochenta y nuove y sus ©nmiendas. Ibid. r 
pp. 51-52. 

" June 10 No. 632 - /In Act to amend Sect: on 515 of the Administrative 

Code. Ibid,., pp. 52- 
June 10 No. 633 - An Act to authorize the President of the Philippines 
rf to appoint the first additional councilors for muni- 

cipalities passing to higher class, further amending Section 
2170 of the Administrative Code. IbJuk*. pp.. 53-54. 
" June 10 No. 694 -"An Act to penalize, disrespect to the Philippine 

National* Anthem, amending Commonwealth Act No. 382, 
entitled "An Act to adopt tho original authentic form of the 
Philippine Rational Anthem and to appropriate funds for its 
printing and free distribution. D&sU, pp. 54-55. 
" Juno 10 No. 635 - Ley que concede liconcia de vacaoion y licenoia por 

enfermedad a los empleados de la oficina de sanidad 
que sin eligible s en el Servicio Civil pero que reciben sus 
sueldos de los fondos donados para las clinicas nacionales de 
caridad. IJjisU, p. 55. 1 
" June 10 No. 636 - An Act amending Sections 3 and 9 of . Commonwealth Act 

No. 192. Official Gazette. Vol. 40, No. 2, pp. 227-228. 



- My - 



III - 68 



U Juno 10 Wo. 637 - An Lot to exempt non-resident citizens of the United 

States and corporation organized under the laws of the 
United States from certain taxes. pp. 228-229. 

• June 10 No. 638 - to Act to provide for the uniform publication and " 

distribution o'f the Official Gazette. Official 0»- 

- aaiia*. vol. 40, No. 1, Pp . 25-26. 

June 10 No. 639 - to <>ct to amend Section 184 of the Administrative 

Code, as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 3; Offic^ 
CfaS^t^i. Vol. 40, No. 2, pp. 229-230. 
June 10 No. 640 - to tot extending the periods of time during which the 

appropriations authorized in Item I-IV of Commonwealth 
Act No. 555, and in Section 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 587, shall 
be available for expenditure. Ibi^ r p. 230. 
June 11 No. 641 - to Act to amend Section 21 of the Administrative Code, 

as amended by Commonwealth tot w 0 . 270.- Ibid. r p., 231. 
June 11 No. 642 - Ley que enmieda los Articulos 8 y 10 de la Ley Numero 

3222, titulada "Loy que autoriza a la provincia y : 
ciertos municipios.de Iloilo,- para emitir bonos con el fin de 
arbitrar fondos para la construccion de mojoras pormamentes, y 
que autoriza tambien la emision do bonos del gobierno insular 
garantizados con los bonos provincialos y munioipales arriba 
mencionados, y para otroa fines. IbJjL., pp. 231-233, 
June 11 No. 643 - Ley quo autoriza el traspaso a la "Philippine • Air- 
lines Inc." de la franquicia de la "Philippine Aerial 
Taxi Company, Incorporated," para explotar un servicio de trans- 
pose aereo en..Filipinas. Ibid. . p. 233. 
June 11 No. 644 - An Act authorizing the Pan. American ^irways Company 

to sell, assign or otherwise transfer its franchise *. 
and all property and rights acquired under Act No. 4249 in 
favor of the Pan-American Airways Incorporated. Ibid n r pp. 233- 
234." ' 
June 11 No. 645 - An Act to amend subsection (c), Section 22, of Common- 
wealth Act No. 1, otherwise known as the National 
Defense Act, as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 569, IfriA, r 
pp» 234-236. 

June 11 No. 646 - An Act providing for the establishment of Cinchona 

Plantations in public forest lands. Ibid. f p. 236. 
Juno 14 No. 647 - An Act to grant maternity leave to married women • 

who are in the service of the government or of any 
of its instrumentalities. Ibid. f pp. 237-238. 
June 16 No. 648 - An Act creating the National Housing Committee, 

lJ!i.cU»_PP. 238-246. 



. 644 . 111 * 69 

1941 Juno 16 No. 649 - An Aot to reduce the contribution of provinces and 

■"municipalities to the agricultural fund. Ibid., p. 247. 
" June 16 No. 650 - An Act amending Section 1 of Commonwealth Aot No. 223 

and appropriat "IjOO^OOO as additional fund for the 
award of increased air mail contracts. Iblfl nf pp. 247-248. 
» June 16 No. 651 - An Act authorizing the province of Rizal and 12 

municipalities thereof to issue bonds for the purpose 
of providing funds for permanent improvements. I bjd tf pp. 248- 
252. 

" June 19 No. 652 - An Act to amend subsection (c) and (d) .of Section -8, 

Article 2, Chapter 2, of Aot No. 3992, as amended.. 
IMu. P. 252. 

" June 21 No. 653 - An tet to require the registration and finger printing 

of aliens. IbJ^j. pp. 253-256. 
" Juno 21 No. 654 - An Act appropriating funds for the operation of the 

Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines 
during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1942. Official G»*t>%ie t 
Vol. 40, No. 3, p. 399. 
" June 21 No. 655 - An Act to permit the sale of meat of animals slaigh- 

tered in the national slaughterhouses in any place, 
without paying extra fees or levieB of any kind. liisU, p. 399. 
" June 21 No. 656 - An 'Act amending paragraph 3 of Section 7 of Common- ' 

wealth Act No. 586, known es the Educational Act of 
1940. IbJ^,, p. 400. 7 
" June 21 No. 657 - An Act to reorganize the Commission on Election. 

Ibjd. f pp. 400-403. 
" June 21 No. 658 - An Act appropriating P15,760,500 for public .works. 

. ' JMjU p. 403. 

" June 21 No. 659 - An Act to amend Sections 2, 3, 12, 19, 20, 21, 24-, 

fc and 27 of Commonwealth Act No. 502, and inserting now 
sections therein, to be known as Sections 13-a, 21-a, 21-b, ' 
21-c, 21-d, 21-o, 21-f, and 21-g. Ibid. , pp. 403-411. 
" June 21 No. 660 - An Act authorizing the abolition of the Department 

of the Interior. XfeisL, pp. 411-412. 
" June 22 No. 661 - An Act to croate an additional branch of tho Court of 

* First Instance of C a gayan in the first judicial dis- 
trict. Ibid. f pp. 413-414. 
" June 22 No, 662 - An Act to grant to the Hawaii-Boholanos Agricultural 

and Commercial Co., Ltd., a franchise to install, 
operate and maintain en electric light,, heat and power' system 
in the municipality of Tubigon, province of Bohol. IbjjLu. p. 414. 



- 645 . 



Ill - 70 



1941 June 22 No.. 663 - An Act to grant to Aurolia S. de Intengan, a frantifcise 

for an electric light, heat and power system in the 
municipality of 3alamban, province of Cebu. Ibid. f p. 41$; 
« June 22 No. 664 - An Act to grant Jesusa Viuda de "rroyo, a franchise 

for an electric light, heat and power system in Mid- 
sayap, Cotabato. Ibid t t pp. 415-416. 
» June 22 No. 665 - An Act amending paragraph (d) of Section 2550 of the 

Administrative Code as amended. jcfcid^, p. 416. 
" June 22 No. 666 - An Act to provide for the first election for president 

■and vice-president of the Philippines, senators and 
members of the H 0U se of Representatives, under the -Constitution 
and amendments thereof. IbjLsU, 416-421. - 
» June 22 No. 667 - An Act to grant to Ruperto A. Villareal a franchise 

for an electric light, heat and power system in the 
municipality of Mambusao, province of C a piz. Ibid. , p. 422. 
" June 22 No. 668 - An Act to amend Section 1151 of the Administrative 

Code, as amended by Act No. 175, bj» adding Cagayan, 
province of Misamis Oriental, as port of entry. Ibj4 ff f pp. 422- 
424. 

" June 22 No. 669 - An 'Act to provide for the apportiomenf of the gross 

proceeds of the real property tax on machineries used 
in sugar oentrals, mills, or refineries, amending. for thiB pur- 
poses, Sections 4 and 5 of Commonwealth Act No. 470, known as 
the "Assessment Law". IbisU, PP« 424-425. 
Dec; 121 No. 670 - An Act appropriating ?11 unexpended balances of the 

/ general fund and authorizing the transfer to the said 
' general fund of the unexpended balances of all special funds in 

the Philippine Treasury for the National Defense of, and the 
protection of the civilian population in the Philippines, and for 
other purposes connoctod with the present emorgenoy. Mfllaogfig n 
-CQBPjJLlUgJl. 

" Dec. ..16 :No. 671 - An Act declaring a state of total emergency as a 

result of war involving the Philippines and authori- 
sing the President to promulgate rules and regulations to meet 
suoh emergency. Official Gazette. Vol. 40, Hos. 2>-26, Dec* 6- 
27, 1941. 



Ill - 71 

1-935 Nor. 15 Executive Order No. 1 - Requiring all officials and the Armed 

forces of the Government to take an oath of loyalty to 
the Constitution and of allegiance to the United States. 

aaasss&Xs&asa&M. Vol. I, s P . Rev. m., jbvfj?, pp . 193-194. 

» Nov. 15 No. 2 - Assuming command of all the Armed 3'orces of tha Govern- 
ment. Ibid., p. 195. 

'« Not. 16 So. 3 - Appointing General Douglas KacArthur military adviser of 

the Commonwealth and creating the National Defense' 
Council. Ibid., p. 196. 

» Hoy. 20 No. 4 - Attestation of the signature of the President, ' and 

'affixing the great seal, on important documents. Ibid., 
PP. 197-199. v . 

Nov. 26 No. 5 - Reserving a parcel of land in the barrio of Hulugan, 

municipality of Tanza, Cavite, for school purposes. 
iMsL, pp. 198-199. * • 

Dot. 19 • No. . 6 - Order of issue of the City of Manila 1935 thirty-year, 

' five ? er cent bonds; Ibid. , pp. 200-201. 

Dec. 19 JTo. 7 - Extending the period within which amount appropriated by 

Act Ho. 4131 shall be available. Ibid. . p. '202. 
936 Jan. 2 No. 8 - Enforcing the provisions of the Constitution on the Civil 

Service, auezon Messages, Vol. 2, Part I, JBVOT, p. 607. 
Jan. 10 No. 9 - Creating r a committee to be known as the General Committee 

on President Roosevelt's birthday celebration. Ibid. . . 

P. 609,. 

Jan. 11 No. 10 - Prescribing army promotion regulations. Ibid., pp. 610- 

.614. ■ • ■ 

Jan. 11 No. 11 - Designating the chief cf staff and . transferring the 

Philippine Constabulary to the Army of the Philippines. 
Ibids.» p. 615. 

Jan. 12 No. 12 - Reserving five per cent of the appropriations authorised 

for the year 1936. Ibid. . p. 616. 
Jan. 2T No. 13 - Abolishing the municipal districts of Ampusungan and 

Tauit and annexing them as barrios to the municipal 
districts of Bakun and Luna, respectively, Mountain Province. 
Ibid., p. 417. . . *' 

" Jan. 21 No. 14 - Creating, the Domestic Sugar Administration. 

Ibid., pp. .618-622." 



Ill - 72 

- 647 . 

1956 ft*. 3 No. 15 - Abolishing .the barrio of " Wc«ra. municipality of 

Z^bopnga, 2^bo'^, . and organizing the sitfb of Punta 
Gabilan, iSaid municipality' into an independent barrio under^ the 
name of Punta.Gabhan. Ibj^, p . 6 23. 
" Peb - 5 N0 " 16 " ^biting the automatic renewal of contracts, Ibj^, . 

■1> £.24,. ■ i ,•• . :-, .. .......... , •!.■■•"•. 

Feb. 14 No. 17 - ^constituting the H a tWb Economic Council. 

• p - 625 r : , ,.:-,„, . , 

" Peb * 17 *V 18 ~ Cre -^ Commission- for *h 9 . purpose of studying 

^ aakin S ^commendations on ways and means to solve ' 
the present rice crises and to insure a permanent supply of rice 
at reasonable prices. pp. 626-627. . • 
» Feb. 19 No. 19 - Creating a. National ■ Council of Education to advise the 

Government on educational policies and necessary reforms 
in the existing system of education. Ibid. r pp.' 628-629. 
Mar. 4 No. 20 - Fixing office hours on Saturdays and during the hot 

seasons.. Ibid. , p. 630. . . 
Kar. 5 No. 21 - Wing Executive Order No, 872, dated September ., 27,. 

1935, Re: issuing temporary rules 'and regulations 'viih 
■ * reference to the purchase, sale, and hoarding of pal ay and rice. 
Ifci&u, pp. 631-632. 
Mar. 17 N 0 . 22 - Constituting a Committee on Pensions and appointing- the 

members thereof. pp. 633-634. 

Mar. 25 No. 23 - Descriptions and specifications of the Filipino Flag. 

pp. 635-637. 1 

Apr. 11 No. 24 - Expenditure of 175,000 of the five 'per cent required 

savings of the Department of Justice. Ifcisk., p. 638.. 
Apr, 25 No., 25 - Creating the Budget Commission. Ibid, ,. pp. 6 39-640. 
May. 4 No. 26 - Designating the permanent Chief of Staff and annbuftoing 

certain appointments of general officers of the Ariny of 
the Philippines. Ibj^ pp . 641-642. 
May 4 No. 27 - Order of issue, province of Cfebu, thirty-year five per. 

cent bonds. Ibid,,,,, pp. 643-644. 
May 13. No. 28 - Order of issue, province of Nogros Occidental, thirty year 

fiv ->er -t bo"ds. " - -1 . . pp. 645-646. 

» r. . -- 

.-^y of Iloilo, Iloilo, thirty - 
year five p^r cent bonds. Ib . id , Hf pp. 647-648. 
May 13 No. 30 - Conduct of public affairs during the President's absence. 
UsSAk* p. 649. 

May 18 No. 31 - Procurement, of medical reserve officers. Ibid.. 
pp. 650-652. 



■ III -75 

- 648 _ 

1956 May 25 No. 32 - Prescribing uniform fees for copies of official records 

and documents furnished of private persons and entities. 
IHjLm P. 653. 

" Mfl y 29 No » 33 - Creating the Deportation Board. lTfrA&. f pp. 654-655.. 
•" June 1 N ». 34 - Transferring the Navigation Division, Department of 

Agriculture and Commerce, to the Bureau of Custom a, 
Department, of, Finance. ■ Uiii.^. p. 656. 
» June 2 Ho. 35 - Fixing office hours"," on Saturdays and during the rainy 
:■' - , seasons, in the City of Baguio. Ibid. , p. 657. 

" June 3 96. 36 -kordage allotment for 1936-1937. Ibid. f pp. 658-660. 
" June 4 No, 37. -Organizing the municipal districts of Kolainbugan arid ' 

-^vi^ 1 ™ 11 ' Province of Lanao> into an independent. municipa- 
lity under the name of Kolambugan. Ibid. f p. 661. ; .' v. 
» June 4 No. 38 -Authorizing the .Army .of the. ^Philippines to 'utilize 

Teacher's Camp, Baguio, for' conducting- the Philippine 
Military Academy. Ibid. f pp. 662-663. ■ 
11 June 23 No. ^39 - Recognizing the Bureau of Civil Service and creating v the 

Civil Sorvice Board -.of v Appeals* Ibid,,, p. 664. - ' ;t 
" June 25 No. 40 - Recognizing the Bureau of Justice.' Ibid.,, p. 666 
" June 29 . No.i .'41 , r Transfer of administrative supervision over ■ the Bure^au 
" ' of ^ so ,4 8 to the' Philippine Army. Ibid^ f pp. 668*669. 
" June 30 No; 42 - Transferring the executive' supervision over offices of 

provincial, city arid municipal treasurers from the Depot-!- 
merit of the Interior to .the Depevtment of Finance. ibjd. r p. 670. 
" June 30 No. 43 - Transferring certain fractions and duties of the Bureau 

of Science to other en . .ties under the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines. IbJl^ pp. 671- 672. ' } r ■" 

" June '30 No. 44 - Transferring the collection of radio" registration fees 

from the Bureau of Posts to. the Bureau of • Internal Revenue 

providing for corresponding ad justmontB incident thereto and' for 

•■ y < \ i ■ - '•. "■■ 

other; purposes. IMdjlV PP' 673-674. 

July 6 No. 45 - Creating the National Transportation. Board, to advise the 

government on* the improvement of land, marine and air 

transportation facilities. JJr' \., t 675-676. 

" July 7 No. 46 - Designation of officers and omployees who may be, granted 

deferment of their trainee instruction for. a period not 

to exceed throve years* J^IA,., p. 677. . . ( v 

" July 7 No. 47 - Road and street rights-of-way through public lands. • 

" July 20 No. : 48 -. Fixing quarters allowance for general -officers' of the 

High Command of the Army of the Philippines, Ibid , ftf> 

P. 679. 



1936 Aug. 19 No. 49 . Increasing and fixing tho minimum daily wage to t» paid 
■ . „ to common laborers* omployed by the national government 
in the different provinces 'and chartered cities. pi 680; 

» 24 50- l^■Il«. t^^ s ^ ? ^^Wi^ th«t should b._p«ld-.td 

yoes of the national government. Ibid. T p. 681. ' 
" /iUg ' 31 No - 51 ' Orsani.ation of certain sitios in the municipality of 

Polillo, Tayabas, into an. independent .barrio under the 
name ,of Magdalo. Ibj^, p. '.684» ' ■ '" 

» Sept. 8 . No. .52 Consolidation of official warehouse receipt-permit fot 
• domestic consumption or emergency fesefve^sug^V Ibid. , 

" Sept * 9 N °'. 53 - pending Executive Order' No."' current series > by pro* 

vi^lng a new' tine .limit for Civ. 1 Service qualifioation 
fbr. employees, therein mentioned. Ibid. r p. 684. ' r - >',(.'>': 
Sept. 14 No. .54- Domestic consumption and emergency reserve sugar alio t- 
. / •. me.nts for.. 1937.. .liid^., 'pp.- 685-693. 
" S ^ ±m & ' 55 - - gating, a National. Electrical Communication' Board to • • 
- ;; ; ;&4yise..the government upon m electo- 

ral communications. IbJLdj., pp. 694-69^. '■. •• . " ••• 

Poti. 5 No. 56 - Organizing, the barrios, of Danawin/ ana'"kilbay, ouni'oi- 

pali^y of Ragay, Cam.arines Sur, into- an independent ■*. 
municipality, . undter a name to be decided' 'upon by the "inhabitants 
thereof through a'plebisc^to, with, the Seat of' govbrnmekt in the 
barrio of I>anawin,' Ibj^, p. 69C: '■ ■ :r\^ 

Oct, 14 . No, .57 - Establishing Reserve Officers Training Units in the ' 

... «\ Phiiippinoe. Ibji^, p. '69?, ■ - • '., .-V 
Oct. 14 No. 58 - Re cogni zing 'Reserve Officers Training in the Collegiate 

'.. Department of ; San Juah do Letran College. Ibtdi . j> 4 698.. 
Oct. 21 No. 59 - Transferring the i: seat of 'government of the municipal 

district of Kabasalari, Zamboanga, ' from its present lo- 
cation at .the barrio of Naga to .the barrio of Kabas elan. 1 

p. 699. ' . ;. 

" Oct. 23 . No, 60 - /aithorizing the acceptance : "of PMlippirie CommOnweaith 
" 'Bonds as security for all undertakings for which tho 
giving of a bond i3 required by law. l.bjd .. f pp.' 700*701 ♦'• '" 
" .Nov. 3 . No, '61 -. Creating the National Relief Board. 1 Ibid. » pp.' 702- "■ 

. _; ( ■ ' " '703.'; . ''.."."'■' « 

" Nov. 4 No. 62 - 'Additional cordage allotment for' 1936^1937 . ' 

Ibid*, pp. 704-705. 
Nov. 12 "No.. 63'-* ."-^quiring the Commissioner' o'f ^ublicV : Sa*tf4y/.Tto«i 'Ifeo- 

vost Marshal General as head of the Constabulary Divi- 
sion of the Philippine army, eyery mayor of a chartered city, c*. 
and every Municipal President to detail and organise speoial 



III - 75 

_ 650 _ 



members of the Police Force, Local, National and the Constabulary 
to watch, capture and prosecute offenders against the laws and 
ordinances enacted to prevent cruelty to animals. Ibid- pp. 706- 
707. 

1936 Nov. 13 Ho. 64 - Organizing the municipal districts of Malita and Pantu- 

kan, province of D a v a o, into independent municipalities 
under the names of Malita ,-nd Pantukan, wit h the seats of govern- 
ment in the barrios of Malita and Pantukan. IbjuU, p# 708. 
'» Nov. 19 ■ No. 65 - Organizing the barrio of Buenavista, together with the 

sitios belonging to the said barrio, municipality of 
Butuan, Agusan, into an independent municipality , under the 
name of Buenavista, with the seat of government in the barrio 
of buenavista. Ibid. f p. 709. 
Nov. 25 No. 66 - Organizing the municipal districts of Daguma, Isula% ' 

Maganuy, Reina Regente, Talayan, and the Southern por- 
tion of the municipal district of Libungan and the northern por- 
tion of the municipal district of Dulawan, province of Cotabato, 
into independent municipalities under the names, of Dulawan and 
Midsayap. IbJ^., pp, 710-712, 
Nov. 28 No. 67 - Delegating to the Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce 

the power to sign patents and certificates. Ibid.. p. 713. 
Deo. 1 No 4 68 - Creating the Flood Control Commission to advise the 

government in the planning and construction of river 
and sea protection and other related works. Ib ^ , 4 t f pp. 714-715. ■ 
Dec. 2 No. 69 - Transferring the seat cf the municipal distrio> govern- 
ment of Bongao, province of Sulu, from its present lo- 
cation at Bongao to the barrio of Batobato. Lbj L fl *. p. 716. 
Dec. 2 No. 70 - Organizing tho sitio of L a ca, Barrio of Kinagbaa, Jagna, 

Bohol, into an independent barrio under the same name,- 
XkL&uu p. 717. 

Dec. 3 No, 71 - Establishing a classification of roads, Ibid. r p. 718-" 

726. 

Dec. 3 No. 72 - Establishing a classification of ports. Ibid., pp. 727- 

729. 

Dec. 3 No. 73 - Establishing a classification of airports and landing 

fields. Ibid. , pp. 730-735. 
" Dec. 7 No. 74 - Transferring some of the records of the Bureau of the 

Treasury to the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
H&cUl P. 736. 

" Bee. 7 N 0 » 75 _ iiuthorizing the Domestic Sugar Administrator to issue 

necessary rules and regulations. Ibid n f p. 737, 

11 Dec. 22 No. 76 - Creating the Board of Food Inspection. 'Quezon Meaawgeft . 

Vol. 3, Part II, JBVFF, p. 591* 



1936 Dec. 23. Hp. 77 - Organising the ten municipal districts in the 'plovi^e of 

'' z ^Qanga intjfeo five municipalities. Ibid. , pi 5 92i 
" **- 23 ^ 78 - Abolishing the municipal district of Wtuga*, Moun- 

tain Province, and annexing its barrios to the following 
municipal districts: Namaltugan to the municipal' district of 
Bayag and Tayangan and Dibagat to the municipal district of 
S&bugao,* JUa^p, 593. ^ ^ , , , ; 

" De °' 23 *»• 79 ~ G i^ ^vernmont officers and employees detailed to 
, ?( ' census work under Commonwealth Act No. 170, recess from 

their- regular duties during .such detail. Ibid 4 - p. 594. , ; ' 
If Dec. 23 N^.;S6 ; '- Providing' for a prelimin^y enumeration of dwellings in 
■>'■: '- * ■ connection.with the forthcoming'taking- of a how census 
f <; ^- -the- Philippines under Commonwealth Act ; Now-.-17Ek .Ihid^ . p. SOS 
» Dec. 18 ^•-8^-^f^ 

/ Customs, together. with;its. personnel, supplieBSlHreoords, 
equipment^ or ahy other property,- and,' appropriation to the Depftrt- 
n#t : of* Labor. , ; .. r . ^ , ; .,. v . • '-, fW . .', ^ 

1937 Jan. 4 No>.: 82 Revoking. Bxocutivo- . Order No. 41, dated June .2$,-. 19 36. . 
•' JV - 4 "'; 7 ••flue.gcn Mftflflflffpfl-,; -VoW. 3, Part II, JBV3TP, p. 597.. - " 

,* Jan. 11 Now-83" ; -~Designatitig^^ 

■ ■ ■, i i as; a Board 0/ Pardons;.- Ib.i&i.,'. $9B&-fe ^' ; ,««,: 

Jah* 20 No; -84 -"Ordering thevtaking of complete ^bl^itfibd iaa^ otf real 
p^p>*ty-'0wn6rs-Mp^improv«nd*tr*4nd ^^saen^'lttftr*- ' 
•-.■0. ,:■ Census; Day,, designating census': of fieer*^^ 

and- for other 'purposes.' IbJLdjU.:p : . 599*^'^v* .-^ro-i . -r 
Jan * 22 Noi1 ' 85 * Ab °lishing and 'r G organ: iing.vall : the .existing; barrios Com- 
' 1 •'• • prised within the' now- municipality of ■ mawah,- v Cotabato. 

ifeidjui pp.: 600-601. ■■>.;:<: «*v:h'»b."i.-iiir[-'a-*i l ii l # ; ■ ■. . - ... .' 

Jan. 22 Nq^Jk-. Abolishing' and f -reorVahizing M'i-the'- i! e^8tilig''i)^o8 ebm- 
* - v * i: ; : 'i- -poised . within th G . new muni eipality of -Mids ajrap, Cotabato. 

» pp. ••602-603.' v ' ' 
-f an. 23 No. $8 - Prescribing regulations governing the'. receipted accep- 
' tance of donations of money for the National -Defense 
and the expenditure thereof .JEHiUu. PP« 606-,607. • ■ >'.■. . ■• «.-. 
Jan. 23 No.- 89 - Prescribing regulations regarding transportation: allo- 

'''* ■ ^WahCe's: of provincial and city government officials and '•' 

' ' ,: ' employees and revoking Executive k Order -NoV •45?V'"!Seri'es^bfiigl33, 

' IttLdfcf.i.PP» 608-609.' ' ? ■*."■"■■• 

Jan. 23 No. ,90 .. Creating the Hationalr.Board.pf , Surveys, and Maps. • ' .: 
' C * C '.\ v v " ; ' ''" "IMLSUi-.P* 610. : . ..-.'.•,<• V;;;..:.r .H^r-V:,' -^.V; ■ 
Jan. 23 No. .91 - Creation of Philippine Historical Committee. Ibid., 

p. 611. • i- ■ 



'~V _ 658 III -71 

1937 Jan, 23 No.' 87 - Conduct of. public affaira when Preaident is outside of 

fMlippinos. X&^ f pp. 604-605, />: Inadvertently 
arranged* - .®S.„Z7 
- Jan, 23 No. 92 - Requiring that a reserve of 5 per cent be set up from 

the general appropriations authorized for^the year 1937 
under Commonwealth Act, No. 38. Ibj,d_ Lf p. 612,' 
■ Jan. 23 No. 93 - Placing under the control of the Division of Purchase • 

and Supply all unused and dormant, supplies and eguipment 
of the National Government, and requiring the approval of the " 
Commissioner of the Budget on all requisitions and orders for 
supplies materials, furniture and equipment. Iit& , pp. 6l 3-615. 
" Mar. 29 No. 94 - Office hours on Saturdays and during the hot season. • 

IbisU, p. 6i6, 

» Apr. 6 No. 95 - Organization of the sitio of Bull, barrio of Malindig, 

municipality of B aUa n, 3 a tangas, i*to an independent 
- barrio under the name of San Diego. Issued in Washington, D.C., - . 
(for the City of Manila). Ibj^, p . 617. 
Apr. 24 • No. 96 - Segregating the barrio of San Francisco from the muni- 
cipality of Talavera, province of Nueva Ecija, and 
annexing the same to the municipality of Santo Domingo,' same' pro- 
vince. Issued 'in Washington, D.C., (f or the City of Manila). 
I&LL., p. 618. 

Apr.' 24 No, 97 - Requiring the submission of monthly reports showing the. 

trend of revenue collection and expenditures. Issued in 
Washington, D. C,, (for the City of Manila). &Mm., ■ pp. 619-621.' 
Apr. 24 No. 98 Amending Executive Ordei No. 16, dated February 3, 1936, 
entitled "Prohibiting the automatic renewal of oontraots 
by requiring public bidding before entering into now contracts." 
Issued in Washinton, D.C*, (for the City of Manila). Ibld. f p. 622. 
June 14 No. 99 - Regulations governing the pay and emoluments of officials' 
and employees of the government called for military trai- • 
ning or to extended tour of active duty in the Philippine Army. 
Issued in the City of New York, U.S.A.; (for the City of Manila). 
. Ibid -r PP» 623-624. 
June 14 No. 100- Regulations governing quarter allowances of Philippine 
Army officers. Issued in the City of Now York, U.S.A., 
(for the City of Manila). IbJLdj,, p. 625. 
June 14 No. 101- Cordage allotment for 1937-1938. Issued in the City of 

New York, U.S./.., (for the City .of Manila). Hiid^., p. 626. 
June 14 No. 102- Prescribing specifications for Portland ooment. Issued 

in the 'City of New York, U.S.A., (for the City of Manila), 
ikik, pp. 627-628. 



653 m - 7* 



V sing of official correspondence to the United States 

» *, 16 No 10, t0f ° reign c -^ie S . p . 650 . 

• «*ug. 16 No. 105 - Minimum daily WaFoa fnY . , . . „ 

any wages for laborers in Manila and in the 
province s. Ibj^ pp . 631-632. . 
" Aig. 24 No. 106 - Promulgating ^ ■ 

omulgating rules and regulations governing arrest of 

auu pp.""*" 8 ~ ° f ** — 

• ,4 No. 107 -, B .ei g „ati„ e „ 0oMlssl „ ner of Heaiih ^ ^ 

the „ . T ° harS ° ° f °° lleCti ^ t! *> information and furnishing 

::: ir;:.^ by th ° — * °^ w *- ^ 

■ * So. 108 - Mthonsin* the repurchased of lends levied mi ,old m 

■ pp. 64^r oution for * « 

• 34 No. 109 -Procedure to ^ foUowed in r9pa±r ^ ^ tenj 

and similar eo.uip.ent of the various offices of the 
National, Provincial, City and Municipal Governments. IM^ 
pp. 645-646. *. 

' 50 "°- 110 " ' taeDai "" <W No.. 102 , dated June 14, ftjf 

Prescribing epeoifieetione for etanderd Portland Ce- ' ' 

Ibid., pp. 649-650. 
*«. 31 Ho. 112 - Prescribing rules and regulations to govern the use of 

31 No 11, E tr r? rt * ti0n f ° r ° ffiCial pUrp ° Se - JEW- PP- 651-653, 
*9. 31 No. 113 - Extending of Cebu Burnt District. IbJ^, p . 654 

31 Ho. 114 - Requiring that communities to be organised into'politi- * 
oal divisions or subdivisions shall have well defined 
boundaries. JbjUU, p. 655. 

1 No. 115 - Requiring the approval of the Secretary of Public Works ' 
and Communications in the construction and operation of 
any government radio station a nd authorizing the granting of gone— 
ral authority to the Philippine *my to establish and operata . ■ 

radio stations for military Vrposes. IbJ^, pp. 656-657. 
°P . 1 «>. 116 - Requiring Government offices to. have shop repair and 

manufacturing work done at the Government Marine Rail-' 

Sent 9 V RePair ^ ?V,S With ° 0rtain excB P tions ' PP- 65S-660. 

• No. 117 - Providing for the manner of enforcing the provisions of ' 

the State Police Law. Ibid., pp. 661-662. 



654 



III - 79 



Oct. 6 
Oct. 8 

Oct. 15 

Oct. 23 



1937 Sept. 16 Ho. 118 - Croatia „ p^v . 

atlng a Ph ^PP"o Su ger Mministration. Ibid.. 
pp. 663-665. 

• Sept. 18 Ho. 119 - Creating an anniversary COfflmittee tf) fomulate ^ 

and devise, ways and means for the appropriate ope- 
ration every year of November l 5 th. IbJ^, p. 666. 
» Sept. 24 No. 120 - Regulating the registration of an assignment of number 

plates to motor vehicles used by government officials. 
Afrlflf. PP. 667-668. 

No. 121 - Creating a Government Quarters Committee. JJ^JU, P- 66 9 . 
No. 122 - Creating a National Unemployment Board. £^ pp . 670 _ 
671. 

Mfe. 123 - Promulgating regulations to govern salvage work in the 
Philippines. 

No. 124 - .Annexing a certain portion of the barrio of Daanghari,' 

municipality of H a votas, Rizal, to the poblacion of 
said municipality. Ibjd^ pp . 673-674. 
' Oct. 25 No. 125 - Creating a Lighthouse Board. J^, p . 675 . 

Nov. 4 No. 126 - Transferring from the Division of Purchase and Supply 

to the Budget Office the control of unused and dormant 
supplies and equipment 6f the National Government and extending 
the application of Executive Order Ho. 93, current series, to 
order for the manufacture of supplies, materials, furniture and 
equipment including those filed with bureaus and offices other 
than the Division of Purchase and Supply. IbJ^.pp. 676-678. 
<ov. 9 i» 0 . 127 - Creating an Advisory Ahaoa Committee. Ibid. , p. 679. 
%v. 16 No. 128 - Use of family surnames in the census of the Philippines. 

Ibid,,, p. 680, 

Nov. 20 Ho. 129 - Annexing the barrio of Bughayan, municipality of Butuan, 

province of Bohol, to the barrio of Cantigdas of the 
same municipality. IbJ^ p. 681. 
Nov. 20 No. 130 - Amending Executive Order Ho. 61, dated November 3, 1936, 

entitled "Creating a National Relief B 0ard> .. ao M tf) 
• designate the Commissioner of Health and Welfare as member and 
executive officer of said board, ibid^.pp. 682-683. 
Dec. 23 No. 131 - Directing the Director of i-iines personally or through 

his authorized representatives, to conduct underground 
mine inspections in representation of the Secretary of Labor. 
I&Uk, 684. 

Doc. 27 H 0 . 132 - Procedure to be followed in the acquisition of private 

property for public use and creating Appraisal Commit- 
tee. jCbjuUu pp. 685-686. 
D oc. 29 No. 133 - Confirming the election of provincial and eity officers 

elected on December 4, 1937. Ibid. r pp. 687-691. 



1937 Dec 30 No. W . . ^claiming the national language 0 f the Philippines 

based on the "Tagalog" language. IbJ,^ pp , 692-694. 
■ Dec. 31 No. 135 -Establishing a classification of r^adl! [LviLng 

Executive Order N 0 . 71 .) 1^ pp . 595.709. 
Dec. 31 No. 136 - Ending Executive- Order N 0 . 73, series of 1936, 

establishing an d elassifying *i™orts and landing 
fields. Ib^M p. 710; 

- Dec. 31 No. 137 - attestation of the signature of the President, and "' ■ 

affixing tho Great Seal, on important documents. iHd. . 
p. 711. **uu.» 

1938 Jan. 3 *>.!»- Providing for tho collection and compilation of histo- 
rical data regarding barrios, municipalities, cities, 
and provinces of tho .Philippines. «WVol. 4, Part I 
JBVFF, p p . 1295-1297. , r ,. 

" Jan. 14 No. 139- Creating a National Relief 'AW^b1^^"j^ ^ ■ 

.... ,,- ,. PP« 1298-1300, 

• '"Fob; 7 No, 14b - Fixing tho salaries of tho officers of the Philippine 

■ Army. p. 1301. 

" Feb. 11 No. HI - Organizing the sitio of Tignuan, barrio of Kapalong; : - 

municipality of Infanta, ?ayabas, into a barrio under 
the namo of Tignuan. Ibji^ p. 1302. 
Feb. 15 No. 142 - -Formulating regulations to govern the • administration 

and collection of delinquent irrigation fees from land- 
owners under irrigation systems constructed under the -provisions 
of Act No. 2152, as amended; fixing adjusted irrigation fees for 
said systems, and prescribing tho manner of collecting Same. 
ZhXsUt pp. 1303-1304. - . 
Har. 15 Fo. 'Segregating from tho rounioip„H.ty of Guimbal, province 

of Iloilo, the former municipality of Tubungan, and 
organising the same into an independent municipality under tho 
name of Tubungan, with the seat of government in the barrio of ; 
Tubungan. Ibid., p. 1305. 
Mar. 17 No. 144 - Creating a Council of State. Ibld ri : p. 1306. *. •'. 
Mar. 18 No; 145 - Fixing office hours on Saturdays and- during the hot 

season. Ibi d., f p. 1307. \ 
Apr. 1 No. 146 - Enforcement of the London Sugar Agreements ■ - '.< 

Ibidj., pp. 1308-1 309. . 
Apr. 8 No.' 147 - .Authorizing the Commissioner of the Budgot to take 

part in the deliberation of the cabinet in certain 
f matters. Ibid: r p. 1310. 
Apr. 22 No. 148 - Policy regarding applications for publio lands and pub- 
lic forests to be devoted for pasture purposes. Jfcilw '• 

P. 1311. 



22 "°- 149 - to the rroaidont to _ 

tain deeds or contract. Jjjjj^, p . l312 . 

Apr. 50 Be. 151 . Promazine- rules and redone Kerala, the arrant, 

custody, and trial 0 f peraenn subject tc the military 
cr naval luue the United States. 1^ pp. ms-1317. 
*r. 50 He. „ . ordain, the barriee „ f Bende. Z^L. «W 

bang layman, Cawaym> Sll0a(tm . ^ ; 

ngon, and Pageangahen, all „f the municipality of mulanay, Tayabaa, 
into an, independent municipality under the name of Bende, JMjv 
p. 1318. 

- ^^^^ 

, ' Polico PorCG - PP. 1319-1323. ' , 

June-24 No, 154' - Designating the t Cebu land!,, f as a '.lai^ai^ . 

port and landing mid, and amending for this purpose ' 
' Wcu ^* e Order No . 73, dated Member- 3, 1936, entitled- W 
Wishing a classification. of airports and landing fields." - 

• ' p. 1324. ■■■ . . ■ ... . m ._ } v ^ v .' ; ; . . 

" July. ?3 N 0V 155- Fixing the. salaries. and allowances Of the^ft^ 2 r ' 

the -Philippine Army, Ibl^/pp. 1325-1326. 
1 Nov.156- Reorganization and administration of local -police ;f 0 r- 

- ee s- Ii3^i*'PP. 1327^1331v»*. ' -., IV! ...... 

„ ^ 17 Nd> 157 !4i -°»«tti* the Rational Sugar -Board. <W XSy&lW> 

-lug. 19 No, 158 ^ Organising the barrio of ,liigono f mu„ioip«aity of B taa ,-, • 
' ngonan, province of Rir.al,' into" an independent munici-,. 
pality, -under -the name, of /.ngono. Ibjfo _ f .p T i yyg. 
•tog. 23 No; ,159 >- Organizing- certain barrios of the municipality of Dao : 

in the province of :C a piai into an independent aunicipe- •■ 
lity under the name of Cuartero. pp. . 1336^1338. >„ - 

i 23 N0i 160 - Creati «« ^ T « Commission.. J^, pp. 1339-1340. • • . 

Aug. 23 Nov 161 - Promulgating regulations to govern the administration ' 

" " a» d collection- of delinquent irrigation foes -from land— . 
owners under irrigation systems constructed under the prcrvisldns 
of i.et No. 2152, as. "amended, fixing edjusted irrigation fees for 
said systems and prescribing the manner of collecting same, and 
revoking Executive Order No. 142, dated February 15y .1938. 
HMj.t pp.- 1341-1343. ••• • •;, .1: ... 

Sept. 5 No, .162 - Amending paragraph 1 of Executive Order No; 99, dated ■ 

June 14, 1937, entitled "Regulations governing the pay 
and .emoluments of officials and employees of the government Called 
for military training or to extended tour of active duty in the > . 
Philippine Army. p. 1344. 



_ 657 ^ 



III- 82 



1938 ^ 6 ' N °- 163 " * putizi - - CivU 

hing Committees to provisionally authorize for the 

c™ i8sioner , f Civil gemce appoinWts . n iQcai ^ 

oia^and municipal branches of the .overrent. ^ pp , 1345 . 
- Sept. 24 No. 164 - T„ ily ^ ^ ^ rf ^ ^ ; ^ ^ ^ 

» Sept 27 No 165 1° T**" 8 ° 0niine ^ Philippines ' 3*4*.* W7. 
Sept. 27 No. 165 - Annexing certain barrios M sitios of the municipality 

. of Santa Lucia, Iloco S Sur, to the municipally of ■ 

Jiauguen, same province. I^ JLt p . 1348# . . , . - . 

" ° Ct * 8 - R ^ lati0ns *™«*»« the half-masting of 'flags on 

"Oct 8N ^ .f V&rment buildi ^'^ pp.' 1349-1^- • 
Oct. 8 No. 167 - Revising the instructions delimiting the respective ' 

responsibilities of the Secretary of the Interior and 
the Secretary of Chance in the supervision and control of the 
. P***6*nel and finances of the provincial, city and municipal - 
governments.- Ij^, &.> 1351-1353, V;- . • - 

" 0Ct ; ^ 168 - Secti - 6 of Executive Order No. 1 57 , dated 

' ^gust 17, 1938, -entitled "Creating the Nations* &- 
h ^ gar Board." Ib^, p. 1354v •-vV"^ . - 

" Oct. *5 K *.^9-^ ' 

' aihafion c£ offi^oW of the regular force, Philippine 
■ -My.' JlsUwi pp. 1355-1359. : ^V : C- 

" ° Ct * " 18 ' N °\ 170 " Paragraph 2 -of Executive OrW%'. 'lol^dated 

August 23, 1938, entitled ^omuigating'^ 
govern the administration and collection of delinquent irrigation 
fees from landowners under irrigation systems constructed under 
the P rovisi6ns of Act No. : 2152 r as amended, fixing^ adjusted : irri- 
gation fees for" "3 aid" system and 'prescribing the 'miinher of collect 
ting' same, and' revoking Executive Order No; 142, 'dated February 
15, 1938. " '- I3M*., p. 1360. : - " "v.; h 

Oct. 18 No. 171 - Creating a Nations Fire Prevention Board. tbidl f • " . ■ 

. ,: ; :V -"" ' pp. "1361-1363. ' /. '• 

Oct. 18 No. 172 - Regulations governing the use of motor Chicles or. 

other means of transportation' for ; off ici'al -purposes, 
iUsLt, PP. -136^1366, / ' '\ r " ■ "■* v '- '•• 

"ov, 7. No. 173 - Changing the dute of gathering' and compiling statis- 

'tical data on real property f rom • March 31 , 1937, as 
provided in Executive Order No. 84, dated January. 20, 1937*, to. 
Census Day, January 1, 1939.„^bi^ pp. 1367-1368i,- " 
°v« 7 No. 174 - Prescribing rules to govern the rate's of compensation ' 

at which now appointments and promotions in the 
positions subject to the provisions- of Commonwealth Act No, 402 



III - 83 

— 658 — 

may bo authorized. Ibjtri „ pp , 1369-13V0. 
1933 Nov, 11 No. 175 - Revising the rules , and relations relative to the 

administration and 1 supervision of looel police forces, 
iai&w pp. 1371-1375. ' • 

- Dec. 1 No. 176 -Designating the Secretary of Interior to exercise super- 
vision over local police forces. IttrfLu .p. 1376. 
' Bee. 12 No. 177 - Wing the barrio 0 f .Balaybay, ^oipeii* of S«Ho, 

province of Zambales, to the municipality of Castillo jos, 
* same province. Ibj^,, p. 1377. 

' » ^ 17 N 0i 178 - Prescribing the procedux., including modes of proof ( in 

cases before Courts-Martial, Courts of Inquiry, Military 
Commissions and other Military Tribunals of the Army, of the Philip- 
pines. Ifcid^, pp. 1378-1674. 
- Dec. 31'. No. 179 - Designating a C hief of Staff ^ ^ ■ rf 

Commonwealth Act No. 312. Ibid^, p. 1675. 
1939 ^ 27 No. 180 - Organizing the sitio of Bubuyan, barrio of Sapak, muni- , 

cipality of Batangas, into a barrio under the name, of 
Santo Nino. (Quezon y ol . % Part ^ JBVFF, p . 875.) 

Jan. 27 No. 181 - Organizing a certain portion of the municipality of. 

Santiago, Isabela, into an independent municipality- * 
under the name of Cordon. IbJLsU pp. 876-877. ■ 
Jan. 30 No. 182 - Designating the Secretary of the Interior to exercise 

supervision over the Philippine Constabulary. Ibid^ 
pp. 878-880. 

Feb. 2, No. 183 - Physical and medical examination of proposed appointees 

in the classified service of the government as' well as 
in the University of the Philippines and government owned or ' 
controlled corporations. Ibj^., pp. 881-882. 
I! Feb * 2 Ho « 184 - Promulgating rules on mobilization. Ibid. , pp , 883-885. 
Fob. 3 No. 185 - ©rganizijig certain barrios in the municipality of ' 

. Unisan, in the province of Tayabas, into an independent 
municipality under the name of Jr. -'onsen. pp . 886-890. 

Feb. H No. 186 - Promulgating rules and regulations governing the loss 

of firearms hold under the provisions of Sec. 881 of 
the Revised Administrative Codi. lild^., pp. 891-8.92. 
Feb. 17 No. 187 - Prescribing regulations .governing the granting of allo- 
wance for the partial support of dependent of trainees 
who, after the termination of the period of deferment by reason 
of dependency, are selected to undergo trainee instructions 
IbAd*, pp. 893-894. 

Feb. 23 No. 188 - Revising Executive Order N 0 . 139, dated January 14, 1938, 

creating a National Relief .Administration. iMd.. pp . 1 

895-896, . 



•^44 . ., • • " 

659 liX ~ 84 

1939 Fob. .^8 No. 189 - Creatine the Pmn j 

• seating *ne Philippino Committoo oh Geographical 

Names. JM^., pp.. -897-898. 
- Fob. 28 ^190 - ^tin^ the portion of the appropriations ^no^ed 
. by Commonwealth .let N p . 300, which may be used .for 

the. expenditures of the executive departments of the national 
•governments during the period from January 1. to June 30, 1939. 
Ifcii-, PP., 899-936. • 
. Mar. 2 *. 19! - Creatine tho tel ^^ ^.^^f V 

' hi : PP. 937-938. 

- Mar. .8 No. 1 92 .. Ending Executive Order' ^'i^'S,- 

* Mar 13 No " " B^f * ^ ^^^^^^J^^^. 

Mar. 13 No. ,193 - Designating the Government Board of Examiners- as 

• -., .. . ■ ■ ■ advisory committees on technical matters .to ,tho Office 
of Private Education, ibj^, p. 940. '{'".,-•'■•-•-- •;. 

" : 13 ?° • m ~ Rising Executive Order No^S^dlDepe^r 31, . 

i937, establishing a classification .of roads^Tbid^ 

pp. 941-962. . . ; ... I ■ ? . 

" . 13 195 " ^ing Exe^tivi Order Fo. ^^dated ie^nbe^ ' 

.1936, establishing .A classification of ports/ Xm<L. 
PP. 956-958- ::• r 

- Mar. 24 No. ; 1 9 6. - feing office hourVon Saturday's Wiring *h«ino* ' ' 

season. liid^, p.. 959. . ,-\ -v • 

? Mar ' 24 * 0 ' i97 - ^her ^ecutive Order nV 

■ -v.- v - ry 14, 1938, creating a National Relief Administration, 
as revised; by Executive Order No.. 108, dated. February. . 23,^1935. 

UaiAtut pp. 960-962. • " 

Apr. 4 No. 198 Making allotments of the appropriation for the Phllip- 

.pino /^ny authorised by Commonweal to., Act No'. 300, ,in 

series, for expenditures of. the exeoutive/dopartme^ .of^the^ .. : 
national 'government during the period from January i v to. June 
3°» 1939. , IbJL^U, p. 963. .' "-■ ' : " "■; : ^[- 

Apr. 4 ■ No. 199 - Fixihg the maximum weight of ^Bgi^'^^^t^^ 
' ^ of government officers and employee's when, transfe^ 
.by competent- authority from one station to W>therV *ncluoi^ " 
those, of the members of their fandiies^thkt- Vr&spbrtek. 
at government expense. IbJLdx, p. 964. " -pfrS -'V''; 4 - "•'• i ' ! V ' 

Apr. 11 No. 200 - Amending paragraph (7) of Executive Order*«o; ' 161, 

dated August 23, 1938, entitled ^ '^wmulgatlng '^gula- 
tiohs to govern the- administration and TOUec'tiWo^iilBlii^eni ' 
irrigation- fees from landowners under irrigation aystemVttonstruo- 
ted under the provisions of Act No. 2152, as amended, fixing 



- 66* ... 



Ill - 85 



adjusted irrigation fee 8 for said systems and prescribing the 
nanner of collecting same, and revoking Executive Order No. 142, 
dated February 15, 1938." IbicU , p. 965.. 
1939 Apr. 15 No. 201.- Amending paragraph 1 of Executive Order No. 99, dated 

June 14, 193r; f entitled "Regulations governing the pay 
and emoluments of officials and employees of the government called 
for military training or to extended tour- of active duty in the " 
Philippine Army." IbjLdj./p. 966. 
» Apr. 18 No. 202 - Requiring that savings of 5 per cent up from the relea- 
ses made in Executive Orders Nos. 190 "and 198, current 
series, for the first six months of 1939, from the general appro- 
» priations authorized in Commonwealth Aot No. 300." Il&djj- 

PP. 967-968. 

" May 3 No. 203 - Designating Philippine Army Extra Cantonment Zones in 

all mobilization centers and empowering the director of 
health to. promulgate all needful health rules and regulations 
thereof . IhAd^, p. 969. ■' ■ 

M May 30 No. 204 - Making an additional allotment from the appropriations 

for aid to the City of Manila authorized by Common- • \ 
wealth Act No. 300. Ibjd , tf p. 97c. 
May 31 No. 205 - Prescribing the policy to be observed in the promotion 

of retired offioers of the Philippine Army recalled 
to active duty. Ibid. , p. 971. ' 
" May 31 Nov 206 - Authorizing the conversion of Rural Progress Adminis- 
tration created by E-. ; eutive Order No. 191, into a 
corporation. Ibid. f p. 972. 
"• June 15 No. 207 - Requiring the establ: shment of ROTO Units in all coL- 

leges and universities as requisite to recognition by, 
tho government. JbJLsL., p. 973. 
June 15 No. 208.- Amending Executive Order No. I94, dated March 13, 1939,. 

entitled "Revising Executive Order No. 135, dated 
December 31, 1937, establishing a classification of Roads." 
I&sL., p. 974* 

June 23 No. 209 - Revoking Executive Order No. 202, ourrent series, 

entitled "Requiring that savings of 5 per cent be 
set .up from the releases made in Executive Order Nos. 190 and 
198, current serios, for the first six months of 1939, from the 
general appropriations authorized by Commonwealth Aot No. 300." 
IbAfl,., p. 975. 

Juno 23 No. 210 - Amending Executive Order N 0i 118* creating the. Philip- 
pine Sugar Administration. Ibjd. P pp. 976-^977. 

June 23 Noi 211 - Making additional allotments for various purposes from 

the appropriations authorised under Commonwealth Act. 



' if"* 

. 661 _ , if* - 86 

No. 300. Ifcisk, pp. 97&_ 980# ' 
1939 >uly 6 No. 212 . Rotation, governing seniori . ty , . prom6t±ens> ^ ^ 

ce --PMH T 10 " fr ° m ^ S ° mCe ' ° f ^ fiCerS ° f thu ™ e ™ 
ce, Philippine Army, pp# 981 . 984# 

. oipality of Majayjay, province of Laguna ^ — 

«. J , n . ^ ^ Lill °' Sam ° Pr ° VinCe ' ^ W« 985-986. 

' ^ U *' " C ~ i0 * ° f Committee oreated under 

Executive Order No. l 32 , dated Decoflber ^ ' 

IkLsk, p. 987: . - • • • • 

*■ toy 22 *, B5 :^ lKmtt78 W8i „ 0i v 5i totttl94 

the approval of the 3ooretary>f Pubiio Vorha and Oo-ual 
eatinn In «. oonetructlon ana operation of any government radio 
station ^authorising the srantin, of .onoraa authority to the 
.Philippine :. EJ to establish and operate radio"statiW f6r n^i- 
tary purposes." JSiix, pp. 988-989. ' : ' 

Executive Order No, 1 9 7, dated March 24, 1939. 1]^, 

P. 990. ( ■ ;, 

" 19 No. 217 , Prescribing certain- civic and ethical principles to be 

taught in all schools in the Philippines. Ibid., pp . 
991-992. . ~ . 

" 'AW. 25. No. 218 - Ending Executive" Order No. 166, dated October 8, 1938, 

regarding regulations governing the half-masting of 
flags on government buildings. Ibid . r p , 993, ; 
" 31 No. 219 y - Suspending the effectivity of Executive Order No. 213, 

: - dated July io, 1939. p. 994. ' 

Sept. 8 No. 220 - Segregating from the municipality of Benate^^nc, 0 f 
> . . Hoilo, the former municipality of Anilao, and organi- ' 

zing the same into a separate municipality under "the name of ' ' 
Anilao. IbjJ^., p. 995, 

'. Sppt. 9 No.. 221 - Prohibiting the filling of vabant positions and increa- 
ses in salary in the government. Ited. f p. 996. 
Sept. 13 No. 222 - Prescribing the office hours to be observed in the 

different bureaus and offices of the government.'' 
Jbjd.,, pp. 997-998. 
Sept. 25 No. 223 - Amending Section 3, rule VII, of the Civil Service rules 

regarding reinstatement. Ibid. r p. 999, 
Sept. 28 No. 224 - lending Executive Order No. 220, dated September 8^ 

1939. ij&sl,., p. 1000. ' ..f " ; - 

Sept. 30 No. 225 - Granting quarters or the commuted Value thereof, to 

officers of the United States Army who are commissioned 



fie*? 

662 111 «* 8? 

in the Philippine,- Army bfr reason n *x,/ 

, t . , „ 1 ' W< " ,ti(!atl0n ^ »° P^=l> aot. of nonooopo«tl„„ to 
o bj ooUvo e of ^oolt,, , ct „ o _ 498j 

■ cot. 25 n 0 . 227 - roaappflintBent of . uafipes of ^ ^ 

retired under Commonwealth Act No,- 331 to *™ 

. «|» ports of entry, Jj^ pp . . J0054aD6> , , 9r<,Ml " 
, «, - Co.,,, f? • h ^ ^ ^ ?5 

•' ■ ■ -JisuLti pp., igloos,- . ■■■rr**?^ 

■ ' . . *M . rt, i;- pp. 1009^1010,,- . ; •.!'■. v - •• 

Nov. 4 ^-^^^^^ 

■ bonds - -SdiUjppw 1011-1012. ' 

ifei<U .pp., ••1013-1014.- • . < . : . 

' , . , 5 ^ ^ DaXiOUm sellin * Prices of certai* articles of 

■ mov « * """ " pri * e neee ^i*y. -ittdiu, pp.. 1015-1017. 

■ , xnto- the record of military prisoners confinad ln 
^ntiaries ^d to make proper recordation, for WWeW^f 

( such prisoners on parole. Ibij r , r p. i 2 qo - ' " 

^ " ^ -«*^-*-T^ distinction between Sp^ 8h 

^ 29 ™ - «n e for a special per.it s y3 te m ^' au thori a o ^ \ 

J importers, , wholesalers., and- ^tailors t to .trade- at.prices 

hiGheT.than .those fixed i^cut^rt^^ ^ ^ 
.1202-150.3. • 

29 N °* 237 " ^ en ^ E ^outiye,Order,Wo.. 2^daU KovemWs, • 
' 1939,, entitled "Fixing the maximum selling price 0 f ' 

' °* 238 " until further orders, •the^ecretary ; to . 

■ ' the President of .the. Philippines to -aHooato .and/rfi allo- 

cate the quotas for all articles established for the Philippine^ 

Public Act Ho. 127, of the- Cpngress of the, Unitei St ate^ 
approved March 24, 1934, as amended, and ^ to issue -export, ^raits 



- 665 - 



lit - 68 



1939 Dec 



* Dec. 



' £ ■ '■ 



Deo. 
Dec. 



thereof . Ibj^, pp. ,l246-a ? 48. ; / • 

16 No., 239 -pending »r^4€^rdor No i' V «~ 

'..Ayp/-, as amended' bV 'BypWn+^ris J »r . .•!> '•• 
! 13.- ig-w *„*- M , 'u ' Zecutive °* d( k Wo » 194, dated March 

., . j-^, establishing a el A «, 0 4 #j *. 

21 No. 240 - ft.™,.- <=l«s 31 fio a tion of roads. Ja^ .p. 124 g. 

" . ■ -at of 'the ^fpol district of 

: :M. ,ta XbostT'Tr " '* llS - ^ f ^, fro. its pre- 
, *~ to.the^io of* W . , 

..No. . oertsin portioo oftW^eipaU* of .sro. 

a Crtain portion of the ^ioipalit, of ' 
^angub, Hisamig Occidental 
A , waentaL, into a regular munioinalitv 

244 * *f ^ % « the date for WW 

402. and prosorihio, the proosdure for shch allocation. /- 
JJ2id*» PP. 1257-1258.. 
31 No, 245 - Abolishing the ^ ^ ^ 

. transferring its powers, functions, and duties, as Veil 

as its personnel, appropriate, and parties, to 

the said department. ^ 1299ml26 ^ 

31 No. 246 - Effecting certain fcdjustmonts -of the personnel of the 

° ffi n Ce of Secretary of the Department of Agriculture 
and Commerce, The Bureau of Lands, and the Bureau of forestry, and 
. • ...abolishing the Division of Veterinary- Research in the Bureau of . 
" ; •' inim&1 IndU8try ■ aad ere ^^ a DivisiCn of Parasitology and Proto- 

oology and a Division of Pathology and Bacteriology in lieu • 
thereof . UjisU. p P% 1264-1286. 
Dec. 31 No. 247 - Abolishing the Bureau of Labor and transferring all its 

functions to the Department of Labor, and effecting 
l^"'" adjUStm ° nta ° f th ° P ersonne:i - thereof. IbJLsU, pp. ,1287- • 

J an. 2 "Wo. 248 - Further amending Executive Order No. 233, dated November 

8, 1939, entitled "Fixing the maximum selling prices 



Dec. 



Dec. 



„ — -cww.^^ avj.j.j.Ufi prxoes 

Jan , f Certa±n nrtiCleS ° f Prim ° "eoessity t Jl fl l flOJiafl n Wil^^ 
Jan' " Cr0Stine thS National fading Corporation. IbJLsU. 

an. 10 jJb. 250 - Creating a committee to make a study of, and reooaaend 

ways and means for the organization of a reservists 
association. S£&sAal£a*sd^ Vol. 38, No. 18, p. 349, ' 



6f4 in - 89 

1940 Jan. 17 No. 251 - Creatine „ a ^ 

bating a decoration to be known as the medal of honor 

and prescribing ruloa and regulations for its award. 
IbisL., pp. 349-350. 

- Jan. 23 No. 252 . Granting ^ ^.^^ rf ^ ^ ^ 

Off, , , P° rd0r ^ aPPr ° Ve ^ publication of .census reports. . 
^^OlSa&S^. Vol. 38, No. 19, p 373 

- ™. 14 No. 253 - * 3r ending Executive' Order N 0 . 23 3, dated November 

cert < 1939 ' entitl ° d ""^^ S6lli ^ <* ' 

- »b 20 No 2 t T ^ Prime neCeSSit " 

^b. 20 No. 254 - H eviaing Bxecutivo 0rder ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

h ,„ 31 „ ^tablishing a classification of ports, ib^ 

*eb. 21 No. 255 . nxim rt re ^ ating ^ conection of ^ ^ pier 

zetto V , ^ ° f P ° rt facilitie - QffloUQJfa* 

xsiisu Vol. 38, n 0 . 35, PP . 815-816. 

" Mar. 1 Ho. 256 . g ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

October 15, 1938, PJ^,^;^^ ^ 38 No> 
P. 829. ' 
" Mar. 12 No. 257 - Creating the deportation Board, m^^^ 

Vol. 38, No. 37, p. 847. 
» Mar. 1 2 No. 25 8 - .Authorising the parent of the salaries or wages of 

newly appointed or transferred officers and employees 
of the national, provincial, city, and municipal governments 
. *hile their appointments are pending action by the proper autho- 
rities. Off i cial fr^ J&uJfrl. 38, No. 38, p. 871. 
Mar, ja »o. 259 - Regulations governing, official travel abroad. Q££ isl£2 

Oaaatis* Vol. 38, No. 39, p. 887. 
Mar. 12 No. 260 - Extending the application of certain provisions .of 

Administrative Order No. 63, dated March 17, 1938, to 
the creation and filling of position carrying compensation at 
*>3,000 - or more per annum in the provincial governments, char- 
tered cities, and corporations owned or controlled by the govern- 
ment and their subsidiaries. Ib^ f f p. 887. 
Mar. 19 No. 2.61 - lending Executive u r der No. 253, dated February 14, 

1940, entitled "Further amending Executive Order No. 233 
dated November 8, 1939, entitled "Fixing the maximum selling 
prices of certain articles of prime necessities. " MjJ aflfifljM 
c QBrt.1.'n1;3 t Q,TU 

Apr. 1 No. 2 6 2 - Revising Executive Order No. 3 2 , dated Mpy 2 5, 1936, 

prescribing uniform fees for copies of official records 
and documents furnished private persons and entities. Off, nt «l 
Sflfrqttau. Vol. 38, No. 44, p. 983. 



_ 665 



III - 90 



1940 Apr. 1 176. 263 - Authorizing the ralntin,* 

xf, ma printing of the dictionary and grammar 

of tho national language, and fixing the day from which 
said language shall be used and taught in tho public and private 
schools of the Philippics, ^c^m^ Vol. 38, No. 45, 
P. 997. 

■ Apr. 1 No. 264 - Appointment and separation of secret ^ or doW 

tives and confidential employees. 0.^, 
Vol. 38, No. 46, p. 1017. 

Apr. 4 No. 265 - Declaring certain positions as primarily confidential 

in accordance with the provisions of Section 1 (g) of 
Commonwealth let No. 402, and amending for this purpose the se- 
cond paragraph of section 1 of Executive Order N 0 . 244, dated ' 
December 31, 1939. SmaUUto,^ Vol. 36, No. 47. p. 1035. 
Apr. 15 No. 266 - Organizing a certain portion of the municipality of 

Cagayan, Hi Bamis Oriental, into an independent munici- 
pality under the name of Alubijid, Official Vol. 38, 
Wo. 52, p. 1122. 

Apr. 15 No. 267 - Organization of the Philippine Army Nurse Corps Reserve. 

IkLsk, No. 54, pp. 1153-1154. 
Apr. 25 Ho. 268 - Requiring the prompt 'and direct submission of papers to 

tho auditor general. liad^ No. 55, p. 1167. 
Apr. 25 Ho. 269 - Requiring that the opening of all bids and all public 

competitive biddings be made in the presence of a repre- 
sent ativer of the auditor genera. BfljLu, No. 56, p. 1181. 
Apr, 25 No. 270 - Amending Executive 0: ;,,r No. 255, entitled "Fixing and 

regulating port facilities." lbj^, f No. 60, pp. 1245- 

1246. 

Kay n h 0> 271 - Modifying paragraph 2 of Executive Order No. 221,. dated 

September 9, 1939, regarding inoreases in salary in the 
same position. JEMsU.. N 0 . 64, p. 1331. 
Kay 11 No. 272 - Transferring the powers and duties of the secretary of 

public works and cormunications and the secretary of the 
interior under Act No. 3997 and Commonwealth .let No. 98, respec- 
tively, to the secretary of National Defense. Ibid. f No. 65, 
P. 1353. 

May 11 N 0 . 273 - Regulations governing the use of tho flag of the United 

States, the flag of tho Philippines, and the flags of 
othor nations. Ibjid,., No. 66, p. 1373. 

M ay 11 N 0 . 274 - Fixing tho schedule of per diems for provincial, oity 

and municipal officers and employees. AhjUU, N o. 67, 

P. 1393. 



- 666 _ 111 -91 

1940 May 11 N 0 . 275'- Transferrin tho „ ft * * 

the barrio of San P odro f +v / ' ^ Xt3 Pr ° 8ent lQo ^n at 
JQMm P. 1393 Siti ° ° f TaPi ' Wi ° ° f 

' " May 26 Mb. 276 - Prescribing unifo™ 

in™ +■ Procoduro to be followed in tho 

investigation of adniniq+r-w* 
p. 1447. aoniatatrative oases. * 0 . 70> 

" May 29 No. 277 - Reducing the real property tax o» i, * 

^ t Property tax on all permanofc plants 

'* ^no 7 Ho. 278 - F^thl *" ^ 194 °' ^a***^^ 

certain article If t ^ ^ "* ^ ^ P ^ ° f 
Order k. ^ ^ " " ^ * 

» June 7 m L ° Vember 29 ' 1959 « JWL^ 

^ to possess Rearms under certificate of registration. 
- *- 7 No. 230 - fishing the barri0 of Josug ^ 

barrio of Pi ' ^ ** itS to the 

Juna 15 No. 281 - Bf f eotuflt-i +v 

"eotuatznfe the purposes of general ruling N 0 . 5, 
June 6, 1940, of the Secretary of t 
UnltnH , ^cretary of tho Treasury of the 

(To ta 4U 3 ; S0Cti ° n 5 " ^ ° f »7 

10, 1940, as tended, of the President of the United States and 
7^~- d ~ " - — - other .thirty 
June 22 No. 282 - Mending Executive Order No. 281, dated Juno 5, 1940, 

effectuating the purposos of general ruling No. 5, 
June 6, 1940, of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States 
under Section 5 (b) of tho .Act of October 6, 1 9 1 7 (940 stat. 41l), ' 
as amended, by Executive Order No. 83*9 of April 10, 1040, as 
amended, of the President of the United States and regulations 
^ issued pursuant thereto and under all other authority of law. J^. 

uno 22 No. 283 - Creating a sugar advisory committee, defining its pur- 
poses, functions, and powers, and designating the 
secretary to tho President, until otherwise provided, to adminis- 
ter the sugar adjustment and stabilization fund created under 
Commonwealth .let No. 567. JD&sL. 
June 22 No. 284 - Ordering the hospitalization of accused persons needing 

such hospitalization in the Bilibid Prison Hospital. 



_ 667 



III - 92 



1 9 40 June 24 Ho. 285 - Prescribing regulations for the preparation and submis- 

• - a of special budgets required by section 7, paragraph 
l-U), of Commonwealth ,'.ct No. 246. JJOJ^. 
n July 8 No. 286 - Revising further Executive Order No. 135, dated December 

3--, 1937, establishing a classification of roads. SbA fU. 
» July 8 No. 287 - Seducing the real property tax on coconut trees and abaca 

plants duo for the year 1940 in the City 0 f Davao. 
9ffg.fi1.nl, Q/ififttfak..Vol. 38, No. 90, p. 1927. 
•' July 8 No. 288 - Reducing the real property tax on coconut tress and abaca 

plants due for the year 1940 and remitting the penalty 
of the first installment of the tax due on all real property for 
the year 1940 in the City of Zamboanga, subject to certain conditt. 
Ibid, 

» July 8 No. 289 - Revising fur^r Executive Order No. 72, dated December 

3, 1936, establishing a classification of ports. Mala- 

pnfinn gftnftllafeLQQ.. 

July 8 No. 290 - Promulgating rules and regulations governing the giving 

of security for every firearm held under the provisions 
of section 888 of the Revised Administrative Code. Ibj^ 
A®. 5 No. 291 - .Creating the Philippine Exposition Commission to manage 

and direct the exposition to be inaugurated in 1941. 
SffJLotaL Cas5.et.tr,.... Vol. 38, No. 99, p. 2161. 
Aug. 5 No. 292 - Establishing the Manila Port Area Rat-Proof Building Zone, 

Ibid,.., No. ICO, p. 218c „ 
-lug. 5 No. 293 - Enjoing 1 provincial an' municipal treasurers who are appoin- 
ted agents of the agr rultural and industrial banks even 
without compensation to comply f nithfully with the ruleB and regu- 
lations or instructions of the lank and not to exact unauthorized 
fees from the applicants for loans. JKiAd*, N 0 . 106, p. 2323, 
" Aug. 5 No. 294 - .Imending Executive Order No.' 47, dated July 7, 1936, 

fixing the width of road and street rights-of-way 
through public land. Ibid,,. Ho., 107, p. 2351. 
" Aug. 12 No. 295 - Segregating from the municipality of Santa Barbara, 

province of Iloilo, the barrio of Zarraga and organize n<» 
. the same into a separate municipality under the name of Zarraga, 
with the seat of government at the barrio of Zarraga. Ibid. f 
No. 108, pp. 2377-2378. 
Aug. 12 No. 296 - Segregating from the municipality of Jordan, provinoe of 

Iloilo, the former municipality of Nueva Valencia, and 
organizing the same into an independent municipality under the 
name of Nueva Valencia, with the seat of government at the barrio 
of Santa A na . Xpi&A,. No. 109, p. 2409. 



- 668 



III - 93 



1940 13 No. 297 . ^ ^ 0oOTm ^ ^ 

_ , aS0n07 *" hmdl '> — **° oXargo of all ^ 
activities rolati,* to the proootlon> or(rMizatlon ^ ^ 

of oooparativo or mutual M Moociations . ^ „ 

PP. 2435-2434. 

» 12 No. 298 - Prohibiting the autonatjc ronQwai Q . contract ^ ^ 

ring public bidding before entering into new contracts, 

Aug. .19 No. 299 - Creating . National Social Security ^.ni strati on and 

revising further, for this purpose, Executive Order Ho. 
139, dated January 14, 1 93 8, as revised by Executive Order No. 188, 
dated February 23, 1939. Executive Order No. 216, dated July 28, 
1939. XbAsU No. 11 2 , pp. 2481-2482. 
" Sept. 3 No. 300 - Placing the Bureau of Immigration under , he B}lper7±eiQn 

and control of the Office of the President of the Philip- 
pines. Ibj^, N 0 . 113f p> 25Q3> 

" Sept. 10 No. 301 - Designating the Philippine National Bank as one of the 

agencies to carry out the objectives of Commonwealth Act 
600. IbJL&uu Ho. 115, p. 2573, 
• Sept. 26 No. 302 - Superseding Executive Order No. 93 , as amended by Exe^ 

tive Order No. 126, both series of 1937, providing for 
the control of unused and dormant supplies and equipment of the 
national government and prescribing the procedure to be followed 
in making regular and emergency purchases of supplies, materials, 
furniture and eauipmont and in ordering repairs of furniture and' 
equipment. JEbj^., N 0 . 136, pp. 3247-3248. 
Sept. 26 No. 303 - Promulgating rules ar.d regulations governing the appoint- 
ment and supervision of government pensionadoe. lMd fl f 
No. 137, pp. 3281-3283. 
Oct. 8 No. 304 - Creating investigating committees on veterans' pension, 

requiring city and municipal treasurers to perform oer- 
tain duties in connection with such pension and enjoining all 
officers and employees of the Philippine government to render 
necessary assistance to applicants therefor, Ibj^, No. 138, 
pp. 3311-3312. 

Oot. 19 No. 305 - Designating provincial, city and municipal treasurers, 

librarians of the branches of the National Library, 
and principals of central schools to seM and distribute govern- 
ment publications.' JM&u, No. 139, p. 3335. 
°ct. 21 No. 306 - IWsing Executive Order No. 73, series of 1936, este- 

blishing and classifying airports and landing fields as 
amended by Executive Order Ho. 136, dated December 31, 1937. 
iitlL., No. 140, pp. 3355-3356. 



0-2f III - 94 

669 „ • 

19 40 Oct. 22 No-. 307 - Prescribing rules and regulations to govern the employ- 
ment of common and semi-skilled laborers in public 
. works, supplementing for this purpose the provisions of Executive 
Order Ho.- 299, dated .August 19, 1940. IbjuL., Ho. 141, p. 3377. 
» Nov. 7 No. 308 - Creating a committee to revise and codify the existing 

substantive laws of the Philippines, and providing for 
the expenses to be incurred thereby. Ibj^U,, Wo. 142, p. 3401. 
» Nov. 22 Wo. 309 - Amending further Executive Order No. 47, dated July 

7, 1936, as amended by Executive Order No* 294, dated 
August 5, 1940, fixing the width of road and street rights-of- 
way through' public land. lbid. f No. 145, p. 3477. 
" Dec. 4 No. 310 - Creating the Philippines Heraldry Committee to make a 

study of, and recommend ways and means for, .the adoption 
of. the Coat-of-.Arms of the different political subdivisions, pro- 
vinces, cities and semi-governmental institutions. Ibid. r No. 151 
p. 3611. 

" Dee. 17 No. 311 - Revising further Executive Order No. 135, dated Deoember 

31, 1937, as amended, establishing a classification of 
roads. _ Mnlflca?mn Compilatio n^ 
" Deo;. 23 No. 312 - Declaring that the portion of the Benguet Road (Kennor. 

Road) from Klondyke's Spring to Camp Six within the 
Mountain Province a toll road and fixing a schedule' of, fees for 
the collection of tolls thereon. Pffj.cj.al ftraitte^ Vol. 39, No, 7, 
p. 141. 

Dec. 23 No. 313 - Rules and regulations governing the use of the Coat-of- 

Arms of the Philippines and the great seal of the Go- 
vernment- as authorized in Commonwealth Act No. 602, I bid , ,, No, 8, 
pp. 157-158. 

" Dec. 24 No. 314 - Transferring powers, functions, duties, personnel, 

appropriations, property, and records from various 
statistical agencies to the Bureau of the Census and Statistics. 
Ib3.<l.,. No. 9, PP. 177-178. 
" Doc. 28 No. 315 - Confirming the elections of provincial and oity offi- 
cers elected on De-comber 10, 1940. IbJLsU., No. 10, 
pp. 195-196. 

" Doc. 31 No. 316 - Segregating from the municipality of Guinayangan, 

province of Tayabas, tho barrios of ALonoros, Bagong 
Silang, Balogo, Cabibihan, Catimo, Danlngan, Kabugwang,Kanpalap- 
dap, Halbog, Monnto, Mailgayaw, Quinatacutan, Siguiwan, Tagcawayan, 
and Triumfo, and organizing the same into an independent munici- 
pality undor the name of Tagcawayan, with the seat of government 
at the barrio of Tagcawayan. Ibjd^ f No. 11, p. 211. . 



670 



III - 95 



£214*., pp. 211-212. 

Jan. 25 No. 319 - Rogulatmg the operation of nightclubs, cabarets, d e n- 
^ cng schools, and dance halls, fl^ N Q . 24, pp. 519- 

■ Jan. 27 No. 320 - l^ lating the ^ ^ trackg " 

n t on w - ^ h0rS ° raCi ^* No ' 21 ' PP. 445-445. 

Jan. 27 No. 321 - Prescribing measures for the reduction of the expendi- 
tures of the national government to meet expected reduc- 
tions or revenues. Ibj^L., N Q . 22 , p. 471 . 
" »Wb. 5 No. 322 - Providing for rules and reflations governing the orga- 
nization, operation, and dissolution of cooperative 
associations. Ibj^, Ho . 2% pp> * ' 

»b. 5 No. 323 - Revising further Executive Order No. 1 35 , dated December 

31, 1937, as amended, establishing a classification of 
r °ads. J^iiLu, No. 26, p. 595. 

Feb. 11 No. 324 - Prescribing regulations governing the approval of appli- 
cations for vacation and sick leave of officers and em- 

eb. .2 No. 325 - Revising Executive Order Ho. 2 9 0, dated July 8, 1 94 0, 

promulgating rules and regulations governing the giving 
ITT" GVGry firearm h3ld ^ dGr ^ Pr0ViSi0ns ° f **io» 
*eb. 19 No. 326 - Regulating the operation of "bars". 

Feb. 19 No. 327 - Regulating billiard and pool halls, and bowling alleys. 

Ibid, 

Feb. 19 No. 328 - Regulating the reappointment or reinstatement of officers 

and employees who resign to engage in political activity. 

1 V: 7 No. 329 - Reducing thirty per centum the tax on all permanent 

plants and/ or trees in all the provinces and cities of 
Davao and Zamboanga, for the calendar year 1941. Ibid, 
M ar. 7 No. 330 - lending Executive Order No. 316, organizing the muni- 
cipality of Tagcawayan, Tayabas. Ib j d j, . 
iar. 11 No, 331 _ Revising further Executive Order No. 135, dated Deoember 

31, 1937, as nmended, establishing a classification of 
roads. HaA^ 

M ar. 14 No. 332 - Prohibiting the payment of additional compensation to 

officers and omployees of the national government inolu- 
„ ding those on the boards of management of government owned and 
controlled enterprises. Ibid. 



_ 671 



III - 96 



1941 Mar. 20 No.. 333 - Prohibiting the exportation of rice. J*^ 

- Mar. 22 No. 334 - /.ending Executive Order No. 333, dated March 20, 1941, 

entitled "Prohibiting the exportation of rice." JMfl* 
Apr. No. 335 - Creating a civilian ene rgency administration, defining 

its powers and duties and providing for the coordination 
and control of civilian organizations for the protection of the 
civil population in extraordinary and emergency conditions. 
Q X^lffiLaJ > jSfl2^t S- . j Vol. 39, No. 47, p , n Q1 
» i>pr. X Ho. 3,6 - Define th<3 territorla ; ^ ' f ^ ^ rf w ^ 

ibid.... No. 48, pp. 1215-1216. 
■ Apr. 16 No. -337 - Promulgating rules and regulations for the organization 

and training of volunteer guards, ibj^, No. 53, 
pp. 1299-1301. 

1 Ho. 338 - Placing the Bureau of Immigration under the supervision 
and control of the Department of Justice. IbJ^. No. 57 
p. 1369» . 

3 No. 339 - Requiring all government entities to purchase a reserve 



May 



May 



May 



supply of oil products for possible emergency .use. 
IbJLdj., No. 58, p. 1385. 



5 No. 340 - Requiring dealers, distributors, etc.,. to report stocks 
of foods and feeds in their possession and of those ' 
arriving under contract. Ibid t f p. 1385. 
May 5 No. 341 - Revising the rules and regulations governing the use 

of Coat-of-Arms of the Philippines and the Great Seal 
of the Government. XbjjU, No. 5S, pp. 1405-1406. 
May 12 No. 342 - Granting provincial ,«r vernors the power of supervision 

and control over volunteer guard units in their respec- 
tive provinces. IbJ^., No. 61, p. 1451. . ' ' 
May 12 No. 343 - Reorganizing the barrios of Mahabang Parang and Soroeoro, 

municipality of Batangas, province of B a t.angas. 

liisLu, No. 63, pp. 1501-1502. 

May 17 No. 344 - Requiring certain persons and entities to report stocks 

of essential building materials, food commodities, and 
food containers. Ibj, 4 . J ,_ No. 65, p. 1561. 
May 17 No. 345 - Designating the Department of Labor in place of the 

Philippine National Bank as one of the .agencies tp carry 
out the objoctives of Commonwealth Act No. 600. Ibid , . r No. 66, ■ 
p. 1587. 

May 20 No. 346 - Revoking Executive Order No. 331, dated March 11, 1941, 

revising further Executive Order No. 135, dated December 
31 1 1937, as amended, establishing a classification of roads. 
Malagas rm Soaia jLa&ojLu 
21 No. 347 _ Reducing by thirty per contum the tax on all permanent 



K, 



672 



III - 97 



- • Plants and/or trees in the City of San Pablo for the 

calendar year 1941. 

1941 May 24 No. 348 - Creating a committee to formula 

to loraulato a comprehensive plan 

„fM Z r ° bUildl,,e ° f th0 T ™*° ton* eree „ f the 0 ity 

" ^ ^ W " °™ • *-* <* — 0- to editor ^ H. s. 

Alanine Public .Boxatanoo Service under the Bureau 
+ . . + ° f 1)111)110 felfOTR to over the relief and other 

activities of the Associated Charities of the Philippines. 
IfauU No. 73, p. 1781. 
• U, 31 *. 351 - P* Utt , „ ffioor3 of oorporatiotls 

and their vivos and other niters of their household 
from entering into contracts with tho corporations of which they 
era officers. JMlL., pp. 1781-1782 
" W 27 No. 352 - 'Converting the municipal .district of province 

of i) a vao, into a municipality under the same name. 
ItalU Vol. 40, No. 2, p. 192., Mailable at the Jorge B, Vargas 
Finp.niana Foundation, Kandaluyong, Metro Manila, 
uly 1 .To. 353 - Segregating from the municipality of Pagadian, province 

of Zamboanga, tho barrio, of CebuanoB^racks, Parasan, 
and Tambulig, and organizing the same into a separate municipa- 
lity under the name of .Aurora, with the seat of government at 
the barrio of Cebuano Barracks, il^c^^C^^ 
uly 1 No. 354 - Promulgating certain emergency rules and regulations 

governing electrical communication and radio install a- 
tion and sale and repair of radio apparatus of parts thereof. IfcU, 
u y 2 No. 355 - Amending paragraph 1 of Executive Order No. 335, dated 

April 1, 1941, creating a civilian emergency adminis- 
h tration. ^Qi. n l_.G aaai±a , v 0 l. 40, wo. 2, p. 193. 

J uly 25 No. 356 - Abolishing the landed estates survey committee, created 

by Administrative Order No. 49, dated October 7, 1937, 
and transferring its functions and duties to tho rural progress 
adrainis tration, created by Executive Order No. 191, dated March 
2, 1939. Q££lS^ajij&J?±%su. Vol. 40, No. 5, p. 873. 
J uly 30 No. 357 _ Revising Executive Order No. 135, re classification of 
| roads. IbjvsU, p. 874. 

■Aug. 4 N 0 . 3 58 _ ^ endine Executive Order No. 306, dated October 21, 

1940, which revised Executive Order No. 73, series of 
1936, establishing and classifying airports and landing fields. 
No. 6,. p.. 1121. 



673 



III - 98 



1941 Aig. 5 Wo. 359 - Creating the H««n». i r- 

a ing xne National Cooperative Administration. 

^siai^J^ Vol. 40, Ho. 7, p. 1391. 

P Aug. 5 No. 360 - Creating tha V«+< n » 

ating the National Enterprises Control Board to coor- 

dinat ° th ° P ° licios to Sll pervise the activities of 
the .overrent corporations and enterprises engaged in economic 
actxvxtn.es. JQ^ Wo . fif pp> 1122 _ n2 ^ 

- ** 6 Ho. 361 - Creating the corps of professors of the Philippine Nili- 

tary Academy and providing rules and reflations for the 
appointment and promotion of members thereof. iMd. p U24 
■ - 15 No. 36 2 - Prescribing the rules and ^ations^I^ 

conduct of persons during obscuration of lights (black- 
outs; and during air raids. l_ hJJU , N 0 . 8> p< ia2 

" Aug. 20 Ng. 363 - OrderJn/T +„ . 

rinS the tr ^mission free of charge over all govern- 
ment electrical eommuni cation systems for the duration 
of the present emergency of all messages concerning weather con- 
dxtions and those relating to the enforcement of the neutrality 

- ^g 28 T\T T Uti0nS ^ Um '- ted StateS * 

Aug. 28 J6. 364 - Segregating from the municipality of Numancia, province 

of Capiz, the barrio of Lezo ,nd organizing the same 
into a separate municipality under the name of Lezo, with the 
b i seat of government at the barrio of Lezo. IbJ^, „o. 10, p. 20 18. 

- «. ^9 i.o. 365 - lending paragraphs 3 and 8 of Executive Order No. 354 , 

dated July 1, 1941, promulgating certain emergency rules 
and regulations governing electrical eommuni cation and radio ins- 
tallation and sale or repair of radio apparatus or parts. IMcL, 
P. 2019. • 

Aug. 31 No. 366 - ending further paragraph 3 (a) of Executive Order No. 

255, dated February 21, 1940, fixing and regulating the 
collection of wharf or pier charges for the use of port facilities, 
- as amended by Executive Order No. 270, dated April 25, 1940. 
IhjLsU, p. 2020. 

Sept. 1 Wo. 367 - Amending Executive Order No. 357, entitled "Revising 

further Executive Order No. 135, dated December 31, 1937, 
as amended establishing a classification of roads. IbjuL., p. 2020. 
Sept. 9 No. 368 - Procurement of offshore patrol reserve officers^ 

I&lLu No. 11, P , 2242. 
Sept. 15 No. 369 - Revising Executive Order No. 274, fixing the schedule of 

por clioms for provincial, city and municipal officers 
and employees. Ifcidj., No. 12, p. 2441. 
Sept. 29 N 0 . 370 _ Prescribing a uniform procedure for the investigation of 

administrative casos, and revoking Executive Order No. 27" 
IfeAsU.. No. 14, p. 2788. 



- 674 - 



III - 99 



1941 Oct. 2 Ho. 371 - Fixing the maximum selling prices of certain articles 

of prime necessity and promulgating rules and regula- 
tions for their enforcement. IJ^, No. 15, p. 3015. 
" Oct. 14 No. 372 - Providing for the licensing of the civilian emergency 

administration of the sale, . distribution, or other 
disposition to the public gas masks, respirators, or other pro- 
tective devices against irritant or poisonous gases or substances, 
creating the Board of Inspectors for gas masks, and defining its 
functions and dutios. PbijjL, JTo. 16, p. 3247. 
" Oct. 15 No. 373 - Revising further Executivo Order 4o. 135, as amended, 

establishing a classification of roads. Ib^d.., No'.- 19, 

P. 3799. 

- Nov. 19 No. 374 - Providing for the control and regulation of the ship- 
ment of export quota sugar and for the distribution of 
the proceeds thereof, and creating a sugar control authority for 
the purposes. IfcisU,. No. 22, p. 4279. 
Dec. 3 No. 375 - Extending the scope of the powers nested in the sugar 

control authority be Executive Order No. 374 to include 
the control and regulations of the shipment of expert sugar to 
countries other than the United States and the distribution of 
the proceeds thereof. I_bjUU, To. 25, p. 4711. 
Dec. 6 No. 376 - Revising Administrative Order ivo. 107, dated October 2, 

1939, entitled "Creating an Emergency Control Board." 
XttfUt P- 4712. 

Dec. 8 No. 377 - Prohibiting excessive withdrawal of deposits in all 

banking institutions in the Philippines. Ibj^, p. 4712. 
Dec. 10 No. 378 - .mending further paragraph 1 of Executive Order No. 335, 
4 dated April 1, 1941, creating a Civilian Emergency 
Administration. JJjJjUi pp. 4713-4714. 
Doc. 10 Hp; 379 - Baelaring Executive Order No. 213, dated July 10, 1939, 

entitled "Annexing- a certain portion of the territory of 
the municipality of Hajayjay, province of Laguna,' to the municipa- 
lity of Lilio, same province," to be in full force and effect. 
IbL&M PP. 4715-4716. 
Dec. 11 No. 38O - /unending further paragraph 8 of Executive Order No. 354, 

dated July 1, 1941, entitled "Promulgating certain emer- 
gency rules and regulations governing electrical communication and 
radio installation and sale or repair of radio apparatus," as 
amended, by Executive Order No. 365, dated August 29, 1941. Ibi&L, 
p. 4717. 



- 675 _ 



m - 100 



1941 Dec. 11 Ho. 381 - Providing for th P m ■ u 

-or i or tne establishment of priorities in 

. telephone and telegraph QGrvice ^ ore&Ung therefor p 
telephone and telegraph priorities board.- IbJ^, 25 , 
pp. 4717-4718. 

" - DeC ' 15 - ******* the commandeering of food, fuel, building 

materials, and other articles or commodities of prime 
necessity, prohibiting and penalising the hoarding thereof, P „ d 
providing for a more effective, enforcement of the provisions of all 
anti-profiteering orders. Ib^, pp . 4718-4720. 
• Dec. 16 No. 383 - bonding Executive Order No. 377, dated December 8, 1 94 1, 

entitled "Prohibiting excessive withdrawal of deposits 
an all banking institutions in the Philippines." Ij^, pp . 47 20- 

" Dec. 16 No. 384 - Fixing hours of labor durin g the present emergency. ' 

XMjLlj. p. 4721. 

Dec. 17 No. 385 - Transferring from the General Editing Office the func- 
tions of preparing,, and keeping the accounts of the 
various departments, bureaus, offices, and dependencies of the ' 
National. Government, including the Supreme Court, the Court of 
Appeals, The Commission on Elections, and the University of the- 
Philippines, as well as the functions of acting upon requisitions 
for supplies, materials, and equipment, and of operating the sal- 
vage-warehouse. IbjyU No. 26, pp. 1-3. 
" Dec. 18 No. 386 - Placing the red stripe of the Filipino flag up during ■ 

the present emergency. IbjjU, PP . 3-4. 
Dec. 18 No. 387 - Fixing the schedule of burial expenses in case of death 

from injury received or sickness contracted in perfor- 
mance of duty. IbjjU, pp. 4-5. 
Dec. 22 No. 388 - Placing the Bureau of Inmigrotion under the Office of 

the President. Ibjjk., p. 6. 
Dec. 22 N 0 . 389 - Directing the immediate arrest and vigorous prosecution 

of person pillaging, looting or committing other acts of 
lawlessness against the civilian population. Ibid. , pp. 6-7. 
Doc. 22 No. 390 - Prescribing the order of presidential succession and 

abolishing the Department of the Interior. Ibid., 
Nos. 23-26, Doc. 6-27, 1941. 



Ill - 101 



676 *?: 



D. GENERAL ORDERS 
(inoomplete) 

1 1957 Oct. 30 Presentation of Distinguished Service Star to First Lieutenant 

Hugh A. Parker, Air Corps, U. S. Army. Quezon Messages , Vol. /.. 
Part I, JBVPF, p. 1725. 

2 1938 Feb. 3 Posthumous award of Distinguished Service Star to the late 

Lieutenant Colonel James. B aS evi Ord, U. S. Army. Ibjd . f p. 1726. 
5 " Apr. 19 Award of Distinguished Star to Captain Bonner. F. Fellers, Coast 
Artillery Corps, U. 3. Army. Ibirt. r p. 1727. . 

4 " May Award of Distinguished Service Star to First Lieutenant Williem , 

L. Lee, Air Corps, U. S. Army. Ibid*., p. 1728. 

5 1939 Jan. 3 Award of a bronze clasp for the Distinguished Service. Star to 

Major General Paulino Santos, Philippine Army. v ol. 5. 

Part I, JBVPF, p. 1340. 

6 " June 21 Composition of Central General Staff of Philippine Army. Ibid . r 

p. 1350. 

7 " July 13 Award of Distinguished Service Star to Captain Mark K. Lewis, 

Jr., U. 3. Army. Ibid.., p. 1351. 
0 11 July 14 Posthumous award of Distinguished Conduct Star to Captain 
Julian Olivas, Philippine Army. IbJ^. , p. 1352. 

9 " July 14 Designation of Philippine Army station at San Fernando, 

Pampanga, as Camp Julian Olivas. IbjLi. , p. 1353. 

10 " Dec. 12 Award of Distinguished Service Star to Lieutenant Colonel 

Dwight D. Eisenhower. IbJL&. , p. 1354. 



\ 



U ~ 105 



577 _ 



.1 


1935 


Nov. 


25 


o 
i. 


11 


Deo. 


9 


■■} 


n 


Dec. 


12 


4 


!t 


Doc. 


12 


5 


II 


Doc . 


12 


- 


11 


Dec. 


12 




tl 


Dec. 


12 




11 


Dec. 


13 




11 


Dec. 


16 


1 G 


11 


Dec. 


16 


11 


II 


Dec. 


16 


1.": 


It 


Dec. 


16 


1 '' ; 


II 


... ■ 


1 7 
1 / 


14 


II 


Dec . 


13 


1 ') 


11 


Dec . 


18 


In 


II 


Dec . 


15 


1 7 


II 


Dec. 


18 


16 


II 


Dec. 


19 


1 9 


II 


Dec. 


19 


20 


It 


Dec. 


19 


• -1 


11 


D3C . 


1 9 


22 


II 


Dec. 


19 




II 


• 




IS 

o 


Jec . 


1 9 


24 


II 


Dec . 


20 


25 


II 


Dec. 


20 


26 


11 


Dec. 


20 


( - I 




June 


1 0 


2-::. 


1! 


June 


23 


29 


II 


June 


24 


'; ; o 


II 


June 


25 




tt 


July 


6 


32 


II 


July 


6 



}fi. I-QOSoAGjjO j. v ,;L3 r7ATI03£L ASSiiDJLY- . -* • 
(Incomplete) . .• .. 

national Defense, .^capn JlsgSflfigfti. Vol, I, Sp. Rev. Bd. , 
JLVFF, pp. 18-35. 

Railroad Bonds Redemption. Ibid. , pp. 36-39. 
Court of Appeals. .Ibid., pp. 40-42. 
Government Reorganisation. Ibj.d^, pp. 46-43. 
Speaker's Salary. IJjjLd.,, p. 49. 
Locust Campaign Fund. Ibid.., p. 50. 
•Jational Afssenbly Sessions. I.bid,., p. 51 . 
Office of the Resident Commissioner. Ibid. . p. 52. 
Civil Service Law A'.iendnent. lbid^, p. 55. 
Olympics Fund for Berlin Delegation. .Ibid.., p. 68. 
Cebu Junior Collage Fund. Ibid._, p. 69. 
National Assembly Appropriation. .Ibid.., p. 73. 
Public Calamity Fund. .Ibid..., p. 75. 

Budget for Resident Coamissioner 1 s Office. TbjA._, p. 71. 
Creation of National icoaoKic Council. Ibid. , pp. 79-86. 
Flood Control Fund, Jb.^d..., pp. 67-33. 
Probation Office. Ibid., p. 90. 

Traveling Expenses for Resident Conuissicner and Staff. 
IJ?JA\> P- 72. 

Friar Land Purchase. Ibid..., pp. 93-^94. 
Agricultural Colony Roads. Ibid,.., pp. 95-96. 
Rice and Cera Px-oblem. .ibid . , p. 97. 
• Inauguration Expenses Deficit. I.bid_._, p. 100. 
Necessity of Inuediate Enactment of Bills. Ibid«.» pp. 101-102, 
Trade Conference Fund. I bid. . p. 103. 
Biiibid Prison Transfer. Ibid.., p. 105. 

Port V/orks Fund Transfer to General Fund. Ibid»_, pp. 103-109. 

* * 

Country's Condition and Problems, .auszc-n Kessaff es, Vol. 2, 
Part I, JBVFF, pp. 159-181. 

Budget for the Year 1937. Ibid.., pp. 162-137, 
Plebiscite on Viomen Suffrage. IbijLj. p. 188. 
Stabilization of Pension Funds. Ib^d..,., pp. 189-190. 
Expropriation Procedure in Relation to Large Landed Estates. 
Il?Mi.f ?• 194. 

Reforms and Changes in the Organization of the Comiaonwealth 
Government. JJbid..^ pp. 195-195. 



- 678 _ 



III - 1 03 



» 1936 July 6 Hol ding of Plebiscite Q „ ^ ^ ^ 

34 July 9 Fund, for tho Insular Psychopatic Hospital. 1^., pp. 

198-199 

35 - Jul, 1 3 miing of th0 ^ cant Pos . tion(i ^ ^ 

IM.4. > p. 200. 

36 " 



37 
28 

39 

40 
41 

42 



45 " 

46 " 

47 " 

48 " 

49 " 

50 » 

51 " 

52 " 

53 " 

54 " 

55 " 

56 >. 

57 •• 



July 13 Changes in tho Appropriation for the Bure a u of Justice. 

Ifcid.., pp. 201-202. 
July 15 Carriage of Goods by Se a . Ibid., pp. 203-204. 
July 16 Abolition of the 13u roa u of Non-Christian T ribe s . 
PP.. 205-206. 

July 17 Unexpended Appropriations of tho Philippine Amy fot 1936 . 
pp. 207-209. 

July 20 Increase of Slaughter Fees. Ib^. , pp. 210-212. 
July 21 Vetoing Bin Ho. 492, "Extending Financial Ad to Arnaiz 
and Calvo, Manila-Madrid Fliers." pp . 366-368. ■ 

July 29 Repeal of the Sweepstakes Law. £44,, pp . 218 _ 219 . 

43 " lug. 14 Port Works Fund. Ibid., pp . 2 24-22 5 . 

44 " Aug. 15 Funds for lite-rations and Improvements of Government Build- 
ings. .IbJUi., pp. 226-227. 

^g. 31 Turning to the Philippine Postal Savings Bank Money which 

Should Escheat to the Government . ,1^. , pp. 228-229. 
Sept. 2 Reduction of Menbership in the District Board of the 'Metro- 
politan Water District. Ibjd- f pp. 232-233. 
Sept. 2 Additional Appropriation for Salaries and Wages of Employees 

and Laborers. Ibid., pp. 230-231. 
Sept. 9 Report of Hon. Quintin Paredes for the Period from February 

13, 1936 to Juno 20, 1936. Ibid., p. 239. 
Sept. 14 Creation of Additional Scholarship in Arts, Sciences and ' 

Letters in 1937. Ibjji. , p. 240. 
Sept. 14 Offer to the Government of the Philippine Railway Company 

Sinking Fund Bonds. Ibj jj . , pp. 241-242. 
Sept. 14 Disposal of Excess Sugar. IbM. , pp. 248-249. 

Sept. 15 appropriation for the Maintenance and Operation of Wolfareville 

Institution in 1937. iM-d.., pp. 250-251. 
Sept. 16 Consideration of Recommendations in the Report of Commissioner 

Paredes. Lbj^. , pp. 252-253. 
Sept. 23 Remission of Uncollectible Accounts due to the Government. 

-Ibid., pp. 254-255. 
Sept. 28 Increase of Total Estimated Regular Income for 1936 to 

m, 737,000. ibid.., pp. 264-265. 
Sept. 28 Allotment of Portion of Cedula Tax Proceeds for School Purposes. 

I&L4., pp. 266-267. 
Sept, 29 Taking of New Consus in 1937. pp. 268-269. 



- 679 - 



III - 1 



58 1936 Sept. 29 Need for m FW, 

Bio! T an ; ra ° reenCy -PP-Priation for Keeping Open 
Elementary Schools „ nJ n, 

59 " Sept. 29 Wor !^ pp - 270 " 271 - 

I««tr Appropriations for P„ bli o Vorkn in 1937 . ^ 
pp. 272-273. -uaa»> 

60- " Sept. 29 Transfer of Cortnln -1 . 

^ al11 - ldnini ^ative Supervision from the 

62 » Sept. 30 Regulation of Entry of <n loria * , „ 

. y ° f • Ulen3 t0 and Residence in the Phi- 

iiPP^s. IbjU., pp. 278-279. 

Sept. 30 -Appropriation of P500 000 fn,, ^ n 

5UO,000 for the Construction of L Q d- 

« q+ P0Saria ^ LuZOn ' PP. 280-282. 

S0Pt ' " — t Relation of Socurities. 

PP. 283-284. -JM.» 

JJMSUf PP. 300-302. 
' 67 " ° 0t ' 2 ": dU ! tt0n ° r *™ <* on n-tioloo Covorod ly 

68 " Or-t on 

Oregon of the National Power Corporation. pp . 

6 ^ " Oct. 7 ^crease of the Bs ti ffla te of the Total Regular Inoce of 

the National Government for 1937 by P 5 ,002,600. IbM., 
P. 313. 

70 " 0 4- 

VI » Oct a C IramG ? te EnaCtmCnt ° f ImP ° rtMt BillS ' PP" 314-322. 

72 ■ Oct' q ^T"^ ° f Thr0 ° CiUS - PP* 32>324. 

73 ■ oc ' j ; T n ~ ° f ImP0r ^ t Bills ' PP« 325-327. 

ot. 19 Lxquxdation of Government Pension and Retirement Funds 



and Establishment of Government Insurance Service. Ibid,. 
PP. 329-339. ' 



75 " 



ot. 20 Consideration of Important Bills, r^., pp . 

c • 22 Abolition of .Accrued Leave, Increase of Vacation Leave and 

76 » Oct -^Howance of Sick Leave. Ibiii., pp. 344-346, 

24 Ancndmont to the Charter of the Manila Railroad Company 



77 - o^' 11 ( ;° n8idoratio " 0^ Important Bills. Ij^. , pp . 347 _ 348t 

78 « 



79 



■Ifeisl., pp. 351-352. 
24 Amendments to the Revised Penal Code and Act No. 2580. 
p. 353. 

0ct - 26 Appropriation of P25,000 as /id to the V.A.A.I. Ibid ., 
P. 354, 



HI - 105 

- 690 - 



19* oot. a 7 o roa , lon of m Wituto ofFML 

PP. 355-356. ^ JJHA.» 

Oct. 27 of th0 „, ationai ?roduoo Exch ^_ ^ ^ 

Oct. 27 WUtion of P50 ,oco for Identifylns ^ ^ ^ 



atlM f / ^tion. "Bov Scout of tho P hi - 

Oct. 29 Vetoing 3iH No. 128 Wh« ■ ■ 

. °* ±A -* ■^thoriamg Automatic Promoti 



Nov 6 Z \ ' i<,rViCO PP. X9-KO. 

or. 6 Vote 3lU „. ^ „ providing ^ ^ 

*** WtM ° f - Nation of a 



Nov 5 It" , ^ ° f "» l ° m3 -" I"- P- 371. 

2= of OonfUot Between tae fc*^ Wl . Bt 

No, T . ! ,U " 10iP,1 C ° ,m0il -" ttt - »• 372 -3"- 

' 7 I**"* *• **, for ^opriation of . 

Funds for tho Manufacture of Mprovod Haad w ^ . 

tacossorioa." J-tsU. , p. 37a. 
""V. 7 Votola, I!o . 130 , „ H9[lucine Oost of 0fldastrai ^ 

JJBili,, p. 375. 

Nov. 7 Vetoing 3m No. 274. • 

274, ..uthonzmg Leaso of Certain Public 
Lands in Hfinila." JDsU., p. 376. 

K0V * 7 VlJt ° ing 3111 *>' 2264 ' "hiding for .Mditional Compen- 
sation for the Justice of the P 00 oo of V irac , Subprovinoo 
of Catandunnes." pp . 377.. 373. 

Nov. 8 Vetoing Bin No. 1653, "Providing for Establishment of and 

Appropriation for a Labor Census." Ibj^., p . -jqj. 
Nov. 8 Vetoing Certain Items of Bill No. 228 7 , "Providing for 

Appropriation of Funds for the Construction .and Repair of 
Dama Inside the Friar Lands Estates." Ib^., pp . 379.300 
<°v. 8- Vetoing Bin No. 2322, ".Ending tho 0 S men a Retirement Jet." 

IMA., pp. 381-382. 
Nov. 18 Vetoing Bill No. 2090, "Providing for Election of Officials 

of Municipal District Governments." Ibjjj. , pp. 384-385. 
Nov. 20 Vetoing Bill No. 2026, "Providing for Establishment of Sa, 
natoriuins and Clinics for the Cure and Prevention of Tu- 
berculosis." Ibid., pp. 386-387. 
Nov. 20 Vetoing Bill No. 2381, "Amending in Toto Act Creating the 
City of Cebu." Ibid ., p. 390. 

Nov. 20 Vetoing Bill No. 2222, "Excluding Tuba Landowners V«io. Sell 
Their Own Products, from the Definition of Retail Dealers 
In Tuba Etc. " Ibid., pp. 380-389. 



- 681 



HI - 106 



93 1936 Nov. 23 Vetoing Bill Ho. l 052 " Autw , „. , 

±v?t, Authorizing the Province of 
^uova Eoija to Spend tho Unexpended Balance Qf ^ 
Proceeds of Certain Bonds." IbjU. , pp 391 _ 3q2 

99 " Noy. 29 Vetoing Bin Wo 118 n "r 

«o. 1180, "Condoning tho Bonds of Luis Luna 
«»*' al." Ibid., pp. 393-394. 

100 " Nov - 29 Votoinr- ton n 

ctoing Bill No. 1584, "Fixing the Ilininum Height Require- 
ment for Commissioned 0 ffiMrs of the PhilippinQ , 

Jtaii-f p. 397. 

101 » „ov. 29 v otoin , Biu If0 . 1506 _ „ providing ^^^^^ ^ 

P.rsonno! i„ 0m of fcu^ stom En8inoa> 
Haohtn., of Intern^ Coition and ...p paratua Run ty 

103 ■ Nov pa r t0r SyirX " li0 P °"' !r -" »• »^». 

3 0T ' 29 V etoin/r Bill No l^nfi >m 

■> i-I "o. 1;06, Providing Limitation on Re a p- 

pointnent of Provincial Fiscal*. » ^ p> 4Q1> 
29 Vetoing Bin No. l 9 B4, "Providing for Standardization of 
Salaries of Officials and Employees of Baguio." Ihi4. , 
PP. 402-403. 

29 Vetoing Bin No. 21 9 8, "Regarding Licenses for First P nd 

Second Class Bars." Ibid., p . 404> 
29 Vetoing Bin No. 221 9 , "Levying b "t« of, One-Fourth Per 
' Centum of Total Selling Price of Stocks, Bonds or Other 
Securities." Ib^d., pp . 405-406. 

107 " N0V * 29 VGt0int ' Bil1 No ' ™> "Exempting From the Merchants Salos 

Tax Sales 0 f Agricultural Products Through Produce E x - 
changes." Ibid,., pp. 407-408. 
29 Vetoing Bill No. 2397, "Relating to Final Disposition of 
^rtgagod Real Property." IbJ^. , pp . 409-410. 
- 937 .'ug. 28 Date of General Elections for Provincial and Municipal 

Officials. iJaaaaajsgaaagga, Vq i. 3, Part 1, jbvff, pp . . 

187-188. 

Aug. 30 Emergency Appropriations for New Schools and Classes. 

Mm p. 189. 
Sept. 1 Repeal of Probation Law. IbJ^. , pp. 190-193. 
Sopt. 3 Appropriation for the Extension of Elementary Instruction. 
UsiA', p. 194. 

s ^pt. 3 Appropriation for the Construction of Elementary School 

3uildings. Ibid. , pp. 195-196. 
Sept. 3 Expropriation Proceedings for Acquisition of Large 

Haciendas. Ibid . r pp. 197-199. 
Sept. 3 Heavy Penalty for Jueteng. Ibjji., p. 200. 



104 " Nov. 

105 " Nov. 

106 " ff ov . 



108 » N 0V . 



110 

111 
112 

113 

114 

115 



Iir - III - 107 * 

_ 682 _ 

H6 1937 Sept. 3 Creation for Allotments of Philippine Sugar Quota. flU, 

pp. 201-202. ' 
117 » Sopt. Pull Payiaont of Pensions to Retired Officials and Em- 

ployees. IbS4., PP. 203-205. 

no » sopt. I, Voto inff am , 0 . 2417 , „ Hovokine ^ w ■ 

JU2i&. > PP. 206-208. 
•119 " Oct. 7 Vetoing 3 iU No. 24?2 , "Appropriation for Construction 

of Elementary School Building." 1]^., pp . 2 o 9 -210 
120 - Oct. 18 Improvement of Philippic Conditions, Philippine Independence 

and Relations with ,™rican High Commissioner. Ibid., pp 
211-229. 

26 Transmitting Report of Director of Forestry on Reforestation 

and Afforestation. Ibjjl., p. 2 30. 
28 Transmitting Report of Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce 
on the Manner, the Amount Appropriated in Commonwealth iot 
No. 110 has Been Spent. Ibid.., p . 231. 
30 National Budget for 1938. IbM. , pp . 232-241. 
1 Volition of Cedula Tax. iMd., pp . 242-243.' 
10 Transmitting List of Personnel of Bureau of Aeronautics. 
IbisL., p. 244. 

12 Appropriation for Public Improvements in Ilanila. Ibid.., 
p. '245. 

16 Transmitting Report of Radio .Broadcasting Committee. 1^., 
p. 246. 

17 Changes in Appropriations for the University of the Phi- ' 
lippines. Ibid . , pp . 247-253. 

129 n Nov. 19 Immediate Enactment of Certain Bills. Ib^., p. 254. 

130 * W0V ' 19 Ch ^s in the Budget for 1938. Ibid.., pp . 255-260. 

Nov. 20 Appropriation for Public Improvements in Manila. Ibifl., 
p. 261. 

tov. 20 Immediate Enactment of Certain Bills. I_bjji., p. 262. * 
20 Appropriation for Relief of Typhoon Sufferers. Ibid . r 
p. 263. 

18 Vetoing Bill No. 473, "Specific Persons Liable For Pro- 
secution for Cruelty to .'ninnls." Ibjfl. , p. 267. 
Dec. 18 Vetoing Bill No. 1601, -"Fixing Salaries of Elective City 
Councilors in Baguio." Ibid . r pp. 268-269. 
136 1938 Jan * 2 4 Revision of the System of Taxation. Quezon Messages / 

Vol. 4, Part I, J3VFF, pp. 257-266. 

F< 2b. 1 Public Works Program. IbM., pp. 267-278. 
138 " p nV „ „ 

2 Participation in the New York World's Fair and the Golden 

Gate International Exposition. Ibid . f pp. 279-280. 



121 " Oct. 

122 " Oct. 

123 " Oct. 

124 " Nov. 

125 " Nov. 

126 " Nov. 

127 " Nov. 
120 " N 0 v. 



133 " Nov. 

^ " Dec. 

135 » 



XIX- 

■ _ 68? 111 ~ 1 08 

„ 1958 Fo b . 4 C roa tion of p oaitl(1M for ^ ^ ^ 

,» Court of Industrial Relations. iaid.. , pp. 281—282, 

140 Feb. 7 Report on the Li an Est -te nnrf tv 

■ 811 bStat0 ^ d Disposition of Expropriated 

Estates. 1^. f pp< 283-284. 

141 " Feb. .7 National Budget for Tq^q „.» v 

g T 1939 md B naotnont of a Salary Standar- 
dization Law. Ibid., pp. 285-287. 

142 " Fob. 8 Mditionnl ippropnintion for tno of Ho^itos 

m Haciendas, pp. 288-289. 

Feb. 10 Legislation Confirming th,-. TW,-,™ +• , , 

urming tiiu international Agreement Regarding 

the Rotation of Production and Marketing of Sugar. Ibid 
PP. 290-291. -«*..•» 

Feb. 10 Increase of Meters of the Court of Appeals. 1^., pp 

292-293. ■ 
Feb. 16 Prompt Payment of Salaries and V m . Ibid., p. 29 4 
Feb. 18 Legislation on Acceptance of Honors Conferred upon Major 
General Basilic J. Valdes and Captain Ciriaco C«r±llo. 
IbJJL., pp. 295-296. 
Feb. 21 Legislation on Jooeptanoo of Decoration Conferred upon 

flr. Felipe Cuaderno. Ibjd., pp. 297-298. 
Feb, 25 Petroleum Exploration in the Philippines. Ib^. , pp.' 
299-302. 

Mar. 3 Additional appropriation for Relief Ifork. pp. ' 

303-304. 

Mar. 8 Representation of National Assembly in the Council of State, 
pp. 305-306. 

Mar. 10 Appointment of Speaker and Floor Leader of National 

Assembly as Members of Council of State. Ibi^ ., p . 307. 
Mar. 17 Report of tho Government Survey Board. IbM., p. 308. 
Mar. 17 Early Partial Release of the Appropriation for Public 

Works. TbiA., p. 309. 
Mar. 18 Additional Pay for trainees Who May Serve Longer Than 

Five and a Half Months. .Ibid. , pp. 310-312. 
Mar. 25 Changes in tho '.dministration of the Public School System. 

UaiA. t pp. 313-317. 

Mar. 25 Report of tho Committee Created to Study Effects of Earth- 
quakes on Buildings. Ibid., p. 318. 
Mar. 25 Sinking Fund as Guarantee Against Loss of United States 

Military Property. Ibid.., pp. 319-320. 
•*pr. 8 Immediate Enactment of Bill No. 3428, JJaJA., p. 321. 
^Pr. 13 Appointment of Jofk T. Tecson and Nepotism in the 
• • Government Service. Ibid . r pp. 322-325. 

Ipr. 20 Heavier Penalties for Theft of Large Cattle. Ifcia., pp. 
326-327. 



143 



144 " 

145 " 

146 " 



147 ' 

148 " 

149 " 

150 " 

151 " 

152 11 

153 " 

154 » 

155 " 

156 " 

157 » 

158 » 
I59 

160 » 



' HI - 109 

- 684 - 

161 1938 Apr. 20 Repeal of Laws Fixing Salaries of Officers, Professors, ' 

and Instructors of the University of the Philippines.' 
Ifeii., pp. 328-329. 

lfi2 " Apr. 20 Appropriation of Pi, (XX) ,000 for the Purchase of Equipment 

for the University of the Philippines. IbM., pp.. 330-331. 

163 » Ipr. 20 Transfer of the northern Luzon Junior College. IbM. , pp . 

332-333. 

164 - Apr. 20 Repeal of Section Three of City Lowland Improvement Act. 

Ibid.., pp. 334-335. 

165 " Apr. 26 Censorship and Foreign Distribution of Philippine-made 

Movie Films. Ibid., pp. 336-337. 

166 • " Apr. 28 Volition of the Manila Harbor Board. IbM., p. 338. 

167 " Apr. 28 Penal Restrictions on the Transfer of Private Agricultural 

Lands. Ibid,., p. 339. 

168 " Apr. 30 Separation of the Constabulary From the Philippine Army. 

IMLA., pp. 340-342. 

169 " Apr. 30 Replacement of the Eight-Hour Labor Law with Another L a w. 

Ibid.., pp. 343-344. 

170 » Apr. 30 Venue of Suits by Laborers for Claims in .Small Amounts. 

Ibid... p. 345. 

171 " 'ipr* 30 Information Regarding Labor Conditions in Bach Place of 

Business. .Ibid. , p. 346. 

172 " Ipr. 30 Revolving Fund for the Construction of Tenement Houses.' 

Ifeid-f p. 347. 

173 " Apr. 30 Amendment of the Philippine Rice Share Tenancy Act. Ibid,., 

pp. 348-349. 

174 " Apr. JO Repeal of the Employers' Liability Act and Amendment of 

the Workmen* 3 Compensation Act. Ibjd . r pp. 350-351. ■ 

175 " Apr. 30 Licensing Radio Receiving Stations Used for Commercial 

Purposes. Ibid ., pp. 352-353. 
lr 76 11 .Apr. 30 Placing of all Land and So a Transportation Enterprises on ■ 

Equal Footing. Ibid.., p. 354. 
" Apr. 30 Legislation Authorizing the President of the Philippines 

to Enter into Agreement with the Atlantic Gulf and Pacific 
Company Regarding Foreshore Reclamation Projects. Ibid . f 
PP. 355-356. 

Apr. 30 Prohibition of Use, Sale, or Circulation of Postage Stamps, 

and Envelopes Bearing Unauthorized Surcharges, Cachets, or 

Marks. Ibid. , pp. 357-358. 
■^9 " Apr. 30 Prohibiting Constructions which Offer Hazards to Air 

Navigation. Ibid., pp. 359-360. 
180 " Apr. 30 Enlarging the Present Territorial Limits of tho City 

of Baguio. Ibid.., p. 361. 



- 685 - 



III - 1.10 



181 


1938 


Apr. 


30 


Reduction of Contributions to the Agricultural Fund. 
JMA. , PP. 362-363. 


182 


M 


Apr. 


30 


Further Revision of the Election L a w. Ibid., pp. 364-365. 


183 


t» 


Apr. 


30 


Further Revision of the Election L aW . Ibid,. f pp. 364-365. 


184 


ii 


Apr. 


30 


Providing Adequate Protection to Philippine Forest Re- 
sources. Ibl4. , PP. 366-367. 


185 


ii 


Apr. 


30 


Additional Appropriation for Reforestation and Afforestation 
Purposes. Ibid. f pp. 368-369. 


186 


ii 


Apr. 


30 


Inspection and Grading of Philippine Timber and Lumber for 
Export. iMd., pp. 370-371. 


187 


ii 


iipr. 


30 


Regulation of the Business Warehousing. Ibid. T pp. 372-373. 


188 


n 


Apr. 


30 


Penalizing the Erasure of the Word "Imported" from Shells 
of Imported Eggs. x bjd., p. 374. 


189 


it 


Apr. 


30 


Appropriation for Classification Survey and Subdivision of 
Public Lands. Ibid,. , pp. 375-376. 


190 


ii 


:.1pr. 


30 


Modifications of the national Budget for 1939. IltiA., pp. 
377-383. 


191 


ii 


.:ipr. 


30 


Veto of Bill Ho. 2492, "Commutation of the Money Value of 
Additional Leave of Justices of the Supremo Court, etc." 
Ibid., PP. 384-385. 


192 


it 


Apr. 


30 


Veto of Bill ?. r o. 2338, "Securing to Lawyers the Right to 
Appear in Justice of the Peace Courts." Ibid. , pp. 386- 
387. 


193 


ii 


May 


10 


Transfer of the Duties Performed by the Bureau of Commerce 
Regarding Registration of Corporation and ilssociations to 
the Securities and Exchange Commission, ibid.., pp. 383-389. 


194 


ii 


May 


10 


Rank and Term of Office of the Philippine Army Chief of 
Staff. h&&', P. 390. 


195 


ii 


May 


10 


Amendment of the National Public Works Program. Ibid. . pp. 
391-394. 


196 


ii 


May 


11 


Clarification and Correction of .".mbiquities and Defects 
in the Charter Creating the Court of Industrial Relations. 
IMA., pp. 395-397. 


197 


n 


May 


11 


Construction of the Tarlac-San Jose Railroad Line and of 
Provincial Hotels and Resthouses. Ibid* > PP« 398-399. 


198 


n 


May 


11 


Payment of Retirement Gratuities. Ibid. , p. 400. 


199 


n 


May 


11 


Increase of Judges and Judge s-at-Lar go of First Instance^ 
and Fixing Their Compensations. Ibid., PP. 401-403. 


200 


ii 


May 


14 


Taking Over and Operation by the Government of Public 
Utilities or Business Coupled with a Public Interest. . , ,, . . 
Ibid., PP. 404-406. -, 5J .... 


201 


it 


May 


18 


Withdrawal, of Judge Zandueta's Appointment* lilA*, PP*-,, 



407-409. 



. 686 HI- 411- 

202 19 38 May 19 Commercial Stock Servi ce and Mh „ t 

vlce 311(1 Public Improvement ALds to 
the Cl ties of Manila and Baguio. ^ ' 

203 " May 1 9 Report on the Operation of th, n " 

JSi . _ . ^ P ratl ° n ° f tlle B ^au of Printing Revolving 
Fund During 1937. p< 41J 

204 » May 19 Further Qf ^ p^./^ ^ ^ ^ 

■Ibisi., PP. 414-415. 

205 » May l 9 Consideration of To» Bnis. J^, pp . 416 _ 41? . 

206 " May 24 Consideration of Bills No,. 3 343 md 3395. x 

207 " June 4 Veto of Bin No TW7 «n +• , » ' 

1 ° * 3:507 ' "Optional Religious Instruction." 
IMA», pp. 419-428. 

208 " June 16 Veto of Bin No. 3?80 "JW+fcr » 

o. Further lending the Charter of the 

City of Davao." Ibid., pp. 429-430. 

209 " June 16 Veto of Bill No v-nq »tp. 4. j- ^, „ • 

ixx no. .5313, Extending the Bff activity of the 

City of Manila Reorganisation ;.ct.» Ibj^., p . 431 . 

210 " .June 16 Voto of Bill Nn •'■xon ht . "'" r " J ' ""' 

01 bxii wo. ^98, "Increasing the Salary Rates for o. 

Municipal Official., in the Specially Organized Provinces 
of Mindanao and Sulu." Ibid,, pp . 432-433. 

211 " June 16 Veto of Bill ]I n m < ■ ^. 

01 ^111 no. 3566, .ppropriating Fund for the Es- 
tablishment, Maintenance, Equipment, and Operation of 
Public Works in Barrios and Remote Communities." £44., ' , 
pp. 434-435. 

212 » June 16 Veto of Bill No. 3572, "Ending Section 18 of the Fisheries 

4ct." Ibid,, p. 436. 

213 " June 16 Veto of Bill No. 3573, "Increasing the Fisherman's License 

Pee to Two Pesos. ",Ibi.d, , pp. 437-438. 

214 « June 16 Veto of Bill No. 3694. "Enabling the Office of Private 

Education to Maintain a Close and Rigid Supervision Over ' 
Ml Private Schools, Colleges, and Universities." ibid., 
p. 439. 

215 » June 16 Veto of Bill No. 3376, "Exempting Prom Preventive Detention 

Persons Accused of Petty Thefts or Less Serious Physical 
Injuries." Ibid., pp. 440-441. 
1 1 " June 16 Veto of Bill No. 1613, "Reimbursing Necessary Travelling 
Expenses and A .ctual Subsistence of Witnesses Subpoenaed 
to Give Testimony in the Trial or Investigation of Criminal 
Cases." Ibid.., pp. 442-443. 
June 16 Veto of Bill No. 3075, "Increasing the Salaries of the Fiscal 
and the Chief of the Police and Fire Department of the City 
^ of Hoilo.": Ibid.., pp. 444-445. 

June 16 Veto of Bill No. 3252, "Making Public School Buildings Available 
for the Free U 3 o of Community Centers, Women's Clubs, Parent- 
Teacher .Associations, and Local Mult Education Committees for 
their Activities." pp. 446-447. 



T.I.1 



HI -112 

- 687 - 



222 

223 
224 
225 



W W38 Juno 16 Toto of Bui fc . 3250 , „ GTmUng ^ ^ 

, „ j ^ i ° utena " t3 md thair Substitutes." Hii., pp. 448-449. 

220 " June 16 Veto of Bill No »t„ 

* - 5075 ' Creasing the Salaries of the 

^scal and the Chief of the Police and P ire Department 
of the City of Uoilo.--.Ibid,, pp. 444-445. 

221 " June 16 Veto of the Bill Ho " w„„ • x. 

°* Appropriating P3, 000, 000 for 

the Purpose of Creating Thirty Health Traveling Units." 

, pp. 450-451. 

June 16 Veto of Bill Ho "n-?-,,,- 4.u -n. 

°* ^ 5l > Giving the Director of Public 

Work, .Authority to flLlow Public Ditches to be U 3 ed for 
Irrigation or for Private Purposes." IbjLd. , p. 452 
June 16 Veto of Pill K 0 . 2295 , "Exempting Municipalities from the 

Foment of Costs in Criminal Cases." Ibid., pp. 453-454. 
June 17 Veto of Bill Ho. 3027, "Making Elective the Two Appointive 

Councilors in the City of Sanboanga." Ib^. , pp. 455-456. 
June 18 Veto of Bill No. 2250, "Giving the Name of Celestino .. 

■Aragon to a Street in the City of Manila." Ibid., pp. 
457-458. 

226 " June 18 Veto of Bill No. 2924, "Exempting from the Fixed Tax 

Business Subject to the Merchants' Sales Tax whose Sales 
Do Hot Exceed i>300 Every Three Months." Ibj£. , p. 459. 
June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3106, "Reducing the Cost of Cadastral 

Surveys Made by Corporations of Private Surveyors." IfcM., 
p. 460. 

June. 18 Veto of Bill No. 2777, " Appropriating ?4, 800,000 from the 
Excise Tax to Reimburse the .'mount .Appropriated Previously 
for the Construction of Irrigation." Ibid ., pp. 461-462. 
229 " June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3341, "Changing the Name of Cambagul Ele- 
mentary School, of Sevilla, Bohol, to L a camb a cali .Elementary 
School." Ibid ., p. 463. 
2 '30 " June 18 Veto of Bill No. 2584, "Exempting from Taxes Artesian "fells ' 

and Other Works of Water Supply Used for Domestic and* 
Agricultural Purposes." Ibj d. r pp. 464-465. 
231 " June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3494, "Appropriating P2, 000, 000 for 

Philippine Participation in the Golden G a te International 
Exposition and the New York World's Fair." Ibjd . f pp. 
466-467. 

■ J '- ' June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3535, "Increasing the Fee to be Charged 

of Each Applicant for Examination for Registration as Nurse." 
JMi., p. 468. 

;j " June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3377, ".Amending the Civil Code," Ibid . f 

p. 469. 



227 



228 



_ 688 



III - 113 



58 June 18 Veto of Bill Ho mm ir , 

ixi i,o. 3533, Hmmuj, V^uation of Property that 

Should bo Exempted fro. Taxation." Ib^. , pp . 47CM 71. 
June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3493, "Creating a Revolving Fund for the ■ 
Construction of Permanent Public Markets, Slaughterhouses, 
and Waterworks Systems." Ibj^., pp , 472-473. 

June 18 Veto of Bill No. 364f, «c Wn K n , r> * . 

u. treating a Board of Assessment in 

the City of Manila." Ibid., pp . 474-475. 
June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3615. "Empowering the Provincial Boards 

and City Councils to Reduce the Assessment of Certain Proper- 

ties Under Certain Conditions." Ibid., pp. 476-477/ 
June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3 603, . "The Law on Textbooks." Ibj^. , pp. 

478-479. 

June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3501, "lending the Franchise of the 

Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company." Ibid '. , pp. 
480-481. 

June 18 Veto of Bill No. 2654, "Granting Ricardo Gomora the Right- to 
Sell or Transfer His Electric System Franchise." Ibid ., pp. 
482-433. 

June 13 Veto of Bill No. 2156, "Appropriating P 2f 500,000 for the 

Classification, Survey, and Subdivision of Public 

•Igricultural Lands." Ibjjl., pp. 484-485. ■ 
June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3701, "Establishing a School Ritual in the 

Philippines." IbM., p. 486. 
Juno 18 Veto of Bill No. 3745, "Creating the National Merchandizing 

Corporation." Ibid.., p. 437. 
June 18 Approval of Bill No. 3353, " lending the Act Making 

Appropriations 'for Public works." Ibid ., p. 488. 
June 18 Approval of Bill No. 3''*28, "Amending Items of Act Appro'- : 

priating Funds for Elementary School Buildings. " Ibid . f 

pp. 489-490. 

June 18 Approval of Bill No. 3721, "Establishing the National 
Abaca and other Fiber Corporation." Ibid . f p; 491. 

June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3500, "Granting the Jai-Alai Manila, Inc., 
a Privilege to Conduct the Business of Polota Vasca." 
Ibid., pp. 492-493. 

June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3506, "Granting the Collector of Customs 

Authority to Impose Surcharges in Case of Undervaluation or' 
Misdescription of Merchandise." I bjd . , p. 494. 

June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3633, "Amendment of the Motor Vehicle Law." 
iMA't p. 495. 

June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3327, "Amending the Charter of the City 
of Cebu." IbM.t PP. 496-497. 



_ 669 



III - 114 



260 
261 



251 1938 Juno 18 Approval of Bill No. 3468, "Creating tho City of Bacolod." 

Ibid,., pp. 498-499. 

252 " J un° 18 Veto of Bill No nn„„j . 

J 11 °* ^ 85 » Condoning Penalties on Roal Estate- 

Taxes Incurred Prior to 1 9 38." Ibj^. , pp . 500-501. 

253 - June 18 Veto of Bill No. 3499, "Creating the City of Lip a .» Ib^., 

p. 502. 

254 - Juno 18 blowing Bill No. 2845, "lending tho Rural Credit Asso- 

ciation Law to Become Q Law without tho President's Sig- . 
nature," Ibid., pp. 50>504. 

™ " JUnB 18 ^ Ppr ° Val 0f Bil1 »°. 3589, "-Appropriating Funds for Public ' 

Works." Ibid., pp. 505-506. 

,56 " June 21 Veto of Bill No. 338/,, "/mending Act No. 4151, Providing 

Retirement of Citizens of U.S. in Philippine Civil Service." 

Ihid«» p. 507. 

257 » June .21 Veto of Bill Ho. 3841, " Authorizing the City of D a vao to 

Issue Bonds for tho 'Purpose of Providing Funds With Which 
to Construct Sewer Facilities and Other Permanent Improve- 
ments. " Ibi_4. , pp. 508-509. 

258 » Juno 21 Approval of Bill No. 3811, "Incorporating the City of 

Tagaytay." IbM., pp. 510. 

259 " June 21 Approval of Bill No. 3478, "Creating an Animal Utilization 

Service in tho Bureau of 'ninal Industry." I^d.^p. 511. 

June 22 Veto of Bill No. 3547, "Placing the Board of Medical Examiner 

in a Class by Itself." Ibid.. , pp. 512-513. 
June 22 Veto of Bill No. 3395, "lending tho Law on Firearms License 
Foes." Ibid.., P. 514. 
262 " June 25 Tho Election Law, New Taxation Measures, Religious Instruction 

and the Work of the Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine 
Affairs. Ibid., PP . 515-523. 
July 27 Repealing the Conditional Feature of Some Items of Appro- 
priations Contained in the General Appropriation Act for 1939. 
UtiA't PP- 524-527.'. 
" July 27 Changing the Official Fiscal Year. Ibid., pp. 528-529/ 

" U S« 1 Reconstruction of Bills Approved by the National Issembly at 
its Last Regulas and Special Sessions, which were Vetoed by 
the President. I_bjji. , p. 530. 
-'• u £« 10 Authorizing the President to Lease Haciendas from Their Pro- 
sent Owners for a Period not Exceeding 25 Years with an Op- 
tion to Purchase Them at a Stated Price. Ibid ,. , pp. 531-534. 
267 " lug. 12 Situation of the Sugar Industry. IbiiU, pp. 535-538. 
m " Aug. 15 Immediate Enactment of 27 Bills. Ibid ., pp. 539-542. 

.n.d.m. Negotiations on the Pineapple Industry and tho Operations of 
the Philippine Packing Corporation. Ibid . P pp. 543-549. 



V:1 " ^ III - 115 

_ 690 _ 

o 70 1938 Sept. 12 Approval of Bill No. 36I6, "Providing for Payment of Indem- 
nities and Pensions in C a so of Accident During the Training 
of Trainees and Reservists of the Philippine Array." 
pp. 550-551. 

271 " 13 -Approval of Bill No. 3907, "lather lending Act Ap P ropri P .t. . 

Funds for Elementary School Buildings." Ibj,d. f p. 552. 

272 11 Sept. 13 Veto of Bill Ho. 3887, "Further 'mending the Charter of tin 

City of Davao." Ibid., PP . 553-555. , 

273 1939 J*n. 24 State of the Nation and Important Economic Problems. Quezon 

Messages , Vol. 5, Part I, J3VFF, pp. 245-260. 

274 " Feb.' 2 Calling of Bids for Exploration and Development of Petroleum 

and Gas Deposits and Rejection of Bid of Standard- Vacuum Or.: 
Company. Ibid., pp. 261-262. 

275 " ^b. 7 National Budget for Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 1940. Utf£. : 

pp. 263-275. 

276 " Fob * 8 Appropriation to Cover Expenses of the Osmena Delegation 

Sent to the United States. Ibid ., pp. 276-277. 

277 " Mar. 3 Appropriation of Five Hundred Thousand Pesos for Increasing 

the Services of the Departments of the Interior and of JusV 
Devoted to the Maintenance of Peace and Order. Ibid . • pp. 
278-279. 

278 " Mar. 7 Revision and Codification of Tax Laws. Ibid . f pp. 280-287. 

279 " Mar. 31 Appropriation for the Second Regular Election of Members of 

National Assembly and the Plebiscite of Woman Suffrage. 
JJ2M., PP. 288-289. 

280 . " Apr. 14 Financial Roport of the Operation and Maintenance of the 

Baguio Dwellings and Equipment for Rent for 1938. Ib jd > f 
p. 290. 

^l " Apr. 14 Financial Report of the Operation, Maintenance and Improve- 
ment of the Los Bafios Quarry for 1938. Ibid , f P> 291. 

~' J:> '" Apr. 14 Report of the Board of Directors of the National Development 

Company Covering its Operations in 1938. IhjjL. t P« 292. 

203 " May 10 Roport of Committee Created to Study the Effects of Recent 

Earthquakes on Buildings. Ibid. . p. 293. 

264 " May 12 Important and Urgent Public Developments. Ibid ., pp. 294- 

295. 

285 " May 15 Urgent Public Needs Requiring a Supplementary Appropriation 

Bill. "ibid. , pp. 296-299. 
2% 11 May 16 Proposed Constitutional Amendments. Ibid ., pp. 300-305. 
287 " May 17 Sending of Two Members of National Assembly Abroad to 

Study Best Means of Promoting Abaca and Coconut Industries. 

Ibid.., p. 306. 



HI - 116 

-691 



268 1939 ^ay 



17 Sending of a DoWnf ,- or , „ , . 

„. , . * ' Ibgatlon t0 Washington to Holp the Osnefia Mi, 
eionlmta Work. Ibid,, p . ^ . 

289 " Hfly 17 Necessity of Innediptn p„ * 

nnediato Enactment of 52 B± lls . J^,, pp< ^ 

290 " 



: ;91 



292 



312. 

JUttC " oTTTT 3111 828 ' " B " Gnding ^ B — <* HOOPOE, ; 

Cadastral Proceedings Already D ecided by the . Courts to ,not,„ 
Two Years." Ib U . , pp . 313 _ 314< 

Juno 16 Approval of ■\ss^oi-,>r>+- t t,_. , 

1 ." 8 '"' 0 "*«nt Law. Jht4. t pp. 3i5_3i6. » 

June 16 Disapproving Bill No qi7 »a,^j- t 

o x„ o. ,ii7, Aacnding iradenark Law. " Ibid. . 
PP. 317-318. ' 

m " Juno 16 Approval of Bin No ocjr ^ „ 

°* jb8 ' ending the Philippine Tariff 
Act of 1909." Ibid,, p . 319> 

294 " Juno 16 Disapproving Bin No. --^q ''p™„,-v 

o. ^39, Providing Security Against Fraud . 

in fading of Lumber for Sales." Ib^. , p . 320 . 

JlmC 17 ° f ^ *" " '-ding Act ,ppr 0 pri,ting Funds 

for Elementary School Buildings." Ibid,, p . 323. 
2:.»7 " Juno 17 Approval of Bil ■> IJ 0 n-yi » »„ _ , 

— °* sending the Public Works Act." 

JDai£. » PP. 324-325. 

f 6 ] " ne ' 15 ^dings-Kocialkowski Act. Ijjid, , pp. 326-332. ' 

299 " Aug. 16 Constitutions aendnents Regarding Presidential Tenure, Re- 

vival of the Senate, and Establishment of Office to Enforce 
the Election Law. IbJUJ,, pp . 333-340. 

300 » Aug. 18 Report of National Sugar Board. Ibid, , p. 341. 

301 " Sept. 5 Loyalty to, and Cooperation with the United States During 

the European War. Ibid,, pp. 342-344. 

Sept. 16 Necessity of Enacting Emergency Measures. Ibiri . r pp . 345. 
346. 

Sept. 16 Fixing Within Specified Limits the Tonnage Dues on Foreign 

Vessels. Ibid., p. 347. 
Sept. 16 Correction of Defects in Eight-How Labor Law. Ibid ., p. 348. 
Sept. 16 Payment of Bonds of National Power Corporation in Philippine 

Currency. Ibid., p. 349. 
Sept. 16 Prevention of Monopolization and Injurious Speculations Ef- 
fecting Articles of Prime Necessity. Ibid' r P« 350. 
Sept. 16 Appropriation of 1*2,550,000 for Opening' "of New Primary . 

Classes in the Philippines. Ibid., pp. 351-352. 
Sept. 16 Proposed Amendments to National Internal Revenue Code. I bftfl . ■ 
PP. 353-358. 

Sept. 18 Appropriation of F100,000 to Effect Adjustments of Fersonnel 

in the Department of Labor. Xbid,, pp. 359. 
Sept. 18 Suspension of Services or Projects Which are not of Immediate 
Necessity. Ibid, , p. 36O. 



302 
303 

30-1 
305 

306 

307 

308 

309 

310 



- 692 HI -117 

3U 1939 Sept. 18 Creation of a N ew City Enbracing m ^ ^ 

the Northeast Boundary of Manila to the Marikina River. 
IbuUt PP. 361-362. 

512 » Sept. 18 Creation of a Joint Educational Survey Committee. .JMA-, 

p. 363. - ■ 

313 » Sept. 25 Emergency Legislation. IbM., pp . 364.365. 

514 " Sept. 25 Necessity of Immediate Enactment of Pour Bills. 1^-., Bp . 

366-367. 

315 » Sept. 29 Increase of Judges of First Instance. I^d.., pp . 368-36Q. 

316 - Oct. 27 Approval of. Bill Ho. 1158, ".bending the Act Appropriating . 

P5, 050, 000 for Elementary School Buildings." 11^., p. 370, 

317 " Oct. 27 ipproval of Bill No. 11 59 , "lending Commonwealth Act No. 

330 Appropriating ?96,351,300 for Public Works." I&JL., p. 
371. 

318 » Nov. 10 Appropriation of Additional Funds for Opening of Extension 

of Classes in the Philippines. IbM. , pp. 372-375. 

319 " Nov. 13 Approval of the Philippine Economic Adjustment Act. 

PP. 376-377. 

320 " Nov. 25 Improvement and Stabilization of the Abaca. IMA., pp. 217- 

218. » 

321 ' Dgc * 1 Y ' H " °* as Non-sectarian Institution. Ibid . f pp. 219- 

220. 

■ )2? - " Dec « 9 Civil Liberties. Ibjjl., pp. 221-227. 

' i2 ' 5 " Dec ' 10 Re form in the Public School System and Cooperation of School 

Teachers with the Government. Ibjcj,., pp. 228-240. 

324 " Dec. 19 The Qualities of Hon. Joaquin M. Elizalde as Resident Com- 

missioner of the Philippines to the United States. Ibid ., 
pp. 24-1-242. 

* * * 

325 1941 Jan. 31 State of the Nation Message. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 

2373-2396. 

326 » H„y 15 Extension of Emergency Powers Act. IbM. , pp. 2297-2300. 



1955 Nov. 15 Proclamation Jo. 1 - C a r,i nff t v_ ., . 

a±J - ln S tii e National Assembly to special 

session beginning November 22, i 935 . fe^e^e^, 

Vol. I, dp. Rev. Jiid., J3VBV, p. 203. 

» Nov. 21 So. 2 - Calling the r^ai - -. * - 

xu b rae agonal Assembly to a special session 

commencing November 25, 1935, and revoking Proclamation 
No; 1 . Ibid. . p. 204. 

- lov. 21 No. 3 - designating November 23 to 2 9 as J'irst National Girls' 

Week. Ibid., p. 205. 
■ Nov. 22 No.' 4 - Proclaiming the existence of publio calamity in the pro- 
vince of La Union. Ibid., p. 206. 

- Nov. 22 No. 5 - Proclaiming the existence" of public calamity in the pro- 

vince of Isabela. Ibid. , p. 207. 

Nov. 22 Ho. 6 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the pro- 
vince of Ilocos Sur. Ibid. . p. 208. 

Nov. 26 No. 7 - declaring the existence of public calamity in the pro- 
vince of Cagayan. I bid . . p. 209. 

Nov. 26 v; 0 . a - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the pro- 
vince of Nueva Viacaya. iMAi., ?• 210. 

Nov. 26 No. 9 - designating Thursday, the 28th of November, 1935, as 

a Day of National Thanksgiving . Ibid. , pp. 211-21.2. ' 

Nov. 26 No. 10 - Dsclaring November 29, 1935 p an _Am e rican. Day.. 

Ibid. , p. 213. 

Nov. 30 No. 11 - Lifting tariff cn rice imported by the government.' 

Abid. . pp. 214-215. 
Dec. 11 No. 12 - Extending the period of special session to December 20, 

1935. Ibid., p. 216. 
Dec. 12 No. 13 - Reserving twenty nine parcels of the public domain in 

the barrio of 3an Roque, municipality of Tar lac, for 
cemetery purposes. Ibid,. , pp. 217-225. 
Dec. 12 No. 14 - Reserving a parcel of the public domain in the barrio 

of Pinamitinan, municipality of Dasey, province of 
£>amar, for lighthouse purposes, ibid . . pp. 226-227. 
Dec. 12 No. 15 - Reserving tuo parcels of the public domain in the mu- 
nicipality of Cotabato, province of Cotabato, for 
radio-post office site. Ibid... t pp. 228-229. 
Dec. 12 Ho. 16 - Reserving a parcel of the public domain in the barrio 

of Look, municipal district of Lamitan, province of 
2aaboanga, for school purposes. Ib id . . pp. 230-231. 



.it-2 

- 694 • 111 - 11 9 

1935 Dec. 20 No. 17 - Extending the neriod of < •. 

pow.od of special session to December 21. 
1935. Ibid,., p. 232, 

1956 Jan. 7 No, 18 - Declaring the existonco of a public calamity in the pro- , 
I, JBVP,;" GaQarlneS i:0rt0 - Vol. 2, Part 

« Jan. 10 Ho. 19 -Reserving for school purposes a parcel of land in the 

. bamo of L 0 yol a> municipality of Hinatuan, province of 
Surigao. IbjuL., p. 478. 

" Jan. 10 No. 20 - Reserving for aohnoi r,,„,™„ 

lor scnool purposes a parcel of land in the 

barrio of Topdac, municipality of Atok, Mountain Province. 
I&djLi P. 479. 

- Jan. 10 No. 21 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of land in the 
. T ,n it . of Gonzaga, province of Cagayan. p . 4 80. 

Jan. 10 Lo. 22 - Reserving i0 r municipal site a parcel of. land in the 

municipality of Gonzaga, province of Cagayan. ibj^, p. 481, 
' Jan. 11 no. 23 - Calling upon all young men, citizens of the Philippines, 

who shall attain the age of 20 years in the calendar year 
1936 and succeeding years, to register for military instruction. 
E&SUL., PP. 432-485. 
Jan. 17 No. 24 - Reserving for railroad purposes five parcels of land in 

the City of Manila. "JUjisL, p. 486. 
Jan. 21 No. .25 - Reserving for school purposes three parcels of land in 
the municipality of Taytay, province of Palawan. Ibj^, 

p. 487. 

Jan. 21 No.- 26 - Reserving for provincial nursery purposes a parcel of 
land in the barrio of Sumulong, municipality of Calaug, 
province of Tayabas. rbl&u, 438. 
Jan. 21 No. 27 - Reserving for school purposes three parcels of land in 
the barrio of Colonia, municipality of Carnen, province 
of Bohol. IJ&d^., P- 489, 
Jan. 24 No. 28 - Reserving for the exclusive use of the non-christiana, 

a parcel of land in the barrio of Lemut, municipality of 
Siangan, Mountain Province. Ib M ,_r p. 490. 
Jan. 29 No. 29 - Reserving for colonisation purposes, a parcel of. land in 
the municipalities of Kapalong and. Taguin, province of' 
Davao. Ibid^, p. 490. . 
Jan. 29 No. 30 - Reserving for colonization purposes a paroel of land in 
the municipality of Tuburan, province of . Lanao. Ibid. , 

P. 492. 

an. 29 No, 31 - Reserving for cemetery purposes a parcel of land in th£ 
barrio of Penaplata, municipality of flamal, provinoe of 
Davao. IT2A£U, p. 493- 



_ 695 



III - 12C 



1956 Jan. 29 No. 32 - Reserving for town *i+r> 

b xown slto Purposes two parcels of land, 

located in the municipality of San Jose, province of 
Mindoro. Ibid. , p. 494. 

■ ■ Jan. 31 No. 33 - Reserving for forest station site to be known as Port 

Lamon Forest Station Site, a parC(3l of lmd located in 
the municipality of Sinatuan, province of Surigao. .jj^ p . 495.. 

- Feb. 4 No. 34 - Establishing a watershed forest reserve in -the municin,! t 

of Baler, province of Tayabas. IbjjU, p. 496. 

- Feb. 5 No. 35 - Declaring open to disposition all lands of the public 

domain covered by public land applications received and 
accepted in the Bureau of Lands on or before Member 31, 1935. 
IM<L., P. 497. 

Feb. 7 No. 36 - Declaring February 8th of each year as Constitution Day, 

IMsL., pp. 498-499. 
Feb. 8 Ho. 37 - Reserving for exclusive use of non-Christians, nine par- 
cels of land in the province of Agusan. Ibjj^, p. 500. 
Feb. 8 No. 38 - Revoking Executive Order No. 10, dated January 22, 1917 
and declaring the land therein described open to dispo- 
sition under the provisions of Act No. 2874, as amended. I^-.t 
P., 501. 

Feb. 11 No. 39 _ Sotting aside Saturday, February 22, 1936, as Boy Scouts 

D ay- iM&,_, p. 502. 
Feb. 17 No. 40 - Revoking Proclamation No. 127, series of 1927, and reser- 
ving and designating as Pamabaran Buri Forest Reserve, 
for ; forost protection and conservation of buri palm3, the parcel 
of public domain situated in the municipalities of San Antonio 
and Cabiao, province of Nueva 'Ecija and municipality of Concep- 
cion, province of Tarlac. IbJ^ L. . pp. 503-504. 
Feb. 26 No. 41 - Reserving for the exclusive utse of the non-Christians, 

a parcel of land in the barrio of Dulungan, municipality 
of B a co, province of Hindoro. Ibjd. . p. 505. 
I --r. 5 No. 42 - Reserving for explosive ma'-azine site, a parcel of land, 
in the barrio of Calarian, municipality of Zamboanga, 
province of Zamboanga. I&ULl, P . 506. 
" MarJ 5" No. 43 - Reserving for government centur site a parcel of land 

located in the municipal' district of 3anauo, subprovinco 
of Ifugao, Mountain Province. UjjjLu, p. 507. 
" Mar. 5 No. 44 - Resorving for park purposes a parcel of land in the 

municipality of La Libortad, province of Negros Oriental, 
IkwU, p. 508. 

" Mar. 10 No. 45 - Amending Pro cl amation No. 33, dated July 24, 1926, which 

reserved for municipal building site , the two parcels of 
land described therein. IJadj. 509- 



- 696 - 



III - 121 



1936 Mar. 10 No. 46 - Reserving for r»ilronri ' 

• 1J - r0nd Purposes, two parcels of land in 

the Municipality of Guinba, province of N UG va Bcija. ' 

lUdw p. 5io. 

- Mar. 17 No. 47 - Reserving f or school ft ^ ^ ^ 

at the barrio of Canip 7 , municipality of Minglanilla- 
province of Cobu. rfeLd,.., pp. 511-512. 
" Mar. 24 No. 48 - Reserving for school purposed, two parcels of land in 

the barrio of 3 a tobato, municipal district of Balimbing. 
province of Sulu. Ibid_ p . 513. 

- Mar. 25 No. 49 - Declaring Saturday A P ril 11, 1936, P . public holiday. 

XtAiUi p. 514. 

Mar. 31 Ho. 50 - Giving due recognition to the course of Military Instru-. . 

tion at the University of the Philippines. Ibid... p. 5^. 
» Apr. 11 No. 51 - Reserving and designating as iiilisbilisan Pall Watershed 

Forest' Reserve for watershed protection and timber pro- 
duction the parcel of the public domain, situated in the munici- 
pality of Talisayan, province of Kisamia Oriental. Ibid... pp. 3-.fi 
517. ' /' ■ 

Apr. 11 No. 52 - Reserving and designating as Naguilian Watershed Resor- • 

vation for watershed protection and timber production , 
the parcel of the public domain situated in. the municipality of 
Naguilian, province of L a Union. JJ?i^.., pp. 518-519. 
Apr. 11 No. 53 - Reserving and designating as M a hua Forest Reserve for 

forest protection and timber production, the parcels of 
public domain situated in the municipality of N a bua, province cf 
Caraarines Sur. Ibid^., p. 520. 
Apr. 11 If 0 . 54 - Establishing and designating as Libertad Spring Forest 

Reserve for conserving and regulating the water of Liber- 
tad Spring, the parcel of the public domain, situated in the 
municipalities of Initao and Cagayau, province of His amis Oriental- 
Ite&j., pp. 521-522. 
A pr. 11 No. 55 _ Revoking Proclamation No. 279, series of 1929, and 

establishing and designating as the Albay-Sorsogon Force L 
Reserve for forest protection and timber production, the parcel 
of the public domain situated in the municipalities of Albay p"' -1 
Manito, province of Albay, and municipalities of Castilla, Sor- 
sogon and Bacon, province of Sorsogon. IJjisU, pp. 523-524. 
Apr. 11 n 0< 56 - Setting apart and designating as Sudlon National Park 
for park purposes for the benefit and enjoyment of the 
people of the Philippines, the parcel of the public domain 
situated in the nmnicipality of C«bu, province of Cobu. JtbjL<t % , 
P. 525. 



- 697 



III - 122 



1936 Apr. 11 No. 57 - Revoking Proclamation Pn ->aa 

forest TV d ° S1Snatin * » W ,lmorong Forest Reserve ft, 
f rest Protoctxon and ti.bor production> ^ ^ Qf - 

r of v u th ° — * CuyaP0 ^ Lupao , j- 

vxnce of Nuev a 3olJa ^ uunicipgIity of 
Paiigasman. IbjUL, pp . 52 g_ 527 
- Apr. 23 No. 53 - ^ thc , ational ^ ^ ^ 

T . " r ° lnef "ff-^ion ^ import rice, free of duty. 

I]23Ldx, pp. 528-529. 

" Hay 9 Ho. 59 - Reserving ^¥+-t ntr ' 

^ rvinfl, .etting apart, and designating aa Mount Apo 

national Park for park purposes for the benefit and en- 
Want of the people of the Philippine, a parcel of public do- 
main situated in the municipal di strict of r<A 

^.strict of Kidapawan, province 
of Ootabato, and „,„i=i pal di3trjot of ^ 

of .anta Onus, pr „ vlno<J of w . ^ pp . 530 . 531 . 
>% 9 Ho. 60 - ^ for park „a, a P aro el of land sit uat a d 

,n the district of Sa » ii.toolaa, City of ilaoHa. XM .. 

P« 532. 

" a* 9 no. 6i - * xcluding from tho oporat . on Qf ^ ecut . v& 0rdt3r ^ ^ 

dated July 26, l 9 o4, and n*^ for purp0SJS 
a parcel of land located in the nunioipality.of Ilagan, previa ' 
of Isabels. .Ibj^, p. 533. . . 

' May 9 No. 62 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of land situated 

in the municipality of oi nda ngan, province of Zamboangr- 
P. 534. 

«ay 13 No. 63 - Declaring the period between independence Day, July 4 th f 

and July 31stf as thu timo fQp th() ^ ^ 

the Red Cross in the Philippines. IbjUL,, pp. 535-536. 
"ay 25 No. 64 - Including from tho operation of Proclamation No. 37, 

Series of 1 9 22, and reserving for radio station site, 
certain parcels of land in the municipal district of Glan, pro- 
vince of Cotabato. JMsU, p. 537. 
June 3 No. 65 - Excluding from tho operation of Proclamation No. 217, 

series of 1929, and reserving, setting apart, and 
designating as Baguio-Bontoc Scenic national Park for tho benefit 
and enjoyment of tho people of tho Philippines tho parcel of land 
situated in the municipal districts of Tublay, Atok, Bukod, 
kab?yan, Kibungan, Buguias, and Aapuaungan, subprovincd of Benfcx 
municipal district of Kiangan, subprovinco of Ifugao; and muni- 
cipal districts of Bauko, Banaao, and ,'Jabangan, subprovinco of 
Bontoc; Iiountain Province. IJjIjU, pp. 538-539. 



- 698 _ 



III - 1?. 



56 June 16 No. 66 - Reserving and designating as Initao Forest Reserve for 

forest protection and timber production and conservatic , 
the parcel of the public domain, situated in tho municip.ality o" 
Initao, province of Miaomia Oriental. IbJ,&._, pp . 540 -541. 
June. 23 No. 67 - Reserving for military purposes a parc ol of land situat; 

in the municipal district of Duluan, province of Cotcbei 
l3M*.t P« 542. 

June 23 No. 68 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of land situated 
in the barrio of Upi, municipal district of Awang, pro- 
vince of Cotabato. Ibid..., p. 543, 
July 16 No. 69 - Rules and regulations prescribing the method and proce- 
dure of selection of trainees for military service. 
JM&t., pp. 544-540. 
July 20 No. 70 - Calling for special election to fill existing vacancies 

in tha National Assembly.. Ibid... pp. 549-550. 
July 23 No. 71 - Withdrawing from disposition all unsurveyed lands of tho 
public domain except those which are classified to mor- 
suitable for residential, commercial, and industrial purposes. 
J&Lddu P- 551. 

Juiy 31 No. 72 - Reserving and designating as Davao Buri Forest Resorve 

for forest protection and conservation of buri palms, tho 
parcel of the public domain situated in the municipality of Santa 
Cruz, province of ;, Davao.. IbM.-., p. 552. 
Aug. 5 No. 73 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of land situated 
in the barrio of Pinaring, municipal district of Nuling. 
province of Cotabato. Ijjid.., p. 553. 
Aug. 5 No. 74 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of land situated 
in the barrio of Cebuano Barracks, municipality of 
Labangan, province of Zamboanga. IbjjU, p. 554. 
Aug. 11 No. 75 _ Fixing the date for the election of the third member of 

the provincial board of Bukidnon. Ibid_._, p. 555. 
Aug. 12 No. % _ Proclaiming the week from August 17-23> of each year, 
as i'lade-in-the-Philippines Products Week. IbiiL.., 
PP. 556-557. 

'*ug. 15 1T 0 . 77 _ Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of land situated 
in the barrio of Sapang-Dalaga, municipality of Balia- 
ngao, province of Occidental Hisamia. JJeUU, p. 558. 
Aug. 17 N 0 , 78 _ Reserving for landing purposes a parcel of land situat""''' 
in the poblacion, municipality of Hasantol, province of 
Pnmpanga. IbjLd,.., p. 5'59. 
A ug. # i7 n 0 . 7g _ Establishing as Lidlidda Watershed Forest Reservo for 

watershed protection and timber protection, a parcel of 
public domain, situated in tho municipalities of Lidiidda and 



- 699 - 



III 124 



Banayoyo, province of Iiocos S w . ^ p . 56o> 

, 93 6 17 ,o. 80 - Reserving for military p;xrposea , a parcel of ^ ^ 

xn the barrio of C^, QUnicipality of Tuguegar 
vinoe of Uagayan. IbicL, p . 56i 
- lug. 3! No. 81 - Wving for military purp0S08> fiVQ ^ Qf land 

v+ ' ;i tUat ° d in thB Wi0S *»» truces and Punta, munici- 
pality of xan Za , , rovj . nce of ^.^ ^ ^ ^ 

" .Aug. 31 No. 82 - Reserving for aclmni v,,,™~ 

>, ior school purposes, a parcel of land situate 

in the barrio of Halalagr raund . cipa ; Lity of ^ 
province of D a vao. Ibid,., p. % 4 
. - ^ P t. 1 ,0. 83 - Reserving for cemetery „ s , a parcel of M ^ 

ted xn the- barrio of Lala, municipal district of Kolam- 
. bug a , province of Lanao. Ij^, p . 565> 

" Sept. 1 No. 84 - Reserving fa-r <=nv,^ i 

" fi f ° r B0h001 P^posos, a parcel of land situatec 

. in the barrio of Hantoa, municipality of Reina Mercedes, 
province of Isabel a. Ibj w d,.., p . 566. 

" Sent. 7 No. 85 - Reserving for i -i + 

R lor aill - tar y Purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Davao, province ' 
of Davao. Ibid..., p. 567. 

" SePt - 15 06 ' ******** « forest Reserve for forest protection 

and timber production, a parcol of land 8itllated in the 
municipality of Bula, province of (Wines 3ur. JEbjJ,, p . 568e 
Sept.17 No. 87 - Reserving for military purposes, a parcel of public 

domain situated in the municipality of Cabanatuan, pro- 
vince of i-fueva Ecija. .Ibid..,, p. 569, 
Sopt.22 no. 88 - Designating part of th* R^an Jarracks, Daraga, -VLbay, 
Federal Reservation, as Philippine ,.„rmy Post. ibid,., 

p. 570. 

Sept. 22 No. 89 - Establishing as Kaatoan Forest Reserve for experimental - 
work in Quinine tree cultivation, forest protection and 
timber production a parcel of the public- domain situated in the 
municipality of Malaybalay, province of Bukidnon. IbjjU, P. 571. 
Sept. 24 No. 90 - Publishing Executive Order of the President of the 

United States, dated September 11, 1936, delegating to 
the United State High Commissioner to the Philippines the perfor- 
mance and functions in connection with the proceedings involving 
the extradition of fugitives from justice to and from the Philip- 
pines. Ib^d,.., pp. 572-573. 
°°t. 1 N 0 . 91 _ Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the. public 

domain situated in the municipality of Plaridol, province 
of Mi 3 amis Occidental. IbjyL., p. 574. 



_700 



III - 125 



1936 Oct. 4 No. 92 - Excluding from the operatic* n f v , , ■ , 

operation of Proclamation K'o. 24, 
series of 1926f ?nd openjng ^ & 

portion of the private domain of the Commonwealth Government of ' 
the Philippine situated "in the City of H«nila. Ib^d., P . 5 75. 

" Oct. 4 No. 93 - Reserving for municipal di^-iU 

"* « • district government site a p £ - 

~ ° f PUbUC d ° m * in situ ated in the municipal district 

J-JD-SU, p. 576. 

" Oct. 14 No. 94 - Reserving for mSlit-wv 

military purposes, n paroel o£ land situa- 
ted in the municj pnl i +v n-p p„„ ~ 

CJ - 1 - aLlt ->' 01 *«enaquo f province of Rizp" . 

IEUL.. P. 577. 

- Oct. 17 No. 95 - CalHnc the National Wbly to a special session for 

a period of S j. x days beginning October 19, 1936. 
UajUi PP. 578-579. 

" Oct. 21 No. 96 - ii-eservjn/r for n in+. w , 

• U( ' IOr "^^ary purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the b-vr-Hn n -e "„„ n . . 

bnt, oarrio ol , Ja n lloque, municipality 

of Tarlac, province of Tarlac." Ibf^, p. 580 . 
» Oct. 21 No. 97 - Serving for the exclusive use of non- Christians, two 

parcels of the public domain situated in the municipali- 
ty of San fi.arcelino, province of Zambales. Ib^. , p . 58 i. 
Oct. 24 No. 98 - Extending the period of special session to October .28. 

1936. IbjLrU, p. 502. 
Oct. 26 Ho. 99 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the publi, 
domain situated in the municipal district of Idbungau, 
province of Cot abate. IbjyU, p. 503. 
Oct. 26 Ho.100 - Reserving for military purposes, two parcels of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrio of TJ p i, municipality 
of fianu, proving of Isabel*. IJxidj., p. 584. 
Oct. 26 h 0 . 101 - Itoserv.-i.ng for cemetery purposes, a-parcel of the public 
dotaain situated in the barrio of Bunnay, municipality of 
."ngadanan, province of Isabela. IbjjL., p. 585.- 
Oct. 26 No. 102 - Extending the period of special session to October 30, 

1936. IJiich, p. 586. 
Oct. 28 No. 103 - Amending Proclamation No. 71. JJiid.., p. 587. 
Pet. 30 No. 104 - Establishing the daylight saving time for the Philippines - 
J-.bjjU, p. 588. 

l 'ov. 13 i-lo.105 - Declaring November 15, a special public holiday. rbid A . 
p. 589. 

J-'Ov. 18 No. 106 - Reserving for penal colony purposes, two parcels of tW - 
public domain situated in the municipal districts of 
koronadal and J'iuayan, province of Cotabato. I bid • r p. 590. 
ov. 19 II0.I07 - Reserving for water supply purposes, two parcels of land 
situated in the City, of tfaguio, Mountain Province. 
•S&uLu*. P« 591. 



Ill - .126 

1936 Nov. 19 *. 10.8 - Reserving for park md garden & ^ tf ^ 

public domain situated in the City of Zamboanga. 
JU&sLu p. 592. 

» Nov. 19 No. 109 - Designating the period from r oveuber 24 tQ ^ Qf each 

year as tho National Book -.feok. IbJ^, p. 593. . 

" Nov. 19 Wo. 110 -Declaring tho period from November 3 0 to December 6, 

1936, an Boys' Wook. Ibid^, p. "594. 

" I?0V * 19 U °- 111 ~ P -t San Pedro, Uoilo, as Philippine /,rmy 

Post. Ibid t , P . 595, 

Nov. 19 No. 112 - Revoking Proclamation N 0 . 575, series of 1928, as 

modified by Proclamations N os . 2 83 *nd 575, series of 
1930 .and 1933, respectively, and reserving the land described 
therein *nd another parcel of land situated in the barrio of 
Calarian, City of Zamboanga, province of Zamboanga. p. 596. 

" Nov. 23 No. 113 - ^serving for military purposes, four parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrio of Libert ad,' muni- 
cipality of Butuen, province of .Igusan. T&JL., p. 597. 
" 4». 23 »o. 114 - Designating Wsuay, th« 26th of ;.ov.mber, 1936, as 

Day of National Thankagiving. IbJuU, pp. 598-599. 
Hov. 25 No. 115 - Reserving for town site purposes, three parcels of tho 

public domain situated in the barrio of Haluso, munici- 
pal district of Pialuso, City of ^amboanga. JMA*., p. 600. 
Nov. 25 No. 116 - Reserving for playground, landing, and street expan- 
sion purposes, a parcel of tho public domain situated 
in the poblacion, municipality of Tubigon, province of Bohol. 
J-bJUL., p. 601. 

Doc. 7 N 0 . 117 _ Reserving for school purposes, a percol of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Carabalan, municipality 
of Hj.mamaylan, province of Negros Occidental. JLbJLcL.* P« 602. 
Dec. 7 No. 118 - Proclaiming the existence of the public calamity in the 

provinces of Albay, Camarine3 Sin?, Isabela, ■ 

Hasbate, N'ueva Viacaya, .'>araar, and Sorsogon. IfciiU, p. 603. ' 
Dec. 18 No. 119 - Reserving for military training oamp site, two parcels 

of the public domain (Lots Nos. 1 and 13 of Plan IR- 
438) situated in tho barrios of Baybay and San Isidro Norte, 
municipality of Binmaley, province of Patigasinan. ( Q uezon 
H&SSfl8ea^.Vol. 3, Part II, J3VPF, pp. 715-716.) 
Dec. 18 No. 120 - .'-mending Executive Order No. 48, series of 1918, reser- • 

ving for military purposes certain parcels of the public 
domain situated in tut* municipal district of iilan, provinco of 
Cotabato. Ibid.., pp. 717-718. ; ' ; 



III - 127 

1936 Bee. 18 No. 121 - "eaorving for air D lan fe i 

airplane landing purposes certain parcels 
of tho public domain, sitlmtfjd . n Wrio Qf 

Boqu., municipality of T„ lfl0f provinco of TarU(J . ^ pp> 
719-759. ±<i>. 

« Doc. 21 No. 122 - Declaring Saturday, January 2 iqvt • , v, 

oj» anuary ^, 1937, a special public 

holiday. IjjiiU, pp. 760-761. 

11 Dec. 24 No. 123- Reserving for airr"" nrw> i™,*- 

airplane landing purposes a warcol of the 

public domain situated in tho pob.lacion, municipality 

of Masbato, province of Masbate. Ibj^, pp . 762-763. 

7.937 Jan. 11 I'fo . 124 - Rescrvjm- for -own ™ 

lk r 00,1001 Purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the poblacion, municipal district 
of Maramag, province of Bukidnon. Ij^, pp . 754.765. 
Jan. 11 No. 125 - Land reservation for school purposes in Magdug and 

Nangan, D a vao. IbjyU, pp. 766-767. 
»■ Jan. 15 No. 126 - Revoking Proclamation No. 104, dated October 30, 1936, 

establishing the daylight saving time for the Philip- 
pines, p. 768. 

" Jan * 20 127 - t!ie P-visions of .ct No. 4054 known as the 

Philippine. Nice Share Tenancy Act, as amended by Com- 
monwealth ;ct No. 178, to be in full force and effect in the 
provinces of Bulacan, N U ev* S C i.ja, Pampanga, Pangasinan and 
Tarlac. zMsLl, p. 769. 
Jan. 21 No. 128 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the property 

of thfl Cotnmonwoqith of the Philippines, situated in 
the barrio of kstipona, municipality of Pura, province of Tnrlao. 
IttuU* pp. 770-771. 
' Jan. 21 No. 129 - Reserving for plaza purposes, a parcel of the private 

property of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, situa- 
ted in the barrio of Estipona, municipality of Pura, province of 
Tarlac,. Ibid*, pp. 772-773. 
J an. 23 No. 130 - Setting aside February 24, 1937, as a day for the 

inauguration of the City of Ccbu, and declaring it a 
special holiday for the province of Cobu. Ibjd^,, p. 774. 
J an. 23 No. 131 _ Setting aside February 26, 1937, as a day for the 

inauguration of the City of Sambo «nga, and declaring it 
a special public holiday for the City of ^auboanga. Ibjyd* , p. 775. 
t* 1 ' 23 No. 132 - Setting aside n'arch 1, 1937, as a day for the inaugura- 
tion of the City of Davao, and declaring it a special 
public holiday for the province of Davao. JLbjUL,., p. 776. 
J an. 23 No. 133 - Setting aside July 16, 1937, as a day for tho inaugura- 
tion of the City of 1'loilo, and declaring it a spociel 
public holiday for the province of Iloilo. IbjjL«.» P« 777. 



Ill - 128 

- Tt»3 - 



1937 «pr. 6 



No. 134 - Declaring' the wfirwi v j. 

g the period between independence Day, July 4, 
and July '-51, iq^n „_ ,, , . ' 

Jtoii ^aii of .the Red Cros- +i, , », • ,. * 

„ , • + „ „ , thl; ^^^PPines. Issued at the Hty o 

Vaamngton, D.C.. (for n-.. ■- \ 

„pr. 6 ho. 135 - . intendment of Philip m ■ -* • 

^Jiixj.ppme -ar.i.ff Act of 1909. Ibid n 7P- 

Apr. 6 No.- 136 - Reserving for th, „ , . 1 7 

arvinfi for the exclusive use of non-Christians, p p,-,.. 

Qf c . . PUbUC d ° ,,iain SitUatud 111 the -nicipalitics 

f aUno g and Wounao, province of I loilo ,. I ssuod at the City e - 
Washington, D.C., (f or th f > r-;+„ ~p -t n " 

, .ipr. 6 No. 137 - Reserving for school 

fa i or school purposes, a parcel of the public 

d0Maln SitUated in th * of Balzac, minicipality 

of C ap Kountain Wm0b issuod ^ ^ ^ 

D.C, (for the City of Manila), i^ pp< 

Apr. 6 No. 138 - Reserv-in-r ™ i ^ 

eservmg xor market purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Penaplata, municipality 
of *«al. province of W Ia8ued at the 0ity Qf ¥aaMngt „ \ 
(for the City of Manila). Ibid. r p. 785 . 



' "°* 139 " DeClari "« ^d 8 y, March 27, 1937, a public holiday. 

Issued at the City of V/ashington, D.C., (f or the City of 
Hanila). Ibj^, p. 786. 

Apr. 12 No. 140 - Declaring Fridav. bril Yl iqt? • n 

h i.j.u.^v, -piu >j, 19^7, a special public holi- 
day. Issued at the City c f Washington, D.C., ( for the 
City of hanila). TbjJ^, P . 787. 
4>r. 14 No. 141 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the City 

of Manila. Issued at tho City of Washington, D.C. (for 
the City of I, Manila.) I b jd rf p. 730. 

Apr. 16 No. 142 - Establishing as Kuapnit-^alisasayao National Park for 

tho benefit and enjoyment of the people of the Philippines 
the parcel of land situated xn the municipalities of ^aybay, raid 
•ibuyog, province of Leyte. Issued at the City of Washington, B.C., 
(for the City of Manila). JJjisLu pp. 789-793. 
-Pr. 17 No. 143' _ Reserving for school purposes, Q parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Duoro, province 
of Bohol. Issued at the City of Washington, D.C., (for the City 
of Manila). -UeUU, pp. 794-795. 
v?r. 17 No. 144 - Reserving for cemetery purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Namabbalan, municipality 
of I'uguugarro, province of Cagayan. Issued at the City of Washing- 
ton, D.C. , (for the City of Manila). IMsU, pp. 796-797. 
"pr. 17 No. 145 _ Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrios of San Miguel and 
Maroyogroyog, municipality of Coron, Palawan. Issued at the 'City 



Ill - 129 

■i. - of Washington, D.C.. (for +>m * tr . \ 

/ e. uor the City of Manila). Ifci^, pp . 798-799. 

37 Apr. 17 No. 146 - Reserving for market 

t, or anrJctt purposes, R parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Halaybalay, pro- 

vince of Bukidnon. Issued at tv r---t-, # i- , . , > 

0 at the Cj - t - 7 ° f ''ashington, D.C., (for th 
City of Manila). Ij^, py< aoo-801. 

Apr. 17 No. 147 - Reserving for airplane purposes, two parcels of the pub- 

lie domain situated in the municipalities of Guianga end 
Sta. Cruz, province, of W Issued at the City of Washington, 
D.O., (for the City of Manila). IbjjU, pp. 304-805. 

Apr. 17 No. 148 - Reserving for sehnni nimn„ n 

h ior scnool purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Cncilayan, municipality 
of llurcia, province of N 0 gros Occidental. Issued at the City of 
Washington, B.C., ( foP the City oflianilp J, pp . ao4 . 805< 

Apr. 17 Ho. 149 - Reserving for municipal situ, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of K G palong, pro- ' 
vince of JW. Issued at the C ity of Washington, D . C#> ( ff)r tht 
City of Manila). IJ&dv, p. 006. 
Apr. 17 No. 150 - Establishing as Southern Hocos Norte Forest Reserve for 

forest protection and timber production the parcels of 
public domain situated in the municipalities of iiadoo, Banna, Ea- 
tac, Currimao, Dingras, Nueva lira, Paoay, Pinili, Sarrat, and Sol- 
sona, province of Ilocos Norte. Issued at the City of Washington, 
D.C., (for the City of Kanila). Ibid. f pp. 007-901. ■ 
Apr. 24 No. 151 - Reserving for stock farm mid breeding station purposes ' 

a parcel of the public domain situated in the barrio of 
3alactasnn, municipal district of Lanitan, province of Sambo ang^. 
Issued at the City of Washington, D.C., (for the City of Manila). 
Jj&sU, K>« 902-904. 
June 14 J'vo. 152 - Reserving for market and pi as a purposes, three parcels 

of land situated in the poblacion, municipality of oan 
fearcolino, province of 'Janboloo. Issued at the City of Now York, 
U. (for the City of ilanila). IJM*.f pp. 905-906. 
June 14 No. 153 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of i: a hini, municipality of 
'^alavera, province of Nueva Scija. Issued at the City of New York, 
h. S. A., (for the City of iianila). .IJ&iL., pp. 907-908. 
June 14 No. 154 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Cartogena, municipality 
of Plaridel, province of Occidental Mis amis. Issued at tho City 
of New York,- U.S.A., (for the City of Manila). Ib ftfl ., pp. 909-, ■■ 
910. 



Ill - 130 

~ 7^3 ~ 

.937 June 14 Ho. 155 - Reaerving for liH^, 

oubi • „ lighth0US0 two parcels of th0 

• Publxc domain situated in the barrio of San Carlos 

province of Accidental TW« 0 T ^arlos, 
n ■ , u * r0B - SSUed at thG C ity of JT 0W York 

° L ' (f ° r the C ^ of Manila). Ibj^, w . 9n °*' 
11 June 14 Ho. 156 - Itesa-vim- r . iJ ^"J 12 - 

•TO for „ unicipal ^ lding 8ite md 8chool 

bob, two parcel,, of tho pubHc ^ 

poblacion, municiualitv or r ^ 

at the Citv of ,t "y ' ' att8Pan ' yr ° Vlnce of ^Won, Issued 
tho C lt y of ,l ew , ork> u . s> u> (for 

pp. 913-914. "anila;. ifcuU, 

woei „ f rr of im - md ™ n * f ° r • 

paroel „ f Taklan , nmioi ^ ity of fa , 

Issued at the City of Yn*> tt « , / rovince . 

lom, pp. 915-916. ' S ' A " (f ° r ° f 

' >une 14 No. 1 5 8 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the Publi , 

domain situated in the barrios of San Rafael and San 
Jose, municipality of Hontalban, province of Rizal . Isgued &t ^ 

HZ " *" ^ ^ - of Manila). 1^, pp . S1V ._ 

JUDS 14 *' " * XClUd ^ f ™ ^ operation of Executive Order Ho 97 

dated October 11, i 90 Q, and oponin ^ to diGposition & 
Parcel of land described as Lot B in Subdivision Plan 33*4509 
located in the barrio of Inagaua*, municipality of Puerto Princesa. 
Province of Palawan. Issued a t the City of »ew York, U.S.A., (for 
the City of Manila). Thj^. , pp . Qio_n? 0 

JUneM ,T °- - *™ exploration, prospecting occu- 

pation, location, or exploitation, and from sale or other 
disposition and reserving for the exclusive use of non-Christians 
portions of the suborovinces of ]3ontoc, Kalinga,- Mountain Province. ' 
Issued at the City of Mew York, U.S.. 4., (for the City of Manila). • 
■iiidLut Pi). 921-922. 
June 14 No. if* _ Revoking Proclamation V.o. 611, series of 1933, and 

establishing as Mongolian. Hot Spring National f'ark for 
the benefit and enjoyment of the people of the Philippines the 
parcel of public domain situated in tho municipality of Ormoc, 
province of Leyte. Issued at the City of «ew York, (for the City . ' 
of Manila). JMjL., pp. 923-925. 
une 14 h Qm 162 _ ReaervinK for forfist station site pur P oses and designa- 
ting as if aga-Kaga Forest Station site roservation tho 
Parcol of- P ublic domain situated in the municipality of Margosatubig, 
province of Sanboanga, Issued at tho City of : r ew York, U.S.A. , 
Jfor tho City of Manila). IfcuU, pp. 926-927. 



- ?5« - 



III - 1 31 



77 JUnU U * 0 ' " f ° r ***** ^-tion to fill the ousting vacancy 

of assemblyman for <W ineg lforte> Issued ^ ^ ^ 

of Ne„ York, U.S.A., (for the City of Manila.) Ibii,, p. 928 . ' 
July U Ho. 164 - Proclaiming the existence of public canity in the 

province of Hiaaoia Occidental. Issued at the C it y of 
Paris,. France, (for the C it y of Manila). IbicL, p. 929. ' ' 

June 27 No. 165 - Establishing as Singian Forest Reserve for forest pro- 
tection and timber production a parcel of public domain 
•situated in the municipalities of Bagahag and Solano, province of 
Huova Vi-soaya. Issued at the City of Washington, D.C., (for the 
City of Manila). IbjJ^, pp. 930-935. 

Juno 27 No. 166 - Establishing as Buenavista Watershed Forest Reserve and 

timber production a parcel of public domain situated in 
the municipality of Hulanay, province of i'ayabas. I ssucd at tho 
City of Washington, B.C., (for the City of Manila). Ibid*., 
pp. 936-939. 

"une 27 No. 167 - Reserving for forest station site purposes and designr- 

ting as Brooke's Point Forest Station site reservation 
tho parcel of public domain situcted in the municipal district of 
Brooke's Point, province of Palawan. Issued at the City of Washing- 
ton, D.C., (for the City of Manila). IfcULw p. 940. 
June 27 No. 168 - Reserving for wharf site purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Carmen, province 
of Qcbu. Issued at tho City of Washington, P.O., (for the City 
of Manila). JCjjiiL p. 941. 
June 27 No. 169 - Reserving for park purposes a parcel of the public I, 

domain situated in the municipality of "igbauan, pro- 
vince of Iloilo. Issued at the City of Washington, D.C., (for -. 
the City of Manila ). Ibjq,., pp. 942-943- 
•June 27 No. 170 - Reserving for hospital purposes a parcel of tho public 

domain situated in tho barrio of tiargosatubid, province 
of iamboanga. Issued at the City of Washington, D.C., (f or the 
City of Manila ) .„IJJJ.iUi..pp. 944-945. 
•June 27 No. 171 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in tho barrio of Barangobong, munici- 
pality of Villasis, province of Pangasinan. Issued at tho City of 
Washington, D.O., (for the City of Manila), JMsUt. PP« 946-947. 
Aug. 20 No. 172 _ .bonding ProclnnatSon No. 133, dated January 23, 1937, so 

as to set aside Aigust 25, 19-37 as a day for the inaugu- 
ration of tho City of Iloilo, and declaring it a special public 
holiday for the province of Iloilo. IbjjL., P« 94-8. 



- 79? - 



III - 132 



19 ;57 Aug. 21 Wo. 173 - Enjoining ,11 branches, subdivisions, agencies, and 

instrumentalities of the Commonwealth Government to 
extend their cooperation in rendering the necessary aid to the 
refugees from China and prohibiting as an emergency measure, the 
raise in house rentals and prices of foodstuffs and other prime 
necessities of life. Ibid,., p. 949. 

" Aug ' 23 N ° ' 174 ~ ° allin '' th ° Atonal \ssembly into a special session 

commencing .\ugust 20, 1977. ibid„ p. 950. 

" 24 1,0 * 175 ~ Doclarin « °^>n to disposition all public Lands not pre- 

viously declared open to concession that have been, Ca- 
may hereafter be classified alienable or disposable ,and delimited 
and surveyed .and the unsurveyod lands of the public domain that' 
covered by public land applications received and accepted in the 
Bureau of Lands on or before July 1, 1936, subject to future deli- 
mitation and survey. .Ibicw_, p. 951. 

" Aug. 24 No. 176 - Reserving and excepting from lease, sale, or other dis- 
position Lot Wo. 1557 of 1'i'aio Friar Lands Estate, in 
Cavite, containing an area of 13,411 square meters, more or less, 
D?Uuu P- 952. 

Aug. 24 Wo. 177 - Koserving for settlement farm school purposes, throe 

parcels of the public domain situated in the barrio of 
Daguit, municipality of L a bo, province of Canarinc-o Forte. 
IMjL., pp. 953-955. 

" Aug. 24 Wo. 178 - .Reserving for cemetery purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Kolambugan, pro- 
vince of Lanao. Ibid..., pp. 956-957. 
•&ug. 2% Wo. 179 - ^evoking Proclamation W 0 . 382, dated April 20, 1931. 

IMA*., p. 950. 

Aug. 27 *<o. IRQ - iieaorvj.ng for post-office purposes a parcel of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the City of Cebu, Philippines. 
.Q&Au P. 959. 

" Aug. 27 Wo. 181 - Reserving for school purposes six parcels of the public 

domain situated in tho municipality of Aracoli, pro- 
vince of Palawan. I bjLd. f pp. 96O-Q63. 
Aug. 27 Wo. 182 - Establishing as Wasiping Forest Reserve for forest 

protection and timber production a parcel of public 
domain situated in the municipalities of Alcala, Baggao, and 
Wattaran, province of ^agayan. JDiiij., pp. 964-975. 
Aug. 27 Wo. 183 - Heserving for school purposes two parcels of the public 

domain situated in tho barrio of Hahalo, municipality 
of Cagayan do 8ulu, province of Sulu. JMAx.> PP« 976-977. 



- fm - 



III - 133 



J.957 27 No - 184 - 2st.ibliuhi.ng as ilahagnao Hational Park for the bonofit 

arid on joyno»it of the people of the Philippines the pa:: - 
col of land situated in the municipalities of Burauen and L a Taz ! 
province of Leyte. Ibjd^, pp. 978-952. 
Aug. 27 Ho. 185 - Reserving for hospital and dispensary purposes a par- 
cel of the public domain situated in the municipality 
of Parang, province of Cotshato. Ibid., pp. 983-984. 
. Azg. 27 Mo.. 186 - R f5 serving for stream- hank protection purposes a pares? 

of the public domain situated in the municipality of 
Baclayon, province of aohol. I bid. f pp. 985-987. 
Aug. 28 No. 187 - Reserving for workingmm's village purposes two parcels 

of the public domain situated in the district of I'ondo, 
City of Manila. IJsIAm., pp. 988-990. 
Aug. 28 i<o. 183 - Reserving for military purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Teneguiban, municipa- 
lity of Puerto Prinoesa, province of Palawan. Ibid. , pp. 991- > 
992. 

Aug. 28 ho, 189 - -^serving for airplane landing purposes a parcel of 

land situated in tlie municipality of 'Iloilo, province 
of Iloilo. Ibid*., pp. 993-994. 
Aug. 28 No. 190 - Preserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Lalauanan, municipality 
of Turaauni, province of Isabels. Ib id, f p. 995. 
Aug. 28 No. 191 - Reserving for quarry purposes a parcel of lend in the 

barrio of Manuangan, municipal district, of Libungan, 
province of C 0 tabato. Ib\d._, p. 996. 
Aug. 28 No. 192 - Reserving for market purposes two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Talakag, province 
of Bukidnon. JMiUi pp. 997-998. 
Aug. 28 Ho. 193 - Reserving for cemetery purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Tucelana, municipality 
of Lallo, province of Cagayan. Ibjji,., pp. 999-1000. 
-ug. 30 No. 194 - Publishing the Proclamation of the President of the 

United States, dated nay 1» 1937, recognizing and pro- 
claiming the existence of a state of civil strife in Spain and 
placing an embargo on the arms, ammunition, and implement of 
war therein described in so far as shipment to Spain from the 
United States and its territories and insular possessions is 
concerned. IMA*., PP» 1001-1006. 
Sept. 3 No. 195 - Extending the period of special session to September 

7, 1937. jtjjil., P- 1007. 



III - 1.34 



1937 Sept. 3 No. 196 - Publishing the rulm ™ri 

' ruAf ' s1 ,incl relations promulgated by the 

Secretary of State- of tho United Stefctt on May 5, 1937- 

governing tho soliciting and roeaivi^ n<- 4. • v 

*i, «uiu receiving of contributions for use 

in Spain. Ihjd A> pp. 1000-1011. 
" Sept. 3 Hb. 197 - Publishing the Proclamation of tho President of tho 

"nitod States, dated Hay 1, 1937, declaring that the 
articles listed therein shall, on and after Juno 1, 1937, be con- 
sidered arms, ai.imuniti.on, and implements of war for the purpose of 
Section 5 of the Joint Resolution of Congress, of May 1, 1937 „ 
JMsLu Pp. 1012-1016. 
» Sept. 6 No. 198 - Publishing the instruction., issued by the Department of 

State of the United States defining the procedure to be 
followed in the exchange of communications between the authorities 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, on the one hand, and 
Foreign Consular Officials in the Philippines and .aorican Diplo- 
matic and Consular Officers, on tho other hand. Ibjd^, pp. 1017- 
1918. 

" Sept. 6 Wo. 199 - Publishing the instructions of the Secretary of State 

regarding the exchange of communications between the 
League of rations and the Government of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines. I_bijU, pp. 1019-1021. 
Sept. 7 No. 200 - Further extending the period of special session to 

September 8, 1937. IJiicL, p. 1022. 
Sept. 8 No. 201 - Calling the National Assembly into a special session for 

a period of 0110 day on September 9,. 1937. liM*.* p. 1023 
Sept. if, No. 202 - Sstablishing as Central Cobu National Park for the bene- 
fit and enjoyment of the people of the Philippines tho 
parcel of land situated in' the municipalities of -'alaniban, Toledo, 
and the City of Cobu. Ibid*., pp. 1024-1044. 
kept. 16 ho. 203 - .Unending Proclamation Ho. 594, series of 1933, reserving. 

setting apart, and designating as Mount *\rayat National 
Park for the benefit and enjoyment of tho people of the Phiiip- 
pines, the parcel of public domain situated in tho municipality 
of i^rayat, province of Pampanga. JMsU, pp. 3.045-1046. 
^upt. 21 -<o. 204 - Designating the period from November 6 to 30, 1937, 

as tho period for tho National Fund Campaign of tha 
3oy Scouts of the Philippines. IJaixL, ]?• 1048. 
Sept. 21 No. 205 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

dora.'d.n situated in the barrio of Calunod, municipality 
of Balingao, province of Occidental Misamis. .Ibi&u, pp. 1049-1050. 
0( -'pt. 21 :\'o. 206 - Reserving for pl.aza purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Pavia, province 
of Iloilo. pp. 1051-1052. 



II n 



- no ~ 



III - 135 



1937 Sept. 23 No. 207 - Excluding fro* the operation of Executive Order ifo. 41, 

.cries of 1919, Slocks N 0S .171 and 176, Reclamation *o!, 
1, Manila -arbor, and reserving s*ao for bonded warehouse sites 
. for the Manila Railroad Company. ibiq^ p . 1053 . 

" 0ct ' 5 H °- 208 " * eSGrvin « for Purposes, one .hundred eighty-five 

lots of Talisay-Hinglanilla Estate, Cebu. Hflfl-, p. 1£5< 

11 Oct. 7 -o. 209 - Reserving fn-* mrO' ,o ,, j 

in/, in. narL dne playground purposes a parcel of 

the private domain of the Commonwealth of the Philippn re- 
located in the municipality of Ualabon, province of R iza l. Ifctf., 
pp. 1055-10^6. 

Oct. 7 No. 210 - Reserving for railroad purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of R a bon, municipality of 
*osario, province of L a Union. Ibid,._ f pp. 1057-1058. 
Oct. 7 lio. 211 - Land reservation for school purposes in Impasugong, 

3ukldnon. IbiiL,, pp. 1059-1060. 
Oct. 12 No. 212 - Declaring the provisions of .'.ct No. 4054, known as the 

Philippine Rice Share Tenancy Act, a - amended by Com- 
monwealth Act No. 178, to be in full forco and effect in the 
provinces of Laguna and Covite. Ibi , .. f p. 1061. 
Oct. 14 No. 213 - Declaring the first iionday of December each year as 

Parent's Day and revoking Proclamation No. 11, dated 
May 20, 1921. Ib^, p. i 0 62. 
Oct. 21 No. 214 - Reserving for forest purposes, Lot No. 3210 (now .Lot 

No. 4313) of the Calasnba Estate, laguna,. IbjjJ^, p. IO63 
Oct. 21 No. 215 - .Reserving for school purposes two parcels of /the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Toga, municipality of 
Katipunan, province of Zamboanga. Ibid^., pp. 1064-1065. 
Oct. 25 No, 216 - Fixing Saturday, -»pril 16, 1938 as Census Day. Ift Afl. f • 

pe. 1066-1067. 

°ct. 25 No. 217 - Reserving' for experimental and plant propagation pur- 
poses Lot lio. 3519 of Iloilo Cadastre. Ibi,fl. r p. 1068. 
Nov. 4 No. 218 - Declaring Monday, November 15, 1937, as a special 

public holiday. IJbidj., p. IO69. 
Nov. 5 IJ 0t 219 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of "ant a Maria, municipa- 
lity of Umingan, province of Pangasinan. l , bid .t.t pp. 1070-1071. 
IT ov. 11 Ho. 220 - Establishing as 3 0 ngabon-3aler National Park for the 

benefit and enjoyment of the people of the Philippines 
the parcel of land situated in the municipalities of 3ongabon end 
Ealer, province of Nuova Ecija and l'ayabas. I^id«.» PP« 1072-1078. 
12 No. 221 - Amending Proclamation No. 432 by modifying tho descrip- 
tion of the boundaries of the Northern 3 a taan Forest^ 
Reserve. Ip ,cj f . t pp. 1079-1105. • 



Nov. 



m - 



III - 136 



1937 Nov. 15 No. 222 - Reserving for headquarters purposes of the Boy 3 C outs of 

the Philippines a parcel of the private domain of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, known as Lot No. 193 of the Manil.- 
Cadastral Survey, Manila, IfcttLj. p. 1106. 
Nov. 16 .'Jo. 223 - Establishing a ^iak-na-%to National Park for the benefit 

of the people of the Philippines the parcel of Land situ 
ted in the municipality of r>m L'iguel, province of Bulacah. 
XbiiL., pp. 1107-1118. 

» Nov. 16 No. 224 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the muni 

cipalities of Infanta and Polillo, province of Tayabas. . 
ibidj.» P. 1119. 

11 Nov. 16 fio. 225 - Designating Thursday, the 25th day of November, 1937, ps 

a day of National Thanksgiving. Ibid., pp. 1120-1121. 
" Nov. 20 No. 226 - Proclaiming the existence; of public calamity in the 

province of kjyte. IjbjjL., p. 1122. 
" Nov. 22 Mo. 227 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the pro- 
vince of Capia. Ibid-, ?- 1123. 
" Dec. 7 No. 228 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the pro- 

vincds of Iloilo, Samar and Cebu. Ibjd., p. 1124, - 
" Dec. 7 No. 229 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the pro- 
vince of Bulacan. ibid,., P . 1125. 
" Dec. 9 ?Jo. 230 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the - 

province of flindoro. Ibid. , P- 1126. r< - 
" Dec » 15 No. 231 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the ■,.-;(•,_->•:. 

province of Romblon. Ibjd. , p. 1127. 
Dec. 23 No. 232 - Excluding from the operation of Executive Order Nq. 43, 

series of 1919, ^nd opening to disposition Block No. 148, 
Reclamation No. 1, Manila Harbor. I bid. . p. 1128. 
" Dec. 23 No. 233 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Bagbag,. municipality of 
Solaonn, province of Ilocos Norte. Ibjd. f pp. 1129-1130. 
" Dec. 23 No. 234 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Camiguin, municipality 
of Calayan, province of Cagayan. Ibj d... pp. 1131-1132. 
" Dec. 23 No. 235 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 419, 

series of 1931, a parcel of land in the barrio of Julong- 
Duhdt, municipality of halabon, province of Rizal; Ibjd« > PP« 1133- 
1134. 

Dec. 23 No. 236 - Reserving for the exclusive use of non-Christians, ■ 

two parcels of the public domain situated in the district 
of Rocodo, City of ^amboanga. PP» 1135-1136. •;<•• s 



- m - 



HI - 137 



1957 Dec. 23 Ho. 237 - Reserving for school 

. flf school purposes two parcels of the public 

j3 , SitUatGd in **» ^ of Paitan, 

B^bong, province of N UOVa V izcqya . ^ ^ * 
» Dec. 23 Bb. 238 - Reserving for road ™^ H37-1138. 

or road purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrin nf q p v, 
„x. ., . , °§rrio of San Pablo, municipality 

of oan Estoban, province of Hocos W ' 
»' Dec 2^5 Ho ?m h , . „ r * - iJaiL -' PP- H39-1140. 

*o. 2, ,o. 239 - Revoke Proclamation , 0 . 25, dated July 8, 1920 , and 

t . ++ . re8erVin8 th ° land de °^ therein for plant propaga- 
tion station purposes. Ibid,,, p. 1141 

" Dec. 24 No. 240 - Declaring Friday, December 31 iq-, 

' oeilDC -r 51, 1937, a special public 
hoxiday. IJsllUi Pp. U42-1M3 

* DS °- 24 *" " ta °" di "' : »~«~ W ho. 30, ^ „ av 15 , 1916 . 

Uii&u, pp. 1144-1145. 

• hoc. » fc. 242 . . Mlni; ProolMation , io- 42J| date4 October ^ 

■IbJ^Lu, pp. 1146-1147. 
.W50 .Tan. 11 M„. I!evt , kl „ K ProclK „„ ti „ n ^ ^ ^ ^ 

outitlod "Rooorvins for headquartors purposes of tho 
*.y <W. of tho Philippine,, , parool of the ^ Qf 

tho Co, M „„„o.,ltl. of tho Philippic, too™ oo lot No. 3, hlook 
*>. 193, of tho Kasila Cadastral KurTCy , Hmilo . Jilgimtiiw ^ 
Vol. 4, Part I, JSVFF, p. 749. 
Jan. 11 No. 244 - Reserving for municipal building site purposes a pared 

of the public domain .situated in the barrio of Central,' 
( municipal district of Itogpn, Mountain Province. 1^, pp . 750 - 75 ,. 

Jan. 11 No. 245 - Reserving for railroad purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in tho .barrio of Plaridel, municipality 
of Atimonan, province of Tayabas. IbjjL., pp. 752-753. 
Jan. 11 No.. 246 - Reserving for public fishpond purposes two parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrios of Longos, and 
Bankulasi, municipalities of lialabon and Uavotas, Rizal. Ibid^ f 
PP. 754-755. 

Jan. 20 No. 247 - Reserving for municipal building site purposes a parcel 

of tho public domain situated in the barrio of Santa Jo, 
municipal district of Imugan, province of Nueva Vizcaya. IbA djL, p. 
756. 

an. 20 No. 248 - Proclaiming tho first week of March of every year as 
Fire Prevention 7a ek. I&Aaj. pp. 757-758. 
Jan. 27 No. 249 - Reserving for market purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Cajidiocan, 
province of Komblon. iM&^r pp. 759-760. 
27 No. 250 - Reserving for provincial Capitol ground and park purposes 
four parcels of the public domain situated in the munici- 
pality of San Jose, province of .Antique. Ibid... . pp. 761-762. 



- n> - 



III - 138 



1938 Feb. 1 No. 251 - Declaring February q nnm 

(J "ruary y, 1933, a spocial public holiday. 

lioJLs., p. 763. 

11 Feb. 3 No. 252 - Abstention from all rnilVH ~ ^. 

n aJ " L Public demonstration in favor of 

parties engaged in the 3pani 3 h Civil Var and Sino-Japs- 
neso war, February 3, 1.938. Ib^U, p. 764. 
» Feb. 3 Wo. 253 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipal district' of Kling, 
province of Cotabato. Il^, py . 765 _ ?g6< 

«■ Fab. 3 No. 254 - Land reservation for military training site in Masbate, 

riasbato. IJ&sU, PP . 767-768. 
\ Feb. 3 No. 255 - Land reservation for municipal building site in Glan, 

Cotabato. Ibid^, pp. 769-772. 
" Feb. 11 Ho. 256 - Land reservation for comfort station in Santa Clara, 

. iiatangas, B a tangas. HaHL, pp. 773t774. 
Feb. 11 No. 257 - Land reservation for school purposes in 3 a diodaya, 

Pinili, Ilocos Korto. Ibid. f pp. 775-776. # 
" Feb. 11 No. 258 - Establishing as Marinduaue Forest Reserve for forest 

protection and timber production, parcels of public 
domain situated in the municipalities of Boac, Buonavista, Gasac, 
Mapog, Santa Cruz, and Torrijoa, province of Harinduque. Ibj£. , 
pp. 777-8.12. 

Feb. 23 No. 259 - Publishing the proclamation of the President of the' ' 

United States issued on January 26, 1938, extending for 
three years the period of operation of the act approved on June ' 
3-4 , 1935. IbjjU, pp. 043-844. 
Feb. 28 No. 260 - Excluding from the operation of Executive Order No. 10, 

series of 1907, and reserving for railroad purposea, 
thirteen parcels of land situated in the municipality of Mufioz, 
province of Nuova Ecija. Ibid..., pp. 845-852. 
Feb. 28 No. 261 - Establishing as I .fount »ajo National Park for the benefit 

and enjoyment of the people of the Philippines and the 
parcel of land situated in the municipal districts of Patikul and 
Talipau, province of Sulu. T&LsL., pp. 853-855. 
Feb. 28 Jo. 262 - Establishing as 'Jaraagon-Anahau Forest Reserve for forest 

protection and conservation of camagon and anahau trees, 
.the parcel of the public domain situated in the municipality of 
Infanta, province of "ayabas. .Ibj,dv f pp. 856-058. 
Mar. 4 No. 263 - Giving public notice of the approval of the President of 

the United States of National. Assembly "Act No. 2512 now 
known as Commonwealth Act No. 253. IbJJ*, p. 859-. Ui 
H ar. 17 No. 264 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the 

province of B a taan. IbifiL, p. 860. 



Ill - 1 39 

~ 714 - 

1930 Mar. 31 No. 265 - Reserving for the use of th« pmi • , 

"se ox the Philippine Amy three par- 

eels „f the publio domain situated in the barrios of Bu~ 

U : , r en> ******* of Cagayan,province of W s , Orien- 
tal. JiliL., pp. 861-362. 

» Mar. 31 i' J o. 266 - Fixing liondw. OotoW 

* • ' uctob < 31 3, 1930 as Census Day. Ibid. , 
pp. 863-864.. 

" .Apr. 7 Wo. 267 - Reserving for the «. .,. 

{, ior tlie uoe oi the Philippine Tuberculosis 

Society, a parcel of the public domain situated in the . 
barrio of Ki a3 , City of Baguio. Ibj^, pp . 865 _ 866< 

- Apr.. 7 No. 268 -.Declaring Saturday, April 16, 1OTBf a special public 

holiday. Ibid^, p. 867. 

" Apr. 29 -No. 269 - Reserving f ov m-m-^,, 

rviii,, j oi military purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the Manila Port Area, district of 
Intramuros, City of Manila. Ibid^,, op. 868-869. 

- Hay 10 No. 270 - Declaring the period between Independence Day, July 4, 

and July 31, 1938 as the time for the Third Commonwealth 
Roll Call if the Red Cross in the Philippines. IbicU, pp. 870-871- 
" "ay 19 No. 271 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 217, 

series of 1929', a parcel of land located in the barrio 
of Talnag, municipality of Itogon, subprovince of Benguet. Ibid., 
p. 872. 

I:ay 20 No. 272 - Calling the National Assembly to a special session for a 

period of two days beginning Nay 23, 1938. Ibid , t r p. 873.. 
June 21 No. 273 - Revoking a Proclamation il 0 . 141, dated April 14, 1937, 

declaring tho existence of a public calamity in the City 
of iianila. JJ>A<L__, p. 874. 
Jul. 19 Mo. 274 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the publio 

domain situated in the barrio of riambalot, municipality of 
Brooke's Point, province of Palawan. JJMjl, p. 875. 
Jul. 19 Ho. 275 - Snonding Proclamation No. 569, dated April 6, 1933. 

ifeiiU, pp. 876-877. 
Jul. 19 h 0 . 276 - Reserving for school purposes two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the bsrrios of C am ang- c am ang, and G'abcab. 
municipality of Isabels, province of Ifogros Occidental. Ibj^U, 
pp. 878-879. 

J ul. 19 No. 277 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of tho public do- 
main situated in the barrio of Guinbirayan, municipality 
of Looc, province of Romblon. JLbjjL., PP« 880-881. 
Jul. 19 tj 0< 278 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public do- 
main situated in the barrio of Tanato, municipality of 
Nalanga, province of Bataan, . IbJjL.» PP« 882-883. 



.?'<> 

Ill - HO 



:i958 Jul. 19 Ho. 279 - ^serving for school purpose., two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Rangayan, municipality 
of Hufioz, province- of Nueva Ecija. Ib^, p.. 084-88-5. 
" Jul. 19 Ho. 280 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Santa Teresa, municipa- 
lity of Can Jose, province of Mindoro. 11^, pp . 886-887. 

" JU1 ' 19 N0 * 281 ~ Re80rvin <' for sch0 °l Purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in thp h-ai->~-i /-, ~r n n • ^ . . , .. 

.o.u ± n oarno of Oalomn.ntao, municipality 

of Iiaraburao, province of hindoro. Ibj^, pp . 888-889. 

" Jul. 19 No. 282 - Reservine' for spttl^nt.n+ -p„™, i -. 

-Lii^, -lux oex-cjxnent i a rn school purposes a parcel of 

the public domain situated in the barrio of Gibato, muni- 
cipality of Dumarao, province of C a piz. Ibi^, pp. 890-891. 
" Jul. 19 No. 283 - Declaring the provisions of Act No. 4054, known as the 

Philippine Rice Share Tenancy Act, as amended by Common- 
wealth Act Ho. 178, to be in full force and effect in the municipa- 
lity of Hemiosa, province of 3 a taan. IbjijU, p . 892. 
" Jul. 19 No. 284 - Establishing an a coal mining reservation two parcels of . 

the public domain situated in the municipalities of K F ba- 
salan, and Hargosatubid, province of Zaaboanga. IbjjL., p. 893. 
Jul. 19 No. 285 - Reserving for municipal building site purposes, two parcels 

of the public domain situatod in the municipality of T a clo- 
ban, province of Leyte. JJiijU., pp. 894-895. 
Jul. 19 Wo, 286 - Reserving for railroad purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of San Antonio, muaicipe- 
lity of flufioz, province of Kueva Kci.ia. Ibid. f pp. 896-897. 
Jul. 19 No. 287 - Reserving for plaza purposes two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Sorsogon, province 
of SorsOgon. Ibid, , PP- 898-899. 
Jul. 19 i'fo. 288 - Reserving for cemetery purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of San Raynundo, municipality 
of Jolo, province of Sulu. XJjjjLu, pp. 900-901. 
Jul. 19 ho. 289 - Reserving for health resort purposes a parcel of the pviblic 

domain situated in the barrio of 1'agburo3, municipality of 
Puerto Princes a, province of Palawan. JMA.-., pp. 902-903. 
Jul. 20 'Ao. 290 - Calling the National Assembly to a special session- for 

a period of ten days beginning July 25, 1938. 1J®A*.> P« 904. 
J ul. 20 So. 291.- Establishing as varamoan I'ational Park for the benefit and 

enjoyment of the people of the Philippines tho parcel of 
the public domain situatod in the municipality of Caramoan, province 
Camarinos ^ur. ibid. t , PP« 905-908. 
J ul. 20 No. 292 - Establishing as hayon Volcano National Park for tho benefit 

and enjoyment of the poopl" nf tho 'Philippines, tho parcel 



HI r- 141 

- ?M - 



^ :.^ S "' " aUliPOt ' - **«>. P™ of md r3TOkl(1 , 

for this purpose Proclamation Nr, 

909 _ 922> Nation I<o. .341, series of 1930.^1^ pp. 

1938 Jul. 20 ITo. 293— Establishing is t» 

nint as ..ount Isarog National Park for the bono- 

. fit and uujo^at of tho peoplo of the PhiliDpinoa> ^ 
P-col of land situated in tho municipalities of Uaga/ Calabanga, 
LXnmhflC ' C '° e ' ' 2i ™° n > Province of Chinos our,' and 

revoking for this purpose Proclamation Ho. 840, series of 1 935 . 
UiULut pp. 923-935. 

" Jul. 20 No. 294 - Establish-in* as Timrt n +. • , n 

a- ig a» i\rad . ass National Park for tho benefit 

mid enjoyment of the people of the Philippines, the parcel ' 
of public domain situated in tho municipal districts of ^gaki, Con- , 
copcion, o ig , y> wd Suyo and aunicip ^ ity of Corvantos> provinCG Qf 
Ilocoa Sur. IbjaU, pp. 936-951. 
Jul. 21 No. 295 - Establishing as ?ibiang-Dom agendo ng Watershed Forest Re- 
serve for forest protection and timber production the par- 
cel of public domain situated in the municipality of Guinayangar ! 
province of '^ayabas. Ib^d,., pp. 952-954. 
Jul. 21 ho. 2Q6 - Establishing as nuianay Watershed Forest Reserve for 

watershed protection and timber production "the parcel 
of public domain situated in the .municipality of Kulanay, province 
of I ay abas. Ijbici-., pp. 955-956. 
Jul. 21 ho. 297 - Establishing as Kidapawan Lanzonos Forest Reserve for 

forest protection, timber production and conservation of 
lanzones, certain parcels of public domain situated in the municipal 
district of Kidapav/an, province of Cotabato. Ibid.^. pp. 957-968. 
Jul. 22 /Jo. 298 - Giving public notice that no public calamity now exists 

in the provinces of Leyte, Jay-abas, Tarlac, Bulacan, I oun- ' 
tain Province, and the City of ^aguio, and for this purpose revoking 
Proclamations iT os . 760, 836, 837, and 838, series of 1935, and 224, 
226, and 229, series of 19 '-57: and excluding tho province of Loyto 
from the effect of Proclamation ho. 755, series of 1934, as amended 
by Proclamation "a. 775, series of 1935. JJiixLw. pp. 969-970. ' 
J ul. 27 ho. 299 - Excluding from tho operation of Exocutivw Order lh, 46, 

series of 1908, a parcel of land situated in Puerto 
Princosa, Palawan containing an area of 2,004 square meters. Ijjj.d jt , 
PP. 971-972. 

* lu g. 2 Ho. 300 - Reserving for citrus experiment station purposes, two 

parcels of tho public domain situated in the barrio of 
Kisolon, municipality of Impasugong, province of Bukidnon. JJaisL., 
' PP. 973-975. 



m 



III - U2 



195 8 .taf. 4 Ho. 301 - Extending the period of special session to August 15, 

1938. JMjL., p. 976. 

" Aug. 6 No. 302 - Declaring J^turdav 'niflnc.+ i ■z o-o 

>ugust 1;, 19;;8, as -a special nation*! 

holiday. Ibid. f pp. 977.970. 

" ' 8 Ji °* 303 " PrOClainir ^ th « ^tenee of public calamity in the pro- * 

vince of Laguna. Ibid,., p. 979. 

» /.ug. 8 No. 304 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 53, 

series of 1936, and Forestry Administrative' Order No. 2- 
804, dated January 2, 1936, and opening to the position under trc 
provisions of Comonwoalth Act No. 137, a parcel of land located in ' 
the barrio of Caorasan, municipality of Ii a bu a , province' of Oamarine, 
Sur. Ibj.dj.. pp. 980-981. 
Aug, 10 No. 305 - Reserving for the use of the National Power Corporation, 

blocks nop. 165,169, and 170 of the Manila' Reclamation No. 
1, Manila Harbor, City of Manila. Ibid.., p. 982. 
lug. 10 '?o. 306 - Reserving for airplane landing purposes three parcels of 
the public domain situated in tiie barrio of Barobo, muni- 
cipality of Lianga, province of Surigao. Ibid,, pp. 983-984. 
/'ug. 10 Wo. 307 - Excluding from tho operation of Executive Order No. 17, 
dated February 19, 1917 and reserving for the use of the 
Philippine Army, a parcel of land located in the City of Hoilo. 
iMiL., pp. 985-986. 
lug. 12 No. 303 - Reserving for offshore patrol purposes a parcel of the. 

public domain situated in the City of Oebu. J^isL, 
pp. 987-938. 

.ug. 12 No. 309 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain, situated in the barrios of At' no ay and Poblacion, 
municipality of San Jose, province of Antique. jCbJjlu* PP. 989-990. 
Aug. 12 'No. 310 - Reserving for government center purposes, four parcels of 
the public domain situated in the municipality of Clan, 
province of Cut abate ibid., pp. 991-992. 
"Ug. 17 No. 311 _ Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the City 

of Manila. I bid. ,, p. 993. ' , ' 

^-ig. 20 No. 312 - Reserving, for school purposes a portion of lot no. 6330 

of the Imus Friar Lands ^states, situated in the munici- 
pality of NfKimnrifias, Cavito. IJajk, pp. 994-995. 
.•.ug. 24 Ho. 313 _ Proclaiming October 31 to November 15 of every year as 

3oy Scouts /mnivers airy period throughout the ^ Philippines. 
JJi-UL, pp. 996-997. 
• 4U 6*. 24 No, 314 _ Reserving for lighthouse site purposes a parcel of the ' 
public domain situated in the barrio of Balanacan, muni- 
cipality of Mogpog, province of Harinduque. Ij2iiLu> PP« 998-999. 



HI - 143 



1958 :.ug. 24 ho. 315 - Reserving for municipal building site purposes three 

Parcel, of the public domain situated in the municipa- 
lity of lialabon, province of R isa l. pp . 1000 -1001. 
" Sept * 5 Jl °* 316 ~ * 8 iff*fcins the third Friday of October of each year 

as national Child health Day. Ibj^, p . 1002 . 
" H0VU 5 lh ' 317 ~ Ee8ervin e for Post office site purposes a parcel of the 

public domain situated in the City of Gebu. Ibj£., P . 1003. 
» Sept. 5 No. 318 - Reserving for the exclusive use of the non-Christians 

two parcels of the public domain situated in the barrios 
of Damulog and Kapot, municipality of Oron, province of B a taan. 
JLUAm PP- 1004-1005. 

" S6pt - 5 W °- 319 - Resorvin « for military purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Lagauo, municipality of '. 
i3urnay, sub-province of Ifugao, Mountain Province. Ibjd tf pp. 
1006-1007. 

Sept. 7 No. 320 - Fixing Tuesday, November 15, 1938, as Census Day. 

' I)2i£L, p. 1008. 

Sept. 12 No. 321 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the mu- 

nicip.ility of Nagallanes, province of Sorsogon. I ^d j., 

p. 1009. 

Sept. 23 Mo. 322 - Getting aside September 30, 1938, as a day for the 

inauguration of the City of Dacolod, and declaring it a 
special public holiday for the province of Negros Occidental. 

I&LsUt p. ioio. 

Sept. 24 No. 323 - .Aerial navigation in Philippine territory. IbjjUf 

pp. 1011-1012. 

Sept. 24 No. 324 - Reserving for railroad purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Luclucan, municipality 
of Jose Panganiban, province of Camarines Norte. I bj , A j. f pp. 1013- 
1014. 

°ct. 3 No. 325 - Amending Proclamation No. 322, dated September 23, 1938, 

so na to sot aside October 19, 1938, as a day for the 
inauguration of the Oity of Bacolod, and declaring it a special 
public holiday for the province of Negros Occidental, l.bidt.f p» 1015. 
Oct. ft H 0 , - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain located in the municipal district of ^raparo, 
province of .Jgunan, containing an area of 93,674 squaro meters. 

Uji&u, PP. 1016-1017. 
Oct. a Ho. 327 - Establishing as Fuyot Spring National Park for the bene- 
fit and enjoyment of the people of the Philippines, the 
parcel of land situated in the municipality of Ilagan, province of 
Isabel a. Ibj^u, pp. 1018-1022. 



- n$ - 



III - 144 



)38 Oct. 8 No. 528 - Wring for aiW landing purpogeg twenty _ fivc 

of the private domain of the Commonwealth of tho Philip- 
pines situated in tho barrio of 3 an Joso, municipality of Tacloban, 
province of Loyte. Ibid*., pp. 1025-1030. 
Oct. 8 lb. 329 - Reserving for airplane landing purposes three parcels of 

the public domain situatod in the barrio of San Jose, muni- 
cipality of Tacloban, province of Loyte. I bid. , pp. 1031-1055. 
" 0ct ' 11 Ho * 530 " nx±n « 0und ^'. ••muary 1, lo 3 <), M Census Day. Ibid. , p. 10' 
" 0ct « 13 No * 551 " R eservin R for plaza, landing and municipal building' site 

purposes throe parcels of tho public domain situated in the 
municipality of 'S a n Dionisio, province of Hollo. Ibid. , pp. 1035- 
1036. 

11 Oct. 18 No. 332 - Prescribing the conduct that should.be observed by offi- 
cials and employees charged with the duty of enforcing the 
election law, especially tho election inspectors, with a view to 
insuring orderly and clean elections. ' Jj&jLu, pp. 1037-1038. 
Oct. 13 No. 533 - Establishing as Janta Lucia ^atwrshed Forest Reserve for 

watershed Protection and forest protection end timber pro- 
duction, the parcel of public domain situated in the municipality of 
Santa Lucia, province of 1'locos Sur. ±bjjU.» pp. 1039-1041. 
Oct. 18 No. 334 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public domain 

situatod in tho barrio of Halaain, municipality of Dupsx, 
province of L'ueva Viacaya. Ibidj., pp. 1043-1044. 
Oct. 18 No. 355 - Reserving for plaza purposes threo p.arcels of the public 

domain situated in the City of Iloilo. Ibjjk . pp. 1045-1044. 
Oct. 18 No. 336 - Reserving for school purposes three parcols of the public 

domain situated in the barrios of Central, Tubig, and 
Panacan, municipality of Vborlan, province of Palawan. Ibid. . 
pp. 1045-1046. 

Oct. 23 No. 337 - Establishing as Namambalan Forest Reserve for forest pro- 
tection, timber production and administration, the parcel 
of the public domain situated in the municipalities of Penablanca 
and Tuguegarao, province of C'agayan, and municipality of San Pablo, 
province of Isabola. XbjjL.. pp. 1047-1055- 

Oct. 24 No. 338 - Establishing as Northern Ho cos Norte Forest Reserve for 

forest protection and timber production,- the parcels of. 
public domain situated in the municipalities of Bangui, Burgos, Leog, 
Pasuquin, Piddig and Vintar, province of Ilocos Norte. Ibid., pp. 
1056-1211. 

°ct. 28 Flo. 339 _ Declaring Tuesday, November 15, 1938, as a special public 

holiday. JD&sLr P« 1212. 



III - 145 



195 8 Nov. 7 -«o. 340 - Proclaiming the existence of a public calanity in the 

municipality of Donsol, province of Sorsogon. Ibj^ r,. 1P1 
■ Nov. 9 No. 341 - Reducing during „ certain period tho irap ort duty of husked 

nee to threo contavoa pur kilo. Ibid.,,, p. 1214. 
- Nov. 22 No. 342 - Designating Thursday, the 24th of November, 1938, as e 

day of National Thanksgiving. pT3 . i 2 l 5 -12l6. 

" !I ° V - 28 N0 * 343 ~ RfcSUrVjnfi f0r r ^ro.d purposes four parcels of the public' 

domain situated in the barrio of Santo Tomas, municip £ litv 
of San Jose, province of Nueva 3cij a . Ibid,, pp. 1217-1219. 
" D0C * 2 H0 ' 344 ~ PrOClfdK,i ^ «» existence of a public calamity in the 

municipalities of 3 alur ^ Casiguran, province of T f .y P _ 
baa. rbj-ilci p. 1220. 

" D0C ' 3 N0 * 343 ~ 2xc:, - ud1 ^ f ™> *»* aeration of Proclamation No. 230, dated 

-Ipril ,?2, 1929, certain lots situated in the municipal 
district of Libona, province of Bukidnon, and declaring the same 
open to disposition. I.bjjU*. p. 1221. 
Dec. 10 No. 346 - Proclaiming the existence of a public calamity in tho 

province of Cngnyan. IhjL<k> P. 1222. 
Dec. 10 Ho. 347 - Proclaiming the existence of a public calamity in the 

provinces of "Alb ay. and Samar. Ib id... p. 1223. 
Dec. 12 ITo. 348 - Proclaiming tho existence of a public calamity in the 

province of Sorsogon. IbjjU, p. 1224. 
Dec. 12 No. 349 - Reserving for constabulary purposes, a parcel of the 

public domain situated in the municipal district of Tendu, 
province of Sulu. IbJA^s. pp. 1225-1226. 
Dec. 12 No. 350 - Revoking Proclamation No. 47, series of 1923, nnd ests- 

blishing as I'alavera V/ a tershed Forest Reserve for watershed 
protection, timber production and administration, tho parcel of the 
public domain situated in the municipalities of Caranglan, Lupao, 
oan v ! ose, and Pantabangan, province of iiueva Bcija. UjiiL., pp. 
1227-1260. 

Dec. 12 No. 351 - Reserving for forest station site purposes and designeting 

as Lalav/igan Forest Station site reservation, the parcel 
of tho public domain situated in the municipality of Daet, province 
«f Camarinos .Norte,. I.bjd,,..,, pp. 1261-1262. 
Dec. 12 Ho. 352 - Reserving for warehouse purposes, two parcels of tho public 

domain situated in the barrio of Poblacion, municipality 
of I) ana al an, province of L.anao. Ihjd f v pp. 1263-1264. 
12 ho. 353 _ Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of 1'ayamot, municipality of 
Guimba, province of Huova Bcija. Ibid- « PP» 1265-1266. 



III -' 146 



W 8 Doc. 17 »o. 354 -Reserving for military purpose seven parcels of the 

public domain in the Poblacion, municipality of Halay- 
balay, province of Bukidnon. Ib^, pp . i 267 _i 270 . 
" DeC - 17 N0 ' 355 ~ Bs ^ b l"hing as Tamuk /.nahau Forest Reserve for forest 

protection and conservation of anahau trees, the parcel" ' 
of public domain situated in the lialuso District, City of ^ambo.nga. 
2-Mllx., pp. 1271-1277. 
Doc. 17 No. 35.6 - Revoking Proclamation No. 751, dated December 6, 1934,. and 

declaring the land reserved thereby open to disposition. 
Mt, p. 1278. 

• " Dec. 17 Ho. 357 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public do- 
main situated in the barrio of Luyang, municipality of 
Carmen, province of Cebu. Ibid. T pp . 1279-1280. 
•• Dec. 17 No. 358 - Reserving for workingmen's village purposes, two parcels 

of the public domain situated in the City of BagUio, con- 
taining a total area of 318,084 hectares. IbjjLuL. pp. 1281-1282. 
» Dec. 20 No. 359 - Declaring Saturday, December 31, 1938, a special public ' 

holiday. Ibj,A...,. PP- 1203-1284. 
Dec. 24 N 0 . 360 - Piloting frequencies . and wavelengths to the United Press 

Associations and issuing a license for the use thereof. 
Ibtf*f P. 1285. 

Dec. 24 No. 361 - Reserving for school purposes two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrios of Bite and Comon, muni- 
cipality of Aritao, province of Nueva Vizcaya. I.bA Ao . pp. 1286-1287., 
Dec. 24 No". 362 - Reserving for constabulary purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Kolambugan, pro- 
vince of Lanao. iMd*., pp. 1288-1209. 
" Dec. 24 No. 363 - Revoking Executive urder No. 82, dated November 8, 1917 < 

JEMd-* p. 1290. 

Dec. 27 N 0 . 364 - Revising the regulations governing aerial navigation jn 

Philippine territory. XTailU*. pp. 1291-1292. 
!939 Jan. 2 No. 365 - Unending Proclamation Yk. 742, series of 1934, by modifying 

the description of the boundaries of the I'laulawin Spring ■ 
Watershed Forest Reserve, ((faggon, Kepagffi!?,. Vol . 5, Part I, JBVFF, 
pp. 483-485. 

Jflh. 2 No. 366 - Reserving for park and playground _ purposes a parcel of the 

public domain situated in the barrio of Poblacion, munici- 
pality of Jolo, province of Sulu. jLbjUL., PP« 486-487. 

11 - ^ 

J an. 2 No. 367 - Reserving for watershed purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Yaganac, municipality of 
Calauag, province of Tayabas. JMA*J. PP«' 489-490. 



- 788 - 



III - H7 



1939 J an. 2 No. 368v- Reserving for ^ohn«i „„„ 

r 3Cn001 P^poses two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the Poblacion, municipal district of 
.an Hsnano, province of I 8abola . pp> 

» ,an. 10 No. *g - Serving for the exclusive use of the non-Christie/ 

FxUpxnos, two parcels of the public domain situated in 
the barrio of Camurong, nunicipality of ^ de ^ Qf 
iiindoro. JEbjj^, pp. 493-494. 
» Jan. 23 *o. 370 - Reserving for watershed purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Bad-Is, municipality of 
Placer, province of fiurigao. IJ^. , Dn . 405-496' 
- Jan. 23 No. 371 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Naga, municipality of 
KabasalQn, province of Uanboang*. lMLcj._, pp . 497-498. 
Jan. 27 No. 372 - Reserving for railroad purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated ln the barrio of San Antonio, municipality 
of i-iunoz, province of Nueva Ecija. IbJjU, pp. 499-500. 
Jan. 27 No. 373 - Reserving, for school purposes a Parcel of the public 

d0main situ it«d in the barrio of Cabugbugan, municipality 
of Santa Ignacia, province of Tarlac. Ibid,,, pp. 501-502. 1 
Jan. 27 No. 374 - Reserving for airplane landing purposes eight parcels of 

the public domain situated in the Poblacion, municipality 
of Butuan, province of Agusan. IbjjU, PP. 50>506. 
Fob. 2 No. 375 - Reserving for school purposes a- parcel of the public ■ 

domain situated in the municipality of Jolo, province of . 
Sulu. Ibid.,., p. <,U7. 
F eb . 3 No. 376 - Reserving to form parts of the mansion house site, three 

parcels of tat) private domain of tho Commonwealth Govern- 
ment situated in the residence section D, City of Baguio. Ibid,,, 
pp. 500-509. 

Feb. 11 iJo. 377 _ AHoting frequencies and wavelonghts to tho Philippine 

Press tireless, Inc., and issuing a licanse for the use 
thereof. 'JJjAjU., pp. 510-511. 
Feb. 11 S 0 , 573 _ Ro serving for airplane landing field purposes a parcel 

of the public domain situated in the barrio of Upi, 
.municipality of Garni, province of Isabels. IbM*., pp. 512-513. 
Feb, 11 :i 0 . 370, _ Reserving for municipal building site purposes a parcel 

of the public domain situated in the Poblacion, municipal 
district of Hungduan, Mountain Province. Ibid. . pp. 514-515. 
Feb. 11 H 0 . 3Qo - Reserving for railroad purposes two parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrio of C a tabangan, munir- 
eipality of Ragay, province of C'amarines Sur. Ibid., pp. 516-517. 



- 723 - 



III - 148 



1039 Feb. 11 No. 381 - iistabliahi np as Pi nmo i n ,r t? ± r, 

R aS ^ inm «l°y Forest Reserve for forest protec- 
tion and timber production a parcel of the public donain 
sxtuated in the municipal districts of Harare and Kinabawe, pro- 
vince of Bukidnon. Ibid.,_ pp. 518-525. 

" Feb ' 11 Bo ' 382 " I{6SerVi ^ f0r of the Philippine Army Blocks Nob, 

172, 175, and 170, Ilanila Reclamation Area Wo. 1, Manila 
Harbor, City of Manila. Ibid.,, p. 526. 
« Feb. 11 No. 383 - Reserving for settlement purposes a parcel of land situa- 
ted in the Koronadal and Buayan, province of Co.tabato, 
Ibid*., pp. 527-528. 

" Feb. 11 No. 384 - Reserving for settlement purposes a parcel of land si- 
tuated in the upper Agusan Valley and along the national 
highway in the municipal districts of Compostela and Monkayo, 
province of D a v a o. Ibid,., pp. 529-534. 

" Peb ' 23 Ho * 385 - Excluding from the operation. of Proclamation No. 217, 

dated February 16, 1929, a parcel of land located in the 
municipal' districts of Tuba .and Itogon, Mountain Province. 
IM,<Luu P?. 535-537. 
Feb. 23 No. 386 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of tho public 

domain situated in the barrio of Betas, municipality of 
'iVtay, province of Palawan. J-M&i., p. 538. 
Feb. 23 No. 387 - Reserving for military purposes, two parcels of the 

public domain situated in the district of Port Area, City 
of Manila,. Ibj^Uj. pp. 539-540. 
Mar. 6 Ko. 308 - Reserving for military purposes, three parcels of tho ' 

public domain .situated in tho City of Cebu. Ibid. f 
pp. 541-542. 

Mar. 13 N 0 . 3Q9 _ Designating the period from May 4 to May 13, inclusive, 

as National Defense week. Ibjy ^ pp. 543 -544. 
J 'ar, 13 No. 390 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 36O, dated 

December 24, 1938, the allotment of certain frequency to 
the United Press Associations and declaring the same cancelled. 
DiiA*., p. 545. 

"ar. 13 N 0 . 391 _ Establishing as Mineral hand Reservation all mineral 

deposits and mineral lands in the islands north of the 
island of Mindanao. rbi.d,«jL P» 546. 
"ar. 28 No. 392 - Including from the operation of Executive Order No. 33, 

dated July 26, 1904, as amended by Executive Order Ho. 65, 
dated August 22, 1913, and reserving, setting apart, and designating 
as Pagsanjan Gorge National Park for the benefit and enjoyment of 
tho people of the Philippines, the parcel of land situated in the 
municipalities of C a vinti and Lumban, province of Lagune. Ijii&tu. 
PP. 547-559. 



11 v 



- 72* - 



III - 149 



m Mar. 29 Ho. 393 - "educing during a certain period, the import duty on • 

fauskud non-glutinous rice from 5 to 4 centavos per kdlo ' 
JSMkm. p. 560. 

" Mar ' > 29 *°' 394 " 3aturd ^' -Pril 8 f 1939, a special public 

holiday, jibid^ p. 56l# 

" Mar. 30 No. 395 - Publishing tho proclamation of the President of the United 

Status declaring April 6, 1939 as Army Bay. 1^ pp . 

562-563. 

-- Apr. 4 No. 396 - Reserving for military purposes a p arC ol of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Central, municipality of 
Puerto Princosa, province of Palawan. Ibj^, pp. 564-565. 
Apr. 11 No. 397 - Reserving for military purposes / six parcels of the public 

domain situated in the City of Baguio. Ib^, up. 5 66-56 9 . 
- Apr. 14 No. 398 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 102, 

dated August 30, 1927, two parcels of the land described 
therein, and opening the same to disposition. Ibj^ p. 570. 
» Apr. 28 No. 399 - lending Proclamation N 0 . 6 59 , series of 1934, establishing 

tho Hanleluag. .'Jpring Forest Reserve. I^d*., pp. 571-572.' 
" 1% 4 No. 400 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 448, 

dated February 25, 1932, and reserving for park and 
playground purposes, a parcel of land situated in tho City of D a vao. 
I&Uk, PP. 573-574. 
"ay 9 No. 401 - Educing during certain period, tne import duty on husked. 

non-glutinous rice from 5 to 4 centavos per kilo. 
Ikisl*., 'p. 575. 

Nay 11 Mo. 402 - Setting aside a special day in each community for the 

celebration of Rice Planting Say. Ibid,.,, p. 576. 
Nay 11 No. 403 - Reserving for plaza purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the municipal district of (xlan, pro- 
vince of Cotabato. IJ&cU^ P« 577. ( 
-ay 11 No. 404 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public' do- • 
main situated in the barrio of Labungan, municipal 
district of .Wang, province of Cotabato. IbJLcLj. pp. 577-578. 
' ay 15 j Jo. 405 - Expressing the thanks and appreciation of tho Commonwealth 

Government and of the Filipino people to every partici- 
pant in the recent army mobilisation. IJjicU.,. 580. 

" H r 

'ay 1 9 ij 0 . 4Q6 - Reserving for watershed purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the. barrio of Naval as, municipality of 
Ajuy, province of Iloilo. Ibid. . pp. 581-582. 
22 No. 407 - Declaring the provisions of ict No. 4054, known as the 

Philippine Rice Share Tonancy ->ct, as amended by Oomiron- 
woalth ict No. 178, to bo in full force and effect in tho municipa- 



- W - 



in - 150 



litios of. Santiago, Lichame -n***^ n 

rp . . . ^ ' ^adanan, C a uayan, G a mu, Atatet, and 

Turaauinx, province of Is a bel a . Ibj^, p . ^ 

m May 30 "Wo. 408 - Declaring Monday afternoon, ' June 5 \q« . , 

' unc ->» -Wy, a special -pub-: ' 

t° h ° liday ^ IianUa and surrounding municipalities. 
IbuLuu P. 504. 

" ^ ° 3?0 - 409 ~ DeClarin£: the I»«od between Independence .ay, Ju3y 4 • 

«d July 11, 1039f M ,, le tiiw fQr fourth QonLiTion ^ aith 

roll call of the Red Cross In the Philippine,,. ^ np. 5 85-^ 

" ^ 8 "°" 410 • ii6SerVin '" f0? scho <* P-Posee, a paPcel of ^ public " 

domain situated in the barrio „f u' n « J 
. , r 0 Darrio of Jag-Ong Pardo, municipali- 

ty of Kolambugan, province of Lan a0 . Ibj^, pp. 587-588. 

11 June 8 No. 411 - Revoking Pruc 1 );„ -z-.^ 

"it, * reclamation li 0 . 3.17, cUted September 5, 1938, 

and declaring- the land reserved thereunder open to die- • 
position Ibjji.^ P . 509. 

" June 23 Ho. 412 - A-nending Proclamation o Ki a + j t> 

e j-uoj.ari3Ti.on -0. 352, dated December 12, 1938, 

reserving for warehouse purpose,, two parcels of the 
public domain situated in the barrio of Poblacion, municipality of 
Dans al an, province of Lanao. Ibid,.^ p. 590. 
" June 23 No. 413 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain oituated in the municipality of Concepcion,' pro- ■ 
vince of Hoilo. XWUt p. 591. 
" June 23 No. 414 - Reserving for park purpo.es, three parcels of the public 

domain situated in the Poblacion, municipality of C avit e, 
province of C a vite. Ibid., pp. 592-593. 
June 23 No. 415 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public do- ' 

main situated in the barrio of Palestine, municipality of 
San Jose, province of Nueva >Scija. Ibid 1 f pp. 594-595. 
Jul. 10 ho. 416 - Revoking Proclamation No. 865, dated November 13, 1935, 

and declaring the land reserved thereby open to disposi- 
tion. Ibid^ p. 596. 

Jul. 10 Ho. 417 - Reserving for military purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain in the City of ^amboanga. IbjjL t. p. 597.' 
Jul. 13 i,' 0 . 418 - Reducing during a certain period the import duty on husked. 

, non-glutinous rice fron 5 to 4 ccntavos per kilo, 
Ji&Siu P. 598. 

It r . 

' !^ r '0. 419 - Re-amending Proclamation No. 31, series of 1917, este- 

bliahing parcels of public domain, situated in the islands- 
of Alabat and Folillo,' province of Tayabas, as forest reserves. 
■DtULui pp. 599-f>:59. 
ul « 24 No. 420 - Revoking Proclamation No. 274, dated November 22, 1929, 
and reserving the land embraced therein for school pur- 
poses. Ibjjjka. p. 640. 



- m - 111 - 151 

m Jul. 24 No. 421 - Reserving for plant propagation 8tation purposes> & p _ 

col of the public domain situated in the barrio of Digos, 
munacxpaUty of Santa Cru., provinco ()f w ' 
■ Jul. 24 No. 422 - Establishing . M apaso Hot 3 P ring tJ^Z for 

watershed protection and timber production, a parcel of 
public domain situated ln tne municipality of C abadbaran , provirce 
of .ift-usan. iWi..^ Pp . 643-644. 

•" Jul. 24 No. 423 - Reserving for school 

ocnool purposes, four parcels of the public 

domain situated in tho barrio of 3i nalhan, municipality 
of .-Santa Hose., province of Laguna. Jj^ pp . 645 _ 646 . 
- Jul. 20 N„. 424 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of tho public 

domain 8ltu«rt„d in the barrios of Dig on and Talusan, 
municipality of Largo,, atuhig, provinco of Zamboanga. Ib^ pp. 
647-648. 

« Jul. 28 No. 425 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Central, municipal dis- 
trict of Tublay, Mountain Province. Ibid^ pp . 649-650. 
" iug. 1 No. 426 - H eserv ing for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality 0 f Pina PP agan, 
province of Nuova i bid. . p. 651. 

" - M3 ' 5 rf0 * 427 ~ ft,clarin « th « Provisions of Act ho. 4054, known as "The 

Philippine Rico Share tenancy Act, " as amended, to he 
in full force and effect in the province of Iloilo. Ibid, tf p. 652. 
Aug. 8 No. 420 - Calling the National Assembly in special session for a 

period of five days beginning August 15, 1939. Ibid. f 
pp. 653-654. 

Aug. 10 No. 429 - Publishing Executive Order of the President of the United' 

otatos, dated «-;ay 15, 1939, regarding appeals from deci- 
sions of the auditor general of the Philippines to the President 
of the United States. IJ&jUj. pp. 655-656. 
Aug. 10 M 0 . 430 - Reserving for warehouse purposes Block No. 4 of the 

Reclamation Area No. 4 of tho City of Cnbu. jblflm. p. 657. 
^»ug. 16 No. 431 _ Establishing as Bibiga Spring Forest Reserve for water- 
shed purposes and timber production a parcel of the pub-, 
lie domain situated in tho nun.icipa.lity of Narvacan, province of 
Ij.ocos our. IbicL., pp. 65.3-661. 
-«*g. 16 W 0 . 432 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 514, 

dated Nov. 7, 1932, and reserving for school purposes a 
Parcel of land in tho Municipality of Puerto Princesa, province 
of Palawan. Ibid., pp. 662-663. 
" U S. 16 No. 433 - Fixing the- 19th day of August, 1939, as the day on which 

tho .Agricultural and Industrial Bank of the Philippines . 
shall begin operations. I^ftd*., p. 664. 



-TW- 



III - 152 



1959 ^" 17 * # " D ° Claring th ° Pr ° Visi0 - of Act i/o. 4054 known as 

Philippine Rice Sharu "Tenancy .ct,» as aacnded , to be 
xn full, force in the province of Bataan. Ibid., p 66 5 

- Aug. 19 Ho. 435 - Standing the period of special s , ssion of ^ 

Assembly to August 26, 1939. Ibj^, p . 666 

- Aug. 23 No. 436 - Reserving for school purposes, a pfircel of the public 

domain situated in thn bn-r-in n -r n-s i 
• . D - r;L0 of Dilam, municipality of 

Caleynn, province of Cagayan. Ih^, pp . 667-668. 

" 23 437 ~ * eSerVlne f ° r ""lament farm school purposes, two pare, 

of the public domain situated in the barrio of Dipintir, 
municipal district of Pinappagan, province of Nueva. Waya. 
IfejiL . PP. 669-671. 

" *«' 25 438 ~ th " *"«™> on of the day set aside by each 

Municipality for the celebration of the Rice Planting 
Day, a special public holiday in such municipality. Ibid. t p. 6 72 

- Aug. 26 No. 439 - Declaring the national Assembly to remain in special 

session. IbjjU, p. .673. 

- Aug. 29 No. 440 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Ilangga, municipality of 
Vlanibugan, province of Lanao. Ibid. f pp. 674-675.. 
" .Aig. 29 No. 441 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrios of 3uyun f and Paddaya, 
municipality of Buguey, province of Cagayan. IbjUU, pp. 676-677. 
Aug. 30 No. 442 - Revoking Proclamation No. 29, dated January 29, 1936, 

and declaring the land reserved thereby open to disposi- 
tion. Ibjd_,_,_ u. 678. 
it .. *■ 

*ag. 30 No. 443 - Excepting from lease, sale or other disposition and reser- 
ving for school purposes a portion of lot no. 3212, of 
• Talisay, Minglanilla Friar Lands Estate, Gebu, containing an area 
of 0,969 square meters, uore or less. Ib id. / pp. 679-680. 
"Ug. .30 j 0 . 444 _ Reserving for cemetery purposes, two parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrio of Culao, municipa- 
lity of Dj.ngras, province of liocos Norte. I.b Mv f pp. 681-682. 
«ug. 30 No. 445 _ Reserving for constabulary purposes, a parcel of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrio of Taft, municipality 
of Surigao, province of Surigao. IbMw PP« 683-684. 
°ept. 1 Ho. 446 - Reserving for school purposes, three parcels of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrios of Jauili, and Cpyan- 

guan, municipality' of Makato, province of C a piz. Ibid^. pp. 685- 
686. 



m Sept. 1 No. 447 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the b,rrio of Sibuto, municipal dis- 
trict of ;wang, province of Cotabato. Ib^, np . 687 _ 688 . 
. Sept. 4 No. 443 - Establishing as Sinkatulan Forest Reserve for forest r^o- • 

tection .and timber production a parcel of public dom.in 

situated in the municipal distri r+ ^-p via 

pai axstrict of kidapawan, province of Cota- 

bato. ibj^k, pp. 689-697. 

" k iept. 6 No. 449 - Reducing during a cert-iin +1, • 

*• a curt '«-n perxod the .import duty of hurked 

non-glutinous rice from 5 to 4 contavos per kilo. 

i bid.. , p. 698. 

" ° ept * 8 N0 ' 450 ~ BxCludin « f ™' operation of Proclamation No. 743, dated 

October 25, 1934, and reserving for school "purposes, a 
parcel of land (lot no. 261-B) in tin, City of 3 a guio. Ibid.. Pp . 
699-700. 

" Sept'. 13 Wo. 451 - Publishing the neutrality proclamation of the President . 

of the United States, dated Soptemhor 5, 1939. Ibid, t 
pp. 701-709. 

" Sept. 13 No. 452 - Publishing the executive order of the President of the 

• United States, dated September 5, 1939, providing for the 
enforcement of the neutrality of the United States within the juris- 
diction including the Philippines. Ibid. f pp. 710-712. 
Sept. 19 ho. 453 - Publishing the proclamation dated September 11, 1939, of 

the President of the United States regarding the suspen- 
sion of operation of title two of the Sugar -let of 1937. Ibid.. 
pp. 713-714. 

Sept. 19 ho. 454 - Reserving for warehouse purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Calamagui, municipality 
of Hagan, province of Isabela. Ibid. , pp. 715-716. 
oept. 22 No. 455 - Calling the National Assembly in special session of 

September 25, 1939- JUaiU,. p. 717. 
Sept. 25 No. 456 - Establishing as ?i a do Hot Spring National Park for the 

benefit and enjoyment of the people of the Philippines, 
a parcel of the public domain situated in the municipal district of 
Awang, province.' of C'otabato. JtbilLu* pp. 718-719. 
°ept. 25 No, 457 - Establishing as Baslan National Park for the benefit and 

enjoyment of the people of the Philippines, a parcel of 
the public domain situated in the district of Lamitan, island of 
3 anil an, City of ;3amboanga. JLbiUU*. PP« 720-727. 

CI 

°°Pt. 26 N 0 . 450 - /.mending further Proclamation 360, dated December 24, 

. 1938, as amended, by Proclamation No. 390, dated March <~ 
13, 1939, regarding the allotment of frequencies and wavelengths 
to the United Press Associations and issuing license for the use 
thereof. Ibjdr f P- 728. 



r 



- m _ 



III - 154 



109 S ^-' 27 No ' 459 " Declari ^ th « Provisions of Act No. 4054, known as "The 

Philippine Rice Sh.ro Tenancy Act," as tended, to be in 
full forcu and effect in the provinces of : lhsy pM C apiz . l Mri . f 
p. 729. 

■ Kept. 30 No. 460 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public do- 
main situated in the barrio of B.JLaga, municipal district 
of Kayan, subprovince of Kontoc, liountain Province,. Ibid. f p->. • 
730-731. 

« Sept. 30 No. 461 - ^serving for school purpoges {jvQ Qf ^ 

domain situated in the barrios of Poblacion, Lubon, Kaa- 
la, Sumadel, municipal district of Kayan, and in the barrio of ?ana- 
bungen, municipal district of Besao, subprovince of Bontoo, Mountain 
Province. IbiiL., pp. 732-736. 
» Oct. 9 No. 462 - Reserving for provincial nursery purposes two parcels of . 

the public domain situated in the barrio of Baneuro, 
municipality of Naujan, province of Mindoro. Ibid. r pp. 737-738. 
" Oct. 9 No. 463 - Reserving for school purposes, three parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrios of Barcelona, i-ni- 
bungan, and iian Roque, municipality of Lingig, province of Surigao. 
ZM&s^. PP. 739-741. 

" Oct. 9 No. 464 - Reserving for school purposes, four parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrios of Padada, and Kibulan, 
municipality of Santi Cruz, province of D a vao. Ibjj L ., PP- 74£r744. 
" Oct. 9 No. 465 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated i.n the barrio of Bato-B a to, municipality 
of .Hilem, province of Ilocos Sur. IJsLdjs., p. 745. 
" Oct. 9 Ho. 466 - Reserving for railroad purposes two parcels of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrio of Catabanga, municipa- 
lity of Ragpy, province of Camarines 3ur. Ibid. . pp. 746-747. 
Oct. 9 No. 467 - Reserving for the exclusive uses of non-Christians, a 

parcel of the public domain situated in the barrio of 
Culat, municipality of O.tsSgurnn, province of T^yabps. I,bj,4« r 
pp. 740-749. 

°ct. 18 No. '468 - Excluding from the operntion of Proclamation No. 192, 

dated August 30, 1927, n parcel of land described there- 
in, and opening the same to disposition. IbjL£L*.» p. 750. 
Oct. 18 No. 469 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in tho barrio of Abaga, municipal dis- 
trict of Kumungan, province of Lanao. TbJAut PP« 751-752. 
°ct. 18 No. 470 - Reserving for municipal building and school site purposes, 

three parcels of the public domain situated in the berrios 
of Central and Palina, municipal district of Kibungan, subprovince 
of Benguet, Mountain Province. IJzLfU., PP« 753-755. 



Ill - 155 



& Oct. 18 No. 471 - Will* for school purposes, one parcel of the public 

domain situatedin the barrio of P n0 , municipality of *W 
lac. • IiisL., pp. 756-737. 

Oct. 20 No. 472 - Publishing proclamations, executive orders, .and regulations 
relating to neu.tr.lity issued by the President end the 

Secretary of State of the Uni tori * c- . ■ , 

l -m.teci otates, from September 11, 193<3. 

IbicU, pp. 758-786. . ' ■ > 

'' 0ct ' 24 N0 * 473 - Callin ^ tllG J: ^ional Assembly in special session. Ibid., . 

pp. 737-780. 

-Oct. 25 No. 474 - Reserving for market site purposes , two parcels of the ■' 

public domain situated in the barrio of Buenavista, muni- 
. cipality of Jetafe, province of Bohol. Ibjd,_, pp. 789-790. 
" Oct. 27 Ko. 475 - Reducing during a certain period the import duty, on husked 

non-glutinous rice from 5 to 4 centavos per kilo. Ibid ff 

p. 791. 

» Oct. 27 1.0.-476 - Restoring to the National Rice and Corn Corporation the 

administration of two parcels of. the public domain situa- 
ted in the barrio of Poblacion, municipality of Dansalan, province 
of Lanao, reserved for warehouse purposes by Proclamation No-. 352, • 
dated December 12, 1938. Ibid, , p. 792. 
Oct. 27 No. 477 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 448, 

series of 1932, and reserving for the use of the Depart- ' 
ment of Agriculture and Commerce, a parcel of land in tho City of 
Davao. Ib.icU, pn. 793-794. 
Oct. 27 No. 478 - Reserving for school purposes, throe parcels of tho public 
domain situated in the barrio3 of Banaao, -^acudac, and 
Bonaga, municipal district of Kayan, subprovinco .of Bontoc, Mountain 
Province. H-jd-., pp. 795-797. 
*'<ov. 3 Ho. 479 _ Declaring Wednesday, November 15, 1939 as a special public 

holiday. Ibj_4a.f P- 798. 
Hov. 6 No. 480 - Designating Thursday, the 23rd day of November, 1939, as 

a Day of National Thanksgiving. Ib jd. f pp. 799-800. . 
Nov. 6 No. 481 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public. 

domain situated in the barrio of Maniki, ."Municipality of 
Kapalong, province of Davao. Ib jdf • PP» 001-802. 
IJ nv. 6 Ho. 482 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of tho public 

domain situated in the barrio of Dugatay, municipality of 
Poiiablanca, province of Cngayan. Ibid. . pp. 803-804. 
6 j., 0> _ xtfjsorving for school purposes, a parcel of the public do- 
main situated in the barrio of Bancuro, municipality of 
Nau.jan, province of Mindoro. Ibj^Lt*. PP« 80 5-806. 



- 751 - 



III - 156 



1939 ilov. 17 No. 484 - ^serving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in tho b»rrio of Bnjmo, irmn.ici.pnl district 
of Baudo, subprovince of Bontoo, Hountnln Province. Ibid. . PP . 807- 
803. 

« iiov. 29 i'O. 435 - Establishing as Daram Forest Reserve for forest protsc- 

tion and timber production, a parcel of the public domain 
situated in the island of Daram, municipality of Zumarraga, pro vino, 
of Samar. JM&M.I PP. 009-812. 
« Nov. 29 ^o. 486 - Reserving for cemetery purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Bancuro, municipality of 
Naujan, province of Mindoro. JiajL., pp. 313-814. 
» Nov. 29 N o. 487 - Reserving for school purposes two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrios of Casarabalangan, and 
Cabiragan, municipality of Gonzaga, province of Cagayan. Ibid.. 
pp. 315-816. 

" Dec. 2 No. 488 - Proclaiming the existence of a public calamity in the 

province of C a piz. IbjjU, p. 817. 
" Due. 5 We. 489 - Revoking Proclamation No. 230, dated ^pril 22, 1929, rnd 

declaring the land reserved thereunder open to disposi- 
. tion. Ib\d_. L , p. 818. 
" Dec. 5 "O. 490 - Reserving; for school purposes, five parcels of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the Poblacion and barrios of 
Guinzadan and Otucan, municipal' district of Bauko, subprovince of 
Bontoc, "ountain Provj nco. Ib jd, , pp. 819-321. 
" Dec. 5 i-'o. 491 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Panicupan, municipality 
of Pikit-Pagalungan, province of Cotabato. UaisUf PP« 822-323. 
" Dec. 14- No. 492 - Publishing the proclamation issued by the President of 

the United States on December 12, 1939, and giving public 
notice of the approval by the President of the United States, of 
National Assembly Bill Wo. 1242, now known as Commonwealth Act Jo. 
511. }MAju, PP- 824-826. 
" Dec. 16 No. 493 - Reserving for storehouse purposes, block no. 2, PLS-75, 

Gebu declaimed "roa Subdivision, City of Cebu. IbjjU» 

p. 827. 

" Dec. 16 Wo. 494 - '.mending Proclamation r.o. 324, dated' July 16, 1930. 

IMsUj- PP. 828-832. 
Dec. 16 No. 495 - Publishing proclamations and regulations relating to 

neutrality issued by the President and Secretary of Utfite 
of the united States, respectively on November 6, 1939. £& C U > 
pp. 833-847. 



Ill - 157 

~ V& - 

19 39 Dec. 16 No. 496 - Excluding from the. operation of P™ i , ■ „ 

«.'P«raxion oj. Proclamation Ho. 472, ae- 

ries of 1932, and establishing as C a poocan Forest Reserve 
for forest protection and timber itv.h,,,.*-; 

• nDcr P rod uotion, a parcel of the public 
domain situated in the municinsl -i +v n 

..unicxppnty of 0«p O oc R n, province of Ley t:, , 

J&XsLm PP. 848-851. 

« Dec. 16 No. 497 - Reserving for school purposes, three parcels of tho publ- 

domain situated in the barrios of Decalachao, B a uang D af n 
and London, municipality of Coron, province of Palawan. Ibj^, 
pp. 852-853. •• 
» Dec. 21 No. 498 - Proclaiming the existence of a public calamity' in the 

province of Marinduque. Ibio\, p . 854 
■- Dec. 21 No. 499 - Publishing Departmental Order No. 827 issued by the Ac- 
ting Secretary of State of the United States on November 
17, 1939, regarding regulations relating to travel in combat areas 
and on belligerent vessels. Ibid., pp. 855-850. 
- Dec. 21 Mo. 500 - Establishing as Kibawe Forest Reserve for forest protec- 
tion and timber production, a parcel of the public domein 
situated in the municipal district of Kibawe, province of Bukidnon. 
Ibi&Lt PP. 859-867. 
Dec. 21 No. 501 - Reserving for radio station purposes lots nos. 143, 144, 

mid 145, residence section "K", Baguio Townsito, City of 
Baguio. Tb&sU*. p. 068. 
Dec. 21 No. 502 - Reserving for school purposes two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrios of iimbasing and Jlnquilen,. 
municipal district of 3agada, subprovince of Bontoc, Nountain Pro- 
vince. J MsL. , PP. 869-070. 
Dec, 29 . No. 503 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 448, 
dated February 25, 1932 and reserving for constabulary 
purposes, three parcels of land situated in the City of Davao. 
IkuL., pp. 071-872. 

1940 Jan * 1 N °- 504 - Giving public notice of the approval by the President of , 

the United States of National Assembly Bill No. 958, now 
known as Commonwealth .Act No. 512. O fficial Gazette. Vol. 38, 
No. 21, p. 407. 

J an, 23 fio. 505 - Proclaiming the official population of the Commonwealth 

of the Philippines. Ibi d, v P» 407. 
-an. 23 Ho. 506 - Establishing as Antique-Iloilo Forest Reserve for forest 
protection and timber production, a parcel of tho public 
domain sitv.stvi ir. tho -unici^ ality ~f 3iialo= end 3«s Remigio, 
province of -intique, and municipalities of Leon, T'ubungan and 
I^baras, province of Iloilo. IbjjU^.jpp. 2009-2014. 



_ . HI - 158 

194 0 Feb. 8 Ho. 507 - Revoking Proclamation No. 30 ^ t 

declaring th«. 1 i Ty 29 ' 1956 ' » nd 

« Feb. 8 No. 508 - Revoking Forestry ldm inlq ^- + . r 

lq « + M . ^""trative Order N 0 . 5-23, series of 
1933, establishing a - OTr(ll , . 
t v, ■ • P-reoi of land as communal pasture 

for the mumcioalitv of S+ a n w , 1 

* h- ■ * ' provincc of Zambalos, and opening 

to disposition under the provisions nf r opening 

P 10ns of Commonwealth Act No. 137 the 
said parcel of land, situated in the barrio of ■ 
of iV„* , • Guisguia, municipality 

, r ° ta ' ^ Pr0VlnCC ° f Z ^«1«b. IM^ No. 23, p. 445 
« Feb. 0 No. 509 - Excluding from the operation nf P , 

j ... operation ol Proclamation ff 0 . 31, d^tod 

uiy .1, 1917, and opening to disposition under the ,ro 

JUodLu. No. 24, p. 464. ' * 

" reb - 8 *' 510 - *>«»*r ^inutrativ. o ra „ s 2 _, 7 (01d 

<W .,0. 42), both oori „ „„, ^ _ 

"7 ° f 1926 ~* W2B ' <•» ^ of „ com . . 

"™ ° f aiZ ' a ' ''" d ° POni,,K t0 ^PO'ition u*dor the proviso*, of 
Commonwealth Act No T17 -j 

.10. 1/7, the said four parcels of land. Ibid., 

No. 25, p. 485. . ' 

" ^b. 9 No. 511 - Publishing regulations issued by the Secretly of atrfo u, 

of the United States- on November 10 and 25, 1939, under 
section 2 (c) and (i) of th. Joint Resolution of Congress approved 
November 4, 1939, and Departmental Order No. 831. Ibid.. Hb. 2 6, 
PP. 505-506. 

' 1 No. 512 - Declaring Saturday, March 23, 1940, a special public holi- 

day. IJjidju, No. 30, p. 709. ; ,. 
Har. 1 N 0 . 513 _ Revoking p hilippino Commission Resolution E 0 . 10, dat.;d 1 
J anuary 23, 1913, and reserving. the parcels of land embraced 
therein for hospital purposes. IbjUL^ No. 31, p. 731. 
ar. 1 iJ 0 , 514 _ p ublishin ^ th6 rc;gulation p romu i gat ed by the Secretary of 
State of the United States on January 16, 1940 relating 
to travel on belligerent vessels. liAjLu. No. 32, p. 753. 
ar. 1 No. 515 _ Publishing the proclamation dated December 26, 1939, of 

the President of the United States removing suspension of 
•the operation of title two of the Sugar Act of 1937. IfcjjUi. lio. 33, 
P. 773. 

8T * 1 *'o. 51.6 - Reserving for provincial hospital purposes, four parcels 
of the public domain situated in the barrio of Calamagui, 
municipality of Hagan, province of isabola. Mfll^op ftan Of 



-Ta- 



in - 159 



liar. 



" Har. ' 1 



19 40 Mar. 1 Ho. 517 - Reserving for school purpo.es ' , 

, . . A Purpojes, a parcel of tho public 

domain situated in the barrio of 3i „ • 
Carmen, province of B oh ol Qffici , r ^.xpality of 

- *, 1 ,o. 518 - ^serving for J^^^ * *>' *• » «* 

, . pwposo j, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in + n„ n , 
r , ° loblac "n, municipal district of 

Conner, subprovi nee of - " 01 

P mcc of . payao> jlonntain Provinc j 

pp. 829-830.. --WHAm-Ao. ^6, 

» Mar. 1 No. 519 - Reserving for school purposes <5 „ - , 

iurpo..6.s 3 parcels of the public do- 
-aan situated in the Poblacion, municipal district of ^ 
H*, subprovince of Bontoc, Mountain Province. ^ 3? 
pp. 847-848. " J,uu ' * 51 * 

«o. 520 - Wi* for sow ^ threo parcols of ^ • 
domain ItMtud in th0 barri0 „ f ^ Bunioipality 

*. 5a - tart, f „ PoUool purposuaj a porool of 

taain sit^.j itt tlle Poblaolon> nlM . oipal a . str . ot of 

*7' "a*""*- * fountain Province, IJ^ iio . „, 

p. 888. • ' 

" Har. 1 llo. 522 - Publishing orders, relations, and determinations under 

the o'ugar .Act of 1937 reinstated published on January 3, ■ 
1940 by the Secretary of culture of the United States. Ikm 
- r o. 40, p. 905. ^ 
" «>*• 12 No. 523 - Establishing as Siquijor Forost lleserv , for reforestation> 

forest protection and timb'or production, a parcel of the ' 
public domain situated in the municipalities of Siquijor and L aZi , 
island of Siquijor, province of Nogros Oriental. Ibid,_ r No. 41, 
PP. 925-926. 

har. 12 No. 524 - Revoking Pro elation No. 266, dated October 11, 1929, and ' 
reserving the parcols of land embraced therein for the use 
of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce. Ibjd 'I 0 . 42 - 
*o. 525 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public do- 
main, situated in the barrio of nangandingny, municiprlity 
of Murloz, province of Nuovn Bcija. Ibj&uu No. 43, p. 963. 
K ar. 12 No. 526 - Reserving for school purposes, three parcels of the public 
domain situated in the barrios of Osorio, Sum ar ay «nd 
Ppnpanan, municipality of ?Jan Remigio, province of Antique. Ibid. , 
N o. 44, pp. 983-984. 
2 No. 527 - Reserving for school purposes four parcels of tho public 
domain situated in the Poblncion, municipality of Jolo, 
province of Sulu. Ibjdirr No. 45, p. 998. 
ar » 12 l<o. 52a _ Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public domrin 
situated in the barrio of Habatobato, municipal district 
of Kiangan, subprovince of Ifugao, Mountain Province.. Ibid r f No. 46, 



Ill - 160 

" m ~ 

pp. 1017-1018. 

iy4 0 Mar. 14 «o. 529 - Amending Proclamation No. 397, dated April 11, 1939, by 

excluding from its operation lot no. 36-B-2. Ibid.. 

p. 1018. 

» Apr. 1 No. 530 - Proclaiming the official population of the Commonwealth 

of the Philippines. IpjA^ p. 1018. 
. " .Vpr. 1 No. 531 - Reserving for railroad purposes, a parcel of tho public 

domin situated in the barrio of 3alo, municipality of 
Victoria, province of Tarlac. JMzLu. I'o. 47, pp. 1035-1036. 
" ..Apr. 1 No. 532 - Revoking Proclamation Mo. 488, dated Docembor 2, 1939, 

proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the pro- 
vince of Capi:-,. Ibid-j. p. 10 36. 
" Apr. 1 No. 533 - designating the .'National Rioe and Corn Corporation as a 

relief organization to import rice free of duty. iM&j., • 

p. 1036. 

" Apr. 1 So. 534 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the' public 

domain situated in the barrio of .'taduntog, municipal dis- 
trict of Ki.nngnn, smhprovi nco of Ifugao, I-'ountnin Province. 
JJliiU, ITo. 48, p. 1049- 
" Apr. 1 No. 535 - Revoking Proclamation Ho. 769, dated February 9, 1935. 

Iki£U*. p. 1049. 

" 'Apr. 4 No. 536 - Proclaiming the existence of a public calamity in the 

municipality of Paracale, province of Camarines Horte. 
Taken from tho compilation of proclamations of Malacauan Library, 
Manila. Hereinafter to be referred to as jlalflfiaiafl. CpjaPAlfl fe»- , Q fl« 
" Apr. 15 No. 537 - ^evoking Proclamation No. 472, dated hay 17, 1932, and 

declaring the land reserved thereunder open to disposition. 

Offiqjql SagaJttftj v ol» 55, P. 1167. 

" Apr. 15 No. 538 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of tho public do- 
main situated in the municipal district of Balbalan, 
Mountain Province. J&UU*. No. 56, pp. 1181-1182. 
" Apr. 15 No. 539 - Reserving for cemetery purposes, a parcel of tho public 

domain situated in the barrio of Npi-Borofigotan, municipal 
district of .Wang, province of Cotabato. JJM^t 57, p. 1195. 
" Apr. 15 No. 540 - Reserving for school purposes, four parcels of tho public 

domain situated in tho barrios of Dupag, Magnao, Kabongtot 
and Ouinaang, municipal districts of I'abUk and Lubuagan, subprovincs 
of Kalinga, llountain Province. IbpJLw. No. 58, pp. 1211-1212. 
" Apr. 25 No. 541 - Establishing as Punt a Diwata Forest Reserve for forest 

protection and timber production, a parcel of tho public 
domain situated in the municipality of Gingoog, province of Oriental 
Hisamis, and municipality of Hasipit, province of Oriental IWis. 
UdAu. No. 59, PP. 1227-1228. 



Ill - 1 61 

~ ?*> ~ 

1940 Apr. 10 No. 542 - Publishing the proclaim „„ 

proclamation dated April 10, 1940. of thn 
President of the United + , 
o.. a com d at aro a , and the announcer, + ,• 

tho Sccretarv of Statu rc „, """^ 0n th ° Sam ° ^ * 

,, fn ■ ' atU ' r(i,?ard5 - n « tr ^l on combat aroa. 1^ 

no. 60, pp.. 1246-1247. 

" May 11 No. "343 - *Wrvinr for sohnnl Bj + 

0h ° 01 8lt0 Eposes, a parcel of the pub- 
lic domain situated in tho barrio nf v 1, • 
T) 10 barrio of I, a basa, municipality 

of Uupax, province of n UO vn Vj 7C ^ a r M , „ 

- Vlzc aya. JJjidjt, No. 65, Pt) , n<5*_i -sc .1 
May 11 No. 544 - Establishing as I3 asj i nn v 0 ' „ P 1355-1,5.. 

S as Jasi^an x-oroat Reserve for forest prot^c- 

■ . t + , . tl0n ^ timb0r Pr ° dUCti011 ' a parcel of tho public domain ' 
situated m the districts <~>f T*„v.,,i -t , 

p tri °t- of Isabels, .laluso and Lamitan, island of 

Basils, Cxty of Zamboanga. IJ^ N 0 . 146, po . , 503 _, 51Q 

- Hay 11 No. 545 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in tho barrio of Naiingin, munici P alitv 
oi *>bo, province of (John, Ibid^. N 0 . 68, p. ll 4 l 

- Hay 11 No. 546 - Reserving for school pulses, a parcel of the public Co- 

main situated in the barrio of Labuan, City of Zamboang,, • 
province of Zamboanga. IJ^L, N 0 . 69, p. 1425. 

- Hay 11 No. 547 - Reserving for school purposes, a pnrcol of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Pitac, municipality of 
Tibiae, province of Antique. Ij^, N 0 . 70, p. 1447. 
11 May 11 No. 5 48 - ^serving for market site purposes, a parcel of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrio of Poblaoion, iouniod?a- 
lity of Ronda, province of Cebu. .IJ^d,__. N 0 . 7 1, p. 1468. 
^ 11 IV, °'"' 549 ~ ^rvixu-r for radio station site purposes, a parcel of 

the public domain situated in the barrio of Pikit, munici- 
pality of Pikit, province of Cotabato. Ibj.^ No. 72, p. 1482. 
Ma}' 11 No, 550 - Reserving for school nurposHs, a nwaol of tho public 

domain situated in the barrio of Kadaelan, municipal dis- 
trict of Natonin, fountain Province. I bj 4., No. 73, p. 1503. 
Hay 11 No. 551 _ R 030rvjng for school purpoaos a parcel of tho pu _ lic 

domain situated in the barrio of Losseb, municipal district 
of J^auko, Mountain Province. IbjjLj__.No. 74, p. 1539. 
-ay 26 No. 552 - Reserving for national defense purposes,' blocks nos. 141, 
and 142 of lianila Harbor Reclamation Area No. 1, situated 
in the City of Lanila. JLMd_,j. No. 75, p. 1553. 
c'o r '\^^ ^53 - Publishing the proclamations and executive orders, and the 

announcements, all relating to neutrality, issued on /pril 
25, 1940, by the President and the Secretary of State of the United 
states, respectively. jn_i_d_,, JJ o. 84. 
7 No. 554 _ Publishing proclamations, executive orders, and regulations 
issued by the President of the United States at Washing- 
ton, D.C., in connection with the neutrality of the United states 



J ime 



- 7*7 - 



III - 162 



in the war between Romany, Belguim, Luxembourg, and Netherlands. 
IM-cLju Ko. 35, p. 1790. 

Juno 12 No.' 555 - Declaring ^/odnosday afternoon, June 12, 1940, a special • 

public holiday in the City ..of P anil a and surrounding . 
municipalities. JJlid-.,. p. 1790. 
" June 12 No. 556 - Publishing executive orders by the President of the 

United states, general rulings and regulations by the 
fJecretnry of the Treasury of the United States, and announcements, 
by the Office of the United States High Commissioner, issued from' 
January 15, 1934 to Hay 13, 1940, relating to property in which 
Norway, Denmark, Belguim, Netherlands, Luxembourg or nationals 
thereof have an interest. flalaaaiUn. CflDBUattJUh. ' 
» June 15. No. 557 - (Jiving public notice of the approval by the President of 

the United States of National .Assembly Bill. Ho. 11, now 
known as Comnonwoalth Act No. 585,. Officii. fl^tta. Vnl . 58, 
No. 88, p. 1872. 

" Juno 22 No. 558 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public ' 

domain situated in the barrio of Bunhian, municipal dis- 
trict of Mayoyao, subprovinco of Ifugao, Mountain Province. 
UiiiUj. p. 1872. 

June 22 No.' 559 - iieserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public' 

domain situated in the barrio of Oton, municipality of ■ 
Bacuit, province of Palawan. I hid. ., No.' 89, p. 1905. 
" June 22 No. 560 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Calawag, municipality , 
of 'i'aytay, province of Palawan. Ibid. . So. 90, pp. 1927-1928. 
" Juno 22 No. 56l - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of "p.bon, municipality of 
Aborlan, province of Palawan. I bid. . p. 1928. 
" June 22 No. 562 - Reserving for school and mvinicipal building site purpo- . 

oos, two parcels of the public domain situated in the 
municipal district of Nakun, Nountain Province. IbjjL., No. 91, 
p. I960. 

" J une 22 Ho . 563 - Reserving for railroad purposes, two parcels of the. 

public domain situated in the barrio of Haglabrahan, 
municipality of Guimba, province of Nueva Licljn. -IbiiLuL PP« 1960- 
1961. 

June 22 No. 564 - Reserving for market purposes, a parcel of ' the public 

domain situated in the Poblacion, municipality of Mabitac 
province of L a guna. JJiisL., No. 92, p. 1984. 
J une 22 No. 565 - Reserving for market purposes, a parcel of the public , 

domain situated in. the Poblacion, municipality of Kaga,.. 
province .of Cebu. IJild_.., p. 1984. 



7^V - 



III - 163 



viO June 22 Ho. 566 - lending Proclamation No. 411, sorios of 1931, establish- 
ing the Lopez Watershed Forest Reserve. Ibid.. N 0 . 93, ' 
pp. 2014-2015. 

" June 22 K0 * 5&I ~ iteaurVin « f ° r * laZa Purpura four parcels of tho public 

domain situated in the Poblacion, municipality of Dao, ' 
provinco of Capiz. Ibjy^, ifo. 94> p# 2(H5# 

" June 24 No. 568 - Calling the National W>mM v ^ ■ - 

uuiOJiai ..losemsuy in special session to 

canvas the reseats of the plebiscite held on June 18, 
1940. Ibid^, p. 2046. 

"' Juno 24 Ho - 569 " Dcclarin « the period between Independence Day, July 

and July 31, 1940, as the time for the fifth Commonweal th 
roll call of the Red Cross of the Philippines. Ibj^k, Ho. 95, 
p. 2067. 

« Jul. 1 No. 570 - Unjoining all branches, subdivisions, agencies, and 

instrumentalities of the Commonwealth Government and 
inhabitants of the Philippines to extend their cooperation in ren- 
dering the necessary aid to the refugees from the British Colony 
of Hongkong. IJud.^ pp. 2067-2068. 

" Jul. 8 No. 571 - Reserving for school purposes, five parcels of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrios of ilaliap, Julongan, 
Antipolo, hungayan, and iiagacadan, municipal district of Kiangan, 
subprovinco of Ifugao, hountain Province. IJjjdj., No. 96, .pp. 2089- 
2090. 

" Jul. 8 No. 572 - Reserving for school purposes, five. parcels of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrios of Carpenito, Batcnen, 
'i'idman, Jiaculin ana oan uuan, municipality of Linatuan, province of 
3urig a o. Ibid^ Ho. 97, pp. 2123-2124. 
" Jul. 8 No. 573 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Ilaggoc, municipal dis- 
trict of Hungduan, subprovince of Ifugao, liountain Province. 
>■«■. 98, p. 2145. 

"Ul. 8 No. 574 _ Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Banocboc, municipality 
of Indan, province of Camarines horto. AbMiu L 99, p. 2162. 
Jul. 0 Mo. 575 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the Poblacion, municipal district of 
Antatot, province; of Isabela. IMjLul No. 100, pp. '2189-2190. 
Jul. 8 No. 576 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Bangan, municipality of 
UnnchoB-hirn, province of Cagayan. I'iaXsiS^i^.SmJ^J^Mj^ 
Jul. Q No. 577 _ Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Oambulo, municipal dis- 
trict of Banaue, Mountain Province. Offj j)jjti ., <*nm\\Qt v °l» 38, 



■ HI - 1 64 

- fjt - 

. No. 101, p. 2235. 

m Jul. 0 No. 573 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the City of Cebu. Ibi,d r , No-. 103, 

p. 2259. 

u j u i, 8 No. 579 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrios of iiaLangbang and D«r,ag, 
municipal district of fiayoyao, Mount pin Province. Ibj,^, No. 104, 
p. 2277. 

» Jul., 8 No. 530 - Establishing as Vallehormoso Forest Reserve for forest 

protection, timber production and aesthetic purposes, a 
parcel of the public domain situated in the municipality of Valle- 
hermoso, province of Negros Orient, al. Halnc.-nnn Comnj,1,qt t inji, 
11 Jul. 3 No. 531 - Establishing as Santo Tom,?;; Forest Reserve for forest 

protection, timber production and aesthetic purposes, ?• 
parcel of the public domain situated in the municipal district of 
Tuba, subprovinco of Bonguct, Mountain Province. Of f j. o Afl. 1 J^ & cAfeLt; 
Vol. 33, No. 105, pp. 2295-2296. 
" Jul. 8 No. 582 - Establishing as Fany-Inf anta Forest Reserve for forest 

protection, timber production and aesthetic purposes, a 
parcel of trie public domain, situated in the municipalities of 
Farny and Jiniloan, province of Laguna, aid municipality of Inf rntn 
province of I'ayab as. Ilslajiaijan^^U^ 
" Jul. 3 No. 583 - Establishing as Kitcharao Forest Reserve for forest pro- 
tection and timber production, a parcel of the public 
domain situated in the municipality of Jabanga, province of 
Agusan. Ibi_d._ 

" Jul. 8 No. 584 - Establishing as Callao Forest Reserve for forest protec- 
tion, timber production and reforestation, a. parcel of 
the public domain situated in the municipality of Pehablanca, 
province of Gngaynn. ibid*. 
" Jul. 8 fio. 585 - Excluding from the operation of Executive Order No. 85, . 

dated November 12, 1919, and reserving for market site 
purposes and for other public improvements two lots situated in 
the Poblacion, municipality of No lam but an, province of Lanao. 
Of.fi cinl Cl fl , a prte. Vol. 33, Mo. 106, pp. 2323-2324. 
" J ul. 8 No. 586 - Reserving' for cemetery site purposes, a parcel of the 

public domain situated in the barrio of Haligaya, muni- . 
cipality of Infanta, province of Tayabas. Ibj ,, d ,-> lio « 1Q 7> PP» 
2351-2352. 

" ° u l. 8 No. 587 - Reserving for municipal building site purposes, a 

parcel of the public domain situated in the Poblacion, 
municipality of Pagadiim, province of ."-.amboauga. IMA**. Ho. 108, 
P. 2373. 



- 1*} - 



III - 165 



340 Jul. 22 Ho. 588 - Restoring the Commonwealth of the Philippines, a part of 

the military reservation of Weda, C it y of Manila. 
Ibid,., ho. 109, pp. 2409-2410. 
■ Jul. 22 No. 589 - Reserving f or dispensary site purposes, four parcels of 

the public domain situated in the barrio of Tubod, muni- 
cipality of Kolambugan, province of Lanao. Ibid.. No. 110, o. 24*. 
" Jul ' 22 No " 590 ~ Reaervin ^ for school' purposes, a narcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of San Francisco, munici- 
pality of Dupax, province of Fueva Vizcaya. Ibid. T U 0 . Ill, 
pp. 2455-2456. 

" Jul * 22 No * 591 ~ Serving for railroad purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Naglabrahan, municipar- 
lity of Guimba, province of Huova Scija. Ibid..,; No. 112, p. 2402. 
11 Aug. 5 Ho. 592 - Publishing executive orders of the President of the 

United States, a Joint Resolution of the Congress of the ' 
United States, regulations, instructions, general rulings and gene- . 
ral licenses by the Secretary of Treasury of the United States, 
and orders of the United States High Commissioner, to the Philip- 
pine Islands and information relating to property in which Norway, 
Denmark, Helguim, Motherlands, Luxembourg, Prance or nationals 
thereof have an interest, and revoking Proclamation No. 556 of the 
President of tlie Philippines, dated June 12, 1940. JiaLattaft#L_ 

Ssmsxlj&s&iu. 

Aug. 5 Fo. 593 - Publishing Executive Order No. 3445 of the President of 

the united States, dated June 15, 1940, amending Execu- 
tive Order N 0 . 8135 of Hay 15, 1939, relating to appeals from 
decisions of the Miditor General of the Philippines to the President 
of the United States. PXfjjLUiL^aaftfetfi*- Jol . 38, No. 113, pp. 
2503-2504. 

big. 5 No. 594 - Amendi ng Proclamation No. 740, series of 1934, establish- 
ing the Quezon National Park, situated in the municipali- 
ties of .'Vtimonan, Pagbil.xj, and Padre Burgos, province of Tayab^s. . 

Aug. 5 :i 0t 50,5 _ u oaerv ing for school purposes , a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Lonoy, municipal dis- 
trict of San Gabriel, province of La Union. Q££XsX£U^Jll*SiA&*. 
Vol. 38, No. 114, p. 2529- 
• u t'. 5 No. 596 - Reserving for school purposes, three parcels of the 

publi.c domain situated in the Poblacion and barrio of 
Baliwang, munici. pal district of 3adanga;and Lias, municipal district 
of Barlig, Mountain Province. IbisU*. No. 115, pp. 2573-2574. 



♦ 



Ill - 166 

~ 741 ~ 



40 :,ug. 5 No. 597 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel' of the public 

domain situated in the Poblacion, municipality of Concept- 
cion, province- of Iloilo. Ibj^U., I 0 . 116, p. 2600. 
« Aug. 5 Ho. 598 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the public- 

domain situated in the Poblacion, municipal district cf 
Lima, subprovinco of Apayao, fountain Province. IbjjSU*. Ho. 117, 
p. 2628. 

» Aug. 5 Ho. 599 - Reserving for warehouso purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the Poblacion, municipality of Legfanj ,• 
province of Albay. Ibid*., H 0 . 110, pp. 2650-2651. • 
11 Aug. 5 Ho. 600 - deluding from the operation of Pro citation No. 427, '"■■< 

dated ? T ovoraber 7, 1931, »nd reserving for warehouse pur- 
poses, a parcel of land situated in the Poblacion--., municipality of 
Santiago, province of Isabela. Ibid..,, Ho. 119, pp. 2608-2609. 
" Aug. 5 I-o. 601 - Reserving for airplane landing field purposes, a parcel *••'». 

of the public domain situated in the barrio of Tinib 
(Dinalongan) , municipality of Oasiguran, province of Tayabas. 
IMAjl» n o. 120, p. 2710. '' 
" Aug. 5 Ho. 602 - Reserving for cemetery purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of tfasoli, municipality of 
'San Remigio, province of Antique. Ibid • • Ho. 121, p. 2764. . 
" Aug. 5 Ho. 603 - Reserving for animal, breeding station purposes, two par- 
cels of the public domain situated in the City of Baguio. ■ 
Ibid. . No. 122, pp. 2807-2008. 
" Aug. 9 I.'o. 604 - Excluding from the operation of the resolutions of the 

Philippine Commission dated January 25, 1907, and August 
30, 1916, and opening to disposition under the provisions of Common- 
wealth Act :?o. 137, a parcel of the land situated within the Pg-guio 
Townsita Reservation. .IbjjU., Ho. 123, p. 2034. 
" Aug. 9 :J 0 . 605 - Excluding from the operation of Executive Orders Noa. 35 

and 36, series of 1904 and 1912, respectively, the whole 
island of Darab, province of Palawan, and declaring the seme open ' 
for mining purposes. ]Jj^^.^i^L^S>IwX r ^A!^a. 
" *ng. 9' »o. 606 - ' J xclud-i n<- fr'vi +)v> operation of Proclamation ho, 208, 

dated October 5, 19:57, and opening to disposition under 
the provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 137, a parcel cf land situa- 
ted in the barrio of Camp 7, municipality of ilinglanilla, province 
of Cobu. Pms^Jla«&foU. Vol. 38, Ho. 125, pp. 2897-2898. 
" "US. 9 So. 607 - Including from the operation of Proclamation Ho. 823, 

dated June 29, 1935, and opening to disposition under the- 
provisions of Commonwealth Act Ho. 137, a parcel of land situated r.i 
in the barrios of HrfLono and liagdalona, municipality of Aroroy, 
province of f r asbate. JGMjUl. Ho. 126, p. 2943. 



- 742 - 



III - 167 



19 40 m- 12 Wo * 608 - ^M-iuhing proclamation and executive order by the 

President of the United States and rules and regulations 
by the Secretary of State of the United States, all relating to 
neutrality, issued on June 10 and 11, and July 5, 1940. SflLMflEjSi 
Compilation.. 

« AUg. 21 Ho. 609 - Designating the period from September 14 to October 15, 

1940, as the period for the .joint citizenship fund • ■ 
campaign of the 3oy Scouts and «irl Scouts of the Philippines. 

.Q££ifilaL&aasltflk-Voi. 38, . Ub. 127, p. 2972. 
»■ Aug. 29 No. 610 - Reserving for settlement purposes, a parcel of the land 

situated in the tfallig Palins, municipalities of Catagen, 
Camu, Ilagan and Tumauini, province of Isabcla. Ibid.. N o. 128, 
pp. 3000-3001. 

" Sopt. 3 ' ? o. 611 - Giving public notice of the approval by the President 

of the United States of ifational assembly Bill I T o. 1732, 
now known as Commonwealth let No. 613. I bjd f . f p. 3001. 
:| Sept. 3 Wo. 612 - Revoking Proclamation : : o. 659, series of 1934, as 

amended by Proclamation Fo. 399, series of 1939, and. -• 
establishing as Hanloluag Spring National Pari: for the benefit 
and enjoyment of the neopla of the Philippines the parcel of 
land situated in the nunicipality of Mangatarcm, province of 
Pangasinan. Ibjd, Lr No. 129, pp. 3C 30- 30 31. 
" Sept. 3 J'O, 613 - Reserving for school purposes, throe parcels of the 

public domain situated in the b-rrio of Cali^t, muni- 
cipality of Solano, province of Imova Vizcaya. Ibjd. , '. Vo» 130, 
p. 3069. 

" kiopt. 3 Wo. 614 - Reserving for the exclusive use of non-Christians four 

parcels of the public domain situated in the barrio of 
Dinas and Kumalarang, municipalities of Pagadian, and liargosatubir, 
province of Zamboanga. Ibid, ,, " [ o. 131, pp. 3099-3100. 
" Sept. 3 Ho. 615 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Munguia, municipality 
of Dupax, province of Nueva Vizcaya. JJ&sUj. i<0 « !32, P» 3125. 
" Sept. 3 Ho. 616 - Establishing as Rizal Fational Pnrk for the benefit and 

enjoyment of the pooplo of tlio Philippines, the parcel 
of land situated in the municipality of Dapitan, province of Zam- 
boanga. ibjd. . pp. 3125-3126. 

" Sept. 10 Ho. 617 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated' in the barrio of Bugabofigan, municipal - - 
district of Wang, province of Cotobato. IM^o. 133, p. 3155. 

" Sopt. 10 Ho. 618 - Reserving for officers' landing purposes, two parcels of 

l«nd in the Port 'jo a. City of iianila. BjJLd«. PP. 3155- 

3156. 



Ill - 168 

194 0 Sopt. 20 No. 619 - Publishing as a supplement to Proclamation No. 592, dated 

fcgust 5, 1940, executive orders of the President of the 
United Statoa, reflations, instructions, general rulings," and 
general licenses, and general authorizations by the Secretary of , 
the Treasury 0 f the United States, and orders of the United Stetea 
Jiigh Commissioner to the Philippines and information relating to 
property in which 'Way, Denmark, Bolguira, Uthorlmds, Luxembourg 
franco, or nationals thereof have an interest. H R l ftCH H^ Cn^l^- 
" Sept. 20 No. 620 - declaring the provisions of let No. 4054, known as "The 

Philippines Hi co Share Tenancy *.ct", as amended, to be 
in full force and effect in the provinces of Camarines Norte, C F ns- 
rlnos our, and Sorsogon. misSj&Jla&J&u Vol. 38, No. 134, 
p. 3181. 

" Sopt. 26 No. 621 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of T)i nalongan, munic"* prlity . 
of Caaiguran, province of Tayabas. Ibid., pp. 3181-3182. 
" Se P t - 26 622 - Reserving for military purposes, a parcel of the public • 

domain situated in the Poblacion, municipality of Romblon. 
Jhifl*, Uo. 135, p. 3213. 
" Sopt. 26 xio. <>23 - Reserving for hospital purposes, three parcels of the 

public domain situated in the City of Naguio. Ibj^j. 
pp. 3213-3214. 

" Sept. 26 No. 624 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public ■, 

domain situated in the barrio of Kaub, municipality of - 
Aborlan, province of Palawan. IbjjLj. No. 136, pp. 3248-3249. 
" Oct. 4 No. 625 - Calling for special election to fill existing vacancies 

in the 'National Assembly. Ibj .d A ,. p. 3249. 
" Oct. 8 No. 626 - Revoking Proclamation No. 25, dated May 23, 1925, and 

reserving the parcels of land covered thereby for incene- 
rator and pound purposes. XhJ^Lj. ; 'o. 137, pp. 3283-3284. 
Oct. 8 No. 627 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain .situated in the barrios of Nagsanghan and Oestc, 
municipality of Tarangnan, province of Samar. XhJJjuu PP» 3284- 
3285. 

" Oct.' 8 No. 628 - Reserving for fishery station purposes, a parcel of the 

public domain situated in the barrio of Banauan Gueset, 
, municipality of Patfupan, province of Pangasinan. XUjUL., * T cw -36, 
P. 3312. 

°ct. 8 N 0 . 629 - Reserving for military purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the City of Manila. Zl23&*.> P« 3312. 

() °t. 8 i. 0 . 630 - Reserving for the site of the Philippine National Bank,, a 

parcel of the public domain situated in the residence sec- 
tion 3, City of Bagujjo. HvA*-f 139, PP- 3335-3336. 



III - 169 



1940 Oct. 8 No. 631 - Reserving for railroad purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of San Rafael, municipa- 
lity of htimonan, province of Tayabas. IbiiU, p. 3336. 
n Oct. 8 Ho. 632 - Reserving for cemetery purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Kalamansig, municipality 
of Lebak, province of Cotabato. IbJUU No. 140, pp. 3356-3357. 
" 0ct - 8 :h ' 673 ~ lie ^rvin,r for school purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated rn the bnrrio of Sanganan, municipality 
of >itao, province of liuova Viaoaya. Ibjd^ p. 3357. 
« Oct. 8 No. 634 - lending Proclamation No. 65, dated June 3, 1936, es- 

tablisliing the Naguio-Bontoc Scenic National Park, so 
as to raodifjr the description of its boundaries and to change its 
name to Mount D a ta "ational Park, Nalacailan ConP^fooj^ 
" Oct. 16 No. 635 - living public notice of the approval by the President of 

the United States of sections 1 and 4 of Commonwealth 
Act No. 503. Ibid. . No. 141, p. 3370. 
" Oct. 19 No. 636 - Establishing as Bontoc-Ifugao Forest Reserve for forest 

protection, timber production and aesthetic purposes, 
parcels of the ijublic domain situated in the municipal districts - 
of B a naue and Nurnay, subprovir.ee of Ifugao, and municipal dis- 
trict of Nontoc, Mountain Province. ; ■ al as al an . . Cpmu i 1 a t i o n, . 
" Oct. 28 1J0. 637 - Publishing the proclamation of the President of the 

United States dated October 17, 1940, and setting asride 
November 11, 1940 as special public holiday for the observance of 
the anniversary of the 'mstice of 1913. Official. Gazette, Vol. 38, 
No. 136, p. 3249. 

" Oct. 29 No. 63O - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrios of .:daoay, and Central, 
municipal districts of Kabayan and Bokod, respectively, Mountain 
Province. ibJLdx, No. 141, p. 3378. 
Oct. 30 No. 639 - Declaring I'riday, November 15, 1940, a special public 

holiday. IbjjUj. No. 136, p. 3249. 
" °ct. 30 No. 640 - lending Proclamation No.* 26, dated August 16, 1921, so 

as to reserve the parcels of Land unbraced therein for 
■ agricultural school purposes and the establishment of agricultural 
colony for the students and gradutes of such schools. IJb jJ uu u 
No. 142, p. 3401. 

" I] ov. 18 No. 641 - Designating Thursday, the 21st day of November, 1940, 

as a day of national thanksgiving. JJoAxj. p. 3402. 
s ov. 20 No. 642 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 414, 

dated October 7, 1931, and opening to disposition under 
the provisions of the Public Land Net, a parcel of the public do- 
main situated in the municipal district of ?agur.i, province of Esveo. 



Ill - 170 

-40 Nov. 20 Ho. 643 - Establishing as 3aia Forest Rooorve for forest protection 

and tinibor production, a parcel of the public domain si- 
tuated in the municipality of Bais, province of Uogros Oriental. 

« Pov. 20 I J o. 644 - Reserving for school purposes, four parcels of the sub- 
lie doaain situated in the barrios of Ngipin and Hara.ng, 
municipal district of Tabu!:; and in the barrio a of Bangad and 
Kallago, municipal district of i'inglayjm, Mountain Province. 

" Nov. 20 No. 645 - Reserving for school purposes, a paroej of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of (Jul at, municipality of • 
Casiguran, province of 1' ay abas . fifJEJjsAjiL Jwaatta^Vol. 38, Kb. 
148, p. 3547. 

" Nov. 20 No. 646 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Dodan, municipality of 
Aparri, province of Oagayan. IbjUL., pp. 3547-3548. 
" Nov. 20 Ho. 647 - Reserving for school purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of ^artolabac, municipali- 
ty of .'Jan Jacinto, province of K'aabate. Ibid- r Ho. 149, P. . 3565. 
" f 'ov. 20 £.'o. 648 - Reserving for cemetery purposes a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Oscaris, municipality 
of Santiago, province of Isabela. lbj-_rlf_,- pp. 3565-3566. 
11 iov. 20 ^o. 649 - Establishing as coal-mining reservations ell the coal. 

deposits and coal-bearing lands in the south-eastern 
portion of the province and island of Ilindoro, and islands of 
Somirara, Siboy and Caluya, province of Antique. . J EMflt j.. Ho. 150, 
p. 3585. 

" Dec. 4 No. 650 - living public notice of the approval by the President of 

the united States of the amendments to the Constitution 
of the Philippines, as contained in resolution no. 73, of. the 
National Assembly, dated April 11, 1940. IbjA, , Ho. 151, 
pp. 3611-3612. 

" Dec. 4 ho. f>51 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the pub- 
lic doaain of the Commonwealth of the Philippines 
situated in the district of Pftco, Manila. I&ilLj. Ho. 152, p. 3646. 
" Dec. 4 No. 652 - including from the operation of Proclamation No. 443, 

series of 1932, and reserving for garage, shop and 
storehouse purposes, a parcol of the public domain situated in 
the City of Jbivoo. JJivU, 153, pp. 3668-3669. 
" °ec. 16 Ho. 653 - Declaring Tuesday, December 31, 1940, a special public 

holiday. Ihj,fl- • Ho. 154, p. 3692. 



- : III - 1 71 

AO Doc. 17 No. 654 - Giving public notice Qf the by ^ President 

of the United States of Bm No. 3927 ((Wmwealth lei- 
No. 406). IbjjW p. 3693. 
« Dec. 23 No. 655 - Amending Proclamation no. 657, aeries of 1934, esta- 
blishing the Bicol ifationaL ?ark cituated in the muni- 
cipality of iinr.ud and Dart, province of Camwinos Nor to. and muni- ■ 
eipalitioa of Lu P i and Sipocot, province of Camarinos Sup. 

" p ec. 23 No. 656 - Reserving for quarry site purposes, a parcel oft the 

public domain situated in the barrio of .indopan, munici- 
pality of (W.aga, province of Cagayan. Qi^i^ t O^JBXaXSi^J r ol • 39, 
Ho. 0, p. 158. 

" Dec. 23 ir o. 657 - Reserving for . school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Arellano, municipality 
of ;;urigso, province of Surigao. IJaiiLj. No. 9, p. 178. 
11 Dec. 23 No. 658 - Reserving for Military purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Libertad, municipality 
of jJutuBii, province of ..guaan. IJ&sLk*. No. 10, pp. 196-197. 
" Dec. 23 No. 659 - Reserving for fialiery office and laboratory purposes, 

two parcels of the public domain situated in the City 
of Oebu. Ij2i£Uj. Ib. 11, p. 212. 
'41 Jan. 4 No. 660 - Reserving for school site purposes, a parcel of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrio of Buaya, municipal 
district of BaLbalan, subprovince of Kalinga, Mountain Province. 
XbMjuu No. 12, p., 231. 
" Jan. 4 No. 661 - Reserving for forest station site purposes -and designa- 
ting as Cagayan Forest Station Site Reservation, a ppr-*. . 
col of the public domain situated in the municipality of Cagayrn, 
province of Mis amis Oriental. _I_bj,d- , No. 13, p. 249. 
" Jan. 5 No. 662 - Proclaiming the existence of a public calamity in the 

subprovince of Catanduanos, Albay. Ibid. . pp. 249-250. 
" -Tan. 7 lio. 663 - Innoxing die municipality of Jaro to the territorial 

jurisdiction of tlie City of Iloilo. I.bJ t d.. J . No. 14, p. 263. 
" Jan. 9 No. 664 - invoking Executive Order i'o. 22, series of 1912, ,?a 

amended .by Executive Order No. 51, soriea of 1913, and 
declaring the land reserved thereunder open to disposition. 

I&jUi No. 14, p. 26 3. 
J ari. 9 Wo. 665 - Publishing proclamation and executive order issued by ... 

the President of the United States, and rulos and regu,.. 
iations promulgated by tuc -oting Secretary of State of the United 
States, all relating to the neutrality of the United States in the 
war between Italy and Greece. jlfllflj^a^^cj ^ Jja U O B .. - 



- T47 



III - '172 



19 41 Jan. H *>. 666 - Establishing .as petroleum mining reservations all 

petrol*™ deposit, and potroleun, lands in the provinces 
of Caeayan, Isabola, Pangasinan, Nuova E cija , Tarlac, PajtipanRa| 
Bulacan, Iloilo and Ccbu, northwestern portion of Loyte and 
southern portion of Tayabas. QfJX^ J^tj^Vol . 39, No. 15, 
p. 276. 

" Jan> 18 No ' 667 ~ S^lishing 33 iiundrod Inlands National Park for the 

benefit and enjoyment of the people of the Philippines, 
the group of islands situated in the municipality of Alaminos, 
province of Pangasinan. JMA^ p. 276. 
» Jan. 23 No. 668 - Reserving for school purposes, parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of (iabaldon, municipality 
of Kunqa, province of i'iuova Ecija. IMjU.JTo. 17, p. 305. 
» Jan. 28 No. 669 - Reserving for cemetery purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the municipality of Pagadian, province 
of tfamboanga. Toid.^pp. 305-306. 
11 Jan. 28 No. 670 - Reserving for municipal building site purposes, a parcel' 

of the public domain situated in the barrio of Lag awn , 
municipal district of Airnay, subprovince of Ifugao, Mountain 
Pro vi nee . ^aJiMU^mSsm^Xion^ 
Jan. 29 No. 671 - Proclaiming the existence of a public calamity in the 

municipality of t'aramoan, Camarines .'jut. I b J A-u, 
Jan. 29 No. 672 - Reserving for the use of Philippine Constabulary, a par- 
col of the public domain situated in the barrio of San 
Juan, municipality of Cervantes, province of Ilocos Sur. Q££j £X aX. 
ibiiiSLtiii*. Vol. 39, No. 19, p. 397. 
■Jan. 29 No. 673 - Reserving for school purposes, three parcels of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrio3 of (ima, Tanlag and 
Dalupa (j-bleg), municipal district of Lubuagan, subprovince of 
Kalinga, Mountain Province. IJiicUa. pp. 397-398. 
Jan. 31 r! 0 . 674 - Reserving for school rate purposes, a parcel of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrio of Data, municipal dis- 
trict of Sabangan, subprovince of Bontoc, Mountain Province. 
I&Au. No. 20, p. 417. 

II V 

•'an. 31 u 0< (-,713 _ Reserving for workingmen ' s village purposes, throe per- 

cols of the public domain situated in. the district of 
iondo, City of Manila. IJ&iL*. pp. 417-418. 
Jan. 31 JJ 0 , 676 - Reserving for school site purposes, a parcel of the pri- 
vate domain of the Commonwealth of the Philippines situa- 
ted at Palomar Park, City of Manila. .ibjLti,,,, M o« 21, pp. 445-446. 
Peb « 5 No. 677 - Establishing as .isi a Forest Reserve for forest protection. 

timber production and aethetic purposes, a parcel of the 
public domain situated in the municipal districts of Sablan and 



III - 173 



*uba, aubprovinco of Benguot, fountain Province. 

5.941 Feb. 5 No. 670 - Establishing as Matchwood Forest Reserve, a parcel of 

the public domain situated in the municipality of Sar: 
Toodoro, province of iilndoro. IJj&sU 
" Feb. 5 Ho. 679 - i«ovokin« Executive Order ? ; o. 39, dated July 26, 1912, 

and reserving a portion of the lend described therein fc 
sugar experimental purposes and for the establishment of a nation:, 
sugar cane experiment station. IJ2i.1l. 
» Fob. 12 No. 680 - Designating the period from Narch 19 to March 28, inclu- 
sive, as National Befonso Week. Offi gj.ffl Ga*u+±p f Vnl . 
39, i'l'o. 29, p. 600. 

" Feb. 12 i'o. 601 - Excluding from the operation of Fore* s try .'.dminiatrative 

Order unnumbered, dated iiay 20, 1922, and opening to 
disposition under the provisions of Commonwealth Act No, 137, e 
parcel of land situated in the sitio of ^uyag, barrio of Ilalabsgo. 
municipality of Cataihgan, province of Masbate. TbjJL., pp. 680-601 
" Fob. 17 No. 682 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of 3 an Francisco, munioiv 
lity of 3an Jose, province of Nuova Scija. HajUj. No. 30, p. 712 
" Feb. 17 No. 683 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situntod in th« barrio of Impig, municipality of 
Sipocot, province of Camarines our. I bid. , pp. 712-713. 
" Feb. 17 No. 684 - Reserving for military purposes, six parcels of the pri- 
vate domain of the Commonwealth of the Philipines, 
situated in the baxrio of Guiang-Culang, municipality of Lucena. 
province of l 1 ay abas. IMiL-*. No. 31, pp. 735-736. 
" Feb. 17 ITo. 68? - Reserving for school purposes, eight parcels of the 

public domain situated in the berries of C a 3iitan, Isca, 
Natangan, Ninariga, r fapel, N a ua, Harede and Nagbabacalan, municipa- 
lity of Consaga, province of Cagayan. ibiiU*. Nc - 32, pp. 759-760; 
" Feb. 27 No. 686 - Reserving for municipal building site and school purpo- 
ses, two parcels of the public domain situated in the 
Poblacion of the municipal district of Pingid an, province of Nueva 
Vizcaya. JhijLuu - ; o. 33, pp. 785-786. 
" Feb. 27 No. 607 - Reserving for Boy Ocout Headquarters and Library site 

purposes, a parcel of the public domain situated in the 
business section "0", City of J-vaguio . JLbjjU*. ?• 786. 
" Mar, 7 No. 688 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Capuy, municipality of 
Sorsogon. IMjLj- No. 34, pp. 916-917. 



Ill - 1 74 

- 74» - 

341 Har. 7 No. 689 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrio, of Blahgali and Hunduan, 
municipal district of Tanudan arid liunduan, respectively, Mount ein 
Province. Ibjd. , Ho. 35, pp. 931-932. 
„ Mar. 7 No. 690 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the publj.c 

domain situated in the barrio of Naucong Diot, munici- 
pality of Cataih/ran, province of tfabate. IbjjU*. No. 36, p. 680. 
» i-iar. 11 691 - Reserving for scaool purposes, four parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrios of Sopac, Poswoy, 
Nalinciago and k abac a, municipal district of Balbalan, Kalinga, 
Mountain Province. li^^a^O^sa^xXs^. 
11 liar. 14 No. 692 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the pub3ic 

domain situated in the barrios of Pacligan, Oababuyen, 
Kinakin, Gohong, 3aqniawan and Hapao , municipal district of Bsnaue, 
Ifugao, mountain Province. IJiiji,._ 
" Mar. 1A !l o. 603 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the publv.- 

domain situated in the barrio of Riaal, municipality of 
Muhos, province of ?*ueva Ecija. Ibid. 
" M ar. 14 No. 694 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrio 3 of ^ulaed and .ilir.it. 
municipal district of Mayoyao, subprovince of Ifugao, Mountain 
Province . Ilbjjlj. 

" har. 24 No. 695 - Reserving for school purposes , three paresis of the 

public domain situated i^n the barrio of fiamaltugan »nd 
Poblacion, respectively, municipal district of Bayag (subprovince 
of jV payao), 1 mountain Province, ibid., 
" N 8 r. 27 No. 696 - Declaring the 12th day of April, 1941, a special public 

holiday. Ibid^ 

" ?'bar. 27 No. 697 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situatud in the barrio of Betis, municipality of 
Guagua, province of Pa-rpanga. £bjuU. 
" Nar. 27 No. 698 - Reserving for cemetery purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the sitio of Pugon, barrio of Ha- 
niongan, mui-iicip.ality of --urora, province of T ay abas. IbJA.. 
" Apr. 15 No. 699 - Reserving for the use of the Philippine Constabulary, 

a parcel of the public domain situated in the barrio 
of liabantao, municipal district of Kapalong, province of D a vao ... Ifcii-. 
" Ipr. 15 No. 700 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcol of the public 

domain situated in the b-rrio of Buenavista, municipa- 
lity of BTionavista (formerly a barrio of Butuan), province of 
%us a n. JMsL*. 



- 790 



III - 175 



,041 Apr. 15 No. 701 - Serving fop aa rket. site purposes, two parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrio of Santa Fe , 
municipal district of Inugan, province of Nueva V i2Ca ya. Ib^ 
" 15 H °- 702 ~ ReSOrvi ^ for use «>' tho Bureau of .Animal Industry, 

two parcels of the private domain of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines situated in the district of Pandacan, City 

of iinnila. JUaUU. 

" "P r - 15 No « 703 ~ ^okin/j Proclamation No. 4.17, dated October 12, 1931 

and declaring the land reserved thereunder located in 
Kaaibu, Hombang, %eva Viacaya, open to disposition. 1^., 
" flay 5 No. 704 - Reserving for school purposes, three parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrios of Harag, Anao 
- md B «li"Ong, municipal distract of Luna and Burnay, Mountain 
Province. Ibjd_._ 

" Kay 5 No. 705 - Reserving for military purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the City of Cebu. Ibj,.d..__ 
" fiay 5 No. 706 - Revoking Executive Order No. 1, series of 1911, and 

declaring the land covered thereby, situated in Lipa, 
Batangas, open to disposition under the Public Land Law. Ibid. 
" May 12 No. 707 - Excluding from the operation of executive Order Nos. 

35 and %, scries of 1904 and 1Q12, respectively, the 
whole island of Lajo, province of Palawan, and declaring the- seme" 
open for mi rang purposes. IjjlcU. 
" hay 12 No. 708 - Proclaiming the existence of public calamity in the 

City of fianila. 3jjid,„ 
" ''iay 12 i >; o. 709 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Dungeg, municipality of 
Gonaagn., nrovince of Oagayan. I_bjd..__ 
" Nay 12 No. 710 - Establishing as Liangan Katubuan Forest Reserve for 

forest protection, timber production and aesthetic 
purposes, a parcel of the public domain situated in the municipa- 
lities of Holabaiig and Nunnngan, province of Lanao. £bJjL>__ 
•" I! ay 17 Ho. 711 - Publishing tho proclamation of a state of war between : 

Hungary and Yugoslavia by the President of the United 
States and the announcements made by the Secretary of State of - 
the applicability to Hungary of the rules and regulations promul- 
gated by him under the Neutrality .".ct of 1939- JJiAjL. 
" ! '-ay ig No. 712 - Reserving for school purposes, s parcel of the public 

domain situated in tho barrio of Ilasao, municipality of . 
Haiabang, province of Lanao. I_teuU,. 
fi ay 19 Mo. 713 _ Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of tho public 

domain situated in the barrio of Haaao, municipality of 
Ragay, province of Camarines Sur. IMA*-- 



- m - 



III - 176 



19 4I May 20 No. 714 - deluding from the operation of Executive Order No. 61, 

series of 1919, a parcel of land in the municipality of 
Sta. Cruz, D a v a0 , and declaring the Sa no open to disposition under 
the Public Land Let. .Ibid. 
Kay 20 No. 715 - Reserving for use of the Manila Railroad Company, two 
parcels of the public domain situated in the Poblacion, 
municipality of Legasp.i , Province of "ah ay. Ibid . 
" May 21 No. 716 - Revoking Proclamation Ho. 42, aorioa of 1921, and es- 
tablishing as Mountains Banahaw-San Cristobal National 
Park for the benefit and enjoyment of the people of the Philippines., 
the parcels of land situated in the City of S a n Pablo; municipali- 
ties of Lucban, T ay abas, Sari ay a, Riaal, rtagcarlan, Lilio and Kaj :y- 
jay, province of Laguna. I bid. 
" Hay 29 No. 717 - Publishing a Joint resolution passed by the United States 

Congress and signed by the President of the United States 
on May 28, 1941, which amends the export provisions of section 6 of 
that act to the Philippines, and a proclamation issued by the Pre- 
• sident of the United States on May 23, 1941, making applicable to 
the Philippines all previous proclamations and executive orders 
under Section 6 of the Export Control Act. J&X&a. 
" June 2 I'O. 718 - Declaring the period between Independence Day, July 4, and 

July 31, 1941, as the time for the sixth Commonwealth Roll 
Call of the Red Cross of the Philippines. Ibid. 
" June 3 i'-Jo. 719 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain in the barrio of I til, municipality of Malabang, 
province of Lanao. I bj.d . 
" Juno 3 No. 720 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Maniongan, municipality 
of Aurora, province of T ay abas. IbLdj. 
" June 3 No. 721 - Reserving for cemetery purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Kongkong, municipal dis- 
trict of Kacibu, province of Imova Vizcaya. Ibi-jEU. 
" June 4 No. 722 - Publishing the proclamation of a state of war between Bul- 
garia, on the one hand, and Yugoslavia and Greece, on the 
other hand, by the President of the United States and the announce- 
ments made by the Secretary of State on the applicability to Bulgaria 
of the rules and regulations promulgated by him under the Neutrality 

i*ct of 1939. iliisU 

J uno 0 P 0 . 723 - Declaring Thursday afternoon, June 12, 1941, a speciel 

public holiday in the City of Manila and surrounding muni- 
cipalities. ibi»d.«__ 

" J uno 13 K 0 . 724 - Proclairaing Thursday, June 19, 1941, Loyalty Day and decla- 
ring the afternoon thereof a special public holiday. Ibid, 



III - 177 



1041 Juno 24 No. 725 - ^serving for school purposes, a parcel of the public 

domain altatod in the barrio of Tocanon, municipality 
of Aritao, province of Nuova Viacaya. Of f j .ojaI C flZ id ri &j. Vol. 40, 
iio. 2, p. 197. Available at the Jorgo 3. Vargas Filipiniana Foun- 
dation, Handaliiyong, V-otxo Manila. 
h Juno 24 No. 726 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of tho public 

domain situated in tho barrio of Busilao, municipality 
of Bayorabong, Nueva Viae ay a. lbi d.._,_ p. 198. 
"• Juno 24 No. 727 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of tho public 

domain situated in the barrio of Ibung, municipality of 
Solano, Iiueva Viacaya. IbjJ. v , pp. 199-200. 
11 Juno 24 ^o. '728 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the pub- ■ 

lie doiuain situated in the barrio of ^ayabo, municipa- 
lity of San Jose, Nuova iJcija. Ibj^U*. P« 201. 
" J une 24 No. 729 - Designating tlje Civilian Braorgtmcy Administration as 

relief organisation to import corn free of duty. 
JUaJL-i. P- 202. 

" June 24 Ho. 730 - Reserving for school purposes, tiro parcels of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrios of Oaang and Lubo, 
municipal district of Tanduay, subprovince of Kalinga, ^unt air- 
Province. Ibidj., pp. 205-204. 
" June 24 No. 731 - Reserving for school purposes, seven parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrios of /umaacian, Aciga 
Dugpa, i'aga, '^appo, and Linos, municipal district of Pinukpuk, 
subprovince of Kalinga, i'iountain Province. Ibid..., pp. .205-209- 
" Jul. 1 No. 732 - Publishing the Executive Order of the President of the 

united States, dated liarch 22, 1941, establishing Subic 
Bay Naval Defensive Sea <lrea and Subic Bay Naval .Airspace Reser- 
vation. llnJUicjuiaJX.^ 
" Jul. 2 No. 733 - Declaring the 5th day of July, 1941, a special public 

holiday. pjEfjLci^ii^^tiiu. Vol. 40, No. 2, p. 209. 
" Jul. 2 No. 734 - Publishing tho interpretation made by tho U.S. Depart- 
ment of State of its instruction regarding the procedure 
' to be followed in the exchange of communications between the 
authorities of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, on the one 
hand, and Foreign Consular Official in the Philippines, on the 
other. Ibid. f pp. 210-211. 
" Jul. 7 No. 735 - Publishing Proclamation No. 2487, dated May 27, 1941, 

of the President of tho United States, "proclaiming that 
.an unlimited national emergency confronts this country, which re- 
quires that its military, naval, air and civilian defense be put 
on the basis of readiness to repel any and all acts of threats of 



- m 



III - 173 



agfjrossion directed tovrard any part of the western hemisphere." 
.IhicU.. p. 212. 

•1941 Jul. 19 Uo ' 756 ~ Rc ' sorvin S for ceraotory purponoa, a parcel of the public 

domain, situated in tho barrio of Camudmud, municipal 
district of Samel, province of D a vao. Ibjd._ t _ No. 4, p. 673. 
r Jul. 19 No. 737 - iWorvinft for school purposes, throe parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrios of Nararagan, 
Facac and Naguininago, municipal district of Allacapan, Cagayan„ 

11 Jul. 19 -'O. 730 - fciatobliahing as Bolota Pass Forest Reserve for forest 

s 

protection, timber production, and aothotic' purposes, 
a parcel of tho public domain situated in the municipal district ' 
of Imuran, Uueva Vise ay a. Ib,\d. f p. 675. 
" Jul. 26 No. 739 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public ' 

domain situated in the barrio of Inpalutao, municipality 
of Impasu;:on,'5, Nukidnon. Ibid.. N o. 5, p. 077. 
" fat',. 10 No. 740 - Publishing tho military order of tho President of thr 

United States, dated .'uly ?J~>, 1941, incorporating the 
i'iiiliijpiii« .vrny into tho United Jtatos Army. Ib id. . i*o. 7» 
p. 1392. 

" Aig. 11 No. 741 - lioaorving for school purposes, a marcel of tho public 

domain situated in tho barrio of -.Armenia, municipality -of 
Pimasalang, Hasbate. jMsLj. p- 1393- 
" Aug. 11 .No. 742 - Reserving for school purposes, too parcels of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Villahermosa, munici- 
pality of Tudeia, Cobu. JJsqA^ P- 1394. 
" Aug. 11 ho. 743 - Reserving for school purposes, a parcel of the public. 

domain situated in the barrio of lion Nicolas, nunlcipali- 
+7 of Taliaay, Camarines Norte. Ibid^. p. 1195. 
" Aug. 11 No. 744 - Amending Proclamation Kb. 220, series of 19 and 37, 

establishing the Bongabong-Balor Kational Park, situated 
in the municipalities of *ongabon and Baler, provinces of Nuovr 
iciia and T ay abas, respectively. IJM*^ To. 0, pp. 3.614-1622. 
" Aug. 14 No. 745 - Calling for special election of municipal officials of 

tho municipality of Dunn el fin, Lanao. U&k*. P. l g 23. 
' " Sept. 9 ho. 746 - Reserving for school purposes, one parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Tadi an, municipal dis- 
trict of Kayan, fountain Province. JJ^A^. lo - n ' P* 2245 * 
" Sept. 9 No. 747 - Reserving for school purposes, one parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Pulong Karagul, muni- 
cipality of latfioiw *^eva Vizcaya. Z&A*j. P» 2246. 



Ill - 179 

- 75* _ 

-41 Sept. 9 No. 748 - Reserving for radio-telegraph station purposes, a par- 
cel of tho public domain situated in tho Pobladon, 
municipal district of Brooke's Point, Palawan. Ibid., p. 2247. 
" Sept. 10 No. 749 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation' No. 217 : 

aeries of 1929, the four parcels of land situated in 
the barrios of Antanok and Oumatdang, municipal district of It>- 
gon, subprovince of Benguet, Mountain Province, and declaring tir 
said four parcels of land open for mining purposes, ibid.. N o, ; 
p. 2446. 

» Sept. 12 No. 750 - Reserving for municipal building purposes, a parcel of 

the public domain situated in the barrio of Kattsali, •• ■' 
municipal district of Tanundan, iiountain Province. Ibid, > p. 2447 
" Sept. 12 No. 751 - Reserving for school purposes, one parcel of the pub- 
lic domain situated in the barrio of Ditucalan, muni- 
cipality of Iligan, Lanao. Ibjd_._, p. 2448. 
" ^Pt. 18 No. 752 - Postponing to a later date the holding of the special 

election of local officials in ^ansalan, Lanao. Ibid... 
^o. 13, p. 2603. 

" Sept. 22 »'o. 753 - Proclaiming the existence of a public calamity in the 

.province- of Pampanga. IbjUU, p. 2604. 
" Sept. 22 No. 754 - Establishing as Eucalyptus Forest Reserve for forest 

protection and conservation of amamanit trees (Eucalyp- 
tus deglupta, bluiae) a parcel of the public domain situated in 
the municipal district of Lebak, Co.tabato. IbjLcL., p. 2605. 
11 Sept. 26 No. 755 - Reserving for school purposes, four parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrios of Diaat, Kadaya- 
kan, Diome, Suguit, municipality of Baler, SayabaSt Ibid- . 
No. 14, pp. 2790-2791. 
" s ept. 27 No, 756 - Changing the date if the annual observance of "Kade-in- 

the-Philippinos Products Week" from August 17 to 23, 
to the period from February 14 to 20, beginning with the year 

1942. IfcisLuL P. 2792. 
," Sept. 28 No. 757 - Reserving for school purposes, one. parcel of tho public. 

domain situated in the barrio of Betuagan, municipal 
district of Bontoc, Mountain Province, (subprovince of Bontoc). . 
JMll^. P. 2793. 

" Sept. 29 No. 758 - Reserving for cemetery site purposes, one parcel of 

of the public domain situated in the district of Bolong,' 
City of Zamboanga. IbjjsUj. p. 2794. 
" u ct. 2 No. 759 -.^serving for school purposes, one parcel of the pub- 
lic domain situated in tho barrio of Nungnugan, muni- 
cipality of Oauayan, Isabela. JMjUi. 15, pp. 3084-3085. 



:U; • III 100 

" 799 - 



i 



j j 



Oct... 2 No. 760 - Reserving fnr settlement purposes, a parcel of land 

situated in the 'la and Banga Valleys, in the municipa.. 
districts of Kaganui, Buluan, Isulan, Dagiuaa, and Sebu, province 
of Cotabato. Ibid. . p. 3006. 
« Oct. 10 Wo. 761 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation Ko. 2, 

series of 1921, as racndad by Proclamation N 0 . 512, 
series of 1932, and reserving for school purposes, throe parcels 
of the public domain situated in the barrio of Atata, municipa 
of Bongabon, imcva ttcija. I bid. , No. IS, pp. 3248-3249, 
" Oct. 10 No. 762 - Excluding from 'the operation of Proclamation No. 26. 

series of 1924, as amended by Proclamation I\ T o. 449, 
series of 1932, and reserving for school purposes .one parcel of 
'the public domain situated in the barrio of Calaanan, municipality 
of Boiignbon, Nueva iicija. Ibid.., p. 3250. 
" Oct. 15 Wo. 763 - Reserving for school purposes, seven parcels of the 

public domain situated in the barrios of T'aloctoc, 
Sumadol, Karagavan, 1'anauatnn, Katablangan," Talifugo, and T'awit ; 
municipal districts of Tpnudan, Tinglayan, Kabugao, Oonner, and 
Luna, Mountain Province, (subprovincos of Kalinga and Apayao). 
IHL&m. 17, pp. 3425-3427. 
" Oct. 21 ''o. 764 - Proclaiming the existence of a public calamity in the 

municipality of (J -lata; can, Batangas. Ibid - • p. 3420. 
" Oct. 21 No. 765 - Excluding from the operation of Proclamation No. 374, 

dated January 27, 1939, lots no a. 294, 452-/., 527, 559; 
571, and 572, and reserving the said parcels of Land together v;ith 
lots noa. 24 6- A, B3D-4015 of Butuan Tovmsite, located in the. muni- 
cipality of Butuan, province of Agusari, for hospital site purposes 

IMd^ p. 3429. 

" Oct. 21 No. 766 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated in the b-rrios of San Antonio and Angub. 
municipality of Cuartero, Capiz. ibJUU> P« 3430.^ 
" Oct. 22 No. 767 - Declaring Saturday, Nov. 15, 1941, a special public 

holiday. JMA^j, P- 3432. 
" Oct. 22 ho. 760 - Reserving for school purposes, two parcels of the public 

domain situated 'in the barrios of Badduat and Bulu, 
municipal district of Kabugao, fountain Province. (subprovinco of' 
Apayao). IbjjW pp. 3432-3433. 
"" Oct. 22 No. 769 - Reserving, for school purposes, one parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Sagpat, municipal dis- 
trict' of Kibunga, Mountain Province (subprovince of Benguet). 
IhJA»uJ. 3434. 



- m - 



in - i8i- 



q41 Oct.. 22 No. 770 - Reserving for experimental fishpond ^ ^ 

purposes, onu parcel of tll0 pubUc ^ 
the barrio of Mncabalan, municipality of 0 agayen> Oriental 1W. 

" ° Ct ' 22 K °" 771 " 1,Jblishi ^ the executive order of the President of the 

united ytat ° 3 ' datGd ''^ust 26, l 94 l, authorizing the 
united States Maritime CWsaion to issue warrants with respect 
to vessels, and the rules , Jld regulations issued thereunder by th* 
baited states Naritime Commission; Ibp^U, pp . 3436.3630. 

" Oct. 22 No. 772 - Resorvin/r fo^ n-'nofinnnKi ^+ a.- 

io- c...pexiMontal station purposes two parcels 

of public domain situated in the barrio of /a-oman, 
municipal district of Cannon, Cot abate. Ibid,., p. 3631 
- Oct. 24 No. 773 - Reserving for post-office .and radio site purposes, one 

parcel of the public domain situated in the municipal • 
.district of Kiaabn, Cotahato. Ibj^ No. 19-, p. 3803. 
" V0V ' ' 5 F °* 774 ~ ] ' ul,lialii ^ Proclamation of the President of . the United 

States, issued on October 22, 1941. Ibjd . r f p. 3804. 
Nov. 7 No. 775 - Reserving for- school purposes, one parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Lamut, municipal dis- 
trict of Kiangan, Kountain Province (subprovince of Ifugao). 

IkM«juJ f o. 20, p. 3957. 

fcov. 15 No. 776 - Publishing proclamation of the President of the United 

States, designating Thursday, November 20, 1941, as 
Th anics giving Day. Ibid._;_ N 0 . 21, p. 4115. 
Sov. 22 No. 777 - Reserving for school purposes one parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Cahicsan, municipality, 
of f'iondragon, Sanar. Xbjjkf No. 22, p. 4285. 

I( ov. 22 No. 778 - Reserving for school numoses, two parcels of the public 

/domain 

/situated in the barrio of Tinago, municipality of Viga. 
province of Ubay. l>QA».t P- 4206. 
*' ov ' 22 No. 779 - Reserving for school purposes one parcel of the public - 

domain situated in the barrio of Panubigan, municipality 
of Vallerhermoso, Negro s Oriental. Ibj^, p. 4287. 
Nov. 22 No. 780 - Reserving for school purposes one parcel of the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Nanungaran, municipality 
of Rizal, Cagayan. Xbidj., P- 4208. 
Nov. 22 No. 781 - Reserving for school purposes one parcel of. the public 

domain situated in the barrio of Palina, municipal distri 
of Pugo, La Union. IbJA.^. No. 23, p. 4427. ' ' 

Nov. 22 No. 782 - Reserving for school purposes, ten parcels of the public. 

domain in several barrios of. some municipal districts in 
the liountain Province. liiiL-t. pp. 4423-4431. 



III - 102 

- m - 

,41 .Sov. 26 No. 7«3 - ^serving for development, cultivation and for other 

purposes, a parcel of public domain in barrio Lasang, 
Tagus, Davao. Ibid._, pp. 4432-4433. 
i. 3 0 T. 26 N 0 . 784 - Reserving for development, cultivation and for other 

purposes, a parcel of the public domain in barrio 
Lafiang, Tagum, Uavao. Ibid.,, p. 4434. 
■' Nov.. 26 No. 785 - Reserving for development, cultivation and for other 

purposes, a parcel of the public domain in barrio of 
Lasang, TagUm, Davao. IbjjL., pp. 4435-4436. 
» Dec. 2 i'o. 786 - Calling for special election of municipal officials of 

the municipality of Dansalan, Lanao. Ibid.. T . p. 4437,. 
11 Dec. 3 K o. 787 - Reserving for school purposes, one parcel of 'public 

domain in barrio Parista, Lupao, iiueva Lcija. Ibjd f _ .- 
Ho. 24, p. 4587. 

i 

11 Dec. 10 No. 788 - Calling the "ational .'.ssenbly in special session. Ibid, 

No* -25, p. 4722. 

" Dec. 13 No. 78Q - Kstoblishing delight saving time for the Philippines 

during the present emergency. J^Aaj. P» 4722. 
." Dec. .16 lio. 790 - Postponing to- a later date the holding of special elec- 
tion of local officials in Dansalan, Lanao. Ibid_._,_ 

P. 4723. 



. . HI - .185 

- ^ 750 

: : : t r :\v,: 4? l-,-S; PJ] * cues . ; . 

; ; .-, (Selected) ' 

« 

ig35 Nov. 13 Inaugural Address as President of the Philippines. At the L*-'-, 
gislative building, -Manila. Quezon Hgssjggs, Vol. I, Sp. Ro- 
Ed.., JBVFF, p P , ii_i 7 . 

... " Nov. 16 Appointment of General Douglas Hac.lrthur as Military Adviser 

to the President of the Philippines. At the first meeting 
. the National Defense Council, Manila. QP, MR#37, TiTL. 

.: " Nov * 19 National Dofens£3 ^ogram of the .Commonwealth. Before th e >J.r S - 
Provisional Brigade, Philippine Constabulary, atothe- Harrxsc .. 
Parkj^ Manila. Ibj-jl. 

4 " Nov - 25 Gomprohensive Plan on National Defense. In Manila. QP, MRfe 

TNL. 

? " Dec - 9 Vi co-President OsraehVs 57th Birthday. In Manila. QP, MR#37. 
TN'L . 

5 " Dec. 21 The National Defense Act. In Manila. QP, MR#38, TNL. 

Doc. 21 Congratulatory Speech. At the Legislative building, Manila, ,:• 
2imSILSSiSRaSSlL» Vol. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, pp.* 111-114, 

8 1936 Jan. 11 Spain's Contribution to Filipino Culture and Development, t • 

the Tabacalera building, Manila. Quezon Mess ajej , Vol. 2, Pa."': 
I, JBVFF, pp. 25-31. 

9 " Jan. 14 The Role of the U.S. High Commissioner in Imerican-Philippincv 

Relationship. Banquet in honor of Frank Murphy, Malacafian, V.r~ 
nil a. Ibid . . pp. '28- 31. . „ 

10 " Feb. - 10 Accomplishments During the First Quarter of the Commonwealth • 

Government. For Movie-tone, Manila. i PP. 37- 38. 

11 . " Feb. 12 Address on National Defense. .It the U.p. Campus, Manila. Ibid,, ,. 

pp. 32-36. 

,12 Feb. 28 Public Service and Loyalty to the Government. In Ilagan, lapr 

bola. Ibid., pp. 52-65. Also in Rivera Collection, Vol. III. 
pp. 1291-1299. 

.13 . " Fob. 28 Greeting the People of San Pablo. In San Pablo, Isabela. ' .. 

Quezon Messages. Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, p. 66. 
.W ■" Feb. 28 Government Cooperation and National Defense. In Tuguegarao, . 

Cagayan. IbisL$ PP* 39-51. 

15 " Mar. 28 Honest and Efficient Judiciary. Upon acceptance of tho degree 

of Doctor of Laws, honoris c ausa , from the University of Sto. 
Tomas, Manila. .IbM- » PP- 69-74. 

16 " Mar. 30 Economic Planning and Progress. At the first meeting of the 

National Economic Council, Maine an an, Manila. Ibid.. ; ; pp. 75-77- 

17 " -tyr. .11 Effective Public Service. In Davao Penal Colony,- D a vao. JiiA..- 
• ' pp. 78-80. 



26 



, 8 193 6 ^r. 17 Good and Efficient Government. Conference of provincial and- 

municipal officials in C apiz . Ib^. , pp . 81 _ 89< 

, g « May 22 Changes in Government and Political Philosophy, it the Senior 

Teacher's Assembly, Teacher's. Camp, Baguio. gn^Jkm^^ ' 
Vol. 2, Part I, J3VFF, pp . 90-99.. 
; 0 . " May 26 The Rice Shortage and the Naric. In Manila. QP, TEL, ' 

Pi » June 4 Functioning of the Government. At the Rotary Club of Mnnilr, 

^uaauLJaaar^ v 0 i. 2 , Part 1, jbvff, PP . 100-110. 

r» » Juno 6 Development of Mindanao. In Camp Keithloy, Lanao. Ibj^. , pp, ■ 

111-118. 

21 June 16 Problems of Legislation and Maintenance of Peace and Order. ,* 

the first session of the National .Assembly. QP, HR#38, T!TL. 

24 " July 28 Friendship .and Goodwill. Before visiting students from Japan, 

Malncanan, Manila. JiuaaaaJSaaaagaa, Vol. 2, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 
115. ' 

25 " Mg. 19 Underfed Because Underpaid. In: Pedro de la Liana and F. 3. * 

Icasiano, itoaLiBL^.am<5haa. Manila: State Publishing Go. 
cl937, p. 128. 

lug. 19 Higher Wages for Filipino Laborers. Over Station KZRM, MamJ.p, 

jJaaaoaJfeaftflaea, Vol", z, Part i, jbvff, pp . 116-118. 

27 " /lug. 24 The Mac 'irthur s in Philippine History. At a dinner in honor of 

Field Marshal Douglas H a c Arthur, Malacafian, Manila. I bid . , ??- 
119-125. 

28 . 11 Sept. 4 Separation of Church and State. ,-Vt a dinner in honor, of .to-olt- . 

bishop Michael J. O'Dohorty, Malacanan, Manila. Ibid. , pp. 
126-128. 

29 " Sept. 18 Military Training and Leadership. Before the graduating class 

of the Reserve Officers Service School. QP, MR#38, Ti'TL. 

30 " Sept. ^C) Woman Suffrage. Upon signing the vonan's suffrage plebiscite 

bill, Malacanan, Manila. Quezon M essages . Vol. 2, Part I, 
JBVFF, pp. 137-139. 

31 " Oct. 12 England and the Philippines. \t a dinner in honor of Lord 

Rothermere, Malacaiian, Manila. 2&3&> , pp. 140-141. 
Nov. 15 Social Justice. On the first anniversary of the Commonwealth.;,* 
Malacanan, Manila. 2MA-t PP* 142-145. 

33 " Nov. 25- Woman Suffrage. Before the delegates to the ai:.th bionnial 

convention of the National Federation of Women's Clubs of the. 
Philippines, Malacahan, Manila. .Ibid.- , pp. 146-149. 

34 " Dec. 12 Sino-Philippine Friendship. *t a dinner in his honor in. Canton- 

, China. Ibj .d. r pp. 150-152. 
Dec. 13 Devotion to Duty. It Canton Military /.cadomy, Canton, China. 
IbM., pp. 153-154. ■' • 



35 11 



- 7*0 - 

,. ; 1937 . Jan. 18 National Defense. Before ROT C Units, University of the Phi- 
lippines. Ibid., Vol. 3, P a rt I, J3VFF, pp. 13-I6. 
n Jan. 20 Social Justice end National Defense. ,Vt a banket for nati,..i 
officials, Malac3i«n, Manila. Ibicl. , pp. 27-34. 

T. " J «»- 28 Sino-Philippine Relations. At the presentation of the Deo, 

ration of the Order of the Brilliant Jade, in Shanghai, Ch:,< 
Ibjjl., pp. 35-36. 

•• 9 " Fab * 1 ^storing -Friendly Relations Anong U. S. , J apan and ■ the P.. '.- 

lippines. At s banquet given in his honor by th,e Minister: 1". 
Foreign Affairs and K a dano' .'rita, Tokyo, Japan. QP, HR#5§ S r \ 
-,j »»• Feb. 2 Japanese-Philippine Relations. Before the Philippine Society 
of .Japan, Tokyo, Japan. .Quefeon Hosing, Vol. 3, Part I, JB". 
pp. 37-39. 

; 1 " Fob, 5 Filipino rtHitude Toward Japan. \t a banquet in his honor fx. 

Tokyo, Japan. Ibicl. , pp. 40-42. 
42 " Feb. 14 Greeting the "unerican People. At a banquet given by Fox Filas 

Los Angele3, California, fjjid . , p. 43. 
41 " Fob. 15 Achievements of Ken. -,t a banquet in Hollywood, California,. 

JJfeilL'j pp. 44-45. 

44 " Feb. 20 Status of the Cownonwualth and National Defense. At a lunch': 

given by the New York City Mayor's Coonittoe at the Waldorf- '; 
toria Hotel, How York. Ibid., pp. 46-54. 

45 " Feb. 27 ' Spanish Vsaoricpu "ar and- National Defense. *t a banquet giver 

by the Military Order of the Carabao, 'Milliard Hotel, Washing- 
ton, D.C. QnsiZSSL^SS&asSS'.i • v ol. 3, Part I, J3VFF, pp. 55-63-' 
11 so in Rivera Collection, Vol. Ill, pp. 1470-1476. 

ri< " Mar. 10 America's ichiovoments in the Philippines. Before the U.S. . 
House of Representatives. QP, MR#39, TifL. 

v7 " Apr. 3 Philippine. Constitution and Policies of the Commonwealth Go- 
vernment* At a luncheon given by the Foreign Policy Associate 
Hotel Astoria, Sew York City. Quezon Messages. Vol.. 3, Part X 
JBVFF, pp. 64-87. 

" Apr. 4 Women Suffrage and Philippine Independence. Radiocast from 
Washington, D.C. ,to the Philippines. Ibj^.v pp. 88-92. 
'>?■ .'" Apr. 17 Christian Creed of Filipinos. Upon acceptance of the degree e 
Doctor of Laws, h q n p.rj.s causa, from Georgetown University, • 
Washington, D.C. Ibid. , pp. 93-94. 

50 " Apr. 19 Philippine Economic Adjustments. At the first meeting of the 

Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine- American Jf fairs/ 
Washington, D.C. Ibid., pp. 95-93. 

51 " Aug. 16 Results of My Trip to the United States. In Tagalog at Mala-' ■ 

caftan, Manila. JMA- , PP» 99-100. , 



III - 186 



52 1937 .^g. 19 Speech on his 59th birthday, MaiacaHan, Manila. Ibid . . 

pp. 101-103. , 
w . ' Aug. 20 Purpose of My Trip to the United States and Relations with. ' 

the High Commissioner. -\t the popular banquet in his honor, 

Rizal Memorial Stadium, Henil.o. Ibid. , pp. 104-114. 
5 , " Sept, 20 Difficulties and Problems of the Coalition. ,',t the Convention 

of the Coalesced Parties, Rizal Memorial Stadium, Manila. 

Ibid ., pp. 121-120. 

55 " Sept. 29 l'ho Civil Service Law. it a conference with a delegation of 

the Young Philippines, Malac.m'ian, Manila. QP, P;/40, TIIL. 

56 " °<3t. 2 Principles of Law and Justice. Yt the University of Sto. 

Tomas, Manila. Quezon HasRyfis, Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 
139-152. 

57 " Oct.- 11 The' Shortening of the Period for the Granting of Philippine 

Independence. Before the delegates to the International 
Eucharistic Congress, Manila. QP, TIIL. 

58 " Oct. 30 Philippine ,/rny ir Corps. At the graduation, exercises of the 

Filipino ,'dr Pilots, Camp Murphy, Rizal. Quezon jfessage s ,, V 0 1 . 

3, '?wt I, JBVFF, . pp. 155-155. 
.59 " Nov. 7 Separation of Powers, Franco Hymn, and the National Language. 

"t the San Juan de Letran llumni Banquet. Ibid . f pp.- 156-171. 
60 " Nov. ' 11 On Achieving the Highest Standard of Education, 't a conference 

with the U.p. Board of Regents, Maine an an, Manila. QP, HR#40, 

TNL. . 

51 11 Nov. 15 Abolition of the Cedilla Tax and National Defense. In Tagaloe 
on the second anniversary .of the Commonwealth at the Lunota, 
Manila. Quezon Ifcaamroa. Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 175-177. 

62 " Nov. 15 The Bill 'bolishing the Codula Tax. Before members of the 

National Assembly, at Hal ac an an, Manila. IbM. , p. 172. 

6 3 ■ " Dec. 30 The Filipino .National Language. Radiocast from Malacafian on 

Rizal Day. Ibid., pp. 178-183. 
W 1938 Jan. 15 State of the Nation address at the National \ssembly. QP,. MR# - 
41, TNL. 

6 5 ' " Fob. 14 Government Policies and Relation Between the National Govern- 

ment and the Provinces. Before provincial governors and city 
mayors at Hal ac ah an, Manila. .Quezon Messages., Vol. 4, Part. I, 
JBVFF,. pp. 3-16. 

66 " Feb. 17 Social Justice for the Laborers. \t a luncheon for labor rep- ' 

resentatives, Malacafian. Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, pp. 1698- 
1699. 

67 " Feb. 19 ■ The Excise Tax --on Coconut Oil, National Language, , and Social 

' Jus-W.ee. Before coconut planters and municipal mayors at Ma- 
lacafian, 'Manila. Q^QJL2k^M^> Vol « 4 > Part JBVFF ' pp ' 2f: 
38. 



- m - 



III - 137 



68 1938 Feb ' 22 Responsibility of Provincial Treasurers. .At a luncheon for 

provincial treasurers, MalaflnHan, Manila* Quezon- Mb HSBg0 fl. 
Vol. 4, Fart I, J3VFF, pp . 39.49, ^ lso in Rivera Collection, 
Vol. IV, P . 1707. 

69 >' Feb. 23 Enforcement of Eight-Hour Labor Law, Strikes, and Union Among 

Laborers. At a luncheon fpr labor representatives, Hal ac ail nn, 
Manila. Quezon Messages, Vol. 4, Part I, JBVPF, pp. 50-57. 

70 " rI ar. . 31 T ho Proposed Re-establishment of the Bicameral Legislature; 

At the graduation exercises of the Visayan Institute, Cebu 
City. QP, MR#41, T1TL. 
rji if May 22 My Friendship with General James G. Harbord. At a banquet for- 
General Harbord, Malacanan. Manila. Quezon Mes sages , Vol. 4, 
Part I, J3VFF, pp. 58-62* 

72 " June 1 Maintenance of Peace and Order in Tarlac and Pampanga. At a 

conference in 3 an Fernando, Pampanga. UaA., pp. 63-66. 

73 " June 8 Social Justice, Labor Unions and Public 'forks. At the public 

plaza of Virac, Catanduanes. I_hjL4> , pp* 67-71. • ' 

74 " June 10 'New Policy on Education, Public works, and Glean and Honest 

Government. At a public meeting in Tacloban, Leyte. Ibid,. , pp.- 
72-80. 

75 " June 10 Non-Partisanship in the Government and Government Policies. 

At a' public meeting in Catbalogan, Samar. Ibid. , pp. 81-87. 

76 " June 12 The Hemp Industry and Government Policies. At the public 

plaza of Maasin, Leyte. Ibid.., pp. 88-95. 

77 " June 13 Reelection of 'issemblymen, Social Justice, and Labor Organi- 

zation. Vt the public plaza of Ormoc, Leyte. Ibjd . . pp. 96- 
103. 

78 " June 14 The Provincial Capitol of Cebu, Religious Instructionc and 

Social Justice. At the inauguration of the provincial capitol 
of Cebu, Cebu City. Ibid., pp. 104-114. 

79 " July 17 My Veto of the 3ill on Religious Instruction. Delivered upon 

the President's arrival from a trip to Japan, New Luneta, . . 
Manila. Ibid., pp. 115-120. 

80 " July 29 Government Policies Concerning Business. Vt the inauguration 

of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce building,. Manila. Ujiii., 
pp. 121-125. 

01 " Aug. 13 Filipino Gratitude to the United States. Delivered at the 
Luneta on Occupation Day. Ibid., PP- 126-132. 

82 " Aug. 13 Statesmanship of U.S. High Commissioner Paul V. Mc'Nutt. At a 

banquet for Mr. " . - . and Mrs. McNutt at Malacafian, Manil 
Ibid . . pp. 133-136. 

83 ' " Aug. -14 Occupation Day and*- toeri can-Filipino Relations. Broadcast 

over station 'KZRK, Manila. Ibid.., pp. 137-143. 



Ill - 188' 

- m - 

py. 1938 Aug. 18 My Experience as a Tubercular. At the dedication ceremonies 
of the Quezon Institute, Sta. Mesa, Manila. Ibid ., pp. 144- 
145. 

35 " Aug. 19 Policies and Achievements of the Government and Regeneration 

of the Filipino. Before the faculties and student bodies of 
public and private schools, colleges, and universities, at 
the Rizal Memorial Field. Ibid.. , pp. 146-157. 

36 11 Aug. - 22 National Sugar Board and the Sugar Industry, -it the o atht akin;; 

of the members of the National Sugar 3oard, Malacanan, Manila. 
Ibid. , pp. 158-160. 

3^ " Aug. 22 Work of the National Economic Council. Bo fore the mombors of 

the NEC, Halacaiiau, Manila. Ibj,d,. f pp. 161-163. 

gg " . ,'iug. 25 Building the Character of the Youth, "t the Zanboanga Normal 

School, Zamboanga City. Ibi.4.. , pp. 164-170. 

89 " Aug. 25 Zamboanga Mayorship, •'issorabljnaan Alano 1 s Reelection, and 

Public Works in Mindanao. At a public meeting at Plaza Pershing, 
* Zamboanga City. Ibid,. , pp. 171-177. 

90 " Aug. 26 T aX on Coconut Trees, Oil Uxcise Tax, and Politics in the:. ■■. 

Government. At a public meeting in Cagayan, Oriental Misamis. 
Ibid. . pp. 178-184. 

91 " '.ug. 27 Building the Character of the Children. At the Cagayan High' 

School, Cagayan, Oriental Misamis. Ibjd. . pp. 185-193. 

92 " 'lug. 28 Development of Lanao. At the provincial building at C a mp 

Keithley, Dansalan, Lanao. Ibid., pp. 194-197. ■ 
9? " '*ug. 30 Appointment of Governor Ombra and Government f%>licies for Sulu. 

At the provincial building in Jolo, Sulu. Ibid., pp. 198-202. 

94 " Sept. 8 Accomplishments of Vice President Sergio Osinena. At the banquet 

for Osmeha on his 60 th birthday, Malacanan, Manila. Ibid.. , 
pp. 203-208. - 

95 " Sept. 20 Excise Tax on Coconut Oil, the Coconut Industry, and the Rice 

Situation. At the Tayabas provincial capitol, Lucena,Tayabas. 
ibici., pp. 209-217. 
% " Sept. 26 Amelioration of the Lot of the Workingmen. Read at the ce- 
lebration of the Collective Labor Movement in Angeles, Prtfr- 

panga. Ibid . . pp. 218-219. 

97 » Sept. 27 Secretaries Elpidio Quirino and Jose Yulo. At a luncheon given 

in their honor, Malacanan, Manila. Lbid.. , pp. 220-223. 

98 " Oct. 17 Improvement of the Living Conditions of Laborers. At the 

inauguration of the government tenement houses, at Barrio 
. Vitas, Tondo, Manila. Ibid. , pp. 224-228. 

99 " Oct. 19 Government Polipy, Progress of Occidental Negros, and the 

Sugar Industry. At the inauguration of the City of Bacolod, 
Occidental Negros. Ibid., pp. 229-236- 



10L 

102 

103 



nr.- .111-189 

. - 1t6 - 

:0 0 193B 0ct « 29 Coconut Industry and Elections, At the. inauguration of the 

municipal building of Candelariai Tayabas* IblsU* PPi 237- 
240» 

Oct. 31 B oy Scout Training. Radio broadcast from Malacanan, Manila. 
Ibid.., pp. 241-243. 
i Nov. 3 Government Policy, Electoral Campaigns, and Reelection of 

Assemblymen for Oriental Ncgros. At the public plaza in Du- 
magucte, Oriental Negro 3 4 Ibid. , pp. 244-250. 
1 Nov.. 26 Duties of the Cabinet and Ains of the Administration. Before 
the members of the new cabinet, Malacafi'an, Manila. Ibid . . . 
pp. 251-253. 

104 1939' Jf3iu 15 New Policy in Handling Provincial Affairs. At the luncheon 

for provincial governors at Malacanan, Manila, ibid.., Vol. 5, 
Part I, J3VPP, pp. 3-7. 

105 ■ " Jan. 31 Respect for Property Rights and Government Plans for Buena- 

vista Estate. At a public meeting in 3arrio Cruz-Na-Daan, 
San Rafael, Bulacan. Ibicl. , pp. 8-17. 

106 " Feb. 12 Funds for Athletics in the Philippines. At the inauguration 

of the annual interscholastic meet, Quezon Stadium and 
Athletic Field, Bat,angas. ibid., pp. 18-19 . . 

107 " Feb. 14 Labor Conflicts, Social Justice, and the Amelioration of the 

Laboring Class. At a mass gathering of laborers and tenants 
in San Fernando, Pampanga. Ibid. , pp. 20-32. 
108 ' " Feb. 18 Solution of Problems Confronting the Hemp and Coconut In- ' 

dustries. Read at the convention of coconut- and nemp pro- 
ducers in Manila. JLbid. , pp. 33-35. 

109 " Feb. 22 Government Add to Coconut and Hemp Industries, the Coconut 

Oil Excise Tax, .and Payment of Land and Income Taxes. At the 
joint convention of coconut and abaca producers, Philippine 
Chamber of Commerce building, Manila, ibid.., pp. 36-45. 

110 . "• Feb. 24 Lease of, and Pinna on, the Bucnavist a Estate. Before the 

tenants of the Buenavista Estate in San Ildefonso, Bulacan. 
IM4., pp. 46-52. 

HI " Mar. 2 Government Recognition of Scientific Research in the Philip- 
pines. At the breakfast for scientists^ the Philippines, 
Malacanan, Manila, ibid., pp. 53-54. 

■112 » 1^. n Government Policy Regarding Industrial and Agrarian Conflicts. 

Radio broadcast from Malacanan, Manila. Ikid.. , pp. 55-60. 

113 " Mar. 30 . .Ideal Partnership of Landowners and Tenants. At a gathering 

of his own tenants in Ar ay at, Fampanga. Ibid., PP- 61-63. 

H4 » Apr. 4 National Policies, Nationalism, and Economic Security. 

At the 29th oommencenent exercises of the University of the 
' Philippines, Manila. Ifei.4., PP. 64-74. 



III - 1 90 

- im _ 



115 1939 Apr. 23 Cooperation Between the President and the -National Assembly. 

/.t the public P l aza of Bangued, Abra. IbM. , .pp.' 75-79. 

u6 Apr. 26 Government Aid to Ilocos Uorto. At the public plaza in L a oag, 

Ilocos Norte. IbM., pp. 80-85. 4 
, u7 Apr. 30 ^nancy Relations Between Landlords and Tenants. Before the ' 

landowners of .Cabanatuan, Nueva Eci.ja. Ibid . f pp. '86-97. 

118 " Apr. 30 Improvement .of the Living Condition s of ' Farmers and Te- 
nancy Relations. Before a gathering of farm tenants in ' 
bahatuan, Nueva Eci.ia. Ibid ., pp. 98-107. 

219 '" May 1 Cooperation with the Secretary 'of Labor, Strikes, and the ' ' 

True Value of Honey. At the induction of Jose Avelino as 
Secretary of Labor, Halaca'ian, Manila. Ibjj. , pp. 108-112 

120 " . May 2 The Medical Profession and Public Health Activities in the 

Philippines. At the annual convention of the Philippine 
. Islands Medical Association, Baguio City. Ibid .-, pp. 113-. " 

118. 

■s. 

121 " May 8 Military Training Camps as Fields of Instruction for De- 

mocracy. Before the officers, ROTO cadets and trainees of the 
Philippine Army at Camp Murphy, Rizal. Ibid . f pp. 119-120.. 

122 " May 17 Quality of Officers of the Philippine /army. At the oath- 

taking of Brig. Sen. Vicente Lin as deputy chief of staff, 
Philippine -'a-ny, at Hal ac ah an.. IbM. , pp. 121-124. 

123 " May 22 Cooperation Between the Chief Executive and the National 

Assembly, Coconut Oil Excise Tax, and Constitutional .Amend- 
ments. At the farewell banquet for Majority Floor Leader 
Quintin Parades, Mai ac ah an Park, Manila. Ibid, t pp. -125-135. 

124 " May 29 Life and Honor of a Soldier. At the graduation exercises of 

the ROSS, Philippine Army, at Camp Dau, Pampanga. Ibid . f 
p. 136. 

125 "• June . 5 Labor Unity in the Philippines. On the occasion of the Labor 

ft 

Unity Parade at the Luneta, Manila. IbM. » pp. 137-140. 

126 11 June 

9 Significance of Rice Planting Day. At the celebration of the 
first rice planting day in the Philippines, at the Buenaviste 
Estate, San Ildefonso, Bulacan. IbM. t PP- 141-146.- 
W- " July 16 Amelioration of the Laboring Class. At a public rally in Car- 

banatuan. iMd. , pp. 147-157. ^ 
July 23 Effect of the Excise Tax on Coconut Oil on the People of 

T ay abas. At the inauguration of the Quezon National Park in 
Atimonan, Tayabas. Ibicl.r PP. 158-163. 
Aug. 19 Democracy and Political Parties. Radio broadcast on his 61 st 
birthday, .at Malacafian. Ibid. , pp. 173-176. • 



128 



129 



i» ' . iii - 191 

1/0 1939. ^. 20 Partnership, National Unity, and Cooperation with the Go- 
vernment. At the convention of the Palihnn ng Bayan at the ' 
■ Grand Opera House, Manila. Ibid., pp. 177-183. 

131 « Oct. 7 Government Aid to Intori si and Shipping. Broadcast from the " 

IOaSju DQIL JiU ufeT.. Ibid.., pp. 184-186. 

132 " 0ct - 11 Significance of the Plebiscite on . Proposed Changes in th- 

Tydings-McUuffie Law. Broadcast from Mallear! an, Manila. Ibi<* . 
pp, 187-190, Also in QP, Ml"^43, TIIL. 
•133 " 0ct * 19 Presidency of the University of the' Philippines. At tho in- 
duction of Dr. Bionvenido M. Gonzales as President of the 
University of tho Philippines, Manila. Ibjd.. f pp-. 191-193. 
• " • Also in QP, MR#43, TNL. 

1>1 11 Oct. 21 Hon. Francis B. Sayru, tho Philippines and its People. Upon • 
- < arrival of the new U.S. High Commissioner, New Luneta, Manilr 

Xhiil., pp. 194-195. Also in QP, MR#43, TNL. 

155 " Oct. 28 Woman Suffrage, Civil Rights and Social Responsibilities of 

Women. At the Villamor Hall, Manila. Ibid., pp. 196-201. 
Also inQP, IiR-,/43, T1JL. 

I'j6 " Oct. 31 Essential Qualities of Boy Scouts. Radio broadcast on the 

third anniversa v of the law creating the Boy Scouts of the 
Philippines, at Malacahan, Manila. Ibid* > PP« 202-204. Also 
in QP, MR#43, TilL. 

137 " Nov. 1 Creation of Department of National Defense. At the induction 

of Secretary of National Defense Teofilo Sison, at Malacahan, 
Manila. Ibid., pp. 205-207. 

138 " Nov. 4 National Abaca and Other Fiber 3 Corporation and the Hemp In- 

dustry. At the induction of Pedro Sabido as manager of the 
Abaca and Other Fiber Corporation, at Malacahan, Manila. 
Ibid.., PP. 208-210. • - 

139 " Nov. 15 Accomplishments of the Commonwealth and Government Aid to . 

Philippine Industries and Business. At the celebration of 
the 4th anniversary of the Commonwealth, at the New Luneta, 

Manila. Tbj&. , PP- 211-216. 

140 " Dec- 9 Speech at the ■ CLU-sponsored inter-university, oratorical con- 

test, Ateneo auditorium. Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, p. 2191. 

141 " Dec. 10 Speech before division superintendents of schools, Malacahan 

. Park. Ibid.., p. 2197. , „ 

142 1940 Jan. 15 Speech on the occasion of the oath-taking of/Eulogio Rod- 

riguez of Manila, at Malacahan. QP, MR#43, TNL. 

143 '» June 12 Renew Our Faith in Freedom and Democracy. At the 42nd an- 

niversary celebration of tho Declaration of Independence -in 
Kawit, c'avite. QP, MR#44, TNL. 



r T r, ' III - 192,. ' 

•44 1940 J uly 15 Sp«ech beforo the National Assembly seeking authority to 

carry out a national policy in times of emorgency. QP, MR#44, 
TNL. 

^ 11 July 16 Speech on the essence of democracy at the University of the 
Philippines. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. '2229. 
» July 24 Developing the Public Domain Through the Establishment of 

Agricultural Settlements. At the Central Luzon Agricultural 
School, Munoz, Nueva Sci.ja. QP f HR//44, Ti-iL. , .... 

y\rj h .Aug. 7 1' Partyless Government in a Democracy, it the open forum of 
the U.P. /lumni Association. Rivera Collection, Vol.. V, p.. 
2238. . 

148 " Aug. 19 Social Justice. At a radio program commemorating his 62nd-. 

birthday, Malacahan, Manila. QP, MR#44, TEL. 

149 • " Aug. 23 Extemporaneos speech at the IIEP.* Day celebration, Rizal Memo- 

rial Stadium. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2269-2272. 
mo " Sept. 2 Speech at the inauguration of the Sayre Road linking Cot a- . . 
! bato and Bukidnon. QP, KRsf44 p TNL. 

151 " Sept. 4 Speech on local conditions in Cagayan, Mi sands- Oriental. JLkid.. 

152 " Sept. 24 Speech on economic development plan for the province, in Ham-- 

bajao, Camiguin Island. Ibid.. 
Yfj ' " Oct. 2 Speech on the coming election and party policies,, in Bacolod 
City, Negros Occidental. Ibiil* 

154 " ' Oct.- 19 Speech on tty; coming election at the public plaza of Legaspi, 

Ubay. I_b_id. ' . * 

155 " Oct. 19 Speech on the coming election in Sorsogon, Albay. Ibid.. 

156 " Oct. 20 Speech on local conditions, the public plaza of Naga, Ca_ 

marines Sur. Ibi&. . . 
.157 " Nov. 15 Rededd cation to the Cause of Democracy. .At the laying of the-- 

cornerstone of the national capital, in Quezon City. BoA* . 

158 1941 Jan. 31 Speech on the amendments to the Constitution. At the last 

regular session of the Second National Assembly. IbjJ.. 

159 " June 19 Speech pledging Filipino loyalty to the United States. At the 

Loyalty Day celebration in Manila. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, 

pp. 2302-2303. uso in u.s. c^ngr^saijai^ta^v 701 ' 87 ' 

Part 13, PP- A- 3652-53. 

160 » June 19 Speech on the Roosevelt proclamation calling for general mo- 

bilization, .and pledging Philippine loyalty to .taerica. QP, 
MR//45, TNL. 

161 » Nov. 15 Address on the sixth .anniversary of the Commonwealth, at th» 

Luneta. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2329-2332. 

162 - Nov. 17 Radio speech beamed to Filipinos residing in Hawaii. QP, MR#45, 

TNL. 



ILV : - III - 193' '• 

l63 " 194I Nov. 28 Speech at the National Heroes Day celebration, University 

of the Philippines. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2341- 
2342.. Ilso in QP, MR#45, TNL. 

164 " Dec - 50 Second inaugural address delivered et Corrogidor. Rivera 

Collection, Vol. V, p ; 2%1. ' " 

165 1942 May 19 Speech on the Latin taorican contribution to the war effort. 

in New York City. QP, HR#45, TNL . 

166 " June 4 s P occh in thc United States Senate. Rivera Collection, Vol. V 

pp. 2388-2389. 

167 " Aug' 9 Speech during the intermission of the CBS Sumner Symphony" 

New York City. Ibid. 

168 " Nov.- 15 Speech at the 7th Commonwealth Day celebration, Washington,' 

D.C. op, MR#45, TNL. 

169 " Doc. 30 Jose Rizal and the Sun of Liberty. Broadcast from Washington- 

D. C. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2418. 

170 1943 Jan. 16 Speech on the Japanese occupation of the Philippines, before 

^g 0 Mg^and Bar Association, Baltimore, Maryland.' IbjjL. , pp. 

171 " Feb. 20 Report to the Filipino People. Broadcast to the Philippines 

from Washington, D. C. Ibid. , pp. 2436-2439. 
17? " Feb. 27 Speech on the war in the Philippines, at tho 13th Opera Vic- 
tory Rally of the Metropolitan Opera broadcast from New York- 

175 " 'pr. ' 9 Speech on t!ie role of the Philippinv.>s in the United Nations. 

In Washington, D. G. rbj_d.. 

174 " Nov. 16 Speech- on the 8th anniversary of the Commonwealth, included 

v 

in the U. S. Congressional Rcj.cor_d, Vol. 89, App. Part 12, pp. 
A49O7-08, by request of Representative John D. Dingell of 
Michigan. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2470-2471* 

175 " Nov. 16 The Role of tho Philippines in the World We Want. Delivered 

in behalf of President Quezon by Dr. Carlos P. Romulo, sec- 
retary of information and public relations in tho war cabinet 
of the Commonwealth, at the Herald Tribune Forum, Hotel 
Waldorf- Astoria, Now York City. QP, MR#46,^TNL. 

176 1944 Juno 14 Radio spoech beamed to the Philippines from Washington, D.. C. 

This was Quezon's la3t public utterance before his death at 

Saranac Lake, New York, 48 days later, August 1, 1944. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. "2505. 



"it"-' 



. -) 

QUEZON IN BOOKS 

Abaya, Hernando J. Betrayal in the Philippine; Now York: A. A. Wyn/ 1946.* Re- 
printed by Malaya Books, Inc., Quezon City, 1970. 

_____ > ' ^he Untold Philippine Stor £_ Quezon City: Malaya Books, Inc., 

1967. 

Abelardo, Pedro E. American Tariff Policy Toward the Philippi nes. 1898-194 6. 
AgoncillO, Teodoro A. The ?ateful Years: Jap^'g fti^ gnture in the Philippine , 

•1941-1945. 2 vols. Quezon City: R. P. Garcia Publishing Company, 1965. 
_____ • Filipino Nationalism, 1_____19_IQ_,. Quezon City: R. P. Garcia ' 

Publishing Co., 1974. 
Agoncillo, Teodoro A. and Guerrero, Milagros C. History of the Filipino Peop le. 

Quezon City: Malaya Books, Inc., 1970. 
Agpalo, Remigio E. "The Political Process and Nationalization Of the Retail 

Trade in the Philippines." (Ph.D. dissertation, Indiana University, 1958. In: 

Guide to Doctoral Dissertation on Microfilm, 1937-1968, The National Library. . 

Hereinafter to be referred to as Ph.D. . Research Guide, TNL. ) 
Aguinaldo, J^milio and Pacis, Vicente Albano. A Second Look at America. New York: 

Speller, 1958. 

Alip, Eufronio M. Philippine-Japanese Relations. Historical, Political. Social 
and Econoaic. Manila: Alip & Sons, Inc., 1959. 

■ Political and Cultural History of the Philippines. 2 vols. 

Manila: Alip & Sons, Inc., 1967. 
. The Philippine Presidents (from Aguinaldo to Marcos). Their 

Lives and Messages. .Manila: Alip St Sons, Inc., 1973. 
Alzona, Encarnacion. Galicano Apacible: Profile of a Patriot. Manila: The Heirs 

of Galicano Apacible, 1970. 
Aquino, Ramon C. A Chance to Die. Biography of. Jose Abad Santos. Quezxm City: 

Alemar-Phoenix Publishing House, 1967. 
Apostol, Jose M. The Economic Policy of the Philippine Government: Ownership 

and Operation of Business. Manila: University of the Philippines, 1927. 
itlas of P hilippine Statistics. Manila: Bureau of Printing, 1939. 
Baden, Anne L. Philippine Islands. With Sp ecial R eference to the Qu estion of . 

Independent, Washington: Library of Congress, 1931 . 
Baliga, , Bantval Mohandas. "The American Approach to Imperialism in Southeast 

Asia. The Attitude of the United States Government in the Philippines, Indo- 

°hina, and Indonesia, 1945-1948." (Ph.D. dissertation, Southern Illinois 

University, 196 1 . In: Ph.D. Research Guide, TNL.) 
Barrows, David P. A Decade of American Government in the Philippines. World 

Book: 1914. 

Benitez, Conrado. History of th_ Philippines. Boston and New York: Ginn and 
Company, 1954. 



:■'>■'■' in - 195 

Bernstein, David. The Philippine S-fcm-y. New York: 1946. 

Blount, J- H. American Occupatio n of th e Philinp -in P 3 , 1898-1912. New York: 
Putnam's, 1912. 

Blue_BooK..P n the ^smSl£^orisLJL^^mmmsl^. of the ?hilit)T>inn H . Manilas . 

Bureau of Printing, 1935. 
Borg, Dorothy* The United States and t.Vip t?,-. i;yt-m Tri ^is of HTS-iffi^ ■• 

Canbridgei Harvard University Press, 1964* 
Brazil, "Harold Edmund. "The Conflict of Political and Economic Pressures in 

Philippine Economic Development." (Ph.D. dissertation, Ohio State University, 

1961. In:Ph.D. Research Guide. TNL. ) 
Buenafe, Manuel B. Wartime Philippines.. Manila: Philippine Education Foundation.. 

1950. 

Caballero, I. P. and Concepcion, M. de Gracia. Quezon: The Story of a Nation and 
Its Foremost Statesman. Manila: International Publishers, 1935. 

.Cannon, M. Hamlin. Levte: The Return t o the Philippines. Washington: Off ice. of 
the Chief of Military History, 1954. 

Census of the Philippines for 1918 and 1939. 

Cerezo, Saturnino Martin. El Sitio de Baler. Guadalajara: 1904. 
Clarino, Jose V. General Aguinaldo and Philippine Politics. 

Constantino, Renato. The Making of a Filipino . A Story of Philippine Colonial 

Politics. Quezon City: Malaya Books, Inc., 1969. 
. ,. s . The Philippines: A Past Revisited. Quezon City: Tala Publis^-'" 

Services, 1975. 

Corpuz, Onofre D. The Bureaucracy in the Philippines. Quezon City: University of 

the Philippines, 1957. 

. The Philippines. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1970. 

Costa, Horacio de la, S.J. The Background of Nationalism and Other Essays. 

Manila: Solidaridad Publishing House, 1965. 
Curry, Roy Watson'. Wopdrow Wilson and Far' Eastern Policy. New York: 1968. 
Duran, Pio. Philippine Independence and the Far Eastern Question. Manila: 

Community Publishers, 1935. 
%gan, Fred; Hester, Evett; and Ginsburg, Norton, eds. Area Hand book on the : 

Ph ilippines. Chicago: Human Relations Area Files, 1956. 
%gan, Fred and Hester, Evett D. University of Chicago Philippine Studies Progr?-- 

Selected Bibliography of the Philippines: Topically A rranged- and' Annotated, 

ilew Haven; Human Relations Area Files, 1956. 
Ilect i on nf Resident Commissioners to the United States. ■ Manila: Bureau of 

Printing, 191 1 . „ ' 

Person, Rupert. Frnnt Emp-i re to Nation, the Rise to Self -Assertion of Asian and_ 
.African P^i^, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, I960. 
Mpent F-il-ip-ir^q, Manila: National i\ atprical Commission, 1969. 
-vangeUsta, Buenaventura. ___j___3__. of the World. Manila: The Author, 1957. 



Ill - 196 

~ 775 ~ 



Ejre , j r> , James K. "The Philippines, tho Powers, and the Spanish-American War: 
A Study of Foreign Policies." (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan, 1940, 
In: Ph.D. Research Guide, TNL . ) 

. lao^lMa^rjotflict, Cambersburg: The Craft Pre, 



3SS 

1950. 

Fernandez, Alejandro K. "International Lav; in Philippine Relations, 1898-1946." 

(Ph.D. dissertation, Duke University, 1966. In: Ph.D. Research Guide, TNL.) 
F^nandoz, Laandro K. A Brief History of the v^ V T ^ n Boston and New Y or k: 

Sinn and Company, 1951 . 
.^rrel, Robert H. American Diplomacy in the Great D np ™ ag <„„ New Haven: Yale 

University Press, 1957. , . 

Forbes, William Cameron. The Philippjj^Jaiandg^ 2 vols. Cambridge: Harvard 

University Press, 1945. ■ ■ 

First Osoena-Roxas Mission. Progeadl ngs of the First Inrlpp.n d ence Congress. 
Manila: 1930. 

Ford, A. H. The Philippine Republic. 1934. - •' 

Friend, Theodore. Between Two Empires, The_OrdgaI.. of the Philippines. 1929-^ 6. 

Kanila: Solidaridad Publishing House, 1969. 
Francisco, Jr., Gregorio Adriano. "Higher Civil Servants in the Philippines: A 

Study of the Backgrounds, Career Patterns and Attitudes of Filipino Higher 

Officials." (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Minnesota, 1959. In: Ph. D. 

Research Guide, TNL.) 
Furnival, J. 3. Colonial Policy ami Practice^ Cambridge University Press, 1948; 

American ed., New Y ork University Press, 1956. 5 
Gagelonia, Pedro A. President s All. Rizal: Agteferdan Book, 1967. 
Galang, Zoilo H. Manuel L. Quezon. 1949. 

— • Encyclopedia of the Philippines. 10 vols. Manila: Philippine. 

Education Company, 1936. 3rd ed., Manila: E. Floro, 1950-1958. 
Gallego, Manuel V. The Price of Philipp ine Independence Under the Tvdings-Mc- 

jjuffie Act. Kanila: Barristers' Book Co., Inc. 1939. 
Gates, John Morgan. "An Experiment in Benevolent Pacification: The U.S. Army in 

the ihilippines, 1898-1902." (Ph.D. dissertation, Duke University, 1967. In: 

Ph.D. Research Guide, TNL. ) 
Goner, Teodoro E. and Others. Manuel L. Quezon. Quezon City: 1952. 
Gootel, Elinor. Eaglo of the Philippines: Ma nuel L . Quezon. New York: 

J..Messner, cl970. 

Green, Allan Arthur. "Economic Aspects of the Philippine Question." (Ph.D. 

dissertation, Yale University, 1939. In: Ph.D. Research Guide, TNL.). 
Griawald, A. Whitney. ^e_Jlaj^E^sJbern 1 P olicy of the United States . New York: 

Harcourt Brace, 1938. 
Tosaholtz, Jean. Politics in the Philippines. Boston: Little 3rown, 1964. 
'"Wilder, Garel A. and Livezey, William E. The Philipp ines an d the United States, ., 

Aonaan, Okla: Oklahoma University Press, 1951. 



- 77* - 



III - 1 97 



Guevara, Guillormo B. Across Four Gc-nr.v^.i^ a Manila: 1973. 

Gunther, John. Inside Asia, New York: 1939. 

* The Riddle ot^sk£^LJmsIb^S ^a. and thc Fflr BflR ^ 

New York: Harper & Bros., 1950. 

Guauan, Raul P. do. "The Fornulation and Implementation of the Philippine Inde- 
pendence Policy of the United States, 1929-1946. (Ph.D. dissertation, Florid;. 
State University, 1957. In: Ph.D. Research Guide, TWL.) 

Gvekoh, Solomon Hilario. ltarj_g^Baler.. Manila: Apo B 00 k, cl939. 

._ • Manuel Luis Q ue zon, ,. His Life and Cav***: Manila: University 

Pub., cl948. 

.. • Mrora (Aragon) Quezon. 1 888-1949. Manila: Fortune Publisher.-.: . 

1950. 

Hagedorn, Hermann. Leonar d Wood . 2 vols. Now York: 1931 

Hammond, Lyman P. RepoxL-QjlJiSon^ic_C^ 0 f the Philippines. Manila: 

bureau of Printing, 1928. 
Harrison, Francis Burton. Corne rstone of Philipp ine Independence. Hew York: 192": 
Eartendorp, A. V. H. A History of Industry and TradP nf tt P Ph-M-i p-p-jr^ . M RTr j i „ ■• 

American Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines, 1958. 
Hay, Stephen N. , and Case, Margaret K. Southeast Asian Histo ry: A Bibliogra phic 

Guide,. New York: Praeger, 1962. 
■layden',' Joseph Ralston. Tjio JPhiliripin os - A Study in National Development. - 

Now York: Macmillan & Co., 1942. 
Hawes," Harry. Philippine Uncertainty. New York: Century, 1932. 
Henderson,'" James A. Rejjublic of the Philippin es Digest. Manila: Lawyer's 

Cooperative Publishing Co., 1961 . 
Hester, E. D. "Outline of Our Recent Political and Trade Relations with the . 

Philippine Commonwealth," Annals of the Ameri can Academy of Political and So cial 

f lcience. (l943) 

Hoeksema, Renze L. "Communists in the Philippines. A Historical and Analytical 
Study of Communism and the Communist Party in the Philippines, and its Relati^- 
to Communist Movements Abroad." Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Harvard 
University, 1956. 

Hoover, Herbert, Memoirs. 3 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1951. 

Horn, Florence. Orphans of _tho Pacific:, The Phil ippines. New York: Reynal and 
Hitchcock, 1941. . 

Houston, Jr., Charles Orville. "The Philippine Commonwealth to Republic; An 

Experiment in Applied Politics." (Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia' .University, 

1952. In: Ph.D. Research Guide, TBL.) 
Hoyt, Frederich Gilman. "The Wood-Forbes Mission to the Philippines, 1921." 

( p h.D. dissertation, Claremont Graduate School, 1963- In: Ph.D. Research GuidV- 

Tj.'L.) . 
Hunt, Frazier. The Untold Story of D ouglas MacArthu r^. New York: Deven-Adair r . 195- 



Ill - 198 

- 775 - 

Jenkins, Shirley, £tt9EiaaaJfiMS^^ 

Stanford University Press, 1954. 
jonos, r. 0. Ja^an^exiirdeO 

sity Press, 1954. 

Jurika, Jr., Stephen. "The Political Geography of the Philippines." (Ph-.D. dis- 
sertation, Stanford University, 1962. In-: Ph.D. Research Guide, TNL.) 

Ihlaw, Maximo M. The Case for th e Philir.jjjT^ h ow Y or k: 1916'. 

;, a law, Pura Villanueva (Mrs. Teodoro). Osaena. - From H mwi)B + 0 President . 
Manila: The Author, 1946. 

5{ ,,law, Teodoro M. ridj^^^dosu Trans, from the Spanish by Maria Kal.- 
Katigbak. Manila: Teodoro M. Kalaw Society, Inc.", 1965. 

liirk, Grayson V. Philippine , Independenc e. . Hew York: Parrer & Rinehart, 1936. 

'.[atigbalc, Maria Kalaw. Few There Wore (Lik e My Fath er). Manila: 1974. 

Lande, Carl H. Lg J ad^r£ JU jj\aja&p^^ The Structu re of Philippine Po li. 

t.iSSs. H avon: Southeast Asia Studies Monograph Series No. 6, 1965. 

Lansang, Jose A., ed. 'War Memoirs of Dr. Jorp P. T, n n^i Manila: Laurel Founda- 
tion, 1962. 

Lnrdizabal, Amparo Santamaria. "Pioneer American Teachers and Philippine Educa- 
tion." (Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University 1956. In: Ph.D. Research 
Guide, TNL.) 

>.us, E. L. Brief Pio^rj^ies_of J^n.Most Outstanding Filip ino National Load ers. 
Manila: National Printing Co., Inc., 1951 . 

Lava, Jose. "Milestones in the History of the Communist Party of the Philippine- 
Unpublished brochure on the Communist interpretation of contemporary Philippine 
history. cl950. 

Lavalle, Ramon Munis. Filipin os y la Guerra. del Pa cifico. Madrid: 1936. 

Liang, Dapen. The Development of Phi lippine Po litical Parties . Hongkong: South 

China Morning Post, 1939. 
Lichauco, Marcial. Dear Mother Putnam: A Dia ry of War' in the Philippines. 

Kaniia: The Author, 1949. 

. R oxas . Manila: 1952.. . 

Liana, Pedro de la and Icasiano, F. B., eds. Q uezon in His Speeches. Manila: 

State Publishing Company, 1937. 
fuicArthur, Douglas. Reminiscences . New York: McGraw Hill, 1964. 
Hahajani, Usha. Philippinj^Jjationalism:,,, Extern al Challen g es and Filipino Re sponn 

1565-1 Q4_6_._ St. Lucia, Queensland: University of Queensland Press, 1971. 
kalay, Armando J. O ccupied Philippines. The Role of Jorge 3. Vargas During the 

Japanese Occupation. Manila: Filipiniana Book Guild, 1967. 

... U 

'"•alcola, George A. TJ^C^jm^nwaallh ^f_._tJie_jMii^iiL^- Wew Y ork: Apple ton- 
century, 1936. " . 'v 
A merican C olon ial Careerist. Christopher Publishing House, 

1957. ! 



- 775 - 



III' 



?imtJk^GyAn_Ro^.ubli Q ..„ Boston: Christopher Publishing H- 



1951 • ■ * 

-feiuel, Arsenio E. ed; .P na r y, of P h ilisplne Ji^graiA^ Quezon City: Fili- 

piniana Quezon City: Filipiniana Publications, 1955, 
;ir.rquardt, Frederic S. Bof 'SO&^S^SLM^. After., Indianapolis: Bobbs Merrill, 
;hrritt, Jesus V. fia r , ? r ^g 4 ^.Q^tsjJ^fiIes_.in Hisfor^ Manila: Filipino 

Publishing Co., cl966. 
fcrritt, J. V. and Abad, N. P, edo. PjLr^MeAla„to_the Unite d States Congrepfl . " • 

j-Vyer, Hilton Walter. A.Pj^lQaajbjLc_Hi storv of the Pfrllippjrjftfj, University of 
ll'.-.-p.ii Press, 1965. 

:: 0 :.ina, Antonio M, The. I^hiJLi^in^s^hrpu gh the Ce nturies. _ .2 vols. Manila: Ur~ 

Cooperative, I960, 
'.'o.l'ison, Elting E. TurmpiXaM 

, :f-Tiry_.Ln^Stirisj3.n., Boston: Houghton Mifflin, I960. 

Prison, Saramuel Eliot. The_Ris_ing Sun in _the _ Pacific. 3ostont Little Brown 
end Co., 1948. 

. Levte.:. June 1944 - January 1945 •- Boston: Little Brown and 

Co., 1958. 

. The, Liberation of the Philippines: Luzon, M indanao , the Vi-r; 

sayas. 1944-1945. Boston: Little Brown and Co., 1959. 
Morton, Louis. The United States Array in ...World War/Two ,- , The Fa ll of th e Philip,- 

£iiies._ Washington': Office of the Chief of Military History, 1953* 
. . Strat egy a nd Command: The First Two Y ears . Washington: 

Department of the Array, 1962. 
Harwell,- Richard S. Records of th e Bur eau of Insular. Affairs... Washington: Thr. 

National Archives, Preliminary Inventories, No. 130, I960. 

. . Records of the U. S. Hiflh,Conunis^^ 

Haxwoll, Richard and Walker, Evans. Rec^rd^oJM&eJtff^^^^ 

Washington: The National Archives, Preliminary Inventories, Nos.. 151-154, 1963- 
Kunden , Kenne th . Record s- of thr? Bureau of Insular /iff airs Relating to the Phi- 
lippine Island s.- 1898- 19 35; A List of Selecte d. Files,^ Washington : The 

National Archives, October 1942. • 
^•"mmn, William L. / uaeric a Encounters- Japan: ' . xp^QTrjiJ^o^aqJ^mj^ Baltimore 

Johns Hopkins Press, 1963. 
Ocanpo, Esteban A. de, and Saulo, Alfredo B. 2&i&9j&or^UaiJ2 ?& HIVQ& P- 

PMpnat., Manila: .National Historical Institute, 1977. 
°8ias, Camilo and Baradi, Mauro.. T&e^lUl^^^^ Baltimore: ^ 

Pronch-Bray, 1933. 
-Mis, Vicente Albano. ^rJlggHll.CT f or Interanflaflflfti. Manila: 1926. 

• ■ Ehjaj^toJto^ Manila: 1967. 

■ ■ 'vZ*™™* ggggAfl Osmena, 2 vols. Quezon City* Phoenix 

^ess, Inc., 1971, 



TA~ . Ill - 200 

~ 777 

x-alna, Rafael. Our Campaign for I ndepenrif_ ____ Manila: 1923. 

_____ My Autobiogr aphy Trans .from the Spanish by Alicia Palaa 

Bautista. Manila: Capital Publishing Co., 1953, 
I-anlilio. Yay. The Crucible: An A J __ a ^_ {gaBfegl New York: Macmillan & 80. , 1950.' 
Perkins, Whitney T.. Denial of E m jje: The United States and Its Dependencies. ; 

Lydenr A W. Sythoff, 1962. "', ■ 

Philippine (Commonwealth) -W^L^SSiL^L^M^mssmAal th of the Philipp ines. 193",'. 
______ • Mosaafcea of the President, TQ^-lQ^ . Manila: Bureau -of 

■printing. 

• Thc Annual RcporJ^j___J;_ho_ Pre sident o f the Philippine Conmon- 

wealthy Manila: Bureau of Printing, 1939. * 
• Report ttn N ationa l Defense in the Philippines, by Maj. Gen. 

Douglas MacArthur, Military Adviser to the President of the Philippines, 1936. 
• MsS£t_sL -the Special Mis sion to the Un ited States. ________ 

1939. Bureau of Printing, 1939. 
Philippines (Republic). Committee on Funeral Arrangements and Burial. In Hem o- 

r ian: Manuel Luis Quezon. 1946 . 
._ ^residential Economic Staff. Operation, Planning, Research and ' 

Statistics Office. "Quezon." (in: Provincial Profile, 1967, v. 37.) 
Poblador, Filomon, comp. & ed. Quezon Memorial Book; Manila: Quezon Memorial ' 

Committee, 1952. 

Porter, Catherine. Crisis in the Philippines . New York: Alfred Knopf, Inc., 1942, 
Portugal, Ramon. "Background and Development of Philippine .administrative Law." 

(Ph.D. dissertation, Syracuse University, 1958. In: Ph.D. Research Guide, TNL. J 
Pratt, Julius. America's Colo ni al Exper i ment . / How the United- States Gained, 

Governed, and in Part Gave Away a Colonial Empire. New York: Prentice-Hall, 1950. 

,__ __. The Expansionists of 1898. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1936. 

institute of Pacific. Relations Fourth Conference, Hangchow and Shanghai, China, 

1931. Probl ems of the Pacific . 
Tucson, Manuel L. The Good Fj^ht .- New York: Appleton-Century, '1946. 

. The Autobiography . c omp. & ed. by Sol II . Gwekoh. Manila: 

Art Printing and Publishing Co., 1940. 
'•uila, Solomon Era. "The Impact of Nationalism Upon the Christian Culture of tho 

Philippines, With Reference to Contemporary Times." (Ph.D. dissertation, 

Princeton Theological Seminary, 1963. In: Ph.D. Research Guide, TNL.) 
Quirino, Carlos. Quez on. Pla n of Destiny .. Manila: McCullough Printing Company,. 

cl935. 

— . . Quezon, Paladin of Philippine Freedom. Manila: Filipiniana 

B ook Guild, 1971. '" : . 

^ M agaaysay of the Philippines. Manila: Carmelo & Bauernann, . 

' In =., 1958. 

Recto, Claro M. Three Years of Enemy Occupation. Manila: People's Publishers, 
1946. 



Asiatic M ^ im^A^t^ss^ . Manila:' General' Printing 



vress, 1950. 

fiitiaoB , Isidro L.: and Soriano, D. II. Phil j^jncfs 'W ho ' § Whn . Quezon City: 

Capital Publishing, 1957. 
Rodri311CZ , Eulogio 3., ed. ^si^jtj^ S]ratnh _ Hossagog ' 

onH S peeches. Manila: .Publishers, Inc., 1940. - 
Iio , 2 ni, John Henry. "The Philippine Presidency: An Valuation in Terns- of Ameri- 
. C an Practice and Procedures." (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan, 

1955. In: Ph.D. Research Guide, ' TNL. ) . 
toualdoz, Norberto and Morrow, Fr. Louis la Ravoire. A Short H ist^y nf ^, 

Philippines^, Manila: 1936. 

Ronulo, Carlos P. I Saw .t M J^sL^^^mj, Now York: Doubleday 
Duran & Co., 1942. • _ • 

' 1 Sotf th0 IM liXStemJ&Ba*. New York: Doubleday Duran & Co., 19 

..... • I^M£2±JSi^SX2§^ N ew York: Holt, Rinehart ft Winston, 1961, 

? l0 ,:ulo, Carlos P. and Gray, Marvin M. The Ka^y^y Sw v . New York: Pocket .' 
Books, Inc. , 1957. ■ 

Roosevelt, Nicholas. The Philippines: A Trea sure and A Prphl N ew York: 1926. 
Roth, David Franklin. "Towards a Theory of the Role of the Philippine Presidoaqy 

in the Politics of Modernisation."- (Ph.D. dissertation, Ciarenont Graduate 

School, I960. In: Ph.D. Research Guide, Ti-IL. ) • » . 

lioxas, Felix it. The Worl,d of FqMt R 0 y»«, Manila: The Filipiniana Book Guild, 1970 
ifeulo, Alfredo B. Ma^er_gf. His Soul: The Life of Norberto Romualdez. 1875-1941. 

Hanila: National Historical Institute, 1975. 
. Fj3li^o.^oncallo:. First Filjp ino Djpl6nat. ( Co-authored with 

Esteban A. do Ocar.po.) Manila: National Historical Institute, 1977. 
— — • Coiuaunisp in the Philippines: An Introduction . Quezon City: 



Ateneo de Manila University, 1969 . 

■ — ♦ A Second Look a t Philippine Coaaunisn. Serialized in, the 

Weekly Nation, 1971 . 

. "Manuel Luss Roxao, 1887-1950," and "Bionvenido M. Gonzalez, 



1393-1953," in Scientis ts of the Philippines, Vol. II, National' Science Devc- 
lopnent Board. •. ' 

^yro, Francis. Gl'ad Adventure. New York: Macr.iillan, 1957. 

&oaff » ^lvin II. Thg_rhiii ir jine Answer to Cpmu nisri. Stanford: Stanford University 
iross, 1955. 

*dth, Robert Aura. Philippine Freedom. 1946-1958.. New York: Colunbia Univer- 
sity Press, 1958. 

0L ' dth » Robert R. Triumph in the Philippines . Washington: Office of the Chief of. 
Military History, 1963. 

°°riano, Rafaelita Hiiario. "The. Japanese Occupation of the Philippines, With 
s Pocial Reference to Japanese Propaganda, 1941-1945." (Ph.D. dissertation, 
diversity of Michigan, 1948. In: Ph.D. Re's earch Guide, TNI. ) 



Ill - 202 

~ m " 

SpGnce , Hartzoll. %ycps of tho -Phili^n^ L Now York & Cleveland: The World 
Publishing Company, 1969. 

Spencer, J.^B. Land and l ^ g^in anu^ ^ Berkeley: University of Ca- 
lifornia Tress-, 1952. ' 
v^t.P. P apers of Herbert Hoover. New York: 1934. 

Steinberg, David Joel. Philippine C i oli a b 0 ^a^ 2 nj^ jld War II. Manila: Soli- 

daridad Publishing House , 1967. 
■ibiason, Henry L. and Bundy, McGeorge. On Active Service in Poaco ^nd War 

IJaw York: Harper & Co.-, 1947. 
Storey, Moorfiold and Lichauco, Marc'ial P. The Conquest of the Phili.nin^ bg 

the United States, L8 2§=12g5x York and London: G . P. Putnam's Sons, 1 9 26. 

Stubbs, Roy M. "Philippine Radicalism: The Central Luzon Uprisings, 1925-1935." 

(Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of California at Berkeley, 1951.) 
Sturtevant, David Reeves. Philippine Social Structure and Its Relation to 

Agrarian Unrest." (Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University, 1958. In: Ph.D. 

Research Guide, TNL.) 

Tariada, Lorenzo M. I^ijgny^i.^S m u: ions to Greatneas. Quezon City: Phoenix- 
i'ublishing House, 1965. 

Tame, Luis H. Born of JAe^ople. Hew York; International Publishers, 1953. 
Taylor, John R. M. The miip„imicJ^surre etion Against the United States. 

5 vols. Pnsay City: Eugonio Lopez Foundation, 1971 . 
Taylor, George E. Tho^iJ^jjq^^ U nited St ates : Proble ms of Partnershi-o . ' 

New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1964.' 
Thomas, Henry & Others.. Living Biographies. 1959. 

Toland, John. But Not in SIw.ir; Th e Six Months After Pearl Harbor. New York: 
Random House, 1961 . 

Touhy, Anthony R. , ed. A lbum Kistoricos de -la Prinera Asambloa Filipina. c1910. 
Trunan, Harry. Year of Decisions. Garden City; Doubleday, 1955. 
University of Sto. Tmaa- Alnnni TViT-poto ry: 161 1-1971. Manila: UST Alumni 

Association, Inc., 1972. 
Valensuela, Jesus Z. H istory of Journalism in the Philippine Islands .' Manila: 1933. 
Jaiiwright, Jonathan. General '/ainwright's Story. New York; Doubleday & Co. , 1946. 
fcissblatt, Franz J., ed. "Who's Who in the Philippines." (BIA 4666' 7, 1937.) 
Wioelor, Gerald 15. Pr elude to Pearl h arbor: The U nite d States Navy and the Far 

&a L_132l - 1 23J . Columbia: University of Missouri Press,. 1963i 
Witney, Courtney. HncArt hur: His Rendez vous with History. New York: Alfred 

Knopf, 1956. 

y ickberg, 3dgar. The Chinese in Ph ilippin e Life. 1 350-1 898. New Haven: Yale 
Univ srsi ty x'ress, 1965. 

illoughby, Charles A. and Chamberlain, John. HacAr thur . 1941 -1 95 1 . New York: 
KcGraw .Hill, 1954. 

T.T ■ 

" ln go, Janes. The Philippine Problem. N ew York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1939. 



Ii> III - 203 

- <m - 

•johlstottor, Roberta. PoazQarbor: Warnin^ajjO^jsioi^ Stanford: Stanford 
' University Press, 1962. 

■Tolfort, Ira. .k^lcjm^ue^^ ^ew York: Simon '& Schusto 

1945. . 

- ol ff, Leon. Little Broyn Brqt^or... London: Longmans, Green 6k Co., I960, 
"oodward, C Vann. ms^^2£^^^to_a^_ New York: Ballantine Books, 1947. 
...rA, Governor-General Leonard. k^2^vort_ot _the Govsmor-Sannral of the 

Phili TTQine Is lands , 1 9^4 . Washington: Government Printing Office, 1926. 

• . Annua l _ J igjiojl_of^oJl_OT 0 f- t ho rhil-ip p-ivf,* . 

T^T, °nds. 1925. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1927, 
'.'orchoster, Dean C. The Philimnnen T P^st^nd^osenjj. New York: Hacmillan, 

1950. ' . ? ■ 

Zafra, Nicolas. Philippinc^a^aj^u^Lj^cted Sources . Quezon City: 
ulanar-Phoenix Publishing House, 1967. 

Hdo, Gregorio P. PM li ppi ne Political and Cultu ral Kistorv 1 2 vols. Manila: 
Philippine Education Company, 1957 . 

• Great Pili j3inos in History. Manila: Verde Book Store, 1970. 



Ill - 204 



•''/[Tii/'ON IN PERIODICAL 
LITfiRATUHiJ 



,_CCPJ - American Chamber of- Commerce of the 

Pb i 1 ip ? i nee Journal 
,.03 - American Historical -Collection 

bulletin 

AIL - Agricultural and Industrial Life 

AK - Asia Magazine 

A'iR - American Quarterly Review . 

ire . - .Archipe la/50 

AFT, - Asia-Philippine Leader 

iff - Asian Studies 

ilfi - Aquinas University Review 

S3 - Bagong Buhay 

3ayan - Bayan 

■fiul - Booklovers' Bulletin 

- Boys world 
.-'eye - Bui Is eye . 

'JAOJ - Government Auditing Office Journal 
"/'id.' - Character Education 
■-it . - Citiaen ' 
2cn. - Commerce 
Go. - Connent 

CiVrt. - Coamoir.fealth fortnightly "' 
CAuv.- » Coa-uonwealth Advocate 



CS'- CcntiJmporary Studies 

Cofarm - Cooperative Faming 

C:-rps - The Corps 

Cross - The Cress 

Cms, - Crusade • 

Deb; - El Debate 

Def . - L a Defensa 

DFARev. - Department cf foreign 

Affairs Review 
Dh, Dhirror - Daily Mirror 
DI\ hag. - Daily I-Iirror ilagazine 
Dh'ews - Daily jfews 
Dlleccrd - Daily Record 
S'ierald - livening herald 
•iiiilews - livening ).'-i'ews 
■Ex. - .'ixaminsr 
F-fJl' - Far Eastern freemason 
FO - Filipino Observer 
•FR8 - Filipi'niana Reference She If 
FT - Filipino Teacher 
Folio - folio 
freedom - Freedom 
FP - free Philippines . 
(Continued on next page) 



sources : 



lanue.l L._ Qjv->''.o.n: A hLo-bibliograi-hy- 



Issued by the Bureau of Public Libraries 
in 1Q62 with a prVfa'c-.V by Car] op : :}uir.ino, acting director. This work has - 
coupilsd by thy'' Research" and Bibliography. Division staff composed of Sever: no 
I. Velasco*, chief; feline Gont.aga, researcher; Josef ina K. martinez, libra:- ia 
and Letieia a. liJspina, junior librarian. It is referred to in the following 
listing as »Q B-V," 
Mex to Philippine Periodical. .Litpratiire. Issued by the Laticnal Library. 

Referred' to' a7 "iLPPL f TI.jT. 
Me= .tq. .Philippine.. PerAodicalj?.. Issued by the iiain Library, University of 

the Philippines. Referred to as IPP/-JPL. 
Index to Philippine Periodicals. Kditod by Kaxina H. Ferrer and Venancia T. 
GuiUemoV "issued 'by" UTVnTsr-lJopartaental Reference Service,. Graauate ■ 
School of Public Administration, University of the Philippines. Referred tc 
as IPP, YDHS, UP. With respect to the last tve sources, the invalua^e 
assistance of Hiss marina Dayrit, University Librarian, and the stall oi 
the Archives Section, U. P. Kain Library, .is hereby acknowledged . 



(toitiaued) •• 

Grannie 



:-ra 



- Independent 



.. The Ilocos Times 

IMS, UP - Index to Philippine Periodi- 
cals, Intor-Departnental Reference Sor- 
vies, Universit^r of the Philippines 

B'Pir-KiL - Index to Philippine Periodical 
Litsratura, The -<aticnal Library 

.[/F-IJPL - latex to Philippine Periodicals, 
ij.p. Library 

'3 - Historical Bulletin 

jv; - Journal of History 

Lai. - Kalayaan 

llira. - Kis lap-Graphic 

SJ - Lawyers Journal 

I'uay - liwayway 

"Jl'i - Local Government Review 

a'i. - Habuhay 

..Courier - liauila Courier 

.1)3 - Hanila Daily Bulletin 

;Gra. -- Hani la Grafiea 

:.i o:)t - Manila Post 

;: i - Mirror 

5' - National lucrum 

■ =>.C.ju1. -- -.ational Historical •Coi-Eiiission 
Bulletin " . • 

Kill. - Hew Philippines 

OG - Official Gazette 

up. - Ha Opinion 

;, r. - Orient , 
• l J CoL - Philippine Charity Sweepstakes 



Ha;:azine 



ft!IJ 

PjtiB - 
Ksj - 
m - 
IVJ - 
Pi' _ 
P?P . 
?H 

?a 



Philippine Economic and Industrial 
Journal 

• Philippine iiconoay Bulletin 

• Philippine iicononic Journal 
■ Philippine Lcononic Review' 
- Philippine Parsers Journal 
Philippine Porun 

• Philippine Free Press 
Philippines Herald 

~ ^ilippines Herald .iasazine 



04 ~ Philippine Historical Association 
- * 'lilippino Journal of Education 



III - 205 

PH - Philippine Labor 

PL J - Philippine Law Journal 

PLMews - PI. ilippe Liberty News' 

Pl-i - Philippine Magazine' 

PO - Philippine Outlook 

PP - Philippine Panorama 

PPr. ,- Philippine Progress 

PH - Philippine Review ■ 

P3L - Philippine Student Life 

PSSiiR - Philippine Social Sciences 

and Humanities Review 
PSR - Philippine Sociological Review 
PS - Philippine Studies 
PToday - Philippines Today 
PyrB - Philippine Yearbook 
Q 3-b - Quezon 3io-bibliogra?hy, c.nc-r 

The Hational Library 
RR - Readers Review 
RPil. - 31 Renacirciento Filipino 
Rep, - Republic 
SLI; - Saiapaloc Lake News 
SB - Science Bulletin ; 
Sen.. - Ssmana 

Sen. - Sentinel ,_ 
Sol. - Solidarity 
SR - The Star Reporter 
• SRev. - Science Review 
Sc. - Sower 
£15 - Sugar Hews . . 
STJi - Sunday Tines ?«a<;asiae 
Tal. - Taliba 

TCL - Teacher's College Journal 

TW - 'inis Week 

Un. - Unitas 

UPNows - U. P. Hews 

uPRS - U. P. Reference Service 

UPRD - U. P. Research Digest 

UPToday - U. P. Today . 

Van. - La Vanguardia 

Var. - Variety . 

Voz - Vos de Manila 

WG - Weekly Graphic 

tfN - Weekly Nation 

TM - Weekly "/onen's Magazine 

w&Ji - Women and the Home 



III - 206 

- 7fiJ - 

1 19 10 My 14 Philippine affairs; analysis of the Philippine government - 

self-governing capacity of the Filipinos, their unanimous " 
desire for independence; speech of Resident Commissioner 
Quezon in the U.S. House of Representatives, Saturday, My 
14 '10. Washington, D.C. U.S. Gov't. Printing Office, 1 9 10 
14 pp. (Q-B-b, p. 3.) • 

2 1910 Jl 21 Biography and photograph. Rgn,. Fjj^. Mo 1 N 3 p. 17 - : * 

Jl 21 '10. ( Q-B-b, p. 154.) 
y 1910 undfttfe"- Speech in. the U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, 

D.C., n . pub., 1910. (Q-B-b, p. 4.) 

4 1912 Ja 9 Mdress at the annual meeting of the Anti,Imperialist 

League, J a 9 '12. (in: Polletos varies v. 20.) (Q-B-b, • 

p . 1 ci Supp . ) 

5 1913 Jl 17 L a Trinidad Nacionalista (Quezon, Osmefia y Palma) Ren. 

SJuu- 3er aniversario. p. 43 Jl 17 '13 (Q-B-b, p. 154.) 

6 1914 0 14 The Jones Philippine Bill; speeches of Resident Commissioner- 

Quezon in the U. S. House of Representatives, S 26- 0 14 
'14. Washington, D.C., U.S. Gov't. Printing Office, 1?14.. 
(Q-B-b, p. 2.) 

7 1915 T^dai-gfJ Discursos del Hon. N.L. Quezon - con motivo de la discusion . 
^ de Bill Jones, (varios folletos) 1915. (Q-B-b, p. 1 & Supp.) 

8 1916 0 n ^ Inaugural address of Pres. Quezon of the Senate. Ph i l. Rev,. 

v. 1, n. 10, pp. 76-77, 0 '16. ( Q-B-b-, Supp.) 

9 1916 0 Discurso inaugural del Presidente . Quezon del Senado. PhjLl ^ 

Rev. v. 1, n. 10, pp. 7B-/82, 0 '16. ( Q-B-b,. Supp.) 
10.1916 0 rimA. Quezon's farewell to Congress that becomes Congress fare- • 

well to Quezon; Patrick Gallagher. P frU . ReVj. v. 1, n. 10, 
pp. 11-31 0 '16. (.Q-B-b, pp. 8 & 154.) 

11 1917 N n . , The nationalization of the Philippine railroad under govern- 

ment management. Luis Moreno Jeres. Phil. Rev, v. 11, 
n. 10,. pp. 35-36 N '17. ( Q-B-b, pp. 10 & 154.) 

12 1917 N rKnd. Pres. Quezon defining Phil, attitude. Phil. Rev, v. 11, ■ 

n. 11, pp. 52-54 , N '17. (Q-B-b, p. 154.) 

13 1917 D rwd. Tho Jones Bill. PhjU. Rev, v. 2, n. 12, pp. 8-9, D '17.' 

( Q-B-b, p. 154.) 

14 1918 D rwd. The Carriage of President Quezon of the Senate. PhjUL. 

Rev. v. Ill, n. 12, pp. 1000-1005 ? '18. (Q-B-b, p. 154.) ' 
!5 1919 S 11 The inspired spokesman for a fadeless faith. CjJU, v. 2, 

n. 19, pp. 9-12 S 11 '19 (Q-B-b, p. 154.) . 

16 1919 0 23 The statement of Pres. Quezon on the reappearance of our 

flag. CjjL*., v. 2, n. 25, p. 4, 0 23 '19 (Q-B-b, p. 154). 

17 !919 uftd-attad PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, Commission of Independence. La 

mission filipino. 1919 (Q- B -b, p. 16.) 



-184. • ni - 2 ° 7 



18 1920 Je 11 * he coastwis : shi p^' v. 3f n . 6 , pp . 7 . 8 

Je 11 '20. (q-B- b , p . 154<) PP * °' 

19 1920 Je 18 "Would-be president" a dark horse. C^., v . 3 n . ? . 

PP. 1, 3, 13 Je 18 '20. (Q-B-b, p. 154 { ' ' 

.20 1920 Jl. 11 Extension of U.S. Coastwise law to P.I. Mclntyre. 

&JU.. v. 3, n. 6, pp. 3, 16 ji u , 20< ( & 

21 1920 Ag 6 Nuostroo enemigos so han nuitartn i « ■'" 

nan quitado l a mascara. Qi£., v. 3 

n. 14, p. 25, Ag 6 '20. ( Q-B-b, p. 155.) 

22 1921 Ap 4 Hy Quezon y el idioma Ingles. Pj^Jkv. v. 6, n . 4 ft 5 

pp. 200-202, .Ap ftHy -21. (Q-B-b, • p. 155 ) 

23 1921 A P & My Quezon and the English language, v . 6p n . 4 & g 

pp. 200-202, Ap & My '21. ( Q _S-b, p. 155 ) 

24 1921 Ag & S Quezon se explica. Mki^ v. 6, n. 8 ft 9, pp. 378^ 

385. Jls & S '21. (Q-B-b, p. 155.) . 

25 1921 0 ft D Quezon's valedictory. FMXU^ v. 6, n. 10,11 ft 12, 

PP. 552-555 0_. D '21. (q-3-b, p. 155.) 

26 1921 D 24 Quezon and Oanefia clash over one-man leadership. PFP, v. 15, ' 

P. „ 3 24 '21. (Q-B-b, P . 109.) 

27 1921 D 31 Quezon vs. O sme na. InjL v. 7, n. 352, pp. 6-7,* D 31 '21. 

(Q-B-b, p. 155.) 

28 1921 ■.tt.iiin.i Statement of the Commission of Independenco to the Special 

Mission to the Philippine Islands. 1921 (Q-B-b; p. 16.) 

29 192 2 F 25 The new party. Ini.. v. 8, n. 36O, pp. 5-7 P 25 '22. 

( Q-B-b, p. 155.) 

30- 1922 0 n^d.. Th G responsibility and authority of the Filipino people in - 
the government of the Philippines. Manuel L. Quezon. Ngfc. 
-to v. 1, pp . 9-16 0 '22 (lPP,UPL, v. 11, p . 2038.) ■ 

31 1924 ftrtdto* Addresses: extracts from speeches of Senate President Quezon, 

in the United States and Philippines, Manila, The Philippine 

Commission of Independence, 1924. (£htt«Jto£&»iaUa^^ 
v. 1, n . 1, p. 1 ) (Q-B-b, p. 1.) 

32 1925 • n'*4%J3a U n afio en Manila. Juan Potoua y Martinez. Mia. Gr- r 1925. 

(Q-B-b, o. 16.) 

33 1925 n.d'iai'i Sino and Pangulong Quezon sa bayang maralita? Siya'y isang 

tunay na maka-mahirap at maka-anak-pawis sa puso, sa diwa 
at sa gawa. May nil a» 1925. Taliba ng Bayan, comp. (Q-^-b, 
p. 20.) 

^ 1927 J a 3 -jj ag atpquog de Aguinaldo a Quezon. Def. v. 8, p. 4, Ja 3 '27. 
( Q_B-b, p. 42.) 

1927 J a g ; Quozon oncareco a lideras deraocratas sostengan la union. 
Xaa. v. 17, pp. 1,8 Ja 6 '27 (Q-B-b, p. 136.) 



311-? Ill - 208 

■ 7*9? ~ 

..g 19 27 Ja 8 Jmbrento politico se despeja y todos miran con optimlsmo 

ol futuro do 1» combatida coalicion. R. Escoda. Dgb Af 
v. 9, pp.1, 4 Ja 8 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 27.) 

37 1927 Ja 8 L a iterna cantinela. Ir^. , v. 13, p. 27, Ja 8 '27. 

(Q-B-b, p. 155.) 

38 1927 Ja 13 'food, Quezon y Roxas reunidos coroo control'en el bancoi. 

DeK, v. 9, p. 1,4 Ja 13 '27. U-B-b, p. 28.) 

39 1927 J a 15 Los sustitutos augaridos el impuesto- aobre ventas declara-. 

dos inadocaudos. Jose i. Querubin. Deb., v. Si pp.. 1-2; 
Ja 15 '27. (Q-B-b, pp. 16 & 28.) 

40 1927 Ja 16 Quezon y Roxas seran quines presentan hoy accion contra 

Wood. Deb., v. 9, ry." X,. 4 Ja 16 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 28.) 

41 1927 Ja 18 Quezon acopta las domandas do democrat as. ' Van , v. 17, 

p. 1, Ja 18 '27. (Q-B-b, p . 136.) 

42 1927 J a 20 Autonomia ouierese decir por los monos treinta anos mas do . 

dominacion. Quezon. Deb. , v. 9, pp. 1,4 J a 20 '27.' 
( Q-B-b, P . 28.) 

43 1927 Ja 23 Cambio no habra in el caudillaje. Deb ., v. 9, pp. 1-2 

Ja 23 '27. ( Q-B-b, p. 28.) 

44 1927 Ja 25 L a coalicion victoreada en la H-Qcandia. Deb . , v.- 9, 

pp. 1,7 Ja 25 '27. ( Q-B-b, p. 28.) 

45 1927 Ja 26 Quezon tilda a Wood de maquiavelico. Vfljau. v. 17, pp. 1,4 

Ja 26 '27. ( Q-B-b, p. 136.) 

46 1927 Ja 26 Con un pueblo .que grita no dura un abusd por 48 horas. 

Ssk't v. 9, pp. 1-2 Ja 26 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 28.) 

47 1927 Ja 30 Ya sea Osmefia 0 Aguinaldo, deci Quezon defendicadose contra 

la politica de Wood. Deb., v. 9, pp. 1-2 Ja 30 "27. 
(Q-3_b, p. 28.) 

48 1927 F 5 Sobre la rivalidad politica de los caudillos Filipinos. 

Roberto Benon. Jai. f v - 13'» PP« 20 ~51 F 5 '27. ( Q-B-b, 
p. 155.)' 

49 1927 F 5 Mujeres catolicos por Quezon y Roxas. Dak., v. 9, pp. 1,2 

F 5 '27 ( Q-B-b, p. 28.) 

50 1927 'F 6 Quezon, Haranba y i'iascardo sera expulsados. S&h^ v. 9, 

pp. 1-2, F 6 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 28.) • ■ 

51 1927 F 7 El Presidente Quezon y otros nuevo ve tor anos expulsados de 

asociaciori. Van. , v. 17, p. 2, F7 *27. ( Q-B-b, p. 136.) 

52 1927 F s Ho quiero ser'un mere mandatorio de Wood, declara Quezon. . 

laa., v. 17, pp. 2,7 P8 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 136.) 

53 1927 F 8 Quezon acopta el reto de Aguinaldo sobre el liderato. IaHxj 

v. 17 r pp. 1,8 F 8 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 136.) 

54 1927 F 8 Quezon ira al sur ol'Marzo; luego a B.U. Vga., v. 17, 

'pp. 1,8 F 8 *27 (Q-B-b/ p. 136.5 ■ 



IIP -209 

- 786 - 

5 5 1927 F 8 ^zon nunc a fuo do l a As. de V otoranos> v> q> p . ;> 

P 8 '27. (q-B_b, p. 42.) 

5 6 1927 F 9 Bapititu acusa a Quezon de deslialted y' per jurio. v.. 17, ' 

' p. 4, F 9 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 136.) 

57 1927 F 9 L a expulsion de Quezon considerada' coino- un triunfo de Wood. ' " 

Vgft. v. 17, p. 2 F 9 '27. (Q-3-b, p. 136.) '. 

5 8 1927 F 9 Otro reto lanza, el Presidents Quezon, Dgb,., v.' 9, pp. 1-2, ■ 

F 9 *27 ( Q-B-b, p. 28.) 

59 1927 F 9 B S farsa lo de la Associacion de Veteranos Quezon. Sal.. , 

v. 8, p. 5, F 9 -27. ( Q-B-b, p. 42.) 

60 1927 F .9 Quezon no ha'llamado ol Senador Osineha. Sa£.. t v. 8, p. 1, 

F 9 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 42.) • 

61 1927 F 10 Bmilio Aguinaldo prueba Quezon ha sido voter ano.. De£„., v. 8, 

p. 5, F 10 '27. (Q-B-b, P . 42.) 

62 1927 F 10 Huestro caudillos su animan por la actitud del Congreso Ame- 

ricano. JDe£., v. 8, p. 1 F 10 '27. ( Q-B-b,. p. 42.) 

63 1927 F 10 Quezon Alega que la «sociacion de hoy no es la misma 'do ayer. • 

XflH., v. 17, pp. 1,4 F 10 '27. (Q-Ji-b, p. 136.) 

64 1927 F 11 The leadership question. In.4,., v. 8, n. 358, pp. 6-7 

" F 11 »27. . (Q-B-b, p. 155.) 

65 1927 F 11 Quozon se opone al bill sobre la lepra. Dak., v. 9, pp. 1,6 

F 11 '27. (Q-l-3-b, p. 28.) 

66 1927 F 12 Habra decin Osmenista y Quezonistas. De'f,, v. 8, p. 1 

F 12 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 42.) ■ •" • 

6? 1927 F 12 Quezon apoya el dialecto local en las escuelas. Deb . v. 9, 
pp. 1,5 F 12 '27. (Q-3-b, p. 28.) 

68 1927 F 13 La unidad nacional asigurada por el rndio asi tambien el desa- 

rollo. Deb., v. 9, pp. 1-2, F 13 '27. ( Q-B-b/ p. 28.) 

69 1927 F 14 Sobre la afilicacion de Quezon a In asociacion de veteranos. 

Def . r v. 8, p. 6, P 14 '27. (Qr-B-b, p. 42.) 

70 1927 F 16 Quozon ya no contestara n Emilio .Aguinaldo. £g£., v. 8, 

p. 1 P 16 '27. ( Q-B-b, p. 42.) 

71 1927 P 17 El Presidento Quezon contra el militarismo. De_£. , v. 8, 

p. 5 F 17 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 42.) 
72. 1927 F 18 El Presidento Quezon apruebn la reduccion de la coalioion a 

mutua intelligent a. Van., v. 17, p. 2, F 18 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 42.) 

73 1927 P 18 Otro encucntro por el banco nacional. £0$.., v. 8, p. 1 

P 18 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 42.) 

74 1927 P 19 Por dos grandos -partidos. (Editorial) IM- v. 13, p. 11 

F 19 '27. (Q-B-b^ p. 155.') 
?5 1927 F 19 Estoy muy conforme con la rosolucion adoptada por ol Dir. 

Domocrata -Quozon. Mi-, v.. 9, p. 1 F 19 ' 27. . (Qr^b, p. 28.) 



^V"' ' III - 210 

- 78? - 



76 1927 F W L a coalicion so ha anlvodo. v. 8, p. 5, F 19 '27. 

(Q-B-b, p. 42.) 

77 1927 F 20 Quezon on ol norte soluciona conflictos do partido. Deb . r 

v. 9, p. 16 F 20 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 28.) 
7'8 1927 F 20 °- UG %uinnldo nos dijo solos a Wood y ami, y y a promete 

derotarle a Wood-Quezon. Deb. , v. 9, pp. l f 7 F 20 '27. 
(Q-3-b, p. 28.) 

79 1927 F 21 Quezon- y Aguinaldo f rente n fronto en un- duelo^ verbal. 

■ Vflji,, v. 17, p. 2, F 21 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 136,) 
00 1927 F 21 Historia y patriotica sosion quo- se celebro on ol salon 

del Sonado. v. 8, pp. 1,8 F 21 '27. ( Q-B-b, p. 43.) 

81 1927 F 23 L a politi.cn do ahora so dobe a Emilio iguinaldo. Def . f 

v. 8, p. 5, F 23 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 43.) 

82 1927 F 24 Quezon es un falso, uh astuto politico'- .Aguinaldo. Dejj..-, 

v. 9, p. 4, F24'27. (Q-B-b, p. 29.) 
83* ■ 1927 F 25 No so puode tenor hoy a un democrat a. .Ttef., v. 8 l/2 

pp. 1,3 F 25 '27 (Q-B-b, p. 43.) 

84 1927 F 26 Por fin, Quezon y /jguinaldo se van a oncontrar. Dgb_. , 

.v. 9, p. 1, F 26 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 29.) 

85 1927 F 27 Parecido y diferoncia entre Aguinaldo y Quezon. G.T.Surla, 

Dob. f v. 9, pp. 9,10 F 27 '27. (Q»3-b, p. 29.) 
36 1927 F 28 Quezon acogc entusiasta la idea do ser lider. oposicionista. 

Vqn»f v. 17, p. 2 F 28 '27. [Q-B-b, p. 136.) 
G7 1927 Mr 8 Ni buono, ni bonito, ni barato (poem) Vaa»» v « 8 > P« 6 , 

Mr- 8 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 136.) 
88 1927 Mr 8 Quezon gasta casi ol doblo do lo quo el Vice-Presidente 

do B.U. Ian.., v. 18, p. 1 Mr 8 '27. ( Q-B-b, p. 136.) 
09. 1927 Mr 8 Quezon gasta mucho. (Editorial) Van., v. 18, p. 4 

Mr 8 '27. • (Q-B-b, p. 136.) 

90 1927 Mr 9 Unidos en la paz en la muorte se conseque la' libertad - 

Quezon. Deb.., v. 9, p. 1 Mr 9 '27." (Qr-3-b, p. 29.) 

91 .1927 Mr 10 Quezon y 0 amort a elogian la labor del Sonado Arroyo muerta 

en Milan, Italia. JM«. v « 9» PP» 1» 6 Kr 10 ' 27, 
(Q-B-b, p. 29.) 

92 1927 Mr 11 Qui-rino escribe a Wright llaaandole meticuloso. £aa., • 

v. 18, pp. 1,9 Mr 11 '27. ( Q-B-b, p. 136.) 

93 1927 Mr 12 Wood gasta mas. (Editorial) I^n.. , v. 18, ' p. 4, 

Mr 12 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 137.) ... 

94 1927 ' Mr 26 Oabaldon dice quo Quezon es inderrocable on Filipinos. 

1^., v. 18, p. 3 Mr 26 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 137.) 

95 1927 Mr 29 Quezon reitera que profiero un goUorno propio aun que- sea 

infernal. 1^., v. 18, p. 2 Mr 29 '27. - (*-B-b, p, 137.) 



9»r HI -211 

96 1927 Hp 29 Lucharon approvechando l a alegada diferenla entre ol 

Prosidento Quezon y Osmeha. 'Deb. , v . 9 , p . 2 Hr 2g , 
(Q-B-b, p. 29.) ' 

97 1927 Ap 2 ^Quezon no le sorprende la decision y dara la orden de 

apelar. V^. , v . 10, p. 3, Ap 2 - 27> ( ._ B _ b> p , ^ 

98 1927 Ap 3 Sin olloa no aceptamos la independent*- Quezon. D^., ' 

v - 9, pp. 1,6 \; p 3 -27. (q_B_ b , p. 29.) ■ 

99 1927 Ap • 7 Coalition failed -Quezon. HTrjJi. v . ?> pp> 1>1Q 

7 .'27. ( Q-B-b, p . 84.) . 

100 1927 Ap 8 .Aguinaldo vir otro ardio politico on lo que dice Quezon. 

laa., v. 18, p. 8 Ap 8 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 137.) 

101 1927 Ap 9 Wood stood like immovable rock, declares .Quezon. MTrih, f 

v. 3, pp. 1,4 Ap q '27. (Q-B-b, p . 84.) 

102 1927 Ap 17 El problems moro y a h a pasado a los historia, dice el 

Presidents Quezon. Deb., v . 9, p. - Ap 17 '27. (Q*B r b, 
•p. 29.) _ 

103 .1927 A P 19 Quezon, ni afirma ni desmiente la dimission de H cc to. 

Vflft., v. 33, p. 1 Ap 19 '27. ( Q-B-b, p. 137.) 

104 1927 Ap 20 Quo: cl pueblo honro a Hap a urge Quezon. J^., v. 18, 

pp. 1,4 Ap 20 »27. (Q-B-b,^p. 137.)- 

105 1927 . Ap 21 O'uanto mas conozca .'jnorioa a Filipinas sera mejor -Quezon. 

Xaii., v. 10, p. 2 Ap 21 '27. (Q-3-b> p. 137.) 

106 1927 Ap 22 Wood no puede, por ge y ante si disolver la Compania de 

fomanto npcional; dice el Quezon. Dejb.. , v. 9, p. 1, 
Ap 22 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 29.) 

107 1927 Ap 23 Filipinos produce hijos eminentes en la guerra y en la 

Paz. V^., v. 18, p. 7, Ap 23 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 137.) 

108 1927 Ap 28 V/ood y Quezon frente a frente por voz primera desde la 

famosa orden. V/ia« , v. 18, p.' 2, Ap 28 '27. (Q-3_b, 
p. 137.) ^ 

109 1927 Ap 29 Alegacionc's maliciosos. 0. Guevara. laa«> v.- 18, p. 2, 

Ap 29 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 137.) 
-10 .1927 / ip 29 Has fortalicida mi conviccion - Quezon. DeJ?_. r v. 9, 

pp. 1, 4 Ap 29 "27. (Q-B-b, p. 29.) 

111 1927 Ap 3Q ThQ forGign ca pital in P. I. Inji. , v. 13, p. 7, 

Ap 30 '27. ( Q-3-b, p. 155.)-- 

112 1 927 My 12 Vender sin naftcion legislative desrea despotismo. .Sab.., 

v. 9, pp. 1,4 % 12 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 29.) ' 
^3 I927 My 14 Quezon es el rey no coronado de toda Filipinos - Chalmers. 

Van.., v. 18, p. 2 Hy 14 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 137.) 
14 l92 7 My is En Iloilo atacn 3eramam,onte la politica de Wood sobre 

campanas. Vga., v; 18, p. 1 My 18 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 137.) 



Gli- 7 



III - 212 

7m - 



u5 1927 My 19 Wood cree q uo /aorioa puodo esplotar Filipinas por 

haberlas comprado - Quezon. V ffltj v> i 8 , p 2 
' My iy '27. (Q-B-b, p. 157.) 

U6 1927 My 20 lioilo protoata contra la venta de la imprest del ' 

govierno. Salvador Vinluan. De^. , v . 9, p . 8f 
Hy 20 '27. (Q-B-b, P . 29.) 

117 1927 Je 1 The easy way of settling the Philippine problem. 

In*., v. 13, p. 11 j e 1 <27. ( Q-B-b, p. 155.) 

118 ■ 1927 Jo 7 Quezon y Recto a los B.U. Febrero. ' Ds£. f v, 8, p. 5, 

Je 7 '27. (Q-B-b, p . 43.) 
■ 119 1927 Je 14 Quezon y Osmaiia saldra nianana a hacer compafia en el ' 

7.0 distrito. Deb.., v. 9, pp. 1,5 j 0 14 > 2 7. 
(Q-B-b, p . 29.) 

120 , 1927 Je 16 Dejo mi hi jo enfermo y eatare en Uoilo hasta la oleccion.: 

PJ&., v. 9, pp. 1,5 j e lfi . 2 7. (q_B-b, p. 29.) 

121 1927 Je 19 ^eis mil peroonas victoraaron entusiastamente a. Quezon. 

Esb't v. 9, pp. 1,5 Je 19 '27. ' (Q-B-b, p. 29.) . : 
122. 1927 Jo 24 "Ellos de tienon la culpa; no fuimos quierres buscamos 

esta lucha. j^b. , v. 9, pp. 1,4 Je 24 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 29. 

123 1927 Je , 25 Triunfo la oligarquia. (Editorial) Xj&. , v; 13, p. 11, 

Jo 25 . '27. (Q-B-b, p. 155.) 3?. ' 

124 1927 Je 25 Una drama Osmeriista. (Editorial) Inj^. , v. 13,' p. 11, 

Je 25 '27. (Q-B-b, p. .155.) 

125 1927 Je 28 Debin ir. (Editorial) Deb., v. 9, p. 4, Jo 28 '27.- 

(Q-B-b, p. 29.) 

126 1927 Je 29 Quezon no croc en el envio urgente de. la miaion a E.U, 

Vfltt.» v. 17, p. 3 Je 29 '27. (^B-b, p. 137.) .-17, ■ 

127 1927 Jl 5 Osmefia denies break with Quezon. HTri.b . f v. 3, pp. 1,4 

Jl 5 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 84.) 

128 1927 Ji 6 Johns told to mind his own business. M£cjJb. , v. 3>. 

pp. 1,4 . Jl 6 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 84.) ■ , . 

129 1927 Ji 6 Queson-Romualdcs entente intimated. E£xilu.> v. 1, 'p. 4, 

Jl 6 '27. ( Q-B-b, p. 84.) 

130 1927 Ji 6 Pagaran caro . . . contesta Tan a Quezon. D0J1. , v. 9, 

pp. 1,2 Jl 6 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 29.) 
] -31 1927 Jl 7 Wo- oabe duda; la politica revive, asigura Quezon. ^De^, 

v. 9, PP. 1,4 Jl 7 '27. (Qr-B-b, p. 30.) 
1 32 1927 Jl 8 Filipinismo y anti-^uoricano. (Editorial) D&b_. , v. 9, 

p. 4, Jl 8 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 30.) . 
1 '3 1927 Jl 9 q U ea es demasiado s»,bio. laft., v. 18, p»-9, Jl 9 '27. . 

(Q-B-b, p. 137.) " 



sn-8 . 

w 1927 J1 9 rr;rtcn;r ^•'• i8 ' ro ' 1 ' 11 

m., v. 9 , ,,. 3,, Jx 9 , 27 _ ^ ^ ■ 

,* X937 ,1 10 ^ „ Chiang Kai-Shek. Dgjj. , v. 9,' pp. 1>6 

ol 10 27. (Q-Ji-b, o. 30.) 

137 1927 ^ 13 ^ a - -** , ^ extranjeros . 

158 1927 .JI 15 Persona grata. (Editorial) V^. , v . 18 , p . , " ^ 

(Q-B-b, p. 138.) 

139.1927 JI 16 ■ dangerous doparturo. (Editorial) 1^. , v 13 p 4 . 

JI 16 '27. ( Q-B- b , p . 156 .) ' ' ' 

140 1927 "JI 21 Sin radioalis.no no hay progreso, dioe Quezon en Shanghai. 

Veraoaa. D^., v. 9, pp . 1(4 Jx 21 , 27> (q _g_ b> p< 

141 1927 JI 28 Uuando Quezon vistio el traje de mandarin Chino. J^. f ' 

v. 13, p. 1 Ji 28 '27. (Q-3-b, p. 1 38 .) 
.142 1927 JI 28 Seria estupido provocar a America - quezon. V*., v. 18, 

PP. 1,10 JI 20 '27. (q-ii-b, P . 138.) 

• H3 1927 Jl 28 Q,16Z0n 3863 8U00B « of Chinese nationalism. fttffc, v. 3, 

PP. 1,7 Jl 20 '27. (q-B-b, p. 84.) 

144 1927 Jl 30 Quezon returns from vacation in China. PJ£, v, 21, p. 32. 

Jl 30 '27. (q-B-b, p. 109.) ' 

145 1927- Jl 30 Filipino loaders refute Bingham. KTj^, v. 3, Pp. 1,4 ' 

Jl 30 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 84.) 

146 1927 Jl 30 My 1^ statement, feu., v. 3, p. 4, ' Jl 30 '27. 

( Q-B-b, p. 84.) 

147 1927 Jl 31 Democrats urge Recto to fight Quezon. MTjib.. , ' v. 3, p. 17, 

Jl 31 "27. . (q-B-b, p. 84.) - 

148 1927 Ji — • Quezon gasta casilanto como toda la Corte Supreme, roitera ' 

Johns. Ian.., v . IS, pp. 7-8, Jl '27. ( Q-B-b, p. 137.) 

149 1927 Ag 8 Constestacion democrat a a Quezon. D&f . , v. 0, p. 2 ' 

Ag R '27. (Q-B-b, p. 43.) 
*50 1927 % 8 El fracaso de la Coalicion segun quezon. De_£. , v. 8, 

p. 2. Ag 8 *27. (Q-B-b, p. 43.) 
.151 1927 jig s Un recuerdo de cuando aun reinaba la armonia. • Dg£. , 

v. 8, p. 1 Ag 8 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 43.) 
152 1927 ^ g ^ Sab ado sorvicios necrologicos por Wood 0 discureo de 

Quezon. !)&£. , v. 8, p. 2, % 9 '27. (Q-B-b, p. 43.) 
-j3 I927 ^g g E j finado era una roca inconmoniblo. . .' Quezon. -Vjaa? » 

v. 8, p. 2, Ag 9 '27. • (q-Blb, p. 138.) 
15 4 1927 Ag 13 Ruidoso proceso de adulterio... M,, v. 13, pp. 28-29 

Ag 13 *27. (Q-3-b, p. 156.) ■ 



III - 214 

- m - 

155 1927 ife 15 ^ezon elogia al Javanes Tan Halaca. v . 18, pp. 1, 

10 , ie 15 *27. (QB-b, P . 138.) 

156 1927 30 Romualdez no se marcho sin notification. Dej£. f v. 8, 

p. 2 % 30 '27. (q B_b, p.' 43.) 

157 1927 S.. 1 No desea un parlamento en Filipinas. D§£. , ' v. 8, p. 1, 

S 1 '27. ( Q B-b, P . 43.) • 
<v 

158 1927 S 2 Useless to prate' about proposed Parliamentary Government 

says Quezon. MTri_b., v. 3, pp . lf 4 s 2 « 2 7. (Q 3-b, p. 84.) 

159 1927 S" 10 Guvevara'a choice of Gen. Hclntyre as Island Governor is 

supported by Quezon in speech before the Senate. KTrib. . 
v. 3, -pp. 1, 4 S 10 '27. (qB-b, p. 84.) 
160. 1927 S 10 Quezon ncepta al G. Hclntyre como Gov. General. Deb. f 
v. 9, p. 2 S 10 *27. (Q 3_b, p. 30.)- ; 

161 1927 S 11 Kendoza denounces Quezon and party. HTri ,b ,_ f v. 3, p. 30, 

S 11 '27. (Q B-b, p. 84.) 

162 1927 S 12 Quezon acreraente- criticado por prestar apoyo el general 

Hclntyre. Jm^v. 18, p. 2 S 12 '27. (Q B-b, p. 138.) 

163 1927 S 13 Por que los democratas se" oponen a que el Gen. Mclntyre sea 

Gob. General . DeJU., v. 8, p. 2 3 13 '27. (Q B-b, p. 43.) 

164 1927 S 13 Quezon cooperara con Hclntyre pero no puede prestarle apoyo.- 

SfllU,, v. 18, p. 27 3 13 '27. (Q B-b, p. 138.) 

165 I927 S 17 Quezon favors government getting out of busine'ss. MTrjb. f 

v. 3, p. 7 S 17 '27. (Q B-b, p. 84.) 

166 1927 S 17 La politica del campo. por PFP v. 21, p.* 67 S 17 '27. 

(Q B-b, p. 109.) . 

167 1927 S 20 Canon, al igual fue el ex-premier ..Isquith, pide un juicio de 

residencia. Vaft. f v « 1 8 » PP« 1» 4 S 20 '27. (Q B-b, p. 138.) 

168 1927 3 20 El Sec. P. Canon se dirige a quezon. Def. . v. 8, p. 1 

S 20 '27. (Q B-b, p. 43.) 

169 1927 3 21 El rendirse es de valiente. De£. , v. 8, p. 4 S 21 '27. 

(Q B-b, p. 43.) . 

170 i927 S 22 Una conferencia entru ,tacricanos y Filipinos sobre las I si as 

Pilipinas. Ss£*j v. 8, p. 1 S 22 '27. (Q B-b,. p. 43.). 

171 1927 S 24 Majority decides to send Quezon alone to U.S. EElik.* 

v. 3, pp. 1, 4 S 24 '27. (Q B-b, p. 84.) 

172 1927 S 25 Quezon's trip to U.S. useless, says ,jguinaldo. MT j ri . fr ., 

. v. 3, p. 1 3 25 '27. (Q B-b, p. 04.) 

173 1927 S "27 Democrat as still ignore Quezon's aim. I ff j A hi > ▼» 3» . - ■ 

pp. 1, 4 S 27 '27. (Q B-b, p. 84.) 
W 1927 S 28 La cooperaoion de todos pide el President e Quezon. Def., 

v. 8, pp. 2, 5 S 28' '27, (1 ^ P- *3* ? • • 

^5 1927 S 28 Quezon asks all Filipinos to back him, iSlikf v. 3, 

pp. 1, 4 3 28 '27, ■ (4 B-b, p. 84..) 



• TI- 11 III - 215 

- 7S» - • 

176 1927 S 28 Barnshaw seoundo hI llamamiento expedido por Quezon. 

lalbu, v. 18, pp. 1, 7 S 20 '27. ( 0 3-b, p. 138.) 

177 1927 S 28 Quezon pide el apoyo de todos en cualquiera empresa 

nacional. Xaa^ v. 18, p. 8 S 28 '.27. ( Q B-b,. p, 138.)' 

178 1927 s 2 9 Que son asked for conference with Coolidge. . fylTri.1? . r v. 3, 

p. 1 3 29 '27. (Q 3-b, p. 84.) . 

179 1927 S 30 feci, en que Osmena forme con Quezon la delegacion a America'. 

V«u_v. 18, ,p P . 2, 7 S 30 * 27. (Q 3-b, p. 138.) 

180 1927 0 1 Quezon y Osmena. (Editorial) Def . . v. 8, p. 4, 0 1 '27. 

(o 3-b, p. 43.) 

181 1927 0 1 Quozon-Osmena trip intended to regain prestige to party. ' 

I-ITrib., v. 3, pp. 1,- 4 0 1 »27. (Q 3-b, p. 84.) ' 

182 1927 0 1 Quezon willing to be Resident Commissioner. MTrib .. v. % 

pp. 1, 4 0 1 '27.. (Q B-b, p. 85.) 

183 1927 0 1 The conference with Coolidge k (Editorial) - Ind. . v. 13, 

pp. 3-4 0 1 '27. (Q B-b, p. 156.') 

184 1927 0 2 Democratas wish Quezon and Osmena success. MTrib. f v. 3, 

p. 18 0 2 '27. (Q 3-b, p. 85.) 

185 1927 0 3 Cooperacion incondicional recaba Quezon antes de partir. 

Van,, v. 18, p. 7 0 3 '27. (Q 3-b, p. 138.) 

186 1927- 0 3 Cooporacion y unidad piden los delegados. ' Def. . v. 8, 

p. 2 0 3 '27. (Q"B-b, p. 43.) 

187 1927 0 6 Quezon is not against amending shipping law. MTrib. . 

v. 3, p. 10 6 "27. (Q 3-b,' p. 85.) ' 

188 1927 0 . 8 Una salida en faJLso, (Editorial) Mm v ; 13, p. 11 ■ 

0 8 '27. ■ (Q 3-b, p. 156.) 

189 1927 0 2 9 Quezon y Osmena no tienen esperanza de obtener la libertad. 

■Ba£. , v. 8, p. 6 0 29 '27. (Q B-b, p. 43.) 

190 1927 N 1 Ni una razon vnlida vs. la emancepacion. MLut v. 8,' 

• pp. 1, 2 N 1 '27. (Q 3-b, p. 43.) 

191 1927 N 1 Uncertainly. (Editorial) * OxLku, v. 3, p. 4 N 1 *27. 

(Q B-b, p. 85.) 

192 1927 N 1 Quezon and Osmena in Tokyo. gSxUb., v. 3, p. 1 ( N 1 ' 2 7» 

(Q 3-b, p. 85.) 

193 1927' N 1. Island conditions undesirable, olaim. MxHi x.* v » 3. 

p. 6 HI *27. (Q 3-b, p. 85.) 

194 1927 h 1 Ya es hora do resolver la cuestion - Quezon. XfljW v, 18, 

pp. 1, 10 N 1 '27. ( Q 3-b, p. 138.) 

195 1927 N 2 Quezon sigue siendo immediata. £slw v * 8 » P- 1 

12 *27. (Q B-b, p. 44.) 

196 1927 H 2 Se suspendoran las elecciones del ano de 1929. 

J2a£.", v. 8, p. 1 H 2 '27. (Q B-b, p. 44.) 



III -.216 

• . " m - 

19? 1927 N 2 El executive vuelve a urgir onmiendas a la ley de cabotaje. 
Ifltt.., v. 18, p. 6 N 2 '27. (Q B-b, p. 138.) 

198 1927 N' 3 Esta mafiana comonzo la conforoncia con el Presidente Calvin 

Ooolidge. JM,, v. 8, P . 1 K 3 -27. (qB-b, p. 44.) 

199 1927 N 3 U.S. President will receive quozon today. i-Trib,,, v. 3, 

p. 1 N 3 '27. (Q B-b, .p. 85.) ' > 

200. 1927 N 4 En la conforoncia con Coolidgo no han tratado de nuestra 

emancipacion. l]ej;. , v . 8, pp. 1, 2"N 4 .»27. (Q B-b, p. 44.) 

201 1927 N -4 Quezon torno a remitiorao a la mayoria. Voiu, v. 18, - 

' • pp. 1, 10 N4 '27. (Q3-b, p. .138.) ;r; 

202 1927 N 4 Underbill persigue- a Quezon y Osmena en la casa blanca. 

IfltU. v. 18, p. 2 IT 4 '27. (Q i3-b, p. 138.) 

203 19 27 N 5 Ocolidge habe varias sugestiones a Quozon. V m jLT v. IS, 

pp. 1, 4 N 5 '27. (Q B-b, p. 139.) 

204 1927 N 5 Independence not touched by leaders. KTr jj^ , v. 3,- p. 1 

N 5 '27. (Q B-b, p. 85.) 

205 1927 N 7 El sucesor de Vood recibira ya cooperacion. JsR^ v. 18, 

pp. 1, 4 N 7 '27. (Q 3_b, p. 139.) 

206 3.Q27 N 7 King pre sent ar. a su pro.jocto con vistas a la inddpendencia, 

lm*.t v. 18, p. 2 N 7 '27. (0 B-b, p. 139.) , 

207 1927 N 8 Aguinaldo acusa a Quezon do supuosta deslealtad al paia. 

Vga,., v. 18, p. 2 N 8 '27. (Q B-b, p. 139.) 

208 1927 N 9 Carcel para el aparcero que- no cumpla contratos. JsHj., 

v. 18,' p. 7 H 9 '27. (Q B-b, p.- 139.) 

209 1927, ^ 9 A ultima hora atac'aran al Speaker Roxas. V a n , , v. 18, 

pp. 1, 12 N9 '27. (q B-b, p. 139.) 

210 1927 N 10 Quezon congratula. a los raiembros de la cameras. 'OaSU.t 

v. 18, p. 7 N 10 '27. (q B-b, p. 139.) 

211 1927 N 11 En general la. prensa do los 3.U. aboga por que haya armonia 

con Filipinas. T&JU., v. 8, p. - N 11 '27. (Q ^-b, p. 44.) 
212. 1927 H 11 Se tiene entendido que Stimson so considera ya viejo para 

ser Gov. General. JkL» v » n » P» 1 N 11 ' 27 « B " b ' P* 44 * 

213 1927 N 11 N a da sobro el futuro politico del pais so revela a los 

caudillos. Iszu, .v. 18, p. 1 N 11 '27. (Q »-b, p. 139.) 

214 1927 N 12 H a sonado la hora - quozon. , V^, v. 18, p. 1 N 12 '27. 

(Q B-b, p. 139.) 

215 1927 N 15 Quezon desmiente la abolicion do Culion. Jm*,t v « 18 » 

p. 2 N 15 '27. (q B-b, p. 139.) 

216 1927 N 16 El 28 do Diciembro es el dia de la llegada de quozon y 

Osmefia. £a£. , v. 8, p. 1 N 16 '27. (4 B-b, p. 44.) 
2] -7 1927 N 16 N acia dn Gob. de.gabinete. Sal. , 8, p. 1 N 16 '27. 
(a B-b, p. 44.) 



HI - 217 

79* - . 



218 .1927 .N 16 -Coolidge apuesto a toda reform organic. v . 18 ■: 

. PP. H 16 .27. (Q B-b, p, 139.) 

219 1927 N 16 Inforraara a Quezon do tnoH„ a = . , . 

ao t ^oticaa sucxas sobre el cabotaje. ' ' 

to** v. 18, p, 2 N-16 '27. (o B-b, p. 159.) 

220 1927 N 17 Quezon denies secret move, jffi^ v . 3> p§ , H 1? , 2?< 

(Q 3-b, p. 85.) 

221 1927 * 17 Quezon will raond broken fences here. MTrj^ v 3 p i 

IT 17 '27. (Q B-b, p. 85.) 

222 1927 N. 18 una injusticia a los barco* wn^^,, 

a j.us oar cos iilipmos en puertos extranjeros 

v. 8, p. 1 n 18 '27. .(0 B-b, p. 44.) 

223 19 27 N 20 Forbes accepts Quezon S M Osmefla as guests, ffl^,,,. 5 , 

P. 13, N 20 '27. (Q B-b, p. 85.) 

224 ' 1927 N" 20 Quezon's mission to Washington has failed, Democrats 

declared. flT^, v . 3, p. 16 N 20 '27. (QB-b, p. 85.) 

225 1927 H 21 Quezon y Oamefia esperaran la apertura del Congreso. 

MU., v. 8, p. 1 H 21 '27. (Q B-b, p, 44.) 

226 1927- N 21 U n comite ir a a Hongkong a llevar quejas. V^, v . 18, 

pp. 1, 9 N 21 '27. (Q B-b, p. 139.) 

227 1927 N 23 Hasta enero y a no ventra - M.L.Quezon. De^. , v.- 8, 

• P-. 1 N 23 '27. ( Q B-b, p. 44.) 

228 1927 N 24 Quezon vuolvo a domanda la inraediata. 1^. , v , 18, 

pp. 1,, 10 M 24 "27. (Q B-b, p. 139.) 

229 1927 N 25 Quezon favors .berican naval bases here. MTrlh.y v. 3, 

PP. 1, 4 N 25 '27. (Q B-b, p. 85.) 

230 1927 N 25 Quezon desmiente supuestas tratas sobre fondas para consejor. 

leiUt v - 18, p. 2 N 25 '27. (Q B-b, p, 139.) 

231 1927 N 26 The conquerors return. (Editorial) Ind. r v. 13, p. 4, 

IT 26 *27. (Q B-b, p. 156.) 

232 1927 N 26 Who is who in the .Philippines.- Grju. v. 1, pp. 4-5, 

If 26 '27. (Q B-b, p. 50.) 

233 1927 N 26 Culpa a los filipinos el projuicio racial. Van. . v. 18, 

p. 3, 31 26 '27. (0 B-b, p. 139.) 

234 1927 N 26 Retonan I03 conquistadoreo. Inq% . v. 13, pp. 11-12 

I. : 26 '27. (-'I 3-b, p. 156;) 
•■35 1927 If 27 Quezon debates with Gilbert. .SErib., v. 3, p. 13, ' 

N 27 '27. (Q B-b, p» 85.) - " 

2 % 1927 D 1 Completa automia. Def.. v. 8, pp. 1, 4 D 1 ''27. 

(Q B-b, p. 44.) 

237 I927 D 1 j.j 0 q Uorj0mos ser S ubditos de /ttnerica, afirma Quezon. 

VfflU, >• 18, p. 1 15.1 '27. (QB-b, p. 139.) 

238 1927 d ^ 2 Quezon debate con Vf.S. Clow sobre el- pais. 

lao*., v. 18, p. 1 D 2 '27. (Q B-b, p. 140.) 



. - III - 218 

* m - 

239 1927 D 5 Independent a y arguoo l 0 gl a . Def., v. 8, p. 1 D 5 - 27 . 

(Q B-b, p. 44.) 

240 1927 D 5 La independent, ftlipina no esta a la vista - admite Quezon. 

VflJU, v. 18, p. 2 D 5 '27. (q B-b, p . 140 .) 

241 1927 » 6 W ° hpl »*» cambio on 1„ politic* de los B.U. ggyi, 

v. B, p. 1 ]) 6 . 27 . (q }i _ b> p . 44> ) 

242 1927 D 6 Heath finds Quo son coup frustrated. ESxilu, V. 3, p. 1 

D 6 »27. (Q B-b, p. 85.) 

243 1927 D 6 Quezon admits independence for Islands is not in sight, 

LTxSJa., v. 3, p. 7 D 6 '27. (q B-b, P , 85.). 

244 1927 D 7 Quezon por el viaje Manual 'de inspeccion. Van., v. 18, 

pp. 1, 12 D 7 '27. (q B-b, p. 140.) 

245 19 27 D 8 Fraeaso de Quezon y Osmofia von. algunos democrat as- locales. 

Van., v. 18, p. 2, D 8 *27. (q B-b, p. 140,) 

246 1927 D 8 Quezon y Osmena esporan que el nuevo gobernador sera nombra- 

do antes del 15. Jj^h., v. 18, p. 1 D 8 '27. (Q 3-b,. p. 140. 

247 1927 D 9 Quezon eritica lo hocho por Coolidge.. Dpf^, v. 8, p.' 1, 

D- 9 '27. (Q B-b, p.. 44.) 

248 1927 D 10 Son insinceros Quezon y Osmena al decir de Heath, 

VaiU.,. v. 18, . p, 3 35 10 '27. (Q B-b, p. 140.) 

249 ' 1927 D 13 El viaje de Quezon y Osmena es un fraeaso dice el Sen. 

Sumulong. BoJ^., v. 8, p. 2, D 13 '27. (q B-b, p, 44.) 

250 1927 D 13 Sumulong atribuye a Guevara el fraeaso de quozon y Osmena. 

I&U* v. 18, p. 2 D 13, '27. (O B-b, p. 140.) ' 

251 19 27 D 14 Los Democrat a3 de E.U. contra H. Stimson, per'o quezon vs. a 

su favor. S&£ju. v « B » PP» 1» 4 D 14 '27. (q B-b, p. 44.) 

252 19 27 D 14 Todps aco'gen n H. L. Stimson. Van., v.. 18, pp. 1, 12 

D 14 '27. (Q -B-b, p. 140.) 

253 19 27 D 15 Quezon and Osmena pleased with Stimson appointment. 

H Trib. r v. 3, pp. 2, 6 D 15 *27. . (Q B-b, p. 85.) 

254 1927 D 15 3e propone el regreso. Vgn^., v. 18, p. 1 D 15 '27. 

(Q B-b, o. 140.) 

255 1927 D 17 Wright y Quezon frente ante el com. de asuntos insulares. 

Def r . f v. 8, p. 1 D 17 '27. (Q 3-b, p. 44.) 

256 1927 D 17 Acusa a Quezon de tratnr de oliminar la supervision de 

.America. Van.. , v. 18, p. 2, D 17 '27. (Q B-b, p. 140.) 

257 1927 D 17 Quezon denuncia alright ante el congreso. JsXUx. v. 18, 

pp. 1, 14 D 17 '27. (Q B-b, p. 140.) 

258 1927 D 19 8e aplazara acaso la peticion a los E.U. de la indepandencia? 

DgJLu, v. 9, P. .1 B 19 '27. p. 30.) 

$9 1927 D 19 Go creo que el pueblo Filipino recibo'do Stimson un trato 
Justo. v. 8, p. 1 B 19 '27. (Q B-b, p. 44.) 



19« III - 219 



260 1927 D 19 Quezon ase*ur a q ue no habia loves roaccionarios. ' 

VfflU, v. 18, pp. J,. 10 D lg , 2?> (q ^ ^ 

261 1927 D 19 Quezon dico que o S p<;r P srr ntmh^A* ■ ■ 

10, p. 2 Dig -27. (q B_b, p. f 40 .) 

262 1927 D 20 Elimination of Quezon is f„ared hero. M. IVih, v 3 

PP. 1, 4 D 20 '27. (0 B-b, P . 85.) 

263 1927 D 20 Tomen una discusion por la aceptacion do Quezon. 

IflIU, v. 10, pp. 1, 14 D 20 , 27> (Q B-b, p. .140.) 

264 1927 D 21 H. L. Stimsori contento de Quezon ot al. Jjg^ v. 8, ' . 

P. 1 D 21 '27. (Q B-b, p. 45.) 

265 1927 D '22 Otra campaha para a Quezon despreatigiar. W v . 18> 

PP. i; 14 D 22 '27. (Q i3-b, p . 140.) " 

266 1927 D 23 Dofonsoroa do los Filipinos. Doj^, v . 8, p. 1, 

D 23 *27. (Q B-b, p. 44.) 

267 1927 D 24 Quezon carries over P200,000 life insurance. PPT, v . 21, 

pp. 17, 24 D 24 '27. (Q B-b, p. 10 9 .) 

268 1929 Ja 1 "I have proofs," says Quezon in accusing bank. MPrlh. .. 

v. 8, p." 2 J a 1 '29. (Q B-b, p. 88.) 

269 1929 Ja 2 Tal fue lo que caudillo filipino declarado hoy. 

OP. v. 4, p. 1 J a 2 '29. (Q B-b, p. 100.) • 

270 1929 Ja. 4 Quezon so prepara por si seaso.hay sesionos especiales. 

laa*., v. 19, p. 1 j a 4 «29. (Q B-b, p. 100.) 

271 1929 Ja 6 Whore reason fails. (Editorial) PH v. 9, p. 6 

Ja 6 '29. (Q B-b, p. 117.) 

272 1929 Ja 7 Los tres liders so preparan por si Stimson es llama. 

Ifl ft ui. v. 19, p. 1 Ja 7 '29. (Q B-b, p. 141.) 

273 1929 Ja 8 ¥H1 map out strategy of fight today. ' HTrib. , y. 4, 

p. 1 Ja 8 '29,* (Q 3-b, p. 85.) 

274 1929 J a 9 Villamin ser prejudicial sogun Quezon. Beb t f v. 10, 

PP. 1, 4 Ja 9 '29. (Q B-b, p. 30.) 

275 1929 J a 9 l' 0 expand membership of inter-parliamentary body. 

PH v. 9, p. 2 Ja 9 '29. (Q B-b, p. 117.) ' 

276 1929 j a o. Island Mission is heartened by decision of Quezon to' go, 

to U.S. to help secure action. PH, v, 13, pp. 1, 3 
Ja 9 '29. (Q B-b, p. 119.) 
t77 192 9 Ja 11 Urge Stimson, Quezon to, go. HTrib. . v. 4, p. 2 
Ja 11 '29. (Q B-b, p. 86.) 

278 1929 j a 2.4 Stimson y Quezon so muostran complacidos por el aplaza- 

mionto hacia el mas de Jibril de la revision arancelaria 
en la metropoli. Ian*, v. 19, p. 2 Ja 14 '29. 
(Q B-b, p. 141.) 

279 192 9' J n 15 Quezon will speak on tariff before P.I. Chamber of Commerce 

tomorrow. PH v. 9, pp. 1. 10 Ja 15 '29. (Q B-b, p. 117.) 



- T9T - 



III - 220 



230 1929 J a 16 Triunfaronog S er a 



OF v A ^ _ CUVlad ° eSp ° Cial 7 conisionado. 



v - PP. 1, 8 Ja 16 '29. (Q B-b, p . 100 ) 

281 1929 Ja 17 Stimson, Quezon to stud ' 



t„ ,„ _ . y SUgar * v. 4, p. 1 



^17 '29. (q B-b, p. 06 .) 

282 1929 Ja 17 Quezon urges Aim Capital> y 

Jal7 '29. (qs- b , p . 86 .) 

283 ■ 1929 Ja 17 Tros hospitales de ener^m 

encrsencxa en esta ciudad. V^, v . 19, 

I>. 4 Jal 7 '29. (q H p .. 141 .) 

, 284 1929 J a 18 St /flS on and Quezon officially discussed special 

Plan. HTr^, v . 4> p . 2 Jal8 , 29> 

285 1929 Ja 23 Stlnson, Quezon, Schwilt-. v 

t .iuu, ocn,/,<atn and Unship meet. £H v . 9 

P. 2 J a 23 '29. (q B-b, p. 117J '. . ' _ , 

286 1929 Ja 29 Lq quioron a vor a Oun~nn v«„ j„ -1 . . 

a vez de ^onisionado. Deb, f v. 10 

P-. 1, Ja 29 '29. (Q 3_ b , p . 30.) ; * ' 

287 1929 Ja 30 Quezon so niga ropresentar a los azucareros. 

$akv, v. 10, p. l J a 30 '29. • (Q 3-b, p. 30 ) -a 

288 1929 F 1 El , 0 bierno * cta dispuosto a ayudar a 'la industria azuca- 

rera del pais. Dob,, v. 10, F 1 ^'29. (Q B-b, p. 30.) 

289 1929 F 1 Senator Osnona favors Quezon in o'loction to post in 

Wanhilieton - &&.f v - 10, P. 8, F 1 »29. (Q B-b, p. 45,)' 

290 1929 F l Quezon sayo he was Misquoted. HTrib rr v . 4, p .. 5 

F 1 '29. (Q 3-b, p. 86.) 

291 1929 F 2 Thinks naming of Solon to U.S. post is legal. 

m v. 9, p. 1 p 2 '29. (Q B_b, p. 117.) 

292 19.29 F 3 Quezon siguo inalterable en su decision de aceptar el 

puesto en Washington. Ml*., v. 10, pp. 1, 4 F 3 »29. 
(Q B-b, p., 30.) 

293 1929 F 5 Inconsistency seen in move to make Quezon P.I. resident 

envoy to U.S. PH v. 9, PP . 1," 2 'F 5 '29. (Q B-b, p. 117.) 

294 1929 F 6 El Sr. Quezon debe quidar. (Editorial). •' 

MU., v.' 10, p. 4, F6 '29. (q B-b, p. 30.) 
295^ 1929 F 6 Quezon sera un cubiado especial y Osias comisionado . 

OP v. 4, pp. 1, 8 F 6 "29. (QB_b,-p. 100.) 
296 1929 F 6 Who is. next? PH v, 9, p. 12 F6 '29. (Q 'B-b, p. 117.) 
97 1929 F 7 Quezon y Osmofia lament an la marcha de Stimson. * 
Bef., v. 10, p. 2 F 7 '29. (Q B-b, p. 45.)'. 
P 7 Quezon will hoad special delegation. |IT r jj L>. » v. 4, 
p. 1 F 7 »29. (Q B-b, p. 86.) 
99 I929 p 7 Quezon y Osnefia reconocen el exito del' govierno de Stimson. 
OP v. 4, p. 2" F7 '29. (Q B-b, p. 100.) 
Leaders meot this morning. MTrib. . v. 4, p£. 1, 4 
F 8 '29. . (Q B-b, p, 86.) 



300 i 929 



F 



5I5-1S. 



Ill --22\ 



798 



501 1929 P 8 Soy un niero saldado, doclara Osmofia. '■ 

0£ v. 4, p. 2 F8 -29'. (C H p . looJ 

502 1929 F 8 Quezon says death Qf ^ ^ & 

oal figure. PH v. 9 , p. 1 P 0 '29. (q B-b, p. 117.) 
30; 1929 P 9 ^ Special trip by 3 leader, is approved . ' ' 

Msuk., v. 4, pp. 1, 9 p 9 - 29 . ( q ^ p> ^ 
364 1929 P 11 Aspect for Fili P i nos io foundation. 

v. 4( pp. i ( a Fll -29, (q B-b, p. 86.) 

305 1929 P 12 Stimson, Quezon y Roxas expresan su confianza en el future. 

-flE- v. 4, p. 2 P12 -29. (Q B-b, p. 100.) 

306 1929 P 13 Legislature will not intervenS in selection of new G.G.- 

Quezon. PH v. 9, p . 1 p 13 ; 29 , ( Q ^ p< 

307 1929 P 13 La Logislatura no tendra uno terucucion alguna en la seleo- 

cion de.un ejecutivo. V^, y. 20, p. 2 P 13 '29. 
(0. ^-b, p. 141.) ' ' 

308 1929 P 13 Se fija para mediades de Marzo la marcha de Quezon y Roxas 

309 1929 P 15 Senate head calls banks' kicks unfair. 

ISrjJ^, v. 4, pp. 1, 5 P 15 '29. (q B-b, p. 86.) 

310 1929 P 17 Quezon sees no exploiting of Philippines by United States. 

K T A B fl g ..v. 31, p. 8, P 17 '29. (Q B-b f p. 76.) 

311 1929 P 19 Quezon y Roxas defienden los bills sobre bancos. 

HsZm., v. 10, p. 1, 3 P 19 '29. (Q B-b, p. 45.) 

312 1929 P 22 Quezon y la causa nacional. (Editorial) 

Ml*., v. 10, p. 4 P 22 '29. (Q B-b, p. 30.) 

313 1929 P 23 Stimson da a Quezon y al speaker. 

£P v. 4, pp. 1, 7 P_23 '29. (Q B-b, p. 100.). 

314 1929 P 23 Stimson vuelve a admitir que su asiste le debe .a la 

corporacion. OP v. 4, p. 2, F 23 '29. ('Q b -V p. 100.) 

315 1929 P 23 Quezon strongly for King's proposal. - 

PH v. 9 , pp. 1, 2 P 23 '29. (Q B-b, p. 117.) 

316 1929 Mr 5 Will ask U.S. Committee to hear mission. 

MTrib. . v. 6, p. 1 Mr 5 '29. (Q B-b, p. 86.) 

317 1929 Mr 19 Viiianin conte.sta a Quezon. OP v. 4, p. 3 

Mr 19 '29. (Q B-b, p. 100.) 

318 1929 Mr 23 L a universidad conferia deplomas de honor al Sr. Quezon 

y Librada Avelino. OP v. 4, p. 2, Mr 23 *29. (Q B-b, 
p. 100.) 

319 1929 M r 26 Quezon will wield all his men. MTrjW v. 4, p. 1 

Mr 26 '29. (Q B-b, p. 86.) 
520 1929 Mr 26 State University grants honorary degrees today on Quezon, 

, Miss Avelino. MTrjJ^, v. 4, p. 1 Mr 26 '29. <Q B-b, p. 86.) 



- »» - 111 " 222 



321 1929 ' Mr 27 Sees early chance to «,t treoAr™ ■ 

PH v _ g9t freed0m ln the .^w developments. 

V ' 9 ' P ^ 10 *27 '29. (oB_ b , 117<) 

322 19 29 Mr 27 L a independent puede que venga. v 10 

■ PP. 1, 4 Mr 27 - 29 . (q 3-b, p. 45.) ' 

323 1929 Mr 28 Stimson pays high tribute to Senate head. ; 

SI- 9, pp. 1, 10 Mr 28 '29. (q a. b , p, 117 .) 

324 1929 Ap 1 T ne three leaders of the Par East. 

'JffiBlJW v. 5, p. 1 (sup) Ap 1 '29. (Q B_ b , p . . 86 .) 

325 1929 ."p 2 Quezon trabn.lnr* por que ol ™, oa +„ ^ n v ■ 

jjoi quo oj. puesto do Gobernador de Filipi 

nas sea eleccion. Van -w on ■ o a „ .' / 

-an*, v. 20, p. 2 Ap 2 '29. (Q B_ b , 

p. 141.) 

326 19 29 A P 3 Villamin hits apathy here; raps Quezon. MDE v. 74, " • 

pp. 1, 8 Ap .5 '29. (0 B-b, p. 63.) 

327 1929 Ap 9 Leaders get optimistic U.S. report. PH v. 9, p. 1 

Ap.9 '29. (Q B-b, p. 117.). 

328 19 29 Ap 11 Quezon tells solon his trip is off. MTrib, , v. 5^ 

p. 3 Ap 11 -29. (Q B- b , p. 8 6.) ' 
329_ 1929 Ap 11 Un tributo de Quo son a V. n a pa. OP v. 4, pp . 1, 8 

Ap 11 '29. .. (Q B-b, p. 100.) 

330 1 929 Ap _11 Quezon to reirain here to receive new Chief Executive; 

P.I. leaders virtually have hand in minority. P1J v. 9, " 
PP. 1, 9 Ap 11 '29. (Q B-b, p. 117.) 

331 19 29 Ap 12 Vieno de China solo paro poder hablar a Quezon. ' 

DeXv, v. 10, p. 2 Ap 12 *29. (QR-lyp. 45.) 

332 1 929 Ap 14 Rider to tariff bill not worrying Filipino leader. ■ 

PH v. 9, pp. 1, 11 Ap 14 '29. (Q 3-b, p. 117.) 

333 1929 Ap 19 Quezon wants tariff on P.I. products to became effective 

on the very day Philippine Republic is established. 
Msih^ v. 5, p. 1 Ap 19 '29. (Q B-b, p. 86.) 

334 1929 Ap 23 Stimsom 'reveals agreement with Quezon, Osmefia. 

ICT rib A , v. 5, p. 1 Ap 23 »29 v (Q B-b, p. 86.) 

335 1929 Ap 23 Stimson revela un convenio con .Quezon y Osmefia do no ' 

hablar de la independenoia. 1sn*.t v « 20, p. 2 hp 23 '29. 
(Q B-b, p. 141.) 

336 1929 Ap ..23 'The secret "treaty", (Editor:. a].) PH v. 9, p. 10 

Ap 23 '29.. (Q B-b, P . 117.) 

337 I929 Ap 24 Quezon a ays he was misquoted. . MT jj ie a .,. v. 31, p. 3, 

Ap 24 '29. (Q B-b, p. 76.) 

338 1929 /_p 26 Quezon urges more pny for new fiscals job. . 

PH v. 9, p. 1 Ap 26 '29. (?3-b, p. 117.) 
359 1929 Ap 26 Washington hears Quezon, is for Mac Arthur as G.G. 

HI v. 9, P. 1 Ap 26 '29. (Q B-b, p. 117.) 



Ill - 223 

340. 1929 My 11 Quezon „ opone a qUo 3e 10TontaQ ^ • 

Sa^ v. 10, pp. i, 5 My u , 29> (Q - p> ^ 

341 1929 My 11 W„ n warns sugar # . ^ ^ 

. his plea. flDB v. 7, pp. 1, 4 My H ' 29 . (o B_ b , p. 63.) 

342 1929 My 11 Quezon sees near hope in Hoover plan. 

PJi v. 9, P . 1 fly 11 - 29 . ( Q B_b„ p . 11? J 
543 1929 My 11 Quezon urges halt in sugar development. 

m v. 9, pp. lf ; L1 %n , 29t ^ p> 

344 1929 My 16 Quezon ve una indicacion clnra de que se ampliara la 

politica de Stinson. v . ' 20 , p . 1 My 16 '29. 

(Q B-b, p. 141.) 

345 1929 My 18 Quezon warns agrf.nst more sugar investments. 

iM v. 23, n. 10 My 18 '29. (Q B-b, p. 109.) 
346. 1929 Je 3 Quezon sure to go unless forced here. 

MTrJJ^, v. 5, pp. 1, 5 Je 3 '29. (Q B-b, p. 86.) 
347 1929 Jo' 12 Quezon thinks U.S. Senate ,dll not change bill. 

m v. 9, p. 1 Jo 12 '29. (QB-b, p. 118.) 
343 1929 ' Je 12 Washington Administration asked to recall Auditor Ben F, 

Wright; Quezon, Auditor silent on report. PH v. 9, 

p. 1 Je 12 '29. (Q'B-b, p. 118.) 

349 1929 Je 19 Quezon se nioga a comentar la politica anunciada por Davis. 

Van., v. 20, p. 2 Je 19 '29,. (Q B-b, p. 141.) 

350 1929 Je 22 Quezon welcomes move for P.I. independence, says mission 

favors it. HI v. 9, pp. 1, 10 Je 22 '29. (Q B-b, p. 118.) 

351 1929 Je 26 Stop it. ^Editorial) MTrjb^ v. 5, p. 4 Je 26 '29, 

. (Q B-b, p. 86.) : 

352 1929 Je 26 Independence is impossible under Quezon's leadership? 

PH v. 9, p. 2 Je 26 '29. (Q B-b, p. 118.) 

353 19 29 Jl 2 Wants to know planters kicks. IsMi*^ v. 5, p. 1, 

Jl 2 '29. ( A B-b, p. 87.) 
554 1929 Jl 5 Tribute recalls how Quezon proved integrity. 

■ MTrjJ^, v. 5, p. 1 Jl 5 '29. (Q B-b, p. 87.) 

355 1929 Jl 8 Los caudillos del pueblos y Mr. Davis. 

OP v. 4, p. 1 Jl « '29. (Q B-b, p. 100. > 

356 1929 J]_ g Quezon wishes Davis success. . '. 

M?J3ibuu v. 5, p. 11 Jl 9 '29. (Q B-b, p. 87.) 

357 I929 Jl 9 Los jefes executives de provincias conforenclan con Davis 

y con Quezon. OP v. 4, pp. 1,-8 Jl 9 '29. (Q ^ p- 
100.) 

358 1929 Ji 12 Legislation plan dismissed by G.O. with H. Quezon. 

EH v. 9, p. 1 Jl 12 *29. (Q B-b, r. 
% 1929 Jl 16 .Scathing reply to Aguinaldo' a charges is made by Pres. Quezon. 

MTjrjj^, v. 5, P. 11. Jl 16 '29. (Q B-b, p. 87.) 



- 801 ~ 



III - 224 



360 1929 J l 16 Work of mission praised and congratulation sent. 

m v. 9, pp. 1, 10 Jl 16 '29. (QB-b, p. 118.) 

361 1929 Jl 18 Se atribuye vengansas el cobro de 1*80,000 a Aguinaldo. 

Van,., v. 20, p. 2 Jl IS '29. (Q B-b, p. HI.) 
5 62 1929 J l 23 Special mission headed by Quezon, Aguinaldo to work for 

Philippine Independence in United States strongly urged 
by Ex- representatives. PH v. 9, p. 1 Ji 23 '29. 
(•Q B-b, pp. 20 ic 118.) 

363. 1929 Jl 29 L a trajara Quezon no es la trajar al pueblo, Aguinaldo. 

ItHUj. v. 20, P . 1, Jl 29 '29. (Q B-b, pp. ( 5 & Hi.) 

364 1929 A g 1 Revelations yet to come. E^Sxife*., v. 5, pp. 1, 12 

Ag 1 *29. (Q B-b, p. v 87.) ' ' 

365 19 29 Ag 2 Let that last word be never heard. (Editorial) 

MTrjJ^, v. 5, p. 4 Ag 2 "29. (Q B-b, p. 87.) 

366 1929 Ag 2 Quezon welcomes Hep. Sanvictores to Nacionalista-Oonaoli- 

dado party. Jf^EiJii., v. 5, p. 2, Ag 2 '29. (Q B-b, p. 87..) 

367 1929 Ag 4 L a ultima embestida de Aguinaldo contra el Pres. Quezon 

creese que puede terminar en el juzgado. Deb r f ■ v. 10, 
p. 1 Ag 4 '29. (q B_b, p. 30.) 

368 1929 Ag 4 - Senate President Quezon is millionaire, Gen. .Iguinaldo 

declares in heated statement questioning financial methods. 

wrings, w 31, PP . 1, 5 Ag 4 '23. (q 3-b, P . 76.) 

369 1929 Ag 4 Let people decide now - Quezon- Aguinaldo debate. 

HI v. 9, p. 8, .'ig 4 '29. (Q B-b, p. 118.) 

370 1929 Ag 5 Quezon ya no contestara al Gen. Aguinaldo; esta millones 

por solo 1*200,000. Def. . v. 10, p. 7 .Ag 5 '29. 
(Q B-b, p. 45.) 

371 1929 Ag ,8 Stimson pays tribute to Quezon. NTjmos. v. 31, p. 2, 

Ag 8 '29. ' (Q B-b, p. 76.) 

372 1929 Ag 11 Ten most interesting Filipinos to /jaerioans are Manuel L. • 

'Quezon. PH v. 10, p. 7, Ag 11 '29. (Q B-b, p. 118.) 

373 1929 Ag 16 - El verdadero motivo por que Quezon se opone al. nombramiento 

de oficio, segun Hontihola. Debt, v. 10, p. 8, Ag 16 ' 29» 
(Q B-b, p. 30.) 

374 1929 % 17 Quezon y Aguinaldo. (Poem) PFP v. 23, p. 57, Ag 17 "29. 

(Q B-b, p. 109.) 

375 I929 t \g 20 Quezon sees two victories on birthday. 

IITrib. . v. 5, p. 10, Ag 20 '29. (Q B-b, p. 87.) 

376 !929 Ag 20 Quezon says Filipino people won two great victories. 

' PH v. 10, p. 5, Ag 20 '29. (Q B ~ b » P« 118 « ) 

377 '1929 ,' ; g 21 Quezon town in Batangas is proposed. 

MTrib. . v. 5, P. 2, Ag 21 '29. (Q B-b, p. 87.) 



3JI- 



802 , ' ■ ■ 111 " 225 



378 1929 -to 23 Revolt against budget system utter failure/ ' 

FH v. 10, pp. 1, 7 /g 23 '29. (Q 3-b, p. 118.) 
579 .1929 24 Quezon y T ay abas. Leon 3. Guinto. 

OP v. 4, p.. 11, .\ g 24 '29. (Q B-b, p. 100.) 
?>Q 1929 Ag • 27 Urge monument to Bonifacio, laud Quezon leadership at 

Balintawak. PH v. 10, pp. 1, 3 Ag 27 '29. (Q B-.b, p. 118,) 
3 31 1929 Ag 28 Senate President Quezon celebrates 51st birthday. (Poem) 

HI v. 10,' p. 5, Ag 28 '29.- (Q B-b, p. 118.) 
382 1929 . -Vc r 28 Rinde tribute al caudillaje de M. Quezon..- 

laa., v. 20, pp. ]., 12 .\g 28 '29. (Q B-b, p. 141.) 
38? 1929 Ag 29 Topacio visit a a Quezon antes de verse con Perez. 

OP v. 4, pp. 1, 3 Ag 29 '29. (Q B-b, p. 100.) 
384 1929 Ag 31 La republica ea la unica autorizada a buscar los fondos. 

de la revolucion. OP v. 4, pp. 1, 7 Ag 31 '29. 

(Q B-b, p. 100.) 

J85 I929 Ag 31 La lee'eion de sacrifice y solidaridad que nos ha llogado . ■ 

Plnridel- segun Quezon. PIT v. 23, p. 54, Ag 31 '29. 
(Q 3_b, p. 109.) 

386 1929 S 1 Who can succeed Quezon? P. II. I.'aflgahas. 

fficlLuf v. 5, pp. 6,' 20 S 1 '29. (Q B-b, pp. 12 & 87.) 

387 1929 S 9 Todavia veremos a Osmefia dirigir la Republica Filipina. • 

* • OP v. 4, pp. 1-2 S 9 '29. (Q B-b, p. 100.) ; . 

388 1929 S 12 Quezon tolls caucus plans. Cipriano D. Old. 

Wl v - 75, pp. 1, 2 3 12 '29. (Q B-b-, pp. 7 & 63.) 

389 1929 S .14 Quezon se despido y dija a Osmeiia. 

Van., v. 20, pp. 1, 12 S 14 '29. ( Q B-b, p. 141.) 

390 1929 S 15 Quezon without question mark; Osmeha, an enigma. 

MTrib. . v. 5, p. 19 S 15 '29- (Q B-b, p. 87.) . . 

391 1929 S 16 El Senador Osmefia, niendo soldado, es siempre uh general,- 

declara Quezon. Van., v. 20, p. 8, S 16 '29. (Q B-b, p. 141.) 

392 1929 S 19 "The laborer is worthy of his hire." 

MTrib. . v. 5, p. '2 S 19 '29. (<l B-b, p. 87.) 

393 1929 0 1 Seria de desiar. (Editorial) 

Van ., v. 20, p. 4, 0 1 '29. (Q B-b, p. 141.) v 

394 1929 0 4 Shifting the grain from the chaff. (Editorial). 

MTrjLb,., v. 5, P. 4, 0 4 '29. (Q B-b, p. 87.) 

395 1929 0 7 L a independencia es la suprema aspiracion. 

Dei., v. 10, p. 1 0 7 '29. (Q B-b, p. 45.) 

396 19*29 0 10 Trying his leadership. 

HD3 v. 76, p. 12 0 10 '29. (Q B-b, p. 63.) 
597 1929 0 13 Time for decision on liberty drive now - Quezon. 

HI v. 10, pp. 1, 10 0 13 '29. (Q B-b, p. 118.) ' 



V 



_ 803 _ ' 111 " 226 



59 8 1929 0 !9 3een frora the Salle.ry. PFP v . 23, pp. 2, 4, 34 

0 19 '29. (Q B-b, p. 109,) • " ; ■ ' ' . 

399 1929 0 2 5- L a r £e crowd greets dollar liner at pier. 

MTjjijes v. 32, pp. 1-2 0 25 '29. (Q B-b, p. 76.) 

400 1929 0 2 5 Quezon warns against danger of over-optimism. 

ISEiJU.. v. 5, pp. 1, 5 0 25 '29. (Q B-b, p. 87.') 
.01 1929 °. 2 5 Senate appoints member of liberty mission. 

IMxib.., 5, pp. 1, 10 0 25 '29. (Q B-b, p. 87.) 
402. 1929 0 26 L a indopendencia no esta llogsndo; no ha pasado nada - 

Quezon. Sa^A., v. 11, pp. 1, 8 0 26 '29. (Q B-b, p. 31.) 

403 1929 0 28 These receptions. (Editorial) * 1 

iffiifflfla . v. 32, p. 6 0 20 '29. (Q 3-b, p. 76.) 

404 1929 0 28 Independence not within sight, says .Quezon in caucus, 

lim. v. 76, pp. 1, 6 0 28 '29. (Q B-b, p. 63.) 

405 1929 0 31 22 bills soran tratados, estas nueve d.ias. 

BeJ^., v. 11, pp. 1, 14 0 31 '29. ( Q 3-b, p. 31.) 

< 

406 1929 N 2 So aprueba la revolucion Quezon disponiendo la identifica- 

cion de los restos del General del Pilar. Deb., v. 11, 
p. 4, il 2 '29. (Q B-b, p. 31.) 

407 1929 N ie Why do we Filipinos desire our independence? 

HTrib*., v. 5, pp. 15, 16, 18 K 10 '29. (Q B-b, p. 87.) 

408 1929 N 11 La labor legielativa reatrasi'un canto el estudio del 

asunto. Def*.. v. 10, pp. 1, 4 N 11 '29. (Q.B-b, p. 45.) 

409 .1929 N. 20 Sparc him. (Editorial) PH. v. 10, p. 4 N 20 '29. ' 

(O 3-b, p. 118.) 

410 1929 N ,22 Todos se oponen al viaje del Presidente Quezon. 

OP v. 4, pp. 1,8 N 22 '29. (Q B-b, p. 101.) t 

411 1929 K' 28 Quezon supports solons in Pork Barrel quarrel. 

PH v. 10, pp. 1, 4 N 28 '29. (Q 3-b, p. 118.) 

412 1929 D 3 Quezon y Osmeiia ■ debe ir a Londres. 

.Yafl. v. 20, pp. 1, 10 B 3 '29. (Q 3-b, P- 141.) > 

413 1929 D 4 A wise step. (Editorial) 

MTrib.- . v. 5, p. 4 D 4 '29. (Q 3-b, p. 87.) 

414 1929 D 7 Quezon tips Confessor and newspapers. 

I IDE v. 26, pp. 1-2 B 7 '29. - (Q 3-b, p. 63.) 

415 1929 D 8 rjenato President defends secretaries, flays critics. 

riT.yme.s_ v. 32, p.' 4, D 8 '29.. (Q 3-b, p. 76.) 

416 1929 D 22 Quezon seriously ill. jlTjAb, > v. 5, pp. V 28 

B 22 T 29. (Q B-b, p. 87.) * 

417 1929 D 24 Senate President Quezon is out of danger. 

MTrib. . v. 5, p. 1 ,]) 24 '29- U 3-b, p. 88.) 



_804 ■ m -227 



:i3 1951 Je 13 T hat Quezon canard. (Editorial) . 

-m v. 25, p. 30, Je 13 '31. (q H P. 109.) 

419 1931 29 Quezon's own revelation about Jones Bill. ' 



PFP 



v. 25, n. 35, pp. 16, 56 29 '31. (Q B-b, pp. 4 

• & 109.) 

420 1933 Ja 1 Son aguistas los fines del bill H a wes-C u tting. 

SstiU* v. 14, p. 2 J a 1 '33. (Q B- b , p. 31 .) 
1933 Ja 1 P.I. "Miafsion has to prove bill is good, says Quezon. 

HTCUU, v. B, p. 10' Jal '33. (QB-b,'p. 08.) 
422 1933 Ja 2 Quezon debe hacor que la Legislate acepto la ley - Roxas. 

°£ v. 0, p. l j a 2 '33. (Q B-b, p. 101.) 
423. 1933 Ja 2 NaolonaLiata party splits as Hoover considers independence. ' 

m v. 27, pp. 23, 27 Ja 2 '33. (Q i-b f p. 109.) 
424 1933 J a 2 Quezon greets his well-wishers. 

m -v.. 13, pp. 1, 4 J a 2 '33. (Q 3_ d , p. 118.) 
''25 19 33 Ja 2 V amenta threshes out Quezon stand. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 4 J a 2 '33.' (Q B-b, p. 118.) 

426 19 33 Ja 3 T Jn gran nuianro do nraigos fclicitaron a Quezon el Domingo." 

SsthM., v. 14, p. 8 J a 3 '33. (Q -B-b, p. 31.) 

427 19 33 J a 3 «1 r «n; \guinnldo es do la misraa opinion que ol Presidents 

Quezon. Leb^, v. 14, p. 8 J a 3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 31'.) 

428 19 33 J a 3 Politica de construcoion de oarreteras defendida por el 

Pres. Quezon. Van. , v . 23, p. 2 Ja 3. '33. (Q B-b, p. 142.) 
t29 19 33 Ja 3 Las iniciales de Quezon equivalen a "morir" la chando 

quiero" segun Oppus. Jjm..^. v. 23, p. 4, Ja 3 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 142.) 

430 1933 Ja 4 Quezon may talk on bill in Cebu. 

HTrib. . v. 8, p. 1 J a 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 88.) 

431 1933 Ja 5 Mission and Quezon exchange hot words. 

HTrjb T f v. b, p. 10 Ja 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 88. ) 
t32 I933 Ja 5 Si dimite Ventura, Quezon recomendan al Uenador T. Siaon. 

OP v. 8, p. 2 Ja 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 101.) 
433 1933 Ja 6 City council backs Quezon. 

MTrj,b rf v. 8, pp. 1, 12 Ja 6 '33. (Q B-b, p> 88.) 
>34 1933 Ja 6 Gobernadores provinciales llamados a Baguio por el Pres. 

Quezon. OP v. 8, pp. 1, 8 Ja 6 '33. ( y B-b, p. 101.) 
435 1933 J a 6 Ouenco salio para veace con Quezon. 

V.an_._ f v. 23, p. 1 Ja 6 '33. (Q B-b, p. 142.) 
''36 1933 Ja 6 Quezon ira a Suiza pronto, segun se dice. 

Deb . r v. 14, pp. 1, 4 Ja-6 '33. (Q B-b, p. 156.) 
^ 1933 J a 7 iiandiko subio a Baguio; conjocturas de actualidad. 

Deb,., v. 14, p. 1 Ja 7 '33. (Q B-b, p. 31.) 



-803 ■ 111 " 228 



,33 1953 Ja 7 . Quezon going over probing of Dept. of Interior, tabor. 

™ V ' 89 ' ™- l> » ^7'33. (Q B- b , p . 63 .) 

439 1933 Ja 7 Que son summons his lieutenants for coming war. 

ISEeUu, v. a, pp. i, 4 Ja 7 , 33> (Q ^ p> ^ 

440 19 3 3 Ja 7 Quezon roune a su gente en preparaoion a i a decisis , 

partido de la mayoria. Van. v. 23, p. 2 J a 7 '33. ' 
(Q 3-b, p. 142.) 

•441 1933 Ja 8 El bill H awes _Cutting votado P or Hoover. 

Mu, v. 14, pp. 1, 3 J a 8 '33. (.Q 3-b, p. 31.) 

442 1933 Ja 8 Quozon to go to Washington. Mrib., v. 8, pp. 1, 28 

Ja 8 '33., (Q B-b, p. 38.) 

443 1933 _ Ja 8 Tho battle ia forming. MTrjj^ Vf 8 , pp. 9, 16 (mag. ) 

. Ja 8 ''53. (0 B-b, p. 83.) 

444 1933 Ja 9 Que son will leave as noon as possible. 

EPA v. 89, pp. 1, 3 Ja9 '33. (!] B-b, p. 63.) 

445 1933 Ja 9 El Rop. Vamenta reconoco ol patriot! smo de Quezon. 

OP v. 7, pp. 1, 8 J a 9 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 101.) 
.446 1933 <Ja 9 Quezon 11 win al Je.c. ;J.unan oon nogencia. 

Van., v. 23, pp. 1, 2 J a 9 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 142.) 

447 1933 Ja 10 L a iucha entre nosotros ha terminado, deolara al Pres. 

Quezpn. Deb., v. 14, pp. 1, 4 J a 10 '33. B-b, p, 31. 

448 1933 J a 10 Las cabalas de hoy. (Editorial) Deb, . v. 14, p. 4, 

Ja 10 '33. U :3-b, p. 31.) 

449 19 3 3 «Ja 10 Quezon's trip, post in cabinet up in caucus tomorrow. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 4 Ja 10 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 119.) 

450 I933 J a 10 Quezon vuelvar para atondor las v&cantos. 

Vfla. , v. 24, pp. 1, 2 Ja 10 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 142.) 

451 19 33 Ja 11 Quezon seeks no authority from Solons. I 

MDB v. 89, p. 1 Jail '33. (Q B-b, p. 63.) 

452 I933 J a 12. Quezon will not consult legislature. 

. PH v. 13, p. 4, Ja 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 119.) 
'■'•53 I933 Ja 12 Quezon explica el objecto de su viaje. 

Dej2., v. 14, p. 1 Ja'l2 '33- (Q 3-b, p. 31.) 
454 I933 j a 12 Quezon spikes movement to split party. 

MD3 . v. 89, pp. 1, 6 Ja 12 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 63.) 
'►55 I933 Ja 12 Quezon clarifies his purpose in leaving for U. S. 

MDB v. 89, p. 1, Ja 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 63.) 
456 1933 J a 12 Quezon bnres aim of next trip to U.S. 

HTrjb., v. 8, pp. 1, 5 Ja 12 '33. 0°. 3-b, p. 88.) 
45? 1933 Ja 12 Appointments disclosed with President- Quezon. 

HT-rib. . v. 8, pp. 1, 3 Ja 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 88.) 
458 19 33 J a 14 Hoy tenemos oportunidad, dice Quezon. 

Dej2., v. 14, pp. 1, 4 Ja 14 '33- (Q p. 31.) 



- 806 - HI - 229 . 



459 1933 Ja 14 Presidential veto Predicted »» rw 

VF p „ ~ * M " Ue!50n announces departure. 

460 1933 Ja 15 Senate Head enumerates hi. poli cies . ^ . 

M£rik., y. 8, p Pl 1( 22 Ja „ (Q — 

4611933 Ja 16 ^-n con los represent antes en 1Ula rounio. 

OP v. 8, pp. i, 8 Ja]6 ,- 3# (Q3 _ b> p> 

462 1933 Ja 17 Quezon el Obrorista. OP v. 8, pp. lf 8 J& 1? 

. (°- B-b, p. 101.) ' • 

463 1933- Ja 13 Quo son will 'sail despite bill passing. 

■2fflim„ v. o, pp. 1( 2 Jal8 , 33i ( Q ^_ b #88j 

464 .1933 Ja. 19 .1 ^,1V< destruira la ostractura economica de Pilipinas - 

Quezon. Deb,., v. l 4 ,-pp. lf 4 Ja lg (q ^ p> ^ <} 

465 1933 Ja 19 Nanuol L. Quoaon. J. P. Hllorlo. . 

' ^- v ' ^ P. 14, Jal 9 '33. (o H p . 6 ,.) 

466 1933 Ja 19 Dos terceros partes de la Legislature opuestos al "Bill". 

* _ & V ' 8 » P- 2 ' J al9 '33. (QB-b, p. 101.) 

467 1933 va 19 Quezon warns sugar law friends. 

m v.,,13, pp. 1, 4 Jal9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 119.) 

468 1933 Ja_ 19 Quezon has not changed stand. PH v. 13, pp . 1, 4. - 

J a 19 '33. (Q'B-b, p. 119.) 
«9 1933 Ja 20' U n convenio entre Quezon y l a mission revelada P or el 

mismo Pres. ayer. DgJ^ v. 14, p. 8 " J a 20 r 33. (Q B-b, p. 31 

470 1933 J a 20 No action unless prove fcod - Quezon. 

1LD1 v. 89, pp. 1, 8 Ja 20 '33. (Q B-b, p, 63.) 

471 1933 Ja 20 Queaon, Abo to and T-R take up new .judges. . 

.HEriJL.., v. 8, pp. 1, 6 J a 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 88.) 

472 1933 Ja 21 Quezon abandons his trip. ^ 

MDB v. 89, pp. 1, 8 'j> 21 '33. (Q B-b, p. 63.) 
.473 19 3 3 Ja 21 Quezon honors Roosevelt. 

P|T v. 27, p. 36, Ja 21 '33- (Q 3-b, p. 109.) 
47'r 1933 J a 21 Quezon no podria obtener un bill mojor dice el Wellington 

Post. VflQ., v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Ja 21 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 142.) 
175 1933 J a 22 Senate President, opposing measure, explains position. 

MTr^b vl v. 8, pp. 1, 7 Ja22.'33. (Q 3-b, p. 88.) 
' r76 1933 J a 23 Quezon hablara del bill. _ ' • [ . 

OP v. 8, pp. 1, 8 Ja 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 101.) 
^77 1933 Ja 23 President Que icon .clarifies stand on protested seats in 

long letter. .PH v. 13, pp. 1, 3 Ja 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 119.) 
^ 1933 Ja 23 Un escandalo lo de o'ardo dice Quezon. 

Vffl' f . f v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Ja 23 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 142.) 

479 103^ T 

^■>J " a 23 Quezon aclara su actitud. 

Van". , v. 24, pp. 1, 2 Ja 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 142.) 



: ;>yi in - 230 

• - 807 - 

m 1933 Ja 24 • Quezon quiore la oigan los jovonos do l a universlded. • ' 

. Dojj., v. 14,. pp. 1, 8 J a 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 31.) 

481 1933 Ja 24 Quoson ccmtosta 103 ataques lanzados por el Rep. Gomes el 

Sabado. D&b. , y. 14, p'. 8., J a 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 31.) ' ' . 

482 1933 Ja . 24 °- U(;zou recalls telephone talk with Palma in Clarifying 

stand. OB v., 89., pp... 1, 6 Ja24'33. (Q 3-b, p. 63.) 

433 1933 Ja ' 2 ^ Quyzcm will speak at U.P. ,.. 

SScikt.* v. 8, pp.. 1, 14 .Ja 24 '33. '(Q B-b, p. 88.) 

til. 

434 1933 J a 24 Quezon will, not act till mission returns. 

ESxiXbut v. 8, pp. 1, 3 Ja 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 88.) 9 ' 

485 1933 Ja ^4 ''! uezon dispuesto a hablar ante los de la. Univ. de Filipinas. 

OP v. 8, p. 2 Ja 24 '33. (Q B-b, p.' 101.) ■ 
436 19 33 .-^ a 24 President- Quezon explains to Pallia attitude on student 

' demostration on Phil. Act. . PH v. 13, p. 3 Ja 24 '33.'-' 

(Q B-b, p. 119.) 

487 1933 Ja 24 Quezon -dirige una carta a Palma. por el proyecto H a wes. 

3taa. , v.. 23, p. 3 Ja 24 '33. (ft 3-b, p. 142.) 

488 1933 Ja 25 Quezon explica por que sois jueces. no han flido confirmados 

awn. J2eb., v. 14, p. 1 Ja 25 '33. (Q 3-D, p. 31.) 
189 1933 Ja 25 Torres a la Coraision que j as contra Ocsmpo a otro no le 

conocen. j&b.. , v. 14, p. 11, Ja 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 32.) . 

490 1933 Ja 25 Reasons given for delaying. 

KDB v. 89, pp. 1,. 8 Ja 25 '33.. (Q B-b, p. '63.) 

491 1933 Ja 25 El d.iscur:30 de f'i . Que son. 

OP v. 8, pp. 1, 8 Ja 25 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 101.) 

492 1933 Ja 25 Abeto gives unconfirmed Judge nominees, etc. 

PH v. 13,. pp. 13, 14 Ja 25*33. (Q B-b,. p.. 119.) 

493 1933 Ja 26 Posible marcha de Quezon a Yokohama, dondo se'vera con la 

mision. Dei., v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Ja 26 '33. (Q p.. 32;). 

494 1933 Ja - 26 . Lineup at the political front. , 

Gra.. v. 6, pp. 6, 7, 63 Ja 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 50.) 

495 19 33 Ja 26 Quezon sale al .encuentro de la mission on Yokohama para 

recibir los informes. OP v. 8, p. 4 Jft 26 '33. 
(q 3_b,. p. 101.) •. 

496 1933 Ja 27 Ouezon urge la ropatrian de Filipinos en E.J. 

v. 23,,PP. 1- 10 J * 27 (Q 3 " 15 ' P * ' 

497 1933 Ja 27 L a Mision aun -spera en E.U. a M. Quezon. 

V^, v. 23, PP. I, 2 Ja27'33. (Q B-b, p. 

498 1933 Ja 28 El Pres. ^e,on urge la repatriacion de "Pinoys" desem- 

pleado en ^erica. Bfilu. v. 14, p. 8 Ja 28 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 32.) 

499 1933 Ja 28 Quezon to open provincial war. on P.I. measure. 

• ' MDB v. 89, PP. 1. 8 Ja28 '33. B-b, p. 63.) ■ 



Ill - 231 

" 808 - 

500 .1933 Ja 28 Senate Pres. Quezon." (. por .) ' 

HE v. 21, p. 22 Ja2 B .33. (q H p , l09) . 

501 1933 Ja 28 Independence in the balance. 

,mv. 27, p. 4 J a2 8 '33.' (Q B-b, p . 109 .) 

502 1933 Ja 30- Independence may ncver comc - 

y ' PP * 1 ' 5 J 'a 30 '33. (q.B-b, p< 6 ,j . 

50? 1933 Ja 30 Quezon broadcast for U.S. 

KDBv. 89, pp. lt o. Jfc 3Q ,^ (q ^ ^ ^ ■ 

504 1933 Ja 30 -Quezon broadcast clearly recoived. 

41 v. 13, pp. 1, 3 j a 30 , 33t (Q3 _ b> ^ ngJ 

505 19 33 Ja 30 TrnnsmiBt&n del discurso. 

laa.", v. 23, pp. 1, 2 J a 30 '33. (Q B-b, p. 142.) 

506 1933 Ja 30 Quezon no eompronde bien ol bill Ilawes, dice Su author. 

Ian-, v. 23, PP. 1, 2 J a 50. '33. U B-b, p. 142.) ' 

507 1933 Ja 30 Queaon anuncia rsu viaje a PJ.U. 

v - 23, pp. 1,10 Ja 30'33. (q B-b, p. 1 42 . ) 

508 1933 Ja 31 Congratulan a Quezon per au. discurso aver. ' 

£eb., v. 14, pp. 2, 5 j a 31 - 33> (o J3 _ b) p< 32 j 

509 1933 Ja. 31 Es una Ley do exclusion y do tarifas, no de independent. 

v - u > P. »» Ja 31 '33. (q B-b, p. 32.) 

510 1933 Ja 31 Quezon will leave for U. B. 

OS v. 89, p. 1 J a 31 '33. ( a E-b, -p. 64.) 

511 1933 Ja 31 ' Speaking of platform. (Editorial) 

M£3 v. 89, p. 14, Ja 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 64.) . 

512 1933 Ja 31 ' Quezon attacks independence bill in radio speech,' etc." 

ISidJlw v. 8, p. 2, Ja 31 *33. (q B-b, p. 88.) 

513 1933 Ja 31 Quezon's speech clearly heared by radio fwis in U.S. 

ISrjJ^, v. 8, pp. 1, 2 Ja 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 89.); 
5U I933 J a 3! ' Quezon sails February 25. 

KTriJ^, v. 8, pp. 1, 1G J a 31 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 8 9 .) 

515 1933 Ja n»d. Un monsajo. J our.. P.I. H od. Ah v. 13," pp . 4, 5 

Ja '33. (Q B-b, p. 156.) 

516 1933 j a n->>(it 0ur pGaCKful atrucfile for independence. Phil. Soc. Sc. 

v. 5, pp. 71, 86 Ja '33. (Q B-b, p. 156.) 

517 1933 F 1 El discurso de Quezon no convence a nadie por sus arguraen- 

tos, (itc. Beb. , v. 14, p. 2 P 1 '33. ( Q B-b, p. 32.) 
jIO 1933 F 1 Es hora de aprobns Leyes obroristas, afirraa Quezon. 

Bob., v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Fl '33. (Q B-b, p. 32.) 

519 I933, F 1 . Osmena won't fight Quezon, Cebuanos say. 

MDB v. 89, pp. 1, 4 F 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 64.) 

520 1933 F 1 Quezon hits Congressman for talking. 

MT rib r f v. 8, pp. 1, 11 F 1 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 89.)' 



_ 809 



iii - 232 



•521 1933' F 1 OuBzon would chock Bolshevism. • ' • • 

V * °' W ' l ' 11 * I ; 33. (Q B. b , p . 89 .) 

522 1933 F 1 Quezon no en/Ho un rlr<-rvi „h , 

Op v o J T dL,5pladad0 Cn - tico do nuestros Misioneros. 
~ V * °' P ' 2 1 1 '33 % (QB-b, P . 101.) 

523 1933 F 1 El.GraL. ^tornio (Vivora) Rr^r+n 

nT3 ^or a ; Kxcpjto encomia al Pres. Quezon. • 

v. 8, P . 2 Pi -33. (o iH p . 1()1>) 

5 24 1933 F 1 Pactores do des'contonto do la' mas as senala ante eT iSonado. 

_ • low v. 23, p ; 2 pi .33. (Q3 _ b> p> 142>) 

•525 1933 F 1 Es injusto que conpre<5:i q+ n -i^-ri,, • 

i ngrtsista influyon sobre ol bill H a wea con * 

su declaraciones - Quezon. ^ ^ ^ ^ g p i 
(Q B-b, p. 142.) 

526 1933 Ss dober del .obierno protegor bajo sua leyes a los 

obroros - „e K on. Bob, , v . 14 , p . 8> p 2 t33< ( 

527 1933 F 2 The hand-out. (SditorlaO , v. 6, P . 4, I 2 '33 

(0 B-b, P- 50.) *' 
523 1933 P 2 Que son tolls Wioa. 0^ v ,. 6 , pp . lQ> ^ ( ^ 
F 2 *33. (Q B-b, p. 51.) • 

529 .1933 F 2 Sxisto desasosi^o eritre nuestras mas as dd.de el Pres. Quezon. 

OP v. 8, p. 2 P 2 '33. (Q B-b, p. 101.) ' 

530 1933 F 2 Quozon ur ff od to go to .Wica.' ' ' 

M v. 13, pp. 1, 14 P 2 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 119.) 

531 1933 P 3 Proteccion ne cess aria. (Editorial) ' ' 

v. 14, p. 4 F 3 »33. (0 B-b, p. 32..) " ' 

532 1933 P 3 Varona wins trip to U. S. vi.th Quezon; 

im v. 09, pp." 1, 8 TP 3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 64.) - 

533 1933 P 3 Quezon will seek changes in Kawes Law. 

W v. 89, pp. 1, 2 P 3 '33. ( Q B-b, p. 64 J 

534 1 9 3 3 P 3 The poor and their duo. (Editorial) . " 

USEibuu v. 8, p. 4, P 3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 89.) 

535 1933 p 3 Should Quezon, go "to .taarica? (Editorial) 

£H v. 13, p. 4 P 3 '33.' (Q 3-b, p. 119.) ' V 

536 1933 P 3 Quezon praises decision made by Hawos on floor-leadership. 

HI v. 13, pp. 1, 3 P 3 '33. ( n B-b, p. 119.') 

537 I933 P 3 "Beware of promises", says Quezon. ^ 

PH v. 13, pp . 1, 3 P 3 -33. (Q B-b, p. 119.) 
1933 P 4 \J e must learn 'to use our products - Quezon. 

J2II v. 13, pp. 1, 14 P 4 '33. (Q B-b, Supp.) 
1933 P 4 Compares Q\iozon to Mosos, 

PFP v. 27, p. 24, P 4 '33. (Q B-b, p, 110.) 
1933 P 4 El Bin H a wes no da ni la inmediata en la tomprana Quezon. 

laa-, v. 24, pp. 1, 10 P4 '33. (QB-b,' p. 142.). 
933 P 5 Quezon says he 'was duped by preamble of Jones .Act. 

MTrib T _,_ v.- 8, pp. 1, 22 P 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 89.) 



810 111 ~ 2 33 



542 1933 F 5 Quezon favored retention hero of naval bases, is Vera's 

relation. J^, v. 8, p. 2, j 5.-33. (q B . b> p> QgJ 

543 1933 F 5 ^n did not invite Varona, leader rovoals. 

KCEilb., v. 8, pp. 1, g F 5 .33, (q B.- br p . 89t ) ' 

544 1933 F 6 Why? Quoson asks Palma. MM V. 89, pp. 1, 8 F 6 '33 ■ ' ' 

(Q B-b, p. 64.). 

545 1933 F 6 Quezon swings Iloilo vs. P.I. measure. 

MB v. 89, pp. 1, 4 F6 '33. (QB-b/p. 64.) 

546 1933 F 6 Quezon osta icuy nlroado. 

Iaa-» v. 24, pp. 1, 2 F 6 «33. (q B-b, p. 143.) 
547- 1933 F 6 Qu.zon arguyo a f,vor d, la retoncion de los bases naval.s, ' 
alega P. Vera. V^, v . 24, p. 2 F 6 '33. (Q B-b, p. 143.) 

548 1933 F . 7 Funds for trip of Quezon and Varona found. 

EM v. 89, p. 1 F 7 '33. *(Q B-b, P . 64.) 

549 1933 F 7 Justice not served in Viola case - Quezon. 

KMhx., v. 8, pp. 1, 8 F 7 '33..(Q B-b, p. 89.) 

550 19 33 F 7 Garde critioa al Pres. 11. Quezon. 

OP v. 8,. p. 8 F 7 '33. (3 B-b, p. 101.) 

551 1933 F 7 Quezon revela a corao el Juez que. absolvio a' Silvio Viola ha' 

perdido au nombrado. OP v. 8, p. 2 F 7 '33. (Q B-b, p. 102,.) 

552 19 3 3 F 7 "I wm defend the rights of the -poor, if I have to do so 

• against the best lav/yers" -Quezon. PH v. 13, p. 2 
F 7 '33. (Q B-b, p. 119.) 

553 19 3 3 F 7 Quezon decl.ara que no ha invitado al representante Varona 

para ir con el a E.U. Vjqi^ v. 24, p. 6 F 7 '33. (Q B-b, p. 143 

554 19 3 3 F 7 Quezon sigue preparandose. Van., v. 24, p. 1 ? 7 '33. 

(Q B-b, p. 143.) 

555 1933 F 8 El' viaje de Quezon. (Editorial) Deb., v. 14, p. 4, P 8 '33. 

(Q B-b, p. 32.) 

556 1933 f 8 Roosevelt and Quezon to address Governors in convention today. 

MDB v. 89, pp. 1, 8 F 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 64.) 

557 1933 F 8 Restoring confidence in our courts. (Editorial) 

' MTrAfr. r v. 8, p. 4 F8 '33. U B-b, p. 89.)' 

558 1933 f 8 D e Joya strikes back at Quezon. 

MTrjJ^, v. 8, pp. 1, 6 F 8 '33- (Q B-b, p. 89.) 

559 I933 F 8 U.P. should be free from politics, says Quezon! 

PH v. 13, PP. 1, 6 F 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 119.) 
3b0 1933 f ' 8 Quezon no*quiero politioa en U.P. 

Van., v. 24, pp. 1, 2 F8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 143.) 
561 I933 F 9 Quezon no hablara noo en la U.P. para no dar panilo a las 

recomendaciones. Ml., v. 14, p. 2 F'9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 32.) 



5I1-2S 8U 111^234. 



,-, 2 19 35 F 9 Quezon speech. HDB v. 89,< p. 6 F 9 '33. (Q 3-b, p . .64. ) 
563 1935 F . 9 Quezon resents attack of Palma on his leadership. 

MTrih., v. 8, p. 10 F 9 ■'33. (q B-b, p. 89.) . • 
ffl 1933 - F 9 Quezon dara mas revelaciones. ImL. v. 24, pp. 1, 2 

F 9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 143.) 

t 

565 19 33 F 10 351 .Pres. Que son busca su propia caida por J. -A. Jose. 

Deb,., v. 14, p. 4 F 10 '33. (Q -3-b, p. 32.) 

566 1933 F 10 Ho existe la politic a en l a Universidad dice el Rector 'Palma 

a Quezon. DgJ?^, v. 14, p. 2 F 10 '33. (Q 3-b, -p. 32.) 

567 1933 F 10 Palma takes strong- stand. KD3 v. 89, pp. 1, 8 F 10 '33. 

(Q 3-b, p. 64.) 

568. 1933 F 10 Solo o' acompasiado seguirse mi viaje a B.U. - Quezon. 

OP v. 8, pp. 1, 2 F 10 '33. (Q3-b, p. 102.). 

569 19 33 F 10 Quezon habla a' su vez de la Filipinizacion. 

OP v. 8, pp. 1, 8 F 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 102.) 

570 19 33 F 10 -Quezon advances liberty plan. PH v. 13, pp. 1, 7 

F 10 '33. ( Q 3-b, p. 119.) " • . 

571 1933 F 10 Enviemos' otra Mision - Quezon. Van*., v. 24, pp. 1, 9 

F 10 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 143.) ■ ,' 

572 1933 F 11 Texto integro del discurso de Quezon, ayer mafiana. 

Ian*., v. 23, pp. 3, 4 F 11 '33. (Q B-b, Supp.) 

573 , 1933 F 11 El torno a un discurso. (Editorial) 

Deb^., v. 14, p. 4 F 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 32.) . 

574 19 33 F 11 Quezon dice a Palma se equivoca. 

Deb, , v. 14, pp. 1, 8 F 11 '33.. (Q 3-b, p. 32.) 

575 1933 F 11 Fue definido Quezon en su discurso ayer. 

Dgb^., v. 14, pp. 1, 4. F 11 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 32.) ■ 

576 1933 F 11 Una mision represent ativa para consequir una ley mejor, 

recoraienda Quezon. Deb^., v. 14, p. 2 F 11 ''33. (Q 3-b, p. 32 

577 1933 F 11 Quezon plan well received. MDB'v. 89, pp. 1, 8 

F 11 '33. (Q3-b, p. 64. ) 

578 1933 F 11 Quezon flays Uawen bill urging new Mission to tackle question. 

JJBL.V. 89, PP. 1, f> F 11 '33. (Q3-b, p. 64.) , 

579 1933 F 11 Positions of Quezon and Palma are compared. 

MDB - v. 89, pp. 1, 8 F 11 '-33. (Q 3-b, p. 64.) 

580 1933 F 11 ' Independent, says Quezon. KpB v. 89, pp. 1, 8 

F 11 '33. (Q ^-b, p. 64.) 

581 1933 P u Reve^g how Palria wrote resolution to support Vood. 

JEcik., v. 8, pp. 1, 2 F 11 '33. (Q ^-b, p. 89.) • 

582 1933 F 11 Quezon is still the real eni^a, not Osmena, declares 

F. 3enitez. i;Mfc« v. 8, pp. 1, 5 V 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 89.) 
5?j 3 1933 F 11 Se vitfiuttbra un acuerdo, etc. 0£ v. 8, p. 6 F 11 '33. 
(0 B_bf« p. 102.) 



III - 235 

812 - ' 



58 4 1933 F 11 Quezon reconoce l a buena fo d e los misionero filipino. 

OP v. 8, p. 2 P 11.-33. (Q S-b, p. 102.) 

585 1933 F 11 Ha sido nuestra proposition. ■ 

• OP v. 8, p. 6, I- 11 '33. ('g3_ b , p . 102.) * : 
•386 1933 F 11 ' Commission takes up Quezon's plan Monday morning. 

PK v. 13, pp. 1, .14 F ii '33. (q B_ b> p. 119.) 

587 1933 F 11 Quezon replies to Palma. HI v. 13, p. 3 p n -33. (q ;B _ b> • ' 

P. 119.) 

588 1933 F 11 Quoaon shudders on hearing facts of Viola incidents. 

PK v. 13, pp. 1, 14 Pll '33.. (Q B-b,. p.. 119. ) 

589 19 33 F 11 'Quezon's proposal. (Editorial) 

PH v. 13, p. 4, P 11 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 119.) ■ 

590 19 33 F 11 Palma attacks Quezon. ¥11 v. 13, pp . 1, 14 p n 133. 

(Q 3-b, p. 120.) 

591 19 33 P 11 Senate head reviews libertarian fights, makes revelations. 

Hi v. 13, p, 2 P 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 120.) 

592 1933 P 11 Quezon says he had nothing to do with I3elo L a w, was not in 

P.I. when it passed, in reply to Palma. PH v. 13, 

p. 3 P 11 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 120.) • . 

593 1933 1 P 11 Union cabal entre obreros urge Quezon. 

Ian., v. 23, pp. 1, 2 P 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 143.) 

594 19 33 P 11 ^1 plan Quezon se sonetira a la Ccmision. 

• Ian., v. 23, PP. 1, 2 P 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 143.) 

595 1933 P 11 La Legisiatura no puede dar sus prerogativas a Palna, 

■declara el Pre3. Quezon. XaS_-.f v « 23, p. 6 P 11 '33. 
(Q 3-b, p. 143.) 

596 19 33 P 11 L a alusion de Quezon es inoportuna. 

Van. . v. 23, pp. 1, 10 P 11 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 143.) 

597 1933 P 12 El Pres. Quezon express su agradecimiento a los obreros 

de todo el pais. M^, v. 14, p. 8 P 12 *33. (Q 3-b, p. 32.) 

598 1933 P 12 Replica de D. Rafael a H.L.Quezon. 

Dab,., v. 14, p. 6 P 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 33.) 

599 19 33 P 12 Palma attack stirs Quezon. 

Iff rib., v. 8, pp. 1, 13 P 12 '33- (Q P» 89.) 

.600 1933 P 13 Contesta al Pros." Palma. 

SSL v. 8, pp. 1, 8 P 13 '33. (Q B-b, p. 102.) 

601 1933 P 13 Support Quezon fight against H a wes Act, Roxas tells guide 

at Oteyza fete. Pjl v. 13, p. 2 F 13 '33. (Q B-b, p. 120.) 

602 1933 P 13 Palma moja su pluma en hiel al atacarme - Quezon. 

V«i. . v. 24, p. 2 P 13 '33. (Q B-b, p. 143.) 

603 1933 P 14 Por que hay necesidad de que otra mision- vaya hoy a Ame- . ' 

rica explica Quezon. SstiU, v. 14, p. 8 P 14 '33. 
(Q 3_b r p. 33.) 



-~- III - 236 

- 813 - „ 

504 1933 : F 14 Un * mision con .iguinaldo y lideres obreros, una con el. • 

Pres. Quezon. .Deb,., v. 14, p.. 2 F 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 33.)' 

605 19 33 F 14 Caucus favors Mission's plan, backs Quezon. 

m v. .89, "PP. 1, 8 F 14'33. (Q B-b, p. 64.) 

,•06 1933 F 14 Quezon oxplaino stand regarding Jones Act. 

tlSrjjLu, v. 8, pp. 1, 8 P 14 »33. (Q B_ b> p> 89 J 

607 1933 F 14 Mission has finished its work - Quezon. ' 

Iffitikw v. 8, pp. 1, 6 P 14 '33. (Q jj_ b> p . 89> ) 

608 1933 F 14- Support Quezon, f ,iect V. Pormoso as representative. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 12 P 14 '33. (Q3_b, p. 120.) • 

609 1933 F 14 La Ley Jones comproinete a 2.U. 

Imu, v. 23, pp. 1, 2 P14'33.. (Q 3-b, p. 143.) 

610 1933 F 15 H.L.Q tercia en el debate entre M.Kalaw y J. Bocobo. ' 

2ah*.t v. 14,' p.- 8, F 15 1 33. (Q 3^b, p. 33.) 
•611 1933 F 15 Quezon sugiero so investigne y se dostituya el ex-Juez Reyes . 

DflJi., v. 14, pp. 1, 6 P 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 33.) 

612 1933 F 15 Quezon wants judxe probed. NDJ1 v. 89, p. 2 P 15 '33. 

■ (Q ii-b t p.. 64.) 

613 1933 F 15 Quezon would have Judge Reyes dj.3P]i3sed. 

IWrJJi*., v. 8, .pp. 1, 12 P 15 '33. (Q a-b t p. 90.) 

614 1933 F 15 Quezon y Guinto son Presidentea honorarios. • 

OP v. 8, pp. 1, 8 P 15 '33. ('Q B-b, p . 102.) 
"15 1933 -P 15 Quezon urge de Aboto la revision del asunto Viola en una 

carta al Sec. Abeto. OP v. 8, p. 8 P 15 '33. (Q B -b, p. 102.) 

616 1933 F 15 Quezon asks Abeto to probe Judge Reyes in connecting Viola ' 

case. .PH v. 13, p. 3 P 15 '33- (Q B-b, p. 120.) 

617 1933 P 15 Lo acotado por Kalav; ya es refutaron. 

Xaa.f v - 23, PP. 1, 2 F 15 '33. (Q H P- 143.) . 

618 1933 F 16 Negros Occidental is for the Hission. . 

Gra -. v, 6, pp. 14-15 P 16 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 51.);. 

619 1933 P 16 Negros planters on difficulty due to support of Hawes Law. 

HDB. p. 2 F 16 '33. (Q B-b, p. 64.) 

620 1933 F 16 Quezon's observations on faculty, regent post not accurate, 

says Tan. SffiEUlM v. 8, p. 3 F 16 * 33. U 3-b, p. 90. ) 

62 1 19 33 F 16 Quezon habla de su discusion en Iloilo acotado por Kalaw. 

OP v. 8, p. 2 F 16 '33. (Q B-b, p. 102.) 

622 1933 F 17 Mussolini will send boat here for Quezon and party. 

HT rjb. . v. 8, p. 2 P 17 '33. (Q B-b, p. 90.) 

52 3 19 33 P 17 El gobierno debe valeose ya de sus cientificos - Quezon. 

OP v. 8,. pp. 1, 8 P 17 '33. P- 102.) 

524 1933 F 17 Quezon says country should take advantages of P.I. scientists 

work. PH v. 13, PP. 1, 3 P17 '33. U B-b, p, 120.) 



•it ^ * in - 2 

-• 914 _ 



625 1933 P 17 Mussolini's offer meaningful, 

PI v. 13, pp. 1, 3 Piv '33. (Q B-b, p.* 120,) 

626 1933 F 17 Pal^a explains Quezon articles, 

£11 v. 13, pp. 1, 14 P 17 '33. (Q a -b, p. 120.) 

627 19 33 F 17 Mussolini and Quetjon. (Lditorial) 

Hi v, 13, p. 4 F 17 '33. (Q B-b,' p. 120.) 

628 19 33' F !7 Quezon ur^-e a cientifioos ayuden al pais. 

Iaa.» v 4 23, pp. 1, 2 P 17 ' 33* (Q BLb, p. 143:) 
629. 19 3 3 F 18 Que son prodica la union y la bonded ontre cientificos. 

Dob., v 4 14, p. 2 P 18 '35. (QB-b, p. 33. ) 
650 1933 F 18 Quezon talk to scientists. ' , 

Vm v. 89, pp. 1, 2 P 13 '33. (Q B-b, p. 64.) 
6J1 1933 F 18 Quezon sets definite date for departure. 

MDB v. 89, pp. 1, 8 F 10 '33. (QH p. 64.) 

632 19 33 F 1 Q Silos 'leaders' no seponen de acuerdo, nuestra causa 

esta perdida. OP, v. 8, pp. 1, 6 F 18 '33'. (Q B-b, p. 1 

633 1933 F 18 D'obernos discutir honradarnente In Ley Hawes - Gutting. 

OP v. 8, pp. 1, 3 P 10 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 102.) 

634 19 33 F 18 Quezon,. Palma rift widens during week. 

PFP v. 27, pp. *5, 27 P 18' '33. (Q 3 -b, p. 110.) 

635 1933 P 18 Nov; mission' being formed. ... 

PFP v. 27, pp. 4, 5 P 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

636 1933 P. 18 Aguinaldo y Quezon form an otra dclegacion nacional. 

PFP v. 27, p. 67, F 10 '33. (Q 2-b, p. 110.) 

637 1933 P 18 Quezon issues plea for harmony. ^ 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 9 P 18 *33. (QB-b, p. 120.)' 

638 19 33 P 18 3nvio do Quouon a Iii.V', aprobado. 

y. 23, PP. 1, 10 P 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 143.) 

639 19 33 F 19 W n nts /aguinaldo to go. ' 

" MTrjAt f v. 8, pp. 1, 7 P 19 '33. (Q B-b, p. 90.) 
-640 1933 P 19 Palma soya he has not attacked Quezon personally/ 

MxXu, v. 8 » P» 5 F 19 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 90.) 
6'41 1933' P 19 Letter roveals hidden story of right in Senate. 

2J?XUi« v - 8 > PP- 1 > 15 P 19 (q ^ P * 90<) 

.642 1933 F 20 Quezon given authorization. 

MDB v. 89, pp. 1, 8 F 20 '33- U 3-b, p. 6?.) 
' fi 43 1933 F 20 Quezon analyses Diokno victory. 

£1 v. 13, PP. 1, 3 F 20 '33. (Q *~*t P? I 20 ') 
644 1933 F 20 Quezon olimina con af an del gobierno a' los que no son 

fasontoa - Palma. laiL, v. 23, p. 2 F *> '33. 

(Q 3-b, p. 143.) 

fi 45 1933 F 20 Viola scandal. Jiox v. 29, n, 14, pp. 10, 11 F 20 '33 

(Q B-b, p. 156.) 



• • III - 238 

- 8X5 _ 



.646 1953 F 20 Quezon & Aguinaldo. N m v . 29,'pp. 7, 8 ' P 20 '33. 

(Q B-b, p. 156.) 

647 1933 F 21 Gran satisf accion .expresa Quezon por ol trtunfo de R. 

Diokno en Batangas. Deb.., v . u> p< 2 p a 
(Q y -b, P. 33.) 

648 1933 F 21 Quezon sees vote on Law.' 

MM v. 89, pp. 1, 4 P 21 '33. (Q B-b, p. 65.) 

649 1933 F 21 Tolentino holds Quezon l a wrong. 

li&ib., v. 8, PP . i, 3 P 21 '33. (Q B-b, p. 90.) 

650 1933 F 21 .\guino ha do .j ado de ser misrabros de l a mision. v. 8, 

P. 1 P 21 '33. (Q B-b, P . 156.) 

651 1933 F 22. El Sec. Abe to promote al Pres. Quezon que so hora sentir 

el peso de la Ley. Deb.., v. 14, p. 8 P 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 33.) 

652 19 33 17 22 Abe to tells Quezon, etc. 

HEctil*., v. 3, p. 2 P 22 "J5, (q B_b, p. 90.) 

653 1933 F 22 Quezon tendra que rogeras. 

OP v. 0, p. 1 P 22 '33. ( Q B-b, p. 102.) 

654 1933 P 23 Quezon group to reorganize. .. . 

MDB v. 89, pp. 1, 8 P 23 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 65.) ^ '> 

655 1933 F 23 Quezon may see Aguinaldo today. f 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 12 P23.'33. (Q B-b, p. 120.) 

656 19 3 3 P 25 Quezon invitara al ex-C a udillo Gral. Aguinaldo. * 

SI- v. 8, pp. 1, 6 P 25 *33. (Q B-b, p. 102.) 

657 19 3 3 P 25 Quezon rehuya comentarios. 

Vaa. t v. 24, pp. 1, 10 F 25 '33. (Q B-b,%. 143.) 

658 1933 P 26 Quezon, Aguinaldo will hold 'pow-wow. 

£$£xUu., v. 8, p. 9 P 26 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 90.) 

659 19 3 3 P 27 Quezon, Aguinaldo conf-ft held last week in Kawit. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 2 P 27 '33. (Q B-b, p. 120.) 

660 1933 P 27 Pidon ayuda du ii. Quezon. 

Vflnu.» v. 23, PP. 1, 6 P 27 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 143.) 

661 1933' Kr 2 Hy country first, Quezon tells his followers. 

IlTrib-r v. 8, pp. 1, 14 Mr 2 '33. (Q B-b, p. 90.) 

662 1933 Mr 2 Lis tare al lado pueblo como su todo - Quezon. 

M., v. 24, pp. 3, 6 Mr 2 '33. (Q B-b, p. 143.) • 

66 3 19 33 Mr 3 Primero me pais antes que mi psrtido, do jo el Pres. Quezon.. 

Deb., v. 14, p. 7 Hr 3 '33. (Q R-b, .p. 33.) 
1933 Hr 4 Quozon honra a' los dobatista en un almuerzo. ■ 
OP v. 8, pp. 1, 6 Hr 4 '33. (Q — b, p. 102.) 
66 5 1933 Mr 4 Quezon honors debating teams of 2 universities. 

PH v. 13, PP. 1, 14 Mr 4 '33.. (Q 3-b, p. 120.) 



- 816 - 



III - 



66 6 1933 M r 5 . Quezon telle Santo Tonus and U.P. debaters he is against 

Hawes Bill for tho sake of younger generation. 
U&UU. v. 3, p. 8, Mr 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. go..) 

667 1933 Mr 6 He °Ponga a la Ley Hawes volando por la cuoste ' de' 1ft 

juventud, dice Quezon.. -Vfizu, v. 24, p. 6 Mr 6 '33. 
- (Q J -b f p. 144 J ■ • ' 

668 19 33 Mr 6 The Nixed Mission. Nqx v. 19, p. 6 Mr 6 '33. (Q B-b, 

p. 156.) 

569 19 33 H r 0 Quezon praises Santo Tom as dedication of swimming pool. 

|IDB v. 89, p. 4 Mr 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 65.) 
.670 1933 K r 8 Pres. Quezon praises courage of 3to. Torn as debaters p.t 

inauguration of new swimming' pool. PH v. 13-, p. 2 

Mr 8 '33. (0 B-b, p. 120.) • 

671 1933 Mr 8 Formal invitation to join mission sent by Quezon to 

Aguinaldo. PII v. 13, p. 2 fir 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 120.)' 

672 1933 Mr 8 Quezon habla en 3to. Tomas. 

Van., v, 23. pp. 1, 12 Mr 3 '33. (Q J -b, p. 144.) 

673 19 3 3 Mr 9 El pais sentera la marcha do ..«Roo3evelt - Quezon. 

Deb.., v. 14, p. 2 Mr 9 '33- (Q B-b, p. 33.) 
,'674 19 33 Mr 9 Quezon, a fighter of flash and fire. 

£Eav, v. 6, pp. 9, 51 Mr 9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 51.) 
'675 19 33 Mr 9 M. L. Q. masterful and lucky quibbler. 

Gr_gu., v. 6, pp. 8, 49 Mr 9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 51.) 

676 1933 Mr 9 Quezon's trip to U.S. expected to clarify islands poli- 

tical outlook. MDB v. 89, pp. 1, 5 .Mr 9 '33. 
(q B-b, p. 65.) 

677 . 19 33 Mr 9 Poclran veose Quezon, .Iguino. 

Van.. > v. 23, PP. 1, 10 Mr'9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 144.) 

678 1933 Mr 10 Quezon. N. Laoxxz. Deb^., v. 14, p. 1 Mr 10 '33. 

($ B-b, p. 33.) 

679 19 33 Mr 10 Probable conferencia de Quezon y .Aguino antes de la . 

marcha del President©. Deb,. , v. 14, p. 8, Mr 10 *33. 
(Q B-b, p. 33.) 

6R0 1933 Mr •.. 10 Quezon prepara un pro gram a de legislacibnes. 

OP v. 8, pp." 1, 3 Mr 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 102.) . 

681 1933 Mr 10 Quezon tendra tiorapo para conferencia con Bonigno S. 

Aguino, antes de salir el dia 13. 0£ v. 8, p. 8, 
Mr 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 103.) 

68 2 1933 Mr 10 U n discurso trascendental de Quezon eaperan en el 

Columbian. , v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Mr 10 ' 33. 
(Q B-b, p.- 144.) 

683 1933 Mr 11 Quezon is ready to sail on 18th. 

12WU1M v. 8, p. 'l Mr 11 '33. (Q B-b, p, 90.) 



: ' III - 240 

~ 817 ~. 

684 1933 M r H ■ Debemos prosentar loa hechos ante, nuostro pueblo. 

OP v. 8, pp. 1, 6 Hr 11 '33. (q B-b, p.. 103.) ' 

685 1933 Mr 11 Dan raucha. importancia al disourso que pronunciara hoy el' 

Pres. Quezon. OP v. 8, p. 4 Hr 11 '33. (o. B-b, p. 103.) 

686 1933 Mr 11 Where are. they now? (por) 

PFP v. 27, pp. 6, 7, 9 Mr 11-33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

687 19 33 K r • 11- Quezon* city officials mourn Umario's death. 

£fi v. 13, .pp. 1, 2 i,r II '33. U B-b, p. 120.) 

688 19 33 Mr 11 Quezon desea que el pueblo sopa la verdad. 

Iaja., v. 23, pp. 1, 10 Mr 11 '33. (q B-b, p. 144.) 
'689 1933 Mr 12 Quezon voliro a' exprosar sus puntos de vota vs la Ley * 

Hmros-Cuttinff. v. 14, p. 8 Hr 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. '33. 

690 19 33 Mr 12 Quezon pontinuos attack against terms of H a wes measure. 

1™ 89, pp. 1, 8 Mr 12 '33. (QB-b,.p. 65.) 
601 1933 Mr 12 Senate head points vivid picture of P.I. under new Law.. 

n&ibfc, v. 8, pp. 1, 15 Hr 12 ! 33. (Q B-b, p. 90.) .'• 

692 1933 Mr . 13 Quezon recibir do la comision otros encargos. 

OP v. 8, pp. 1,.5 Hr 13 '33. ('i B-b, p. 103.) 

693 1933 Mr 13 Quezon shows what would bo consequences if Filipino people 

accepted H a wcs Act. PH v. 13, p. 3 Mr 13 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 120.) 

694 1933 Mr 13 Shortly after his momentous speech in Legislature, Quezon 

tolls Filipinos over radio, etc. £H v. 13, p. 3 Mr 13 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 121.) 

695 1933 Mr 13 Quezon sits with .'iguinaldo for 1st time in many years at 

picnic. PJI v. 13, pp. 1, 7 Mr 13 '33. (Q B-b, p.. 121,) 

696 I933 Mr 14 ■ Don Manuel L. Quezon y Molina. 

■ Deb.., v. 14, p. 4 Mr 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 33.) 

697 1933 Mr 14 Quezon ya no traba.iara por un bill mejor sino estudiar. 

la aituacion. DuJi. , v. 14, p. 8 hr 14 '33. U J -b, p. 33.) 

698 I933 'Mr 14 Lot us enlighten the people. ■ 

HTrAb. r v. 8, p. 4 Mr 14 '33. (Q B-b, p.- 90.) 

699 '1933 Mr 14 Quezon, Aguinaldo discuss Mission's invitation to General 

to make trip. MTrjJi*., v. 8, pp. 1, 3 Mr 14 '33. 
(Q 3-b, p. 90.) 

700 1933 H r 14 Quezon ya no trabajara por la aprobacion de una Ley major 

quo Hawos-Haro-Cutting. OP v. 8, p. 4 Mr 14 '33. 

* 

(Q 3_b, P . 103.) 

701 1933 Mr 14 Quezon praises Alunan's work. . 

fflv. 13, PP. 1, 4 Mr 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 111.) 
7 °2 1933 Kr 15 T.K. obtuvo exito porquo conoce nuostra prologia- Quezon. 

Vjja., v. 24, p. 9 Hr 15 '33. (1H Supp. ) < " 



-.J- III - 241 

" - 818 _ 

"03 1933 Mr 15 °.uozon se marcha. (Editorial) 

Si&'t v. 14, p. 4 Mr 15 '33. ( q B-b, p. 33. ) 

704 1933 Mr 15 ■ i ' ,s . wo 300 it « (Editorial) 

lltrjJl*.. v. 8, p. 4 Mr 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 90.) 

705 1933 Mr 16 Los 0X " lt0R d<3 -- pueblo Filipino son au mojor slogio -T.R 

Dpi>. , v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Mr 16 '33. (q 3-b, p. 33.) 

706 1933 Mr 16 'i uczon Pay 8 tribute of osteon to Roosevelt at state 

banquet. MB v. 89, pp. l, 8 Mr' 16 '33. (Q B-b, p.' 65.) 

707 1933 IIr • 1 ^ Quezon pays flawing tribute- to Roosevelt . 

liS^JijL, v.. 0, pp. 1, 8 Mr 16 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 90.) 

708 1933 *' ir ^ Quezon do'Didido a 1 do jar de sor lider nncional. 

OP v. 8, pp. 1, 8 Ilr 16 '33. (Q B-b, p. 103.) 

709 19 33 ^ r Achievements of T R unparallod, nays Quezon. 

PH v. 13, p. 2 Hr 16 '33- ( 2 . 3-b, p. 121.) 

710 1933 ^ r -"-^ Quezon appoints five to rule najority party. 

HI v. 13, p. 1 Hr 16 '33. (Q B-b, p. 121.) 

711 1933 16 Leader mil fit quit when he can't lead. 

PII v. 13, pp. 1, 12 Mr 16 '33. (Q B-b, p. 121.) 

712 1933 Mf 16 El diacurso del Pres. Quezon. Miguel A. Velarde. 

XflJUi v. 24, p. 4 Mr 16 '3'i, (Q B-b, p. 144. ) . 

713 1933 Mr 17 .teat are vuostra decision, dice el Pres. Quezon^ etc. 

Mu, v. 14,' pp. 1, 7 Mr 17 '33. (Q B-b, p. 33.) ' 

714 1933 M t r 17 El discurao del Pres. Quezon. 

D0J1., v. 14, p. 4 Mr 17 '33. B-b, p. 34.) 

715 1933 Mr 17 Quo haya, tolerancia entre to do 8, dice Quezon. 

JJaJj*., v. 14, P. 2, Mr 17 '33. (Q B-b, p. 34.) 

716 1933 Mr 17 Quezon triunfador sc marcho. - P.- Vj.ctoriano. 

v. 14, p. 4 Mr 17 ' 33. (a 3-b, p. 34.) 

717 1933 Mr 17 Un memorial volurainoso de los eoonomistas sera entre- 

gado a Quezon hoy. Deb., v. 14, p. 8, Mr 17 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 34. ) 

710 1933 • Mr 17 Quezon reiterates his position against Haras L a w but 

declares he will' follow majority mandate. MLB v. 89, . 
pp. 1, 8 Mr 17 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 65.) 

719 1933 Mr 17 Quezon defines tetand as leader. 

720 1933 Mr 17 Quezon reiterates his opposition to Hawes bill before 

economists. Jffl&Ju, Vi 8 > PP- X ' 2 Hr 17 ' 33 ' " 
(0 B-b, .p. 91.) 

721 1933 Mr 17 Quezon to find out what U.S.' government may or may not 

x do on Phil, question.. fflfcUU* v. 8, p. 1 Mr 17 33. 
(Q B-b, p. 91.) 



- 819 ' 



I'll - 242 



722 1953 Mr 17 Quezon retains his hold ™ „ * 

723 1933 Mr 17 ^-o-™.^ waldol ^^' toi ;^ 

aZUCaPpra - - V ' °' P « ■? 17 -33. (Q *b, P . 103 ) ' 

724 1933 Mr '17 Quezon no ira a' E.E.U. K naPp +r h . . 

■ trabajar por una Ley ■ 

-jor. _0Pv. 8, p. 2 Mr 1 7 . .33. ( Q B -b, p> ;) 

725 1933 17 Gran manifest acion popular do dospedid, al Pres. Quezon ' * 

cuando part, manana. V^., v . 24> pp> ^ 1Q ^ ^ . ■ 
(Q B-b, 0. 144.) 

726 1933 Mr 17 H a bla ante azucareros y economist^. 

to" v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Mr 17 .33. { Q } 

727 1933 Mr 18 Veioso invitado per el Quezon. 

Mt., v. 14, p. 1 fi r 18 .33, (Q B _ b> p> 34>) ■ 

728 1933 ^ 18 ES Un 0bBt «"*> * ~ independent la industria 

azucarera, dice Quezon. D^b. , v . 14, p. 2, Mr 18 '33. • 
(Q B-b, p. 34.) 

729 19 33 Mr 18 Grandiosa manif estacion habra ostamanana por la marcha 

del Pres. Quezon. Dob . , v. 14, p. 2 .Mr 18 '33. (Q B-b, ' 
P. 34.) 

730 1933 Mr 18 The Quezon Mission. (Editorial) 

Ml v. 27, p. 4, Mr 18 '33. (Q B- b , p. no.) 

731 1933 Mr 18 Quezon's evuntful 17 months. 

221 (per) v. 27, p. 2. Ilr 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

732 1933 Mr 18 Senate President describes Philippines under Commonwealth.- 

Mv. 27, p. 41 Mr 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

733 1933 Mr 18 Quezon maps out his Washington Campaign: 

m. v. 27, pp. 3, 40 Mr 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) ' " 

734 1933 Mr 18 II a wes bill settles nothing, libertarian bill must provido 

means for protecting freedom, sugar not his concern, 
Quezon says at Columbian speech. PH v. 13, p. 2 Mr 18 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 121.) 

735 1933 Mr 18 I'll not sell P.I. birthright for sugar - Quezon. - 

PS V. 13, pp. 1, 14 Mr 18 '33- (Q 3-b, p. 121.) ' • 

736 19"33 Mr 18 Quezon and members of Mission sail with 'Habuhay' 

from 20,000 throats, por PH v.- 13, p. 1 Mr 18 '33. 
• (Q B-b, p. 121.) 

737 I933 Mr 18 President Quezon gives parting message to 'tao' before 

sailing, por PH v. 13, pp. 1, 13 Mr 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 121 

738 1933 Mr 18 Split of party considered sure. 

HI v. 13, pp. 1, 13 Mr 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 121.) 

739 19 33 Mr 18 20,000 see Quezon sail for U.S. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 13 Mr 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 12J.*) 



820 ni - 243 

740 1933 " ;r 18 E1 P«ebJ.o dico adios y de victoria. . 

Van. v. 24,' pp. 1, io Mr 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 144.) 

74 1 1933 »r 18 <^on temo quo on vez de Manoomunidad haya su regimen, 

ate. Vga., v. 24, p. 3 Mr 18 '33. U B-b, p. 34.) 

742 19 33 Mr 19 Asogura el "split" dol Partido a jusgar por la actitud del 

Pres. Quezon. Ml. , v. 14, p. 8' ll r 19 '33. (Q B-b, p. 34.) 

743 1933 H r 19 Vast crowds boo raixod mission off. 

y .r AJL L> v. 0, pp. l, 19 H r ig - 53 . (q B-b, p. 91.) 

744 19 33 n r 20 Quezon given big send-off. 

JABS v. 89, pp. 1, 5 Hr 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 65.) 

745 1933 Mr 20 L a manif estacion lo ha cornovido dice, etc. 

laa., v. 24, pp. 1, 8 lir 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 144.) 

746 19 33 Mr 21 Reunion on c as a "del Pre 3. Quezon. • ' ' 

Dfli., v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Mr 21 ' 33. B-b, p. 34.) 

747 19 33 Mr 23 f'ixed Mission departs, (por) 

ika*.» v.. 6, pp. 4, 61 Mr 23 '33- ' (Q B-b, p. 51.) 

748 19 33 Hr 23 Quezon told of .^lino's attack. 

JSStfJw v. 8, p. 2 Hr 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 91 J 

749 1933 Hr 23 Quezon inquires into floor leadership post; moot called. • 

PH v. 13, pp. 1,- 12 Hr 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 121.) 

750 19 33 Mr 24 Bemocratas to join Quezon- in fight 'on law; 

_BIEB v. 89, pp. 1, 7 Hr'24 '33. (Q B-b', p. 65.) 

751 1933 Hr 25 Quezon's envoy returns; raps Senate Pros. 

PFP_v.'27, p. 29 Hr 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

752 19 33 Mr 25 Quezon and Aquino. (Editorial) / 

PIT v. 27, p. 32 Hr 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

753 1933 Mr . 25 • Quezon leaves with new Mission. . 

PH v. 13, p. 4 Mr 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 121.)' 

754 1933 Mr 25 Quezon mission reported after 5-year freedom. 

PH v. 13, pp.' 1, 13 Hr 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 121.)' 

755 19 3 3 Hr 25 Dojo en sus nanos dice a Clariri - Quezon. 

V/m- , v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Mr 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 144.) 

756 1933 H r 26 Quezon tolls Clarin to' handle situation. 

HTrib. . v. 8, p. 32, Mr 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 91.) 
W '1933, Mr 26 ' Former Oebu Solon attacks Pros. Quezon. 

Hi>ib.v f v. 8, p. 3 Hr 26 '33- (Q B-b, p. 91.) 
753 1933 Mr 27 Pight Act as far as hell - Quezon. 

' £2 v. 13, p. 1 Hr 27 '33- (Q B-b, p. 121.) 
759 I933.. Mr 28 Quezon invita a' los Misioneros a' una co.nferencia. . 

QL v. 8, pp. 1, 8 Hr 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 103.)' 
750 1933 Mr . 29 Party unity seen as end of Quezon move. 

KDB v. 89, pp. 1, 8 Mr 29 '33. (Q ^ P- 65.) 



- 821 - 



III - 244 



761-1933 Mr 29 Paris conference will test Won. 

fflv* 13, p. 14 lir 29 '33. (o B-b, p. 121.) 
n 1933 Hr 30 Aquino announces M issioners decisiQ . ±q ^ ^ 

£kv. 13, pp. l, 2 r, r 30 ., 33# (Q}3 _ b> ^ ^ 

763 1933 Mr 30 Aquino hopeful Quezon Mission will change mind. ' 

fflv, 13, pp. 1, 2 Mr 30 '33. (Q B-b, p. 121.) 

764 19 33 Mr 30 Esperaren a Quezon en a. Unidos. 

• . Iaa '' V V 24 ' PP- 1> 2 Mr 30 '33. (q B-b, p. 144.) 

765 1933 Hr 30 Por mas omnipotente que sea Quezon no e. toda la Legislature 

declara Aquino. V^, v . 24, pp. 3, 4 Mr 30 '33. 
{■■-I B-b, p. 144.) 

766 1933 Mr 31 Quezon rehusa entrar en ningun acuerdo sin previa aproba- ■ ' ' 

cion de sogudores a qui. V^, v . 24, p. 1 Mr 31 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 144.) 

767 1933 Ap 1 Osnefia, so propara a verce con Quezon en l a ciudad de Niza. 

Ia£U., v.^24, pp. 1, 10 A P 1 '33. (0 3-b, p. 144.) 
76« 1933 • 6 Th*t Quewn Osmena Conference. (Editorial) 

£ra., v. 6, p. 64 Ap 6 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 51.) 

769 1933 Ap 7 Let Quo son and Osmena decide our fate. 

m v. 13, p. 4 Ap 7 '33. (Q B-b, p. 122.). 

770 1933 Ap 8 A Quezonian attribute. \ 

m. v.. 27, p. 62 Ap 8 '33. (q B-b, p. 110.) 
77.1 1933 Ap 9 Gull as scores Quezon for "hell" utterances. " ■ 

MSjULw.v. 9, pp. 9, 25 Ap 9 '33. (Q B-b,-. p. 91.) 

772 19 33 Ap 10 Ante Quezon se quedan verdes Niro y Herodes; t 

Van., v. 24, p. 6 Ap 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 144.) '. •' 

773 1 9 33 Ap 15 The race to Quezon's eager ear. 

P£P v. 27, pp. 16, 45 Ap 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

774 1933 Ap 16 M.L.Quezon, Gob. Gen.; vice, el Sr. Osmena. 

Deb. , v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Ap 16 '33. . (Q B-b, p. 34.) 

775 I933 Ap 16 Os.nona,' Quezon embrace warmly in Paris meeting Hawes Bill 

best obtainable, says Cebu Legislator. MTrib . . v. 8, 
pp. 1, 19 Ap 16 '33. (QB-b,'p. 91.) 

776 1933 Ap 17 Osmena meets Quezon in Europe. 

W.v. 90, pp. 1, 8 Ap 17 '33. (Q B-b, p. 65.) 

777 1933 Ap 17 Quezon reitora su oposicion miontras Osnena habla con 

miembros individuales. Xaflju. v « 24, pp. 1, 2 Ap 17 '33. 
(Q H-b, p. 145.) 
18 Si Quezon acept^ la Ley, al rnorira jooliticamonte, anuncia 
Clarin. JQftfc. , v. 14, pp. 1, 4 Ap 18 '33- (Q 3-b, p. 34.) 
779 1933 Ap 18 El afectuso encuentro de los dos Jefes. 

Dab., v . 14, p. 8 Ap 18 '33. (Q B-b, P* 34.) 



.51140 



822 



III - 245 



780 1933 Ap 18 son stands pat in Paris., 

MSB v. 90, pp. 1, 2 Ap 18 ,33, (Q ^ p ; 65<} ' ' ' 

781 1933 AP 1G Leaders open parley in Paris. 

UEiaji., v. o, pp> lf 12 Ap 18 , 33> (q ^ p/ 

732 1933 ^ 18 I ignored Quezon, Aquino tells Hocanos. ■ . 

VSxitU, v. 9, pp. 1, 4 Ap 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 91. ) 

783 1933 Ap 18 : Quezon no es sincere afirma el Hon. .Jquino ante los Ilongos 

ayer. OPv. 8, p. 2 Ap 18. '33. (Q B-b, p. 103. ) 

784 1933 Ap 18 Both to seek U.3 abandon tent of certain economic and mili- 

tary reservations in Hare-H a wes Law. PH v. 13, pp. 1, 12 
Ap 18 '33.. (Q B-b, p. 122.) 

785 1933 Ap 18 Quezon ignoring Aquino's attacks, he tells Clarin. 

— v - 1 3» PP- 1, 12 -p 18 '33. (Q B-b, p.. 122.). ; ' 

786 1933 Ap 18 Aquino califica a Quezon de dictador y lo acusa do s%r 

disleal a la cans a del pais. V^., v . 24, p. 2 
.Ap i£j '33. (q i3_b, p. 145.) • ' 

787 19 33 Ap 19 Aquino revela que Quezon aprobo las enmiendas a la Ley 

Haweo-Cuttinc. Dob., v. 14, p. 2 Ap 19 '33. (Q B-b, p.' 34.) 
783 1933 Ap 19 El plan de trans acion entre Quezon y Osraena. 

MU* v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Ap 19 '33. (Q B-b, p. 34.) 

789 1933 Ap 19 Quezon envia una cablegram con una fraso muy significativa. 

M>.., v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Ap 19 '33. (Q B -b, p. .34.) 

790 1933 Ap 19 Quezon cables firm stand. 

MDB v. 90, pp. 1, 8 Ap 19 '33. (Q B-b, p. 65.) 

791 19 33 Ap 19 Have . not changed, Quezon cables Quirino. ' . „ ■ 

HTrjJis., v. 9, pp. 1, 2 Ap 19 '33. (Q B-b,' p. 91.) 

792 19 33 Ap 19 Lsto no cignifica que he combiado mi actitud - Quezon. 

OP v. 8, p. 2, 'Ap 19 '33. (Q B-b, p. 103.) 

793 1933 Ap 19 Leaders pleased at Quezon stand. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 14 Ap 19 '33.. (Q B-V p. 122.) 

794 1933 Ap 19 Quezon y Osmeiia no llegan a un acuerdo tras larga confe- 

rencia. Ian., v. 24, p. 1 Ap 19 '33. (Q B-b, p. 145.) 

795 I933 Ap 20. L a muerte de Quezon. (Editorial) 

Deb.., v. 14, p. 4 Ap 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 34.) 

796 1933 Ap 20 Quezon and Osmeiia meet. 

Grja.., v. 6, p. 2 Ap 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 51.) 

797 I933 Ap 20 L a contest acion de Quezon historicamente infundada, 

OP v.. 8, pp. 1, 8 A P 20 '33. (Q B-b, pp, 103 & 145.) 
753 1933 Ap 20 President Quezon's stand held historically unfounded 

by Dean.. £H v. 13, pp. 1, 12 Ap 20. '33. U B-b, p. 122.) • 
79 9 1933 Ap 21 La'proposicion Quezon acogida por los impugnadores de la . 

Ley. Deb., v. 14, pp. 1, 5 Ap 21 '33. (* B-b, p. 34.) ' 



823 



III - 246 



1933 Ap 25 



*» 1933 * 21 "f 110 CritlCiSeS *"« *«, I loil o to take Act. 

Siv. 13, pp . lf 2 , p21 .^.(^^ 

801 1933 Ap 21 LJ.P. professor dira ub m. n + +• ■ * 

Qx £ ,j up quotations from Quezon to build up 

nowpu.zle. fflv.i 3pP-5 ipa.,,. (QB- bi p. 122.) 

802 1933 Ap 22 Quosoh urges continued drives against Act. 

V ' 9 ' PP- 1» 9 'P 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 91.) 

303 1933 A P 23 /dunan urg* a Qu 0zon q «e 8e h^o todo lo posible por o] 

azucar RLlipliaB. Deb., v. 14-, p. 8 Ap 23 '33. (o B- b , 
p. 34.) 

m 1933' Ap 23 Quezon will take Sugar Problem in U.S. 

■mxUu, >. 9, p. 6 Ap 23 '33. (q 3-b, p. 91.) . 

605 1933 Ap 23 Quezon gives Osmcfia clear field in P.I. if par i ey . s faL1 . 

v. 9, pp. 1, 27 Ap 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. -91.) -' ^' 

606 1933 A P 24 ' Lo, despachos entro Alun«n y el Prosidonto Quezon. ' 

OP v. 8, p. 1 A p 24 '33. (Q B_ b , p . 105 .) • 
807 1933 Ap 25 Quezon wants five years free trade before transition. 

m v. 90, pp. 1, 8 Ap 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 65.) 
Quezon asks free trade for first five years. .-;„•:,■ 
MxUu., v.-9, pp. 1, 12 Ap 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 91.) 

809 1933 Ap 25 Quezon 5 year free trade plan is temporary relief. 

1 . . Iv. 13, P . 1 ; ; p 25 '33. (Q 3-b, P . 122.) 

810 1933 Ap 25 Quezon lucha por mas concesiones. 

.Ian., v. 24, p. 1 Ap 25 *33. (Q B-b, p. 145.) 

811 1933 Ap 25. Quezon decide verse con la Hision antes do establecer su 

futura norma do accion. Van. , v. 24, pp. 1, 8 Ap 25 '33. 
• (Q B-b, p. 145.) 

812 1933- Ap 26 Quezon volvera para trabajar para quo Filipinos rechaco 1?! 

Ley. J2aH., v. 14, pp. 1, 4 Ap 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 35.) 

813 1933 Ap 26 Quezon still for rejection. 

MM v. 90, pp. 1, 2 Ap 26 '33. (Q B_b, p. 65.) 

814 1933 AP 26 Quezon may not oppose bills approval in Legislature; 

accord with Osmeiia- foreseen. HTrib , . , v. 9, pp. 1». 3 
Ap 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 91.) 

815 1933 Ap 26 Quezon omprondera una csnpafia activa por la ropudiacion de 

la Ley. OP v. 8, p. 4, Ap 26 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 103.) 

816 1933 Ap 27 Crenn qua so aceptara la Ley Hawes-^utting do un modo 0 do 

otro. Bob., v. 14, pp. 1, 4 Ap 27 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 35.) 

817 1933 Ap 27 Quezon hears other side. 

HDB v. 90, pp. 1, 3 Ap 27 '33. (Q J -b, p. 65.) 

818 1933 Ap 27 Will reject Hawes Act if Quezon is balked. 

IMxtii*., v. 9, PP. 1, 8 Ap'27 '33. U B -b.. p. 92.) 



III - 247 

~ 824 - 



S19 1933 Ap 27 Coming co n f a b with Roosuvf.it 4 nM * . . 

woutvolt xmportant in Quezon's final 
decision on Kawea c t pw it 

/„ , , > Ct * ffi v ' ^> PP. 1. 13 Ap 27 '33. 

W B-b, p. 122.) 

320 19 33 Ap 27 ^ y o uesmsepronetraplenacoo ^ 

Ian,, v. 24, PP . !, 2 , p2? , 33> (QB _ b> p< ms 

321 .1933 Ap 28 Mystery veils Quezon st.-md. 



HDB 



v - 90, PP . i, 8 , p 28 , 33> (Q p> , 5j 



,22 1933 -:p 28 Volooo reports by radio-phono th,t Quezon hao accepted 

liffi v. 90, p. Ap 20 '33. (Q B_ b , P . 65.) 

023 1933 Ap 28 "Will preserve Filipino m ,n„ w ,N n v. 

ij.-T.pino culture', Murphy asserts: Quezon 

announces sailing. MlV-i h ,r n •, 

fj * ^ r J-- b -*-> v - 9, pp. 1, 3 js p 28 '33. 

(Q B_ b , p . 92 .) 

824 1933 Ap 28 ^inrddo forgets peevishness over trip with new Quezon ' 

note. PH v. 13, p . 1 , lp 28 {q p> ^ 

' 825 1933 AP 28 H ° hay oportimldfid de obtener otro bill y vuelvo a'infor- . 

mcr do rai suggestion - Quezon. V^.-, v . 24, p. 1 
Ap 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 145.) 

326 1Q33 Ap 29 Tengo grades os F oranzas de hallnr una soluoion satisfacto- 

ria- Quezon. Ml-, v. 14, p. 2 Ap 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 35.) 

827 19 33 Ap 29 Opponents of law glad over Quezon stand. 

m. v. 90, pp. 1, 8 .1p 29 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 66.) 

820 1933 Ap 29 Quezon's course undecided. 

MDB v. 90, pp. 1, 4 .(. p 29 '33. ('{JB-b, p. 66.) 

«29 1933 Ap 29 Quirino party cables Quezon to confirm news he has accep- 
ted law. im v. 90, pp. 1, 8 Ap 29 '33. B -b, p. 66.) 

830 1933 Ap 29 Agreement reached by Quezon mission found unworkable. 

UEcUliuf PP. 1, 2 lp 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 92.) 

8 31 1933 Ap 29 In defense of the Quezon f notion. 

HLdJu, v. 9, P. 8 Ap 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 92.) 

8 32 1933 ..\ p 29 Uill stand fast if alone, General says. .. , . , 

MxXhjL*. v. 9, pp. 1,- 4 Ap 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 92.) 

8 33 I933 Ap 29 Quozon, Osmefia and Roxaa leave Washington for Manila. 

PFP v. 27, p. 30 Ap 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

834 19 33 Ap 29 un acuerdo que no era factible se ha revocado. 

VqILl, v. 24, p. 1 Ap 29 '33- B-b, p. 145.) 

8 35 I933 Ap 29 Otra voz no venos Senador, dice Roosov3lt al recibir a 

Quozon. Van., v. 23, pp. 1, 10 • Ap 29 '33. ■ (Q B-b, p. 145.) 
19j3 Ap 30 Quezon announces another voyage to U.S. in winter. 

MTrifr f f v. 9, pp. l'» 19 Ap 30 *33- (Q B-b, p. "92.) 
Q 37 1933 Ap y^gig who in tno Independence Mixed Mission. 

Sug«r Nowa v . 14, p. 195 Ap *33. (Q B -b, p. 156.) 



- 825 _ 111 

'338 1933 AP The Quezon Mission. 

flWasJaw..^ 14, pp. 169-170 Ap -33. (Q B-b, p. i 5 6.) ■ 
939 1933 -P Public opinion on the H W0S -Cutting Law. 

UL^U v.- 7, pp. 3, 13 Ap '33. J (Q B_b, p. 156.) 
840 1933 My 1 Nuovo plan Quezon do accion comun. 

Imi., v. 24, pp. 1, 3 My 1 .33. (0 3-b, p. 145.) • 
8U 1933 % 2 Paper endorses Quezon return. 

MDB_v. 90, p . 1 i % 2 -33, (q ^ p> 6fi>) 

»* 1953 % 2 Senatc ]Ioad wil1 now plan to Osmofia, Roxas; Mission 

fetes war secretary. MTrJJ^, v. 9, pp, 1,. 2 My 2 '33. 
(Q B-b, p . 90.) 

043 1933' % 4 In the good old days, (por) 

ika., v. 6, p. 29, My 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 51.) 

044 1933 My 4 Will ascertain whether split is the prospect. 

■ ; • Ilrib,., v. 9, pp. 1, 2 My 4 '33. (Q B-b,' p. 92.) 

045 1933 My 5 'Oppositores' intri/jados ante la actitud do Quezon. ' 

J&fc., v. 14, p. 1, 8 'My 5 '33. (q B-b, p.- 35.) V.- 
.846 1933 My 5 OsCTeria, not r niozon hns foresight. • .' . 

' . v. 9, p. 4 My 5 '33. (q j3_b, p. 92.) ; .f- 

347 1933 My 6 La Ley de Independoncia. : : 

PJT v. 27, p. 67 My 6 '33. (q B-b, p. 110.) 
048 1933 My 8 Quezon urged to remain adamant. ' • ■ " 

I&JU., v. 9, PP. 1, B My 8 '33. (q B-b, p. 92.) 

849 1933 My 8 Quezon oncarece una reduccion mas radical. 

■ ' VflH., v. 24, p. 1 My 8 '33. ( CI. B-b, p. 145.) 

850 1933 My 9 Senate President amazes co-travellers'* by remarkable improve- 

ment in health. MTrjL&L, ' v. 9, p. 1, My. 9 '33. (Q B-b, 
p. 92.) 

851 1933 My 12 Quezon anuncia que tiene preparado un plan comun con 

. Osnena y Roxas. Deb., v. 14, p. 2 • My 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 
35.)- • • • 

852 1933 My 12 Pope receives Quozon family. •> 

MBB v. 80, p. .1 My 12 '33- (Q B-b, p. 66.) 

853 1933 My 14 Defcndiendo a' Quozon. ' , 

■ De^., v. 14, p. 4 My 14 '33. B-b, p. 35.) 
8 W 1933 My 15 Befondiendo a' -Quezon. 

OP v. 8, p. 2 My 15 '33. (Q B-b, • p. 103.) ■ ■• 

855 I933 My 15 Sen. Quirino wires inquiry. to Quozon. 

Fg v. 13, pp. 1, 2 My 15. '33. ( Q B-b, p. 122.) 

856 1933 My 16 Quezon tool of U.S. imperialism - .iiquino. ' 

MTr?,b. f v. 9, PP. 1, 6 My 16 '33- (Q B-b, p. 92.) 



- 826 _ 



III ~ 249 



357 1935 My . 17 Muino dico quo Quezon ha side un instrument dol imporia- 

■liamo Tanqul. , v . 14> p . 8 I1y „ ^ (q ^ . # ^ } 

058 1933 My 19 Quezon cable changes pinna for reception. • 

2Q£ v. 80, pp. 6 My 19 .33. (q B_ b> p ; 664 ) 
859 1933 Hy 19 ■ New factor may move H a wes Act acceptance. 

IMw v. 9, pp. 1, 3 % 19 .33. (n 3_ b , p. 92.) 
360 1933 My 23 V a rio3 pianos del Pros. Quezon insortados on la Ley, 'dice 

Sen.- Hawes. J&h. , v . 14, p. 8 % 23 '33. ' (Q B-b, p. .35.) 

861 1933 ' % 24 La actitud de Quezon 03 criminal - Aquino. ■ 

Ian., v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Hy 24 '33. "(3 B-b, p. 145.) ' 

862 1933 My 26 Autonomous position under U.S. flag open to Islands, says 

paper. HOT v. 90, pp. 1, 8 My 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 66* ) 

863 1933 My 28 • Everything looks harmonious, (por) ' • ■ 

8£xibj.t v. 8, p. 1 Hy 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 92.) . 

864 1933 My 29 Quirino suspends Senate pay raises. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 14 Hy 29 *33. (Q B-b, p. 122.) 

865 1933 My 30 Flat rejection of Hawos-Cutting Act, quick return of Que- 

zon to U.S. urged. PH v. 13, p. 3 My 30 '33. (Q B_b, p. 122. 

866 1933 Jo 1 Quezon's findings in Washington as far as press could learn 

it briefly outlined. PH v. 13, p. 3 Jo 1 '33. (q }3_b,' 
p. 122.) 

867 1933 ' Je 1 Leader wires latest on Hawos Ajt situation, talks on 

• Quirino, etc. PH v. 13, pp. 1, 2 Je 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 122.) 

868 1933 Je 2 Quezon announces his intention to resign. 

KTrib.. v. 9, pp.' 1, 2 Je 2 '33- .(Q B-b, p. 92.) 

869 1933 Je 2 Quirino conbatua la anunciado dimision del Presidento del 

Senndo Manuel L. Quezon. OP v. 8, pp. 1, 8 Je 2 '33*.- ' 
(Q B-b, p. 103.) 

870 1933 J e 2 Irrevocable attitude of leader against certain provisions 

of law lending new enthusiasm to drive. PH v. 13, 
pp. 1, 6 Jo 2 '33- (<i B-b, p.. 122',) 

871 1933 J e 2 Quezon dimitira si Osmofia y Roxas insiston en que se acep- 

tu la Ley. VajLu, v. 24, pp. 1, 2 Je 2 ' 33. (Q B-b, 
p. 145.) 

372 1933 j e 3 Quezon resignation opposed. 

MLB v. 90, pp. 1, 6 Je 3 '33. (0 B-b, p. 66.) 
8 73 1933 J e 3 With the Quezon Kissioners in Washington. 

PFP v. 27, pp. 4, 5 Je 3 '33- (°.H.P' 
8 ?4 1933 Je 3 Filipino loaders who worked in Washington sized up by . 

Washington Press Correspondents. PH v. 13, p. 14 
^ Je 3-'33. (Q : *r b > P- 122*') 



..11-^ 



827 • 111 ~ 250 



375 1935 Jo 3 La ley Hawos no os acoptable aun. con roservas dico Quezon 

a la A.P. Van., v. 24, Pp . lf 10 j e 3 ^ (q ^ ^ ^ 

87 6 1933 Jo 3 Quezon urge un programa comun de accion futura.' 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 Jo 3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 145.) 

877 1933 ^ 4 Proodom is Legislature's first concern, says' Quezon. 

mX2&., v. 9, pp. 1, 8 Je 4 '33. (Q B-b, P . 92.) 
873 1933 J o 4 Quezon urges .common program for future. 

iiSKilU, v, 9, pp. 1, 7 Je 4 .33, (q B-b, p. 92.) 

879 1933 Jo 6 Quezon adamant says rnoro parleys :'fttr.ile. 

£li v. 13, pp. 1, 2 Je 6 '33. (Q B-b, p. 123.) 

880 1933 Je 8 Gorao interpretan una indecision de- Quezon. 

DaJu, v. 14, p. 1 Je 8 »33. (Q B-b, p. 35.) • 

881 1933 Je 8 Quezon offers to resign leadership. 

v. 6, pp. 2, 99 Je 3. '33. (Q B-b, p. 51.) 

882 1933 Je 9 President invites Colons, cabinet members to lunch Monday. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 10 Je 9 ;,33. (Q B-b, p.' 123.) 

883 1933 Je 10 Quezon volvera a' plantear su dimision, on opinion de Pare-' 

Aes. Dob^, v. 14, p. 1 Je 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 35.) x 

884 1933 Je 10 Home they come. PPP v. 27, p. 38 Je 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

885 1933 Je 10 Back stage in Washington. 

PIT v. 27, pp. 2, 3, 47 Je lo'*33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

886 19 33 Je 10 President sends his message to people; continues to be 

firm.. £g v. 13, pp. 1, 6 Je 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 123.) 
,887 1933 Je 11 Quezon, Osmeha y Roxas reeomiendan la unidad del pueblo. •' 

v. 14, p. 1 Je 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 35.) 

888 1933 Jo 11 Three leaders issue 1st joint statement. 

' KTrjb., v- 9, pp. 1, 17 Jo 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 93.) 

889 I933 J e 12 Quezon, Osmeha deny accord. . ■ 

2231 v. 90, pp. 1, 8 Je 12 '33. (Q B-b, p.' 66.) 
■890 19 33 Je 12 Quezon outlines plan, of action. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 14 Je 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 123.) , 

891 I933 Je "12 Quezon propone una nuova formula. 

Van., v. 24, pp. 1, 8 Je 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 145.) 

8 92 1933 Je 13 No ha habido inteligencia, pero hay paz y unidad -Quezon. 

Dob ., v. 14, p. 2 Jo 13 '33. (°. 3-b, p. 35.) 

8 93 1933 Je 13 Conmomoraron en Malolos un acto historico. 

Dob, . v. 14, pp. 1, 5 J'u 13 '33- (Q B-b, p. 35.) 

8 94 1933 Je 13 War over Law is declared. 

MDBv. 90, pp. 1, 6 Jo 13 *33. (<1H P> 66 ') 

8 95 1933 j Q 13 Harmony prevails at peace luncheon. 

MTrjb.. v. 9, PP. 1, 8 Je " '33. '(Q B-b> p* 93>) 



- 828 . 111 " ™ 

,396 1933 J e • 13 . Dos formulas oomoto Quezon, etc. 

PP v. 8, p. 4, Jo 13 '33. (n.H p. 104.) 
; 9 7 19 33 Jo 13 Politics forgotten a t adversary. 

Pli v. 13, pp. 12 Ju „ , 33b (q R _ b> p< i23j 

;; 9 8 1933 Jo 13 Dobomos haoor campona per una libertad real - Quezon. •:. 

Ian., v. 24, pp. 3, 8 Jo 13 '33. (QB-b, a . .146.) 
399 1933 Jcb 13 Doolaraoioitta de OoznoHa y Quezon quo afirman la solidarida 

nacional. V^. , v . 24, p. 10 Je 13 '33. (Q B-b, p. 146.) 
■-00 1933 . Jo 14 Quoaon to ask sanction for special session. 

MjoJUj. v. 9, pp. 1, 3 Jo 14 »33. (Q B-b, p. 93.) 

901 1933 Je 14 Quezon vanco la oposicion de Sonadores. 

PP v. 8, pp. 1, 8 Je 14 '33. (OH p. 104.) 

902 1933 Je 14 Spirited debates on. plan of action feature meeting. , 

PH v. 13, PP . 1, 14 Jo 14.-33. (Q B-b, p. 123.) 

903 1933 Jo 14 President leads in predicting new era in Philippines. / 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 14 Je 14 '33. (Q'.B-b, p. 123.). 

904 1933 Jo 14 L a formula de Quo son so discutio hoy. 

IfiH., v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Jo 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 146.) 

905 1933 J e 14 Los caudillos brindan ipoyo a P. Murphy. ;• 

Xaa., v. 24, pp. i, 10 Jo 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 146.) 

906 1933 Je 15 Quezon adroite quo no ha llegada a' una conclusion hocha • 

ahora sobrc la Ley. D0J2. , v. 14, p. 8 Je 15 '33. 
(Q 3-b, p. 35.) 

907 I93.3 Jo 15 Independence mission arrives. 

JaKfi.» v. 6, pp. 6, 63 Jo 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 51.) 

908 1933 Jo 15 Keeping, with the Hissioners. 

v. 6, p. 7 Je 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 51.), 

909 1933 Je 15 Quezon reiterates belief Legislature will support. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 12 Je 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 123.) 

910 1933 J e 15 Quezon ologia cl discurso del ojorcitivo. 

V'mi f v. 24, pp. -1, 4 Je 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 146.) 

911 I933 Je 16 Quezon promises full revelations. 

HTrib. . v. 9, pp. 1, 2 Jo 16 '33- (Q B-b, p. 93.) 

912 1933 Je 17 Sin sacrificio alguno pueden ostar unidos.. 

OP v. 8, pp. 1, 6 Je 17 '33. (Q B-b, p.. 104.) 

913 I933 Je 17 Mission members describes Quezon's reply to Robinson. 

PFP v. 27, p. 43, Jo 17 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 
SLt 1933 Je 18 L a union de loo caudillos do la nacion as ya un hecho 

positive. MUj v « 14 > PP- 1 » 4 Jg 18 ' 53 * ^ Q B " b ' P * 35 
91 5 1933 Je 18 Quezon's sudden decision to return home- its reasons. 

MTrj.b., v. 9, PP. 1, 30, 31 Je 18 '-33. (Q B-b, p. 93-> 



- 829 _ 



III - 252 



016 1933 Je 19 . Quezon refuses compromised^- % • 

— V ' 92 ' PP- V4 Je 19 '33. (q B.b f . p. 66.) 

9 17 1933 Jo ' 19 Quezon squarely stands on unity; warns of disaster. 

£H v. 1.3, pp. 1, .14 j e lg .33, (q 3_ b> p> 

918 1933 - T e 19 Soxas refutara los arguments' del Presidente Quezon anoohe. 

OP v. 8, p. .1 j e 19 -33. ( Q B_ b> p> 1Q4 j 

gig 1933 Je 19 Quezon, Osmeria, Hoxas in accord on plebiscite; drives begin 

soon. PH v. 13, PP . 1, 14 Jo lg .33, (q. B-b, p. 123.) 

920 1933 J e • 20 SI presidents del Senado roitera que su posicion a la 

medida siquu firmo. De^. , v . 14, p. 2, Je 20 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 36.) 

921 1933 Je 20 Hawos prometio ayudar para obtenor eniaiendas quo mojoran 

la Loy Indepondencia. Mm v. 14, pp. 4, 6 Je 20 '33, '• 
(Q B-b, p. 36.) , 

922 1933 Je 20 President Quezon on national unity. (Editorial) 

*SxjJLu» v. 9, p. 4 Je 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 93.) 

923 1933 Je 20 Quezon opposed to special session for freedom act. 

UEeDLul v. 9, pp. 1, 9 Jo 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 93.) * 

924 1933- Je 20 Thousands throughout city listen as Quezon and others talk 

on bill. E^Xhx., v. 9, pp. 1, 8 Je 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 93.) 

925 1933 Je 20 Leader question claims to greater wisdom, patriotism. '■ 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 11 Jo 20 '33. ■ (Q B-b, p. 123.) 

926 1933 Je 20 Principios no porsonalisaos, dice Quezon. 

V^n,., v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Je 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 146.) 

927 1933 Je 20 El reajusto economico da estabilisidad a la future' vida- 

. politica. Ian.-, v. 24, p. 3 Je 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 146.) 

928 I933 Je 21 Que la discusion se haga duntro del terreno de los princi- 

pios, dice Quezon/ Dab.. , v. 14, p. 2 Jo 21 '33.. (Q B -b, 
p. 36.) 

929 1933 Je 22 Quezon y las dos banderas en 03ta pais. 

Deb., v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Je 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 36.) 

930 1933 J e 22 Silken P.I. flag presented by Prsjsident Quezon to Jamboree 

delegates. HTrjJ^, v. 9, pp. 1, 3 Je 22 '33. (Q 3-b, 
p. 93.) . 

931 I933 Je 22 Independence Act discussion heads Legislature calendar, 

.Quezon nays. I-ilVi.b. . v. 9, pp. 1,'4 Je 22 '33. (Q B-b, 

' p. 93.) 

932 I933 Je 22 Quezon presents Philippine Flag to Scout Delegate to 

Budapest and urges them to add to its luster. 
PHv. 13, p. 3 Jo 22 '33. .(Q B-b, p. 123.) 

933 I933 Jo 22 Quezon outlines rejections drive. 

• PH v. 13, PP. 1, 12 J o 22 '33. >(Q *-b, P- 123.) 



- 850 



III - 253 



954 1953 Je 22 Simbolismo de la bandera explica Quezon. 

1^., v. 24, P . 3, j e 22 '.33. (q B-b, p. U 6.) 
s;55 19 33 23 Informaoion y no acusaciones en l a caBpafia de 

14, pp.. 1, 8 Je 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 36.) 

936 1935 Je 23 Quezon advices moderation in discussions of L a w 5 informa- 

tion, not controversy is main goal. MDB v , go, pp. 1, 8 
Je 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 66.) 

937 1933 Je 23 Solo con una condicion, etc. 

OP v. 8, p. 4 Je 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 104.) 

938 1933 Je 24 It's up. to the people. 

HI v. 27, pp. 4, 40 Je 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) 

939 19 33 Je 27 Mission promises reVel-ations in report. 

Mxiju, v. 9, PP. 1, 2 Je 27 '33. (Q B-b, p. 93.) 

940 1933 Je 28 Lucha hasta el final, sean cuales sean las consecuencias - ■ 

Quezon. Deb., v. 14, pp. 1, 6 Je 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 36.) 

941 1933 J e 28 Says Quezon favored Act. 

MDB v. 90, p. 6 Je 28 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 66.) 

942 1933 Je 28 Ilawes, in letter alleges Pa ct with Quezon. 

MTrjJii., v. 9, pp. l, 9 j e 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 93.) <-;.-.., ■ 

943 19 33 Je 28 Ilawes alega que Quezon prometio trabajar por 'su bill en 

i'iiipinas. Vjgn.. , v. 24, p. 2 Je 28 '33. .(Q B-b, p. 146.) 
944' 1933 Je 29 Vera denuncia un prestamo de Quezon. 

Dgb., v.- 14, p. 2 Jo 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 36/) 

945 1933 Je 29 Strong statements from Baguio taken to mean open war. 

MDB v. 90, pp. ]., 6 Je 29 '33. (Q B-b, p.' 66.) 

946 1933 . J e 29 Imprudence, Quezon charges. 

MDB v. 90, pp. 1, 6 Je 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 66.) 

947 19 33 Je 29 All doors to understanding closed , says Senate President. 

MDB v. 90, p. 1 Je 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 66.) 

948 1933 Je 29 Quezon declares open war. 

MTrib. f v. 9, P. 1 Je 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 93.) 

949 1933 Je 29 Leader, provoked by "imprudent" remark, calls off peace 

efforts; re,jec"tionists indorse his decision. PH v. 13, 
pp. 1, 12 Je 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 123.) 

950 I933 Je 29 L a Miaion acepta el re to de Quezon. 

Van . . v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Je 29 '33- (Q B-b, p. 146.) 

951 1933 Je 30 Quiere aparecfir victima cuando es el victimario. 

Mb., v. 14, p. 8 Jo 30 '33. (°- B-b, n. 36.) 

952 1933 Je 30 Quezon embarca a' la gente y se queda en tierra, segun 

dicen. OP v. 8, p. 2 Je 30^ '33- (°- B-b, p. 104.) 

95 3 1933 Je 30 L a declaracion de guerra del Pres. Quezon ha sido aceptada 

por la Mision. OP v. 8, p. 8, Je 30 '33. (Q B-b,' p. 104.) ■ 



311- 



.83! . 111 "254 



954 . 1953 Je 30 Legislature will repudiate Wen's . acts; Quezon confident 

People will back flolona. PH v. 13f p . lp j G 30 '33. 
(Q B-b, P. 123.) 

955 1933 Je 30 L a Legislatura oata pucsta a repudiar a la lesion que no 

cumplio ordenas - Quezon. £». , v. 24, pp. 1, 2 
Je 30 '33. (c B-b, p. 146.) . 

956 1933 Je 30 U na hora con el , President (-Quezon, .(pop)'. 

M. v. 30, p. - J 6 30 »33. (OB-b, p. 156.) 

957 1933 Je-n,.d. llio Haws-Act or. Quezon versus Osmofia. (Editorial) 

£,11. v. 30, p. 19 Je '33. (q]3-b, p. 156.) 
' 958 1933 Jl 1 L a Mision sera repudiada. por l a Legislatura,- M, Quezon. 

Deb., v. 14, p. 2 Jl l -33. (q B-b, p. 36.) 

959 1933 Jl 1 Contra el :>r. Quezon. 

Deb., v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Jl 1 '33. (q B-b, p. 36.) 

960 1933 Jl 1 Quezon's statement revives campaign against plebiscite .but 

ranks are divided. MDB'v. 71, pp. 1, 6 .Jl 1 '33. (q B_ D , 
p. 66.) 

961 1933 Jl 1 Osraefia challcngas Quezon to resign and fight it out before 

the people. MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 8 Jl 1 '33. (Q B-b, p-. 66.) 

962 1933 Jl 1 Mission did not obey .Legislature;, Quezon declares. 

HTrjJ^, v. 9, pp. 1, 9 Jl 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 93.) 

963 1933 Jl * 1 Fight to finish, says Quezon. 

ML v. 27, p. 44 -Jl 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 110.) . 

964 1933 Jl 1 Neither l/ingo nor Romulo was correct, says Quezon. 

PK? v. 27, pp. 17, 45 Jl 1 '33.' (Q B-b, p. Ill,) 

965 1933 Jl 1 Move footnotes I have forgotten to use. 

PPP v. 27, pp. 16, 17 Jl .r'33- (Q B-b, p. 111.) 

966 1933 Jl 1 L a Lig a tilda de histriona M. Quezon. 

■Van., v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Jl 1 "33. ■ (Q B-b, p. 146.) 

967 1933 Jl 2 Injusta e' infundada la declaracion de Quezon dice el Rep. 

fimiliano Tria Tirona. Bob. , v. 14, p. 8 Jl 2 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 36.) 

968 1933 Jl 2 Declaraciones del Presidente M. Quezon. ; , 

Deb ., v. 14, p. 4 Jl 2 '33. (Q B-b, p. 36.) » . . v' 

969 1933 Jl 2 Quezon sounds rallying call against Mission. 

■ . • MTrib.. v.' 9, pp. 1, 19 Jl 2 '33. •(<-"> B-b, p. 93.) 

570 1933 j]_ ? Oamoha strikes at Quezon in speech at Capiz. . 

HTrjJ^, v. 9, 'pp. 1» 27 Jl 2 '33- (Q B-b, p. 93.) 
? 71 1933 Jl 2 ".July 4, 1945. W&ku v - 8 PP' 7 ' 21 Jl 2 " 33 ' ^ 

p. 93.) 

972 1933 Jl 2 Senate Head's attitude scored in acceptance league mani- 
festo. MTrib.. v. 9, P. 5 Jl 2 '33.. (Q ?-b, p. 94.) 



III - 255 

832 _ 7 



97? 1933 Jl 2 Quezon no es el puoblo Filipina, declara la L iga d e acep- 

tacion. Dob,., v. 14, p. 2 Jl 2 ' 33. (q 3-b, p. 36.) 

974 1933 Jl 3 Quezon orders reorganization, saying 'no accord is possible'. 

»v. 91,. PP. 1, 6 Jl 3 '33. (on, p. 66.) 

975 1933 Jl 3 Big crowd acclaim Senate Head upon his return from Pines 

City. PH v. 13, pp. i, 14 Jl 3 -33. (q B-h,- p. 123.) 

976 1933 Jl 3' Quezon to ask all leaders to quit. 

™ v « 13, PP. 1, 14. Jl 3 '33. (Q B_b, p. 123.) 

977 19 33 Jl 3 Quezon will place confidence matter before his party. '' 

PI v, 13, pp. 1, 14 Jl 3 '33. (q B-b, p. 123.). 

978 '1933 Jl 3 Peace impossible judging from Quezon's attitude, Clarin says-. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 2 Jl 3 '33. (Q 3_b, p. 124.) 
979. 1933 Jl 3 El informe de la- Miaion deraonstrara que la misma a siguio 

las instrucciones. Xaa. , v. 24, p. 6 II 3 '33. 

(Q B-b, p. 146.) 
980 19 33 Jl 3 Hejor ayuda para eocuelas - Quirino. 

Ian., v. 24, pp. 1, 3 Jl 3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 146.) 

931 1933 Jl 3 Quezon dice que dimitira como Presidente el 16 de Julio. 

Vfliul v. 24, p. 3 Jl 3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 146.) 

932 1933 Jl 3 Quezon falto a un convonio, dice Osmena. " 

Ian.., v. 24,. pp. 1, 8 Jl 3 '33. (Q B-b T p. 146.) 

983 1933 Jl 4 Exposicion de hechos y llamamientc que se haco a los 

ciudadanos. De^. , v. 14, pp. 1, 4 Jl 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 36.) 

984 1933 Jl 4 Niego q\ie el Pres. Quezon sea mas patriota que otros. 

Dab., v. 14, p. 4 Jl 4 '33- (QB-b, p. 36.') 

985 1933 Jl 4 'No s.aldro nunca de mis tnrcera formula, dice el Pres. Quezon 

Deb ., v. 14, pp. 1, 4 Jl 4 "33. (QB-b, p. 36.) 
936 1933 Jl 4 Quezon meets Osmena on people's stage, Quezon declares. 

MTrjb. f v. 9, PP. 1, A Jl 4 '33- (Q B-b, p. 94.) 

987 1933 Jl 4 4 People must demand return of powers given leaders who 

ignore their wishes - Osmena. ll£rjL&*., v « 9, PP« 1» 3 
Jl 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 94.) 

988 1933 Jl 4 Grave consequences loom in Legislature as Quezon falls in 

with resignation plan. ETj-j.fr t > v « 9, pp. 1, 2 Jl 4 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 94.) 

939 1933 ' Jl 4 Leader accepts . Osmena challenge to debate, Legislature stage.. 

PH v. 13, PP. 1, 11 Jl 4 '53- (Q B^, P- 123.) 
990 1933 Jl 4 Onmena, Roxas want Legislature to act only when they are 

obeyed, not otherwise - Quezon. PH v. 13, PP« 1, 12 

Jl 4 *33. (Q B-b, p. 124.) 
•991 1933 Jl 4 U n llamamionto al pueblo haco la liga civioa. 

SOU, v. 24, p. -3 Jl 4 '33. (QB-b, P . 146.)- 



$W . Ill - 256 

- 833 - 

Q92 1933 J1 4 Quezon dosobo al pueblo - Osmefia.- 

laa., v. 24, pp. l, 2 JJ. 4 '33. (q B_b, p. 146.) 

093 1933 J l 5 Si aceptaraoo, relevaremos a B.U. de su promesa - Quezon. 

Xa&., v. 24, p. 3 Jl 5 '33. (Q H-b, Supp.) 

904 1933 Jl 5 From Quezon's address. . . 

HDB v. 91, pp. 1, 6 Jl 5 '33.. (Q B-b, p. 66.) 

995 19 33 Jl 5 Keep M\irphy out - Quezon. • - 

HDD v. 91, pp. 1, "6 Jl 5 '33. (Q .B-b, p. 67.) 

996 1933 Jl 5 Mission unfa.tr in discussing bill - Quezon. 

Wkibjui v. 9, PP. 1, 3 Jl 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 94.) 

997 1933 J l 5 Highlights of Quezon speech. 

ISxib., v. 9, p. 1 Jl 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 94.) 

998 1933 Jl 5 -Quezon trata de repetio el desganamiento de 1921 que le 

elevo a' la.Jefatura. OP v. 8, p. 4 Jl 5 '33. (Q B-b, % 
p. 104.) , • 

999 1933 Jl 5 Quezon deraonstrara que es mas consecuente que es los 

Hisioneros Osmeria y-Koxas. OP v. 8, p. 4 Jl 5 '33. 
(Q.B-b, p. 104.) 

1000 1933 Jl 5 Quezon firmly against unlimited power for U.S. to 'pick 

army reservation after liburty. PH v. 13, pp. 1, 3 
Jl 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 124.) 

1001 19 33 Jl 5 Quezon rights papers' quotation of him on military reser- 

vations. PH v. 13, p. 1 Jl 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 124.) 

1002 1933 Jl 5 Tres informea habra sobre la I'asiones. 

Vm-f v - PP» 1» 10 Jl 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 147.) 

1003 1933 Jl 6 Un dialogo inte res ante. 

Deb., v. 14, p. 4 Jl 6 '33- (Q B-b, p. 37.) 

1004 1933 Jl 6 Estoy dispuosto a' luchar contra los miembros de la mision 

Hanuel L. Quezon. Deb., v. 14, p. 2 Jl 6 '33. (Q B-b, 

p. 37.) . 

1005 1933 Jl 6 Contest acion de .Equine al Pres. Quezon. 

2&tL.f v. 14, p. 8 Jl 6 '33. (Q B-b, p. 37.) 

1006 1933 • Jl 6 Japanese peers look as over. 

Scai, 6, pp. 61, 63 Jl-6 '33. (QH P- 51.) 

1007 1933 Jl 6 War over IUH-C Act war' declared. 

Pxa., v. 6, pp. 4," 5, 60 Jl 6 '33. (Q B-b«, p. 51.) 

1008 1933 Jl 6 Quezon twists statements, says Osmefla. 

hdb v. 91, pp.- 1. 6 J1 6 (Q B_b ' p * 67j • 

1009 1933 Jl 6 JteuinaLdo and Quezon decline to reveal plan. 

MDB v. 91, PP. 1, 6 J l 6 '33. (Q B-b, p. 67.) 

1010 1933 J! " 6 Quezon no aboga por la independencia absolute • 

OP v. 8, pp. 1, 8 Jl 6 '33. (4 B-b, p. 104.) 



- 834 - 



III - 257 



mil 1953 Jl 7. Quezon no csta ornie^tn Q t « ' ■ 

10U ' 3 °P uosto a las resorvas navalea y militates. 

^b- v. 14, p. 2 Jl 7 . 33 ; (o B-b, p. 37.) 

1012 1933 Jl 7 Quezon is to resign, but his group will control Legisla- 

ture. MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 8 Ji 7 - 33 . (q B_ b> p> 67j 

1013 1933 . ^ 7 No peace proposals arc sought, declares Quezon; . rojoct thc 

law to achieve unity, says Aguinalde. MDB v. 91, 
PP. 1, 6 Jl 7 '33. (Q B-b, P . 67.) 

1014 1933 Jl 7 Quezon dispuesto a asumir hoy tod a l a responsibilidad. ' 

Vail., v. 24, p. 3 Jl 7 '33. (Q B-b, p. 147.) 

1015 1933 Jl 7 Hasta cuando abusara Quezon de l a confiariza del pueblo. . 

XflO,., v. 24, p. 4 Jl 7 '33* (Q B-b, p. 147.) 

1016 1933 Jl 8 Quezon oota indignado del alegado regionalismo de Osraofiai. 

v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Jl 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 37.) . 

1017 1933 Jl 8 ' Las dardos lanzados contra Pres. Quezon. 

£eb., v. 14, p. 4 Jl 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 37.) 
1019. 1933 Jl 0 Quezon plans to reorganize Legislature. 

PPTv. 27, pp. 5, 35 Jl 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 111.)-. 

1019 1933 Jl 8 L a cuestion batallona. 

PS? v. 27, p. 67 Jl 8 '33. ■ (Q B-b, p. 111.) 

1020 1933 Jl 8 T a ctics of C e bu Solon not new, Quezon says: Rosas draws • 

sarcasm. PH v. 13, pp. 1, 12 Jl 8 '33. (Q B-b, p.- 124'.) 
.1021. 1933 Jl 9 Quezon aboga por un oonsejo quo decida la accion la Ley 

• ilawes. Deb., v. 14, j. 2 Jl 9 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 37.) 

1022 1933 Jl 9 ''hat did Quezon say to Murphy? 

MMlLf v - 9, P. 2 Jl 9 '33. (Q B-b, P ; 94.)' 

1023 1933 Jl 9 -Senate Head gives two alternative leadership plans. 

MTrib,., v. 9, PP. 1, 7 Jl 9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 94.) 

1024 1933 Jl 9 Quezon's negotiations with D.C. administration shown in 

cables. KTrJJb., v. 9, p. 19 Jl 9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 94.) 

1025 1933 Jl 9 Osuefia, Roxas did not object to truce plan, Hagalona s'ays 

* ' 

•revealing telegrams. MTribj^ v. 9, pp. 1, 7 Ji 9 "33* 
(q 3-b, p. 94 J 

1026 1933 Jl 10 Quezon's plan for council not popular. 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 4 Jl 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 67.) 

1027 I933 Jl 10 The Philippines' protest. 

I1DB v. 91, p. 14 Jl 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 67.) 

1028 1933 Jl 10 Cebu visit ends in' fiery attack against Quezon. 

MDB v. 91,' pp. 1, 8 Jl 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 67.) 

1029 .1933 Jl 10 Quezon sale al encuentro de los cargos de Osmena. 

O? v. 8, pp. 1, 8 Jl 10 "33. (Q 3-b, p. 104.) 
io ?0 1933 Jl 10 L a unidad nacional no significa union de los 3: Quezon, 

Osmeha, Hoxas. OF v. 8, p. 8 Jl 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 104.) 



1031 1933 Jl 10 ^n'B^anforffationaa^u-o^^^^/. 

ffl v. 13, pp. 1, H Jl io -33. (oB-b, p. ,124.) . 

1032 1933 Jl 10 Quezon says in note answering 'twisting' charge. 

m v. 13, PP . 1, H Ji io .33. (o B_ b> p . # 124>) . 

1033 1933 Jl' 10 Es insidia de Osmofla, dice Quezon. 

IfflW v. 24, pp. 1, 2 Jl 10 '33. (Q 3-b, p.- 147.) ' ■ 

10 34 1933 Jl 11 Los 'Antis* torn von. al acuerdo de aceptar l a Ley con 

reservas. Dob., v. 14, pp. 1, 8 Jl 11 ; 33 . (q B-b, p. 37. 

1035 1933 Jl 11 Quezon contcsta Ins acusaci ones "del Sen. 'osmeha. 

Mi., v. 14, p. 2 Jl 11 -33. (q B-b, p. 37.) - 

1036 *19 33 Jl 11 Quazon.reorgani3ara.el par ti.do. Uwantolo Partidp Naoibna- 

lista Obrero. Deb., v . 14, pp , lf 8 3l n « 55> ( Q ^ 
P. 37.) 

■1037 1933 Jl 11 Osmofia would be "power behind 'throne" , Quezon declares. ' 

^gri b , . , v. 9, p. 9, Jl 11 '33. (Q B-b, p.. 94.) 

1038 1933 ' Jl 12 H a aprobado del Pres. Quezon el bill del estado libro do 

Filipino. Deb., v . 14, p. 8 Jl 12 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 37.). 

1039 1933 Jl 12 -Propose antedated election for oolons. 

EZxiXu, v. 9, pp. 1, 9 Ji 12 '33. (Q J3^b, p. 94. + ) 

1040 1933 Jl 12 Is Quezon against independence? 

WSxikjLt v. 9, p. 8 Jl 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 94.) 

1041 1933 Jl 12 Hasta cuando abusara Quezon de la confianzadel pueblo. 

OP v. 8, p. 6 Jl 12 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 104.) 

1042 1933 Jl 12 Quezon must stay, Don Belong says. 

PH v. 13, p. 1 Jl 12 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 124.) 

1043 1933 Jl 12 Ha aprobado del Pres. Quezon el bill sutro? 

Van. . v. 24, p. 3 Jl 12 ''33. (Q 3-b, p. 14?.) ' 

1044 1933'' Jl 13 Que dijo Quo son on re alidad. 

Dob., v. 14, pp. 1, 3 Jl 13 '33. (Q B-b, p. 37.) 

1045 1933 Jl 13 Quezon, .Osmofia y Koxaa por una I'iayorira Filipina en lo 

Corto ouproraa. Deb.., v. 14, pp. 1, 3 Jl 13 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 37.) , . 

1046 1933 Jl 13 The fight, rages on. 

' Oea., v. 6, pp. 4, 3, 61 Jl 13 '33. (Q B-b, p. 51.) , v : 

1047 1933 Jl 13 Aquino makes bitter spoech. " • 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 6 Jl 13 '33- (°~ 3-b, P- 6 7.) 
■ 1048 1933 Jl 13 Vigoroso ataque contra el liderato de Quezon lanza el 

# Senator Aquino. OP V. 0, p." 2 Jl 13 *33. .(Q B-b, p. 104.) 

1049 I933 Jl 13 Quezon no tiono la culpa. 

• Vflfl... v.. 24, P . 4 Jl 13 '33. (Q 'A-b, p. 147.) 

>J050 1933 ' Jl 14 Quezon relat.a detail adanente' a Alunan los motivos. del 

conflicto . fiai., v. 14, p. 1 Jl 14 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 37.) 



SIX-"' 



- 836 - HI - 259 



1051 1933 Jl 14 Quezon no tieno l a culp £ 

v. 14, p. 4 Jl 14 '33. (QB-b, p. '37.) 

1052 1953 Jl 14 Split with opponents inevitable - Quezon. 

v.. 9, pp. 1, '3 Jl H .33. (q }M)> p> 94 j 
1055 1933 Jl 14 Quezon no ticne l a culpa. 

OP v. 8| - p. 6 Jl 14 '33. (QB-b, p . 1 04 .) 

1054 1933 Jl 15 Osmena dice que no esta para polemics con el Pros. Quezon. 

JM., v, 14, p . 8 Jl 15 -33. (o B-b, p. 37.) 

1055 1933 Jl 15 Destiny confronts the Legislature. 

v. 27, pp.- 5, 41 Jl 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. ill,) 

1056 1933 Jl 15 Ricarto wires pledge to Quezon. 

m v. 13, p. 1 Ji 15 -33. (o B-b, p. 124.) 

1057 1933 Jl 16 wants Osmofla, _ Quezon to run in 4th District. 

IIScULl, v. 9, p. 18b Jl 16 '33. (Q B-b; p. 94.) 

1058 1933 Jl 16 Quezon postpones caucus; truce pnrley in. progress. 

1059 19 33 Jl I 6 ^ new political party soon to be organized. ■■ > .' t ... 

i^iiLu, v. 9, p . 7 ji 16 '33. (q B-b, p. 94.) • 
.1060 1933 Jl 17 In memorial!) to Justice ViHamor. 

PH v. 13, p. 6 Jl 17 '33. (QB-b, p. 124.) 

1061 1933 Jl 18 Quuzon to quit as Party Il'oad. 

i-ijJB v. yi, pp. i, 2 Jl 18 '33. (Q B-b, p;. 67.) 

1062 1933 Jl 19 Un dialogo intoreaonta.. 

OF v. 8, p. 4 Jl 19 '33. (Q B-b, p. 104.) ' ' '• 

1063 1933 Ji 19 Quo son stays as party president. • 

PH v. 13, pp. 1, 14 Jl 19 '35. (Q B-b, p. 124.) 

1064 1933 Jl 19 Conf ianza. en Quezon como lider ratificada} Osmefla concurro 

en el voto de ratificacion. Van.., v. 24, pp. 1, 8 
Jl 19 '-33. (Q B-b, p. 147.) 

1065 1933 Ji 19 La dimision de Quezon como Presidents del Partido. 

Van., v. 24, p. 1, Jl 19 '33. (Q.B-b, p." 147,.) ' 

1066 1933 ji 20 La dimision de Quezon. 

Deb. . v. 14, p. 2 Jl 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 37.)' 

1067 1933 Jl 20 ilanuel L. Quezon ha aceptado do nuevo la Jefatura 

del Partido. Deb.. , v. 14, p. 2 Jl 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 38.)' 
1063 1933 Jl 20 Osias quotes Quezon letter. 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 6 Jl 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 67.) 

1069 1933 Jl 20 Osmofla won't resign, but Quezon is given hugo confidence 

vote. HDB v. 91, PP- 1, 4 Jl .20 '33- (QB-b, p. 67.) 

1070 1933 Jl 20 Quezon no puedo oponerse a' la Ley Independencia. ' 

JQ£. v. 8, pp. 1,. 4 Jl 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 104.) 



- fl 37 - 



III - 26C 



1071 1933 Jl 20 Quezon resigns as Senate Head. ' ' 

~ V * 13 ' p P- X ' " Jl 20 '33. (Q B-b,' p, 124.) ■ ' - . 
. 107 2. 1933 Jl 20 Quezon apoyo el bill H mB on 1930 pidiendo una leva 

canibio, fl 8e unO flla a. V^n., v . 24> p> g J;L 2Q 
(Q B-b, p. 147.) 

1.073 1933 Jl 20 Jfo destruyon la unidad nacional diferencias entro lideres- 

Quezon, v. 24, pp. 1, 2 j x 20 -33. ( Q B _ bf p> W7<) 

i074 . 19 33 Jl 20 La politica del J aP on on el Oriente aplicada a Filip iuas . 

Ian., v. 24, p. 6 Jl 20 '33. (Q .B-b, P . 147.) 

,075 1033 Jl 21 La limitacion do productos fue recomondad por Quezon - 

Osias. Deb., v. U, p . 8 J3 _ 21 (q ^ p< 

1076 1933 Jl 21 Quezon sostiene.que la Ley Indopendista debe ser some tide 

a* la decision del pueblo. OP. , v. 8, pp. 1, 4 Jl 21 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 105.) 

1077 1933 Jl 21 Palma denies he initiated attack against President Quezon. '' 

m v. 13, pp. 1, 13 Jl 21 '33. U B-b, p. 124.) 

1078 1933 Jl 21 ■ Loader reveals all steps he took to consult people before' 

forming decision. £H v.,13, pp. l, 14 Jl 21 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 124.) ' , 

1079 1933 Jl 21 La Minion provocadora, ' no puodo prosentarse como martir- • 

Quezon. V^, v. 24, pp. 1, 10 _ Jl 21 '33. (Q B-b, 'p.- 14.7.) 
•1080 1933 Jl 22 Koorganizacion debida al deficit - 'Quezon. " 

Xan*.i v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, Supp.) 

1081 1933 Jl 22 Aquino v fl a contestar al.Pres. Quezon. 

,sf Deb., v. 14, pp. 1, 4 Jl '22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 38.) . ' 

1082 1933, Jl 22 Palma sostiene que os vordad quo ha iniciado ataque cor.tra 

Quezon. Dob., v. 14, pp. 2, 8 Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 38.0 ' 

1083 1933 Jl 22 Quo son sostiene y justifica su actitud la opinion sobre la 

Ley '-JIare-Hawes-Cutting. Deb, . , v. 14, pp. 2, 8 Jl 22 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 30.). ' . 

1084 1933 Jl 22 Una carta al Pres. Quezon. 

Deb., v. 14, p.' 5 Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 58.) ' 

1085 1933 Jl . 22 Quezon backs ouster moves. 

KDB v. 91, PP. 1, 5 Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 67.) 

1086 1933 ■ Jl 22 Solon3 cordial, in Quezon home. 

HTrjj,b. f v. 9, pp. 2, 3 Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 95.) 

1087 1033 Jl 22 Kalaw gives version of Quezon's meeting with the university 

heads. HTrJJ^, v. 9, PP- 1,. 4 Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 95.). 

1088 1933 Jl 22 Did not attack Quezon in .articles, Palma declares answering 

charges. ■;E&Xb*., v. 9, P- 2' Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 95.) 

1089 1933 Jl 22 Version sobre "cables" .al Pres.. Quezon, dudoaa. 

OP v. 8, p. 1 Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 105.) 



838 III - 261 

109 0 1933 ^ Jl 22 Ventura, uogun Quezon, no esfcaba capacitado para el 

Gabinete. OP. f v . 3, PP . lf 6 Jx 22 ..^ (q p / ^ >} 

1091 1933 Jl 22 Opponents of bill urge rejection , 

m v. 27, P . 29 Jl 22 '33. (ft 3-b, p, m.) ' 

1092 1933 J l 22 Quezon gives lie to Kalaw story. 

m v. 13, pp. 1, 12 Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 124.) . • 

1093 1933 Jl 22 Quezon follows our stand, party leader declares. 

M v. 13, pp. 1, 12 Jl 22 "33. (0 B-b, p. 124.) 
10.94 1933 Jl 22 Quezon, ably defends government reorganization, says 

Ventura was incompetent politician. PH v. 13, pp. 1, 13 
Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 124.) 

1095 1933 Jl 22 Palm a atribuyc al Prosidento Quezon ansias .do venganza. 

IbUjl, v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Jl 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 147.) ' 

1096 1933 Jl 23 No hay tal mayoria absorbente en nuestra Logj.slatur a - 

Quezon. Dob., v. 14, pp. 2, 7 Jl 23 '33. (Q B-b, Supp.) 

1097 1933 Jl 2'3 Quezon sacrifico todos los principios para domonstrar su 

podor. Deb., v. 14, p. 2 Jl 23 '33- (Q B-b, p. 38.) 

1098 1933 Jl 23 Ventura, roused by Quezon attack, answers Senate Presi- 

dent's charges. HTrib.., v. 9, pp. 1, 3 Jl 23 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 95.) 

1099 1933 Jl 23 Palma replies to Quezon's attack; will stick to job, 

?2£c£22*., v - 9, p. 8 Jl 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 95.) 

1100 1933 Jl 23 Dean Kalaw wrong, says 'Jen-ye Head. 

$£eU2ul v. 9, p. 8 Jl 23 '33.- (Q 3-b, p. 95.) 

1101 1933 J]. 24 0 anon a will present his reply ;oday. 

NDB v. 91, pp. 1,'4 Jl 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 67.) 

1102 1933 Jl 24 El ex-Juez Leonardo Gardurio contesta al Pros. Quezon. ■ 

OP. , v. 8, pp. 1, 3 Jl 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 105.) 

1103 1933 Jl 24 Quezon cri tica 1." actitud del Speaker Roxas. 

SlL*, v - °r pp. 1, 4 Jl 24 '33. (Q B-b, p-. 105.) 

1104 ■ 1933 Jl 24 Quezon solo tiene que respondor a' una sola pregunta, 

■ segun Poxas. OP., v. 8, p. 2 Jl 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 105.) 

1105 1933 Jl 24 Last session proved Roxas is fully unfit. 

£H v. 13, PP. -1, 14 Jl 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 124.) t 

1106 1933 Jl 24 Ventura contesta ataques de Quezon. 

Van., v. 24, pp. 1, 8 Jl 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 147.) 

1107 1933 Jl 24 Garduho refuta al Presidents Quezon. 

Van., v. 24, pp. 1, 4 Jl 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 147.) 

1108 1933 Jl 24 Ex-^ecretario Vontura refuta ataques lanzados por el 

Presidente Quezon. Van., v. 24, p. 2 Jl 24 '33- 

(q 3-b, p. 147.) ■■ ; 

U °9 1933 Jl 24 Pedro Abad Santos lanza un roto; - 

V^,, v. 24, PP. 1, 8 Jl 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 38.) 



■ It 



III - 262 

- 8» - 



1110 1$53 Jl 25 Garduiio y b'antos ooateatm el Presidente Quezon; 

£eb., v. 14, pp. 2 , 5 Jx 25 ^ (q ^ p> ^ 

nil 1933 Jl 25 Roxas demonstration more plan to beguile unwary, saya 

Quezon. MDB v. 9 1, pp. 1, 8 Jl 25 < 33 . (Q B-b, p . 67.) 

1112 1933 Jl 25 Prove charges, says Abad Santos. . 

m^b., v.. 9, pp. 1, 8 Jl 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 95,) 

111? 1933 Jl 25 Quezon condemns' "mob rule" in House. 

ITrlb.., v. .9, pp. a, 13 Jl 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 95.) 

1114 1933 Jl 25 El horabre que fie hiao segun el Presidents Quezon. 

-QP v. 8, pp. 1, 4 Ji 25 '33. (0 B-b, p. 105.) 

1115 1933 Jl 25 Ventura ro forth Quezon is another professional politician 

himself, ^v. 13, p.. 3 Jl 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 125.) 

1116 1933 Jl 25 K«lav recites series of allied inconsistencies of Pres. 

Quezon. KIv. 13, p. 9 Jl 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 125.) 

1117 1933 Jl 25 I can't follow Quezon any longer - Osmena. 

£H v. 13, 'pp. 1, 14 Jl 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 125.) 

1118 1933 Jl '25 El honbre que se hizo y el que se destruyo. 

Ian., v. 24, pp. 1, 2 Jl 25 '33- (Q 3-b, p. 147.) 

1119 1933 " Jl 25 Las inconsistencias del Presidente Quezon. * 

Ian-, v. 24,, p. 4 Jl 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 148.) 

1120 19 33 Jl 26 3oy humano. Hi corazon no ssbe lo que es odiar, contesta' 

Quezon a Roxaa. Van., v. -24, pp 1, 8 Jl 26 '33. 
(Q B-b, Supp. ) 

1121 1933 Jl 26 Yo trate varias veces de demitir pero me hicieron desistir 

- Quezon. Van., v. 24, pp. 1, 10 Jl 26 '33. (Q 3-b, Supp.) 

1122 1933 Jl 26 Quezon ha carabiado nuchas veces de actitud, Kalaw. 

Deb.., v. 14, p. 2 Jl 26 '33- (Q B-b, p, 38.) 

1123 1933 Jl 26 II. Ventura no tuvo ninguna profesion. 

Deb-, v. 14, p. 2 Jl 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 38.) 

1124 1933 Jl 26 Quezon tells of his early life in sharp rejoinder to 

Ventura. HDB v. 91, pp. 1, 8 Jl 26 '33- (Q 3-^b, p. 67.) 

1125 1933 Jl 26 Heated debate seen as Quezon replies to Osmena today. 

HDB v. 91, PP. 1, 5 Jl 26 '33. (Q &-b, P- 67.) 

1126 1933 Jl. 26 Will not resign from Senate, says President. 

NTrJJli., v. 9, PP- 1, 3 Jl 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 95.) 

1127 I933 Jl 26 Quezon had initialled agreement to recommend acceptance, 

.Osmena discloses in speech in .senate. HTrj,bi-.> v « 9, 
pp. 1, 8, 9, 12 Jl 26 '33. (Q B -b, p. 95.) 

1128 1933 Jl 26 Quezon describes his early struggle for education in 

reply to Ventura. l&iLu '9/ PP« 6 , W J l 26 • 
(Q B-b, p. 95.) 



_ 840 _ 



1129 1933 J l 26 dozen's actions confirm -opinion that Sdnato President 

hao been playing with independence, former Speaker declares., 
MeUm v. 9, pp. i, 3 j x 2 6 '33. (Q B-b, p. 95.) 

1130 1933 J l 26 L * voluntad rtol puoblo sora dotorrainada, asogura Quezon 

contostando a' Manned Roxas. OF v. 8, pp. 1, 4 
Jl 26 '33. (Ci B-b, p. 105.) • 
1151 1933 J l 26 Quezon no. so detierro ante- nada para lograr sus fines. 

OP v k 8, p. 6, Ji 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 105.) ' 

1132 1933 J l 26 T k 0 self-made man and the self-unmade man described 'by * 

President Quezon. H v. 13, pp. 1, 12 Jl 25 '33; 
pp. 1, 14 Jl 26 '33. (q rf-b, p. .125.) 

1133 1933 J l 26 Vor '' 1 311(1 -qui 110 attack Quezon leadership, calling it 

dictatorial; both let fly grave insinuationsv PH v. 13; 
pp» 1, 4 Jl 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 125.) 

1134 1933 ^1 2 ^ Roxa3 answers Quezon's charge that ho was incompetent 

Speaker. PH v. 13, -p. 2 Jl 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 125.) 

1135 19 33 Jl 26 Quezon reuoats earlier election challenge. 

PH v. 13, pp. 1,.].4 Jl 26 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 125.) 

1136 1933 Jl 26 Quezon nos lanza ol abismo, declara Aquino. 

laa.j v. 24, pp. 1, 6 Jl 26 »33. (Q B-b, p. 148.) 

1137 19 33 Jl 26 Lo que Quezon dice en un momento de frenosi solo puede 

danarle a el - Roxas. Van. > v - 24, pp. 2, 3 Jl 26 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 148.) 

1138 1933 # J1 26 El lider que sd hiao y supo enciquecerse en el poder. 

Vfln-. . v. 24, pp. 1, 8 Jl 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 148.) 

1139 1933 Jl 26 Gardufio continuara contestando al Presidente Manuel L. 

Quezon. J£aa.<- v. 24, p. 4 Jl 26 «33. (Q B-b, p.,-148.) 

1140 19 33 ■ Jl 26 Combato a Quezon por sus teorias. 

Van ., v. 24,, pp. 1, 6 Jl 26 '33- (Q B-b, p. 148.) 

1141 1933 Jl 27 Vhero are my millions?, asks Quezon. 

MTrjLb., v. 9, P- 8 Jl 27 *33. (Q B-b, Supp.) 

1142 1933 Jl 27 L a s ultimas sorpreaas de Quezon. 

DeJi., v. 14, p. 8 Jl 27 '33- (a 3-bf P- 35.) 

1143 1933 Jl 27 El Pres. Quezon me aseguro que la inmediata es imposible - 

Aquino, Ml., v. 14, p. 5 Jl 2 7 '33. (Q B -b,' P- 38.) '. 

1144 1933 Jl 27 L a incorregible vanidad de Manuel' L. Quezon. ^ ' . 

Deb., v. 14,- P. 2 Jl 27 '33. (Q *-b, p. 38.) 
U45 1933 Jl 27 Quezon ha dimitido para provocar la roorganizacion an el . 

Senado. 2*. , v. 14, p. 2 ' Jl 27 '33. (Q H P. 38.) . 
1146 1933 Jl 27 Cheap politics. (Editorial) 

Cfca., v. 6, p. 64 Jl 21 '33. (Q3-b, P . 511) 



_841 HI - 264 

U47. 1933 Jl 27 . Quezon makes acid, roply to Ho Xaa answer*" ' 

Uffl v. 91, p. 12 Jl 27 '33MQB-b> p 4 67.) 

1148 1933 Jl 27 .Quezon brained loader without ideal principles. ' 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 5 Jl 27 '33. (qu, p . 67 .) 

1149 1933 Jl 27 Quezon tolls of his early life in sharp rejoindor to - 

Ventura, (cent.) HDB v . 91, pp . i. 8 j x 27 .33. . . 

(Q B-b, p. 68.) 

1150 19 33 Jl 27 Aquino raps. Quezon's inconsistency > defends H-H-C Law* 

'HEliLu, v. 9, p> 10' Jl 27 *33.- (Q B-b, P *-95.) 

1151 1933 Jl 27 Quezon reply to Ventura is nothing but personal boSst,' 

says Ex-Secretary; •KTrJJfo v; 9, ps> 8 Jl 27 '33. ■ 
(Q B-b; p. 95.) , ' .. ' ' 

1152 1933 Jl 27 Vera scores reorganisation, attacks Quezon's attitude , ' . 

in Senate speech. 'HTriK, v. 9; pp- 8, 11 Jl 27 '33, 
(Q B-b, p. 95.) 

1153 1933 ' Jl 27 Will of people shall be determined on freedom act, Pres. 

Quezon asserts in reply to former Speaker. MTrib, , v. 9, ' 
pp. 1, 11 Jl 27 '33. ( Q B-b, p.. 96.) 

1154 19 33 Jl 27 L a dimision de Quezon es de 'Biro-biro' solamente - 

Gardufio. OP v. 8, p; 7 Jl 27 *33; (Q 3-b, p. 105.) 

1155 19 33 Jl 27 Qiu )zon found Mission slan on Law wrong. 

PH v. 13, pp. I,'l3 Jl 27 '33- (Q B-b, p. 125-.) 
1156' 1933 Jl 27 fil honbro que; no hir.o y el so destruyo. 

"Van.. , v. 24, p. 10 J127 '33. (Q B-b, p. 148.) 

1157 1933 Jl 28 Nolasco defends Quezon's stand on Act. ' 

M^TJj^, v. 9, PP. 1, 9 Jl 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 96..) 

1158 1933 Ji 28 Fug provocado en los discursos do los de. la Mision* 

OF v. 8, pp. 1, 4 Jl 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 105.) 

1159 19 33 Jl 28 Clarin, Arranz and Avelino rise in Senate to point accusing 

finger at Hare-Hawes-Cutting measure advocates and defend 
Pres. Quezon's leadership. PH v. 13, pp. 1, 13 Jl 28 '33. 
(Q' B-b, p. 125.) 

1160 I933 Jl 28 Acusaciones contra Quezon. 

Vaa., v. 24, pp. 1, 2 Jl 28 '33. ■ (Q B-b, p. 148.). 

1161 1933 j]_ 28 -Impugna a Osraena no por ambicion. ■ 

Ian., v. 24, pp. 1,'2. Jl 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 148.) 

1162 1933 Jl 28 Quezon tiene derecho a la cooperacion de todos - Avelino. 

Ifltt., v. 24, pp. 1, 2 Jl 28 '33- (Q B-b, p. 148.) 

116 3 1933 Jl 29 Clarin y Avelino defienden al Pres. Quezon y su caudillaje. 

Miv, v. 14, pp. 5, 6 Jl 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 38.) 

116 4 1933 Jl 29 Quezon given warm deffenKe by followers. 

. MDB v. 91, PP. 1> 6 Jl 29 '33-. "(Q P- 68.)' 



842 . 111 ~ 265 

•1165 1*33 *L 29 Loading rejections in Senate " defend Pres. Quezon. 

H2cLb « v ' 9 ' -P- 2 Jl 29 '33.' (QB-b, p. 96.) 
1166 1933 Jl 29 Demasias del Sr. Quezon y un reto a' su 

OP v. 8, P . 2 Jl 29 '33. (q B-b, p. 105.) 
i.l67 1933 J l 29 L a tsuostion batallona. 

£Ev. 27, p. 61 J129 '33. (q B-b, p.'m.) 

1168 1933 Jl 29 Quezon defends actions in governments reorganization. 

PF? v. 27-, pp. 5, 37 Jl 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 111.) ' 

1169 1933 Jl 29 Senate slowly reorganizes. * 

IJZ v. 27, pp. 5, 38 Jl 29 '33.- (Q B-b, p. ill.) 

1170 1933 Jl 29 Quezon praises rules promulgated by University. 

m v. 13, pp. 1, 15 Jl 29 '33. (3 ^-b, p. 125.) 

1171 1933 Jl .30 Rules on students participation in public demonstration 

please Quezon. UTriK, v. 9, p. 8 Jl 30 '33. {q B-b, p. 

1172 1933 Jl 31 Elimination of Quezon real aim of Osrox, Quirino declares. 

M v. 13, pp. 1, 4 Jl 31 '33. (Q 3_b, p . 125,) 

1173 1933 Jl 31 Confidence in Quezon reiterated, 

m v. .13 pp. 1, 13 Jl 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 125.) 

1174 1933 Jl "he rejection of the frice independence. 

iL-Hv. 30, p. 60 Jl '33. (Q 3 -b, p. 157.) 

1175 1933 1 Quezon challenges Osnena to organize own party. (Speech) 

PK v. 13, p. 1 1 '33. (Q-U-b, Supp.) 

1176 1933 /,g 1 Osiaeiia deja de ser presidentc pro-tempore, etc. 

Deb., v. 14, p. 8 1 '33. ( ; < B-b, p. 38.) 

1177 1933 lg 1 El informe de la Mision ha omitido hechos essenciales, 

Quezon juzga a la inforrao de Hoxas, Osmena. De,b « , v. 14, 
p. 1 Iff 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 38.) 

1178 1933 • Ag 1 q ue7j on stays; Osmena out, etc. ^ 

ilDB v. 91, pp. l, 6 4g 1 '33. (Q 3_b, p. 68.) 

1179 1933 Ag 1 Indirect move to kill freedom, act fails. 

M Trjb. . v. 9, pp. 1, 11 Ag 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 96.) 
1100 1933 ; \£ 1 i4 r# q UOKOn iinc i Independence. . D. Hacapagal. 

. PH v. 13, .iff 1 '33- (Q B-b, p. 125.) . . 

1181 1933 fig 1 Defends Quezon speech. 

PH v. 13, .lg 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 125.) 

1182 . 1933 % 2 Quezon should form party, Osrox reply. 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 4 Ae 2 '33. (Q 3 -V P« 68.) 
U83 I933 /.g 3 Jl. Quezon tiuno complete libortad do organizar un nueyo 

partido. Dab., v. 14, p. 2 Ag 3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 38.) ' 
1184 1933 Jig ■ 3 L a independencia quo H. Quezon desea es la Formula No. 5. 

Dei., v. 14, p. 2 Ag 3 '33. (QH p. 39.) 



UV- 843 



III - 266 



U85 1953 Ag 3 Osmefla siempro acara la voluntad de mayoria - J. Fuente- 

bella. Bat., v. 14, p. 2 .fc 3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1186 1933 3 Osmefla v a a' replicar con gran energia. 

Dab., v. 14, P . 1 \g 3 '33. (q a-b, p. 39.) 

U87 1933 Ag 3 Divinity in the making, (por) P. Mangahas. 

Sx&it v. 7, p. 1 Ag 3 '33. (Q B_b, p. 5i.) 

1188 1933 Ag 4 Dispute keops Osmefla from making reply; Senators haggle 

over final disposition of .Aquino report; procedure denied 
right of petition. MDB v. 91, p. 30, pp. 1, 8 Ag 4 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 68.) 

1189 1933 Ag 5 El Pres. Quezon ignorara al Senador Sergio Osmefla. 

Dak,., v. 14, Ag 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1190 1933 Ag 5 Quezon will commence party; new challenge hurled as 

President leaves for Baguio. MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 8 
Ag 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 68.) 

1191 1933 Ag 5 Osmefla makes frontal attack upon theory of majority rule 

previously given out by Quezon. MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 5 
■Ag 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 68.) 

1192 1933 Ag 5 Firm in his presidential chair, (por) 

PPP v. 27, pp. 4, 38 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 111.) 

1193 1933 Ag 6 Reunion de Legisladores por nombrameinto en la casa del 

Pres. Quezon, etc. Deb . , v, 14, p. 8 ^g 6 '33. ' ' .' 
(Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1194 1933 Ag 6 El Presidente del Senado esta a favor de que no se cobran 

derechos de matricula. Dgb.. , v. 14, p. 2 Ag 6 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1195 1933 Ag 7 Favors free tuition, etc. 

MDB- y. gi, p. 4 % 7 '33. (Q B-b, p. 68.) 

1196 1933 Ag 77 Quezon pushes plan to call party session; holds rush 

meeting, with leaders in Baguio. MDB v. 91» PP» 1» 8 
Ag 7 *?3^(Q B-b, p. 68.) 
U97 1933 Ag 7 Vigorosa acusaciones lanza el Sen. Vera contra del Pres. 

Quezon. OP v. 8, p. 1 Ag 7 '33. (Q B-b, p. 105.) 

1198 1933 Ag a Oamena slated to speak today. 

MDB v. 91, p. 1 Ag 8 '33. U B-b, p. 68.) 

1199 19 33 Ag 8 New Mission to go to U.S. next January. 

• MDB v. 91, PP. 1, 4 Ag 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 68.) 

1200 1933 Ag 8 Don Alberto una de las victimas del Pres. Quezon. 

0£., v. 8, p. 1 Ag 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 105.) 

1201 1933 Ag 8 Quezon's opposition to the H-H-G . Aldenas Orlando. 

PHv. 14, Ag8'33. (Q 3-b, p. 125.) 



511-^' 



-844 



III - 267 



!20? 1933 Ag 8 Quezon believes he owns Senate, says Osmena 

~ V - 14 ' '33. (Q3-b,' p . 125.) 

1205 1933 4g 9 Cabales con motive de l a vuelta del br. ' Quezon.. 

v. 14, pp. i, 2 % 9 , 33< (Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1204 1933 Ag 9 Quezon will reply today. 

Bffi v. 91, pp. 1, 8 Ag 9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 68.) 

1205 1933 Ag 9 Osmena continues his replies to Quezon. 

Hffiv- 91, pp. 1, 4 Ag 9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 68.) 

1206 1933 Ag 10 Aouerdos de un caucus presidio por Quezon. 

Mm v c 14, p. 4 .Agio '33. (q B-b, p. 39.) 

1207 1933 Ag 10 Una orden de Quezon. 

Ssk-f v. 14, pp. 1, 4 Ag 10 »33. (Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1208 1933 Ag 10 Dissension brewering. ( por ) 

v. 7, p. 4 Ag 10 '33. (Q 3_b, p. 51.) 

1209 1933 Ag 10 Budget will be approved next week. 

K£B v. 91, pp. 1, 8 Ag 10 '33. (Q %b, p. 68.) 

1210 1933 Ag 10 Quezon reitera sus acusaciones. contra Osmena. ec; 

P_P. v. 8, p, 1 Ag 10 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 105.) 

1211 1933 Ag 10 Quezon, the dictator under the guise of democracy. M.R. 

Cornejo.. PH v. 14, .',g 10 '33. (Q B-b, p. 125.) 

1212 1933 Ag 10 Quezon accuses Osmena of seeking coalition to stay in 

power. (Speech) PH v. 14, Ag 10 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 125.) 

1213 1933 Ag 11 Osmena se unio al colectivisno para estar en el poder. 

Dfcb.., v. 14, p. 5 Ag 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1214 1933 Jig 11 I never submit to humiliation, says .Quezon. 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 2 Ag 11 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 68.) 

1215 1933 Ag 11 Osmena turned Collectivista to stay in power, Quezon 

revealed in speech. HStj^ v. 9, pp. 1, 12 Ag 11 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 96.) 

1216 1933 Ag 11 El ex-Speaker ^oxas desmiento al Presidente Quezon. • 

OT., v. 8, p. 6 % 11 '33. B-b, p. 106.) 

1217 I933 Ag 11 Roxas hits Quezon for resorting to alleged objectionable 

tactics. PH v. 14, % 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 126.) 

1218 1933 12 Quezon y i'aredes se apondrar para culquier aumento de su 

aalario en el budget. D^b,. , v. 14, p. 2 Ag 12 '33. 
(Q B-b, Pi 39.) 

1219 1933 Ag 12 Quezon issues hot challenge to Montinola. 

I'lDB v. 91, PP. 1, 4 Ag 12 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 68.) 

1220 1933 ,Jg 12 %at to do next is question of hour - Osmejfra continues 

s 

verbal barrage while Quezon take holiday. P££ v. 27, 
PP. 39, 40 Ig 12 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 111.) 

1221 1933 Ag 14 Ouster faced by Montinola. 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 8 Ag 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 68.) 



III - 268 



1222 1933 • Ag 15 Quezon is back to preside a t Senate debate 

Mv. 91, p. 18 /« 15 . 33 . (QB _ b> p> 6Qj 

1223 1933 Ag 15 Diaoureo de Hontinola ondosado al C omit e de Privileges • 

v. 8, p. .1. Agl5 , 35> (QB _ b> p> iogJ 

1224 1933 Ag 16 Quezon wants Hontinola' s charge probe. 

MM v. 91, p P . 1, fl ; €l6 (q ^ p< ^ 

1225 1933 AS 16 Quezon drafts 3 questions for plebiscite. 

v. 3, pp. i, 9 A ., lfi , 33> (q ^ ^ g6j 

1226 19 3 3 4g 16 Quezon recomienda su oportunidad a' nuestra pueblo. 

Oilv. 8, P . 1 Ag 16 , 33> (q }3 _ bf p . 106 j 

1227 1933 16 Who has suffered the consequences? (Editorial) 

m v. 14, p. 4 Ag 16 *33. (Q B-b, p. 126.) 

1228 1933 Ag 16 Quezon opposed to itemized budget for state university. 

M v. 14, p, 1 .)g 16 '33. (q B-b, p. 126.) 

1229 1933 % 16 Defiende a la U.i\ Quezon. 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 Ag 16 '33. (q B -b, p. 148.) 

1230 1933 Ag 17 Quezon insiste de que la Ley H-H-G no esta de acuerdo con 

el prearabulo de la Ley Jones. Dob., v. 14, p. 2 
Ag 17 '33. (Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1231 1933 Ag 17 Expulsion is not main aim. 

im v. 91, p. 2 Ag 17 A33. (Q B-b, p. 68.) 

1232 1933 17 Quezon for liberty in U. p. 

MDB v. 91, p. 2 V,' 17 '33. (Q B-b, p. 69.) 

1233 19 33 Ag 18 Plebiscite pi an opposed. 

MDB v. 91, p. 2 Ag 18 *33. (Q B-b, p. 69.) •• 

1234 1933 Ag 18 "New epoch of economic life in Islands " opened by inau- 

guration of Trade Center, Murphy declares. HTrj.b f r v. 9, 
pp. 1, 2 Ag 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 96.) 

1235 1933 Ag 18 Quezon encabeza la nueve sociedad politica "liber t adores". 

OP.y p. 6 Ag 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 106.) 

1236 1933 Ag 18 Quezon hits "machadists" for tactics. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 ig 18 '33- (0. B-b, p. 126.) 

1237 1933 Ag 18 Quezon fete set Tuesday; nationwide celebration to center 

in Q. C. PH v. 98, pp. 1, 4 Ag 18 *33. (Q B-b, p. 129.) 

1238 1933 Ag 18 Se aprueba el plebiscito. 

Van., v. 24, p. 1 Ag 18 *33. (Q B-b, p. 148.) 

12 39 I933 Ag 19 El plebiscito sera nuestra contestacion. . 

Deb ., v. 14, p. 2 Ag 19 '33. (Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1240 I933 % 19 Plebiscite plan endorsed. 

MD3 v. 91, pp. 1, 8 Ag 19 '33. (Q ^-b, p. 69.) 

1241 1933 Ag 19 Who has a fortune? (por) 

PET v. 27, pp. 4, 39 4g 19 *33. (l H P« . 



124 2 1933 Ag 19 Throngs of admirers call on Quezon on his birthday. 

21 v. H, p. 1 ,ig 19 . 33# (q B_ b , p . 126 J 

1243 1933 NS 19 La casa de Quezon es inviada por una legion de funciona-. 

rios y pepBonaJos que i e felicitan. VaiL., v. 24, p. 1, 
Ag 19 '33. (q B-b, p. 148.) 

1244 1933 Ag 20 Quezon, our nan of destiny. 

&U^, v. 9, p. 3 % 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 96.) 

1245 1933 Ag 21 -'^olvamos a entrar en razonj' urge Quezon en su compleafio. 

laa., v. 24, p. 1 21 '33. (Q B-b, 8upp.) 

1246 1933 Ag 21 Makes radio speech. 

MSB v. 91, p. 2 .fe 21 '33. (Q B-b/ p. 69.) 

1247 19 33 Ag 23 Quezon proraete su cooperacion, etc. 

OP., v. 8, p. 1 4g 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 106.) 

1248 1933 Ag 23 Mission's own bill would let literate women over 18 years 

vote; Quezon calls committee. PH v. 14, p. 1 .% 23 '33. 
(q B-b, p. 126.) 

1249 1933 Ag 24 U.P. told to curtail output of teachers, lawyers at 

meeting. PH v. 14, p. 1 fig 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 126.) 

1250 1933 Ag 24 Auinento para Quezon rechazado. 

laa., v. 24, p. 1 Ag 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 148.) , 

1251 19 33 Ag 25 Quezon protesta contra las insinuaciones del Senador .,, 

Clarin. OP v. 8, p. 1 .1g 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 106.) 

1252 1933 Ag 25 oenate Head spends 2 hours in discussion. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 Ag 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 126.) 

1253 19 33 Ag 25 Quezon esta gquivocado si cree que sobran maestro en el 

pais. laa., v. 24, p. 2 ^g 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 148.) 

1254 19 33 Ag 25 Clarin suscita de nuevo el hallazgo del raaletin de 

Hontinola. laa., v. 24, p. 1 Ag 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 148. 

1255 1933 Ag 26 Quiren que el Pres. Quezon asuma una responsibilidad 

unica. OP v. 8, p. 1 Ag 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 106.) 

1256 1933 Ag 27 Quezon to meet with U. P. Regents. 

MDB v. 91, P. 1 Ag 27 '33. (Q B-b, p. 69.) 

1257 1933 Ag 28 Island is sure to vote 'no' in plebiscite. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 % 28 '33. (°- B-b, p. 126.) 
125Q I933 Ag 28 30,000 people cheer Quezon in Pampanga. 

£H v. 14, p. 1 Ag 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 126.) 

1259 1933 Ag 28 Vera, Quezon stage debate on procedure Hontinola demands 

ho be made Chairman of Probe Committee. £2 v. 14, 
p. 1 Ag 28 '33. (q B" b r P- 126* ) 

1260 1933 fig 28 No recibi dinero de centrales, dice Quezon." 

Vaa., v. 24/ P. 1. Ag 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 148.) 



zon. 



Ill - 270 

845 (b) 

;?61 1933 Ag 28 El pueblo estPanPui-Hn 

o^ranguiado ecpnomicamente. 
laa., v. 24, p. ! %28 , ( 

..262 1933 Jfls 28 Koxas oondena los Ca , W „ 148, J 

los ca-nbxos de actitud del Pre 3 . Que 
I«..T.24 f p.i ,« 28 , 33< ( 

.1263 19 33 Ag 29 Quezon's plan to ™„h ^ v- ' 

P pusn plebiscite measure will be voted 

upon now or later. HD3 v qi _ n , Q , 

(QlB-b, p. 6 9 .) "" T -^"- 1 ' 8 *»'J3. 

.-,64 1933 4g 29 Cfcoson defends plebiscito bill in Senate. 

lB=lh« v. 9 , pp. i, u -Vr29 , 33> 

:.265 19 33 -g 29 Quezon sees bad faith in charge. 

MTrib,, v. 9 , pp. 1, 2 ,. g 2g ,33. (q ^ p< 
1266 1933 Ag 29 Repaying bread with stone. 

PHv. 14, p. 4 %2g (QB _ b; p> i2gJ 

.-.267 1933 Ag 29 Quezon compromise plan ends deadlock over 1 95 4 budget, ' 

_PJi_v, 14, p. 1 , te P3 -33. ( q p> 126j . 
:.268 1933 4. 29 El P le biscito. ^ T . 24 , p . 10 % 2g ,33. (q " ,„ 

1269 1933 A. 30 Plebiscite plan originally Quezon's, Cebu Senator says. ' " 

&Lh_,, v. 9, pp. 1, 9 Ag 50 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 96,) 

1270 19 33 Ag 30 Quezon lauds "Plaridel" in radio speech. 

ELvih.^ v. 9, pp. 1, 2 ^ 30 , 33> (q p> 9g j 

1271 19 33 Ag 30 Quezon se opuso a' un bill independista dentro de 5 ancs. ' . 

OP v. 8, p. 6 Ag 30 -33. (Q B-b, p. 106.) 

1272 1933 .ig 30 Replies to all attacks by ifcssioner. ' 

PK v. 14, p. 1 Ag 30 '33. (Q B-b, p. 126.) 

1273 1933 % 30 Quezon invoca la manor!?, de del Pilar frente a la supreme, 

decision popular. Vgn..., v. 24, p. 4 Ag 30 '33. (Q 3Lb, 
P. 149.) 

1274 1933 Ag 30 Quezon aclara una formula. 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 .1g 30 '33. (Q B-b, p. 149.) 

1275 I933 fig 31. Hi deseo que le lamente a un plebiscito. 

Deb., v. 14, p. 2 Ag 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1276 1933 /jg 31 Quezon insists on popular plebiscite to settle question. 

HDB v. 91, pp. 1, 8 Ag 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 69.) 

•"■277 ^33 Ag 31 Quezon estaba confabulando con algunos Democratas. 

OP v. 8, p. 1 Ag 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 106.) '•• 

1278 1933 Ag 31 Says Quezon would lose public confidence. By men's admis- 
sion, he has not represented Legislature, Tirona says. 
PH v. 14, p. 1 .ig 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 126.) 

" 27 9 1933 Ag 31 Quezon gets reply. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 -Vr 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 126.) 

•■280 19 33 s 1 Qsias should do the revealing, Quezon says. 

PH v. 13, p. 1 S 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 69.) 



846 - 111 " 271 



1281 1933 S 1 ALegada vacilacion de Q uezon sobre la Lgy mQ ^ 

Roxas on mitin on Los B^s. V^., v . 24> p< w s± , 
(Q B-b, p. 149.) 

1282 1933 S 2 Insists that chauffeur be brought to court. 

VM v. 91, p. 2 8 2 '33. ( Q B-b, p , 6g .)' 

1285 1933 S 2 Quezon assures action on L aw . 

IEeULw v. 9 , pp. 1, 8 S 2 '33. (q B-b, p. 9 6.) 
12fl4 1933 S 2 Dosgraciado del pais qll e este regido por la Ley del embudov 

OP, v. 8, p. 6 S 2 '33. (q B-b, p . 10 6.) 
-.285 1933 S 2 Quezon y la Ley de Independencia. 

Van-, v. 24, p. 1 S 2 '33. (Q B-b, p. 149.) 

1286 19 33 S 2 Quezon es ominente peligroso pa r a la democracia, afirrna Vera.. 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 S2 '33. (Q B-b, p. 149.) 

1287 19 33 S 2 Montinola aclara algunos parrafos de sus acusaciones contra ^ 

Presidente Quezon. V^., v . 24, p. 3 S 2 '33. (Q B-b, p. 149. x 

1288 19 33 S 3 Quezon eager to push battle. 

KTrib., v. 9, pp. 1, 12 S3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 96.) 

1289 1933 S 4 Solo los politicos seran beneficiada con la HKC - Quezon. 

Vflft., v. 24, p. 1 S 4 *33. (Q B-b, Supp.) 

1290 19 33 S 4 Quezon en una sosion secrota sobre presupuestos de la Uni- 

versidad official. OP., v. 8, p. 1 S 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 106.) 

1291 19 33 S 4 Quezon pidio 10 anos al Sen. H a wes, dice el Oomisionado C. 

Osias. OP., v. 8, p. 1 S 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 106.) 

1292 19 33' S 4 15,000 people hear Quezon denounce Law. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 3 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 126.) 

1293 19 33 S 4 Roxas talks of power-raad nan. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 S 4 '33. (q B-b, p. 126.) 

1294 1933 . S 4 On "dictatorship" again. Plorentino Cargar. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 S 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 126.) 

1295 19 33 S 4 Quezon y la Ley Independencia - Maximo Kalaw. 

Van ., v. 24, p. 2 S 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 149.) 

1296 19 33 S 4 Quezon sobre el plcbiscito. 

Van., v. 24, ?. 1 S 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 149.) 

1297 1933 S 5 El Gob. General Filipino segun la Loy H a wes seria una simple 

figura decora. Deb., v. 14, p. 8 S 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1298 1933 S 5 Plebiscite plan to go through, Osmofia insists. 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 6 S 5 '3.3. (q B-b, P« 69.) 
!299 1933 S 5 Plebiscite approval certain, says Ouezon. 

KTrib.. v. 9, PP. If 2 S 5 '33. (l «-b, p. 96.) 
1300 1933 S 5 El Senador Hontinola refuta al Presidonto Quezon. 

PJP., v. 8, p. 1 S 5 '33. (q B-b, p. 106.) 



847 111 - 2 72 



:5)1 193 3 S 5 Decidido anuncio sobre plebiscite. 

PP., v. 8, p. 1 8 5 '33. (QB-b, p. -LQ6.) 
: .302 1933 S 5 Quezon now out - Hurley. Camilo Osias. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 S5'33. (QB-'b, p . 127.) 
^3 1935 S 5 Montinola takes up Kalabon talk of Pres. Quezon. 

Hi v. 14, p. 11 3 5 '33. (Q3-b, p. 127.)' 
1.3C4 1933 S 5 Quezon y l a Ley Independista - Maximo M. Kalaw. 

Vaa., v. 24, p. 4 S 5 '33. (Q3-b, p. 149.) 
"305 1933 S 6 Quezon saves 2 delegates* allowance. 

M v. 14, p. 1 3 6 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 127.) 
■1306 1933 S 6 Quezon y la Ley Independista - Kaadino 'M. Kalaw. 

Ian., v. 24, p. 4 S 6 '33. (q 3-b, p. 149.) 
1507 1933 S 7 Quezon y l a Ley Independista - Maximo M. Kalaw. 

Ian., v. 24, p. 4 S 7 *33. (QB-b, p. 149.) 
1308 1933 S 8 Case of Quezon's chauffeur. 

JSB v. 91, p. 4 S 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 69.) 
.1509 1933 S 8 Quezon hablara a' Osinefia y al Dipufjjflj Roxas. 

OP., v. 8, p. 1 3 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 106.) 

1310 1933 S 8 Quezon cree hoy obtenible la libertad a' base de la Ley ' 

Jones. OP., v. 8.. p. 1 S3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 106.) 

1311 1933 S 8 Quezon defends majority against charges it has no program 

on H-H-C Law - Quezon. PH v. 14, p. 1 3 8 '33. (Q B-b, p, 
J-312 1933 S 9 Quezon confia en que D. U. nos hara justicia. 

Deb., v. 14, p. 4 3 9 '33- (Q B-b, p. 39.) 

1313 1933 S 9 Quezon will head new mission to seek freedom legislation. 

MTrib^. v. 9, PP. 1, 9 S 9 '33. (0 B-b, p. 96.) 

1314 1933 "S 9 10,000 hear President Quezon. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 S 9 '33. (Q B-b, p. 127.) 

1315 1933 S 9 Ignoring the real target. (Editorial) 

PH v. 14, p. 7 S 9 '33.. (QB-b, p. 127.) 

1316 1933 S 11 Forty-thousand turn out to hear Quezon. 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 8 S 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 69.) 

1317 1933 S H Quezon leads congratulations for Osmeha on birthday. 

MOT v. '91, p. 2 3 11 '33. (q B-b, p. 69.) 

1318 1933 S 11 Grandioso recibiraiento a' la comitiva del Pres. Quezon ayer 

en 17. Ecija. OP. , v. 8, p. 1 S 11 '33- (Q 3-b, p. 107.) 

1319 I933 S 11 Quezon hace un resumen de la situacion politica. 

OP., v. 8, p. 1 S 11 '33. (Q3-b, p. 107.) 

1320 1933 S 11 Large crowd hails Quezon. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 3 11 '33. (q B-b, p. 127.) 
A 321 1933 S 11 Quezon y Osmeria discuten el plebiscito. 

V a n. , v. 24, p. 1 Sll »33. (Q B-b, p. 149.) 



848 



III .- 273 



.. 522 1933 S 11 Docenas. de miles reciben al Pres. Quezon en NueTa EciJa# 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 s ii '33. (q B-b, p. 149.) 
1.323 1933 S 12 ^ezon taboos conditional -action on Law. 

MSB v. 91, p. 1 3 12 '33. (o B-b, p . 6 g.) 
m 1933 S 12 Threat to kill plebiscite plan made by Quezon. 

— v * 91 ' PP- 1» 6 S 12 '33. (QB_ b , p . 69 .) 
?.325 1933 S 12 Quezon blocks changes in Questionnaire. 

ERnJb., v. 9, pp . i, 9 g 12 - 33< .(,-, ^ 97 j . 

:3 26 1933 S 12 Quezon dispuesta' que haya una sola preguntl en el plebis- 
cite. OP v. 8, p. 1 3 12 -33. (Q B_b, p. 107.) 

1327 19 33 S 12 Farm tenants meet 'Quezon. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 '3 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 127.) 

1328 19 33 S 12 Impugnan l a ley HUG el plebiscite 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 S 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 149.) 

1329 19 33 S 13 Convencion si no hay plebiscite 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 S 13 '33. (Q B-b, p. 149.) 

1330 1933 S. 14 Pork barrel is still hoped for. 

MP! v. 91, p. 1 S 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 69.) 

1331 1933 S 14 "Big Four" expected- to reach decision today. 

msZku, v. 9, pp. 1, 3-3 14 '33. (Q3-b, p. 97.) 

1332 1933 2 14 Cuando Quezon invadio C a banatuan. 

OP., v. 8, p. 6 S 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 107.) 

1333 1933 S 14 La Minoria vn por la convencion. 

Vafl., v. 24, p. 1 S 14 '33. (Q B -b, p. 149.) 

1334 1933 S 15 Minority fears inaction will kill HHC Act. 

HSlillLi. v. 9, PP. 1, 4 ' S 15 '33. (Q B -b, p. 97.) 

1335 19 33 S 15 Quezon to resume negotiations with Osrox. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 S 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 127.) 

1336 1933 S 15 Imposible prescindir del estadismo de Osmefia y Quezon, 

dice Belo. Ian., v. 24, p. 3 S 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 150.) 

1337 1933 S , 16 L a mayoria suguira de triunfar - Quezon. 

Van,, v. 24, p. 1 S 16 "33. (Q B-b, p. 150.) 

1338 1933 s 16 Race bve.n "pendant" con la gimnastica de Quezon, brujeria 

de-Claro M. Recto, Quezon. Van., v. 24, p. 3 S 16 '33. 
(O B-b, p. 150.) 

1339 : 19 3 3 8 17 "Mission, not U. S., unjust", Quezon avers. 

MTrjb. , v. 9, PP. 1, 4 S 17 '33. (Q B-b, p. 97.) 

1340 1933 3 18 Quezon sure of plebiscite. 

m v. 91, PP- 1,5 S 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 69.) 

1341 1933 S 18 Otra desafio lanza Osias. Cita 14 hechos contra Quezon. 

' V^., v. 24, p. 1. S 18 '33. (l B :-b, p. 150.) 



:.U— ■ 



~ 8*9 _ 



III - 274 



l542 1933 S 18 Gran effccto on E. U. tendra la reaolucibn de votar nos - 

Wesson. Van,, v . 24, p. 1 S 18 '33. (o B_b, p. i 50 .) 
:.345 1953 ^ 19 Single query plebiscite is sure, report. 

MTrib.*, v. 9 , pp. 1, 9 S 19 '33. (Q 13_ b , p. 97.) 
: .344 1953 S 19 Quezon y Osmoila cliocaron inosperademente en l a Camara ALta 

OP., v. 8, p. 1 a 19 -33. (0 B-b, p. 107.) 
.;,345 1933 S 19 Assertion Quezon can't face Congress draws calling down- 

EH v. 14, p. 1 3 19 '33.- (n B_ b , p . 127 .) 
;.346 1933 S 19 Quezon and Osmeiia clash on Senate floor, 

£H v. 14, p. 1 3 19 '33o (QB-b, p. 127.) ' 

1347 1933 S 19 Quezon finds 3icol against Law - Nazario. ■ . 

PH v. 14, p. 1 S 19 '33. (QB-b, p. 127.)- 

1348 1933 S 19 Qsmena y Quezon traban vivo debate sobre una resolucion. 

Van., v. 24, p. 1 S 19 '33, (Q B-b, p. 150.) 
.1349 1933 S 20 Segunda pregunta del plebiscito indecisa. 

Ian.., v. 24, p. 1 S 20 '33\ (Q B-b, p, 150.) 
1350 1933 s 21 Will continue fight for. real liberty - Quezon. 

Will invade Laguna, M_DB v. 91, p.> 8 S 21 '33. (Q 3-b f p 
1351- 1933 S 21 All but Lay vote, Quezon offers mission. 

MTrib., v. 9, p. 1 S 21 '33. (Q B-b, p. 97.) 

1352 19 33 S 22 New division appears on plebiscite count. 

MTrib. . v. 9, pp. 1, 2 S %2 '33, (Q B-b, p. 97.) .,, 

1353 19 33 S 23 'Quezon explica su oposicion a la Ley Hawes. 

Deb., v. 14, p. 2 S 23 '33- (Q B'-b, p, 40.) 

1354 19 33 S 23 Hatchet burried in Senate. 

MDB v. 91, PP. 1, 8 S 23 '33. (Q B -h, p. 69.) 

1355 19 33 S 23 Students to hear Quezon. 

■ ' MDB v. 91, P. 2 S 23 '33- (Q B-b, p. 69.) 

1356 1933 S 23 .Suffrage bill may be passed; to pay tax. 

MDB v. 91, p. 6 S 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 70.) . 
•1357 1933 S -23 Senate Head raps malice in disputes. 

MTrib. . v. 9, PP- 1, 4 S 23 '33. (Q B -h, P- 97.) 

1358 1933 S 23 Roxas dar otra noticia sobre el Sr. Quezon. 

'OP., v. 8, p. 8 S 23 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 107.) 

1359 1933 S 23 0 a vite president's back Quezon; confidence.resolution also 

passed. Pjl v, 14, p. 1 S '23 '33: (SH p. 127.) .- 

1360 1933 S 23 L a unidad nacional segun Quezon. Miguel .4. Velarde. 

Van., v. 24, P. 14 S 23 '33- (Q B-b, p. 150.) 

1361 1933 S 24 Senate girds for struggle. 

MTrib.. v. 9, P. 2 S 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 97.) 

1362 1933 s 25 Cavite backs Quezon stand. 

MDB v. 91, P. 7 . S 25 '33. (Q D-b, p. 70.) 



iII-70 



HI - 275 

- 850 _ 



is 



- 363 1933 S 25 Reject Hawes L a w outright, says Quezon. 

M^v. 91, pp. 1, 4 S25 '33. (-B.bi p.-70.)- 
:3 64 1933 S 25- Leader broaches new formula on K a wes L a w- claims there 

■ no time li.it for P.I. ph v . 14 , p . , „ 25 , (ft ^ 
P. 127.) ' 
1933 S 25 Quezon holds formula No. 2 is different - Montane D. W 
PH.v. 14,. p. 1 S 25 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 127.) 
;.366 1933 S 25 10,000 hear Quezon speak. 

PH v. 14, p . i S 25 '33. (0 B-b 7 p . 127.) 
7 3^7 1933 S 25 Huevo plan de Quezon, 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 3 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 150 .) 
: 3 68 1933 S 25 Quezon rovela despachos que la Mision ha omitido segun el/ 

laa., v. 24, p. 1 S 25 '33. *(Q B-b, p.. 150.) 
. :.?69 1933 S 26 , Quezon sefiala un motive de intelegencia entre 'l a Mayoria y 

los do Ilenoria. Deb., v . 14, p. 6 S 26 *33. (Q B-b, p. A* 
".370 19 33 S 26 Let's have L a w amended first. 

ILB v. 91, pp. 1, 6 3 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 70.) 

1371 1933 S 26 Quezon accuses Osroz Mission. 

. , MSlilL, v. 9, pp. 8, 16 S 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 97.) 

1372 19 33 S 26 Que son acusa a la Mision de injusta. 

Ia&. , v. 24, p. 1 3 26 '33.- (Q B-b,- p. 150.) 

1373 19 33 S 26 Osias denuncia a Quezon como unico obstaculo a la libertad,, 

Ian., v. 24, p. 2 3 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 150.) 

1374 1933 S 27 Cuando debe de reunirse la Gamble a. 

Deb,., v. 14, pp. 1, 2 S 27 '33. (Q B-b, p. 40.) 

1375 19 33 S 27 /mity move abandoned. • * 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 8 S 27 '33. (Q B-b, p. 700) 

1376 1933 S 27 Quezon doe3 not want freedom, say Aquino. 

MDB v. 91, p.- 2 3 27 '33. '(Q B-b, p. 70.) 
■1377 19 33 S 27 1,100,00 - ton limit would help H-H-C L a w. 

jiUUi v. 9, PP. 1, 9 S 27 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 97.) 

1378 1933 S 27 Dean Kal aw answers Quezon speech delivered before 8,000 

students. HEeUIm. v « 9, p. 2 S 27 '33- (Q B-b, p. 97.) 

1379 1933 S 27 "E. U» nos hara justicia en todas nuestras demandas." 

OP v. 8, p. 1 S 27 '33. (Q B-b,. p. 107.) 

1380 1933 S 27 El discurso del Presidente Quezon ante los estudiantes - ' 

. M. Kalaw. OP. v. 8, p. 2 3 27 ' 33. (Q B-b, p. 107.) 

1381 1933 S 28 fie augur a un arreglo entre los caudillos. 

Deb,., v. 14, p. 4 3 28 '33., (Q B-b, p. 40.) ' 

1382 1933 S 28 To make last try for amd-ty. 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 8 S 28 '33, (Q B-b, p. 70.) 



- 851 111 " 276 

* 

:.383 19^5 S 28 ^ ezon 7 Osmefla frente a » frente sobre el Budget para el 

alio 1934. OP. v. 8, p. 2 s 2 8 .33. B_b, p. 107,) 

1.384 1933 s 28 Legislature passes 1934 budget bill. 

m v. f 14, p. 15 S 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 127 J • 

1385 1933 S 29 El Pres. Quezon cuenta con al apoya de lo 3 "provinces del: « 

Bicol. Deb., v. 14, p. 8 S 29 '33. (Q. B-b, p. 40.) 

1386 1933 S 29 . Do an Bocobo answers Kalaw's comments on Quezon's .speech ai 

the Metropolitan. MTr_ib. , v. 9, pp. 9, 16 S 29 '33, 

(Q B-b, p. 97.) a 
:.387 19 33 S 29 Quezon Mission to secure Commissioner's elimination.' 

EE v. 14, p. 1 S 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 127.) 
?.388 1933 S 30 Quezon scheduled to speak. 

MDB v. 91, Pa 1 3 30 '33. (Q B-b, p. 70.) 

1389 19 33 S n.d. Manuel L. Quezon. PJL v. 30, p. . 139 S *33. (Q B-b, p„ 1 

1390 1933 0 1 T 0 pass plebiscite Tuesday, 

MJLrib,,, v. 9, pp. 1, 10 0 1 '33. (q B-b, p.' 97.') 
."391 1933 0 2 -Plebiscite antes quo el azucar. - Quezon, 

Van., v. 24, p. 1 0 2 '33. (1 3-b, p. 150.) 

1392 1933 0 3 -Esa Ley H a wes 0 Cutting 0 Hare no vale nada. 

Deb., v. 14, pp. 1, 4 0 3 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 40.) 

1393 1933 0 3 El Bill de Limit acion del azucar no se discutira en las 

Camaras. Ml-^v. 14, p. 6 0 3 ' 33. (q 3-b, p. 40.) 

1394 1933 0 3 Quezon-Montinola clash features session. 

lEEUb.! v - 9, PP. 1, 10 0 3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 97.) 

1395 1933 0 3 Quezon denounces H-H-C Law as worthless, vigorously denies 

P.D.R. told him to accept L a w. PH v. 14, p. 12 0 3 '33- 
(Q B-b, p. 127.) 

1396 1933 0 3 Quezon announces plebiscite abandonment; sending of new 

Mission to be taken up today. PH v. 14, p. 1 0 3 '33. 
(q B-b, p. 127.) 

1397 1933 0 3 Resolucion acordada en vez del plebiscite 

Van.., v. 24, p. 1 0 3 '33. (q 3-b, p. 150.)- ■ - 

1398 1933 0 3 El Senador Montinola rebate al Presidente M. Quezon. 

Van. , v. 8, p. 1 0 3 '33- (Q B-b, p. 150.) 

1399 19 3 3 0. 4 Mission plan f avored. 

MDB v. 91, pp. 1, 8 0 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 70.) 

1400 1933 0 4 Will lead new Mission to U. S., President .Quezon says. 

MTrjb.. v. 9, PP- 1. 10 0 4*'33. (Q B-b, p.. 97.) 
W01 1933 0 4 Quezon explico su novisimo proyecto sobre la Ley H-H-C . 

OP v. 8, p. 8, 0 4 '33. (Q B-b, p. 107.) 
14 °2 1933 0 .5 L a mayoria suspende sus preparativos belicos con motive 

del Plan Quezon. Ml.., v. 14, pp.. 1, 4 0 5 '33. ( Q B-b, 

p, 40.) 



>' 7r; III - 277 

- 852 - 

,105 ° 5 Actitud vigil ante adoptara la Hinoria. . ' 

Deb. , v. 14, pp. 1, 4 0 5 ' 33. B-b. p. 40.) 
-404 1933 0 ^ Lucha habra si la quieren., dice Quezon. 

■ Van*, v. 24, p. 1 05 '33. (Q B-b, p c 150. V" 
••405 1933 0 ^ Quezon says he will stay. 

ML v. 91, p. 2 0 6 '33, (0 B'-b. p. 70.) 
■■406' 1933 0 7 'La decision de muorte del plebiscite. 

Deb 0 , v, U, pp, 1/ 4 0 7 '33. (Q B-b, p. 40.) 
••407 1933 0 ^ New dcle «ation nails soon r Pres. Quezon announces. 

PH v. 14; p» 1 0 7 '33. (Q B-b r p. 128,) 
•;403 1933 0 7 L a Ley HHC na ha inuerto - Roxas. 

Vqn. , v. 24, p. 1 0 7 '33. (a 3-b r p. 150.) 
1409 1933 0 8 Reactionist President -Quezon. (Editorial) 

MElik-r v - 9, P. 14 0 8 '33. (Q 3-b, p„ 97.) 
"410 1933 0 9 Holds secret confab on leadership. 

MDB v. 91, p. 1 0 9 '33. (Q B-.b, p. 70.) 
"411 1933 0 10 Quezon pide suspension de todas las discusiones sobre li>. 

Ley. Deb., v. 14, pp. 1, 4 0 10 '33* (Q B-b, p. 40 J 
.V+12 1933- 0 10 Mission up in Senate today. 

MEe&m v - 9, pp. 1, 14 0 10 '33.' (Q B-b, p. 97.) , 

1413 1933 0 11 Quieren impresionar al Congreso. mentras aqui alogan quo 

la Ley vive - Hoxas.. OP. , v. 8, p. 4 0 11 '33. (Q B-b 
p. 107.) 

1414 1933 0 11 Quezon calls Roxas Act treason - Tyranny talk. 

£H v.' 14, p. 1 0 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 128.)- 

1415 1933 0 12 El discurso de Roxas, envuelve traicion a la causa de 

nuestro pais. Dob., v. 14, p. 2 0 12 ''33. (Q B-b, p. 4 

1416 1933 0 12 Quezon prepares answer to charges of Oamefia and Roxas. 

'Hps v. 91, PP- 1, 5 0 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 70.) 

1417 1933 0 12 ■Quoaon will refute Roxas charge today. . 

' UTrib.. v. 9, PP. 1, 14 0 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 97.) 
UI8I933 0 12 Quezon convencido de quo existe conspiracion para derro- 

carle. Of, v. 8, p. 1 0 12 '33- ('1 BV-b, p. 107.) 

1419 1933 0 12 Ex-Speakor is denounced as denouncer. 

PH v. 14,' p. 1 0 12' '33. ( p i B-b,' p., 128.) 

1420 1933 0 12 '\iezon denuncia otra trama on Washington, 

to., ^ 24, P.'l 0 12'33. (OB-b, p. 150.) 

1421 1933 -0 13 Quezon saldra primoro como vanguardia de la Mision. 

i n n B-b, p. 40.) 

Deb., v. 14, p. 1 0 13 ■>■>; v • ' v 

1422 1933 0 13 New peace negotiation afoot, etc... 

PH v. 14, p. 1 0 13 *33. (0 'B-b, P . 128.) 



•,ji-73 



- 853 



III - 278 



l4 23 1933 0 13 Interior Dep^tmont Quezon's tool - Roxas. 

£H v. 14, p. i o 13 im rp u v \ 
w 53. (.Q B-b, p . 128.) 

• ;i.424 193 3 0 1 3 Quezon y Osmoha Iran a Li, U. juntoa . 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 0 13 '33. (o. H p . 150 .) . 

1425 1553 ° W ^ ?' in hia first 

reply- h L. ( Speec ,) ffl y . ^ p. l 0 14 .33. 

V -u-b, Supp. ) 

1426 1933 0 ' 14 .Arbitration pl a n; proposed. 

v. 91, pp. 1, 8 0 14 -33. (QB-b, p. 70.) 

1427 1933 0 Id Hew Quezon offer up- to-day. 

S£sib~ v. 9, PP . 1, 10 0 14 -33. (q B-b, p. 9 8 ) 
.1.428 1933 0 14 Quezon refuta al ex-3peaker Roxas. 

OP.-, v. 8, P . 1 0 14 '33. (Q B-b, p . 107.) 

1429 1933 0 14 Aun viene lo peor - 'Quezon. 

Ian-, v. 24, p. 1 0 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 150.) 

1430 1933 0 14 Quezon mismo y n,p otro e s el obstaculo a la nueva Mision. 

contiende Roxas. V*n. , v . 24, p. 6 0 14 '33. (q B-b, 
p. 151.) 

W31 1933 0 14 Arreglo entre llderes mas probable. 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 0 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 151.) 

1432 19 3 3 0 15 Volvere si no es posible mejorara. 

Seb., v. 14, pp. 1, 4 0 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 40.) 

1433 1933 0 lg Quezon denies charges of insincerity. 

HTrib.., v. 9, pp. 1, 2 0 15 '33. (l3-b, p. 98.) 

1434 1933 0 J 6 Quezon »nd Roxas in press duel promise to annihilate each 

other. HDH v. 92, pp. 1, 8 0 16 '33. (<> 3_b, p. 70.) 
H35 1933 0 16 Formal pact on Hission due today. 

v. 92, pp. 1, 8 0 16 '33. (Q B-b, p. 70.) 

1436 I933 0 16 President Quezon spied on himself, say Roxa3 in statement 

to^press. PH v. 14, p. 3 0 16 '33. (QB-b, p. 128.) 

1437 1933 0 16 Quezon oxplica en un mi tin en Norionos por quo la Legisla- 

ture opto por rechazar la Ley H-H-C. Van., v. 24, p. 2 
0 16 '33. (Q B-b, p. 151.) 
W38 1933 0 17 Recomendara la aceptneion si obtieno do Roosevelt promesa 

de mejorar la Ley. Dejb., v. 15, p. 6 0 17 '33. (Q B-b, 
p. 40.) 

439 1933 0 17 Quezon saldra ol 4 do Hoviembre para Washington. 

De,b. , v. 15, pp. 1, 4 0 17 '33- (QB-b, p. 40.) 

440 1933 0 17 N 0 trace of Quezon money. 

KDB v. 92, pp. 1, 6 0 17 '33- (Q B-b, p. 70.) 
1441 1933 0 17 ouezon will sail for U. a. Nov. 4. 

MB v. 92, pp. 1, 6 0 17 '33. (Q B-b, p. 70.) 



Ill - 279 

~ 854 ~ 

1933 0 17 Todo dopende do U decision final de Quezon. 

Iaa.» v. 24> p. 1 0 17 -33. (QB-b, p . 151.) 
m 1953 0 18 Quezon autoriza a Belo a RCOptar las declaracionea 

testlgo de Montinola. Deb., v . 15, p. 2 0 18 '33 
(Q B-b, p. 40.) 

1444 1933 0 19 Mission plan 'again blocked by Minority. 

~ V * 92 ' PP- 1» 6 <> ig .33. (Q B-b j P . 70.) 
m 1933 0 19 Osmofia will question Quezon on Senate floor this morning. 

iSiiJix, v. 9, pp. if 8 o 19 > y}m {(] ^ ^ 9Q ^ 

:.446 19 3 3 0 19 Quezon reply disploaaoa Osrox, etc. 

fit v. 14, p. 1 0 19 '33. (-B-b, p. 128.) 

1447 1933 0 20 Quezon insists resolutions on Law stand. 

m v. 92, PP . 1, 5 0 20 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 70.) 

1448 19 3 3 0 21 Osmofia given free hand on Quezon offer. 

im v. 92, pp. 1, 8 0 21 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 70.) 
.1449 1933 0 22 Quezon's stand is minority's chief obstacle. 

v. 9, pp. 1, 12 0 22 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 98.) 

1450 1933 0 22 Must have Quezon's commitments - Osmefia. 

Mlitb., v. 9, p. 19 0 22 '33. (Q B_b, p. 98.) 

1451 1933 0 23 De la Puente says Ouezon is to blame. 

HDB v. 92, p. 2 0 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 70.) 

1452 1933 0 23 Osmefia reply scheduled to be given today. 

im v. 92, pp. 1, 8 0 23 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 70.) 

1453 1933 0 23 Osmeria se niega a' ir con Quezon. 

OP., v. 24, p. 1 0 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 107.) 

1454 1933 0 23 Quezon and Osmena in new clash. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 0 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 128.) 

1455 19 3 3 0 2 3 Fuerte choque verbal de Quezon y Osmefia. 

Van., v. 24, p. 1 0 23 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 151.) 

1456 1933 0 24 Pinal split takes place. 

MDB v. 92, pp. 1, 7 0 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 71..) 
W57 1933 0 N 24 Will oppose sugar limit. 

M v. 92, pp. 1, 8 0 24 '33- (Q B-b, p. 71.) 

1458 I933 0 24 Quezon answers Osmeria today. 

WSxAlSU., v. 9, PP. 1, 10 0 24 *33. (Q B-b, p. 98.) 

14 59 I933 0 24 Sucoda lo que suceda, .juro no votar jamas por esa ley 

Quezon. OP. v. 8, p. 1 0 24 '33- (Q B-b, p. 107.) 
460 1933 0 25 L a Minoria va a realizar una campafia eficas. 

Deb ., v. 15, p. 6 0 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 41.) 
1461 1933 0 25 Iremos a loa Estados Unidos en la Minoria si esta persiste 

en exigir que aceptamos la Ley H-K-C. Deb.., v. 15, p. 2 

0 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 41.) 



^75 



855 



in - 28o 



1462 1935 0 ^ ^ -tort to 0 Srox eroup _ W ^ 

SUE v. 92, pp. x, 8 o 25 - 

7.463 1933 0 26 ^anquot sot for Sunday. ' ? ' } 

JSfflv. 92f p. 2 0 26 , 33< 

-0, 1933 0 26 Mission has no definite ^ 

aeimxte pi,™, says 0ame . ia> 

™ v * 92, pp. 1, 6 0 26 '33 , h „ , 

1933 0 26 ^^r, lezonto ^ ess ^-^^ . 

fflV ' 92 ' P« 1 °26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 71 \ 

:.466 19 3 3 0 26 Quezon solves deadlock by uniting 1 a l n \ 

/ 467 19 33 ° 26 ^ - — f belpfumess 

■ here, says n uezon . ^ v , 14> p> , Q ^ ,^ - — 

p« 128. J 

..60 1933 0 27 El Pre a,- Quezon anunciara lo quo la Mision-en America* " 

M., v. 15, p. ! o 27 '33. .('■ B-b, p . 4 1.) 

3.469 19 3 3 0 27 Help, economic structure or leave. 

mv. 9 2, PP . i, 6 0 27 '33. hl-b, p. 71.) ' 

H70 1933 0 .27 Not in U. S. « 0 de to give Islands choice i, H-H-C Law. 

&U^> v. 9 , pp. 1, 14 0 27 '33. (Q B-b, p. g 8 .) 

1471 1933 0 27 ---on proves Mission false to popular will; 3000 attend 

convention. PH v. 14, p. 1 0 27 '33. (Q B-b, p. 128.) 
1933 ° 27 ^ e2 ° n ^ ui£ire trys ailos para lograr una buen a' Ley do ' 
America. OP. v. 8, p. 1 0 27 '33. (Q B-b, p. 107.) 

1473 1933 0 27 Somoa pro-Quezon por nuostra admiracion a su caudillaje 

dinamico, m unifies ta Malcolm. Van., v. 24, p. 3 0 27 * 33. 
(Q B -b, p. 151.) 

1474 1933 0 27 Oamefia y Roxas debian diraitir, dice Quezon. 

laa-i v. 24, p. l 0 27 "33. (Q B-b, p. 151.) 

1475 1933 0 28 Quezon critico aeveramente ayer a los do la Hinoria por 

rehusar su invitacion, etc. Deb., v. 15, p. 2 0 28 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 41.) 

'76 1933 0 29 Quezon decidira la lucha por la espique'rato entre los Rep. 

Postin y Zulueta. Dgb. , v. 15, p. 2 0 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 41 
1933 0 • 29 WiH-to-Power comprises principles, objectives of Quezon. 

££Elb., v. 9, PP. 1, 8 0 29 '33. (Q B-b, p. 98.) 
1933 0 30 Mantenerse en el poder es el objeto de la carrera de Quezon, 

declara Roxas. ilPl v. 24, p. 2 0 30 *33. (Q B-b, p. 71.) 
1933 0 30 Quezon sees long drive for better Law. 

iiSB v. 92, pp. 1, 8 0 30 '33. (Q B-b, p. 71.) 
1933 0 30 Usurpacion ^.iczonista - Gregorio Perfocto. . 

PP.., v. 8, p. 1 0 30 '33. (Q B-b, p. 107.) 



III - 281 

- S5S - 



,31 1933 0 30 r*Mon roitera su nctitud por la indbpendencik y Tr^&- 

poridad do Pilipinas. V^., v . 24> p. 2 0 30 '33. 
(1 B-b, p. 151.) 

,82 1933 0 51 Quezon discutira con loa Representees del 3ur el caso d*. 

espiquerato. DgJi. , v. 15, p. 2 0 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 41- 
. , 3? 1933 0 31 Huestrns propias divergencies no nos han dividido. 

Deb., v. 15, pp. 1, 4 0 31 -33. (q B -b, p. 41*) 
•34 1933 0 31 Quezon speech is cut short by cold. 

MDB v. 92, pp. 1, 6 0 31 '33. (q B-b, p. 71.) 
\.'B5 1933 0 31 Wiat the Quezon leadership killed. 

mxlh*., v. 9, pp. 1, 4 0 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 98.) 
786 1933 0 31 Quezon will have our support even in failure, says Fernand 

Hi v. 14 0 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 128.) 
•.(87 1933 0 31 Quiero que el pueblo sepa que no voy a E. U. para mi 

intere3 personal - Quezon. Vgn.. , v. 24, p. 3 0 31 '33. 

(Q B-b, p. 151.) 

".4fl»3 1933 K 1 Los 'Antis' deben conservar un frente unido en la camparia 

quo emprendera los prepugnodores. Dsb.. , v." 15, pp. 1, 4 
N 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 41.) 

:'.489 19 33 ft 1 Sugar limit up to Quezon. 

MBB v. 92, pp. 1, 8 II 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 71.) 

1490 19 33 ft 1 Quezon asks for support of students. 

MDB v. 92, pp. 1, 5 HI '33. (Q B-b, p. 71.) 

1491 1933 N 1 I want people to decide on my accountability, let them 

give their verdict next June.- Quezon. PH v. 14, p. 1 
N 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 128.) _ 
".492 1933 ft 1 Memorandum de la mayoria a Quezon. 

Van., v. 24, p. 1 ft 1 '33. (Q B-b, p. 151.) 

1493 1933 ft 2 Committee to take charge. 

MDB v. 92, pp. 1, 6 N 2 '33. (Q B-b, p. 71.) 

1494 1933 N 2 The logic of apologism. (Editorial) 

PH v. 14, p. 4, ft 2 '33. (Q B-b, p. 128.) 

•■495 .1933 ft 3 Plans final speech. 

MDB v. 92, p. 1 ft 3 '33. (Q B-b, p. 71.) 

U96 1933 N 3 I am and shall always be profoundly interested in the wel- 
fare and prosperity of the Philippines, say Schurman at 
banquet given in his honor by Pres. Quezon. PH v. 14, 

p. 3 ft 3 '33. (Q P- 128 ') 

1^97 1933 ft 3 Prestadrne vuestro apoyo hasta que el pueblo diga "Basta" - 

Quezon. , v. 24, p. 1 ft 3 '33. U B-b, p. 151.) 

•1498 1933 ft 4 Mi exito dependera del pueblo. 

Dab.., v. 15, P. 1 ft *' '33- (Q B-b f p. 41.) 



'57 ; III - 202 



se 



1499 19» N 4 Quezon makes final plans for departure 

mv. 92, PP . i, 8 N4 , 33b (QB _ b> p> ?iJ 

1500 i 955 H 4 Senate votes to fine Hontinola for Quezon attack. 

I2B v. 92, p. 2 N 4 '33. (Q B-b, p . 71 ,) 
-501 1933 N 4 Quezon prepares to leave. 

£EEv. 27, pp. 5, 38 ll 4 -33. (Q B-b, p . m.) 
1502 1933 N 4 Quezon reveals what he will do in U. S. etc., 

_ PH v. 14, p. 1 114 '33. (Q B-b, p. i 28 .) 
■'.503 1933 N 4 Quezon leaves to seek real independence. V. A. P ac is. 

£H v. 14, p. 1 N 4 '33. ( Q3 _ b> p> 128>) 

1504 1933 N 4 Quezon parte urgiendo unidad. 
. - Ian., v. 24, p. 1 K 4 '33. (q B-b, p. l 5 l.) 

1505 19 33 N 5 Frente a frente ante la ley H-H-C, Quezon y Schurman 

sinceran. Deb.., v. 15, pp. 1, 4 u 5 .33. (q B_ b , p. 41.) 

1506 19 33 N 5 El pueblo debe estar unido en todo lo que ha pedioi 

Dob-, v. 15, pp. 1, 9 N 5 -33. (q B-b, p. 41.) 
.1507 1933 N 5 Oro por ol bienestar del pueblo Filipino. 

Deb., v. 15, p. 1 K 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 41.) 

1508 1933 N 5 Quezon parting plea is for unity. 

HMfeu. v. 9, pp. 1, lj li 5 '33. (Q B-b, p. 98.) 

1509 1933 N 6 Quezon loaves on new quest. 

MDB v. 92, pp. 1, 8 K 6 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 71.) 

1510 1933 N 6 Independencia lo mas temprano posiblo, dice Quezon. 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 N 6 '33. (Q B-b, p. 151.) 

1511 1933 N \f Urges amendment of sugar bill. 

MDB v. 92, pp. 1, 6 N7 '33. (9 B-b, p. 71.) 

1512 1933 N 11 Quezon hails approval of woman vote measure. 

BEcSJu, v. 9, PP. 1, 3 N 11 '33. (Q B-b, p. 98.) 

1513 1933 N ,11 The Quezon Mission. (Editorial) 

PFP v. 27, p. 30, N 11 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 111.) 

1514 1933 N 12 Quezon urge unidad a los de la Hayoria. 

Deb., v. 15, pp. 1, 4 IT 12 '33. (Q B-b, p. 41.) 

1515 I933 N 13 Filipinas necesita tecnicos para cultivar sua campos sobre 

un base cientifica. Deb. . v. 15, pp. 1, 4 N 13 '33. 
(Q B-b, p. 41.) 

1516 1933 N- 13 Quezon is welcome to all but lobbyists, says paper. 

NDB v. 92, p. 5 N 13 '33. (Q B-b, p. 71.) 
517 1933 N 14 Osmefla hace votos por que Quezon obtonga una claracion. 

Van ., v. 24, p. 1 N 14 *33. (Q B-b, p. 151.) 
1518 1933 N 15 Si ios Filipinos obtienen su Independencia deben de 

asumir completo responsibilidad. D&b_. , v. 15, pp. 1» 4 

N 15. *33. (0 B-b, p. 41.) 



tv •■VP 
jxA- . - 



III - 283 

858 



m 1935 N 15 Quezon satisfy do los acuordos quo l a Mayoria ha ado*. 

tada. Dab., v. 1 5 , p. 2 H 15 (q ^ ?> ^ 

1520 1933 N 15 Quezon urges long delay on-oxtra session. 

KDB v. 92, pp. 1, 5 Nl5 ,33. ( Q B-b,' p . 72.) 

15 21 1933 N 15 Majority of Fili pinos neither expect nor desire U. S. pro - ' 

tection, Quezon declares. MTrJLb^ v. 9, pp . i 4 
N 15 >33. (Q B-b, p. 98.) * 

152 2 1933 -N 15 L a declaracion do Quezon puede crearle difficultados en 13. U, 

OP., v. 8, p. 1 N 15 (q H p> 108>) 

:. 5 23 1933 N 15 Quezon'n remarks on armaments, revelation of aims are critr, ■ 

ciged. PH v. 14, p. 1 If 15 '33. (0 B-b, p. 128.) 

1524 1933 ■ N 15 Hongkong p aper gives generous space to Quezon Mission on 

its arrival. PH v. 14, p. 3 N 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 128.) 

1525 1933 N 15 Osmejla preocupado por declaraciones de Quezon en Japon. 

2aa., v. 24, P . 1 n 15 -33. (Q B-b^ p. 151.) 

1526 1933 N 15 Final independence and reservations are incompatible. 

, CoeR.Mv,..,. W 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 157.) 

1527 1933 N 16 Osmolla thinks Quezon spoke out of turn. 

KDB v. 92, pp. 1, 8 N 16 '33. (Q B-b, p. 72.) .. ' 

1528 1933 N 16 Quezon reverses himself again, is Oaias comment on speech- •.' 

in Tokyo. MTrjJj.,, v. 9, pp. 1, 6 N 16 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 98.) 

1529 19 3 3 N 17 . Sin llogaf aun a su dostino y a comienza Quezon a contra-^ 

decires - Osias. Van., v. 24, p. 1 IT 17 '33. (Q B-b, p. 151 
1550 1933 N 18 Oaraoiia's criticism off mark; diplomatic knowledge would have 

been put to better use had he joined, Mission, declares . 
Quezon. PH v. 14, p. 1 N 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 129.) 

1531 193 3 N 19 Instruceiones dadas por el Pres. Quezon. 

'De_b., v. 15, p. 2 N 19 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 41.) 

1532 1933 N 21 Osmena y Osias ataoan on Zambales la actitud dictatorial 

de Quezon. OP. v. 24, p. 1 N 21 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 108.) 

1533 1933 IT 22 Quezon llega a Honolulu. 

Vaa., v. 24, p. 1 N 22 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 151.) 
!534 I933 N 23 Los Filipinos dispuestos a renunciar la proteccion de 

Anorica. De_b . , v. 15, p. 3 N 23 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 41.) 
^35 1933 N 23 Filipinos ready for responsibilities of immediate freedom, 

says Quezon in Hawaii:. E&j&g.? v « 9> P- 1 11 25 '33. 

(Q B-b, p. 98.) • 

1536 1933 tj 23 El Rep ^ Kapunan de lo que hacia Quezon respecto a' la Ley 

H-H-C. OP. v. 8, p. 1 N 23 '53- (Q B-b, p. 108.) 

1537 I933 jj 23 "Abajo Qiiezon", gritan en Hawaii. 

OP. v. 24, p. 1 H 23 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 108.) 
!538 1933 N 24 Hawaiian Legislature wolcomos Quezon, etc.. • 

tiS&tU* v. 9, pp. 1, 4 N 24 '33. (Q 3-b> p.. 98.) 



- 359 - 



III - 284 



ence ., 



m w H 24 Shanghai paper thinks Quezon has case but not with audi. 

m v. 92, p, 1 N24 '33. (QH p . 72.) 

154 0 1933 N 24 Filipino laborers give Quezon unpleasant reception. 

H2B v. 92, pp. 1, 8 H 24 '33. (q 3-b, P . 7 2.) 

1541 1933 N 24 El pueblo • no doba dojarso enganar per neras promesas de 

Quezon, dice Osias. V^. , v . 24 , p. 3 N 24 '33. (Q B-b, 
p. 152.) 

1542 1933 N 24 . U. 3. must show spirit of helpfulness if she must remain 

here.- Quezon. Read. Rev,, pp. 11-16 N 24 »33. (Q B-b, 
p. 157.) 

1543 1933 N 25 Quezon llega a San Francisco. *. 

Ian., v. 24, p. 1 .11 25 '33. (Q B-b, p. 152.) 

1544 1933 N 27 Curio so incidents entre Quezon y varios Obispos. 

OP. v. 8, p. 1 N 27 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 108.) 

1545 19 3 3 N 27 Quezon's Tokyo speech reveals leader's aims. 

PH v. 14, p. 1 N 27 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 129.) 

1546 1 9 33 H 27 Osmefla pleads for continuance of faith in Quezon, etc. 

PH v. 14, p. 13 11 27 *33. (Q B-b, p. 129.) 

1547 1933 N 27 Quezon discusses II-H-C Law before Pan Pacific Club. 

Cpju..IJK, pp. 11, 1 ft 27 *33. (Q 3-b, p. 157.) 

1548 1933 N 28 Backs party plans. 

MDB v. 92, pp. 1, 8 N 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 72.) 

1549 1933 N 29 Lands in California. 

MDB v. 92, pp. 1, 8 M 29 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 72.)" 

1550 19 33 N 29 Quezon pide la "contimiacion de las relaciones satisfacto- 

rias" con Estados Unidos. Van., v. 24, p. 1 N 29 '33. 
(Q 3-b, p. 152.) 

1551 193 3 D 1 Quezon outlines objections to II awes Law in speech in Tokyo „ 

MDB v. 92, p. 5 D 1 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 72.) 

1552 I933 D 1 II awes Law would kill sugar industry in five years. 

MDB v. 92, p. 5 3 1 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 72.) 

1553 1933 D 1 Si Quezon vuelve sin nada cometera un crimen del paria - 

Roxas. Van . . v. 24, p. 2 D 1 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 152.) 

1 554 193 3 D 1 H-H-C unac co pt ability hinges on its sugar limitations, 

Quezon say. .Cqbl-W 1 D 1 '33. (Q Bpb, p. 157.) 
*555 I933 D 2 Will reopen P. I. qtiestion. 

MDB v. 92, pp. 1, 5 3 2 '33. (Q 3-b, p.. 72.) 

1556 1933 D 3 Tengamos fe en Dios y en -America. 

Bflfc. y v. 15, pp. 1, 4 D 3 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 42.) 

1557 !933 D 3 Quezon pleads for faith, unity. 

MTrib .. v. 9, PP. 1, 7 D 3 '33. (Q H P- 98-) 



- 660 - 111 " 285 

155 8 1933 » 4 Quezon urges unity in campaign for independence. 

m v. 92, PP . 1, 8 d 4 (Q3 _ b> p< . 2>) 

1559 1933 D 5 El "Post" prcdioe «1 fracaso de Quezon. _ 

Iflft., v. 24, p. 1 D 5 '35. (QB-b, p. 152.) 

1560 1933 D 6 Mere information. (Bdo.tori.-jl) 

MTriJ^, v. 9 , p. 4 D 6 '33. (q B-b, p. 98.) 

1561 1933 D 7 Things look for Quezon. 

v. 7, pp. 4-5, D 7 '33. (QB-b, p. 51.) 

1562 1933 D 7 Recto: Is politics the end or only the means to him? 

fiKfl.f v. 7, pp. 7, 63 D 7 '33. (Q B-b, p. 51.) 

1563 1933 D 7 Quezon in Congress hurls attack on P.I. products limitation, 

and immigration. Cpju 1XX, P . 19 D7 '33. (QB-b, p. 157, 

1564 1933 D 7 Los "Pros" deciden facilitar la Mision de Quezon. 

VflQ., v. 24, p. 1 D 7 *33. (Q B-b, p. 152.) • 

1565 1933 B 8 Quezon expresa su coufianza en Roosevelt. 

Ml*, v. 15, pp. 1, 3 D 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 42.) 

1566 1933 D 8 Quezon pide indepondencia a cualquicr precio. 

Ian. v. 24, p. 10 D 8 '33. (Q B-b, p. 152.) 
.1567 1933 D 8 Quezon answers doubts whether Islands ready for new res- 
ponsibilities. JLqm s _lAX, p. 20, 1 D 8 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 157. 

1568 193 3 D 9 Independence at any price to be Quezon's slogan. 

MSB v. 92, pp. 1, 8 D 9 '33. (Q B-b, p, 72.) 

1569 1933 D 10 H-H-G Law acceptance is possible, ".Intis" hold. 

E£tiLkw v - 9, PP. 1, 18 D 10 *33. (Q B-b, p. 98.) 

1570 1933 D 14 Quezon narks time on "better law" drive. 

ESxiiU., v. 9, pp. 1, 2 D 14 '33. (Q B-b, p. 99.) . 

1571 1933 D . 15 Quezon niega haber prometido la aceptaciqn de la Ley H-H-C. 

Deb., v. 15, p. 8 D 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 42.) 

1572 1933 D 15 u. S. farmers strongly urge independence, 

HDB v . 92, pp. 1, 8 D 15 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 72.) 

1573 1933 D 15 Quezon's silence a puzzle to Washington. 

MTrib. . v. 9, pp. 1, 4 D 15 '33. (Q B-b, p. 99.) 

1574 I933 D 16 Tydings contra las verdades a Quezon. 

Van ., v. 24, p. 1 D 16 '33. (Q B-b, p. 152-.) 
!575 I933 D 17 Opposition to Quezon Mission is growing. 

v. 9, p. 1 D-17 '33. (q B -b, p. 99.) 
1576 1933 d 17 Tho human oqU ation. (Editorial) 

KIrib. . v. 9, P- 14 D 17 '33- (Q 3_b, p. 99.) 
!577 1933 • d 18 Quezon gives no importance to opposition. 

MDB v. 92, pp. 1, 8 D 18 '33. .(Q B-b, p. 72.) 
1578 1933 D 18 Quezon da poo a importancia al nuevo partido. 

Vaa., v. 24, p. 12 D 18 '33. (Q B-b, p. 152.) 



III - 286 



l579 193 3 D . 20. Developments hope spur Quezon to action • 

mn^, v. 9, p. 1 D20 '33. (q H p . 99 .) 
1933 D 20 "New York Herald Tribune" hitg Osrox ^ ^ 

nery intended to embarass Quezon. PH v. 14, p 1 
D 20 '33. (Q B-b, p. 129.) 

1581 1933 D 20 E S una purlalada traicionsra - Quezon. 

Im-, v. 24, p. 1 D 20-33. (Q 3-b, p. 152.)- 

1582 1933 D 21 Quezon seeks support of Farm group leaders. 

IffiElk., V, 9, pp. 1, 10 D 21 '33. (Q B-b, p. 99.) - 

1583 1933 D 21 Roxas replica a defensores 'de Quezon. 

Ian., v. 24, p. 3 2 21 '33. ( Q B-b, p. 152.) 

1584 1933 D 21 Quezon nega al pueblo la oportunidad de decidir su inde- 
pendent, dice Roxas. Van,. , v. 24, p. 2 D 21 '33. 
( Q B-b, p. 152.) 

1585 1933 D 22 Action on Philippine status will be deferred. 

W v. 92, pp. 1, 8 D 22 '33. (Q B-b, p. 72.) 

1586 19 33 D 23 Quezon's ilission a flop, says James Wingo. 

EM v. 27, pp. 9, 46 D 23 '33. (Q B-b, p. 111.) 

1587 1933 D 23 Quezon pro test a contra Cummings. 

Ian-, v. 24, p. 1 D 23 '33. ( Q B-b, .p. 152.) 

1588 193 3 D 24 Quezon formula su protesta ante el Sec. de Guerra. 

Deb., v. 15, p. 12 D 24 '33- (Q B-b, p. 42.) 

1589 1933 D 24 Sunshine. IiTrj^., v. 9, p. 14 D 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 99.) 

1590 1933 D 24 Quezon seeks trade parley, reports says. 

MTjlIU.» v. 9, pp. 1, 13 3 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 99.) 

1591 1933 D 24 Quezon adopted by wealthy Malabon man, records show. 

MxiJLu v. 9, p. 2 D 24 '33. (Q B-b, p. 99.) 

1592 1933 D 26 Osias promote un obstaculo a Quezon. 

Van-, v. 24, p. 10 D 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 152.) 

1593 1933 D 26 Nada conseguira, asegura Guevara. 

Vfla., v. 24, p. 1 D 26 '33. (Q B-b, p. 152.) 

1594 I933 D 26 Osias opens fire on Quezon Mission in maiden speech. 

Com. 1XX, v. 24, p. 1 D 26 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 157.) 

1595 I933 D 28 Quezon pide p. Roosevelt una Ley major. 

M'. 15, p. 1 B 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 42.) 

1596 1933 d 28 Q ueaon ia rouscd . 

Sea. , p. 7, pp. 4-5 D 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 51.) 

1597 I933 D 28 Roosevelt hears Quezon views. 

MTri,b,. v. 9, pp. 1, 3 D 28 '33- (Q B-b, p. 99.) 

1598 1933 D 28 Quezon pide sugestiones a' la lideres. 

OP. v. 9, p. 1 D. 28 '33. (Q B-b, p. 108.) 



- 862 - 



III - 287 



1599 1953 • D 28 Quezon demand* instruccionos de aqui, etc.. ' 

"Z*. v. 24, p. 1 D 28 -33. ( Q ^ p> 
15 00 1933 T 29 ElPresidente Qu^on urge la cooperacion .de todos." ' ' 

J2UH.. v. 15, p. l D 29 '33. (QB-b, p. 42.) 
.1601 1933 B 29. New proposal will be drafted to n-et President's request. 

mv. 92, pp. i, 7 D29 '33. .(Q B-b, p . 7 2.) 
.1602 1933 D 29 People can now understand Quezon's independence plans, 

Roxas declared. MT^, v . % pp . lf w jj gg ^ 
(Q B-b, p. 99,) 

-1603 1933 D 29 Roosevelt dice a Quezon soy 'Pro 1 . 

IoOm.v. 24, p. 1 D 29 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 152.) 

1604 1933 D 29 Carta blanoa a Quezon? ■ . 

Vflft-, v. 24 p. 1, D 29 '33. (Q 3-b, p. 152.) 

1605 193 3 D 30 New Majority, Quezon have precious opportunity to save 

P.I. Independence, is Roxas comment on Roosevelt view. 
»NiTr! b ,_, v. 9, p. 1 D 30 '33. (Q B-b, p. 99,) 

1606 1933 D 30 Mission pushes work on now bill. 

K&Ulw v. 9, pp. 1, 2 D.30 '33. (Q B-b, p. 99.) 

1607 19 33 D 30 Quo son Mission sees Roosevelt. ■ 

PFF v. 21, P . 27 D 30 '33. (Q B-b, p. 111.) 

1608 193 3 . D 31 Quezon confers' with Stimson. T. Roosevelt. 

HSeULu v. 9, pp. 1, 25 B 31 '33. (Q B-b, p. 99.) 

1609 1933 D n.d. Osmofia and Quezon. K. M, Kalaw. 

RpJjd.. ML*., M pp. 27, 28 D »33. (Q B-b, p. 72.) 

1610 1933 D n.d. Bonifacio the least privoleged of men, H. L. Quezon. 

Read.. Rev. p. 24 D '33. (Q B-b, p. 157.) 

1611 1933 n.d.m. "Buong nilalaman ng batas H a wes-Cutting**Hare; kuru-kuro 

ng mga pnngunahing lider ng bansa. " Manila, Loyal Press, 
1933. (Q B-b, p. 1.) 
.1612 1933 n.d.m. Hindi' nasunod ang mithiing Pilipino. (in : Buong nilalaman 

ng batas H a wes-Cutting- Hare. 1933. pp. 23r29. (Q B-b, p. 2. 

1613 1933 n.d.m. Ang mission mixta. F. E. Jose 

Paris,. 1933 (Manuscript ) (Q 3-b, p. 10.) 

1614 I934 6 Quezon delivers sale3 talk. Manuel M. Insigne. 

PjjT v. 28, pp. 8, 28 Ja 6 '34. (Q B-b, pp. 110, 111.) . 

1615 1934 j a 20 Quezon asks independence in 3 or 6 years. 

PET v, 28, p. 35, Ja 20 '34. (Q 3-b, p. 111.) 

1616 1934 j a 27 Quezon proposal draws fire. 

PFP v. 28, p. 4 Ja 27 *34. (Q B-b,' p. 111.) 

1617 1934 j\g 18 Manuel L. Quezon. Vicente G. 3unuan. 

PFP v. 28, n. 33, p. 6 % 18 '34. (Q 3-b, pp. <S, HI.) 



- 863 - 



111 - k!Sb 



1618 1954 * 23 Wc.ontofteon'sdoparturuhighlightofvoeks- 

politics! development. G^., v . 7f pp< ^ . ^ 
(Q B-b, p. 51.) 

1619 1934 S 29 Manuel L. Quezon, leader of men; Hontano b. Wio. 

PYrJiv v. 2, pp. 39-41 S 2 9 '34. (q B-b, pp. 14, 157.) 

1620 1934 S 29 Some problems of tho Commonwealth. 

PJCdk v. 2, pp. 15, 21 S 29 '34. (q 3-b, p. 157.) 

1621 1935 Ja n.d. Quezon asks war department to help P.I. defense. 

FM v. 29, p. 24 J a '35. (Q B-b, p. 112.) 

1622 1935 P 1 Partnership with .America. 

SsOm^U v. 1, n . 1, p. 11 F 1 '35. (q 3-b, p. 157.) 

1623 1935 Ag 14 QuoHtm may have been impetuous but he was also tender and ' 

generous. hatividad Aimed* Lopez. HTimes Nag_ v v. 10, 
p. 11, n. 362 Ag 14 '35. ( Q 3-b, p. 11.) 

1624 1935 Ag n.d. Why I will vote on Sept. 17 for Quezon. Com. Adv. v. 1, ' 

n. 8, pp. 25, 27, 40 ,«g '35. (Q B-b, pp. 6, 157.) 

1625 1935 0 17 Valedictory address as President of the Phil. Senate, 

Oct. 17, 1935. (in: Caballero, I. P. & Gracia Concepcion 
H. de Quezon. cl935. pp. 506-512.) (Q B-b, p. 4.) 

1626 1935 N 15 Inaugural address of nis Excellency Manuel L. Quezon... ' 

delivered Nov. 15, 1935. Manila, 3ureau of Printing, 1935. 
(Q B-b, p. 2.) 

1627 1935 N 25 Uensaje de su Excellenci a Manuel L. Quezon... a la 

As amble a Nacional leido el 25 de Noviembre de 1935 en su 
sesion inaugural salon de sesiones de la Asamblea Nacional. 
Manila, Bureau of Printing, 1935. (Q B-b, p. 2.) 

1628 1935 N n.d. First president of the Commonwealth of the Philippine's. 

P.M. v. 32, n. 11, p. 532 N '35. (Q B-b, p. 158.) 

1629 1935 D n.d. In reply to Roy Eowwd. Com. Adv. v. 1, n. 11, p. 15, \ 

D '35. (Q 3-b, p. 158.) 

1630 1935 

n.d.m. Quezon: the story of a nation and its foremost statesman. 

Concepcion M. de Gracia & Isabelo P. Caballero. Manila, 
United Pub. cl935. (Q 3-b, p. 7.) 

1631 I935 n.d.m. My autobiography, (in: Caballero, I. P. & Gracia 

Concepcion, M. de Quezon. cl935. pp. 485-498.) 
(Q 3-b, p. 1.) 

1632 1935 n.d.m. Mg a Manggagawang naglalahad ng mga katotohanan hinggil 

sa mga nagawa ng Pangulong Quezon sa kapakinabangan ng 
maliliit. Si 'Quezon at ang bayang manggagawa. Maynila, 
The .Issn. , 1935. (Q B-b, p. 12.) 



- 864 - 



III - 289 



163 , m5 n.d... mzanma (o 0 „„ TOualth ) IllaU(5Urati(>n 

of the Phxupp^, ^ th0 . nduot . on . nto ^ ^ 
I. ».», ftrst Prosidont of th0 ^ llmn mi 
o—* «»« v ioc . Presid8nt of the ^ 

15. ,.935. KaniU, B^au of Printinej 

1634 1935 n.d. in. Souvenir do la inauguration h„ i 

wutfuracion de l a manoomunidad. 

OP- 1935 (Q B-b, p. 20.) 

1635 1935 n.d.m. Some problems of tho Commonwealth. 

HeS*v. 11, p. 15 1934 _ 35< (QB _ b> p> 15?J 

1636 1936 P n.d. Quezon as President. 

£JL v. 33, n. 2, P . 65, P » 3 6. (Q B-b, p. l 5 8.) 

1637 1936 Je 16- Message of his Excellency Manuel 1. Quawn... to the 

National Assembly, delivered June 16, 1936 at the opening 
of its first session ... Manila, Bureau of Printing, I936. 
(Q B-b, p. 2.) 

1638 19 36 Jl n.d. Policy on higher education. Manuel L. Quezon. 

ghj,],, P qr .p m_ v. 1, pp . 6 9 -70 Jl '36. (IPP, UPL, v. 11, 
p. 2038.) 

1639 1936 Ag 15 Biographer reconsiders Quezon. 

SMmJAZm.*. 2, n. 12, pp. 7-8 ;ig 15 '36. (Q B-b, pp. 6/158. 

1640 19 36 Lg 20 M.L.Q. - a woman's eye view. P. S. Feliciano. 

fitfi-f v. 10, n. 10, pp. 6-7 .\g 20 *36. (Q B-b, pp.' 8, 52.) 

1641 1936 S 15 Notes on an Osmeiia biography. I. P.- C a ballero. 

Sgflbu^flLu v. 2, n. 14, pp. 7-8 S 15 '36. (Q 3-b, pp. 7, 158.) 

1642 1936 0 1 On extended Commonwealth (interview) 

SOBU-Jtefc v. 2, n. 15, p. 7 0 1 '36. (Q Bib, p. 158.) 

1643 1936 N l Quezon, the economic liberal. I. P. Caballero. 

0qBU-M3Lu.v. 2, n. 17, pp. 11-13 -• 1 ' 36 . (Q B-b, pp. 7, 158 

1644 1 9 36 D n.d. Social justice - once more. Manuel L. Quezon. Com^ J t iy_._ 

v. 2, n. 8, D '36. (First half). (IPP, UPL v. 11, 
p. 2038.) Also in the Q B-b, o. 158.) 

1645 1936 n.d.m. Our appeals to the U. S. Congress, Selected speeches 

delivered by Resident Commissioners... Manila, United 
Printers, c 1936. (Q B-b, p. 13.) 

1646 1936 n.d.m. For an independent judiciary, (in: Evangelista, B., ed. 

The modern international masterpieces. 1936. pp. 45-50.) 
(Q 3-b, p. 1.) 

16 47 I937 J a 16 President Quezon's social justice policy. 

PPP v. 31, pp. 14-15 Ja 16 '37. (Q B-b, p. 112.) 

1648 1 937 J a 28 Permanent neutrality and naval stations. 

Sea., v. 10, p. 84 Ja 28 '37. (Q B-b, p. 52.) 



865 



III - 290 



score 



16 49 1937 F 11 p - uezon Government is attacked; veterans, socialists 

"Evils" in Philippine Politics. Jfe*, v . 10, a. 35 
P. 9 F 11 '37. (q B-b, pp. 5, 52.) 

1650 1937 Ap 15 Manuel L. Quezon. Janes S. £Llon. Com. /flv,_ v. 3, 

n. 5, pp. 21-24 ,Vp 15 '37. (q B-b, p . i 58 .) ' . 

1651 1937 /.p n.d. Quezon's visit to li« x i C n: Joseph Freeman. Com.. m v . v. 3 

pp. 11-13, 20 n. 4, Ap '37. (Q 3-b, p. 158.) 

1652 1937 Ap n.d. Cardenas remakes Mexico. (Quezon's visit to Mexico); 

Joseph Freeman. fijjnEaiLu v. 3, n. 4, pp. 11-13, 20 
Ap '37. (Q 3-b, p. 158.) 

1653 1937 Hy 15 The P. I. belongs to Pan America. Carlos P. Romulo. 

(Quuzon-Sayre Statement). SSSL^OU. v. 3, n. 7, pp. 6-8 
My 15*37. (Q B-b, p. 158.) 

1654 1937 My 24 Party vs. people. (Editorial) 

PFPv. 27, p. 10 Hy 24 '37. (q 3-b, p. 112.) 

1655 1937 % n.d. Guszon clarifies three points. Co mFort . r v. 3, n. 13, . 

pp. 21-24 Ag '37. (Q 3-b, p. 158.) 

1656 19 37 Ag n.d. The President reports to the people. ComFort. v. 3, 

n. 13, pp. 6-7 Ag '37. (Q B-b, p. 158.) 

1657 1937 S n.d. A new Quezon. Fedro M. Blanco. ComFort. v. 3, n. 15, 

pp. 9-11 S '37. (Q B-b , pp. 6, 158.) 

1658 1937 S n.d. Senior and junior partners. Cpjyjbrj^. v, 3, n. 15, 

pp. 19-20 S '37. (Q 3-b, p. 159.) 

1659 1937 0 18 liens.aje de su Hxcellencia hanuel L. Quezon... a la 

As amble a Hacional Pronunciado el 18 de Octubre de 1937... 
Manila, Bureau of Printing, 1937. (Q 3-b, p. 2.) 

1660 1937 0 n.d. 'The Chief Executive and the judiciary in a democratic 

government. Un.. v. 16, pp. 207-218, 0 '37. (Q B-b, 
p. 159.) 

1661 1937 N n .d. Quezon reborn. I. P. Cahallero. Cpj^dv*. v. 3, n. 18, 

pp. 6-7 N '37. (Q 3-b, pp. 7, 159.) 

1662 I937 n.d.rt. Quezon, Hanuel Luis, President Philippines. Cuevo- 

liarredo Case (Clippings). (Q 3-b, p. 8.) 
lfi 63 1937 n.d.m. Quezon in his speeches. Pedro de la Liana and others. 

Manila, State pub. cl937. (Q 3-b, p. 11.) 

1664 1937 n.d.m. Aug katarungan sa mga anak-pawis J. 0. Hanahan. 

Manila (The Author) 1937. (°. 3-b, p. 12.) 

1665 19 37 n.d.m. PHILIPPICS (Commonwealth) Anniversary Committee 

White book of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. 1937. 
(Q B-b, p. 16.) 

1666 1937-39-46 n.d. Message of his Excellency, K. L- Quezon to the National 

Assembly. 1937, 1939, 1940. (Q B-b, p. 3.) 



_ 866 III - 291 



!667 1938 J a 6 Quezon, Oameiia give Kizal Pay talk. 

&&, v. 11, p. 4 Ja 6 - 38< (q 3 _b, p. 52.) 
1660 '1938 F 24 Qu^on talk with labor leaders. 

.££&., v. 11, p . io F 24 '38. (Q B-b, p. 52.) 

1669 1938 * 24 Quezon's re-election* second term for Quezon discussed. 

v. 11, p . 9 p 24 '38. (Q B-b, p. 52.) 

1670 1938 F n.d. President Quezon's reform program. 

P..ikv. 35, n. 1, P . 79, p.. 38# (q 3_b, p. 159.) 

1671 1938 Hr n.d. Present status not satisfactory. Com. .\dVj_ v. 4, 

n. 2, pp. 10-11 Mr '38. (q B-b, p. 159.) 

1672 1938 My n.d. Quezon to Confessor. Com, 4dv^ v. 4, n . 4, pp. 23-24 

% '38. (Q B-b, p. 159.) 

1673 1938 A& 19 Spiritual regeneration of the Filipino; address... 

delivered before the faculties and student bodies of pub- 
lic and private schools, colleges and universities at 
the Jose Ilixal Memorial Field, .Aug. 19, 1938. Manila, 
Bureau of Printing, 1938. (q B-b, p. 4.) 

1674 1938 Ag n.d. Quezon-Mci'utt tete-a-tete. OsMjJj&u. v. 4, n. 7, . 

pp. 25-28 Ag *38. (Q B-b, p. 159.) 

1675 1938 S 8 Address delivered on the occasion of Vice-President 

Osraeha's birthday, Sept. 8, 1938. PSR v. 10, n. 4 
pp. 3, 11, 13 (Q B-b, p. 1.) 

1676 1938 S n.d. The need for regenerating the Filipino national character. 

Manuel L. Quezon. PhjJL. Pr_o_so_ & Poe.^ry; v. 4, pp. 199- 
207. (From the speech of Pros. Quezon, Bureau of Public 
Schools Bulletin n. 18, J '38. (IPP,UPL, v. 11, p. 2033.) 

1677 1938 0 n.d. Quezon on clean elections. Com. Adv . v. 4, n. 0 

p. 21 0 '38. (Q B-b, p. 159.) 

1678 1938 n.d.m. The first annual, report of the President of the Philip^ ■• 

pines; message from the President of the United States... 

covering the period Nov. 15, 1935 to Dec. 31, 1936. 

U.S. Government Printing Office, 1938. 48pp. (Q B-b, p. 1. 

1679 1938 n.d.m. Ibigay kay Cesar an^ kay Cesar; talumpating binigkas ng 

kanyang kamnhalan, Manuel L. Quezon. . Manila, Bureau of 
Printing, 1938. (Q 3-b, p. 2.) 

1680 1938 n .d.m. Proclamation of Tagalog as the basis of Philippine 

National Language, (in: Galang, Z.H., ed. 1938. pp. 401- 

405). (Q ]3 -»> p- 3.) 
lfi 81 1938 n.d.m. Ang paggawa ay dl parusa ng Bios sa tao kundi biyaya sa 

kanya; talumpating binigkas. Manila, Bureau of Printing, 

1938. (Q B-b, p. 3.) 
168 2 1938 n.d.m. Pagtatapat sa mga manggagawa; talumpating binigkas. 

Manila, Bureau of Printing, 1938. (Q B-b, p. ?.) 



- 867 



111 - 292 



<*» 1938 W4 - Bi " r »"««" " f «• "Wd. at . llanlla , 3ureau of Pr . iit 

P- 1 (Q 3-b, p. 3.) 
!684 193 8 .n.d.m. H„t as de mi Crtora. l. IaniUi tho ^ 

(Binder's title: T fca 0harla de ^ Pedro w 
(Q B-b, p. 5.) 

1685 1^39 J a n.d. "Licoiioiaic freedom for all" I'anm.i i * 

cu.x . i^anuoj. jj. Quezon. 

-BOTJte. v. 4> n. 9 Ja '39. (IPP,UPL v. U , pJ 2 0 3 8.) 

1686 19 39 T n.d. Manuel Que son. l^Me v. 2f n . 7 , pp. 18-19 

* '39. (Q 3-b, pp. 9 , 159.) 

1687 19 39 F-Iir n.d. Deadline for labor violence. SmMz^ v. 5 , n . 3 

pp. 15, 16 F-IIr -39. (q 3-b, p. 159.) 

1688 1939 Je '24 Message of his Excellency Manuel L. Quezon... to the 

second National Assembly, delivered June 24, 1939.... 
Manila, Bureau of Printing, 1939. (Q B-b, p. 2.) 

1689 1939 Jl 30 Quezon at park inauguration (Quezon National Park, 

Atimonan). OTjlbJL pp. 13-19 Jl 30 '39. (Q 3-b, p. 99.) 

1690 19 39 Aft 27 President Quezon as a family man. Paz P. Hendez." 

SSUMx. P. 12 lg 27 '39. .(Q B-b, pp. 13, 99.) 

1691 19 39 M n.d. national unity. Ssm^v. 5, n. 6, pp. n, 34 

V? '39. (Q B-b, p. 159.) 

1692 1939 S n.d. Pledge of loyalty to America. Manuel L. Quezon. 

Sqeu^lV. 5, n. 92 S'39. (IPT.UPL v. n, p . 2038.) 

1693 19 39 S n.d. Loyalty speech. Manuel L. Quezon. TeachCo;.J, v . 1, 

pp. 47-48 3 «39. (l?P,U?L v. 11, p. 2038.) 

1694 1939 0 n.d. Background of re-examination, (interview) 

-QpJiLi&k. v. 5, pp. 8-9 0 '39. (Q 3-b, p. 159.) 

1695 19 39 0 n.d. Sad to tell. QqbEoxSl' v. 3, n. 17 pp. 10-11 0 '39. 

(Q B-b, p. 159.) 

1696 1939 N n.d. Quezon-Osmoha leadership and after. S.P. Lopez. 

£Ir3*. PP. 15-45 N'39. (Q 3-b, pp. 11, 159.) 

1697 I939 K n.d. The Commonwealth's social landscape. Jose A. Lansang. 

£2eL. PP. 03, 06, 153, 154, 157 H '39. (Q B-b, pp. 10, 
159.) 

1698 1939 D n.d. Goal of social justice. £oj^4dv. v. 5, n. 10, pp. 9-11, 

34 D '39. (Q B-b, p. 159.) 

^99 19 39 n.d.m. Cooperate with the government in carrying out its prog- 

ram of social justice; radio speech. Manila, n. pub., 

i 1939. (Q B-b, p. 1.) 

1 939 n.d.m. Peace and social and economic security of nations; speech 

delivered at the. University of the Philippines. Manila, 
Bureau of Printing, 1939. U B-b, p. 3.) 



5TT.58 



_ 868 



III - 293 



W 1939 ■ n - d * m ' SeCOnd rR P° rt of the President of the Philips 

to the Confess of the U.S. , covering the 

ended Dec. 31, 1937. U. 3. Governraent Pri ^ 

1939. (Q 3-b, p. 4 .) 

1702 1939 n.d.m. When H.L.Quezon Was hQT ^ /ideudatQ J# # 

Manila, ^^Oj^Tj^^ 1939 . (q 3 _ b> p> 5 j* 

1703 1939 n.d.m. Stars of Baler. 3. II. C 1re koh. 

Manila, iipo Book Co., 1939. (Q 3-b, p. 9 .) 

1704 1939 n.d.n. Quezon for life. (l n : Japanese spirit and culture. . ' 

1939. pp. 84-92) Yoshitaro Negishi. (Q B-b, p. 14.) 

1705 1940 Ja 25 I m unaterably opposed to extension of Commonwealth. 

FPP v. 34, J a 25 '40. (Q 3-b, p. 112.) 

1706 1940 P n.d. President Quezon leaves the door open. (Editorial) 

Pilkv. 37, n. 2 pp. 51-52 P '40. (q 3-b, p. 159.) 

1707 1940 Mr n.d. President Quezon and business. (Editorial) 

Z'Hi v. 37, n. 3 p. 93 Mr '40. (q 3-b, p. 160.) 

1708 1940 Mr n.d. The Quezon Mission brings hone to the Philippines the 

Tydings-McDuffie Law. Character Sd._v. l,. n . 8, p. 284, 
Mr '40. (q 3-b, p. 160.) 
.1709 1940 Ap 6 The incredible speech of H. Quezon. 

SM. v. 34, Ap 6 '40. (q .-3-b, p. 112.) 

1710 1940 Ap n.d. Independence in 1946 - or never. Ilanuel L. Quezon. 

Coi^ldv. v. 6, pp. 9-11 Ap '40. (IPP,UPL v. 11> p. 2038.) 

1711 1940 Je 8 President Quezon as a farmer. PPP v. 34, p.' 10 

Je 8 '40 . (Q 3-b, p. 112.) 

1712 1940 Je 8 Want Quezon for a king? PPP v. 34, p. 4 Je 8 '40. 

(Q 3-b, p. 112.) 

1713 1940 Je 15 The President speaks his mind. PPP v. 34, p. 10 

Je 15 '40. (Q B_b, p. 112.) 

1714 1946 Jl 15 Message of his Excellency Hanuel L. Quezon, President of 

■the Philippines, to the second National .\ssembly, delivered 
July 15, 1940, at the opening of its fourth special session 
Manila, Bureau of Printing, 1940. (Q B-b, p. 2.) 

1715 1940 Jl n.d. The essence of democracy. Manuel L. Quezon. 

Com.Adv. v. 6, n. 14, Jl '40. (IPP,UPL, v. 11, p. 2038. 

,11so in Q B-b, p. I60J 
716 ' 1 940 Ag n.d. Mr. Quezon's partyless democracy. (Editorial) 

P.J1.. v. 37, n. 8, pp. 299-304 '40. (q 3-b, p. 160.) 

WW 1940 S n.d. Duty called Jose Ynlo to public service. Manuel L. Quezon. 

Cpm-ld v. v. 6, n. 10 U '40. (IPP/JPL v. 11, p. 2038. 

.Also in Q B-b, p. 160.) 
l7 * 8 1940 D n.d. Streamlining democracy. (Speech) Pil.Ref .Shelf v. 1, 

pp. 1-2, 5-6, 16 D '40. (Q B-b, Supp. and p. 4.) 



869 111 " 2 94 



m 194 0 n.d.m. "Filipinos owe loyalty to .^rica. (in: Filipiniana 

Reference Shelf. i 940 v . 1, pp . (q s_ b , p . lt ) 

1?20 1940 n.d.m. The Filipinos are gratoful to the United States. ( In: 

Pilipiniana Reference Shelf. 1940. v.' 1, n . 8 pp. i 5 i_ 
153.) (q 3-b, p. 1.) 

m 1940 n.d.m. Commonwealth code of "ethics . (in: Filipiniana Reference - 

Shelf. 1940. pp. 25, 32 (q B-b, p. 1.) 

1722 1940 n.d.in. Addresses... on the theory of partyle SS democracy. 

Manila, bureau of Printing, 1940. (q B-b, pp. 1, 4.) 

1723 1940 n.d.m. The autobiography ... pomp.,., arr. & od. by 3. II. Gwokch. 

Manila, -Art Printing & Pub. C 0 ,, 3.940. (q 3-b, p. 1.) 

1724 1940 n.d.m-. Philippine loyalty, to teerica. (in: Pilipiniana Reference 

Sholf. 1940. v. 1, n . 7, pp. 125-127.) (q 3-b, p. 3.) 

1725 1940 n.d.m. President Quezon, hia bicTraphical sketch, messages and 

speeches. Manila, Publishers Incorporated, 1940. 
. (Q 3-b, P. 5.) 

1726 1940 n.d.m. Third annual report of the President of the Philippines 

to the President and Congress of the U. S. covering the 
period Jan. 1, to Pec. 31, 1938. U. S, Government Prin- 
ting Office, 1940. (Q B-b, p. 4.) 

1727 1940 n.d.m. lie must have a. national language, (in: Arguilla M. ii. & 

others, eds. Literature under the Commonwealth. 1940. 
pp. 23-30) (Q 3-b, p. 4.) 

1728 1940 n.d.m. Manuel L. Quezon: from nipa house to Halacaiiang. G. H. 

Ihiosawa. Tokyo, Japan Pub. .\gency, 1940. (Q 3-b, p. 8.) 

1729 1940 n.d.m. Aug. 19: story in verse of a god to forgotten millions.. 

C.H. -Vega. Manila, The Author, 1940. (manuscript.) 
(Q 3-b, p. 21.) 

1730 1941 J a 31 Message of his Excellency Manuel L. Quezon... to the 

second National Assembly, delivered Jan. 31, 1941, third 

session. Manila, Bureau of Printing, 1941. (Q 3-b, p. 3.) 
!731 1941 p n% & t T he r(i -election of Queaon and Osmeha. Vicente del Pierro. 

icfiPL&Lh n. 7, p. 6 P *41. (IPP/JPL v. 10, p. 2039.) 

Also in Q 3-b, pp. 8, 160.) 
1? 32 1941 Ap n.d. The Filipino writer. Pil. Ref, Shelf, v. 1, p. 103 

,Vp '41. (Q B-b, p. 160.) 
1? 53 .1941 J e n .d. Philippine loyalty to America. (Speech) Pil. Ref.' Shelf 

v. 1, pp. 125-127 Je '41. (Q B-b, Supp.) 
1? 34 1941 Ag 14 Quezon, the student. Gra.. , v. 15, n. 7, pp. 2, 24, 38 

Ag 14 *41. (Q B-b,- pp. 9, 52.) 
I73 5 1941 Ag 14 Quezon, the publicist. Hilarion Ruia. 

fiKft,, v. 15, n. 10, pp. 2, 17, 37 .4g 14 '41. (Q B-b, 
pp. 18, 52.) 



- 870 - 



III - 295 



1736 1941 Ag 19 Quo,on, the youth's friend. HeUhor p. 

v - 15, n. 7f pp. 2 , 39-40 * 19 (q pp " 

lfi7 1941 /* n.d. Filipinos owe loyalty to America. Fil. Ref. Shelf v 1 ' 

P. 104, <\g '41. (Q 3-b, Supp. ) • ' 

17?8 194 i D n.d. President Won and capital punishment. P^ v . 58 

n. 21, p. 496 D '41. ( Q B-b, p. 160 .) 

1739 194 1 n.d.m. The President's message to the National Assembly. (Vdth: 

Philippines (Commonwealth) Civilian Emergency Administration. 
Patnubay ng mamamayan sa panahon ng panganib. 1941. 
pp. 44-47.) (Q 3-b, p. 3.) 

1740 1941 n.d.m. Orphans of the Pacific, the Philippines. Florence Horn. 

J r ow York, Reynal, 1941. (q 3-b, p. 10.) 

1741 1941 n.d.m. ,lng Kumuni smong Quezonista. U. P., n . pub _ 1941> ' 

(Q B-b, p. 10.) 

1742 1941 n.d.m. Manuel L. Quezon, patriot and statesman (Bd with his "The 

Kola of teachers in nation building", and -other speeches, 
1941.) Sergio Osmena. (Q B-b, p. 15.) 

1743 1941 n.d.m. .'. tribute to President Quezon. Manila, Bureau of Printing, 

1941. (Manuscript) (q 3-b, p . 15.) 

1744 1943 Ja n.d. Quezon of the Philippines. Am. Qrt. Rev T J a '43. 

(Q B-b, p. 15.) 

1745 1945 Jl 1 Osmefin leads nation in tribute to Quezon. Fr,. Phils f v. 3, 

p. 1 Jl 1 '45. (IPP-TNL, Y'45, p. 178. Also in Q B-b, 
160.) 

1746 1945 Jl 29 Quozoniana- with illustrations. T¥ n. 11, pp. 3-5 Jl 29 '45. 

(Q B_b, p. 160.) 

1747 194 5 Ag 2 Quezon and his friends, ed. Fj^PhjJ.s,. v. 4, p. 2 

Ag 2 '45. ( IPP-TNL, Y'45, p. 178. Also in Q B-b, p. 160.) 

1748 1945 /.g 2 Osraeha lauds Quezon's record; hails wisdom of transfer of 

Government to U. S. in 1942. Fr. Phi,ls . v. 4, p. 4 

Ag 2 '45. (IPP-TNL, Y»45, p. 178. \lso in Q 3-b, p. 160.) 

1749 1945 3 8 Turning back the pages, por. UStafia. v « If p. 1 S 8 '45. 

( IPP-TNL., Y'45, p. 178. Also in Q B-b, p. 56.) 
^50 I945 0 31 Quezon's instructions 

President Quezon's last instructions. Jose T. Pastor. 
Lawye rs' J v. 10, pp. 54-56 0 31 '45. ( IPP-TNL, Y '45, 
p. 179.) 

Wl 1945 N 6 Quezons Return to P. I. 

Que sons coming home. PLjfews . v. 2, p. 1 N 6 '45. 

(IPPL-TNL, Y'45, p. 179.) 
1752 1945 • N 15 Quczon f a ther of his country. James Wingo. IffifiSjL*. v, 1, 
" pp. 5, 9 E 15 '45. ( IPPL-TNL , Y'45, p. 178. .Also 
in Q B_b, pp. 22, 160.) 



- 871 - 111 ~ 296 

1755 1945 » 21 0smefia ' ilra « * iuzon arrive. U. S. Htaaion is success, 

Roinulo says. IivJLejts.v. 1, pp . lf 4 N 2 \ V45> ( Ipp]j _ 
TNL, Y'45, p. 178. Also in Q 3-b, p. 45.) 

175 4 1945 » 26 P ' 1 - lG aders told how to handle Fips. Former first lady 

says Oauefia, Roxas, Laurel present at confab. Ramon C. 
Portugal. IKinaa v - 1. PP- 1, 7 F 26 '45. (IPPL-TNL, 
Y'45, p. 178. ,1180 in Q B-b, p. 76.) 

1755 1945 D 4 Quezon absolved 'puppets'; suspended judgment on Vargas. 

UEnaJt v. 1, pp. 1, 5 D 4 '45. ( IPPL-TNL, Y'45, p. 178. 
U so in Q B_b, p. 161.) 

1756 1945 D 7 Elizalde tells local Rotarians reason for Quezon flight to 

U. 3. DKej£s„v. li PP. I? 6 D 7 '45. (index to Philippine 
Periodical Literature, General Reference Section, The 
National Library; hereinafter to be referred to as IPPL-TEL, 
Y'45, p. 178. .Also in Q B-b, p. 161.) 

1757 1945 D 9 I; rs. Quezon named to administer Quezon Estate valued at 

1*255,641. iSiHBfi. v. 1, pp. 1, 8 D 9 '45.' ( IPPL-TNL, Y '45, 
p. 178. Also in Q B-b, p. 76.) 

1758 1945 D 10 Quezon monument proposed by labor; leaders visit Mrs. Que son. 

IlTjjKis. v. 1, pp. 1, 2 D 10 '45. (IPPL-THL, Y'45, p. 178. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 76.) 

1759 1945 D 11 Quezon charged with being party to treason of collabora- 

tionists. MPpjLt„v. I, PP. 1, 2 D 11 '45. (IPPL-TNL, 
Y '45, P. 178. Also in Q B-b, p. 161.) 

1760 194 5 D 16 Gets facts in Florida intervievr. KPaai. v. 1, pp. 1, 6 

D 16 '45. (IPPL-TNL, Y '45, p. 178. Also in 1 3-b, p. 161.) 

1761 194 5 D 17 Quezon 's political testament, ed. WssSi v. 1, p. 2 

D 17 *45. (IPPL-THL, Y '45, p. 179.) 

1762 1945 D 18 Quezon Monument 

Drive for Quezon Monument fund is proclaimed. PikaSj v « 1» 
pp. 1, 3 D 18 «45. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '45, p. 179.) 

1763 1945 D 18 Quezon monument fund drive to begin, Jan. 2. MCflujier , 

v. 1, p. 1 D 18 '45. (IPPL-TNL, Y'45, P- 179.) 

1764 1946 J a 6 Quezon manorial. Jffiflai v. 1, ed. 2 Ja 6 '46. ( IPPL- 

TNL, Y»46, p. 263. Also in Q B-b, p. 161.) 
W65 1946 J a 12 QuezonHalk with Cabinet recalled. iSosi' v. 1, pp. 1, 8 

Ja 12 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 265.) 
^6 1946 J a 30 Court rejects KLQ orders? memoirs also avoided as evidence. . 

M.P. v. 1, up. 1, 3 Ja 30 '45. (Q B-b, p. 161.) 
1767 1946 F 2 0 Quezon's heir - II. de. la Vega. m& v. 1, p. 2 

F 20 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 263. Also in Q 3-b, pp. 

21, 161.) 



;>H2 



c~ III - 297 

- 872 - 



1768 1946 F n.a. " Quezon, the inconsistent. PacJ.fl.oo R. Ortiz. 

IfiOU v. 1, n . 2, p r , >7 F -46. (Q 3-b, pp . 15 , 161>) 
m 194 6 Mr 21 Quezon City of prewar grandeur now favorite haunt of ' 

rats, crooks. ffi^ v. 1, p . 1 i!r 21 '46. (iPPL- . 

TKL, Y -46, p. 259.) 

1770 19 46 Mr 29 Quezon Book off the press soon throws light on centre- ' 

versies.. P. CI. Burgos. Dl ta v . lp pp . ^ 2 Mp ^ 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 259. Also in Q 3-b, Pp . 6, 161.) ' 

1771 1946 Ap 6 The last days of Manuel Quezon. J. (i. Wingo. PJT 

v. 37, p.. 4 Ap 6 '46 ( 7 th install.) ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, 
p. 260.'' Also in Q 3-b, p. 112.) • 

1772 1946 Ap 13 The last days of Manuel Quezon; .tacious and danger- 

filled hours - The Spanish Pirate and Midnight dash to 
Mindanao. PPP v. 37, pp. 8, 24 Ap 13 '46. (8th Install.) 
( IPPL-TNL , Y '46, p. 260.) 

1773 1946 Ap 20 Roxas can't be replaced- Quezon. PPP v. 37, pp. 6, 7 

Ap 20 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 263. Also in Q 3-b, 
pp. 4, 112.) 

1774 1946 Ap 20 Quezon's tribute to Osmeiia ... in Quezon's own words... 

Osnofia 3. a ny candidate for first president. .. . Quezon. 
?Dt v. 37, p. 12 :\p 20 *46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 263. 
Also in Q 3 -b, pp. 15, 112.) 

1775 1946 Ap 20 The last days of Manuel Quezon. PPP v. 37, pp. 8, 24 

Ap 20 '46. (9th install.) ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 260.) 

1776 1946 ' Ap 27 The last days of Manuel Quezon. PPP v. 37, pp. 8, 17 

Ap 27 '46. (10th instal.) (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261.) 

1777 1946 Ap 30 Quezon views on puppets explained; testimony for Luz 

quotes late President. irsenio Luz. 3jlew_s v. 1, pp.. I, 
3 Ap 30 '46. (Q 3-b, p. 11.) 

1778 1946 My l Quezon didn't doubt men's loyalt&r ••• H oward. 

EmiS. v. 1, P. 6, My 1 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 263. 
Also in Q 3_b, p. 45.) 
^79 1946 My 4 The Last days of Manuel Quezon. PPP v. 37, pp. 8, 24 

My 4 '46. (llth install.) ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261.) 

1780 1946 My 11 The last days of Manuel Quezon. J. G. Wingo. 

PFP v. 37, pp. 8, 24 My U '46. (l2th install.) 
(IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261.) 

1781 i 946 Hy 18 ThQ last ^ of Nanuol o U ezon. PP? v. 37, pp. 8, 20, 21' 

My 18 '46. (13th install.) ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261 J! 

1782 1946 My 25 The last days of Manuel Quezon. PPP v. 37, pp. 6, 22 

(14th install.) (IPPL-TNL, Y'46, p. 261.) 

1783 1 946 My 26 Quezon city is bankrupt. MChXPji. v. 2, p. 5,. 

Hy 26 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 259.)" 



. Ill - 2SS 

" 873 - 

17 84 1946 'My 28 Calling all writers. JU^Sk v. ' 1, pp. 9f lQ 

My 28 '46. ( IPPL-TNL. Y 'dfi « ocn 

S ;46 -) Dagidi naudi nga aldaw ni I W W>n. James G, Wingo. 

Manila, H Colcol Pub. c l 94 6 (Paper cover) ( The ^ ^ 
of President Quezon, also published in PIT in 24 install _ 
ments from My '46 to Jl '48. (o B-b, p. 22.) 

1786 1946 oe 1 P. I. spurned FDR's offer to auit fi*M-' * ■> , ^ 

u luit light, says late Quezon 

in his book. Don Dillon. HChron. v. 2, p. 5 J e i - 46 
(IPPL-TNL, Y - 4 6, p . 262. Also in Q B-b, p. 56 .) 

1787 1946 Je 1 Quezon's autobiography. PIT v. vj, pp . 2 , 3 J e i < 4 6 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 263. : lao in q 3-b, p. 112 .) 
1788^ 1946 Je 1 The last days of Ilanuel Quezon. J. .G, Wingo. PIT v. 37, 
. PP. 8, 24, 25, 28 Je 1 '46. (15th install.) (IPPL-TNL, 
Y '46, p. 261.) 

1789 1946 Je 2 Flattop to bring Quezon body here. MPo^ v . 2, p. 1 

Jo 2 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 260. Also in 0 3-b, p. 161.) 

1790 1946 Je 4 S'50,000 asked for MLQ funeral. I IChron . r v. 2, pp. 1, 2 

Je 4 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 26O. &so in Q 3-b, p. 56.) 

1791 1946 Je 8 The last days of Manuel Quezon. J. G. Wingo. PIT v. 37, 

PP. 8, 20, 21 Je fi '46. (l6th install.) (iPPL-TIIL, Y '46, 
p. 261.) 

1792 1946 Je 9 Prom "The Good Fight", JSEaafc v. 2, mag. pp. 5, 19 

Jo 9 '46. (Chapter XIII 1st pub.) (IPPL-THL, Y '46, p. 260. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 161.) 

1793 1946 Jo 13 Quezon bill debate draw3 house fight. HTjmes . v. 1, pp. 1, 

13 Jo 13 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 259. Also in Q B-b, 
P. 76.) 

1794 X 946 Je 15 The last days of Manuel Quezon. J. G. Wingo. PIT v. 37, 

PP. 8, 20, 21 Jo 15 '46. (l7th install.) (. IPPL-TNL, 
Y '46, p. 261.) 

1795 l9 46 Je 16 From Quezon's "The Good Fight". Kftlfit v. 2, mag, p. 19, 

Je 16 '46. (Chapter XIII 2nd install.) ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, 
p. 260. Also in Q B-b, p. 161.) 

17 96 1946 j e 2 0 "The Good Fight". JKafffc v. 2, mag. .pp. 18-20 Je 20 '46. . 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 260. Also in Q 3-b, p. 161.) 
1? 97 1946 Je 21 Officer lauds Becto's work. HSlUMtt. v. 2, pp. 1, 2 

Je 21 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 262.) 
1? 98 1946 Jo 22 The last days of Manuel Quezon. ?J£E v. 37, pp. 8, 20, 21, 

24 Je 22 '46. (l8th install.) (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261.) 
179 9 1946 J e 22 Full honors to be given Quezon remains June .28. Mayg, 

v. 1, p. 1 Je 22 '46. ( IPPL-TIIL, Y '46,. p. 260. Also in 

Q B-b, p. 45.) 



III - 299 

- 874 - 



1800 1946 ^ 23 Full military honors at removal of Quezon's body. 

J-iStawu v. 2, pp. 1, 2 Je 23 , 46< ( IPPL . mt y -46 

p. 260. ';lso in Q 3-b, p. 56.) 
1301 1946 ^ 23 From Quezon's "The Good Fight". KPoatv. 2, mag. pp. 19, 

20 Je 23 '46. (Chapter XIII 3rd instal.) (IPPL-TNL, 

Y '46, p. 260. Also in Q 3-b, p. 161.) 

1802 1946 Je 23 High honors for Quezon body planned. Frank Murphy. 

. I2ima.v. 1, p. 1 Je 23 '46. (Q 33-b, p. 14.) 

1803 1946 Je .26 Quezon got pledge for four-billion rehabilitation fund; 

Concepcion says no strings attached to U. S. hand-out. 
I^Tews v. 1, pp. 1, 8 Je 26 '46. (iPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 263. 
.ilao in Q 3_b, p. 45.) 

1804 1946 Jo 29 The last days of Manuel Quezon. PFP v. 37, pp. 32-A, 

32-3, 40-3, 40-G J e 29 '46. (19th install.) (IFPL-TLIL, 

Y '46, p. 261.) 

ie05 1946 Jl 4 ■:. J. will r^-.'^r.Wl in IJ'fi o,r»uoniut\ t WidZOk*. v. 

nag., aupp. p. 21 J]. 4 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46. p. 264. 
'.lso in Q 3-b, p. 56.) 

1806 1946 Jl 4 Quezon's life linked with fight of all Filipinos- for 

freedom. Melius v. 1 supp. 1 Jl 4 '46. (iPPL-TNL, Y '46, 
p. 263. 11 so in Q 3-b, p. 76.) 

1807 1946 Jl 5 Quo a on is the symbol of undefeated soul of 'Filipino people. 

.. liomulo. likCisli v. 1, pp. 2, 3, 6 Jl 5 '46. (Q B-b, 
pp. 161, 18. ) 

1808 1946 Jl 5 Quezon honored in U. S. Navy ceremony. jjR v. 2, pp. 1, 4 

Jl 5 '46. (Q 3-b, p. 14.) 

1809 1946 Jl 6 The last days of Manuel Quezon. PFP v. 37, p. 6 Jl 6 '46. 

(20th instal.) (iPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261.) 
181Q 1946 Jl 13 The last days of lianuel Quezon. PFP v. 37, pp. 8, 20, 21, 

24, Jl 13 '46. (21st instal.) (IEPL-THL, Y '46, p. 261.) 

1811 1S46 Jl 16 /J.unan says he "served" Japs, on MLQ instructions. 

MChrmi. v . 2, pp. 1, 2 Jl 16 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, 
p. 259. -ilso in Q B-b, p. 46.) 

18 12 1946 Jl 3.7 Letter reveals Quezon - FDR friendship. KTjJBSa v « 

p. 14, Jl 17 '46. (Q B-b, p. 76.) 
10 13 1946 Jl 17 Quezon, book, a great document. MssO. v - 1» P» 4 

Jl 17 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p, 263.) 

181 4 1946 Jl is Quezon S letter bnres worm friendship with Roosevelt. 

HChron... v. 2, p. 3 Jl 18 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 263. 
/ilso in Q B-b, pp. 18. 56.) 

181 5 1946 Jl 20 The last days of Manuel Quezon. £E£. v. 37, pp. 8, 20, 21, 

24 Jl 20 '46. (23rd instal.) (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261.) 



- 875 - 



III - 300 



18 16 1946 Jl 21 Quezon s good fight. miuULF. 1 'mag P 5 Jl Pi -a. 

( IPPL--THL, Y '46 n ?fi ^ 

' p. 263. ..Iso xn Q 3-b, pp . 8 , 76.) 

1817 1946 Jl 21 The legacy of Quezon. HPo^t mag. v. 2, pp. 4 2 1 

Jl 21 '46. (q B-b, p . 161 .) 

1818 1946 Jl 24 Cabinet takes up MLQ rites. MChron. v. 2, pp. 1,. 2 

Jl 24 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y ' 46 B olo ' . \ -1' v 

» - h-o, p. ^9, Also m Q B-b, p. % ) 

1819 1946 Jl 24 Manuel L. Quezon. Poem. v , 2f mag. p. 1 

Jl 24 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y'46, p. 2 62.) 

1820 1946 Jl 26 McNutt lauds President Quezon. HJhr_on, v. 2, pp. 1, 2 

Jl 26 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46 n m a n 'J ■ 

"1 to, p. ^t>2. ,u.so in Q 3_b, tj. 56.) 

1821 1946 Jl 26 P. I. awaits arrive of late president. SR v. 2, pp/l / 

Jl 26 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 262. Also in Q 3-^' p. 161.) 

1822 1946 Jl 26 Quezon place in U.S. history secure MoNutt. PLNew,s v. 2, 

PP. 1, 8 Jl 26 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 263. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 161.) 

'1823 1946 Jl 26 Carrier carrying NLQ body manned by officers with colorful 

war records. Eilej£s v. 1, pp. 1, 10 Jl 26 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, 
Y '46, P . 259.) 

1324 1946 Jl 26 Truman's condolence to Filipino people to be road by 

Murphy. EFpjis v. 1, p. 2 Jl 26 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, 
p. 264.) 

1825 1946 Jl 27 President Quezon.. P_LJioj£s v. 2, ed. 3, Jl 27 '46. (IPPL- 

TNL, Y '46, p. 262. Uso in Q 3_b, p. 162.) 

1826 194 6 Jl 27 A president comes home; greater love hath no man for the 

Philippines than he and now, after five years, he is home 
at last. PjY v. J], p. 8 Jl 27 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, 
p. 262. Also in Q B-b, p. 112.) 

1827 1946 Jl 27 Mourning P. I. receives Quezon body. EHerald v. 1, pp, 1, 7 

Jl 27 '46. (IPPL -TNL, Y '46, p. 262. Also in q B-b, p. 162.-) 

1828 1946 Ji 27 Mortal remains of President Quezon due today, port. 

J'l&QUC. v. 2, p. 1 Jl 27 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 262. 

Also in Q 3_b, p. 162.) 
1(1 29 1946 Jl 27 Manuel L. Quezon. KPp.afc v. 2, p. 2 Jl 27 *46. (editorial) 

( IPPL-TNL, Y'46, p. 262. Also in Q B-b, p. 162.) 
l8 30 1946 Ji 27 Kg warn an recalls wave of grief that swept P. I. when Quezon 

died. IJEbjjS, v. 2, pp. 1, 8 Jl 27 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, 

p. 262. 'J.so in Q 3-b, p. 162.) 
1851 1946 Ji 27 A note to President Quezon, v. 2, pp. 1, 4 ad. 

Jl 27 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 262. Also in Q 3-b, p. 162.) 
1832 1946 Ji 27 To her who waits.... in Women's section. SB v. 2, p. 3, 

Jl 27 '46. (IPPL-TITL, Y '46, p. 263. Also in Q B-b, p. 162.) 



- 876. - 111 - 301 



1833 1946 Jl 27 Remember our national hero IWl L. Quozon. PEP v. 37 

P. 3, Jl 27 '46. (IPPL-TNL, I -46, p. 263. Also in Q B-b, ' 
p. 112.) 

m 1946 Jl 27 Return of the leader. HOh^. v . 2 , ed. 4, Jl 27 '46. 

(IPPL-TNL, Y -46, p. 263. Also in Q 3-b, p. 56.). 

1B35 1946 Jl 27 Home to rest. MDB v. 126, od. p. 8, Jl 27 '46. ( IPPL- 
TNL, Y '46, p. 260. ilao in 0, 3-b, p. 73.) 

1836 1946 Jl 27 Back from -the* war. .3R v. 2, port. p. 1 Jl 27 '46. 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 259. Also in Q B-b, p. 161.) 

1837 1946 Jl 27 The late President Quezon; '"Jo Champion of liberty fought 

for such a noble cause with more determination and against, 
odd." port Malta v. 1, p. 1 Jl 27 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, 
p. 262.) 

1838 1946 Jl 27 The i a st days of flanuel Quezon. PFP. v. 37, pp. 6, 18, 19 

Jl 27 '46. (24th install.) (iPPL-TilL, Y '46, p. 261.) 

1839 1946 Jl 27 Quezon's funeral- to .show movie of Quezon funeral. HPos t 

v. 2, p. 7 Jl 27 '46, (Q B-b, p. 162.) 

1840 1946 Jl 28 He lived a full life. MTjj»a& v. 1, nag. p. 10 Jl 28 '46. 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 260. ilso in Q B-b, p. 77.) 

1841 1946 Jl 28 Ho belongs to the agea. j^liaes v. 1 mag. p. 12 Jl 28 '46. 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 260. Also in Q B-b, p. 76.) 

1842 1946. Jl 28 Hundreds pay respect as Quezon's body lies in state in 

Hnlnoanan. JEinaa v - li PP- If 14 Jl 28 '46. (iPPL-T'iL, 
Y '46, p. 260. ,!lso in Q B-b, p. 76.) 

1843 1946 Jl 28 How Quezon died. ISoat v. 2, pp. 7, 20 mag. Jl 28 '46. 

(IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 260. ,'lso in Q B-b, p. 162.) 

1844 1946 Jl 28 Hold services for IiLQ today; rests for last time in palace. 

lEfllKiL v. 2, pp. 1, 8 Jl 28 '46". (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 260. 

Also in Q B-b, p. 162.) 
1 

1845 1946 Jl 28 Quezon family; the warrior's widow prays. 3unuan 

KTin.es mag. v. 1, pp. 9-14 Jl 28 '46. (Q B-b, pp. 6, 77.) 

1846 1946 Ji 28) Quezon' a body arrives; nation honors leader; thousands 

^ 2>) line streets to see funeral cortege. .Armando J. Malay. 

MChro n.. v. 2, pp. 1, 2 Jl 28 '46; v. 2, pp. 1, 9 

Ag 2 '46. (Q B-b, p. 12.) 
lf H7 1946 Jl 29 Impressive ceremonies will mark removal of MLQ body. 

U&WA. v. 2, pp. 1, 2 Jl 29 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, 

p. 260. Also in Q 3-b, p. 56.) 
lf H8 1946 Jl 29 Body of President Quezon moved to chapel of Santo Tomas- 

University where' people may see it till burial. IBruU, 

v. 1, PP . 1, 7 Jl 29 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 259- Also 

in Q B-b, p. 162.) 



: in - 302 

- 877 - 



m 194 6 Jl 29 Public pays homage' t0 . NL0 . Roxag extoig Qf iifca ■ 

. loader.- US*^. 2, pp. lp 4 j, 2g (lppL _ m /.^ 

P. 263. .'ilso in Q B-b, p. is 2> ) ' 
, B50 1946 Jl 29 Roxas, ,0,*, , urphy oxtol ^ ^ ^ 

JkQfinv. 1, pp; 1, i 2 Jl 29 - 46 , (i PPL _ TIIL> Y ^ V 
Pl 5 l 1946 Jl 29 The warrior return,. &ts _,v. I, od . 4 Jx 2g , 46 ' " * 

(IPPL-T1TL, Y '46, p . 264.) 

^ 2 1946 Jl 30 ^ e7 ' 0n ' a horit ^- MPBv. 126, ed ..6, Jl 30 '46. (iPPL- • 

T1 ' :; L, Y '46, p. 263. Also in Q 3-b, p. 73.). 
1853 1946 Jl 30 Fugoso and do la Wo will deliver HL Q ' funeral oration,. . 

E&iKftLA v. 1, pp. .1, 8 Jl 30 '46. (iPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 
260. 4iao in TU, p. 162.) 
, 1854 .1946 Jl 30 Quezon still lives with his people - Recto. MSWL v. 1, . 

PP. 1, 12 Jl 30 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y - 4 6, p. 263. Also in' 

Q B -b, p. 17-.) 

1855 194 6 Jl 30 U.S. spends 2 million dollars to bring Quezon's body. 

Pfc&Ut&v. 2, pp. 1, b Jl 30 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 264.) 

1856 1946 Jl 31 Don I-tol had tact, sympathy; these qualities, last singular 

charm of lato leader. Prantz, ,.H.¥. ■ £R v . 2, supp. pp. 1, 
4 Jl 31 '46. (IPPL-THL, Y '46, p. 259. -Also in Q B-b, 
pp. 8, 162.) 

1857 194 6 Jl 31 Murphy cites Quezon as model for every Filipino. Burial 

tomorrow. IMj. 2, pp. 1, 8 Jl 31 '46. (iPPL-TNL, 
Y '46, p. 262. Also in Q 3-b, p. 162.) 

1858 1946 Jl 31 Self-sufficient P - L is Quezon dream; sau NDC aa start of 

development of natural resources. SR v. 2, supp. pp. 9, 11 
Jl 31 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 263. 'Also in Q B-b, p. I63.) 

1859 1946 Jl 31 Quezon - one of the greatest men of the twentieth century. 

Pierro, V. L. $R v. 2, supp. pp. 1, 6 Jl 31 '46. ( IPPL- 
TNL, Y '46, P . 263. Iso in Q B-b, pp. 8, 162.) 

1860 1946 Ji ■}! Good fi^ts of fighting President are described. SR 

v. 2, supp. pp. 7, 10 Jl 31 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, pp. 
7, 10 Jl 31 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 260. Also in Q B-b, 
p. 162.). 

1861 1 946 Jl 31 p. officialdom to accompany Quezon on last .journey. 

SNows v. 1, pp. 1, 10 Jl 31 '46. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 262.) 

1862 1946 Ag 1 p< paya 1ast tribute t0 Q uu2on as body is laid to rest in 

special mausoleum. JUSsuaJi v. 1, pn. 1, 2 *g 1 '46'. ( IPPL- 
TNL, Y '46, p. 262. Also in Q B-b, p. I63.) 
185 3 1946 ,\g 1 Nation's head has secure place in history - HcNutt. 

mziQA v. 1, supp. A, D Ag 1 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, 
p. 262. AI30 in Q B-b, p. 163.)- 



- 878. - HI -203 



1864 W6 * 1 r Z ° n flamine " rt « ° f dependence, says no Waman • 

Reviews attitude of dead President to press. ' . 

V su ^- 4 ' 3 ^ 4. i '46. (iP PL : m> Y , 46> 2 ; 

Also in q B-b, p. i 63 .) 

1865 194 6 Ag 1 ^neral procession to start at 10 o'clock. HCo^ v 2 

PP. 1, 6 ,,i . 46 . ( IP?L _ TNLf y - 46> p . 26Q ^ /JLso ' 
Q B-b, p. 163.) 

1066 1946 * 1) tribute to President Quezon. Manuel A. Roxas. EH^ 
3) v. 1, pp. i, g - ig ! , 46 . pp> ^ 9 ^ 2 , 4f . ? ^ ^ 

^ 3 '46. (q B-b, P . 13.) 

1867 1946 Ag 2 Late President quezon laid to rest in simple crypt; tearful- 

thousands watch final rites for stateman and patriot. 
HEflflfc v. 2, pp. 1, 2 2 '46. (IPPL-THL, Y '46, p. 262. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 163.) 

1868 1046 Ag 2 quesoXirthday - l 9 th **. Would make Que ZOn S birthday a 

holiday. MM v. 127, p. 2 Ag 2 '46. (IPPL-T3L, Y '46, 
p. 259. Also in Q 3-b, p. 73.) 

1869 1946 2 500,000 attend last rites for President Quezon. KCpjir. 

v. 2, pp. 1, 4 ,'*g 2 '46. ( IPPL-THL, Y '46, p. 259. Also 
in O 3-b, p. 163.) 

1870 1946 Ag 2 Feasant leaders laud Quezon. Misws v. 1, p. 6 Jig 2 '46. 

(IPPL-THL, Y '46, p. 262.) 

1871 1946 Ag 2 Tribute to Hanuul Quezon. Douglas II ac "arthur. tiDB v. 126, 

pp. 1, 2, 15 Jl 29 '46; Bliorald v. 1, p. 3 .fig. 2 '46. 
(Q B-b, p. 12.) 

1872 1946 Ag 3 In Monoriam. PFP v. 37, ed. 10 'g 3 "46. ( IPPL-THL, Y '46, 

p. 260. Also in q B-b, p. 113.) 

1873 1946 /ig 3 The last days of Manuel Quezon. PEP v. 37, pp. 7, 18, 1 9 -, 

22 Ag 3 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261.) 

1874 1946 4 iiy Jonisot. i'-Cour.. v. 2, p. 3 Ag 4 *46. ( IPPL-THL, Y '46, 

p. 262. '.lso in Q B-b, p. I63.) 

18 75 1946 Ag 4 Q roat leader laid to rest. Mgauj^ v. 2, p. 3 Ag 4 '46. 

( IPPL-THL, Y '46, p. 260. Also in q B-b, p. 163.) 

18 76 1946 Ag 4 Fighting words of HLQ. JiCpja* v. 2, pp. 3, 6 Ag 4 '46. 

( IPPL-THL, Y '46, p. 259.) 
18 ?7- 1946 Ag 5 Decoration to honor Quezon. HDD v. 1^, p. 2 Ag 5 '46. 

( IPPL-THL , Y '46, p. 2*^. l lao in q -B-b, p. 73.) 
1878 1946 Ag 14 Baler claims th*« remains of its foremost son. PLNgws , 

v. 2, w !• 8 ^ W ' 46 ' (l ppL - TItt » Y P- 25 9- 

.<urio in 0 B-b, p. 163. •) 
^79 1946 ^ The last days of Hanuol Quezon. £FP v. 37, pp. 7, 22, 23 

26 Ag 14 *46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261.) 



879 



III - 304 




lSfl0 1946 Jig 17 ML* and the proud boy. Andres G. San. Sl^ v . 1, supp. 

p. 8, Ag 17 '46. (IPPL.THL, Y « 4 6, p. 262. ,Uso in ' 
Q B-b, p. 19.) 

Ag 17 The last days of Kanuol Quozon. PIP v. JJ, pp . 7, 22, 23, 

26 /»g 17 '46. (IPPL-TIIL, Y '46, p. 261.) 
IB The Good Fight. ESEaaiv. 2, mag., pp. 11, 20 Ag 18 *46. 

(IPPL-TIIL, Y '46, p. 260.) 
./\g 19 MR Speaker at Quozon day. ritea. £11 v. 27, .1g 19 ' 4 6. 

( Q -3-b, p. 129.) 
Ag 20 Tributo paid to Quozon on occasion of his birthday. 

liSinaa v. 3, p. 14 Ag' 20 '46. (ippl-tkl, y « 4 6, P . 264. 

Also in Q 3-b, p. 77.) 
Ag . 24 The last days of Hanuel Quozon. PPP v. 37, pp. 7, 26, 

27 , 30 24 '46. (iPPL-TtiL, Y » 4 6, p. 261.) 
Ag 31 The last days of Kaiiuel Quezon. PET v. 37, pp. 7, 2 

30, 31 V: 31 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261.) 

/•g n.d. Hanuel L. Quoson. Santiago Artiaga. T0rqs3 v. 1, n 

pp. 5-7 '46. (Q 3-b, pp. 5,-163.) 

Ag) , Hanuel L. Quezon? eulogv. Hanuel -A Roxas. Gpm. n. 40, 
n.d. 

' pp. 11-13 VT-S '46. V IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

S T The last days of Manuel Quozon. PPP v. 37, pp. 7, 26, 

27 3 7 '46. ( IPPL-TIIL, Y '46, p. 261.) 
3 11 I oxecuted Quezon's orders - Laurel; Don't judge by results, 
court told. Jose P. Laurel. SR v. 2, pp. 1, 8 3 11 '46. 
(Q B-b, p. 11.) 

S 14 The last days of Hanuel Quezon. PPP. v. 37, pp. 6, 7, 30, 31 

G 14 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 261.) 
S 20 The last days of Kanuel Quezon. PFP v. 37, pp. 7, 30, 31, 

3 28 '46. (IPPL-TIIL, Y '46, p. 262.) 
'■j 30 Homing in probate of last will and testament of President 
Quezon opened on Doha aurora's petition. BHoraM v - 1 > 
pp. 1, 7 S 30 '46. ( IPPL-TKL, Y '46, p. 260. Mso in 
Q 3-b, p. 163.) 

0 5 The last days of flannel Quezon. BE v. 37,' pp. 6, 27, 

30, 31 0.5 '46. (33rd install.) (IFPWNL, Y '46, p. 262. 
0 11 fWn City is r,storod as chartered community. £taa&. , 
v. 2, P n. 1, 2 0 11 '46. (IPPL-TNL, Y '46, p. 259.) 
1896 1946 0 12 The last days of Kanuel Quezon. PJ?_ v. 37, pp. 6, 26, 27 

/ , • *. ii ) fTPPL-T T IL. Y '46, p. 262, 
0 12 '46. (final install. J A " Ui » * * y 

Also in Q B-b, p. 112.) ^ 
N 9 Re-vitalize adult education. BE v - 1 
(IPPL-TWL, Y '46, p. 263. Abo in Q B-b, p. 112. J 



- 880 111 " 305 



i89 8 1946 D 1 Quezon on Bonifacio. UBal v. 2, mag. pp. 11, i 8 

D 1 '46. (IPPME, Y -46, p . 26 3 . Also in Q 3-b, p . l63 .) 

1399 1946 n.d.m. The good fight. Nov; York & London, Appleton, 1946 

(Q B-b, P . 2.) 

19 00 1946 n.d.m. Ante los restos raortalos de Ilanuol Luis Quezon... oracion 

funebre. Manila; The; Author, 1946 (Manuscript) 
(Q 3-b, p. 17.) 

1901 1946 n.d.m. Quezon City favored for capital site. Ellewj. v. 1, 

(IPPL-THL, Y '46, p. 259.) 
■ 1902 1947 Ja 3 Quezon memorial committee seeks popular support for .Quezon 

memorial fund drivo. MDB v. 129, pp. 1, 12 J a 3 '47. 
(Q 3-b, p. 73.) 

1905 1947 Mr 22 Un nuevo testanunto do Quezon el ultimo otorgado on Karzo 

do 1942 en Bukidnon hallado. Vpj;. v. 4, p. 2 Mr 22 '47. 
(Q B_b, p. 163.) 

1904 1947 4p 15 Mrs. Que son rec.-i0.l3 old dream of latu husband at PiffiC 

rites. lEaai v. Ill, pp. 1, 11 Ap 15 '47. (q Bgsb, p. 16 3 .) 

1905 1947 Ap 19 Quezon postage straps on S"le starti ng Hay 1. HChron. . 

v. 2, P . 1 Ap 19 '47. (Q B-b, p. 56.) 

1906 1947 Ap 26 Quezon and those surplus scandals. R. Lim. PIT v. 38, 

n. 17, pp. 14-15 Ap 26 '47. (Q 3-b, ppv 11, 113.) 

1907 1947 Ap 28 Quezon lauded at fair rites. MDB v. 130, p. 2 Ap 28 '47. 

(Q B-b, p. 73.) 

1908 1947 My 1 Primer a piedra de un monumento a Quezon. Voz . v. 4, 

p. 6 My 1 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 153.) 

1909 1947 My 10 An opportunity. (Editorial) £fl? v. 38, p. 10 My 10 '47. 

(Q B-b, p. 113.) 

1910 1947 My 11 In Quezon's memory. VSjMA v « 2 > na K« P» 22 11 ' 47 * 

(Q B-b, p. 77.) 

1911 1947 My 18 Quezon memorial library planned. 

v. 2, p. 4 My 18 '47. (Q B-b, p. 77.) 

1912 I947 ji 26 Quezon's funeral in .'jnerio a honored dead loader. 

m. v. 38, pp. 25-26, 20-29 Jl 26 '47. (Q B-b, p. 113.) 
WW 1947 Jl 26 Quezon's last message in 1934 when he died not knowing 

whether he would live or die, Quezon left... Pj£ v. 30, 

pp. 4, 5 Jl 26 '47. (Q 3-b, P- n 3-) 
'WW 1947 Jl 27 Per Quezon. Vo.z. v. 4, p. 8, Jl 27 '47. (Q B-b, p. 153.) ' 
191 5 1947 Ag l Roxas, officials to hear requiem mass for President Quezon. 

MDB v. 131, p. 1 £gl '47, (Q P- ^.) 

1915 1947 Ag 1 Filipinas conmcmora hoy 3er aniverserio de la muerte de 

Quezon. Vo_,. , v. 4, PP . .1. 7 * 1 '47. (Q B-b, p. 153.) 
l ^ 1947 Ag 2 Ouirino calls on nation to help loaders carry out Quezon 

plans. MDB v. 131, P. 2 Ag 2 '47. (Q W>, p. 73.) 



881 HI - 306 



X9I8 1947 *< 12 Hawaii. Filipinos to honor Quezon. 

MSLwav. 2, pp. 1, 2 ^ 12 « 47 . (o B-b, p. 47.) 

1919 1947 !5 HL0 - birthday to be celebrated. 

KSbEfl&. v. 2, V! 15 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 56.) 

19 20 1947 Ag 16 Quezon birthday. POT v. 38, pp. 28-29 Ag 16 '47. 

(Q 3-b, p. 111.) 

1921 1947 Ag I 6 Quezon and the " ',nti" issue. 

PIT v. 38. pp. 14-15 Ag 16 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 113.) 

1922 1947 Ag 17 Quezon's last days in iianila. 

SEtflttfl. v. 2, mag. pp. 8-9 /iff 17 '47. (Q.B-b, p. 77.) 
1925 1947 Ag 17 MLQ - As I know him. Phillip L. de Vault, 

ESAlBSS. v. 2, mag. p. 30 .Ag 17 '47. (Q B-b, p. 77.) 

1924 1947 Ag 18 Quezon's birthday fote tomorrow. 

EHfljia v. 2, p. 2 Ag 18 *47. (Q B-b, p. 47.) 

1925 1947 Ag 19 "One World" pageant at iianila Hotel tonight features 

Quezon Ccmsiutiorative program. BNfiJia v. 2, p. 4 j5g 19 '47. 
(Q 3-b, p. 47.) 
1Q26 1947 Ag 19 Quonon genius extolled. 

Ftea v. 2, pp. 1, 1<? Ag 19 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 47.) 

1927 1947 Ag 19 Nation honors Quezon today. , 

ILDB v. 131, pp. 1, 2 Ag 19 *47. (Q 3-b, p. 73.) 

1928 1947 Ag 19 Filipino pooplo honor Quezon today on his 69th birthday 

anniversary. 

HEiHRli v « 3, P. 24 Ag 19 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 77.) 

1929 194 7 Ag 19 Grande a foatujos en In. oiudad de Quezon por el natalicio 

del oaudillo; otros actos en Manila. Vp_z_. v. 4, p. 8 
Ag 19 '47. U 3-b, p.. 153.) 

1930 1947 .Ag 19 Manuel Luis Quezon. (Editorial) 

Voz. v. 4, p. 4 Ag 19 '47. (Q B-b, p. 153.) 

1931 1947 Ag 19 Quezon una inspiracion en momentos de crisis. 

Vqz,. v. 4, p. 5, Ag 19 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 153.) 

1932 1947 /)g 19 Quezon y el Japon. ■ 

Vofc. v. 4, p. 8, A-g 19 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 153.) 

1933 1947 Jig 19 MLQ's life, from beginning to end, is a story of struggle, 

fortitude. JANews v. 3, pp.- 4, 8 Ag 19 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 164.) 

1934 1947 % 19 A newsman's tribute to the late HLQ. A. H. Lacson. 

(port) max* v- 3, PP. 3, 9 % 19 '47. (<l B-b, p. 164.) 

1935 1947 .lg 19 -Quezon in our national life. (Editorial) 

SRv. 3, P- 6 Agl9 '47. ^ ^ P« l64j ' 
1947 Ag 19 Quezon's birthday celebrated today. 

PLIIews v. II, PP. 1, 2 * 19 (« ^> P- I 6 *.) 

^ 1947 % 19 Roxas recalls Quezon's ideals in birthday anniversary note. 

MPost v. 3, PP. 1, 4 JteW '47. (1H P. 164.) 



:> 10? III - 30? 

- 882 - 

193 8 1947 Ag 19 Manuol Quezon's 6 9 th birthday observed today; tha city 

that Quezon dreamed. Jesus V. Herritt. SR v. 4, 

Ag 19 '47. (Q 3-b, p.. 164.) 
195 9 1947 46 19- Hanuul boson's 69th birthday observed today; message by 

Mayor P. A. Bernardo of 'Quezon City. SR v. 3, p. 4 . 

Ag 19 '47. (q 3-b, p. 164.) 

1940 1947 20 Que yon retraction letter shows lie repudated masonry in 

1930. gSauft v. 2, pp. 1, 3 /.g 20 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 47.) 

1941 1947 Ag 20 Avelino, iiulueta pay tribute to Quezon in radio speeches. 

Eikits. v. 2, p. 11 \g 20 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 47.) 

1942 1947 20 Quirino compares Quezon to Rizal in Quezon City memorial 

festival, iffijaaa v. 3, pp. 1, -28 'ig 20 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 77. 

1943 1947 Afi 20 Santuario para Quezon en cnda uno de los corazones Fili- 

pinos - Quirino. Voz.. v. 4, p. 7 Ag 20 '47. (Q B-b, p. 15; 
,1944 1947 -V? 21 Ya hoy P158,478 para el monuraento a Quezon. 

Vp_z. v. 4, p. 4 Ag 21 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 153.) 

1945 1947 '"g 24 Tribute to Quezon. 

LtiESJi v. 3, mag. p. 10 Ag 24 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 77.) 

1946 1947 Ag 27 Last resting place for late President located at old 

proposed capitol site. BNpjjs v. 2, p. 1 Ag 27 '47. 
(Q B-b, p. 47.) 

1947 1947 S 6 Theae crowned friends of ours; although it is true that 

only Ood can make a tree... iiiejia v « 2 mag. pp. 7, 34 
S 6 '47. (Q B-b, p. 47.) 

1948 1947 S 7 Quezon's word spurs Indonesians. James J. Halsema. 

HfilOfiO* v - 3, PP. 1, 9 S 7 '47. (ft 3-b, p. 56.) 

1949 1947 S 16 Osias cites HLQ's writings in move to quash charges. 

EamH v. 2, p. 2 3 16 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 164.) 

1950 1947 3 20 Quezon and Roxas. SM v. 38, p. 32-A 3 20 '47. (Q B-b, • 

p. 113.) 

1951 1947 0 15 Sound policy. (Editorial) 

EITews v. 2, p. 6 0 15 '47. (Q 3-b, p. 47.) 

1952 I947 0 31 Hawaii Filipinos remember President Quezon's birthday. 

W.H.J , v. 17, pp. 14-15 0 31 '47. (Q B-b, p. 164.) 

1953 1947 H 29 Quezon, Abad Santos and the national liberation movement. 

BNews v. 3, nag. pp. 14, 35 B 29 '47. (Q B-b, p. 47.) 
«rf 1947 D n.d. A code of citizenship and ethics. Manuel L. Quezon. 

aUfiflU v. 1, n. 4 D '47. (W^ P« ZD38 ' ) 

^ 1947 n.d.m. Manuel L. Quezon; as I knew him. Sergio R. Histica. 

n.p, Felipe B. toman. cl947 (Manuscript) (Q 3-b,. p. 14 J 
^ 1948 j a 3 M.L..Q. "Off the Record". £££ v. 39, PP- 26-27 Ja 3 *48. 

(IPPL-TNL, Y *48, p. 992. Also in Q B-b, p. 113.) 



■ "' '"Y5 



-883 - m " 308 



!957 1948 J a 2 5 Quezon Hetaorial Foundation 

Una "fundacion Quezon" Pa r a combM-ir. i „ ™< 

pdj.a cornoatir l a mi3eri a rampante. 

Joz. v. 5 , p. 6 j a 25 '48. (iPPL-TNL, Y ' 4 3, p. 994.) 
J55B 1948 Ja 31 Quezon's secret agent. Lt. Col. Emigdio Cruz, HC, as' told 

to Dr. Conrado M a t a . PPP v . 39, pp , 2> 3> 42/ ^ 
Ja 31 '43. ( IPPL-TNL, Y ' 4 8, p. 993. ^ in Q ^ 
7, 13, 113.) 

1959 1948 F 7 Quezon Service Cross 

Groom Romulo for Quezon Cross. Wsm. v. 3,. p. 2 
P 7 '43. (IPPL-TIJL, Y '48, p. 994.) 

1960 1948 F 13 Quezon secret agent. Lt. Col. Emigdio Cruz, MC, as told to 

Dr. Conrado H a ta. PFP v. 39, pp. 12, 13, 36 P 13 '48. 
( IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 993. iiso in a ^ pp> ?> ^ u%) 

1961 1948 P 14 Quezon's secrot agent. Lt. Col. Emigdio Cruz, HC, as told 

to Dr. Conrado li a t a . PFT v. 39, pp. 20, 21, 22, 23 

F 14 '48. (final install.) ( IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 993. ALso 

in Q B-b, pp. 7, 13, 113.) 

1962 1948 P 18 Foresight of Quezon is recalled. ENews v. 3, p. 16 

F 18 '48. (IPPL-.TNL, Y '43, p. 991. Also in Q B_b f - p . 47.) 

1963 1948 P 21 Quezon in Action. PPP v. 39, p. 40 P 21 '48. (iPPL-TiJL, 

Y '48, p. 992. Also in Q B-b, p. 113.) 
I9& 1948 Mr 6 On President Quezon's retraction letter. PPP v. 39, 

p. 20 Mr 6 '48. (IPPL-T?IL, Y '48, p. 992. Also in Q B_b, 
p. 113.) 

1965 1948 Ap 7 Quezon memorial, swiraning pool, Leyte land sale taken up 

by cabinet. HpB v. 134, pp. 1, 13 Ap 7 '48. (IPPL-TNL, 
Y '48, p. 993.)' 

1966 1948 A-p 13 Harrison returning to U.S. in May to publish book on Quse 

last years. HgB v. 134, p. 3 Ap 13 '48. (IPPL-TNL, Y '4 
p. 992. Also in Q B-b, p. 73.) 

W 1948 Ap 15 Roxas lays cornerstone of Quezon edifice. EIfey,s, v. 3, 

pp. 1, 2 Ap 15 '48. (IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 994.) 

^8 1948 li y n Quezon Memorial 

El comite de Quezon sufre nuevos cambios. Jog., v. 5, 
p. 4 My 11 '48. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 993.). 

^9 1948 My 22 Quezon Memorial Fund Drive 

Drive head is denounced. Mariano Logarta. M v « 3, 
pp. 1, 4 My 22 '48. (IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 994.) 

970 1948 My 28 Quezon Memorial Fund 

Konato charges refuted by fund drive manager. SB v « 3, 
pp. 1, 2 Ily 28 '48. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 994.) 



1972 1948 



-)> . • III - 309 

- 8H - 



l9 71 1948 Je 25 P1 raillion raised for Quezon tomb. ENg^g, v. 3, p. io 
. Je 25 '48. ( IPPL-TIJL, Y '48, p. 993.)" 
Jl 2 Quezon Manuel L. - Biography 

5*3,000 offered for Quezon book. EWejia v. 3, pp. 18, 20 
Jl 2 '48. <IPPL-T1JL, Y ' 4 8, p. 993. Also in A H p. 47.) 
10 1948 Jl 5 Road builder > with S0II!e five thousand "landless" men 

behind him... Jgljuta. v. 3, mag. pp. 16, 32 Jl 3 *48. 
(IPPL-TML, Y '48, p. 993. ;j. s0 in Q 3-b, p. 47.) 

1974 1948 J l 3 A thought for the week; the essence of freedom. 

Ei-Siia v. 3, mag. p. 4 Jl 3 '48. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 993. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 47.) 

1975 .1948 J l 2 7 Tne last da Y s of M anuel Quezon. PFP v. 39, pp. 6, 18, 19 

Jl 27 '48. (24th install.) (iPPL-TI-JL, Y '48, p. 992. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 113. 

1976 1948 Jl n.d. The psychology of Hanuel L. Quezon's leadership. V. R, 

Vilar. Pliil. Outlook v. l v pp. 8, 22 Jl '48. (iPPL-TiiL, 
Y '48, p. 992. Also in Q 3_b, pp. 21, 164.) 

1977 1948 Jl n.d. Quezon, Manuel Luis. PhJ-JbM. v. 27, pp. 18-20 Jl '48. 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 992. Uso in Q B-b, p. 164.) 

1978 1948 Ag 3 Romulo rinde calido tributo a Quezon en el 4.0 aniversario. 

Vo_ i; . v. 5, PP. 1, 7 Ag 3 '48. (IPPL-TIJL, Y '48, p. 993.) 

1979 1948 Ag 14 2sta noche se celebrara el cumpleanos de Presidente Quezon. 

Vfta. v. 5, P. 5 Ag 14 '48. (IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 991. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 153.) 
1900 1948 Ag 15 Quezon: friend of the common man. H. D a vid Bscalante. 

HChron. v. 4, mag. pp. 10, 29 Ag 15 '48. (IPPL-TIJL, Y '48, 
p. 992. Mso in Q B-b, pp. 8, 57, 164.) 

1981 1948 Ag 19 Deep secret of Quezon revealed for first time. jffi v. 4, 

pp. 1, 3 19 '48. (IPPL-TIJL, Y '48, p. 991. Slso in 
Q 3-b, p. 165.) 

1982 1948 hg 19 Bjecutoria de Quezon recordada hoy en su natalicio. 

Voz. v. 5, PP. 6, 8 Ag 19 '48. (IPPL-TIJL, Y '48, p. 991. 
Also in Q 3-b, p. 153.) 
^ 1943 Ag 19 \plazan para el 25 festejos por Quezon. Vfta- v - 5, 

PP . 1, 12 .Ag 19 '48. (IPPL-TITL, Y '43, p. 991. Also in 

Q 3-b, p. 153.) 

1948 Ag 19 Manuel L. Quezon. Jsa, v. 5, ed. 12 Ag 19 '48. (IPPL- 
TNL, Y '48, p. 992. Also in Q B-b, p. 153.) 

1948 Ag 19 Philippine Charity Sweepstakes una idea del Presidente 

a 1. in ' A8 (IPPL-TIJL, Y '48, 
Quezon. Vp^. v. 5, p. 4 Ag 19 48. \^ 

•-•„; p. 992. Also in Q 3-b, p. 153.) 




III - 551 n 

885 - 51 



19B6 X948 ig 19 In this corner: Manuel L. Q ue3 on. A. H. Lacson 

4, P . 2 %1V48 . (IPPI.THL, Y-48, p. ^ ^ 
w. in Q B ~ h r PP. 10, 165.) 

1937 19 48 * 19 Quezon' s 70th birthday today revered by nation, Quirino 

other, pay leader high tribute. K W v. 4, pp. 1, 5 
As 19 .'48. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 993. -Also in Q B-b, p. 77 ) 

1988 1948 % 22 ■ G ra n parada por Quezon hoy, a .m. Vp^ v . 5, pp 1 7 

4, 22 '48.. (iPPL-TfiL, Y ' 48 , p. 992 . ^ in \ ^ p> ^ 

19 89 1948 % 23 Honor memory of late leader; Quirino leads in tribute to 

Quezon. MT^ v . 4, pp. 1, 12 jg 25 '48. (iPPL-TITL, 
Y '40, p. 992. Also in Q B-b, p. 77. ) 

1990 1948 Ag 27 Quezon memorial fund drive explained. MTjaaa v. 4, 

pp. 1, 14 4? 27 '48. (IPPL-TML, Y '48, p. 994.) 

1991 1948 28 Quezon City celebrates. PFP v. 39, p. 32 Ag 28 '48. 

(IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 992. Also in Q B-b, p. 113.) . 

1992 1948 Ag . 29 Quezon memorial. flTiiass v . 4> mggt p> 2g ^ 2g , 48< 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 993. Also in q B-b, p. 77.) 

1993 1948 Ag n.d. Quezon and the national language, Antonio Isidro. 

EiuJdM. v. 27, pp. 72, 73, 74 ,*g '48. (IPPL-TNL, Y '48, 
p. 992. ALso in Q B-b, pp. 10, 165.) 

1994 1948 Ag n.d. lianuel L. Quezon as public servant and executive. M. Poque. 

£fejJw. Putlopk v. 1, p. 7 Ag '48. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 992.) 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 18, 164.) 

1995 1948 Ag n.d. Quezon and Philippine education. Ysidro ' Salvador. 

£hjU£&. v. 27, pp. 71, 74 Ag '48. (IPPL-TNL, Y '48, 
p. 992. Also in Q B-b, pp. 19, 164.) 

1996 1948 Ag n.d. Quezon and religious instruction. Fidel Apostol, 

£hi£JM. v. 27, pp. 70, 120 Ag '48. ( IPPL-THL, Y '48, 
p. 992. Also in Q B-b, p. 164.) 
1997- 1948 Ag n .d. Quezon's thoughts. EhiJ^M. v. 27, p. 69 Ag '48. 

(I?PL-T::L, Y '48, p. 993- ..Iso in Q B-b, p. 165.) 

1998 1948 :, g n<d< 3ome Que^onian phorisms. Adn.Iiag. n. 1, p. 1 Ag '43. 

(IFP,UPL v. 10, p. 2040.) 

1999 1M8 S 25 , Quezon said it. PFP v. 39, p. 46 S 25 '48. (IPPL-TNL, 

Y '48, p. 993. Also in Q B-b, p. 113.) 

2000 1948 IT 23 L a era politica Quezoniana. M v. 5, P- 2 N 23 '48.' 

(IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 991. Also in Q B-b, p. 153.) 

11 Quezon Preventorium 

Where children are happy. £2£ v. 39, PP- 6, 7 D 11 '48. 
( IPPL-TNL, Y '48, p. 994.) 
18 Quezon Memorial Hospital 

President recalls start. Msm v. 4, pp. 1, 31 
L 18 '48. ( IPPL-THL, Y '48, p. 994.) 



2001 1948 



2002 



1948 



III - 31 1 

886 • - 



a03 1948 D 25 Gala celebration, PJT v. 39 , p. 3 1 D 25 '48 fPW 1 

(IPPL-TNL, Y -48, p . 9930 25 48> (Ph0t °^- ■ 

m 194 8 n.d.m. Manuel L. Quezon: II is life ^ Cfir ep| & ^ ^ ^ 

President biography. S ol R ilarlo , mkoh , Haall % 
Pub. Co., 1948. (Q B-b, p . 9 .) 

2005 1948 n.d.m. Manuel L. Quezon: a character sketch*. 

Manila, U. 3. T. Press , 1948t (q ^ ^ ^ 

2006 1948 n.d.m. Quezon, patriots palaran. Cayetano M. VilW, Cebu 

City, Viiianor Pub. House, cl 9 48. (Cebu text) (Q 3-b, p 21 ) 
m 1949 Ja 20 Hindi maari kay MLQ ang gin a w a ni Avelino kay EQ sa 

Malakanyang. BB v. 4, p. 3 Ja 20 '49, (Q .B-b, p. 3.) 
2000 1949 Ja 24 P^tatan^ol kay BLQ l a ban s a isang bahagi ng '. ilang ' sali _ 

ta J3B v. 4, p. 3 J a 24 '49. (Q B-b, p. 23.) 

2009 1949 P 5 Question purchase of Quezon hacienda. 

PPP v. 46, p. 26 F 5 '49. (Q 3-b, p. 114.) 

2010 1949 P 7 T-ularan si MLQ, a ni .inbaaador Romulo sa tag*. Q uez on. 

M v. 4, p. 4 P 7 '49. (Q B-b, p. 23.) 

2011 1949 Mr 3 Quezon life book approved for government use. 

EWana, v. 4, p, 3 H r 3 '49. (Q B-b, p. 47.) 

2012 1949 Ap 17 Hanana termina la celebracion del aniversario de Roxas; 

los actos del Viernes muy sentidos. V&z. pp. 3, 4 Ap 17 '49. 
( IPPL-TNL, Y '49, p. 53.) 

2013 1949 Ap 20 Quezon, Manuel Jr. 

Homenaje de los jovenes catolicos al papa; fueron oradores 
ITonong Quezon, Jaime... Vpj& p. 3 Ap 20 '49. (iPPL-TITL, 
Y '49, P. 5?.) 

a W 1949 Ap 29 Nation in grief over massacre. HTjmeq v. 4, pp. 1, 18 

Ap 29 »49. (IPPL-TNL, Y '49, p. 53.) 

2015 1949 Ap 29 Murder of Mrs. Quezon is top story of New York Sun and 

New York World Telegram. EHeraJ-d v. 3, pp. 1, 4 Ap 29 '49. 
( IPPL-TNL , Y '49, p. 53.) 

2016 1949 Ap 29 Mrs. Quezon's death shocks U.S. , Elizalde, Tydings, others. 

ENews IV: pp. 1, 2 Ap 29 '49. (IPPL-TNL, Y '49, p. 53.) 

2017 1949 Ap 29 Mrs. Quezon funeral today. MChj^ pp. 1, 4 Ap 2 9 '49- 

( IPPL-TITL, Y '49, P- 53.) 

2018 1949 Ap 29 Quezon murder shocks nation; Felipe Buencamino, III dies. 

MTimes v. 4, pp. 1, 18 .lp 29 '49. (IPPL-™,, * '49, p. 53 

2019 l94 9 Ap 29 State troops contact killers in ambush area; people mis- 

led . charge; tanks, planes used. BNejia IV: PP- 1 » W 
Ap 29 '49. (IPPL-TNL, Y '49, p. 53.) 
2320 1949 Ap 29 Mrs.' Aurora Quezon; she inspired a great leader. 

ENgaa IV: P . 12, Ap 29 '49- (l?PL-TNL, Y '46, p. 53.) 



- 887 - 



in - 312 



2021 1949 " 29 ' Mrs. Quo son, -Baby', nine othe ' . 

_ , , p , ai ° ln Huk ambush. MDB 

v - 138, pp. lf 15 ip 29 , 49> (][ppL _ m -~ 

m 1949 Ap 29 Hoy entiorro do Doha Aurora V da Hn 0 

UST Vn v ra Vda * d0 Que ^n; cadaveres en 

I ' **" V " PP ' X > 8 29 '49. ( IPPL-TNL, I .49 p 5 , ) 

m M9 * 29 The anbush on , rs . Quezon ^ ^ ^ ^ 9 "' ^ 

•ip 29 '49. ( IPPL-TNL, Y .49, p . 53.) 

2024 1949 /.P 30 Quezon widow buried beside great husband. EN^ iy 

p. 26 .-ip 30 '49. (IPPL-TNL, Y '49 p 53 ) 

2025 : 1949 ' P 30 TrUmM lRadS in ~ ^Pathy. for II rs . ^ ^ 

v - 4, pp. 1, 3 Ap 30 '49. (IPPL-TNL, Y '49 p 53 ^ 

2026 1949 Ap 30 Hao Arthur send condolences. ENg^ IV: p. 2 " - p '^ i 4q 

(IPPL-TNL, Y -49, p . 53.) 1 f ' 

2027 1949 Ap 30- Dona Aurora ha caido en servicio del pueblo. Vp^ V: 

p. 4 .ip 30 '49. (iPPL-TnL, Y '49, p . 53.) 

2028 1949 A P 30 Duelo popular por Aurora de Quezon: fue muy pa tetico el 

final tribute del... Vpji V: pp . lf 2 Ap 30 '49. 
(IPPL-TNL, r '49, p. 53.) 

2029 1949 Ap 30 Griof-bo.ed throne mourns loss; 300,000 line route; sobs 

break silence. UTj^ v. 4, pp. 1, 16 Ap 30 '49. 
(IFPL-THL, Y '49, p. 53.) 

2030 1949 Ap 30 Quezon, Aurora ... (Mrs.) 

Cabinet hoars Jalandoni; E x -Chief of Staff gives first- 
hand story of massacre. MiiLeja v. 4, pp. 1, 16 Ap 30 '4S. 
( IPPL-TNL, Y '49, p. 53.) 

2031 1949 I!y 10 President Quezon' a' voice. I-iTjjaefl v. 4, pp. 1, 14 

Hy 10 '49. (Q B-b, pp. 6, 77.) 
20% 1949 .\g 13 Quezon era maestro en replicas contiendes; por Francisco 

Palisoc. Sjaoanjl v . 2, n. 35 pp. 5-7, 10, 35-40 

Ag 13 '49. (Q B_b, pp. 15, 165.) 
2033 1949 Ag 18 L a carrera meteorica del individual hijo del Baler. 

SgEiaaa v. 2, n. 35, p. 3 18 '49. (Q B-b, p. 165.) 
34 I949 /jg n<(i> Record of the Filipino people in World War It; Manuel L. 

Que son. Address delivered January 16, 1943- iOfiSoyRgv. 

v. 1, pp. 418-419 Ag"'49- (IPP, UPL, v. 11, p. 2038.) 

2035 1949 n.d.m. Quezon; ang dakilang Pilipino. Manila, Philippine Book 

Co., 1949. ('•; ^-b, p. 8.) 

2036 1950 Ap 23 The Quezon ambush. TVf n. 5, pp. 12-14 Ap 23 '50. 

(IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2042.) 

2037 1950 ig 2 Panatilihing buhay ang mga ginawa ni Quezon. Elpidio Quirino. 

Tai. v. 1, pp. 1, 2 Ag 2 '50. (Q B_b, pp. 17, 135.) 

2038 1950 Ag 13 ouezon; private citizen. R. F. Santos. TV v. 5, n. 34, 

pp. 4-5, 7 13 '50; Kfifarqa. v. 6, pp. 4-8 Ag 13 '50. 
(Q B_b, pp. 19, 57, 165.) 



III - 313 



oq39 1950 16 Kanino utang ang Republika ng Pilipinas? Pascual Kanalo,. 

KaL. v. 2, n. 41, pp. 7, 11 Sfi? 16 '50. (Q B-b, p. 12.) 

2040 195° 17 Quezon era enemigo do los o portuni 3 1 as. Francisco C. 

Palisoc. Sjgaaaa v. 4, n. 8, pp. 12, 29 .ig 17 '50. 
(Q B_b, pp. 15, 165.) 

2041 195° '£ 17 £il G audillajG dinaroico de K. L. Quezon. Jnastacio Javelosa. 

SeuLaaa v. 4, n. 87 pp. 16-17 .ig 17 '50. (Q B-b, pp. 10, 
165.) 

'■>042 1950 --ig 19 Nation marks Quezon anniversary - Quezon, the nationalist. 

HChron. v.. 6, pp. 11, 13. -g 19 '50. (Q B-b, pp. 6, 57.) 

2043 1950 Jig 19 Filipino nation celebrates Quezon 3 J ay today, tfladio 

Caliwara. MCfccQa. v - 1°» n - 120 ' PP- 6 > 8 ^ 19 ' 
(Q B-b, p. 7.) 

2044 1950 Ag 19 Manuel L. Quezon> the nationalist. Sotero Baluyot. 

MTjnes v. 6, p. 6 /ig 19 '50. U B-b, pp. 6, 78.) 

2045 19 50 /-g 19 T he nan Quezon. Jesus V. Kerritt. PjT v. 41, pp. 10,' 11 

19 '50. (Q B-b, pp. 13, 114.) 

2046 19 50 19 Quezon; Father of the' Philippine history; intensely 

nationalistic, he fought for independence in the battle- 
field and fron his sickbed. Gregorio F. Zaide. Eikaa 
mag. v. 5, pp. 4, 5, 23 g 19 '50. (Q B-b, pp. 22, 48.) 

2047 19 50 /ig 19 vJalang maliw si Quezon sa puso ng bayan. 

BB v. 6, p. 4 Jig 19 '50. (Q B-b, p. 23.) 

2048 1950 Jig 19 Kailangan pa si Quezon sa panahong ito. 

BB v. 6, p. 4, 19 '50. (Q B-b, p. 23.) 

2049 1950 .Ag 19 Nation honors late President Quezon; Perez urges prepared-. 

ness on Red threat. EFew.s_v. 5, pp. 1» 31 4g 19 '50. 
(a B-b, p. 48.) 

2050 1950 /g 19 P. I. remembers Quezon today. v. 6, pp. 1, 4 

ilg 19 '50. (Q B-b, p. 57.) 

2051 1950 ,*g 19 Remember Quezon. H^imes. v. 6, pp. 1, 3 Ag 19 '50. 

(Q B-b, p. 78.) 

2052 19 50 /ig 19 Quezon and our democratic institutions. (Editorial) 

PH v. 88, p. 4 J-g 19 '50. (Q B-b, p. 129.) 

2053 1950 Jig 19 Cowen exto^late President. 

PH v. 31, pp. 1, 3. 19 '50. (Q B-b, p. 129.) 

2054 1950 Zg 19 Spirit of friendship builds Filipino- Anerican tic 3. • 

PH v. 88, p. 8 19 '50. (Q B-b, p. 129.) 

2055 1950 .ig 19 Isagawa ang simulain ni HLQ - Cowen. 

Tfli. v. 1, pp. 1, 2 .gl9 '50. (Q' B-b, p. 135.) 

2056 1950 Ig 19 Magsasalita sina B. Q. , Laurel, Tahada ukol kay Quezon. 

(Konument) TaL- v. 1, pp. 1, 2 Ag 19 *50. (Q 3-b, p. 135.) 



Ill - 314 



2057 1950 ,ig 19 Hanuel L. Que son. (Editorial) 

lal. v. l, p. 2 J£ 19 '50. (q 3-b, p. 155.) 

2058 1950 .2g 19 Sasiphcyo ang pangarap ni Quezon, ani Cleo&aa. 

lal. v. 1, p . 2 jg 19 '50. (q B-b, p. 135,) 

2059 1950 % 20 Lumuluha ang bayani. Jose V. Mangalunan. 

BBHae. v. 6, pp. 7, 15 J!g 20 "50. (Q B-b, pp. 12, 23.) 
ZoM 1950 % 20 Bayan muna bago sarili- iyan ang tapat n s pinuno. Hario B. 

Hababangloob. BRiajr . v . 6, pp. 9, 10 ig 20 '50. 
(Q B-b, pp. 12, 23.) ' 

2061 1950 .ig 20 3i Quezon; ang bayani. *.rturo Ha. Hisa. 

MLa£. v. 6, pp. 6, 10, 15 ;ig 20 '50. (q 3-b, pp. 13, 23.) 

2062 1950 % 20 Writer recalls wartime interview with MLQ, bares late 

leader's concern for Filipinos abroad. FH v. 88, pp. 2, 4 
20 '50. (Q 3-b, pp. 19, 129.) 

2063 1950 /.g 21 ,'ng katarungang - fiaciipiman ng Pangulong Quezon. 

£aL> v. i, P . 5 21 '50. (q 3-b, p. 135.) 

2064 1950 22 i'alahiran. (Poen) Flor /J-cega ilvarez. 

laL. v. 1, p. 6 .ig 22 '50. (q 3-b, pp. 5, 135.) 

2065 1950 /g 24 Wagparangal din kay Quezon ang betcrano. 

Tai. v. 1, p. 4 .ig 24 '50. {% 3-b, p. 135.) 

2066 1950 /ig 30 Tinangkilik ni Quezon ang wikang Tagalog sa ipagkakaisa 

ng bansa. 33 v. 6, p. 6 .ig 30 '50. (Q B-b, p. 23.) 

2067 1950 S 1 ilanuel L. Quezon; a leader with the common touch. 

H-Jk v. 2, 11. 24-25, p. 89, S 1 '50. (Q B-b, p. 165.) 

2068 1950 S 2 .".ng Pangulong Quezon at ang kalayaan ng Pilipinas. Delfin 

Ferrer Garaboa. Taj^ v. 1, p. 3 S 2 '50. (Q B-b, pp. 9, 135. 

2069 1950 S 11 ,'ing pagk a- bayani ng yiunaong Pangulong Manuel L. Quezon. 

Jose P. Santos. Tr],. v. 1, p. 5 3 11 '50. (Q B-b, pp. 19, 
135.) 

2070 1950 n.d.m. Inaugural address, (in: Valeros, F.B., ed. Filipino 

speeches for different occasion. 1950. pp. 54-56.) 

(q 3-b, P . 2.) 

2071 1950 n.d.m. To my people, (in: Valeros, F.3. ed. Filipino speeches for 

different occasions. 1950, p. 94.) (Q B-b, p. 4.) 

2072 1950 n.d.m. The educational ideas of Hanuel L. Quezon. Virginia Montilla. 

University of the Philippines. The Author, 1950 (Thesis, 
M.A.) U.P. (q 3-b, p. 14.) 

2073 1950 n.d.m. Spiritual revival of the Filipino people, (in: Valeros, 

F.B., ed. Filipino speeches for different occasions. 1950. 
p. 72-79 ) (Q- B-b, p. 18.) 

2074 1950 n.d.m. On tho nomination of Manuel L. Quezon. Manuel Roxas y .icufla* 

(in: Valeros, F.B., ed. Filipino speeches for different 
occasions. 1950. pp. 30-33.) (Q B-b, p. 18.) 



- ago - 



III - 315 



2075 1950 n.d.m. ... To the Filipino people, (in: Valeros, F.B., ed. 

Filipino speeches for different occasions. 1550. 
p. 108.) (Q 3-b, p. 18.) 

2076 1951 Mr 31 When Q\iezon cried "Basta" . Frederic S. Karqusrdt. (ils) 

PFP v. 42, pp. 2, 44 Kr 31 '51. (IPFL-THL, X »51, p. 66?. 
Also in Q li_b, p. 114.) 

2077 1951 Jl 8 Quezon Preventorium, White Cross saves children from T. B. 

PH v. 92, supp. pp. 1, 4 j"l 8 *51. (IPFL-TNL, Y '51, 
p. 662.) 

2078 1951 Ag 8 First Malayan Republic: The story of the Philippines 

( Chapt. 8 - The wgr period - President Quezon wages the 
good fight.) George A. ualcoln. KChron. v. 7, pp. 1» 9 
Ag 8 '51. (IPFL-THL, Y '51, v. 661. Also in Q pp. 12, 

57'.) 

2079 1951 Ag ■ 8 Quezon Memorial. Jesse Bello. PK v. 93, p. 4 Ag 8 '51. 

(IPFL-Tia,, Y '51, p. 662.) 
?0!D 1951 Ag 9 First Malayan Republic: The story of the Philippines 

(Chf!.pt. 8 - The wav period) George A. Malcolm. MChron. 
v. 7, pp. 1, 12 Ag 9 '51. ( IPFL-THL, Y »51, p. 661. Also 
in Q 3-b, pp. 12, 57.) 

2081 1951 Ag 18 As I remember Quezon. MT jj a e.s. v. 6, pp. 8, 9, 11 Ag 18 '51. 

(iFPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 660. Also in Q B-b, p. 78.) 

2082 1951 Ag 18 President Quezon's good fight is still ours. Jose A. 

Quirino. MTimea v. 6, p. 9, As 18 '51. (IPPL-THL, Y '51, 
p. 661. Uso in Q 3-b, pp. 17, 78.) 

2083 1951 Ag 18 In memory of Quezon. Pi?, v. 42, pp. 10, 11 Ag 18 '51. 

( IPPL-TIIL, Y '51, p. 661. .lso in Q B-b, p. 114.) 

2084 1951 Ag 18 Quezon's surgeon on Quezon. Or. Carmelo P. Jacinto. 

PFP v. 42, pp. 30, 37 M 18 '51. (iPPL-TKL, Y '51, p. 662. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 114.) 

2085 1951 Ag 18 Quezon today in' the Philippines. Julio S. Garcia, (ils) 

PFP v. 42, pp. 31, 39 Ag 18 '51. (IFPL-THL, Y '51, p. 
662. Also in Q B-b, p. 114.) 

2086 1951 Ag 19 Quezon, champion of common man's amelioration. Model 

Homesites built for benefit of workingmen. PH. v. 93, 
pp. O, 9 -* 19 '51. (IPPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 661. .Uso in 
Q B_b, p. 129.) 

2087 1951 Ag 19 Government officials extol virtues of late. Quezon. 

PH v. 93, p. 6 19 '51. (iPPL-TiiL, Y '51, p. 661. £Lso 
in Q B-b, p. 129.) 

2088 1951 JiE 19 How Quezon paid old debts. MFABBfiL v. 6, p. 2 Ag 19 '51. 

(IPPL-THL, Y '51, p. 661. ..Uso in Q B-b, p. 78.) 



- 891 - 



III - 316 



2089 1951 Ag 19 P.I. to mark 73rd Quezon birthday. HChr^- v. 7, 

PP.. 1, 4 19 '51. (iFPL-TPL, Y '51, p. 661. Also in 
Q B-b f p. 57.) 

2090 1951 Ag 19 Que son the man. Jesua#. Merritt. MfibKOft. v. 7, 

pp. 1-A, 8 '« 19 '51. (IPPL-TML, Y '51, p. 661. ilao: 
in Q B-b, p. 57.) 

2091 1951 Ag 19 MLQ symbol of country's freedom fight, says EQ. 

MStoa. v. 7, p . i_/i ./jg 19 '5i. (ippl_tiil, Y '51, 
p. 661. Also in Q ^-b, p. 57.) 

2092 1951 Ag 19 Ninais tuwina ni queson na lunaya ang Pilipinas. 

BB v. 7, p. 3, .Iff 19 '51. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 661. Mso 
in 0 B_ h , p . 23.) 

2093 1951 19 Manuel L. Quezon, Arkitekto ng Republika ng Pilipinas.' 

Jesus C. Olega. BBH^. v. 7, p. 13 Ag 19 '51. ( IPPL- 
TML, Y '51, P . 661. Also in Q B-b, p. 23.) 

2094 1951 Ag 19 The Quezon I knew, (port) Richard C. Wilson. 

Mfiiuaa. v. 7, pp. 4, 6 Ag 19 '51. (ippl-tnl, y '51, 

p. 661. Also in Q B-b, p. 22.) 

2095 1951 /g 19 Dumakila si Quezon sa pagsisikap na rin niya. 

It. 7, p. 3 Ag IS '51. (iPFL-TNL, Y '51, p. 661. 
.'0.50 in Q 3-b, p. 23.) 

2096 1951 Ag 19 iJlien I first met Kanuel-L. Quezon. Pio Pedrosa. 

WjJMZLu v. 6, p. 2 Ag 19 '51. (IPPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 662. 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 16, 73.) 

2097 1951 Ag 19 «i Queson at ang Wikang Pambansa. BB v. 7, p. 2 

Ag 19 *51. (IPPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 662. Also in Q B-b, p. 2? 

2098 1951 Ag 19 Remembering Queson. (ils) KC hrp n. v. 7, TW pp. 12, 13 

Jig 19 '51. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 662. Also in Q B-b, p. 57 

2099 1951 Ag 19 Quezon's fight. Kuch has been written of him in politics 
/ and in war - very little of him in bed. liTjjae^. v. 6, 

mag. pp. 6, 7 Ag 19 '51. (IPPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 662. 
AI30 in Q B-b, p. 70.) 

2100 1951 Ag 19 The Quezon memorial tilt. H T Jjae_3, v. 6, mag. pp. 24-27, 

Ag 19 '51. (IPPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 662.) 

2101 1951 /.£ 20 T;r, e big fight c of h'ar.uel L. Quezon. Sol It. Gwekoh. 

SKewa v. 6, pp. 1, 5 .'g 20 '51. (iPFL-TNL, Y '51, 
p. 661. Also in Q B-b, p. 9.) 

2102 1951 Ag 20 Bi na ka ng Pangulong Quezon ang mapagsnmantala at mapag- 

imbot. BB v. 7, p. 3 Jg 20 '51. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 
661* /aso in Q B-b, p. 23.) 

2103 1951 Ag 20 Hahahalngang pamana ng yumaong Quezon sa bansa. BB v. 7, 

p. 2 Ag 20 '51. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 661. .Uso in Q B-b, 
p. 23.) 



in - 

2104 1351 Je 30 QraesBrn's tqyfcncid ffctand, S1ism& ▼% <§» p. 15 % 29 *5i % 

2105 1951 /« 20 ^Lriwj leafla p^d35g tribute to %saa©& ©a Ma 

birthday finaLversflary. 147, pp. 1, 23 jg 10 '51% 

(UPL-m, T '51, p. 662. $a Q SL.\ p. ?3.) . 

2106 1951 21 Par«s extols JiL^'s virtues. HTfe^ v. 6, pp, 1, 2 

iig 2i '51. (ieel-sbil, i *a, p. &a, as© in q sm>, 7©,) 

2107 1951 -Sg 21 Satlon obsarvas Quasson birthday, v. 147, pp. 1, 7 

% 21 '51. (USWKiL, Y '51, p. 661, &ao i» ^ $-b, p, 1%] 

2108 1951 21 Poadfdsdig rag kabtntusin ai I&q. iv.l, p, 3 % 21 "51, 

(XPPL-TTIL, Y 'a, p. 661. ,a SQ ia q B-b, p. 23,) 

2109 1951 21 Sinnsariwa awr nga katan^ioa Pw^uicwag: 

BB v. 7, p. 4 21 "51. (lEPL-TKL, I '51, p. 662, -. As© . 
in q B-b, p. 23.) 

2110 1951 i-g 21 Queson would be aore than happy about nation's peasant 

state. Paras. My. 93, pp. 1, 9 .Jg 21 '51. (iPPL- 
THL, Y '51, p. 662. -llso in Q 3-b, p. 129.) 

2111 1951 ig 25 Quezon, the politic! to. JScattdojR v. 3, pp. 31-32 

Ag 25 '51. (IPPL-KIL, Y '51, p. 661. illao in q B-b, 
p. 165.) 

2112 1951 ^ 25 Ferpetuating the Que son legend. In Quezon's aoaory, th© 

nation finds cause for prido in tlio past, inspiration for 
the present. faped.QJil v. 3, pp. 5 , 27 , 30, i& 85 '51. 
(IFPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 661. ^lso in 0 B-b, p. 165.) 

2113 1951 As n.d. On Quezon's 73rd birthday. J^Jj^LiXa v. 13, pp. ' v % ,s 

Jig *51. (IPPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 661. ,Mso in Q 3-b, P . 

2114 1951 0. 13 Need for government agency like FRISCO saen by Preoidont. 

Quezon in 1939. Mv. 148, p. 12 0 13 '51. (iPPL-TNT, 
Y '51, p. 66. /JLso in Q 3-b, p. 73.) 

2115 1951 0 13 FRIfiCO story goes back to time of President Quo son. 

MChron. v. 7, p. 6, 0 13 '51. ( IFPL-TNL, Y '51, p. 
Also in Q 3-b, p. 57.) 

2116 1951 N 4 Relics. .Collected mementos big and small help tho Fili- 

pinos in remembering Quezon. MSimfli v. 7, mag. pp. 'i-7 
N 4 '51. (IPPL-THL, Y '51, p. 661. /JLso in Q B-b, p, 78, 
and IPP,UFL v. 10, p. 2041.) 

2117 1951 U 16 Que son's dreams for the common man near fruition. 

Jacobo S. de Vera. HDB v. 148, pp. 7, 9 N 16 '51. 
(IPPL-TIIL, Y '51, p. 662. ilso in Q B-b, p. 73.) 

2118 1951 n.d.m. Brief biographies of the ten most 'outstanding Filipi- 

no national leaders. B.L. Laus. Manila, National Printing 
Uo., 1951. (Q 3-b, p. .11.) 



- 8» - 



III - 318 



~2119 1952 Hr n.d. ^uoeom and the Filipino youth. J.P.Bantug. |T v. 6, 

PP. 53, 54 Kr '52. (q B-b, pp. 6, I65.) 

2120 1952 Je 16 The emergency powers act; Queson autobiography favors 

group opposed to continuance; Abelardo Suhido. BEay^ r 

7, p. 9, n. 228 Je IS '52. (I2PL-TNL, T «52, p. 1073. 
Also in -1 B-b, pp. 20, 48.) 

2121 1952 Jl )„ n d> Quezon's passing at Saranac. Augusto C. Catanjal. 

PhilLiM.- v. l, pp. 10, 29, 32, 33, 37, nos. 4-5 
Jl-Ag '52. (IEPL-TM, T '52, p. 1078. Also in q 3-b, 
pp. 7, 166.) 

2122 1952 iig 1 Hark 8th year of Quezon death. KD3 v. 151, n. 28 

P. 2 Ag 1 '52. (0 B-b, p. 73.) 

2123 1952 Ag 5 Quirino proclaims Aug. 19 special public holiday. 

EKejjs. v. 7, n. 270 Ag 5 '52. (IFPL-TBL, X '52, p. 1078. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 48.) 

2124 1952 Ag 16 Quezon and Alegrc. Dalisay 3ocobo. FFP v. 43, n. 33, 

PP. 31-32 Ag 16 »52. (q 3-b, pp. 6, 114.) 

2125 1952 Ag 16 The Quezon story; the story of a great Filipino who rose 

from poverty to become symbol for the true patriot and 
leader. 3Ke_H& mag. v. 7, p. 5, n. 280 Ag 16 '52. 
(iPPL-TNL, Y »52, p. 1078. Also in Q &-b, p. 48.) 

2126 1S52 Ag 16 The Que son legend. Freedom, v. 4, pp. 1, 8, 10 n. 25, 

Ag 16 '52. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '52, p. 1078. Also in Q B-b, p. 166 

2127 1952 Ag 16 Seven years of the Quezon Memorial Foundation. Filemon V. 

Tutay. PFP v. 43, pp. 6, 7, 59 n. 33, Ag 16 *52. 
(IPPL-TEL, Y '52, p. 1078. Also in Q B-b, pp. 20, 114.) 

2128 1952 Ag 18 Quezon natal day marked. 

Mf3gaa. v. 8, pp. 1, 6 Ag 18 '52. (Q B-b, p. 57.) 

2129 1952 Ag 18 Nation to mark Quezon birthday. 

HDB v. 151, n. 42, pp. 1, 19 Ag 18 '52. (Q B-b, p. 73.) 

2130 1952 Ag 19 Nation marks Quezon natal day today. 

MChron. v. 8, pp. 1, 6 lg 19 '52. (Q B-b, p. 57.) 

2131 1952 Ag 19 P.I. remembers Quezon in various rites today. 

M Chron . v. 8, p. 3 V? 19 '52. (Q B-b, p. 57.) 

2132 1952 Ag 19 lianuel L. Quezon. (Editorial) 

JffiB v. 151, n. 43, P. 16 Ag 19 '52. (Q B-b, p. 74.) 

2133 1952 Ag 19 'Dream City' is KLQ life work. 

PH v. 98, p. 2 ? g 19 '52. (0 B-b, p. 130.) 

2134 1952 Ag 19 Quezon, the man. Jft v. 98, pp. 2, 3 n. 11, Ag 19 '52. 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '52, p. 1078. Also in Q B_b, p. 130.) 

2135 1952 Ag 19 MLQ natal day marked by world-shaking ovents. 

PH v. 98, p. 3 VJ 19 '52. (Q B-b, p. 130.) 



311-114 



- 894 - 111 " 3,9 



son on natal day. 



2136 1952 * l 9 ^tion 

4 — * "aucu. u.i 

98 ' P' 2 % 19 '52. (q&-b, p 130 ) 

2157 1952 * 19 rr:; he r ! ^ ideBi - 

^ valued freedom of press; Carlos Quirino. PH v. 9 8, 

PP \ ' ' " 11 * 19 ' 52 ' <™^>*. I '52, p. 1078. ,l., 0 
in o i3-b f pp. i 7> 130 j 

2159 1952 * 20 virtues extolled by EQ, HCbron. v. 88, pp. 1, 10 

n - 122, .« 20 '52. (IPPL-TNL, Y « 52 n 1(1 7« • „ 

^ ' P» 1078. .uso an Q 

2140 1952 4. 20 m^p dw ^ v _ 8> p _ 2> 

q'b-T'p ' 52 ' (IPPL " TI " L ' 1 ' 52 ' 1078 - a» i» 

2H1 1952 , s 20 Q^/^ for mitea oitizenry ^ te2oa ^ ^ 

i£B v. 151, pp. lf 15> n> 44> ^ ^ (lppL _ m> y . 

52, p. 1078. ,Uso in Q B-b, p. 74.) 

2142 1952 ,ig 20 Quezon's address on JIL"> 

duuitiss on jil^ birtnday anniversary fete. PH. 

v. 98, p. 3 n. 12, 20 '52. (iPPL-TFL, Y '52, p. m 78 
A lso in Q B-b, p. 130.) 

2143 1952 46 n.d. T he statemanship of Quezon. Pelix P. Ledda. P^oR. v 3 
lnr n * 1 PP - 51 ' 78 •* '52. (Q B-b, pp. 11, 166.) 

2144 19,2 M n.d. The Quezonian concept of economics; Justin P, Ledda. 

2145 . ^ V - 3 ' n ' 1 PP. 5-7 * '52. (Q B-b, pp. n, 166.) 
214. 19,2 ,g n . d . The first time I met Quezon. P. Pedrosa.. PfiU^ 

V * ] "' n " 10 P- 19 .Iff '52. (o B-b, p. 166.) 
1952 n.d. President Quezon and vocational education. (Ed.) 

2 PJE V * n « 2 ' P. g 8 ■* '52. (q B-b, p. 166.) 

1952 S 6 Quezon, Roxas portraits on new CB notes. 

Whr2H. v. 8, pp. 1, 9 S 6 '52. (Q B-b, p. 57.) 
2148 1952 3 21 The Ylao. HCj^ W v. 7, pp. 6-10 il. n. 38, . 

S 21 '52. (IPPL-TNL, Y ' 5 2, p. 1 078 . Also in Q B-b, p. 57.) 
1 Five Quezon incidents. Jorge iiocobo. HTjmes v. 8, 
p. 7 N 1 '52. (Q 3-b, pp. 6, 78.) 
-IjO 1952 H 22 Quezon and judicial criticisms. Rodrigo Q. Lim. PIP 

v - 43, pp. 18, 19, 20 N 22 '52. (Q B-b, pp . llf 1U J 

2151 1952 n.d.m. Manuel L. Quezon. Teodoro E. Ganer & others. 

Quezon City, n.pub. 1952 (Q B-b, p. 9.) 

2152 1952 n.d.ra. Quezon memorial book... originally prepared undei the 

auspices of the committee in charge of the reception and 
burial of the mortal remains of President Manuel L. Qu* SO n. 
Filemon Poblador, comp. & ed. Manila, Quezon Memorial 
Committee, 1952. (Q B-b, p. 16.) 



- 895 _ 



III - 320 



2153 1953 F ,1- Tl* Quezon ruins. Marie Rose EcCraig. ENsaa .mag. 

v« 8, pp. 8-9 11., n. 116 F 7 '53< (IPPL-TM,, Y '53, 
P. 970. .M S0 in Q B-b, pp. l 2 , 48.) 

2154 1953 Mr n.d. Quezon and religious instruction. F ide l Apostol. PJE 

v - 31, pp. 550, 551, 571 n. 9,' Mr '53. (IPPL-THL, 
Y *53, p. 969. -J-so in a B-b, pp. 5, 166.) 

2155 1953 Ag 1 /m interview with Manuel Jr.; Paredes. PH mag. 

v. 101, P . 2, n. 358 ,*g 1 '53. (IPPL-TITL, Y '53, 
P. 970. Also in Q B-b, p. 130.) 

2156 1953 *g 9 Quezon relics. mag. , v. 3, pp. 7-10 11., 

n. 32, Ag 9 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 970. Also in • 
Q B-b, p. 53.) 

2157 1953 4s 9 The fighting president. Julio 3. Garcia. KCfo^. mag.. 

v. 8, p. 6, n. 32, Ag 9 '53. (IPPL-TITL, Y '53, p. 968. 
Also in Q T_b, pp. 9> 58.) 

2158 1953 .ig 9 ^e days of Quezon. HChjzoju mag. v. 8, pp. 1143 11. , 

n. 32, .V? 9 '53. (iPPL-TSL, Y '53, p. 968. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 53.) 

2159 1953 M 14 MLQ' S dream chapel at QI. Francisco Ortigas, Jr. 

PH v. 101, pp. 1, 6 n. 6, ..ig 14 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, 
p. 968.^ Also in Q B-b, pp. 14, 130.) 

2160 1953 Ag 14 Quezon's dream - a chapel. Francisco Ortigas, Jr. 

l£ua£s, v. 8, pp. 1, 4 n. 362 Ag 14 '53. (IPPL-TNL, 

Y '53, p. 970. Also in Q B-b, p. 78.) 

2161 1953 Ag 15 Quezon in Washington, D.C. Eduardo Lachica. FHiu ag ., 

v. 101, pp. 2-3, n. 7, Ag 15 '53, (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, 
p. 969. -ilso in Q B-b, p. 130.) 

2162 1953 Ag 15 Quezon and Osmeha. ?heir last battle. Frederick Marquardt 

PFP v. 44, pp. 25, 26, 28 n. 33, '>g 15 '53. (iPPL-TZTL, 

Y '53, p. 969. Also in Q 3-b, n P . .12, 114.) 

2163 1953 Ag 15 Stories of Quezon. Anante F. Paredes. PFP v. 4<l, pp. 32, 

" /' -r 77 ' ~ 1 ( _ >:7 , r->r\ 



- ^ • — — ■ 



n. 36i A3 16 '53. (IPPL-TuL, Y '53, p. 968. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 78.) 

2165 I953 Ag 16 The Quezon legend. Ingel del Bias. Freedom, v. 4, 

pp. 7-8, 10 n. 25, Ag 16 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 969. 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 6, 166.) 

2166 1953 jjg 1? Let's help make MLQ's dreaias cone true - Ortidas, P. 

ENsmv. 8, p. 3, n. 278, Ag 17 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, 
p. 968. Also in Q 3-b, pp. 14, 48.) 



III.- 32\ 

-896 _ 

.-67 1953 A« 18 Noughts in wartime. ESfflia v. 8, p. 5, n. 279 Ag 18 '5^ • 

:l68 1953 Ag 19 Isagawa. ang simulain ni IILQ. T^. v . 1, pp. l, 2 
f .1g 19 '53c (q B-b, p. 7.) 

2169 1953 A -g 19 Cite Quezon, man of people: nation remembers patriot. 

jffltaas v. 5, pp. 1, 12 n. 94, .ig 19 '53, (IPPL-TNL, 
Y '53, p. 967. Also in Q B-b, p. 26.) 

2170 1953 Ag 19 Gugunitain ngayon si Quezon. BB v. 9, pp. 1, 8 por. 

n. 156 Ag 19 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 968. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 24.) 

?171 1953 Ag 19 MLQ (Editorial) BB v. 9, p . 4, n . 156 /<g lg .53, 

(IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 968. Also in Q B-b, p. 24.) 

2172 1953 Ag 19 Manuel Luis Quezon. (Editorial) PH v. 101, p. 4, 

n. 11 Ag 19 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 968. Also in Q 3_ b; 
p. 130.) 

2.173 1953 Ag 19 Important dates in life of Manuel L. Quezon, ffiCjjnasu 

v. 9, Po 8, n. 2 Ag 19 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 968. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 78.) 

2174 1953 Ag 19 Mark Quezon's 75th birthday. ENews v. 8, p. 8, n. 280, 

Ag 19 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, P. 968. Also in Q B-b, p. A*. 

2175 1953 Ag 19 N n sa kabotaan pa si Quezon ay may pagmamalasakit na sa 

kanyang bayan. Jose P. Santos. |B v, 9, pp. 2-3 por., 
n. 156, Ag 19 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 968. .Also in 
Q B-b, pp. 19, 24.) 

2176 1953 Ag 19 Quezon lives in our memory. Arsenio H. Lacson. 

v. 9, pp. 8-9, n. 2 Ag 19 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 969 - 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 10, 78.) 

2177 1953 Ag 19 P.I. marks Quezon's 75th birthday. ffl&xxax.v. 5, p. 7 

n. 94 Ag 19 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 969. -Uso in 
Q B-b, p. 26.) 

says 

? 78 1953 Ag 19 Principles of Quezon disregarded £*y N.P. Ejiewjs. v. 8, 

pp. 2, 19 n. 280 Ag 19 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 969. 

Also in Q B-b, p. 48.) 
2179 1953 Ag l.Q v^^r hi^c opposition. ENcjjs. v. 8, pp. 2, 19 n. 280 

Ag 19 '53. (IPPL-TPTL, Y '53, p. 969- Also in Q B-b, p. 48cC 
-.'.80 1953 Ag 19 Nation will honor today late Quezon. MChjm. v. 9, 

pp. 1, 3 n. 121 Jig 19 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 969. 

Also in Q B-b, p. 58.) 
2.1.81 1953 Ag 19 Quezon remembered in nationwide fete today. MC hj?pq t , v. 9, 

p. 7, n. 121 Ag 19 *53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 970. Also 

in Q B-b, p. 58.) 



SIJ-12.7 



III - 322 

- 697 - 



2182 1953 Ag 19 Tribute to President Qu^on. MJ&r^n, v . 9, p. 7 por. f 

n. 121 Ag 19 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 970. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 58.) 

2183 1953 Ag 19 Some interesting anecdotes about Quezon. Mioaa_v. 9, 

PP. 8, 11 n . 2 19 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 970. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 78.) 

2184 1953 Ag 20 Nation pays high tribute to Quuzon on his 75th birthday. 

M2S, v. 155, p. 1, n. 44, Ag 20 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, 
p. 968. /ilso in Q B_ b> p> ^4.) 

2185 1953 Ag 20 May budhi si Quezon sa bayan, ani Recto. MChroq. v. 9, 

PP. 1, 6 n. 157, Ag 20 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y » 53, p. 968. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 58.) 

2186 1953 Ag 20 MP's urge EQ removal. WhZGtlL. v. 9, pp. 1, 4 n. 122, 

Ag 20 '53. (IPPL-TIJL, Y -53, p. 968. Also in Q B-b, p. 58.) 

2187 1953 Ag 20 The political philosophy of Manuel L. Quezon. MChj^a. 

v. 9, p. 2, n. 122 Ag 20 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 969. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 58.) 
' 2188 1953 Ag 20 The political philosophy of Manuel L. Quezon. Claro M. Route 

MTjjnes v. 9, p. 7 n . 3, Ag 20 '53. ( IPPL-THL, Y '53, 
p. 969. Also in Q B-b, p. 78.) 

2189 1953 Ag 20 The political philosophy of Manuel L. Quezon. Claro M. Roct- 

£lkaP-C& P. 5, n. 239, Y 7 Ag 20 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53.- 
p. 969. Also in Q B-b, pp. 17, 166.) 

2190 1953 Ag 20 The political philosophy of Manuel L. Quezon. Claro M. Roetc 

PH v. 101, pp. 5, 8 n. 12 /.g 20 '53. ( IPPL-THL, Y '53, 
p. 969.) 

2191 1953 Ag 20 Valdez recalls Quezon fight. ENews v. 8, p. 3, n. 281 

Ag 20 '53- ( IPPL-TNL, Y »53, p. 970. Also in Q B-b, p. A*.) 

2192 1953 Ag 20 Recto on Quezon. (Editorial) HOhron . v. 9, p. 4, n. 122 

Ag 20 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, p. 970. Also in Q B-b, p. 58.) 

2193 1953 Ag 20 Recto essays MLQ stature. MChro q. v. 9, pp. 1, 4 

n. 122, Ag 20 '53. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '53, P. 970. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 58.) 

2194 1953 Ag 20 Quezon paid high tribute on birthday. HTimes v . 9, 

pp. 1-2, n. 3 Ag 20 '53. ( IPPL-THL, Y '53, p. 970. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 78 J 

2195 1953 jig 20 Recto says historic taboo sa»ctioning no-reelection 

decree in original charter; little known fact in Quezon 
life. £11 v. 101, pp. 1, 10 n. 12, Ag 20 '53. ( IPPL- 
THL, Y '53, p. 970. Also in Q B-b, p. 130.) 

2196 1953 Ag 21 MLQ told Laurel to serve under Japs, Valdez reveals. 

MC hron. v. 9, pp.. 1, 2 n. 123 Ag 21 '53. (IPPL-TNL, 
Y '53, p. 968. Also in Q B-b, p. 58.) I 



- 898 - 



III - 323 



2197 1953 * 21 Quezon's last days recounted: General Valdez war cabinet 

member, gives Rotarians ultimate" details of leader's life. 
WiMUiv. 9, pp. 1, 7 n. 4, 21 '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, 
P. 970. Also in Q B-b, p. 79.) 

2198 1953 * 21 Sinariwa m( , nga hulinfi Sandflli ^ buhay ^ 

lv< 9 » P* 3 ' n - 158 " e 21 '53. (IPPL-THL-, Y '53, p. 
970. Uso in Q J3_b, p . 24.) 

2199 1953 Jg 24 Quezon as Nationalist. Rama ALaan. 'mBjWI t. 9, ' p. 4, 

n. 7 .Vr-24 '53. (iPPL-TIIL, Y '53, p. 96 9 . Also in Q B-b f 
PP. 5, 79.) 

2200 1953 ig n.d. Manuel Luis Quezon; a personal appraisal. Ramon O zae ta. 

PJlv. 32, pp. 70, 71, 131 n. 2, Ag '53. (IPPL-TNL, Y '53, 
p. 968. /JLso in Q B-b, pp. 15, 3.66.) 

2201 1953 0 10 Quezon, nanuel, American intervention. Teodoro M. Locsin, 

HZ v. 44, pp. 2, 58, 59 n. 41, 0 10 '53. (IPPL-TIJL, Y '53 
' p. 967. £Lso in Q B-b, pp. 11, 114,) 

2202 195 3 n.d.m. Quezon asked Roosevelt full liberty for P. I. before fall 

of Corrcgidor. ilDB v. 156, p. 3, n .' 57 (lP?L_Tr]L, Y '53, 
P. 969.) 

2203 1954 My 23 Quezon in plaster, ffln. 9, p. 12 My 23 '54. (lPP,UPL. 

v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2204 1954 /.g 2 Nation observes HLQ anniversary. FJ1 v. 102 pp. 1, 7 

n. 358 Ar 2 '54. (IPPL-TEL, Y '54, p. 1,609. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 130.) 

2205 1954 iig 14 Unforgettable character. S.Y. Orosa. SHrMag . p. 16, 

Ag 14 "54. (Q 3-b, p. 14.) 

2206 1954 jg 18 Nation to honor HLQ memory on 76th birthday tomorrow. 

HChrpn... v. 10, pp. 1, 14 n. 11 9 Ag 18 '54. (iPPL-TBL, ' 

Y '54, p. 1,609. ALso in Q B-b, p. 58.) 

2207 1954 Ag 19 Quezon legend: it grows with the years. Adoracion tf. 

Quirino. M PP. 4-5 -'g 19 '54. (Q 3-b, pp. 16, 166.) 

2208 1954 jig 19 * memento to Quezon's poverty. IfeE pp. 2-3 Ag 19 '54. 

(Q B-b, p. 166.) 

2209 1954 Ag 19 Immortal Quezon! an thoughts recalled. Jose Nav. Atienza. 

KChron. v. 10, pp. 6, 8 n. 120 Sg 19 '54. (IPFL-THL, 

Y '54, p. 1, 609. Isc in Q 3-b, pp. 5, 58.) 

2210 I954 Ag 19 fllipino nation celebrated Quezon Day today. Siadio 

Caliwara. HChr,Qn. v. 10, pp. 6, 8 n. 120 '<g 19 '54. 
(IPPL-TIL, Y '54, p. 1,609. Also in Q B-b, p. 58.) 

2211 1954 *g 19 Hags ays ay pays tribute to KLQ on birthday eve. KChrpfl. 

v. 10, pp. 1, 9 n. 120 »g 19 '54. (iPPL-TKL, Y "54, 
p. 1, 609. Also in a B-b, p. 58.) 



- 899 - 



III - 324 



2212 1954 /« 19 Nation marks Quezon's 76th birthday annivorsary. 

m v. 102, p. 2 n. 575 Ag 19 '54. (IPPL-TNL, Y '54, 
p. 1,609. Also in Q B-b, p. 130.) 

2213 1954 Ag 19 Quezon recalled today, MTj^ v . 10, pp. 1, 18 n. 2, 

Ag 19 '54. (iPPL-THL, Y '54, p. 1, 610. Also in Q B-b, 
P. 79.) 

2214 1954 Ag 19 T 0 observe Quezon Day. PH v. 102, pp. 1, 3 n . 375 

Ag 19 '54. (IPPL-TNL, Y '54, p. 1, 610. Also in Q B-b, 

p. 130.) 
P.I. 

2215 1954 Ag 20 needs Quezon's realistic thinking, asserts Hags ays ay. 

Malison., v. 10, pp. 1, 3 n . 121 Ag 20 '54, (IPPL-TNL, 
Y '54, p. 1,609. Also in Q B-b, p. 58.) 

2216 1954 Ag 20 Quezon saw the need for unity. Ramon Magsaysey. £H 

v. 102, p. 12 n. 376 Ag 20 '54. (IPPL-TEL, Y '54, 
p. 1,610. Also in Q B-b, pp. 12, 130.) 

2217 1954 Ag 20 RM pleads for unity. MXl^s v. 10, pp. 1, 3 n. 3, 

Ag 20 *54. (IPPL-Tltt, Y '54, p. 1,610. Also in Q B-b, 
p. 79.) 

2218 19 54 Ag 20 Stress HLQ plea anew. PH v. 102, pp. 1, 8 n. 376 

Ag 20 '54. (IPPL-TNL, Y '54, p. 1,610. Also in Q 3-b, 
p. 130.) 

2219 1954 Ag n.d. The business theories and principles of Manuel L. Quezon. 

Francisco Villanueva, Jr. Cam. n. 51, p. 5 Ag '54. 
(IPF.UFL v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2220 1954 0 21 3 around MLQ, Osmeila reunite at Leyte rites. MTj.ffles r 

v. 10, pp. 1, 3 n. 65 0 21 *54. (IPPL-TNL, Y '54, 
. p. 1,610. Also in Q B-b, p. 79.) 

2221 1954 N 28 RM to unvoil Quezon statue. MTimes v. 10, pp. 1, 12 

n. 103 N 28 '54. (iPPL-THL, Y '54, pp. 1,610. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 79.) 

2222 I954 D 11 Quezon and the church. Frederick S. Marquardt. 

PPP v. 45, PP. 34, 145 n. 50 D 11 '54. (lPPI>-TNL, Y '54, 
p. 1,609. Also in Q B-b, p. 114.) 

2223 1954 n.d.m. Quezon- father of our country, (in: Vital speeches 1954. 

pp. 169-172. ) (Q B-b, p. 15.) 

2224 I954 n.d.m. Quezon monument inaugural (official program) Lucena, 

Quezon, 1954. Souvenir Handbook. (Q B-b, p. 20.) 

2225 1954 n.d.m. MLQ story. PBP p. 19 (Q B-b, p. 166.) 

2226 1954 ) Souvenir program; birthday anniversary celebration in 

\ n.d.m, \ 

; honor of the late President Manuel L. Quezon. 1954, 1957. 

(Q B-b, p. 20.) 



...iX-.'.2> 



Ill - 325 

_ 900 _ 



2227 1955 F 28 The strong man" of Philippine politics; McNutt meets the 

Filipinos. Pedro Padilla. MlgfigB. v. 4, pp. 3-6, 1st 
inst., n. 30, F 28 '55. (iPFL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,995. Also 
in Q B-b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2228 1955 Mr 6 MakasayKayang kasulatan. BBmn.T. v. 10, p. 18 n. 352, 

Hr 6 -55. (IPPL-TIFL, Y '55, p. 2,992. Also in Q B-b, 
p. 24.) 

2229 1955 Mr 14 The strong man of Philippine politics. Pedro Padilla. 

SliLL^eje v. 4, pp. 3-5 n. 40, Mr 14 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, 
Y '55, p. 2,995. Also in Q B-b, p. 15, 167.) 

2230 1955 Hr 30 Naghihintay si Quezon. BB v. 11, p. 4, n. 15, Mr 30 '55. 

(IPPL-TNL, y '55. p . 2,992. "iso in Q 3-b, p. 24.) 

2231 1955 Ap 11 The strong man of Philippine politics: Manuel L. Quezon. 

Pedro Padilla. Bullsevc p. 3 cont. n. 44, Ap 11 '55. 
(IPPL-TNL, Y -55, p . 2,995. Also in Q B-b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2232 1955 Ap . 18 The strong man of Philippine politics: Manuel L. Quezon. 

MLLj&ye. v. 4, p. 36, n. 45 -*p 18 '55. 2nd inst. ( IPPL- 
TNL, Y '55, p. 2,995. Also in Q B-b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2233 1955 Ap 25 The strong man of Philippine politics: the star and the 

satellites. Pedro Padilla. 3u,llpeyq v. 4, pp. 3-5 
n. 46, Ap 25 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,996. Also in 
Q. B-b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2234 1955 Ky 9 The strong man of Philippine politics; Paredes and a 

comedy^ Pedro Padilla. BuLLs^ye. v. 4, p. 3 n. 48, 
My 9 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,996. .Uso in Q B-b, 
pp. 15, 167.) 

2235 1955 My 16 The strong man of Philippine politics} National defense 
* and the army. Pedro Padilla. 3uJJ^e.y.e v. 4, pp. 3-6 

n. 49, My 16 '55. ( IPPL-TNL , Y '55, p. 2,995. Also in 
Q 3-b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2236 1955 My 23 The strong man of Philippine politics; National defense 

and the army. Pedro Padilla. BuJUaeye v. 4, p. 3 cont. 
n. 50 My 23 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,995. -Uso in 
Q B-b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2237 1955 My 30 The strong man of Philippine politics. Pedro Padilla. 

Bu^seve v. 6, p. 3, n. 51 My 30 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, 
p. 2,995. Also in Q B-b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2238 1955 J e 27 The strong man of Philippine politics; The Japanese 

problem. BuJLiasys. v. 5, pp. 3-7 n. 3, Je 27 '55. 
(IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,995. Also in Q B-b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2239 1955 Jl 14 Paghamak sa mga aral ng nasirang Quezon: tumututol ang 

gurong Lope K. Santos. £&L. v. 1, p. 1, n. 37 Jl 14 '55. 
(IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,993. Also in Q B-b, pp. 19, 53.) 



<>ii-i&. 



III - 526 

-901 - 



2240 1955 Jl 16 Protestants do grave injustice to Quezon; misinterpret 

message vetoing religion bill. jfenSinaJ,. v. 6, pp. 1-2, 
n- 28, Jl 16 -55. (iPPL-TNL, Y ' 55 , p. 2,993. Also in 
°- B-b, p. 167.) 

2241 1955 Jl 17 Forgotten political lessons. Vicente Albano Pacis. MT%e. 

mag. v. 10, pp. 10-13, n. 334, Jl 17 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, 
Y '55, p. 2,991. Also in Q B-b, pp. 15, 79.) 

2242 1955 Jl 30 Quezon and atom bomb anniversary in Aigust. (Editorial) 

PJL sup. v. 105, p. 6, n. 356 Jl 30 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y ! 55 
P. 2,993. .Also in Q B-b, p. 130.) 

2243 1955 Jl n.d. Manuel L. Queson. Pablo Ft. Cuasay. F. T. v. 2, pp. 77- 

80, n. 32, Jl '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y ' 55, p. 2,992. .Also in 
Q B-b, pp. 7, 167.) 

2244 1955 Jl n.d. The star of Baler. Antonio L. Orilla. F.T_._ v; 10, 

pp. 77-78, n. 2 Jl '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,995. 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 14, 167.) 

2245 1955 Zg 1 Pararangalan ni RM ngayon si Quezon. BB v. 11, pp. 1-10 : 

n. 138, Jig 1 '55. (IPPL-THL, Y '55, p.- 2,993. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 24.) 

2246 1955 Ag 1 The strong man of Philippine politics. Pedro Padilla. 

The coalition of parties. Bu llseve v. 5, pp. 3-7, n. 9, 
Ag 1 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,995. Also in Q B-b, pp. 
15, 167.) 

2247 1955 Ag 3 /,p a t na naging pangulo sa araw ni Manuel Quezon. BBpflg . 

v. 14, p. 8, n. 137 3 »55. ( IPPL-TNL , Y '55, p. 2,990 
Also in Q B-b, p. 24.) 

2248 1955 Ag 13 Mg a ugali at salita ng Pangulong Queaon. Kai« v. 1, 

pp. 1-4, n. 42, Ag 13 *55. ( IPPL-THL, Y '55, p. 2,992.) 
Also in Q B-b, p. 53.) 

2249 1955 Jig 13 Masons used Mac Arthur to got* Quezon veto, jjigjjtinel, 

v. 6, p. 1, n. 32 Ag 13 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,992. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 167.) 

2250 1955 Ag 13 The way we honor Quezon. Flor G. Morgan. PH v. 106, 

p. 10, n. 5, Ag 13 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,996. Also 
in Q B-b, pp. 14, 131.) 

2251 1955 Ag 14 Footnotes on Quezon. Ronaldo Lacson. MTjjqftfl v. 10, 

pp. 10-11 n. 362 Ag 14 '55. ( IPPL-THL, Y'55, p. 2,991. 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 10, 79.) 

2252 1955 jjg 14 Quezon. MOhron . v. 10, pp. 8-9, n. 33, Ag 14 '55. 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,993. Also in Q B-b, p. 59.) 

2253 1955 Ag 14 Quezon ''Ciay have been impetuous but he was also tender and 

generous. Natividad Almeda Lopez. Mime a mag. v. 10, p. 1 



Ill - 327 

- 908 - 

n. 362, % 14 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, T '55, p. 2,994. Also in 
... Q.B-b, p. 79.) 

2254 1955 Ag 14 "That man nearer vacillated; he knew no superior, but he 

also welcomed council." Claro M. Recto. Mima mag, 
v. 10, p. 10, n. 362 Ag H '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 
2,996. Also in Q B-b, pp. 17, 79.) 
2,155 1955 Ag 15 The strong man of Philippine politics; by social justice. 

... Pedro r adilla. Blillaeve v. 5, pp . 3.7, n . llf (j g 15 > 55 . 
: ' . (IPPUTNL, Y '55, p. 2,996. Also in Q B-b, pp. 15, 167.) 
"256 1955 Ag 16 Ang kadakilaan ni Quezon. Dr. Ilariano Santos. K&U v. 2. 

p. 2, Ag 16 '55. (Q 3-b, p. 53.) 

2257 1955 Ag 18 'Quezon as a family man. VJHI pp. 4-5, Ag 18 *55. (Q B-b. 

p. 167.) 

2258 1955 Ag 18 Gugunitain bukas si MLQ sa 77 kaarawan. JJak. v. 2, pp. 1- 

n. 11, 18 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,991. . Also in 
Q B-b, p. 54.) 

2259 1955 Ag 18 Ilang karangalang-asal ni Manuel L. Quezon. Lope K» Santos 

Kai. v. 1, pp. 1-3, m 42, Ag 18 '55. (iPPL-TNL/Y '55, 
p. 2,992. Aiso in Q B-b, pp. 19, 53.) 

2260 1955 Ag 18 Nation starts celebration of Quezon's 78th birthday. 

ILQtaan. v. 11, P . 3, n . 119, Ag 18 '55. (ippl-tnl, y '55, 

p. 2,993. Also in Q 3-b, p. 59.) 

2261 1955 Ag 18 Si M. L. Quezon; ang ama ng wikang pambansa. Sal. v. 1, 

pp. 1-2, n. 42, Ag 18 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,994. 
Also in Q 3-b, p. 53.) 

2262 1955 ■ Ag 18 Quezon recalled for "little things". MTimea v . 11, 

pp. 1-8, n. 1 Ag 18 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,994. . 
Also in Q B-b, p. 79.) ' 

2263 1955 Ag 19 Ama si Quezon ng demokrasya natin, sabi ni RM. 

Mak- v. 2, pp. 1, 6 n. 146, ig 19 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, 
p. 2,990. Also in Q 3-b, p. 54.) 

2264 1955 Ag 19 Araw ngayon ni MLQ. Nagpuri ang Pangulo. BB v. 11, 

pp. 1-10, n. 155, Ag 19 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p.' 2,990. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 24.) 

2265 1955 Ag 19 Foreign investment must be treated with equality and 

justice. Manuel L. Quezon. PEcoRev . v. 2, pp. 25, 41, 43. 
n. 1, Ag 19 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,991. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 167. 

2266 1955 ;.g 19 Code of citizenship and ethics. MT ^es , v. 11, p. 9, 

n. 2, Ag 19 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,991. Also in 
Q 3-b, p. 79.) 

2267 1955 Ag 19 Honor Quezon today. The Malacafian todays; RM leads in 



■1?'' 



- 905 - 



III - 328 



paying homage to departed National leader* MTi mea v; 11, 
PP. 1-0, n. 2, Ag 19 '55. (iPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,991. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 79.) 

2268 1955 Ag 19 Ceneral Valdes pays Quezon tribute in talk at U.P. 

ISifflgja v. 11, p P , i_2, n . 2, Ag 19 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55. 
P- 2,991. .Also in Q R-b f p. 79.) 

2269 1955 Ag 19 Father of . ; democracy; our heritage'from Quezon. ENewa. 

v. 10, p. 7, n . 308, Jig 19 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p, 2,991* 
Also in Q B-b, p. 49.) 

2270 1955 Ag 19 Mags ays ay heads government officials in extolling Quezon 

traits. HStaaa. v. ll, p. 9, n . 120 Jig 19 '55. (iFPL- 
TIIL, Y '55, p. 2,992. Also in q B-b, p. 59,) 

2271 1955 Ag 19 Magsaysay leads in marking Quezon Day. JlChxoja. v. 11, 

PP. 1-5, n. 120 Ag 19 '55. (iPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,992.) 
AI30 in Q B-b, p. 59.) 

2272 1955 Ag 19 Kagsaysay on Quezon. Ramon Magsaysay. l^SiMiS. v. 11, 

p. 8, n. 3, .V: 19 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,992. Also 
in Q B-b, p. 79.) 

2273 1955 Ag 19 The legacy of Quezon. (Editorial) £H v. 106, p. 4, n. 11 

Ag 19 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,992. Also in Q B-b, 
p. 131.) 

2274 1955 Ag 19 Nation observe Quezon's 77th birthday today. MCiu^n. 

v. 11, pp. 8-18, n. 120, Ag 19 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y 
p. 2,992. ,'lso in Q 3-b, p. 59.) 

2275 1955 Ag 19 P. I. past presidents rally nation to Quezon concepts 

PH v. 106, pp. 1-4, n. 11, 19 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y 
p. 2,993. Also in Q B-b, p. 131.) 

2276 1955 Jig 19 Quezon and Nationalism. (Editorial) MPilEaiU. v. 11, 

p. 4, n, 120 Ag 19 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,993. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 59.) 

2277 1955 Ag 19 Quezon; Ama ng demokrasya sa Pilipinas; Eulogio German 

Cruz. M. v. 11, p. 6, n. 155, Ag 19 '55. (IPPL-TNL, 
Y '55, p- 2,993. Also in Q B-b, pp. 7, 24.) 
2270 1955 Jig 19 Si Quezon at ang pangasiwaan ni RK. (Editorial) 

Hah, v. 2, p. 6, n. 146, Ag 19 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, 
p. 2,994. .Iso in Q B-b, p. 54.) 

2279 1955 Jig 19 Star of Baler remembered as man who shaped the destiny of 

Philippines. Eladio Caliwara. M Chron . v. 11, p. 9» n. 120 
Ag 19 "55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,995. Also in Q B-b, 
pp. 7, 59.) 

2280 1955 Ag 19 A striking similarity. Manuel Turingan. MTi»2& v. 11, 

pp. 9-11, n. 2, Ag 19 *55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,995. 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 20, 79.) 



- 904 - 



III - 329 



2281 1955 Ag 20 *n open letter to Manuel Won. MChro m _ v. 11, pp. 1, 5 

n. 121 Ag 20 '55.-dEPt.THL, Y '55, p. 2,990. Also in 
Q 3-b, p. 59.) 

2282 1955 Ag 20 Elaborate rites mark Quezon Day celebration. MChron . 

v. 11, pp. 1-2, n. 121 Ag 20 '55. (iPPL-TICL, Y '55, 
P« 2,991. Al so i n q &-b, p. 59.) 

2283 1955 Ag 20 Hay ibinunyag si Recto kay Quezon. BB v . n, pp . i_ 8 , 

n. 156, Ag 20 '55. (IPPL-TML, Y '55, p. 2,992. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 24.) 

2284 1955 Ag 20 Pangulong Quezon. Mab. mag. v. 2, p. 2, n. 147 Ag 20 '55- 

(IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,994. Also in Q B-b, p. 54.) 

2285 1955 Ag 20 Recto writes to Quezon. M^'imes, v. 11, pp. 1-8, n. 3, 

Ag 20 '55. (iFPL-TKL, Y '55, p. 2,994. Also in Q B-b, 
p. 80.) 

2286 1955 Ag 20 Where my loyalty to my country begins. (Editorial) 

PH sup. v. 106, p. 6 Ag 20 '55. (JlPPL-TNL, Y '55, 
p. 2,996. Also in Q B-b, p. 131.) 

2287 ■ 1955 Ag 21 Ang kadakilaan ni Manuel L. Quezon. Lope K. Santos. 

BB tttflS. v. 11, pp. 15, 19 por. /ig 21 '55. (IPPL-T^TL, 
Y '55, p. 2,990. Also in Q B-b, pp. 19, 24.) 

2288 1955 Ag 21 Si Quezon at ang tuberkulosis. BB mag. v. 11, pp. 2-3 

n. 157, Ag 21 '55. (IPPL-TIIL, Y '55, p. 2,994. Also 
in Q B-b, p. 24.) 

2289 1955 Ag 22 The strong man of Philippine politics. Bullseve v. 5, 

pp. 3-7, n. 12, Ag 22 '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,396. 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2290 1955 Ag 25 Bukas na liham ni Senador Claro M. Recto sa naaa kabilang 

buhay, Pangulong Manuel Quezon. Kal. v. 1, pp. 1-4, 
n. 43, Ag 25 '55. (iPPL-TH, Y '55, p. 2,990. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 53. 

2291 1955 /<g n.d. The business theories and principles of Manuel L. Quezon; 

his views on agriculture, commerce and industry. Francisco 
Villanueva, Jr. F.T. v. 10, pp. 166-168, 178, n. 3, 
Ag '55. (IPPL-THL, Y '55, p. 2,991. Also in Q B-b, p 8 . 21, 
166.) 

2292 1955 Ag n.d.. Honor Quezon today; the Malacarlan recalls MLQ's six 

year;? in palace. Vicente J. Guzman. NTimes v. 11, 
pp. 1-8, n. 2, Ag '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,991. - 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 9, 79.) 

2293 1955 Ag n.d. Immortal sparks of Broughts expounded by Quezon recalled. 

Jose N a v. Atienza. MChron . v. 11, pp. 8-18, n. 120 

Ag '55. dPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,992. Also in .Q B-b, p. 58.) 



Ill - 330 

- 905 - 



194 1955 Ag n.d. Pagd iriwang ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

P^apyaw na tala ng buhay ni HLQ. M^. v . 2 , p . 5> 

n. M6 Ag . 55 . (lE PUTIIL f Y '55, p. 2,992. Also in Q B-b, 
P. 54.) 



2296 1955 Ag n.d. Old friend recalls human side of late President. 

MTifflsa v. 2, pp. 1-2, n. 2, Ag '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, 
P. 2,993. Also in Q 3_b, p. 79.) 

2297 1955 Ag n.d. Quezon, father of Philippine Republic. B.H. Francia and 

. Pete G onf5ales. PEcoRev. v. 2, pp. 73, 74, 76, n. 1 
-fig *55, (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,994. Also in 0 3-b, pp. 
8, 167.) 

2298 1955 Ag n.d. Quezon as economist. Felix Z. Ledda. PEcoRev . v. 2, 

PP. 71-72, n. 1 fig "55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y »55, p. 2,994. 
Also in Q B_b, pp. 11, 167.) 

2299 1955 Ag n.d. Quezon and Philippine economy. Camilo Osias. PEcoR?v . 

v. 2, pp. 13, 14, 75, n. 1, ,'g '55. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, 
p. 2,994. Also in Q 3-b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2300 19 55 Ag n.d. Remember when? WUMag. v. 5, pp. 16-17, n. 16, tg '55. 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,994. ALso in Q B-b, p. 167.) 

2301 1955 S 1 Bukas na* liham ni Sonador Claro M. Recto sa nasa kabilang 

bull ay, Pangulong HLQ. K al . v. 1, pp. 1^3, con't. , 
n. 44 S 1 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,990. Uso in 
Q 3_b, p. 53.) 

2302 19 5 5 S 6 3ina Bonifacio, Quezon at Nagsaysay; mga demokratiko. 

. Honorio Lopez. BB v. 11, p. 3, n. 173 S 6 '55. ( IPPL- 
TNL, Y '55, p. 2, 994. Also in Q B_b, pp. 11, 24.) 

2303 1955 S 15 Bukas na liham ni Senador Claro M. Recto sa nasa 

kabilang buhay, Pangulong Manuel Quezon. K&A,. v. 1, 
pp. 1-2, n. 46, S 15 '55. (IPPL-TNL, Y '55, p. 2,991. 
Also in Q 3-b, p. 53.) 

2304 1955 S 24 Quezon's veto message. PF? v. 46, pp. 28, 52, n. 39, 

S 24 '55. (I?I ; L-?:"L, Y "55, p. 2, 99^. Also in IPP-UPL 
v. 10, p. 20-0. .'Jso in r. 3-b, p. 115.) 

2305 1955 0 7 Remember when? WHMng. v. 5, pp. 8-9, n. 23, 0 7 '55. 

(IPPL-TNL, Y "55, p. 2,994. Also in Q B-b, p. 167.) 

2306 1955 0-i> n.d. National leadership in the Phi lippine history. M.M.Kalaw. 

.liai. v. 4, pp. 14-17 n. 1 0-D '55. (IPP, IMS-BP v. 10, 
* p. 341. Also in Q B-b, pp. 10, 167.) 



- 906 - 



III - 351 



2307 1955 H 3 Pinapuri ni Kecto ang dapat parihin. Ang ut* at dsnda- 

ming hinahanap niya sa mgr. lider. Manuel L. Quezon. 
£al. v. 1, pp. i_4, n . 53, N 3 < 55t (ippl_tij I)> t r 55> 
P. 2,993. -lso in Q 3_ b , pp . 1?> 53< ) 
2508 1955 H 24 Book Week proclamation. We m v. 11, p. 8, n. 33, 

ff 24 '55. (IFPL-™*, y - 55> p . 3,990. Mso in Q B-b, 

2309 1955 D 9 Tutol si Ferrer na baguhin ang pagbabawal ni MLQ S a 

kawani. BB v. 11, pp . 1-2, n . 265, D 9 '55. (IFPL-TM, 
Y '55, p. 2,996. .a so in Q 3-b, p. 24.) 

2310 1955 n.d.m. A national language for the Filipinos; message, Manila 

Institute of National Language, 1955. (manuscript.) 
(Q B_b, p. 3.) 

2311 1955 n.d.m. Quezon code of ethics for citizenship. Sulpicio Guevara. 

(In: Your Community and You, cl955, pp. 261-268.) 
(Q B-b, p. 9.) 

2312 1955 n.d.m. The strong man of Philippine politics: Manuel L. Quezo:;. 

Pedro Padilla. (IPPL-TIIL, Y '55, p. 2,995. Also in 
Q B_b, pp. 15, 167.) 

2313 1955 ■ Kr- 29 Quezon memorial decors displayed at Manila Hotel. 

KTiiaaa v . 11, P . is Mr 29 '56. (q 3-b, p. so.) 

2314 1956 My 8 Seriously speaking. I. P. Soliongco. MGhron . Yr 12 

n. 15, p. 4 My 8 "56. (q B-b, pp. 19, 59.) 

2315 1956 Je 13 Aguinaldo gets Quezon Award. II£i I roe& v. 11, p. 2, 

Je 13 '56. (Q B-b, p. 80.) 

2316 1956 Jl 6 Mayayari nang bantayog ni HLQ. Ma p , v. 2, pp. 1, 7 

Jl 6 '56. (Q B-b, p. 55.) 

2317 1956 Jl n.d. Manuel L. Quezon. P.N. Nicasio. PJ£ v. 35; n. 2, p. 117, 

Jl '56. (l??,IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 341. Mao in Q B-b, pp. 14, 
167.) 

2318 1956 Jl ) , President Quezon and the land for the landless polioy» 

, ui.d. 

^ '' Zoilo Castrillo. Lands Jour, v. 8, n. 4, pp. 35, 89 

Jl_,\g '56. (IPP,IDR3-UP, v. 10, p. 341. Also in Q B-b, 
pp. 7, 167.) 

2319 1956 Ag 2 Kamatayan ni Manuel L. Quezon. (Editorial) 

BB v. 12, p. 4 Ag 2 '56. (Q B-b, p. 25.) 

2320 1956 Ag 2 Libraries, bureau oppose transfer MLQ documents. 

HChron. v. 12, p. 12, Ag 2 *56. (Q B-b, p. 59.) 

2321 1956 Ag 4 Quezon City to mark Quezon's natal day, Aug. 19 with pomp. 

PH v. 107, p. 3, 4 '56. (Q B-b, p. 131.) 

2322 1956 Ag 7 MLQ, catholic, RIP. Francisco Avcndano. 

MTimes v . 11, n. 355, p. 4 Ag 7 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 6, 80.) 



Ill - 332 

- 907 - 

* 

2323 1956 Ag 9 Quezon the man. M p. 6, Ag 9 '56. (IPP,IDRS-UP, 

v. 10, p. 209.) 

2324 1956 Ag 10 Quezon as student and man: anecdotes about the Filipino 

leader... Basilio J. Valdez, ffljjasa v. 11, n. 358, 

pp. 1, 15 Ag 10 '56. (Q 3-b, pp. 21, 80.) 
2-525 1956 Ag 12 The town that Quezon loved. Natividad Lapuz. MEto mag. 

v. 11, n. 52, pp. 24-25 Ag 12 *56. (Q B-b, pp. 11, 80.) 
2326 1956 Ag 12 Quezon, the leader- - a tribute. Esteban Silva Carag. ^ 

MTime. v. 17, n. 360, p. 4 Ag 12 '56. (Q -B-b, pp. 7, 80./ 
-327 1956 Ag 12 Quozon-Suraulong controversy on bases. MChjaai*. M ag- 

v. 11, pp. 16-17 Ag 12 '56. (IPP,IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 209.) 

2328 1956 Ag 14 Quezon described as man of culture; his effort to create 

museum cited. Eduardo Quisumbing. PH v. 108, n. 11, 
p. 7, Ag 14 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 17, 131.) 

2329 1956 Ag 15 .How Quezon disposed of Soviet Russia, Vicente. F. Barrancq. 

jfcgca. v. 9, n. 21, pp. 10-11 Ag 15 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 6, 52. 
2530 1956 Ag 15 Quezon loved children. Juanito V. Jabat. 

I«J X3a v. 19, n. 21, p. 11, Ag 15 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 10, 52., 
2351 1956 Ag 15 Our ways of remembering Quezon. Flor C. Koran. K-Grfl, . 

v. 9, n. 21, pp. 6-7, A; 15 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 14, 52.) 
?532 1956 Ag 15 Ang kadakilaan ni Quezon. Ponciano Salem. BB mag. 

v. 2, n. 155, PP. 16, 19 ig 15 '56. (Q B-b, p. 19.) 
2335 1956 5e 15 Monday, not legal holiday, says Palace. 

PH v. 108, pp. 1, 2 Ag 15 '56. (Q B-b, p. 151.) 
2334 1956 Ag 16 President Manuel L. Quezon, advocate of social justice. 

Z.M. Galang. Kai. v. 2, n. 41, pp. 9-10,. Ag 16 '56. 

(Q B-b, pp. 8, 54.) 
2555 1956 Ag 16 Quezon, man of destiny. Agustin H. L a chica. 

Kai. v. 2, n. 41, p. 12 Ag 16 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 10, 54.) ■ 
2356 1956 /ig 16 Si Quezon, bayani ng kalayaan. Felix Manalo. 

Kai. v. 2, n. 41, p. 6 .'g 16 '56. (Q B-b,- pp. 12, 54.) 
2557 1956 Ag 16 Dakilang pamana. Patricio E. del Rosario. 

K^i. v. 2, n. 41, p. 3, Ag 16 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 18, 53.) 
2338 1956 Ag 16 Ang kadakilaan ni Quezon. Harciano Santos. 

Kai. v. 2, n. 41, p. 2 «.g 16 '56. (Q B-b, p. 19.) 
2359 1956 Ag 16 Quezon on positive nationalism. Herminio Velarde, Sr. 

Kai. v. 2, n. 41, PP. 6-15 Ag 16 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 21, 54.) 

2540 1956 Ag 16 Pambihira ang kabayanihan ng Pangulong Quezon. Domingo de 

Vera. Kfli- v. 2, n. 41, p. 2- A, Ag 16 '56. (Q B-b, 
pp. 21, 54.) 

2541 1956 Ag 16 Kanino utang ang Republika ng Pilipinas? Pascual Manalo. 

K a j.. v. 2, pp. 7, 11 Ji« 16 '56. (Q B-b, p. 54.) 



III - 353 

- 906 - 



-sao 1Q56 Ag 16 Makasaysayaog sulat ng Pangulong Quezon. 
*** ml. v. 2, p. 1W /gl6'56. UB-b.p.54.) 

?<W3 1956 16 Kung buhay si Quezon. L.A.D . 

2545 1^. v. 2, pp. 4-6 % 16 '56. (q B-b, p. 54.) 

23M 1Q56 i* 16 My life - Manuel L. Quezon. 

254 jul. v. 2, pp. 8, 10 ^16'56. UH P. 54.) 

2^5 1956 Ag 16 Poggunita sa Pangulong Quezon. 

Kai. v. 2f p. 6 .»«16 "56. • (QB-b, p. 54.) 
2346 1956 ^ 16 Quezon equanimity and courage. 
" ^ KaL. ^ 2, P . 5 Agl6 '56. (HH P- 54.) 

?*,A7 1956 /ig 16 Panuntunan-Quezon ng Kagandahang asal. 

m . v. 2, n. 6-B * 16 '56. (Q B-b, p. 54.) . 

2348 1956 * 16 Quezon the man. ito v. 12, p. 7 Zg 16 '56. (Q B-b, 

p. 59.) 

2349 1956 17 Pananghal na Quezoniana sa Quezon City. 

Hab. v. 2, PP . 1, 5 *17 '56. (Q B-b, p. 55.) 
2^50 1956 ig 17 Stories people tell about Quezon. 

"^•^ s ,_ w oi ^ 17 "ifi fi B-b, p. 168, , 

Wliaj:. v. 6, n. 16, pp. 20, 21 17 5U V ■* » ^ 

-351 1956 Vs 18 Pararangalnn si Quezon sa Lingayen, Pangasinan.^ 

iiaJi., v. 2a, pp. 1, 3 -v; 18 '56. (Q *-b, P . 55.) 

.352 1956 ^ 18 Gunita bukas ng buong bansa sa araw ni IILQ. 

riab. v. 2a, pp. 1, 3 :*18 '56. (Q B-b, P . 55.) 

0353 1956 Ag 18 Celebration of MLQ's 78th birthday set to start today. 

Bto, v. 12. pp. 1. 12 '56. (Q B-b, p. 

2354 1956 Jig 18 Quezon and Mags ays ay. J. ^opacio Uueno. 

H^v. 11, P. 4, .tel8 '56. (QB-b, p. 80.) 

2355 1956 lie 18 Quezon Day program on today. 

v. 11, pp. 1, 15 * 18 '56. (a B-b, P. 80.) 

clock. ,2fc v. 8, n. 15, * 18 '56. (UP.iraS-nP, 
V. 10, p. 209.) 

2557 1956 -.F 18 Judionce Kith the president. J. 0. Dionisio. 

OUIK. v. 8, pp. 12, 13 * 18 '56. (IPP,~, 
v. 10, p. 209. 'Iso in Q B-b, p. 26.) 

2358 1956 18 Twice-told tales about Quezon. I. Garcia. 

PHHflgj v. 107, n. 12, Ag 18 '56. (IFP,IDRS-UP, v. 10, 

p. 209. Also in Q B ~ b » p ' 

2359 1956 /g 18 Quezon's Kaledian farm. v. 107, n. 10 Ag 18 '56.- 

(IPP,IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 209. Also in Q B-b, p. 131.) 

2360 1956 Ag 18 Quezon and Arayat's golden years. L. R. Parungao, Jr. 

PPP v. 47, n. 24, Ag 18 '56. (IPP, ™^™> *>> P- 209 ' 



III - 334 

- 909 - 

2361 1956 Ag 18 ) Fame and fortune; anecdotes of famous men. Zacarias Imguid 

ISiwaajne*. v. 12, n. 14, p. 17, Ag 18-19 '56. (Q B-b, 
pp. 14, 80.) 

2362 1956 Ag 19 Tribute to President Quezon. Ricardo C. F a vis. 

E£lm& v. 12, n. 1, p. 4 Ag 19 »56. (Q B-b, pp. 8, 80.) 

2363 1956 Ag 1 9 Manuel L. Quezon. Edilberto Psrulan. 

BB v. 12, n. 155, p. 4, Ag 19 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 15, 25.) 

2364 1956 Ag 19 Quezon's leadership. N. de Ramos. 

j£EiHte v. 12, n. 1, P . 4 19 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 17, 80.) 

2365 1956 Ag 19 Hindi kalian man pinababayaan ng Diyos ang isang bayang 

surnusunod sa Kanya. BB v. 12, p. 2, Ag 19 '56. (o 3-b, 
p. 24.) 

2366 1956 Ag 19 3 a tas ng kagitingan at kagandahang-asal ng Pangulong Quezon. 

— ma ^- v - -2, p. 16 ,'g 19 -56. (0 B-b, p. 25.) 

2367 1956 Ag 1 9 Hindi naibagsnk ng kalaban si Quezon. E. German Cruz. 

BB v. 12, n. 155, p. 2 .*« 19 '56. (0 B-b, pp. 7, 25.) 

2368 1956 Ag 19 Why have TB? Quezon would have said this. Carmelo P. J a cintc 

v. 12, n. 1, p. 10 Ag 19 '56. (o B-b, pp. 10, 80.) 

2369 1956 Ag 19 Kagdiriwang kay Quezon. 

BB v. 12, pp. 1, 3 Ag 19 '56. (q B-b, p. 25.) 

2370 1956 Ag 19 Quezon birthday marked today. 

M-Chron. v. 12, pp. 1, 13 ,ig 19 < 56 . ( Q B-b, p. 59.) 

2371 1956 Ag 19 Quezon Day observed today; Magsaysay slated as guest 

speaker at QC ceremonies. MCj^on^ v. 12, p. 2 
Ag 19 '56. (Q B-b, p. 59.) 

2372 1956 Ag 19 VP pays homage to HLQ in speech at Columbian. 

MTimeiLv. 12f pp . 1, 8 Ag 19 . 56> (q B _ b> p> qqJ 

2373 1956 .' € 19 A realistic foreign -policy for the Philippines. Manuel L. 

Quezon. MTia«L.v. 12, pp. 9-11 Ag 19 '56. (Q B-b, p. 30.) 

2374 1956 Ag 19 Quezon paid high tribute; B u i a can Rotarians told of leadors 

virtues and deeds. MTimea v. 12, p. 3 Ag 19 '56. 
(Q B-b, p. 80.) 

2375 1956 Ag 19 Hation marks Quezon Day. 

lEJOflfl.,v. 12, pp. 1, 8 Ag 19 '56. (Q B-b, p. 80.) 

2376 1956 Ag 19 Quezon in the rock. Pr, Francisco Vyendano. 

KEaaaa v . 12, P . 4, <g 19 '56. (q B-b, p. 80.) 

2377 1956 Ag 19 w e remember Quezon. (Editorial) 

PH v. 108, p. 4 Ag 19 '56. (Q B-b, p. 131.) 

2378 1956 Ag 19 IT a tion observes Quezon's 78th birthday anniversary today; 

K agsaysay to deliver main address. PH v. 108, p. 6 
Ag 19 '56. (Q B-b, p. 131.) 

2379 1956 Ag 19 Garcia urges rededication to principles of Quezon. 

PH v. 108, p. 16 Ag 19 '56. (Q B-b, p. 131.) 



- 910 - 



III - 335 




2380 1956 Ag 19 Highlights in life of late president. 

PH v. 108, p. 6 Ag 19 '56. (Q B-b, p. 131.) 
2331 1956 Ag 19 Kadakilaan ni Quezon. P. Salen. 33 mag. pp. 16-19, 

Ag 19 '56. (lPP,IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 209. Also in Q B-b, p. 

2382 1956 Ag 19 Pangulong Quezon at a ng wikang Pilipino. BB mag. pp. &-£ 

Ag 19 '56. (lPP,IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 209. Also in Q B-b, p. J 

2383 1956 Ag 20 Father of his country. Dominador E. Chipeco. KTjyjieji 

v. 12, n. 2, p. 4, Ag 20 '56. (Q 3_b, pp. 7, 81.) 
2334 1956 Ag 20 Rejoinder to Mr. Nueno. Hanuel Turingan. 

KTjmes v. 12, n. 2, p. 4 Ag 20 '56. (Q 3-b, pp. 20, 81.) 

2385 1956 Ag 20 Katarungan sa dukha-RM; naisasagawa ang bilin ni M} 

M v. 12, pp. 1, 3 As 20 '56. (Q B-b, p. 25.) 

2386 1956 Ag 20 HM bares HLQ wish for close P. I. -U.S. ties. 

ft pfaflfl . v. 12, pp. 1, 3 Ag 20 '56. (Q 3_b, p. 5S 

2387 1956 Ag 20 Adevoso exhorts youth to Quezonian doctrine. 

iSSinaa v. 12, p. 2, Ag 20 '56. (q 3-b, P . so.) 

2388 1956 Ag 20 Quezon- backed ties, say EM; President reads letter of late 

leader. Mimes, v. 12, pp. 1, 15 Ag 20 '56. (Q B-b, p. 81 

2389 1956 Ag 21 Itinanghal ng Kalihim Mevoso at Kong.Macapagal si Quezon. 

33 v. 12, p. 9, 21 '56. (Q 3-b, p. 25.) 

2390 I956 Ag 21 Binatikos ang mga banyegang nanghihimasok. 

BB v. 12, p. 4 "ix 21 '56. (Q B-b, p. 25.) 

2391 1956 Ag 21 Pinarangalan si Quezon 3a Halolos, Bulacan. 

MO., v. 2, p. 8, Ag 21 '56. (Q B-b, p. 55.) 

2392 1956 Ag 21 Library bureau contest 2 history societies' claim to Quezon 

papers. MDB v. 167, n, 49, p. 9 .Ag 21 '56. (Q 3-| 

2393 1956 Ag 23 Si Quezon at ang wika. Bdilberto Parulan. 

Kai. v. 2, n. 42, p. 8, Ag 23 '56. (Q B-b, pp. 

2394 1956 Ag 23 Abello cites Quezon qualities. 

lilifflgJI v. 12, p. 20 Ag 23 '56. (Q B-b, p. 81.) 

2395 1956 . Ag 24 Quezon: lawyer and politician. WWMqg . v. 6, n. 17, 

p. 46 Ag 24 '56. (0 3-b, p. 168.) 

2396 1956 Ag 25 Transfer of MLQ archives sought. 

MChroA. v. 12, p. 2 Ag 25 '56. • (Q B-b, p. 59.) 

2397 1956 Ag 26 Par ang al kay Quezon. 

BBMag. v. 12, pp. 4-5 Ag 26 '56. (Q B-b, p. 25.) 

2398 1956 Ag 27 Manuel L. Quezon; makabayan at tunay na lalaki, Liwavwav ,, 

v. 33, pp. 82-83 Ag 27 '56. (iPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 209.) 

2399 1956 Ag 30 To pursue social justice program. 

PH v. 108, pp. 1, 7 Ag 30 '56. < (Q B-b, p. 131.) 

2400 1956 Ag n.d. August anniversary issue. (Editorial) PEooRev . v. 3, 

n. 1, pp.. 72, 88 Ag *56. (iPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 341. 




•' ■■ in - 336 

- m - 

Also in q 3-b, p. 167.) 

2401 1956 n.d. The Que so ni an concept of economics. A. N. Ledda. 

PEpoRev. v. 3, n. 1, pp. 5-7 Ag '56. ( IPP, IDRS-UP', 
v. 10, p. 341. Also in Q B-b, p. 168.) 

2402 1956 Ag n.d. Quezon (Poem) A. Acacio. Fil. Teacher v. 11, n. 3, 

p. 144 Ag '56. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 341. Also in 
Q B-b, pp. 5, 168.) 

2403 1956 Ag n.d. The statemanship of Quezon. F. 2. Ledda. PBcoRe y,. v. 3, 

n. 1, pp. 51, 78, 80 Lg '56. (iPP, IDRS-UP, v; 10, 
p. 341. Also in Q B-b, p. 168.) 

2404 1956 S 1 HLQ documents willed to National Library. 

PH v. 108, p. 6 SI '56. (0 B-b, p. 131.) 

2405 1956 S 4 Quezon archives.... Porfecto Padilla. 

MTjjlfift v. 12, n. 17, p. 4 S 4 '56. (q B-b, pp. 15, 81.) 

2406 1956 N 24 Ouezon; men of destiny. Carlos Quirino. il. PJT v. 47 ; 

n. 44, pp. 20-23 N 10 ; n. 46, pp. 20-23, 54-55, N 17 ; 
n. 47, pp. 20-23 N 24 '56. (IPP, IDRS-UP , v. 10, pp. 
209, 512. ALso in Q B-b, pp. 17, 115.) 

2407 1956 D n.d. A challenge and an opportunity. Bufronio Melo -Hip. 

•Liiifit. v. 4, pp. 5-9, 3 '56. (Q B-b )( p. 5.) 

2408 1957 Ja 20 Fame and fortune. Zacarias Nuguid. STM. n. 12, p. 2fT~~ 

Ja 20 '57. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) : • 

2409 1957 My 21 Quezon called benevolent dictator by Sayre in book, t ; . ' 

KStafifl. v. 13, p. 3, n. 31, My 21 *57. ( IPPL-TNL, Tl*."jj?f 
p. 5,043. ALso in Q 3_b, pp. 59, 131.) 

2410 1957 My 22 Quezon was a benevolent dictator - Sayre. PH v. 108, 

p. 4, n. 287 My 22 '57- (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,044. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 131.) 

2411 1957 Jl 4 Quezon Cross given to RM. BNews v. 12, p. 5, n. 240 

Jl 4 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,046.) 

2412 1957 Jl 4 New honor paid to Mags ays ay. MDB v. 171, pp. 1, 31 

n. 4, Jl 4 '57. ( IPPL-TNL , Y '57, p. 5,046.) 

2413 1957 Jl 7 Colorful Quezon rites set Aug. 19. ENey a v . 12, p. 3, 

n. 401 Jl 7 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,040. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 49.) 

2414 1957 Jl'- 10 PI 24, 000 goal of .Quezon memorial fund. 

HTimes v. 12, p. 11 Jl 10 *57. (Q B-b, p. 81.) 

2415 1957 Jl 22 President to address HLQ rites. ENejjs. v. 12, p. 4, 

n. 255 Jl 22 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,042. Also 
in Q B-b, p. 49.) 

2416 1957 Ji 23 Cugunitain si Quezon sa Agosto 19. Hah*, v. 4, p. 3» 

n. 123 Jl 23 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,041. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 55.) 



, . Ill _ 337 

- 912 - 

2417 1957 Jl n.d. The character of M. L. Quezon. S. Alzona. 

PI.U n. 1, pp. 37-45 Jl '57. (Q B-b, pp. 5, 168.) 

2418 1957 Jl n.d. Quezon's place in Philippine history. Francisco Vil3 anuev.-v 

Jr. In the Gra^. Sc&^, v. 6, pp. 106-107, n. 2, Jl '57- 
( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,044. Jlso in Q 3-b, pp. 22, 168,) 
2<''-19 1957 Jl) n d Quezon and the merit system. A. del Rosario. port. 



Ag) 



LgndJour. v. 9, n. 4, pv 12 Jl-Ag '57. ( IPP , IDRS-UP , 
v. 10, p. 512.) 

2420 1957 Ag 1 Quezon exhibits opening set off fete. 

PH v. 38, p. 1 .ig 1 '57. (Q B-b, p. 132.) 

2421 1957 Ag 1 Araw ng pagyao ngayon ni f-ILQ. flab, v. 6, pp. 1, 7, n. 151 

Ag 1 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 2,040. Also in Q B-b, p. 55-) 

2422 1957 Ag 1 MLQ*s 13th death anniversary today. PH v. 108, p. 1 

. n. 338 Ag 1 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,041. .Also in 
Q 3-b, p. 131.) 

2423 1957 Ag 1 13th anniversary of Quezon's death marked today. ISJiron.- 

v. 13, p. 26, n. 103 Ag 1 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 

5,045. Also in Q B-b, p. 60.) 
P I 

2424 1957 A% 2 Garoi.a leads in *' x observance of Quezon death anniversary. 

MChrp.Tl,. v. 13, p. 5, n. 106, Ag 2 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y *57.. 
p. 5,040. Also in Q B-b, p. 60.) 

2425 1957 Ag 2 Paggunita kay Quezon. (Editorial) BB v. 13, p. 4, 

n. 140 Ag 2 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,042. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 25.) 

2426 1957 Ag 2 Quezon leadership. (Editorial) MChjcoa. v. 13, p. 4, 

n. 104, Ag 2 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,043- Also in 
Q B-b, p. 60.) 

2427 1957 Ag 4 Draft program for Ouezon Day. HDB v. 171, p. 19, n. 39, 

Ag 4 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,040. Also in Q B-b, p. 74.) 

2428 1957 Ag 11 Quezon birthday; President Garcia speaker at ceremony in 

QG; Que zonian exhibits at City Hall; OP. MTjjags. v. 12, 
p. 1, n. 173 Ag 11 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y »57, p. 5,043.) 
Also in Q B-b, p. 81.) 

2429 1957 Ag 12 CG, First Lady, participants in Quezon 79th birthday fete., 

ENews v. 12, p. 23, n. 273 Ag 12 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, 
p. 5,040. Also in Q 3_b, p. 49.) 

2430 1957 Ag 12 August 19, Quezon natal fete is public holiday. DM v. 9, 

p. 1, n. 88 Ag 12 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,040. Also 
in Q B_b, p. 26.) 

2431 1957 Ag 12 August 19, declared special holiday. ENejia v. 12, p. 23, 

n. 273 12 "57. (IPPL-THL, Y '57, p. 5,040. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 49.) 



- 915 - 



III - 3'iS 



?432 1957 % 12 Quezon Day rites slated. DM v. 9, v. 9> n. 88 Ag 12 '57 

(IPPL-TIJL, Y '57, p. 5,043. Also in Q B-b, p. 26.) 

2433 1957 Ag 13 Issue new appeal to Quezon Memorial Fund. 

DM v. 9, p. 1 •** 13 '57. (Q B-b, p. 26.) 

2434 1957 Ag 13 CG proclaims Aug. 19, official holiday, Mental health 

barrio officials seek. Ellews. v. 12, p. 5, n. 274 
As 13 *57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y "57, p. 5,040. Also in 0 B-b, 
p. 49.) 

2435 1957 Ag 13 Lingvo ng Wika. (Editorial) v. 4, p. 6, n. 141 

Ag 13 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p . 5 , 0 41. Also in Q 3-b, 
P. 55.) 

2436 1957 Ag 13 P'agkakaisa sa Pilipinas dahilsn sa sarillng wika. 

Mak. v. 4, pp. 1, 2 n. 141, /« 13 '57. (iPPL-TNL, Y >57 : 
p. 5,042. .Mao in 0 B*-b, p. 55.) 

2437 1957 Ag 13 Proclaims /ug. 19 special holiday. v. 171, p. l'6 

n.38 Ag 13 «57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,042. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 74.) 

2438 1957 /;g 13 I can now appeal to give to Quezon Memorial fund. 

DM v. 9, p. 1, n . 89 Ag 13 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,045- 

2439 1957 Ag 13 Quezon Day sohud. readied. M v. 9, p. 7, n . 89 

Ag 13 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,046.) 

2440 1957 Ag 13 Yulo speaker at Quezon dinner. MstXM. v. 12, p. 26, 

n. 274 \g 13 '57. (lPPL-TJ.iL, Y '57, v. 5,046.) 

2441 1957 Ag 14 AL1 set in QC for MLQ's 79th birthday anniversary. 

£H v. 108, p. 1 Ag 14 '57. (Q B-b, p. 131.) 

2442 1957 Ag 14 The famous temper (as a news cameraman saw it.) Manuel 0.. 

Alcantara. KGra. v. 10, pp. 6-7 n. 21 Ag 14 '57. 
(IPPL-TKL, Y -57, p. 5,040. .Also in Q 3-b, pp. 5, 52.) 

2443 1957 Ag 14 All's set in QC for MLQ's 77th birth anniversary. 

M v. 38, p. 1, n. 8, Ag 14 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,040 
Also in Q 3-b, p. 132.) 

2444 1957 Ag 14 Complete preparations for Quezon fete. Mejza v. 12, p. 6, ; 

n. 273 Ag 14 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y' '57, p. 5,040.) 

2445 1957 Ag 14 Quezon Boy plans complete; parade to highlight QC fete. . 

MQhxaa. v. 13, p. 7, n. 116 /ig 14 .57. (iPPL-TNL, Y '57, 
p. 5,043. Also in Q B-b, p. 60.) 

2446 1957 Ag 14 QC Mayor names chairman for Quezon anniversary, fiesta. 

HNewa Ag 14 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57^ p. 5,043.) 

2447 1957 Ag 15 Quezon Day parade chairman, board of judges announced. 

Mejta v. 12, p. 26, n. 276 Ag 15 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, 
p. 5,943. Also in Q B-b, p. 49.) 

2448 1957 .Ag 16 Dadakilaing kaarawan ni Quezon s a Villasis. 

lab., v. 4, p. 3 '.g 16 '57. (Q B-b, p. 55.) 



^-•l v\ III - 339 

. 914 . 

. 2449 1957 Ag 16 Kaarawan ni Quezon; naiharida na ang palatuntunan ng QC; 

panauhin si CPG. lljfc. v. 4, p. 3, n. 144 .Sg 16 *57. 
(iPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,041. .Also in Q B-ta, 'p. 55.) 

2450 1957 Ag 16 Quezoniana exhibits opening sots off fete. PH v. 38, p. 1 : 

Ag 16 '57. (iPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,044. Als6 in Q B-b, 
p. 132.) 

2451 1957 . .Ag .16 Set to mark Quezon Day. DM v. 9, p. 9, n. 92, Ag 16 '57 

•(iPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,045. Also in Q B-b, p. 26.) 

2452 1957 Ag 17 Quezoniana exhibits opened, by First Lady; Mayor absents 

E]Jews_ v. 12, p. 4 17 '57. (Q B-b, p. 49.) 

2453 1957 ' Ag 17 Name Quuzon Day feto body. DM, v. 9, p. 11, n. 93, Ag 17 l 5,' 

(IPPL-TKL, Y '57, p. 5,042.) 

2454 1957 Ag 17 Quezon exhibit opens program. H_DB v. 171, p. 24, n. 42, 

Ag 17 1 57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,043. Also in Q B-b, p. 74- 

2455 1957 Ag 17 Quezon; Thu Unknown. PET v. 48, pp. 26, 34 n. 33, Ag 17 '5' 

( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,044. Also in- IPP, IDR3-UP, v. 10, 
p. 512; and Q 3-b, p. 115.) 

2456 1957 Ag 17 Quezon; social justice in action. Arturo Ma. Hisa. ' 

JUL v. 9, p. 4, n. 93 A* 17 "57. (iPPL-TNL, Y '57, 
p. 5,044.- J-iso in Q. B-b,' pp. 13, 26.) 

2457 1957 Ag • 17 Quezon stood' for country,first and last. Arsenio H. Lacson 

fflv. 38, p. 10, n. 9, Ag 17 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, 
p. 5,044. .'a so in Q B-b, pp. 10, 132.) 

2458 1957 Ag 17 Si Quezon at ang Wikang Parabansa. Mak. v. 4, p. 6, 

n. 145 Ag 17 '57. ( IPPL-TNL; Y '57, p. 5,045. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 55.) 

2459 1957 .Ag 17 Quezon's visit to Australia. T. S. Marquez. 11. 

• • • PIP v. 48, n. 33, pp. 34, 37-38- Ag 17 '57. (lPP,IDRS~UP f 
v. 10, p. 512.) 

2460 1957 Ag 18. Quezon today in the Philippines. Julio S. Garcia. 

■£E£v. 42, pp. 31, 39 Ag 18 '57. (Q B-b, p. 9.) 

2461 1957 -Lg 18 Exhibit to open Quezon program. MSB v. 171, p. 20, n. 41 r . 

Ag'l8 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,040. Also in Q B-b, p. 74..' 

2462 1957 Ag 18 Nation to mark Quezon Day. Garcia speaker at program 

tomorrow in QC. KTimes v. 12, pp. 1, 2 n. 180 Ag. 18 '57„ 
( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,042. Also in Q B-b, p. 81.) 

2463 1957 Ag 18 Quezon D^y rites set Monday; Garcia address parade feature . 

QC observance. MCjvron. v. 13, p. 15, n. 120 Ag 18 '57.. 
(IPPL-THL, Y '57, p. 5,043. Also in Q B-b, p. 60.) 

2464 1957 Ag 18 Quezon's virtues extolled; natal day observance set. 

PH v. 38, p. 1, n. 10 Ag 18 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,044- 
Also in Q B-b, p. 132.) 



- "i 1 '~F, 

III - 340 ■ 

"915 

2465 1957 Ag 18 . Quezon, the nationalist. .. also a man and politic**., il, 

'^iBlftaJtag. v. 12, pp. 1, 9 "n. 180 \Ag 18 "57. (iPPL- 
TK L, Y 57, p . 5,044. Also in IPP,IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 512, 
& '-l B-b, p. 01.) 

2466. 1957 .V? 18 From Quezon: lemons on politics. Santiago Alcantara, port. 

■ STM v. 13, n . 1, pp. 10-12 .Ag 18 '57. (lPP,IDRS-UP, v. 1.0. 
P. 512.) 

2:;67 1957 Ag 19 Quezon, the man. HChron. v. '7, pp. 1-4, 8 ',g 19 '57. 

(ft B-b, p. 13.) 

.2468 1957 Ag 19 Manuel L. Quezon, Arkitekto ng Republika ng Pilipinas. 

Jesus 0. qiegn. xJB mag. v. 7, p. 13 Ag 19 '57. 
(Q *-b, p. 14.) 

. 2469 1957 Ag 19 Hark Quezon's 79th natal day today; parade, program. set at • 

00. HI v . 33, pp. 1, 9 /lg i 9 .57. (q 3_ b> p> 132 J 
-"*70 1957 Ag 19 HanuQl L. Quezon: statesman and patriot. MJiBiSa v. 12, 

p. 10 n . 181 Ag 19 '57. (iPPL-TNL, Y. >57, p> 5,041. 
Also in 0 B_b, p. 81.) 
2*71 1957 Ag 19 Honor memory of Quezon today. ^B, v. 171, pp. 1, 11 n. 43 ; 

19 '57. (iPPL-iTIlL, Y '57, p. 5,041. Also in Q B_ b , p. 74-.; 
2172 1957 Ag 19 Manuel L. Quezon, the rebel; a forgotten talc' of the states- 
man's part in the revolution. HChj^a. p. 11, n . 181 

19 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y »57, p. 5,041. .Also in Q 3-b, p. 60.: 

2473 1957 Ag 19 Halimbawa ng pamamatnubay. (Editorial) MqJj. v. 4, p. 6, 

n. 145. Ag 19 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,041. ilso in ' 
. Q B-b, p. 55.) 

2474 1957 Ag 19 Honor Quezon at rites today. EHej^ v. 18, pp. 1, 31" n . 279,' 

Ag 19 "57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,041. Also in Q B_ b , p. .49')* 

2475 1957 Ag 19 MaJor Q uezon in Bataan. Narcelo S. Quiroz. ENa H fl - 

Ag 19 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,041. Also in Q B-b, 
pp. 17, 49.) 

2476 1957 £g lg ^Wks HLQ's 79th birthday today. figtaaa. v. 13, p. 10, 

n. 121 Ag 19 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,042. Also in 
Q ^-b, p. 60.) 

477 1957 Ag 19 Nation to observe "uozon Day today. HTimp fl v. 12, p. 1, 

n. 181 .% 19'57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,042. Also in. 
Q B-b, p. 01.) 

247.8 1957 Ag 19 President to speak at HLQ rite today. HChron - v. 13, p. 1, 

n. 121 -.ig 19 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,042. Also in 
Q B- b , p . 60.) 

■^ 79 1957 Ag 19 Quezon as nationalist. (Editorial) M v. 9, p. 4, n . 94 

^ -lg 19 *57. (iPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,042. .ALso in ,Q B-b, p. 26.) 

2480 1957 19 QC hub Qf Quezon 79th birthday fet0< a y> 9f pi ' 12f n# 94 

Ag 19 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p . 5,043.) 



lb.-. : 



ill-].:*" 



- 916 - 



III - 341 



2481 1957 Ag 19 Quozon's leadership. (Editorial) ENejia v. 12, p. 8 

n. 279 Ag 19 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,043. Also in • 
Q 3-b, p. 49.) 

2402 1957 Ag 19 Quezon legacies. (Editorial) MDB /,g 19 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, 

Y "57, p. 5,044. Also in Q B-b, p. 74.) 

2483 1957 Ag 19 Quozon's leadership. (Editorial) PH v. 38, p. 4, n. 11 

Ag 19 '57. (IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,044. Also in Q B-b, 
p. 132.) 

2484 1957 Ag 19 Recall MLQ as hero of revolution. PH v. 38, pp. 1, 2 

n. 11, Ag 19 '57. (IPPL-TjL, Y '57, p. 5,044.- .ilso in 
Q 3 -b, p. 130.) 

2485 1957 Ag 19 Recall MLQ'a love for labor. A. T. Oarlit. ENevf S v. 12, 

pp. 1-2, n. 279 Ag 19 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,044, 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 9, 49.) 

2486 1957 ,!g 19 Si II. L. Quezon at ang Tagalog. 'Mat. v. 4, pp. 1, 7 

n. 145 Ag 19 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,045. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 55.) 

2487 1957 Ag 19 Vets recall Quezon exploits against Spanish, US forces. 

MC.USPil. v. 13, v. 10, n. 121 ,\g 19 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, 
p. 5,045. AJ.30 in Q B-b, p. 60.) 

2488 1957 Ag 20 MLQ's ideals supported by Garcia. HCJajatt. v. 13, p. .1 

■!g 20 '57. (Q B-b, p. 60.) 

2489 1957 Ag 20 Ang Wikang Pilipino at yumaong Quezon. K«.b . v. 4, p. 6 : . 

n. 146 Ag 20 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y »57, p. 5,040. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 55.) 

2490 1957 ;'ig 20 Laud Qudzon for his nationalism-.. MM v. 171,* pp. 1, 19 

n. 44 .0g 20 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,041. "J.ao in Q B_b f 
p. 74.) 

2491 1957 Ag 20 Quezon .architect of P.I. freedom. Ellens, v. 12, p. 4, 

n. 280 Jg 20 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,042. .Ilso in 
Q B-b, p. 49.) 

2492 1957 ,,jg 20 We have kept with Quezon - CPG. ENew 3. v. 12, p. 4, n. 280 

Ag 20 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, 1* '57, p. 5,045. Also in Q B-b, p. 49.) 

2493 1957 Ag 20 Only 2700,000 has been raised f or P5 million Quezon 

Memorial Mausoleum planned by committee. MTimes v. 12, 
p. 10, n. 182 Ag 20 *57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,045. 
Also in Q 3-b, p. 81.) 

2494 1957 Ag 20 Urge dedication to Quezon principle. PH v. 38, p. 1, 

n. 12 Ag 20 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,045. SLso in 
Q B-b, p. 132.) 

2495 1957 Ag 20 P124,000 goal of Quezon Momorial Fund. MTimaa v. 12, p. 11, 

n. 141 Ag 20 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,045.) 



- 917 



2436 1957 Ag 21 Quezon would be more than happy about nations present 

state. PH v. 93, pp. 1, 9 Ag 21 '57. (Q B-b, p". 15.) 

2497 1957 Ag 21 MLQ monument in Elcija unveiled in Gen. Tinio torn. MChj^n. 

v. 13, p. 18, n. 183 .lig 21 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, 
p. 5,041. -Iso in Q B-b, p. 60.) 

2498 1957 Ag 21 Unveil Quezon Monument in Nueva Ecija. BNowa v. 12, 

p. 4, n. 281 Ag 21 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,045. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 49.) 

2499 1957 Ag 23 If Quuzon were alive. MLima. v. 12, pp. 1, 2 n. 105 

Ag 23 '57. (iPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,041. Also in q 3_b, p. 8 

2500 1957 Ag 28 Quezon's rubber-stanp assembly. KG£a. v. 13, pp. 8, 9 

n. 23, Ag 28 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,044. Also in 
Q B-b, p. 53.) 

2501 1957 Ag 31 Speech before the Nanila Lions Club, Monday night, August 

19, 1957 at the Manila Hotel. C. P. Garcia. OG v. 53, 
n. 16, pp. 5175-5177. Ag 31 '57. (lPP,IDRS-UP, v. 10, 
p. 512.) 

2502 1957 Ag 31 Speech delivered in Quezon City, Monday afternoon, August 

19, 1957. G.P. Garcia. OG v. 53, n. 16, pp. 5171-5175. 
Ag 31 '57. 'IPP,IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 512.) 

2503 1957 Ag n.d. Quezon as a Thomosian. Vidal G. Ungos. PEcoRev . v. 4, 

n. 1, pp. 84-85 Ag '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y 57, p. 5,042. Also 
in IPP,IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 512 & Q B-b, pp. 20, 168.) 

2504 1957 Ag n.d. Quezon and the business principles of the Philippine Cons- 

titution of 1935. Com., v. 54, pp. 11-12, n. 1 Ag '57. 
( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,042. Moo in Q B-b, p. 168.) 

2505 1957 "g n.d. Quezon and the business principles of the Philippino Cons- 

titution of 1935. Francisco Villnnueva. /AlndLifo v, 19 
pp. 23, 38, n. S, .';g '57. (l?P,IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 512.) 

2506 1957 Ag n.d. Quezon as a student. P.O. Malay. Fil. Teacher v. 12, 

n. 3, PP. 163, 164, 170 Ag '57. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, 
p. 512.) 

2507 1957 S 4 Quezon's last day. Basilio J. Valdos. Gra .. v. 13, pp. 4~ 

(con't.) n. 24, S 4 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,043. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 21.) 

2508 1957 S 11 Quezon's last days. Basilio J. Valdes. Ojft. v. 10, 

pp. 8, 4, n. 25 S 11 '57. ( IPPL-TNL, Y '57, p. 5,043.) 
.i'lso in Q B-b, p. 53.) 

2509 1957 N 16 Quezon dreams for the common man near fruition. Jacobo S. 

de Vera. MEB v. 148, pp. 7, 9 N 16 '57. (Q B-b, p. 21.) 

2510 1957 D 4 delegate quotes Quezon in urging independence for 

Algeria, Red satellites. MPJjepj^. v. 13, p. 2, n. 228. 



- 9t8 - 



III - 343 



S '' " D 4 '57. (iPPL-TKL, Y '57, p.. 5,042. Also in Q B-b, p. 60, 

'>511 1958 F 4 Bataan folks recall NLQ'a role in 111. American war. 

PH v. 38, p. 3 F 4 '58. (Q B-b, p. 132.) 

2512 1958 Mr 8 Unfinished memorial. SSlafi- v. 38, pp. 9-10 Mr 8 '58. 

(Q B-b, p. 132.) 

2513 1958 Je) . .. Manuel L. Quezon and the Jone3 Bill. N. J. Casambre, 

D ) ' 

ESSS&-V. 23, n. 2-4, pp. 265-282 Je-D '58. (iPP-IDRS, UP 
v. 10, p. 249. /lao in Q B-b, pp. 7, 168.) 

2514 1958 Jl 9. Quezon birthday rites set in QC, M Chron . v. 14, p. 20 . 

Jl 9 '58. (Q ]3_b, p. 60.) 

2515 1958 Jl 14 Pinaghahandaang gunita sa naging Pangulong Quezon. 

Iki>. v. 5, p. 6 Jl 14 '58. (Q D_b, p. 55.) 

2516 1958 Ag 1 'Quezon's death. 

KOtefln. v. 41, pp. 1, 5 Ag 1 '58. (Q B-b, p. 60.) 

2517 1958 Ag 1 'Quezon's death is recalled. 

KSinaa v. 13, pp. i, 12 Ag 1 '58. (q B-b, p. 81.) 

2518 1958 .ig 1 President, First lady recall MLQ's death. 

PH v. 39, p. 1 Ag 1 '58. (Q B-b, p. 132.) 

2519 1958 .Ag 10 A roomful of relics. T¥ n. 13, pp. 20-21, Ag 10| 

(IPP,UPL, /. 10, p. 2041. Mao in Q B-b, pp. 61, 

2520 1958 . 11 Quezon Day fete. 

HChxpji. v. 14, pp. 1-2 Ag 11 '58. (Q B-b, p. 60.1 

2521 1958 Ag 11 'Quezon in Russia. 

MTjmoa v. 13, p. 4 Ag 11 '58. (Q B-b, p. 81.) 

2522 1958 Ag 12 Sked of MLQ day rites announced. 

HChj^m. v. 14, p. 22 Ag 12 '58. (Q B-b, p. 60.) ' 

2523 1958 Ag 15 Rotary speaker relates Quezon pranks, disregard for rules, 

HChron.. v. 14, p. 20 Ag 15 '58. (Q B-b, p. 60.) 

2524 1958 Ag 16 Manuel Luis Quezon - Am a ng Wikang Pilipino. 

K»b. v. 5, pp. 6, 8 Vg 16 '58. (Q B-b, p. 55.) 

2525 1958 Ag 16 Quezon and the revolution. PFP v. 49, n. 33, pp. 22-23 

Ag 16 '58. (IPP,IDRS-UP v. 10, p. 345. Also in Q B-b, 
p. 115.) 

2526 1958 Ag 16 Quozon - the neutralist who failed. PFP v. 49, n. 33, 

pp. 20-21, 24 Ag 16 '58. ( IPP, IDR3-UP, v. 10, p. 345. 
Also in Q B-b, p. 115.) 

2527 1958 Ag 16 Quezon's farewell message. Primitivo Milan. PFP 

n. 49, pp. 45-46 Ag 16 '58. (lPP,UPLy v, 10, p. 2039.) 

2528 1958 Ag 17 Armed forces to participate in Quezon Day. celebration. 

MChpon. v. 14, pp. 1, 2 Ag 17 '58. (Q B-b, p. 60.) 

2529 1958 Ag 17 Quezon: the photographer's subject. 

HChron. mag. v. 13, p. 22 Ag 17 '58. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 




- 919 - 

2530 1958 Ag 17 Capitol city center of 80th birthday anniversary fete f< 

Commonwealth head. MTjjnejj, v. 13, pp. 1, 2 Ag 17 '53. 
(Q B-b, p. 81.) 

2531 1958 Ag 17 Quezon on National language. 

JHSiWfta v. 14, p. 14 Ag 17 '58. (Q 3-b, p. 81.) 

2532 1958 Ag 17 What kind of nationalist was Manuel L. Quezon? Thedore 

Friend. jSE v. 14, n. 1, pp. .10-13 Ag 17 '58. (iFP, 
IDES-UP, v. 10, p. 345. nao in Q 3-b, pp. 8, 82.). 

2533 1953 Ag 18 liation to celebrate Quezon birth anniversary tomorrow. 

-H&Efia. v. 14, pp. 1, 9 Ag 18 '58. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 

2534 1958 Ag 18 MLQ escape from capture by U.S. troopers recounted. 

HpJUBIl. v. 14, p. 22 Ag 18 '53. (Q 3-b, p. 61.) 

2535 1958 fig 18 Manuel L. Quezon in retrospect. 

MTjmea v. 13, p. 4 Ag 18 '58. (Q B-b, p. 82.) 

2536 1958 Ag 18 1896 war widow tells how MLQ eluded U.S. troops. 

HI v. 39, P- 3, .4? 13 '58. (Q 3-b, p. 132.) 

2537 1958 Ag 18 Quezon Day celebration set tomorrow; Garcia speaker. 

J2£ 39, PP. 1-2 .'g 18 '58. (Q B-b, p. 132.) 

2538 1958 Ag 19 Si MLQ a t ang Wikang Pilipino. 

BB v. 14, IP- It 8 :"g 19 '58. (Q B-b, p. 25.) 

2539 1958 Ag 19 Ginugunita ng bans a si MLQ. 

BB v. 14, pp. 1, 3 Ag 19 '58. (Q B-b, p. 25.) 

2540 1958 Ag 19 Quezon doctrines due for discussion today. 

DM v. 10, p. 1 Ag 19 '58. (Q B-b, p. 26.) 

2541 1958 Ag 19 Quezon and the Civil Service. (Editorial.) 

DM v. 10, p. 4 Ag 19 '58. (Q B-b, p. 26.) 

2542 1958 Ag 19 A great man remembered by inmates. 

Bliews v. 12, pp. 1, 2 .g 19 '58. (Q 3-b, p. 49.) 

2543 1958 Ag 19 Emulate Quezon ideals - C. G, 

I&XB. v. 12, pp. 1, 20 Ag 19 '58. (Q B-b, p. 49.) 

2544 1958 Ag 19 President Manuel L. Quezon; a life devoted to country. 

Pilemon Poblador. BJaaa v. 12, p. 6, Ag 19 '58. (Q B-b 
p. 50.) 

2545 1968 Ag 19 Lakip ng pag-ibig sa kanya ang wika ayon kay MLQ. 

Mfli. v. 5, pp. 1, 2 Ag 19 '58. (Q 3-b, p. 55.) 

2546 1958 Ag 19 P.I. pays homage to Quezon today. 

MOhron. v. 14, pp. 1-2, 'Ag 19 '58. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 

2547 1958 Ag 19 Quezon. (Editorial) 

M Ch ron. v. 14, p. 4, \? 19 '58. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 

2548 1958 Ag 19 Nation lauds MLQ today. 

MTimes v . 13, pp. 1, 6 ,lg 19 "58. (Q 3-b, p. 82.) 

2549 1958 Ag 19 Manuel L. Quezon. (Editorial.) 

HDB v. 175, n. 4'-, p. 12 Ag 19 '58. (Q 3-b, p. 74.) 



: -ii«*<, > III - 345 

- 920 - 

2550 1958 Ag 19 Remembering Quezon.' (Editorial) . 

FA v. 39, p. 4 .J« 19 '58. (Q B-b, p. 132.) 

2551 1958 Ag 19 P.I. honors MLQ today. 

HI v. 39, pp. 1-2 Jig 19 '58. (Q B-b, p. 132.) 

2552 1958 Ag ' 19 Cite Quezon as father of P.I. social justice. 

£H v. 39, p. 3, 4' 19 '58. (0 B-b, p. 132.) 

2553 1958 Ag 20 Dinakila ai Quezon ng bay an. . 

M v. 14, pp. 1, 8 V; 20 '58. (Q B-b, p. 25.). 

2554 1958 Ag 20 Quezon virtues extolled at rites. 

liSJiEPJl. v. 14, pp. 1, 13 Ag 20 '58. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 

2555 1958 Ag 20 Quezon obsession to remain president related by Valdes. 

li-ima. v. 14, p. 16 :.g 20 '58. (q B-b, p. 61.) 

2556 1958 Ag 20 Extol Quezon ideal at colorful rites. 

IIP! v. 175, n. 44, pp. 1, 4 Ag 20 *58. (q B-b, p. 74.) 

2557 1958 % 20 P.I. officialdom pays glowing tribute to HLQ. 

HI v. 33, pp. 1-2 Ag 20 '58. (Q B-b, p. 132.) 

2558 1958 Ag 20 Quezon's farewell pooms. Jose A. Quirino. KGr a. n. 25, 

PP. 8-9 Ag 20 '50. (IPP,UPL v. 10, p. 2040.). . 

2559 1958 Ag 21 Intimate incidents in Quezon's war years bared at U.B. 

Valdes. MTtafia v. 13, p. 7, /.g 21 '58. (Q B-b, p. 82.) 

2560 1958 Ag 23 The legacy of Manuel L. Quezon. Carlos P. Garcia. 

HI Oup. v. 39, n. 15, p. 20 Ag 23 '58. (Q B-b, pp. 9, 13?:. ) 
?56l 1958 Ag 23 Dinakila ni l'lacapagnl .in/; simulain ni Quezon. 

Mak. v. 5, p. 5 Ag 23 '58. (Q B-b, p. 55.) 

2562 1958 Ag n.d. Manuel Luis Quezon. (Editorial) Cjnis_a.de v. 9, n. 8, p. 24, 

Ag '58. (lPP,IDR3-UP, v. 10, p. 345. Also in Q B-b, p. 168. v 

2563 1958 Ag n.d. Unpublished anecdotes about President Manuel L. Quezon. 

Francisco ViHanueva. Com., v. 55, n. 1, pp. 18, 27, 28 
Ag '58. (lPP,IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 345. Also in Q B-b, 
pp. 21, 168.) 

2564 1958 Ag n.d. Quezon and Hags ays ay - outstanding leaders. Coop.Fqr m,. 

v. 6, n. 8, pp. 6-8 Ag '58. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, 
p. 345. Also in Q B-b, p. 168.) 
^565 1958 Ag n.d. Partyless democracy. Manuel L. Quezon. ? aqQr_a i_fl 

v. 10, pp. 9-17 Ag '58. (IPP, UPL, v. 11, p. 2038.) 

2566 1958 Ag) , Quezon and Philippine freedom. (Address delivered at the 

S ) ' * 

Quezon Day celebration, 19, August 1958, in Lucena, Quezon.) 

D.Z. Romualdez. port. PEcojtev. .v. 5, n. 1-2, pp. 22-24, 

54-55, Ag-S '58. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 345. Also in 
Q B-b, pp. 18, 169.) 

2567 1958 S 6 Quezon on Osmena. SEE v. 51, n. 36, pp. 22, 24 S 6 '58. 

( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 345. "dso in Q B-b, p. 4.) 



II'-l-'-l 



- 921 ~ 



III - 346 



2568 1958 3 " 8 Osmena record assessed by Quezon. 

DM v. 10, p. 9 3 8 '58. (q 3-b, p. 26.) 

2569 1958 3 9 Quezon praises Oamona. 

ENpJia v. 12, pp. 1, 2 S 9»58. (Q J3-b, p. 50.) 

2570 1958 3 n.d. Quezon and Mags ays ay; notes on a new situation. Benito 

Hencias. port. PEJ v. 13, n, 4, pp. 207-208 S '58. . 
(IPP,IDRS_UP, v. 10, p. 345. /-lso in Q B-b, pp. 13, 169." 

2571 1958 0 29 The shocking report. 0. hi Carunungan. il -port KGra. 

v. 25, n. IS, pp. 16, 17, 40-41 0 29 '58. (IPP, IDRS-UP, 
v. 8, p. 395. ) 

2572 1958 D 17 Portrait of Quezon and Osmena. T.II. Kalaw. il port. 

J£r_a^ v. 25, n. 25, pp. 6-7 D 17 '58. (lPP,IjDRS-UP, 
v. 8, p. 394.) 

2573 1958 n.d.m. History of industry and trade of the Philippines. J;. V, 

H. Hartendorp. Manila, J3CP 1958. (Q B-b, . p. . 9. ) 

2574 1959 Ja 3 ' I'o collect HLQ» S works. 

— Su P« v. .39, p. 14 J a 3 '59. (Q 3-b, p. 132.) 

2575 1959 Ja 26 Code of citizenship and ethics. 

tiSltton. v. 14, p. 15 Ja 26 '59. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 

2576 I959 J a n.d. Man from Baler. 

Ml v. 13,. n. 8, p. 517 Ja '59. (Q B-b, p. 169.) 

2577 1959 F 4 My side on the independence issue. P. B. Sayfe. 

il port. JSaca*.' v. 25, n. 32, pp.. 18, 19, 27 P4 '59.. 
. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v . 8, p. 394. :j.so in Q B-b, pp. 19, 53.) 
?578 1959 P 11 Quezon and the people. F. B* Sayro. il KGj^. v. 25, 

n. 33, pp. 24-25, 33 F 11 .'59. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 8, p. 394 
,'lso in Q B-b, pp. 19, 53.) 

2579 1959 F 14 What becpjno of Quezon's dream city? 

P|Pv. 52, n. 7, p. 18 F 14 '59. ( Q 3-b, p. 13.) 

2580 I959 F 24 What' became of Quezon's dream city? J. V. Merritt. 

PFPv. 52, p. 18 F 21 '59. (Q B-b, p. 115.) 

J81 I959 Ap a IiLQ memorial' marble has relief panels here. 

BH v. 39, p. 5 Ap 11 '59. ■ U B-b, p. 132.) 

2582 1959 Ap 13 Idinating pang raarmol \ikol sa bantayog ni I'iLQ. 

BB v. 15, p. 4 Ap 13 '59. (Q B-b, p. 25.) 

2583 1959 Ap n.d. Philippine economic policy. JgCJ v. 35, n. 4, pp. .144, 146 

Ap '59. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 249. £Lsb in Q B-b, 
P. 169.) 

2584 1959 Je 13 Memorial to a national hero. ?' 

DM v. 11, p. 17 Je 13 '59. (Q B-b, p. 27.) 

2585 1959 j e 30 Analyze Quezon Malayan hope. 

_DM v. 11, p. 7, Je 30 '59. (Q B-b, p. 27.) 



95 



...u,-.^,.- in - 347 

~ 922 ~ 

2536 1959 Jl '4 Me of two presidents. J. V. Merritt. PIT v. 52, 

n. 27, pp. 41, 48 Jl 4 '59. . (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, 

p. 249. -lso in Q 3-b, pp. 1?, 115.) 
2567 1959 Jl 5 Quezon's role in attainment of P.I. independence . recalled 

at •'■fl rites. HI v. 39, p. 16 Jl 5 '59. ( n . B-b, p. 133.' 
2538 1959 Jl 20 ^arcia to address Quezon Dny rites. 

HChrjm. v. 15, p. 22 Jl 20 '59- (Q B-b, p. 61.) 
2589' 1959 Ag 5 Parade to feature i'ILO's 81st birthday rites in QC. 

£H v. 39, P. 3, 4 5 '59. (Q B-b, p. 133.) 

2590 1959 Ag 7 ...ugust - nonth of great heroes, significant events. 

i£ijnes v. 14, n.p. Jig 7 '59. (Q B-b, p. 82.) 

2591 1959 9 ^arcia to spe.-k on Quezon Day. 

EQiKfla*. v. 15, p. 19 4 9 '59. (Q 3-b, p. 61.) 

2592 1959 S'g 13 President proclaims August 19, and 29 as special holidays, 

KCjiEoji. v. 15, pp. 1, 13 /.g 13 '59. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 

2593 1959 Jg 13 Hame "cab grand marshall for Quezon Day parade. 

PHv. 40, p. 16 13 '59. (Q B-b, p. 133.) 

2594 1959 Ag 15 'Quezon practical nationalism. 

M v. 11, p. 4 . : ig 15 '59. (Q B-b, p. 27.) 

2595 1959 Qg 15 Manuel L. Quezon; ama ng wikang pambansa. 

lab. v. 6, p. 11 Ag 15 '59. (Q B-b, p. 56.) 

2596 1959 15 Maagang naguni-guni ni Quezon ang kanyang kamatayan. 

iiak. v. 6, p. 6, '.g 15 '59- (Q B-b, p. 56.) 

2597 1959 Ag * 15 I remember Quezon's voice. 

miv. 52, p. 39, g 15 '59. (Q B-b, p. 115.) 
2593 1959' :g 15 Quezon quarreled with me. 

PPPv. 52, P . 56 ^g 15 '59. (Q B-b, p. 115.) 

2599 1959 ■% 15. Quezon as a father. J. >. Quirino. PPP, v. 52, n. 33, '■ 

pp. 42-43, 46 /.g 15 '59. (IPP,IDRS-UP, v . 10, p. 249. 
£Lso in Q B_b, pp. 17, 115.) . . 

2600 1959 Ag 16 Q.G. girds for Quezon's 81st birthday anniversary. 

liglKOZU v. 15, p. 20 "g .16 »59. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 

2601 1959 Ag 16 Beau Brummoll among .teif.n dictators. TW v,.14 f n. 33, 

p. 8, .Ig 16 '59. (IPP,IDR3-UP, v. 10, p. 249. Uso in. 
"I B-b, pp-. 9, I69.) 

2602 1959 Ag 16 Manuel L. luezon and the .^lOrican military. V. S. B a clar- 

gon. 3TM v. 15, n. 1, pp. 10-11, .ig 16 '59. (IPP, 
IDR3-UP, v. 10, p. 249. "lso in Q B-b, pp. 6, 82.) 

2603 .1959 Ag 17 Paredos, Garcia speech to highlight Quezon birthday rites. . 

MGiu^a. v. 15, p. 9, /g 17 '59. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 

2604 1959 Ag 17 Parade, programs and fireworks display *o feature obser- 

vance. MDB v. 179, p. 1 Ag 17 '59. (Q B-b, p. 74.) 



Ill - 

923 ~ 

t 

iS05 1959 £g 17 Pomp, pageantry to mark Quezon Day celebration. 

PH v. 40, pp. 1, 2 /fc l 7 '59. (1 3-b, p. 135.) 
-606 195? Ig 18 81st -ueson birthday celebration opens today. 

M v. 11, P . 14 18 '59. (•> B_b, p. 27.) 
.6C7 1959 ig 18 Napa brochure off the press on Quezon's Day. 

S&uca. v. 13, P . 16 ; w la '59. ( ; 3-b, P . 50.) 

60*3 1959 As 18 'iuozon birthday foto opens today. 

£i5tiu»a. v. 15, pp. 1, 15 .Vt 18 "59. ( r : 3-b, p. 61.) 
6>9 1959 /.g 18 Uatiou will honor Kir; tomorrow. 

K&naa. v. 14, ? P . 1, 13 ; € i8 -59. ( • ^ f p . 8 2.) 

2610 1959 /.g 18 Elaborate rites on MLQ's 81st birth anniversary. 

Si v. 40, p. 16 18 '59. ('I B-b, p. 133.) 
511 1959 .Ig 19 OG atroBsou Filipinisn at >iozon ritos today; will recs 

KLQ ideals in address. Carlos Qnrcin. llUjtxa. v. 13, 
n. 284, pp. 1, 11 19 '59. (r. B-b, ? . 9.) 
"0J.2 1959 % 19 Hnnuol L. tuezon. John C-unther, ."lejandro Roces. 

mtaSB. v. 14, n. 181, p. 4 19 '59. (Q B-b, pp. 17, 
'13 1959 Ag 19 N«gdi W8 ng ang bans- kay IIL-1 at sa wika. 

BB v. 15, pp. 1-8, /.gig '59. (Q B-b, p. 26.) 
-414 1959 .Ig 19 Quezon, the naturalist. (Editorial.) 

M v. 11, p . 4, )g 19 "59. (Q B-b, p. 27.) ' 
' iSl5 1S5 9 19 Manuel L. Quezon. (Editorial) 

liStttHfl. v. 15, p. 4, .ig 19 '59. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 
0I6 1959 -ig 19 P.I, honors Quezon on 81st birthday today. 

BilUSA. v. 15, p. 14 .^19 '59. ("3-b, p. 61.) 
'*17 1959. Ag 19 President leads HI/: Day observance today. 

hStooi. v. 15, pp. i, 3 19 '59. (Q B-b, P . 61.) 

2r>18 1959 .'ig 19 The last days of Quezon in the United States. 

iLQhroji. v. 15, p. 10 'ig 19 '59. (Q B-b, p. 61.) 
2'19 1959 -V 19. Knnuol L. Quezon's code. 

liPJ. v. 179, n. 43, p. 1 /« 19 '59. ( Q B-b, p. 74.) 
2^20 1959 19 r J-'ho thought that made Manuel L. Quezon great. 

SiZinaa v. 14, p. 4, Ag 19 '59. (Q B-b, P , 82.) 

2^21 1959 19 K y firat meeting with MLQ. Luis Serrano. 

iffiiBWfl-V. 14, pp. 1, 10 .ig 19 '59- (Q B-b, p.. 82,) 
2*22 1959 ..ig 19 Quezon honored at rite3 today. 

PH v. 40, pp. 1, IG ^g 19 '59. (r. 3_ b> p< 13?i ) 
2i 23 1959 .'jg 19 Quezon's code of citizenship and ethics. 

PH v. 40, pp. 2-3 Jig 19 '59. (Q B-b, p. 133.) 
2624 1959 lg Quezon's contribution to national language- cited. 

PH v. 40, p. 2 Sg 19 '59. (Q B-b, p. 133.) 



;.:li-:.4 



III - 349 

924 " 



2*25 1959 Ag 19 Recall Quozons days at Lotran. 

£S v. 40, p. 3 Ag 19 '59. ( r : 3-b, p . 133.) 
■2626 1959 Ag 19 Quezon and party politics. (Editorial) 

PH v. 40, p. 4, Ag 19 '59. (Q B-b, p. 133.) 
2*27 1959 Ag 19 Nation celebrates MLQ's 81st birth anniversary. 

m v. 40, p. 2, Ag 19 '59. (Q 3-b, p. 133.) 
2623 1959 Ag 19 KLQ documentary picturo premiered at Malacahang. 

£2 v. 40, p. 2 Ag 19 '59. (" B-b, p. 133.) 
2629 1959 Jg 19 The code of Quezon, Consorcio Borjo. 

I c fea«. v- 26, n. 8, p. 13 % 19 '59. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 8 3 

P. 394.) 

2*30 1959 Ag 19 Glimpses of Quezon, tho man. E.O.Mina. port KGja . 

v. 26, n. 8, p. 12, A3 19 '59. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 8, 

.p. 394. Also in Q B-b, pp. 13, 53.) 
2'-. 31 1959 Ag 20 Urgo people to emulate MLQ's citizenship concept. 

PH v. 40, p. 16 .% 20 '59. ( r , B-b, p. 133.) 
?' 32 1959 Ag 20 Cite Quezon as foremost advocate of protectionalism. 

PH v. 40, p. 3 ;. g 20 '59. (a B-b, p. 133.) 
2'.-33 1959 Ag 21 Former aides reveal anecdotes on Quezon at Rotary meeting. 

• MCh^oji. v. 15, p. 3 % 21 '59. (Q 3-b, p. 61.) 

2634 1959 Ag 21 Close associate of ML" recalls his groatnoss. 

PH v. 40, p. 16 Ag 21 '59. ("1 B-b, p. 133.) ' 

2635 1959 Ag 21 Youth urged to emulate Quezonian patriotism. 

PH v. 40, p. 16 .iff 21 *59. (Q B-b, p. 133.) 

2636 1959 Ag 23 Quezon mnrkor in U.S. planned. 

PJI v. 40, p. 16 'g 23 '59. (Q B-b, p. 133.) 

2637 1959 Ag 24 Quezon marker in U. 3. planned. 

HSiUBfl. v. 15, p. 21 ,"g 24 '59. (Q B-b, p. 62.-) 

2638 1959 Ag 25 Quezon's prayer for P.I. recalled. 

MTiiags v. 14, p. 4 .ig 25 '59- B-b, p. 82.) • 

2639 1959 Ag n.d. 15 years after Quezon. D.L. Francisco. .AIL v. 21, 

n. 8, pp. 2-3, 31 V: '59. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v . 10, p. 249. 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 8, 1*9.) 

2640 1959 Ag n.d. Tribute to Quezon. Comilo Oaias. PER v. 6, n. 1, 

pp. 23-27, 31 Ag '59. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 249. 
Also in Q B-b, pp. 15, I69.) 

2641 1959 Ag n.d. Quezon and the church. Frederic 3. flar.quardt. 

Panorama, n. 11, pp. 3-10 Ag '59. (IPF,UPL, .p. 2039.) 
2' 42 1959 S 30 Give other leaders a chance. Sergio R. Histica. 

KGxa. v. 26, 11. 14, p. 17 S 30 '59. (Q B-b, pp. 13, 53.) 
2M3 1959 0 3 The Gobu carnival of old. Jose Martines. port PEP v. 52, 

n. 39,' pp. 17, 24 0 3 '59. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 283. 

Also in Q B-b, pp. 12, 155.) 



III - 
- 385 - 

2644.1959 ■» 9 - Cba*ril»tioa for ©.©aortal fmads porar ia?"" 

Ssmv. 14, p. 7 D 9 "«»9. (*:B-b, p. 50.) 

2-45 1959 D 16 Sow luoson spent yulbtide ataroaA. Sixt© X. Qroa*. 

Kfa .iL - . v. a. 25, pp. xft-19 B '59. IDRS-IIP, 
^* .8, p. 394. ,.«lao in IPP^tfPL, v. 10, p. 2041, * 1 B-fc, 
PP. 14, 53.) 

**** 1959 n * d,B ' living MoRrnphioai intinoto stories of world-renowned 

figures. Henry Shan as & others. Manila, Bureau of 

Printing, 1959. 3-b, p. 20.) 
2*47 19 f £> Mr 26 How -feosoa handled government crooks. R, C. Lim. 

port PgP v . 53, a . 13| pp> 26> 2 8, 30, 32 Mr 26 »60. 

(lFP t II>KS-UP, v. 10, p. 283. Also in B-b, pp. 11, 115 v) 
2*48 I960 /p 28 Monument for KL f 1 ,,t -uoson City gathers moss. 

M t. li, p. ( » p 28 '60. (Q B-b, p. 27.) 

2649 'I960 My 5 Cue-son seon RS sctive lobbyist, 

• ISisss v. 15, p. 4-a My 5 '60. <Q S-b, p. 82.) 

2650 I960 F-Je Bits of liilipiniana. Ernesto R. Rodriguez, Jr. 

^Chron. v. 15, F 22, fir 28, Ap 11, My 9, % 16, % 30, 
Jo 6, Jo 13, Je 20 'GO. ( : 3-b, pp. 16, 62.) 

2651 I960 Jl 30 The we son you do not know. J. V. Herritt. 

port PJT v. 53, n. 31, pp. 28-29, Jl 30 '60. (IH»,1DRS- 
UP ' v * 10 ' P« 283. Also in B-b, pp. 13, H 5 .) 

2^52 I960 Jl 30 "uozon; twice; remembered in '.ugust. C. S. *rrasoU. 

port PIT v. 53, n. 31, p. 18 Jl 30 '60. (iPP, IDRS-UP, 
v. 10, p. 283. Also in : B-b, pp. 5, 115,) 

2653 I960 Jl n .d. A long-range plan for social studios; (two great presidents) 

P. I. Crua. PJE n. 39, pp. 120-121 Jl '60. (IPP,UPL, 
v. 10, p. 2041.) 

.2654 I960 : Jl n.d. Kahabang ban-hay ng pogtuturo, dalawang tola ng /igosto: 

Manuel L. 'iioaon at Hanon Hags ays ay.- A.M. Villamin. 
££i n. 39, pp. 106-108 Jl '60. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2041.) ' 
16 na taon ngayon. Ibinnlitang patay si MLC. 
ial. v. 16, p. 2 4 "60. B-b, p. 135.) 
P.C soldier recalls death of "uozon 16 years ago. 

Araw ni luezon. Pnlatuntunan; mioa ngayon. 
laL. v. 16, pp. 1, 8 :;g 9 '60. (0 3-b, p. 135. 

Simple rites for ML'i sot. 

ISlKatt. v. 16, p. 18 ,Ag 15 >60. (a B-b, p.. 62.) 
Scribes mark luezon birth. 

HShSCn..v. 16, Ag 17 '60. (0 B-b, p. 62.) 
Manuel L. ".uozon: Commonwealth's champion. 
m v, 12, p.. 6, Ag 13 -60. B-b, p. 29.) 





I960 


Ag 


4 


2656 


I960 


*r 


1 


2657 


I960 


•% 


9 


2658 


I960 


^g 


15 


2659 


I960 


Ag 


17 


2660 


I960 


4s ■ 


13 



- 926 - 

266$ I960 Jig 17 'Quezon was strict on palace manners. 

-Scat n. 27, pp. 20-21 17 '60. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.^ 

2662 I960 /,g 17 Quezon would have; boon alive today. Urnio C. iilvora. 

JSKfl. n. 27, pp. 10-11 17 '60. (lPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2039 

2663 I960 Ag 18 Quezon birthday rites. set. 

M v. 11, p. 5 ^ 18 '60. (1 B-b, p. 27.) 

2664 I960 Ag 19 Goldon heart award given late President. 

JEK. v. 12, pp. 1, 16 Ag 19 *60. (QD-b, p. 27.) 

2665 I960 Ag 19 Quezon Day fete centered at Quezon City. 

Maxa. v. 15, P. 2 Ag 19 '60. (Q B-b, p. 50.) 

2666 I960 Jig 19 Quezon. ENpjis. v. 15, mag. pp. 4-5 Ag 19 '60. (Q E*b, 

p. 50.) - 

2667 I960 ,/lg 19 Memories of the man. 

MiewjL v. 15, pp. 6-8 (mag.) Ag 19 '60. (Q B-b, p. 50.) 

2668 I960 Ag 19 Manuel L. Quezon. (Editorial) 

ENshs. v. 15, p. 4 Ag 19 '60. (Q B-b, p. 50.) 

2669 I960 Jig 19 Manuel L. Quezon. (Editorial) 

USctoaa. v. is, p. 4 Jig 19 '60. (q B-b, p. 62.) 

2670 I960 Ag 19 Cite forgotten tale of MLQ in revolution. 

MPiLma. v. 16, pp. 2, 3 Ag 19 '60. (a B-b, p. 62.) 

2671 I960 Jig 19 That strong man, Quezon. 

H&Kfla. v. 16, p. 19 Ag 19 '60. (Q .B-b, p. 62.) 

2672 I960 Ag 19 Nation observe Quezon's 82nd birthday today. 

MCiij£a. v. 16, p. 2 Ag 19 '60. (Q B-b, p. 62.) 

2673 I960 Ag 19 Nation marks Quezon Day. 

M pta a a . v. 16, pp. 1, 10 Ag 19 '60. (Q B-b, p. 62.) 

2674 I960 Ag 19 Quezon: founding father. 

MDB v. 183, n. 43, p. 8 .\g 19 '60. (Q B-b, p. 75.) 

2675 I960 Ag 19 Nation honoring Quezon today. 

MDB v . 183, n. 43, pp. 1-2, Ag 19 '60. (Q B-b, p. 75.) 

2676 i960 Ag 19 P.I. honors Quezon today. 

W&ms. v. 15, p. l-a Ag 19 '60. (Q B-b, p. 82.) 

2677 I960 Ag 19 Lucena honors MLQ with town parade. 

Mima. v. 15, p. 10-a Ag 19 '6o. (q B_b, P . 82.) 

2678 I960 J>g 19 The foresight of M. L. 'Quezon. 

ESXoaa. v. 15, p. i-b *ig 19 '6o. (a B-b, P . 82.) 

2t>79 I960 Ag 19 Magkakaroon pa kaya ng bagong Quezon sa atfing psmahalaan? 

TaL. v. 16, p. 5 Ag 19 '60. (Q B-b, p. 135.) 

2680 I960 Jig 20 Quezon and the progresista walkout. 

M v. 12, (mag.) pp. 6-7 ig 20 '60. (Q B-b, p. 27.) 

2681 I960 Ag 20 Quezon extolled on 82nd birthday. 

MQhraa. v. 16, P . 5 20 '6o. (q 3-b, p. 62.) 



- 927 - 



III - 352 



2682 I960 Ag 20 , Quezon Day marked without warmth... _ ...... 

U v. 183, n. 44, pp. 1. 10 Ag 20 *60. (Q B-b, p. 75.) 

2683 I960 <ig 20 Among scores GG regime. 

I?jjaaa. v. 15, pp . i_ a , 12-a Ag 20 '60. (■■• B-b, p. 82.) 

2684 I960 Jig 20 Oamofta bares Quezon view on U. S. bases. 

]£iaaa v. 15, P . 5- a Ag 20 '60. (q B-b, P . 82.) 

2685 I960 Ag 20 The first monument to Quezon. U.K. Patricio, il port 

£FP v. 53, n. 34, pp. 18, 67 ^g 20 '60. (lPP,IDRS-UP, 
v. 10, p. .283. Also in Q B-b, p. 116.) 
2686. I960 Ag 20 Quezon on Rizal. L. R. Serrano, port PFP v. 53, 

n. 34, pp. 20-22 Ag 20 '60. (iPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 283,). 
Also in B-b, p. 116.) 

2687 I960 /sg 20 Quezon and the Amor i can military bases in the Philippines, 

Sergio Osmofia, Sr. port PIT v. 53, n. 34, p. 57 
. Ag 20 '60. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, p. 283. Also in Q B-b, 
0 p. 116.) 

2688 I960 Ag 20 Quezon and his fights. R. C. Lim. port PFP v. 53, 

n. 34, pp. 34, 36, 52 Ag 20 '60. (iPP, IDRS-UP, v. 10, 
p. 283. Mso in n B-b, pp. 11, 116.) 

2689 I960 Ag 26 ¥0 the people; Quezon is remembered as civil service 

champion. MTjjBfia v. 15, p. 4-a, Ag 26 '60. (Q B-b, p. '82.) 
.. 2690 I960 Ag n.d. The '.uezon story. Francisco Villanueva, Jr. F. T . 

v. 15, n. 3, pp. 152, 154-155 A .g '60. (IPP,IDRS-UP, 
■ V. 10, p. 283. Also in Q B-b, p. 22.) 

2691 i960 Ag n.d. Quezon and nationalism. (Editorial) SLMews n. 29, 

.p. 3 Ag '60. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2692 I960 Ag n.d. '.uezon and education. (Editorial) PJE n. 39, pp. 142- 

143 /* '60. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2693 I960 S 24 President Quezon- the nation builder. Conrado Benitaz. 

PH v. 41, p. 8, S 24 '60. (■■ B-b, pp. 6, 133.) 

2694 lgflo S n.d. Code of ethics. Manuel L. luozon. Opxaa. v- 17, outside 

backcover S '60. Cow issue. (IPP,UPL, v. 11, p. 2038.) 

2695 I960 S ) , 

0 ) n «"-' :uozon arid the common 'tao' - a legacy. Vicente iraneta. 

il CF v. 8, n. 9-iO pp. 5-6, 32 S-0 '60. 

2696 I960 D 8 Manuel L. Quezon. 

MChr,oji. v. 16, pp. 9, 10 (Q B-b, p. 62.) 

2697 I960 D 10 Quezon forgave his would-be assassin. J. T. Nueno. port 

PFP v. 53, n. 49, pp. 126-128 D 10 "60. (lPP,IDRS-UP, 
v. 6, p. 296. -' Also in IPP,UPL, Y 1 60, p. 289 & Q B-b, 
. pp. 14, 116.) 

2698 I960) D n.d.) President Quezon- the nation builder. Conrado Benitez. 
1961) Mr n.d.) , 

ISE v. 10, n. 3-4, pp. 3-33 D '60-Hr '61. (lPP,IDRS-UP, 



Ill - 353 

- 928 ~ 

v. 6, p. 296. Also in Q 3-b", pp. 6, 169 & IPP,UPL, Y '61 
p. 289.) 
Quezon scheme. 

EH v. 41, p. 13 F 11 '61. (Q S_b, p. 134.) 
Fight for independence recalled; a triumph for democratic 
system. MDB v . 189, n. 3, p. 1 Jl 4 '61. (Q B-b, p. 75^ 
Quezon admired M a cArthur. 

MTiass v. 16, p. 20-a, Jl 11 '61. (Q B-b, p. 83.) 
When the Americans "killed" Quezon. J. V. Merritt. 
il PJP v. 54, n. 30 pp. 28 , 30 Jl 29 '61. (lPP,UPL, 
T '61, p. 289. Also in Q ^-b, pp. 13, 116.) 

2703 19&1 Jl n.d. Magagandang halimbawa sa buhay ni Manuel L. Quezon. 

Pablo M. Ouasay. PJJS n. 40, p. 117 Jl '61. (lPP,UPL r 
v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2704 1961 Ag 1 Quezon died 17 years ago today; the nation's greatest 

statesman., ffi r. 187, n. 27, p. 1 Ag 1 '61. (Q B-b, p.,. 

2705 1961 Ag 1 Quezon City, press, radio men to honor Garcia. 

TSimes, v. 16, p. 6-A Ag 1 '61. (Q B-b, p. 83.) 

2706 1961 .Ag 1 KLQ death recalled today. 

MTjmefl v. 16, p. 1 Ag 1 .'61. (Q B-b, p. 83.) 

2707 1961 Ag 6 4 Asian countries in MLQ fete. 

MDB v. 16, n. 167, pp. 10-13 Ag 6 .'61. (Q 3-b, p. 75,) 

2708 1961 Ag 7 What m a dc Quezon a gro a t man? ' 

MTiffies. v. 16, p. 1-b 7 '61. (Q B-b, p. 83.) 

2709 1961 Ag 13 Quezon's good fight. 

MChxoa,. v. 17, pp. 10-19 Ag 13 '61. (Q B-b, p. 62.) 

2710 1961 Ag 14 Birthday programs for Quezon slatod. 

MTiaes v. 16, p. 14- a Ag 14 '61. (Q B-b, p. 83'.) 

2711 1961 Ag 13 Garcia lauds MLQ's nationalism. 

piTEflfl. v. 17, pp. 1, 5 Ag 13 '61. (Q B-b, p. 62.)' 

2712 1961 Ag 16 Quezon Bay program set. 

MCjiron. v . 17, pp. 1, 2 Ag 16 '61. (Q 3-b, p. 62.) 

2713 1961 Ag 16 Baguio Quezon Day rites set. 

MTimsa. v. 16, p. 2-A Ag 16 '61. (Q 3-b, p. 83.) 

2714 1961 Ag 16 Folk dances of four other Asian countries at Quezon Day 

dance. MTioaa v. 16, p. 4-a Ag 16 *6l. (Q B-b, p. 83.) 

2715 1961 Ag 16 H 0 fathered the national language. Consocio Borje. 

il port iLGxa. v. 28, n. 8, pp. 18-19 Ag 16 '61. 
(IPP.UPL, Y '61, p. 28Q. Also in Q B-b, pp. 6, 170.) 

2716 1961 Ag 16 The end of a strange political friendship. J. V. Merritt. 

port WGrj^ v. 28, n. 8, pp. 14-15 Ag 16 '61. (lPP,UPL,. 
Y '61, p. 289. Also in Q B-b, pp. 13, 170.) 



2699' 1961 F 11 

2700 1961 Jl 4 

2701 1961 Jl 11 

2702 1961 Jl 29 ' 



Ill - 354 ' 

- 929 - 

ug. 16 President Quezon and the radio operator. C. Mendigo. 

il ffira. v. 28, n. 8, >. 16 Ag 16 '61. (lPP,UPL, Y '61. 
p. 289. Also in Q B-b, pp. 13, 170.) 
?718 1962 Ag 17 Garcia loads 3-day observance on Quezon's 83rd anniversary 

Mojig. v. 16, p. 14 Ag 17 '61. (Q B-b, p. 50.) 

2719 1961 Ag 18 Nation honors Quezon; Quezon City brass plant trees. 

DM v. 13, pp. 1-2 :.g 18 'hi (Q B-b, o. 27.) 

2720 1961 Ag 17 Vargas, Halacanang ' s 4 ox- reporters talk on MLQ, 

» SyjjMfift v. 16, p. 6-A Ag 17 '61. (Q B-b, p.' 83.) 

2721 1961 Ag 18 MLQ birthday made holiday. 

SiSbxsn. v. 17, pp. 1, 18 .lg 18 '61. (Q 3-b, p. 62.) 

2722 1961 Ag 18 Quezon Day a holiday. 

v. 187, n. 42, pp. 1-2 Ag 18 '61. (Q B-b, p. 75.) 

2723 1961 Ag 18 August 19 special holiday. 

SSiaaa. 16, p. 1 % 18 '61. (a B-b, p. 83.) 

2724 1961 Ag 18 Valdoz to speak on Quezon. 

MilQ&S v. 16, p. 24-A Ag 18 '61. (Q B-b, p. 83.) 

2725 1961 Ag 18 Nation to mark 83rd birthday of Quezon. 

MTimea v. 16, p. 24-A Ag 18 '61. (Q B-b, p. 83.) 

2726 1961 Ag 19 MLQ remember as beloved leader. 

M v. 13, p. 17 Ag 19 '61. (Q B-b, p. 27.) 

2727 1961 Ag 19 Nation marks 83rd Quezon anniversary. 

M v. 13, pp. 1, 14 lg 19 '61. (Q B-b, p. 27.) 

2728 1961 Ag 19 c.uezon the soldier. 

M v. 13, p. 4 Ag 19 '61. (Q B-b, p. 27.) 

2729 1961 Ag 19 Quezon's legacy. (Editorial) 

M v. 13, p. 4 Ag 19 '61. (Q B-b, p. 27.) 

2730 1961 Ag 19 P. I. marks Quezon birthday. 

ENejia v, 16, p. 1 Ag 19 '61. (Q B-b, p. 50.) 

2731 1961 Ag 19 Nation marks 83rd birthday of Quezon. 

MDB v. 187, n. 43 pp. 1-2 *.g 19 '61. (Q B-b, p. 75.) 

2732 1961 Ag 19 83rd anniversary of Quezon today, foremost social justice 

exponent. MDB v. 181, n. 43, p. 1 Ag 19 '61. (Q B-b, p., 

2733 1961 Jig 19 Quezon birthday. (Editorial) 

MDB v. 117, n. 43, p. 6 »g 19 '61. .(Q B-b, p. 75.) 

2734 1961 .ig 19 President nearly boycotted his own inauguration. 

MDB v. 187, n. 43, p. 1 g 19 '61. (Q B-b, p. 75.) 

2735 1961 Ag 19 MLQ ' 3 unfinished task challenges leaders now. (Editorial) 

Jffiinaa v. 16, p. 4- a Ag 19 '61. (q B-b, P . 83.) 

2736 1961 Ag 19 finnuol L. Q\io.zon - leaders' statesman. 

MiMiS. v. 16, p. 3-A Ag 19 '61. (Q B-b, p. 83.) 

2737 1961 Ag 19 Quezon memory honored today. 

MSjoss. v. 16, p. 1 Ag 19 '61. (Q B-b, p. 83.) 



2717 1961 



- 950 - 



III - 355 



2738 1961 Ag 19 Taflada spuaks on MLQ. 

ISilOaa v. 16, p. 7-a k% lg »61. (C, B— b, p. 83.) 

' im 1961 % 19 °- C «nter of Quezon rites today , 

ffiv. 42, pp. i, 2 19 '61. ('< B_b, D . 134.) 
-V40 1961 Ag 1 9 N ation observoa , uoaon , s 83rd b . rth 

£H v. 42, p. 5 Ag 19 '61. (r. B_ b , p . 3.34.) . 
™ 1961 ^ 19 ML. extolled at lions meet. 

^ v - 42, 4r 19 '61. (-: 3-b, p. 134.) 
:.7^2 1961 Ag 19 -^ozon's greatest triumph. J. V. Umali. 

il 3TH pp. 5-II, Ag 19 '61. (lPP,UPL, Y '61, p. 289. dls' 

in •. 3_b, pp. 20, 134.) 

2743 1961 Ag 19 luezon and the can opener. Gonzalo P. Mis a. 

m n. 54, p. 20 Ag 19 '61. (lPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040. 
•Also in 1 B-b, pp. 13, 116 & IPP,UPL, Y '61, p. 289.) ■ 

2744 1961 Ag 19 My town remembers President r iuezon . i sidr0 c> Gregorio> 

£12 n. 54, p. 82 Ag 19 '61. (iPP/JPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 
Also in r B- b> p. 116.) 

2745 1961 Ag 19 Ifonong o ueson . s life with father> ^ R> ^ 

£EE.v. 54, n. 33, pp. 44-47 19 '61. (IPP, UPL, 

P. 289. Jleo in 0 B-b, pp . 10, 116.) 

2746 1961 Ag 1 9 N ini ^ Nononf ,. B> v> Sebastian, il p0 rt STM pp jl 

13 Ag 19 '61. . (lPP,UPL, Y '61, p . 289.) 

2747 1961 Ag 19 'The unfinished -uozon memorial. Jose J». Able to a. 

n. 54, pp. 26-27 Ag 19 '61. ( IPP, UPL, v. 10 

2041 J * M 

2748 1961 Ag 19 The Q uozon memorial monununt in ?3TQZ Pprk> Lucona> J 

PFP n. 54, p. 49, Ag 19 '61. illus. (lPP,UPL, v. 10| 
p. 2041.) I 

2749 1961 Ag 20 N a tion pays Quezon tribute. 

mjO&a. v. 16, p. 1 20 '61. 3-b, p. 83.) 

2750 1961 Ag 20 Quozon 'a message to the Filipino youth. 

MChEDj^ v , i 7 f p> 22 <Vl 20 '61. (q B-b, p. 62.) 

2751 1961 Ag 20 Quezon remembered in nation-wide rites. 

^Sbxan. v - 17, pp. l, 5 Ag 20 »6i. (q B_ b , P . 62.) 

2752 1961 % -20 -'iuojjon and Filipino nationalism. 

M&USM*. v. 17, p. 22 Ag 20'61. (q B-b, p, 62.) 

2753 1961 Ag 20 Cite role of ML'1 in P.I, freedom fight. 

£2 v - 42, pp. 1, 2 20 '61. (q 3-b, p. 134.) 

2754 1961 Ag 27 Quezon & Osmona. Alfredo Veloso. port STM v . 17, 

n. 3, pp. 10-11 .\g 27 *61. (IPP, UPL, Y >6l, p. 289.) 

2755 1961 Ag 29 We, the people; if quezon were alive .today. 

iS& Oa a v. 16, p. 4- A -lg 29 '61. (q B-b, p. 83.) 




- 931 



III - 356 



2756 1961 Ag n.d. Quezon and his courageous decisions. (Editorial) 

£Q3 v. 40, n. 3, pp. W9-151, 203 > '61., (lPP,UPL, 
Y '61, p. 289. .Uso in IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. '2039, * 
^ B-b, p. 169.) 

2757 1961 n.d. 'we son: warrior from Baler. J. S. Tornacruz. il 

Mv. 20, pp. 12-13, 32 Ag '61. (l?P,UPL, Y '61, 
p. 289. Uso in 1. 3-b, pp. 20, 169.) 

2758 1961 As n.d. Quezon and loyalty to country. (Editorial) 

32. v. 5, n. a, p. 1, Ag '61. ( IPP, UPL, Y '61, p. 289, 
Also in ! \ B_b, p . ifig.) 

2759 1961 A C n.d. Manuoi L. r wzon: thf; statoaman par OXCRllenoQ> (Editorial) 

2JQ£ v. 8, n. 11, p. i inside back cover ' Ag '61. 
(1PP,UPL, Y '61, p. 289. Also in li-b, p. 169.) 

2760 1961 Ag n.d. Quezon and the press. Armando J. Malay. 

n. 3, pp. 68-70 Ag '61. (iPP, UPL, v. 10, 
P. 2039.) 

2761 1961 S 26 50 years with the times; M ozon on press relations. 

MSim^v. 16, p. 1-3 s 26 '61. (': B-b, p. 83.) 

2762 1961 D 27 50 years with the times; despedida for Manuel L. ' We20 n. 

ESAmi v. 16, p. 1 D 27 '61. (r B-b, p. 83.) 

2763 1962 Jl 4 The declaration of independence, il port WG^. v . 29, 

n. 2, p. 50 Jl 4 '62. ( IPP, UPL Y '62, p. 320. Also 
in IPP, UPL v. 11, p . 2038.) 

2764 1962 Jl n.d. Manuel Luis Quezon, the father of social justice. 

P. M. a. Gachero. il FT v. 17, n. 2, pp. 107-110, 
114-145 Jl '62. ( IPP, UPL Y '62, p. 320.) 

2765 -1962 Jl n.d. President C;uezon, the international nationalist. 

Pie Pedrosa. iiQ. v. 4, n. 2, pp. 90-94, Jl '62. 
(IPP,UPL, Y '62, p. 320.) 

2766 1962 Jl) ^ Quezon , a Philippino contribution to global freedom. 



Cnmilo Osias. port PER v. 9, n. 1, pp. 19-22, 35 
(lH?,UPL, Y '62, p. 320.) 

2767 1962 Jl) ^ ouezon, the leader and the family man. (Editorial) 

C. P. Pacheco. PG v. 6, n. 7-8 p. 1, 54 Jl-Ag '62. 
( m \ * '62, p. 320.) 

2768 1962 Ag 15 Quezon's greatest triumphs. V. A.P a cis. il P ort 

}lhj!^ v. 29, n. 9, pp. 10-11, 33 Ag 15 '62. 
(IPP, UPL, Y '62, p. 320.) 

2769 1962 Ag 15 When 'Won ^ the press. Luis Serrano, il port. 

v. 29, n. 9, pp. 12-12 Ag 15 '62. (lPP,U?L, Y '62, 
P. 320.) ' 



- 952 - 



2770 1962 Ag' 18 The M. L. Quezon that I know. R, C. Lim. il PFP v. 55.- 

n, 33, PP. 28, 32, 68 '.g 18 '62. (TPP/JPL, Y '62, p. 32- 

2771 1962 Ag 18 Quezon- a reappraisal of his centralization concept. 

Honina Allaroy, il port FH mag. pp. 12-15 Ag 18 '62. 

(IF?,UFL, Y '62, p. 320.) 
£772 1962 Ag 18 Quezon's fights with death. J. P. Abletes. il PEL 

v. 55, n. 33, pp. 18-79 A K 18 '62. (lPF,UPL, Y '62, p. 3?'- 
"773 1962 18 The tenancy principles of Manuel "uozon. Severino Pelayo 

il ML v. 55, n. 33, pp. 42-43 Ag 18 '62. ( IPP, UPL, 

Y '62, p. 320.) 

2774 1962 Jig n.d. "uuzon, tho father. Araceli T. Salazar. gj^jjqf.. n. 4, ■ 

pp. 7-9 • .g '62. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2775 1962 Ag n.d. Scientific Views ; Manuel L. Quezon and Philippine scienca 

Florencio A. Medina. Sqjencjj Rev. n. 3, pp. 19, 22 

'« '62. (IPP, UPL., v. 10, p. 2041. Also in IPP,IDRS-UP, 

v. 8, p. 394.) 

2776 1962 % n.d. Manuel L. Quezon. (Editorial) PJE v. 41, n. 3, pp. 156- 

157 M '62. (IPP, UPL, Y '62, p. 320.) 

2777 1962 Ag n.d. Manuel L. Quezon- his views on some common problems of 

his day. G. A. Liquicia. port v. 17, n. 3, 

pp. 189, 218-219 Ag '62. (IPP, UPL, Y '62, p. 320.) 

2778 1962 S n.d. Manuel L. Quezon. ££) v. 1, n. 1, p. 5 S '62. 

(IPP, UPL, Y '62, p. 320.) 

2779 1962 S n.d. The Quezon-Salasar incident. Leopoldo R. Serrano. 

Hiat.Bul. n. 6, pp. 249-252, S '62. (IPP, UPL, v. 10, 
p. 2040.) 

2780 1962 S n.d. Anecdotes about Quezon. Carlos Quirino. RjAi*Slil«, 6. 

pp. 239-243, 3 '62. (IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2781 1962 0 21 Quezon and tho bones of Bonifacio. Francisco Villanueva f 

Jr. il STM v. 18, n. 11, pp. 40-41 0 21 '62. (IPP, 
IDRS-UP, v. 3, p. 394.) 

2782 1962 0 n.d. The President goes to Dilibid. Pjaflgxamja, n. 14, pp. 33-- 

34, 0 '62. (IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2783 1962 0 n.d. Bodyguards at the palace. ZsHQima 14, pp. 35-38, 

0 '62. (IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2784 1962 N 15 Quezon and the 21-gun salute. 

JSimaa v. 17, pp. 1, 12 n 15 '62. (Q B-b, p. 83.) 

2785 1962 D 15 Osmena and Quezon. F. S. Marquardt. il port S? v. 55, 

n. 50, pp. 36-39 D 15 '62. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 8, p. 394.) 

2786 1963 J a 12 Quezon's former valet, (isidro N. Aromin) Ernesto 'A. Flore 

Jr. PJT n. 56, p. 26 Ja 12 '63. ( IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2041. 



III - 356 

- 935 - 



2787 1963 Jl n.d. Manuel Quezon and independence for the Philippines; some 

qualifications. G. E. Wheeler. UPRD v. 2, n. 3, pp. 12- 
16 Jl '63. (lPP,IDRS-UP, v. 8, t:$*.) <t v x 



V. U, 



2768 19.3 Ag 17 The dynamic chief, p. L. Espino. il port MI p. 29, 

% 17 '63. (lPP,IDR3-UP, v . 8 , p. 394.) 

2789 1963. Ag 17 Aboard the Casiana. T. L. Rodriguez, il port MI 

PP. 36-37 % 17 '63. (IPP,IDR8-UP, v. 8, p. 394.) 

2790 1963 Ag 17 The Quezon era. port MI pp. 26-27 Agl 7 '63. 

( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 8, p. 394.) 

2791 1963 Ag 17 Quezon's early struggles. E. A. Flores. port PIT v. 56, 

n. 33, pp. 26, 28 Ag 17 '63. (iPP, IDRS-UP, v . 8, p. 
394.) 

2792 1963 Ag 17 Quezon and the Red Cross. E. S. G ir on. il MI pp. 33, 

34 Ag 17 '63. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v . 8, p. 394.) 

2793 1963 Ag 17 Quezon's "more government and less politics". R. C. Lim 

il III v. 56, n. 33, pp. 10, 56 .Ag 17 '63, (iPP, 1DRS- 
UP ' v - 8 > P- 395. Also in IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2041.) 

2794 1963 Ag 18 Quezon and Aguinaldo; their friendship and' feud. J. 3. 

Tomacruz. il port STM pp.. 38-41 »g 1Q '63. (iPP, IDRS- 
UP, v. 8, P . 394.) 

2795 1963 Ag 19 The last days of Quezon. B. R. Diho. il EX 62nd 

Issue, pp. 6, 13, 24 Ag 19 '63. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v . 8, 
P. 394.) 

2796 1963 Ag 25 Reminiscences on "The Star of 3aler". POSKag^ n . 6; 

P. 9, Ag 25 '63. (IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2797 1963 Ag n.d. Manuel L. Quezon. (Editorial) PJE v. 42, n. 2, pp. 88-89, 

Ag '63. (EPF, IDRS-UP, v. 8, p. 394.) 

2798 1963 Ag n.d. Social reforms under two presidents; a parallelism. 

Antonio Golez. port PT v. 10, n. 3, pp. 17-19 Ag "63. 
(IPP, IDRS-UP, v . 8, p. 395.) 

2799 1964 J a n.d. Quezon and the marie an presidents. Gerald E. Wheeler. 

EsMSL n. 1, .p. 4-8, J a '64. (iPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2041.) 

2800 1964 Ap 19 Quezon's parting words. J. A. Villamor. il j=|TM pp. 20-23 

Ap 19 '64. (IPP, IDRS-OP, v. 9, p. 226.) 

2801 1964 Ag 15 Quezon's greatest triumph. B. R. Diho. il port PFP 

v. 57, n. 33, pp. 36, 38-39, 57-58 \g 15 '64. (iPP, IDRS- 
lJ P| v. 9, p. 226. Also in IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2802 1964 Ag 15 The legal battle that made Quezc^. Nicanor M. Patricio. 

il MI p. 10 Ag 15 '64 (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 9, p. 226. Also 
in IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 



- 934 - 



III - 359 



2803 1964 15 Quezon the insurrecta. P. Dolor Angeles. 

CM n. 19, p. 14, Ag 15 '64. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2804 1964 .'iff 15 The day Quezon arrived late. Leon S. del Rosario. 

£•! n. 19, p. 15 Ag 15 '64. (IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 
2 ! X)5 19 4 Ag 15 Life with the Quezon family. Melinda N. Quintos. illus. 

CM n. 19, pp. 24-27 Ag 15 '64. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.,^ 

2806 1964 Ag 16 Queaon and Mae/arthur. J. V. Merritt. port ffl p. 26, 

-V? 16 '64. (IPF,IDRS-UP, v. 9, p. 226. Also in IPP, UPL, 
v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2807 1964 Ag 16 .',s a statesman, Quezon was a fearless fighter. J. S. 

Tomacruz. port 3TH pp. 22-23 Ag 16 '64. (IPP, IDRS-UP. 
v. 9, p. 226. Also in IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2808 1964 .'.ff .16 A nationalistic president. Francisco Villanuova. 

il .S™ pp. 26-27 -Ag 16 '64. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 9,- p. 226, 
Also in IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2809 1964 Ag 19 A ncsw move is begun to build Quezon Memorial Park and 

transform it from eyesore to beauty spot. Gerardo L. Galv.?n' 
Gra. n. 31, pp. 8-9 Ag 19 '64. ( IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2810 1964 Ag 19 5 fateful decisions. Jesus V. Merritt. Gr_a. n. 31, 

p. 10 Ag 19 '64. ( IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2811 1964 Ag 19 MLQ's farm reforms. Dell H. Grocia. ka. n. 31, p. 10 

Ag 19 '64. ( IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2812 1964 Ag' 19 President Quezon's code of citizenship and ethics. 

Gr_a. n. 31, p. 12 ' Ag 19 '64. (lPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 20; 
2313 1964 Ag 19 Quezon's last days. Nick I. Marte. Gr_a< n. 31, p. 

Ag 19 '64. ( IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2814 1964 Ag 19 Let's live by Quezon code. Primitivo C. Milan. Gj 

n. 31, p. 12 Ag 19 '64. (IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2039. )i 

2815 1964 J-g 23 The genius of Quezon. Francisco Villanueva, Ur. 

port EX 114 th Isr;ue pp. 6, 26 % 23 '64. (IPP,IDRS- 
UP, v. 9, p. 226. Also in IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2816 I964 Ag 23 Quezon's dedication to public service. Mariano Santa 

Romana. il EX 114th Issue pp. 7, 30 Ag 23 '64. 
. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 9, p. 226. Uso in IPP, UPL, v. 10, 
p. 2040.) 

2817 1964 Ag 23 Quezon in wax. Durauk D. ;*guila. M. PP« 14-15 

■1g 23 '64. (IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2041.) 

2818 1964 Ag n.d. Manuel L. Quezon, the man. port FT v. 11, n. 8, 

p. 15 Ag '64. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 9, p. 206.) 

2819 1964 Ag n.d. Manuel L. Quezon and the American presidents. G. E. 

Wheeler. JQ, v. 2, n. 2, pp. 231-246 Ag »64. (lPP,IDRS- 
UP, v. 9, p. 206.) 




III - 360 

- 955 - 



2320 1964 Ag n.d. Manuel L. Quezon. PJE v. 43, n. 1, pp. 13-14 -Ag '64. 

(lPP,IDRr>-ijP, v. 9, P. 226.) 
''821 1964 S 30 How Quezon got married. Jorge B. Vargas, port M. v « 3 1 

n. 14, pp. 10, 77 S 30 '64. ( IPP , IDRS-UP , v. 9, P- 226. 

Also in IPP,UFL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 
2822 1964 3 n.d. Quezon the statesman. Ernesto del Rosario. JSSigSfiaSPJl 

n. 45, p. 17 3 '64. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 
• 1 823 1964 0 10 Lessons from Q\iezon. Teodoro Evangelista. port PJ3i 

p. 9, 0 10 '64. (IPP,IM3- T JP, v. 9, P- 206. Also in 

IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 
2324 1964 N 22 The QuezonQuezon, Jr.; libel suit over Spence book. Sx- 

p. 9, K 22 '64. (IP?,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 
2025 "1964 D 12 "The reluctant partners". B. R. Diho. il ?M v - 57, 

n. 50, pp. 34, 36, 38, 40, 169-170 D 12 '64. (IPP,IBRS- 

UP, v. 9, P. 206.) 

2326 1964 D n.d. Quezon and Philippine foreign policy. Hauro Mendez. 

DF4 Rev, n. 4, pp. 32-35 D '64. ( Speech on the 86th 
birthday anniversary of President ^ezon before the Quean- 
Society and the Philippine Columbian Association, August 
19, 1964.) (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

9^,27 1065 Ap n.d. Manuel L. Quezon and the American Presidents. Gerald B. 

feeler, jfc n. 1, PP. 36-51 Ap '65. (lTP,UFL f v. 10, 
p. 2040.) 

2828 1965 Ag 14 The road to freedom. C. S. Arrazola. port Hi. P- 13, 

Ag 14 '65. ( IPP, IMS-DP, v. 9, p. 206.) 

2329 1965 Ag 14 Quezon opposed two-party system. P. H. Ma«no. il K£ 

p ; 12, Ag 14 '65. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 9, p. 206.) 

2330 1965 Ag 14 Quezon's battles with the press. P. L. Bspino. port UX. 

p. 11, Ag 14 '65. (IPP,IBRS-UP, v. 9, p. 206.) 
2831 1965 % 15 Quezon's war with the ugly Americans. J. V. Merritt. 

port m PP. 14, 15 15 '65. (IPP, IBR3-UP, v. 9, 
p. 206.) 

283? 1965 Ag 15 Quezon's simple living. A. V. Raquiza. il SOL PP- 52- 

53 Ag 15 '.'5. (IPP,IDRS-UP, v. 9, p. 206.) 

2833 1965 Ag 18 Quezon,^ the nationalist. Luis Serrano, port IS v. 32 

n. 3, pp. 18-19 Ag 18 '65. ( IPP, 1**3-10?, v. 9, p. 206 

2334 1965 Ag 18 The apolitical Quezon. M. A. Merc a do. port W£ v. 32, 

"a. 3, pp. 15-17, 34 Ag 18 '65. (IPP, I^DP, v. 9, 
p. 206.) 

2835 1965 V 21 Quezon and the judiciary. E.G. Lim port PFP v. 58, 

n. '34, PP. 24, 26, 28 * 21 (IPP,™> r. 9, 

p. 206.) 



.. Ill - 351 

- 936 - 

28:16 .1965 Ag n.d. Father of Philippine Independence. FM^^Tpdjff. n. 12, 

p. 22, .Ag '65. (lPF,U?L, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2837 1965 Ag n.d. The great man of Baler who was horn in .August. P.M. A. 

Cachero. FT, v. 20, n, 2, pp.. 81, 86, 100, 142, 139 
Ag '65. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 9, p. 206.) 

2838 1965 • N 14 The pre- Commonwealth Quezon; a legal luminary. Luis Serrano 

port STM pp. 38, 40-41 N 14 '65. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 11 
p. 282.) 

2839 1965 IT 17 Let illiterates vote, il WG v. 32, n. 21, pp. 12-13 ' 

N 17 '65. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 11, p. 282.) 
iiHO 1965 D 8 Manuel L. que son, Jr. ; democracy and public opinion. 

il lift v. 32, n. 24, pp. 8-9 D 8 '65. (.IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 11. 
p. 282.) 

2841 ' 1965 n.d.m. Mags ays ay, Kennedy and Quezon. Carlos P. Romulo. UP_Tojday 

PP. 3-7 4th q '65. (IPP,TJPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2842 1966 Ja 5 Man; scientist or humanist? il ¥G v. 32, n. 28. pp. 18- 

•19 J a 5 '66. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 11, p. 282.) 

2843 1966 F 9 Reflections on the constitution, port VG v. 32, n. 33, 

pp. 14-15 F9 '66. ( IPP, IMS, UP v. 11, p. 282.) 

2844 I966 F 23 ,1 house divided. WG v. 32, n. 35, pp. 18, 20, 24 ' 

F 23 '66. ( IP?, IDRS-UP, v. 11, p. 282.) 

2845 1066 Mr 13 Quezon's winning ways. E. P. Virata, port B^. n. 195, 

p. 35, Mr 13 *66. ( IPP,. ICRS- UP, v. 11, p.' 282.) 

2846 1966 Ap 20 The fair hope-now! il WG v. 32, n. 43, pp. 10-11, 

20-21 Ap 20 '66. . ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 11, p. 282.) 

2847 1966 Ap n.d. The political philosophy of Manuel L. Quezon. Claro M. Reoto. 

ZjmpJLam n. 18, pp. 51-64. Ap '66. (From Manila Chronicle 
Aug. 20, 1953.) (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2041.) 

2848 1966 My 18 A parliamentary approach to constitutional change, il 

3iS v. 32, n. 47, pp. 10-11 My 18 '66. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, 
v. 11, p. 282.) 

284.9 1966 My 25 Unicameralism. WG v. 32, n. 48, pp. 16-17 My 25 '66. 

( IP?, IDRS-UP, v. 11, p. 282.) 

2850 1966 Je 22 Set freedom's, defender free, il ¥G v. 32, n. 52, 

pp. 22-23, 41 Je 22 '66. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 11, p. 282.) 

2851 1966 Jl 13 The leisure problem, il WG v. 33, n. 3, pp. 26, 28 

Jl 13 '66. (IPB, IDRS-UP, v. 11, p. 282.) 

2852 1966 Jl 20 Threat to tradition, il VJG v. 33, pp. 32-33 Jl 20 '66. 

(IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 11, p. 282. Also in IPPjUPL, v. 11, 
p. 2038.) 

2853 1966 Jl) n.d. Charismatic leadership in Southeast Isia: Manuel Luis 

S ) 

Quezon. C. A. Buss. S&l,. v. 1, n. 3, pp. 3-8 Jl-3 '66. 
(IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, p. 485.) 



- 937 



III - 362 



2854 1966 Ag -3 Sense of national identity, il Sfi v. ' 33, n. 5, pp. 16- 

19 Jl 27; n. 6, pp. 24-25 Ag 3 '66. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, 
v. 11, p. 282.) 

2055 1966 Ag 17 My father was proud of the Filipino. Manuel It. Quezon, Jr. 

port £i v. 33, n. 8, p. 10, 12 Ig 17 '66. ( IPP, IDRS-UP 
v. 11, p. 282.) 

2856 1966 Ag 17 Quezon and the national policy. T, A. -ogoncillo. port 

M v. 33, n. 8, pp. 11, 14, 60-61 Ag 17 '66. (iPP, 
IDRS-UP, v. U, p. 282.) 

2857 1966 Ag 20 Quezon the leader, Ramon linorio. il PJLjP. v. 59, 

n. 34, pp. 25-26 Ag 20 '66. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 11, p. 282.) 

2858 1966 Ag 20 Quezon's biggest fight. R. C. Lim. il FFP v » 59, 

n. 34, pp. 30-32, 63 ..g 20 '66. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 11, 
p. 282.) 

2359 1966 Ag 31 Language; a people's soul. Manuel L. Quezon, Jr. 

v. 33, n. 9, pp. 16-17 Ag 24; n. 10, p. 34 Ag 31 '66. 
(lPP f IDRS-UP t v. 11, p. 282. Also in I?P,UPL, v. 11, 
p. 2038.) 

2860 1966 Ag n.d. Quezon's last thoughts for his country. Ban B. Alsaybar. 

JUaaaxma, n. 18, PP . 33-36 Ag '66. (ipp,ufl, v. 10, 
p. 2039.) 

2861 196'6 Ag n.d. lianuel L. Quezon; profile of a nation builder, M. J. 

Laterina. port PJE v. 45, n. 2, pp. 134-135 Ag '66. 
(IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 11, p. 282.) 

2862 1966 S 11 Quezon and Osmena; contrast in character. STM pp. 22-23 

3 11 '66. (Prom a chapter in a book "Teodoro H. Kalaw: Aiie 
de Camp to Freedom.) (iP^/uPL, v. 10, p. 2042. Also in 
IPP , IDRS-UP , v. 11, p. 282.) 
2863. 1967 Ja 7 Run like hell. F. 0. Javines. PFP n. 60, p. 30 Ja 7 '67. 

(IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2864 1967 Ag 5 Quezon, as Mac.'irthur saw him. T.irso L. Rodriguez. JM 

pp. 18-19 Ag 5 '67. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2865 1967 Ag 13 From poverty to prominence. _3TM pp. 26-28 Ag 13 '67. 

(IFF,UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2866 1967 .Og 13 Quezon, the lover. Pedro A. Gagelonia. VflE&ftlV, P« 3, 

Ag 13 '67. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2867 1967 iig 19 Quezon and the police. Rodrigo C. Lim. PFP n. 60, 

p. 20 Ag 19 '67. (IPP, UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2868 1967 Ag 19 Quezon in quotes. Barbara Luna. PFP. n. 60, p. 32, 

Ag 19 '67. (IPP, U?L, v. 10, p. 2041.) 

2869 1967 Ag 19 A PC band remembers Quezon. Ban B. flsaybar. PFP. n. 60, 

p. 63 Ag 19 '67. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2021.) 



J 



- 958 - 



III - 363 



2870 1967 £g 19 "Hy loyalty to my party ends ...» PFP n . 60, p. 12 • 

Jg 19 '67. (lPP,UPL, v. 10, .p. 2041.) 
'.371. 1967 Jg 21 We remember President Quezon. Ernesto R. Rodrigue Zc 

M n. 3, pp. 14-15 Jc 21 '67. (lFP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 
2372 1967 S 10 Quezon calls on Roosevelt. Jose.E. Romero. Bj. Issue No, 

273,. p. 6 S 10 (67. (lPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2873 1967 S n.d. ,•; character sketch of President Manuel L. Quezon. Kigucl 

°aaizares. MExssnaaaiX n. 48, pp. 17-24 S *67. (IPP,UPL 
v. 10, p. 2039.) 

2874 1967 . K n.d.. President Quezon ^ the judiciary. PanprgfM n. 19, 

p. 8 ' N '67. (IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2039.) 
•2875 1967 D 'n.d. Quezon and Sumulong. Ejc.' Issue No. 289 p. 14 D '67. 

(IPP,UPL, v. 10, p. 2040.) 

2876 1968 Jl) ^ The youth as revolutionary. G. B. Estrada. Tr v. 4, • 

. _ " ' n. 1, pp. 74-85 Jl-0 '68. ( IPP, IDRS-UP,' v. 14, p. 486.) 

2877 1968 14 The President that was Quezon. Hernando J. .Abaya. 

' ^Ca- v. 35, pp. 16-19. (IPP,UPL, '68-72.) 

2878 1968 Ag IS Rizal and Quezon: L Heritage of Heroism. Julita R. Sta. 

Romana. 3TM pp. 38-39. (IPP,UPL, '68-72.) 

2879 1968 .Ag 21 Focus on Quezon City. Toodoro 0. Berbano. Grja.. v, 35, ■ *. 

pp. 48B-64. (IPP,UPL, '68-72.) 

2880 1968 S 15 .^rayat Farmers Honor Quezon. PHil, Pan^ v. 1, pp. 14-15 

(_TP-UPL, '68-72.) 

2881 I968 S n.d. Legacies of Quezon. -• Oamilo Osias. F EFreeffl as o j^ v. 49, 

pp. 7-16. (IPP,UPL, '68-72.). 

2882 1968 0 28 A horse for President Quezon. V. p aC is. port M 

v. 4, n. 10, pp. 4, 63 0 28 '68. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, 
p. 486.) • 

2883 1968 N 1 The Stately Rigodon: Dance of State.- Ester Salcedo. 

. MI v. 7, pp. 18-20, (IPP,TJPL, '68-72. )• 

2884 1969 Mr -17 -RM and other great men.* Ramon Ellen, port ' M v. 4, 

n. 30, p. 16 Mr 17 '69. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v, 14, p. 485.) 

2885 1969 Je 16 Vas not Quezon worried? Vicente ,'lbano Pacis. OT v. 4, 

p. 4 (IPF,WPL, '68-72.) 
2886' 1969 Je. 22 A soldier from Baler. Recah Trinidad, port £M pp. 50- 

51 Je 22 '69. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, p. 486.) 
2887 1969 Jl 26 Cradle of nationalism. Benny Luzentales. port jjjs,. 

n. 370, pp. 20, 35 Jl 26 '69. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, 

p. 485.) 

2388 1969 Jl) . , Living anecdotes about President Quezon, port PJRCM 
g \ n.d. 0 e 1 

1 v. 24, n. 1-2 pp. 20-37 Jl-S '69. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, 

p. 485.) 



_ 939 _ 



III - 364 



2889 1969 Ag - 9 \ Many great Filipinos wore born in August. Luis Serrano. 

port Ex n. 372, pp. g„ 29 Ag_9 ■ '69. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, 
p. 485.) 

2090_ 1969 Ag 16 Quo son's Car (Now "a Museum Pieco) . Mi.., pp. 10-11 

- (lPP,liPL f '63- '72.) 
2391 1969 Ag 18 I "shot" President Quezon. II. T. Vitug. il port M 

v. 4, n. 52, pp. 4-5 Ag 18 '69. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, p. ' t 8 

2892 1969 Ag 18 The unusual Quozon. Vicente Bunuan. il WN v. 4, n. 52, 

pp. 16-17 Is 18 '69. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, p. 486.) 

2893 1969 Ag xd The politician and Quezon's memory. (Editorial) M v. 4, 

n. 52, p. 1 Ag 13 '69. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, p. 485.) 
2394 1969 Ag 18 The roriantic revolutionary. I. T. Crisostomo. port W 

v. 4, n. 52, pp. 14-15 .'jg 18. '69. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, ' 
p. 485.) 

2895 1969 Ag 20 ?T e ll Governor w 0 od he can go to hell.* J. V. Herri tt. 

port JJG v. 36, n. 11, pp. 28-29, .31 Ag 20 '69. (IPP, 

IDRS-UP, v. 14, p. 486.) 
f- 

2896 1969 Ag 22 Quczon-AvanceKa, Maria Zenaida (Nini) ; The lady wants 

politics, flalu Tronqtied. port v. 1, p. 55 Ag 

'69. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 537.) 
•2897 1969 Ag 22 Who best approaches the qualities of Quezon? Gene de HH 

Gracia & others, port Rej^ v. 1, n. 1, pp. 8-9 Ag 22 
• '.9. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 537.) 
2398. I969 Ag 22 The words that moved Quezon. G. L. Galvan. il ]&&. v. 1, 

n, 1, pp, 13, 52 &g 22 '69. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 537.) 

2899 1969 ' Ag 23 Quezon's Social Justice Program.. Santos P. Agbayani. Ex.. 

Is. sue Ho. 374 v. 11. Ag 23 '69. (IPP,UPL, >68- *72.) 

2900 1969 Ag n.d. The life and patriotic labors of President Manuel L. Quezon., 

(Editorial) FT v. 24, n. 2, pp. 82, 104 Ag '69. 
(IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 14, p. 435.) 

2901 1969 0) n.d. Quezon: The good fighter and progressive leader. Joso • 

N) 

Ha. Parados. Cqristitut Aojl v. 3,. pp. 14-15. (IPP,UPL, 
• 1 68-' 7.2.) 

2902 I969 D 13 Quezon's gift; a dream of social justice. E. Y. Arcollans. 

il FM v. 62, n. 50 pp. 24 , 28 , 30 , 32, 170, 172 
D 13 '69.. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 562.) 

2903 1970 F 7 He recalls Quezon's last days. Nick I* arte, il £i 

p. 10 F 7 '70. (IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 562.) 

2904 1970 Mr 27 If Quezon were in Marcos ' shoes today. Gone do Gracia . 

port Rpjl. v. 1, n. 32, p. 6 Mr 27 '70. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, 
v. 15, p. 537.) 



- 940 _ 



III - 365 



2905 1970 Je n.d. Quezon and Student activism. Salvador P. Lopez. 

&Uia&&ltLfla v. 3, pp. 4-5 .41so in Ity, Rejy. v. 17, pp. 15- 
23. J a '69. (lPP,UPL, '68- "72.) 

2906 1970' Ag 19 Quezon and the columnists. Federico Mangahas. il }£G 

v. 37, n. 11, pp. 26-27 Ag 19 '70. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 15, 
p. 562.) 

2907 1970 Ag 22 Quezon on Filipinos. Primitive Milan, il PFP v. 63, 

J . n * 34, pp. 18-19 .Ag 22 '70. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 562,) 

,2£08 1970 Ag 24 His words were the measure of his deeds. J. V. Morritt. 

il port J2N v. 6, n. 1, pp. 16-17 *g 24 '70. (iPP, 

IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 562.) 
2909 1970 Ag 24 How IILQ ran tho army. A. P. Pena. il M v. 6, n. 1, 

PP. 14-15 Ag 24 '70. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v . 15, p. 562.) 
2910- 1970 S 5 Quezon's birthday should be an official holiday. ' Luis 

Serrano, port n. 428, pp. 18-19 S 5 '70. (iPP, 

IDRS-UP, v. - 15, p . 562.) 

2911 1970 3 n.d. The greatness of President Quezon, Ambrosio Pena. 

jinto v. 1, PP. 16-17 (IPP,UPL, '68-'72.) 

2912 1971 J a 6 , Cradle of nationalism. B. J c . Luzentales.. port WG 

v. 37, n. 31, p. 15 Ja 6 '71. (IPP,IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 537.) 

2913 1971.. Je 21 Manila; thirty five years ago. Julio Alvarez. v. 6, 

n. 44, p. 11 Je 21 '71. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 537.) 

2914 1971 Jl . 9 Ooa.om.al mentality - much- abused words. V. A. Pacis. 

port Rej2. v. 2, n. 47, pp. 8, 22 Jl 9 '71. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, 
v. 15, p. 537.) 

2915 1971 Jl) n>d< Patriotism - Quezon's legacy to the youth, port PJROM 

v. 26, n. 1-2 p. 19 Jl-S 1 71. (IIP, IDRS-UP, y. 15, p. 537. 

2916 1971 Ag 16 Manuel L. Quezon: victory in defeat. J. -8. Tomacruz. il 

Rej*. v. 6, n. 52, pp. 20 r ::22 Ag 16 '71. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, 
v. 15, p. 537.) 

2917 1971 Ag 18 Quezon today. P. Bn. Daroy. il port WG v. 38, n. 11, 

pp. 8-9, 42-43 Ag 18 '71. (IPF, IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 537.) 

2918 1971 Ag 20 Quezon's political testament found. V. A. Pacis. il port 

Ran. v. 3, n. 1, pp. 2-3, 86 .1g 20 '71. (IPP,JDRS-UP, 
• . ■ v - 15 > P« 5 37.) . 

2919 1971 Ag 23 Manuel L. Quezon: victory in defeat. J. S. Tomacruz. il 

M v. 6, n. 53, pp. 22-23, 40 Ag 23 '71. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, 
v. 15, p. 537.) 

2920 1971 Ag 23 A second hard look at MLQ. J. V. Merritt. 'port 

v. 6, n. 53, P. 12 Ag 23 '71. ( IPP, IDRS-UP, v. 15, p. 537.) 

2921 1971 Ag 28 The actor and the Vice-President. Carlos Quirino. port 

PEP v. 64, n. 35, pp. 30, 138-139 Ag 28 '71 . (lFP,IDRS- 




Ill - 366 

- 941 _ 

™, v. 15, p. 537.) • . , 

2922 1971 Agj Patriotism - Quezon's legacy to the youth. Phil. Jr. Re d 

fiia^5.1ia^ v. 26, n. 19 Ag-8 '71. (IPP,UPL, «68- l 72.) 

2923 1972 Je 24 A very Quezonian story. E. V. H. Hartendorp. Issue 

Nob. 522-525,. (iFP/JPL, , 68-*72.) 
2Q24 1972 Ag 13 Quezon's other "Good Fights". Euffonio V. Afuang. Pj&U," 

£an*. v. 5, n. 19, £g 13 '72. (IPP,UPL, '68-'72.) 

2925 1972 Ag 14 Manuel L. Quezon and the PTS. WN v. 7, n. 51, p. 33, 

Ag 14 '72. (IPP,UPL, v. 13, p. 484.) 

2926 1972 Ag iS The unsinkable Quezon. E, S. G±ron. il I& p, 

. .< 19 '72. (IPP,UPL, v. 12, p. 122.) 

2927 1972 Ag 31 Quezon and Amoranto. Celoo ,'J.. Carunungan. PH. 

pp. 13-14 Jig 31 '72. (IPP,UPL, l 68- , 72.) , 

2928 1972 Ag n.d. Quezon the great. Matias Marbella. Phil. Bj LgSflA v. 11, 

pp. 4-9. Ag '72. (IPP,UPL, '68-'72.) 

2929 1972 S) Si Manuel L. Quezon- champion ng social justice. R. 

Alejandro, port. FB v. 6, n. 2, pp. 107-108 S-0 '72. 
(m-yjPL, v. 13, p. 484.) 

2930 1972 n.d.m. Quezon and Hags ays ay. H. A. Bornad. Pgiuj. v. 20, pp. 323- 

341, 2d quarter '72. (IPP,U?L, v. 12, p. 122.) 

2931 1973 Ag 19 Reminiscences on iiLQ. ;.. S. 3asilide3. il £P (ns) 

y. 2, n. 33, p. 6 Ag 19 '73. (IPP,UPL, v. 13, p. 484.) 

2932 1974 Ap n.d. T".e Philippines and Japan: historic fragments. D» T, 

Sternberg. MLjpjj P.QjUs.cdL^Mlx. n. 2, pp. 12-16 Ap »74, 
(lPP,UPL, v. 14, p. 937.) 

2933 1974 My n.d. Philippine President?, from I899 to 1974. por ifejagh jj,. 

. n. 13, p. 16 My '74. (IPP,UPL, v. 14, p. 937.) 

2934 1974 Ag 18 Quezon and the Hew Society. J. J. Tena. £P n. 3, p. 10, 

ig 18 '74. (IPP/UPL, v. 14, p. 938.) 

2935 1974 Ag n.d. Quezon and his code of ethics. J. M. Harvasa. £JE n . 53, 

p. 137 .<jg '74. (IPP,U?L, v. 14, p. 937.) 

2936 1974 Ag n.d. President Quezon as commonwealth head, 1938. por 

&&hX28la&U n. 1, p. 9, .ig '74. (IP?,UPL, y. 14, p. 937. 

2937 1974 Ag n.d. The aristocrat of Philippine politics. T. A. Agoncillo. 

il por .frqhj.poJiflgo,. n. 1, pp. 8-13 Ag '74. (IF?,UPL, 
v. 14, p. 937.) 

2938 1974 Ag n.d. Manuel L. Quezon, a horn leader. A. H. Asuncion, por 

mL^ch..JA£.e..n. 29, pp. 147-148 Ag '74. (IPP,UPL, v. 14, 
P. 937.) 

2939 1974 Ag n.d. With a blowtorch, President Quezon inaugurates f >uezon bridge 

in downtown Manila on his birthday in 1940. por Archipe- 
lago n. 1, p. 10 Ag '74. (IPP,UPL, v. 14, p. 938.) 



III -. 367 

942 - 



2940 1974 ".Jig n.d. The Quezon family in their summer home, 1936. .por 

ixshiS&IaSQ. n. 1, p. 12 '74. (IPP,UPL, v. 14, p. 938.) 

2941 1974 S n.d. Quezon: haligi ng.kalayaaii. (Tagalog) ML&£Ll n. 4, 
r. P. 15 S '74. (IPP,UPL, v. 14, p. 938.) 

2942 1974 N n.d. Code citizenship and ethics. Jaainaa Univ Ra ft- ' n. 6, . 

p. 37,' N '74. (IPP,UPL, v. 14, p.- 937.) 

2943 1974 D 6 Three are recipients of UP..'./, oblation award. UP News,. 

v. l, n. 2, p; 1 D 6 '74. (IPP,UPL, v. 14, .p. 938.) 

2944 1975 bp . n.d. Daylight Saving Time, anyone? por Ex. 13:20 Ap '75. 

(IPP,uVL, v. 20, '75.) 

2945 1975 0 n.d. The fight 'that killed Quezon. P. S. Uarquatdt. por 

' M-flnJfiLatitoJL. 3:6-17 0 '75. (ipp,upl, v. 20 '75.) 

2946 1975 n.d.m. Manuel L. Que z on Vanguard in fight vs. TB. * L. G. Ordonez. 

.Pnwflda i» -n. 3, '75.' (ipp,upl, v. 20 ■75.) " 



