
Photo hy Rofje} St it die 
President Quezon as Commander- hi- chief of the armed forces of the Philippines. 



MANUEL L. QUEZON 

His Life and Career 

A Philippine President Biography 



by 



SOL H. GWEKOH, Ph.B., M.A. 




T>3' 

1948 

University Publishing Company, Inc. 
Manila, Philippines 



Copyright, 1048 
By SOL H. GWEKOH 
and 

UNIVERSITY PUBLISHING CO., INC. 



* «]F5rst* Printing, August, 1948 



To the Loving Memory 
Of My Father 
CONRADO R. GWEKOH 



CONTENTS 



Page 

PREFACE vii 

Chapter 

Book 1 

1. The Bright Boy From Baler 3 

2. The Self-Supporting' Student 13 

Z. The Heroic Soldier 24 

1. The Successful Lawyer 41 

5. The Brilliant Prosecutor 47 

6. The Efficient Governor 51 

7. The Fiery Majority Floor Leader 59 

8. The Energetic Resident Commissioner ........ 65 

9. The Dynamic President of the Senate 80 

10. The Diplomatic Ambassador 96 

11. The Seasoned Politician 106 

Book II 

12. The Passionate Lover 

13. The Affectionate Father 124 

14. The True Friend and Noble Foe 131 

15. The Cheerful Patient « 143 

16. The Assiduous Reader I 57 

17. The Enthusiastic Sportsman 162 

18. The Tireless Worker 165 

19. The Beloved Employer I 70 

20. The Practical Catholic 179 

21. The Uncompromising Nationalist 188 

Book III 

22. The Great Leader 195 

23. The Solicitous Wartime Statesman 217 

v 



Chapter Page 

24. The Eminent Father of Philippine Independence 230 

25. The Popular Hero and Idol 243 

26. The Immortal Malayan 265 

APPENDICES 
EULOGIES ON QUEZON 

1. QUEZON WAS NO ORDINARY MAN 

By Manuel Roxas 279 

2. SPIRITS LIKE QUEZON'S DON'T DIE 

By Frank Murphy 289 

3. FATHER OF THIS INFANT REPUBLIC 

By Douglas MacArthur 291 

4. QUEZON, ARCHITECT OF OUR FREEDOM 

By Claro M. Recto 293 

5. QUEZON, THE UNDAUNTED SOLDIER 

By Raul T. Leuterio 300 



vi 



PREFACE 



THIS IS the story of the great est Filipino of his gen- 
eration— Manual L. Quezon — whose life had been de- 
voted entirely to his country and consequently should 
prove an inspiration and example for his fellowmen. 

This biography has its own story, Soon after 
getting acquainted with President Quezon in 1938, 
I started working on the first draft, with the assis- 
tance of an able and cooperative secretary. In the 
course of the yeans, valuable Quezona materials were 
accumulated, which enabled me to complete the draft 
shortly before the war broke out in 1941, But the 
intensive house-to-house search made in Manila by 
the enemy during the early months of the occupation 
period farced me to dispose of everything Quezona 
in order to save myself from sure death. Part of my 
collection was therefore thrown awav into the near- 
by river and the rest burned hurriedly. 

When the capital city was liberated in 1945, I 
had with me the only typewritten copy of the manus- 
cript which I brought along, together with a few other 
personal belongings, everywhere 1 drifted. That 
copy has now become precious. 

Reminded by my publishers, the University Pub- 
lishing Co., Inc., through its genial president, Dr. Jose 
M. Aruego, in 1947, I resumed the work which 
was mainly a revision of the draft, with the incor- 
poration of additional newly-acquired materials. Ear- 
ly this year, it went to press after it had undergone 
careful editorial scrutiny by both Dr. Jose M. Her- 
nandez, then assistant press relations secretary of 
Malacanan, and Dr. Jose M. Aruego. To these two 
understanding gentlemen and good friends, I hereby 
publicly acknowledge my indebtedness for their in- 
valuable assistance. 

This biography is the product of extensive re- 
search and many interviews had' with friends and as- 
sociates, and even with "enemies", of Quezon. In this 
book are also incorporated materials contained in my 
earlier books on the same subject. 

Biography writing is a field in the Philippines 
that is practically unexploited. Most of the biog- 

vii 



raphies that have appeared so far are of the "thumb- 
nail sketch*' type, limiting themselves to a mere chro- 
nological narration of facts and figures of life* In a 
sense, therefore, this book helps blaze the trail in a 
new field of writing and publishing: the bcok-length 
biography. 

A grateful people has placed Quezon side by side 
with RizaL The two are- the towering figures of 
Philippine history and rationalism. Since Rizal's works 
and works about Rizal have become valuable reading- 
for the- Filipinos, it is heped that those of Quezon and 
about Quezon should be equally so. Hence, the thought 
of writing the complete biography of Quezon, which it 
ha> taken me years to do. 

GRATITUDE: To all those persons who, in one 
way or another, aided me in the preparation of this 
work, I hereby express my heai'tfelt gratitude. I 
know that, without their cooperation, this book would 
not have> been finished in its present scope and form. 
To my publishers, who have very elaborate plans for 
the widespread circulation of this book in its English 
and in its translation editions, I am equally thankful. 



SOL H. GWEKOH 

Manila, Philippines 
July 29, 1948 



viii 



ILLUSTRATIONS 



Facing Page 

President Quezon as the commander-in-clref of the 

armed forces of the Philippines Frontispiece 

Lucio Quezon, the father of President Quezon 8 

Quezon as the revolutionary officer . . . , 26 

Quezon in a group with other provincial governors , . 56 

Quezon together with other assemblymen 62 

Quezon as the resident commissioner of the Philip- 
pines . , . . . 70 

Quezon as the President of the Philippine Senate 80 

Roosevelt greeting Quezon 96 

Roosevelt signing the Constitution of the Philippines 103 

The young couple 117 

The father and his child 124 

Quezon playing solitaire . 126 

Quezon acting as his daughter's chaperon 130 

Quezon and General Emilio AguinrJdo 137 

Quezon playing golf 162 

The lover of dogs . . . . 164 

Office of Jorge B. Vargas, Secretary to Quezon 167 

The President signing official papers . 168 

Quezon wearing a barong Tagalog 192 

The Presidents— Quezon and Osmena 195 

Quezon taking his oath of office as President 197 

Quezon delivering hb inaugural address 198 

Social hall of the Malacahan Palace 200 

The President presiding over a conference 206 

The Commonwealth calendar ■ - 209 

Extolling the dignity of labor - . 211 

Quezon marching at the head of the loyalty parade . . 217 
Quezon as he appeared in the United States during 

the war years I 233 

The Quezon family on August 19, 1942 235 

ix 



Facing Pugv 



Quezon in bed — his last living photograph 2 17 

People walking past the flag-draped casket of Quezon 

at the St. Matthew's Cathedral 249 

The Quezon remains at the St. Matthew's Cathedral 

during 1 the requiem high mass . . . 251 

The funeral cortege of President Quezon at Washing- 
ton, D,C M on August 4, 1944 . • 253 

The commitment rites at the Maine Memorial 254 

"Bathala, Bless Our President" (song) . . . , , 269 



President Quezon, portrait by Fernando Amorsolo. Jacket 
Book jacket designed by Jose Balquiedra 



MANUEL L. QUEZON 

His Life and Career 



Chapter "I 



THE BRIGHT BOY FROM BALER 

/ come from a poor family. 
I am a poor man's son. 

—QUEZON 

p VERY NATION has been endowed with men born to 
^ guide its course through different periods of its his- 
tor y. To mention a few, America has had its George Wash- 
ington and Abraham Lincoln; China, its Sun Yat-sen; 
Prance, its Napoleon Bonaparte; Turkey, its Kemal Ata- 
turk : and the Philippines, its Jose Rizal and Manuel Luis 
Quezon. 

Quezon, like Rizal, is first and foremost in the hearts 
of his countrymen. He was the leader of the Filipino peo- 
ple during their long and fruitful struggle for independence, 
a period covering more than four decades. 

In the small and isolated town of Baler on the east- 
ern coast of Luzon, Quezon was bora. A typical Philip- 
pine community enjoying provincial environment and at- 
mosphere, Baler was at the time of the birth of Quezon 
the capital of the district of El Principe under the juris- 
diction of Nueva Ecija. Later it was- transferred by law 
to the province of Tayabas. Passing through the new na- 
tional inter-provincial highway one finds Baler to be only 
241 kilometers from Manila. Tayabas was renamed Que- 
zon in 1946. 

The town started as a mere sitio belonging to Barrio 
Zabali. Then a group of seven Franciscans headed by Fr. 
Bias Palomino founded it in 1609. The missionaries were 
responsible for the conversion of the inhabitants to Chris- 
tianity. The original townsite was at Kinagunasan on 
the side of the San Jose river opposite the present location 



3 



MANUEL L. QUEZON; HIS LIFE AND CARKKR 

of the town which lies at the mouth of the Aguang river 
on Baler bay. One of the oldest towns in the Philippines, 
Baler has a history which is both tragic and mysterious, 
and which reminds one of the destruction of Sodom and 
Gomorra. 

The name of the town itself is tragic in meaning for 
it signifies a place washed away by water. On December 
27, 1735, about two o'clock in the morning, as the peaceful 
inhabitants were fast asleep, the sea overflooded the town, 
and eventually washed it away. The phenomenon was 
considered strange as the weather was clear when it oc- 
curred- Learning from that bitter experience, the people 
transferred the town to the present site which is one ki- 
lometer from Kinagunasan. 

How did Baler get its name? There are several ver- 
sions, the school supporting each of which claiming it to 
be the real cause for naming the town. Old records show 
that Baler was once written "Valer" and meant to refer 
to the bay which protects it during stormy weather. 
Hence, the Baler bay. 

However, old folks assert that it was named after an 
early Franciscan friar who was greatly beloved by the 
people for his many and varied religious accomplishments 
in the town, including the building of the concrete church. 
He was Fray Valeriano, but was popularly known as Padre 
Vale. 

In 1611 the first church of Baler was established with 
Fr. Francisco de San Antonio as parish priest. The lack 
of Franciscan fathers to minister to the spiritual needs of 
the populace compelled the Recollect Order to take over 
the parish in 1658, only to return it to them 45 years later, 
or in 1703. When the town was moved, Fr, Jose de San 
Rafael was parish priest. The patron saint of Baler is 
San Luis. 



4 



THE BRIGHT BOY FROM BALER 



Although inaccessible by either land or sea transpor- 
tation most of the year because Baler is walled in from 
the west by the great Sierra Madre range and on its east- 
ern side is the vast Pacific ocean, it has always been an 
attractive place to adventurers, hunters, and fishermen. 

Not only is the climate of Baler healthful and cool, 
but its immense and virgin forest is also a good hunting 
ground for wild carabaos, hogs, and chickens. In its tro- 
pical vegetation flourish ornamental palms and choice or- 
chids- First-class trees, like molave, banaba, tindalo and 
narra, grow luxuriantly in the forests, while abundant fish 
thrive in Baler bay. The people are peaceful, religious, 
an d gallant. Fanning, hunting, and fishing are their 
ma in occupations. 

Baler is historically famous for two important events : 
it was the birthplace of both the late President Quezon and 
th e distinguished first Filipino First Lady of the Land, 
Mrs. Aurora Aragon Quezon ; and it was the last foothold 
of the Spanish forces in the Philippines. Aa a matter of 
fact, Baler continued to fly the Spanish flag for almost a 
year after Spain had lost the Philippines to America. 

During the Philippine revolution a Spanish garrison, 
composed of four officers and 50 soldiers was besieged m 
the church of Baler by the Filipino insurgents from June 
27, 180.8, to June 2, 1899. Five times the garrison refused 
to surrender and sue for peace. Because of their iso- 
lation from the rest of the Spanish forces in Luzon, the 
garrison was completely ignorant of the fact that Spain 
had already lost the Philippines to the United States and 
that for many months the only Spanish flag waving in Lu- 
zon was that over the Baler Roman Catholic church. How- 
ever, an emissary of General Rios had the courage to drop 
into the court of the church newspapers from which they 
soon learned of their situation. 

5 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

So the garrison officials arranged a truce with the 
insurgents, and on June 2 the survivors marched out of 
the church, and crossed the mountains to Manila, Among 
the survivors were Lieutenant Don Satuniino Martin Ce- 
rezo, commanding officer of the siege, a surgeon, two cor- 
porals, the trumpeter, and 28 privates. 

Of the original garrison two officers, the parish priest, 
and 12 men had died from tropical diseases; two men had 
been killed by insurgent bullets, two others had been 
executed; two officers and 14 men had been wounded ; and 
three men had deserted due to starvation. The fortitude 
of the garrison was praised by General Aguinaklo in a pub- 
lic document issued at Tarlac on June 20, 1899, Upon 
their return to Spain each survivor was rewarded by the 
Queen Regent in the name of Alfonso XIII, the king, and 
the Spanish nation. 

Historical markers identify two historic spots in Ba- 
ler. The church has one marker, while the other was 
erected on the spot where Lieutenant Commander James 
C. Gilmore, of the United States navy, commander of the 
U.S. 3. Gunboat Yorktown, and his party were captured 
by the Filipinos in April, 1899. The prisoners of war 
were taken to Nueva Ecija where they were later rescued 
by the American army. 

About 1870, only 250 men and women of Baler could 
read while 314 could both read and write; and of 441 
school children, only 134 knew how to read and 133 could 
both read and write. 

Today Baler is a progressive town. Its streets are 
well paved; it has a market, a puericulture center, prima- 
ry and elementary schools* a barrack for the military po- 
lice detachment from Nueva Ecija, a post-office and a tel- 
egraph system, a weather station, an airplane landing, 
and an overland transportation service. 



6 



THE BRIGHT BOY PROM BALER 



Taking the place of a narrow treacherous trail that 
used to be the only land route from Baler to Nueva Ecija 
is the Quezon national highway, inaugurated In 1940, which 
has proven to be a great blessing to Baler, as its products 
can now be sent to the markets of Manila and Central Lu- 
zon, and its vast tracts of virgin land have been made 
available to immigrants. The Baler national park has 
made the town popular. In it are the Quezon natatorium 
with its natural swimming pool and crystal* ice-cold wa- 
ter, Camp Labi, Cabatangan gorge, Camatis bath springs 
and resthouse, and several waterfalls. Because of its ideal 
climate and scenic mountain vistas, it has become a favorite 
vacation resort and camping ground* 

Baler's beautiful scenery has fascinated people. With 
the immigrants who joined their fate with the 1,800 in- 
habitants of the town as early as 1870, was Lucio Quezon, 
a handsome, adventurous young Tagalog from Penafran- 
oia, of the district of Paco in Manila, who later became the 
schoolmaster at the Cbmandancia of Baler. He had Span- 
ish blood ; his father was a Spaniard and his mother a Fi- 
lipino. Young Lucio enlisted in the infantry unit of the 
Spanish army together with other Filipinos* After some 
years of loyal service, he was retired with the rank of ser- 
geant. 

In 1897, when Baler was placed under the Spanish 
militia, Lucio became the adviser of Don Enrique de las 
Morenas y Fossi, captain of infantry and politico-military 
governor of El Principe. Highly respected by the popu- 
lace, he was greatly instrumental in regaining the good- 
will of the inhabitants for the Spaniards, as well as in 
making them cultivate the lands of the Comandancia with 
free labor, a work committed to his charge. 

However, the gratuitous services rendered by the peo- 
ple created discontent and soon became the source of en* 
mity between the inhabitants and the school teacher. "The 



7 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND C A 11 K K it 



people, in fact* complied with this service very unwilling- 
ly," related Captain Don Saturn i no Martin Cerezo, com- 
mander of the Spanish detachment in Baler, "claiming 
that, owing to the private nature of the object of the service, 
their labor ought not to be devoted to it without com- 
pensation, even though it were ordered under the letter of 
the law; that it was prejudicial to their interests; and that 
it was an abuse, * * * and, in their eagerness to get sat- 
isfaction out of somebody, they blamed the schoolmaster 
for having advised such a disagreeable servitude " 

Belonging to a middle-class family in Baler was the 
attractive, charming, and beautiful Dona Maria Dolores 
Molina, who later became the bride of the schoolmaster. 
She was popularly known as the "belle of Baler." She 
herself was a school ma'am. Like her husband, she had 
Spanish blood. She was distinguished for her good man- 
ners. Her marriage to Lucio was her second* By her 
first wedlock she had one son — Teodorico Molina, chief of 
the non-Christian tribes in Tayabas for many years now. 

The couple lived in a small house with wooden posts, 
split bamboo floor, and nipa roof* As the couple was the 
only family that spoke Spanish in the town, the Spanish 
officials of Baler, consisting of the military governor, the 
Franciscan friar, and the corporal of the civil guards, were 
their constant visitors. 

As teachers the Quezons earned only a small salary 

each received P12 a month; bsLt Lucio, outside of school 
hours, cultivated his two-acre rice paddy; and from his 
meagre income he saved as much as he could, his savings 
reaching a few hundred pesos at one time. In those days 
Filipino families in the provinces lived frugally on four 
pesos a month and rice, With the market-money thley 
bought fish from the fishermen, venison, especially of deer 
and wild hogs, and wild honey from the hunters. In this 
way the Quezon family lived for years. 



8 




Lucio Quezon, the schoolmaster and father 
of President Quezon, 



THE BRIGHT BOY PROM BALER 

They had two sons — the eldest was Manuel Luis Que- 
zon y Molina, born at about seven o'clock in the morning of 
August 19, 1878. His middle name which stood for San 
Luis, the patron saint of Baler, was given by his mother. 
His birthday coincides with the town fiesta of Baler. The 
Philippine "Log Cabin" where young Manuel was born no 
longer stands today, and the lot where the house stood for 
many years no longer belongs to the Quezons but to aged 
Benigno Pimentel. The lot faces Mabini street, is in the 
block surrounded by the San Luis, Aurora, and Quezon 
streets. The ether son was Pedro who died young in the 
hands of his own countrymen. 

Dona Maria died of tuberculosis in 1893. Manuel was 
only 15 then and was just graduated with the degree of 
bachelor of arts from the San Juan de Letran college. It 
was vacation time when his mother became seriously ill, 
and he devoted his time to taking care of Her. As both 
the father and the two brothers were on their farm at the 
time she died, Manuel saw to it that his mother was admin- 
istered the last sacraments by the parish priest before she 
joined her Maker in heaven. Her death caused his father 
to lose his mind for some time. An orphan, Manuel lived 
with an aunt, a sister to his father, in Baler. 

Being a man of influence in his day, Lucio was greatly 
loved and esteemed by his Spanish masters. However, his 
countrymen looked at him with disfavor because of his 
friendly relations with the Spaniards. 

At one time he and his son, Pedro, were ordered by the 
Spanish officials to secure food supplies in Nueva Ecija. 
Lucio took advantage of this trip to purchase goods for the 
retail store he intended to open with the back salary he 
had just received. 

As they were nearing the town on their return from 
Nueva Ecija, they were accosted by Teodorico Novicio 
Luna, an Bocano katipttnero residing in Baler and the 



9 



MANUEL U QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

EMM 

supremo of the Filipino revolutionists in that region, and 
his gang of bad men, Novicio wanted to confiscate the food 
supplies in order that he could starve the priests to death 
and make them surrender to him. So he ordered Lucio 
and his son to surrender the goods they had procured and 
join them, 

But being a loyal and dutiful employee, and a law-abid- 
ing and peaceful citizen, Lucio turned down the offer and 
resisted the subsequent attack on them. However, being 
outnumbered by Novicio's men, they were later subdued. 
Complying with strict orders given by Novicio to his con- 
fidential men, both father and son were tied in separate 
trees in the bushes and later hacked on the neck. The 
heads of the victims were then given to the non-Christians 
inhabiting the mountains of Baler in exchange for meat. 

The cold-blooded murder was shrouded in mystery for 
some time* However, when Quezon became a lawyer and 
returned to Lucena, Tayabas (now Quezon), to be the pro- 
vincial fiscal, he unearthed the case, gathered the facts, cap- 
tured the bandits with the aid of his other brother, and 
accused them of murder and robbery. They were found 
guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment. After partly 
serving their term, he worked for their release, "perhaps 
realizing that no good would come out by avenging his kin." 

As to young Manuel, at the age of five, he was taught 
by his mother how to read and write Spanish and also 
catechism. Two years later he lived with the parish priest 
of Baler, the Franciscan Friar Teodoro Fernandez, under 
whom he studied religion, Latin, history, geography, and 
grammar. Being a bright and intelligent boy, Manuel's 
mother wanted him to be a priest, but his father thought 
a soldier's career would fit him better. 

One of his companions in the convent was Abdon Po- 
blete, the sacristan and attendant of the priests. One Fri- 



10 



THE BRIGHT BOY FROM BALER 

day morning Poblete and Manuel accompanied Father Ve- 
nancio Angolo for a dip in the Baler bay. Not long after- 
wards, a big wave heaved them toward the shore and then, 
when it receded, sucked them all toward the sea. At this 
moment, a bobbing head was seen five yards away. Po- 
blete swam towards it and immediately grabbed Manuel's 
hair and swam ashore. After this association in the con- 
vent, Manuel and Abdon separated, and never met until 
many years later when Quezon was a practising attorney 
in Lucena. 

In his childhood he had the sons of equally poor fami- 
lies as his playmates. With the boys he enjoyed immensely 
playing these two native games — the sipa, and the palaba- 
san. Day in and day out he was with them — on the street, 
in the school, in the church. They were the children of 
farmers, hunters, fishermen, woodcutters, as well as of 
town officials — religious, military, and civil. His constant 
and close association with them made him familiar with 
the life and conditions of the common people as well as 
with their hardships and struggles. From them and their 
parents he learned how to plant rice seedlings and harvest 
the crops. 

Together with his boyhood playmates, Manuel enjoyed 
the farm and country life, especially the sunshine, the open 
fields, the woodlands, the rivers, the plantations, the hum- 
ming of the birds, the beauty of the flowers. Like the 
rest of them, he also did his moral and civic obligations 
loyally and satisfactorily. From what he saw around him, 
he learned to cherish the civic virtues in which his elders 
and the town folks of Baler took pride. 

Young Manuel did his bit. Although more than 50 
years have already passed, the canal which he built along 
the road that leads to the Quezon farm, in order to allow 
the water to pass and flow to the rice field, is still of bene- 
fit to the landowners of the region. 



11 



I 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREKi: 

When he had already learned all that could be taught 
in the town school, the good-looking youngster was brought 
by his father to Manila to begin the secondary course of 
instruction. As Baler is far away from the metropolis, 
both father and son rode on horseback and at times walked 
on the rough mountain trail to San Isidro, the capital of 
Nueva Ecija until 1913, which is half of the way; but 
from this provincial town the trip was already pleasant as 
the road to Manila was good. 

When he left his hometown, young Manuel was advised 
bv his priest-teacher, who recognized qualities of great- 
ness in, him even in his youth, to take his studies seriously. 

In his trips to Manila and back to Baler, his uncle, 
Pedro Aragon, usually accompanied him. At San Isidro 
they customarily rested for some days before resuming 
the' perilous journey. In the town Manuel used to play 
practical jokes on the Chinese merchants, and the celestials 
greatly feared him and simply had to keep silent. At times 
his pranks greatly dismayed the Chinese storekeepers who. 
on many occasions, chased him on the streets whenever 
he pulled the legs down of half-sleeping celestials seated 
on their benches. 

Nature seems to have seen it fit to have Baler as the 
birthplace of Quezon. Its rugged topography, with high 
and almost insurmountable mountains surrounding and 
isolating it from the rest of the world, has made out of 
its inhabitants rugged individuals — men and women who 
have acquired courage, determination and sterling virtues 
to spur them on to be ambitious, persevering, and mighty. 



12 



Chapter 2 



THE SELF-SUPPORTING STUDENT 

When 7 i('«s a student I contin- 
uously Jacked many of the necessi- 
ties of life, a»d I had almost no 
money for my studies and my 
living. 

—QUEZON 



IN THE Spanish days the leading higher institutions of 
learning in Manila were the San Juan de Letran College 
and the University of Santo Tomas— both managed by the 
Dominican fathers. From the portals of these Catholic 
' institutions have come out men who have shaped the des- 
tiny of the Philippines and "have stood unfailingly by the 
ideals of the Filipino people." 

Lucio Quezon enrolled his son at the San Juan de Le- 
tran College in 1887. The son of humble folk, Manuel 
did not get sufficient money for his schooling. So at 
the age of nine, he became a room-and-mess boy (mucha- 
cho) for Fr. Teodoro Fernandez, last Franciscan parish 
priest of Baler, in the Convent of San Francisco in the 
Walled City (Intramuros) for almost one year m exchange 
for free board and room. He received no salary. 

Determined as he was to be self-supporting in his 
studies he soon found that the arduous work, aside from 
impairing his health, was also preventing him from going 
to college Besides, he feared that the special attention 
given him by the mistress (quenda) of his benefactor 
would make the latter entertain suspicion. So he left the 
convent in the following year and lived with his aunt, a 
cousin to his father and married to an officer in the Spanish 
army, on Calle Gomez near Plaza de la Virgen in the dis- 
trict of Paco. To her he paid PI 2 a month for board and 
lodging. 



13 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

But as Paco is about three kilometers from the San 
Juan de Letran College in the Walled City, which distance 
he had to walk in going to and returning from che school, 
the Baler youth rose up early every day in order to be at 
school on time for the classes which began promptly at 
seven o'clock in the morning. The daily ordeal soon told 
on his health again, so that in the following academic 
year, using the savings of his father, he became a boarder 
(interno) in the San Juan de Letran College. 

In school he was a popular student, an athlete, the 
class orator, and the college leader. A pianist, he and 
his classmates, Francisco Ortigas and Francisco Imperial, 
furnished the music for school programs. Gymnastics ap- 
pealed to him in early youth, and his fondness for swim- 
ming and exercising on parallel bars was mainly respon- 
sible for the development of his well-built and fine 
physique which stood him in good stead until shortly before 
his death. He was also a fast runner. 

Not only that, but he became sports-minded even as 
a young man. Classmates of Quezon still remember the 
days when with the vigor of youth in him he faced his 
enemy and had a square fight with him. The size of his 
adversary did not matter. As he hated seeing his com- 
panions being abused or himself being the victim of dirty 
jokes and tricks, he was loved by his college companions 
because of his ready defense of them. 

His fellow-students looked upon him as an example 
of extraordinary diligence. In his last year in college he 
showed a great liking for physics, so much so that he went 
to the extent of digging references on the subject during 
his spare time, thus enabling him to cite the ideas of two 
or more physicists in addition to what he had learned from 
his textbook whenever he recited. 

Being a good orator he was always invited by friends 
and classmates to different places in Manila to deliver 



14 



THE SELF-SUPPORTING STUDENT 

speeches. Once when he and a group of students were 
rowing their banca on the Pasig river* they saw some 
colegialas of an exclusive religious girls' college playing 
leisurely on the college grounds by the river. 

As their leader, Quezon sat at the bow. Upon ap- 
proaching them the boat slowed down, and he stood up to 
deliver a speech. Captivated by the charm of the young 
orator the girls stopped their games and listened attentive- 
ly to him. It was not until the mother superior threatened 
the girls with immediate expulsion from the college that 
they resumed their games and allowed the brilliant speaker 
to go on his way, 

Quezon was at times mischievous. He was once seen 
by Fr, Serapio Tamayo, then professor in the San Juan de 
Let ran College, quarreling with a bigger boy. He had to 
stop the fight to save him from bodily harm. At one time 
he was reprimanded by his priest-teacher for his folly. 
Asked to put wafers in a cup to be served to a big group 
of students, he purposely provided only a few, so that not 
ail the students received their holy communion that Sun- 
day morning. As he frankly and boldly confessed his 
mischief when he was asked shortly after the mass, his 
angry mentor became impressed by his straightforward- 
ness 'and meted out a light punishment to him. 

His collegiate work began in the San Juan de Letran 
College and ended in the University of Santo Tomas. A 
brilliant student, always the valedictorian of his class, he 
finished, two courses in five years. For the first he was 
awarded the degree of bachelor of arts and for the second 
he was given the title of "Experienced Surveyor and Ap- 
praiser of Lands." He was only 16 years old them 

His subject^ in the San Juan de Letran College were: 
in the first year, 1889-90— Basic Latin Grammar, Basic 
Spanish Grammar, and Sacred History; in the second year, 
1890-91 — Advanced Latin Grammar, Advanced Spanish 



15 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



Grammar, and Geography; in the third year, 1891-92— 
Analysis of Latin and Rudiments of Greek, Universal His- 
tory of Spain and the Philippines, and Arithmetic and Alge- 
bra; and in the fourth year, 1892-93— Rhetoric and Poetry, 
and Geometry and Trigonometry. 

In the University of Santo Tom as he completed the 
fourth year course with the study of French, and took in 
the fifth year, 1893-94,— Psychology, Logic and Moral 
Philosophy, Physics and Chemistry, and Natural History. 
In his studies in both institutions he received only one 
grade: sobresaliente or excellent. 

Upon completion of his last year of study, Quezon peti- 
tioned the rector of the University of Santo Tomas for 
an examination for the degree of bachelor of arts. The 
request was formally granted, and beginning at eight 
o'clock in the morning of February 19, 1894, he was exam- 
ined by a board composed of Fr. Jose Jarpon, Fr. Daniel 
Gonzales, and Fr, Felipe Zabala, with Bias Alcuaz as sec- 
retary. The board unanimously approved his examination 
and gave him the grade of sobresaliente. On February 24, 
he was awarded the degree of bachelor of arts, summa emu 
laude* The Spanish governor general attended the com- 
mencement exercises. 

His classmate, the late Francisco Ortigas, in his time 
a prominent lawyer in Manila, made this remarkable ob- 
servation of Quezon: 

"He was a naughty student, full of pranks. He in- 
variably disobeyed the regulations of the college, which caused 
him no little amount of trouble and annoyance, I remem- 
ber one day when a sign was posted in a conspicuous place 
in the college forbidding, under strict penalty, boys to pass 
from one hall to another through the windows. Mr. Que- 
zon was not in the habit of passing that way, but just to 
contravene the order, he did so before a crowd of students. . * 
On another occasion, Mr. Quezon was deprived of a quarterly 
medal in physics for another of his youthful pranks. The 

16 



THE SELF-SUPPORTING STUDENT 



vice rector, through some of Mr. Quezon's companions, sug- 
gested that he apologize for what he had done, assuring him 
Unit the medal would be awarded him if he did. Tins, Que- 
zon refused to do. I then could detect in him signs of fu- 
ture ^roalni'ss, for whenever he was convinced that a thing 
was right, he never gave it up," 

Of his college days in the San Juan de Letran Col- 
lege, Student Quezon reminisced: 

14 When I was in college— in the College of San Juan de 
Letran — I had a constitutional right to go anywhere I pleased; 
nevertheless, at seven o'clock in the evening I had to 
hfc there and I could not go away except by being out of the 
college. 

"My record as a student of the College of San Juan de 
Letran testifies to the fact that I have always been against 
every established order. I took pride in showing my school 
or college mates that I had enough nerve to fight or defy 
authority, and I felt then an inner satisfaction whenever I 
defied authority even though it earned for me some punish- 
ment. The pleasure that I obtained in satisfying my rebel- 
lious spirit was greater than the pain that I suffered from 
punishment; therefore, I expect punishment as a natural 
consequence and I simply accepted the punishment aud con- 
tinued with my rebellious spirit, 

"One of the first virtues that men should have— men 
who are on the road to success and with ambition to go 
high — is modesty* Enthusiasm, however, is natural among 
students. Enthusiasm makes the student feel more im- 
portant than anybody else. When I got my bachelor's 
degree I felt so big, so important, that I looked down upon 
everybody, including the Spanish Captain-General, who 
was the Oovernor-GeneraL I simply felt I was the biggest 
man, I had my breast full of gold medals, six or seven of 
them, and I was graduated with the highest honors. 1 felt 
T did not want to talk to anybody. That is not a Joke, that 
is a fact. I felt it then in my heart. I looked with a sort 
of pity upon everybody. That was the only time I lost my 
head, 1 ' 

During his residence in the San Juan de Letran Col- 
lege, Rev, Faher Lorenzo Garcia, vice rector, incidentally 
discovered that Quezon had not yet been confirmed. So 



17 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

at 14, he underwent this religious rite in the chapel of the 
college. As he had no relatives to attend the ceremonies, 
he picked on Dr. Rafael Bertol, his professor of mathe- 
matics, as godfather. In later years he found him an 
insignificant practitioner in Baliuag, Bulacan. A grate- 
ful godson, Quezon, then chairman of the board of direc- 
tors of the Manila Railroad Company, appointed him the 
company physician. 

On the wooden desk he used in the college, he engraved 
with a knife his own name: M. L. Queson. A loyal alum- 
nus, Quezon always attended the annual Letran alumni 
day. As he once expressed to Mr. Vicente Madrigal, "the 
day brings me happy memories of my life and renews my 
faith in the principles which we learned in our beloved col- 
lege, and at the same time strengthens the ties of unity 
which bind me with my friends and colleagues." He was 
the honorary president of the Letran Alumni Association 
in his lifetime. 

Having completed his baccalaureate studies, he re- 
turned to Baler to spend his vacation. One summer day 
his father disclosed to him that he not only had already 
spent all his savings but also had even obtained loans to 
enable young Manuel to continue with his studies; henee, 
if he wanted to pursue further his college work, he would 
have to work his way through the university. 

Undaunted by the family's financial difficulties, the 
student returned to Manila bearing on his forehead the 
imprint of a star, and immediately sought the help of his 
Dominican professor, Fr. Tamayo, director of boarders in 
the University of Santo Tomas, who, fortunately, took him 
in as coach of students in mathematics. Quezon did also 
errands during his off-hours to meet incidental expenses. 
The job, which gave him free room, board, and tuition, en- 
abled him to begin his law studies. "I wanted to be a 
lawyer but could not pay my expenses," he remarked. He 
did this work for the next three years. 



18 



THE SELF-SUPPORTING STUDENT 

The law course at the time required one year of pre- 
paratory study and six years of proper law work. Students 
must be holders of the degree of bachelor of arts before 
taking up the course. Quezon took the preparatory course 
in the school year of 1894-95. His subjects and their cor- 
responding grades were: Metaphysics, notable; General 
Spanish Literature, excellent; and Critical History of Spain, 
excellent, with a prize awarded to him. 

Being a working student he studied law at night. In 
1.835 he enrolled in the University of Santo Tomas, but be- 
cause of the outbreak of the Philippine revolution, he gave 
up the next school period. He resumed his law studies in 
1807, only to be interrupted again the following year when 
the Filipinos started the hostilities against the Americans, 
after the latter had completely annihilated the Spanish 
squadron at the Manila bay on May 1. 1898. 

Remembering vividly the ghastly effects of the revo- 
lution and his bitter experience in the war, Quezon decided 
to take up dogmatic theology as suggested by an old 
Dominican priest. And were it not for a jest he would have 
been a member of the religious order instead of the Phil- 
ippine bar. He had already entered the class, when the 
professor, Reverend Fr. Vaquero, who had no inkling of 
the desire of his new student, noticed his presence in the 
room, and he inquired. "What are you doing here?" 

"Studying for the priesthood, Father," he answered. 

"Who deceived you and gave you the idea that you can 
become a priest?" the ambitious boy was further asked. 

"My professor, Father." 

The priest, who foresaw in him the makings of a great 
statesman, said, "Tell your professor you're both crazy." 

Told that he did not belong to that class, he left and 
never returned. 



19 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



During the revolution he stayed in Manila, He was 
already out of the University of Santo Tomas at the time 
following the discovery made by Fr. Tamayo that Quezon 
used the side door in returning* to the university at night 
as late as nine o'clock when the regulations allowed stu- 
dents to go out only two hours, two times a week, starting 
at five in the afternoon. He therefore lived in a house in 
the Walled City together with other students. 

He had the rare privilege of witnessing the battle of 
Manila fought between the Spanish and the victorious 
American forces. As a result of this decisive victory, the 
American flag was hoisted as the flag of Spain was hurled 
down in defeat. This historic event Quezon also saw- He 
felt sad for one thing and happy at the coming of a new 
era. 

Following the establishment of the civil government 
by Governor General William H. Taft in the Philippines in 
1900, the law student decided to resume his studies. But 
as he was too poor to pay his matriculation fees, his pro- 
fessors made him an overseer of the friar estates in Dina- 
lupihan, northern border town of Bataam 

However, because he did not like to reside in the prov- 
ince, Quezon gave up the job after a few months and 
sought transfer to the Monte cle Piedad, the bank of the 
church in Manila. He became a bank clerk with the 
modest salary of P25 a month, and remained there until he 
completed his studies. 

To make both ends meet, Quezon lived with a poor 
couple to whom he paid a few pesos for his board and lodg- 
ing until he passed the bar examination in 1903, In ap- 
preciation of their kindness he later took in Mang Antonio, 
who survived his wife, as his permanent house guest, 

"I was once a working student, I know that a working 
student cannot do well both his work as a clerk and his 



20 



THE SELF-SUPPORTING STUDENT 

work as a student. There is a limit to every human 
capacity, to human energy/' declared Quezon later. 

His record as a law student revealed that Quezon was 
among the bright members of his class and that he main- 
tained his leadership throughout the course. 

In the regular law course, his record showed the fol- 
lowing subjects and grades: First year, 1895-96— Elements 
of Natural Law, notable; Rules of Canon Law, notable; 
Economics and Statistics, good. Second year, 1896-97 — 
he enrolled (in the Roman Law and Guardianship subjects), 
but soon left the course. In the following year, 1897-98, 
he enrolled again and at the end of the academic season 
obtained a grade of fair in the Rules of Roman Law, and 
notable in the Guardianship of the Indies and Ecclesiastical 
Discipline, 

Having had more than two years of university work in 
law, which was one of two requirements to be complied with 
by a candidate for the bar— the other being three years 
of practice — Student Quezon applied to the Supreme 
Court for permission to take the bar examination on Feb- 
ruary 20, 1903, In his application he mentioned that he 
was a citizen of the Philippines, 23 years old, residing at 
No. 2 Calle Limasana in the district of San Sebastian, 
Manila, and that he worked for three years in the law firm 
of Don Francisco Ortigas. In his signature on the applica- 
tion he omitted his middle initial "L M and spelled his family 
name "Queson," using an "s" instead of a "z." More than 50 
law students, including Sergio Osmena who succeeded him 
as president of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, took 
the same examination which covered six subjects. 

He passed the bar examination with very high grades, 
having obtained excellent marks in four subjects, and a sat- 
isfactory grade in one ; and for answering perfectly only six 
of the ten questions in Private International Law, for lack 
of time, he received 60 per cent. His other marks were 



21 



MANUEL L QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



85 per cent in Mercantile Law, 93 per cent in Penal Code, 
95 per cent in Civil Law, 96 per cent in Civil Procedure, 
and 98 per cent in Criminal Procedure. 

In those times prospective barristers had to pass all 
the different subjects and to answer all the questions— 
usually ten — in every subject Examination questions were 
as difficult to answer as those of the present bar tests. 
Typical questions asked were the following: In Criminal 
Procedure: "What are the rights guaranteed in favor of 
the accused in a process brought against him?" In Private 
International Law: "What is domicile and what are its 
elements? How does it differentiate from mere residence?" 
In Mercantile Law: "What are the endorsements and 
requisites of a draft?" 

Quezon answered the questions in Spanish. His high 
marks were due to his complete and detailed answers. His 
failure to get full credit in some cases was mainly due to 
the brevity of the answers given. His brief answers were 
attributed to his "natural and nervous impatience," 

When the results of the bar examination were re- 
leased, Quezon appeared to be among the first ten highest. 
J. L. Quintos was the topnotcher ; Sergio Osmena came out 
second, and Fernando Salas third. His bar examination 
ratings, compared with those of the first three highest- 
candidates, showed that he beat them in Civil Procedure 
and that he obtained second in both Penal Code and Crim- 
inal Procedure. 

Quezon became a full-fledged lawyer on April 16, 1903, 
when he, together with other successful bar candidates, 
took the oath before the justices of the Supreme Court of 
the Philippines. ■ - 

The official roster showed that, alphabetically ar- 
ranged, Osmena bore No. 282 while Quezon occupied the 
next number. 

22 



THE SELF-SUPPORTING STUDENT 



Of the study of law, Quezon declared: 

"I feW an inmost satisfaction and pride that what t 
know of the principles of law and justice I have learned 
from the University of Santo Tomas, and my love and devo- 
tion to the lofty ideals and high purposes which underlie 
and give life to the legal profession, I have imbibed from 
men who have graced the professorial chairs of this Univer- 
sity ami whose names will go down in history as the per so n- 
if i eat ion of the best that can be found among judges and 
professors of law anywhere in the world," 

Reminiscing on their association in college, Sergio Os- 
mena said: 

M | knew Que/.ou for the first time in 1S93, when both 
of us were students of law in the University of Santo Tom as. 
We lived under the same roof in the same room of that uni- 
versity. Among our classmates— in law and philosophy and 
letters— were men who in later life figured prominently in 
public affairs, in the judiciary, in commerce, and in other 
ac civ i ties. Anions them, to mention only a few of the well 
known, were Felipe G. Calderon and Enrique Mendiola, Juan 
Sumulong and Fernando Salas j Vicente Singson Enearnacion 
and Vicente Madrigal, Rafael Palma and Jaime C. de Veyra, 
Simeon Mobo and Mariano Yengco, Vicente Albert and Gre- 
gorio Agoncillo. Also among us were the poet laureate, Ce- 
cilio Apostot, and the intellectual adviser of Andres Bonifa- 
cio — Emilio Jacinto — rightly called the brains of the Katu 
pun an. Quezon then already showed signs of that quick 
thinking, that dialectic keenness, and that power of impro- 
visation by which he was to distinguish himself in his par- 
liamentary career and in his memorable battles in the arena 
of politics. 

"Our friendship as students in the University of Santo 
Tomas, far from being a transient affair, was the prelude to 
an association of a life-time. Interrupted by the revolution 
against Spain and the war against America, our comradeship 
was renewed when we met again, shortly after the end of 
hostilities, to review for the bar examination. Then, when 
we were already lawyers, the parallelism between our lives 
was continued with his appointment as fiscal of Mindoro and 
mine as fiscal of Cebu and Negros Oriental." 



23 



Chapter 3 



THE HEROIC SOLDIER 

/ was for two yearn in the field. 
We i m oved the mountains t sleeping 
many a night in the mud and with- 
out shelter. Many & time we had 
nothing to cat, 

—QUEZON 

|N THE prime of youth — robust, fearless, and impulsive 
— Quezon voluntarily joined his countrymen in their 
fight for freedom— first against Spain and later against 
America, In the revolution he started as a lieutenant 

and rose to be a major within the two years of loyal and 
patriotic service in the battlefields of Luzon. 

Prior to this enlistment, however, Quezon was a mem- 
ber of the Filipino volunteers who were recruited to the 
Spanish army that attempted to stop the powerful enemy 
during the Spanish-American war. "Armed with worth- 
less and useless rifles, we wanted to be heroic not knowing 
that the Spanish governor general had surrendered the 
city," Quezon, stated. 

He belonged to the Manila battalion, popularly known 
as the Leales Voluntarios de Manila, commanded by civilian 
Spanish officials. This unit had a sprinkling of Spanish 
mestizos who enlisted to save themselves from both persecu- 
tion and execution by the enemy. They guarded the Mura- 
11a, the Intendencia, the Bureau of 10 du cation building— 
prominent landmarks in the Walled City until they were 
destroyed by the American liberating forces in the battle 
for the reconquest of the Philippines from the Japanese in 
1945. Their headquarters was located on the corner of Ma- 
gallanes and Santa Potenciana streets in Intramuros. Guard 
duty called for a continuous stretch of 12 hours starting 



24 



THE HEROIC SOLDIER 



from seven o'clock at night for a group of 24 soldiers headed 
by a sergeant. The volunteers had Remington rifles sup- 
plemented by tri-nointed bayonets which reached up to the 
knee. 

Quezon, at Lhe time 19, was a corporal in this battalion. 
His companions simply addressed him as "Quezon" because 
several volunteers in the same headquarters happened to 
bear the first name, Manuel 

As he was a poor boy, most of the time he did not have 
ready cash with him. So there were days when he left his 
college medals with a certain Filipino woman, Sefwrita Gon- 
zales, for the merienda he took on credit, The food con- 
sisted of guinatan, sardine sandwiches, and sliced fried ba- 
nanas. The medals were always redeemed at a later date. 

The capture of Manila by the Americans in 1898 was 
witnessed by Quezon, Of the fall of the capital city, ho 
gave this vivid and colorful account: 

"Forty years ago (as of Aug. 13, 1938), this clay and hour, 
an American army stormed to the attack of the beleaguered 
Spanish city of Manila. I ay as a witness to that epoch-making 
event. In memory's eye, I can see them now, forming grimly 
for the adv a nee in the hazy mists of the morning's glow, "tight- 
lipped, covered with sludge and mud, sweated and seared hy 
tropical heat, driving home to their objective, and for some of 
them, to the judgment seat of God* Green's brigade sweeps 
over San Antonio A bad and along the beach while over to the 
east General Mae Arthur drives up the Smgalong road to be met 
by a hall of fire from Block House 14. He calls for an officer 
to volunteer to lead a close assault and clear the way, and history 
writes its first chapter in the career of the future American 
World War Chief of Staff, Peyton C. March, By nightful the 
town is theirs. 

"As I saw in that late afternoon of August 13. 1898, the 
sun set in the clouds that crown Mariveles with purple and gold, 
in the gathering darkness of the Pacific, the royal flag of Spain 
came down and for the first time in my life I saw the Stars and 
Stripes run to the fore. Little did I realize then that I was wit- 
nessing what in ultimate result may prove to be the greatest 



25 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



event of modern civilization in the Orient Little did I know 
in my immaturity that I was beholding the birth of a new ideol- 
ogy in Asia — an ideology based upon what was then a .strange, 
new conception in this part of the world — a conception that 
government is 'of the people, by the neople, and for the people' 
— a conception based upon the magic words — liberty and free- 
dom. I did not dream then that the first pangs of Philippine 
nationhood were in their beginnings," 

After the defeat of the Spanish troops, Quezon joined 
the Filipino revolutionists. Commissioned a second lieu- 
tenant of infantry by Colonel Villacorte in Pantabangan. 
he was made his aide-de-camp* Being an exceptionally 
brave soldier, his good work in the different skirmishes in 
the provinces earned for him rapid and well-deserved pro- 
motions. 

His first promotion to the rank of first lieutenant was 
given in recognition of his success in apprehending the gang 
of roving thieves in Aliaga, Nueva Ecija, who murdered a 
rich family after robbing them. It took Quezon two days 
to hunt for them. These people were later courtmartialed 
and executed, 

For some months he was stationed in Cabanatuan, Nue- 
va Ecija, It was at the time that he accompanied General 
Benito Natividad to the headquarters of General Antonio 
Luna in Bayambang, Pangasinan. Natividad was wounded 
in the battle of Calumpit, Bulacan. 

The revolutionary officer was fearless, impulsive, 
quick-tempered but kind-hearted, arrogant, and aggressive. 
Quezon possessed a strong personality. He had the military 
bearing all right. His black hair was combed back; his 
eyes were dark brown and bright, He had an aquiline 
nose, prominent cheekbones, and a thin mustache like many 
a Spanish aristocrat. 

Promoted to captain, he joined the forces of Generals 
Aguinaldo and Gregorio del Pilar which moved first to 



26 




Quezon in the full regalia of the 
revolutionary officer. 



i 



THK HEROIC SOLDIER 



Angeles, Pampanga, and then to Tarlac. In Tarlac he met 
Colonel Alejandro Albert, of the revolutionary medical ser- 
vice, with whom he lived. 

Quezon spent his vacation leave in Tarlac, As it was 
during the rainy season his stay was considerably pro- 
longed due to the destruction of the provincial highway by 
a big flood- During his sojourn he became acquainted with 
several beautiful ladies. One fine afternoon he invited 
them for a walk in the town, While strolling, too, the colo- 
nel commanding the Filipino revolutionary forces saw the 
gallant and handsome captain with his jolly company. As 
he did not approve of the idea, he called the attention of 
Quezon who appeared stubborn to the last. 

As a result of this incident, Quezon was sent to Baguio 
and succeeded the commanding officer of the garrison at 
Trinidad, When he returned to the lowlands he brought 
back two sacks of coffee for Mrs. Albert and a small bottle 
of gold particles for the mother of Aguinaldo. 

Then, at his own request, Quezon was sent by Aguinal- 
do to the battle front and assigned to the headquarters of 
General Tom as Mascardo at Porac, Pampanga. Mascardo, 
in turn, appointed him member of the staff of Colonel Ley- 
san, commander of the San Fernando^Porac-Baeolor line. 

Captain Quezon was both daring and useful. In the 
battles at Bacolor and Porac, the insurgent forces were short 
of weapons. To make up for this handicap he was commis- 
sioned by Mascardo to secure a dozen guns and hundreds of 
ammunition in Manila, These he loaded into a carretela, 
then crossed the American line, and brought them safely 
to Pampanga, despite the personal risk in complying with 
the order, But, because they were outnumbered, outarmed 
and outclassed, the Filipinos were finally defeated by Gen- 
eral Arthur MacArthur's troops. 



27 



MANUEL L. QUEZON; HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



Mac Arthur met a courageous and brave foe in Quezon. 
While stationed in Porac, Quezon received news that a de- 
tachment of the enemy force from San Fernando, under 
the command of Captain Colleens, was on its way to attack 
the town. 

In view of this, Major Liraz, assisted by Captain Que- 
zon, immediately met the enemy. At about 11 o'clock in the 
morning of that day the Filipino soldiers were already 
located in a strategic position in Sitio Babo-Saean in the 
hacienda of the late Don Alfredo Petell. At two o'clock in 
the afternoon, the enemy was fired at. The Americans 
lost no time in returning the attack. 

In the thick of the fight, Liraz was fatally hit as he 

led his battalion. The encounter continued with Quezon 

assuming the command, However, seeing no ghost of a 

chance to win the battle, due to the superiority of the enemy 

both in arms and in number, Quezon ordered his soldiers to 

retreat by the Fampanga river, and left only a platoon to 

check the further advance of the Americans and at the same 

time to protect and cover their retreat. In this encounter 

the Filipinos had six casualties, while the Americans left 

a corpse behind. * 

v 

Quezon's last encounters with the American soldiers in 
Dolores, Porac, nearly cost his life. In the first he was 
surprised by the cavalry troops of Major Bell while he was 
taking his breakfast. He had to leave the table hurriedly, 
jump to his saddled horse, and flee as fast as he could. 
The surprise attack compelled Mascardo to move his head- 
quarters farther in the interior of the mountainous re- 
gion. Quezon, who commanded the two companies detailed 
to guard the entrance to the place, had occasion to repel 
the advance of the Beil cavalry once. He himself fired 10 
shots at Bell but missed his target. 

Before Quezon left Pampanga he was marked for as- 
sassination by his Filipino compatriots. The main cause 



28 



THE HEROIC SOLDIER 



of the plot was personal enmity, misunderstanding, and 
lust for power. 

As Quezon came from the distant province of Taya- 
bas, he was a total stranger among his companions-in-arms 
in Central Luzon. This fact, coupled with the importance 
attached to his new assignment, stirred up envy and hatred 
among some of his superior officers. 

The plotters met one night in San Antonio, Nueva 
Eeija. Confine d in a secluded place, a colonel revealed the 
plot to kill the young captain from Baler, It was very 
simple : an ambush, a quick shot, and they would be rid of 
the handsome Tagalog. 

They all agreed to send Quezon out to the field on 
some sort of excuse. He would be met at a crossroad 
nearby, then fired at. The corpse was to float down the 
river. 

All the while, a captain-plotter had heard of the cold- 
blooded plans in silence. Now he stood up and exclaimed 
hotly, "Gentlemen, I protest against this infamous plot to 
kill a man who has committed no wrong, Was it Quezon's 
fault that he came from another region ? We are all Fili- 
pinos. Had he not served our government faithfully? 
Who of us could say that he was a better patriot, or that 
he would serve his country more than this Tagalog?" 

It was a daring defense of a doomed man, for feeling 
was running high. 

White-lipped, a colonel stood up, too. "Traitor! In- 
grate! Insolent meddler!" he shouted. "If your mother 
were not my father's relative, you would die with Que- 
zon !" 

"You're no relative of mine," retorted the captain cold- 
ly. "You're a... t" 

29 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

With' a bellow of rage, the colonel pulled out his gun 
and fired, hitting him in the left side of the head. 

The quarrel was fortunately the turning point of the 
whole affair. Frightened by the scandal that followed the 
shooting, unable to decide upon a definite course of action, 
the conspirators after a time abandoned their nefarious 
plan. 

With the occupation of Pampanga by the American 
forces, Mascardo had difficulty in getting food for his re- 
maining troops. He, therefore, commissioned Quezon to 
look for a place to retreat in Balaam After walking bare- 
footed on mountains, swimming crocodile-infested rivers, 
subsisting on rice and salt, and sleeping without mosquito 
nets for three days, Quezon and his 25 soldiers selected the 
forest between Bagac and Moron g. 

Of their encampment in Bataan, Quezon remembered 
some interesting incidents. 

"One day," he once related, "while following our Ne- 
grito guide on a mountain foot-trail, the bravest member 
of our group who was immediately behind the guide sur- 
prised us by running fast. Scared, the others blindly fol- 
lowed him. I was left behind for I decided to investigate. 
I armed myself. Looking around I found to my great 
amazement a snake crossing my path— our path," 

During the revolution the Filipinos kept vigil over their 
camps day and night, ever alert on the movement of the 
enemy/ Early ohe dawn, Mascardo, Quezon and other of- 
ficers encamped by a river bank suddenly heard the bugle 
call. The night guard informed them of an approaching 
light in the river which he mistook for that of an invad- 
ing detachment. Taken by surprise, Mascardo jumped into 
the water, while the rest immediately armed themselves 
and hid in the bushes. When the light came nearer, the 
only woman in the camp, who incidentally was left alone 



30 



THE HEROIC SOLDI EE 

and stood by with her rifle, shouted to inform her com- 
panions of a banca loaded with Filipino revolutionists who 
were coming from another camp on the other side of the 
mountain- They used a torch to light their way during 
the dark night. 

Although he was only a law student at the outbreak 
of the revolution, Quezon proved to possess a brilliant legal 
mind, when his defense in the case of a Frenchman, sus- 
pected of being a spy, acquitted the accused of the charge- 
The foreigner was captured by Quezon's fellow-insurgents 
during the Filipino- American war, and was tried before 
Mascardo's court-martial. Quezon took up his case, studied 
it thoroughly, presented his side convincingly, and as a re- 
sult his man was exonerated and finally released by the 
insurgents. 

It wag this anonymous Frenchman who prophesied the 
bright future of Quezon. Ever grateful to his "lawyer," 
he was loud in expressing his sincere and high admiration 
for him "The voting man who took charge of my defense 
is very admirable," he said. "His mind is of the sharpest 
and brightest kind." Then came Ms prophecy, "A glo- 
rious and brilliant career is ahead of him. You watch- 
that brilliant and glorious career will surely be his!" And 
the Frenchman was right. 

In 1899 Quezon was promoted to major and appointed 
commander of the second company composed of guer- 
rillas in Bataam During his encampment, Quezon and his 
men attacked the Americans in Hermosa one night With 
the arrival of considerable reinforcements from other 
neighboring towns, the Americans forced the Filipinos to 
retreat. 

"Those were real hardships— marching up and down 
the mountains of Bataan, leeches sticking not onjy to your 
legs but also to your eyes," Quezon reminisced as he de- 



31 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

scribed the Hermosa campaign. "If you had rice once a 
day or drank water without mud, you were lucky," 

"X have lived a life of ease, but I have never felt so 
completely relieved as during the revolution when, return- 
ing from battle, I saw all my companions safe together. 
That meant everything to us, at a time when life was so 
uncertain. Brave, strong, and young men — you saw them 
alive at night and the next morning they were dead." he 
recounted. 

Quezon had bleak Christmases for the last few years 
because of the revolution. Many a Yuletide season he 
spent in the battlefield fighting for the freedom of his peo- 
ple and country. But in the Christmas of 1899 he found 
time to celebrate it. With 100 loyal soldiers he came down 
from the mountain retreat to Orion, Bataan, where the mu- 
nicipal mayor saw to it that their vacation was not dis- 
covered by the Americans. 

Quezon enjoyed the Christmas eve by winning P200 in 
the game of chance known as monte in the residence of a 
inch family. He had only five pesos in his pocket when 
the game started. He thought that with his winnings he 
could visit Manila. g 

Disguised as a lowly fisherman, he left Orion in a fish- 
ing vessel bound for Navotas, Rizal. He was accompanied 
by Isidoro Paguio, popularly known as Cabesang Doro, of 
Pilar, Bataan, on this trip. At Malabon, Rizal, Quezon 
changed his clothes to appear like a university student. 
Having succeeded in eluding the American patrols posted 
at various strategic points on the way to Manila, Quezon 
stayed with the Albert family on Calle Ronquillo in the 
city. On New Year's Day (1900) he was honored with a 
breakfast by his Dominican professors at the University of 
Santo Tomas building who urged him to give up the life 
of an insnrrecto. 



32 



THK HKROIO SOLDIER 

He did not heed the appeal, and instead returned to 
B fa scar do's headquarters in Bat a an. Soon after his ar- 
rival, he was attacked with malaria. A quack doctor al- 
most killed him with an overdose of aspirin. As he had lost 
all hope of living, his companions called for a priest who 
administered the last sacraments to him. 

However, he soon got well and then was taken in a 
hammock to Pilar, from where he boarded a fishing boat 
for Navotas. In Navotas he spent a month as guest of 
Cahesung Doro. During this vacation he read books which 
influenced his religious outlook so greatly that he later 
forsook the Roman Catholic faith and joined Freemasonry* 

On his recovery ho rejoined his comrades in the 
Mascardo encampment. He took a Yangco launch from 
Navotas for Pilar where, upon arrival, he was hidden in 
the bushes near the beach as the Americans were patrol- 
ling the outskirts of the town. That night the enemy pa- 
trol searched all the houses, and Quezon hid under the 
house before he could finish his supper* The searchers 
discovered his presence in the barrio as they found his 
picture and that of a young Pampango lady in his valise. 
The people were asked about him but they refused to di- 
vulge his hiding place* Consequently, the Americans got 
enraged and burned the houses. 

Quezon and his faithful orderly saved their lives from 
certain death by fire, by running toward the river a few 
yards away. Several shots were fired at them but for- 
tunately he was not hit, although the orderly was shot 
through the body three times. 

Enraged by this attack and the misfortune that be- 
fell his companion, Quezon returned to the mountains de- 
cided on revenge. Almost all the men from that devas- 
tated barrio followed him. With them he had his last 
encounter with the Americans who lost two men during 



33 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

the attack. After this incident, Quezon became a victim 
of recurrent malarial attacks. 

The trials and tribulations of the Filipino insurgent, 
the hardships and drawbacks of the poorly equipped Fili- 
pino fighting organization and the sacrifices and suffer- 
ings of the Filipino people during the revolution, Quezon 
narrated vividly and interestingly in the following account: 

"I was for two yeans in the field. I was not put UP 
in any military barracks. We roved the mountains bare- 
footed, sleeping many a night in the mud and without shelter, 
There was no one to prepare our food and many a time we 
had nothing to eat but guavas. 

"I finally fell sick with malaria. As a result, I later 
on contracted tuberculosis from the effects of which I have 
only recently recovered. But 1 did not get anything out 
of the war. I did not even become a good soldier. Nobody 
taught me how to handle my rifle. The rifle was terrible; it was 
old and we had poor ammunition. I could not have hit any- 
body 500 yards from me. 

"There was no equal chance for us in the fight with 
American soldiers. The time came when our best defense 
was our legs. For two years I had to undergo all kinds of 
hardships, nights without sleep, days without food, with no 
place to rest in — all this in the service of our common coun- 
try* ( 

"The greatest war ever fought by the United States 
Army was the war in the Philip pines— the Spanish- American 
War, and perhaps it is the one war winch hardly will find 
a page and space in the history of the United States Army 
because there were no glorious fights, for, as I said before, 
that was no war. In the war against Spnin was ^n army 
who had old, hardly useful weapons; and the poor Philip- 
pine Army, the Filipinos— the courage to face the enemy 
and to die a few minutes after they had faced them. 

"The war against America was no war; that was 
slaughter, pure and simple. We had no weapons to spealc 
of and did not know how to use the few that we had. Our 
army had no discipline, no organization. We had men will- 
ing to die, and thousands upon thousands died heroically; 
others, only through a miracle survived* We fought only 
to die, for we were not trained nor equipped to kill. 



34 



T! I K HKKOIC SOLDIER 

"The American soldier made my life miserable, for he 
made me spend nights without sleep and made me hide in 
the forest days and nights without food. That is no joke: It 
is true. After that war he kept me in jail for six months, 
and after six months iu jail I went to another jail, a hospital, 
for two years. 

"I remember the days when my great ambition was to 
kill an American soldier, and my constant fear was to be 
killed by an American soldier. It is very hard for me to 
say now which of the two emotions was the stronger, I 
only remember that the second emotion kept me miming 
through the mountains, and in thus running I had very little 
opportunity of satisfying the first one/' 

Soon after the downfall of the Malolos Republic came 
the capture of its president, General Emilio Aguinalcto, at 
his headquarters in Palanan, Isabela, by Colonel Frederick 
Funstom, and his subsequent imprisonment in Manila. 
Who was to contact the imprisoned Filipino chief execu- 
tive in order to ascertain the news of his capture by the 
Americans but Major Quezon? To him the delicate and 
important mission of visiting Aguinaldo fell And to ac- 
complish this task, he had to surrender to the enemy as 
he was ordered, though much against his will Of the 
circumstances surrounding his untimely surrender, his 
historic visit to his former chief, his first trip to the Ma- 
Iacanan Palace, and his initial contact with the Americans, 
Quezon graphically related thus: 

"In the year 1£)00 I was privileged for the first time 
to walk into the grounds of Malacaiian and enter the Palace 
halls. The circumstances attending my errand were such 
that my visit left a lasting vivid impression on my mind* 
Before that day I had no occasion to see Malacanau even 
from the street, 

"I knew, of course, of the Palace as the official resi- 
dence of the Spanish Captain-General who was also the Gov- 
ernor General of the Philippine Islands; and my idea of 
the grandeur of the place was in harmony with my concep- 
tion of the power and authority of the personage occupying it. 

u 'El Capitau General/ as His Excellency was called, 
was to my youthful mind a demigod* His word was law 



35 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



and his will supreme. Liberty, property, life lt*elf were Id 
the hollow of his hand. I envisioned Ma lacunar. I'alace as 
a sort of a 'sancta-santorum* which my feet of Clay were 
forever barred to enter. 

"But one day in 1000, when General Mascardo's head- 
Quarters was located in the mountains between Bagac and 
Morong, of the province of JJataan. we read the news In a 
Manila newspaper that General Aguinaldo bad been captured, 
and was taken prisoner in Malacafian, 

"General Mascardo at once summoned bis general staff. 
The first impression among us was that the story could not 
be true, for even our own headquarters did not Know i in- 
exact whereabouts of General Aguinaldo, We thought that 
it was a fabricated story published for the purpose of demor- 
alizing the ranks of the Philippine army. 

"But our chief of staff, the late Colonel Leysan, a former 

officer of the Spanish army, remarked that the Importance 
of the news required that we ascertain its veracity. There- 
upon General Mascardo ordered me to surrender to the 
American forces and try to find out whether or not General 
Aguinaldo had really been captured. 

"I was at the time suffering from malaria and had be- 
come more of a burden to our headquarters than anything 
else. The general, theiefore, thought it best for me to go 
to Manila and undergo treatment. 

"'If General Aguinaldo is a captive in Manila, try to 
get in touch with him', General Mascardo said to me. 'Ask 
him if he has any order to give and write me a letter. , 

"The following day 1 left the camp (in Bagac) and 
went to Mariveles with my two orderlies. After a long and 
hard journey I at last reached the foot of the Mariveles moun- 
tain where I encamped and from where I sent word to the 
American commander of the post that I was willing to sur- 
render if he could guarantee that after giving myself up I 
would be set free. 

"In reply I was told that unless I had committed some 
crime, such as ordering the killing of some American pris- 
oners or some Filipino civilians, and provided that I was 
willing to take the oath of allegiance to the United States, 
I would be released immediately. 

"Given this assurance, and knowing that I had com- 
Kitted no crime, with my orderlies I entered the town of 
Mariveles in the afternoon (of April) and surrendered to 



36 



THE HEROIC SOLDIER 



the American officer whom I subsequently found to be Lien- 
ten mi t Lawrence S. Miller, 

"True to his word, Lieutenant Miller told me that I was 
a free man after I had signed the oath of allegiance to the 
United States, I then informed the lieutenant that one of 
the reasons for in y surrender was to find out the truth about 
the report of General Aguinalrio's capture, and it true, I 
wanted to see him with my own eyes in order that I could 
inform General Ma scar do of the fact. 

"The following day Lieutenant Miller sent for me and 
told me that I could go to Manila on one of the army launches 
and proceed directly to Malacauan where General Aguinaldo 
was detained* 

"I took the launch, came to Manila, arrived early in the 
even In Kp and from that boat I was taken to Malaeanan, It 
was with a feeling of awe that I entered those forbidden 
grounds and, with diverse feelings, went up the stairs, and 
was ushered into Hie last door on the right side. 

"As I entered the door I saw an imposing military figure 
dressed in the uniform of a general of the United States 
army, who, upon seeing me, rose to his full six feet. At his 
side there stood a young army officer and a man dressed in 
civilian clothes, who acted as the interpreter. The general 
was General Arthur MacArthur; the young army officer, his 
aide, and the interpreter, Pied Fisher, later to become a 
member of the Supreme Court of the Philippines, 

"After my introduction to the general, I told him that 
I had come to find oat if General Aguinaldo had really been 
captured; and if so, to see the general and talk to him* 
General MacArthur pointed to the opposite door, said a few 
words in English, which were later translated to me in Span- 
ish as meaning that General Aguinaldo was in the room 
and that I could go and talk to him. 

"I then withdrew, walked toward the room pointed out 
to me, at the door of which there were two American soldiers 
standing with white gloves, each soldier holding a gun with 
drawn bayonet, 

"As I entered the room and saw General Aguinaldo, I 
felt that the world had ended. The last time I saw General 
Aguinaldo, he was in his general headquarters in Tar lac, 
still the supreme head of the Philippine Republic, the com- 
mander-in-chief of our forces, the man whose very order no 
Filipino dared to question. I was then on his staff and had 
come that day to bid him goodbye, for I was going to the 



37 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

front at my own request, to join the command of General 
Mascardo, 

"As long as I live I shall never forget the anguish of 
my heart when I saw my former commander* in -chief a pris- 
oner, alone in that room, guarded by armed soldiers, and 
accompanied only by Dr, Barcelona, his personal physician. 

"1 approached General A^uinaldo with all the respect 
and veneration that I felt for him and told him of the pur* 
pose of my visit. General AgUtaaldo looked at me with sus- 
picious eyes r and as I divined what he had in mind, I said, 
'General, please take a good look at me and see my appear- 
ance. Does not my frail frame and my clothing speak to 
you of a life led in the mountains? And see these scars,- - 
don't they remind you of the effects of a certain medicine 
only the people in the hills use?' 

"After my remarks General A^uinaldo's countenance 
changed somewhat, but he simply said to me, 'Well, as you 
see, I am a prisoner. Tell General Mascardo you have seen 
me and that I have nothing to say/ He then asked how 
many more rifles we had. I told him we had 800 but hardly 
any ammunition. 

"Seeing that he had no further questions to ask, I took 
my leave/' 

To this personal narrative of Quezon may be added 
the fact that when he decided to surrender to the Ameri- 
can forces stationed near Mariveles, the Filipino mayor of 
that town made the negotiations. Quezon first met acciden- 
tally Roy Squires, a first class private, who was collecting 
botanical specimens in the mountains. As Squires did not 
know Spanish and the Filipino officer English, they made 
good use of signs in their conversation. Before Quezon 
revealed his purpose he first asked for the time of the day. 
The American soldier thought that he was going to be 
deprived of his timepiece first, and later of his clothes 
and money- But seeing that the Filipinos were very 
gentlemanly in their actions, he "began to pick up cour- 
age/' 

When Miller accepted Quezon's surrender, he demand- 
ed the rifles of the two Filipino insnrrectos in exchange for 



38 



THE HEROIC SOLDIER 



P30 a piece. For being allowed to keep his revolver, Quezon 
presented Miller his sword. In the night of that fateful 
day Miller got Quezon for his house guest while he waited 
for the launch to take him to Manila on the afternoon of 
the following day. 

After this visit to the Malacanan Palace, Que? on went 
to the residence of the Alberts at 132 Ronquillo, in the 
district of Santa Cruz, but that night he confided to his 
hosts that he did not sleep a wink as he had been thinking 
of Aguinaldo, 

Quezon was not only penniless at the time but also ill 
of malaria and dysentery. His period of recuperation with 
the Alberts was soon interrupted by his imprisonment by 
the United States army without any cause for six months 
in 1900. Together with compatriots he was confined in 
the southern guardroom of Postigo Gate (Pmrta Postigo), 
the smallest of seven of the completed walls of the Old 
Spanish Walled City of Manila. The room was damp and 
dark as it had only two small windows. 

This confinement started one afternoon when, while 
taking his siesta, some American soldiers took him to the 
jail, located on the corner of Ancla and Letran streets in 
the Walled City on the pretext that the provost marshal 
wanted to see him. He later learned that someone had 
falsely accused him of complicity in the murder of a com- 
panion. During his imprisonment Dona Ignacia de Albert 
sent him regularly his meals in a dinner pail (fiambrera) . 
The confinement caused him sacrifices, physical and men- 
tal. As he recalled his days of imprisonment in a Muralla 
dungeon, "for four months, one hundred of us lived on 
canned salmon and pinawa (red rice), cooped up in a room 
which could hardly hold twenty-five/' 

A sickly man, he eagerly looked forward to his 
release, Fortune smiled on him when, while he was being 



39 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



marched in front of the San Juan de Letran College, he 
saw Father Florsncio Llanos, former Dominican professor 
of botany, in the college situated on the opposite side of 
the street. Recognizing; the prisoner as his former student, 
the priest asked why he was a prisoner, and Quezon re- 
plied, "I have been accused of a Tnurder of which I am in- 
nocent" 

After learning of the plight of his student, the priest, 
without losing time, contacted Archbishop Alcocer who, 
in turn, went to see Mr, Hartigan, the church's attorney. 
Hartigan presented the case so ably, that he was able to 
convince the military authorities of his innocence. Forth- 
with he was immediately released. Although ho was set 
free in a stormy night, he left the prison and returned to 
Navotas, 

Father Llanos was very affable and sympathetic to 
Quezon. lie loved him so much that on his deathbed he 
called for him repeatedly. He died at the St. Paul's Hos- 
pital in 1920, One day while visiting a friend in Intramu- 
ros, he was accidentally bitten by a dog. The bite proved 
fatal to him. While confined in the hospital, he was 
heard to exclaim in delirium, "I want to see Quezon.,. 
Call him in, won't you? I want to talk to him." The aged 
churchman died with Quezon's name in his lips. His pass- 
ing was deeply mourned by Quezon who cried like a child. 

Later Quezon, pale and weak from malaria and a 
nervous breakdown, was admitted free of charge in the San 
Juan de Dios hospital through the intercession of his friends 
and the Dominican professors* After a prolonged con- 
finement, Dr. Gregorio Singian, famous Filipino physician 
and surgeon, brought him to his home in Santa Ana dis- 
trict and cured him gratis. 



40 



Chapter 4 



THE SUCCESSFUL LAWYER 

/ charged large fees to the rich, 
and none whatever to the poor, 
I lost no cases. 

—QUEZON 

LAWYER AT 25, Quezon immediately gave up his cler- 
ical work in the Monte cle Pieclad despite the entreaties 
of his chief, Cashier Sotelo, to remain, with the promise of a 
x^aise in salary coming soon, in order to practice his first 
love — the law. 

Upon the invitation of Judge Francisco Ortigas of Ma- 
nila he became a junior partner in the Ortigas law office, 
the most reputable law firm in the Philippines in those 
days. He received a monthly salary of PI 50 and was giv- 
en the privilege of having his own clients. The other 
lawyers were Eusebio Orense, Florentino Gonzales Diez, 
and Rafael del Pan. 

When he won his first case Quezon was elated and en- 
couraged to do his Ust in all the subsequent ones. In 
thi& case he defended the innocence of five men accused 
by the American military authorities of having extended 
help to some Filipino revolutionists who were still engaged 
in guerrilla warfare in the hills. 

As there were very few lawyers at the time and there 
were many civil and criminal cases brought to the courts, 
Quezon decided, at the end of three months of association 
with Ortigas, to open his own law office in Tayabas. By 
then he had already P2,000 in cash from fees paid by his 
rich clients. 



41 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



Quezon had high regard for the law profession and the 
lawyers themselves, so much so that on one occasion he 
revealed : 

"Time there was in our country when the appellative 
lawyer was taken to mean a champion of human rights, a 
veritable soldier of truth and justice, an apostle of peace 
and general well-being. Isaac Fernando de I03 JUos, Caye- 
tano Arellano, Victorino Mapa, Florentine Torres. Manuel 
Araullo, Marcelo H. del Pilar, Apolinario Mabini, Rafael del 
Pan, and many others raised the prestige of the legal pro- 
fession to that hoight They were not only shining lights 
of their calling but also commanding pillars of right and jus- 
tice. One or two of them left some fortune, most of them 
died poor; two of them embraced the profession of law p not 
so much as a means of livelihood, but because in their hearts 
there burned a consuming fire urging them to fight wrong 
and injustice." 

When he was practising law in Manila, he lived with 
Attorney Gay of Iloilo and Dr. Fernando * Calderon, former 
director of the Philippine General Hospital, in a big house 
on Calzada de San Sebastian, now R. Hidalgo, in the dis- 
trict of Quiapo, They shared equally the monthly rental 
of P180 for the house, even after Gay had moved out. The 
first floor was occupied by the clinic of Calderon, and the 
second story served as their headquarters. Their house- 
hold included a cook, a driver, and three houseboys. 

When they rented the house, Calderon and Gay gave 
Quezon the money to pay for the installation of the light 
service. But he forgot to pay the electric company before 
he left for Tayabas to attend a trial, so that his companions 
spent the first three nights in the house without light and 
had to eat their supper by candlelight- 
Recognized as a good lawyer, he handled important 
criminal and civil cases, and won all. While he was in 
great sympathy with the poor, and therefore gave his 
services free, he charged his propertied clients large fees, so 
that his average monthly income reached P1.00Q. 

42 



THE SUCCESSFUL LAWYER 



At one time Quezon secured the acquittal of 12 of the 
16 rebels accused of brigandage before Judge Sweeney, As 
defense counsel of Aurelio Tolentino, Tagalog playwright, 
who was charged with sedition for writing the novel, Ka- 
hapon, N gay on at Bukas {Yesterday, Today and Tomor- 
row), he won this case by force of his logic and strength 
of his arguments. 

He handled also the Luis Palad case. Four years be- 
fore Pa lad died in 1896, he made a testament donating to 
the town his land in Colong-Colong and provided for the 
establishment of a Colegio de Ensemnza. Relatives ques- 
tioned the legality of the testament, Quezon handled bril- 
liantly the case for the administrator. The Supreme Court 
upheld him. 

In October, 1903, Quezon personally filed a criminal 
case against Fabian Hernandez, arch-enemy of his late fa- 
ther, Lucio, for having falsified the latter's signature and 
for having forcibly taken possession of his two-acre rice 
farm in Baler, Tayabas (now Quezon). 

Quezon was always helpful to all — friend and foe 
alike. In the first grand observance of Occupation Day in 
Litcena on August 13, 1903, he was among the guests at 
the municipal hall who reviewed the parade of American 
troops headed by General Bandholtz. Suddenly the crowd 
shouted, 'Tire, fire!" Immediately the young lawyer ran 
to the burning house of Don Enrique Valencia, a promi- 
nent coconut planter, on Mat ion a street, and led the town 
voluntaries put out the fire. 

Quezon wa» congratulated by Bandholtz for the splen- 
did work. The next morning the municipal council passed 
a resolution changing the name of the main street of the 
town from Key Alfonso XIII to Manuel Luis Quezon. 

Later the council honored Quezon with a dance at the 
casa real (the municipal hall). At the reception he deliv- 

43 



\ 



MANUEL L, QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

ered a short speech in Spanish treating on civic duty, 
respect for American sovereignty, and the significance of 
Occupation Day. "The Americans came here not for con- 
quest, but to help develop our country and to enlighten 
the people," he said. After he had finished, cheers of 
"Viva, viva Quezon" rent the air* 

On another occasion Quezon directed the chase for sev- 
eral persons who looted the rice bodega of Don Narciso 
Lopez in Lucena. 

It took him only a short time to establish his repula- 
tion as a brilliant lawyer, and litigants who flocked to his 
law office made it physically impossible for him to han- 
dle all the cases. Even the famous lawyer of Tayabay at 
the time, Martinez Llanos, saw in Quezon a serious threat 
to his prosperous career. His practice extended to the 
towns of Baler, Calauag, Tayabas, and Lucena. 

However, his progressive practice was soon interrupt- 
ed by Dr, Trinidad H. Pardo de Tavera, member of the 
Philippine Commission, and Judge Linebarger, of first in- 
stance of the district, both of whom offered him the posi- 
tion of provincial fiscal of Mincloro with a salary of PI 50 
a month. Linebarger was deeply impressed by Quezon's 
extensive knowledge of Spanish substantive law and pro- 
cedure. 

After several months in the public service, first as 
provincial fiscal of Mindoro and later of Tayabas, he re- 
signed against the advice of higher authorities. 

Again he returned to his law practice "and once more 
my law office had to refuse many cases because I could 
not handle them/* A successful practitioner he earned 
several thousand pesos. 

Then politics lured him. He joined the Nacionalista 
party and launched his candidacy for various important po- 



44 



XI IK SUCCESSFUL LAWYER 



si Hons. But all the time ho was always thinking of prac- 
ticing: law anew, Upon his arrival from the United States 
in 1916 as resident commissioner of the Philippines, he told 
Speaker Sergio Osmena of the Philippine Assembly of this 
desire, but he was prevailed upon to stay in the public 
service. 

When I lie Philippine Senate was created, Quezon was 
elected senator from the fourth district and became the 
first president of that august body of distinguished states- 
men. Notwithstanding the fact that he was the highest 
ranking representative of the Filipinos in the government 
and next in rank to tfoa American governor general, he at- 
tempted to resign from his position and to be a mere law- 
yer. 

"All steps had been taken for me to be a member of 
the firm of Cohn and Fisher, the largest law firm in Ma- 
nila at the time, and when everything was agreed and all 
that was needed was for me to go into the firm, the mem- 
bers of the Senate asked me not to resign as president 
I was single, had neither need nor desire to make money, 
and was persuaded to remain in public life/' Quezon later 
revealed. 

Why did he want to practice law? His reason was 
this: "I love my profession more than I love politics and 
I have never been dazzled by the glitter of power. I am 
a poor man, born poor, lived with the poor in my infancy 
and youth, and the formalities and ceremonies of official 
life do not appeal to me/* 

When he became a family man in 1918 he realized 
that he needed mojney to provide for the comforts and lux- 
uries to which his wife and children were entitled. So, 
once more, Quezon looked to the law profession as the only 
means to earn and save. While in Washington, D. C, at 
the head of a mission sent by the Philippine Legislature, 

45 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



he entered into a contract with Judge DeWitt and then 
Attorney General Quintin Paredes binding himself to join 
the partnership of the law firm, Quezon, DeWitt, and Pa- 
redes, as soon as he arrived in Manila, Each partner put 
up a bond of P5 ? 000, which amount was to be forfeited in 
case any one failed to fulfill the contract. "This time T 
wanted to practice my profession not only for love of the 
practice of the law but also to make money, I had a wife 
and was expecting to have children. I had a duty to them* 
I did not want them to be 'shirtless' as their father had 
been, not because to be poor is a dishoner, but because it 
is hard," Quezon disclosed. 

But pressure was agam exerted on him to remain by 
his colleagues in the Senate, and he again yielded. Seeing 
the futility of returning to the practice of his profession, 
Quezon, after this attempt, never initiated any further move 
to be a practising lawyer. 



46 



Chapter 5 
THE BRILLIANT PROSECUTOR 

The position of fiscal gave on- 
ly a salary of P150. / decided 
to accept it as a call of public 
duty. 

—QUEZON 

CONSIDERING THE offer as a "call of public duty/' 
Quezon accepted the position, of provincial fiscal for 
Mindoro in September, 1903, at a great financial sacrifice, 
for the salary was only P150 a month while he "was making 
over one thousand pesos a month as a lawyer/' The po- 
sition was offered to him by Judge Linebarger after the 
court session in Tayabas one day. He was given 24 hours 
to make the decision. Governor General William Howard 
Taft signed his appointment 

Shortly after assuming office in Calapan, capital of 
Mindoro, Quezon found that, in his study of the cases filed 
against several prisoners for banditry, there was not suf- 
ficient evidence to justify the prosecution. So he moved 
for the dismissal of the cases as soon as Judge Linebarger 
came and held court sessions. Quezon's decision on this 
matter made him very popular among the people who saw 
in him an apostle of justice, 

Conceded as the best provincial fiscal by Judge Ross, 
inspector of f [seals, he was promoted after six months, 
without asking anybody for promotion, and was trans- 
ferred to Tayabas where he served for another six months, 

As government prosecutor Quezon had a royal legal 
battle with the five best American lawyers in the Philip- 
pines in those days, in the celebrated case of Francisco J, 
Berry* American practicing lawyer in Manila and Tayabas 



47 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



and influential proprietor-publisher of the then powerful 
newspaper, Cahlenews American. Quezon charged Berry 
of estafa in 25 informations for trying "to rob of their 
property a number of ignorant but somewhat well-to-do 
Filipinos/' He considered his triumph in this case as one 
of his major legal achievements. 

The accused and his secretary, Mr. Carriers, faking 
advantage of the ignorance of the 25 Filipinos detained in 
the provincial jail of Tayabas, made each sign a document 
which turned out to be an absolute sale of their coconut 
lands together with their work animals at a price said to 
have been received from them. The total value of the prop- 
erties was P60,00CL 

At the time the fiscal had something to do with the 
registration of deeds. So Berry left the contracts with 
Quezon. One day he returned to inquire from him wheth- 
er or not the contracts had already been registered. For 
lack of time Quezon was not able to register them, but 
promised to do soon. Disgusted, Berry intimated the fil- 
ing of administrative charges against him. Quezon got 
angry at his insolent attitude, so he ordered him to step 
out of his office, and Berry stepped out. 

The great interest which Berry had in the prompt reg- 
istration of the papers caused the fiscal to investigate. 
At the provincial jail he learned that the American offered 
his services to defend the prisoners, an offer which they 
accepted. Right there he asked them to sign the docu- 
ments to secure the payment of his fees. 

As the documents were ratified before the justice of 
the peace of Tayabas, the fiscal asked the judge if the pa- 
pers had been read to the vendors before he ratified them. 
In giving a negative answer, the judge reasoned out that 
Berry brought the contracts already prepared and all that 
he did was to affix his signature to the acknowledgment. 

48 



THE BRILLIANT PROSECUTOR 



The well-known lawyer, Fred C- Fisher, later an asso- 
ciate justice of the Supreme Court, and W, W- Bishop, once 
fiscal of Manila, defended the accused in the court of first 
instance. Judge Paul Linebarger heard the case and sen- 
tenced Berry to 30 days of arresto manor. The decision of 
the trial court was appealed to the highest tribunal. For- 
mer Judge \V\ 0. Kineaid, a famous American lawyer, ap- 
peared on appeal But the Supreme Court, through Mr- 
Associate Justice Florentine Torres, not only confirmed 
the sentence against the accused, but also increased the 
imprisonment to four months and one day of arresto ma- 
yor, as it considered the nature of the crime as con- 
summated estafa instead of frustrated estafa as established 
by the trial court. 

On this case the following observation was noted: 

"The careful preparation of the case on the part ot the 
fiscal, the orderly presentation of his evidence, and the care 
-with which he framed his questions to the witnesses for the 
prosecution 

"In his cross-examination of the accused and the im- 
portant witnesses for the defense, one may note the skill of 

an able cross-examiner 

"His questions are clear, short, and to the point 

"There is not much desire to look tor contradictions 
because, as is well knowr^ contradictions, if they touch on 
minor details, are of little value . . , . 

"The tendency of his cross-examination is to look for 
and expose improbabilities and incredibilities in the testr 
mony of the witnesses for the defense — a method which is 
most effective in unmasking false witnesses or m exposing 
fabricated declarations " 

However, while the first case was on appeal with the 
high tribunal, Berry left for Hongkong and never returned 
to the Philippines. His bond was consequently forfeited 
when the final judgment was rendered. 

An aftermath of this victory was the administrative 
charges filed against him by Captain Ofley, then governor 
of Mindoro, based on acts which Quezon allegedly had com- 



MANUEL L. QUEZQN: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



mitted as fiscal of that province. Although it was an ex- 
parte investigation that was held, in which witnesses were 
called to testify during his absence, Quezon held his legal 
ground irreproachably and was acquitted of the serious 
charges. He had the support of leading Mindoro people 
headed by Macario Adriatico, Agustin Quijano, and Com- 
missioners Trinidad H. Pardo de Tavera and Benito Le- 
garda. But he was found guilty of the minor offense of 
having attacked physically Agaton Escal, 

Disgusted wth the procedure taken against him, Que- 
zon resigned the position "against the advice of Judge Ross, 
inspector of fiscals, who told Judge Ide, secretary of justice, 
in my presence, that I was the best provincial fiscal/ 1 

Quezon's own version of the Escal incident follows: 
One day he lost his way in a forest near the town of Pola. 
When he inquired from Escal whom he met, the latter failed 
to give him a satisfactory answer. So Quezon punched 
him on the nose- 
In 1940 when Quezon visited Mindoro, he mentioned 
the incident in his speech at the public plaza of Calapan, 
acknowledged his mistake, expressed his profound regret, 
and blamed it all to his quick temper and his youth. 

People admired him for his brilliant work as fiscal 
and for his personal appearance. Although he dressed 
smartly, when he worked in the office he always took off 
his coat to feel more comfortable. He was sociable, friend- 
ly, and gallant. He spent his earnings as fast as he re- 
ceived his money. 

"Mindoro will always have a warm spot in my heart," 
Quezon reminisced once. "I started serving our country 
when I accepted the post of provincial fiscal of this prov- 
ince. I have many friends there to whom I owe person- 
al favors" In Calapan lived two characters who had in- 
timate relations with Quezon : Colocar, his bodyguard, and 
his barber. 

50 



Chapter 6 ' 11 

THE EFFICIENT GOVERNOR 

/ stopped every kind of abuse of 
the people known to me* and as- 
mired the common man of protec- 
tion* 

—QUEZON 

YIELDING TO the demands of the poor and oppressed 
people of his province who assured him of their whole- 
hearted support, Quezon entered politics with his election 
as councilor of the municipality of Tayabas, in Tayabas, 
on January 15, 1906. He was then a young man known 
throughout the province as the fighting fiscal and the bril- 
liant lawyer. 

His election as councilor was provided for in Act No, 
82, known as the new municipal law, passed on January 
31, 1901, which created a system of municipal governments 
composed of the municipal president, vice-president, and 
councilors chosen by the qualified voters of the town. 

In the following month— February— he resigned this 
position to enter the gubernatorial race at the insistence 
of the common taos who clamored for his constant and ef- 
fective service. The first election for provincial gover- 
nors was decreed by Governor General James F. Smith of 
California* Although his two opponents were supported 
by the rich and influential families, he won the coveted 
position of governor, both in the election and m the pro- 
test; thereby, becoming the first Filipino governor of Ta- 
yabas (now Quezon). 

Quezon succeeded General Bandholtz, the only Ameri- 
can who became a provincial executive in the Philippines 
by popular vote. His candidacy was launched in Atimo- 



51 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

nan soon after his conference with the leaders of the con- 
tmcosta of Tayabas. His triumph was attributed to the 
solid votes of the councilors from this part of the province. 

His election as governor he owed to Act No, 83, which 
organized the provincial government in the regularly or- 
ganized provinces. At the head of the provincial board 
was the governor, with the district engineer and the pro- 
vincial treasurer as members. The engineer was later re- 
placed by the division superintendent of schools, The 
only elective member was the governor who was elected 
by the councilors of the municipalities assembled in a con- 
vention, 

Quezon z*emembered vividly this election, for it was a 
turning and decisive point in his political career. "The 
richest, most powerful and influential families of the prov- 
ince fought me," he recounted. "The poor and the hum- 
ble stood by me, and I won against my two rival candi- 
dates who both belonged to the cream of the society of the 
province. I was elected, my election was protested, one 
of the grounds of the protest being that those who voted 
for me were the uneducated. My election was confirmed 
and I became governor of the province/ 7 

The young governor was greatly indebted to the Unit- 
ed States army in winning the gubernatorial race. The 
army personnel helped him morally and materially. He 
never forgot the cooperation extended to him. In later 
years he revealed this interesting historical fact: 

"Every American in the province, with the exception of 
officers of the Constabulary and Lieutenant Hunter Harris 
of the United States Army, was against my candidacy. The 
superintendent of schools, the district engineer, and all the 
school teachers of the province organized a league against 
niy candidacy. 

"I remember that the American school principal, a 
young man, came to my house one night and said: 'Que- 
zon, is it true that you want to be a candidate for gover- 

52 



THE EFFICIENT GOVERNOR 



nor?' I said, yes, 'Well, I am going to oppose you/ he 
said. 'You are too young. It will be better for you to sup- 
port Mr. Carmona, and two ye firs from now you may be a 
candidate for governor. I will be your opponent if you run 
now because we are obliged to support Carmona/ 

" 'I have not asked you to give me any advice/ 1 told 
him, 'but I thank you for it, just the same. Only, I want to 
make it clear that. I have made up my mind on one thing: 
I will be a candidate/ 

"A few clays later Colonel Harbord came to see me. 
We were already acquainted with each other at the time and 
he said, 'Are you going to be a candidate for governor? 1 
'Yes, Colonel, 1 was my immediate reply. 'Well,' he said, *I 
do not want to have anything to do with that, but I should 
like to know your attitude toward the United States, Are 
you loyal to America?' 

"He was the chief of Constabulary and, naturally t he 
was interested in having a governor that would not or- 
ganize a revolution, 'Colonel/ I said, 1 have taken the oath 
of allegiance, and I am determined to make my oath good.' 
After that he left and without violating the Civil Service 
law or other laws then in force which did not allow colonels 
of Constabulary to mix in elections, I noticed that an un- 
dercurrent which was favorable to me had come out from 
the headquarters of Tayabas. 

"Old Hunter Harris — he was the quartermaster officer of 
the regiment in Lucena — and I became friends, We were both 
young and merry. We used to go out together. At the time the 
electors of the province were not the townspeople. They 
w*ere the cone ej ales of the towns, and we had to bring them 
to Lucena from Maainduque, the coast of* Tayabas, and from 
other places. I needed water transportation. My opponents 
— Tolentino and Carmona — were rich. The United States 
Army had their ships which brought the covcejales to Lucena, 
and my problem on how to transport my conccjales was solved. 

"Somehow or other I succeeded in getting the army 
launch to bring the concejales. So the first ones to help me 
when I turned politician were the officers of the United 
States Army, and they did it against the regulations of the 
government of the Philippines (as far as General Harbord 
was concerned) and the Federal Government of the United 
States," 

This election Quezon nearly lost due to some unwhole- 
ame trickery resorted to by his opponents. On several 



53 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

occasions during the balloting there was a deadlock on the 
outcome. To break the results, the concejales had to stay 
several days more in Lucena. As he was then penniless, 
his opponents had all the stores which granted him credit 
closed to him. So he was in a quandary for a while, until 
his laundry woman volunteered to feed the electors, A 
few years later, during a visit to Tayabas, Quezon found 
her to have almost lost her eyesight, which misfortune he 
felt so greatly that he even shed tears in front of the 
crowd. 

Shortly after assuming office, Quezon paid his home- 
town, Baler, a visit aboard a coastguard cutter accompa- 
nied by Colonel J. G. Harbord, Constabulary district com- 
mander in Tayabas. It was in June, 1906. Quezon was 
met by a big crowd at the beach. The old women flocked 
to him and addressed him "Manuelito" — for they had 
known him since his boyhood. 

As politician Quezon frequently attacked the Roman 
Catholics in those days in his political speeches for their 
questionable conduct. His denunciations became known to 
his venerable teacher, Father Llanos. One day Quezon 
met his old professor in Manila who asked him, "I hear that 
you attacked the church. What do you mean?" Smiling, 
Quezon replied, father, it is a political speech,'" The an- 
swer brought a merry laughter to both men. 

As provincial fiscal Quezon was both dreaded and ad- 
mired, as a practitioner he was reputed as a competent 
lawyer and a lover of justice, and as governor he continued 
his crusade against abuses and lawlessness, attended to 
the material rehabilitation and improvement of the prov- 
ince, and propagated extensively the new educational 
system. He established primary and intermediate schools 
in the barrios throughout the province, he developed the 
major industries and undertook scientific agriculture, es- 
pecially in the coconut and abaca plantations, with a view 



54 



THE EFFICIENT GOVERNOR 



to bringing prosperity to the people in later years. Que- 
zon also gave complete freedom to the town mayors and 
the municipal councils in the management of their respec- 
tive affairs, in the same way that he insisted in being 
given a free hand in governing his province, by the higher 
authorities in Manila, 

He proved helpful, too. In one of his regular visits 
to the barrios, he was overtaken by night in a friend's 
house. At midnight fire broke out accidentally in the 
neighborhood. To prevent a possible conflagration, Que- 
zon personally put out the fire with the help of other res- 
idents. This single voluntary act added much to his pop- 
ularity and was greatly appreciated by the people. 

At the time a religious-military organization, known 
as the Ejercito Libertador National, flared up in Tayabas, 
and its brief existence was crowded with several murders 
and robberies. Aimed to obtain a "complete independence" 
for the Philippines, this society depended on Japan for its 
arms. Pantaleon Villafuerte was its leader. On hearing 
of its lawless activities, Quezon personally conducted the 
raid together with a Constabulary force under Major Bor- 
seth. Villafuerte was killed, 19 of his officers surrendered, 
and the society went out of existence. 

In those days people took to their legs in covering dis- 
tances between towns and barrios. In most cases only 
foot trails were available. The country had few automo- 
biles, while the roads were not good. Tayabas was no ex- 
ception. Yet Quezon visited every barrio of the province. 
Reminiscing, he said. "I went through all those barrios on 
horseback. I visited all barrios, even the ones most re- 
mote from the capital. I remember one small barrio down 
on the border of Camarines Norte where a governor had 
never been seen before, nor I think since. Those fellows 
had never seen any official of the government higher than 
a barrio lieutenant before I went there," 

55 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



As governor, Quezon had an enemy — an influential 
political chieftain — who swore he would kill him. Once 
they met while both were passing through a small and 
narrow corridor. A collision could have been avoided had 
one of them turned back. But Quezon purposely kept on 
walking, and then hailed his enemy, "Amiga, have you any 
cigarettes? Can you spare me one?" This friendly ges- 
ture brought about reconciliation, and thereafter they be- 
came best friends. The perfect strategist! 

Quezon belonged to the Nacionalista party which, in 
1906, was composed of two factions — the Independista 
Inmediatista unit to which he was affiliated and the Union 
Nacionalista group. His faction was pledged "to work for 
the immediate independence of the Philippines and to ne- 
gotiate with the United States for an international treaty 
which should establish and guarantee the perpetual neu- 
trality of the Islands," 

The first governors were considered representatives of 
a new spirit. As the American historian, D, P. Barrows, 
observed, "They were noticeable for their youth, progres- 
sive attitude, and eagerness to prove themselves able and 
efficient in their positions. Their election marked a gen- 
eral advance in the spirit of cooperation between the pro- 
vincial authorities and Manila. * * * The ability displayed 
by these governors led to their taking a leading part 
in the subsequent politics of the country and in the Phil- 
ippine Assembly/' 

On October 1, 1906, the governors held an important 
convention in Manila at the instance of Governor General 
Smith. The Tayabas executive dominated the scene, out- 
shining even Osmena, the chairman of the convention. 
At the banquet given by Smith in their honor, Quezon be- 
came their spokesman and as such he pledged the coop- 
eration of the governors to the Smith regime in return for 
the support of the chief executive of their administration, 

56 



Quezon (standing, third from left) had this group photograph together with 
some provincial governors when he was head of his province, 
Tayabas. Former President Sergio Osmena (front, 
seated, right) was governor of Cebu then. 



THE EFFICIENT GOVERNOR 



asserting that "this support and that cooperation will re- 
dound to the welfare of our people." His stand was high- 
ly commended by the newspaper, La Independencia, the 
following clay. 

Of this gathering Osmena recounted: "Once again, we 
found ourselves working together in that memorable con- 
vention of governors in 1906, the first of its kind to be 
held in Manila, in which one could already perceive the 
outlines of the ideology and political action of Filipino na- 
tionalism which was to inspire the labors and achieve- 
ments of the Philippine Assembly. We were only a few 
Nacionalista governors, all of us young — the fighting Que- 
zon of Tayabas, the circumspect Jaime C. de Veyra of 
Leyte, and the effusive Isauro Gabaldon of Nueva Ecija. 
The Federal party, then the ruling party, dominated the 
convention, but in spite of this, we were able to assert the 
Nacionalista principles which, after suffering a temporary 
setback by the defeat of our arms at the hands of America, 
recaptured the popular imagination and gained new 
impetus under the libertarian crusade launched in the 
arena of peace and legality." 

As governor, Quezon was highly admired by former 
Governor General W, Cameron Forbes, who said, "Manuel 
Quezon gave good service as governor of the province of 
Tayabas, He also assumed the initiative and used his of- 
ficial position beyond the legal powers of a provincial gov- 
ernor in requiring citizens to improve their own proper- 
ty by planting great areas of coconut and hemp — an ex- 
tra-legal performance which resulted in much greater 
prosperity in that region/* 

Son of poor parents, Quezon, even when he rose to be 
the chief executive of his province, did not forget the poor 
to whom he had promised a new deal under his adminis- 
tration. He took interest in their welfare and they re- 
paid him with their eternal gratitude. 



57 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CARRE R 

Of his administration as governor, Quezon wrote: 

"I remember that in my inaugural speech I dealt pre- 
cisely with the condition of the masses and I assured the 
people oi Tayabas of the protection that the common man 
would receive under my administration. I told the people 
of my province, especially the poor, that 1 was hoping and 
desiring for their valuable assistance in the establishment 
of a clean government and honest public service. That did 
not mean that I took the part of the poor as against the 
wealthy, and that I would aid only the poor; it simply meant 
that, as the poor did not have any means to pay for their 
needs nor were they learned enough to help themselves, I 
therefore consider it reasonable to defend them and their 
rights if they were aggrieved. 

"As governor, not only did I stop every kind of abuse 
of the people known to me, but when a band of ladrones 
armed with guns was organized in my province, I also per- 
sonally led the Constabulary and the police with the then 
Colonel J. G. Harbord to pursue them in the mountains. 
After hiking all day and night without sleep and without 
food, we met the band, had a hand-to-hand fight with them, 
caught their leaders, and that was the end/' 

When Quezon was governor, his savings of a few thou- 
sand pesos were all spent in dances and parties which he 
gave now and then. He was a young man, only 28 years 
old, single, and very fond of entertainments, He occupied 
a house in Lucena, capital of Tayabas (now Quezon), and 
had his first cousin — Senorita Aurora Aragon — act as 
his hostess. "She was a young woman of amazing fair- 
ness and very beautiful gray eyes/' the late Don Teodoro 
M, Kalaw described her. "Her beauty was exceptional." 



58 



Chapter 7 



THE FIERY MAJORITY FLOOR LEADER 

My election was practically unani- 
mous though (here was a candidate 
against me and I wade no cam- 
paign. 

—QUEZON 

POLITICAL PARTIES began to be organized in the 
i Philippines soon after the establishment of the civil 
government by the Americans. The Federal party formed 
under the auspices of former Governor General William 
H Taft was the first political entity to be constituted. It 
advocated the permanent retention of the Philippines by 
tne United States. Prominent members of the group were 
old men who had spent their manhood in the Spanish re- 
gime. They "knew enough of American history to under- 
stand the difference between the American regime and 
the Spanish regime in the Philippines and they were fa- 
vorably disposed towards the United States," wrote Que- 
zon, 

In the first few years of American occupation mar- 
tial law was enforced in the Philippines, so that the Fili- 
pino leaders did not dare to organize other parties for fear 
of being prosecuted and persecuted. However, when the 
ban was lifted, several political parties sprang up, all ad- 
vocating the early grant of the independence of the Phil- 
ippines. "The country was still strongly anti-American 
for the war had just been over and sentiments for Phil- 
ippine independence were very strong/' observed Quezon. 

The early advocates of freedom were known as the 
Urgenthtas and tnmediatiatm; and in the opinion of Taft 
they were explosivisstas. So strong, indeed, was the sen- 
timent for independence that everybody entertained the 

59 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

idea that one was considered a traitor to his country un- 
less he bound himself with the rest of the young men in 
a common cause. In 1907, with Sergio Osmena of Cebu 
and Rafael Palrna of Cavite, Quezon united together the 
small parties in existence into the Nacionalista party. 

In that year the first election for the Philippine 
Assembly was announced. 

Having proved himself a capable executive and a pub- 
lic servant, Quezon resigned as governor, after serving 
for one year and a half, to run for representative of the 
first district of Tayabas in the elections of July. Because 
of his strong desire to be the leader of the opposition, 
which he revealed to Senor Unson, then secretary of the 
provincial board of Tayabas, during a trip to Baler, Que- 
zon bolted from the ranks of the Nacionalista party two 
months before the election and presented his candidacy as 
an independent. 

Quezon had very plausible reasons for taking such a 
drastic course. Reasoned he, "I like to talk if I have 
something to say, and I talk regardless of the consequences 
of my talk. I felt that I would have to be compelled 
to measure my words if I should be the leader of the oppo- 
sition. . I withdrew from the Nacionalista party and I 
was elected as an independent member." 

Supported by both rich and poor he won over hi? 
only opponent, Domingo Lopez, by a big margin without 
the necessity of a campaign. Lopez got only 840 votes as 
against the 2,237 votes cast in his favor. 

The opposition group of Quezon composed of 20 young 
men bitterly hated the old men who made up the Federa- 
listas t (known as the Progressives in the first Assembly) 
for these wanted "to run the affairs as they were ex-mem- 
bers of the Malolos Congress and naturally had taken for 



60 



THE FIRRY MAJORITY FLOOR LEADER 



granted that they could scare us like children and run the 
affairs under their control," noted Quezon. 

Before the inauguration of the first Philippine As- 
sembly the young assemblymen disregarded party align- 
ments in an effort to control the body. When they already 
commanded the majority they elected Sergio Os'mefia as 
speaker and Quezon as floor leader. Upon the formal or- 
ganization of the Assembly, the new alignment of the law- 
makers showed that the Nacionalista party had 58 as 
against 16 Progressives and six Independents, 

Largely responsible for the birth of the Assembly was 
William Howard Taft who, at the time, was the secretary 
of war of the United States. Taft returned to Manila at 
the head of an official party to attend the inauguration 
held at the Manila Grand Opera House on Rizal avenue at 
nine o'clock in the morning of October 16, 

At the opening ceremonies both Governor General 
James L. Smith and Secretary Taft addressed the assem- 
blage, while Bishop Barlin of Nueva Caceres offered a 
prayer. After the inauguration, the Assembly adjourned 
until 5:30 in the afternoon of that day. 

When the Assembly met, this time at the Ayuntamiento 
in the Walled City (Intramuros), the election of the speak- 
er was taken up. After the roll of the delegates was called 
Quezon nominated Assemblyman Nicolas Jalandoni of Iloilo 
as temporary chairman. Then the House proceeded with 
the election which was not an easy undertaking, Quezon 
stood up again and nominated Osmena. Osmena's name 
was received with enthusiasm and his election was declared 
unanimous. In turn, Quezon was elected the floor leader 
and was also chosen the chairman of the powerful 
committee on appropriations in recognition of his execu- 
tive ability and loyal and meritorious service to the party. 



61 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LFFE AND CAREER 

As the fiery leader, Quezon was instrumental in wield- 
ing the big stick against recalcitrant young men who dared 
question the leadership of Speaker Osmena. Quezon be- 
came the golden-tongued .speaker of that august body, al- 
ways taking a hand in the important deliberations, and 
exercising tremendous power and influence in the decision 
of legislative matters. 

As committee chairman Quezon led the attacks in the 
Assembly on the alleged excessive sums for some items in 
the general appropriations bill prepared jointly by the 
American commissioners and the Assembly, Due to a 
disagreement between the two bodies, there was no appro- 
priation act for three years beginning in 1910. 

Quezon was the author of the formal resolution of the 
Assembly protesting against the establishment of free trade 
between the United States and the Philippines which was 
presented to the United States Congress during the con- 
sideration of the bill. Although the protest was regarded 
by America as a "'childish tantrum," she learned that the 
Filipinos had their own temper and mind. The burden of 
Quezon's plea was understanding and frankness. 

"America regarded the Philippines as a backward 
helpless country that was to be aided and fattened in spite 
of itself. It had to become a profitable market for Amer- 
ican goods, and the -aspirations of its people to nationhood 
could be dismissed as unwise/' he vehemently protested. 
All the undesirable consequences predicted in the resolution 
came out true, "The economic ties that free trade has 
forged have become the Gordian knot in the loosening of 
which the MacMurray-Yulo committee has been enlisted," 
he later commented. 

Had it not been for Quezon the Dominican Order in 
the Philippines would have lost real estate property in the 
Walled City worth at least F100,000 by an oversight on 



62 



THE F1EUY MAJORITY FLOOR LEADER 



their part- During a revision in the land registry, it was 
noticed that the property had been declared government- 
owned, This error was discovered by Reverend Serapio 
Tamayo upon his return to Manila from a provincial trip. 
So worried were the Dominican fathers that they had to 
approach Quezon for his intervention. 

Always the grateful man, Quezon lost no time in con- 
ferring with the American governor general who kindly 
acceded to his plea. However, inasmuch as to make the 
Dominicans repurchase their own property in order that 
they could get it back was deemed unjust if ied, Quezon 
talked the matter over with the city fiscal of Manila, the 
former Chief Justice Ramon Avancena of the Supreme 
Court. Taking up the suggested course of action, the in- 
terested party brought the matter to the courts, and Judge 
Roman Lacson favorably granted the petition that the 
property in question be returned to the Dominicans. 

During his term in the Assembly Quezon had an un- 
pleasant incident with the press which gave the newsmen 
a lesson. Without any justifiable motive the editor of 
La Democracies a Spanish newspaper, started publishing a 
series of articles attacking his record as provincial fiscal 
of Minctoro. So scurrilous were the attacks that Quezon, 
accompanied by Assemblymen Villamor and Lerma, was 
obliged to visit the newspaper office on January 7, 1909. 
"Upon seeing the editor, Quezon held him by the neck, shook 
him as a terrier would shake & rat, then pushed him away 
so vigorously that he fell to the floor* Mutual friends 
separated the two assailants," so the meeting was described. 

At the close of the second session of the first Assem- 
bly Quezon was rewarded by his colleagues for his leader- 
ship and in recognition of his ability as an outstanding 
parliamentarian, with an appointment as the official dele- 
gate of the Philippines to the International Congress of 



63 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



Navigation at St. Petersburg in Russia. The invitation 
which came from the government of the Czar of Russia 
was transmitted to the Philippine government by the 
Department of State of the United States, 

This trip gave Quezon his first glimpse of foreign 
lands. It also afforded him the opportunity to study the 
workings of foreign governments in Europe. The Assembly 
set aside £34,000 for the trip. 

Two secretaries— the late Don Teodoro M. Kalaw and 
F. Theo. Rogers who acted as an interpreter at the same 
time — accompanied Quezon in this trip in the summer of 
1908. The journey took him to Japan, Russia, Germany, 
and Great Britain. Taking a liking of the climate of France 
he decided to stay for some time in Paris. On his way back, 
the envoy passed through America where he had his first 
glimpse of that great and wonderful country which was 
to be the scene of his next political activities. He became 
the guest of Theodore Roosevelt, then the president of the 
United States, at a luncheon at Oyster Bay. 

In Assemblyman Quezon his Nacionalista colleagues 
found an effective floor leader, a logical, eloquent, and out- 
spoken speaker, a ready and formidable debater, a demo- 
cratic mixer and a good friend, and a master of repartees. 
During his 18 months in that legislative chamber, Quezon 
rendered a splendid service to his country* 



64 



Chapter 8 

■ 

THE ENERGETIC RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 

We recognize no substitute, ad~ 
mil no alternative^ concede no re- 
duction of our righteous demand 
for the absolute iv dependence 0/ 
the Philippines, 

— QUEZON 

AFTER HIS return from Europe. Quezon was elected 
by his colleagues in the Assembly the junior resident 
commissioner of the Philippines to the United States to 
succeed Pablo Ocainpo de Leon. He held this position from 
May 15, 1909, to January 11, 1917, being reelected thereto 
in 1911, 1913, and 1915 His eight-year tenure ran through 
the administration of two presidents— the Conservative 
Republican, Taft, and the Liberal Democrat, Wilson — from 
whom he learned tactics in conflicting schools of political 
opinion of which he was to make good use in his later years 
in the government service. 

President William Howard Taft of the United States 
advocated the sending of the commissioners to represent the 
Philippines in the United States Congress. The two com- 
missioners were by law chosen by each house — the Phil- 
ippine Commission and the Assembly — and the selection 
of one body had to be ratified by the other before the 
nominee could assume the position. They received the salary 
of the members of the American House of Representatives 
and on the floor they were allowed to speak but they had 
no vote, 

Quezon arrived at Washington, D. C„ on December 24, 
1909, and on New Year's day he was taken by the senior 
resident commissioner, Mr. Legarda, to the White House 
to greet President Taft* 



65 



MANUEL L, QUEZON; HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



A Spanish-speaking; young man, Quezon found that 
Spanish would not help him in any way in his relations 
with the American congressmen. So he studied English 
under a teacher in preparation for his intensive campaign 
for Philipine independence. Within six months, with the 
aid of the Spanish-English dictionary and newspapers and 
books, he was able to master the language, and soon he 
was recognized as a vigorous and forceful speaker in the 
Lower House. 

On May 14, 1910, Quezon made his maiden speech in 
which he paid glowing tribute to the fine work of the 
American administration in the Philippines. For three 
hours he amazed his hearers at the joint session of the 
House of Representatives and the Senate. In part, he said: 

"I am glad to be able to affirm, first of all, that simul- 
taneously with the American occupation, there has been estab- 
Usheri* a more liberal government, and from that, the Filipinos 
have enjoyed more personal and political liberty than they ever 
did under the Spanish Crown. These facts are freely acknowl- 
edged throughout the length and breadth of the Islands, and 
my countrymen wish me most cordially to assure the House 
and, through it, the people of the United States, that they are 
grateful, profoundly grateful, for all the benefits that your 
government has conferred upon them." 

Quezon also "appealed to the pride and patriotism of 
the American people, to their devotion and to the princi- 
ples of liberty and self-government, -and reminded them 
that in spite of all the good things done by America in the 
Philippines, the Filipinos preferred to be free and inde- 
pendent." 

In the august halls of Congress Quezon found himself 
both young <a'nd inexperienced to play the important role 
of a crusader. However, he did his best. Soon Congress 
and Washington were impressed by his personality. With 
inspired fervor and tireless zeal he laid the solid and per- 
manent foundations of the Commonwealth and the Republic. 



66 



THE ENERGETIC RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 



His feverish activities did not keep him in Congress 
only, for he also attended the national conventions and 
popular gatherings of political parties, and toured the con- 
tinent in an intensive campaign for independence. His long 
years of campaign, both inside and outside of Congress, 
eventually produced the desired results. The American 
people soon realized that the Filipinos were capable of 
governing themselves, and so put them to a test by the pas- 
sage of the Jones Act in 1916, 

As early as 1911 Quezon started a series of speeches 
on the floor of the House of Representatives. On one occa- 
sion he voiced his preference for a Philippines without 
millionaires if "we could also have a Philippines without 
people starving or lacking m the means which would per- 
mit them to live a decent life." At other instances he de- 
livered half a dozen speeches on the same hall advocating 
the neutralisation' of the Philippines. When the question 
of protection of the Filipinos from foreign invaders was 
propounded to him, his ready reply was that the same be 
secured through neutralization. 

His campaign for independence took him to a tour of 
the New England states in the autumn of 1911 under the 
auspices of the Anti-Imperialist League, In his trips he 
successfully combatted the wrong impression imparted by 
American writers to the American public about the Fili- 
pinos who were taken for cannibals, the majority being 
Moros and Igorots wearing Gastrin gs. He campaigned ef- 
fectively and vigorously to erase the prevailing impression 
that the Filipinos were savages. Quezon wore a silk hat 
and overcoat in these trips. His elegant attire surprised 
his audience and often brought disappointment to many 
people who had come purposely t 0 see him expecting him 
to be wearing G-strings. 

He took the American officials in Manila to task when 
he denounced the Philippine Commission to Congress for 
authorizing the sale of 55,000 acres of agricultural land in 



67 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: JUS LIFE AND CAREER 

San Jose, Mindoro, to an American firm. To him the trans- 
action was a complete deviation from the policy of America 
to conserve the land as the patrimony of the Filipinos. The 
attack later brought a sharp note from General Edwards, 
chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs, of the United States 
government, who threatened to work for his immediate 
recall. Although more attacks were heard in the House of 
Representatives from Quezon, no recall ever came. 

As a result of his denunciation, the House committee 
on insular affairs investigated the charges. Although the 
officials were apparently arquitted, it was evident that the 
committee frowned at the practice of government employees 
buying lands of which they acted ao trustees for the Fili- 
pinos. This incident brought a new element in the discussion 
of the Philippine question in the United States. For the 
first time the Filipinos were heard through their commis- 
sioners who voiced their wishes and even their disagree- 
ment with American policies in the Philippines, 

On the floor of the Lower House and in the American 
press Quezon belied the charge that chattel slavery ever 
existed in the Philippines, particularly in the Christian 
provinces. The problem had attracted the attention of the 
leaders following the passage of the anti-slavery bill by the 
Philippine Commission with special application in the Mo- 
hammedan regions. As spokesman of the Filipinos, Quezon 
was given ample space in the New York Evening Post to 
argue the point at issue. Making special reference to the 
social and economic conditions then obtaining in the Moro 
provinces, he did not only deny the existence of any kind 
of slavery but also singled out the mistake ol General Bates 
in negotiating a treaty with the Sultan of Jolo in which 
he recognized slavery as an existing Moro custom. 

The victory of the Democratic party in the elections in 
the United States in 1912 gave Quezon ample opportunity 
to secure greater autonomy in the government. After the 



68 



Til E ENERGETIC RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 

election to the presidency of Governor Woodrow Wilson 
of New Jersey, Quezon came into frequent conferences with 
the new chief executive on the independence question. 

At one time Wilson was looking for a young and active 
governor general for the Philippines to success W. Came- 
ron Forbes, a Republican. Hearing of this opening, Con- 
gressman Francis Burton Harrison of New York visited 
Quezon and suggested the name of a friend. But instead, 
Quezon asked Harrison to consider himself as a candidate for 
the position. Harrison asked time to consider the preposi- 
tion. The following morning, Harrison accepted the gov- 
ernorship; and the two friends began holding conferences 
with prominent Washington officials about the matter. 
Harrison was then a ranking member of the committee on 
ways and means of the Lower House, 

Harrison arrived in Manila on October 6, 1913. In his 
inaugural address he made public the fact that he owed his 
appointment to Quezon, During his administration Harri- 
son consulted the Naciojialwta leaders in the Legislature, 
especially Speaker Osmena, on important matters of state. 
This attitude became the target of attack by the opposition, 
the Democrata party. Quezon justified the arrangement 
in his speech on the occasion of the incorporation of the 
Liga Popular Nacioiialista into the Nacionalista party, on 
September 12, 1915, He declared, in part: 

iT \Ye have no independence as yet> we cannot get it now, 
but the American administration, in spite of the fact that while 
its flag is here it has the sovereign right to rule the country 
according to its will, consults those Filipinos who have been 
elected by the people to represent them, Is the administration 
criticised for this act? Gentlemen, the best proof that Pres- 
ident Wilson is sincere and that Governor General Hanison 
is sincere in his desire to give the Philippines its independence 
and pending the granting of that independence to govern the 
country in accordance with the wrll of the Filipino people, is 
the fact that they consult a representative Filipino in the mat- 
ter of public policy for the country." 



69 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LfFE AND CAREER 



To keep the American public well informed of the Phil- 
ippine situation and its progress, Quezon often wrote arti- 
cles in the American magazines and newspapers. As far 
back as 1915 he already published his ideas on social jus- 
tice and on thinking for ourselves, which later constituted 
the main tenets of his policies as president of the Phil- 
ippines. His article on "Recent Progress in the Phil- 
ippines/* published in the Journal of Race Development in 
its January, 1915, issue, dealt with his progressive prin- 
ciples and was penned in his characteristically clear and 
vigorous style. 

Once he had occasion to inform his colleagues in the 
Congress the reasons why the grant of independence to the 
Philippines, and not the annexation of the Philippines as a 
•state of the Union, was a wise and just policy for the 
United States to follow. Said he: 

"American policy regarding the Philippines must he based 
upon the theory that the United States by its traditions, by 
its history and institutions, and by the principles which con- 
stitute the very foundations of its national life, cannot consist- 
ently hold colonies against the avowed will of the inhabitants 
thereof. Therefore, that policy to be truly American must con- 
template as a final outcome either statehood or independence. 

"Statehood for the Philippines is not desirable, either from 
the standpoint of the American or from that of the Filipino 
people* Difference in race, customs, interests, and the thou- 
sands of miles of water which separate both countries, are 
insurmountable obstacles to Philippine statehood." 

Quezon played an important role in the drafting of 
the Jones law. He secured the assistance of Congressman 
William Atkinson Jones of Virginia and John Sharp Wil- 
liams of Mississippi in nominating Governor Wilson on a 
platform containing a pledge on Philippine independence. 
"After his nomination, I prepared a memorandum on inde- 
pendence and went to New Jersey to see Governor Wilson, 
He would not state his views at the time, but later during 
the campaign, when at Staunton, Virginia, he came out un- 
reservedly m favor of independence/' Quezon stated, 



70 




When Quezon was the resident commissioner of the Philippines to the 
United States, he had this photograph taken. 



TH K ENERGETIC RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 



After his interview with President-elect Wilson in 
Princeton, Quezon cabled to the Nacionalista party direc- 
torate in Manila* "I have held conferences with Governor 
Wilson on the Philippine question and know that his ideas 
are perfectly in accordance with the platform of his party 
on this particular," 

The platform of the Democratic party favored "an 
immediate declaration of the nation's purpose to recognize 
the independence of the Philippine Islands as soon as a stable 
government can be established , such independence to be 
guaranteed by us until the neutralization of the islands can 
be secured by treaty with other powers." And in recogni- 
tion of this independence, "our Government should retain 
such land as may be necessary for coaling stations and 
naval bases," the same platform added* 

Advised of the favorable endorsement of the plea for 
independence, the Philippine Assembly immediately sent a 
resolution congratulating the Democratic party. 

After the Democratic triumph in the 1912 elections 
Quezon submitted to Congressman Jones, then the chair- 
man of the committee on insular affairs of the Lower House, 
his plan of giving the Philippines immediate independence 
except in the matter of foreign affairs of which the United 
States retained control through a Philippine secretary of 
state. The bill, which provided for independence in 1921, 
passed the House of Representatives but died in the Senate, 

After a conference with Wilson on Philippine policy, 
Jones modified his bill upon learning of the objection of 
the American president to a definitely fixed date. He in- 
troduced his second bill in 1914 which embodied the Demo- 
cratic pledge of independence. This condition was more in- 
accord with the opinion of Wilson who, in his book-writing 
days, had written that "self-government could not be given 
to the Filipinos as a gift but that the Filipinos must grow 
towards self-government." 

71 



* 



MANUEL L, QUEZON': HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

Under the circumstances the bill was the best that the 
Filipinos could get. The attitude of the people was voiced 
by Quezon in his magazine, The Filipino People, in its July, 
1914, issue. In endorsing the measure, Quezon penned this 
editorial : 

"That it will be a disappointment to many who had hoped 
that the present administration of the United States intended 
to effect the immediate separation of the Philippines from 
the domination of America, wo have no doubt. That they will 
feel that the new bill represents far less than ought to have 
been conceded, that they will deeply regret the failure to state 
the date at which independence is to be definitely granted, and 
that they will in some ca.«es urge a policy of postponement 
rather than the acceptance of a compromise — we likewise under- 
stand. We do not, of course, regard this bill as a final it v. Wore 
it so, we should never consent to its consideration ov enact- 
ment. Did it debar us from continued agitation and effort to 
secure the enactment of final independence legislation we 
should oppose it to the uttermost. But such is not the case 
The issue now presented is that of securing some forward 
step while a party friendly to the aspirations of the Filipino 
people is still in office. To adopt a measure which at least 
represents some progress, which gives assurance that ground 
already gained shall not be lost, is, we think, only the part of 
wisdom, and is dictated by every consideration of expediency 
and of the immediate interest of the people. Were we to re- 
ject any concession, even the smallest, that would advance the 
welfare of the people of the Philippines, we should be false 
to our trust and neglectful of our responsibility to public in- 
terest. If, by accepting the new Jones Bill, we can obtain the 
permanent maintenance of the more beneficent order of things 
in the Philippines, produced by the advent of Governor General 
Harrison and the greater power of self-government given tr. 
the inhabitants of the Islands, we shall at least prevent a 
recurrence to the abhorrent tyranny— now happily rast -_ of 
the imperialistic period. If, besides this immediate and prac- 
tical concession, we can secure a positive promise of independ- 
ence from Confess, such as is afforded in the preamble to 
the new Jones Bill, we shall have before us a hopeful, instead 
of an indefinite and uncertain, future. 

"We, therefore, favor the passage of the new Jones Bill 
advise its acceptance by the people of the Philippines, and 
Pledge ourselves to its support. If enacted, the measure shall 

72 



THE ENERGETIC RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 

have our hearty and sincere cooperation, to the end that it 
shall be put into effect in good faith, without reservation, 
and with every presumption in its favor. That, both now and 
ever, it will be t he duty, as it undoubtedly is the intent, of all 
Filipinos to continue undiminished effort for the actual prac- 
tical establishment of independence! free of all foreign control, 
we take for granted, and we once again solemnity pledge, both 
to the Filipino people and to those American citizens who 
have steadfastly supported the cause of free government, that 
there shall be no cession or intermission of our efforts to se- 
cure the independence of the Philippines, either now or in 
the future, whatever Congress may do or may fail to do. With- 
out the ultimate accomplishment of that end. all else would 
be as nothing, and better government, wiser management, and 
larger generosity would but aggravate the disappointment of 
a people balked of its dearest and most legitimate aspiration. 

"For what it is, therefore, for the sake of its genuine 
merits, and in the hope of realizing its ultimate benefits, in 
the form of a more vigorous impulse toward complete inde- 
pendence, we accept the new Jones Bill, but we hold fast to 
our program — unalteiable, unassailable, and permanent as it 
is. We recognize no substitute, admit no alternative, concede 
no reduction of our righteous demand for the absolute inde- 
pendence of the Philippines. Anything that may fall short of 
that ideal must be regarded as a tentative step, affording an 
earnest of later good, desirable no doubt in temporary effects, 
but no more than a partial measure of progress towaul a final 
goal/' 

From September 25, 1914, when it was reported as a 
strictly party measure, the House of Representatives dis- 
cussed the bill up to its passage on October 16 by a vote of 
211 to 59 votes. The solid vote of the Democrats and the 15 
Republicans and Progressives accounted for the ayes. How- 
ever, the Congress eaided its session and no action was 
taken in the Senate. 

In the later part of February, 1915, leading Democratic 
senators, with the cooperation of Wilson, had a compromise 
with the Republicans so that the bill could be voted upon. 
Rut when it was found that there was opposition to the 
preamble, the Republicans agreed to eliminate the word 



73 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

^independence" and substitute "self-government." The 
plan was rejected. 

The same bill was reintroduced by its author in the 
House of Representatives on the opening day of the Sixty- 
fourth Congress. Some days later Senator Hitchcock filed 
his bill with the Senate, After conducting brief hearings, 
the Senate Philippine committee, headed by Hitchcock, filed 
its report on December 17, 1915, recommending to the 
Senate a change in the preamble so that independence would 
be granted to the Filipinos when the United States deemed 
it would be "to the permanent interest of the people of the 
Philippine Islands," instead of when the Filipinos should 
have • 'shown themselves to be fitted therefor." 

On January 2, 1916, Senator Clarke of Arkansas intro- 
duced an amendment providing for independence in two 
years and instructing the President of the United States 
to negotiate neutralization treaties with several nations 
to guarantee Philippine freedom-. The President opposed the 
amendment, so he made the grant of independence effective 
in not less than two and not more than four years. The 
amendment was passed in the committee of the whole house 
of the Senate after Vice President Marshall decided affir- 
matively a tie vote of 41 all. 

The amendment, as amended, was already acceptable 
to Wilson, The Filipinos were jubilant; the Philippine As- 
sembly endorsed favorably the , amendment. But in the 
Lower House, 28 Catholic Democrats refused to be bound 
by the decisions reached at the caucuses, and the unanimous 
vote of the Republicans spelled defeat to the Clarke amend- 
ment, 

Of the defeat of the Clarke amendment, Quezon wired 
this report to Speaker Osmena at Cebu on April 27, 1916 : 

"Opposition to Clarke amendment among Democrats 
strong. Majority of Catholic members against it. Last night 
no decision was reached. There will be another caucus tonight* 



74 



THE ENERGETIC RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 



Suggest you secure cable from Filipino clergy or bishops favor- 
ing Seriate bill with Clarke amendment, addressed to President 
through Governor Martin. President has written letter indors- 
ing Senate bill including Clarke amendment. Cable Harrison 
urging he cable some of the New York Democrats* Work of 
publicity essential. Talk to Ferguson and have them author- 
ize me to ask Far Eastern Bureau to openly advocate inde- 
pendence*" 

On the floor of the Congress on August 18, 1916, Que- 
zon spoke of the significance of the Jones bill to the Filipino 
people, as follows: 

"Heretofore we have been the least and the last factor 
in Philippine affairs. Hereafter we shall be the first and most 
important factor. Heretofore things were done by the Phil- 
ippine government not only without the consent but on many 
occasions against the strong opposition of the Filipino people. 
Hereafter nothing will be done without our consent, much less 
in defiance of our opposition. So I say, Mr, Speaker, this bill 
is a long and very decisive step toward the complete emanci- 
pation of the Filipino people. It marks an epoch in our 
national history. We are convinced that the promise of 
independence contained in the hill will be faithfully fulfilled, 
for we know that we are dealing with a nation in the truest 
sense jealous of its honor and its good name." 

With the defeat of the Clarke amendment in the House 
of Representatives, the Jones bill, with some modifications, 
was finally approved on August 29, 1916. 

The passage of the Jones hw, popularly known as the 
Philippine autonomy act, marked the second milepost in 
the direction of self-government in the Philippines. The 
act created a bicameral legislature — the Philippine Senate 
and the House of Representatives— with members elected 
by the people excepting two senators and nine representa- 
tives appointed by the governor-general from among the 
Filipinos to represent the non-Christian provinces- While 
the Legislature was vested with general legislative powers, 
the Senate was further conferred with the power to confirm 
appointments made by the chief executive, thus completing 
the filipinization of the executive department. 



75 



MANUEL L. QUEZON; HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



The Jones law was one of the three vitally Important 
concession;? which Quezon as the resident commissioner 
succeeded in obtaining for the Philippines from the United 
States. The two others were the Filipino majority in the 
Philippine Commission in 1913, and the solemn pledge of 
independence for the Philippines, In Washington Quezon 
was called the "Patrick Henry of the Philippines" because 
"he made his position clear and minced no words in pro- 
claiming his wishes." 

On the completion of his work in Washington, Quezon 
made a detailed report of the passage of the Jones act, 
which he sent to Osmena. In turn, his people were fully 
gratified with his accomplishments in the United States, 
as revealed by Mr, Osmena in a long cable he sent him : 

"I have received your report with the most profound 
satisfaction and pride and I feel very fortunate to have con- 
veyed it to the members of the Philippine Assembly. In con- 
sidering all the difficulties of the past campaign as finally 
irone through and overcome, it seems only just that the ln^lily 
distinguished services you have rendered as representative of 
the Filipino people in the United States can he fully recognized 
now, Although it is true that the encouraging inspiration of 
your people has never been lacking, yet the able, complete, 
and most satisfactory way in which you have discharged your 
duties, the faithfulness and devotion you have shown on all 
occasions to achieve the national ideals, and the never failing 
courage with which you have faced the most adverse and try- 
ing circumstances, all give you full title to the eternal recogni- 
tion of your country as well as to the blessings of posterity- 
No other living Filipino could have fulfilled such a tremendous 
task with such a rare success in so short a time, and it should 
be emphatically stated here that your sincere and steadfast 
efforts have saved to your country centuries of sufferings 
which other less fortunate peoples have to go through on their 
way to final emancipation. I do not believe that any one will 
justly dare minimize the merit and far- reaching significance 
of the reforms thus attained. The letter and spirit of the Jones 
act are so evident an3 so self-explanatory of the generosity of 
the American people, of their thoughtful purpose to do justice 
to the Filipino people, and of their earnest adherence to the 
ideals of liberty of the founders of their Republic that there 

76 



THE ENERGETIC RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 

can be no room for doubt as to the final fate of the Islands, 
The glory of having secured such a remarkable step belongs 
to you in a great part, and I therefore consider myself extreme- 
ly happy to be able to convey to you from the innermost of 
my heart, in the name of the Philippine Assembly and of the 
people it represents, my most sincere congratulations upon 
the passage of the Jones act," 

Of Quezon's distinct services in the Congress of the 
United States, the well-known American newspaperman, 
Harry W> Frantz, of the United Press staff, who knew 
Quezon personally, made the following 1 observations: 

"The Congressional Record during Quezon's period of 
service boars witness to his political skill and his willing 
tutelage to his American colleagues. His freedom appeals 
were well timed and not too frequent, well documented, and 
delivered with effective oratory, Friendly congressmen shared 
time with him, asked leading questions to compel discussion, 
and coached him adroitly on the advancement of independence, 
# # * * * 

"Quezon's addresses in the House, when reread today, 
reveal a prophetic quality. His thought was in line with the 
doctrine of self-determination fostered by the United States 
through two world wars. He once had a clear presentiment 
of war -in the Philippines, and forecast the loyalty of the 
Filipino people to the American cause, vindicated a quarter 
century later at Bataan. He loved a fight, but avoided false 
issues, and scored by clear purpose and persistence." 

On January 2, 1917, the House took up the letter of 
resignation of Quezon, Speaker Champ Clark gave to the 
clerk for reading a message from Secretary of War Baker 
transmitting the resignation, In part, Quezon said, "We 
are now convinced that your country stands for freedom 
for all; that we are regarded by your people with paternal 
care, and that you will go to any extent to secure for our- 
selves and for our children the blessings of democracy/' 

The Speaker then banged the gavel and said, "With- 
out objection, the resignation will be accepted," There 
was no objection from the members, and Quezon's services 



77 



MANUEL L, QUEZON: IKS LIFE AND CAREER 

as resident commissioner of the Philippines to the United 
States were officially terminated. 

On the eve of his homeward voyage, Quezon was given 
a farewell banquet by his many friends and admirers at the 
New Willard hotel. On this occasion he was presented with 
a gold watch as a token of their esteem for him* He then 
took the s.s. Empress of Asia, and arrived in Manila on 
September 17, 1916. 

A triumphal arch was built at the Quezon gate, located 
a few steps from the San Juan de Letran College, his alma 
mater. Flags, buntings, and flowers decorated the drive 
from Padre Burgos avenue to the gate. Crowds gathered 
along the streets as three long blasts from the ice plant an- 
nounced the entrance of the boat at Corregiclor at nightf uh 

As the ship approached the bay sirens shrieked and 
rockets flared, while a fluvial parade followed the launch 
that took Quezon to the landing place where a distinguished 
group of persons awaited him. He first approached Osme- 
na, whom he patted on the shoulder, and said, "Que tal, 
Sergio?" Passing through thousands of people who braved 
the rain as they cheered him, Quezon boarded his carriage 
for the parade. The cadets of the Liceo de Manila and the 
Institute Burgos escorted him to the Quezon gate to the 
accompaniment of 40 blaring brass bands. Once on the dais 
at the gate, he was presented by Mayor Roxas of Manila to 
the people. Quezon started his speech in English, but ended 
it in Tagalog at the insistence of the crowd. The mayor 
formally presented the gate to the returning leader, while 
a silver hatchet on which was inscribed a poem was handed 
to him by the author, Fernando Maria Guerrero, who recited 
it. 

From there the parade went to the Mehan gardens 
where, from an elevated platform, Quezon expressed his 
gratitude for the grand reception and his happiness to be 
back home. "The Filipino people now," he stated in his 
speech, "have something tangible to hold, and that is the 



78 



THE EXERGETIC RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 



recognition by the American nation of our right to govern 
ourselves, Not only had America recognized our right to 
direct our own destiny, but she has also promised us inde- 
pendence soon after the establishment here of a stable gov- 
ernment. From now on we Filipinos can look up and look 
any man of any nation in the eyes, because our status Is no 
longer that of a subjugated people. We need no longer lower 
our eyes, for we can say to ourselves and others that our 
land is our own as the American nation has given into the 
hands of the Filipino people the right to govern the people 
of the Philippine Islands/' 

In the evening Quezon was honored with a grand re- 
ception and ball at the Marble Hall of the Ayuntamiento 
in the Walled City, A banquet was given in his honor on 
the following day at the Hotel de France. Six hundred and 
fifty friends joined the guest who sat with Governor Gen- 
eral Harrison, Speaker Osmena, Commissioners Falma and 
Earnshaw, Secretary of Justice Mapa ? and Don Francisco 
Ortigas at the presidential table. Quezon closed the occasion 
with an eloquent speech. 

An automobile parade that passed through the princi- 
pal streets of Manila was held in his honor in the afternoon 
of September 30. It was an opportunity for him to see the 
city after many years of absence. The parade fittingly 
ended at the Malacanan palace where Quezon stayed as 
guest of Harrison for some days. 

The job of the resident commissioner proved fascinat- 
ing and pleasant to Quezon, "I love that job," he said. "It 
has, for me, some memories which have now become sen- 
timents only. I am attached to it, and I would have liked 
to finish my public career holding that post/' 

The election for the first senators was scheduled for 
October 3, and Quezon was a candidate. Although only three 
days were left, he did not campaign in his district, but re- 
mained in Manila and waited for the results. His 
constituents gave him an overwhelming majority over his 
opponents. 

79 



Chapter 9 



THE DYNAMIC PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE 



ELECTED FROM the fifth senatorial district, compris- 
ing the provinces of Tayabas, Batangas, Cavite, Min- 
doro, and Marinduque, Quezon held the position of senator 
continuously from 1916 to 1935, when the bicameral legisla- 
ture provided in the Jones law was supplanted by a unicam- 
eral body under the Commonwealth government of the 
Philippines. 

He was not only a member of the Senate but through- 
out his long tenure of office was continuously its president 
having been chosen such by his fellow senators. His 
brilliant work for Philippine autonomy abroad and his ele- 
vation to the head of the Senate instantly made Quezon the 
idol of the masses. His dynamic personality dominated 
the national political scene for 25 long years. 

As Quezon had high regard for his youthful friend and 
colleague, Osmena, he did not show any personal desire to 
be the presiding officer of the Senate, On the contrary, he 
offered the position to Osmena. But Osmena thought other- 
wise at the moment. Of this significant turn in the political 
career of Quezon, Osmena related: 

"Believing that the leader of the Filipino participation 
in the government should be at the head of this upper chamber 
of the legislature, Quezon offered me the Senate presidency. 
However, after mature deliberation I thought otherwise and 
preferred to remain as Speaker of the House of Representa- 
tives, It was my opinion then (although I realized later that 
I was wrong as subsequent developments proved) that it was 
in the Speakership where th* Filipino leadership in The gov** 



80 



THE DYNAMIC PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE 

eminent ought to reside because the House was the more 
representative body and as such the more sensitive to the 
popular wili, Quezon was then elected president of the Senate." 

The inaugural session of the Senate was held at the 
Ayuntarniento in the Walled City of Manila on Monday, 
October 16, 1916, at 10 o'clock in the morning. Consider- 
ing the importance of the occasion Governor General Fran- 
cis Burton Harrison declared tho day an official holiday. 
He also read a special message from President Woodrow 
Wilson of the United States during the opening session. 
Tens of thousands of people from the provinces came to 
Manila and attended the inauguration of the bicameral leg- 
islature. They also came to see Quezon personally. 

At this inaugural session, Quezon was elected pres- 
ident by unanimous acclamation. A committee of three 
headed by the late Senator Rafael Palm a notified him of 
his election. As he entered the chamber and walked towards 
the rostrum he was warmly greeted with prolonged ap- 
plause by the people inside the building and by the big 
crowd that patiently stood out on Plaza McKinley directly 
in front of the Ayantamiento. 

He took his oath of office before Palma; his colleagues 
followed in a body. Then Quezon stood up and delivered his 
inaugural address, at the conclusion of which he said: 

"I feel upon my shoulders the full weight of the enormous 
responsibility that you have placed upon me. With the aid of 
God and your assistance I hope to discharge my mission success- 
fully. We need the support of the whole people. We must re- 
mind them that we have entered upon the most acute period 
of our history; that our triumph will be their triumph, our 
defeat their defeat, our failure their failure. We must ask 
them, and we can trust that they will respond to our request, 
to give us the inspiration of their patriotism, their advice and 
direction of their intellect, the support and cooperation of their 
powerful arm." 



81 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

Friends and admirers warmly congratulated him for 
his brilliant and statesmanlike address, and as he left the 
rostrum to join his colleagues in the chamber the people 
closed in in order to shake his hands. 

The Senate was composed of 24 members coming from 
12 senatorial districts- Twenty-two were elected, while 
the remaining two representing the non-Christian districts 
were appointed by the governor general, A senatorial can- 
didate possessed the following qualifications: he must be a 
qualified elector, at least 30 years old, capable of reading 
or writing either Spanish or English, a resident of the 
Philippines for at least two consecutive years, and an actual 
resident of the district for at least one year immediately 
prior to the election. Quezon had all these requirements. 
The Senate, like the House of Representatives, convened on 
July 16 of every year — from 1917 to 1935 — in a regular 
session lasting for 100 days, exclusive of Sundays and of- 
ficial holidays. 

Conscious of their importance and responsibilities, the 
senators proudly selected a beautiful mansion on Calle Gen- 
eral Solano in Manila for their chamber, and each senator 
had his own splendidly fashioned room. The session hal] it- 
self was magnificent in every detail. 

With the establishment of the Senate, Quezon became 
the recognized leader of the Filipinos and the second highest 
official in the Philippine government — the leader clothed 
with glory and giarr.or of power. As it was invested not 
only with legislative powers but also with administrative 
authority, the Senate shared powers and responsibilities 
with the American governor general. That the Senate was 
superior both in power and in authority to the House of 
Representatives, Quezon made clear in his inaugural ad- 
dress when he said: 

"Wherever the bicameral system exists, the Lotver Housi? 
:s supposed to serve as a very sensitive thermometer register- 



82 



THE DYNAMIC PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE 



ing the most momentary and temporary changes in public 
sentiment, while the Senate must represent the serene, mature 
and prudent judgment of public opinion. In other words, the 
Senate must be a safe, immovable dam to contain any over- 
flow of popular passion* The voice of the people is the voice 
of God only when it expresses a judgment formed within the 
safe channels of serene reflection . . We must take a step for- 
ward only when we are sure of ourselves, and such step must 
necessarily be few. We must act when we are sure that we 
know public opinion and that this opinion has been formed 
conscientio\isly." 

As the presiding officer Quezon saw to it that the rules 
of proceedings of the Senate were obeyed. One rule 
provided for punishment to be meted out to any member 
for disorderly behavior and the expulsion of an elective 
member from the chamber if two-thirds of the senators 
concurred in such action. 

A victim of this ruling was Senator Jose Alejandrino 
who was suspended by the Senate for disorderly behavior. 
He took his case to the Supreme Court to determine if "the 
power to suspend is included in the power expressly granted 
by the Jones Law to each house of the Legislature to punish 
its members for disorderly behavior." Quezon was made 
one of the respondents in the case. Although the Court 
ruled that the Senate was not empowered by the Jones law 
to suspend an appointive member of the Legislature, it 
denied the petition of Alejandrino to have annulled the 
Senate resolution ordering his suspension on the ground 
that to grant the petition would be a violation of the prin- 
ciple of separation of powers. 

Among the first things that Quezon did in the Senate 
was to denounce the frauds and irregularities committed 
in the first senatorial election in the Bicol provinces. ^ Dur- 
ing the session in the evening of November 2 he yielded 
the chair to another senator in order to denounce on the 
floor with all his. fiery eloquence the irregularities that 
came to his notice. Said he: 



83 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAHKER 

"The sixth senatorial district shall not be represented in 
the Senate until a new election devoid of the incredible irreg- 
ularities recently perpetrated in the last election, shall have 
been held. Not even if the men coming out victorious as a re- 
sult of the last electoral battle were to come to the Senate 
chamber, with certificates in their hands of having been elected, 
will they be allowed to occupy seats in the Upper House of the 
Philippine Legislature* The frauds that have been committed 
were so stupendous and phenomenal as to destroy all the con- 
fidence in the honesty of the voters within its jurisdiction. 
Therefore, it is not proper for the Senate to permit any can- 
didate triumphant in the last senatorial election to have any 
place In it, because then, it would be an act of injustice, founded 
on the ignoble machinations of an irresponsible body of crim- 
inal voters . * . It is true that frauds are common in demo- 
cratic countries, but when they assume such grave proportions 
as evidenced by the ignominious conduct of the voters of the 
sixth district, then they can no longer be excusable on account 
of human imperfection, and consequently their authors must 
be punished with all the force of the law because they reflect 
the greatest dishonor, shame and discredit to the society in 
which they live. . . 

"The rights of the majority as well as the minority should 
be respected and recognized, but mere party prejudices should 
not dominate any Filipino whenever his country demands of 
him high patriotic services. High above all party, high above 
all selfish interests rise the sacred rights and liberties of the 
people who have sent us here to the end that we may defend 
those rights and liberties... A thousand times better that 
the sixth district should not be represented in the Senate than 
if it were only to be represented by men placed upon their seats 
by the black hands of detestable criminals , . 

This frank and firm attitude taken by Quezon was 
praised by the Philippines Free Press, an American week- 
ly, which considered him "a political educator and a model 
worthy of emulation by his countrymen/' In its editorial 
it declared: 

"Fresh from a comparatively long sojourn in the United 
States, where men speak their minds freely, Mr. Quezon has 
brought with him much of that same manly independence and 
indifference of consequences in regard to what he may have to 
say. Kor is it any flattery of him to assert that he stands out 

84 



THE DYNAMIC PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE 



conspicuously as by far the most courageous and outspoken 
man in public life in the Philippines today. Almost daily* in 
his tilt with the outworn but still revered fetishes of the past, 
he is showing that he has the courage of his convictions, and 
is ready in risk unpopularity if only he may spread the doc- 
trine of a healthy democracy among Ms people, It 13 in such 
guise, in such manifestation, that Mr, Quezon stands as an 
exemplar to the older generation, and as an inspiration to the 
younger generation . . 

As a result of his denunciation the Senate created a 
committee that investigated the frauds. 

Of the many American presidents, Woodrow Wilson 
was one of the few who sincerely worked to give the Fili- 
pino people more autonomy in their government. To him 
the Filipinos and their leaders are ever grateful. When 
Wilson was re-elected to the presidency of tliti United States?, 
Quezon lost no time to acquaint his people with the signif- 
icance of the results of the election in America to the poli- 
tical -situation in the country. He pointed out that the pres- 
ident's re-election meant the endorsement of the Jones act 
by the American people, "We can go ahead undisturbed to 
build up the foundations for the stability of our govern- 
ment as required by the said act. I confidently look forward 
to the rapid progress and development of the country in 
every wiay," he said. 

The Filipino people demonstrated with heart and soul 
their adherence to the policy of Wilson by making Quezon 
in 1917 pledge the unconditional and loyal support of the 
Filipino people to the United States soon after the latter 
had declared war against Germany in World War One. 
Later at a special session the Legislature passed the Mi- 
litia Act which gave birth to the Philippine National Guard. 
Besides these manifestations, Quezon sponsored a loyalty 
parade in Manila which ended at the Malacanan palace 
where Governor General Harrison and he delivered 
speeches. 

85 



MANUEL L, QUEZON; HJB LIFE AND CAREER 

Later Quezon made a trip to the United States to offer 
to Wilson the 25,000 ra composing the Philippine National 
Guard In Washington, D, C, he personally met Wilson 
who expressed his gratitude and appreciation for the loyal- 
ty of the Filipinos. 

Back in the Philippines, Quezon made possible the en- 
actment of a law appropriating Pl,344,386 for the militia. 
As the militia movement spread rapidly throughout the 
Philippines, Quezon took advantage of the occasion to ac- 
quaint the people of the attitude of the Filipino officials 
on the war, Quezon said: 

"If we believe that America is enslaving us, if we believer 
that America is not sincere, if we believe that America has 
not fulfilled its pledges to the Filipino people, let us tako 
advantage of this opportunity in which she is engager! in a 
war and declare war against herself. If we do not do this, we 
are cowards, for a coward is the man who speaks much of 
liberty but does not know how to die for it. On the other hand, 
if we think that America is sincere, if we think that we have 
been fairly treated by her, let us show her our gratitude by 
siding with her and upholding the cause that she is uphold- 
ing. 

"Let us throw a retrospective glance over the past. This 
liberty, this progress we are now enjoying, we owe to the 
American nation. From the remotest corners of the islands 
come messages of peace and progress, America is entitled to 
our gratitude. And the time has come for us to show that 
we are grateful, 

"The Philippines wants to take part in the struggle. It 
must take part in the fight. Let us not lose this opportunity of- 
fered to us to seal with our blood our love for liberty. And I 
know that the dauntless sons of my native land are ready 
10 accept that sacrifice- We are given an opportunity to show 
that we are a nation, to assert our legal international per- 
sonality, to show that we are not a group of savages, but we 
are a people, lovers of liberty and ready to die for it. 

"If we adopt a passive and indifferent attitude in the pre- 
sent war, with what face shall we appear before America and 
the tribunal of nations after the struggle when right shall 
have conquered might? But if we take advantage of this op- 
portunity, with what pride shall we appear before the tribunal 



86 



THE DYNAMIC PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE ] 

of nations, bearing not only liberty bonds but also mourning 
for the loss of thousands of oar brothers who have struggled 
and died not for America, but because America has declared 
that she is fighting: for humanity, for the liberty and protec- 
tion of weak and small nations? How can America then refuse 
to grant what we want of her?" 

Friendship and personal relations were to Quezon of 
no importance when matters of the state were involved* 
Even Harrison, who was a bosom friend, was not spared 
the presidential ire when he attempted to have the Legisla- 
ture pass the appropriation bill involving F614,363.40 to 
cover the salaries of the different positions he created with- 
out legislative confirmation. When the measure was dis- 
cussed in the Upper House, Quezon took the floor and made 
clear his stand on the matter, Quezon warned: 

"I am not opposing the passage of this measure and will 
not vote against it, but I would certainly be recreant to my 
duty did I not take the floor here now and voice my most 
vigorous and energetic protest against the unauthorized and 
unjustified attitude taken by the chief executive of these 
islands. 

"Illegally, and without vestige of authority existing' in any 
legislation, much less in the Appropriation Act for the past 
year, the chief executive has taken it upon himself to create 
new positions for both officers and enlisted men in the Phil- 
ippine Constabulary* Such action I must most energetically 
condemn. The executive is not empowered to assume the func- 
tions of the Philippine Legislature, and I feel impelled to take 
this opportunity to warn him that if he persists in the attitude 
which he has adopted, he will precipitate a crisis between him- 
self and the Legislature, 

"It is the Legislature alone that has the power to create 
positions, and if that body is not in session when the chief 
executive thinks that new positions should be created, he has 
the power to convene it. 

"The argument is put forward that action had to be taken 
immediately in order to provide more Constabulary troops to 
replace the military being withdrawn from Mindanao. I realise 
that the situation arose hurriedly and was unexpected, and 
inasmuch as the replacing of the military forces in Mindanao 



87 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

with those of the insular government is ir entire accord with 
the policy of the Government to bring that region under the 
full control of the insular government, I will not vote agarnst 
the bill, but I again want to make it clear that I cannot vote 
without first expressing my most vigorous protest/' 

The courageous stand of Quezon received the unani- 
mous approval of the senators, so that at the end of his 
speech the Senate approved a motion endorsing his senti- 
ments- This stand did not, however, mar the personal rela- 
tions of Quezon and Harrison for after this incident the two 
leaders were seen together most of the time again and in 
the best of spirit* 

When the Congress of the United States passed the 
coastwise shipping law which required that all trade be- 
tween the Philippines and the United States should be car- 
ried exclusively in American bottoms, Quezon sent the reso- 
lution of the Nacionalista party of which he was the pres- 
ident to the American president "protesting against the 
coastwise shipping law on the ground that it was against 
the policy of independence, for it would increase the eco- 
nomic dependence of the Philippines upon the United States, 
it would establish great shipping interests in the Philip- 
pines, it would curtail the autonomy already given to the 
people, and, it would, in effect, be an indirect tax upon the 
people without the consent of the Philippine Legislature," 

As early as 1918 the need of an advisory body to the 
American chief executive was already felt and Governor 
General Harrison, who had the best interests of the people 
at heart, conceived of the idea of creating a definite body 
"to represent more narrowly the counsel of the people, to 
breathe harmony and efficiency into the legislative and 
executive departments, and to assign a, place in that body 
to a Filipino leader who would stand at the head of the 
Government on behalf of the people and who should be 

88 



THE DYNAMIC PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE 



raised to that position by a triumphant majority through 
his undoubted leadership and the confidence he might com- 
mand in the entire nation,"' 

So with the acquiescence and support of the Filipino 
officials Harrison established the first Council of State 
composed of nine high officials; namely, the Governor Gen- 
eral, who was its president, the Senate President, the 
Speaker, and the six department secretaries. It was prima- 
rily charged with the duty of advising the governor general 
on matters of public importance. 

That he was not altogether ambitious and had no de- 
sire for power, Quezon amply demonstrated when, at the 
first meeting of the Council of State, he nominated Speaker 
Osmena for the vice presidency. The council continued to 
exist until the administration of Governor General Leonard 
Wood when it was abolished following the controversy be- 
tween the executive and the legislative departments. 

The indifference of Wood to the pro-independence 
labor of the Filipino officials, as well as his desire to put 
the government out of any business enterprises, which were 
giving the government enormous revenues from their 
operations, compelled the Filipino leaders to send independ- 
ence missions, one after the other, to the United States. 
Headed by either Quezon, or Senator Osmena, or Speaker 
Roxas, the missions protested against the attitude and re- 
actionary policy of Wood and at the same time renewed 
their appeal for the grant of immediate independence as 
contained in resolutions unanimously approved by both 
houses of the Philippine Legislature which repeatedly as- 
serted the establishment of a stable form of government 
in the Philippines — a condition set forth for the grant of 
freedom. 

Meanwhile, in the ranks of the powerful Nacionalista 
party a break occurred between the two dominating leaders 



89 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



— Quezon and Osmena — and their followers. The party 
heads could not reconcile for the moment on the course of 
action to be taken. Of this incident Osmena offered the 
following version which tends to show how he loved and 
respected Quezon and how both leaders saved the day for 
the Filipinos. 

"The intimacy of our long and fruitful association was not 
disturbed by any serious incident until in 1922 certain differ- 
ences arose to split the Nacionalista party. However, because 
they were not fundamental differences, affecting as they did 
only the methods of directing and leaOing the Filipino partici- 
pation in the Government, they were quickly ironed out and 
a reconciliation within the party followed. Viewing that in- 
cident from the perspective of this day, what healed the rup- 
ture and reconciled the antagonistic elements was the absence 
of the human and personal factor, or what I might call the 
ingredient of egotism. Even in the midst of the acrimonious 
conflict, when the tension of animosity was at its height. 
Quezon and I never ceased to be friends and never did ws lose 
the respect we owed each other. The personal element never 
interfered in the clash of pure ideas. 

"This feeling tending towards conciliation and concord 
was the thing that permitted me to give him my full support 
at the moment when he most needed it. It will be recalled 
* that in the elections of 1922 the Nacionalista were split over 
the issue of unipersonalism and collectivism. The results of 
the elections were such that Quezon could not organize the 
House of Representatives with only the votes of the Colectivis- 
tas. Many of my followers, still resentful, stoutly opposed a 
reconciliation with Quezon and were inclined, instead, to enter 
into a coalition with the Democratas who had gained consider- 
able strength in those elections. It wa3 evident that had we 
wanted to revenge on Quezon in order' to destroy him. the 
most logical step would have been to accept the Democratas' 
insistent proffer of a coalition or, to go farther, agree to fuse 
with them into a new party. I thought however that the more 
decent, the more proper, and the more patriotic thing to do 
was to repair the broken wings of the Nacionalista party. Thus 
overcoming the temptations of reprisal, and obeying only what 
I thought was the dictate of the national interest. I placed my- 
self on the side of the moderate elements of my group who 
were anxious to rejoin their old comrades. This immediately 



90 



THE DYNAMIC PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE 

led to the organization of the House, with the election of a 
Collet ivist a speaker and the consequent rehabilitation of the 
Nacionalista party. 

"It will be remembered that from then on Quezon and 
I worked together agrain as if nothing had happened, he as 
my chief and I giving him fully of my support in the same 
way that he had supported me during the fifteen years that I 
was his chief and head of the Nacionalista party. I believe 
that it can be said without immodesty and arrogance that, 
thanks to our unity, the country once more was able to con- 
tinue its progressive march towards the goal of its destiny, 
overcoming all difficulties, the most serious being that of 1923- 
1927 during the administration of General Wood." 

With the fusion of the two estranged wings of the orig- 
inal Nacionalista party under the name of Notionalist" 
Consolidado, headed by Quezon, the Nacioimlistas regained 
their supremacy in the succeeding general elections and 
once more controlled the political situation in the Phil- 
ippines. Quezon, as the undisputed leader of his people and 
country, not only brought to a happy ending his conflict 
with Wood, but also made possible the subjugation of the 
substantial elements composing the Democrata party to 
his side. With the Democratas completely paralyzed by the 
absence of "brainy men to direct its affairs" Quezon be- 
came the supreme head of the nation. To celebrate this 
signal and momentous victory he created the National 
Supreme Council with him at the head for the purpose of 
giving equal representation to the fused political parties. 
In this council even Judge Juan Sumulong, brains of the 
Democrata party, was a delegate. 

Back in the United States in 1927 as co-chairman of 
the fourth independence mission, Quezon, together with 
Osmena, worked incessantly against congressional bills 
intended to produce an adverse effect on the Philippines 
which were already pending in the Congress of the United 
States. Although Quezon was very sick at the time the mis- 
sion left, nevertheless, much against the advice of his physi- 
cian, Dr. Miguel Canizares, who would hardly allow him to 



91 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



sit up in bed, he campaigned personally and his efforts were 
crowned with success when the Congress adjourned for the 
Republican and Democratic conventions without approving 
any of these bills. 

His monumental work for independence in the United 
States which took him face to face with Presidents Harding 
and Coolidge, on whom he urged the appointment of Colonel 
Henry L. Stimson for governor general, was remembered 
by his district during the general elections in 1928 when* 
although absent, he was re-elected, while his colleagues in 
the Senate, in recognition of the singular achievements of 
their leader, elevated him again to the presidency. 

Due to his delicate health Quezon, upon his return to 
Manila, presented his resignation as president of both 
the Senate and the Nacionalista party. His party held a cau- 
cus to consider his resignation. At the meeting Senator 
Camilo Osias declared that "it was never the part of poli- 
tical wisdom or expediency to change leaders at that time/* 
As his colleagues would not allow him to go, Quezon willing- 
ly withdrew his resignation and again assumed active lead- 
ership of his party and the government* 

Although it was Quezon who urged President Coolidge 
to name Colonel Henry L. Stimson as governor general, suc- 
ceeding Wood as a result of his death, Quezon and Stimson 
had disagreements during his administration — at times bit- 
ter- However, they always discussed their differing points 
of views sincerely and frankly, so much so that notwith- 
standing these incidents their friendship was never af- 
fected. It may be said generally that the administration 
of Stimson took certain steps to bring honor to America 
and satisfaction to the Filipinos in the discharge of her 
obligations in the Philippines. 

As a clear manifestation of his willingness to cooper- 
ate with Filipino officials, Stimson revived the defunct 
Council of State while, on his part, Quezon fulfilled his 



THE DYNAMIC PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE 



promise to Washington officialdom by making the Philip- 
pine Legislature pass the Belo bill which appropriated the 
sum of P250;000 for the salaries of the technical advisers of 
the governor general. The real cooperation that existed 
between the Filipino officials and the American chief ex- 
ecutive was sealed by Quezon in a testimonial banquet given 
in honor of Stimson later. 

Still a weak man, Quezon found imperative a trip to 
invigorate himself in more healthful surroundings other 
than the Philippines. So at a caucus of the NacionaUsta 
party held soon after the return of Senator Osmena to Ma- 
nila in September, 1929, Quezon formally turned over the 
party leadership to him, and then sailed for Japan, 

In 1930 influential leaders in science and arts, in 
business and industry, and in labor and education in the 
Philippines initiated the Independence Congress which had 
the late Dr. Rafael Palma for its president Quezon was 
invited to b* present. Since his illness at the time pre- 
vented him, he sent a letter to the members which, upon his 
request, was read before the congress by Palma. In his 
letter Quezon said : 

"No one can predict which should be the immediate result of 
the actual agitation in the Congress of the United States in 
favor of our independence, but it is undoubtful that our self- 
control, our patience, in front of the obstacles which are pre- 
sented, at the time that our determination to conquer them* our 
respect toward the opinion of those who are not with us, and our 
observance of the precepts of the Constitution and of the laws, 
contribute powerfully to the final accomplishment of our 
claim. We should not forget in our campaign that, m tie 
age in which we live, the independence of the countries means 
more than independence, interdependence; that is, that indepen< - 
ence when we have it would not mean our isolation from the 
rest of the world and less our right to do as we please in coir 
tempt of the rights and interests of the other countries and 
their citizens. To be independent is to be admitted in the family 
of nations; hence, our acts now and our acts tomorrow as indi- 
viduals and as a people should be such that would inspire the 

93 



MANUEL L* QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

confidence and security, that we shall know how to live with 
other people and that we shall know how to manage our gov- 
ernment not only for the benefit of the natives, but also for 
the protection and safeguard of those residing in our own ter- 
ritory/' 

Then came the golden chance to obtain the proffer of 
independence by the United States, It was in the latter 
part of the administration of President Herbert Hoover that 
the opportunity presented itself for Senators Hawes and 
Cutting and Congressman Hare to introduce the independ- 
ence bill in the Congress of the United States, This meas- 
ure, popularly known as the Hare-Hawes-Cutting bill, was 
passed by the Congress. Unfortunately it was vetoed by 
Hoover; but the Congress soon overrode the presidential 
veto and it finally became a law. 

However, Quezon opposed the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law 
for which Osmena and Manuel Roxas had worked hard to 
obtain. His objection was based on the provision calling 
for the establishment of new and the retention of already 
existing military and naval bases by the United States in 
the Philippines after independence has been proclaimed and 
the republic inaugurated. 

As a result of his intensive campaign against the in- 
dependence law, the Philippine Legislature rejected it by 
an overwhelming majority and then resolved to send Que- 
zon to the United States to work for a new freedom bill. 
In Washington, D, C, he conferred with President Frank- 
lin Delano Roosevelt with whom the different phases of the 
issue were minutely and fully discussed. 

Convinced of the wisdom of his plan, Roosevelt agreed 
to the introduction of a new measure in the Congress. Sen- 
ator Tydings and Congressman McDuffie sponsored the 
bill that later became known as the Tydings-McDuffie in* 
dependence act. 

Osmena, who collaborated with Quezon, gives further 
enlightenment on the background of the legislation and the 



94 



THK DYNAMIC PRESIDENT OF T II K SKXATK 



significance of the cooperation rendered by him to Quezon 
in these fateful moments in the political history of the Phil- 
ippines. Osmena relates: 

"The course of my political relations with Quezon did not 
sufXer any new interruption of importance until 1933 when, after 
great efforts in the United States, the independence mission pop- 
ularly known as the OSROX (Osrnena-Roxas) Mission returned 
to the Philippines with the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law, After this 
law was rejected by the Legislature at his insistence President 
Quezon headed a mission to the United States in quest of another 
law. In Washington, however, he found that the only legis- 
lation possible was something equal or similar to the one which 
the Legislature had just rejected. Once again the proposition 
whether the Filipinos were capable of subordinating personal 
considerations to the cause of their independence was put to 
a test, a severe test. It seems superfluous to restate, since it 
is of contemporary history, that our patriotism stood the test. 
I decided then to remain in the Philippines instead of going with 
President Quezon as ho had insistently asked me to do, in order 
that I could prepare the ground here to support him when the 
moment came. That moment came when Senator Ty dings asked 
the opinion of the OSROX Mission regarding the Tydings-Mc- 
Duffie bill, then pending in Congress, which was practically the 
same as the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law for which we had worked. 
The radical elements of my group in Manila insisted on rejecting 
the now bill. This was neither unnatural nor extraordinary r 
considering that said elements were still resentful of Quezon and 
his followers. However, because I had placed myself definitely 
on the side of the moderate elements, the OSROX Mission, and 
the group that was helping us in the Philippines, decided to 
support President Quezon by accepting the Tydings-McBuffi* 
law. This conciliatory attitude made possible the subsequent 
acceptance of the law not only by the Legislature but by the 
whole country. 

"Once again the Naciovalista party emerged from a cn* is 
which might have disrupted it. Once again, Quezon and I were 
able to set aside differences in the interest of the nation. Once 
again, we were able to save unity at a moment when it was most 
needed for the health and welfare of our people, relegating to 
the background the personal complex, the human equation. And 
once again, we were able to renew an association and a collab- 
oration so modestly started In our student days in the Univer- 
sity of Santo To mas and so happily continued through the long 
years." 

95 



Chapter 10 
THE DIPLOMATIC AMBASSADOR 



/ have been all around the world. 
1 travel to study . . . My trips are 
for the good of the country. , 

—QUEZON 

TO QUEZON both the United States and Europe were 
neighbors to the Philippines. In his lifetime he vis- 
ited several countries. He saw the actual living conditions 
of the inhabitants. He saw misery and suffering in some 
lands, while in others, prosperity, happiness, and content- 
ment. Being a close student of human nature, he perceived 
that the events in the former pointed to inevitable chaos 
and, therefore, the conditions should be remedied at once. 
Drawing a lesson from contemporary socio-economic events 
abroad, he conceived of a magnificent .social justice pro- 
gram which he championed. 

On several occasions during his long and uninterrupted 
public life Quezon became his people's envoy. To him was 
entrusted the gigantic task of working for the independence 
of the Philippines. 

In 1918 the Philippine Legislature sent the first inde- 
pendence mission to the United States to work for the ap- 
proval of an independence law by the American Congress. 
Soon after Quezon and his party of two dozen distinguished 
Filipino officials arrived in Washington, D. C. : Governor 
General Harrison, then in the United States, accompanied 
them to Secretary of War Baker, then to General Peyton 
March, and later to General Frank Mclntyre, chief of the 
Bureau of Insular Affairs, to whom they paid their respects. 
As President Wilson was then in Europe negotiating the 



96 




Reproduction hy Pablo Gutlas 

*n 1035, Quezon joined the constitutional delegation that presented the Constitution of the 
Philippines to President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. In this photograph, Roosevelt 
greeted Quezon as LL Secretary of War Dern looked on. 



THE DIPLOMATIC AMBASSADOR 

Treaty of Versailles, Quezon bared their purpose to Baker. 

He declared ; 

"The Philippine mission, Mr. Secretary, is here charged 
with a high and solemn obligation. It is enjoined with a noble 
and sacred trust. It is instructed to present the great cause so 
essential and necessary to the happiness and existence of the 
entire Filipino people. I refer to our national birthright to 
he free and independent. We, therefore, formally submit here- 
by the vital and urgent question of Philippine independence to 
you, and through you, to the government of the United States- 
in the confident hope that it shall merit a just, righteous, anc* 
final settlement," 

The secretary promised to relay those sentiments to 
Wilson who, shortly thereafter, communicated with the 
missioners through Baker, his profound gratitude and the 
assurance that "the Filipino people shall not be absent from 
my thoughts/' 

In later years Quezon headed several other missions. 
*I have been to the United States so often that I consider 
that country as my second home. I am a regular commuter 
between Manila and Washington and New York," he once 
said. Quezon was in the United States in 1922, 1924, 1927 ? 
1928, 1929, 1932, 1934, 1937, and from 1942 to 1944— all 
the time in the interest of his native land. 

In his 1927 trip, Quezon fought hard the various pend- 
ing legislations about the Philippines which would curtail 
the powers of the Legislature and attempt to destroy Phil- 
ippine economy. One bill, introduced by Senator Frank E- 
Willis, chairman of the committee on territories and insular 
affairs, appropriated P250,G00 out of the internal revenue 
tax collected in the United States on Philippine cigars and 
tobacco for the salaries of the technical advisers to the gov- 
ernor general* 

Another measure provided for appointive governors 
in the non- Christian provinces by the chief executive with- 



97 



MANUEL L. QUEZON; HIS LIFE AND CACHE*: 



out the consent of the Senate; while a third proposed to 
tax sugar from the Philippines and to restrict the imports 
into the United States. 

"Such attempts arc an outrage," asserted Quezon, 
"since there are already tariff Jaws which discriminate 
against Philippine industries in favor of American indus- 
tries/* 

As the situation was quite serious, Quezon waged a 
three-pronged attack* He held conferences with the prom- 
inent leaders in Washington, attended the hearings In the 
Congress, and in the middle of November went on a 
speaking tour to the Eastern states and as far west as 
Chicago. 

Quezon vigorously campaigned against their passage. 
In the course of the hearings he suddenly fell sick and had 
to enter the Pottinger Sanatorium in Monrovia. 

In the campaign Quezon secured the aid of a friend, 
Senator Burton K. Wheeler, to whom he wrote on February 
3, 1923, saying: 

"For seven weeks I have been in this sanatorium. Although 
slowly, I am improving, and my doctor tells me that there is not 
the slightest doubt as to my complete recovery, although to ac- 
complish this I am told it is necessary for me to remain in bed 
for three more months, and then rest and try to do nothing for 
another four months at least. This means that I shall have to 
stay In Monrovia for about one year. 

"I do hope that you will do what you can to defeat those 
bills to which my last night's telegram refers, x x x rj 

Fighting against his illness on the one hand, and 
the pending legislations on the other, was his task. Un- 
daunted Quezon wired Vicente G. Bunuan to "see Senators 
King and Wheeler on my behalf and inquire if bills will be 
taken up; if so what is their impression as to outcome/' 

98 



THE DIPLOMATIC AMBASSADOR 

Bunuan followed the instructions of Quezon faithfully. 
When the Congress moved to "railroad" the bills, he asked 
Bunuan to "inquire confidentially of Senator Wheeler if 
danger of passing pending measures is great and if he thinks 
my presence in Washington is necessary or if memorandum 
as you suggest is sufficient." In his telegram, Quezon said 
further, "although dangerous to my health I will take risk 
if necessary and go to Washington the first week of May. 
See Mr. Simms and inform him about pending bills and urge 
him to write editorials against these measures." 

After Bunuan had informed him that both the Senate 
and the House were meeting almost every night to dispose 
of all pending bills, Quezon left the sanatorium for the Ca- 
pitol on the Santa Fe Chief despite a rise in temperature. 
Hardly had he reached Kansas City on May 17, when he 
succumbed to physical exhaustion, and w^as "too Weak to 
continue the trip to Washington." 

Nevertheless, he succeeded in his work in the Congress 
when this body delayed action through his intervention, 
after having him promise "that the Legislature would ap- 
propriate the money by exercising the right to do so instead 
of letting the Congress exercise that right for it" 

After this battle in the Congress, Quezon faced another 
political issue, At their convention the Republicans, who 
had been traditionally opposed to the grant of independ- 
ence to the Philippines, decided to insert in their plank the 
curtailment of some powers already enjoyed by the Filipi- 
nos. Quezon opposed this move, and aided by his influen- 
tial friend, Roy Howard, he made the Republicans give up 
the projected reactionary plank. 

Having regained his old strength and physique, Que- 
zon and his family who joined him early in the sanatorium 
sailed back to the Philippines. 



99 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



When President Herbert Hoover nominated Nicholas 
Roosevelt as vice governor of the Philippines, in 1929, Que- 
zon immediately filed his protest with the United States 
secretary of war* Quezon was on his way to Monrovia for 
treatment and rest for the second time then. Upon his ar- 
rival in Seattle in November, he wrote his letter of protest 
which caused Hoover to withdraw the ad interim appoint- 
ment of Roosevelt 

Roosevelt was not acceptable to the Filipino people be- 
cause of his insulting opinions on them in his book. Al- 
though his nomination was strongly endorsed by them, the 
Republican papers were broadminded enough to comment 
editorially "on the firm but respectful and statesmanlike 
manner in which Mr. Quezon presented the case/' and to do 
justice to the Filipinos and to Quezon they quoted both in 
the stories and in the editorials the first paragraph of the 
letter. 

Quezon's letter follows iii part: 

"Let me at the outset disclaim any intention on our pait to 
challenge the power of the President to appoint whomsoever 
he chooses. We are only exercising the right of petition, the 
use of which in this instance and in my ease, considering- the 
position I hold, becomes a duty, imposed alike by my loyalty 
to the government of the United States and to the people uf the 
Philippine Islands. I hope, therefore, that these representa- 
tions will be accepted in the spirit in which they are made. 

u l would request you, Mr, Secretary, to realize how humil- 
iating it will be for the Filipino people to have at the head of 
their Department of Public Instruction and, from time to time, 
as acting head of their government, one who has branded them 
as dishonest and deceitful, and how extremely embarrassing: it 
will be for the Filipinos in public life to deal officially and so- 
cially with one who has written of them with contempt," 

Just how Quezon regarded this letter he told Eunuan 
in Washington. "I was rather hard put to it in writing 
that letter because I had no one to help me/ 7 he remarked, 
"I did not know whether I was using the correct words or 



100 



THE DIPLOMATIC AMBASSADOR 

the correct construction, but I kept on until I finished and 
then mailed it. Yet, I think it turned out to be not such a 
bad letter after all." 

Whenever the country needed his services abroad, Que- 
zon always answered the call willingly even if it meant a 
personal sacrifice on his part. In 1933, although a sick 
man, he sailed for the United States to secure the Tydings- 
McDuffie independence law, despite previous warning that 
the Congress of the United States would not consider re- 
opening the Philippine question for another two years. 

While aboard the ship, Quezon and the other missioners 
played poker with some American friends to while the time 
away. Quezon was a frequent winner, while Senator Elpi- 
dio Quirmo was quite unlucky. When his winnings had 
mounted, he remarked that he was going to give them to Ar- 
temio Ricarte Vibora, self-exiled Filipino general of the 
Philippine Revolution in Japan, when they reached Tokyo. 
Seeing Quirino a consistent loser, Quezon laughingly said, 
"It is a pity that you do not make money for your province- 
mate." Quirino comes from the province of Ilocos Sur. 

As Quezon was not feeling well when the party finally 
reached the United States, his friends in San Francisco 
took him to the vast estate of William Randolph Hearst, 
newspaper publisher, in San Simeon, where he had plenty 
of free and pure mountain air. He was also taken to Hol- 
lywood where he met the late Will Rogers and other world 
famous movie stars; while at New Orleans Mayor Wamsley 
showed him the place of the old Filipino colonists and their 
descendants who take extreme pride in serving the Filipino 
dish, adobo. 

On his return to the Philippines, bringing with him 
the freedom measure, Quezon made public recognition of 
the great work of the United States in the Philippines. He 
declared : 



101 



lUANL'EL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE A XI J CAREER 



"No Filipino can feel less than the deepest gratitude to the 
American people. The achievements of America in the Philip- 
pines during ail these years have been a history of unselfish 
devotion to a duty self-imposed, of helping the Filipinos to im- 
prove their economic conditions, and to train them in the art 
of self-government . The day when the American flag goes 
down to give place to the Filipino flag, American history in the 
Philippines will not have been terminated; it will only he the 
beginning; of a history more sublime; it will be the beginning 
of a relationship between America and the Philippines strength- 
ened by a time more lasting than that which is merely political 
—the tie of friendship and gratitude " 

Of this trip Quezon related : 

"When I left Manila I could hardly walk, and I was ex- 
hausted not only because of the pain of my malady but also 
of the strenuous work whjch I bad done even in bed, A week 
or ten days after I left Manila, I began to feel better, and Dr. 
Estrada and Secretary Vargas who accompanied me were wit- 
nesses thajt I then began to consider the necessity of returning 
to the Philippines, I communicated with several legislative 
leaders of my party, including members of the Cabinet, and I 
would have come had they not advised me to go ahead. Upon 
leaving Sourabaya and on arriving at Singapore, I debated with 
myself whether or not I should return- It was only upon the 
statement of Dr. Estrada that if I came back I might suffer 
a relapse and not recuperate easily, that I hesitated, I then 
reeeired a radiogram from Secretary of Justice Yulo, that if I 
return soon there might be an impression that 'we can't get 
along without you.' I did not want to say that Manuel Quezon 
and others will forever be needed by the countrv. I have strong 
pride as a Filipino, and maintained that the Philippines and the 
Filipinos could carry on without Manuel Quezon." 

After visiting Sourabaya and Singapore, Quezon pro- 
ceeded to Paris where, on October 2, the French government 
presented him with a decoration which carried with it an 
appointment as officer of the French Legion of Honor, 

Quezon's next trip to the United States was in 1935 
when, together with Constitutional Convention President 
Claro M, Recto and Minority Floor Leader Manuel Roxas, 

102 



Tin: DIPLOMATIC AMBASSADOR 

he joined the constitutional delegation that presented the 
Constitution of the Philippines to President Franklin De- 
lano Roosevelt The mission was entrusted with the work 
of insuring and hastening the approval of the Constitution 
and to discuss the possibility of improving the Tydingg- 
McDuffie independence law. On March 23, the delegation 
walked to the White Hoime, where before kleiglights and 
moving picture cameras, Quezon handed the Constitution 
to Roosevelt who instantly signed it. 

After the ceremonies. Quezon said: 

"This is a great occasion. With the signing: of the Consti- 
tution by the President of the United States, ^ve have witnessed 
the birth of a new nation. It is the culmination of a splendid 
work done in mutual cooperation by the people of the United 
States and the people of the Philippines- We are deeply grate- 
ful to the United States for furthering; the cause of freedom and 
numan happiness," 

The Constitution was framed by 202 elective delegates 
at a constitutional convention authorized by the Philippine 
Legislature. At the inauguration ceremonies on July 30, 
1934, Quezon formally opened and addressed the body which 
since then worked incessantly until it approved the Consti- 
tution on February 8, 1935, On March S it was formally 
placed by the missioners in the hands of Roosevelt who ap- 
proved it on March 23 during a brief but impressive cere- 
mony in the White House. Submitted to a national pleb- 
iscite on May 14, the Constitution was ratified by the Fili- 
pino electorate. , 

Although not a delegate to the convention, Quezon, as 
the leader of the Filipinos in the government, took part. 
He favored the precept permitting the government of the 
Commonwealth and later that of the Republic to require the 
services of the citizens both in war and in peace; he ex- 
pressed his desire of having the Senate constituted on the 
basis of nation~at-Iarge representation; he supported the 



103 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

proposition of prohibiting re-election .for the president of 
the Philippines; and he counselled the delegates to refrain 
from including any provision which would antagonize for- 
eign nations. 

Between 1935, when he assumed the presidency of the 
Philippines, and 1941, when the war broke out, Quezon made 
three more trips abroad. In 1936 he took a vacation in 
China. With him as a distinguished passenger, the s. s. 
Empress of Russia hoisted at its topmast the presidential 
flag of four white stars and the Commonwealth seal on a 
navy, blue background. To make his sight-seeing trip pleas- 
ant and comfortable the Kwantung government authori- 
ties prepared a decorated train, called "the flower car," for 
him. 

His trip to the United States in 1937 prepared the 
groundwork for the joint preparatory committee on Phil* 
ippine affairs which was created in an effort to remedy the 
shortcomings of the Tydings-McDuffie independence act. 
This voyage took him as far as Mexico where he was the 
guest of President Cardenas. In America he was guest at 
luncheon of President Pvoosevelt. 

Later, upon his return to Manila, Quezon told a huge 
crowd in the Malacanan grounds, that like all his other trips 
abroad, this was beneficial to the people, too, for he brought 
back with him P10G t 000,0G0. "This money will benefit the 
poor people," he stated. Had Quezon not gone to the United 
States then, the Philippines would have lost the money al- 
though it rightly belonged to the country because of the 
moves by the executive and legislative branches of the 
United States government to halt the payment of the amount 
corresponding to the coconut oil excise tax fund. 

In these periodic commutings to the United States and 
Europe and points between, Quezon took a fancy to the 
dances. As a result he made a serious study of the tango 
under Arthur Murray, famed American dancing teacher. 



104 



TH1-; DIPLOMATIC AMBASSADOR 

In his lifetime he was a charming ballroom dancer; in ^ 
dancing he was peerless in the Philippines. He had finesse, 
grace, and an exquisite sense of rhythm. 

In the United States Quezon was provided with a police 
escort whenever he went out motoring. For his transcon^ 
tinental trip, Roosevelt provided him with a special P ie 
idential coach- 

7* h to 

When Quezon went to Mexico he expressed the WIS 
go as a tourist, but on his arrival at the Mexican f^J?^ 
he found the Mexican people waiting for him. With - _ 
was a military detachment that received him with non- 
befitting the head of a state. Describing the royal recep- 
tion accorded him, Quezon said: 

"We went on to Mexico and at all stations there were the 
same cheers, the same acclamation. We arrived in the city o 
Mexico in a tremendous rain. There was the whole c£l ^ an ^ 
an army escort, the ambassador, of course, and the peop 1 
Mexico, acclaiming me. They gave me a national fiesta of ^ ^ 
bank of the river to which we were conveyed in pagodas* 3C ^ 
At that national fiesta, a Mexican delivered an address on 
relations between the Philippines and Mexico." 
From Mexico Quezon sailed for Cuba and Europe: then 
he went to Germany. He visited Versailles, summer capi- 
tal of Louis XIV and seat of the signing of the treaty which 
ended the World War I, and Rouen, famous cathedral town 
where Joan of Arc was burned at the stake. 

His trip to Japan was made in 1938. The Emperor of 
Japan first received him in audience and later honored his 
guest at a luncheon in the imperial palace. With Quezon 
were Carlos P. Romulo, Jose Yulo, Dr. Miguel Canizares, 
and Major Arsenio Natividad. He spent ten days on 
vacation. When he sailed badk to the Philippines, Quezon 
made this prophetic farewell: 

"Japan and the Philippines are geographically close neigh- 
bors. The only question is whether the two countries shall stand 
as friends or as enemies." 



105 



Chapter 11 



THE SEASONED POLITICIAN 

Before I entered politics I had a 
prof ess ion , practised it and rnadv 
a success of it, both from the 
standpoint of my reputation as ft 
competent lawyer and as a lover 
of justice. 

— QUEZON 

\M ANUEL L. QUEZON entered the public service in 
^ * 1906 as municipal councilor of Tayabas, a town in 
Tayabas province (now Quezon). When he entered poli- 
tics, he "was no longer a shirtless man/' because previously 
he had a successful law practice. 

As one of the first few Filipinos to take up politics, 
later becoming the most outstanding leader of the country, 
Quezon saw, witnessed, and participated in the numerous 
events that led to the birth of political factions in the Phil- 
ippines. Of the beginnings of the Nacionalista party to 
which he was affiliated, he reminisced: 

"The Nacionalista party was born, strongly supported by 
the enthusiasm of the people,, by the passions that had not died 
out yet. You know what happens with political parties. It is 
like religion. If you were born in one religion, it would require 
some efforts to get you out of that religion. We believed we 
were patriots then and we still believe, and our sons believe it. 
Sometimes we fight among ourselves; we get divided and when 
we get together, we get .our followers to come back and they 
come back." 

As early as 1906, the Nacionalista elements were di- 
vided into two factions — the Partido Independista Inmedia- 
ta and the Union Nacionalista. Quezon belonged to the for- 
mer, His group, founded on July 1 ? 1906, "embraced the 

10G 



THIS SEASONED POLITICIAN' 



more radical of those seeking to attain independence by le- 
gal means." The split did not last long, however, for on 
January 17, 1907, the leaders met and decided to fuse with 
the other faction, A new platform for the Nacionalista 
party was approved at a meeting held at 194 Lacoste, Mani- 
la, on March 12. Both Quezon and Gsmena were elected 
among the counsellors. 

Dean Maximo M. Kalaw attributed the prompt fusion 
to the "absence of selfish politics, for at that time the Na- 
cionalistas were the opposition party with no spoils to di- 
vide among the members. They were mostly a group of 
young idealists, inexperienced in politics but thoroughly con- 
vinced of the justice of their cause. On the other hand, they 
had to contend with a well-organized party in power, backed 
up by the administration. It was natural that they should 
find it much more advisable to unite and oppose the foe with 
a solid front." 

Quezon remained a loyal member of the Nacionalista 
party up to his death. To this party he owed his political 
triumphs in the intervening years. His partymen elevated 
him to different positions, the last and the climax being 
that of the first president of the Commonwealth of the Phil- 
ippines- 
Following the passage of the Tydings-McDuffie inde- 
pendence law by the United States Congress and its subse- 
quent acceptance by the Filipino people, a change in the po- 
litical set-up of the country came. Under this law the Amer- 
ican governor general was substituted by a Filipino chief 
executive. In compliance, therefore, with the provisions ol 
the law the first presidential election was held on Septem- 
ber 17, 1935, 

Until some months before the election the people and 
their leaders were still divided into two political factions 
as a result of a bitter disagreement over the ill-fated Hare- 
Hawes-Cutting independence act. Quezon who turned 



107 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

down the law led the antis, while Osmena who campaigned 
In the United States for the approval of the measure headed 
the pros. However bitter their controversy was, when the 
presidential election came nearer, the opposing: groups for- 
got all their past differences, buried deep their hatred for 
each other, and jointly paved the way for the successful 
outcome of the election. 

Realizing that the rich experience and the invaluable 
services of the outstanding leaders — Quezon and Osmena — 
were needed at this crucial period in the life of the new 
nation, the coalition of the pro and the anti factions was 
promptly effected. Following the fusion a group of inde- 
pendent and substantial citizens prepared a manifesto in 
which they expressed their concern "over the liberty and 
the welfare of the country in the face of imminent changes 
of transcendental importance in its political and economic 
life" and urged the Filipino people to unite for a common 
cause and purpose. Almost at the same time the League of 
Provincial Governors approved a resolution proclaiming 
the candidacies of Quezon for chief executive and of Osmena 
for vice president, 

Thus the Coalition was born at a very momentous 
time. Quezon called it "a blessed day for the Philippines, 
when these two contending parties, before the altar of the 
Fatherland, laid down their weapons and signed a truce 
that would permit both to join hands in the service of the 
people." 

Of the significance of the Coalition, Quezon's analysis 
partly follows : 

"When the Coalition was agreed uyon, there were but two 
nationally organized political parties in the Philippines, known 
in common parlance as the Pros and the Antis. These two par- 
ties were engaged in a bitter struggle in the bitterest political 
campaign ever fought in the Philippines — that which imme- 
diately preceded the election of the officials of the government 
of the Commonwealth. 



108 



4 



THE SEASONED POLITICIAN 

"The Ant is and the Pros came into being a s a result of the 
conflicting stands taken by members of the two old political par- 
ties in the Philippines on the Hare-Hawes-Cutting bill, the 
A V lis opposing and the Pros favoring its acceptance. 

"Hardly one year had elapsed after that bitter fight be- 
tween the two parties, in which all human passions were let 
loose, when the leaders of both parties, facing the prospect of 
a new election, feared that another political fight of the same 
nature, if not worse, raight drive the contestants to such ex- 
tremes as would seriously jeopardize the success of the new 
government. Hence, a hi>h sense of patriotism and responsi- 
bility asserted itself, not only among the leaders of the two 
parties, but also in the rank and file of their followers, and 
brought about the Coalition, which, in the opinion of all, wa? the 
best means to insure the growth of tha new-born nation. 

"It was the hope and expectation of the men of both par- 
ties that, through the Coalition, they would be able to cooper- 
ate with one another in one single purpose and aspiration, the 
good of all, the salvation of the Filipino people, the assurance 
for their country of a place in the world worthy of the race 
that produced Rizal. 

"The Coalition was a complete success. The need for its 
formation was amply demonstrated and justified by the bene- 
ficial results accomplished, and by the expeditiousness with 
which these results were achieved." 

In the election Quezon was opposed by General Emilio 
AgUinaldo of the Philippine Veterans Association and Mon- 
signor Gregorio Aglipay, exalted bishop of the Philippine 
Independent Church. The election returns gave Quezon an 
overwhelming Majority over his opponents, 695,297 votes 
having been cast in his favor, or 68 per cent of the total of 
1,022,704 votes received by the three candidates, Agiiinkl- 
do got only 18 per cent and Aglipay 14 per cent. The votes 
given to Quezon were four times as many as those received 
by either of the defeated candidates, while his majority was 
twice the total votes for his two opponents. 

In a clean, peaceful, and orderly election — the first pres- 
idential contest ever held in the Philippines — the people 
bestowed upon their beloved and cultured leader the highest 



109 



MANUEL L. QUEZON; HIS LIFE AND CAIIEEU 

elective position that was within their power to give. Elected 
the first president of the Philippines, Quezon began his 
first term of six years as provided by the Constitution of the 
Philippines upon the inauguration of the new government 
on November 15, 1935. 

Although Quezon was in politics for many years, it was 
never his intention to remain in politics forever. Time and 
again he tried to relinquish the positions to which he had 
been elected. Time and again he repeatedly demonstrated 
that he was always far and above mere politics by adhering 
closely to his own slogan, "My loyalty to my party ends 
where my loyalty to my country begins." True to his dic- 
tum Quezon soon after he assumed the presidency of the 
Philippines divorced himself from active politics. He de- 
clared Ms absolute and complete independence from the 
party that was responsible for his election by resigning as 
its president In his message read at the joint Anti-Pro 
convention in September, 1937, during which occasion the 
delegates formally dissolved the two factions, then fused 
together into the new party, the Partido Nacionalista, Que- 
zon defined his stand on party independence as follows : 

"As President of the Philippines, I declare my independence 
from dictation by this political organization that you are about 
to create, and by any other political organization, and I publicly 
avow my loyalty to my office and to my country above the poli- 
tical fortune of the party in general or the members composing 
it in particular. I am, therefore, by virtue of my office, in- 
capacitated to be president of this party." 

Then he added : 

"I was up to 1937 the elected president of the Coalition and 
president of the Antis. But in this new political organization I 
will take no active part. The President of the Philippines, in 
my opinion, should not be at the head of any partisan organiza- 
tion. By virtue of the election to the high office wherein the 
people have placed him, he is naturally the leader of the party 
which nominated him, as indeed, he is the chosen leader of the 
nation for the term of his office. 



110 



THE SEASONED POLITICIAN 



"But there should be a very clear difference between the 
work and responsibilities devolving upon the president of a 
political party, even if it he the majority party, and the Pres- 
ident of the Philippines or the head of the government, I be- 
long, as an individual, to this party. I believe in the platform 
which this party has adopted and upon which I appeared before 
as candidate of the Coalition." 

Although a Nationalist a and the virtual head of his 
party, Quezon never showed any partisan attitude that 
might lead his party to commit frauds to insure victory in 
the elections. On the other hand, he uncompromisingly de- 
manded clean elections for either municipal, provincial, or 
national positions: often, called politicians who won their 
elections by frauds "thieves 1 ' ; and also threatened politicians 
found committing anomalies with immediate dismissal He 
always set forth a line of demarcation between the govern* 
nient on the one hand and the Nacionalista party on the 
other. "The Nacionalista party is one thing; the govern- 
ment is another. The Nacionalista party is not the gov- 
er nment," tie pointed out. 

Whenever municipalities and provinces were threatened 
\yy disorder as to cause serious disturbances before and 
during election days, Quezon always acted swiftly by put- 
tjjEg these places under Constabulary control. The cham- 
pion of clean elections, he always exerted efforts to prevent 
an y injustice to the people. His paramount aim was al- 
ways to give every political faction equal chances and op- 
portunities during an election period without favoring one 
and discriminating against the other. 

Government officials, from cabinet members down to 
the lowliest civil service employees, were warned repeated- 
ly to keep aloof from politics, especially against doing active 
campaigning in favor of certain candidates. When in the 
elections of 1938 the secretary of public works and commu- 
nications was denounced by his political enemies to Quezon 
as discriminating in the employment of laborers on gov- 



111 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

eminent projects in his home province, Quezon unhesitat- 
ingly took action by sending immediately a personal letter 
to this cabinet member. He wrote in part : 

"As your cine.! and as your friend, I do not only consider 
it a duty of the government not to use the appropriations for 
public works as a means to induce voters to support one can- 
didate or another, by giving them work or employment; it is 
also for me a matter of conscience no* to permit such a prac- 
tice. It seems inhuman to me to refuse work to laborers just 
because they do not belong to the Naewimliatn party or do' not 
support a certain candidate . . ? f 

In this" way he once more assured his people that gov- 
ernment money must benefit everybody irrespective of po- 
litical affiliation. 

The seasoned politician that he was, Quezon succeeded 
if! minimizing the influence of politics in the government. 
Shortly after assuming office, Quezon announced his policy 
of injecting more government and less politics during" his 
term of office. He made this pronouncement patent by 
transferring supervision of the Philippine Constabulary 
from the Department of the Interior to the Office of the 
President. Although the secretary of the interior did not 
play politics, everybody looked upon the Department of the 
Interior as being political in nature. Therefore, Quezon 
ordered the change. He declared : 

"The people here have been believing that the police is not 
an agency of law but an agency of political leaders, since the 
secretary of the interior, having administration over governors 
and mayors, is the head of politicians. I want to finish with 
that notion, I want all police officials and fiscals under a 
department to which the people can look to as the department of 
the government which is vested with the power and responsibil- 
ity in the enforcement of laws and the protection of the rights 
of the individual." 

Again, in line with this policy he transferred provin- 
cial treasurers from the Department of the Interior, where 



112 



THE SEASONED POLITICIAN 

they originally belonged, to the Department of Finance, Of 
this decision Quezon said: 

"The steps that I have taken in removing from under the 
Department of the Interior those government agencies which 
should be entirely divorced from any consideration of politics, 
have been made not because of lack of confidence in the sec- 
retaries concerned, nor because I had reason to believe that 
they were using these agencies for political purposes, hut 
because I wanted to take positive action showing the people 
that we arc divorcing: from politics those governmental func- 
tions which should have absolutely nothing to do with politics/' 

Elective officials who had proven themselves worthy 
of the positions they held, found their candidacies carry- 
ing the indispensable presidential endorsement. Quezon 
always felt satisfied «upon seeing an elective official being 
returned to his position after having complied conscien- 
tiously with his duties. Members of the first National 
Assembly and provincial governors received this endorse- 
ment wihen they sought their own re-election. The specif- 
ic case of former Assemblyman Miguel Raffinan of Cebu 
is in point. He sought re-election in 1938. Although the 
Quezon endorsement came only one week before election 
day, i* brought him victory. 

The creation of the Commission on Elections was vir- 
tually the work of Quezon who was anxious to eliminate 
completely election frauds in the Philippines, The Phil- 
ippine government ordinarily spent at least 1*2,000,000 for 
every election, local or national, in the pre-war years; but 
under the commission it was able to reduce considerably 
its expenses. Through Quezon's efforts the Constitution 
was amended to incorporate a new article creating the com- 
mission. 

When in the elections of 1940 Quezon found that a big 
number of the qualified voters of the Philippines were not 
able to register during the two regular registration days, 



113 



MANUEL L. QUKZOX; HIS LIFE AND CAR BE ri 

he immediately ordered the holding of additional registra- 
tion days "to prevent whatever injustice ma}' be caused a 
citizen by the first enforcement of a new provision in the 
Electoral Code/' Although the government of the Com- 
monwealth incurred an extra expense, Quezon did not con- 
sider the expenditure as wasted in his efforts to afford 
every citizen every opportunity to retain his right to vote. 

Quezon also put an end to the anomalous practice of 
civil service officials and employees with political ambi- 
tions to resign their positions and run for an elective office. 
Once defeated in the polls they sought their reinstatement 
in the government service immediately following election 
day. This procedure resorted to by "safety-first" office 
seekers was stopped in 1941 when Quezon ordered that 
henceforth defeated candidates could "not be eligible for re- 
instatement in the civil service until &ix months after the 
election in which they took part. Quezon received universal 
approval for this decision. 

From 1907 to 1946, the Philippines was under one 
powerful and progressive party, the Nacionalista. The 
minority group, except during the short existence of the 
Democrata party, was unable to present a strong opposi- 
tion. Although the head of the party in power, Quezon 
repeatedly expressed his desire to see grow in the Philip- 
pines, a strong and formidable opposition charged with the 
task of checking and balancing the activities and the admin- 
istration of the majority party. Realizing this need which 
was being answered at the time by the Frente Popular. 
Quezon said: 

"It is our duty to pave the way for this new opposition and 
to place in its hands the instruments by which it can foster its 
own growth through lawful procedure, 

"The opposition must not be maintained merely to defeat 
the majority- They must formulate a platform that will give 
basis for their opposition; and in case they turn down the ma- 
jority, they must have one objective, one common purpose/' 



114 



BOOK II 



Chapter 12 



THE PASSIONATE LOVER 



IN HIS bachelor days Manuel L. Quezon had one real and 
significant romance.* It started in childhood in his 
hometown in Baler, Tayabas. Here he and a beautiful cousin 
saw each other grow up to youth and, because of their close 
family relations, they always treated each other with great 
affection. 

Although still very young, the two cousins already had 
high regard for each other-young Manuel admired the 
c . harm , beauty kindness, and industry 0 f Cousin Aurora 
Ara gon; and the Utter appreciated the courage, ^ in- 
tellect, and gallantry of the former. ' 

Ea , rly fijnS W< ? S6Parated b * Fate - Manuel 
left Baler at the age of nine to continue his studies in Ma- 

On the other hand, Aurora entered the school of the 
Franciscan friars located in their convent in Baler after 
she had been taught by Emilia, her elder sister, and Doha 
Maria ^ olina ' her aunt and "^ther of Quezon. 

Then came the Philippine Revolution in 1898 which 
brought both disaster and misfortune to the Aragon family. 
The father was kept a prisoner in Manila by the Spanish 

P^nQueson reached 17, he was already attracted by the young 

nd beauts 1 women of Baler whose attractive eyes and well-shaped 

2 lures " e ***** that he e ^ly fell in 

fvc wit" an orphan g.rl whom he serenaded with either a guitar or 
10 f lute at her aunt's home up to two o'clock in the morning. This 
a i who never answered h»s letters, was found by Q uez0 n alone at 
Re time- So he k.ssed her, and she did not protest. Quezon also 
SI in l° ve Wlt u h a /° Ung gn ! f ™ m Pam P^nga whose picture was 
ScO*** by thG A ?.f ,ca S 8 f ,n hlS Valise in the course of a night 
r ch of houses in P.lar, Bataan, in an attempt to capture Quezon 



117 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

authorities and the conjugal property was confiscated by 
the Spanish government. Thus the wife and children under- 
went hardships and experienced life as it is lived by the 
poor for the first time in their lives. They lived in a one- 
room nipa shack and slept on the bamboo floor. 

So at the early age of ten, Aurora and her other sisters 
did household duties— pounded rice in the crude wooden 
mortar fetched water from the river in earthen jars wear- 
ing wooden shoes, washed the family clothes regularly, 
helped plant sweet potatoes and other vegetables in the 
home garden, and went out on bare feet to the rice field 
during the planting time under the scorching heat of the 
sun. 

In 1904, three years after the death of the father, the 
Aragon family moved to Lucena, capital of Tayabas. Young 
Aurora went to Manila to study at the Philippine Normal 
School where she soon became a bright and popular student. 

At the time Quezon was the provincial fiscal of Taya- 
bas. Then both living in Lucena, the cousins saw each other 
more frequently as they grew up to maturity. Quezon, ever 
gallant, generous, and affectionate to Aurora, readily ex- 
tended his help in order that she could acquire higher educa- 
tion and realize her life ambition to be a public school 
teacher like her sister, Emilia. So he spent for her school- 
ing in Manila. 

But Student Aurora did not stay long in the city be- 
cause of her poor health. When she unexpectedly returned 
to Lucena, Quezon was the saddest man, for he knew how 
greatly disappointed his cousin was in her inability to fin- 
ish the normal course. But he cheered her up. 

When the call of public service took Quezon away from 
her, he communicated regularly with Aurora. Letters kept 
her posted with his activities and achievements; and even 



118 



THE PASSIONATE LOVER 
when the youthful Filipino l eader represented the Phil 
ippines at the International Navigation Srence he fl 
at st. Petersburg, Ruas.a, i„ 1908j he did j££ 

her* 

ES?S ^uch with her eithe* ZS? he WaS ' ie alwa 3* 
K ' tin" her frequently in tL f.I , tmg re * ularI y °* »* 
SSSTeai ***** Aurora £tf^J2^ n W 
^invitation of Quezon, and UP ° n 

iTa bv either Mrs. San Am 5 PS she was aecom - 

panied by oan Agustin or Mrs. "Rodriguez. 

Tn one of his visits in Lucem rw 

*«■ of romance seriously with +! t00k up the mat " 

~£ cousin did not acce VS^IdilyV-l/i 3* 

nstead she told him, - &6ftft| ^t^^" (Tent^ 
nether). The an swer, which Mm *u wanay (Tell it to 

S s t^e Quezon greatly 5^^^? 

alld ? l ZhLl ol^l* * T Uthful ^ went 

directly to the Deach ol Lucena where, on a big log on the 
"eashore, he sat down and pondered. 

Grea tly moved by the incident he did not know wha* 
- jr nr the moment but finallv nnii^ ■ 
to do for "»«y pulled out a piece of blank 

paper from his coat pocket and began to scribble a love 
poem in Spanish Only after he had finished it did his 
companion break the monotony 0 f the afternoon. The two 
read the poem. It was a piece expressive of his sincere af- 
fection for and deep devotion to Aurora. Still emotionally 
touched bv the incident the two friends went home silently 
with Quezon still undecided as to the next move that he 
was to take in the matter. 

He never lost hope in winning the love of young Aurora 
He continued sending her letters in Tagalog signed 
"Nonong." Wherever he was he always got in touch with 



119 



MANUEL L, QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

her- In these love letters could be gleaned the true and 
everlasting affection of Quezon for Aurora, 

In one of her trips- to Manila Quezon played a practical 
joke on Aurora, as a. result of which the lady shed bitter 
tears. One evening he attended a formal dinner; from there, 
in his formal evening dress, he visited her. He had inten- 
tionally pinned orange blossoms on the lapel of his tuxedo. 
When he showed up in her home, Aurora had two callers 
who were admirers of the young girl. As he came in, the 
young lady was attracted to the orange blossoms, so she 
asked him the reason for wearing that particular flower. 
In a serious manner, he answered her, "I have just been 
married;" 

Upon hearing his reply, "she suddenly burst into tears 
unmindful of the presence of her two other suitors. Why 
she cried so bitterly Aurora later explained. "It was not 
because he was going to get married that I was hurt most," 
she reasoned out A< No ? I was hurt because he had not told 
us he was going to get married/ 5 

Aurora's delicate health up to 1918 greatly alarmed 
Quezon. She was thin and pale, and her doctors advised 
her to go to places with cooler climate, if possible, to regain 
her lost vitality. Fortunately enough, the Filipino people 
were sending the first independence mission to the United 
States at the time. 

When Quezon was named head of the mission, he did 
not lose time to invite his charming cousin to make the 
trip. The invitation was gladly accepted by Aurora. A maid 
accompanied her* The mission left Manila on board the s,s. 
Shiny o Marti on December 9, 1918, Her presence in the 
boat was never detected by the members of the party until 
they arrived in Hongkong, 

On the first night of the trip Aurora seated herself 
on the deck inhaling the cool and pure sea breezes, Later 



THE PASSIONATE LOVER 



her cousin seated himself beside her, and the two lovers 
were left alone for hours as the boat sailed smoothly to- 
wards Hongkong. On that night the lover proposed mar- 
riage to his sweetheart. The young lady maintained her 
silence, and Quezon knew what it meant Although several 
months before their trip Aurora had been informed by 
intimate friends that Quezon had confidentially told them 
that he was going to get married soon to "one of the fair 
daughters of Tayabas," it never occurred to her that she 
was the one being referred to. However, she felt happy 
that, after all, her cousin was to be married and was to 
settle down. But never did she for a moment ever think 
that she was to be the lucky bride after a long engagement 
of 12 years. 

The wedding plans of Quezon were kept a secret to his 
bride because he wanted to give her a surprise in this the 
happiest moment in her life. Besides, the proposed mar- 
riage was strongly objected to by Aurora's mother although 
s he was his own aunt being a sister to his mother. 

Upon their arrival in Hongkong the party went shop- 
ping ^ rst > and then visited the American legation. In this 
British city rickshaws are used for transportation, Aurora 
ro de in a rickshaw on her way to the business section of 
the city- Unfortunately the rickshaw man took her in the 
wrong direction, so that she was isolated from her com- 
panions. When she found out the mistake, she immediately 
told him, "Stop— stop !" The coolie mistook her words for 

"Shop shop/' so he doubled his speed. As a result the 

other members turned around and followed Auroras rick- 
shaw. 

After their shopping the missioners gathered at the 
American consulate general and attended the marriage 
ceremony which in Hongkong was called a "registrar mar- 
riage" as it was performed by the registrar of the colony. 



121 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

Immediately after the affair Quezon sent a three-word 
cablegram to Governor General Francis Burton Harrison 
in Manila, He wired. "Got married today/' So terse was 
the message that Harrison, who was anxious to get more 
details of the wedding, cabled him back, "What's her 
name?" 

In that simple and unobtrusive ceremony that took 
place on Saturday, December 14, 1918, the Quezons had 
Speaker Osmena and Governor Maximo Rodriguez of Taya- 
bas as their official sponsors; but as these gentlemen were 
at the time in Manila, two members of the mission repre- 
sented them. 

His wedding was a complete surprise to his many 
friends and admirers in the Philippines. The people learned 
of it two days later when the Manila Daily Bulletin published 
a short one-column story about it on page 8 thereof. 

Immediately upon learning of the wedding the mem- 
bers of the Legislature sent a cablegram of congratulations 
to the newlyweds. Employees of the Senate and the Labor 
Congress of the Philippines followed suit. 

About his marriage and his preference for the cere- 
mony in a foreign land, Quezon later explained as follows : 

"The time came for me to get married and I did get mar- 
ried. To avoid public demonstration and the pomp of a marriage 
of the first and only president of the Philippine Senate which 
the custom of our people would have demanded, I went to 
Hongkong and there got manned, without anyone being present 
at my wedding except half a dozen men who were travel iilg 
with me. Even these did not know I was getting married that 
day until, to their surprise, the marriage ceremony began. I 
was dressed in business suit and my bride had an ordinary 
dress, no flowers, no celebration, nothing but the absolutely 
essential," 

Three days later the couple underwent a church wed- 
ding solemnized by the Archbishop of Hongkong at the 



122 



THE PASSIONATE LOVER 



Catholic cathedral That was on December 17. In this se- 
cond ceremony a special dispensation was necessary as the 
contracting parties were closely related to each other. News 
of this religious ceremony was published in Manila on the 
day following' the event. 

On their return to the Philippines in 1919, the Quezons 
spent their much delayed honeymoon in a beautiful home 
in Santa Ana district; from here they moved to their own 
homes — first in Marikina and later in Pasay (now Rizal 
City) , both of the province of Rizal 

Since their marriage the Quezons were always a hand- 
some couple exemplary in many ways: the bridegroom was 
a devoted and faithful husband, and the bride was always 
the affectionate and ever zealous wife. 

The wedding of Quezon to his pretty cousin was one 
of his most fortunate decisions in life, for in Aurora he 
found a true, loyal, affectionate, and devoted wife; and, 
in her, thdr children have a loving, obliging, dutiful, and 
kind mother- m ... 



Chapter 13 



THE AFFECTIONATE FATHER 

As a good father, I ilid not want 
my children to suffer the hunger 
and privation that I suffered. 

— QUEZON 

M S HEAD of the nation in his lifetime, Manuel L. 

Quezon was looked up to as the embodiment of all 
that was exemplary and ideal; he was taken as a model 
after whom the people could pattern their ways and man- 
ner of living. 

As a private individual, Quezon was undoubtedly the 
Philippines' Citizen No. 1. He was the happy head of a 
family where true love, deep respect, and mutual admira- 
tion for each other reigned supreme throughout the bliss- 
ful marital years that ended abruptly with his death in 
1944. So dear were his wife and children to him, that, in 
spite of the heavy burden of state responsibility that rested 
on his shoulders, Quezon always managed to see and spend 
some moments with his family. 

Quezon's married life covered 26 full years, and the 
Quezon-Aragon wedlock was blessed with four children. 
Three are living, namely, Maria Aurora, named after her 
mother btt is nicknamed "Baby", who was born on Septem- 
ber 23, 1919; Maria Zeneida, or "Nini ? \ named after their 
maternal grandmother, who was born on April 9, 1921 ; 
and Manuel, Jr., affectionately called "Nonong", bearing 
the pet name of his father when he was a boy, who was 
bom on June 23, 1926. Luisa Corazon Paz, the third child, 
died on December 14, 1924, and is buried in the family plot 
in the Manila north cemetery. 



124 




Fond of children, Quezon posed in this photograph with his child, 
one of the four children of his family. 



THK A V V E r T I. O N A T K FATHER 



Throughout his long marital life Quezon did not have 
a single quarrel with his wife, nor any serious altercation 
with the children- The family always lived in complete 
harmony, and in absolute peace and tranquility. 

An affectionate father, Quezon loved the company of 
his wife and children. He could not bear to see Mrs. Quezon 
out of his siprht for some time, and when this happened, 
he would be heard inquiring: "Where is Aurora?" 

He was so fond of them that once, after he and Mrs. 
Quezon had already enrolled the children in the exclusive 
schools of Rosemont, Philadelphia, in the United States, 
he changed his mind and ordered them to return with him 
to the Philippines, The tuition fees had been paid in ad- 
vance and the family was all set to stay abroad, Quezon 
was then vacationing' in Paris, 

Mrs. Quezon vividly recalls this incident. Two nights 
before they sailed back to the Philippines, she confessed, 
she yearned for home shores but did not know how to tell 
him. So she prayed, "My Lord, I leave everything to You. 
Do as You please with me." Her prayers were heard, for 
3he soon received a cable from her husband instructing 
them to pack up their things and return with him "for he 
could not sleep and eat." He needed their company. "This 
is no surprise to me/' revealed Mrs. Quezon, "knowing my 
husband as I do that he cannot stay away from us even 
for a short time, much less to be away from us for two 
years." 

When he was away, as in his prolonged trips to the 
United States and Europe, Quezon never failed to contact 
his family frequently : he wired them, wrote long loving 
letters, called them by long distance telephone to hear their 
familiar voices. Upon his return home he had always a 
store of surprises for each of them — rare and valuable gifts, 
the best of their kind available in the markets at the time. 



125 



MANUEL L.. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

Quezon likewise followed Mrs. Quezon or the children 
when they were gone to their home town in Baler or to 
their farm in Arayat or to Baguio for their summer vaca- 
tion, whenever he found time to spare from his official 
duties in the Malacanan PaJace. 

He was so closely attached to his only son that Quezon 
even slept with him in the latter's room. Both father and 
son were usually found together by Mrs. Quezon with the 
son's arms entwined around the father's neck when she 
entered the bedroom early in the morning. 

Upon waking up in the morning Quezon bestowed a 
fatherly blessing on the children; he did the same when 
they went to school. In turn, the children never left the 
palace or their private homes in Marikina and Pasay with- 
out first obtaining the permission of their father whom 
they lovingly called "Daddy." 

When Mrs. Quezon was away from home, Quezon 
ooked after the children. As he had to dine with them, 
he usually declined all dinner engagements on such days. 
Maria Aurora, his favorite, always waited for her father 
at luncheon, be it as late as one or two o'clock in the after- 



noon 



A loving father, he was his children's bosom friend- 
to him they confided their troubles and from him they 
received wise paternal counsel. To them Quezon listened 
attentively, even when he was deeply engrossed with im- 
portant problems of the State or was attending to visitors. 

As head of a God-fearing but God-loving family, Quezon 
spared no efforts to raise his children to be good Christians 
and law-abiding citizens by sending them to Catholic 
schools. "That I believe in religious instruction," Quezon 



126 



THE AFFECTIONATE FATHER 



revealed in the heat of the controversy over his veto on the 
religious instruction biil in 1938, "I have demonstrated by 
sending: my own children to colleges where they receive 
religious instruction/' 

Led by him, the Quezon family attended church ser- 
vices regularly and went to confession occasionally. He 
also had a chape! installed in the palace. 

He manifested a great paternal love for his family. 
Once, upon his return to the Philippines from a mission to 
the United States, the people warmly welcomed him and 
showered bouquets upon him. After the occasion, he un- 
ceremoniously gathered the family, then motored directly 
to the north cemetery and placed the flowers on the tomb 
of his deceased daughter. Every now and then and on All 
Saints' Day Quezon visited the cemetery. In 1939, when the 
Quezons celebrated their 21st wedding anniversary, they 
did not forget Luisa as they first dropped at the cemetery 
to pay her homage before proceeding to their farmstead 
in Pampanga. 

His greatest concern was for his family, especially 
when someone was ill, however slight the ailment was. 
Quezon was perturbed and felt uneasy until he got the best 
medical and nursing care for the patient. He stayed all 
day long, spent sleepless nights beside the patient, and 
made inquiries regularly from the attending physicians. 

That his thoughts were always centered on the family, 
he manifested on several instances. When . vivacious and 
charming Maria Aurora observed her 18th birthday m 
1937, Quezon gave her as a birthday gift a 17-page letter 
which visibly touched the celebrant after reading it, The 
letter was dictated by the father to a friend at five o'clock 
that morning. 



127 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

Once Maria Aurora got sick in Baguio, When her tem- 
perature rose to 40 degrees one night, the father was im- 
mediately contacted in Manila. Early the following morn- 
ing Quezon showed up unexpectedly with two personal 
physicians. 

Again, when Mrs. Quezon's sudden illness in April. 
1940, was diagnosed as an acute case of appendicitis, Que- 
zon, who was then on an inspection trip in the southern 
islands, ordered the presidential yacht, Casiana, to speed 
back to Manila. He got the country's best surgeons to at- 
tend to her appendectomy at the Notre Dame Mission Hos- 
pital in Baguio. Besides staying with her throughout her 
confinement, he cancelled all previous engagements until 
she had completely recovered. 

As he easily got worried over any slight indisposition 
in the family, Mrs. Quezon saw to it that he did not hear 
of it. 

Quezon was a disciplinarian. In his lifetime he had 
his daughters rigidly chaperoned by their aunts whenever 
they went to school or visited friends. He also delighted 
in chaperoning them, When he accompanied the girls to 
the collegiate basketball games, he loved to see Aurora 
and Zeneida cheer for the school team of their young 
brother, while Quezon rooted for the players of his alma 
mater, Lefcran. Of his children, he once remarked, "I must 
say that I have never laid hands on any of my children. I 
have two daughters who are already of tage. I have never 
spanked them. But I have disciplined them since they 
were small." 

He also rendered his family the respect due them. As 
father he kept his word. One New Year's eve found him 
slightly indisposed, but since he had previously promised 
his daughters to take them to the Manila Hotel for the 
reception and ball, Quezon made good his word. 



128 



THE AFFECTIONATE FATHER 



Then, shortly after Mrs. Quezon had recovered from 
her appendectomy, the people of Arayat in Pampanga of- 
fered a thanksgiving mass in her honor. Quezon motored 
from Manila for the services. Upon entering the town he 
noticed huge floral arches. His chauffeur told him they 
were intended for Mrs. Quezon. "If that is the case/' he 
said, "let us stop before crossing any of them; it is not 
proper to go ahead of the honoree. Let us wait for Mrs. 
Quezon to come/* 

An ideal father, Quezon provided his children with 
everything necessary in life, excepting luxuries, of course, 
"If the son wants luxuries," he once remarked, "let him 
work and earn his own money, Do not permit our sons 
to sport a fine car or give a sumptuous dance. And we must 
demonstrate with facts what we tell them. Some parents 
hurt their own children by getting them accustomed to a 
life of luxury." 

Being a keen observer of family life and ties in the 
Philippines, Quezon deplored the luxurious manner of living 
of the youth in his time. He blamed the parents for the 
anomalous situation. He opined that "the best way of show- 
ing a father's love for his son is to compel him to suffer 
what the father has suffered; to make him work before 
he learns how to spend money. Let him learn to earn money 
first, then let him spend it." 

When he got married Quezon immediately realized his 
duty to his family. He did not want them to be "shirtless" 
as he had been, "not because to be poor is a dishonor, but 
because it is hard/ 7 As a good father, too, Qilezon did not 
want his children "to suffer from the hunger and priva- 
tion that I had suffered. I wanted them to have the same 
opportunities in their youth that others have in theirs/' 1 



129 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



So Quezon provided his family well and sufficiently. 1 
Besides owning real estate properties in Manila, Rizal City, 
Baguio, Quezon City, Pampanga, and Tayabas, he had a 
piece of land in Baler which he inherited from his father. 
But he was later deprived of it. "The land belonged to my 
father, through occupation under the Spanish laws, but he 
was never able to cultivate it," recounted Quezon. "This 
property, which originally was about three thousand hec- 
tares, because it was unattended by me, was occupied by 
homesteaders. When I went to Baler and found that nearly 
two-thirds of it had been occupied, I allowed them to keep 
all that they were occupying." 

He loved country life so much that he was always in 
his Kaledian farmstead in Pampanga during week-ends. 
"There is nothing more delightful to me than to go to my 
little farm. - 1 just love to be there," declared Quezon. Then 
jokingly he added, "Mount Arayat faces me; Baluyui, with 
his autocratic government, threatens me on the one hand, 
and the Socialists and Communists on the other." 

A home lover, a devoted husband, an affectionate 
father, Quezon found real joy and genuine happiness in 
the intimate company of his family. He lavished them with 
love and care, and provided them with a home which can 
be aptly described as "one my father is proud to support, 
one my mother loves to keep, one our friends like to come 
to. It is a place to grow old in." 



Quezon left an estate valued at P309,641. Mrs. Aurora Ara- 
gon Quezon has been named by the court of first instance of Manila 
the temporary administratrix of the estate, upon the petition filed 
on her behalf by Judge Sixto de la Costa, former solicitor general. 
Quezon left no will. The properties are conjugal in nature. The 
sole heirs are Mrs. Quezon. Maria Aurora, Maria Zeneida, and Ma- 
nuel, Jr. The properties represent Quezon's insurance policies with 
the Sun Life Assurance Company of Canada valued at P30,000; 
personal belongings worth P30,000; and real estate totalling p249,641. 
The real estate is distributed in various parcels of land in Baguio 
valued at i>69,800; Pampanga, P69,540.77; Rizal and Quezon Cities, 
P78,301; Tayabas, P27,000; and Manila, P5,000. 



130 




I'vf\ i ;id?nt Cuezon acted as chaperon of his children whenever they went out. Here he 
accompanied daughter Maria Aurora to the Radio Station KZRH to hear a special radio 
program broadcast in her honor during a recent birthday anniversary. Talking to 
"Baby ' is Beit SiJcn, ^ti-dio manager, &nc: between them is the biographer. 



Chapter 14 
THE TRUE FRIEND AND NOBLE FOE 



AS THE outstanding political leader of the Philippines in 
his lifetime, Quezon acquired friends from all walks of 
life as well as made enemies. Although he had bitter mortal 
enemies owing to differences in many a national political 
issue, like his friends, these greatly endeared him. For if 
he was a good friend, he was a noble adversary, too. 

Quezon can best be portrayed as friend and foe by 
an appreciation of his feelings, sympathies, and reactions 
to everyday incidents and events with associates and co- 
workers. People who had known him for a long time, like 
former classmates and chums in the home province, spoke 
highly of him; they considered him the best friend they 
ever had. He was not only sincere and honest in his deal- 
ings with them, but also kind, thoughtful, and helpful, 
above all 

Although the country's busiest man because of his 
numerous responsibilities and duties as the chief executive, 
these bounden obligations did not prevent Quezon from 
visiting friends, both rich and poor, lending them a helping 
hand, saying a comforting word to relieve them of their 
personal misfortune, and giving them his wise counsel when 
needed. Usually he left the Malaeanan Palace at night to 
be with friends in their homes, spending some ho ^ <^ a ~ 
ting with them, and living for the ""^to 
the Hfe of a plain citizen with no problems 01 
consider. 

Quezon had several friends whose friendships he long 
treasured. He never failed to seek the company oi these 
intimate associates, get their advice in tunes of adversity, 



131 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

and appreciate their words of encouragement, especially 
in moments of preoccupation. 

In all the years, Quezon always extended the paternal 
hand to many people. His acts of illimitable generosity 
and kindness seldom got into print but they were a byword 
among the beneficiaries who were mostly old, decrepit 
comrades in the Philippine Revolution; former neighbors 
in Baler, Lucena, Pasay, and Manila; one-time associates 
and subalterns in the government; and persons who helped 
him financially when he was yet a poor and struggling 
young man. To some he even shared his own home to 
give them the much-needed shelter that the times and the 
circumstances had deprived them of. 

But he never allowed friendship to sway or influence 
him in his duties as the chief executive. Between being ft 
personal friend and a public servant, Quezon made a clear 
distinction, and for that matter his decisions and actuations 
were done unequivocably, impartially, and without any per- 
sonal preference. When he assumed the presidency of the 
Philippines in 1935, one of his first acts was to check the 
growth and prevalence of the compadre system in the gov- 
ernment. He clearly defined the norm of conduct that offi- 
cials of the Commonwealth should adopt, and in unequivocal 
terms he stated that friendship should not be a means to 
attain an end. He advocated, introduced, and adopted a 
government of laws and not of men. For that matter, no 
friend dared approach him for favors in official matters 
for such would only arouse his ire. Although this disap- 
pointed many friends against whom he had rendered deci- 
sions, it gained for him the confidence of the people who 
endeared him more than ever. 

Several foreigners counted with the friendship of 
Quezon. Among them were short, dapper, be-mustached 
Roy Howard, president of the Scripps-Howard newspaper 



132 



THE TRUE FRIEND AND NOBLE FOE 

chain in the United States, who was always the house guest 
of Quezon during his periodic visits to the Philippines; 
General Douglas MacArthur who became field marshal of 
the Philippine Army and military adviser to the Common- 
wealth government; the late President Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt who approved the Tydings-McDuffie indepen- 
dence act and the Philippine Constitution and its subsequent 
amendments; and Associate Justice Frank Murphy of the 
United States Supreme Court and one-time governor gen- 
eral of the Philippines and later high commissioner. 
Murphy was the personal representative of President Har- 
ry S. Truman of the United States to accompany the bodr 
of Quezon to the Philippines where it was buried in 1946. 

Then there were General Wu Te-Chen, once minister 
of overseas affairs of China, who introduced Quezon to the 
late Dr. Sun Yat Sen many years ago ; and former Chinese 
Foreign Minister Quo Tai-chi, an old acquaintance of 
Quezon. 

Of his old-time Filipino friends were Venancio Que- 
blar and Tomas B. Morato, first mayor of Quezon city and 
later congressman of Quezon. Queblar, who was the first 
mayor of Aurora, Tayabas (now Quezon), was a childhood 
playmate of Quezon. Highly respected and much endeared 
by Quezon, he selected him as his personal choice for gov- 
ernor for the 1940 election. "I should like to see him as a 
candidate for governor, but I doubt whether he will agree 
to run for he is as old as I am," he told political leaders 
from Tayabas. "But before death comes to Venancio Que- 
blar, I want the people of Tayabas to know what I think 
of him, and what wishes I hold for him," Quezon added. 

Jose Yulo, former secretary of justice and speaker of 
the second National Assembly, was as a friend loved, re- 
spected and admired by Quezon. Seldom did Quezon publicly 
pay glowing tribute to government officials, and he did it 



133 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREKK 



for Yulo with extraordinary care and length. Of his rela- 
tions with him, Quezon said: 

"I did not know Jose Yulo until 1923. In that year Gov- 
ernor General Wood directed the attorney general of the Phil- 
ippines to challenge the constitutionality of the law creating 
the Board of Control . - - Very seldom did Jose Yulo take 
part in the discussions held in my office as President of the 
Senate, but every time there was an important question raised, 
he expressed his opinion in such a concise and clear manner, 
and his points of law were so well taken that I began to 
take notice of the man who happened to be not only the 
youngest among 1 the lawyers who were representing the Fili- 
pino side in that controversy, but who had so youthful a coun- 
tenance that the solidity of his judgment was doubly impressive. 

"In 1928, during the short administration of Governor 
General Stimson, the governor general discussed with me the 
necessity of amending our corporation laws so as to make 
them conform with the prevailing legislation of this kind in 
the United States. A great opposition to the proposal devel- 
oped both from within the Legislature and from without. . . . 
In this situation I called into consultation the leading Filipino 
lawyers, and once again Jose Yulo threw much light on the 
discussion. 

"Three years later, when the then secretary of justice, 
Jose Abad Santos, was appointed to the Supreme Court by 
the President of the United States, I sent for Jose Yulo and 
asked him if he would be willing to serve as secretary of jus- 
tice should the governor general offer him the post. He was 
held in very high esteem alike by the bench and bar, and yet 
the modesty of the man was such that he declined the offer 
on the ground that he did not consider himself worthy to as- 
sume the responsibilities of the office. 

"Upon the inauguration of the Commonwealth, it was my 
privilege to tender him the appointment as the first secre- 
tary of justice of the Government of the Commonwealth, and 
he became my chief adviser. I can literally say that no law 
enacted during the time he was secretary of justice received 
my approval without his going over it personally, nor was 
any question of major policy ever adopted without the views 
of Secretary Yulo being given full consideration. 

"Jose Yulo is not as well known among our people as 
some of our men in public life today. His modesty and self- 
effacement are such that only those who are close to him know 
and realize what a great man he is," 



134 



THE TRUE FRIEND AND NOBLE FOE " ' 

Quezon likewise admh-ed the late Juan Posadas, mayor 
of Manila. Upon hearing of his confinement in the Phil- 
ippine General Hospital following a heart attack in his 
home, Quezon rushed to visit Posadas at 11 :20 o'clock in the 
night. On his death he expressed publicly his sorrow, at- 
tended the memorial program, and joined the cortege. ,• 

Another friend whose passing he greatly lamented was 
Jorge L. Araneta, Manila and Negros financier. Upon 
learning of his demise, Quezon came down from Baguio to 
call at the Araneta home in Manila, then wrote the widow 
a letter of condolence in which he described him as "my 
dearest friend and one of my most loyal and disinterested 
supporters." Later Quezon headed the nation's leaders who 
escorted the bier to the La Loma cemetery. Quezon and 
Araneta were so intimate to each other that the latter was 
one of the few persons who could go directly to the room 
or office of the President without first seeking an appoint- 
ment. 

"My beloved friend Teodoro" was the familiar way 
Quezon addressed the late Teodoro M. Kalaw, director of 
the National Library until his death. During the Hare- 
Hawes-Cutting bill controversy, Kalaw was often consulted 
by Quezon on various controversial points. Quezon's un- 
expected calls on him often embarrassed Kalaw as on sever- 
al occasions both Quezon and former President Osmena, 
then a senator and the leader of the pro faction, happened 
to be at his home at the same time. 

Of tall, amiable, soft-spoken, and round-faced Rafael 
R. Alunan, once secretary of the interior and twice secretary 
of agriculture and commerce, Quezon became very fond. 
In 1937, while they were aboard the s.s. Bremen bound for 
Europe, Alunan accepted the proffer of Quezon to enter 
the government service, although he was then president 
of the Philippine Sugar Association earning a salary of 
P50,000 a year. So, shortly after their return to the Phil- 



135 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

ippines, he was appointed sugar administrator, then 
secretary of agriculture and commerce, and much/ later 
secretary of the interior. "I am sick and the Vice Pres- 
ident is in the United States/' revealed Quezon, "If some- 
thing happens to me, who will take over the government? 
There is no one in the department of the interior. I need 
you in it." 

Functioning side by side with the official cabinet of 
Quezon was his "medical cabinet" composed of prominent 
physicians. To these friends, Quezon was ever grateful for 
they attended to him in many a crisis and saved his life. 
The Malacarian camarilla of physicians was composed of 
Drs. Antonio G. Sison, Basilio J, Valdez, Miguel Canizares, 
Januario Estrada, Antonio Vasquez, and Catalino Gavin o. 
During the Philippine Revolution his attending physician 
was the late Dr. Gregorio Singian, foremost Filipino sur- 
geon who won world recognition for his treatment of can- 
cer by radium. In the early years of his public career and 
up to the time he was president of the Senate, Quezon had 
both Dr. Fernando Calderon, retired director of the Phil- 
ippine General Hospital, and Dr. Isidoro de Santos as his 
personal physicians. 

When Quezon had his appendectomy, Estrada operated 
on him at the Philippine General Hospital. Estrada also 
accompanied him when he underwent an operation for ure- 
thral stone abroad in 1934 and was likewise present at the 
operation performed on Quezon at the Brady Urological 
Clinic in the Johns Hopkins Hospital. 

If Quezon had enemies, they were his former friends 
and associates who, because he happened to disappoint 
them and thwarted their personal ambitions, turned against 
him temporarily. As the president of the Nacionalista party, 
he was hated by the politicians affiliated with the opposi- 
tion groups. As the head of the anti faction that incessant- 
ly worked to defeat the Hare-Hawes-Cutting bill in 1933, 



136 




An informal pose of President Quezon with 
General Emilio Aguinaldo. 



THE TRUE FRIEND AND NOBLE FOE 

he caused a division among the politicians of the country. 
Those who opposed him sided with Osmena and the pros. 
However, these erstwhile enemies soon came back to win 
the good graces of Quezon as time went on, 

A bitter critic of Quezon was General Emilio Aguinal- 
do, commander-in-chief of the Philippine revolutionary 
army of which Quezon was an officer. When Quezon became 
the leader many years later, commander and officer drifted 
apart because of political and personal differences. This 
bitter political enmity ended with their reconciliation in 
1940 when Quezon accepted the invitation of the Philippine 
Veterans Association, headed by Aguinaldo, to become their 
speaker at the ceremonies commemorating the 42nd an- 
niversary of the proclamation of Philippine independence 
in Kavvitj Cavite, on June 12, 1898* 

On this occasion the two leaders shook hands for the 
first time in many years. Pledges of friendship and good- 
will between them were also made before a gathering of 
5,000 veterans massed on the New Luneta in Manila. In 
this speech Quezon partly said : 

"More important than the great honor you have given me 
bv inviting me to be your guest of honor on this historic 
occasion is the opportunity for General Aguinaldo and myself 
to show to the nation that whenever the welfare of the country 
is at stake, he and I are together, working for a common cause. 

"The general mentioned in his speech our rivalry for the 
presidency in 1935, I wish to make it clear that he and I 
were never enemies. It was his duty, as it was mine and 
every other Filipino's, to offer his services to his people. It 
was likewise the duty of all of us to respect the decision of 
the people/' 

In the first presidential election in 1935, Quezon's ma- 
jor opponents were Aguinaldo and Bishop Gregorio Aglipay 
of the Philippine Independent Church. Although his politi- 
cal enemy, Quezon took active part in paying a last tribute 



137 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



to Aglipay, the spiritual leader of 1,600,000 Filipinos, upon 
his death. Quezon was suffering from a severe cold when 
the necrological services for the bishop were held at his 
cathedral. Yet he led Philippine officialdom and represent- 
ative elements of the Filipinos on this occasion, A big 
wreath "from President and Mrs, Manuel L. Quezon" was 
placed at the foot of the casket. 

Several prominent leaders of the Nacionalista party 
who joined the pro faction during the Hare-Hawes-Cuttin^ 
bill controversy became the virtual political enemies of Que- 
zon. Among them were Manuel Roxas, Rafael Pal ma, Ga- 
rni lo Osias, Honorio Ventura, and Benigno S. Aquino, who* 
as time passed, made peace with the leader. 

To Quezon was partly attributed the political ascen- 
dancy of President Manuel Roxas of the Philippine Republic. 
From being an obscure provincial governor of Capiz he 
made him the nation's idol when he catapulted him to power. 
Quezon helped Roxas become speaker of the Lower House 
of the Philippine Legislature for several terms. But when 
Roxas joined the pro faction his break with Quezon began. 
Nevertheless, they were soon reconciled. 

With the establishment of the Commonwealth, Roxas 
was again in the good graces of his former political boss. 
Quezon began to give a listening ear to his counsels on na- 
tional problems, especially on finance and economics. In 
1937 Roxas earned an appointment as member of the joint 
preparatory committee on Philippine affairs. Later he was 
commissioned to study the rice situation in the southern 
United States and to recommend American professors for 
the University of the Philippines. An ardent student of 
economics, Roxas was also appointed chairman of the Na- 
tional Economic Council, and subsequently made secretary 
of finance. 

When his birthday anniversary came on January 1, 
1941, Roxas received a piece of advice from Quezon w T ho 



138 



THE TRUE FRIEND AND NOBLE FOE 



greeted him as "My clear Manoling." "Don't work too hard, 
take care of your health, for the country will need your 
services fdr many years to come/' he counselled him. 

Another political leader who incurred the ire of Quezon 
was Carailo Osias who, as prewar chairman of the National 
Council of Education, was his adviser on educational mat- 
ters. Osias' most celebrated stand during his term as mem- 
ber of the first National Assembly against Quezon as his 
main target, was manifested in the case of former Judge 
Francisco Zandueta who was then being ousted from the 
iudiciary. He defended the venerable judge, fought his case 
sternly, but finally lost. For charging his enemies with 
^presidential dictation, legislative abdication, and judicial 
submission," a resolution, signed by 69 assemblymen, was 
passed censuring Osias' attitude and attack on Quezon. 

Then one sunny morning Osias was seen serenely walk- 
ing up to the Malacarian Palace. His presence there and a 
breakfast with Quezon indicated reconciliation, followed 
later by a trip to the United States. 

That Quezon was exceedingly human and that he never 
harbored any ill-feeling even for an adversary, manifested 
itself when he voluntarily offered one thousand pesos to 
defray the expenses for the funeral of the son of Osias. 
Quezon knew full well that the bereaved father had spent 
his last centavo to fight him. 

When Honorio Ventura was the secretary of the in- 
terior, he had the misfortune of joining the OSROX leader- 
ship of Osmena and Roxas. As a result he not only fell 
from the political grace of Quezon, but also heard Quezon 
attack him on the floor of the Senate. 

As a result Ventura left the government service. Later 
he was attacked with paralysis. Although still political 
enemies, when Quezon celebrated his birthday anniversary in 
1939, Ventura, in spite of his infirmity, made the trip to the 

139 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



Malacanan Palace to greet him. Upon learning* of his pres- 
ence on the ground floor of the palace and on being in- 
formed that Ventura could not come up to the reception 
room, Quezon went down to thank him for his personal 
felicitations. 

When Ventura died, a victim of a sudden heart attack, 
Quezon was among his mourners. Away from Manila at 
the time , Quezon rushed his return to the city, attended 
the necrological services at the Legislative building, and 
delivered a short oration in which he paid tribute to Ven- 
tura whom he described as one "whom we all really liked." 

Quezon was the political enemy who had a big heart 
so that he could easily forgive and promptly forget differ- 
ences and grudges. Above anything, it was the loyalty and 
friendship of the person that Quezon cared. For that mat- 
ter, many a political enemy soon found himself back, wor- 
shipping him, 

Elpidio Quirino, first vice president of the Republic of 
the Philippines, knew this best. In the election of 1938, 
Quirino launched his candidacy for a seat in the National 
Assembly, But he lost as the big moguls of Philippine pol- 
itics combined forces to defeat him. The cause was that he 
incurred the ire and displeasure of Quezon when, in a cam- 
paign speech, he attacked an administration bill which had 
become a law. Quirino was the private secretary of Quezon 
in the Senate from 1917 to 1919. It was Quezon who later 
made him run for the House of Representatives and then 
for the Senate- Under Quezon he held the portfolio of 
secretary of the interior. 

Forgetting soon their differences and realizing the in- 
justice done him, Quezon took Quirino back and later of- 
fered him the mayorship of Manila and the chairmanship 
of the Agricultural and Industrial Bank which were de- 
clined, and the positions of director of the National Devel- 



140 



THE TRUE FRIEND AND NOBLE FOE 



opment Company and of vice president of the Philippine 
National Bank which he accepted. 

Rafael Palma opposed Quezon in the Hare-Hawes- 
Cutting bill controversy. As a result he resigned as pres- 
ident of the University of the Philippines. But after the 
fight was over, Quezon got Palma to become the chairman 
of the National Council of Education, which position he 
held until his death in 1939. 

Quezon was vacationing aboard the presidential yacht. 
Ccunana, when Palma died. Out at sea, he issued this mes- 
sage : 

"With the death of Rafael Palma, the Philippines has lost 
a patriot, a scholar, and one of the nohlest characters that ever 
lived. He has joined the immortals, leaving us the example of 
a life devoted to the service of his country and his fellow- 
men. May he rest in peace 1 " 

A brilliant and an outstanding leader of prewar times 
was Benigno S. Aquino of Tarlac. Aquino severed his con- 
nections with Quezon also in the Hare-Hawes-Cutting bill 
issue. At the time that the Qsmena-Roxas mission was 
working for the passage of the measure in the Congress 
of the United States, Aquino was sent to America as Que- 
zon's personal representative to inform the missioners of 
his own views and desires. 

However, when the envoy returned to the Philippines 
he was more than convinced that the bill was good enough 
for the country, and so he abandoned Quezon and sided with 
the pros. This got the ire of Quezon and the two leaders 
broke relations. But Aquino was too good and valuable an 
asset to be lost by any thoughtful national leader like him- 
self. So, with the coalition of the anti and the pro factions 
later and the election of Aquino to the first National As- 
sembly, Quezon, as head of the Nacionatista party, made 
Aquino the national campaign manager of the party in the 



141 



MANUEL L, QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

election of 1938. Aquino handled the job so well that not 
one opposition candidate got a seat in the second National 
Assembly, 

Having won the praise of Quezon, Aquino was later 
made secretary of agriculture and commerce when this 
post became vacant in 1938. The opportunity to develop 
further his talent and to serve better his countrymen in 
the public service was given to Aquino once more following 
his reconciliation with Quezon. 

In 1923 Quezon, then the president of the Senate, fought 
tooth and nail to prevent the confirmation by the Senate 
of the appointment of Eulogio Rodriguez as mayor of Ma- 
nila. Rodriguez was a staunch Democrata leader* Quezon 
succeeded* The year was memorable because of the cabinet 
crisis in which the Filipino members resigned en masse as 
a protest against the reactionary policies of the late Gov- 
ernor General Wood. Included among those who resigned 
was Mayor Ramon Fernandez of Manila. The vacancy was 
offered by Wood to Rodriguez, then governor of Rizal, who 
accepted the post. Quezon thought that since the post was 
left by a Filipino, no other Filipino should occupy it. As a 
result, Rodriguez became his political enemy. 

But in the Hare-Hawes-Ctitting bill fight, the two 
leaders found themselves in complete accord in their views. 
Both men campaigned to reject the measure, and they were 
triumphant. Since then they came to understand each other 
more intimately* Quezon became fond of Rodriguez. To 
right a wrong which he thought he did Rodriguez some 13 
years before, Quezon named him first as secretary of agri- 
culture and commerce and then as mayor of Manila in 1940* 



142 



Chapter 15 

THE CHEERFUL PATIENT 

Never did I endure such tortures 
as when 1 was laid up in bed for 
siv months without moving my 
body, without even raising my 
head, 

—QUEZON 

ORDINARILY A patient takes the advice of his physician 
to the letter, But to Quezon, ill health and physicians' 
advice did not keep him from carrying on the heavy re- 
sponsibility and work of his office as long as he could do it. 
In his confinement — in the mountains of Switzerland, in 
a sanatorium in Monrovia, in the Johns Hopkins Hospital 
and the Philippine General Hospital, in his summer home 
in Baguio and his temporary residence in Quezon City — 
his days were full of activity. 

The Christmas season of 1940 found Quezon a sick man. 
Malacanan health bulletins announced daily his continued 
indisposition due to fever and coughing, Despite the ad- 
vices of his private physicians that he should rest, Quezon 
broke the rule repeatedly. He even macte history when, 
advised not to talk, he performed a ministerial duty by 
signs. With the aid of sign language he swore in to office 
Leon G. Gum to as secretary of labor and Camilo Osias as 
chairman of the National Council of Education. He waved 
his hand to his callers as he bade them come closer to him, 
raised his right hand when he heard the appointees read 
their oaths, then got his pen to sign the papers, and finally 
congratulated them. The guests left and not a word was 
uttered- 

Quezon fell ill on several occasions, and at times grave- 
ly so* Once his body was reduced almost to a skeleton so 



143 



MANUEL U QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



that he was carried down the gangplank of the ship that 
returned him to Manila from a trip abroad to recuperate. 
His indomitable will power, however, always transformed 
the sick man in Quezon into the miracle man of the century 
on many instances. 

His first recorded illness came during his student days 
in the San Juan de Letran College in Manila. Too poor to 
be a "professional student", he lived with an aunt in the 
Paco district, and every school day he walked the entire 
distance of several kilometers. "My classes started at seven 
o'clock in the morning, and I had to get up very early to 
be in my class on time/' Quezon revealed. 

His first major illness came during the Philippine Re~ 
volution. He suffered from malaria while in the field To 
enable him to undergo treatment in Manila, General Mas- 
cardo advised him to surrender to the Americans, which 
he did at Mariveles in 1899. 

After his release as a prisoner of war, Quezon was 
"admitted free of charge at the San Juan de Dios Hospital, 
thanks to the good offices of my Dominican professors and 
the generosity of Bishop Alcocer of the metropolitan of 
Manila/' recounted Quezon. "For a long time I was in the 
hospital until Dr. Singian took me to his house to live with 
him free of charge, and to be taken care of by him until I 
got well," Quezon was at the time very poor but kind 
friends saved him from sure death. 

From then on Quezon grew up to be a man full of 
vitality, and the vim and vigor of youth withstood him 
during all the years. But in 1927, while making a trip to 
the United States as co-chairman of the fourth Philippine 
independence mission, he suffered from lassitude, nausea, 
and pam in the chest. He mentioned these physical troubles 
to his friend, Chief Justice William Howard Taft, upon 
his arrival in New York, Upon Taffs suggestion, Quezon 



144 



THE CHEERFUL PATIENT 

visited the New York Institute of Health where, after a 
thorough examination by the physicians, he was informed 
that he was suffering from tuberculosis. 

Depressed over the outcome of the diagnosis, Quezon 
sought Dr. James Alexander Miller of New York, famous 
lung specialist, who subjected Him to another thorough 
examination of the lungs. Miller advised him to take com 
plete rest and treatment for one year, preferably at the 
Pottinger Sanatorium in Monrovia, California. The neces- 
sary arrangements for his accommodation were made. 

"When I entered his clinic, the sun was shining, the 
day was beautiful, and my spirits were high/' recounted 
Quezon, "but when Dr. Miller diagnosed me as positive 
for tuberculosis, I felt that the day had suddenly darkened, 
my ambition shattered, and my spirits depressed. The only 
thing that kept me from going apart was the assurance 
given by Dr. Miller that nobody died from tuberculosis 
when he had the will power to get well, and my own desire 
to fulfill my aspirations." 

Accompanying Quezon to the Miller clinic was Vi- 
cente G. Bunuan who noted the deep concern of the patient. 
"As we drove back to the Commodore Hotel where we were 
stopping, not a word passed between us, as the moment 
was too full of intense emotion for talk," Bunuan observed. 
"I could easily discern what was passing in the President's 
mind as it dawned upon him that a practically incurable 
disease had possessed him." 

His confinement in the sanatorium proved doubly 
fruitful to Quezon, for he soon temporarily recovered from 
the sickness, and at the same time he was able to study 
world affairs- Quezon digested thoroughly every book on 
history, politics, economics, and philosophy that was ob- 
tainable in the place. He also read biographies and detec- 
tive stories for relaxation. His assiduous reading rewarded 



145 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



him later, as when he first visited President Herbert Hoover 
in 1930, the American executive talked on the European 
economic situation and Quezon in turn displayed his knowl- 
edge of the subject by citing facts and figures. In his life- 
time, he stood as the best read man in the Philippines on 
politics and world events. 

For six months Quezon underwent all hardships and 
privation in the sanatorium. After his rest he came out a 
cured man "with spirits high and a feeling of being much 
younger in years/ 3 

Early in 1932 Quezon motored to Baguio for a pro- 
longed rest which he badly needed to cure him completely 
of the white plague. At the time he confessed to his at- 
tending physician. Dr. Andreas Trepp, tuberculosis special- 
ist in the Santol Sanatorium, that he would be contented 
and glad to live for three more years as by then he thought 
that Philippine conditions would be more stable, 

Trepp knew that what Quezon needed was a psycholo- 
gical cure rather than medical treatment; so he was bent 
on cheering him up and reviving in him interest in things 
beautiful. Once Quezon, Trepp, and Jacob Rosenthal went 
out motoring in Baguio. On the way Trepp greeted a wo- 
man walking on the street. Noticing her to be beautiful 
Quezon turned his head around to give her a long look. 
Since then his companions noted that "everything went 
fine with him/' 

It was also during this convalescing period of Quezon 
that the priest-press incident happened. One morning the 
doorbell of the Mansion House rang. The attending nurse 
answered the call. On returning to Quezon's bedside some 
minutes later, she told Quezon that someone wanted to see 
"the President/' 

"Who is it?" the patient inquired, 
"The press, Mr. President/' 



146 



THE CHEERFUL PATIENT 



Suddenly irritated, he waved his hand and ordered, 
"Tell the press to go to " 

Complying, the nurse told the caller what Quezon had 
said. Later in the afternoon Quezon learned that it was 
Rev. Fr. Serapio Tamayo, former rector of the University 
of Santo Tomas, that had made the call. But the defective 
pronunciation of the attendant made him mistake the priest 
for the gentlemen of the press. 

Then, in August, 1934, Quezon journeyed to Europe 
and the United States with Dr. Januario Estrada, famous 
Filipino surgeon, as travelling physician, in search of a 
treatment of his gallstones. 

Quezon first consulted the famed Professor Marion of 
Br oca Hospital in Paris who advised him to undergo an 
operation. Then he went to Professor Cossett who ad- 
monished him of the dangers of an operation. As the two 
French physicians held divergent opinions, the patient went 
to America. 

In New York city, Quezon would have been operated 
on by a Park Avenue doctor at the Doctor's Hospital for 
P24,000. But Dr. Victor Heiser, former director of health 
in the Philippines, suggested Di\ Hugh Hampton Young, 
famous urologist. Taking up the advice Quezon broke his 
appointment with the Park Avenue doctor for which he 
paid P600. Young would have charged him P20 3 000, his 
price for public men, but on his patient's protest he reduced 
it to one-hall But since in Paris Quezon would have been 
operated on for only F4,000, Young later agreed to accept 
the same fee. 

Quezon had unusual experiences with the different 
urologists he consulted. Asked what he would have to take, 
each physician prescribed a different drink as being good 
for his ailment. 



147 



MANUEL L, QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

"When I left Manila, doctors told me I could drink 
nothing intoxicating/' he said. "When I reached Java I 
saw a doctor and he said 'a glass of beer would not hurt/ 
So I drank beer from Java to Paris, In Paris another doctor 
said : 'You should not drink beer, wine is the only thing.' So 1 
changed gratefully to white wine. Then a French specialist 
told me: 'You should drink only champagne, it is the only 
thing for you/ So I drank champagne for a time. 

"Then I reached the United States, and there my phy- 
sicians told me: 'Don't drink any wine and beer at all- 
Whisky is the only proper drink. 5 So now, if I want a drink, 
all I have to do is to decide which physician I will obey." 

On October 26, Quezon underwent the operation by Dr. 
Young at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Young 
successfully removed a gallstone from his ureter. 

Of this delicate operation, Quezon himself gave this 
vivid and interesting account: 

"I told them in the hospital that prisoners convicted to 
the death penalty are usually given whatever food they ask 
for the day before their execution. Well, the night before my 
operation I wanted adobo above everything else and asked that 
adobo be served to me as my dinner. In Washington they had 
to search high and low for a Filipino cook, and the adobo once 
prepared was rushed to the hospital in Baltimore, 

'I flid not want to worry my wife, so when I entered 
the hospital in New York, where I went first, I asked my phy- 
sician to register me under another name. But the name he 
chose was Joe Brown, and who would take me for a Brown? 
Besides, apparently they had seen my pictures in the papers, 
and one of the nurses approached me with a twinkle in her 
eyes and whispered, 4 Are yon really Mr, Brown?' 

"I never said a word to my wife about the operation. 
When I registered in the hospital at Baltimore, I did not want 
to take any chances* I feared my doctor would give me another 
American name if I asked him to give me a fictitious name, 
so I registered as Pedro Lopez, and Pedro Lopez I was until 
the newspapermen discovered I was there. 



148 



THE CHEERFUL PATIENT 



"When I was taken into the operating room and I saw 
Nieto, Estrada, Ehrman, and others who were with me with 
long faces, I cracked jokes right and left to cheer them up. 
The doctors wanted to fool me by making it appear that I 
was going to be placed under anesthesia. One of the nurses 
had a piece of cotton covering my nose with some fake ether. 
I tried to inhale as deeply as I could but when after several 
seconds I felt I was not falling asleep, I peremptorily ordered 
the nurse to quit fooling me and to remove the cotton— which 
she did immediately, 

"Then I saw the reflector right above me and everything 
that the surgeon was doing was reflected there, so I watched 
the reflector and was an interesting spectator of my own 
operation, until the nurses caught sight of my eye and seeing 
what was happening placed a bandage on my eyes. All the 
time I was not feeling any pain. After 12 minutes of opera- 
tion, Dr. Estrada approached me and I asked him in Tagalog: 
Ana ba, dak tor, ano bang Icalohohan ang gumgawa pa dian! 
(Well, doctor, what foolishness are they still doing there!) 
to which he answered that the stone had already been removed. 
When the last stitches were being placed I felt the pain, and 
then I told the doctor it was time to stop. 

"The following day after the operation, I talked to my 
wife over the radiophone, and two days afterward I was al- 
ready working full blast, dictating letters and reading books, 
so much so that I had a slight relapse, and the doctor had to 
give me strict orders to quit dictating and have complete rest," 

Of the Quezon case, Dr. Young included an account of 
it in his remarkable book, entitled A Surgeon's Autobio- 
graphy. "When President Quezon arrived at the hospital/ 7 
related Young, "he was accompanied by a large staff and 
required a suite of rooms. When his numerous bags were 
opened, an orderly assisting was struck dumb when he saw 
a machine gun in one of them. The day of the operation his 
physician (Dr. Januario Estrada) asked me if two of Mr. 
Quezon's staff might be present at the operation. He as- 
sured me that, although they were not doctors, they would 
not faint at the sight of blood. During the operation I saw 
these small, dark-eyed men watching me intently. They left 
the operating room when the patient was taken back to the 
ward. Some physicians who witnessed the operation re- 



149 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



ported to me that as they came clown the steps to the operat- 
ing room these men had stopped them, quizzed them, and 
searched them for arms. I wonder what would have hap- 
pened to me had the patient died on the table/ 1 

Quezon wrote two letters before he was operated on. 
One was addressed to Mrs. Quezon, whom ho called his 
"sweetheart," and his three children; the other to the 
Filipino people. Both were handed to Major Manuel Nieto, 
his aide-de-camp, with instructions to deliver them imme- 
diately upon his death. Since Quezon survived the opera- 
tion and soon recovered completely from his ailment, the 
letters were never delivered. It was only in 1947 that their 
contents were revealed to the general public. Shown for 
the first time to Mrs. Quezon, "they brought tears to her 
eyes/' Both were written by Quezon in long hand in Ta- 
galogv The messages follow in full: 

First Message: TO THE FILIPINO PEOPLE 

"I have served you, land that I love, to the lull extent 
of my capacity. You in turn have shown me a true and sin- 
cere faith, I will never forget till the last beat oC my heart 
what you have shown me. I regret that I cannot be with you 
in the fortunate hour when you will be wholly free. But ymi 
are almost there and have to go but a short way. 

"So that the lives that were given up for you be not 
brought to naught and so that you as well as your sons may 
profit from the freedom that you will very soon receive, my 
last words to you are: 

"1} Value your honor, freedom and independence, fight 

for them to the last. 
"2) Always remember that you are one nation and your 
unity is the source of your strength, peace and 
happiness. 

"3) Do not pay heed to evil counsel, couched in beauti- 
ful words by those who wish for nothing but self- 
aggrandizement. 

"4) Regard America as the true ally of the Philippines 
w " and adopt the policy never to quarrel with America, 



150 



THE CHEERFUL PATIENT 



"5) Beware of Japan. Let us not be wanting in fair 
dealing with her but we should never permit our- 
selves to be under her. We will not profit from it, 

"6) Be at peace with every nation, but from anyone ex- 
cept America ask nothing, 

"7) Be mindful of our indebtedness to Spain. The 
Spaniards have an affection far us, 

"Farewell, dear Motherland. Pray to God for me. And 
in Him repose your hope. He is most powerful and He is the 
origin and source of happiness. No nation will prosper and 
be happy that is without faith in God, or who forgets Him. 

"My God, bless my native land, 

"MANUEL L, QUEZON," 



Second Message; TO HIS FAMILY 

"October 23, 1934. 

"My sweetheart: 

"I have just arrived here at the Hospital. I have to be 
operated on because the stone is big and they say it cannot 
pass through the ureter. It is indeed very fortunate that 
I did not return (to the Philippines) from Java, for had I 
returned I surely would have died for no one there could 
have performed the operation. 

"My operation will take place the day after tomorrow. 
It is well that you are not here so that you may be saved 
from worry and trouble and you will only know when I am 
already well by the help of God. 

"I am not worried about what would happen to me, 
because they say that the operation will not be difficult and 
Dr. Young is the best of all in this kind of operation. And 
above all I have faith in God who is most powerful. Never- 
theless, should any eventuality happen to me, I leave to you 
the care of our children. Have courage because if you fall 
sick no one will look after our children, 

"I regret that I have not dedicated my life to you and 
to our children, and yet it was you who gave me the strength 
to continue my services to our Motherland, 

"My life— I will not make this letter very long because 
I must not be worried, and during the operation I have to 
be in high spirits. To the few words I say, add the rest. 



151 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



"Forgive me for all my faults. My love for you has never 
changed. My lioart and life are for you alone. No wife 
could have equalled you in kindness and in everything. All 
the happiness I received came from you. Now at this hour 
believe what I say because it comes from the deepest part 
of my sou!, 

"Pray for me and, our children, pray tor me, I am 
kissing, embracing you all, and praying to God for all of 
us. If this be the end, then I will be waiting for you in 
the peace of heaven, and I will never forget to watch over 
you and through the Almighty to deliver you from all evil. 

"Farewell — my life, 

"MANUEL 

"Baby, Nini, Nonong: 

"My beloved children, 

"Be good. Obey the wishes of your mother and love 
one another. 

"Pray for your father and forgive him. 

"Till heaven, my loved ones. 

"Your father, 

"This will not be placed in the mails if the result of 
the operation is successful. 

"Same," 



After two weeks in confinement, Quezon left the hos- 
pital a perfectly well man, 

Quezon remained healthy and well for some years. 
But in 1937 he underwent an operation for appendicitis 
on November 23 at the Philippine General Hospital. Late 
one night during his confinement -his temperature suddenly 
rose, followed by an attack of chills with profuse sweating, 
which kept him awake the whole night. 

Although shaking with fever, Quezon jokingly told 
Dr. Antonio G, Sison: "No, this can't be anything serious. 
For wouldn't it be tragic that the head of a nation should 
die because of a small wound?" But when the chills con- 



152 



THE CHEERFUL PATIENT 



tinued, he confidentially and seriously whispered again to 
his head physician: "I want you to be frank with me. If 
you think I will lose consciousness, please let me know. 
There are certain important statements I must make to 
you before that happens/' 

However, his temperature soon returned to normal. 
Then he joked with Mrs, Quezon, "Aurora, the funeral has 
been postponed for six months." 

During the operation the patient suffered some pain. 
So after the operation Dr. Antonio Vazquez apologized 
grandly. Quezon then consoled his physician, saying thai 
•'performing an operation is not so easy as making love/' 

As Quezon seldom visited the hospital, the medical and 
nursing staffs did not know what to do with him when he 
was confined. To end all the fuss being made over him, 
he told his nurse, "Treat me like any ordinary Juan de la 
Cruz*" 

Strict silence was maintained both inside and outside 
the hospital during his conf inement Motorists driving past 
the institution were prohibited to blow loud their horns. 
Policemen patrolled the corridor outside the sick man's room 
to keep the people out. For lack of adequate accommoda- 
tions befitting his exalted position, the office of the hos- 
pital director was transformed into a patient room for him. 
Out of respect for him, the Popular Front and other oppo- 
sition leaders stopped all attacks against Quezon. 

On his part, as soon as he got a little better and could 
do light work, Quezon resumed his duties. Flowers sent 
him by friends and admirers, he ordered distributed among 
Manila churches and the poor wards of the hospital. The 
newspapers were read to him; a radio set furnished musical 
entertainment, His intimate friends took turns in watching 
him at night. "Now t , I can live!" he exclaimed. 



153 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



That operation was a blessing in disguise to the hos- 
pital and the people. One morning while Quezon was being 
taken around the hospital buildings in his wheelchair, ho 
asked Director Sison about the facilities obtaining in the 
institution. No sooner than told, Quezon had the National 
Assembly appropriating money for the construction of ad- 
ditional new buildings and for the maintenance of more 
beds in the free wards. 

Strong and robust, Quezon kept himself physical ly 
sound by playing golf, swimming, riding horseback, and 
walking early in the morning. 

Until 1940 Quezon was hale and hearty. An X-ray 
examination made by Drs. Antonio G. Sison and Miguel 
Canizares and Major Hutter at the Quezon Institute showed 
that his lungs, aorta, and heart were in perfect condition. 
Although pronounced well he was advised to get more sleep 
and rest. While sleep was truly necessary for a man as 
busy as Quezon, the important problems of state pressing 
him for decision and action prevented him from taking 
longer rest. He was usually up at 5:30 o'clock in the morn- 
ing to start the day's work and he retired late in the night. 

In November of that year, the bustling Quezon became 
ill again. First he was confined in his bed in the Malacanan 
Palace troubled by a severe cold. Advised by his physicians 
to cancel all appointments, he limited his activities in the 
palace to reading and chatting frequently with his children. 

While he was recuperating he stayed aboard the pres- 
idential yacht, Casiana. But before Christmas he suffered 
a relapse and had to return to the palace for a rest. Later, 
for a change of environment and to relieve him of his cough 
and daily fever, he was transferred to a temporary res- 
idence in Quezon city where the air is cool and dry. 

As Manila began to swelter in the summer of 1941, 
Quezon, together with his family and physicians, boarded 



154 



THE CHEERFUL PATIENT 



a special train at nine o'clock in the night for Baguio. It 
was the first long trip since his recent illness. In Baguio 
he got on his feet again after more than four months of 
confinement in bed. The Mansion House proved an ideal 
place for Quezon. To give him ample rest and plenty of 
quiet, the traffic on Leonard Wood road was detoured, and 
sight-seers in the vicinity were prohibited. 

Two months later, Quezon returned to Manila and went 
directly to his Marikina home to rest. In later days he 
motored to the Quezon Institute together with his physi- 
cians for his periodic examinations. An X-ray of his chest 
during one of these visits showed amazingly his recupera- 
tive powers. His physicians found out that the inflammatory 
processes in both lungs had subsided and had healed rapid- 
ly. In his 20-iminute visit Quezon appeared in excellent 
spirits: he did not use his portable wheelchair, but walked 
unassisted direct to the X-ray department; he disdained 
wearing the X-ray gown, and went bareback to the X-ray 
stand. He had lively conversations with Drs. Canizares and 
Trepp. When a doctor brought out a dripping X-ray picture 
from the processing room, he asked, "How is it?" "A great 
improvement, sir!" the physician replied. By regaining 
more pounds since his -recovery, Quezon went back to his 
normal weight of 154 pounds. 

Quezon kept his people worried during his sickness. 
On the other hand, Quezon was heartened to receive wishes 
of his speedy recovery from them. Such resolutions and 
messages usually came from provincial boards, municipal 
and city councils, political groups, labor unions, etc. Kind 
expressions from the opposition parties particularly touched 
him. 

The people went to pray for the restoration of his 
health. Even in the remote barrio schools, the teachers and 
pupils dedicated a one-minute silence during the flag cere- 



155 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



mony in the morning for a prayer for Quezon. This was 
regularly done until he had fully recovered. 

That time of his appendectomy in 1937, the Manila 
police were ordered by their chief to stand at attention 
several times during the day at the police precincts and 
offices "with eyes left, right hands clasping the heart, and 
helmets carried under the left armpits," as their sergeants 
recited a prayer for Quezon and policemen followed "de- 
votedly and reverentially." 

In 1940, when Quezon got sick, Malacanan received a 
letter from the nuns of the Santa Clara monastery saying 
that, in spite of their seclusion, they prayed for the imme- 
diate and complete restoration of his health. The late 
Bishop James P, McClosky, of the diocese of Jaro, ordered 
all priests under him to hold daily church prayers for Que- 
zon. To all people from Tayabas anywhere, January 23, 
1941, was a day of prayer for the recovery of Quezon. The 
people of Imus, Cavite, gathered in a public meeting one 
night, prayed and observed a one-minute silence. 

Even the non-Christian population said prayers for 
him. Prominent Moro leaders and their high priests gath- 
ered in the residence of the late Senator Hadji Butu in 
Jolo and invoked the aid of Mohammed for the sake of a 
Christian brother, during a prayer for Quezon. 



156 



Chapter 16 

THE ASSIDUOUS READER 

Good books arc among the best 
friends we can have. 

—QUEZON 

UPON WAKING up early in the morning the first thing 
Quezon did was to get hold of a book and read it. He cul* 
tivated this habit for many years. From book reading he 
was able to build up his private library which at the out- 
break the World War II in 1941 consisted of several thou- 
sand choice volumes on different subjects. 

He was one man who believed that "the best leader is 
the one best informed. He is also the best citizen, 5 ' Quezon 
likewise believed that books which are the lights of civili- 
zation stimulate the mind, satisfy the thirst for knowledge, 
and make man happy. "Their companionship is very satis- 
fying both to the mind and to the soul," according to him. 

A few days after completing his first year as president 
of the Philippines in 1936, he issued a proclamation 
designating the period from November 24 to 30 of each 
year, beginning in 1937, as National Book Week. "The 
reading of good books or the printed page," he declared, 
"is one of the most effective methods of bringing enlighten- 
ment within the reach of the largest possible number of 
people, and of promoting the cause of popular culture with 
its tremendous social benefits." In creating the book week, 
Quezon encouraged and aroused widespread interest in the 
reading of good books by his people. 

In 1928 Quezon became critically ill in the Monrovia 
Sanatorium. As he was hot allowed to work, he took to 
reading the volumes on religious literature obtainable in 



157 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

the institution. On this occasion he came across the book 
which provided him with food for thought. For many days 
and nights he contemplated over his spiritual problems. 
Then he made his fateful decision to renounce Freemasonry 
and to return to the Roman Catholic faith. 

A book addict, Quezon always devoured the libraries of 
homes he occupied, be it in the United States or in the 
Philippines. In 1928, when he attended the national Re- 
publican convention which nominated President Hoover, 
he leased the house that was previously occupied by his 
arch enemy, the late Governor General Wood, in Kansas 
city, Quezon found the Wood library still intact in the 
house. When he examined the books Quezon discovered 
that most of them dealt with military discipline. Then and 
there he reached the conclusion that the kind of books the 
old general liked explained why they differed so greatly 
in their views on the administration of public affairs. 

In his constant reading, Quezon was influenced by 
some well-known authors to a certain extent. Of the Amer- 
ican writers he had a personal liking for Mark Twain. Just 
what branches of literature Quezon desired for his reading, 
he made known thus: 

"Dating back to my youthful years, I have always had an 
extreme fondness for knowing the lives of great men; and this 
personal trait, whkh has kept up with the years, gave me time 
to read either the biographies or autobiographies of practically 
all of the historical figures and prominent personages of ancient 
and modern times, 

"Reading about their failures and achievements, and their 
strengths and weaknesses, has enabled me to shape and pursue 
what is today my life's career— a devoted public service to my 
people — by steering clear from what appeared to have been tri- 
vial errors that had caused downfalls, and learning the lessons 
that had given success and renown to others, 

"Next to reading biographical books, I hold more than a 
partial liking for humorous literature. I can still remember 
with more than a smile the naughty escapades of Tom Sawyer 



158 



THE ASSIDUOUS READER 



and Huck Finn, and of the boyish pranks that filled several 
chapters of Mark Twain's The Prince and the Pauper. Humor 
that is clean and wholesome has always helped me solve diffi- 
cult and, at times, trying problems which usually confront a 
man who finds himself the head of a nation." 

Quezon also had great admiration for George Wash- 
ington both as man and as leader. His personal collection 
of the works and writings of the great American president 
was very extensive and was considered the best. He started 
building up his Washington library at the time he entered 
the government service, and his readings on him greatly 
influenced Quezon in his works as president of the Philip- 
pines. For this reason, there existed a close similarity in 
ideas, thoughts, activities, and accomplishments between 
the two statesmen, 

Quezon loved the companionship of good books. To 
him "our lives become lifted up by the galvanizing contact 
with the best minds produced by the human race" whether 
one reads literature, history, or natural or social science. 

As a book lover, Quezon saw to it that only good books 
came to his attention. He had no use for the cheap, bad 
books. Because he was very discriminating in his acquisi- 
tion of knowledge, he lamented the increasing number of 
magazines and books of the wrong type imported into the 
Philippines and circulated among the people, particularly 
the young boys and girls. On the selection of a book for 
reading, Quezon said : 

"Tiic choice of books is as hard and delicate as the choice 
of friends* For a bad book is in life a false friend— destructive 
and pernicious, 

"As we open the covers of a good book, we seem to open 
the portals of civilization and culture, A world of ideas offers 
itself to our perspective. Before our eyes is unfolded the epic 
of mankind's forward march toward perfection. We realize 
with comfort that each nation has always reached out for its 
high mission to contribute its genius to the world's progress. 
Modern civilization is after all the magnificent blending of all 



159 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

these national self-expressions. And as the day for our free- 
dom approaches, lei us enrich our national life with the culture 
of the world, so that whatever contribution to civilization the 
future may develop out of Filipino life will be enduring- and 
constructive," 

Quezon was taking his early morning stroll on the New 
Luneta and Dewey boulevard when he confessed he "wa« 
thrilled to see many students engrossed in their reading, 
seated under the shade of the trees, and receiving the morn- 
ing breeze." Forthwith he wrote the mayor of Manila 
asking him to "improve that path all along the seawall, by 
leveling the ground and planting more trees/' 

Quezon's numerous duties as president did not prevent 
him from not letting a day pass without reading. He was 
up-to-date in his reading as he got the first copy of any new 
book that arrived in the Philippines. Once his medical 
adviser brought with him a book on socialized medicine to 
be read by Quezon during his leisure moments. When the 
copy was shown to him he told his medical adviser, "I read 
that book a year ago." 

It was only when he was seriously ill that Quezon put 
his books aside, but as soon as his health was on the up 
grade again, he had the attending nurse read aloud to him. 
At one time Quezon had Boris Souvarine's Stalin read to 
him. He kept on listening until he dozed. When a friend 
saw him dozing, Quezon wisecracked: "Yes, Stalin lulls 
me to sleep." 

Quezon also kept pace with current events and affairs 
by reading all important newspapers regularly and thor- 
oughly. One Saturday morning he read the book review 
of David T. Boguslav in the pre-war Tribune on "Mark 
Twain in Eruption," a new collection of unpublished works 
of the American humorist and novelist. In the review 
Boguslav referred to Senator Clark of Montana as the same 
senator who sponsored the Clarke amendment to the Jones 
act Quezon detected the error. So, one hour later, Bo- 



160 



THE ASSIDUOUS READER 



guslav's telephone rang, and at the other end was Dr. Mi- 
guel Canizares, personal physician of Quezon* "President 
Quezon/' he said, "wants you to know that it was Senator 
Clarke of Arkansas, not Senator Clark of Montana, who 
sponsored the Clarke amendment." 

Books were a welcome gift to Quezon on Christmas and 
on his birthday anniversary. Friends and admirers who 
knew of his fondness for good books presented him with 
nice volumes. 

A librarian and some assistants took care of the Que- 
zon private library, The ex-libris of Quezon was affixed 
on the front inside cover of every book purchased for his 
collection. The library consisted mostly of biographies of 
great men and contemporary leaders, of books dealing with 
the different systems of government in the world today, 
as well as with economics, politics, philosophy, history, and 
social sciences. 

The books of Quezon were found wherever he stayed. 
Although his main private library was stored in a spacious 
room in the Malacanan Palace adjacent to his bedroom, he 
also maintained small collections on his farmstead in Fam- 
panga, in his suite aboard the presidential yacht, Casiana, 
in his office in the Executive Building, and in his nipa hut 
on the Malacanan park. 

On the eve of the war in 1941, he was reading various 
books dealing with different forms of government, espe- 
cially socialism and communism. It was said that Quezon's 
social justice program was patterned after the best pro- 
jects started and operated by foreign governments in Europe 
of which he read in several books. 

Through the initiative and influence of Quezon, the 
other members of his family kept their own libraries, Mrs, 
Quezon's collection consisted of some thousand books and 
counted with rare Filipiniana volumes. Their children had 
book shelves filled with their own individual choices. 



161 



Chapter 17 
THE ENTHUSIASTIC SPORTSMAN 



THE LOVE for sports was in Quezon's blood. As early as 
1887, when he was a student in the San Juan de Let ran 
College, he already indulged in gymnastics and swimming, 
and in using parallel bars. Since then he became an en- 
thusiastic follower of many kinds of sports. 

He devoted whatever spare time he could snatch from 
his public duty to athletics; an.d athletics was mainly re- 
sponsible for the well-built and fine physique which kept 
him vigorous and healthy until his old age. Not only did 
Quezon look after his personal development, but he also 
showed time and again his great interest in the promotion 
of athletics among the youth of the land. 

In many ways he helped the cause of sports. He was 
donor of several symbolic trophies. He was, an interested 
spectator of many spectacular games. He obliged many a 
sports organizer to be his guest, He authorized the use 
of his name in the cause of sports. He acceded to become 
an official of several athletic organizations. He was a 
consistent well-wisher of individual sportsmen in the Phil- 
ippines who showed promise of becoming great some day. 

Quezon personally indulged in various games. He 
played golf, took to horse-back riding, and went swimming 
regularly. Sportsminded, Quezon accepted the honorary 
presidency of the Philippine Amateur Athletic Federation 
(PAAF) . In appreciation of his deep concern with athletics, 
the Bureau of Education honored him by calling the 
opening day of the 1940 national inter-scholastic games held 
in Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija, Quezon Day, On his part, 
Quezon took pride in tossing the first ball at baseball cham- 
pionship games in Manila. 



162 



THE ENTHUSIASTIC SPORTSMAN 



Ever desirous of giving his people the opportunity to 
see the best of sports played in the Philippines, Quezon 
invited the countries that participated in the East Asia 
Memorial Games Meet, composed of China, Hawaii, Japan, 
and Manchukuo, to hold their next meet in Manila, 

Quezon also donated the championship trophies for 
two most outstanding sports events played in Manila in 
pre-war years. The President Quezon Trophy was awarded 
to the victor in the traditional Ateneo-De la Salle basketball 
classics. The second trophy was at stake every year for the 
national open polo championship held at the Los Tamaraos 
IX)] o field- The polo- championship was always a big event 
in the Philippine sports world as internationally-known 
poloists participated. This Quezon cup, symbolic of Phil- 
ippine and Far Eastern polo supremacy, was personally 
Presented by Quezon to the winners. 

A swimmer of no mean ability, Quezon manifested his 
interest in swimming even during his presidential terms. 
To this end he donated P20,000 for the construction of a 
swimming pool in Nueva Ecija. Being a swimming addict; 
Quezon nearly lost his life in his boyhood days when one 
Friday morning he was tossed by the big waves of the sea 
in Baler bay while he was taking a bath with other young 
companions. 

Boxing was another sport of which Quezon was an 
enthusiast. He attended important international ring pro- 
grams. At the bout between Luis Logan of Manila and 
Glen Lee of Nebraska for the middleweight championship 
of the Orient, he had a special box at the ringside. In ^ 39 
when the Ceferino Garcia-Glen Lee bout for the middle- 
weight championship of the world was staged, Quezon, 
together with his family, stayed throughout the matches 
despite the heavy rain, Quezon also headed the thousands of 
sports fans that jammed the auditorium at Cebu City when 
the visiting American Redheads played softball with the 
Cebu champions, 

163 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



An able rider, Quezon encouraged the development of 
horseback racing in the Philippines, To place horse racing 
on a high standard, he created the horse race commission. 
He often witnessed horse races and the sweepstakes race in 
Manila. As horseback riding was his favorite sport, he 
maintained a stable of fine horses which he used time -and 
again, especially in his early morning rides in the country 
or in the Malacanan park. 

Golf was another sport in which he indulged. Although 
he did not play golf regularly, he displayed fine form; and 
at an exhibition game at the formal inauguration of the 
new Tagaytay golf course, Quezon drew a beautiful shot 
of about 200 yards from the No. 1 tee. When he saw that 
his ball want straight as an arrow, Quezon beamed with 
a true golfer's pride. 

But what kept Quezon lively and happy was the mass 
playground demonstration staged annually by thousands 
of boys and girls of the Manila public schools at the Rizal 
memorial stadium. He loved to see national folk dances 
performed and mass gymnastics staged by young children 
in colorful costumes. 

In his desire to give a beautiful park to the poor chil- 
dren of Manila, Quezon cleared the Sunken gardens for use 
as a playground for children and drill ground for cadets 
of the Reserve Officers Training Corps (ROTC) of the 
different universities and colleges an Manila, 

Quezon never underestimated the educational value of 
athletics. He believed that athletics, especially among the 
school children, can "promote social intercourse, refine the 
conduct of the players, and correct their attitude towards 
life. It can instill in their minds the spirit of fair and honest 
rivalry and thus contribute directly to the development of 
good character," 



164 




President Quezon loved dogs as this rare photograph shows. 



Chapter 18 



THE TIRELESS WORKER 



It is very hard to see the President 
of the Philippines. He is quite a 
busy man. 

—QUEZON 

TO THE man-in-the-street, the life of the President ap- 
pears to be a "soft" and easy one. He thinks the Pres- 
ident is his own boss, that he can do what he likes when 
he likes because he is not at anyone's beck and call. But the 
man-in-the-street is wrong-. For Quezon, the President, 
was really a servant of the people. He devoted his hours 
to their welfare, so that his workday was full to the brim 
with activity. 

Pressure of official business often kept Quezon busy 
throughout the day and far into the night. This made it 
difficult for either private individuals or public officials 
to call on him in the Executive Building unless his advice, 
action, or decision on some weighty matter was urgently 
needed. 

Quezon was one government official who was an ex- 
ception because he observed no office hours. His daily 
work, Sundays included, started from early morning and 
continued for 16 hours although a 20-hour stretch of work 
at the office was not unusual with him. During these hours 
he held important appointments with government officials, 
provincial delegations, and private persons, including just 
plain Juan de la Cruz who usually had a hardluck story to 
bolster up a request for employment. He also spent time, 
much time, to read, study, revise, correct, and sign gov- 
ernment documents, official papers, reports, and memo- 
randa. 



165 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

Because it was Quezon's habit always to act on things 
as they came and with speed, even as he bathed he dictated 
letters to his stenographer who stayed outside the bath- 
room door. When Quezon motored to the provinces, the 
stenographer sat beside him taking down Quezon's dicta- 
tion. 

Unmindful of his sleep, Quezon woke up at all times 
of the night to study important papers which needed his 
action either in his office or in his private study in the 
Malacanan Palace. Jorge B. Vargas, his secretary, was 
often awakened from his Kawilihan home because Quezon 
wanted his assistance in solving knotty national problems. 
The Malacanan servant detailed at Quezon's library room 
always found the President already engrossed in the read- 
ing of a voluminous pile of papers as early as five o'clock 
in the morning when the houseboy started sweeping and 
mopping the room. 

His multifarious problems were never to him impar- 
tially and judiciously settled until he had exhausted all the 
most authoritative sources available and known to him. So, 
if he was seeking a solution to a labor problem, Quezon went 
directly to the capitalists, laborers, and their leaders, as 
well as to his secretary of labor. 

One Sunday, as he was preparing an important paper 
on the coconut oil excise tax fund, it occurred to Quezon 
that an article in a foreign magazine carried statements 
which he wanted to refute. As there was no copy in the 
Malacanan library he asked the director of National Library 
to locate the magazine in his office. Quezon waited for the 
issue before completing his work on this matter- 
Quezon met the newspapermen in a press conference 
whenever he thought it necessary or when some visiting 
journalists asked for an interview. H, Ford Wilkins, editor 
of the Manila Daily Bulletin, observed on Quezon's behav- 
ior during his short interview with him thus: 



166 



THE TIRELESS WORKER 

"It was an informal interview with ail essentially human 
man* He sat in his office at Malacanan behind his broad frlass- 
topped desk, occasionally lighting a cigarette and inhaling 
deeply. The hour was nine in the morning, and the President 
had been riding, one of his most frequent and best enjoyed 
diversions. He apologized with a smile for appearing in riding 
boots, breeches, and a polo shirt. In his absorption of thought 
the President frequently twisted in his chair and ^azed out 
across the Pasig river. 

"The President's personal physician. Dr. Antonio VasqueZi 
entered the room for his daily visit. The President nodded to 
him and kept on talking, while Dr* Vasquez laid down his 
medical kit, opened it, and prepared some bandages and gauze, 
The index finger on the President's right hand had become 
infected slightly and he wore a small bandage. Without in- 
terrupting the President's train of thought or his conversa- 
tion, Dr. Vasquez deftly clipped off the old bandage, looked at 
the offending member, whose condition appeared to give him 
satisfaction, and bound it up again. Still without interrupting 
the conversation, Br. Vasquez repacked his kit, said 'Goodbye, 
Mr. President', and took his departure." 

His industry was nationally recognized. His efficiency 
was a by- word. Time and again Quezon added to his heavy 
responsibilities those of several department secretaries. 
When the secretary of labor left for Soviet Russia, his was 
the fifth cabinet portfolio that Quezon took up. Already 
he had those of the secretary of the interior, secretary of 
justice, secretary of agriculture and commerce, and secre- 
tary of public instruction at the time. As he assumed this 
additional burden, he saw to it that the efficiency in the 
work of these different government entities was not im- 
paired. 

Commenting on his industry, endurance and persever- 
ance, the Philippines Free Press, an American weekly, said 
editorially of him: 

"It's a pretty hard job . , . For it's action, action, action 
all the time, and, when the need calls, very prompt and deci- 
sive action. Apparently, 'fumbling* is not found in the Quezon 
lexicon. 



167 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

"Reviewing . . . the entire record since his inauguration 
some four years ago, is it any wonder that so many people 
feel that there will never be another Quezon and that, having 
such a President, they want to keep him?" 

Quezon used the presidential breakfast, which was 
generally informal, in threshing out important public ques- 
tions with government officials. On the other hand, he ten- 
dered luncheons and dinners in honor of high personages 
of the government, diplomats from foreign countries, or 
distinguished internationally-known visitors. Even in these 
formal occasions Quezon usually took advantage to fur- 
ther cement the cordial relations existing between the Phil- 
ippines and friendly countries represented by his guests. 

In his public appointments Quezon was very punctual. 
To his numerous callers from all walks of life, he was cor- 
dial, and he was attentive to their problems. Generally 
matters brought to his attention were decided quickly and 
satisfactorily on the spot, so that his callers left with full 
knowledge of the results of their visits. 

Once an assemblyman who wanted to see Quezon on 
an important matter found him occupied in an equally im- 
portant conference of high government officials. The caller 
waited patiently, Shortly after noon, Quezon left the con- 
ference and to his surprise saw a large gathering of men 
with the assemblyman greeting him. Knowing that they 
had waited for him for almost three hours, Quezon was 
very apologetic, then sat clown and attended to their prob- 
lems until they were threshed out definitely and satisfac- 
torily. 

During his administration, Quezon discovered that his 
greatest burden came from office seekers. He confessed that 
90 per cent of the matters brought to his attention by the 
assemblymen, governors, or political leaders consisted of 
requests for jobs for their supporters. Sometimes the job- 
seeker himself saw the President, 



16S 




President Quezon signing official papers. Note how 

he held his pen. 




.- 



THE TIRELESS WORKER 

He admitted having acquired varied experiences from 
job-seekers. He learned that they wanted any kind of work. 

"What do you mean?" he usually asked them, "Can 
you do all kinds of jobs?" When they replied in the affirma- 
tive, Quezon remarked: "You are a wonderful fellow. I 
cannot understand why a man of your marvelous ability 
eon not have a job/' 

If they still insisted on getting any work that would 
give them a salary, Quezon put in this test: "All right, if 
you really need work and want to work, go to the city 
mayor and apply for the work of a street cleaner, After fif- 
teen days come back to me and I will give you a job," No 
one ever came back, he reported, 

Quezon had a broad glass-topped desk in his office in 
the Executive Building. Through white Venetian blinds the 
morning sun streamed into the room. From his office the 
Pasig river which flows past the palace could be seen. An 
American and a Filipino flag stood from stacks behind him. 
In front of him across the room hung a big framed portrait 
painting of Dr. Jose Rizal, Filipino patriot and martyr. 

"The term of office of the President of the Philippines 
is long, six years/' declared Quezon, "and his hours of work 
are long, his work very hard. It requires many hours and 
constant application of the mind to public affairs, The 
President of the Philippines is quite a busy man. Much as 
he loves to be with people, he cannot spend all his time 
talking to his friends, I should like very much to see them, 
but sometimes my public duties do not permit me — I have 
no time, no material time to see them/' 



169 



Chapter 19 

THE BELOVED EMPLOYER 

I have a very soft heart but I have 
a strong will power r and 1 wilt not 
help a boy to become lazy and 
easy-going* 

— Q UEZQS 

QUEZON WAS virtually Employer No. One in the gov- 
ernment service during his administration. He saw to 
it that deserving individuals were given a break to serve 
their country. Many prominent leaders of today owed their 
start in life to Quezon. One need not be known to him per- 
sonally in order to get a job; it was enough that he was 
impressed by his work, that he was a doer rather than a 
talker. 

As a family man Quezon was master of the house. The 
Household personnel looked up to him as their own beloved 
father. Servants stayed for years with him ; in fact, some 
started working with Quezon's family when they were still 
young boys and girls. Some had grown aged, infirm, and 
almost useless, but they were kept and provided for. 

Quezon himself saw to it that his servants were a class 
by themselves — trustworthy, honest, polite, faithful, and 
intelligent. He dealt kindly with them. From him the chil- 
dren learned the use of such respectful words as "please" 
and "kindly'' in their conversations with the servants. In 
return, Quezon was greatly loved by them* 

Quezon was generous and democratic to the household 
personnel On his birthday anniversary he joined them in 
group pictures after receiving their greetings early in the 
morning. On Christmas day he shared in their festivities 
at their quarters. He gave them individual gifts ranging 



170 



THE BELOVED EMPLOYER 



from cash money to baron g Tagalog for the men and balin- 
tawak for the women. 

The Quezon servants had interesting incidents with 
which to remember their master. One of their yarns con- 
cerned the unexpected visits of Quezon during their mea! 
times. Whenever he saw them eating plain rice and salt 
he always ordered additional food for them to let them 
have a good hearty meal. 

Once a driver of the presidential car ran over a man 
while Quezon was motoring through a town in Central Lu- 
zon. When the driver was placed under arrest, Quezon im- 
mediately posted the necessary bond. When he was found 
guilty by the trial court and was sentenced to imprison- 
ment, Quezon did not only look after the needs of his family 
during his confinement, but also paid the amount of in- 
demnity to the victim's family. 

Another former household employee of the Quezons 
related this incident. While he was mailing a trip, Quezon 
happened to wish to smoke. So he asked him for a cigarette. 
The employee offered a package of low-class cigarette. "Is 
that what you have? Go and get me a package of better 
cigarettes," said Quezon as he handed him a ten-peso bill 
which he pulled out from his pocketbook. The employee 
bought a package and gave it to Quezon. Then he handed 
the change to the President but he was told to keep it 
Upon reaching the palace, the employee handed again the 
change, but for the second time he was told to keep it. 

Some years later, when he was a policeman in Manila, 
this same employee happened to have a case. He had a 
fistic fight with a jealous suitor of the girl he was courting. 
Because of his adversary's physical advantage over him, he 
pulled his pistol and fired several shots into the air in 
order to scare this adversary. As an aftermath of the 
quarrel, administrative charges were filed against him and 



171 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



he was removed from the service. As he did not have any 
job he went to Quezon and explained the situation. "Did 
you shoot him?" Quezon asked. To his negative answer, 
Quezon retorted, "Why didn't you when you knew you 
were right?" 

When he expressed his desire for a job in a local bank. 
Quezon asked him, "Do you know if I have any acquaintance 
in the bank?" He replied, "Yes, Mr. President, you have 
several friends there ; you have a compadre there, too/' 

When he reached his house, he was surprised to get a 
letter ordering him to report immediately for duty in the 
police department. 

Quezon also looked after the welfare of his servants- 
One afternoon, much to the surprise of the palace person- 
nel, Quezon assembled them all and took them in jitneys 
to Quezon city where he allotted one lot to each family. 

Ever considerate to his employees, many of them spent 
the best years of their lives in the service of Quezon. Take, 
for example, his chauffeur who drove for him in the Phil- 
ippines, in Europe, and in America, When Quezon found 
him too old to drive and to have developed defective eye- 
sight, he assigned him to do lighter work, His palace cook 
reached 70 when Quezon learned he was no longer fit for 
work in the kitchen. So he gave him another work to keep 
him financially comfortable during his advanced age. 

When Quezon liked a particular servant, he retained 
his services under all circumstances. Once his former valet 
who later became chief steward in the presidential yacht, 
Casiana, transferred to a private concern because he felt 
that his salary under Quezon was small- As he had been 
very indispensable to him, Quezon took him back after miss- 
ing him for some time, giving him the salary he was re- 
ceiving outside. 



172 



THE BELOVED EMPLOYER 

Quezon employed a Manila policeman as personal 
guard during his six-year stay in the palace. "During- that 
time (1935-1941) I came to know him very well; he had a 
temper, but you couldn't help liking that man. He was im- 
pulsive at times, but never mean, and always generous. A 
great guy/' thus wrote Phillip L. de Vault, his American 
bodyguard. 

Vault remembers Quezon very well with some inter- 
esting and significant incidents. When all Americans in 
the Philippine government were due for discharge on Jan- 
uary 1, 1936, he approached Quezon "with some diffidence" 
and told him the city government would not pay his salary 
any more after this date. "I would have to be leaving the 
service/' he said, "No, you don't/' Quezon answered. "As 
long as I am President, you be my guard. If they can't 
pay you, I will, out of my own, pocket/' 

The Quezon houseboys were well disciplined. They 
were familiar with Quezon's every movement. They knew 
what he wanted and what he had in mind. Once Quezon 
overheard the radio in his son's room at the time when he 
knew that his son had already gone to school. Losing no 
time he peeped into the room. And what did he find but 
his son's valet enjoying the fine music while he was busily 
arranging things! Right there Quezon counselled him in 
a fatherly manner. "Do you have to play the radio in order 
that you can do your work well? Don't you know that you 
are wasting the government's money in that way? Now, 
you do not like that to be done to you, do you?" The valet 
understood what his master meant, 

Quezon's faithful valet was Leopoldo Zia Ah, a Chinese 
naturalized Filipino. Quezon became fond of him and 
Adong, as he called him intimately, served him until Que- 
zon's death in 1944. Having come to like him, Quezon usual- 
ly exchanged jokes with Adong, and both got wholesome 



173 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

laughs therefrom. Quezon amused himself now and then 
by telling Adong humorously, "Adong, you are now my 
general, and I am your soldier/' He would stand erect in 
front of Adong and salute him. Adong would return the 
salute, and then the two would have a hearty laugh. As 
commander-in-chief of the Philippine Army, Quezon ap- 
pointed Adong a sergeant in the infantry. 

Being an employee of Quezon was not necessarily a 
cause for envy. More work was done by him which meant 
overtime almost daily, holidays not excepted. But working 
with Quezon had its compensation. When he kept employees 
around for rush work, he personally saw to it that there 
was plenty of food, coffee, and cigarettes around. He took 
his meals with them, and chatted and discussed common- 
place subjects with the clerks as would one employee to 
another. 

He also looked after their welfare. One day, after 
overhearing remarks that government clerks were not 
adequately compensated and their housing facilities were 
uncomfortable and inconvenient, Quezon made a personal 
look-see at the matter, spending several days motoring to 
the homes of meagerly paid employees of Malacanan located 
in the different districts of Manila, The result of the pres- 
idential trips was the immediate planning and subsequent 
opening of a colony for them in Quezon city. 

Arch enemy of nepotism and favoritism, Quezon ruled 
that relatives should not work together in the same office 
nor should favors be extended to any person because of his 
relations to high government officials. He adopted and 
stuck to this policy. At the Philippine Military Academy 
in Baguio his nephew was found guilty of hazing, Quezon 
lost no time in expelling him together with other cadets* 
Mrs. Quezon pleaded with her husband, but all to no avail 
as he wanted the punishment to serve as a lesson to all. 



174 



THE BELOVED EMPLOYER 

But Quezon was a kind-hearted man. Later the same 
cadets were given a chance to get back their commissions 
after serving as privates for eighteen months. During this 
probationary period that his nephew did guard duty at the 
palace, Mrs. Quezon took pity on him and secretly fed him 
in the kitchen. When Quezon discovered this irregularity, 
he immediately stopped the practice. 

He was likewise the enemy of inefficiency, incompe- 
tence, and red tape in the government. A zealous follower 
of the principle, "Do not leave for the morrow what you 
can do today/' Quezon once found that a committee of legis- 
lators dilly-dallied on the rush work assigned to it As he 
wanted the job done promptly, he told the members frankly 
and pointedly, "If your job is not finished on the designated 
period, I will write a letter to the newspapers under my 
own name denouncing you as incompetent/' The job was 
clone as Quezon wanted it. 

But while Quezon was ever desirous to help the needy, 
especially the young and talented men and women, he hated 
egotistic inflation and presumptuous people had no place 
in his heart. He confessed he liked to see almost everybody 
land a job and earn, but every time he heard people tell 
him they could do any an,d all kinds of work, he usually got 
angry. 

"Of course, I immediately know what kind of fellow 
he is, for his interest is not in the work but in the salary/ 1 
he opined. 

Commenting on this particular subject, Quezon said: 

"The salary is secondary. The work is the important thing; 
if you secure work you will get the salary. But when you seek 
work, do not lie to yourself and to the man you are talking to. 
Toll him the truth. If you are looking for work because you 
want to work, tell him so. But only those who work well got 
- a good salary. 



175 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIVE A\I> CARKKR 



"I have never grown old, perhaps because I know how to 
enjoy after a hard day's work. But I do not wa.ste my lift? 
just singing, dancing, and running around- I work as long as 
I have something to work on, sometimes until late in the night. 
I enjoy relaxation, and enjoy it more, after hard work. We 
must have a balanced life consisting mainly cii work and pleas- 
ure. But let vjs work more and enjoy less. Work is the greatest 
thing in life. Therefore, we must not feel ashamed of our 
situation when we work. 

"It seems that others feel proud when they do nothing. 
I am afraid that many of us have been badly influenced by 
that story in the Bible in which the Lord punished Adam 
and Eve for their disobedience by making them work and 
live by the sweat of their brow. I am a scholar of the Bible 
but I have a different interpretation of those words. I do not 
think that God created man and woman just to waste their 
life here— live in paradise, eat the fruit, and do nothing the 
rest of the day. I do not think that work was part of their 
punishment for disobeying Him. God created num to be man. 

That the man must live a high and noble life of service is 

what He meant He ought to be proud when we can say that 
we spend our life in working. It is the greatest title. 

"One morning while I was walking on the palace grounds, 
I saw a clean, nice-looking, young man carrying a heavy piece 
of wood. He was barefooted. My attention was attracted, so I 
called him. Why are you working? I asked. 

"'I have to make a living, Mr. President/ he answered. 

"How much do you get?" 

" 'One peso a day.' 

"Have you been to school ? 

"'Yes, Mr- President/ 

"Why do you have to work this way; do you not have 
n father and a mother? 

" 'I have, Mr. President, but my father lost his job some- 
time ago, so he has to do the same work as 1/ 

"Then I toid him to leave his work and see Secretary Var- 
gas. I told Secretary Vargas to give him a better position. 
Now that boy has a fine job; that boy is going to be a man, 
and as long as I can help him X will help him. He did not 
come to me for a good job, but he needed work to help his 
father. 

"Now and then I get numerous letters recommending some 
boys for some jobs. I asked them to come to me. They thought 
that I am an easy fellow and I give work to everybody who 



176 



THE BELOVED EMPLOYER 



comes to rne. I have a very soft heart but I have a strong will 
power* and I will not help a boy to become lazy and easy- 
going". It is not good for him, I like to see boys sweep the 
streets; I did that work- You know I worked on the r icefields; 
1 waited at tables; I did a lot of odd things. I passed the 
nights without any food. So why cannot others do what I my- 
self can do?" 

in launching a social justice program during his ad- 
ministration, Quezon also had in mind the lot of the un- 
known, lowly but meritorious clerks. He saw to it that the 
government subalterns, regardless of their political con- 
nections, received equal treatment. By an administrative 
order of Quezon, both officials and employees of the na- 
tional government who rendered overtime work in Manila 
received the same fixed amount for their meal allowances. 
Previously, different rates were given in accordance with 
rank and position. 

In the salary standardization act Quezon again mani- 
fested his deep concern for the employees. The act pre- 
scribed rules for promotion and the corresponding salaries 
for each civil service grade established, and eliminated the 
chances of an undeserving employee who had a political 
backing to get a promotion over and above those who were 
really entitled to such privileges but who did not have the 
right connections. 

Having learned from experience that politics had al- 
ways been the root cause of inefficiency in the government 
and also the stumbling block to the progress of a people; 
Quezon issued his executive order prohibiting civil service 
employees to take active part in politics. Previously, the 
personnel of the national government who faced complaints 
for electioneering were simply recalled from 'their pro- 
vincial stations and transferred elsewhere during election 
time. But Quezon did not approve of this plan because it 
did not mean really to punish the erring official. He there- 
fore ordered complaint filed to be thoroughly investigated, 



177 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



and a more drastic step taken by the corresponding- author- 
ities against the culprits. 

During: his administration, among: Quezon's main 
troubles was that with erring officials who violated public 
trust in the performance of their official duties. With a 
firm but just hand, he cracked down on public official? — 
judges, fiscals, justices of the peace, mayors, treasurer. 3 , 
etc* — who made use of their office as a means to an end. 

At one time Quezon was compelled to dismiss the as- 
sistant provincial fiscal of Ilocos Sur. He found him guilty 
of using his office to practice law illegally through a broth- 
er, or serving friends, and "of wreaking vengeance upon 
his enemies." Of these serious irregularities, Quezon, in an 
administrative order, said: fif A person who uses his office 
as a means of serving his friends and of wreaking ven- 
geance upon his enemies, and who looks upon it, not as a 
public trust, but as a source of private profit, has no place 
in the public service/' 

His strong, determined action on the case won the un- 
solicited but unanimous praise of the metropolitan press. 
For its part, the Philippines Free Press partly stated in an 
editorial : 

"This trenchant statement from President Quezon, penned 
in the course of dismissing a provincial fiscal for failing to 
do his duty, shows clearly the attitude which the President 
is determined to imbue in the entire government service of the 
Philippines* 

"It comes, unfortunately, as something of a shock to many 
government officials to be told that they are in office to serve 
the people, not themselves. But President Quezon has a most 
convincing - way of impressing this fact upon doubting' Thomases 
in the service. It is not at all unlikely that, after a few more 
such actions from Malacafian, the holders of all government 
offices will come to realize that their duty to their country 
is ahead of their duty to themselves." 



178 



Chapter 20 



THE PRACTICAL CATHOLIC 



/ am one of those who believe that 
religion exercises a wholesome 
influence ttpon man, both as 
individual and as C t ciOizeni 



—QUEZON 



HE RELIGIOUS history of Quezon has become both 



1 curious and strange. He was born of Catholic parents, 
studied in Catholic schools, sent his children to Catholic 
institutions, reared a Catholic family, built and maintained 
a Catholic chapel in his home and a grotto in his estate, 
and went regularly to church rites; but sometime during 
his checkered career he became a Freemason, was the friend 
of other religious faiths in the Philippines, had the courage 
to displease Catholic authorities on important matters, and 
for a considerable period refused to believe in some Catholic 
precepts, Even his closest associates in office and his most 
intimate friends belonged to different creeds. 

At the tender age of f ive, Quezon had his first contacts 
with the religious sect, The parish priest of Baler took 
turns with Quezon's parents in giving him primary educa- 
tion. He learned Spanish grammar at the Baler convent. 
When he left to study in Manila his priest-teacher already 
recognized qualities of greatness in him although he was 
only nine years old- 

In Manila his youthful years were spent under the in- 
fluence and tutorship of Catholic priests and professors, 
While in the San Juan de Letran College he was confirmed 
at 14 by the Rev, Fr. Lorenzo Garcia, vice-rector, w^ho dis- 
covered that he had not undergone this religious ritual. 
Being a poor lad without sufficient money for his school - 




179 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



ing t a helpful priest made him his room-and-mess boy 
(muchacho) in the convent of San Francisco, In later years 
Quezon cwas able to pursue further his studies in the Uni- 
versity of Santo Tom as through the help of his Dominican 
professors. After the revolution, the same professors took 
him as overseer of the friars' estates in Bataan ? then trans- 
ferring: him later to the church bank in Manila as dork. 
When Quezon was imprisoned on the raise charge of mur- 
der, it was a priest who secured his immediate release. 

These few isolated incidents showed how cooperative 
the church people were to Quezon during the formative 
years of his life. 

Quezon left the fold of the Roman Catholic church to 
join Freemasonry 1 - about 1907 when he was an assembly- 
man from Tayabas. Then at the time of his marriage to 
the former Aurora Aragon in 1918, Quezon was considered 
a free thinker. It was for this reason perhaps that he first 
underwent a civil marriage to suit his convictions, follow- 
ing it later by a Catholic wedding for the sake of his Catho- 
lic bride. 

Quezon was an active freemason for twenty-five 
years, He carried Freemasonry with him to Europe, Rus- 
sia, and the United States. Quezon was elected to the 33rd 
degree, the highest honor in Freemasonry, by the Supreme 
Council of the Scottish Rite Masons at Washington, D, a, 
and received the honors while he was abroad in October, 

tii^^S^^^j if? i a wol 4^wiao institution WfcAst! ivnvr- :uv intended to bring 
y talerntice amon- men. It* principle uf Brotherly Love urines 

25d2* Sf** country .si-ct and opinion, and cause* true friendship to exist amonp 
PLOpjes who misht oiherwi-o remain apart as perrerual enemies. In their -arch 
ior truth freemason* are <li-tinj-ubh<:d in their conduct by rfneerity, civic cour- 
age and plain dealing. Conscious that Justice is the very support of civic society, 
iicemasons maintain and proclaim that it i* the standard or boundarv of rirhi 
\ * cnabl - B man to render unto every other man his just due. For this reason, 
trie : history of Frt ^masonry everywhere is intimately linked with the *tru££l£s of 
oat ions and individual? for their inalienable rights, and frcemaFon^ in all countries. 
rJimc-^ and of whatever race or religions, have evt n di=rin^ui?hsd them=elvc= in 
d|- It inline tho^e rights wit bin the bounds of law tmd in keeping? wiih human 
dignity. — Proceedings of the First hide- pendente Cony res.*, IF^O. 

ISO 



THE PRACTICAL CATHOLIC 



1929. He also became grand muster of the Grand Lodge of 
the Philippine Islands, 

# * 

When the freemasons in the Philippines acquired the 
Plaridel Temple for their grand lodge, Quezon sent this 
significant and brotherly message: 

"I have an abiding faith that they will use that fraternal 
home at all times for the promotion of those principles which 
Masonry teaches, the application of which has made possible 
many worthwhile projects of a social and charitable nature, 

''Contemporary history shows that freemasonry has helped 
to build a more enlightened citizenry m this country, and, 
through the application of its principles of tolerance and 
brotherly love, has served as a contributing factor in bringing: 
about the unity of our people." 

But Quezon was not to embrace Freemasonry forever, 
There were stronger, compelling and irresistible forces, hu- 
man and moral and spiritual, that caused his return to the 
religion of his fathers, Mrs. Quezon, for one, strongly urged 
and insisted upon changing his religious beliefs and affi- 
liation for the sake of their children. 

Early in 1928 Quezon fell gravely ill while confined in 
a Monrovia sanatorium in the United States. £i I felt that 
I was going to die — just like an animal, without any spirit- 
ual consolation or hope/' he confessed to Rev. Serapio Ta- 
mayo, former rector of the University of Santo Tonias. 

During that Monrovia confinement, Quezon got hole) 
of a copy of the 36-page booklet by Annie Fellows Johnston, 
a religious mystic, which he read and re-read many times. 
Dr. Antonio G, Sison, personal physician of Quezon, believed 
that for one thing this treatise greatly influenced Quezon. 
"It was this book that turned the tide of Quezon's morale 
when his health was at its lowest ebb in Monrovia/' Si son 
confided to Carlos Quirino. "The simple moving story, 
couched in the form of a legend, to teach the virtue of pa- 



181 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

tience and hope, sustained Quezon — gave him new strength 
to face the fight and roused his will to a determination to 
conquer the disease/' 

The moral derived was: "To gather from every one 
thou passes t on the highway, and from every experience fate 
sends thee 7 as Omar gathered from the heart of every rose, 
and out of the wide knowledge thus gained of human weak- 
nesses and human needs, to distill in thine heart the pre- 
cious oil of sympathy. That is the attar that shall win for 
thee a welcome wherever thou goest. And no man fills his 
crystal vase with it until he has first been pricked by the 
World's disappointments, and bowed by its tasks/' 

Then, too, there was Archbishop Michael O'Doherty of 
Manila who was a frequent visitor at the Quezon home dur- 
ing his period of recovery from a later illness in Baguio. 
Most often their conversations centered around theology 
and the philosophy of the Catholic religion. Given further 
enlightenment on the subject matter, coupled with the per- 
sistence of his family who are all devout Catholics, Quezon 
finally rendered his fateful decision which he never regret- 
ted having made, 

His decision was contained in a letter-document, con- 
sidered "one of the most important of its kind," written 
by Quezon in Spanish on August 18, 1930, while enroute 
to the United States, Witnessed by Mrs. Quezon and Car- 
men Pena, it was addressed to Archbishop O'Doherty. The 
letter of retraction, translated into English, follows in 
full: 

"Your Grace: It Is now twenty-five years, more or less, 
since I ceased to be a member of the Catholic Faith, to which 
X belonged by virtue of baptism, just as my parents, before 
me, belonged to it. My separation from the religion which 
jruided me during my childhood, my adolescence and the first 
years of my maturity, was due not only to the fact that I 
had lost the faith, but also because furthermore, I had become 



182 



THE PRACTICAL CATHOLIC 



a member of Masonry- This last fact alone and by itself is 
enough to place any Catholic outside of the pale of his religion, 
not only because the Catholic church so declares, but because 
of the absolute incompatibility between certain Masonic theories 
ant! the Catholic dogma, 

"During the above-mentioned twenty-five years, I have not 
embraced any other religion. 

"With regret, and also (why not say it?) with shame, 
I must confess that during all this long period of my life, I 
had practically forgotten my God, if not completely ceased to 
believe in Him, although He, m His infinite goodness and 
mercy, con tinned to heap blessings upon me. - 

"Came the day when I began to feel a complete desolation 
in spite of the material goods which I enjoyed, and looked for 
the cause thereof and found it in my lack of faith in the super- 
natural life, that is, in my lack of religion. After much hesi- 
tation I decided to take steps tending towards professing a 
religion if it were at all possible for me to believe in one. As a 
Mason, I believed in the theory that all religions are the same 
and that, therefore, one could adopt whatever religion that sat- 
isfied one's conscience. Although my Masonic ideas had led 
me completely away from the Catholic religion, I nevertheless 
chose to obtain instruction in Catholicism in preference to any 
other religion, because, this being the faith of my wife and 
children, if I could in conscience embrace it again, it was 
evident that if all of us, the head as well as the members of 
my family, were to profess and practice the same religion, it 
would contribute to the religious solidarity of my family, i 
was, however, decided on adopting another religion, if ray 
conscience were unable to accept the dogma and the precepts of 
the Catholic church, 

"In such a frame of mind, I asked certain ministers of the 
Catholic church to help me in regaining the faith which I had 
professed by virtue of my baptism, and these answered my 
call for help. It cost us a lot of work and time, but with the 
help of Divine Grace, I at last believe now, firstly, that Jesus 
Christ is my God and Redeemer, and also that the Catholic 
church founded by Him is the repository of His doctrine, 

"I am therefore prepared to re-enter my old church and I 
fervently desire to be re -admitted therein, I want to be a 
Catholic again, to live and to sit in my faith. This is my 
prayer to God and I humbly trust that' He, in His infinite 
mercy, will grant it to me. 



183 



MANUEL L. QUEZON; HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

"I abandon Masonry and I abandon it forever, not only 
because this is a condition sine qua non for a Catholic, but 
because the religious beliefs which I now sincerely profess, are 
in direct opposition to certain Masonic theories. I shall never 
again belong - to any society condemned by the church, I de- 
plore with all my heart having spent the best years of my life 
in complete forget fulness of my God and outside of His church, 

"In view of the foregoing statements, I request the Arch- 
bishop of Manila to lift the ecclesiastical censure which I have 
incurred in order that E may enjoy the spiritual benefits of the 
Catholic faith. 

£< I have just noted that I have also incurred ecclesiastical 
censure for having 1 belonged to the 'Legionarios del Trabaja 
as honorary president. I am also abandoning this society and 
I likewise request that His Grace lift said censure, reiterating 
in this regard ail that I have hereinabove stated. And with 
my hand on the Holy Bible, I swear to the truth and sincerity 
of all the foregoing." 

His return to the Catholic religion was vividly de- 
scribed in the pre-war Tribune. ''On a day in November, 
in a sun-flooded room of a house whose windows command- 
ed a view of Manila Bay, a thin, frail figure knelt before 
an altar," the moving story began. Continuing, it wrote, 
"His eyes, as he raised his head, rested on the gleaming 
vestments of a priest of the Catholic church, whose hands 
upraised, held aloft a radiating golden glory, The rays of 
the sun fell on the leonine gray locks and found a mirror in 
the preternatural brightness of the worshipping eyes aa 
the priest intoned the words that have been changeless for 
ages, and that will remain unchanged forever , . « The frail, 
worn man was Manuel Quezon. The time was a few days 
after his return to the Philippines, from what may reveal 
itself as the most important of all his visits to the United 
States. The occasion, it may with truth be said, marked 
his irrevocable return to the faith of his fathers . . ; M 

Although Quezon became a Roman Catholic again, he 
did not give the members of other religious sects, as well as 
his critics, any inch of ground to doubt his actuations on 

184 



THE PRACTICAL CATHOLIC 



religious matters as the chief executive of the land. In- 
stead, time and again, he proved a disappointment to the 
church dignitaries as a relation of pertinent incidents will 
bear out 

Early in 1937, when the Catholic Philippines was pre- 
paring for the 33rd International Encharistic Congress 
which was held in Manila from February 3 to % Quezon was 
asked to participate in the celebration. Thinking at first 
that his personal participation was required, he approved 
of the idea. But upon further consideration he noticed that 
"what is intended in the program is that the Papal Legate 
shall be officially welcomed by the President of the Philip- 
pines in behalf of the Government of the Commonwealth, on 
one hand, and as the Head of the Nation and in behalf there- 
of, on the other/' 

Courteously, therefore, the invitation was declined in a 
letter to Archbishop O'Doherty in which he argued: 

"I am informed by competent authority that the Govern- 
ment of the Philippines may not render His Eminence, the Papal 
Legate, honors that might in any way be construed as a recog- 
nition of him as representative of a foreign state; that the 
Papal Legate should be regarded as an ecclesiastic of high rank 
without any official status, and should not, therefore, be ac- 
corded official honors which can not properly be accorded to 
other distinguished non-official visitors to the Philippines, 

"X X X X X X X 

"I hope I am a good practical Catholic. As such, in my in- 
dividual capacity , there is nothing that I shall be glad to do to 
give added solemnity to the celebration of the Eucharistie Con- 
gress. 1 am also most anxious, as a private individual pro- 
fessing the Catholic faith, to render honors and pay tribute to 
His Eminence, the Papal Legate; but, as the President of the 
Philippines, I am not in a position to do what your program calls 
for." 

Nevertheless, he invited the Papal Legate to be his 
guest at the Malacanan Palace. As Quezon was absent 



185 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



from the Philippines at the time, he designated someone to 
"see to it that everything is done to make the stay of His 
Eminence as pleasant and comfortable as my resources will 
permit." 

Then the sad news of the death of Pope Pius XI reached 
Manila, Who was to lead the Manila Catholics in paying 
tribute to his memory at the solemn pontifical requiem mass 
celebrated in the Manila Cathedral but Quezon? This time 
he did not disappoint the Catholics. Profoundly grateful 
for the expression of sympathy, the Sacred College of Car- 
dinals in Rome conveyed its thanks in a radiogram sent to 
Quezon later, 

Prolonged illness kept Quezon in bed for more than 
nine months, beginning in November, 1940. His extended 
confinement aroused the concern of the nation, and people 
everywhere offered special masses for his recovery. How- 
ever, Quezon, pious as he was, told Mayor Eulogio Rodriguez 
of Manila, who started a nationwide prayer movement, that 
he preferred the prayers to "be expressed more in the pri- 
vacy of homes and churches than in public demonstrations/' 

That he was a practical Catholic, a true Christian who 
looked upon all people equally regardless of differences in 
their religions, Quezon demonstrated repeatedly. Once he 
attended an early morning mass at the Assumption convent 
in honor of Mrs, Quezon. After the breakfast at the Manila 
Hotel, Quezon motored to the Philippine Independent church 
in Ton do, Manila, and attended the induction rites of Mons. 
Santiago Fonacier as the new head bishop of his sect and 
spiritual leader of the Aglipayan Filipinos. On another 
occasion he was guest at the silver anniversary banquet of 
the City Young Men's Christian Association in which, Ro- 
man Catholic though he was, he praised its accomplishments 
towards the physical, moral, and spiritual uplift of the youth 
of the Philippines. "I am glad that most Catholics think 

ISG 



THE PRACTICAL CATHOLIC 



that the Y.M.G.A, is a Protestant organization, because that 
belief should spur them to dedicate more of their interest 
to the kind of social welfare, work that the *Y J has chosen 
io undertake," he declared. 

Quezon had his own philosophy on religion, which he 
followed to the letter in his dealings with everybody. *'As 
an individual, I worship my God in accordance with my own 
religious belief," he revealed, and added, "But as the head 
of the State, I can have no more to do with the Catholic 
church than I can with a Protestant denomination, the Agli- 
payaiL the Mohammedan, or any other religious organiza- 
tion or sect in the Philippines, And no authority of any 
church has any right to interfere with the affairs of the 
Government/' 

Had not Quezon's political luck made him the president 
of the Philippines, perhaps, he would have been the first 
Filipino to be consecrated archbishop and head of the Ro- 
man Catholic church in the Philippines because his mother 
wanted him to be a minister of God, a wish which Quezon 
started to realize in his student days in Manila when h«? 
entered the class in theology. 



187 



Chapter 21 



THE UNCOMPROMISING NATIONALIST 

Although I am a nationalist, my 
nationalism is not orthodox. 

—QUEZON 

N ATIONALISM IS of recent development in the Phil- 
ippines. It was preached by such Filipino patriots as 
the late Fathers Burgos, Gomez, and Zamora, Andres Bo- 
nifacio, Apolinario Mabini, and Jose RizaL The spirit of 
nationalism enables the individual to learn how to conserve 
wisely and judiciously that which belongs to his native land, 
whether it be its natural resources or the native virtues. 

The greatest leader of nationalism during the period of 
Philippine-American relations was Manuel L. Quezon who, 
time and again, demonstrated his nationalism here and 
abroad. Quezon devoted some time and effort to the study 
of the growth and expansion of nationalism in the Philip- 
pines and other countries. He learned from the experiences 
of other peoples what great benefits the Filipinos could de- 
rive by imbibing and fostering the nationalistic spirit among 
themselves. 

Of nationalism, Quezon declared: 

"Nationalism, as an emotional attachment and conscious 
allegiance to one's country rather than to a dynasty, a monarch 
or a ruler , is of comparatively recent development. Its seed 
was planted at the time of the Renaissance, and it has reached 
its extreme expression in the totalitarian states. 

"Rightly conceived, felt and practised, nationalism is a tre- 
mendous force for good, It strengthens and solidifies a nation. 
Community interest is made active. It preserves the best tra- 
ditions of the past and adds zest to the ambition of enlarging the 
inheritance of the people. It is, therefore, a dynamic urge for 
continuous self -improvement* In fine, it enriches the sum total 



188 



THE UNCOMPROMISING NATIONALIST 



of mankind's cultural, moral, and material possessions through 
the individual and characteristic contribution of each people. 

"So long- as the nationalistic sentiment is not fostered to the 
point where a people forgets that it forms a part of the human 
family; that the "rood of mankind should he the ultimate aim of 
all and every nation; and that conflicting national interests are 
only temporary and that there is always a just formula for ad- 
justing them, nationalism is a noble, elevating, and most benefi- 
cial sentiment" 

While the Philippine Constitution was being framed 
by the delegates in 1934 Quezon, as moderator of the Na- 
tional Constitutional Convention, saw to it that as much as 
possible the provisions of the Constitution be nationalistic 
in character. His efforts bore fruit when the framers of 
the Constitution injected nationalistic tendencies and pre- 
cepts in the document. Witnesses thereto are the provis- 
ions on the conservation and utilization of the natural re- 
sources. 

Speaking- of the Constitution as inspired by a nation- 
alistic spirit, Quezon said on one occasion: 

"Our Constitution is inspired by a spirit of pound national- 
ism, and we should endeavor properly to comprehend this spirit 
and to adhere to it in the formulation of our national policies. 

"It is significant that at the very beginning our Constitu- 
tion declares that the Philippines renounces war as an instru- 
ment of national policy, and adopts the generally accepted prin- 
ciples of international law as a part of the law of our nation. 
This js not a mere reiteration of the Eiellogg-Bi'iaud Pact, SO 
loudly proclaimed and so often disregarded; nor is it a passing 
or expedient adherence to a political tenet due to the present 
inability of our people to sustain an armed conflict. In addi- 
tion to the principle enunciated in the Kellogg-Briand Pact, the 
Constitution has made international law part of the law of the 
land. This is a positive injunction against any violation of the 
accepted principles of international law by our Government. 

"This constitutional declaration implies that our people re- 
cognize that no nation has the right to resort to war in order 
to carry out its national policies; that every state is a member 
of the family of nations; that each nation has rights that must 
be respected by the others: that superiority of force is no jfcstlf i- 



189 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



cation for adopting and carrying out a national policy that may 
be prejudicial to the liberties and interests of other peoples; and 
that right and justice alone — never force— should determine and 
decide the conflicts that may arise between nations. In other 
words, it means that we are willing to submit to arbitration or 
to an international court for adjudication of any and all con- 
troversies that may arise between the Philippines and other 
countries. 

"Such is the spirit of nationalism that underlies our Con- 
stitution and our conduct towards the world should be inspired 
by that spirit." 

During his term as president of the Philippines, Que- 
zon exerted efforts to suppress rebellions against the gov- 
ernment and the constituted authorities. A keen observer 
of the rise and growth of the Socialist and Communist move- 
ments in the Philippines, he stopped any radical and sub- 
versive activities whenever necessary. 

When he noted that the Socialists in Pampanga were 
the main cause of the frequent and repeated disturbances 
and disorders in the towns that had Socialist mayors, Que- 
zon immediately summoned them to a conference in the Ma- 
lacanan Palace. He warned the mayors that drastic action 
would be taken against them and their followers should any 
public disorder take place in their respective municipalities 
and that armed forces of the Philippines were ready to meet 
force with force if possible. He also gave them the warn- 
ing that as elective officials of the Commonwealth govern- 
ment they were duty-bound to obey the laws of the land 
and that they should not have any other form of government 
than the constituted one. The result of the conference was 
the prompt and unanimous declaration and pledge of loy- 
alty and support of the mayors to both Quezon and the gov- 
ernment. 

The nationalism of Quezon knew no bounds. While 
returning home to the Philippines from the United States 
where he worked for the approval of the Tydings-McDuffie 
independence act, Quezon and other Filipino missioners 



190 



THE UNCOMPROMISING NATIONALIST 



boarded the liner, lie de France, which was bound from 
New York to Cherbourg, Among their fellow-passengers 
were Edouard Herriot, former premier of France, and the 
late Ignatz Jan Paderewski, famous Polish pianist. To make 
the different distinguished travelers feel at home while' at 
sea, the musicians played the favorite pieces of their re- 
spective countries. Not to be outdone by such nationalistic 
gesture, Quezon asked the orchestra to play the Philippine 
national anthem, which it did after Quezon had tapped out 
the tune with one finger on the piano. 

As a Filipino he had an abiding respect for and faith in 
Filipino ideals and institutions. When reports came to him 
that two foreigners attempted to cast disrespect on the Phil- 
ippine hymn while it was being played during a festival in a 
Visayan province, Quezon immediately recommended to the 
National Assembly the enactment of a measure providing 
for stiff penalty for any act of disrespect to the Philippine 
national anthem. 

In the promotion of Philippine commerce and industry 
Quezon took active part He did not only sponsor the an- 
nual celebration of the Made-in-the-Philippines Products 
Week in August under the auspices of the Bureau of Com- 
merce, but also urged the people to "meet the immediate 
necessity of producing in our country all the articles of food 
and clothing that our people may need." 

In one celebration of the NEPA (National Economic 
Protectionism Association) in Manila, Quezon surprised his 
audience when, in the course of his speech, he pointed out 
the objectionable phase of the course of study of the Bu- 
reau of Education in home economics. He referred to the 
part of the work in which pupils in the public schools were 
taught how to cook and bake foreign recipes instead of 
learning the preparation of native cookies and dishes, lib* 
the bibingka, adobo, puto bombong, etc. His talk startled 
his hearers and gave them food for thought. 



191 



IUANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



True nationalist that he was, he was not afraid to as- 
sert his nationalism wherever he deemed it proper to voice 
it and make known. 

In his home Quezon, like all the other members of his 
family, was heart and soul a nationalist, in his conversa- 
tions with them, he used the national language — Tagalog* 
Even visitors were greeted in Tagalog. Foreigners of long 
residence in the Philippines which must have enabled them 
to learn some of the common expressions in the dialect were 
welcomed in the Malacanan Palace with such Tagalog words 
as mabukay, magandang umaga, kumasta po kayo, 

Quezon often wore the barong Tagalog which he found 
very convenient, comfortable, and elegant, and a source of 
pride to wear, especially in the presence of distinguished 
foreign personages. He was instrumental in the extensive 
use of the native dress among the Filipinos who have found 
it very practical, especially during the summer months and 
in attending special occasions. 

Quezon completed his practice of nationalism in his 
home by eating native food and serving native dishes to 
visitors. He was fond of the native sinigang and adobo: 
while native fruits, like oranges, bananas, mangoes, and chi- 
cos were his favorites. 

Once lie and his eldest daughter, Maria Aurora, were 
invited by Dean and Mrs. Conrado Benitez to a supper in 
their home in the San Juan Heights. It was an informal 
gathering with only the immediate members of the Benitez 
family present. As they knew that Quezon's favorite food 
was the native kind, Mrs. Benitez served also bagoong 
which she prepared especially for the presidential family- 
Quezon liked it so much that when he returned home, the 
presidential driver overheard Miss Quezon telling her father 
of the delicious bagoong. "Yes, indeed, >J replied Quezon, 
"I wish they let us bring some home." 



192 



BOOK III 



President Quezon and Vice-President Sergio Osmefia were photographed 
together waring their formal attire on their inauguration 
on November 15, 193~>. 



Chapter 22 



THE GREAT LEADER 



A new edifice shall arise, not out 
of the ashes of the past, but out 
of the sf-tnidwiR mdieriate of the 
living present, 

—QUEZON 

IN the fine, clear and cold morning of November 15, 1935, 
over a quarter of a million spectators gathered in the 
largest mass assemblage ever seen in Manila, capital^ of 
the Philippines, to witness the historic, solemn and im- 
pressive ceremonies of the birth of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines. The earliest spectators came at about 
six o'clock. 

At exactly S:58, the late George H. Dern, then United 
States secretary of war and personal representative of the 
then President Franklin Delano Roosevelt of the Vmte< T 
States, declared the government of the Commonweal^ 
established, thus virtually ending 400 years of Spanish and 
American rules and starting the Filipino people on a ten- 
year transition period which culminated in the granting 
of independence and the inauguration of the Philippine 
Republic on July 4, 1946. 

At the main ceremonial stand were the distinguished 
guests: high officials of the American and Philippine gov- 
ernments in very formal attire, army and navy .f&tefr 
in white uniform, consular representatives with tneir 
gold braids and medals, dignitaries of the church in tneir 
black priestly vestments with splashes of purple sashes and 
skull caps, and delegates from the 49 provinces in glisten- 
ing top hats and derbies. Near and around the Legislative 
building and on the Sunken gardens were soldiers and 
policemen in -well-pressed khaki. 



195 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

On that same day at six o'clock in the morning, in 
their home on Calle Roberts, in Pasay, Rizal, President- 
elect Manuel L. Quezon and his distinguished family heard 
mass at the family chapel and received the holy commun- 
ion, with the Rev. Cosgrave officiating. At 7:30 Quezon 
together with Mrs. Quezon and the three children, drove 
in the presidential car to the scene of the ceremonies, pre- 
ceded by a cavalry escort of the 26th Cavalry, Philippine 
Scouts- (USA). At the head of the cavalcade were scream- 
ing police sirens who cleared the way. 

At 8:15, a bugle call sounded, and the announcer said: 
"The President of the Commonwealth and the Governor 
General of the Philippines !" All stood up as they took their 
seats in the main stand. Behind them marched three flag 
bearers — one carried the American flag, another had the 
Filipino flag, and the third the bluje presidential flag bear- 
ing the great seal of the government of the Common- 
wealth. 

There was a good cause for the rejoicing through- 
out the land on that particular sunny day. It was the first 
case where a dependency achieved its independence "with- 
out the necessity of securing it at the point of the sword." 
Its peaceful birth, so rare in the. history of nations, came 
ff quietly into the world's sisterhood of states, with an or- 
derly written government, with a well chosen leader, with 
all promise for happiness," as Vice-President Garner of the 
United States saw. On top of it all, it was the first time 
in the world's history that a colonial power redeemed its 
promise to make a possession free and independent "at a 
great loss to itself," 

The fiscal affairs of the government were at the time 
"at the best level in its history/' The finances were in 
excellent condition giving the Philippines the smallest per 
capita national debt of any nation, A prosperous and in- 
creasing commerce and a thriving and expanding industry 
adequately maintained a high standard of living for the 

196 



I 




Photo by Emilio Mt\yhihin$f 
Manuel Luis Quezon, of Baler, T ay abas, t'uxk his oath of office as first President of 
the Philippines before Chief Justice Ramon Avancena of the Supreme Court, 
during' the historic ceremonies of the birth of the Commonwealth 
held in Manila on November 15, 1935. 



THfc GREAT LEADER 



people. On the other hand, the agricultural, mineral, and 
forest resources supported the governmental structure- 
As the young Commonwealth was ushered into the 
family of free and independent sister-nations, Garner ex- 
pressed the hope of a happy and glorious existence. Paul 
he, "May the new nation preserve the world's fine tradi- 
tions of liberty and equality, a nation of Christian people, 
who by its careful and thoughtful consideration of all its 
people will prove an inspiration to the nations of the earth. 

The administration of the new Commonwealth was leit 
entirely in the hands of its equally new president whose 
brilliant mind and patriotism were admired both by his 
countrymen and by foreigners. As Garner knew him. 
Quezon "possessed individuality, activity, intellect, and 
courtesy rarely combined in one man," Ami as the tre- 
mendous responsibility of the chief executive fell on him. 
President Roosevelt expressed his faith in Quezon's devo- 
tion to democratic principles and in his ability "to carry 
the program through in a manner well calculated to serve 
the interests of your people/' 

Before Quezon took over the reins of the government 
leadership, the Most Reverend Gabriel M. Reyes, D.D-> 
archbishop of Cebu, implored the aid of Divine Providence^ 
in his invocation at the inaugural ceremonies. "Assist wrc 
Thy holy spirit of counsel the President and the Vice-Pres- 
ident of our new government, that their administration 
may be conducted in equity, eminently useful and con- 
structive to the nation they preside over," he invoked. 

Quezon was, of course, the principal world figure &_ 
the inauguration ceremonies. He wore a red shoulder sa 
and three foreign decorations— a medal pinned to his e ^ 
lapel and two blazing decorations on the left side 01 ms 
coat above the hip. 

Before Chief Justice Ramon Avancena of the Supreme 
Court, Quezon read his oath of office. Beginning weakly, 
his voice gained force as he went on: 

197 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFK AND BARKER 

"I, Manuel Luis Quezon, of Baler, province of Tayaba 
having' been elected and proclaimed President of the Phil, 
ippines, hereby solemnly swear that I will faithfully and con- 
scientiously fulfill my duties as President of the Philippines, 
preserve and defend its Constitution, execute its laws, do 
justice to every man and consecrate myself to the service 
of the Nation; and I hereby declare that I recognize and 
accept the supreme authority of the United States of America 
in the Philippines and will maintain true faith and allegiance 
thereto." 

Then he signed it with the gold pen used by President 
Roosevelt in signing the Tydings-McDuf fie independence 
law. 

Now President of the Philippines, Quezon delivered his 
inaugural address for 30 minutes, his voice reaching the 
spectators and the millions all over the country that heard 
him by radio. With a voice firm and forceful, with the 
salient points emphasized with vigorous gestures of his 
right hand, he "reviewed the Philippine struggle for liberty, 
pleaded for the strengthening of American-Filipino ties, 
called for reverence for law and maintenance of peace and 
order, sounded a note for an independent judiciary, warned 
the people to be prepared for the increasing burdens of in- 
dependence, and advocated good will toward all nations." 

Of the role of the Commonwealth government in the 
political history and destiny of the Philippines, Quezon said : 

'•Fellow countrymen: The government which we are 
inaugurating today is only a means to an end. It is an 
instrumentality placed in our hands to prepare ourselves fully 
for the responsibilities of complete independence. It is essen- 
tial that this last step be taken with full consciousness of its 
significance and the great opportunities that it affords to us. 

"Under the Commonwealth, our life may not be one of 
ease and comfort, but rather of hardship and sacrifice. We 
shall face the problems which Ire in our path, sparing neither 
time nor effort in solving them. We shall build a govern- 
ment that will be just, honest, efficient, and strong, so that, 
the foundations of the coming Republic may be firm and en- 



198 



THE GREAT LEADER 

during — a government, indeed, that must satisfy not only the 
passing needs of the hour but also the exacting demands of 
the future." 

After the address, Quezon reviewed the long and 
smart military parade held in his honor at about 11 o'clock. 
Then he left the inaugural stand for the Malacaxian Palace, 
accompanied by a cavalry escort. 

Malacanan is to the Filipinos just what the White 
House is to the Americans or the Buckingham Palace to 
the English: the official residence of the highest authority 
of the government. Malacanan stands as a symbol of "the 
popular source of the powers exercised by the government 7 ' 
of the Philippines. 

Originally the magnificent residential home of Don 
Luis Rocha, this house of stone, with its garden and stone 
fence, was sold to Colonel Jose Miguel Formento, of the 
Spanish army, for only Pl t 100 in 1802. Situated on the 
banks of the Pasig river, on Calle de Malacanan (now Avi- 
les), in the district of San Miguel, Manila, the property 
was, in turn, acquired by the Spanish government in 1825 
for P5,100; the money came from the funds of the Chinese 
head tax- 
First occupants of the building were the captains- 
general who, by a royal decree of 1847, were allowed to 
entertain visiting commanding officers of fleets, diplomats, 
and other distinguished foreigners. Then a subsequent de- 
cree converted it into the summer residence of the highest 
authority in the country. His official residence at the 
time was on Plaza del Palaeio (now Plaza McKinley) m 
the Walled City (Intramuros), 

However, the earthquake of June 3, 1863, completely 
destroyed this residence, so that the governor-general 
transferred permanently to Malacanan, As it then lacked 
the royal setting that befitted the home of the chief execu- 
tive, several buildings were built, repairs and alterations 
done, and the necessary improvements made. 



199 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



With the implantation of American sovereignty in the 
Philippines the palace buildings were rebuilt and remod- 
elled. The entire ground was raised 18 inches, track 
gardens were cultivated, new fountains were built, and a 
125-foot flagpole was erected, 

American governors-general before General Leonard 
Wood held office in the old Ayuntamiento in the Walled 
City, but, since he found this practice inconvenient for 
him, General Wood erected the Executive Building during 
the first year of his administration. 

Why the name Malacanan? E, B. Rodriguez said it was 
derived from the Spanish word mala-cana (bad cane). It 
is Malacanan because "in ancient times the bank of the 
Pasig river, especially along the San Miguel district, throve 
with bamboo groves. These bamboo groves were filled with 
birds or insects or animals, whose noise or singing gave 
mournful and weird sounds during quiet evenings. People 
also say that these canes were the habitat of ghosts, of 
asuojig, of tianak, and other weird fantasies." 

On the other hand, eminent Tagalistas claim this word 
Malakanyan is a compound of three Tagalog words: -ma 
which is a Filipino article used to express abundance, la- 
Jcan meaning nobility or chief, and iyan signifying "that 
place/ 5 So, Ma-lakan-iyan means the place of the chief or 
the president. Or Malacanan may have been originally 
written as May La lean Diyan, meaning there are aristo- 
crats there. 

From 1863 to 1898, when Manila was surrendered by 
the Spaniards to the United States, 18 , Spanish governors- 
general took turns in living in the palace ; while in the 45 
years of American administration of the Philippines, which 
began in 1901, ten American governors-general made Ma- 
lacanan their official residence. 

To Quezon belonged the honor of being the first Fi- 
lipino chief executive to reside in Malacanan, the place 
with a romantic past, 

200 



THE GREAT LEADER 



Shortly before his inauguration as President of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines in 1935, Quezon asked 
has childhood playmate and lifelong friend, Mrs. Consuelo 
Cuyugan (now president of the Acoje Mining) to make 
him a flag. "One that I can use as my own personal stand- 
ard/' he said, adding, "It will stay with me as long as I 
live, and it will cover me when I am dead." 

So a flag worthy both of the giver and of the receiver 
was made. The flag's background of a blue silk cloth came 
f rom Hongkong and the stars and the shield were embroi- 
dered with the rich yellow heavy gold of China. It was 
clone by Mrs. Pacita Longos according to the specifications 
of Quezon who, while the process of embroidery was going 
on, came frequently to see it. 

When the flag was delivered to him, Quezon himself 
displayed it prominently in the presidential office. During 
the entire period of his administration Quezon looked at 
that flag as it hung from its mast to get the necessary 
inspiration, the rightful guidance, and the courage and 
strength to help him to carry on. 

Nine years are a short period in the life of a ruler or a 
nation. But within that brief span of time Quezon gave 
the Filipino people the enjoyment and glory of some mon- 
umental achievements, l-endered them satisfactory public 
service, kept them firmly united under his trusted leader- 
ship. 

Quezon's first term of six years — from 1935 to 1941 
— was replete with major accomplishments which prepared 
the country for a political and economic existence in the 
years under independence. His different policies enun- 
ciated in the first years of his administration were suc- 
cessfully carried out, especially those along the lines of 
maintaining an independent judiciary, alleviating the con- 
ditions of the masses, securing order and protection for 
both life and property, readjusting the national economy, 
improving health conditions and extending the rudiments 



201 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

of education to the masses, and constructing public works 
projects throughout the country. The keynote of his ad- 
ministration was social justice to the poor. 

Quezon started his administration with the execution 
of his plan on national defense, the purpose of which was 
"to confront any potential attack with the certainty that 
the losses to be incurred in conquering the Philippines 
would be so great as to make such a venture politically 
and economically unprofitable/' Devoted to the security 
and defense of the Commonwealth were the Philippine 
Army with its citizen army "capable of rapid transforma- 
tion upon emergency call into an effective field force" and 
its air corps, and the offshore patrol. General of the Army 
Douglas MacArthur was the field marshal of the Phil- 
ippine military forces. The citizen army proved its mettle 
in the battles of Corregidor and Bataan. Although com- 
posed mostly of 20-yearold soldiers who finished their mil- 
itary training only in the cadres, they bravely faced the 
enemy and presented them with, a gallant and unflinching 
resistance which won for them the admiration of the world. 

Throughout his administration, the financial condition 
of the government was sound and stable, with a consider- 
able unencumbered surplus on hand. The domestic and 
foreign trade increased in volume, resulting in a large fa- 
vorable balance of trade for the Philippines in visible 
terms. Investments in different businesses likewise con- 
tinued, and banking facilities increased in number. By an 
enactment of the second National Assembly, the Common- 
wealth established the Agricultural and Industrial Bank 
with a view to help the small farmers get agricultural, in- 
dustrial, and real estate loans at very low rates of interest 
to aid them in the cultivation of their crops. On its part, 
the Philippine National Bank raised the amounts loaned 
for agricultural purposes from 60 to 75 per cent of its ca- 
pital, and granted crop loans to farmers on the guarantee 
of their future crop shares. Agricultural products were 
exempted from the sales tax. 



202 



THE GREAT LEADER 



Peace and order prevailed throughout the country all 
these years and the depression showed no telling effects 
upon the people. Unemployment was greatly solved with 
the operation of the National Relief Administration and the 
launching of a huge program of public works projects 
which called for annual appropriations of several million 
pesos. The Philippines became a haven of peace, order and 
security as a result of the splendid work of the Philippine 
Constabulary which served as the national police unit. 

To meet the new economic conditions brought about 
by the change in the political status of the Philippines, 
plans were formulated for economic adjustment and recon- 
struction. Through the efforts of the National Economic 
Council which was created to look after the establishment 
of "the proper relationship between economic activities and 
national needs, correlate productive energy with labor, ca- 
pital and credit facilities, and direct the wise utilization of 
our natural resources/' impetus was given for the develop- 
ment of agriculture on a large scale and the improvement 
of existing industries. 

Through the National Produce Exchange, an open 
market wherein producers dealt directly with buyers, the 
prices of important staple crops and products, especially 
sugar, rice, tobacco, corn, copra, rubber, cassava starch, 
and peanuts, were stabilized. For its part, the National 
Rice and Corn Corporation stabilized the price of rice, 
thereby ending rice shortage and profiteering. To fill the 
need of minor producers and farmers in the marketing of 
their products at the opportune time, the National Ware- 
housing Corporation engaged in the general warehousing 
business. 

On the other hand, the Insular Sugar Refining Corpo- 
ration made possible the local marketing of refined sugar 
at a low price. The National Food Products Corporation, 
which maintained a fish cannery and a can-making plant, 
operated after the manner of a sugar central, thereby giv- 



203 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



ing fishpond owners in Central Luzon long-term contracts 
for the delivery of their produce to the cannery at reason- 
able prices, as well as loans secured by their proceeds. 

Intensive experiments were also conducted by the Bu- 
reau of Animal Industry for the industrialization of meat, 
dairy, and similar products. Plans were also prepared for 
the transformation of the Bureau of Science into an insti- 
tute of research which was to handle the various industrial 
researches of the government. The National Abaca and 
Other Fibers Corporation (NAFCO) rehabilitated the de- 
cadent abaca industry in the Bicol region and Davao as a 
result of the growing demand for the product in the for- 
eign markets. 

These various government agencies and the Bureau of 
Commerce intensified commerce and industry, so that to- 
day there are Filipino merchants and retailers with steady 
business and income. 

In extending its southern line to Legaspi, Albay, the 
j ianila Railroad Company not only reduced by several 
hours the time of travel from Manila to the Bicol provin- 
ces, but also stimulated freight traffic with the cutting 
own of both the passenger and cargo rates and its con- 
venient and economical handling by the new all-rail route, 
travel between the provinces of Central Luzon and the 
^agayan valley in the north was also facilitated with the 
opening 0 f the San Jose branch line of the railroad firm 
m Nueva Ecija. 

The settlement by farm tenants of the sparsely-set- 
ect areas of public lands in the provinces of Luzon and 
Mindanao and in the islands of the Visayas, especially 
rough colonization, was given impetus with the forma- 
m of the National Land Settlement Administration. An 
alon We Survey of P ublic lands > especially in the areas 
reaif f CW roac * s or highways, was conducted by the Bu- 
1 °f Lands, for purposes of subdivision and establish- 

204 



THE GREAT LEADER 



merit of new settlements. Along the new roads small par- 
cels of five and ten hectares were made available to home- 
seekers, with still increasingly bigger areas for the pur- 
pose farther from the road. 

To remedy the unsatisfactory living conditions of the 
laborers and employees residing in Manila, the govern- 
ment, through the People's Homesite Corporation, allowed 
them to acquire lots, on the installment plan, on which to 
construct their houses. The government embarked on this 

;l e n n f e P U bI,C f h J °" si "? P«e«»n with the purchase of 
1,600 hectares of the Diliman estate in Quezon city. 

Pledged to the cause of social justice Quezon did al- 
most anything and everything possible to ameliorate the 
living condition of the poor and the laboring class Mod- 
ern tenement houses for low-salaried worker* were con- 
structed by the government in the old tenement districts 
°*J™ ai l a - . La ™ were enact ed to bring to the common 
people the benefits of the different social reforms initiat- 
ed by Quezon. 

Noteworthy labor legislation during the Common- 
wealth was the act which created the Court of Industrial 
Relations empowering it to "fix minimum wages for labor- 
ers and maximum rentals to be paid by tenants and to 
enforce compulsory arbitration between emplovers and em- 
ployees. This law assured the laborer a living wage, im- 
munity against exorbitant rentals, and speedy settlement 
of factory strikes, walkouts, and tenancy disputes. 

Thanks to Quezon, the Workmen's Compensation Act 
now gives more benefits to injured government laborers 
or to their beneficiaries in case of death, while the Eight- 
Hour Labor Law and the Woman and Child Labor Law are 
being strictly enforced. Today laborers are paid in cash 
and are no longer obliged to purchase merchandise from 
their employers or receive payment for their labor in to- 
kens. 



205 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

The Department of Labor, on its part, extended its 
activities to the regular inspection of factories, the settle- 
ment of wage claims, the employment of thousands of 
job-seekers, and the recruiting of home-seekers and then- 
shipment to Mindanao and other sparsely-populated areas 
in Luzon and the Visayas. 

To help the indigent masses, its public defenders were 
stationed in the provinces. These government lawyers 
were "empowered to prosecute monetary claims for indi- 
gent persons, protect their rights against unscrupulous 
employers, and defend them in court in criminal cases." 

For the improvement of the lot of poor tenants, Com- 
monwealth Act No. 20 authorized the President to insti- 
tute expropriation proceedings or to acquire large landed 
estates to be used as home sites, in order to give the ten- 
ant a chance to possess a home of his own. To this end, 
the Commonwealth acquired the Buenavista estate in Bu- 
lacan and launched a cooperative system of agriculture 
among the tenants. It maintained a cooperative store, 
built a maternity hospital, and constructed wide streets 
traversing the hacienda. 

Owing to the recurrence of conflicts between capital 
and labor, Quezon committed himself to the policy of es- 
tablishing a higher standard of living for the workers and 
laborers. The government initiated the move by giving its 
laborers in the national public works in Manila a minimum 
wage of P1.25 a day and those in the provinces and other 
chartered cities Pl.OO. Private companies also gave their 
laborers their due. 

Education made considerable headway under Quezon. 
With the substantial increase in the enrollment in the 
public schools, more schools were established and addition- 
al teachers were employed to take care of the new classes 
that were opened. In compliance with the provisions on 
education of the Constitution, the national government took 



.206 



THE GREAT LEADER 

unto itself the task of providing at least primary educa- 
tion for all children of school age: of maintaining- colle- 
giate normal schools in the provinces for the training of 
an adequate number of teachers ; and of establishing agri- 
cultural and trade schools in the different regions of the 
Philippines, for the purpose of encouraging vocational edu- 
cation among the youth. 

More private educational institutions were opened and 
operated as the students showed remarkable inclination to 
obtain education from private sources. Quezon approved 
the transfer of the University of the Philippines from Ma- 
nila to its new site in Quezon City consisting of 600 hec- 
tares. The sum of PI 7,500,000 was authorized for the con- 
struction of the buildings and important improvements 
necessary to make it the most modern and completely 
equipped institution of higher learning in the Orient. Que- 
zon set down the policy of having the University of the Phil- 
ippines serve as a standard for university education in the 
Philippines and in the Far East if possible. To accomplish 
this objective he ordered the university authorities to 
adopt a process of selection among the students as a means 
of keeping up a proper standard of education and instruc- 
tion. 

Adult education, under the care of the Office of Adult 
Education, likewise showed satisfactory progress as "an 
agency for the elimination of illiteracy and for instruction 
in the fundamentals of citizenship." 

Although the health situation during the Common- 
wealth was good in general, the government intensified its 
activities against tuberculosis, leprosy, and malaria — the 
three serious health problems that confronted the adminis- 
tration of Quezon. Industrial hygiene was also undertaken 
with a view "to correcting insanitary environment and 
sanitary deficiencies in commercial, industrial, and agri- 
cultural establishments." A number of new hospitals in 
the provinces, and some puericulture centers, public dis- 



207 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



pensaries, and free clinics in the towns were opened and 
maintained. 

To secure greater efficiency in the administration of 
justice and speedier dispatch in the cases pending in court, 
the judicial branch was enlarged, so that during the Com- 
monwealth the Supreme Court had seven justices, the 
Court of Appeals had 15 justices, while 62 judges sat in 
the courts of first instance, three judges constituted the 
Court of Industrial Relations, and 747 justices of the peace 
were assigned in the towns. With this number the clog- 
ging of the dockets of the various courts throughout the 
Philippines was greatly reduced, and judicial work was 
brought up-to-date. Quezon purged the judiciary of all un- 
desirable judges who undermined the faith of the people, 
thereby giving the country a strong and an upright judi- 
ciary which gained the respect and confidence of all. 

While the American administration limited the Phil- 
ippine cities to two — Manila and Baguio — Quezon saw- to it 
that more autonomy was granted by law to big and pro- 
gressive towns with a view to permitting them to expand 
their activities. He, therefore, created nine cities out of 
some provincial capitals and towns with a future. These 
were Cavite, Tagaytay, and San Pablo in Luzon ; Cebu, Ea- 
colod, and Iloilo in the Visayan islands; and Zamboanga, 
Dansalan, and Davao in Mindanao- Following their respec- 
tive inaugurations and establishment, these new cities im- 
mediately developed and rose to meet the expectations of 
the President. 

Then, in the fourth year of his term, the United States 
Congress enacted a law containing important and timely 
amendments to the Tydings-McDuffie independence act. 
The new act provided, among others, for (1) the establish- 
ment of an annual duty-free quota in the United States for 
cigars, scrap tobacco and stemmed and unstemmed filler 
tobacco, coconut oil, and pearl buttons, and relieving them 



208 




r 

|p 



i 



(A 



)) 111! ,i f LJ 

lift t § I if ' .»:d£iii* 




1940 


JANUARY 


1940 


Am- 


fWon. 








I 




r- 1 - 
i ******* * a 






3 


4 


i 5 


6 


-X ■ ss 


t*m St*** 

t»..lllM 






*»<>.■■ hc 


**** 

' .■ r . . - -J ■ 


. V 1^ 




8 


9 


Fio 


f 11 


12 


13 




bttfcA ■»<; H ■ ■ ■ ■ 


tj ■ ■ 4 S 


*>^m iW^MMjr 


ilx- i-S t,^-^ -.. 

«*4 y kwh 

Am* 


[ * ., H -IHiiiH If 

f*. • k* i«n » 




14 


' % 

*.**<» ■ : . . 


16 

■•■ 


17 

i'» ■■• >-•■■>*-■.■■ 


id 

+*• ii j '■*> 


19 

******* it*- 
,. 


20 










21 


22 


23 


24r j 




20 j 


27 








.i -.-l^ (•.-: — +.. 

■ ■,...*•■+ v- i 

wa 

**•*■*»*■ MH -V--* 

- ™ * J 4, jv.i.i jm. 


■ ■ * Si ; 
■ .v.-' .■ • ■ ••• ' 






28 

5 , * * 4 ,=!■' ***■*» 


29 

- > * ■'■ " v 












i 








.,. . „ v ,„-!^'-r 
✓vXv i : f •■* 


* t < ■, *4 :. ts*s+ 
- .. 
















... „ , i 









fc4 



Every year the government published its own calendar which 
featured the major achievements and historic events of the 
Commonwealth* Here the inauguration of President 
Quezon (shown delivering his address) is depicted. 



THE GREAT LEADER 



from the payment of the export tax imposed by the inde- 
pendence act; (2) the continuation until July 4, 1946, of 
the annual quota of 6,000,000 pounds for Philippine cor- 
dage; (3) the use by the Philippine government of the pro- 
ceeds of the excise tax on such expenditures that were 
necessary in adjusting the local economy to a position in- 
dependent of trade preferences in the United States and 
in preparing the Philippines for independence; (4) ex- 
emption of copra and Manila fiber (abaca) from the pay- 
ment of the export tax; (5) the acquisition or retention 
by the United States of such lands and properties in the 
Philippines as might be necessary for its diplomatic or 
consular establishments; and (6) a conference at least two 
years prior to July 4, 1946, for the purpose of formulat- 
ing recommendations as to the future trade relations be- 
tween the United States and the independent Philippine 
Republic. 

As he considered the law to be "another indication of 
the sustained interest of the United States in our welfare 
and of the desire of the American people to be fair and 
just to the Philippines and to do everything reasonably 
necessary to make possible our adequate preparation for 
independent nationhood," Quezon recommended that the 
National Assembly should formally accept the new act be- 
fore it initiated the required steps that were a condition 
to its effective. 

In 1940, with only one year left for Quezon to com- 
plete his term of office as President of the Philippines, a 
strong move by the people to amend the Constitution so 
as to allow a re-election for the chief executive among other 
things was initiated. The movement soon gained momen- 
tum and before long it was widespread, creating much in- 
terest among the people. 

The proposed amendments provided for: (1) the short- 
ening of the term of office of the President from six to 
four years and permitting his re-election for a second 



209 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

term;' (2) the change from a unicameral to a bicameral 
system in the legislative department; and (3) the creation 
of the commission on elections. About the first amend- 
ment, it was argued that "a long term of six years with- 
out the necessity of submitting his official acts to the peo- 
ple, would make the President less responsive to their will 
and might tempt him to place his or his party's interest 
above the interest of the public/' 

The constitutional amendments were all approved by 
the Philippine electorate in a national plebiscite. More than 
85 per cent of the electors voted for the amendment on 
presidential re-election. With the overwhelming approval 
of the re-election provision, Quezon was allowed by law to 
run for a second term in 1941. 

As his first term was about to terminate, Quezon pre- 
pared the site of the future Philippine capitol in Quezon 
city. In a solemn ceremony in 1940 on the occasion of the 
celebration of the fifth anniversary of the Commonwealth, 
Quezon himself laid the cornerstone of the proposed na- 
tional edifice. The impressive feature of the occasion was 
the placing of a Commonwealth bronze capsule containing 
historical documents into the cornerstone cavity. Some 
100,000 peopl? from all walks of life watched the simple 

but fitting ceremony. 

As president of the Philippines Quezon always set the 
example for his people to emulate. His social reforms, 
which gradually transformed the Philippines from a state 
of medieval feudalism to a land of equal opportunities for 
all, were soon followed by the private landowners and plan- 
tation operators everywhere in the country. Quezon also 
set the example "to the nation to put more life into his 
faith in the dignity of labor in the fields." One Thursday 
morning he motored to his Pampanga farm where he cast 
aside presidential decorum as he strolled into the open and 
muddy ricefield accompanied by his farmers. In boots, 
breeches and polo shirt, Quezon sorted a rice seedling from 



210 



THE Gil EAT LEADER 



a bundle handed to him, stooped down, and planted the 
same. After the rice planting act, he "swapped juicy anec- 
dotes with the members of his party, indulged in light ban- 
ter with his tenants, and held a session of fun with the 
barefooted children of the farm. The experience must have 
been refreshing" to Quezon. 

While in the advocacy of his social justice program 
Quezon "for the first time in the histoiy of the Philippines 
lifted the yoke of oppression long borne by the Filipino 
masses and gave them cause to rejoice and hope and strug- 
gle hard for the dawn of a new era of freedom— freedom 
not only to exercise fully their rights under the Constitu- 
tion but also freedom: to live as worthy citizens in a democ- 
racy, harassed neither by want nor fear," he never allowed 
and tolerated the common people for whose welfare he had 
worked so hard to commit abuses or do wrong against 
their fellowmen. 

Instead, time and again, he repeatedly and consistent- 
ly warned them of the kind of government he wanted es- 
tablished and maintained in the Philippines. "This is not 
a government for the capitalists or against the capitalistic, 
neither is it a government of the world ngman against the 
capitalist," Quezon once said. "This is a government of 
right." Then he added, "I am ready to fight the world lor 
the right of workers and be on their side when they are 
right, but I would not stand by them when they are wrong. 

Although he devoted his efforts to the physical devel- 
opment of his people during the first half of the ten-year 
transition period of the Commonwealth government m or- 
der to prepare the country to .assume all the responsibilities 
of an independent nation, Quezon did not, however, forget 
the spiritual regeneration of the Filipinos, especially the 
young men and women about whom he was deeply con- 
cerned. 

The regeneration, of the Filipinos was to Quezon the 
paramount concern of his administration. "My most 



211 



MANUEL h. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREEE 

cherished ambition is to see it realized. It is the greatest 
prize that I can crave for my life," he said. "To attain these 
aims, it is imperative to fashion the culture and character 
of the people, so as to provide them with spiritual and phy- 
sical energies of the highest order. . . Every Filipino is a 
part and an objective of this great national movement, the 
success of which depends upon his own success in building 
'up his character and developing his faculties." 

In his appraisal of the character of the Filipinos today, 
Quezon pointed out their weaknesses and shortcomings as 
well as their virtues. "Let us look at ourselves stripped of 
the veil and trappings with which in our vanity we often 
cover ourselves," Quezon urged. 

Quezon's administration was wholly dedicated to con- 
structive progress. Both rich and poor were served well ; 
their welfare and interest were protected, alleviated, and 
regulated. There was widespread happiness and content- 
ment as the great leader who was both loved and respected 
by all— Filipinos and foreigners alike— gave his heart to 
his people and his mind to his country. 

As the last years of his administration were about to 
dose, Quezon revealed to his people his one great dream 
for them. He said : 

"Some leaders of men have advocated the strenuous life; 
others a life of danger and adventure. I offer to you the 
useful life, devoted to self-improvement and the service of 
the state. It must be rooted on character, self-discipline, and 
work. It should glorify productive enterprise, a high sense 
of responsibility, and the ethical virtues. Its objectives are 
personal perfection and social efficiency." 

During his term Quezon did not content himself with 
™ling the Philippines from his desk at the Malacanan 
Palace, f or at times he went out and inspected the differ- 
ent government offices and brought the government closer 
to the people through periodic visits to the provinces. It 
was during these trips that Quezon came in direct contact 



212 



THE GREAT LEADER 



with the populace whose problems, complaints, needs, and 
suggestions he heard. On the spot of inspection he heard, 
considered and decided cases brought to his attention. 

In one of his trips the case of a justice of the peace 
who has been recommended by the investigating official for 
dismissal after finding him guilty of committing an act of 
immorality was dispatched by Quezon. He called the judge 
before him as he wanted to know the truth. In the course 
of the presidential probe, Quezon asked the accused if he 
did anything to the girl while the two rwfere under a tree 
in the dead of the night. On hearing his negative reply, 
Quezon stood up and, angrily, exclaimed, "You are really 
stupid. You are dismissed from the judicial service." 

On another occasion, Quezon called for the secretary 
of the provincial board of a province in the south. The 
secretary, a young man, was accused of having falsified 
certain public documents. To the questions of Quezon, the 
secretary admitted his guilt, confessed he violated the law 
and knew he was going to jail for the crime. But Quezon 
was so impressed by his honesty that he ordered Elpidio 
Quirino, then the secretary of the interior, to retain him 
in the service. 

Quezon was in his periodic provincial inspection trips 
to the Visayas and Mindanao when he was suddenly both- 
ered by a painful toothache. Following his complaints, his 
aide-de-camp canvassed the town for a dentist, but the only 
dentist available had long since been out of active practice 
and at the time of the presidential call—it was a Sunday 
— he was at the cockpit, The dentist, however, was just 
glad to be of service to his President, and after an injection 
into the gum of Quezon, the patient was relieved of the 
pain. While Quezon was observing the relief, he learned 
from the dentist that his practice brought him practically 
nothing for his livelihood. So, upon his return to Manila, 
Quezon gave him a job in the dental corps of the Phil- 
ippine Army, 



213 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

Then came 1941. It was election year. For the second 
time the Filipino electorate were given by law the oppor- 
tunity to select the man to head their government for the 
next four years. The presidential election was set for No- 
vember 11. The Nacionalista party, to which both Quezon 
and Osmefia belonged, held a national convention in Manila 
on August 16 to choose its standard bearers. Of the political 
accomplishments of the party, former Speaker Jose Yulo, 
in his keynote speech at the opening day of the gathering, 
said in part: "Under the inspiring leadership of our great 
leader, President Manuel L. Quezon, our party has handled 
the reins of the Commonwealth government during the last 
six years with rare intelligence and devotion." 

At the convention the re-election of both Quezon and 
Osmefia was approved and forthwith the party machinery, 
of which the late Benigno S. Aquino was designated the 
campaign manager, went into action. Unknown to him at 
the time that in the next election he was going to be the sub- 
ject of a similar nomination for the presidency of the 
Philippines, Manuel Roxas, then one of the 24 candidates 
of the Nacionalista party for senator, delivered the nomi- 
nation speech in favor of Quezon. The nomination, which 
was placed in order by the delegates to answer "the insistent 
and widespread demand for his continued leadership," was 
met "with a unanimity that leaves no doubt as to the esteem 
in which he is held by the people." 

In nominating him, Roxas said of Quezon in part : 

"We meet during troubled and anxious times. Never be- 
fore in the history of mankind has there been such chaos, 
destruction and suffering in the woild. The law of the 
jungle reigns in three continents. An infernal military 
machine driven by men gone mad has been mowing down the 
lives and free institutions of millions of human beings, leaving 
in their wake massacre and butchery, devastation and ruin 
and the curdled blood of countless innocent victims. We see 
gathering over our heads thickening clouds of lead and steel 



! 



214 



THE GREAT LEADER 



which tin eaten to wipe out liberty and civilization from the 
face of the earth. The conflagration has been sweeping on 
and on and is rapidly Hearing our shores. This historical 
moment is fraught with the gravest danger to our lives, our 
tiomeSj and the liberties that are closest to our hearts. I 
"As we meet to ponder upon this serious crisis and to 
choose the man who can lead the nation wisely and courageously 
through this approaching order of life and death, our 
eyes irresistibly turn to the man who, for over forty years, 
with unsurpassed patriotism, has devoted his life and his all 
to achieve the welfare and liberty that we now enjoy. His 
name is on our lips; it is a household word in the homes of 
the rich and poor, in every hut and shack throughout the 
width, and breadth of our land, because it is carved deep in 
the hearts of sixteen million Filipinos. If this inarticulate mass 
could speak at once in answer to the question that now en- 
gages the attention of this convention, the chorus of their 
voices would in unison, like a peal of thunder, demand his 
nomination. And that is because he is the spontaneous 
choice of our fellow citizens to assume that tremendous 
responsibility. 

"His life is an unbroken record of fruitful service and 
Signal accomplishments in behalf of our people, x x x 

X X X X X 

'■Under his stewardship during the last six years we 
have attained a progress and cultural development unequalled 
during any similar period in our history. His accomplishments 
are well known to all. x \ - x 

"These accomplishments are significant in the life of 
a new nation. They represent a long step forward in pre- 
paring our people for the responsibilities of independence 
and the changes which that new status will bring. 

"At the close of his present administration it was his 
desire to enjoy a well-deserved rest, but the people would 
not allow it. Through an amendment to the Constitution 
brought about by a persistent popular demand, the consti- 
tutional obstacle of his re-election has been eliminated. The 
people's insistence to draft him was moved by the conviction 
that he and he alone could unite the nation and face the 
grave problems that the world crisis has created. And again 
duty calls him in a manner that no patriot can fail to answer. 
It will mean a new risk of his life and new labors and 
sacrifices, perhaps more trying than those which he had ever 
experienced in the past. But as he is a patriot, I have no 



215 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CARKKK 



doubt, he will forget his self-interest and personal convenience 
and submit himself once more to the wishes of his people, 

"He is ;i man with the broadest human sympathy, tli-* 
apostle of our freedom, and the builder of our nation. So- 
cial justice is the keystone of his social philosophy. Tin 1 
well-being of the common man is his ever present and deep 
concern. His keenest interest is for him and the millions 
that he represents; and they love him, because he has jriven 
them justice and has been their benefactor. 

"This great and trusted leader, this inspired liberal, 
this peerless champion of our national independence, this 
statesman of courage and vision, to whom we owe, in a lar^e 
measure, our liberties, our progress, and our well-hcinjr. is 
the man whom I take pride to nominate President of the Phil- 
ippines. He is none other than the fearless warrior, the 
Wend of the people, the father of his country, Ibe Hvlii* 
hero of the Filipinos — Manuel Quezon/" 

The results of the election which save him an over- 
whelming majority for the presidency once more demon- 
strated that Quezon was the beloved and recognized leader 
of his people. 



216 



- 




Chapter 23 
THE SOLICITOUS WARTIME STATESMAN 



% * ANUEL L. Quezon was recuperating from a recent 
IV X attack of his illness in Baguio when he received the 
news of the bombing by the Japanese of Pearl Harbor. In 
the morning of that fateful day — Monday, December 8, 1941 
— his valet woke him up because of an important Ion£ dis- 
tance telephone call from his secretary, Jorge E, Vargas, 
who was in Manila. Informed, Quezon was dumbfounded 
and shocked. He could not believe Vargas at first. 

Soon after, he willingly expressed his reaction on the 
treacherous attack to a reporter of the Philippines Herald 
who came to see him. In his first wartime statement he 
said that as the zero hour had arrived, he expected every 
Filipino, man and woman, to do his duty. "We have 
pledged our honor to stand to the last by the United States 
and we shall not fail her, happen what may," he added. 

From his summer residence, Quezon saw Japanese 
planes fly over Baguio and drop bombs strong explosions 
and detonations of which made the people panicky. 
As his first wartime act Quezon ordered the immediate 
rounding up by a major of the Philippine Constabulary of 
all Japanese nationals residing in Baguio, A similar order 
was given to all Constabulary provincial commanders sta- 
tioned in other parts of the Philippines, In no time Quezon 
received the heartening report that all enemy aliens had 
been placed under protective custody as a precautionary 
measure. 

That afternoon Quezon motored back to Manila. The 
following morning he met, his cabinet at his country home 
in Marikina, Rizal, at 11 o'clock. He also held frequent 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



conferences with his Council of State and the legislative 
leaders until he left Manila for Corregidor in the later part 
of December. In these wartime sessions, Quezon deter- 
mined the necessary steps to prepare the country and the 
people for the war against Japan- Already Japanese air- 
men had bombed Clark Field, Fort McKinley, and other 
military installations in various parts of the Philippine*. 
Quezon was also in constant contact with General Doug- 
las Mac Arthur, supreme commander of the USAFFE in th- 
Philippines. He had a direct telephone line installed 
between his Marikina residence and the headquarters of 
MacArthur in the Walled City (Intramuros) of Manila, 

For its part, the National Assembly met at a special 
wartime session called by Quezon. It approved war meas- 
ures, among them a law granting the President of the 
Philippines emergency powers for the duration of the war; 
an act placing all the resources of the Philippines, both 
men and material, at the disposition of the United States ; 
and another law setting aside the sum of Fl 0,000,000 for 
civilian emergency measures, particularly the prompt and 
safe evacuation of the civilian population and their train- 
ing in air raid drills and blackouts. 

Unmindful of the delicate state of his health at the 
time, Quezon visited at night the wounded civilians and 
military men in the Philippine General Hospital in a wheel- 
chair, in the company of his aide-de-camp, Col. Manuel 
Nieto, and his physicians. 

Most of the provinces of the Philippines were already 
in a state of war. The Japanese invaders thrust so fiercely 
and speedily through the defenses of the United States 
armed forces in the Far East (USAFFE) that in no 
time the enemy was already knocking at the doors of Ma- 
nila, As they advanced closer to the capital city of the 
Philippines, it became evident that their first and main 
concern was to look for and get Quezon whose collabora- 



218 



THE SOLICITOUS WARTIME STATESMAN 



tion and cooperation they wanted and needed in order to 
facilitate the occupation of Manila and other parts of the 
country. 

But Quezon would not be one — a collaborator! So, 
as the enemy pi^essed harder on Manila from both the north 
and the south, he took immediate steps after repeated con- 
sultations with his associates to move out the seat of the 
government to a safer place somewhere in Luzon. Quezon 
transferred the national government to Marikina, where 
it was for sometime. But when Marikina came within the 
shooting distance of the enemy; Corregidor became the 
next choice. In Corregidor, where Mac Arthur was also to 
have his headquarters, he would feel safe and "at home * 
with his family and wartime cabinet 

So, on December 24, after Mac Arthur had reported to 
him the imminent and inevitable fall of Manila to the enemy, 
Quezon readied himself within four hours. The govern- 
ment officials needed in the smooth prosecution of the war- 
time activities of the Commonwealth were assembled in the 
Malacanan Palace. They were Vice President Sergio Os- 
mena, Major General Basilio J, Valdes, Chief Justice Jose 
Abaci Santos, Senator Manuel Roxas, Colonel Manuel Nieto, 
and Serapio Ca nee ran, Quezon's private secretary. In the 
party were also Rev. Pacifico Ortiz, S. J. f Dr. Andreas 
Trepp, Majors Benvenuto Diiio and Emigdio C. Cruz, and 
Ah Dong, his Chinese valet. 

Immediately after luncheon, Quezon motored to the 
presidential landing near the Manila Hotel, escorted by a 
motorized unit of the Manila police. Before boarding the 
P-T boat that was to take him to the s*s. May on which was 
one mile away in the breakwater, Quezon gave his last ver- 
bal instructions to the ranking officials of both the national 
and the city governments whom he was leaving behind. He 
asked them to exert their power, prestige, influence, and 
authority to minimize the sufferings of the people during 

219 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

the temporary occupation of the country by the enemy. He 
likewise counselled them not to lose their faith in the United 
States, 

The trip started at three o'clock that afternoon, and 
Quezon arrived in Corregidor two hours later. At the 
dock was Major General George C, Moore, commander of 
the island fortress, who took him to his temporary wartime 
quarters in the Malinta tunnel. The male members of the 
Quezon party were grouped together in one lateral wing 
which was described as narrow, humid, dark, devoid of 
fresh air, and with facilities consisting of only one shower, 
one toilet, and one wash basin for the use of everybody. 
Quezon was given a bed located at the farthest end of the 
lateral. He had a small altar beside his bed. The place did 
not suit the health requirements of Quezon and his cough- 
ing soon turned from bad to worse. Only the daily visits 
of Mac Arthur in the tunnel cheered up Quezon during the 
Corregidor evacuation. 

Of the life of Quezon on Corregidor, Osmena left to 
posterity this vivid and graphic account: 

"In Corregidor we had to adjust ourselves to the regu- 
lated life of an army post. We were given accommodations 
in Malinta tunnel. Our meals — we got only breakfast and 
an early supper — were the same as those given the soldiers. 

"Ufe in the tunnels of Corregidor was trying. The 
bombs were continuous and deafening. In the heavy at- 
mosphere it was no wonder that President Quezon's health 
deteriorated rapidly. He coughed frequently and soon con- 
tracted a fever. I succeeded in having a platform eon- 
an r e<i on the slope near the entrance of the tunnel, wher^ 
'-et a / my tent Was placed for his use ' Thus he ™ as able to 

to tak eSher alr: and in case of an air r ^ id alarm U was easy 
3 e him t0 safety in his wheel chair." 

mi „ The3 J. 0n December 30 came the end of his first ad- 
0 f th pi - p n ° f Six years as president of the Commonwealth 
to thV Ppines * As he and Osmena had been re-elected 
eir re?pecti ve positions in an earlier election, they were 



220 



THE SOLICITOUS WARTIME STATESMAN 



inaugurated for their second term of office constituting 
in the case of the president the next two years ending in 
1943. The Constitution, as amended, allows the president 
to hold office for two consecutive terms of only eight years. 

The inaugural ceremonies were simple and informal 
On an improvised platform built on a level clean space 
outside the tunnel serving as the officers' mess, Quezon 
stood Up and delivered his second inaugural address. 
With him Avere United States High Commissioner Francis 
B, Say re, Mac Arthur, Osmena, and Abad Santos. The war 
cabinet, high ranking army officials, and Quezon's family 
were the distinguished guests. 

Although the historic event was announced over the 
radio, all that the hearers knew was that the ceremonies 
were taking place somewhere in an un occupied territory 
in Luzon. Virginia Bewley opened the program by singing . 
Hail to the Chief and ended it with the American and 
Philippine national anthems. After Quezon had taken his 
oath of office before Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos, he 
delivered a short but eloquent and impassioned address, in 
the course of which he said: 

"Today I am assuming for the second time the duties 
of the presidency under entirely different conditions. We 
are in the grip of war, In defenseless cities and towns air 
raids are hilling women and children and destroying ceo* 
tury-old churches, monasteries, and schools. 

"x x x We are resisting this aggression with every- 
thing that we have. , , Despite the enemy's temporary su- 
periority in the air and on land and sea, we have been able 
to check the rapid advance of the invading armies, 

"At the present time we have but one task — to fight 
with America for America and the Philippines, To this task 
we shall devote all our resources in men and materials. Ours 
is a great cause. We are fighting for human liberty and 
justice, lor those principles of individual freedom which we 
all cherish and without which life would not be worth living. 
Indeed, we are fighting for our own independence. It is to 



221 



MANUEL L, QUEZON: HIS LIFE AXD CAREER 

maintain this independence, these liberties and these free- 
doms, to banish fear and want among all peoples, and to 
establish a reign of justice for all the world, that we are 
sacrificing our lives and all that we possess. The war may 
Ixi long-drawn and hard -fought, but with the determination 
of freedom. loving peoples everywhere to stamp out the rule 
of violence and terrorism from the face of the earth ( I am 
absolutely convinced that final and complete victory will be 
ours/ 1 

. Shortly after the ceremonies, Quezon formed his five- 
man wartime cabinet composed of Vice President Osmena 
as secretary of public instruction ; Chief Justice Jose Abad 
Santos as acting secretary of justice; Major General Basiiio 
J. Valdes, chief of staff, Philippine Army, as acting secre- 
tary of national defense and of public works and communi- 
cations; Major Andres Soriano as acting secretary of 
finance; and Colonel Manuel Roxas as acting secretary to 
the President, 

Despite his delicate health Quezon continued exercis- 
ing his duties as chief executive. His principal concerns 
at the time were the condition of the soldiers in the fight 
ing lines in both Corregidor and Bataan and the satisfac- 
tory solution of important matters related to the civil ad- 
ministration of the unoccupied areas in the Philippines. 
He also followed closely the general course of the war 
events in the country, paying attention to the advances and 
gams of the enemy from day to day as well as the losses 
m territory and in men of the USAFFE. 

When the enemy had gained much headway in its as- 
saults that made the surrender of the USAFFE imminent, 
Quezon created his Commonwealth committee that conferred 
with the American high commissioner on the ways and 
means of disposing of the remaining government funds in 
Corregidor, consisting of gold and silver coins and treasury 
certificates amounting to several million pesos. The com- 
mittee, composed of Osmena, Abad Santos, Valdes, and 



222 



1HE SOLICITOUS WARTIME STATESMAN 

Nieto, later witnessed the dumping of the coins in the Ma- 
nila bay and the burning of the paper currency — the two 
measures adopted to prevent the money from falling- into 
the hands of the enemy. 

Later Mac Arthur surprised Quezon with a radiogram 
he had received from General George Marshall, chief of 
staff of the United States army, instructing the general to 
negotiate the safe transfer of Quezon to the United States 
where the Commonwealth was to be established in exiie, 
with Quezon as the symbol of redemption of the Phil- 
ippines. At first, Quezon looked with disfavor at the plan. 
But he later decided to go upon learning that the late 
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt had ordered Mac- 
Arthur to sail for Australia where he was to have his next 
headquarters. 

"This decision was not only the wise and patriotic 
thing to do, but the only thing to do under the circum- 
stances/' opined Osmena. "From the outbreak of the war 
in the Philippines in December, 1941, the Question that 
taxed his mind most was whether, as chief executive, it was 
not his duty to remain at the side of his people and share 
their fate. Not until after prolonged and painful deliber- 
ations did he finally decide to separate from his people 
temporarily." 

Quezon had plausible and patriotic reasons for his 
departure. As Osmena knew them, they were: "First, 
nothing further could be done to prevent the invasion and 
eventual occupation of the Philippines, Second, in or- 
der to be sustained and successf ul the resistance movement 
had to be directed from outside the orbit of the enemy con- 
trol. And third, it was apparent that the independence 
of the Philippines could come only from the United States, 
and that, obviously, the United States was the only place 
where we could continue the work of establishing that in- 
dependence/' 



223 



MANUEL L. QUEZON; HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

To leave or not to leave the Philippines and his people 
behind — was undoubtedly the question that kept Quezon 
thinking for many days and nights. He was puzzled. As 
Frank Murphy, first United States high commissioner to 
the Philippines and now associate justice of the Supreme 
Court of the United States, put it, Quezon had three choices 
at the time on which to base his decision, namely: 

"One was to become a quisling. The lavishliess of 
Japan for years had been futile in the face of your loyalty, 
for you are first a patriot. Even at Corridor, Japan made 
advances to you, thinking naively that you could ho tempted 
from your unswerving honor. That choice was, of course, 
unthinkable for you. 

"The second was to remain close to your people, de- 
fending and protecting them with your last breath. Tins 
was what you really wanted to do, for your heart and soul 
were and are today in the Philippines. The third choice 
was to follow the path desired by President Roosevelt, to 
Join him in Washington and to serve actively in the program 
to oust the Japanese from vour country and to bring free- 
dom to your people. 

"No man's duty was ever harder than yours. Your hear* 
Was heavy, but your faith was high, and so you followed the 
ler 1Se ° f duty t0 Washington where your energies could best 
erVe your country and your people." 

Arthur' Pl ^ S ±0r WS trip were secret1 ^ worked out in Mac - 
lo lool/ S fi 6adqUarters " Quezon continued in the meantime 
dor and P f the WeIfare of the fighting boys in Corregi- 
foodstuff He saw to [t tHat they W6re supplied with 

that the *' that they were £ iven < adequate q uarters - and 
mounded were well taken care of. 

the UnfS l of ati ° n of hi s long and hazardous journey to 
cleared of n ' Quezon ordered his desk ° n the " R ° Ck " 

bumed whit t r;t nt ^ The iess *«p° rtant pa / ers z e z 

i u historic documents were put m tight 

Doxes and brought along. He also armed Roxas, who de- 
cided to remam i n the Philippines, with an executive or- 



224 



THE SOLICITOUS "WARTIME STATESMAN 



der that made him the rightful successor to the position of 
chief executive in case of the death of both the President 
and the Vice President during the war. 

His last few days in Corregidor were spent in extreme 
danger, suffering, and privations which he gallantly and 
willingly shared with the Filipino soldiers in the front lines* 
One dusty afternoon he risked his own life while on a mo- 
tor visit of the coast artillery batteries of Corregidor 
during which he met the boys and talked to them. The 
trip proved so much for his health that he was given 
a dose of morphine the next day to relieve him of severe 
coughing, an attack of asthma, and a high fever. 

The announcement by radio of the promise of "inde- 
pendence with honor" to the Filipinos made by Premier 
To jo during his speech before the Japanese diet and the 
reported establishment of a new government in the Philip- 
pines, known as the Philippine Executive Commission, with 
some of his former close associates in the Commonwealth 
as the leading officials, caused Quezon considerable worry 
because he feared that the United States government would 
take seriously the alleged pledge of adherence of the Fili- 
pino people to Japan as broadcast from Tokyo. Quezon 
kept busy the wires between Corregidor and Washington, 
D. C. 7 to assure Roosevelt of the determination of the Fili- 
pinos to fight on the side of America until victory was 
finally achieved. His efforts were later rewarded when 
Roosevelt reiterated the solemn promise of his government 
to fulfill its pledge of granting the Filipinos their inde- 
pendence as soon as feasible. This message of assurance 
cheered Quezon. It gave him vigor and enthusiasm. In 
A proclamation he issued from Corregidor, he paid the brave 
Filipino soldiers m the fronts a glowing tribute for their 
heroism. He said partly: 

"The people ol America and your own countrymen have 
been thrilled by the gallantry with which yon have been 



MANUEL L. QUFZOX: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

defending our country, x x x You have performed deeds 
of heroism and valor which will live in the history of those 
stirring days. 

" . - , You arc fighting with America because America 
is fighting for our freedom. Our salvation will depend upon 
the victory of American and Filipino arms. 

■ . We are fighting that the Filipino people may he 
the master of their own destiny and that every Filipino not 
only of this generation but of the generations to come may 
be able to live in peace and tranquility in the full enjoyment 
of liberty and freedom. Your duty — our duty — is to fight 
and resist until the invader is driven from our land, x x x x" 

After staying: in Corregidor for nearly two months, 
Quezon made a dramatic departure on February 20, 1942— 
the day which started the long odyssey from the island 
fortress to Washington, The journey was full of dangers. 
At times it was thrilling but at other times it was hardly 
bearable. 

At past ten o'clock in the dark night of that day, 
Que^or. drove to the dock accompanied by MacArthur. A 
*st.httle boat took Quezon to the hideout of the submarine, 

T' ' l ! flm ' eomman ^d by Commander Chester C, Smith, 
tea ii^ the breakAvater of Manila bay. The submarine 
me • at mirface FpGed in the ni ^ ht hlli fcept itself sub- 

er^ed m (he day to evade the enemy's sea patrol in the 
area. 

The submarine reached San Jose de Buenavista, in 
utique, 0n p anay islandj at past tWQ 0 - c i ock in the muni- 

unde SUnclay : February 22. This was the first and last 
^^cenvater trip of Quezon. From here he motored to 

fly I? a blief rest at the guest houfle of the Lopez fam " 
site f fu° ltly after noon lle continued the sojourn to Ajui, 
dinner S ^ ay central of the Elizaldes, where he had his 
as fa* Tlnen ^ uezon boar ded the s.s, Don Esteban going 
lloil * as the tiny island of Guimaras at the mouth of the 
24 at U ^ e r After spending: the following day, February 
' ^ui maraSj he cr0flged the Tanon strait aboard the 



22G 



THE SOLICITOUS WARTIME STATESMAN 



s.s, Prhwesa de Negros for San Carlos, Negros Occidental. 
The next day he motored to Bais, Negros Oriental where 
he remained for several weeks. Momentous decisions were 
made at Bais. From here Quezon supplied Bataan with 
fresh foodstuffs for some time; he planned out the island- 
wide resistance movement against the enemy; and he later 
ordered the printing of emergency notes and their distri- 
bution to all localities short of them to cover their current 
maintenance expenses* 

Before he left Bais, which became the temporary seat 
of the free Philippines, Quezon issued on February 28 a 
proclamation intended to boost the morale of the wartorn 
people. He said partly : 

"The bolt hurled by the enemy is fast spending its force. 
The tide is turning and it Tvill not be long, I trust, before 
the tremendous might of America fully goes into action in 
this part of the world. Already the gallantry of our soldiers 
has aroused the admiration of the whole world. 

"I urge every Filipino to be of good cheer, to have faith 
in the patriotism and valor of oar soldiers in the field. But 
above all, to trust America and our great beloved leader- 
President Roosevelt. The United Nations will win this war. 
America is too great and too powerful to be vanquished in 
this confict. I know she will not fail us/' 

During: his stay in Negros, Quezon moved constantly 
from one town to another, never stajnng in a single place 
for more than two days in order to insure his safety from 
the enemy. This practice enabled him to tour the entire 
island. 

On March 17, at Buenos Aires, Negros Occidental, 
Quezon received a letter from MacArthur in Mindanao 
through Andres Soriano, advising him of the trip to Aus- 
tralia, The next day, at ten o'clock in the night, Quezon 
motored to Dumaguete, Negros Oriental, where two P-T 
boats were kept in readiness for the dash to Mindanao, 
Soon after the Southern Cross became visible m the early 



227 




MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

morning of March 19, Quezon boarded the P-T No. 41, the 
flagship of the famous squadron of Lieut. John D. Bulkeley, 
which had Ensign George Cox as skipper. 

It took the P-T boats four hours to reach Oroquieta, 
Lii Misamis Occidental, on the northern coast of Mindanao. 
As soon as Quezon came out of the open cockpit of the boat, 
he proceeded to the church and attended the mass to offer 
his thanks for the safe voyage which had kept both Mrs 
Quezon and Fr. Ortiz saying continuously their prayers in 
the chartroom of the vessel. 

For a much needed rest Quezon then motored to the 
home of the late Senator Jose Ozamis in Jimenez, a pros- 
perous town of Misamis. The next day, March 20. he 
transferred to Dansalan city in Lanao province ; then pro- 
ceeded to Del Monte, made famous by the American-owned 
pineapple plantation in the locality, where he remained for 
three days waiting for the arrival of the flying fortresses 
that were to take him to Australia. In Del Monte a small 
nipa hut was purposely built atop a hill to suit his failing 
health. Here Quezon and Roxas had their rendezvous for 
the last time. From Roxas he obtained valuable informa- 
tion about the aggravating war situation in Bataan, Cor- 
regidor, and other places. 

On the night of March 26 Quezon left the Philippines 
aboard one of the three large flying fortresses which 
MacArthur sent him. After nine hours of smooth flying 
Quezon ended his first airplane ride with a safe landing 
on Bachelor field, 60 miles from Port Darwin. He took 
his breakfast here, and then continued the flight to Alice 
Springs in a Dutch transport plane which negotiated 
the distance in five hours. In this desert town he 
spent the next two days in a small one-story hotel as he 
waited patiently but hopefully for Osmena to show up. 
Osmena's plane ran out of gas when it was about 50 miles 
from Alice Springs and a rescue ship was sent to fetch the 



228 



THE SOLICITOUS WARTIME STATESMAN* 



distinguished passenger to his destination. The ''loss" of 
Osmena had greatly worried Quezon. 

After a full dinner on March 28, Quezon again took 
a chartered commercial transport for the last six-hour hop 
to Adelaide. On the same day Quezon took the special tram 
prepared by MacArthur for Melbourne. At the railroad 
station on March 29, he was welcomed by Mac Arthur him- 
self and his staff as well as by Australian officials and the 
Filipino soldiers who were evacuated from Manila aboard 
the s.s. Ma yon. 

In Melbourne, Quezon received with a heavy heart the 
s.id news of the tragic fall of Bataan. He spent his first 
week in the palatial home of a wealthy department store 
owner of the city. Then he leased a house for the duration 
of his stay. In Melbourne, too, he conferred with the Bri- 
tish governor general of Australia, the prime minister and 
his cabinet, and the top-ranking officials of the armed for- 
ces of the United States, Great Britain, Australia, Nether- 
lands, and Canada. 

For some time Quezon had under serious consideration 
the plan of remaining in Australia and establishing the 
Commonwealth-in-exile government there in order to be 
near Mac Arthur and to be ready to return to the Philip- 
pines with him. However, the plan was eventually given 
up and Quezon stuck to the original schedule of ending the 
trip in the United States. 

On April 20, Quezon boarded the s.s, President 
Coolidge, a luxurious transpacific liner converted into a 
troop ship, for the crossing of the Pacific. At the Mel- 
bourne dock Mac Arthur and other prominent government 
dignitaries bade Quezon farewell and "bon voyage." 

Escorted by a United States navy cruiser, the ship 
which zigzagged through the seas in order to evade Japa- 
nese submarines, reached its destination after 18 days, 

229 



Chapter 21 



THE EMINENT FATHER OF PHILIPPINE 
INDEPENDENCE 



pEECIOUS PACKAGE arrived." This coded message 
* was received by General of the Army Douglas Mac- 
Arthur in Australia as soon as the s.s. President Coolidgc 
had arrived safely in San Francisco, California, on May S ; 
1942. That morning at the pier was United States Assis- 
tant Secretary of the Interior Oscar Chapman, who came 
from Washington, D. C, to meet Quezon whose arrival was 
announced officially by Secretary of the Interior Harold 
L. Ickes in a memorandum sent out to all the newspapers 
of the city. 

Once established at the swanky Mark Hopkins hotel, 
a press conference was arranged by Chapman for Quezon. 
Numerous newspaper photographers were conspicuous 
taking pictures of Quezon in different poses and moods. 
The pictures, together with the interview, were played up 
on the front pages of subsequent editions. On that day 
the Philippine war situation occupied the attention of the 
American reading public. Later Quezon made an inspec- 
tion tour of the military area of the city in the company of 
Lieutenant General John L. Dewitt. 

When he decided to cross the continent, the late Pres- 
ident Franklin Delano Roosevelt sent his special train for 
the trip to Washington, D. C. Accompanying Quezon were 
Chapman and United States military and naval officers. 
Upon alighting from the train at the Union station in the 
afternoon of May 13, Quezon saw Roosevelt standing 
alongside his limousine, aided by his naval escort. The 
two old friends exchanged warm greetings as distinguished 
American and Filipino government and military officials. 



230 



THE EMINENT FATHER OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 

including former governors general and high commission- 
ers to the Philippines, looked on. 

The big crowd gave Quezon a tremendous welcome 
which he gratefully acknowledged with tears flowing down 
his cheeks. From the station the two Presidents motored 
directly to the White House where they talked of the wav 
situation in the Philippines until almost midnight. 

The following day Roosevelt tendered Quezon an offi- 
cial luncheon, after which Quezon left, the White House 
for his permanent residence at the Shoreham Hotel 

Quezon took the entire floor of one wing of the hotel 
to accommodate his office and his family. During his stay 
the Philippine flag with the red field up was hoisted be- 
side the American emblem. On the other hand, the offices 
of the government of the Commonwealths in-exile were es- 
tablished in, the four-story red-brick building located at 
1617 Massachusetts Avenue which was occupied by the 
Philippine resident commissioner. 

Simultaneously, he expanded his wartime cabinet by 
including Joaquin M- Elizalde, resident commissioner, and 
Jaime Hernandez, auditor general 

On June 2, Quezon was privileged to address the 
United States House of Representatives. From the rostrum 
Speaker Sam Ray burn presented him to the representa- 
tives of 48 states and the delegates and resident commis- 
sioners of four territories. He was received with a warm 
welcome by the House while the select crowd of onlookers 
cheered him. He returned the cordial reception with smiles. 
Then he spoke lengthily of the gallantry of the Filipino 
people during the war, reiterated their loyalty and deter- 
mination to stand by the United States until victory was 
finally won, and made the assurance that despite death, 

231 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CA KEEK 



ruin and destruction on their part they would not turn 
their back to America. 

In the United States Senate, where he appeared later, 
Quezon urged the senators to adopt the slogan, "Remem- 
ber Bataan," while America was busy concentrating its 
war effort on the final goal to defeat Germany first. Vice 
President Henry A. Wallace introduced Quezon. 

In his speech-making appointments before important 
American and international audiences. Quezon brought 
to his hearers and* to the millions of listeners by radio, the 
reasons why the Filipinos were fighting side by side wilii 
America. He said in part : 

"The Filipino people fought back because they kuew 
that America had made a promise and that she would keep 
that promise. When we fought for your flag, we knew we were 
righting for our own freedom. When we resisted the inva- 
sion of our country, we did so because we knew the Phil- 
ippines was our country, not only de facto but de jure. And 
we were loyal to you, to your flag, and to your country, 
not because under international law we owed you that al- 
legiance, but because you have won our undying friendship 
and affection— because you did by us what no other colo- 
nizing power has done by the people who had fallen under 
their sway. The presence of your flag in the Philippines was 
a symbol of our freedom. It was there only to allow you 
to finish the work you had started to do — to help set* up 
an independent Philippine Republic/' 

Then he reminded his hearers of Roosevelt's pledge to 
the Filipino people made on January 5, 1942, which said: 
"I give to the people of the Philippines my solemn pledge 
that their freedom will be redeemed and their indepen- 
dence established and protected. The entire resources, in 
men and material, of the United States stand behind that 
pledge. ,, 

A date fraught with historic significance which should 
be remembered forever in the Philippines and by Filipinos 



232 




Reproduction by Pedro Nario 

President Quezon as he appeared in- the United States 
during the war years. 



THE EMINENT FATHER OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



anywhere is June 14, 1942 — the day designated as Amer- 
ican Flag Day in the United States. On this particular 
date Quezon signed the United Nations declaration, on behalf 
of the Commonwealth government at an international ce- 
remony held in the presence of Roosevelt and the delegates 
of all signatory nations at the White House. With this sig- 
nal privilege accorded Quezon, the Philippines became prac- 
tically independent with an independence that was right 
there and then given international recognition. From 
then on, the Philippine flag was displayed together with the 
colors of the Allied powers in all public functions any- 
where, and the Philippines was at the same time admitted 
as a member of the Pacific War Council whose meetings 
were attended by either Quezon or Osmeiia. Roosevelt 
presided the council meetings. 

This singular achievement of Quezon was recorded 
by Osmeiia as follows : 

"... under the leadership of President Quezon, the 
government or the Commonwealth functioned in Washington 
not only with the recognition of the United States, but of 
the other nations with which America is allied in this war. 
The Commonwealth, in a word, acquired an advanced political 
status because, anticipating the promised recognition of our 
independence, the American government had taken the stops 
to invest us with international personality. President Que- 
zon was privileged to sign the United Nations declaration as 
if he represented an already independent nation. We were 
admitted to membership in the United Nations, and we were 
accorded a seat in the Pacific War Council." 

As the months rolled on, Quezon expanded his activi- 
ties in the United States, and paid more attention to pub- 
licising the current war events in the Philippines which he 
believed all Americans had a right to know- As an imple- 
mentation to the publicity being given generotisly by the 
American newspapers, he established the Office of Special 
Services late in 1942. Later Quezon made this office the 



MANUEL L, QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



nucleus of the new department of information and public 
relations in his cabinet. General Carlos P- Romulo was 
appointed its secretary early in 1943. 

In March of 1943, Quezon founded a monthly maga- 
zine which he himself called the PhilvppineSj devoted to 
the extensive publicizing of the varied activities of the 
Filipinos in the war. Quezon also wrote several articles 
under his name for this periodical and other national publi- 
cations. He depicted the heroism of the Filipino soldiers 
on the Bataan front and portrayed the Philippines graphic- 
ally in the war. In his article in the Pearl Harbor an- 
niversary issue of the Army and Navy Journal Quezon 
brought out the fact that his "people have been treated by 
the people and government of the United States, not as an 
inferior colony fit only to be exploited, but as a fellow- 
nation which had a right to independent self-government/' 
In his last known article, published in the Liberty magazine 
of December 25, 1943, and titled "Christmas on Corregi- 
dor " Quezon made known the success of the widespread 
resistance movement in the Philippines against the treach- 
erous enemy. 

For his numerous writings Quezon had plenty of fresh 
and authoritative materials. Time and again he received 
information about the guerrilla activities and the current 
conditions in the Philippines through messages sent by 
General Macario Peralta over his radio station WPM and 
also by regular submarine service maintained by Navy 
Commander Chick Parsons between the islands in the Visa- 
yas and General MaeArthur's headquarters in Brisbane, 
Australia. From there they were flown to America, How- 
ever, in 1942 Quezon depended for his Philippine news 
chiefly on the enemy broadcasts from Tokyo and Manila 
which were picked up by either the Federal Communica- 
tions Commission or his Office of Special Services. 



234 



THE EMINENT FATHER OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 

Quezon also participated active!)' in the nationwide 
drive sponsored by the American government to enlist the 
lurther cooperation of the citizens in the "on to victory ;J 
war effort. Joining a war bond-selling parade in New- 
York city in the summer of 1942, Quezon stood in his lim- 
ousine throughout the way and waved his hand in re- 
turn for the cheers and greetings of approximately 
500,000 spectators lining the streets. 

His next important public appearance was during his 
first birthday in the United States on August 19, 1942. 
Although confined in bed at the Shoreham Hotel, Quezon 
attended the special mass said at the St, Aloysius 1 church 
and then broadcast by radio a message addressed to the 
Filipino residents in Hawaii who celebrated their pur- 
chase of war bonds worth P4, 00 0,000, On, this occasion 
Quezon said the Filipinos were still standing with the 
United States both in life and in death, "No matter how 
long the war lasts, I count upon every red-blooded Filipino 
to stand fast and firm to the bitterest, but, I am sure, glo- 
rious end," he added, Friends and admirers in different 
lands led by Roosevelt sent their greetings- "I know that 
I speak for the people of the United States when I say that 
we hope for you today a continuance of the strength, for- 
titude, and vision which enables you to serve your people 
in their greatest trial and which will enable you in the 
future to play your part in bringing liberty and abundance 
to your people," Roosevelt stated. 

Further manifestations of Quezon's cooperation with 
the United States towards the speedy and successful pros- 
ecution of the war effort were his donation of a yacht for 
use in the Caribbean sea as a submarine chaser, and the 
offer of a Filipino infantry in the United States army. He 
bought the slick, seventy-foot yacht, Limbas, of Resident 
Commissioner Elizalde, renamed it Bataan, and got an 



235 



MANUEL L + QUKZOX: HIS 1AYK AND CAUKKIi 



entire Filipino officers and crew to operate it, On his 
initiative a Filipino infantry unit was formed and trained 
in California- The unit was authorized by the War De- 
partment in response to Quezon's request that Filipinos be 
given the opportunity to join the American military forces 
in the overseas battles. 

Early in November, Quezon held a conference with 
Roosevelt during which they worked out a plan providing 
for the creation of a joint commission to study the econom- 
ic conditions of a post-liberation Philippines. Eighteen 
months later, the Congress of the United States passed an 
Act creating the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission, 

Quezon spent the year 1943 mostly at Miami Beach 
in Florida to recuperate from his illness. Because of his 
continued failing health he delivered only a few important 
speeches, although he never failed to comply with all re- 
quests for special messages which were read during public 
occasions, One important address he delivered was at the 
.'-fathering of the Maryland State bar association in which 
he broached his plan of negotiating with the United Stated 
government Philippine-American military alliance which 
Quezon considei*ed essential — and the only foolproof solu- 
tion, for that matter — to the maintenance of neace in the 
Pacific and for the continued security of the Far East in 
the forthcoming years. 

Besides worrying over his health, Quezon had other 
mental preoccupations. His biggest official worry came 
as a result of the promise to his people of indepen- 
dence with honor by Premier Tojo of Japan during a visit 
to Manila. Quezon for a time feared his people would easi- 
ly swallow To jo's words. He, therefore, prepared a spe- 
cial message addressed to the Filipinos which he broadcast, 
^fter getting the approval of Roosevelt on some statements 
concerning United States policy on foreign affairs affecting 



23G 



THE EMINENT FATHER OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 

the Philippines. "Assuming that tomorrow Japan was to 
declare the Philippines an independent nation, what would 
thai moan?" Quezon asked- "It would merely mean that 
the Philippines would be another 'Manchukuo' — a govern- 
ment charged only with the duty to obey the dictates of the 
Japanese rulers/' he argued. 

On the other hand, Quezon assured his audience that 
"our independence is already a reality, since the President 
of the United States, by his several official acts, has given 
recognition to the Philippines as possessed of the attributes 
of full nationhood. The only thing lacking is the formal 
establishment of the Philippine Republic. This cannot 
happen until our country is liberated from the invader — 
until you, my fellow citizens, can exercise your full right 
to elect the officials of the government of the Republic." 

Quezon followed this broadcast with a series o£ ad- 
dresses over the shortwave radio station OWI in San f ran- 
cisco. In one of these pronouncements, he told his people 
pointblank that "the real purpose behind the granting by 
Japan of a so-called Philippine independence (was) to 
Use the Philippines." Which fact Quezon sensed rightly! 

To appease his perturbed mind once and for all. Que- 
zon later conferred with both former Governor General Hen- 
ry L. Stimson, at the time the United States secretary of 
war, and Senator Millard E. Tydirtgs on the possibility of ad- 
vancing the date of the independence of the Philippines, 
which Quezon believed was the only satisfactory solution 
to the current problem. After repeated conversations, 
and in line \tfith one of the messages of Roosevelt to 
Congress, Tydings introduced two resolutions in the Sen- 
ate. Both resolutions were passed by Congress a few- 
weeks before Quezon died. The first resolution, which 
became known as S. J. No. 9:3. provided for an advancc- 



MANUEL lu QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



merit of the date of independence by the United States, 
while the second, S, J. No, 94, authorized the creation of 
the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission. 

As the days passed, the end of the term of office of 
Quezon as president of the Philippines was fast approach- 
ing, By operation of law, Quezon would have ceased as 
the nation's chief executive on November 15, 1943, and 
Sergio Osmena, as vice president, would have succeeded 
him as President. 

The question of succession became an interesting and 
lively issue in both the Filipino newspapers in California 
and the American press in Washington and New York. 
Editorial writers throughout the continent were over- 
whelmingly inclined to favor the enforcement of the pro- 
visions of the Constitution although they were aware of 
Quezon's brilliant and indispensable leadership during the 
war years. 

The issue soon became a heated controversy between 
Quezon and Osmena. Osmena started by writing Quezon a 
long letter reminding him of the completion of his term* 
But Quezon did not only reply to Osmena in which he ex- 
pressed his desire to continue in office because he felt his 
services were more invaluable at the time than before, but 
also issued a press release that began with the question, 
"Can Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, Con- 
tinue in Office as Chief Executive of the Commonwealth 
Government After November 15, 1943? If He Can, Should 
He?" Logic and reason filled the whole length of the art- 
icle which showed why Quezon should continue in office 
even after the expiration of his term. 

Osmena's next move was to ask Homer Cummings, 
United States attorney general under President Roosevelt, 



238 



THE EMINENT FATHER OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



to study the case, and forthwith Cummings brought out a 
masterly-written brief on the constitutionality of the 
matter. 

But Quezon was still adamant as he firmly believed 
it was his duty to carry on. He ignored the correspondence 
from Osmena. Quezon was only receptive to a decision 
coming 1 from Roosevelt. But Roosevelt chose to keep his 
hands off and suggested that the question be settled among 
Filipino officials in Washington, 

So the cabinet was called by Quezon to a meeting to 
consider his successor. Present at this fateful conference 
were Osmena, Philippine Resident Commissioner Joaquin 
M, Elizalde, Secretaries Andres Soriano, Carlos P. Romulo, 
and Jaime Hernandez, At the end of a spirited discussion, 
during which Elizalde expressed his views which were con- 
curred in by the other members, Quezon agreed to abide by 
their decision and announced his retirement and sub- 
sequent plans to transfer to California. 

After the meeting Osmena remained, and once alone 
with Quezon, told him that he could remain as president 
through legal processes. He then broached his plan to ask 
congressional leaders to enact legislation to suspend the 
presidential succession provision of the Constitution so as 
to permit Quezon to remain as chief executive. As the 
plan was agreeable to Quezon, Osrnena drafted a letter 
which the cabinet members signed on November 5, 1943. 

The letter, addressed to Senator Ty dings and Congress- 
man Bell, left to Congress to "feel free to consider whether 
it would be to the best interest of both peoples to allow 
changes in the direction of the Commonwealth government 
during the emergency, to continue the status quo until such 
time as the constitutional and democratic processes are 
fully established in the Philippines, or to follow such other 
course of action as in their opinion is required by the cir- 
cumstances." 



239 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE A XI) ( A K K KM 



Ty dings instroduced a resolution in the Senate allowing 
both Quezon and Osmena to continue their respective of- 
fices until the President of the United States had pro* 
claimed that "constitutional processes and the normal 
functions of the government had been restore*! in the Phil- 
ippine Islands/' It also stipulated that the vice president 
was to succeed as president until such time as a new pres- 
ident had been elected. The resolution was passed by a 
unanimous voice vote in the Senate. In the House of Rep- 
resentatives it was discussed and debated "with consider- 
able heat/' and then approved by a vote of 181 to 107 in 
the afternoon of November 10- 

Of his personal activity in this matter, Osmena said 
that he called both at the White House and in Congress to 
ask for a legal means to enable Quezon to continue dis- 
charging his powers as president during: the emergency. 
'The Congress accepted my suggestion and I had the sat- 
isfaction of seeing President Quezon's command extended 
so that he and not I should accompany the forces of libera- 
tion to the Philippines to rescue our people from the 
clutches of the enemy, But Providence walled otherwise, 

he passed to a better life," 

Shortly before his sudden death Quezon made a major 
address and a prophetic broadcast. The address was de- 
livered by Romulo during the Neiv York Herald Tribune 
forum. On this program Quezon talked of fostering and 
maintaining a close and coordinate American-Philippine 
cooperation and assistance in the Orient in the interest of 
both the governments and the peoples of the United States 
and the Philippines "even after they have become politi- 
cally independent of one another," He opined that the se- 
curity of both countries and "perhaps the future peace of 
the Pacific will depend very much on the relationship./' 

The farewell broadcast, which was intended for his 
people whose patriotism he spoke of highly and whose 



240 



THE KMIXENT FATHER OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 



loyalty he never doubted even for a moment, envisioned the 
early dawn of the day of liberation of the Philippines, 
Quezon's appeal said: 

"My beloved countrymen: Every day the hour of your 
liberation is drawing closer. Every clay your hope oE re- 
demption is brighter. The forces of the United States under 
General MacArthur and Admiral Nimitz are going forward 
confidently, steadily, relentlessly. American bombers under 
the command of General MacArthur are ranging northward 
ironi the base of Holland ia, which is less than 1,300 miles 
from our Philippines, The day is coming when liberating 
American forces— among them our own countrymen will 
land on our shores. My countrymen, I know— and I am truly 
proud of you— that you have not crooked your knees to the 
Japanese invader these last two years, I say to you: keep 
the banners of your faith flying. You must not falter now 
that the end of our long night of suffering is in sight. The 
day of deliverance is almost here at last. We will soon be 
Willi you. We are on our onward march — to victory and 
freedom." 

Osmeiia, who was with Quezon in the United States 
all this time, saw how Quezon worked incessantly to bring 
the Philippines very close to the hearts of the American 
people and thus enabled his country to get top priority in 
the war effort and in other allied matters. No man is 
better qualified to judge the accomplishments of Quezon 
during the three crowded years of his exile than Osmena. 
Of the distinguished role Quezon played in successfully 
achieving for his beloved Motherland her early indepen- 
dence, Osmena fc'ives this historic and significant account 
which assures Quezon's permanent and lasting place in 
Philippine history: 

"As a result of his contacts with the government in 
Washington, his repeated conferences with President Roose- 
velt, and his impassioned speeches in and outside the Con- 
gress, he was able to focus the interest of the people of the 
United States on the problems of the Pacific, an interest 
which, before his arrival in Washington, had been centered 
in the European front, the front to winch the resources of 



241 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



America were already committed. And thus LI was that, even 
before the surrender of Germany, the problem of the re- 
conquest of the Philippines was brought to the fore and 
General MacArthur was able to return to Philippine soil to 
wage Ms brilliant campaign of liberation earlier than orig- 
inally anticipated. The success of American arms, ably as- 
sisted by the long suffering Filipino guerrillas and civilian 
volunteers, is a monument to the vision and faith of Pres- 
ident Quezon. 

"But the greatest achievement of the Quezon administra- 
tion in Washington, one that excels any In this great leader J 
long record of struggle for our independence, is fne enact- 
ment by the American Congress on June 20. 104-1, of the 
legislation providing for the establishment of bases in Phil- 
ippine territory for the mutual protection of the United States 
and the Philippines and the maintenance of peace in the Pa- 
cific. The advantage of the security which this law knnw^ 
as Joint Resolution 93 provides for our independent existence 
and national integrity cannot be overempha sized. As far as 
human foresight can reach, this protection insures lor our 
present and future generations the peaceful enjoyment of 
the blessings of independence. If President Quezon, in hi- 
long and fruitful career, hat! done nothing more than thir>, 
it would already assure him of an imperishable place in our 
history and list him, besides, among mankinds great bene- 
factors as one of the architects of that permanent universal 
peace so eagerly, patiently and wisely sought by the United 
Nations after the bitter experience of this war." 



242 



Chapter 25 
THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 



WORLD WAR II found Manuel L. Quezon a sick man. 
When the enemy made its surprise aerial attacks on 
different military installations in the Philippines in Decem- 
ber, 1941, he was recuperating from recurrent attacks of 
tuberculosis in Baguio. 

His illness, however, worsened when he "evacuated" 
to Corregidor before the end of that year. On the "Rock" 
where he remained for more than two months, Quezon 
"lived" in a most gloomy atmosphere in the dark, narrow, 
and foul-aired lateral of Malinta tunnel. ■ If he was not in 
bed with his lean body supported by pillows and covered 
with an immaculate, white sheet, he was seated listening 
attentively to something that had caught his attention and 
interest. 

As Quezon needed to be in high spirits and physically 
strong to withstand the continuous news of war reverses 
in many sectors of the Philippines at the time, everything 
possible under the circumstances was made both by Gen- 
era! Douglas Mac Arthur and Vice-President Sergio Osme- 
fia. Mac Arthur assigned a cottage to Quezon, while Os- 
niena had a platform constructed on the slope outside the 
tunnel entrance and an army tent placed for his exclusive 
use. He went to these places pushed in a wheelchair. 

His only recreation was playing bridge with his fam- 
ily, members of the cabinet, and some intimate high rank- 
ing officials of the United States army in Corregidor. 
Bridge games made Quezon happy and gave him the needed 
relaxation. He enjoyed them, especially when the stakes 
were high and his partner was President Manuel Roxas 
of the Philippine Republic- 



243 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

But as the days went on, his physicians observed an 
abrupt change in his health. At times his temperature 
reached as high as 105 degrees, a fact which gave his doc- 
tors no little worry. As he was visibly getting worse they 
told him frankly, in February of 1942, to leave Corregidor 
immediately if he wished to save his life for his people and 
country. 

Losing no time Quezon crossed the vast Pacific. 
Aboard the s. s. President Coolidge he got a long and com- 
plete relaxation for the first time in many crowded 
months. Shortly after his arrival in San Francisco, he 
motored to the Belmont estate, owned by Brigadier General 
Patrick J. Hurley and located near Leesburg, Virginia, 
where he resided for some time. In this place he led a 
normal family life, spent many leisure hours play- 
ing solitaire when left alone or chess with Mrs. Quezon 
and their children. He had books read to him by his 
daughters, held conversations with Osmena and his war- 
time cabinet, and started dictating his memoirs which he 
later incorporated in his book, entitled The Good Fight, 
^hich was published after his death. 

Although a sick man he continued commuting be- 
tween his estate-residence and Washington and New York 
city time and again. In his office at the Shoreham hotel 
in Washington, D. C, Quezon held the meetings of his 
cabinet. He lay in bed while the members sat around him. 
He was always deeply concerned with' his health. Before 
he entered air-conditioned theatres he always saw to it 
hat the temperature suited him and this he accomplished 
y first staying at their lobbies for some minutes. 

He took all precautions and submitted willingly to the 
orders of his doctors as when, in 1943, he was told to end 
IS career as a confirmed chain smoker. Then in the sum- 
mer of that year he visited the tuberculosis sanatorium 



244 



THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 



at Saranac Lake in upstate New York for a physical 
check-up. 

Despite the attention and care demanded by his deli- 
cate health, Quezon's sickness worsened, so that on the 
occasion of the eighth anniversary of the Commonwealth 
on November 15, 1943, he was not able to join in the cele- 
bration as he was already confined in his bed, and on 
Christmas he had to move to a small mansion of the fa- 
bulous Nautilus hotel which had been converted into an 
army hospital. Because of his recurrent bad spells at the 
time, extreme precautionary measures were adopted by his 
physicians. Quezon, as well as his visitors, was provided 
with a white mask to avoid being contaminated with cold, 
and Quezon was prevented from conversing or even dictat- 
ing letters in order to conserve his voice and energy which 
he was constantly losing. When he desired to commune, 
he was given a pen and paper for him to write down his 
thoughts. As late as April, 1944, Quezon could only speak- 
in whispers and he encountered extreme difficulty when- 
ever he attempted to talk for his tuberculosis had already 
reached the throat. In the spring he moved to Asheville, 
North Carolina, then returned to Washington, D. C, 
shortly afterwards. From here he transferred to Saranac 
Lake, in New York, where death came to him on August 
1, 1944. 

Quezon woke up early and was in high spirits on that 
fateful midsummer day. That bright sunny morning 
brought from him the unexpected remark, "I never felt 
so well in my life. ,, He had been in bed for 15 months. 
He was alone at the time as Mrs. Quezon and their chil- 
dren had gone to the little Roman Catholic chapel just a 
stone's throw from his sleeping porch to attend an early 
mass. His bedroom had an altar on which was enshrined 
a little statue of Our Lady — the same statue which Mrs. 
Quezon carried in her arms wherever she went during the 
war; a Holy Bible was placed conveniently nearby. At the 



245 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREEK 

head of his bed was a crucifix. Quezon had become very 
pious in his last days. Time and again he bad the Bi- 
ble read to him, he had his family gathered around him 
in the evening to pray the rosary, he received the Holy 
Communion almost daily. "To him the Faith had become 
the source of inner strength and the secret path to nobler 
and broader vision," Reverend Pacifico R. Ortiz, S. J., Que- 
zon's personal chaplain, disclosed. 

His attending physician had just completed reading 
to Quezon the Douay version of his favorite chapter in 
the Bible — the Sermon on the Mount — "Blessed are the 
poor for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven — Blessed are 
they that mourn for they shall be comforted" — when he 
asked him to turn on the radio. Joy sparkled in his eyes 
as he heard at that precise moment the news commen- 
tator broadcast the successful landing of the liberation 
forces of General Mac Arthur at San sapor in Dutch New 
Guinea. "Just 600 miles!" Quezon whispered faintly. So 
near and yet so far ! His thoughts flashed back to his be- 
loved Philippines whose redemption by Mac Arthur he had 
been praying for and anxiously awaiting. 

Then he started to cough spasmodically. Moments 
later he had that fatal attack of hemorrhage and in no 
time his white bed sheets turned red— drenched with blood. 
He saw the ugly sight. No, he would not want Mrs. Que- 
zon and the children, who had been called from the church, 
to see them. So he motioned to the attendant to remove 
them quickly. As they rushed to his side, Quezon gently 
signalled his family to let him alone in this, his last earth- 
ly suffering which was short and without struggle. 

In a few more minutes Quezon became unconscious, 
and then his dragging breath stopped. Comforted by the 
Sacraments Quezon went to his death in "somber splen- 
dor" at exactly 10:05 o'clock that Tuesday morning. His 
death occurred just a few weeks before the triumphal and 



246 



THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 

epochal return and landing of the American liberation 
farces on Leyte which finally brought about the complete 
recovery of the Philippines from the Japanese, Although 
Quezon died "without seeing the dawn" of his people's 
redemption, he died peacefully as he knew full well that 
it was only a matter of time and his country would finally 
be set free and made independent. A fighter all his life, 
he passed to his eternal reward not only a victor in many 
a worthy cause, but also one of the greatest men in the 
world of his time! 

His death was immediately communicated to the Pres- 
ident of the United States and to Vice President Osniena 
who succeeded him. A world-at-war was wholly shocked 
as the people learned of his demise through the newspa^ 
pers and by radio. The first broadcast, which was bar- 
yen of details, broke into a current musical program, say- 
ing, "We regret to interrupt this program for some im- 
portant news: Washington, President Manuel L. Quezon of 
the Philippines died this morning in Saranac Lake, New 
York/' Promptly tributes to his memory came pouring 
in to the bereaved widow and the new president, Osmena. 
The kings and members of royal families as well as the 
heads of democracies and the ministers of the Allied 
Powers sent their condolences, The Pope and religious 
prelates, generals and admirals, statesmen and politicians 
expressed also their sympathies, 

President Franklin Delano Roosevelt (who was to die 
only a year after Quezon) Jed the sorrowing world in 
mourning for Quezon, "The death of my old friend Manuel 
Quezon is profoundly shocking, although I knew, as did his 
many friends, that only a fierce determination had kept 
him alive these past years. . he revealed in his message; 
then he paid him this signal tribute: "He will be remem- 
bered with the respect and veneration that we in the 
United States have for the name of George Washington/' 



247 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREEB 



On his part, Osmena told the American people, in his 
statement to the press, that the death of Quezon was a 
great loss to the freedom-loving world. "No champion of 
liberty fought for such a noble cause with more determi- 
nation and against greater odds. His whole life was ded- 
icated to the achievement of his people's freedom, and 
it is one of the sad paradoxes of fate that with the forces 
of victory fast approaching the Philippines, he should 
pass away now and be deprived of seeing the culmination 
of his labors — the freedom of his people," he said. Then 
he continued, "To the Filipinos, President Quezon's demise 
is a severe blow. No man has received more tokens of 
a people's love and confidence than did Manuel L. Quezon 
at the hands of the Filipino people. His death will be 
taken in the Philippines as another terrible ordeal visited 
upon a nation already so sorely tried by a brutal invasion, 
and only Filipino courage and fortitude can blunt the poig- 
nant sorrow of so irreparable a loss." 

On the following clay — August 2 — the United States 
War Department issued General Orders No. 62, announcing 
"with deep regret" the death of Quezon. "President 
Quezon was a most effective leader of the Filipino people 
in their long struggle for self-government and indepen- 
dence," the orders read. "The establishment of the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth has been in large measure due to his 
courage and intelligence ... As a result of his efforts, 
throughout the agonies of the Japanese invasion, and in 
spite of all the efforts of our enemies, the Filipino people 
have remained loyal to our government." General George 
C. Marshall, then chief of staff of the United States army, 
signed the orders and said that in Quezon's death the 
Philippines and all the liberty-loving peoples everywhere 
lost an outstanding leader, while the United States "a 
strong and appreciative friend." 

Meanwhile, in the Philippines the death of Quezon 
was cautiously made public by the enemy. The Japanese 



248 



THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 



commented greedily, it at all, on his demise because of 
their fear to antagonize further the Filipinos who love Que- 
zon very much. News of his death did not appear in the 
Japanese-controlled daily newspaper. The Tribune, until 
August 3 when two short dispatches from Lisbon were 
published on the front page together with a half -column 
picture of the late leader. 1 

His death was a shock to his people, True, no requiem 
masses could be said in the churches in his memory, nor 
necrological services held publicly, but as news of his de- 
mise circulated around by word of mouth, a grateful people 
graciously bowed in reverence and prayed for the peaceful 
repose of Quezon. 

The day of Quezon's death was an unf orgetable day to 
President Manuel Roxas. "I remember that day," he said* 
"I was at a morning mass in the House of God when the 
tragic newis was spread. Choked with grief, I prayed with 
all my heart for the repose of his soul, for the solace of his 
widow and his children, for the salvation of our people, 
smitten anew with this irreparable loss, x x x That morning 
I attended the funeral of a dear friend, and as I walked 
the streets of Manila, I saw men, women and children shea 
tears of grief silently bearing their deep sorrow. And they 
were crying because President Quezon was dead/ 1 



*The Tribune editorial on Quezon, published in the same issue, 
showed the adverse regard the Japanese had for his lifelong work 
and the distinct role he played in shaping the destiny of his country* 
Pertinent portions of the editorial follow: 

"Whatever be his sins and mistakes in the past, we cannot but 
deplore his death especially knowing that he died in virtual exile, 
far from the country and people for whom he had labored for well- 
nig:h half a century/* 

u k x x x x 

"Death has put finis to his career. As far as we of the 
Philippines are concerned, while we respect his memory, we accept 
the unalterable fact that his death also put an end to the agreements 
and compromises he had willy-nilly entered into with the American 
government, in the latter's efforts to keep a hold on Filipino sym- 
pathy in this war. The curtain falls completely on the Commonwealth 
Government in captivity . * „ t " 



249 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



The perilous situation under which the people labored 
in this dark moment of their lives was graphically related 
by Vice President Elpidio Quirino in this account: 

"The whole nation was struck with sorrow by this stun- 
ning news. But yrief-stricken as we all were, we could on y 
express our sorrow in loneliness and in whispers, fearing 
that the least sign of outward sorrow would bring Imme- 
diately to our doors the sound of the steps of the despicable 
Kempetai, or agents of the Japanese military police. All of 
us remember that only a year then on the occasion of his 
birthday, some Mends of our departed leader who were cele- 
brating the day in Manila were surpriseclly rounded up by 
the enemy and eventually killed for alleged hostile act. And 
later we learned with poignant feeling that the townsfolk 
of a certain municipality of Tayabas, his home province, who 
dared wear the black arm band to attend a church service 
the day they learned of his death suffered the indignity of 
being arrested and imprisoned. Thus, many wept but would 
not reveal the cause of their tears; many just grieved bin 
with the tears in their hearts. Even our prayers for his 
j=oul we had to conceal. If there has been a nation so grief - 
stricken that it could not express itself in words or in tears 
or even in prayers — that nation was no other than the Fi 1- 
pino people in those dark, unforgetable days/' 

On August 4, the statement of Jose P. Laurel,, pres- 
ident of the occupation Republic, lamenting Quezon's death 
was published. Captioned "Laurel Mourns Passing Away 
iof Old Friend — Says History Will Rank Quezon Among 
P. 1/8 Statesmen", a glowing tribute was paid Quezon. 
"Over and above the vicissitudes of his political career and 
the pathetic circumstances that sundered him from his 
people in a fateful hour, we treasure this memory of him : 
that he was a Filipino first and last, and was tenaciously 
proud of it His vision of a dignified, self-respecting, free 
and independent nation will remain as the inalienable 
heritage of the Filipino people," Laurel said. "Whatever 
his critics may say, Philippine history will rank him a*s 
one of the greatest statesmen of our country/' 



250 



>■ 



THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 



In that log house in Saranac Lake, famed American 
health resort, the bereaved family kept reverential watch 
over the body until it was carried in a special train to 
Washington, D. C. Thousands thronged at the Union sta- 
tion on Thursday afternoon (August 3) to catch a last 
glimpse of the casket. Immediately upon its arrival the 
United States government took charge of the funeral. All 
flags in Washington were ordered lowered to half-staff un- 
til after the funeral, while the Philippine flag flying in 
front of the Commonwealth building on Massachusetts 
avenue remained at half-mast for the entire month of 
August. 

Placed into a hearse, Quezon's casket, draped with 
the American and Philippine flags, was slowly driven 
to the St, Matthew's cathedral on Rhode Island avenue, 
escorted by a military guard of honor consisting of mo- 
torcycle-mounted Washington policemen. Following the 
hearse on foot were the new president and officials of the 
Commonwealth and representatives of the American gov- 
ernment- At the cathedral a continuous stream of peo- 
ple from all walks of life walked past the bier until late 
that night to pay a last solemn homage to the great and 
gallant leader whose body lay in state in front of the flow- 
er-banked altar. Filipinos who came from cities like 
New York, Baltimore, New Jersey, Boston and Chicago, 
entered the cathedral timidly. As a fellow Filipino ob- 
served, "they walked on tiptoe toward the altar as though 
afraid to wake up the dead. Some of them stood long 
and perplexed, looking at the President's face, Then 
they moved a little farther away to kneel and bow their 
heads in prayer. Others had come with offerings of flow- 
ers, crude wreaths hastily made, and seeking no reward 
for the spontaneous, loving gesture/' Special devotions 
were also said uninterruptedly at the cathedral from seven 
to eleven o'clock in the night, while white-gloved Amer- 
ican soldiers with rifles grounded, working in shifts by 



251 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



twos, remained as guards of honor. There were also the 
officials and employees of the office of the resident com- 
missioner of the Philippines who kept vigil over the body 
in shifts of twos for one hour at a time. 

The funeral was held in the following morning. One 
hour before the services stained, the cathedral was already 
filled to capacity by mourners, while a much bigger 
crowd kept standing outside waiting eagerly for their turn 
to sign the register. As President Roosevelt could not at- 
tend the funeral, he was represented by both General 
George C. Marshall and Admiral Ernest J. King, com- 
mander-in-chief of the United States fleet. On the other 
hand, Mrs. Quezon and her children were led to the cathe- 
dral through the sacristy, and before going to their as- 
signed seats in the pew, they approached the casket for a 
farewell look. Present in the services were representa- 
tives of foreign embassies, members of the Congress, the 
cabinet justices of the Supreme Court, the press, and 
close friends of Quezon. At exactly nine o'clock, Bishop 
M. McNamara celebrated the requiem high mass. In the 
course of his sermon, the bishop said, "It is consoling 
that President Quezon lived to see the dawn of tranquili- 
ty breaking over the darkness." 

After the ceremonies, the funeral procession started. 
The flag-draped casket was carried on a black- wheeled ar- 
tillery caisson pulled by six white horses. A saddled -white 
horse without its rider, suggestive of the irreparable loss 
of the leader, was conspicuous in the funeral. The Wash- 
ington metropolitan police escorted the caisson as no less 
than 5,000 mourners rode in their cars behind the mili- 
tary unit, and thousands of others stood in complete silence 
along the streets as the casket passed by. Honorary pall- 
bearers were distinguished Washington officials, including 
Vice President Henry A. Wallace, Speaker Sam Rayburn, 
Secretaries Cordell Hull, Henry L. Stimson, and Harold 



252 



I 



THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 

Ickes, Senator Millard E Tydings, Congressman Jasper 
Bell, Justice Frank Murphy, and Commissioner Paul V. 
McNutt, as well as President Osmena and former Gover- 
nor General Francis Burton Harrison. 

To the throb of muffled drums and cathedral music 
of the military band in attendance, the procession moved 
slowly on its way to the Arlington National Cemetery. 
As it reached the Arlington memorial bridge over the Po- 
tomac river, an army, navy, and marine escort of honor 
replaced the Washington police unit and then led the 
march to the highest hill of the cemetery. In the shade 
of the circular granite Maine Memorial located in the heart 
of the cemetery, not far from the Tomb of the Unknown 
Soldier, Brigadier-General William Arnold, chief army 
chaplain, presided over the commitment ceremonies. Af- 
ter the brief benediction the body was taken inside the 
Memorial and placed in a crypt for its temporary resting 
place. Then, in the solemn stillness of the green sur- 
roundings, a detachment of the military escort fired the 
19-gun salute followed by the slow, sweet notes of "Taps" 
which were sounded by an army bugler. And then. . .as 
the mourners prepared to resume the journey back home 
after completing a task well done, the bronze door of the 
receiving vault of the Memorial was slowly alosed back* 

The homeward journey of Quezon's body came about 
after almost 23 months of temporary repose in the hal- 
lowed burying ground of America's national heroes. The 
voyage home was just a fulfillment of his last wish ex- 
pressed to his family before his death. Mrs. Quezon 
vowed to carry it out and until conditions warranted the 
return of the body to his native soil, she and her children 
remained in the United States keeping company to the 
late Filipino leader. 

It was on a hot afternoon of June 28, 1946, that the 
body was removed from the Arlington National Cemetery 



253 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CARE I- II 

with full international honors and solemn ceremonies. At 
3:30 o'clock, two detachments of soldiers took up then- 
position around the Maine Memorial, after which an army 
band played the Philippine national anthem:* For some 
moments there was a hushed silence as the coffin was 
borne out. Distinguished government representatives then 
bowed their heads, high ranking army and navy officers 
saluted, and the guard of honor stiffened to attention and 
presented arms. Then the priest read the service for the 
dead. 

After the brief ceremony, the casket, draped with the 
flag of the Philippines, was loaded onto the waiting ar- 
tillery caisson, A 2l-gun salute due the head of a state 
was fired in the sultry stillness of the afternoon. As the 
mourners paced the procession to the gate, the band played 
the awe-inspiring measures of Chopin's funeral march* 
The coffin was then transferred to a black motor hearse 
and taken to the Union station. All along the way buses, 
cars and streetcars stopped, and waited for the cortege to 
pass, while people stood silently on both sides of the streets. 
In the procession were the "funeral car, private cars and 
taxis, and a line of army trucks: At the station "all the 
gates to the train concourse were shut to the public, while 
the coffin was being trundled out to a sleek blue car named 
Capitol Home/' The funeral train bore the body to 
San Diego, California, where It was placed aboard the 
n-nghty and new aircraft carrier of the United States 
Navy Princeton, for the voyage home to the Philippines. 
For this "return trip" the United States government was 
reported to have spent at least four million pesos. 

The port of Manila was readied as Manuel L. Quezon 
returned to his native soil in the morning of July 27. But 
this tirne his arrival was met with grief. The hearts of 
aiI ^Pinos — 18,000,000 loyal and grateful — beat as one 
m sorrow as they received his body. Customs guards as- 



254 



The commitment rites were said before the casket of President 
Quezon was temporarily interred in the 
Maine Memorial. 



THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 

signed to Pier 7 where the Princeton docked, wore black 
bands as a sign of mourning while all ships in the Manila 
bay hoisted their respective national flags at half-mast all 
day. 

On his part President Manuel Roxas of the Republic 
declared that the period of national mourning for the be- 
loved leader was to be from July 27 to August 19, and 
ordered the flags on all government buildings and instal- 
lations throughout the Philippines to be flown at half-staff. 
He also granted to dispensable government employees the 
opportunity to attend the cortege from Manila bay to the 
Malacanan Palace in the afternoon of July 27, and requested 
the observance by all the people of a three-minute silent 
prayer in their respective places of worship beginning at 
high noon on August 1. At the same time Roxas designated 
four days of solemn memorial services beginning on July 
27, and Thursday, August 1, as the day of interment of 
the great .Filipino leader; "As surely as the humble soldier 
who died in heroic struggle on the battlefield, President 
Quezon's life was offered on the altar of national redemp- 
tion, that his people might realize in magnificent freedom 
the full independence and true nationhood for which he 
had fought and worked from his earliest years," the Pres- 
ident declared in his proclamation. "During the four days 
of memorial services, and during the entire period of 
mourning, let us direct our prayers to the Almighty . ■ . 
that He may in His goodness bless our people with the 
courage and the nobility so immortally exemplified in the 
spirit of the leader, who, having given on distant soil his 
life for his native land, is now coming home to find his 
last resting place," Roxas added 

As the carrier docked at nine o'clock in the morning, a 
salvo announced the arrival followed by 30 carrier planes 
that hopped off and hovered over Manila and its environs 
in the form of a cross to honor the event. The Princeton 
flew both the American and the Filipino flags at half-mast, 



255 



MANUEL L. QUEZON; HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

but when President Roxas and United States Ambassador 
Paul V. McNutt boarded the ship, the colors were raised 
and then lowered again when they left Roxas, who boarded 
the ship at 11 o'clock, was received by Associate Justice 
Frank Murphy who, as the personal representative of 
President Harry 8- Truman of the United States, accom- 
panied the body. 

After a brief religious ceremony in honor of Quezon 
had been held aboard with Commander Joseph T. O'Callag- 
han, SX, United States Navy chaplain escort of the Quezon 
body, officiating, the casket was lowered at exactly three 
o'clock in the afternoon. The sky was overcast and a slight 
shower fell as the funeral cortege proceeded to the Malaca- 
nan Palace. To the tune of a mournful dirge played by the 
Philippine Army band and before an estimated crowd of 
100,000 most of whom had trekked from the nearby provin- 
ces to pay homage and get a last- view of their leader, the 
new black Cadillac funeral coach of the great Quezon moved 
solemnly bearing the remains of "the sailor home from the 
sea and the hunter home from the hill" It was escorted 
by a battalion of the Manila police and a detachment of 
the Malacahan guards that marched in slow, measured 
cadence. 

Honorary pall-bearers who walked the entire distance 
from the pier to the palace were high government officials. 
Immediately behind the funeral car was the car bearing 
President Roxas and Mrs. Quezon and her children. As 
the funeral coach entered the palace grounds, thousands of 
onlookers who patiently waited for hours standing on both 
sides of Aviles street, craned their necks to have a glimpse 
of the casket. 

The chestnut-colored casket was placed on a catafalque 
in front of a special candle-lighted altar in the ante-room 
of the mam reception hall of the palace, overlooking the 
Pasig river. In his life, Quezon received his guests in this 



256 



THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 

hall. The palace was draped with thin felt and purple 
satin drapes which made a proper setting for Quezon's 
casket. Visitors walked in single line around the flag- 
draped casket, then past Mrs. Quezon to express their con- 
dolence, A four-man guard of honor took turns, while 
mourners from all walks of life "kept -watch over the body. 

On the following morning the casket was transferred 
to the hall of Congress where, wrapped in a silken Filipino 
flag, it rested on a three-tiered catafalque in the center of 
the session hall Marked by solemn and impressive cere- 
monies, Quezon was honored under the joint auspices of 
the Senate and the House of Representatives with a memo- 
rial program, the first of a series of services during the 
period of burial Main speakers were President Roxas, As- 
sociate Justice Murphy, Congressman Raul T. Leuterio, 
Senators Carlos P. Garcia and Mariano Jesus Cuenco, The 
oration of General Douglas MacArthur was read by Vice 
President Elpidio Quirino. Before the occasion a low mass 
was said by Mons. Jose N. Jovellanos. 

"The spirits of men like Manuel L. Quezon do not die/ 7 
Murphy said, and with emotion he added, "The structure 
passes by, but the spirit lives on" On the other hand, 
Cuenco pointed out that "the Christian death of Quezon is 
the most glorious page in his life of triumphs and of laurels. 
Happy are those who, like him, die in the peace of the Lord ! 
And while his soul lives in the mansion of the elect, his 
name will forever live in the love and esteem of all Filipi- 
nos-" Leuterio disclosed that Quezon's "deeds will spur his 
countrymen to emulate him and make of this country a 
haven of justice, freedom and peace/ 1 

In a stirring funeral oration, Roxas revealed that "the 
greatest of our war dead was not a soldier on the field of 
battle. He was a statesman and leader whom we have en- 
shrined in immortality . . , Manuel L. Quezon was no or- 



257 



MANUEL L, QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CARE Kit 

dinary man/' Then he added, "We are a free people and 
a free nation, in large part, because of him. This Republic, 
its government and its institutions are as much his works 
as they could be of any single man. These are his perpe- 
tual monument. Across the ■trackless and virgin territory 
of time, Manuel Quezon's wisdom led the way, through 
four critical decades, through two great world wars, to vic- 
tory and finally to independence-" 

Roxas concluded his eulogy, saying, "Now the body 
of our leader returns to rest From the voiceless lips of 
the unreplying dead come reassurance, courage, and hope. 
The spirit of Manuel Quezon which never left us, soothes 
with gentle balm our heavy sorrow. In the Night of Death 
in which he dwells our love can hear the rustle of a wing, 
and the seraphic song of angels to lull our grief, to give 
us strength, to bring us peace. Let there then be peace, 
too, for Manuel Quezon; for now he belongs to the ages. 
May the causes for which he lived and in whose name he 
died . , . Liberty, Justice, and Democracy , . . exult in 
eternal triumph!" 

From the Congress hall the body was moved to the 
University of Santo Tomas chapel in the following morning. 
Here, it remained until the burial, and here the vigil and 
ceremonial rites over the body continued- On this day (July 
29) the necrological service was under the auspices of the 
people of Tayabas who filled the pews, while the inhabitants 
of Baler, hometown of Quezon, who travelled in extremely 
uncomfortable weather and on foot most of the way, were 
given a special row, close to the casket. Former Associate 
Justice Claro M. Recto of the Supreme Court and Governor 
riilanon Yanza of Tayabas were the main speakers. 

The popular homage that usually started in the after- 
noon ai so continued up to after midnight as the humble 
citizens and their children paid their last respects. Speak- 
ing m Spanish, Recto eulogized Quezon, saying "it is not 



258 



THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 

important that your remains repose under the earth. Your 
country will not look for you among the dead. In death you 
live," Yanza declared, "Let this man's memory be the 
fountain head of constant inspiration to follow his example, 
emulating his patriotism, his love, his loyalty and devotion 
to his country," 

The delegations from the city of Manila, the province 
of Rizal, and others took joint charge of the' necrological 
program of the next day. The principal orations were de- 
livered by Mayor Valeriano Fugoso of Manila, Governor 
Sixto Antonio of Rizal, and President Manuel de la Fuente 
of the municipal board of Manila* A posthumous tribute to 
Quezon, entitled The Last Trail, by Director Ramon Tapales 
of the conservatory of music, University of the Philippines, 
was rendered by the conservatory symphony orchestra dur- 
ing this occasion. Fugoso, in his eulogy, referred to Que- 
zon as the "shining symbol of our national solidarity and 
a beacon to all liberty-loving peoples. He is not dead — he 
merely sleeps in the grateful hearts of his people," 

The last necrological service was given under the aus- 
pices of government employees, labor, civic, women's and 
veterans' organizations, and schools and colleges. Vict 
President Quirino and Judges Francisco Delgado and Ma- 
nuel Camus were the main speakers. Quirino pointed out 
that "never in our history as a people has death so united 
us in grief over one who has departed as is the passing 
away of our national leader — Manuel L. Quezon, In our 
centuries of struggle for liberty and unity, Rizal was the 
idealistic legend, Quezon the breathing power and driving 
force." Then he added, "Manuel L. Quezon lives and he is 
still with us because of the examples that he has left be- 
hind, by the handiwork he has sculptured before our eyes, 
and by the lofty thoughts which are ever-ringing with the 
clear-cut voice admonishing us that, if we desire to see 
this Republic live and endure as the proud legacy of our 



259 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

race in its transitory travel across the vast space of time 
to the final redemption of mankind where justice, liberty, 
democracy, happiness and peace dwell eternally and rule 
as one, we should live by the principles for which he labored 
and work indefatigably at every moment of our life . . 

August 1st was designated by President Roxas as the 
day of burial of Quezon. The memorial program scheduled 
the interment this way: 

8:00 a.m. — Pontifical mass, H. E. Mons. Guglielmo Plani, 
officiating. Rev. F. Pacifico Ortiz, S. J., will deliver 
the sermon. 

10:00 a.m. — Funeral cortege leaves University of Sto. To- 
mas Chapel for North Cemetery. 

12:00 noon — Lowering of casket and signal hour for na- 
tional prayer throughout the Philippines. 

I covered the funeral for my newspaper, The Evening 
Neivs, and on that day's issue, my account of the historic 
event as it appeared on the front page, accompanied with 
pictures, follows: 

QUEZON BODY LAID 
TO REST; THOUSANDS 
ATTEND LAST RITES 

Long List Of Officials And Friends Take 
Tunis As Pallbearers Along Last Route; 
Two 21-Gun Salutes Fired Over Grave 

By SOL H. GWEKOH 

A state funeral was the last tribute a grateful people 
bestowed upon the late Manuel L. Quezon, soldier-statesman 
and first President of the Philippines. 

As the Philippine national anthem was being played by 
the army band, a select unit of the Philippine army executed 
present arms and fired three volleys. Taps was sounded. 



260 



THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 

The people in attendance observed a three-minute silent 
prayer. And the bronze casket containing the remains of 
Quezon was slowly lowered into the sarcophagus of granite 
located near the tomb of his dead daughter, Luisa Paz, In 
the Quezon private lot in the north cemetery. 

The sun came out for the first time in days. 

It was at exactly 12 o'clock noon today that the Que- 
zon remains were interred in this temporary tomb of simple 
design amidst equally simple but Impressive religious cere- 
monies. 

As the Cadillac funeral coach reached the main en- 
trance of the cemetery, the casket was transferred to a 
caisson manned by 100 members of the presidential guards. 
A 21-gun salute was fired from an army battery nearby. 
A brief religious service followed, Moris. Mariano Madria- 
ga f bishop of Lingayen, said the benediction. The thousands 
of mourners stood silently as the priest proceeded with the 
rites. At the conclusion of the benediction, a second 21 -gun 
salute was fired. 

Quezon's burial today coincided with the second anni- 
versary of his death in Saranac Lake near New York. 

The final rites started with a pontifical mass said by 
His Excellency, Mons. Guglielmo Piani, apostolic delegate 
to the Philippines, at the UST chapel at 8* this morning. 
Rev. F. Pacifico Ortiz, S. J., the President's chaplain dur- 
ing his war years in the U, S,, delivered the sermon. In 
the course of his sermon, he said of Quezon: 

"This is the true test of greatness: when people love you, 
not for what you can do for them, but for what you are. 
President Quezon did much for our country, did more perhaps 
than any other man, living or dead. That alone would make 
him our hero, but it takes more than that to make him our 
friend. It takes more than that to make us feel, as we do 
feel today, a deep sense of personal loss. It was the man 



261 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



himself that we loved, the man with a heart so generous 
so brave, so forgiving; the man with a spirit bo noble-. <u 
fearless, so magnificent," 

x x x X X X X 

**It is surely this trait — his love for neighbor — that inaiiu 
him what he was: the champion of the poor, the friend of 
the workingman. No man has ever been blessed with mora 
shining qualities of body and mind; no man has ever been 
showered with more honors and distinctions at home and 
abroad, But this man who walked with kin^s, never lost 
the common touch; this man whose words were listened to 
in the highest council of nations, never forgot his own fa- 
ther's parting words: Son, be gcod and just to your fellowmcu. 
No matter how high your station ih life may he* never 
forget that you came from poor parents and thai you be<* 
long to the poor** 
x x x x x 

"He did not live long enough to give full substance to his 
dream. That too often is the tragic fate of those who blaze 
the traiL But that too is the other test of greatness: whether 
one's work, one's life-dream can survive long after the 
dreamer is gone, In this sense also, this man was great. 
The noble causes for which he so gallantly spent his life: 
the cause of freedom, of social justice, of equality before the 
law , of devotion to country, this our infant Republic, this our 
Philippines — these things for which he fought so nobly and so 
well, these things will not perish with his remains- They are 
sparks of his eternal spirit, and they will light the way for 
generations yet unborn. " 
x x x x x 

"Any nmtion could be proud of such a leader. Any country 
would love to claim him as her own. And he is ours forever! 
As we commit his body to the land which saw his birth and 
which he served so well, let it be with the prayer and the 
resolve to carry on the work to which he devoted his life: 
social justice, respect for the law, national unity." 

At the chapel, a cosmopolitan crowd, headed by Pres- 
ident Roxas and U- S. Associate Justice Frank Murphy, 
filled the halL 

The Quezon remains lay in a catafalque of gray syn- 
thetic marble in the form of a small chapel with a cross on 



262 



THE POPULAR HERO AND IDOL 



top. Two presidential guards kept vigil at a time, day and 
night. Since Monday a continuous stream of mourners 
came to pay homage, and could be compared to the "visits 
iglesia" during the Holy Week. 

The chapel was bedecked with wreaths of all sizes and 
forms. At the foot of the casket facing the general public 
were the wreaths of the President of the Uniced States, 
President Roxas, and Mrs. Quezon and children. The chapel 
was completely draped in purple. 

The Philippine army band led the funeral procession. 
The mourners marched to the mournful tune of a funeral 
dirge played by it. The hearse came behind the military es- 
cort of infantrymen of the Philippine army and a motorized 
umt. Then followed the draped official Lincoln car of the 
late President, and the cars bearing President Koxas, Mrs. 
Quezon, and high government officials. 

The funeral cortege passed through Espana, Quezon 
Boulevard, Azcarraga, Rizal Avenue, and Blumentritt. All 
throughout its long route, the people stood by in respect- 
ful silence. Throughout the funeral procession and over 
the cemetery, formations of airplanes hovered above, 
-strewing flowers upon the funeral route. 

The Quezon family was in full mourning, while Roxas 
and the rest of the government officials wore black arm 
bands. 

The honorary pall-bearers represented both the local 
and foreign entities- The first group, from the UST chapel 
to the main university gate, was the Quezon Burial 
committee headed by Secretary of the Interior Jose C. Zu- 
lueta; next came the cabinet, from the gate to Espaiia- 
Paredes ; then the Supreme Court up to the corner of Que- 
zon Boulevard and Azcarraga; the members of the Senate 
up to the corner of Azcarraga and Rizal Avenue; the con- 

263 



I 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CARE Eft 

gressmen up to Requesens; the undersecretaries up to 
Bambang; the judges of the People's Court up to Quirica- 
da; the officials of the Philippine General Hospital up to 
San Lazaro; the UP officials up to Malabon; the bureau 
directors up to Gamarines; the city mayor and board mem- 
bers up to Tayabas ; the various commissioners up to Ba- 
tangas; representatives of the diplomatic, corps up to La- 
guna ; the guerrillas up to Antipolo; the veterans of the 
revolution up to Blumentritt-Cavite ; the editors and pub- 
lishers up to the cemetery gate; and the PA staff and for- 
mer military aides of Quezon within the cemetery grounds. 

The last honorary pall-bearers were those closest to 
Quezon. They conducted the casket up to the grave. 
These were Justice Murphy, Jose Yulo, Gregorio Agoncillo, 
Andres Soriano. Vicente Madrigal, Tomas Morato, Gover- 
nor General Francis Burton Harrison, Ramon Avanceiia, 
Manuel Nieto, Maximo Rodriguez, Ramon J. Fernandez, 
Jake Rosenthal, Miguel Canizares, Igmidio Cruz, and An- 
tonio G. Sison, 

The Quezon tomb is temporary. It bears the inscrip- 
tion: "Manuel Luis Quezon, statesman and patriot, lover 
of freedom, advocate of social justice, beloved of his peo- 
ple/' For this state funeral the government, through the 
Congress of the Philippines, set aside P50,000. The sum 
included the construction of the temporary mausoleum 
which will contain the remains until the great and perma- 
nent Quezon memorial is built through public contribution. 



264 



Chapter 26 
THE IMMORTAL MALAYAN 



THE FILIPINOS, ever grateful for the fruitful services 
and monumental accomplishments of their national 
leader, foremost statesman, and great president, have hon- 
ored and immortalized Manuel L. Quezon, The honors were 
both a spontaneous expression of admiration and reverence 
for him and a manifestation of love and loyalty to his 
leadership. Some of these honors were conferred on Que- 
zon in his lifetime. 

From up in northern Luzon to dowm south in Minda- 
nao, important places bear the imprint of his name. Vi- 
gan, capital of Ilocos Sur, named its principal thorough- 
fare the "Quezon Avenue." Tayabas (now Quezon), his 
home province, beautified the main street of Lucena, its 
capital, and christened it the "Quezon Avenue." Another 
"Quezon Avenue", spacious and concrete, is in Cebu city. 
On the other hand, the provincial road from Balanga, cap- 
ital of Bataan, to Bagac in the same province is known 
as the "Comandante Quezon Highway*" Practically every 
town in the Philippines has a street named after Quezon. 

In Manila is the imposing "Quezon Boulevard" which 
starts at Plaza Lawton, across the "Quezon Bridge", 
and ends at Blumentritt The longest and the widest, it 
is 4.6 kilometers in length and cost the government 
1*3,100,000 to build. For the bridge Pl,300,000 was spent. 
The expropriation of private property for the roadway 
alone amounted to PI, 600,000. In Inabanga, Bohol, there 
is also a "Quezon Bridge", 

His name is perpetuated in at least four towns of Lu- 
zon which have been named after him. These are in Nue- 



265 



MANUEL L, QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

va Ecija ; Isabela, Batangas, and on Alabat island in Ta- 
yabas. His home province, Tayabas, was renamed "Que- 
zon" by virtue of Republic Act No. 14, on September 7, 
1940. 

Baguio boasts of its "Quezon Hill" on which are lo- 
cated the most beautiful residential houses that command 
a panoramic view of the country around Calapan, Min- 
doro, has also a "Quezon Hill" on which is situated a 150.- 
000-peso hospital. On the northeastern border of the Ko- 
ronadal Valley in Cotabato is the "Quezon Mountain Range" 
in Mindanao. 

In Pangasinan's picturesque Hundred Islands, famous 
as a summer resort and camping ground off the Gulf of 
Lingayen, the largest in the group is the "Quezon Island", 
found near Cape Bolinao. At its entrance is an imposing 
life-size statue of Quezon, Two other monuments of Que- 
zon — on the plaza of Taguig, Rizal, and in Ronda in 
southern Cebu — are worthy memorials to him. 

Public buildings and charitable institutions bear his 
name. The Santol Sanatorium, dedicated to the eradica- 
tion of tuberculosis in the Philippines, was rechristened the 
"Quezon Institute" in 1938 after it had been enlarged and 
remodelled. Devoted to the care of children of tuberculous 
parents is the "Quezon Preventorium" at San Juan, Rizal, 
named after him in recognition of his concern for those 
unfortunates afflicted with the disease. His home prov- 
ince renamed its provincial hospital the "Quezon Memorial 
Hospital" in 1947. 

In Batangas, Batangas, is the "Quezon Stadium and 
Athletic Field", which he inaugurated on February 12, 
1939, The occasion afforded him one of his greatest sur- 
prises. So when he spoke he told the audience in a humor- 
ous vein that if Antonio de las Alas, then chairman of the 
board of trustees of the National Charity SweepstaKes, only 
had told him beforehand that the stadium was to be named 



266 



THE IMMORTAL MALAYAN 



after him, he would have appropriated P90,000 instead of 
only P30,000. In prewar years the people of Cebu held yearly 
carnivals and fairs to finance the construction of a "Que- 
zon Stadium." Iloilo built its "Quezon Hall" to house the 
local branch of the National Library and Museum* 

In its campaign against illiteracy in the Philippines, 
the Office of Adult Education had ambulating institutions 
of learning called the "Manuel L. Quezon Adult School on 
Wheels/* Manila has its "Quezon Elementary School" near 
the Tondo shoreline. There is also the "Manuel L. Quezon 
School of Law" in Manila, which publishes the "Quezonian" 
fortnightly, and the "Quezon College" of which former 
Solicitor General Six to de la Costa is the chancellor. 

The homecomings of Quezon in Manila from the 
United States were epochal events. On the northeast end of 
the old Walled City (Intramuros) was the "Quezon Gate," 
through which, as the resident commissioner of the Phil- 
ippines to the United States, he made his triumphal en- 
trance to the capital city in 1916, bringing with him the 
Jones law. For his arrival on August 16, 1937, a special 
"Quezon Gangplank" was constructed at the equally new 
and elegant President's Landing in front of the Manila 
Hotel. 

Tayabas continued immortalizing its favorite son by 
naming its beautiful park on Mount Inihan-Dalaga near 
Atimonan the "Quezon National Park". On its inaugura- 
tion day, July 23, 1939, an obelisk was erected at the en- 
trance and bore the inscription, "Courageous soldier in war, 
illustrious leader in peace, proudly Tayabas acclaims thee 
savior of the Fatherland." On one side of the monument 
the inscription reads: "With just pride and warm affection, 
the province of Tayabas dedicates this beautiful park to 
a worthy son, Manuel L, Quezon, an exemplary citizen, a 
true patriot, and a beloved leader," The province of Bn- 
kidnon in Mindanao also has its "Quezon Park" on which 
have been grown 17 different memorial trees. 



267 



MANUEL L, QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CARL tilt 

In the very birthplace of Quezon in Baler, Tayabas, is 
an artistic iron marker erected from the proceeds of the 
book, Distinguished 100, written by this biographer in 1939. 
It has a miniature replica of the Commonwealth presiden- 
tial flag on its mast, and on it are engraved the following 
wordings : 

"His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon, President of the 
Philippines, was born on this spot in Baler, Tayabas, on 
August 19, 18 ?8, the son of Lucio Quezon and Maria Molina. 
In the Philippine Revolution lie was major and chief-of_sta£f 
of the department of Central Luzon in 189 0. Shortly after 
his admission to the bar in 1903, he was appointed fiscal of 
Mindoro, and was transferred to Tayabas in 1904, Elected 
governor of Tayabas in 1906, he resigned and became dele- 
sate to the first Philippine Assembly in the following year. 
He was resident commissioner to the United States from 1909 
to 1916, when he secured the passage of the Jones Law. 
Elected Senator for the fifth district upon the establishment 
in 1916 of the Philippine Senate, he became its first and only 
president until its abolition in 1935. As leader of the Fili- 
pino people, he worked for the enactment by the Congress 
of the United States, and the acceptance by the Philippine 
Legislature, of the Tydings-McDuffie Law. On November '15, 
1935, upon the inauguration of the Commonwealth govern- 
ment, he was inducted into office as first President of the 
Philippines. " 

In the realm of music a.nd letters, the Filipinos have 
also manifested their love and respect for Quezon, My 
good friend, Carlos Quirino, is author of the first notable 
Quezon biography entitled, Quezon, Man of Destiny. Other 
books are Quezon—the Story of a Nation and Its Foremost 
Statesman, Quezon in His Speeches edited by the late 
aa*** 50 B ' Icasiano and Pedro de la Liana, Messages and 
Addresses of President Quezon edited by Eulogio E. Rodri- 
guez and Quezon*— From Nipa Hut to Malacanan. 

For my part I wish to state that this is my fourth book 
on Quezon and his distinguished family. The others are 
Quezon, The President, published in 1938; The Quezons, 



268 




i 



Official Version of 
BATHALA, BLESS OUR PRESIDENT 

(Dedicated to President Quezon) 

Mime by Words &» 

Dr. Francisco Santiago Francisco Carballo 

Maestoso 



ft 



IP 



5 



- ry to- our lead-er Hoi? himwM qreaf a*e - fight v 
* Ho-ma^e fer os ren-aer Our c^/^o^roo &e ha// 




S*"&' er " Champion of cvr WQhf 

, W/fh prv&tnte ana* fot/r- &&e % Mau h*> J f?ev~ rr /h?/ 




fifau wtSdomamdehiS ru/e 
leda may he J ti*e A See 



As yearjonc hqrnaatf sgettf- 
The peaee&0fh™&<Vfa7eftf. 




Hear 0 oreat 8a f- ha - /a 
^tfear 0 yreat 3af-ha~ /a 



BUsi out pre - St - dent* 
j3/e*3 cur pre— St - deaf 




lit — 13 tii 



OriVinaHv published in the book, STARS OF BALER, 
by S. H. Gwekoh, 1939. 



THE IMMORTAL MALAYAN 



Stars of Baler, which appeared in the following year; and 
The Autobiography of Manuel L. Quezon which I edited 
and published in 1940, 

Poets, musicians, and painters have likewise their 
share of tribute to Quezon, To Dr. Francisco Santiago, 
retired director of the conservatory of music, University 
of the Philippines, goes the distinction of being the com- 
poser of three hymns dedicated to Quezon, namely, To 
the President of the Philippines, Bathala, Bless Our Pres- 
ident and Long Live President Quezon, which is equivalent 
to England's God Save the King. Dr. Santiago also tran- 
scribed Panagimpan Niyaring Pitso, the song sung by 
Major Quezon during the Revolution of 1899. 

Several oil paintings of Quezon were made by Ameri- 
can and Filipino artists, Professor Fernando Amorsolo, 
director of the school of fine arts, University of the Phil- 
ippines, ably executed several canvases showing Quezon 
in various poses that -were characteristic of him. There 
are also the mat-woven portraits and wood carvings of 
Quezon. 

The road from Manila to the waterworks of the Me- 
tropolitan Water District at Ipo, Bulacan, follows the pro- 
file of Quezon, 

Quezon was likewise the recipient of three honorary 
degrees from renowned institutions of learning in the Phil- 
ippines and abroad. While president of the Senate he was 
conferred the degree of doctor of laws by the Uni- 
versity of the Philippines in 1929; and when he became the 
President of the Philippines, the same distinction was 
awarded to him by both the University of Santo Tomas 
in 1936 and, in the following year, by the Jesuits' George- 
town University, during his sojourn in the United States. 
It was Georgetown's Founders' Day, April 17, and Que- 
zon was cited as follows: 

269 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 



"On this day which commemorates her founding George- 
town University puts "her seal of approval and honor upon 
one who voices and strives to actuate her ideals of service 
to God, to country and to fellowmen. For years a tireless 
proponent of his people's aspirations for independence, Ma- 
nuel Luis Quezon, as First President of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines, has shown in word and unsparing self- 
sacrifice a noble ambition to build a traditionally Christian 
people into a nation unshakably supported by the strong 
girders of Social Justice, and securely founded on the only bed 
rock of peaceful perpetuity, the law of Christ, and thus to 
present to nations of the world an excellent and inimitable 
model of a happy and prosperous modern state*" 

After the award t Quezon responded briefly. He ex- 
plained the peaceful purposes of the Philippines, thus: 

"It is with a very deep sense o[ gratitude that I accept 
the honor which this high institution of learning is confer^ 
ring upon, me, and I take it not so much as the measure of 
your appraisal of my worth as an individual and a public 
servant, but rather as an evidence of your conviction that 
the cause in the service of which I have devoted my life is 
a just and a noble one. More than this, to me this distinc- 
tion which I am receiving from your hands means that in 
the estimation of Georgetown University, the Filipino people 
have attained the dignity of nationhood and have deservedly 
won their right to self-determination. 

"By the grace of God, the Filipinos are followers and 
disciples of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Theirs is a Christian 
civilization. Host of their scholars, for the last 350 years, 
had drunk from the fountain of wisdom which finds its source 
from the Suinma Theologica of St, Thomas Aquinas, as taught 
in another Catholic university, the University of Santo Tomas 
m Manila, the oldest university under the American flag 
— my own alma mater. 

"in the true Christian spirit, the Filipino people have 
laid down the foundation stone of their independent existence. 
When they drafted the Constitution for the Commonwealth 
which is also to be the constitution of the Philippine Re- 
public, they sought first the guidance of Divine Providence 
and inserted in that fundamental law of their land a clause 
condemning war as an instrument of national policy and 



370 



THE IMMORTAL MALAYA X 



pledging our people never to resort to arms except in defense 
of our country. We seek to become a member of the brother- 
hood of nations with love in our hearts for all mankind and 
with zi prayer on our Hps for the salvation of humanity/' 

At the end of the speech he received the enthusiastic 
ovation of a distinguished international crowd of 800, in- 
cluding: the ministers of the Irish Free State, Portugal, 
Denmark, Hungary, Greece, Lithuania, Bulgaria, Para- 
guay, and Czechoslovakia, and some representatives of the 
United States government ami its Congress. 

To commemorate the birth of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines in 1935, commemorative silver coins were 
issued. The effigies of Quezon and United States High 
Commissioner Frank Murphy appeared on both the 50-cen- 
tavo and the one-peso denominations; while the effigies 
of President Roosevelt and Quezon marked the second one- 
peso coins. 

At the completion of the first year of the Common- 
wealth in 1936, a commemorative stamp featuring the por- 
trait of Quezon was issued in three denominations, each 
with a different color. In 1938, on the occasion of the 
fourth anniversary of the Commonwealth, three more com- 
memorative postage stamps with special designs were is- 
sued and featured the historical oath-taking scene of Que- 
zon as chief executive of the Commonwealth before Chief 
Justice Ramon Avancena of the Supreme Court A third 
set of stamps, this time for airmail postage, bearing the 
pictures of Quezon and Roosevelt, was issued by the Bureau 
of Posts on August 19, 1947, to commemorate the 69th 
birthday anniversary of Quezon. 

An endless litany of honors accorded Quezon can be 
recited. Remember the ill-fated s.s. President Quezon, the 
largest liner under the Philippine flag, which the Cojuang- 
co family of Tarlac named after him? Then, carved out 



271 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND C A REEK 



of the wilderness of Mindanao is the new "Quezon Colony" 
situated in Sinaad, within the municipality of Baliangao. 
Misamis Occidental, which has about 2,000 enterprising 
homeseekers. The settlers have al*o their own society 
called the "Quezon Colony Association." 

There is not an important object of admiration that 
does not bear the name of Quezon. In Sexmoan, Pam- 
panga, the town plaza is known as the "Quezon Square.' 1 
and in Lopez, Tayabas, it is "Plaza Quezon." Davao city 
has its ''Quezon Park" in front of the city hall. The vet- 
erans of the Philippine Revolution christened their head- 
quarters the "Campamento Manuel L. Quezon." Named 
after him is the "Quezon Water System" in Tacloban, Loy- 
te, which furnishes adequate water to inhabitants of 10 
towns. The municipal council of Balamban, Cebu, named 
its market place the "Quezon Public Market" as a token of 
love and veneration. 

Quezon has become a household word for Filipinos. 
It is now popular as a christian name for youths. In 
Vintar, Ilocos Norte, two students of the Vintar Academy 
answer to the name of Quezon. They are Quezon Agbaya- 
ni and Quezon Camiao. Then there is also the distillery in 
Mangaldan, Pangasinan, that compounds and bottles the 
"Quezonian Club" gin. 

Described as the most beautiful of its kind in the Far 
East is the "Quezon Natatorium," located at an elevation 
of 2,800 feet above sea level near the Tayabas-Nueva Ecija 
provincial boundary. The swimming pool is famous as a 
summer resort. 

In the Philippines, both Rizal and Quezon have been 
honored with cities named after them. For Quezon there 
is the "Quezon City" from which will rise a newi and mod- 
ern metropolis. In this city will be erected the proposed 
imposing "Quezon Memorial" being sponsored by the gov- 



272 



THE IMMORTAL MALAYAN 



ernment. This memorial is being erected in recognition of 
the great services which he rendered to his country and 
people. A nationwide campaign to raise P3,000,000 for it 
is being waged by the presidential committee organized by 
former President Osmena who said, "as with Rizal, Boni- 
facio, Mabini and our other national heroes, we will erect 
him a monument worthy of his glory, x x x And after we 
have done this, we shall have only partly settled our debt 
of gratitude that we shall forever owe that great and noble 
statesman — Manuel L. Quezon." Contributors include 
school children who pay from 20 centavos up. 

Thriving healthily in different places in the Philip- 
pines are memorial trees planted by Quezon during impor- 
tant occasions and in his inspection trips- In Baguio, Que- 
zon celebrated Bird and Arbor Day in 1940 by planting a 
jacaranda tree in his own villa off the Burnham Park. On 
the same occasion, in. Ormoc, Leyte, a "Manuel L. Quezon 
Tree" was planted after the reading of his message. 

When Quezon planted the raminad rice during the 
first Rice Planting Day in the Philippines in the Buena- 
vista estate in Bulacan, on July 9, 1939, and also on his 
Friendship Farm in Arayat, Pampanga, the name of the 
variety was changed to the "Quezon Rice." 

Quezon will long be remembered for the "Quezon 
Award" medals which are given to boy scouts who distin- 
guish themselves by their activities. 

To encourage, foster, and promote the love, respect, 
and admiration of the people for Quezon, 16 prominent 
Filipinos in Manila founded and organized the "Quezon 
Society" in 1940. The other object of the association was 
to immortalize in, the hearts of the Filipino people the 
name, the deeds, and the achievements of Quezon. 

For its part, the government of the Philippine Repub- 
lic created the "Quezon Service Cross" for exemplary ser- 



273 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CA UK KM 



vice to the nation. In establishing the award the govern- 
ment gives the life of Quezon as a "shining inspiration" 
to the people, and "the value?; and ideals exemplified in 
the resplendent public service" of Quezon are made to 
"constitute a standard by which other contributions to the 
people's welfare can be compared and evaluated/' Joint 
Resolution No. 4 of the first Congress of the Republic said 
that "the unselfish devotion to the public good and the 
supreme sacrifice of life in the cause of his country made 
of Manuel L. Quezon one of the great heroes of all time" 
and that his memory "will be cherished by his people 
through the generations to come, in company with the other 
immortals of our nation." It is the highest decoration that 
the government bestows upon the citizenry. 

The Philippines and the Filipino people are not alone 
in honoring Quezon. Even foreign governments paid him 
singular tribute in recognition of his brilliant leadership 
and statesmanship. While president of the Senate Quezon 
was made by the French government an officer of the 
Legion of Honor, while he was given by Spain the title 
of Gran Caballero de la Republica in 1934, 

Then during his term as President of the Philippines, 
three foreign governments awarded him decorations. In 
1937 the decoration known as the "Order of the Brilliant 
Jade" was conferred upon him by the National Government 
of the Republic of China. The gift, which was presented 
by the mayor of Nanking at Shanghai on January 28, was 
given "as a mark of distinction on the Chief Executive of 
the Philippines and, above all, as a symbol of the friendship 
of the Republic and people of China for the government 
and people of the Philippines/' 

The "Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown of Italy" 
was given him by His Majesty, the King of Italy. Quezon 
also received the decoration of "Grand Cross of the Order 

274 



THE IMMORTAL MALAYAN 



of the Crown" from King Leopold III of Belgium, These 
decorations were received by the Philippine government 
"for the purpose of promoting international friendship and 
understanding." When Quezon visited Mexico in 1937, a 
gift consisting of a machine gun and a rifle of Mexican 
manufacture were tendered him by the government of 
Mexico as a remembrance of this trip. 

World recognition has long been given to Quezon, As 
early as 1930 Quezon was chosen one of the nine greatest 
men of the world at the time, in a popular contest held in 
Manila. He was selected together with Edison, Mussolini, 
Madame Curie, Lloyd George, Hindenburg, Nitobe, Chiang 
Kai-Shek, and Primo de Rivera. This popular verdict was 
further confirmed by Roy Howard, powerful American 
publisher, when he called Quezon "one of the greatest men 
of the world" after completing a prolonged tour of study 
of Europe and the Orient. In the book of Edward Price 
Bell, world-famous American newspaperman, entitled 
World Chancelleries, Quezon figured prominently together 
with Mussolini, Ramsay McDonald, Calvin Coolidge, and 
Shidehara. John Gunther, in his book. Inside Asia, devoted 
several pages on Quezon* "Always the Philippines will 
claim him as its own, as the symbol of the triumph over 
slavery of the Filipino race. But in rising so high in the 
esteem and memory of his people, he also served the cause 
of all humanity. In this dual role, he will remain engraved 
in the memory of the world," 

Among Philippine patriots and leaders, Quezon is placed 
side by side with Rizal by the Filipino people. Both are 
great men. Each was a genius in his own time and line. Both 
were liberty-loving leaders and heroes* Both dreamed, 
lived, worked and died for the same sacred cause, and both 
— Rizal and Quezon — occupy the same hallowed spot in 
the hearts and memory of their countrymen, "Rizal 
planted the seed of freedom and watered it with his blood," 



275 



MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER 

opined Arsenio N. Luz, but "Quezon fertilized and improved 
it so that the fruit may be plentiful and everlasting;." To 
President Elpidio Quirino, "like Rizal, our national hero, 
Quezon is the pride and glory of our country and race. 
Like Pvizal, death has not removed him from our midst, 
rather he lives idolized as a model, preceptor and guide. 
Through his long and patriotic service he has endeared 
himself to each and everyone of ns. In return we have 
reared in our heart of hearts a shrine of affection and 
devotion for him " 

The Filipinos recognize their debt to Quezon. The 
world knows of his life-long life-work for his country, 
Tributes and honors like those that have been bestowed upon 
him are not enough to keep his memory alive forever. More 
than this should be done! As President Roxas urges, fi we 
should enshrine him in our hearts together with Rizal as 
long as we exist as a people/' Giving his persona] esti- 
mation of Quezon, which can be made the yardstick for the 
entire people to follow and adopt, Roxas said : 

"Time cannot efface the glory and the fame of the great 
Manuel Luis Quezon. He is truly one tit the greatest men 
of our race— one of the chief architects of our Republic. 

"He lived a full and strenuous life that .bridged the 
critical transition from Spanish colonialism through American 
democratic tutelage, to the threshold of Philippine independ- 
ence. He held aloft the torch of liberty to his last fighting 
day. 

"In moments of crisis, in periods of stress and tribula- 
tion, we can draw inspiration from the life-story of Quezon 
and seek strength from the springs of his overflowing energy, 
his unflagging industry, his unswerving devotion to God and 
Country It has been our tragic fate to lose him at a time 
when we needed him most. His vision and talents could have 
guided this Republic mare surely along the paths of recon- 
struction and progress. Every recurring year we should cele- 
brate this day (birthday anniversary; August 19) as a day 
of noble dedication to the principles and the ideals for which 
Quezon lived and died— freedom, social justice and equal 
opportunity. Quezon's memory will live in us so long as we 
treasure these principles for which he gave his life!" 



276 



EULOGIES ON QUEZON 



ROXAS 

MURPHY 

Mac ARTHUR 
RECTO 

LEUTBBIO 



QUEZON WAS NO ORDINARY MAN 



By Manuel Roxas 

President of the Philippines 



We do not gather here to grieve or weep. Tiire has 
stench ed our tears. The sorrow now in our hearts is not 
alone for him who lies in blissful sleep before us, but also 
for ourselves, the living, who yearn still for the strength 
and comfort of big presence. 

This was a man whom we loved with all devotion; 
this was a man whom we honored with all the gifts at our 
command. Today we pay formal tribute to his mortal re- 
mains. Today our nation, the Republic of the Philippines, 
enshrines him as a hero on the altar of our love and 
gratitude. 

Manuel L. Quezon has at last returned to his native 
land. For him, it has been a long voyage home* But as 
we prepare to yield his body to the good eirth which first 
nurtured him, we know that we will not inter, we cannot 
inter, in the essence of his being. That essence is as much a 
part of us as the free air we breathe. We are a free people 
and a free nation, in large part, because of him. This 
Republic, its Government and its institutions are as much 
his works as they could be of any single man. These are 
his perpetual monument. Across the trackless and virgin 
territory of time, Manuel Quezon's wisdom led the way, 
through four critical decades, through two great world 
wars, to victory and finally to independence. 

The entire world is similarly in his debt. To him it 
owes m portion of that flaming spirit of leadership which 
guided mankind through the valley of evil and darkness to 



279 



EULOGIES ON QUEZON 



salvation and redemption. In this larger sense, we cannot 
claim him for ourselves alone. This death took both a 
father from his country and a leader from the world The 
pain of loss is felt wherever men are free. In our sorrow 
we are one with all mankind. 

The sad bugle notes of death sounded for Manuel 
Quezon even as the forces of world freedom gathered for 
their final forward thrust. The critical battles had been 
fought; his work was done. His strife had ended. Vic- 
tory lay soon ahead, But the leader of his people, the cap- 
tain of our hosts was not to see the moment of triumph. 
In an alien but spiritually native land m the land where 
he had helped arouse the legions of redemption, he died. 
On the beautiful wooded shores of Lake Saranac in New 
York, heartland of the nation he had learned to love second 
only to his own, the great soul which had clung so long to 
a frail and hard spent body, joined the irrimbrtals of all 
ages. 

Perhaps the Almighty, in His surpassing goodness, 
saw fit to claim the life of Manuel Quezon, after his great 
work was ended, that he might be spared the trial and 
pain of seeing the cost his countrymen were to pay for 
liberty. Perhaps the Divine Mercy was extended that he 
might one day return home in glory, beloved and mourned, 
but blissfully blind to the scars of ruin spread across this 
grotto of tropic beauty, the land whose grace and charm he 
loved so well, 

In this critical epoch, he was the first of the mighty 
leaders of liberty to pass from the world scene. Eight 
brief months later, Manuel Quezon's great and good friend, 
Franklin D. Roosevelt, joined him in death, on the very 
eve of those final triumphs which brought peace to man- 
kind. But Franklin Roosevelt lived long enough to see the 
redemption of the pledges he had made to the Filipino peo- 



280 



QUEZON WAS NO ORDINARY MAN 



p!e, to MacArthur's men return in irresistible power to 
wrest Manila and the Philippines from the enemy. From 
Franklin Roosevelt, from that weary body, too, the mantle 
of life slipped away. 

These two (men, fast and devoted friends, had ascend- 
ed beyond the limits of race and nation and reached the 
blinding heights of universality . . . one an American, one 
a Filipino. They were of the chosen race of benefactors 
of mankind. 

It is difficult to evaluate the works of Manuel Quezon 
at this short space from death, because all of our present 
is in a sense a product of his past The record of that past 
is a continuous canvas of our history in this century. In 
recalling his life, we recall the story of the modern growth 
of our nation. His climb to fame and leadership is a tale 
which must be told to all our generations. The impetuous 
spirit which broke the bonds of personal poverty, which 
hurled every obstacle because there was none great enough 
to £fcay him, is one of the proudest products of our race, 
His name is truly a glittering ornament of this nation. 

In Baler, that storied seacoast town of Tayabas, steeped 
in historic lore and crossed by all the currents of this 
time, Manuel Quezon grew to manhood in the typical at- 
mosphere of the Spanish era. His rebellious soul declined 
to bear the indignities of alien rule and national inferiority. 
Scholarly in spirit, hungry for knowledge, and ambitious, 
yet he bridled angrily at the plight of his people. With the 
frank eyes of youth, he learned to distinguish the dignity 
of worth from the trappings of authority, Although bound 
to inaction by parental pledge, he was spiritually one with 
Rizal, with Bonifacio, with del Pilar, and the other great 
patriots of that day. When the armies of revolution took 
the field in 1898, he was quick to join the struggle for 
liberty. When the antagonist became not Spain but America, 



281 



EULOGIES ON QUEZON 



when it was feared that the Republic across the seas 
came but to replace the former tyrant, Quezon fought while 
there was yet hope, and in the jungles of Bataan suffered 
privations and dangers which 40 years later he had new 
occasion to know. But it was not until American deeds 
and American policies had relieved the basic doubts in the 
questioning mind of Major Quezon that he obeyed his or- 
ders to surrender. 

Suddenly clapped into an American military prison 
and held without charge for four long months, and then as 
suddenly released, Manuel Quezon was not conditioned 
to trust or love the new rulers of his land. The more cred- 
it to him, then, and to America, that in the vista he observed 
in the following years he comprehended in the detail 
of events the firm pattern of basic benevolence; he saw 
imported from America not only economic goods for sale 
but the priceless wares of liberty, of justice and demo- 
cracy. He saw American soldiers build hospitals and roads 
and bridges. He saw schools spring up, and Americans 
teaching the ways of freedom, in them. He saw American 
judges dispense the law impartially between American and 
Filipino. He perceived the cult of fair play being preached 
and practiced by the conqueror. He heard from an Amer- 
ican Civil Governor, William Howard Taft, that the Philip- 
pines were to be governed for the benefit of the Filipinos. 
A former revolutionist, Quezon was named prosecutor, then 
governor of his proud province. 

Elected to the first Philippine Assembly, an avowed 
advocate of immediate and absolute independence, Manuel 
Quezon revealed for the first time the great talents en- 
dowed him— the lightning speed of thought, the brillian.ce of 
intuition, the unerring judgment of decision, the unswerv- 
ing devotion to principle and ideal, and the keen incisiveness 
which enabled him to distinguish between truth and illu- 
sion, between appearance and reality, between honesty and 



282 



QUEZON WAS NO ORDINARY MAN 

pretense. These were the faculties in rare and multifold 
combination which marked Manuel Quezon for the role of 
leadership among: his people. 

In 1912, having already spent some years in the United 
States Congress as resident commissioner and having 
mastered for this purpose the American language, he helped 
secure from the Democratic Party a firm pledge of Philip- 
pine independence. By a scholarly presentation of the 
Philippine position, he won President-elect Woodrow Wil- 
son to his side, and through personal persuasion, gained the 
interest and intercession of Representative Jones of Virgi- 
nia. The historic product of those labors was the Jones 
Act of 1916 which promised, to the great wonder of the 
world, independence to the Philippines as soon as the Fili- 
pinos were ready to govern themselves. 

In the blazing glory of that accomplishment, Manuel 
Quezon returned to his homeland to receive a hero's wel- 
come such as few have ever witnessed. In triumph he was 
elevated to the Supreme leadership of his party and of his 
people, a leadership he never lost in the 22 remaining years, 
of his life. Seldom if ever has one man attained such 
power and influence among his people and held it unchecked 
for so long. Yet it was not power held through force 
or intimidation; there was no Gestapo to retain him in his 
rule. It was a leadership exercised by the prestige of his 
person, by the stature of his accomplishments, by the dom- 
inating proportions of his talents, and by the unswerving 
loyalty of his followers. Few men in all history, unclothed 
in the purple of royalty, have equalled Manuel Quezon's 
tenure as a people's leader. It has no counterpart any- 
where in the world in our time. How did he exercise this 
authority, this power, this influence? That is the statesman's 
test, perhaps the answer to his greatness. He used it 
mildly, carefully and skillfully in the interests of his peo- 
ple, in the interests not of vested wealth which sought his 



283 



EULOGIES ON QUEZON 

favor, not of the socially elite who courted him, but in the 
interests of the great trusting mass of people, inarticulate, 
plain and poor, To them he was devoted. For them he 
was a spokesman and a champion. In their name he es- 
poused, against the opposition of intrenched wealth and 
power, the cause of social justice. We, today, carry for- 
ward with renewed and steadfast resolve the program he so 
nobly advanced. . .the struggle against the inhumanity of 
man to man. We pledge in his name that we will not falter 
on the path he blazed so well. 

He feared no man; often he dared defeat, he was un- 
impressed by danger. Quick in his anger, and quick to 
forgive, warmly loving and cordially hating, enjoying ease, 
yet indefatigable in labor, stern and soft by speedy turn, 
sentimental yet realistic, the unquestioned master of the 
spoken word, loving people so much that he hated solitude 
— this was the man behind the statesman. This was the 
sum of things whidh added up to that magic and unforget- 
table personality. This was the presence which inspired 
his followers, which awed or won over his enemies, which 
impressed presidents and kings, which delighted friends, 
which anade him the tender husband and the loving father 
that he was throughout his life, 

Manuel Quezon was no ordinary man. He was beloved 
by Providence. In his later political career, his deci- 
sions were occasionally inscrutable, but almost always right. 
Through the flat decade of the twenties, when the vessel 
of independence was becatoed in a sluggish sea, he kept 
up the flagging will of his countrymen, continued to beat 
the drums of freedom, and never once lost sight of his goal. 

As the tempo of events qu tokened in the world, Manuel 
Quezon was ready. With enthusiasm undimlmed by a 
quarter century of public life, with energy apparently un- 
diminished by the drain of the dread illness which was so 



?84 



QUEZON WAS NO ORDINARY MAN 

common among our people, he plunged into the crisis of 
his lifelong battle for independence. That battle, too, he 
won. 

It was in 1941 and an exulting people voiced an over- 
whelming will that Manuel Quezon be the first President 
of the Philippines. It seemed that ha had reached the high 
plateau of his career. He toyed indulgently with the 
thought of retiring at the end of his term in office, to tend 
his health, to take his ease, to travel, to spend his declining 
years in the warm and comforting circle of a devoted and 
cherished faultily. 

In his first historic term, he set the new Common- 
wealth well on the road to freedom. He obtained from 
President Roosevelt a pledge of special economic conces- 
sions after independence. He dreamed and designed the 
construction of a magnificent capital city, the crowning 
jewel of the fame that was to outlast him. He (made a 
good -will trip to Cuba and to Mexico, and in accents which 
rang clear in those lands, he told of his faith in America, 
in democracy, and in world unity. 

Then, from a narrow strip of land called the Polish 
Corridor, there burst the lightning of war. Guns grew 
louder; throughout * Europe freedom was vanquished; a 
new tyranny ran rampant over the ancient seats of west- 
ern civilisation. In the Orient, deep out of the north China 
Sea, there rose the menacing clouds of war, Closer and 
closer they drew to the Philippines, still only a mark in 
the sky, but to the wise and practiced eye of Manuel Que- 
zon, they tokened danger. 

The time for retirement of the leader was not yet 
come. This new danger had to be rc&t In the United 
States, ideologically pledged to the support of the western 
allies, Franklin D, Roosevelt was elected for an unprec- 



285 



EULOGIES OX QUEZON 



edented third term. In the Philippines Manuel Quezon 
was chosen for his second. In the few remaining lands ot 
freedom and peace, men girded their loins for battle. Our 
leader called on his countrymen to rally without question 
to the cause to which the United States was pledged — the 
sacred cause for which he had fought all his life, for justice 
and liberty. The youth who had fought America with 
desperate fury in 1898. poured out his eloquence and spent 
his magnificent spirit in support of that nation now. 

The rest of the story of Manuel Quezon is the history 
of Philippine participation in the war. When the mailed 
fist of Japan struck without warning, first at Pearl Harbor 
and then at Manila, Quezon's choice was already made. It 
was not an easy choice. It was a choice previously faced 
by Norway, Denmark, Bulgaria, Hungary, Greece, Siam, 
and Malaya. It was a choice between resisting for the sake 
of principle, or yielding for the sake of relative safety. 
Not all these nations made the same choice. At that time 
the issue on which hung the future of the world was in 
grave doubt. The forces of evil were on the march ; there 
were many men of impartial mind who thought the age of 
barbarism had already won. But the lion heart of Manuel 
Quezon would admit neither doubt nor despair. He threw, 
not without question but hesitation, the force of eighteen 
million Filipinos into the struggle on the side of right, on 
the side of the United States. In a major sense, of course, 
Manuel Quezon's choice was gathered from the hearts of 
his people. There was no question in their minds. There 
was no unwillingness on their part. The die was cast. 
And when the time came, when he was asked to leave his 
beloved land, and to wage the fight from afar, he acceded, 
but with painful sorrow. His heart ached at the thought 
of leaving his people to face their fate alone. First from 
Australia and then from Washington, he urged h>s coun- 
trymen to resist, to keep high their hopes, to maintain in- 
tact their faith in the eventual triumph of liberty. 



286 



QUEZON WAS NO ORDINARY MAN 

Ho plunged with all his heart and soul into his new 
task ... on the one hand as supreme leader of the forces 
of resistance, and on the other as the eloquent advocate, 
for the gathering and launching of the offensive against 
Japan, for the rescue of our people from their brutal 
bondage. 

The flickering flame of physical vitality burned lower 
now that he was drawing from unseen reserves the last 
elements of energy for his final work. The fragile body 
which supported with so much strain the explosive energy 
of a dynamic mind served its fatal warning. But death 
was no stranger to Manuel Quezon. Often it had beckoned, 
never perched far distant from him. The sultrv veil 
which those who live call death, because they cannot see 
beyond it, drew closer to him!. Still he fought it, refused 
it. But as to all, even so to Manuel Quezon, death finally 
came. The essential tasks accomplished, his glorious 
achievements lying in brilliant array behind him, the great 
soul, with the strong surge of the upward flying eagle, 
wrenched itself from its mortal house. This life was ended. 

The American nation and the American people 
mourned him as one of their own. The leaders of state of 
many lands paid him tribute. The muffled drums which 
sounded as the funeral cortege wound its way through 
Arlington National Cemetery reverberated across distant 
waters. They were heard in the Philippines, and the 
millions here wept in unison. 

I remember that day. I was at morning mass in the 
House of God when the tragic news was spread. Choked 
with grief, I prayed with all mty heart for the repose of 
his soul, for the solace of his widow and his children, for 
the salvation of our people, smitten anew with this 
irreparable loss. 



.237 



EULOGIES ON QUEZON 



Now the storm and terror of the recent past are ended. 
The dark and angry clouds which long enveloped us are 
rolling away. The golden fingers of the new day's light 
rest with healing touch upon the pain and wounds which 
this, our people, .suffered. Strong and willing hands re- 
build that which is destroyed. This rich, kind earth re- 
news itself; the blossoms of tomorrow will hide the scars 
of yesterday. 

Now the body of our leader returns to rest. From the 
voiceless lips of the unreplying dead come reassurance, 
courage and hope. The spirit of Manuel Quezon, which 
never left us, soothes with gentle balm our heavy sorrow. 
In the Night of Death in which he dwells, our love can 
hear the rustle of a wing, and the seraphic song of angels 
to lull our grief, to give us strength, to bring us peace. Let 
there then be peace, too, for Manuel Quezon ; for now he 
belongs to the ages. May the causes for which he lived 
and in whose name he died . . . Liberty, Justice and 
Democracy . . . exult in eternal triumph! 



288 



SPIRITS LIKE QUEZON'S DON'T DIE 

By Frank Murphy 

Ass ciaii Justice, United States Supreme Court 



It is my sad but grateful errand to greet you on the 
occasion of the death of your beloved hero, Manuel L. Que. 
zon. The government of the United States deeply mourns 
this occasion dedicated to the memory of a great man. 
We never had a better friend, or one who struggled hard- 
er to achieve independence and self-government for his 
people. He never violated his oath to the people of the 
United States and, in obedience to that oath, he came 
to our land, and perished in exile. One thing he never 
would tolerate would be the slightest hint of violating his 
oath of office. One could not say a word to add to the 
stature— intellectual and spiritual stature— of Manuel L. 
Quezon. That is an impossibility. We might as well at- 
tempt to retouch a masterpiece don,e by an immortal. His 
life should be preached from every pulpit, will be taught 
in the schools and colleges. Every editor will write about 
it. It will be known to every citizen whether in the rural 
areas or in the urban communities of this land he loved 
and for which he perished. 

We cannot let the occasion go by without mentioning 
his history from childhood until that moment when death 
took him lightly by the hand. It reflects what is written 
in the Good Book that "life is a continuous warfare." He 
never knew for a moment, release from that duty of strug- 
gling for his people in order that they would achieve their 
goal of complete independence. We also notice this about 
him — that he never would tolerate for a moment the idea 
of his people not being the equal of any people on earth. 
And then something of the spirit of America went into 



289 



EULOGIES ON QUEZON 



him. My country grew to be great because people from 
every race or every religion came together. They could 
not forget it. They would not be separated. That made 
America's might, America's greatness. Enemies, of course, 
hoped that that would cause disunity and division. T want 
to point out too that they had very few material posses- 
sions—they were the dispossessed. But they knew some- 
thing of natural law. They knew that natural law was 
born of divine law, and so in the declaration of independence 
it was made clear that all people were equal and that 
they have certain rights given to them by their Creator. 
Cicero knew that, Aristotle knew it, Blackstone, Abraham 
Lincoln knew that. And so it was with Manuel L. Que- 
zon. He prepared his people. He knew that his peoplo 
under divine law were entitled to their rights, while at the 
same time recognizing a duty to their country- We saw 
his fragile body, we saw his noble wife beside him during 
those critical days. He never flinched for a moment. 
Spirits like Manuel L. Quezon's just don't die. The struc- 
ture passes on but the spirit will struggle on forever. 

The world, my friends, enters a new era. The hope 
of man is this: that the principle of morality and justice 
cannot and will not fade. This principle of morality and 
Justice must be the motivating force of our lives. They 
are problems that require deeper insight and a more pro- 
found instinct than that of war. 

So the life of your great President for whom 1 had 
the greatest personal admiration should serve as an ex- 
ample to Americans and Filipinos alike* If the youth of 
this impoverished land were to take a faltering step, I hope 
they will think first of the life of Manuel L, Quezon and 
be reawakened to your responsibility, to your sense of in- 
dustry, to your sense of duty, to your sense of tenderness 
and kindness that makes a nation great. I hope God will 
keep and bless you* 



290 



FATHER OF THIS INFANT REPUBLIC 



By Douglas Mac Arthur 

Supreme Commander of the Allied Power® 



It is a source of deepest regret that my duties in the 
occupation of Japan at this critical moment have not per- 
mit ted me personally to be present reverently to pay hom- 
age at the final rites Over the bier which contains the mor- 
tal remains of President Quezon, He was my dear friend 
of long years, and it was my privilege to share with him 
many of the varying conditions which have beset human 
life during our age. And in this tragic moment, as we 
close the scroll of his life and works and hearken to their 
profound and controlling influence upon the destiny of his 
people, I attest to and join in the applauding judgment of 
history of the path of duty he strode upon this earth. 

Of all men of all time, none more truly merited the 
appellation of patriot — statesman. Few could, as he, re- 
place the uniform of the soldier with the mantle of states- 
craft, yet maintain with voice and pen in undiminished 
vigor the crusading fight in the self-same cause for which 
he had fought by the violence of arms. 

Throughout his long years of public service, never 
did he compromise the principle which he thus espoused 
—never did he divert his gaze from the goal which he 
thus resolutely sought. That he lived to bring its real- 
ization in full sight bespeaks the unconquerable determi- 
nation with which he endowed his lofty purpose. That his 
native land now stands as one of the free and independent 
nations of the world is responsive, more than to all else, 
to the indomitable will by which he developed in the con- 
science of his people a firm belief in their destiny as a 



291 



EULOGIES ON QUEZON 

race, and an unshakable conviction that they lacked not 
the capacity fully to support independent sovereignty 
once attained. 

Two years ago, while preparing to join in the final 
blow for his people's liberation, death forever closed his 
lips and stayed his pen, but the immortal spirit which sus- 
tains his soul remains forever a dominant influence upon 
the destiny of the Republic for which he gave so much. 

His hours of life were full— hours of peace and hours 
of war— of anguish and of joy— of defeat and of victory 
—and, as with all men, of failure and of success — the 
rattle of musketry as he fought through the uncharted 
mountain wilderness to seek by war what he later won by 
peace _the bitter gall of defeat and surrender — the Uni- 
versity cloisters where he learned of Christianity, of 
Western culture, of tradition, and of the law— the shifting 
fortunes of political struggle as he rose steadily to the 
fame of position and power — those great crusades he con- 
ducted beyond the seas — his advocacy and his success in 
the cause of Philippine independence — the clouds of war 
spreading over the Orient — the swirl of enemy bombers — 
the crash of death and blood and disaster — again the bit- 
terness of defeat — then the exultation, with the rising tide 
of victory, as he saw our armies standing on the road back 
six hundred miles from Philippine soil — followed by still 
waters and silence. 

His soul being before the seat of Almighty God, judge 
of all men and of all things, Manuel Quezon's mortal re- 
mains are now committed to the tender care of the people 
he loved so deeply and served so well — his cherished own. 
Father of this infant Republic, which he planned but 
never saw, he has returned— he has come home forever. 



292 



QUEZON, ARCHITECT OF OUR FREEDOM 

By Claro jYI. Recto 



"Otir lives are like rivers 
that empty into the se a of death." 

We readily recall these immortal lines from the poet- 
philosopher as we view the remains of Manuel Luis Que- 
zon, that exemplary patriot who dedicated his gifted in- 
tellect and his passion for freedom to the service of his 
people; that modern Argonaut who dared live dangerous- 
ly that he might offer power and glory to his beloved 
country; that noble and gallant spirit who would as soon 
drink of the cup of life to its very dregs, as prostrate him- 
self before his all-merciful God to assuage the troubled 
longings of his soul. 

But the river of life for this man who lived it to 
the full, certainly did not end in death, as do the common, 
nameless lives of those whose lot is immediate oblivion 
and nothingness. Beyond death, despite journey's end 
from which no traveler returns, life if lived for a great 
purpose, takes on a new meaning and merges into immor- 
tality. Thus did fame pay tribute to Manuel Luis Que- 
zon and carve a niche for him in the hall of the immortals 
for the greater glory of his country, and the everlasting 
guidance, inspiration and example of future generations. 

Providence, in its inscrutable ways, chose for Manuel 
Luis Quezon the land where he was to be bom and bred 
and developed for the great task which destiny had in 
store for him. 

It was no .accident that the Philippines was to be his 
country, over the spirit of whose people and treasures of 
whose lands, when he first saw the light of day, hang the 

298 



EULOGIES ON QUEZON 



gloom of centuries. It was no accident that from infancy 
his soul received the imprint that was to distinguish him 
as an outstanding example of human greatness, not from 
tne gentle and noxious zephyr which induces conformity 
and submission to the existing order, but from xh f j 
exhilarating gusts of rebellion which even then were buf- 
feting the structure of the old colonial institution. 

Nor was it sheer chance that Manuel Luis Quezon 
reached adolescence when the tempest of the revolution, 
unleashed by the genius of Rizal and Del Pilar, lashed the 
four corners of the archipelago, while the bolo of Boni- 
facio flashed crimson sparks upon the national horizon, 
and the cry of Balintawak reverberated through moun- 
tains and dales, bringing to the lowliest shack its message 
of deliverance, 

And it was not in vain, finally, that with the death of 
the infant Republic, which he helped establish by join- 
ing the forces of liberation o f Aguinaldo, overwhelmed 
as it was by superior force, Manuel Luis Quezon, along 
with Sergio Osmefia and other young patriots, loyal to the 
ideals of the Republic and alert to the voice of destiny, again 
plunged themselves into the struggle, this time not with 
guns, but with the eloquence of the tribune and the pen 
of the statesman, to save the country's honor from chaos 
and the ignominy of defeat, to retrieve from desertion 
and abandonment the holy cause of the revolution, and 
to keep the flag of freedom flying as a symbol of self-esteem 
and a protest against all foreign domination- 
Had Manuel Luis Quezon been born under other skies, 
had the temper of the times been different, which exacted 
the last ounce of his seemingly inexhaustible energy and 
d his inte nse patriotism, he would not have been the 
acknowledged and outstanding leader of his people that he 
was, nor would his name, now and for always, be like that 

294 



- 



QUEZON, ARCHITECT OF OUR FREEDOM 

of Rizal, Washington. Bolivar, and Kosciusko, a byword in 
the lips of all oppressed peoples, who aspire and struggle, 
live and die, for freedom. 

Like all men born to greatness and power and destined 
to be leaders of men and people, Manuel Luis Quezon re- 
ceived from his Maker the priceless gift of keen and quick 
perception of the meaning and significance of things and 
events. The psychology of individuals and of the masses 
was an open book to his penetrating mind, hence, his im- 
mense and irresistible power of attraction and leadership. 
He was indeed an inspired leader, for, what would take 
others time and reflection and study to understand, he 
could grasp by sheer intuition. Great projects and crea- 
tive ideas, the interpretation of contemporary events and 
the intentions of individuals, whether friends or foes, came 
to him as though from the very tongue of the Holy Spirit. 

He enjoyed man's prerogatives in fullest measure — 
spiritually and materially, and, mindful of this duality of 
his nature, he gave unto the flesh what is the flesh's and 
unto the soul what is its due. He loved everything worth 
loving, exalting, what to him was the embodiment of all 
his loves: the love of country. And because his soul was 
possessed by the anxieties of his time to which he com- 
municated his o\yn anxieties, and because his heart was a 
magnet which drew to itself the people's longings, he put 
in all his acts that unquenchable fire of soul, and that in. 
domitable- tenacity of will, which made his life a never- 
ending adolescence and a continuous fight for the most 
beautiful and sublime ideals, sometimes for the glory and 
satisfaction of victory and at other times for the sheer 
need of fighting. He purposely looked for difficulties that 
he might have the gratification of overcoming them; all 
for the sake of attaining that supreme goal which was the 
pure and constant desire of his heart: the honor and hap- 
piness of his people. 



295 



EULOGIES ON QUEZON 



No one took greater pride in being called and known 
as a Filipino in cosmopolitan circles incurably afflicted with 
the prejudice of their so-called racial superiority. And he 
taught us to emulate that sacred pride, which is not the 
arrogance of the frog in the fable, but the elimination of 
servility and flattery in our conduct, and the serene dignity 
which comes of the conviction that there are no superior or 
inferior races, but only degrees of culture and periods of 
civilization, — that races advance, recede, or stagnate de- 
pending on conditions obtaining in the body politic. And 
in the same way that we have produced Rizal, Del Pilar, 
Luna, Mabini, Quezon, Arellano, Anacleto del Rosario, and 
other shining examples of human greatness in the arts, in 
the sciences, in politics, and in law, so also shall we achieve 
what other peoples have achieved, if we only henceforth 
develop an abiding consciousness that we are a nation des- 
tined for something great, and that our advancement will 
come not from alien patronage but through our own efforts, 
self-confidence and faith in a better future. 

Manuel Luis Quezon loved to bask in glory, gathered 
around him the artifices of power, and sought the glitter 
and pomp of the world. But it would be a sad mistake to 
think that his motive was merely to satisfy his personal 
vanity. All that was but the external trappings, the halo 
of splendor, the dazzling apotheosis, with which he had to 
surround himself the better to set the stage for action. It 
was the contest of the century, among men of the century, 
for the attainment of human objectives, and wherein the 
contender would fare ill should he appear garbed in the 
robes of a penitent reciting verses from the holy scriptures. 

The fight for our independence which Manuel Luis 
Quezon carried on in the United States is one of the bright- 
est pages in the history of all peoples aspiring to be free. 
He fought with the pen and with his eloquence in the halls 
of Congress, in party conventions, at conference tables, in 
the press, in popular assemblies, in the chambers of political 



296 



QUEZON, ARCHITECT OF OUR FREEDOM 



figures, even in the boudoirs of feminine elegance. He 
made friends and enthusiastic admirers wherever he went, 
enlisting them in his noble patriotic mission. He lived like 
an oriental potentate, and became an arbiter of elegance, 
that others might see in him, and not in a savage in gee- 
string, the personification of the people he represented. 

Thus, under the magnetism of his personality and the 
power of his eloquence, we captured, one after another, the 
historical citadels which marked the progress of our strug- 
gle towards the promised land: first, the independence 
planks in the platforms of political parties; then, the 
Autonomy Act, in 1916; later, in 1934, the Independence 
Act, the Constitution, and the Commonwealth; and, finally, 
the Republic which, on July 4, 1946, took its place in the 
concert of free nations, 

Manuel Luis Quezon left shreds of his life along that 
uncertain and glorious road, until he gave up life itself far 
from the fatherland, without seeing the end of the fight 
which sent him to distant shores and without receiving the 
greatest reward which he had longed for and richly de- 
served — to witness, with heart overflowing with emotion, 
the' hoisting of the national flag in all its majestic glory, 
there to be caressed by the air of freedom and sovereignty, 
its sun and three stars even more luminous than those of 
the firmament itself, treasuring in its folds and deathless 
determination of a people expressed in those immortal 
verses of the national anthem: "Ne'er shall invaders 
trample thy sacred shores ..." 

How painful and trying it must have been for Manuel 
Luis Quezon not to have seen his dream realized, that which 
we all cherish and which Rizal immortalized in his verses, 
the dream to die under the skies of one's native land, where 
the hours are sweet and death is peace. How happy his 
spirit must be now to see from the serene heights where 
he dwells that his remains will sleep in his enchanted land 
the sleep of eternity ! 



297 



EULOGIES OX QUEZON 



The Great Leader has returned to receive the warmth 
of this land he loved so much, and the love and devotion 
of his countrymen. But he sees about him only tragic 
and desolate scenes of death and devastation: the popu- 
lation decimated by the war* the public finance in bank- 
ruptcy, commerce in foreign hands, the fields fallow, the 
industries destroyed, peace and order upset, the patrimony 
of our children threatened, the national unity rent asunder, 
the country divided into opposing factions and armed 
camps, the ancient virtues cast aside, and, as was said by 
the exiled patriot in Dapitan, "The home destroyed, faith 
sold to others, and ruin everywhere." 

Rest in peace in your tomb, noble leader, and mind not 
so much the moral suffering and physical misery afflicting 
our people as the ugly aftermath of the last conflagration 
which the ambition of empires visited upon our land. We 
are, it is said, a heroic people, but the whole nation is a vast 
graveyard. We have been freed, but our cities and towns 
are heaps of rubble. We are independent, but beggars of 
foreign favors; citizens of a republic, but with the habits 
and mentality of a colonial. The word "Bataan" spells not 
only deeds of glory, loyalty, and heroism, but also disillu- 
sionment over much vaunted altruism and unfulfilled 
promises. Our homes are in mourning, not only for those 
who fell during the war, but also for those left behind. 
There is frustration in our hearts and confusion in our 
minds, as we ponder upon the grave and complex problems 
confronting our generation and the pressing questions of 
the future to which we find no answer. 

Manuel Luis Quezon, architect of our freedom and 
father of our country: 

This world is the road 
that leads to another, 
where one way dwell 
without mrm f without fears, 



298 



QUEZON, ARCHITECT OF OUR FREEDOM 

but as we go along, God grant that we. may have your 
faith, your passion, and your courage; that we may feel 
the same exalted pride that you felt for your land and 
for your race; that our present leader in whom we see 
the ablest representative and the highest glory of our 
generation, and whom you justly rated the counterpart of 
your genius and the most worthy successor to carry on 
your noble emprise, may steer us clear of all kinds of 
crisis that may beset our path; and that our independence 
and our Republic, not merely in the law and in official 
proclamations and in the verbiage at banquet tables, may 
live as a vital, pulsating force, in our conscience and in our 
conduct as well as in the conscience and in the conduct 
of others, so that our martyrs may not have to return to 
this world for another holocaust of their lives, 

Manuel Luis Quezon, care not that your remains lie 
beneath the sod. Your people will not look for you among 
the dead. In death you live. 



299 



QUEZON, THE UNDAUNTED SOLDIER 



By Raul T. Leuterio 

Majority Floor Leader, House of Representatives 
Congress of the Philippines 



In response to the call of love and gratitude, we are 
assembled in joint session of the Congress to render a final 
tribute and do honor to the memory of the most outstand- 
ing and commanding figure of our race, one whose great- 
ness towers with the greatest of the age, and who in pass- 
ing to the Great Beyond had joined the ranks of the great 
immortals. On this solemn occasion we are fittingly ex- 
pressing the sorrow, the anguish and desolation of eighteen 
million hearts which grieved the departure of their great 
leader, their friend and benefactor, the late President Ma- 
nuel L. Quezon. 

As we contemplate his mortal remains, as we pay 
this posthumous homage to his memory, we are over- 
whelmed with grief and we come to the full realization 
of the immensity of our loss, for all these seem to bring 
back to life that great man who had done so much for his 
country and whose sincere friendship and warm affection 
we all had deeply felt and cherished. Thus, we mourn the 
passing of a great patriot whose glorious memory will for- 
ever and ever remain and endure in the hearts of his grate- 
ful people. 

He died in exile, far from his people and his home, 
in a foreign but friendly soil. The news of his death 
reached us here when we were still in the merciless grip 
of the enemy. It filtered into our valleys, hills and moun- 
tains and travelled from place to place until it reached 
every home and touched every heart. It gave way to a 



300 



QUEZON, THE UNDAUNTED SOLDIER 



glorious spectacle of a nation in mourning in the midst of 
great sufferings, in the face of death and of the enemy. 
When he died, a great people under the leadership of a 
great President paid homage and did great honors upon 
him, who did not belong to their race, but who in life was 
the symbol of eighteen million liberty-loving people who 
side by side with the soldiers of the Mother country fought 
for the great principles of democracy. His mortal remains 
were given an honored place in Arlington, the hallowed 
ground for America's dead heroes and great men, and later 
were brought to his beloved land in one of America's finest 
men-of-war, a hero of the sea, accompanied by a distin- 
guished American, a great friend of our people and of our 
lamented leader. Thus America, the greatest of all democ- 
racies, rendered honor to the memory of our great and 
beloved leader. 

If it is true that the Lord Almighty in His infinite 
wisdom grants to the dying a glimpse of the future, Ma- 
nuel L. Quezon must have had a vision, before he departed 
for a better life, of the final liberation of his people and 
the establishment of their republic in all its magnificence 
and splendor. He must have seen in that vision our beau- 
tiful flag flying alone and proudly under the azure skies, 
the embodiment of all his struggles, his sacrifices, and his 
triumphs. 

He knew his task was done. He knew he had accom- 
plished his mission in life. He knew that his people were 
on their way to freedom and he had an abiding faith in 
their ability and strength to uphold and defend that free- 
dom. 

Our beloved leader is dead! And soon his mortal re- 
mains will find eternal and quiet repose in the bosom of 
mother earth, but his people will never forget the great- 
ness and nobility of his soul, his striking genius, and his 
indomitable courage, his matchless gallantry, and his strug- 



301 



EULOGIES ON QUEZON 

gles for the cause of freedom and his deep concern for 
their welfare. 

He is no more, but his life is a challenge to our people 
to dedicate and consecrate themselves to the service of our 
motherland. His deeds are a challenge to his countrymen 
to emulate him and make of this country a haven of jus- 
tice, of freedom and of peace. His great spirit, his im- 
mortal teachings, and his hallowed memory shall for gen- 
erations to come dominate the life of his nation. 

Manuel L. Quezon, the undaunted soldier, the peerless 
legislator and parliamentarian, the great president and 
leader of the Filipino people and the father of their inde- 
pendence, had answered the call of his Maker, the Supreme 
Arbiter of our Destiny. He is no more, but his great ideals 
shall forever live to inspire us. 

I seem to see him now as he was addressing his peo- 
ple on a memorable occasion when he said : 

"We shall be flowing; stream, a rippling brook, a deep 
and roaring torrent, full of life, of hope, of faith and of 
strength. Through self -discipline we shall harness all our 
energies, so that our power, spreading over the length and 
breadth cf this land, will develop its resources, advance its 
culture, secure social justice, give puissance to the nation, and 
insure happiness and contentment for all the people, under the 
aegis of liberty and peace. 

Other peoples of the world are straining themselves to 
attain higher levels of progress and national security. We 
shall ^ not, we must not, lag behind. 

The Filipino people are on the march, towards their des- 
tojTi to conquer their place in the sun!" 

God grant us the strength and valor to live up to the 
ideals of Manuel L. Quezon! 



302 



r 



i 



fe ! ! : : : . '.M 



EKKATA 

Page 17, line 40: Father instead of Faker 

66, line 5: Philippine instead of Philipine 
69, line fi: succeed instead of success 
90, line 25: Nacionalistas instead of Nationalist a 
102, line 11: tie instead of time 
157, line 9: insert of between break and the 
171 r last line; complaints instead of complaint 
200, line 3: truck instead of track 
249, line 1: if instead of it 
267, line 10: are instead of is 

302, line IS; insert article 'V between be and fUvm 



