
Edited at the Department of Instruction and Information, under Commonwealth Act No. 638 
Entered as second-class matter, Manila Post Office, December 26, 1905 


Vol. 41 MANILA, PHILIPPINES, APRIL, 1945 No. 1 


TABLE OF 

Page 

Three Years in Review 3 

Executive Orders, Proclamations and 
Administrative Orders by the Pres- 
ident: 

Executive Order No. 385. transfer- 
ring from the General Auditing 
Office the function of preparing 
and keeping the accounts of the 
various Departments, Bureaus, Of- 
‘ fices and dependencies of the Na- 
tional Government as well as the 
function of acting upon requi- 
sitions for supplies, materials and 
equipment, and of operating the 


Salvage Warehouse 11 

Executive Order No. 386, placing the 
red stripe of the Filipino flag up 
during the present emergency 13 

Executive Order No. 387, fixing the 
schedule of burial expenses in 
case of death from injuries received 
or sickness contracted in perform- 
ance of duty 14 

Executive Order No. 388, placing the 
Bureau of Immigration under the 
Office of the President 15 


Executive Order No. 389, directing 
the immediate arrest and vigorous 
prosecution of persons pillaging, 
looting or committing other acts, of 
lawlessness against the civilian 


population 16 

Executive Order No. 390, prescrib- 
ing the order of presidential suc- 
cession and abolishing the De- 
partment of the Interior 17 


Executive Order No. 391, authoriz- 
ing provincial, city and municipal 
governments to incur in over- 
drafts for the payment of salaries 
of their officers and employees and 

expenses for essential activities 18 

Executive Order No. 392, authoriz- 
ing the Food Administrator to take 
over farm lands and to require 


able-bodied citizens to engage in 
farming and other productive ac- 
tivities '. 18 

Executive Order No. 393, providing 
for the free transmission of mails 
of United States • Army and Navy 

Officers and men 19 

Executive Order No. 394, establishing 


an interisland shipping authority 
and war risk insurance for vessels 
engaged in the coastwise trade and 
appropriating for that purpose five 

million pesos 20 

Executive Order No. 395, providing 
for an increase in the number of 
justices of the Court of Appeals 
and of the judges of First Instance 
of the Fourth Judicial District, and 
investing judges appointed under 
Commonwealth Act No. 504 (Ca- 
dastral) with general jurisdiction. 21 

60 


CONTENTS 

Page 


Executive Order No. 396, reorganiz- 
ing and grouping the Executive 
Departments of the Government.... 22 

Executive Order No. 397, exempting 
the Harbor Police Force in matters 
of appointment, promotions, dis- 
cipline and removal from the Civil 

Service Rules and Regulations 23 

Executive Order No. 398, permitting 
registration and deposit of Philip- 
pine Government securities with 
the Treasurer of the Philippines.... 24 

Executive Order No. 399, amending 
paragraph 4 of Executive Order 

No. 326 25 

Executive Order No. 400, creating 

the City of Greater Manila 26 

Executive Order No. 1-W, amending 
rules and regulations governing the 
appointment and supervision of 
government pensionados 27 


Executive Order No. 2-W, vacating 


commissions of officers of the Phil- 
ippine Army who will be commis- 
- sioned by the Army of the United 

States 27 

Executive Order No. 3-W, classifying 
University of the Philippines Fel- 
lows as Philippine Government 

pensionados 28 

Executive Order No. 5-W, creating 

the Office of Special Services 28 

Executive Order No. 6-W, creating 
a Committee for Relief of Desti- 
tute Filipinos in the United States 

and Hawaii 29 

Executive Order No. 7-W, creating a 
Post-War Planning Board 30 


Executive Order No. 8-W, organiz- 
ing the Department of Information 
and Public Relations and transfer- 
ring to it the powers, functions and 
duties, as well as the personnel, 
appropriations and properties of 
the Office of Special Services, Office 


of the President of the Philippines 31 
Executive Order No. 9-W, detailing 
all government pensionados to the 

Post-War Planning Board 32 

Executive Order No. 10-W, increas- 

iing the membership of the Post- 

War Planning Board 32 

Executive Order No. 11-W, extend- 

ing further the suspension of grant- 
ing geological exploration and pe- 
troleum drilling leases 33 

Executive Order No. 12-W, creating 
the Division of Civil Affairs, Phil- 
ippine Army, in the Department 

of National Defense 33 

Executive Order No. 13-W, creating 
the Philippine Commonwealth Re- 
lief Committee 35 

Executive Order No. 14-W, creating 

the Currency Committee 36 

Executive Order No. 15-W, reorga- 

nizing and consolidating the Execu- 
tive Departments of the Common- 
wealth Government 36 


2 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Executive Order No. 16-W, creat- 
ing a Committee to study and re- 
commend a plan of reorganization 
of the Commonwealth Government 
Executive Order No. 17-W, amending 

Executive Order No. 6-W 

Executive Order No. 19-W, appro- 
priating funds to be used as aid 
for the operation of the provincial, 
city and municipal civil govem- 


Executive Order No. 20-W, prescrib- 
ing instructions for the conduct of 
public affairs of the Commonwealth 
Government in the United States 
during the absences of the Presi- 
dent - 

Executive Order No. 21, declaring 
to be on active service in the 
Philippine Army all pers<?ns now 
actively serving in recognized mi- 
litary forces in the Philippines 
Executive Order No. 22, fixing the 
salaries of the officers and enlisted 

men of the Philippine Army 

Executive Order No. 23, creating a 
Board of Inquiry to investigate 
charges of disloyalty to the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines and 
the United States of America in 

the Province of Leyte 

Executive Order No. 24, amending 
Executive Order No. 371 of October 

2, 1941 

Executive Order No. 25, promulgat- 
ing rules and regulations concern- 
ing currency, books and accounts 
of banks and their branches and 
agencies in the provinces, provin- 
cial, city and municipal treasuries 
and other government accountable 

offices, and debt moratorium 

Executive Order No. 26, amending 

Executive Order No. 24 

Executive Order No. 27, reorganizing 
the Executive Departments of the 

Commonwealth Government 

Executive Order No. 28, further 
amending Executive Order No. 24.... 
Executive Order No. 29, amending 
paragraph one of Executive Order 
No. 382, dated December 5, 1941.... 
Executive Order No. 30, appropriat- 
ing funds for the operation of the 
Government of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines as reestablished.. 
Executive Order No. 31, prescribing 
the office hours to be observed in 
the different bureaus and offices 

of the Government 

Executive Order No. 32, amending 

Executive Order No. 25 

Executive Order No. 33, creating the 
Banking Division of the National 
Treasury, Commonwealth of the 

Philippines 

Executive Order No. 34, amending 

traffic regulations for vehicles 

Executive Order No. 35, authorizing 
the Emergency Control Administra- 
tor and the officers and agents 
specifically authorized by him to 
administer oath in relation to the 
enforcement of all anti-profiteering 
laws and orders 


Page 


37 

38 


39 


40 


41 

42 


43 

45 


48 

50 

51 
53 

53 

54 


55 

56 


57 

66 


67 


Executive Order No. 36, reviving the 
regrouping of provinces for judicial 
purposes as provided in Act No. 
4007 of the Philippine Legislature 
and repealing Commonwealth Act 


No. 544 68 

Executive Order No. 37, abolishing 

the Court of Appeals 69 

Executive Order No. 38, amending 
section 1659 of the Revised Admin- 
istrative Code as amended by sec- 
tion 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 

543 70 


Page 


Executive Order No. 39, appropriat- 
ing the sum of one million pesos 

for civilian defense 71 

Proclamation No. 1-W, proclaiming a 
state of mourning in memory of 
the death of His Excellency, Manuel 
Luis Quezon, President of the Phil- 
ippines 71 

Proclamation No. 2-W, declaring 
August 19, 1944, a special public 

holiday j. 72 

Proclamation No. 3-W. declaring the 
first Monday of September, 1944, a 

special public holiday 73 

Proclamation No. 4, designating 
Thursday. November 23, 1944, as a 
day of National Thanksgiving... . 74 

Proclamation No. 5, declaring Wed- 
nesday, November 15, 1944, a 

special public holiday 75 


Proclamation No. 6, declaring that 
the City of Manila has been freed 
from enemy occupation and control 
for the purposes of the debt mo- 
ratorium 76 

Proclamation No. 7, declaring that 
the Province of Leyte has been 
freed from enemy occupation and 
control for the purposes of the 
debt moratorium 77 

Department and Bureau Administra- 
tive Orders and Regulations: 

General Auditing Office — 

General Circular No. 1-V, pro- 
mulgating regulations regarding 
the closing of books, freezing 
of accounts, opening of new 
books and submission of in- 
ventories 78 

General Circular No. 2-V, order- 
ing the discontinuance of the 
use of old Internal Revenue, 
documentary, postage, strip and 
other stamps and accountable 


forms 78 

General Circular No. 3-V, order- 
ing the destruction and prohibi- 
tion of the use of Internal Rev- 
enue documentary and postage 
stamps which are declared 
obsolete 79 

Appointments and Designations 80 

Historical Papers and Documents: 

Joint Resolutions Nos. 93 and 94. of 
the Congress of the United States.. 81 

Statement of President Roosevelt 
upon signing Joint Resolutions 
Nos. 93 and 94 85 


General MacArthur’s speech upon 
turning over to President Osmena 
the full powers and responsibilities 
of the Commonwealth Government 


under the Constitution 86 

President Osmena’ s reply to General 
MacArthur’s speech 87 


Texts of cables sent by President 
Osmena to Secretary of War Henry 
L. Stimson and the Hon. Herbert 
Lehman on the occasion of the re- 
establishment of the Commonwealth 


Government 91 

President Osmena’s speech on the 
occasion of the induction into of- 
fice of members of his new ca- 
binet 92 

Secretary Kalaw’s speech inaugurat- 
ing the Commonwealth Hour over 

Radio Manila 99 

President Osmena’s speech pver the 
Voice of Freedom on November 
23, 1944 101 


Legal and Official Notices: 

Department of Public Works and 
Communications — 

Registration of motor vehicles for 
operation and issuance of 
drivers’ licenses - 10 -f 


THREE YEARS IN REVIEW 


W ITH THIS ISSUE, the newly created Department of Instruction and Information 
in the reestablished Commonwealth Government of the Philippines resumes 
publication of the Official Gazette where it was left off on December 20, 1941, by 
the Office of the President at which it was then being edited. The suspension 
of the publication on that date was brought about by the transfer of the seat of 
the National Government, first from- Manila to Corregidor and later from Corregidor 
to Washington, D. C., when the Japanese Imperial Army invaded and occupied the 
Philippines. Notwithstanding this transfer, the Commonwealth Government did not 
for a moment cease to function nor did it lose its legal status under international 
law from the date of its removal to the United States to that of its reestablishment 
in Manila soon after the liberation of the City by the American forces. However, 
self-evident circumstances made it impossible to continue with the publication of 
the Gazette. In fact, there were no reasons whatsoever to justify, as in the case of 
many other governmental activities, the continuation of the Gazette, circumscribed 
as were the functions of the National Government while temporarily established on 
foreign shores to the achievement of definite objectives mainly concerning the prompt 
redemption of the Philippines from the hands of the Japanese invaders, the attain- 
ment of our independence under American protection soon after such redemption, and 
the speedy rehabilitation and reconstruction of our country from the ravages of war. 

It was at the invitation of the President of the United States and with the 
legislative sanction of the National Assembly that the seat of government was 
transferred to Washington, D. C., on May 13, 1942. The Commonwealth Government 
was firmly convinced that mere military occupation of a territory does not confer 
sovereign rights on the invading army and that its legal status, therefore, under 
international law would not be changed so long as it maintained its nucleus abroad 
through its head, President Manuel L. Quezon and his cabinet, and by means of the 
emergency powers given him by the National Assembly. This view was sustained by 
the United States and the other 42 members of the international group known as 
the United Nations, which officially recognized the Philippine Constitutional Govern- 
ment thus established in Washington, D. C. 

During its almost three-year stay in the United States capital, the Common- 
wealth Government set before itself, and substantially achieved, with the full coopera- 
tion of the Government of the United States, the following objectives: 

(1) To maintain the interest of the American people in the redemption of the 
Philippines as a sacred obligation which had been assumed by the United States; 

(2) To speed up the preparation of the necessary men, materials and plans 
for the reconquest of the Philippines; 

(3) To accelerate the advent of our independence; 

(4) To obtain adequate guarantees of the permanence of our political independ- 
ence; and 

(5) To work for our economic rehabilitation and stability as the material founda- 
tion of our independent structure. 

America’s answer to our repeated appeals for redemption is the liberation of the 
major portion of the Philippines by the American forces under the command of 
General Douglas MacArthur, including the complete occupation of the City of Manila. 

As to our independence with American protection, the promise made on Decem- 
ber 28, 1941, and reiterated on August 13, 1943, by President Franklin D. Roosevelt 
to grant it to us before 1946, was given legislative sanction when Congress approved 
S. J. Res. No. 93, which became law on June 29, 1944. President Quezon and other 
Filipino leaders of our Government in Washington requested the introduction of this 
Joint Resolution in the Congress of the United States and gave it their firm support 
until it was finally unanimously approved in both houses of Congress. So it hap- 
pened that our negotiations for Philippine independence, extending over a score and 
two years since the first parliamentary mission headed by Manuel L. Quezon, then 

3 


4 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


President of the Senate, left for the United States in 1922, were satisfactorily ter- 
minated under the authority of the Government of the Commonwealth which func- 
tioned in Washington, D. C., from May 13, 1942, to October 3, 1944. 

With respect to the imperative need for the rehabilitation and reconstruction ol 
the country, the Commonwealth Government urged the passage of the necessary- 
legislation by the Congress of the United States. Such legislation was appproved 
on June 29, 1944, and under its provisions a Philippine Rehabilitation Commission 
has been created, composed of nine Americans and nine Filipinos. It is now sitting 
in Washington and is investigating all the war damages and other rehabilitation needs 
for proper action, and is formulating plans for the future economic relations of the 
Philippines with the United States. 

E XECUTIVE and administrative orders, proclamations, speeches and other doc- 
uments herein published give a more concrete idea of the work carried out by the 
National Government during its stay in Washington, D. C. They reveal how Pres- 
ident Manuel L. Quezon, who with his cabinet represented the Commonwealth Gov- 
ernment in the States until his death on August 1, 1944, was deeply preoccupied 
by the problems of relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Philippines after the 
Japanese were driven out, confident as he had always been in the ultimate victory 
of the American Forces of Liberation in the Pacific. On September 15, 1943, he 
issued an Executive Order creating a Post-War Planning Board to study and rec- 
ommend, among other things, plans for relief of the population immediately upon 
reoccupation of the Philippines, for the rapid rehabilitation and reconstruction of 
the Philippine economy, for the promotion of post-war trade and other relationships 
between the Government of the Philippine Republic and other governments, and for 
the security of the Philippines after the defeat of Japan. Later on, in June, 1944, 
more assured than ever of the approaching liberation of the Philippines, he created 
by another Executive Order the Division of Civil Affairs, Philippine Army, in the 
Department of National Defense, empowered to exercise such functions as may be 
necessary to accomplish the following objectives: 

(1) To effect the necessary liaison between the President of the Philippines, 
the Commander-in-Chief of the Southwest Pacific Area and the people of the Phil- 
ippines during military operations and before normal civil government is reestab- 
lished; and 

(2) To execute plans for the relief of the people of the Philippines immediately 
upon the landing of the military forces of the United States. President Quezon like- 
wise created the Philippine Commonwealth Relief Committee, charged with purchas- 
ing in behalf of the Philippine Government the supplies of food, medicine, clothing 
and other necessities for the relief of the Filipino people. To effect the purchases 
with minimum delay, he authorized at the same time the initial appropriation of 
$5,000,000 from the general funds. The President also formed by Executive Order 
a Currency Committee to confer with the representatives of the Departments of the 
Interior, of State, of War and of the Treasury of the United States Government 
with the view to remedying the considerable confusion in our monetary system, 
resulting in the disappearance from circulation of legitimate currency, especially 
coins, and to arrange for the printing of new Philippine Treasury certificates and 
the immediate minting of subsidiary coins ready for use upon the landing of the 
liberating forces on Philippine soil. 

But President Quezon did not concern himself only with the war situation as it 
affected his country and his people during his forced prolonged stay in Washington, 
D. C. He also paid attention to matters affecting Filipinos residing in the United 
States. His first Executive Order issued in that city on May 30, 1942, amending the 
rules and regulations governing Government pensionados. increased the pension- 
ados’ monthly allowance during the period of scholarship for board, lodging and in- 
cidentals, from $70.00 to $100.00. By another Executive Order he created a 
Committee on Relief for Destitute Filipinos in the United States and Hawaii. The 
Committee is charged with the following duties and functions: 

(1) To study and pass upon all requests for financial aid from Filipinos who 
are destitute; 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


5 


(2) To determine the form and amount of relief that should be given to these 
persons; and 

(3) To aid them, through the Office of the Resident Commissioner, to obtain 
employment. 

P RESIDENT QUEZON died in Saranac Lake in the State of New York, U. S. A. 
on the morning of Tuesday, August 1, 1944. 

Immediately after his death Vice-President Sergio Osmena succeeded him as 
President on two legal bases: 

(1) By virtue of the general elections of 1941, in which he was chosen President 
together with President Quezon, each to serve for a term of two years; and 

(2) By virtue of the extension of his term of office by the Congress of the United 
States in order to give President Quezon a chance to serve longer during the American 
regime. 

P RESIDENT OSMEfrA’S first official act was to is§ue a proclamation designating 
the period from the first of August to the first of .September of 1944 a state of 
national mourning for all citizens of tfie Philippines as a mark of respect to the 
memory of President Quezon. By a subsequent proclamation he declared August 19, 
1944, which was the ^sixty-sixth anniversary of the birth of President Quezon, a 
special public holida y ^j o that Filipinos everywhere may go to their churches to pray 
for our beloved leader: and hold memorial seryices to honor his memory and extoll 
his character and public service. ,, 

President Osmena issued an Executive Order amending Executive Order No. 6-W, 
creating a Committee on Relief for Destitute Filipinos in the United States and 
Hawaii, so as to include therein Filipinos stranded in the United States on account 
of the war. In another Executive Order the President set aside the sum of Ten 
Million Pesos (WO, 000, 000) , or so much thereof as may be necessary out of any 
funds of the Government of the Commonwealth not otherwise appropriated, to be 
used as aid for the operation of the provincial, city and municipal governments 
which may be reestablished upon the reoccupation of the Philippines. In Executive 
Order No. 20-W he prescribed instructions for the conduct of public affairs of the 
Commonwealth Government in the United States during his absence. According to 
these instructions, the Secretary of Finance shall be the representative of the Pres* 
ident of the Philippines, and as such, he shall be charged with the conduct of the 
public affairs of the Commonwealth Government in the United States, with full 
authority to act on all matters which pertain to, or affect, the Government. 

In other Executive Orders issued from the seat of Government in the Field soon 
after the American forces landed in Leyte in October of last year, President Osmena: 
Declared to be on active service in the Philippine Army all persons now actively 
serving in recognized military forces in the Philippines; 

Fixed the salaries of the officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Army; 
Created a Board of Inquiry to investigate charges of disloyalty to the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines and the United States of America in the Province of Leyte, 
and consider the legal problems and matters of public policy involved therein; 

Amended Executive Order No. 371 of October 2, 1941, fixing the maximum 
selling prices of certain articles of prime necessity, and promulgating rules and 
regulations for the enforcement thereof; 

Promulgated rules and regulations concerning currency, books and accounts of 
banks and their branches and agencies in the provinces, provincial, city and municipal 
treasuries and other government accountable offices; and 

Declared a debt moratorium pending action by the Commonwealth Government. 

I MMEDIATELY after the reestablishment of the seat of the Government of the 
1 Commonwealth in the City of Manila on February 27, 1945, President Osmena 
issued an Executive Order restoring the executive departments as they existed 
before the Japanese invasion, but with such modifications as the exigencies of the 
present situation require. The order creates nine Executive Departments, to wit: 
the Department of the Interior, the Department of Finance, the Department of Justice, 
"*the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, the Department of Public Works and 
Communications, the Department of Instruction and Information, the Department of 


6 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Labor, the Department of National Defense and the Department of Health and 
Public Welfare. For the operation of the Government of the Commonwealth, the 
President appropriated by another Executive Order, out of any funds of the Com- 
monwealth Government not otherwise appropriated for the purpose, so much of the 
different amounts authorized in Commonwealth Act No. 654, known as the “General 
Appropriation Act for the Fiscal Year Nineteen Hundred and Forty-two,” enacted 
and approved by the National Assembly on June 21, 1941, as may correspond to the 
period starting from the date of the reestablishment of the Government of the Com- 
monwealth on Philippine soil on October 23, 1944, to June 30, 1945. The President 
also created the Banking Division of the National Treasury, Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, to provide a safe banking depositary for the savings of the people, and 
to provide for temporary banking and loan facilities during the emergency period, 
so that agricultural, industrial and commercial activities may be assisted. 

Three Executive Orders issued by the President on March 10, 1945, effected 
changes in our judiciary. The first one revives the regrouping of provinces for 
judicial purposes into twenty-six judicial districts as provided for under Act Num- 
bered Four thousand seven of the Philippine Legislature, and repeals Commonwealth 
Act No. 544, which creates the positions of district attorneys. The second one 
abolishes the Court of Appeals in the interest of a more speedy administration of 
justice, and orders that all cases which under* the law are appealable to this Court 
be appealed directly to the Supreme Court for final decision. By the third Executive 
Order the President reduces the number of officials of the Bureau of Justice to a 
Solicitor General and one Assistant Solicitor General “in the interest of a more 
simple and economical administration of justice.” A fourth Executive Order issued 
by the President on the same date appropriates the sum of one million pesos to be 
expended by the Emergency Control Administrator, subject to the approval of the 
President of the Philippines, for civilian defense. 

President Osmena appointed the following members of his new cabinet: Tomas 
Confesor, as Secretary of the Interior; Jaime Hernandez, as Secretary of Finance; 
D elfin Jaranilla, as Secretary of Justice; Sotero Cabahug, as Secretary of Public 
Works and Communications; Maximo M. Kalaw, as Secretary of Instruction and In- 
formation; Tomas Cabili, as Secretary of National Defense; and Major General 
Basilio J. Valdes, as Secretary of Health and Public Welfare. He also appointed 
Ismael Mathay Commissioner of the Budget and Dr. Jose S. Reyes Secretary to 
the President. Brigadier General Carlos P. Romulo was reappointed Resident Com- 
missioner of the Philippines to the United States, while Secretary of the Interior 
Tomas Confesor was designated Emergency Control Administrator. Secretary Con- 
fesor was also charged with the reorganization of the Government of the City of 
Manila. 

I N A SIMPLE but impressive ceremony held in the Reception Hall of Malacanan 
Palace on the morning of February 27, 1945, General Douglas MacArthur turned 
over to President Osmena the full powers and responsibilities of the Commonwealth 
Government under the Constitution. “Your country,” the General said in a brief 
speech delivered on the occasion, “thus is again at liberty to pursue its destiny to 
an honored position in the family of free nations. Your capital city, cruelly punished 
though it be, has regained its rightful place — Citadel of Democracy in the East.” 
Answering General MacArthur’s speech, President Osmena paid high tribute to the 
General as “friend and defender of our race.” “General Douglas MacArthur,” he 
declared, “will go down in history not only for his signal military successes but also 
for consistently following truly democratic methods in dealing with Philippine civil 
affairs in areas retaken from the enemy. Instead of taking advantage of military 
operations to maintain military government over territories already recaptured, he 
has been faithful in his role as liberator in the truest American tradition.” The 
President concluded his speech by making an appeal for unity among our people. 
He said: “United and in close cooperation with the United States, we can win for 
ourselves and our children all the blessings of democracy, freedom and security for 
«hich we have sacrificed so much in this titanic struggle against the brutal forces 
of tyranny and oppression.” 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


7 


O N THE OCCASION of the restoration of the Commonwealth Government in 
the City of Manila, the President sent cables to Secretary of War Henry 
L. Stimson and Hon. Herbert Lehman, director-general of the United Nations Relief 
and Rehabilitation Administration, expressing the gratitude of the Filipino people. 
To Secretary Stimson he said in part: “* * * with unshaken spirit, fortified 

by the sympathetic understanding of the American people, they (the Filipino people) 
face with grim determination their immediate objectives: the vigorous prosecution 
of the struggle in which the United States are engaged until final victory is achieved, 
and the rehabilitation of the country and the relief of millions of destitute and 
suffering people.” 

( C 'p OR EXTRAORDINARY courage and valor in the face of overwhelming odds 
Jl shown in Bataan and Corregidor and exceptional performance of service of 
the highest order to the Commonwealth of the Philippines,” General Douglas Mac- 
Arthur was awarded by President Osmena the Philippine Medal of Honor, the 
highest award within the power of our Commonwealth Government to grant. In 
accepting the honor General MacArthur said: “I am deeply grateful for your action 
in awarding me the Medal of Valor. My sense of distinction is increased and made 
more poignant by a realization of the magnificent part played by Philippine troops 
serving under my command. I shall never wear the decoration without a feeling 
of pride in their accomplishment. I regard the award as symbolical of their courage 
and indomitable devotion to their great country.” 


G ENERAL Douglas MacArthur, surrounded by eleven members of his staff who 
left Corregidor with him three years ago, raised the American flag over that 
island fortress last March 2. While the color guard of the 503rd Parachute Infantry 
Regiment stood at attention, the General ordered the Commanding Officer: “Have 
your troops hoist the colors and let no enemy ever haul them down.” 

T HE NEW MEMBERS of the cabinet were inducted into office by President 
Osmena in Malacanan Palace on the morning of last March 8. In a speech 
delivered on the occasion, the President gave a summary of the work done by the 
Commonwealth Government while temporarily established in Washington, D. C. 
during the last three years, and announced the granting by the United States 
of Philippine independence with American protection at an early date. The Pies- 
ident closed his speech by proclaiming the ideals and principles which will guide 
the activities of the restored Commonwealth Government. One of these principles 
is the reestablishment in our country of “a social and political system which is 
founded on mutual faith, honesty and confidence and not on suspicion, corruption 
and fear, and in which government officials and employees are not the masters of 
the people but their servants, acting as necessary instrumentalities through which 
the public good and the individual welfare may be advanced and safeguarded.” 


O N MARCH 10 last, the President issued two proclamations, one concerning the 
City of Manila and another the Province of Leyte, declaring that both places 
having been freed from enemy occupation and control as of March 10, 1945, the 
debt moratorium established by Executive Order No. 25, as amended by Executive 
Order No. 32, will not apply to debts and monetary obligations contracted in said 
City and Province after the date of the proclamations. 

rpHE PRESIDENT, accompanied by Brigadier General Carlos P. Romulo, Resident 

T Commissioner to the United States, visited last q March U th< 

Filipino and American war prisoners in Camp 0 Donnell, Capas, raiiac. inou 
Tands of heroes captured in the hills of Bataan by the Japanese he in nameless graves 

in Camp O’Donnell. 

r-r-HE TOINT CHIEFS of Staff in Washington, D. C., announced last April 6 
T that General Douglas MacArthur has been placed in command of all American 
. • th „ p ac ifi c theatre of war while Admiral Chester Nimitz has been 

Sed°t r o command all Pacific naval forces. General Henry H. Arnold will continue 
in command of the 20th Airforce, composed of the giant B 29s. 


8 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


P RESIDENT OSMENA appointed Brigadier General Carlos P. Romulo, Resident 
Commissioner of the Philippines to the United States, Chairman of the Common- 
wealth delegation to the United Nations Conference in San Francisco, California, 
The following were appointed members of the delegation: Secretary of Instruction 
and Information Maximo M. Kalaw, Senator Carlos P. Garcia, Assemblyman Pedro 
Lopez, Assemblyman Francisco Delgado, Dr. Urbano A. Zafra, Colonel Alejandro 
Melchor, military and technical adviser to the President and Professor Vicente G. 
Sinco. 

A T A MEETING held in Malacanan on the morning of last March 15, the cabinet 
reiterated its adherence to President Roosevelt's announced policy that all those 
persons who collaborated with the enemy should be removed from offices of author- 
ity and influence over the political and economic life of the country. Regarding the 
temporary reemployment of officials and employees who served under the Japanese 
regime, it was explained that the Government was compelled to do so by the pressure 
of circumstances that demanded the immediate reorganization of certain public offices, 
but that should the persons so reemployed be found to have collaborated with the 
enemy, they would be separated from public office immediately. 

(( r T" , HE CIVIL SERVICE employees are Filipinos and citizens of the Common- 
1 wealth Government who have taken the oath of allegiance and loyalty to 
the Commonwealth and the United States. To consider that their status should 
continue even after the government to which they pledged by oath to defend 
has been destroyed, is to my mind absurb.” So wrote Secretary Maximo M. Kalaw, 
of the Department of Instruction and Information, to Acting Commissioner of Civil 
Service A. del Rosario, in answer to the latter’s appeal in behalf of civil service em- 
ployees banned from the reestablished Commonwealth Government for having served 
under the puppet government set up in the Philippines by the Japanese. “I would 
grant you,” the Secretary continued, “that if there were only a change in the per- 
sonnel in the administrative, executive, judicial or legislative branches of the gov- 
ernment, and of the party in power, the civil service should continue. But I should 
like to remind the civil service employees that they are first of all Filipino citizens 
who should, according to their oath, be loyal to their government, to defend it if 
need be even with their lives.” The policy of the Commonwealth Government with 
regard to the so-called collaborationists is based on the statement of President Roose- 
velt on June 29, 1944, when he signed the Joint Resolution No. 93 passed by the 
United States Congress, authorizing him to give independence to the Philippines ahead 
of 1946. One of the two conditions that he imposed is that “those who have colla- 
borated with the enemy must be removed from authority and influence over the 
political and economic life of the country.” According to Secretary Kalaw, minor 
employees who do mere routine work are not included in the prohibition. Those that 
fall within it are men who held positions of influence and decided policies. 

I N A LETTER to Secretary Maximo M. Kalaw, of the Department of Instruction 
and Information, Secretary Jaime Hernandez, of the Department of Finance, now 
in Washington, D. C., informs that the Technical Committee to the President for 
the planning and preparation of relief and rehabilitation in the Philippines, has 
been studying for the last six months the ways and means of replacing the loss of 
Philippine work animals with farm machinery and equipment that may be imported 
from the United States. Two specialists attached to the Committee, according to 
him, are at present attending the Ford-Ferguson Management School at San Antonio 
Texas, U. S. A., for the purpose of studying the operation, maintenance and repair 
of Ford-Ferguson tractors and determining the suitability of their use on Philippine 
soil. Secretary Hernandez also informs that a request has been made to the War 
Department in Washington, D. C., for the procurement and shipment to the Philip- 
pines of vegetable seeds and farm hand-tool 3 . 

T NSTALLING Mr. Juan Chioco as the first Civil Governor of the Province of Nueva 
I Ecija under the reestablished Commonwealth Government, Secretary of the Interi 
Tomas Confesor told a crowd of people at Cabanatuan on the afternoon of 1 t 
March 11 that the Commonwealth was determined to restore law and order ' th 
liberated areas a'nd that it was his full expectation that all Filipinos would live'und ° 


8 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


P RESIDENT OSME5JA appointed Brigadier General Carlos P. Romulo, Resident 
Commissioner of the Philippines to the United States, Chairman of the Common- 
wealth delegation to the United Nations Conference in San Francisco, California. 
The following were appointed members of the delegation: Secretary of Instruction 
and Information Maximo M. Kalaw, Senator Carlos P. Garcia, Assemblyman Pedro 
Lopez, Assemblyman Francisco Delgado, Dr. Urbano A. Zafra, Colonel Alejandro 
Melchor, military and technical adviser to the President and Professor Vicente G. 
Sinco. 


A T A MEETING held in Malacahan on the morning of last March 15, the cabinet 
reiterated its adherence to President Roosevelt's announced policy that all those 
persons who collaborated with the enemy should be removed from offices of author- 
ity and influence over the political and economic life of the country. Regarding the 
temporary reemployment of officials and employees who served under the Japanese 
regime, it was explained that the Government was compelled to do so by the pressure 
of circumstances that demanded the immediate reorganization of certain public offices, 
but that should the persons so reemployed be found to have collaborated with the 
enemy, they would be separated from public office immediately. 


C I 1 * * * HE CIVIL SERVICE employees are Filipinos and citizens of the Common- 
wealth Government who have taken the oath of allegiance and loyalty to 
the Commonwealth and the United States. To consider that their status should 
continue even after the government to which they pledged by oath to defend 
has been destroyed, is to my mind absurb.” So wrote Secretary Maximo M. Kalaw, 
of the Department of Instruction and Information, to Acting Commissioner of Civil 
Service A. del Rosario, in answer to the latter’s appeal in behalf of civil service em- 
ployees banned from the reestablished Commonwealth Government for having served 
under the puppet government set up in the Philippines by the Japanese. “I would 
grant you, the Secretary continued, “that if there were only a change in the per- 
sonnel in the administrative, executive, judicial or legislative branches of the gov- 
ernment, and of the party in power, the civil service should continue. But I should 
like to remind the civil service employees that they are first of all Filipino citizens 
who should, according to their oath, be loyal to their government, to defend it if 
need be even with their lives.” The policy of the Commonwealth Government with 
regard to the so-called collaborationists is based on the statement of President Roose- 
velt on June 29, 1944, when he signed the Joint Resolution No. 93 passed by the 
United States Congress, authorizing him to give independence to the Philippines ahead 
of 1946. One of the two conditions that he imposed is that “those who have colla- 
borated with the enemy must be removed from authority and influence over the 
political and economic life of the country.” According to Secretary Kalaw, minor 
employees who do mere routine work are not included in the prohibition. Those that 
fall within it are men who held positions of influence and decided policies. 


T N A LETTER to Secretary Maximo M. Kalaw, of the Department of Instruction 
I and Information, Secretary Jaime Hernandez, of the Department of Finance now 
in Washington, D. C., informs that the Technical Committee to the President for 
the planning and preparation of relief and rehabilitation in the Philippines has 
been studying for the last six months the ways and means of replacing the loss of 
Philippine work animals with farm machinery and equipment that may be imported 
from the United States. Two specialists attached to the Committee, according to 
him, are at present attending the Ford-Ferguson Management School at San Antonio 

A " f ° r thG PUrP ° Se ° f studyin S the aeration, maintenance and repair 
of Ford-Ferguson tractors and determining the suitability of their use on Philippine 
soi. Secretary Hernandez also informs that a request has been made to the War 
Department in Washington D. C., for the procurement and shipment to the Philip- 
pines of vegetable seeds and farm hand-tools. P 


I N F S Jl ALLI I NG ,f 1 '' JU ?\r h u° C ° aS thG first Civil Governor of the Province of Nueva 

1 Ecija under the reestablished Commonwealth Government, Secretarv of thp 

Tomas Confeso, told a crowd of people at Cabanatuan w the afteLl w 

March 11 that the Commonwealth was determined to restore law and order in tiJe 

liberated areas and that it was his full expectation that all Filipinos would live under 


April, 1945 OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


the law. Singling out for condemnation the well-known Japanese practice of con- 
fiscating private property, he warned that the government, with all the force behind 
it, would not permit any attempt to revive such practice. “Don’t use violence” 
he said, “for if you do, we will meet violence with violence.” 

H AVING BEEN informed that a group of market vendors proposed to go on 
strike on account of the measures adopted by the Government to eradicate 
the black market in Manila, Secretary of the Interior Tomas Confesor, in a state- 
ment issued last March 20, warned that no strike would detain the authorities in 
carrying out their program to this effect and that he would use “every means in 
my power to prevent and stop any disturbance of law and order within the City 
and I would deal sternly and firmly with any lawless elements.” “The welfare and 
well-being of the people of Manila are over and above the selfish intentions of anv 
group of individuals,” he declared. 

T N COMPLIANCE with the provisions of Executive Order No. 34, issued by the 
1 President on March 10, 1945, vehicle traffic in the Philippines, beginning June 1 
1945, shall be on the right, instead of the left, side of the road, thus conforming 
with the practice of driving obtaining in most countries of the world. Main reason 
for making the change is the fact that during the present emergency the great 
majority of the motor vehicles of the United States Army used on the roadways in 
the Philippines are right-hand driven, and the drivers thereof are accustomed to 
driving on the right side of the road. The new regulation affects both motor and 
animal driven vehicles. 

T HE DEPARTMENT of Instruction and Information presented a welcome program 
in Malacanan grounds in honor of Irving Berlin, noted American composer, 
on the morning of last March 28. “Heaven Watch the Philippines,” Mr. Berlin’s 
newest song, written during a six-week stay in Leyte and dedicated to General 
Douglas MacArthur in commemoration of his liberation of the Philippines, was in- 
troduced during the program. The composer hipiself and a group of Filipino school- 
children sang the piece. Mr. Berlin made formal presentation of the scroll of the 
new song to the Philippine Commonwealth Government, Secretary of the Interior 
Tomas Confesor accepting it in the latter’s name. 

T REASURY WARRANTS issued by the Government of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines before the occupation of Manila by the Japanese Army may 
now be registered by their holders with the Registration Section, Department of 
Finance, corner of Aviles and San Rafael Streets. 

G OVERNMENT office hours are from 8:00 a. m. to 12:00 m. and from 1:00 to 
4:00 p. m. (Daylight Saving Time) on week days including Saturdays, accord- 
ing to an Executive Order issued by the President. 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


11 


EXECUTIVE ORDERS, PROCLAMATIONS AND 
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS 


Hereinbelow are the last Executive Orders (Nos. 385 to 400) issued 
by the President of the Philippines before the transfer of the seat of 
the Commonwealth Government from Manila to Washington, D. C. ? 
on May 13, 1942. Following them is the new series of Executive Orders 
(except Nos. 4 and 18) and proclamations issued, first in Washing- 
ton, D. C., from May 13, 1942, until the reestablishment of the Com- 
monwealth Government in Manila on February 27, 1945, and then in 
Manila from this latter date to the present. * 

Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 385 

TRANSFERRING FROM THE GENERAL AUDITING 
OFFICE THE FUNCTION OF PREPARING AND 
KEEPING THE ACCOUNTS OF THE VARIOUS 
DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES AND DE- 
PENDENCIES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERN- 
MENT, INCLUDING THE SUPREME COURT, THE 
COURT OF APPEALS, THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS, AND THE UNIVERSITY OF THE 
PHILIPPINES, AS WELL AS THE FUNCTION OF 
ACTING UPON REQUISITIONS FOR SUPPLIES, 
MATERIALS, AND EQUIPMENT, AND OF OP- 
ERATING THE SALVAGE WAREHOUSE. 

The public interest so requiring, I, Manuel L. Quezon, 
President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested 
in me by Commonwealth Act Numbered Six hundred and 
seventy-one, entitled “An Act declaring a state of total 
emergency as a result of war involving the Philippines 
and authorizing the President to promulgate rules and 
regulations to meet such emergency,” do ordain and pro- 
mulgate the following : 

l Except as herein otherwise provided, the function 
of preparing and keeping the accounts of the different 
departments, bureaus, offices, and dependencies of the Na- 
tional Government, including the Supreme Court, the Court 
of Appeals, the Commission on Elections, and the University 
of the Philippines, and such other duties as are incidental 
to the said function, which are now being performed by 
the General Auditing Office pursuant to the provisions of 
Commonwealth Act Numbered Three hundred twenty, are 


12 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


hereby transferred, together with their corresponding ap- 
propriations, personnel, books, records, equipment and 
other property, to the Budget Office. The functions of 
preparing and keeping the accounts of the Philippine 
Army and the Philippine Constabulary, which are now 
also being performed by the General Auditing Office, are 
hereby transferred, together with their corresponding ap- 
propriations, personnel, books, records, equipment and other 
property, to the administrative control and supervision of 
the Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army and the Chief 
of Constabulary, respectively. The functions of acting 
upon requisitions or orders for supplies, materials, furni- 
ture and equipment, and of operating and maintaining the 
Salvage Warehouse, which are also being performed by the 
General Auditing Office, are likewise hereby transferred, 
together with their corresponding appropriations, person- 
nel, books, records, equipment, and other property, to the 
Budget Office. 

2. The Commissioner of the Budget and the Auditor 
General are hereby designated a Committee to segregate 
immediately the appropriations, personnel, books, records, 
equipment, and other property provided for the present 
accounting-auditing offices to determine those which shall 
be transferred to the Budget Office and those to be re- 
tained in the General Auditing Office. The Committee 
shall, as soon as possible, but not later than December 
22, 1941, submit a report thereon to the President for 
approval. 

3. The Commissioner of the Budget and the Auditor 
General are hereby authorized, subject to the approval of 
the President, to readjust the appropriations for salaries 
and wages in their respective office, including such modi- 
fications of their plantillas of personnel by consolidating, 
abolishing, splitting, and creating positions, as may be 
found necessary, provided that the appropriations segre- 
gated for said offices for salaries and wages shall not be 
exceeded thereby. No salary promotions shall be allowed 
by reason of these adjustments. 

4. The services hereby transferred shall operate in suit- 
able quarters furnished therefor by the corresponding 
departments, bureaus, offices, or dependencies and shall be 
under the charge of accounting offices appointed or desig- 
nated by the Commissioner of the Budget. It shall be the 
duty of said accounting officers to manage such service 
for the corresponding head of department, or chief of bu- 
reau, office, or dependency ; advise him of the trend of the 
business affairs thereof ; render such reports and state- 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


13 


ments as may be required of him by the Commissioner of 
the Budget, the Auditor General, or the head of the de- 
paitment, bureau, office, or dependency concerned; and 
perform such other duties as the Commissioner of the 
Budget may prescribe. 

5. Every department, bureau, office, and dependency of 
the Government shall furnish the Budget Office such in- 
formation as it may require, and the Commissioner of the 
Budget or his duly authorized representative shall, for the 
purpose of securing, such information, have access to and 
the right to examine any books, documents, papers or rec- 
oi ds of such departments, bureaus, offices, and dependencies 
of the Government. 

6. During the period of the emergency and when the 
exigencies of the service so require, the Commissioner of 
the Budget may delegate the exercise of the administrative 
supervision and control of the accounting service of any 
bureau, office or dependency to the director or chief thereof. 

7. The provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Three 
hundred and twenty are hereby declared inoperative. 

This order shall take effect immediately. 

Done at the City of Manila, this seventeenth day of 
December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 

, President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge b. Vargas 

Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 386 

PLACING THE RED STRIPE OF THE FILIPINO FLAG 
UP DURING THE PRESENT EMERGENCY 

Whereas it is prescribed under existing laws that the 
stripe of the Filipino Flag above the imaginary horizontal 
line of the quadrangular bunting starting from the third 
angle of the. triangle and running straight from the left 
to the right border or side of the bunting be colored blue 
and the stripe below said imaginary line be colored red ; 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


WHEREAS it is a tradition of the Filipino peoplethatm 
time of war, the flag shall be flown with the red stop 
above and the blue stripe below in order to denote the , 
firmness and fortitude with which the Filipino people 

to prosecute such war to victory; - th 

Now therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, Presiden 
Philippines, pursuant to the authority vested in me by 
the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do y 

order that, for the duration of the existing emergen y 
until otherwise ordered, the Filipino Flag shall be flown 
with the red stripe above and the blue stripe below, ine 
Filinino Flag shall otherwise remain as prescribed under 


existing laws. . ~ 

Done at the City of Manila, this eighteenth day of De- 
cember, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred an 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 

President of the Philippines 


By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive order No. 387 

FIXING THE SCHEDULE OF BURIAL EXPENSES IN 
CASE OF DEATH FROM INJURIES RECEIVED 
OR SICKNESS CONTRACTED IN PERFORMANCE 
OF DUTY. 

For the purpose of uniformity, it is hereby ordered that 
the burial expenses of a person in the Philippine civil serv- 
ice, when allowed, except when otherwise specifically pro- 
vided for by law, be fixed with the approval of the cor- 
responding head of department in an amount which shall 
not exceed the following: 

(а) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of five hundred 
pesos or less per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed 
sixty pesos; 

(б) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than 
five hundred pesos per annum, but not exceeding one thousand pesos 
per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed eighty pesos; 

(c) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than 
one thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding two thousand 
pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed one 
hundred pesos; 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


15 


(d) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than 
two thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding three thousand 
pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed one 
hundred and twenty-five pesos; 

(e) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than 
three thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding four thousand 
pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed one 
hundred and fifty pesos; 

(/) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than 
four thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding five thousand 
pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed one 
hundred and seventy-five pesos; 

(g) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than 
five thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding six thousand pesos 
per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed two hundred 
pesos; and 

(h) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than 
six thousand pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not 
to exceed two hundred and fifty pesos. 

Any officer or employee, whose compensation is fixed at 
other than the per annum basis, may be granted the sum 
for burial expenses allowable for that receiving compen- 
sation of the corresponding per annum basis. 

Done at the City of Manila, this eighteenth day of De- 
cember, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 388 

PLACING THE BUREAU OF IMMIGRATION UNDER 
THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by the Constitu- 
tion and laws of the Philippines, I, Manuel L. Quezon, Pres- 
ident of the Philippines, do hereby direct that the Bureau 
of Immigration be placed, for administrative purposes, 
under the supervision and control of the Office of the 
President. 


16 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-second day of 
December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred an 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 


Manuel L. Quezon 


President, of the Philippines 


By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 389 

DIRECTING THE IMMEDIATE ARREST AND VIGO- 
ROUS PROSECUTION OF PERSONS PILLAGING, 
LOOTING OR COMMITTING OTHER ACTS OF 
LAWLESSNESS AGAINST THE CIVILIAN PO- 
PULATION. 

Whereas it has been brought to my attention that since 
the outbreak of war, certain vicious and misguided indivi- 
duals, taking advantage of the present emergency, have 
indulged in pillaging, looting and other acts of lawlessness 
against civilian and enemy population ; 

Whereas, under martial law, persons guilty of such 
wanton acts are punishable with the severest penalties; 

Whereas, in areas under the civil authority where the 
courts are still functioning, such acts of violence and van- 
dalism should be dealt with promptly and vigorously ; and 

Whereas, even in peace times, such infractions of the 
law have no place in a civilized society; 

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the 
Philippines, do hereby order all police officers to arrest on 
sight persons pillaging, looting or committing other acts 
of lawlessness against any person, be he a citizen, alien or 
enemy resident, and all prosecuting attorneys are further 
instructed to deal swiftly and severely with such offenders. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-second day of 
December, in the year of »Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 

Secretary to the President 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


17 


MalacaRan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 390 

PRESCRIBING THE ORDER OF PRESIDENTIAL SUC- 
CESSION AND ABOLISHING THE DEPARTMENT 
OF THE INTERIOR. 

Under authority conferred upon me by the Constitution 
and laws of the Philippines, and more particularly pur- 
suant to the powers vested in me by Commonwealth Act 
Numbered six hundred seventy-one, I, Manuel L. Quezon, 
President of the Philippines, do hereby ordain that the 
order of precedence and/or succession to the Presidency of 
the Philippines in case of failure to qualify, removal, ter- 
mination of the right thereto, death, resignation, or inability 
to discharge the powers and duties of the office by both the 
President or President-elect and the Vice President or Vice 
President-elect, as the case may be, shall, for the purposes 
of sections 6 and 8 of Article VII of the Constitution, as 
amended, be as follows: 

Secretary to the President 
Secretary of Finance 
Secretary of National Defense 
Secretary of Justice 

Secretary of Agriculture and Commei'ce 
Secretary of Public Works and Communications 
Secretary of Public Instruction 
Secretary of Labor 

Secretary of Health and Public Welfare 

The Department of the Interior is hereby abolished and 
all its bureaus and offices and their powers, functions, 
duties, records, documents, furniture, office equipment, and 
property shall be distributed as provided in Commonwealth 
Act Numbered Six hundred sixty, effective January 1, 1942. 

Commonwealth Act Numbered Sixty-eight is hereby 
declared inoperative. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-second day of 
December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


60 


18 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OP THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 391 

AUTHORIZING PROVINCIAL, CITY, AND MUNICIPAL 
GOVERINMENTS TO INCUR IN OVERDRAFTS 
FOR THE PAYMENT OF SALARIES OF THEIR 
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES AND EXPENSES 
FOR ESSENTIAL ACTIVITIES. 

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Finance, 
I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, acting 
under and by virtue of the powers vested in me by Com- 
monwealth Act Numbered Six hundred seventy-one, entitled 
“An Act Declaring a State of Total Emergency as a Result 
of War Involving the Philippines and Authorizing the 
President to Promulgate Rules and Regulations to Meet 
such Emergency,” do hereby authorize the provincial, city 
and municipal governments to incur in overdrafts in order 
that they may be able to pay the salaries and/or wages 
of their officers and employees and carry essential activities 
that the President may authorize during the present emer- 
gency, and for this purpose the Provincial, City and Munic- 
ipal Treasurers may use any funds in their possession, the 
resulting net overdrafts in the provincial, city or municipal 
funds to be made coverable from the appropriations 
authorized under Commonwealth Act [Numbered Six hun- 
dred and seventy. Any national fund thus advanced shall 
be refunded as soon as local funds become available. 

This Order shall take effect immediately. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-second day of 
December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge b. Vargas 

Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
Executive Order No. 392 

AUTHORIZING THE FOOD ADMINISTRATOR TO 
TAKE OVER FARM LANDS AND TO REQUIRF 
ABLE-BODIED CITIZENS TO ENGAGE IN FARM 
ING AND OTHER PRODUCTIVE ACTIVITIES. 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


19 


By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution 
and laws of the Philippines, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President 
of the Philippines, do hereby authorize the Food Adminis- 
trator appointed under Executive Order No. 378, dated 
December 10, 1941, to take over farm lands, cultivated or 
uncultivated, with a view to putting the same to productive 
uses; and for such purpose, as well as for the general 
purpose of preventing failure or shortage of crops and 
averting hunger and destitution, to require all able-bodied 
citizens when not engaged in any lawful occupation to 
engage in farming and other productive activities. Any 
person who, when required so to do by the Food Adminis- 
trator, shall refuse to render the service required of him. 
shall be punished in accordance "with the provisions of 
section three of Commonwealth Act Numbered six hun- 
dred. The Food Administrator shall, with the approval 
of the President, issue the necessary rules and orders to 
compensate for the lands taken over and for the services 
rendered by the persons required to engage in farming and 
other productive activities as herein provided, and such 
other rules and regulations as. may be necessary to carry 
out the purposes of this Order. The expenditure of the 
necessary funds to carry into effect the aims and purposes 
of this Order is hereby authorized, subject to the usual 
accounting and auditing requirements. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of De- 
cember, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the 
seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 393 

PROVIDING FOR THE FREE TRANSMISSION OF 
MAILS OF UNITED STATES ARMY AND NAVY 
OFFICERS AND MEN. 

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitu- 
tion and laws of the Philippines, I, Manuel L. Quezon, 


20 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 



President of the Philippines, do hereby order that the mails 
of the officers and men of the United States Armed Forces 
in the Far East and of the United States Navy shall be 
received, transmitted and delivered in the mails of the 
Philippines, free of ordinary postal charges, during the 
period of the present emergency. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of 
December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the 
seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 394 

ESTABLISHING AN INTERISLAND SHIPPING AU- 
THORITY AND WAR RISK INSURANCE FOR VES- 
SELS ENGAGED IN THE COASTWISE TRADE 
AND APPROPRIATING FOR THAT PURPOSE 
FIVE MILLION PESOS FROM THE FUNDS IN 
THE PHILIPPINES TREASURY SET ASIDE 
FOR DEFENSE AND CIVILIAN PROTECTION 
MEASURES. 


Whereas it is necessary during the present emergency 
to maintain adequate interisland shipping communication 
between and among different sections of the Philippines ; 

Whereas, to accomplish this purpose, it is necessary to 
establish an agency that will coordinate shipping activi- 
ties, establish war risk insurance to cover the losses to 
shipowners as' a result of the operation of their vessels 
and appropriate the funds that may be necessary to carry 
out such purposes ; 

Now, THEREFORE, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the 
Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do hereby— 

(1) Create and establish an Interisland Shipping Au- 
thority with the following powers and duties: 


(а) To determine the port or ports between which shipping com 
mumcation should be maintained; 

(б) To designate which vessels should be placed in operation for 

that purpose, and to fix the routes for each vessel ; P * 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


21 


(c) To maintain close contact with army officials to determine 
the interisland shipping requirements of the army and make ar- 
ragements to meet such requirements; 

( d ) To make recommendations to the Public Service Commission 
regarding freight and passenger rates and in the meantime to es- 
tablish maximum passenger and freight rates; 

(e) To issue, upon the request of the owners, war risk insurance 
policies to vessels engaged in the coastwise trade and which may 
be required by the Interisland Shipping Authority to be operated 
so as to maintain interisland shipping communication between the 
different sections of the Philippines. The value at which each vessel 
may be insured, as well as the premium to be paid by the owners 
thereof, shall be determined by the Interisland Shipping Authority, 
but such value shall not exceed the pre-war value of the vessel; and 

(/) To issue regulations and exercise such other powers and 
duties as may be reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of 
this Order. 

(2) Appropriate the sum of five million pesos 
(1*5,000,000) from the funds in the Philippine Treasury 
set aside for defense and civilian protection purposes to 
cover payments under the war risk insurance policies that 
may be issued and to meet the expenses of the Interisland 
Shipping Authority herein created. All premiums collected 
shall accrue to this fund which shall be earmarked in the 
Philippine Treasury for the purposes set forth in this 
Order. The expenses of the Interisland Shipping Author- 
ity shall be made in accordance with a budget approved 
by the President of the Philippines. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of 
December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 

President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 

Secretary to the President 


MalacaSan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 395 

PROVIDING FOR AN INCREASE IN THE NUMBER 
OF JUSTICES OF THE COURT OF APPEALS AND 
OF THE JUDGES OF THE COURT OF FIRST IN- 
STANCE OF THE FOURTH JUDICIAL DISTRICT, 
AND INVESTING JUDGES APPOINTED UNDER 
COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 504 (CADASTRAL) 
WITH GENERAL JURISDICTION. 


22 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Pursuant to the powers vested in me under the Consti- 
tution and laws of the Philippines, I, Manuel L. Quezon, 
President of the Philippines, do hereby order that : 

1. The Court of Appeals of the Philippines shall consist 
of a Presiding Justice and eighteen Associate Justices and 
may sit in such number or divisions as the Court may, by 
resolution, provide. 

2. Fourteen judges shall be commissioned for the Fourth 
Judicial District, of which eleven, with residence in the 
City of Manila, shall be known as judges of the First, 
Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, 
Tenth and Eleventh Branches, respectively, shall preside 
over the Court of First Instance of Manila and Palawan, 
and three judges shall preside over the Court of First 
Instance of, and l’eside in, the Province of Rizal. 

3. All judges appointed under the provisions of Com- 
monwealth Act No. 504 (Cadastral) shall henceforth have 
general jurisdiction throughout the Philippines to try and 
determine all cases cognizable originally or on appeal by 
the Courts of First Instance. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of 
December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 396 

REORGANIZING AND GROUPING THE EXECUTIVE 
DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT 

Pursuant to the authority conferred upon me by the 
Constitution and laws of the Philippines, the Executive 
Departments of the Government are hereby reorganized 
and grouped as follows : 

Office of the President 

Department of Finance, Agriculture and Commerce 

Department of National Defense, Public Works, Communica 
tions, and Labor * ^ 

Department of Public Instruction, Health and Public Welfare 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


23 


All the functions pertaining to the Department of Justice 
shall be performed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of 
December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 397 

EXEMPTING THE HARBOR POLICE FORCE IN 
MATTERS OF APPOINTMENTS, PROMOTIONS, 
DISCIPLINE AND REMOVAL FROM THE CIVIL 
SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS. 

Whereas, by Executive Order No. 228 issued on October 
31, 1939, the Harbor Police was created on a semi-military 
basis to secure and maintain a high degree of efficiency 
in the organization and operation of all police agencies 
within the harbor and port areas in the City of Manila 
and in other ports of entry in the Philippines; 

Whereas this organization is performing police duties 
essentially different from those of other police agencies in 
the Philippines and in an area which is important from 
the standpoint of the national defense; 

Whereas, pursuant to the above-mentioned Executive 
Order, Customs Administrative Order No. 387, otherwise 
known as Harbor Police Regulations, was promulgated on 
December 28, 1940, duly approved by the Secretary of 
Finance, under which regulations all matters relating to 
the appointment, promotion, discipline, and removal of the 
members of the Harbor Police, except that of the Chief 
thereof, are subject to Civil Service Rules and Regulations; 
and 

Whereas, in view of existing conditions, it is essential 
that all such matters be attended to as expeditiously as 
possible ; 

Now, THEREFORE, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the 
Constitution and existing laws and to better serve the ends 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


' Vol. 41, No. 1 



r which the Harbor Police has been organized, do J^ e _ b ^ 

•der that the appointment, promotion, discipline, an 


President of the Philippines 


By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 


PERMITTING REGISTRATION AND DEPOSIT OF 
PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT SECURITIES WITH 
THE TREASURER OF THE PHILIPPINES. 

Pursuant to the powers vested in me under the Consti- 
tution and laws of the Philippines, I, Manuel L. Quezon, 
President of the Philippines, do hereby order that: 

1. The Treasurer of the Philippines is hereby designated 
as Agent of the Government of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines to receive for deposit and safekeeping only from 
their rightful owners securities issued by the Government 
of the Philippines or any of its instrumentalities. 

2. The Treasurer of the Philippines, before accepting 
such securities for deposit shall require the owners or hold- 
ers thereof to execute an affidavit in quintuplicate setting 
forth the following: 

(a) Name, address and citizenship of affiant and of all persons 
having any interest in the securities listed, and the nature of such 
interests. 

( b ) List of securities by title, loan, interest rate, denomination, 
serial number, form of registration if registered, number and dates 
of coupons and a description of any tax or other stamp or notarial 
or similar seal of a blocked country which may appear on such 
securities. 

(c) Date and source of acquisition of coupon securities by present 
owner or holder. 

( d ) A request that the securities be accepted for safekeeping 
during the duration of the national emergency. 


Executive Order No. 398 


April, 1945 • 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


25 


(e) A request that in the event of destruction of such securities, 
if the evidence of such destruction is satisfactory and acceptable 
to the Secretary of Finance, substitute securities be issued by the 
Government of the Philippines and be held for the account of the 
depositor or delivered to a designated bank corporation or individual. 

3. The National Treasurer shall check the list of securities 
against the items deposited and shall certify under his 
official seal on each copy of the affidavit the fact of such 
deposit and its verification. 

4. The original of such affidavit shall be sent to the Office 
of the President of the Philippines, the duplicate to the 
Department of Finance, Agriculture and Commerce, the 
triplifcate to be retained by the National Treasurer, the 
quadruplicate to be given to the depositor of the securities, 
and the quintuplicate to be placed with the securities in a 
sealed envelope which shall be properly identified. 

5. The National Treasurer is hereby authorized to pro- 
mulgate such rules and regulations, and to prescribe such 
forms, as may be necessary to carry out this Executive 
Order. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of 
December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 399 

AMENDING PARAGRAPH 4 OF EXECUTIVE 
ORDER No. 326 

By virtue of the powers vested in me under Common- 
wealth Act Numbered Six hundred and one, entitled “An 
Act to regulate the establishment, maintenance and opera- 
tion of places of amusement in chartered cities, municipal- 
ities and municipal districts,” paragraph 4 of Executive 
Order No. 326 is hereby amended so as to read as follows : 

“ (a) Days and hours of operation .— Bars shall be open only from 
9:00 o’clock a. m. to 2:00 o’clock p. m. every day during the present 
period of emergency. This is understood to mean that after such 
closing hour no activity of any kind, whether music, dancing, holding 
of floor shows, concerts or the like, or the serving of food or drinks 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 



Done in the Phili 
cember, in the year 
forty-one, and of tt 
the seventh. 


Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 


CREATING THE CITY OF GREATER MANILA 

Pursuant to the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, 
the City of Greater Manila is hereby created. Its territory 
shall include the present City of Manila, the Quezon City 
and all territory comprised in the municipalities of Ca- 
loocan, San Juan, Mandaluyong, Makati, Pasay and Pa- 
ranaque. 

Except where otherwise directed by the Mayor of Greater 
Manila or other competent authority, the laws applicable 
to the present City of Manila, shall govern in the territory 
comprised in Greater Manila. 

The present mayors of Manila, Quezon City and of the 
municipalities hereby incorporated shall be assistant 
Mayors of Greater Manila, but their jurisdiction shall be 
limited within their respective existing city or municipal 
boundaries. 

Done in the Philippines, this first day of January, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-two, and of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the seventh. 


Executive Order No. 400 


By the President: 

Jorge B. Vargas 
Secretary to the President 


Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


April. 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


27 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 1-W 

AMENDING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERN- 
ING THE APPOINTMENT AND SUPERVISION OF 
GOVERNMENT PENSIONADOS. 

Paragraph 17, IV, of Executive Order No. 303, dated 
September 26, 1940, is hereby amended to read as follows : 

17. Monthly pension . — A monthly pension of $100 during the period 
of scholarship, for board, lodging and incidentals, shall be given each 
pensionado. Monthly pensions shall begin on date of leaving 
Manila and end on the date the pensionado arrived in Manila. 
Monthly pensions shall be paid at the end of each month in the 
United States by the Disbursing Agent, Philippine Revenues, Divi- 
sion of Territories and Island Possessions, Department of the Interior, 
Washington, D. C. 

This Executive Order shall take effect on June 1, 1942. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this thirtieth day of May, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-two, and of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 2-W 

VACATING COMMISSIONS OF OFFICERS OF THE 
PHILIPPINE ARMY WHO WILL BE COMMIS- 
SIONED BY THE ARMY OF THE UNITED 
STATES. 

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution 
and pursuant to the provisions of Commonwealth Act Num- 
bered One providing for the National Defense of the Phil- 
ippines and section one of Commonwealth Act Numbered 
Six Hundred, as amended, investing the President of the 
Philippines with extraordinary powers, I, Manuel L. Que- 
zon, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare that, 
upon qualification and acceptance by any officer of the Phil- 
ippine Army of a commission tendered him by the President 
of the United States in the Army of the United States, the 
commissioa held by him in the Philippine Army shall forth- 
with be and become vacated. Upon the termination of his 
commission in the Army of the United States and imme- 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE Vol. 41, No. 1 


diately following his honorable discharge therefrom, he 
shall revert to his former status and rank in the Philippine 
Army. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this sixteenth day of June, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-two, and of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the seventh. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 3-W 

CLASSIFYING UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES 
FELLOWS AS PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT PEN- 
SIONADOS. 

In order to supervise more efficiently the academic work 
of Fellows of the University of the Philippines who be- 
cause of the present emergency, are unable to communicate 
with their immediate superiors, I, Manuel L. Quezon, Pres- 
ident of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in 
me by the Constitution and by Commonwealth Act No. 600 
as amended, do hereby declare that all University of the 
Philippines Fellows, now taking post-graduate studies in 
the United States, shall be considered Philippine Govern- 
ment Pensionados. They shall therefore be supervised 
according to Executive Order No. 303 as amended by Exe- 
cutive Order No. 1-W, and shall perform the duties and 
enjoy all the rights and privileges mentioned in these 
orders, effective June 1, 1942. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this seventeenth day of June, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-two and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the seventh. 

Manuel l. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 5-W 

CREATING THE OFFICE OF SPECIAL SERVICES 

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and in ac- 
cordance with the unanimous opinion of the War Cabinet 
I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do here- 
by create the Office of Special Services whose functions will 
be the collection, collation, organization and dissemination 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


29 


of information about the Philippines and the Common- 
wealth Government. 

For administrative purposes this Office shall be con- 
sidered a section under the Office of the President of the 
Philippines and shall have the authority, with the approval 
of the corresponding head or chief, to obtain the assistance 
of officers and members of any Department, Bureau or 
Office of the Government which it may consider necessary 
for the proper performance of its duties. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this eleventh day of October, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-two, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the seventh. 

Manuel l. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 6-W 

CREATING A COMMITTEE FOR RELIEF OF DESTI- 
TUTE FILIPINOS IN THE UNITED STATES AND 
HAWAII. 

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and in 
accordance with the unanimous opinion of the War Cabinet, 
I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do here- 
by create and constitute a Committee for Relief of Destitute 
Filipinos. 

The Committee will be constituted by Col. Manuel Nieto, 
Maj. Dino and Maj. Cruz and its duties and functions will 
be: 

1. To study and pass upon all requests for financial aid from 
Filipinos who are destitute. 

2. To determine the form and amount of relief that should 
be given to these persons. 

3. To aid them, through the Office of the Resident Commis- 
sioner, to obtain employment. 

This Committee has the authority to call upon any office 
or employee, with the approval of the corresponding head 
or chief, for assistance in order to cany out its functions. 

The functions of the Committee under paragraphs 1 and 
2 will be subject to the supervision and approval of the 
Auditor General. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this twenty-ninth day of Jan- 
uary, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty- 
three, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the 
eighth. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines' 


30 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 7-W 

CREATING A POST-WAR PLANNING BOARD 

Whereas the wanton invasion of the Philippines by 
Japanese armed forces, together with the subsequent mil- 
itary occupation of the nation by the enemy, have disrupted 
the normal development of peaceful progress; and 

Whereas the problems of relief, rehabilitation and re- 
construction of the Philippines after the Japanese are 
driven out will be great and manifold, and require lengthy 
study and careful planning; and 

Whereas it appears necessary and desirable that such 
study and planning — and, wherever possible, preparatory 
action — be carried out at once in the interest of the people 
of the Philippines; 

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, 
do hereby create and constitute a Post-War Planning Board 
whose functions are hereunder detailed : 

1. To study and recommend plans for relief of the popula- 
tion immediately upon reoccupation of the Philippines, and to 
formulate proposals for the obtaining of such supplies as may 
be required for this purpose, and for the restoration of public 
and private property. 

2. To study and recomjmend plans for the rapid rehabilita- 
tion and reconstruction of the Philippine economy, including 
agricultural, labor, industrial, financial, and commercial reha- 
bilitation and reconstruction ; and to prepare plans for the de- 
velopment and improvement of Philippine natural resources, 
agriculture, trade, industry, shipping, public works, education, 
public health and nutrition, amid the new conditions that will 
exist after the defeat of the Axis. 

3. To study the post-war trade and other relationships be- 
tween the Government of the Philippine Republic and other 
governments, with pai'ticular reference to the United States and 
to the neighbors of the Philippines in the Far East. 

4. To study and recommend plans for the security of the 
Philippines after the defeat of Japan. 

5. And, in general, to survey, collect data on, and analyze 
all post-war problems of the Philippines and to recommend 
plans and programs for the wise solution of these problems. 

The Post-War Planning Board should consist of: Hon. 
Sergio Osrnena, Vice President of the Philippines, Chair- 
man , and Hon. Joaquin M. Elizalde, Resident Commissioner 
of the Philippines to the United States; Hon. Andres So- 
riano, Secretary of Finance; Major General Basilio J. 
Valdes, Secretary of National Defense; and Hon. Jaime 
Hernandez, Auditor General, Members. The Board shall 
prepare such rules and regulations for its operations as 
may be necessary. It shall have the authority, with the 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


31 


approval of the corresponding head or chief, to obtain the 
assistance of officers or members of any department, bu- 
reau, or office of the government which it may consider 
necessary for the proper performance of its duties. The 
Board shall appoint and have a secretary who shall also 
act as its administrative officer. 

The Board, within the limits of such funds as may be 
created or appropriated for the purpose, may employ the 
necessary personnel and make provisions for necessary 
supplies, facilities, travel and services. The Chairman and 
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation in 
such capacity. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this fifteenth day of September, 
in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred forty-three, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eighth. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 8-W 

ORGANIZING THE DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION 
AND PUBLIC RELATIONS AND TRANSFERRING 
TO IT THE POWERS, FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES, 
AS WELL AS THE PERSONNEL, APPROPRIA- 
TIONS, AND PROPERTIES OF THE OFFICE OF 
SPECIAL SERVICES, OFFICE OF THE PRES- 
IDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES. 

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and in 
accordance with the unanimous opinion of the War Cabinet, 
I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do here- 
by order the organization of the Department of Informa- 
tion and Public Relations effective October 1, 1943. 

The Department of Information and Public Relations 
shall be charged with the duty of collecting, collating and 
disseminating information about the Philippines and the 
Commonwealth Government. 

The powers, functions, and duties as well as the person- 
nel, appropriations, and properties of the Office of Special 
Services, Office of the President of the Philippines, are 
hereby transferred to the Department of Information and 
Public Relations. 

Executive Order Numbered 5-W, series of 1942, is hereby 
repealed insofar as it is inconsistent herewith. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this first day of October, in the 


32 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-three, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eighth. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 9-W 

DETAILING ALL GOVERNMENT PENSIONADOS TO 
THE POST-WAR PLANNING BOARD 

By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Consti- 
tution and laws of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, hereby 
detail all government pensionados now in the United States 
to the Post-War Planning Board created by Executive Order 
No. 8-W for such duties and assignments as may be given 
to them. 

Done in the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this second day of February, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, 
and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 10-W 

INCREASING THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE POST-WAR 
PLANNING BOARD 

By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitu- 
tion and existing laws of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, 
do hereby increase the membership of the Post-War Plan- 
ning Board created by Executive Order No. 7-W, by the 
addition of the following members : Colonel Carlos P. 
Romulo, Secretary of Information and Public Relations, 
Dr. Arturo B. Rotor, Secretary to the President, and Col. 
Manuel Nieto, Aide-de-Camp to the President. 

Done at Miami Beach, Florida, United States of America, 
this sixteenth day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nine- 
teen hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines, the ninth. 


t ' 


Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


33 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington. D. C. 

Executive 'Order No. 11-W 

EXTENDING FURTHER THE SUSPENSION OF 
GRANTING GEOLOGICAL EXPLORATION AND 
PETROLEUM DRILLING LEASES. 

Whereas the National Assembly has by law (Common- 
wealth Act No. 433) suspended for a period of five years 
the granting of Geological Exploration and Petroleum Drill- 
ing Leases under the provisions of Act Numbered Two 
Thousand Thirty-two and the rules and regulations promul- 
gated thereunder; 

Whereas the period of suspension provided for by law 
will expire on May 31, 1944; 

Whereas the Congress of the Philippines under the pres- 
ent war situation cannot act on this matter; 

Now, therefore, in order to safeguard the interest of 
the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue 
of the powers in me vested by the Constitution and existing 
laws, do hereby suspend the granting of such Geological 
Exploration and Petroleum Drilling Leases for another five 
years from May 31, 1944, or until the Congress of the 
Philippines shall have otherwise provided by law. 

Done at the City of Miami Beach, State of Florida, United 
States of America, this thirty-first day of March, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, and of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth. 

Manuel l. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 12-W 

CREATING THE DIVISION OF CIVIL AFFAIRS, PHIL- 
IPPINE ARMY, IN THE DEPARTMENT OF NA- 
TIONAL DEFENSE. 

Whereas it is my desire to provide the people of the 
Philippines with the means towards an early resumption 
of normal functions of government adequate to secure the 
processes of law from the moment the armed forces of 
liberation land on Philippine soil; 

Whereas the misery, sacrifices and starvation caused to 
the Filipino people by the enemy occupation of the Philip- 
60 3 


34 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


pines demand that their government, to the full extent of 
its resources, extend to them the relief necessary to their 
sufferings and to provide for their elemental necessities of 
life as soon as access to them should be made possible by 
military operations; 

Whereas a program of government and relief can best 
be performed by a military agency of the Philippine Gov- 
ernment in conjunction with military operations of the 
United States armed forces entrusted with the task of 
driving the enemy from Philippine territory ; 

Whereas in the best interests of the Philippines, it ap- 
pears necessary that the proper agency of official adminis- 
tration be now organized to effectuate the said objectives; 

Wherefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Phil- 
ippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do' 
hereby create the Division of Civil Affairs, Philippine 
Army, in the Department of National Defense. 

This Division, attached to and under the direct command 
of the Commander-in-Chief, Southwest Pacific Area, is em- 
powered to exercise such functions as may be necessary 
to accomplish the following objectives: 

(а) To effect the necessary liaison between the President of the 
Philippines, the Commander-in-Chief of the Southwest Pacific Area 
and the people of the Philippines during military operations and 
before normal civil government is reestablished; 

(б) To execute the plans decided upon for the relief of the people 
of the Philippines immediately upon the landing of the military 
forces of the United States. 

The Secretary of National Defense shall have adminis- 
trative supervision over this Division and shall proceed to 
organize it for the proper performance of its functions, 
subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines. 
Within the limit of such funds as may be appropriated for 
the purpose, the Secretary of National Defense will secure 
the necessary personnel and make provisions for their 
training. 

Any unexpended balance of the current appropriations 
for the Department of National Defense, or any other ap- 
propriations which may hereinafter be made to the said 
Department, shall be available for the expenses of the Divi- 
sion of Civil Affairs. 

Done at the City of Saranac Lake, State of New York, 

United States of America, this day of June, in the 

year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


35 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 13-W 

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE COMMONWEALTH 
RELIEF COMMITTEE 

Whereas it- is my desire to provide the necessary relief 
for the people of the Philippines upon the landing of the 
forces of liberation; 

Whereas, to that end, it is imperative that the purchase 
of the necessary amounts of food, medicine, clothing and 
other necessities be effected immediately and arrangements 
made for transportation. 

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, 
do hereby create the Philippine Commonwealth Relief Com- 
mittee, which will act under the supervision of and be di- 
rectly responsible to the President of the Philippines. 

The Philippine Commonwealth Relief Committee is 
charged with the following functions : 

(а) To plan for the relief of the people of the Philippines in ' 

coordination with other agencies, official and private, dedicated to 
the same task; ‘ 

(б) To purchase in behalf of the Philippine Government the sup- 
plies of food, medicine, clothing, and other necessities for the relief 
of the inhabitants of the Philippines, and make pertinent arrange- 
ments for transportation. All purchase contracts shall be made by 
the Philippine National Bank, New York Agency. 

To effect the necessary purchases with the minimum of 
delay, I hereby authorize the initial appropriation of 
$5,000,000 from the general funds, this amount to be re- 
volving when arrangements have been effected to secure 
reimbursement out of funds available for civilian relief 
under the Act of December 23, 1941 (Public Law 371), or 
out of any other funds available for this purpose. 

All officials and employees of the Commonwealth Govern- 
ment and its instrumentalities are hereby directed to render 
such services as the Philippine Commonwealth Relief Com- 
mittee may request in the performance of its duties. 

Done at the City of Saranac Lake, State of New York, 
United States of America, this twentieth day of June, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 




36 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 14-W 
CREATING THE CURRENCY COMMITTEE 

Whereas the indiscriminate issue of paper currency in 
the Philippines by the enemy has caused considerable con- 
fusion and chaos in the monetary system, resulting in the 
disappearance from the circulation of the legitimate cur- 
rency and coins to the detriment of the economic condition 
of the inhabitants of the country; 

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, 
do hereby create a Currency Committee which shall confer 
with the representatives of the Department of the Interior, 
of State, of War, and of the Treasury of the United States 
Government with the view to remedying the monetary sit- 
uation in the Philippines and to arrange for the printing 
of new Philippine Treasury Certificates and the immediate 
minting of subsidiary coins ready for use upon the landing 
of the liberating forces on Philippine soil. 

This Committee will act under the supervision of, and be 
directly responsible to the President of the Philippines. 

Done at the City of Saranac Lake, State of New York, 
United States of America, this twentieth day of June, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, and of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth. 

Manuel L. Quezon 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 15-W 

REORGANIZING AND CONSOLIDATING THE EX- 
ECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS OF THE COMMON- 
WEALTH GOVERNMENT. 

For the purpose of adapting the functions of the Execu- 
tive Departments of the Commonwealth Government, now 
temporarily established in the United States, to the exigen- 
cies and necessities of the war situation, and the public 
interest so demanding, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the 
Constitution and the Emergency Powers Law, do hereby 
reorganize and consolidate the Executive Departments of 
the Commonwealth Government into five departments, to 
wit: the Department of Finance; the Department of Na- 
tional Defense and Communications ; the Department of In- 
formation and Public Relations; the Department of Justice, 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


37 


Labor and Welfare ; and the Department of Agriculture and 
Commerce, which shall be under the direct control of the 
respective secretaries of department, exercising their func- 
tions subject to the general supervision and control of the 
President. 

AlPpowers of direction, supervision and control over any 
office which does not come under the jurisdiction of any of 
the departments enumerated above shall be exercised by 
the President or by any Department Secretary whom the 
President may designate. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this eighth day of August, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, and of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 16-W 

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO STUDY AND RECOM- 
MEND A PLAN OF REORGANIZATION OF THE 
COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT FOR THE 
PURPOSE OF EFFECTING ECONOMY, EFFI- 
CIENCY AND SIMPLIFICATION IN ITS OPERA- 
TIONS. 

There is hereby created and constituted a Committee 
composed of three members, namely: 

1. Hon. Jaime Hernandez, Chairman 
- 2. Dr. Arturo B. Rotor, member 

3. Col. Alejandro Melchor, member 
The Committee shall investigate and study the present 
organization and functions of the different offices of the 
Commonwealth Government now established in the United 
States and submit recommendations to the President con- 
cerning changes which are deemed necessary in order to 
effect economy and efficiency, including the transfer and 
allocation of functions, appropriations, property, and per- 
sonnel from one department or office to another; the clas- 
sification of positions and the fixing of the corresponding 
salaries ; the study and recommendation of a plan for the 
allocation and distribution of office space; and such other 
matters as are considered necessary for the efficient and 
economic functioning of the Commonwealth Government. 
It shall submit its findings and recommendations to the 
President as soon as possible. 


38 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


This Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any 
official or employee, office or dependency of the Common- 
wealth Government for such data and assistance as may 
be required. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this fourteenth day of August, 
in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, 
and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 17-W 

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 6-W CREATING 
A COMMITTEE ON RELIEF FOR FILIPINOS 
STRANDED IN THE UNITED STATES ON AC- 
COUNT OF THE WAR. 

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution 
and pursuant to the provisions of the Emergency Powers 
Law, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the Philippines, do 
hereby create and constitute a Committee for Relief of 
Filipinos who are stranded in the United States on account 
of the war. 

The Committee shall be composed of Honorable Ismael 
Mathay, Budget and Finance Commissioner, Chairman; 
Dr. Arturo B. Rotor, Secretary to the President; and Mr. 
Manuel A. Adeva, Chief, Nationals Division, Office of the 
Resident Commissioner of the Philippines to the United 
States, members. 

The duties and functions of the Committee will be as 
follows : 

1. To study and pass upon all requests for financial aid 
from Filipinos who are stranded in the United States. 

2. To determine the form and amount of relief that should 
be given to these persons. 

3. To aid them, through the Office of the Resident Com- 
missioner, to obtain employment. 

4. To review existing cases and recommend to the President 
such action as may be deemed proper to take in each case. 

This Committee has the authority to call upon any office 
or employee of the Commonwealth of the Philippines with 
the approval of the corresponding head or chief, for assist- 
ance in carrying out its functions. 

Executive Order Numbered 6-W, series of 1943, is here- 
by amended insofar as it is inconsistent herewith. 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


39 


Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this thirtieth day of August in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the Pi-esident: 

Arturo B. Rotor 
Secretary to the President 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 19-W 

APPROPRIATING FUNDS' TO BE USED AS AID FOR 
THE OPERATION OF THE PROVINCIAL, CITY 
AND MUNICIPAL CIVIL GOVERNMENTS WHICH 
MAY BE REESTABLISHED IN THE PHILIPPINES 
UPON REOCCUPATION. 

Whereas it is necessary that upon the reoccupation of 
the Philippines, provincial, city and municipal civil gov- 
ernments should be reestablished as soon as possible; and 

Whereas said political subdivisions might not have suffi- 
cient funds or sources of revenue with which to defray the 
expenses of civil administration during the early period 
of reoccupation; 

Now, therefore, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the Phil- 
ippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Con- 
stitution and pursuant to the provisions of the Emergency 
Powers Law, do hereby set aside the sum of Ten Million 
Pesos (1*10,000,000) or so much thereof as may be neces- 
sary out of any funds of the Government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines not otherwise appropriated to 
be used as aid for the operation of the provincial, city and 
municipal civil governments which may be reestablished 
upon the reoccupation of the Philippines. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this twenty-first day of Septem- 
ber in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty- 
four, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the 
ninth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Arturo B. Rotor 
Secretary to the President 


40 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Executive Order No. 20-W 

PRESCRIBING INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE CONDUCT 
OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS OF THE COMMONWEALTH 
GOVERNMENT IN THE UNITED STATES DURING 
THE ABSENCES OF THE PRESIDENT. 

Whereas the exigencies of the present emergency re- 
quire the presence of the President of the Philippines out- 
side the continental United States, the temporary seat of 
the Commonwealth Government; and 

Whereas it is necessary that during his absence and 
until the seat of the Commonwealth Government is rees- 
tablished in the Philippines and normal constitutional pro- 
cesses of government are fully restored, the functions of 
said Commonwealth Government in the United States 
should continue to be performed with regularity and dis- 
patch ; 

Now, therefore, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the Phil- 
ippines, by virtue of, the powers vested in me by the Consti- 
tution and pursuant to the provisions of the Emergency 
Powers Law, do hereby prescribe and promulgate the fol- 
lowing instructions for the conduct of public affairs of the 
Commonwealth Government in the United States during 
my absence from this country, any provisions of existing 
law to the contrary notwithstanding: 

1. The Secretary of Finance shall be the representative of the 
President of the Philippines, and, as such, he shall be charged with 
the conduct of the public affairs of the Commonwealth Government 
in the United States, with full authority to act on all matters which 
pertain to, or affect said Government. This authority shall include 
not only the general administrative supervision, direction and control 
of the departments and offices of said Government in the United 
States, but also the specific authority to appoint and remove any 
employee of the Commonwealth Government in the United States; 
to reduce, increase, redistribute or discontinue the activities of any 
department, office, or employee of said Government; and, where neces- 
sary for the proper discharge of authorized functions and activities, 
to employ technical, expert and other personnel by contract or other- 
wise and to fix their compensations. 

2. The Secretary of Finance as representative of the President 
of the Philippines is hereby vested with full authority to confer 
with the proper officials of the federal, state and local governments, 
their various departments, offices, agencies and instrumentalities, on 
matters affecting the Commonwealth Government, and to decide and 
act upon such matters for and in behalf of the Commonwealth Gov- 
ernment. On important matters where a change of established policy 
is deemed necessary or, where in his opinion, it is advisable to do 
so, the Secretary of Finance shall consult the President of the Phil- 
ippines, through appropriate communication facilities, before taking 
action. 


April. 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


41 


3. The Secretary of Finance is also hereby authorized to represent 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines in international organizations 
and conferences to which the Commonwealth may be invited, and 
to designate such delegates or members as may be necessary. He 
shall make a report to the President of the Philippines of the results 
of such conferences. 

4. All papers which, in the usual course of business, are ordinarily 
signed by the President, shall be signed by the Secretary of Finance, 
“By authority of the President.” 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of America, this twenty-seventh day of Sep- 
tember, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-four and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the ninth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Arturo B. Rotor 
Secretary to the President 


Office of the President of the Philippines 


BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 


Executive Order No. 21 

declaring to be on active service in the 

PHILIPPINE ARMY ALL PERSONS' NOW AC- 
TIVELY SERVING IN RECOGNIZED MILITARY 
FORCES IN THE PHILIPPINES. 


Whereas many civilians residing in the Philippines of 
Filipino, American and other foreign citizenships, and of- 
ficers and enlisted men of the Philippine Army, of the armed 
forces of the United States and of Allied nations, have 
continued armed resistance against the Imperial Japanese 
Government since the sixth of May, 1942; 

Whereas this action has written in blood an epic of 
courage, devotion and loyalty to the Government and the 
people of the Philippines: 

WHEREAS these military forces have contributed in a 
large measure to the Allied military effort and to the libe- 
ration of the Filipino people from the yoke of the Japanese 


invader ; 

Whereas it is the desire of the Government of the Phil- 
ippines to recognize this allegiance; 

Now, therefore, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the 
Emergency Powers Law, Section 22 (c<) and Section 27 of 
Commonwealth Act Numbered One notwithstanding, do 
hereby ordain and promulgate the following: 


1 All persons of any nationality or citizenship, who are actively 
serving in recognized military forces in the Philippines, are hereby 
considered to be on active service in the Philippine Army, 


42 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


2. The temporary grades of enlisted men, enlisted or promoted 
in the field by Commanders of recognized military forces or by their 
delegated authority, are hereby confirmed. 

3. The temporary ranks of all officers, appointed or promoted in 
the field prior to this date by Commanders of recognized military 
forces, are hereby confirmed. 

4. The date of entry into active service in the Philippine Army 
will be that of joining a recognized military force. 

5. The effective date of rank for commissioned officers and en- 
listed men will be the date on which they were appointed or promoted 
to such rank by the Commanders of recognized military forces. 

6. A recognized military force, as used herein, is defined as a 
force under a commander who has been appointed, designated or 
recognized by the Commander-in-Chief, Southwest Pacific Area. 

Done at the seat of Government in the Field, this twenty- 
eighth day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen 
hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, the ninth. 

Sergio Osmena 

President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Arturo B. Rotor 

Secretary to the President 


Office of the President of the Philippines 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
Executive Order No. 22 

FIXING THE SALARIES OF THE OFFICERS AND EN- 
LISTED MEN OF THE PHILIPPINE ARMY 

Pui’suant to. the provisions of section 90 of the National 
Defense Act and of the Emergency Powers Law, I, Sergio 
Osmena, President of the Philippines, do hereby prescribe 
the following schedule of salary rates and quarters allow- 
ances for officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Army, 
effective on dates as indicated herein, and extending for 
the duration of the war and for six months thereafter un- 
less sooner terminated by competent authority : 


Rank 

Annual pay 

Monthly 

quarters 

allowance 

Major General 

1*16,000.00 

1*200.00 

Brigadier General 

1 2,000.00 

200.00 

Colonel 

8,000.00 

200.00 

Lieutenant colonel 

7,000.00 

200.00 

Major 

6,000.00 ' 

160.00 

Captain 

4,800.00 

140.00 

First lieutenant 

4,000.00 

100.00 

Second lieutenant 

3,000.00 

80.00 

Third lieutenant 

2,400.00 

60.00 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


ENLISTED MEN 


Grade* Monthly pay 

Master sergeant 1*276.00 

First sergeant 276.00 

Technical sergeant 228.00 

Staff sergeant 192.00 

Sergeant 156.00 

Corporal 132.00 

Private first class 108.00 

Private 100.00 


The rates of pay and allowances prescribed herein shall 
become effective for officers and enlisted men of any unit 
upon the date on which the unit is returned to or consti- 
tuted under organized military control, and for any indi- 
vidual officer or enlisted man upon the date on which he 
reports to a unit under organized military control after 
having been called or recalled to active duty or after having 
been enlisted for such a unit. A unit shall be considered 
as being returned to or constituted under organized military 
control on the date announcement thereof is made by 
the Commander-in-Chief, Southwest Pacific Area. 

No increase of pay or allowances shall accrue because 
of foreign service. 

During the period that the rates of pay herein prescribed 
are effective, there shall not be paid to any person an in- 
crease of pay or allowances by reason of length of service. 

During the period that the rates of pay herein prescribed 
are effective, there shall not be paid to any person an in- 
crease of pay for duty requiring regular and frequent aerial 
flights. 

Any provisions of existing Executive Orders in conflict 
herewith are hereby superseded. 

Done at the seat of Government in the Field, this twenty- 
eighth day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen 
hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, the ninth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Arturo B. Rotor 
Secretary to the President 


Office of the President of the Philippines 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 23 

CREATING A BOARD OF INQUIRY TO INVESTIGATE 
CHARGES OF DISLOYALTY TO THE COMMON- 
WEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES AND THE 


44 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA IN THE PROV- 
INCE OF LEYTE, AND CONSIDER THE LEGAL 
PROBLEMS AND MATTERS OF PUBLIC POLICY 
INVOLVED THEREIN. 

Whereas it has come to my attention that some persons 
are now being detained in the Provincial Jail of the Province 
of Leyte on suspicion of having committed acts of disloyalty 
to the Commonwealth of the Philippines and the United 
States of America which constitute a violation of the laws 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines; 

Whereas the interest of justice requires that those per- 
sons under detention for alleged violations of the law of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines be promptly brought be- 
fore the proper court of justice for trial; 

Whereas the unification of our people, the overwhelm- 
ing majority of whom have been steadfastly loyal, for the 
purposes of restoring the normal processes df our political 
and economic life and promptly establishing the Republic 
of the Philippines upon indestructible foundations is a 
paramount national need in this hour of our liberation; 

Whereas, for the purpose of strengthening the national 
unity, the legal problems and matters of policy involved 
in the investigation and disposition of the cases of citizens 
who may be accused of disloyalty during the Japanese 
occupation should be thoroughly studied in order that a 
basic policy may be established for dealing with such cases 
in accordance with law and with an understanding of the 
conditions which existed during the prolonged period of 
enemy occupation; 

Now, therefore, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the 
Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do hereby create 
a Board of Inquiry, composed of a chairman and four 
members to be appointed by the President, to investigate 
charges of disloyalty in the Province of Leyte and consider 
the legal problems and matters of public policy involved 
therein. 

1. The duties and functions of this Board will be: 

(a) To ascertain upon what authority and what specific charges 
certain persons are now being detained in the Provincial Jail of the 
Province of Leyte on suspicion of having committed acts of disloyalty 
to the Commonwealth of the Philippines and the United States of 
America which constitute a violation of the laws of the Commonwealth. 

(6) To investigate the validity of such charges as to the law and 
the facts involved. 

(c) To allow such persons the right to be present at such investi- 
gations, to be heard by themselves or by counsel, and to present 
witnesses on their behalf. Hearings of the Board shall be open to 
the public. 

(d) Upon the termination of its labors, to submit to the President 
a report, and in its discretion to submit current reports, of its find- 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


45 


ings and conclusions, and at frequent intervals to recommend to him 
such action as may be deemed just and proper in each particular 
case that has been heard. 

2. The Board of Inquiry will prepare such rules and regulations 
for its operation as may be necessary. It is hereby authorized to 
direct the appearance of witnesses with or without documents, ad- 
minister oaths, and take testimony relevant to its investigation. It 
is also authorized to call upon any office, official or employee of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, for any necessary assistance in 
carrying out its functions and, with the approval of the correspond- 
ing Head of Department, such assistance shall be given. 

3. The chairman and members of this Board will receive compen- 
sation in the form of per diem at the rate of ten pesos (M0.00) a 
day for each day of service actually rendered, except those who are 
already employed by the Commonwealth of the Philippines who shall 
serve without additional compensation. Within the limit of such 
funds as may be set aside or appropriated for the purpose, the 
Board may employ the necessary personnel and make provisions for 
equipment, supplies, materials, travel and other services. 

4. Inasmuch as justice requires and the Constitution of the Com- 
monwealth prescribes that in all criminal prosecutions the accused 
shall have a speedy trial, the Board is enjoined to execute its func- 
tions with the greatest dispatch compatible with safeguarding the 
rights of the accused and the interests of the State. Records of 
proceedings will be as brief as possible and need not be verbatim. 
In the taking of evidence only that testimony will be of record which 
is deemed essential by the Board. 

Done at the seat of Government in the Field, this second 
day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hun- 
dred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, the ninth. 

Sergio Osmena 

President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Arturo B. Rotor 

Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
Executive Order No. 24 

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 371 OF OCTO- 
PFF 2 1941 FIXING THE MAXIMUM SELLING 
PRICES OF CERTAIN ARTICLES OF PRIME 
NFCESSITY AND PROMULGATING RULES 
AND REGULATIONS FOR THE ENFORCEMENT 
THEREOF. 

WHEREAS in view of the shortage of food, other articles 
of prime necessity, and services caused by the war, it is 
essential to the welfare of the people that the fixing of 


46 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41. No. 1 


the maximum selling prices of such articles as promul- 
gated on October 2, 1941, be continued with such modifi- 
cations as circumstances may require; 


Now, THEREFORE, I, Sergio Osmena, Pi-esident of the 


Philippines, by virtue 

of the authority vested in 

me 

by 

the Constitution and the laws of the Philippines, do here- 

by prescribe and 

promulgate the following 

schedule 

of 

maximum prices in the Province of Leyte: 




Maximum Selling Prices 









Price 

Product 


Unit 

Price 
paid by 

Price 
paid by 

paid by 
con- 




wholesaler 

retailer 

sumers 

1. Rice-elon . . 


cavan 

1*7.20 

1*7.30 





ganta 

1*0.32 



Iitro 




.11 

2. Rice native unhusked 






(palay) 


cavan 

3.00 




3. Corn-milled 


cavan 

4.45 

4.60 





ganta 




.21 



Iitro 




.07 

4. Corn-grain 


cavan 

3.62 

3.73 





ganta 




.18 



Iitro 




.06 

5. Wheat-flour-American 






or Australian ... 


49-lb sack 

3.01 

3.10 





kilo 




.15 

6. Vegetable lard 


kilo 

.32 

.33 


.35 

7. Corn beef, canned 


12 oz. tin (case 







48) 

15.50 

15.98 





12 oz. tin 




.35 

8. Sardines, canned . 


15 oz.. tin (case 




/ 



48) 

6.91 

7.15 





15 oz. tin 




.16 

9. Sugar, brown refined . 

picul (63.25 







kilo) 

8.34 

8.60 





kilo 




.14 

10. Salt 


ganta 

.08 

.09 


.10 



kilo 




.05 

11. Milk-condensed .... 


case 48 cans 







(14 oz.) 

13.38 

13.79 





14 oz. can 




.30 

12. Milk evaporated .. 


case 48 cans 







(14 oz.) 

7.58 

7.73 





14 oz. can 




.17 

13. Vienna sausage, 

can- 






ned 


case 48 cans 







(4 oz.) 

6.88 

7.09 





4 oz. can 




.16 

14. Pork and beans, 

can- 






ned 


case 48 cans 







(16 oz.) 

4.05 

4.18 





16 oz. can 




.09 

15. Pork 


kilo 




.40 

16. Beef 


kilo 




.60 

17. Carabao meat 


kilo 




.45 

18. Fish (fresh) : 






First class 


kilo 




.40 

Second class 


kilo 




.30 

Third class . 


kilo 




.20 

Fourth class 


kilo 




.10 

19. Fish (dried) : 







First class 


kilo 




.80 

Second class 


kilo 




.60 

Third class 


kilo 




.40 

Fourth class 


kilo 




.20 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


47 


Maximum Selling Prices 


Product 


Unit 


Price Price 
paid by paid by 
wholesaler retailer 


Price 
paid by 
con- 
sumers 


20. Fish (salted but not 



dried) : 



First class 

kilo 

6-0 

Second class 

kilo 

.45 

Third class . 

kilo 

30 

Fourth class » 

kilo 

15 

21. Fish; salted, small, 



such as ginamos, bo- 

Petroleum can (5 gal.) 

5.00 

linaw, bagon, etc 

(See Appendix). 


22. Eggs 

Dozen 

30 

23. Vegetables: 



Camotes 

1 petroleum can (5 gal.) .... 

50 

Hantao -• 

Small bundle 

01 

Patola ; 

For each 3 

10 

Upo 

Each 

10 

Ceguedilla 

Bundle ’. 

01 

Tancong 

Bundle 

01 

Tomatoes 

For each 2 

01 

Holabtog 

For each 5 

.01 

Gabi w 

Each 

05 

24. Chickens • 

Each depending on size 

25-1.20 

25. Bananas 

Each 

.01 

2G. Soap: 



Large size bars 



(a pproximate- 



ly 1 kilo) 

Each 

30 

Small size bars 



( approximate- 



ly £ kilo) 

Each 

10 

27. Laundry: 



Pants 

Each (pair) 

15 

Slacks 

Each 

15 

Shirt 

Each 

15 

Drawers 

Each 

05 

Under shirt 

Each 

05 

Towel 

Each 


Wash cloth > 

Each 

02 

Handkerchief 

Each 

02 

Sox - 

Each (pair) 


Sheet 

Each 

15 

Pillow case > 

Each 

05 


.20 

.25 

.05 

.50 

.50 

.20 


Mattress cover .. Each 
Denims per suit.. Each 

Cap * Each 

Minimum charge Each 

28. Haircut 

29. Shave 

The maximum selling prices herein fixed will supersede 
the prices provided for in Executive Order No. 371. 

Any person, firm or corporation who shall sell any article 
included in the above schedule at prices in excess of the 
maximum selling prices herein fixed shall be punished as 
provided in section 3 of Commonwealth Act Numbered 
Six hundred as amended. 

Done in the seat of Government in the Field, this sixth 
day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hun- 
dred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, the ninth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Arturo B. Rotor 
Secretary to the President 


48 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


APPENDIX TO EXECUTIVE OIIDER No. 24 


1. Aguas 

2. A gum a a 

3. Agu-ot 

4. Apahan 

5. Bahakulan 

6. Badlong 

7. Bag-angan 

8. Bagtao 

9. Baha-ulo 

10. Bakoko 

11. Balanak 

12. Balo 

13. Bangos 

14. Bangros 

15. Bankules 

16. Baragsikul 

17. Bayang 

18. Bilibol 

19. Buntok 

20. Buraw 

21. Duyong 

1. Adgawon 

2. Aguyong 

3. Bugaong 

4. Balira 

5. Bolinao 

6. Borokon 

7. Busaw 

8. Crabs 

9. Dalagang bukid 

10. Dapak 

11. Darapugan 

12. Gapasgapas 

13. Hipon 

14. I-ito 

15. Kikiro 

1. Gono 

2. Gutan 

3. Ibis 

4. Lomo-an (small) 


1. Bakal 

2. Bali-ad 


CLASSIFICATION OF FISH 
First Class 

22. Guingao 

23. Hawolhawol 

24. Kabasi 

25. Kalapion 

26. Kasili 

27. Komihan 

28. Labajera 

29. Langasi 

30. Langooy 

31. Lapis 

32. Lapulapu 

33. Lokon 

34. Lomod 

35. Magka-agum 

36. Magkutod 

37. Malasugi 

38. Mamsa 

39. Mangagat 

40. Marapati 

41. Morenay 

Second Class 

16. Kirawan (small) 

17. Kini 

18. Kugita 

19. Labongan 

20. Lahing 

21. Langbiyaw 

22. Lomong 

23. Losod 

24. Malatindok 

25. Hangit 

26. Mayamaya (small) 

27. M o 1 a n b o 1 a n 

(small ) 

28. Oso-os 

Third Class 

5. Malimno 

6. Pakol 

7. Sapsap 

8. Sir 

Fourth Class 

3. Bokawil 

4. Sangpiyad 


42. Mublad 

43. No-os 

44. Pagapa (big) 
4|5. Panabela 

46. Panapsapan 

47. Pargo 

48. Pasayan 

49. Pawikan 

50. Rome candado 

51. Sakalan 

52. Sandatan 

53. Sandig 

54. Tabanguggu 

55. Tangingui 

56. Tarukotok 

57. Tasi 

58. Tawa-ay 

59. Turingan 

60. Ugapang 

61. Urang (big) 


29. Palad 

30. Paratpot 

31. Sagisi-on 

32. Sarobasib 

33. Silag 

34. Sinaw-an 

35. Solid 

36. Sonog 

37. Talho 

38. Tamyok 

39. Tambantamban 

40. Tamban 

41. Tambong 

42. Ogdok 


9. Solaybagyo 

10. Talho 

11. Tigui 

12. Yawo 

5. Talaba and 
ohong 


Office of the President of the Philippines 

> ' 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 25 

PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS CON- 
CERNING CURRENCY, BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS 
OF BANKS AND THEIR BRANCHES AND AGEN- 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


49 


CIES IN THE PROVINCES, PROVINCIAL, CITY 
AND MUNICIPAL TREASURIES AND OTHER 
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABLE OFFICES AND 
DEBT MORATORIUM. 

Whereas it is essential that the financial and monetary 
structure of the Commonwealth of the Philippines be main- 
' tained on a sound basis. 

Now, THEREFORE, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the 
Constitution and the laws of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following rules and 
regulations concerning currency, books and accounts and 
debt moratorium for all areas free from enemy occupation 
and control throughout the Philippines. 

t. CURRENCY 

1. The new Victory Series of Philippine Treasury Cer- 
tificates (Victory Pesos) and the Philippine coins identical 
to pre-war issue now in circulation will be legal tender. 

2. All pre-war Philippine Treasury Certificates and coins 
will continue to be legal tender and may be exchanged at 
par for the Victory Pesos if so desired by the holders. 

3. The rate of exchange will be two Victory Pesos for 
one United States dollar. Transactions at any other rate 
are prohibited. 

4. For each province liberated from the enemy, an Emer- 
gency Currency Committee will be appointed by the United 
States Army and the Commonwealth Government to study, 
investigate and report on the bona-fide emergency curren- 
cies issued by duly authorized currency boards. The Com- 
mittee will ascertain the extent of the authority given to 
such boards, the amount of emergency currency actually 
printed and issued, and will recommend as soon as pos- 
sible the redemption of the currencies found to be legally 
issued. In case it is found out that in a given province 
more emergency currencies were in circulation than the 
amount actually authorized to be issued, the Committee will 
recommend what action shall be taken : Provided, hoxvever, 
That counterfeit emergency currencies will not be re- 
deemed. 

5. The printing and issuance of additional emergency 
currencies are hereby prohibited. 

6. Japanese currency, Philippine National Bank Notes 
(except duly authorized emergency issues), Notes of the 
Bank of the Philippine Islands, New Central Bank Notes 
and unauthorized emergency currencies are not legal tender. 
Ti-ansactions in these currencies are prohibited. 

II. BANKS, TREASURIES AND OTHER 
ACCOUNTABLE OFFICES 

1. The books of banks, their branches and agencies in 
the provinces, provincial, city and municipal treasuries and 


HO 1 


50 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


other government accountable offices will be sealed forth- 
with and existing accounts frozen, as of the date the 
province, city, or municipality is liberated from enemy 
occupation and control, pending further action by the 
Government. All books, accounts and previous records as 
closed shall become inactive, filed and preserved for ref- 
erence and other purposes as may be required. 

2. Provincial and municipal treasurers and other ac- 
countable officials will open new books of account as soon 
as their respective offices are duly reconstituted, observing 
strictly the existing accounting laws, rules and regulations 
pertaining to accounts and accounting system of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines. 

3. Provincial treasurers will accept for safekeeping new 
savings deposits in pre-war Philippine Treasury Certifi- 
cates and Victory Pesos. Withdrawals in cash only of not 
less than one peso may be made from each savings account 
upon presentation of the deposit book. No interest will 
accrue on such deposit. In addition to opening new savings 
accounts, provincial treasuries will provide facilities for 
exchanging United States dollars for Victory Pesos. 

III. DEBT MORATORIUM 

1. Payment of all debts and other monetary obligations 
contracted after December 31, 1941, except debts and other 
monetary obligations entered into in any area after decla- 
ration by Executive Order that such area has been freed 
from enemy occupation and control, is temporarily sus- 
pended pending action by the Commonwealth Government. 

Done at the seat of Government in the Field, this 
eighteenth day of November, in the year of Our Lord, 
nineteen hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President : 

Arturo B. Rotor 
Secretary to the President 


MalacaAan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OP THE PHILIPPINES 
Executive Order No. 26 

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER .NUMBERED 
TWENTY-FOUR, ENTITLED “AMENDING EXE- 
CUTIVE ORDER No. 371 OF OCTOBER 2, 1941, 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


51 


FIXING THE MAXIMUM SELLING PRICES OF 
CERTAIN ARTICLES OF PRIME NECESSITY AND 
PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS 
FOR THE ENFORCEMENT THEREOF.” 

In order that cases of violation of the selling prices set 
forth in Executive Order No. 24 of November 6, 1944 
could be handled by justice of the peace courts, the para- 
graph prescribing penalties for said cases of violation 
should be amended to read as follows: 

“Any person, firm or corporation who shall sell any article 
included in the above schedule at prices in excess of the maxi- 
mum selling prices herein fixed shall be subject to imprison- 
ment for not more than six (6) months, or a fine of not more 
than two hundred (1*200) pesos or both.” 

Done in the seat of Government in the Field, this twenty- 
first day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen 
hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Arturo B. Rotor 
Secretary to the President 


Office of the President of the Philippines 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 27 

REORGANIZING THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS 
OF THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT 

Whereas the seat of the Government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines is now reestablished in the City 
of Manila and it is necessary that the Executive Depart- 
ments as they existed before the Japanese invasion be 
restored with such modifications as the exigencies of the 
present situation require; 

Now, therefore, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the 
Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do hei’eby ordain 
and promulgate the following: 

Section 1. There shall be nine executive departments to 
wit: The Department of the Interior, the Department of 
Finance, the Department of Justice, the Department of 
Agriculture and Commerce, the Department of Public 
Works and Communications, the Department of Instruc- 
tion and Information, the Department of Labor, the De- 


52 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


partment of National Defense, and the Department of 
Health and Public Welfare, which shall be under the direct 
control of the respective secretaries of department, exer- 
cising their functions subject to the general supervision 
and control of the President of the Philippines. 

Sec. 2. The Department of the Interior shall perform 
its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary 
of the Interior; the Department of Finance shall perform 
its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary 
of Finance; the Department of Justice shall perform its 
functions under the executive authority of the Secretary 
of Justice; the Department of Agriculture and Commerce 
shall perform its functions under the executive authority 
of the Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce ; the De- 
partment of Public Works and Communications shall per- 
form its functions under the executive authority of the 
Secretary of Public Works and Communications; the De- 
partment of Instruction and Information shall perform its 
functions under the executive authority of the Secretary 
of Instruction and Information; the Department of Labor 
shall perform its functions under the executive authority 
of the Secretary of Labor; the Department of National 
Defense shall perform its functions under the executive 
authority of the Secretary of National Defense; and the 
Department of Health and Public Welfare shall perform 
its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary 
of Health and Public Welfare. 

Sec. 3. The Department of Information and Public Re- 
lations, created under Executive Order No. 8-W, series of 
1943, is hereby abolished and, subject to the approval of 
the President and if the needs of the service so require, 
officials and employees of this department may be trans- 
ferred either to the Department of Instruction and Informa- 
tion in the Philippines or the Division of Information which 
may be created in the Office of the Resident Commissioner 
of the Philippines to the United States. 

Sec. 4. The provisions of Executive Order No. 15-W, 
series of 1944, and of any other executive order inconsistent 
herewith are hereby repealed. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-seventh day of 
February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 

orty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


53 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 28 

FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 24, 
DATED NOVEMBER 6, 1944, ENTITLED “AMEND- 
ING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 371 OF OCTOBER 
2, 1941, FIXING THE MAXIMUM SELLING PRICES 
OF CERTAIN ARTICLES OF PRIME NECESSITY, 
AND PROMULGATING RULES' AND REGULA- 
TIONS FOR THE ENFORCEMENT THEREOF.” 

In order to extend the benefits of Executive Order No. 
24, dated November 6, 1944, entitled “Amending Executive 
Order No. 371 of October 2, 1941, fixing the maximum sell- 
ing prices of certain articles of prime necessity, and pro- 
mulgating rules and regulations for the enforcement there- 
of,” to the inhabitants of the City of Manila and other 
areas liberated from enemy occupation and control, the 
same is hereby amended to make the provisions thereof 
applicable to the City of Manila and other areas effective 
progressively upon their liberation from enemy occupation 
and control. 

Done in the City of Manila, this twenty-eighth day of 
February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and 
forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to' the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 29 

AMENDING PARAGRAPH ONE OF EXECUTIVE 
ORDER NO. 382, DATED DECEMBER 15, 1941, 
ENTITLED “AUTHORIZING THE COMMANDEER- 
ING OF FOOD, FUEL, BUILDING MATERIALS, 
AND OTHER ARTICLES OR COMMODITIES OF 
PRIME NECESSITY, PROHIBITING AND PENAL- 
IZING THE HOARDING THEREOF, AND PRO- 
VIDING FOR A MORE EFFECTIVE ENFORCE- 


54 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


MENT OF THE PROVISIONS OF ALL ANTIPROF- 
ITEERING ORDERS.” 

Paragraph one of Executive Order Numbered Three hun- 
dred and eighty-two, dated December fifteen, nineteen 
hundred and forty-one, is hereby amended to read as fol- 
lows : 

“(1) The Emergency Control Administrator may, at any time, 
order the commandeering of all food, fuel, building materials, and 
other articles or commodities of prime necessity for the .purpose of 
preventing, locally or generally, scarcity, hoarding and injurious 
speculation affecting the supply, distribution and movement of such 
articles or commodities. Any and all commodities so commandeered 
shall be by him sold, distributed, or otherwise disposed of to the 
public through such persons, natural or juridical, agencies or instru- 
mentalities, official or otherwise, as in his judgment may serve the 
best interests of the consuming public. The Emergency Control Ad- 
ministrator shall issue the necessary rules and orders for the purpose 
of enforcing all anti-profiteering laws and orders and of effecting the 
payment of the goods so commandeered, and the sale, distribution, 
or disposal thereof to the public. .” 

Done in the City of Manila this seventh day of March, 
in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, 
and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio OsmeSa 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretai'y to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 30 

APPROPRIATING FUNDS FOR THE OPERATION OF 
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH 
OF THE PHILIPPINES AS REESTABLISHED, FOR 
A PORTION OF THE FISCAL YEAR ENDING 
JUNE THIRTIETH, NINETEEN HUNDRED AND 
FORTY-FIVE. 

Whereas the Government of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines has been reestablished on Philippine soil; and 
Whereas it is essential that the expenses for the opera- 
tion of said Government be made in accordance with a 
l’egular budget of expenditures; 

Now, THEREFORE, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


55 


Constitution, and pursuant to the provisions of the existing , 
laws, do hereby ordain that: 

1. So much of the different amounts authorized in Com- 
monwealth Act No. 654, known as the “General Appropria- 
tion Act for the fiscal year nineteen hundred and forty-two,” 
enacted by the National Assembly and appi'oved on June 
21, 1941, as may correspond to the period starting from 
the date of the reestablishment of the Government of the 
Commonwealth on Philippine soil on October 23, 1944 to 
June 30, 1945, is hereby appropriated out of any funds of 
the Commonwealth Government not otherwise appropriated 
for the operation of the Government of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines. 

2. For the purpose of effecting savings from the appro- 
priations authorized in the next preceding paragraph, each 
head of department shall immediately submit to the Pres- 
ident a special budget which shall include the plantilla of 
personnel and such amounts for sundry expenses, furni- 
ture and equipment, etc., as may be considered absolutely 
indispensable for the reestablishment and operation of his 
department and the bureaus and offices under it up to June 
30, 1945, inclusive. 

3. No new position shall be created unless the salary 
thereof can be covered from savings effected from the ap- 
propriations for salaries and wages of the department 
concerned, and such position shall not be filled without the 
previous approval of the President. 

4. The provisions of sections two, three, four, five, six, 
seven, eight, nine, and ten of Commonwealth Act No. 654, 
which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ex- 
ecutive Order, are hereby continued in force. 

Done at the City of Manila, this eighth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, 
and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio OsmeNa 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 

Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 31 

PRESCRIBING THE OFFICE HOURS TO BE OB- 
SERVED IN THE DIFFERENT BUREAUS AND 
OFFICES OF THE GOVERNMENT. 


56 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


By virtue of the powers vested in me by law and pur- 
suant to the provisions of section 562 of the Revised Ad- 
ministrative Code, I, Sei’gio Osmena, President of the 
Philippines, do hereby prescribe, in accordance with the 
existing emergency, that the office hours of all bureaus 
and offices shall be from eight o’clock to twelve o’clock 
in the morning, and from one o’clock to four o’clock in 
the afternoon (Daylight Saving Time) on week-days in- 
cluding Saturdays : Provided, That, when the interests of 
the public service so require, the head of any Department, 
Bureau, or Office may extend the daily hours of labor for 
any or all of the employees under him, and may likewise 
require any or all of them to do overtime work not only 
on work days but also on holidays. 

This Order repeals Executive Order No. 384, dated De- 
cember 16, 1941, and shall take effect as of March 6, 1945. 

Done at the City of Manila, this eighth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 32 

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 25 PROMUL- 
GATING RULES' AND REGULATIONS CONCERN- 
ING CURRENCY, BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS OF 
BANKS AND THEIR BRANCHES AND AGENCIES 
IN THE PROVINCES, PROVINCIAL, CITY AND 
MUNICIPAL TREASURIES AND OTHER GOV- 
ERNMENT ACCOUNTABLE OFFICES AND 
DEBT MORATORIUM. 

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution 
and the laws of the Philippines, I, Sergio Osmena, President 
of the Philippines, do hereby amend Title III, Debt Mora- 
torium, of Executive Order No. 25, dated November 18, 
1944, to read as follows: 

III. DEBT MORATORIUM 

1. Enforcement of payment of all debts and other monetary 
obligations payable within the Philippines, except debts and other 
monetary obligations entered into in any' area after declaration by 
Presidential Proclamation that such area has been freed from enemy 


April. 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


57 


occupation and control, is temporarily suspended pending action by 
the Commonwealth Government. 

Done at the City of Manila, this tenth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

SERGIO OSMENA 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila * 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 33 

CREATING THE BANKING DIVISION OF THE NA- 
TIONAL TREASURY, COMMONWEALTH OF THE 
PHILIPPINES. 

Whereas, by virtue of Executive Order No. 25, dated 
November 18, 1944, the books of all banks, their branches 
and agencies were ordered sealed and existing accounts 
blocked as of the date of liberation from enemy occupation 
and control of the places where they are located ; and 

Whereas, until normal banking facilities can be reestab- 
lished, it is essential that the Commonwealth Government 
provide a safe banking depositary for the savings of the 
people, and provide for temporary banking and loan facilities 
during the emergency period, so that agricultural, indus- 
trial and commercial activities may be assisted; 

Now, THEREFORE, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the Phil- 
ippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Consti- 
tution and the laws of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
do hereby create a Banking Division of the National Treas- 
ury, which is empowered to exercise banking functions 
within all areas free from enemy occupation and control 
throughout the Philippines, as follows : 

1. To accept deposits; to grant loans; and to engage in 
exchange and other banking operations, in accordance with 
the General Authority and Regulations attached hereto and 
made part of this Executive Order. 

2. (a) The Division hereby created shall be under the 
direction of an administrator designated as the Chief of 
the Banking Division of the National Treasury, who will 
be appointed by the President. 

(6) The loaning operations of this Division will be under 
the supervision of a Loan Committee of three persons, con- 
sisting of a Chairman and two Members, all of whom will 
be appointed by the President. 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


58- 


(c) Separate books of account shall be maintained, and 
the funds of the Banking Division shall not be comingled 
with the general funds of the National Treasury. 

(d) For reasons of economy and efficiency, the Banking 
Division is hereby authorized to employ available personnel, 
and to utilize existing premises, equipment and supplies 
of the Philippine National Bank, the Agricultural and In- 
dustrial Bank, and of provincial and municipal treasurers, 
where practicable. 

( e ) The Banking Division of the National Treasury is 
hereby granted all the authority requisite and necessary 
to provide the Philippines with temporary banking and 
loan facilities during the emergency period. 

3. The sum of Thirty Million Pesos is hereby allocated 
from the Coconut Oil Excise Tax Fund, to provide the 
initial working fund of the Banking Division of the Na- 
tional Treasury hereby created. 

4. (a) The provincial treasurers, when so instructed by 
the Chief of the Banking Division of the National Treasury, 
shall cease to accept savings deposited for safekeeping, as 
provided under Executive Order No. 25, and all funds on 
hand are to be transferred by the provincial treasurers to 
the Banking Division. 

(6) When normal banking has been restored, the Com- 
monwealth Government, either by legislative act or exe- 
cutive order, will transfer the assets and liabilities of the 
Banking Division hereby created, to a government owned 
banking institution, after giving notice to depositors. Free 
working funds then remaining shall be released to the 
National Treasury. 

Done at the City of Manila this tenth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, 
and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

SERGIO OSMEfiA 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan' Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OP THE PHILIPPINES 

general authority and regulations for 

OPERATION OF THE BANKING DIVISION OF 
THE NATIONAL TREASURY, PROMULGATED 
UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 33 OF MARCH 
10, 1945. 


Apiul, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


59 


NAME — DOMICILE AND PLACE OF BUSINESS 

Section 1. The General Authority and Regulations con- 
tained herein shall accompany and be a part of Executive 
Order No. 33, dated March 10, 1945, which creates the 
Banking Division of the National Treasury, Commonwealth 
of the Philippines. Said Division shall be referred to here- 
inafter as the Bank. Its principal domicile and place of 
business shall be in the City of Manila. 

POWERS 

Sec. 2. The said Bank shall have power: 

(а) To accept deposits; 

(б) To make loans; 

(c) To engage in exchange and other banking operations ; 

( d ) To adopt and use a seal; 

(e) To make contracts; 

(/) To sue and be sued; 

(g) To exercise the powers granted herein and such 
incidental powers as may be necessary to transact the busi- 
ness of banking. 

DEPOSITS AND WITHDRAWALS 

Sec. 3. The Bank is hereby authorized to receive deposits 
and may pay interest thereon, from the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines, the provinces, municipalities, Postal Sav- 
ings Bank, firms, companies, corporations, private persons, 
allied governments, their departments, agencies and armed 
forces, of demand, time and savings fund, subject to with- 
drawal by check or presentation of savings bank book. 

RESERVES 

SEC. 4. The Bank shall at all times keep on hand in its 
vaults a sum in lawful money either of the Philippines or 
of the United States which shall be computed as follows: 

Twenty per cent of the demand deposits outstanding and 
credited on its books, and of the fixed deposits maturing 
within thirty days: Provided, That if the Bank shall have 
funds subject to check with National Banks or Federal 
Reserve Banks in the United States, such funds may be 
considered as constituting a part of the twenty per cent 
specified in this section up to a sum to be fixed from time 
to time by the Secretary of Finance, with the approval of 
the President of the Philippines. 

Five per centum of the total savings deposits. 

Whenever the reserve kept by the Bank in its vaults, as 
required in this section shall be below the amount herein 
prescribed, the Bank shall not diminish the amount of such 
reserve by making any new loans or discounts until the 
required proportion between the aggregate amount of its 
deposits and its reserve has been restored. 


60 OFFICIAL GAZETTE Vol. 41, No. 1 


LOANS AND INVESTMENTS 

Sec. 5. To enable said Bank to be of the greatest possible 
assistance to the economy of the Philippines during the 
period of emergency, it is hereby authorized : 

(a) To make personal and business loans with or with- 

out security; 

To make chattel mortgage loans ; 

To make real estate loans; 

To make loans against insurance policies; 

To engage in installment financing; 

To engage in foreign trade financing; 

(b) To purchase or discount promissory notes, drafts 
and bills of exchange issued or drawn for agricultural, 
industrial or commercial purposes, or the proceeds of which 
have been used or are to be used for such purposes. 

(c) To make loans on, or to discount notes secured by, 
harvested and stored crops; Provided, That no loan on the 
security of such harvested and stored crops shall exceed 
seventy per centum of the market value thereof on the 
date of the loan : Provided, further, That the crops so 
mortgaged shall be insured by the mortgagor for the 
benefit of the Bank for their entire market value ; and 
Provided, finally, That if, owing to any circumstances what- 
ever the value of the crops given as security shall diminish, 
the mortgagor shall obligate himself to furnish additional 
security or refund such part of the loan as the Bank may 
deem necessary. Such loans shall be granted for a period 
of three months, subject to three months’ extension, in 
the discretion of the Bank. 

( d ) To make loans to agriculturists in installments, 
secured by growing or standing crops of the natural prod- 
ucts of the Philippines such as rice, hemp, copra, sugar, 
tobacco, corn, maguey, etc., not in excess of three-fifths 
of the estimated value of such crops : Provided, however, 
That before granting such loans, the Bank may require 
additional security in the nature of mortgages on real estate 
or chattel mortgages, including those on livestock, ma- 
chinery, and agricultural implements, or personal bonds 
with sufficient surety or sureties, satisfactory to the Bank. 

(e) To make loans for agricultural purposes, secured 
by first mortgages on real estate in the Philippines. Such 
loans shall not exceed sixty per cent of the actual value 
of said real estate, including the value of the permanent * 
improvements thereon, such as buildings and machinery if 
the same form an integral part of the agricultural devel- 
opment: Provided, however, That whenever the Bank may 
deem it advisable, the mortgages shall contain a clause 
obliging the mortgagor to insure to their full value in the 
name of the Bank, such buildings and improvements. The 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


61 


due date of said mortgages shall not be more than five 
years from the date thereof. The said mortgages, may 
by their terms, be made payable at one time, or in install- 
ments. Applications for such loans shall be in writing 
and under oath, and shall contain among other things: 

A detailed description of the real estate; 

An appi’aisal thereof at its reasonable market value ; 

A full statement of the purposes for which the loan 
is desired. 

It shall be unlawful to use the proceeds of said loan or 
any part thereof for any purpose or purposes, except the 
purpose or purposes set out in said application. Any viola- 
tion of this clause shall be sufficient cause for the rescission 
of the contract and the foreclosure of the mortgage. 

Any justice of the peace, in his capacity as notary public 
ex-officio, shall render service free of charge to any person 
applying for an agricultural or crop loan not exceeding 
two hundred pesos from the Bank, either in administering 
the oath or in the acknowledgment of instruments relative 
to said loan. Any Register of Deeds shall make proper 
entry in the books and records of his office, free of charge, 
of any instruments relative to agricultural or crop loans 
not exceeding two hundred pesos made to any borrower 
by the Bank. 

(/) To make loans to the several provincial and munic- 
ipal governments and to any other branch or subdivision 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines on promissory 
notes guaranteed by the National Government, as shown 
by the endorsement thereon of the Secretary of Finance, 
approved by the President of the Philippines, or to pur- 
chase bonds lawfully issued by the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, or by such provincial and municipal govern- 
ments and any other branch or subdivision of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines. 

(g) Generally, to make advances, or discount paper for 
agricultural, manufacturing, industrial, or commercial pur- 
poses: Provided, That loans, discounts or advances made 
under this section [excepting loans authorized in preceding 
subsection (c)], shall have maturities not exceeding one 
year. ' 

The total liabilities to the Bank of any person, or of any 
company, corporation, or firm, including in the liabilities, 
of the company or firm, the liabilities of the several mem- 
bers thereof, shall at no time exceed fifteen per centum 
of the designated working fund of the Bank, and in addi- 
tion to the fifteen per centum of the designated working 
fund of the Bank, hereinbefore provided' for, the total 
liabilities of any borrower may amount to a further fifteen 
per centum of said working fund of the Bank, provided 


62 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


such additional liabilities are secured by shipping docu- 
ments, warehouse receipts or other similar documents 
transferring or securing title covering readily marketable 
staples, when such staples are fully covered by insurance 
and when such staples have a market value equal to at 
least one hundred twenty-five per centum of such additional 
liabilities. The discount of bills of exchange drawn in 
good faith against actually existing values and the discount 
of commercial or business paper actually owned by the 
person negotiating the same shall not be computed when 
determining as money the total liabilities permitted under 
this restriction. 

The Bank shall not make any loan upon the stock of any 
corporation as collateral if the aggregate market value of 
all such stock held as collateral exceeds an amount equal 
to fifteen per centum of the designated working fund of 
the Bank. 

The term “loan” whenever used in this General Authority 
and Regulations, includes overdrafts and trust receipt 
facilities. 

ADMINISTRATION 

SEC. 6. The affairs, business and administration of the 
Bank shall be directed and its assets managed and preserved 
by the Chief of the Banking Division of the National Treas- 
ury, Commonwealth of the Philippines, referred to herein- 
after as the Chief. He shall be appointed and may be 
removed only by the President of the Philippines, and his 
salary shall be fixed by the President. 

POWERS OF THE CHIEF OF THE BANKING DIVISION 

Sec. 7. The Chief, shall among other duties, powers and 
authority, be charged with the following : 

(а) Fix the rates of discount, remittance fees or ex- 
change to be charged by said Bank, and to issue regulations 
governing deposits; 

(б) To fix in agreement with the Loan Committee, the 
rates of interest that may be paid on deposits and charged 
on loans; 

(c) Before any loans, discounts or other advances are 
made in accordance with the authority of the Loan Com- 
mittee, he shall cause the officer or agent designated for 
this purpose to obtain in proper form and hold safely, the 
required security, and in case of a mortgage, order the 
registration of the proper documents in the office of the 
Register of Deeds of the city or province in which the 
property is situated; 

( d ) Establish accounts with such bank or banks outside 
of the Philippines as may be designated as depositaries 
by the President of the Philippines; 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


63 


( e ) With the consent of the President of the Philippines, 
to establish an agency in New York, N. Y., U. S. A., and 
to appoint an agent who shall be authorized to appoint an 
assistant or assistants and engage such employees as he 
may deem necessary. This agency in New York shall be 
empowered to engage in such transactions as are permitted 
by the New York State banking laws and regulations gov- 
erning agencies of foreign banks; 

(/) Establish branches or agencies of the Bank in pro- 
vincial capitals and other municipalities of the Philippines 
where, in his judgment, the industrial, commercial or agri- 
cultural development or rehabilitation require it. 

The agents and other officers and employees of said 
branches or agencies shall be appointed and may be re- 
moved by the Chief. 

( g ) All signature authorizations shall be issued by the 
Chief, provided that in the case of checks, drafts, or other 
instruments directing the payment of money, two author- 
ized signatures shall be required. 

( h ) The Chief may appoint as agents, cashiers or tellers 
of branches or agencies, the provincial or municipal treas- 
urers, who shall in this case furnish bond and receive such • 
additional compensation as the Chief may determine, and 
shall be removable by the Chief, as such agents, cashiers, 
or tellers. 

(i) To make all contracts on behalf of the said Bank 
and to enter into all obligations required in the conduct 
of the business of the Bank. 

(j) To furnish, upon request of the Secretary of Fin- 
ance, or the President of the Philippines, any information 
in his possession regarding the operations of said Bank. 

LOAN COMMITTEE 

Sec. 8. All loans and other credit facilities extended by 
the Bank shall be authorized by a Loan Committee consist- 
ing of a Chairman and two additional members. They 
shall be appointed or removed only by the President of the 
Philippines who shall fix their compensation. 

The duties of the Loan Committee shall be : 

(а) To authorize such loans and credit facilities as in 
their judgment are proper and in accord with the purposes 
of Executive Order No. 33 dated March 10, 1945, and to 
specify conditions under which officers or agents of the 
Bank may extend loans and credit facilities authorized by 
the Committee. 

(б) To extend authority and prescribe limits as to 
amounts and maturities undei’ which officers and agents 
of the Bank may grant loans and credit facilities without 
prior reference to the Committee. 


64 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41. No. 1 


(c) To study and recommend to the President of the 
Philippines a detailed plan for early extension of small 
relief and rehabilitation loans. 

(d) To cause a permanent record to be kept of the 
minutes of its meetings. 

The Chief of the Banking Division shall not be a member 
of the Loan Committee, but he or the officers or agents 
designated by and responsible to him shall be charged with 
the handling of all loans granted under authority of the 
Committee. 

Decisions of the Committee shall be made by majority 

vote. 

LEGAL COUNSEL 

SEC. 9. The Secretary of Justice shall be attorney for 
said Bank and may, whenever he may deem it proper, in 
specific cases delegate his duties to the Solicitor General, 
the fiscal of the City of Manila, or any provincial fiscal, 
as the case may be: Provided, however, That the Chief of 
said Bank, with the appi*oval of the Secretary of Justice, 
shall have power to employ such additional attorneys as 
may be necessary. 

AUDITING SECTION 

SEC. 10. The Auditor General shall be ex-officio auditor 
of the Bank and shall, with the advice and consent of the 
President of the Philippines, appoint a representative who 
shall be the chief of the Auditing Section of the Bank. All 
the other employees of the section shall be appointed by 
the Auditor General, who with the approval of the Pres- 
ident of the Philippines, shall fix the salaries of the same, 
as well as that of his representative, the chief of the sec- 
tion. The expenses of the section and the salaries and 
traveling expenses of the employees thereof shall be pay- 
able by the Bank. The representative of the Auditor Gen- 
eral shall make a monthly report on the condition of the 
Bank to the President of the Philippines, through the 
Secretary of Finance, to the Auditor General and to the 
Chief. The report shall contain among other things a 
statement of the resources and liabilities including earn- 
ings and expenses, the working fund of the Bank, and un- 
divided profits, as well as the losses, bad debts, and overdue 
accounts carried in the Bank’s assets, as of the day in 
which the statements are compiled. 

APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OP PERSONNEL 

Sec. 11. All the other officers, agents, and employees of 
the Bank shall be appointed and removed by the Chief. 
Said officers, agents, and employees shall not be subject 
to the Civil Service Law, and their duties and compensa- 
tion shall be fixed by the Chief. 


April. 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


65 


FIDELITY INSURANCE OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 12. The members of the Loan Committee, and all 
officers, agents and employees of the Bank shall be bonded 
and their fidelity insured in accordance with the provisions 
of the Public Bonding Law. 


PROHIBITION AGAINST BEING INDEBTED TO BANK 

SEC. 13. The Secretary of Finance, the Auditor General, 
and the latter’s representative, the chief of the Auditing 
Section of the Bank are hereby prohibited from becoming 
indebted to said Bank, directly or indirectly. 

PROHIBITED LOANS 

Sec. 14. The Bank shall not, directly or indirectly, gi ant 
loans to any of the members of the Loan Committee, the 
Chief, other officers and employees of the Bank, to 

agents or employees of the branches or agencies, and no 
loan shall be granted to a corporation, partnership or com- 
pany wherein any member of the Loan Committee ,s a 
shareholder, partner, agent or employee in any manner, 
except by the unanimous vote of the members of the Com- 
mittee, excluding the member mtei este . 

acquisition and disposal of real estate 

sec 15 The Bank is hereby authorized to purchase and 

SEC. ,lo. ii . f as may be necessary for the 

own or lease such real estate a» nmy ^ ^ ^ 

purpose of carrying on its pssar v to acquire 

to hold such real estate as it may hnd necw « 
in the collection of debts due to the said Bank oi to its 
m the conecriu acauired in the collection of debts 

branches; but real estate acqunea 

shall be sold by said Bank within five yeais attei 
of its acquisition. 

WAREHOUSES 

SEC 16 The Bank is hereby authorized to buy, erect, or 

IpS warehouses for depositing therein goods given to it 
lease waiehoi provincial capital or any mu- 

nicfpSS where ftecommerdal, industrial, or agricultural 
development or rehabilitation of the place may require it. 

PROHIBITED REMUNERATION 

Sec 17 No fees or charge of any kind by of com 

bEC. i < • , f i pman ded or paid, for obtaining 

mission shall be exacted, de . f 4.u p T>ank 

loans, and any officer, employee, or agent of t^Bank 
exacting, demanding, or receiving fee foi r i leiwice i 

obtaining a loan or for use of h.s influence to obtain a 
loan shall be punished as hereafter provided. 

PENALTIES 

Sec. 18. The Chief of the Banking Division or any mem- 
ber of the Loan Committee who knowingly violates or 


66 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


knowingly permits any of the officers, agents, or employees 
of the Bank to violate any of the provisions of this General 
Authority and Regulations, and any officer agent, or em- 
ployee of the Bank who violates any of the provisions there- 
of, and any person aiding and abetting the violation of any 
of the provisions thereof, shall be punished by a fine not 
to exceed ten thousand pesos, or by imprisonment not to 
exceed five years, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 

Done in the City of Manila, this tenth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

•Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 34 

AMENDING TRAFFIC REGULATIONS FOR VEHICLES 

Whereas it is deemed advisable to change the existing 
regulations providing for the driving of vehicles on the 
left side of the road so that the vehicle traffic in the Phil- 
ippines shall conform with the practice of driving on the 
right side of the road obtaining in most countries of the 
world ; 

Whereas such a change would bring about certain eco- 
nomic advantages to the people of the Philippines in that 
it would reduce the price of motor vehicles imported into 
the Philippines from the United States; 

Whereas during the present emergency the great ma- 
jority of the motor vehicles of the United States Army 
used on the roadways in the Philippines are right-hand 
riven and the drivers thereof are accustomed to driving 
on the right side of the road ; and 

Whereas the present affords the most propitious oppor- 
tunity to effect this desired change; 

Now, therefore, by virtue of the powers vested in me 
by the Constitution and the laws of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines, particularly Commonwealth Act No. 
671, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines, do hereby order; 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


67 


1. That section 60 of the Revised Motor Vehicle Law, 
Act No. 3992, be amended, as it is hereby amended, to read 
as follows: 

“Sec. 60. Drive on right side of road. — Unless a different course 
of action is required in the interest of the safety and sMunty of 
life, person, or property, or because of unreasonable difficulty of 
operation in compliance herewith, every person operating a motor 
vehicle or guiding an animal drawn vehicle on a highway shall pass 
to the right when meeting persons or vehicles coming toward him, 
and to the left when overtaking persons or vehicles going the same 
direcSon and, when turning to the left in going from one highway 
into another, every vehicle shall be conducted to the right 
center of the intersection of the highway. . 

2 That all other sections’ or parts of the said Revised 
Motor Vehicle Law and amendments thereof shall be con- 
s^edks amended or modified as they are Mr 
or modified accordingly so as to conform f 

sions of the Executive Order; and all other provisions ot 
sions oi tne crA -nntrarv to the provisions of this 

law inconsistent with oi c . J 1 „i pf i as thev are 

Executive Order shall be cons.dered repealed as they 

hereby rep ealed. this tellth day of March, iu 

Done at the C 5 teen hundred and forty-five, and 

oftheCommomvealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

jose S. Reyes 

Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 35 

S™°A R LLY Ar™S Z A E Tm B N Y TO IM TH T E 0 EN-' 
MINISTER OATH IN REL ^ nTIPR0 FITEERING 
forcement OF ALL AJNii 

LAWS AND ORDERS. 

•a. in me by the Constitu- 

Pursuant to the ines , particularly Common- 

’".u " a T No °671 I Sergio Osmena, President of the 
-alth Act No. 671, > and aut h 0 rize to administer 

STjrgenTy CoXl Administrator and the officials 
‘1 ll Z led with the enforcement of anttprofiteenng 


68 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


laws and orders who may be so specifically authorized by 
the said Emergency Control Administrator. 

Done at the City of Manila, this tenth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 36 

REVIVING the regrouping of provinces for 
JUDICIAL PURPOSES AS PROVIDED IN ACT NO. 
4007 OF THE PHILIPPINE LEGISLATURE AND 
REPEALING COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 544 
WHICH CREATES POSITIONS OF DISTRICT AT- 
TORNEYS. 

Whereas it is the prime concern of the Government to 
reestablish the Courts as fast as provinces are liberated 
from the Japanese occupation; 

Whereas the grouping of the provinces for judicial pur- 
poses under Act No. 4007 of the Philippine Legislature, 
creating twenty-six (26) judicial districts, will better serve 
such purpose than the regrouping of the provinces into only 
nine (9) judicial districts under Commonwealth Act No. 
145, as amended by Commonwealth Acts Nos 348 545 and 
661; 

Whereas it is expected that the number of cases to be 
filed with the Courts at this time will not require the num- 
ber of judges as provided in Commonwealth Act No. 145, 
as amended by Commonwealth Acts Nos. 348, 545, and 661, 
and that the number of judges provided in Act No. 4007 
of the Philippine Legislature will be sufficient; 

Whereas the present conditions do not require and 
justify the maintenance of the positions of district at- 
torneys ; 

Now, therefore, by virtue of the powers vested in me 
by the Constitution and the laws of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines, particularly Commonwealth Act No. 671, 
I, Sergio Osmena, President of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, do hereby order: 

1. Sections 2 and 4 of Commonwealth Act No. 145, sec- 
tion 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 348, sections 1 and 2 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


69 


of Commonweal tli Act No. 545 and Commonwealth Acts 
Nos. 544 and 661 are hereby repealed. 

2. Sections 153, 154, 155, 156, 157 and 161 of the Re- 
vised Administrative Code, as amended by Act No. 4007 
of the Philippine Legislature, are hereby l’evived and shall 
have full force and effect from the date of this Order. 

3. All acts or parts of acts which are inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed. 

Done at the City of Manila, this tenth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President : 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 37 
ABOLISHING THE COURT OF APPEALS 

Whereas, during the present emergency, it is necessary 
in the interest of a more speedy administration of justice 
that the Court of Appeals be abolished in order that cases 
heretofore appealable thereto may be appealed directly to 
the Supreme Court; and 

Whereas the limited financial resources of the Com- 
monwealth Government demand that its expenses during 
the present emergency be reduced to the minimum; 

Now, therefore, I, Sergio Osmena, President of -the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the 
Constitution and the laws of the Commonwealth of the Phil- 
ippines, particularly Commonwealth Act No. 671, do here- 
by order: 

(1) That the Court of Appeals, created and established 
under Commonwealth Act No. 3, as amended, be abolished, 
as it is hereby abolished ; 

(2) That all cases which have heretofore been duly ap- 
pealed to the Court of Appeals shall be transmitted to the 
Supreme Court for final decision; 

(3) That from the date of this Order all cases which 
under the law are appealable to the Court of Appeals shall 
be appealed to the Supreme Court, which is hereby granted 
the jurisdiction to finally decide the same; and 


70 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


(4) All provisions of law in conflict with or contrary 
to this Order are hereby repealed. 

Done at the City of Manila, this tenth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 

President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 

Secretary to the President . 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 38 

AMENDING SECTION 1659 OF THE REVISED 
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE AS AMENDED BY 
SECTION 1 OF COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 543. 

Whereas, in the interest of a more simple and economical 
administration of justice, it is deemed advisable to reduce 
the number of officials of the Bureau of Justice as provided 
in section 1659 of the Revised Administrative Code as 
amended by section 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 543, I, 
Sergio Osmena, President of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the 
Constitution and the laws of the Philippines, particularly 
Commonwealth Act No. 671, do hereby order that section 
1659 of the Revised Administrative Code as amended by 
section 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 543 be amended, as 
it is hereby amended, so as to read as follows : 

“Sec. 1659. Chief Officials of the Bureau of Justice . — The Bureau 
of Justice shall have one Chief to be known as the Solicitor General 
whose salary shall be the same as that of a district judge of first 
instance. He shall be assisted by one Assistant Solicitor General 
whose salary shall be the same as that of a judge-at-large of first 
instance. When the Solicitor General is unable to perform his duties 
or in case of a vacancy in the office, the Assistant Solicitor General 
shall temporarily perform the functions of said office, or in his ab- 
sence, the Secretary of Justice may designate the acting chief of 
the office. There shall also be such number of solicitors as may from 
time to time be available under current appropriations and as the 
conditions of the service shall require. 

“The qualifications for appointment to the position of Solicitor 
General and Assistant Solicitor General shall be the same as those 
prescribed for Judges of Courts of First Instance, and those for 
the solicitors shall be the same as those prescribed for provincial 
fiscals.” 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


71 


April, 1945 


Done at the City of Manila, this tenth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 


Malacanan Palace 
Manila 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive Order No. 39 

APPROPRIATING THE SUM OF ONE MILLION PESOS 
FOR CIVILIAN DEFENSE 

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitu- 
tion and laws of the Philippines, I, Sergio Osmena, Pres- 
ident of the Philippines, do hereby order; 

1 That the sum of one million pesos be appropriated, 
as it is hereby appropriated, out of any fund in the Phil- 
ippine Treasury, not otherwise appropriated, to be ex- 
pended by the Emergency Control Administrator, subject 
to the approval of the President of the Philippines, to 
carry out the purposes of Executive Order No. 382, series 
of 1941, as amended by Executive Order No. 29, current 

series. _ , . , 

2 This Order shall take effect immediately. 

Done at the City of Manila, this tenth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

PROCLAMATION NO. 1-W 

PROCLAIMING A STATE OF MOURNING IN MEMORY 
OF THE DEATH OF HIS EXCELLENCY, MA- 
NUEL LUIS QUEZON, PRESIDENT OF THE 
PHILIPPINES. 


7.2 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Whereas His Excellency, Manuel Luis Quezon, Presi- 
dent of the Philippines, died in Saranac Lake in the State 
of New York, United States of America on the morning 
of Tuesday, August first, at five minutes after ten o’clock ; 
and 

Whereas His Excellency, Manuel Luis Quezon, was the 
first President of the Philippines, remaining in this posi- 
tion for nearly nine years with honor and distinction to 
himself, to his country, and to the Filipino people; and 
Whereas the death of Manuel Luis Quezon comes as a 
great sorrow and an irreparable loss to his family and 
friends and as a national bereavement to the Government 
and people of the Philippines; and 
Whereas it is of national importance, as a mark of 
respect to the memory of President Quezon, that a state 
of mourning be declared; 

Now, therefore, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the 
Constitution, do hereby proclaim and designate the period 
from the first of August to the first of September of this 
year a state of national mourning for all citizens of the 
Philippines everywhere; and do hereby direct 

That the national flag of the Philippines be displayed at 
half-mast on all public buildings of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines during this period. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and 
caused the seal of the Philippines to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
this first day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nine- 
teen hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines, the ninth. 

[seal] Sergio Osmena 

President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

Proclamation No. 2-W 

DECLARING AUGUST 19, 1944, A SPECIAL 
PUBLIC HOLIDAY 

Whereas President Quezon passed away on the first 
day of this month, at Saranac Lake, iNew York; and 
Whereas President Quezon had consecrated his life to 
the cause of our freedom; and 
Whereas August 19, 1944, will be the sixty-sixth an- 
niversary of the birth of Manuel L. Quezon, first President 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines; and 
Whereas it would be fitting and proper that a special 
public holiday be declared so that Filipinos everywhere 
may go to their churches to pray for our beloved leader 


April. 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


73 


and hold memorial services to honor his memory and extoll 
his character and public service; 

Now, therefore, in pursuance of the provisions of section 
thirty of the Revised Administrative Code, I, Sergio Os- 
mena, President of the Philippines, do hereby proclaim 
August nineteenth, nineteen hundred and forty-four, a 
special public holiday. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and 
caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines 
to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
this tenth day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nine- 
teen hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines, the ninth. , 

[ SEAL ] Sergio Osmena 

President of the Philippines 


Office of the President of the Philippines 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
PROCLAMATION No. 3-W 


DECLARING THE FIRST MONDAY OF SEPTEMBER 
NINETEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FOUR A 
SPECIAL PUBLIC HOLIDAY. 

Whereas the first Monday of September each year, 
being the day, by legal enactment, celebrated and known 
as Labor’s Holiday in the United States of America under 
Title 5, Article 87, United States Code, 1940, ed. ; and 
Whereas it is most appropriate that during this year 
said day be declared a special public holiday so that Fili- 
pinos everywhere may properly pay tribute to the magni- 
ficent record of the workingmen of America in this peoples’ 


CVl y mm, • 

Now, therefore, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the 
Philippines, in pursuance of the provisions of section thirty 
of the Revised Administrative Code, do hereby proclaim 
the first Monday of September, nineteen hundred forty- 
four, a special public holiday. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and 
caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines 


to be affixed. „ , 

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 

this first day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nine- 
teen hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines, the ninth. 

Sergio OsmeSa 
President of the Philippines 


[SEAL] 


74 ' 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Office of the President of the Philippines 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
Proclamation No. 4 

DESIGNATING THURSDAY, THE TWENTY-THIRD 
DAY OF NOVEMBER, 1944, AS A DAY OF NA- 
TIONAL THANKSGIVING. 

For the information of the people of the Philippines, I 
hereby publish the following proclamation of the President 
of the United States setting aside, in accordance with cus- 
tom, Thursday, November twenty-third, nineteen hundred 
and forty-four, as a day of general thanksgiving: 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED 
STATES OF AMERICA 

A PROCLAMATION 

“In this year of liberation, which has seen so many 
millions freed from tyrannical rule, it is fitting that we 
give thanks with special fervor to our Heavenly 
Father for the mercies we have received individually 
and as a nation and for the blessings he has restored, 
through the victories of our arms and those of our 
Allies, to His children, in other lands. 

“For the preservation of our way of life from the 
threat of destruction, for the unity of spirit which 
has kept our nation strong, for our abiding faith in 
freedom, and for the promise of an enduring peace, 
we should lift up our hearts in Thanksgiving. For the 
harvest that has sustained us and in its fullness, 
brought succor to other peoples, for the bounty of 
our soil, which has produced the sinews of war for 
the protection of our liberties, and for a multitude 
of private blessings, known only in our hearts, we 
should give united thanks to God. 

“To the end that we may bear more earnest witness 
to our gratitude to Almighty God, I suggest a nation- 
wide reading of the Holy Scriptures during the period 
from Thanksgiving Day to Christmas. Let every 
man of every creed go to his own version of the 
Scriptures for a renewed and strengthening contact 
with those eternal truths and majestic principles 
which have inspired such measure of true greatness 
as this nation has achieved. 

“Now, therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, President 
of the United States of America, in concert with the 
joint resolution of the Congress approved December 
26, 1941, do hereby proclaim Thursday, the twenty- 
third day of November, 1944, a day of national Thanks- 
giving. And I call upon the people of the United 
States to observe it by bending every effort to hasten 
the day of final victory and by offering to God our 
devout gratitude for His goodness to us and to our 
fellow men. 

“In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand 
and caused the seal of the United States of America 
to be affixed. 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


75 


'‘Done at the City of Washington this first day of 
November, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred 
and forty-four, and of the independence of the United 
States of America the one hundred and sixty-ninth. 

[seal] “Franklin D. Roosevelt 

“By the President: 

“Edward R. Stettinius, Jr. . 

“ Acting Secretary of State ” 

In line with the proclamation above quoted, I do hereby 
proclaim Thursday, the twenty-third of November, nine- 
teen hundred and forty-four, as a day of thanksgiving 
in the Philippines and enjoin the inhabitants of the nation 
to offer thanks to Almighty God on that day for the 
strength and fortitude with which He blessed the Filipino 
people during their darkest days and for the arrival of 
the forces of liberation on Philippine soil to free the coun- 
try. And I call on the people of the Philippines to observe 
the day by renewing their pledge to continue their unre- 
lenting fight against the forces of evil until victory is won 
so that His spirit of justice, righteousness and charity may 
again reign supreme for all men. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and 
caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to 
be affixed. 

Done at the seat of Government in the Field, this eighth 
day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hun- 
dred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, the ninth. 

[seal] Sergio Osmena 

President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Arturo B. Rotor 

Secretary to the President 


OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
Proclamation' No. 5 

DECLARING WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 1944 
A SPECIAL PUBLIC HOLIDAY 

Whereas the Commonwealth of the Philippines was 
proclaimed and inaugurated on November fifteen, nineteen 

hundred and thirty-five; and 

Whereas that event, constituting as it does an impor- 
tant landmark in the history of our struggle for freedom, 
has been declared a special public holiday in previous 

years ; 


76 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Now, THEREFORE, I, Sergio Osmena, President of the 
Philippines, pursuant to the provisions of section thirty 
of the Revised Administrative Code, do hereby declare 
Wednesday, November fifteenth, nineteen hundred and 
forty-four, as a special public holiday in commemoration 
of that historic event. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and 
caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines 
to be affixed. 

Done at the seat of Government in the Field, this thir- 
teenth day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen 
hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, the ninth. 

[seal] Sergio Osmena 

President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

Arturo B. Rotor 
Secretary to the President 


Office of the President of the Philippines 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
Proclamation No. 6 

DECLARING THAT THE CITY OF MANILA HAS 
BEEN FREED FROM ENEMY OCCUPATION AND 
CONTROL FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE DEBT 
MORATORIUM ESTABLISHED BY EXECUTIVE 
ORDER NO. 25 DATED NOVEMBER 18, 1944, AS 
AMENDED. 

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution 
and the laws of the Philippines, I, Sergio Osmena, Presi- 
dent of the Philippines, do hereby declare, for the pur- 
poses of the debt moratorium established by Executive 
Order No. 25, dated November 18, 1944, as amended by 
Executive Order No. 32, dated March 10, 1945, that the 
City of Manila has been freed from enemy occupation and 
control as of the date of this Proclamation, and that the 
debt moratorium will not apply to debts and monetary 
obligations contracted in said City after the date of this 
Proclamation. 

Done at the City of Manila, this tenth day of March, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, 
and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth. 

[seal] Sergio Osmena 

President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

. Jose S. Reyes 
Secretary to the President 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


77 


Office of the President of the Philippines 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 


Proclamation No. 7 

DECLARING THAT THE PROVINCE OF LEYTE HAS 
BEEN FREED FROM ENEMY OCCUPATION AND 
CONTROL FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE DEBT 
MORATORIUM ESTABLISHED BY EXECUTIVE 
ORDER NO. 25 DATED NOVEMBER 18. 1944, AS 
AMENDED. 


By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitu- 
tion and the laws of the Philippines, I, Seigio Osmena, 
President of the Philippines, do hereby declare, for the 
■purposes of the debt moratorium established by Executive 
Order No. 25, dated November 18, 1944, as amended by 
Executive Order No. 32, dated March 10, 1945, that the 
Province of Leyte has been freed from enemy occupation 
and control as of the date of this Proclamation, and that 
the debt moratorium will not apply to debts and monetary 
obligations contracted in that province after the a e o 

Proclamation. , , . . . 

Done at the City of Manila, this tenth day of March, m 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, 
and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, e en 


[SEAL] 


Sergio Osmena 
President of the Philippines 


By the President: 

Jose S. Reyes 

Secretary to the President 


78 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


DEPARTMENT AND BUREAU ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS 
AND REGULATIONS 


Commonwealth of the Philippines 
General Auditing Office 
Manila 

General Circular No. 1-V 

February 27, 1945 

SUBJECT: Closing of books, freezing of all accounts, 
opening of new books, and submission of in- 
ventories. 

To all Department Heads, Chiefs of Bureaus 
and Offices, and other officials account- 
able for Government funds and/or prop- 
erty , . 

Pursuant to the provisions of Executive 
Order No. 25, dated November 18, 1944 and 
the laws of the Commonwealth of the Phil- 
ippines, the following regulations are hereby 
promulgated : 

1. All books of accounts should be closed as of 
the date of the liberation of the city of Manila 
from enemy occupation and control. 

2. Departments, bureaus, offices, etc., will draw 
their respective final trial balances as of the date 
of liberation, submitting original copies thereof to- 
gether with the journal, vouchers and collection 
papers to the General Auditing Office, Manila, ac- 
companied with their comments on the assets and 
liabilities. 

3. The books of accounts as closed will be frozen 
until further advice. Said books and accounts shall 
become inactive, filed and preserved for reference 
and other purposes as may be required. 

4. An entirely new set of books and records such 
as cash books, journals, ledgers, records of collec- 
tions, etc., shall be set up to commence from the 
date of the reconstitution of each department, bu- 
reau, office, etc., under the Government of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines. 

5. As soon as practicable, an inventory of exist- 
ing properties, such as real property, equipment 
of all kinds, and supplies and materials shall be 
made and submitted to the General Auditing Of- 
fice, with an authenticated copy of the last inven- 
tory of property prior to December 31, 1941. 

6. Together with the above required papers a cer- 
tified copy of the corresponding trial balance of 
December 31, 1941, should be submitted. If that 
is not available, a certified copy of the last trial 
balance on hand prior to said date may be sub- 
mitted in lieu thereof. 

7. The existing accounting laws, rules and regu- 
lations pertaining to accounts and accounting sys- 
tem of the Commonwealth of the Philippines shall 
be strictly followed. Additional instructions re- 
garding accounts and accounting procedure will be 
issued from time to time by this Office in the form 
of circulars and memoranda as circumstances may 
demand. 

For the Auditor General : 

By: (Sgd.) Ismael Math ay 

Commissioner of the Bud (jet 


Commonwealth of the Philippines 
General Auditing Office 
Manila 

General Circular No. 2-V 

March 1, 191+5 

SUBJECT: Internal revenue documentary, postage, 
strip and other stamps and accountable forms 

To all Chiefs of Bureaus and Offices : 

Immediately after the books and accounts 
are put in order in accordance with General 
Circular No. 1-V of this Office, dated Feb- 
ruary 27, 1945, Chiefs of Bureaus and Of- 
fices are requested to make a physical in- 
ventory of internal revenue, documentary, 
postage, strip and other stamps and ac- 
countable forms on hand, if any, based on 
the latest report available. The inventory 
should show among others, whether the 
stamps and forms on hand have been printed 
during the (1) Commonwealth of the Phil- 
ippines; (2) the Philippine Executive Com- 
mission; or (3) the puppet Philippine Re- 
public. The original and one carbon copy 
of the inventory should be submitted to the 
Bureau Auditor concerned. 

On receipt of the inventory, the Bureau 
Auditor shall verify the same and if found 
correct, shall invoice it back to the proper 
bureau or office to be used in connection with 
the collection of tqxes, fees and other rev- 
enues. 

Pending receipt of the new stamps and 
forms for the use of the Commonwealth Gov- 
ernment, the stamps and forms on hand as 
invoiced back to the bureau or office con- 
cerned may be used in the meantime under 
the following conditions : 

l. If there are any of the old Commonwealth 
stamps and forms, they shall be used only after 
sui charging them on the face with the word Vic- 
tory with appropriate rubber stamp. In the ab- 
sence oi rubber stamp, the word “Victory” shall be 
written clearly in ink. The initial of the accounta- 
o °?p Ce £ concerne d shall appear in either case, 
r* , ^he stamps and forms on hand have been 
printed during the Philippine Executive Commission 
or the puppet Philippine Republic, the title head 
thereof shall be superimposed with the phrase 
“Commonwealth of the Philippines,” with rubber 
stamp or by writing the said phrase in ink over the 
title head. Across the face shall be stamped or 
written the word “Victory,” and duly initialed by 
the proper accountable officer, as in No. 1 above. 

When the new stamps and forms are re- 
ceived, the use of the old ones shall imme- 
diately be discontinued, and the unused stock 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


79 


of the latter reported to the bureau auditor 
for destruction pursuant to existing regu- 
lations. 

For the Auditor General: 

By: (Sgd.) Ismael Mathay 

Commissioner of the Budget 


Commonwealth of the Philippines 
General Auditing Office 
Manila 

General Circular No. 3-V 

March 23, 1945 

% 

SUBJECT: Destruction and prohibition of the use 
of internal revenue , documentary and postage 
stamps which are declared obsolete. 

To all Chiefs of Bureaus and Offices: 

The old internal revenue, documentary 
and postage stamps are declared obsolete and 
the use thereof is hereby prohibited. 


Until such time as the new stamps are re- 
ceived, all postage, internal revenue and 
documentary stamps, including internal rev- 
enue stamps heretofore used as documentary 
stamps, now in the hands of collecting and 
accountable officers of the Commonwealth 
Government shall immediately be invento- 
ried and reported to the Bureau Auditor 
concerned for destruction by burning. In 
lieu of such internal revenue and documen- 
tary stamps, official receipts evidencing pay- 
ment of the corresponding taxes or fees, 
shall be used. 

When the new stamps are received, the 
use of official receipts as indicated above 
shall be discontinued. 

Any provision of General Circular No. 
2-V in conflict herewith is hereby super- 
seded. 

For the Auditor General: 

By: (Sgd.) Ismael Mathay 

Commissioner of the Budget 


/ 


80 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


APPOINTMENTS AND DESIGNATIONS 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 


CABINET 

Hon. Tomas Confesor, appointed Secre- 
tary of the Interior, March 8, 1945. 

Hon. Jaime Hernandez, appointed Secre- 
tary of Finance. 

Hon. Delfin Jaranilla, appointed Secretary 
of Justice, March 8, 1945. 

Hon. Sotero Cabahug, appointed Secretary 
of Public Works and Communications, March 
8, 1945. 

Hon. Maximo M. Kalaw, appointed Secre- 
tary of Instruction and Information, March 
8, 1945. 

Hon. Tomas Cabili, appointed Secretary 
of National Defense, March 8, 1945. 

General Basilio J. Valdes, appointed Sec- 
retary of Health and Public Welfare, March 
8, 1945. 


OFFICE OF THE RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 
WASHINGTON, D. C. 

Brigadier-General Carlos P. Romulo, ap- 
pointed Philippine Resident Commissioner 
to the United States. 

EMERGENCY CONTROL ADMINISTRATION 

Secretary of the Interior Tomas Confesor, 
designated Emergency Control Administra- 
tor to enforce the provisions of Executive 
Order No. 382, March 2, 1945. 

OFFICE OF THE BUDGET COMMISSIONER 

Ismael Mathay, appointed Commissioner 
of the Budget, March 8, 1945. 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


81 



Here are the texts of Joint Resolutions Nos. 93 and 94, of the Congress 
of the United States, advancing the date for the granting of Philippine 
independence and creating a Filipino Rehabilitation Commission. 

(Public Law 380— 78th Congress) 

(Chapter 322 — 2d Session) 

(S. J. Res. 93) 

JOINT RESOLUTION 

DECLARING THE POLICY OF THE CONGRESS, WITH 
RESPECT TO THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE 
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, AND FOR OTHER PUR- 
POSES. 

Whereas, on December 7, 1941, while the people of the 
Philippine Islands were peacefully engaged in achieving 
for themselves their complete political independence in the 
manner mutually agreed upon by the Government of the 
United States and the people of the Philippine Islands, 
which independence was to become iully effective July 4, 
1946, the Japanese in a wholly unprovoked wantonly 

treacherous, and surprise attack on ® ^ 0 , . 

ippines and of the United States, did by military invasion 
interrupt these orderly and mutually agreeable processes 
for complete independence of the Philippines; and 

WHEREAS the American and Filipino troops made a va- 
liant and courageous defense to the aggression of the Jap- 
anese invader and were overwhelmed only by the surprise 
anese in a nd equ i pm ent of the enemy; and 

and superior numbeis anu ^ t , 

WHEREAS ^ £ 2 - 

^ofttTlmonwea" ,th 'o, the Philippines, and b. 
cause of these circumstances the Filipino people are denied 
the free use and employment of the processes and political 
institutions jointly established by the Government of the 
Un ed Sates anJ the Commonwealth of the Philippines 
for the transaction of private and public business and for 
the maintenance of liberty, law and order, and justice 

the Philippine Islands; and .... 

WHEREAS by this possession and invasion the Japanese 
have attempted to frustrate the free processes to inde- 
pendence in the Philippines hy substituting therefor then- 
own puppet government which was conceived m intrigue 
born in coercion, and reared primarily for the purpose of 
Japanese selfishness and aggrandizement and not to achieve 
the independence and freedom of the Filipino people ; and 



82 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Whereas the Government of the United States has 
solemnly guaranteed to the people of the Philippine Islands 
the right to be completely free and independent and to 
select by a free ballot, without any kind of inducement or 
coercion whatsoever, those who shall hold the elective offices 
in such government and exercise the power and authority 
thereof, which solemn guaranties have been temporarily 
made impossible of fulfillment due to the wantonly treach- 
erous and surprise attack on the free people of the 
Philippine Islands; and 

Whereas because of the valiant resistance by the Phil- 
ippine people, which is even now continuing while the 
invader occupies parts of the Philippines, and because of 
the long and unbroken record of loyalty of the Filipino 
people, both to the cause of complete independence for 
themselves and to the sovereignty of the United States 
while they have been under our flag, and because they have 
abundantly demonstrated their will to independence through 
the processes mutually agreed upon by the people of the 
Philippines and the Government of the United States, and 
their will to resist all outside invasion and encroachment, 
which seek to destroy or set aside their march to inde- 
pendence, and because they have abundantly proved their 
capacity to govern themselves in an enlightened, progressive 
and democratic manner; Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of 
the United States of America in Congress Assembled, That 
it is hereby declared to be the policy of the Congress that 
the United States shall drive the treacherous, invading 
Japanese from the Philippine Islands, restore as quickly 
as possible the orderly and free democratic processes of 
government to the Filipino people, and thereupon establish 
the complete independence of the Philippine Islands as a 
separate and self-governing nation. 

Sec. 2. After negotiation with the President of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines, or the President of the 
Filipino Republic, the President of the United States is 
hereby authorized by such means as he find appropriate 
to withhold or to acquire and to retain such bases, neces- 
sary appurtenances to such bases, and the rights incident 
thereto, in addition to any provided for by the Act of 
March 24, 1934, as he may deem necessary for the mutual 
protection of the Philippine Islands and of the United 
States. 

Sec. 3. In order speedily to effectuate the policy de- 
clared in section 1, the President of the United States is 
hereby authorized, after proclaiming that constitutional 
processes and normal functions of government have been 
restored in the Philippine Islands and after consultation 
with the President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


83 


to advance the date of the independence of the Philippine 
Islands by proclaiming their independence as a separate 
and self-governing nation prior to July 4, 1946. 

Sec. 4. Meanwhile the resources of the United States, 
both of men and materials, are pledged for continued use 
to redeem the Philippines from the invader and to speed 
the day of ultimate and complete independence for the 
people of the Philippine Islands. 

Approved June. 29. 1944. 


PUBLIC LAW 381 — 78th CONGRESS 
Chapter 323 — 2d Session 

(S. J. Res. 94) 

JOINT RESOLUTION 

TO AMEND SECTION 13 OF PHILIPPINE INDEPEND- 
FNCE ACT AS AMENDED, ESTABLISHING THE 
FILIPINO REHABILITATION COMMISSION. DE- 
FINING ITS POWERS AND DUTIES, AND OTHER 
PURPOSES. 

RESOLVED by the Senate and House of Representatives of 
,, TT .. i nf America in Congiess assembled, That 

^^13 of tte Acfof March 24, 1934, as amended, is 
hereby further amended by striking out the pro™, and 

inserting in lieu «^J 1 |^a 0 a 0 ~nfmiice of representa- 
There shall promptly ! ^ ^ ^ 

tives of the monwe alth of the Philippines, such 

ernment of t t of the Government of the United 

representatives United States Senators appointed 

States to consist of thr ee ^ Memberg Qf ^ 

by the Piesicen 0 appointed by the Speaker of 

rSouse, PhUippinS e to 

con^st^nine r^esentatwes be ap^tod^jr the Pres- 
ident of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, each ap 

pointee shall = e v a, 

as*the FUiptno Rehabilitation Commission, subject to the 
following conditions and with the follow, ng powers and 

"““a) The members of the Commission shall be appointed 
not later than fifteen days after the passage of «... Act. 
Within ten days thereafter the ranking member of the 
Senate appointees and the ranking member of the F.hpmo 
appointees shall jointly call a meeting of the Commission 
to be held in the Capitol of the United States for the 
purpose of organization. In cases of death or resignation 


M 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


of a member, such vacancy shall be filled by the original 
appointing power. 

( b ) The Commission shall investigate all matters af- 
fecting post-war economy, trade, finance, economic stability 
and rehabilitation of the Philippine Islands, including the 
matter of damages to public and private property and 
to persons occasioned by enemy attack and occupation. 

(c) To formulate recommendations based upon such in- 
vestigations and for future trade relations between the 
United States and the independent Philippine Republic 
when established and to consider the extension of the pre- 
sent or heretofore agreed upon trade relations or other- 
wise for a period of years to make adjustments for the 
period of occupancy by the Japanese in order to reestablish 
trade relations as provided for in the original Independence 
Act. 

( d ) The Commission is authorized to employ expert legal 
and clerical assistance, to establish offices in the Philip- 
pine Islands and in the United States, and to make rules 
and regulations for the transaction of its business perti- 
nent to the provisions of this Act. 

(e) The Commission shall make annual reports to the 
President of the United States and to the Congress, and 
to the President and the Congress of the Philippines, and 
more frequently if so desired, and make such recommenda- 
tions from time to time as it deems necessary to carry 
out the purposes and intents of this Act. 

(/) The Commission is authorized to fix the salary of 
all necessary expert and clerical assistance, to provide for 
travel and other expenses incident to its labor, and to do 
all other things pertinent to this Act. The annual com- 
pensation of the United States members of this Commis- 
sion, other than those holding official positions under the 
United States Government, shall be on a per diem basis at 
the rate of $10,000 per annum. The compensation of 
the Philippine members of the Commission shall be deter- 
mined by the Government of the Philippine Commonwealth. 
The United States, as herein provided, shall compensate 
the members of the Commission who represent it, and the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, or the Filipino Republic, 
as the case may be, shall compensate the members of the 
Commission appointed by it or them. Otherwise, the ex- 
penses of the Commission shall be equally borne by the 
United States and the Commonwealth of the Philippines 
or the Filipino Republic, as the case may be. 

Sec. 2. For the purpose of carrying on its duties, there 
is hereby authorized to be appropriated, out of any money 
in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, such sums 
as may be necessary. 

Approved June 29, 1944. 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


85 


Statement of President Franklin D. Roosevelt upon signing S. J. 
Resolutions Nos. 93 and 94, on June 29. 1944. 

I have signed today two Joint Resolutions of Congress 
respecting the Philippines. The first of these resolutions 
lays down a policy for the granting of independence and 
for the acquisition of bases adequate to provide for the 
mutual protection of the United States and the Philippine 
Islands. 

In that resolution it is declared to be the policy of the 
Congress “that the United States shall drive the treach- 
erous, invading Japanese from the Philippine Islands, re- 
store as quickly as possible the orderly, free democratic 
processes of government to the Filipino people and there- 
upon establish the complete independence of the Philippine 
Islands as a separate self-governing nation.” The measure 
makes it possible to proclaim independence as soon as 
practicable after constitutional processes and normal func- 
tions of government have been restored in the Philippines. 

It is contemplated that as soon as conditions warrant, 
civil government will be set up under constitutional of- 
ficers. It will be their duty forthwith to take emergency 
measures to alleviate the physical and economic hai-dships 
of the Philippine people, and to prepare the Commonwealth 
to receive and exercise the independence which we have 
promised them. The latter includes two tasks of great 
importance: Those who have collaborated with the enemy 
must be removed from authority and influence over the 
political and economic life of the country, and the democra- 
tic form of government guaranteed in the constitution of 
the Philippines must be restored for the benefit of the 
people of the Islands. 

On the problem of bases, the present Organic Act per- 
mitted acquisition only of naval bases and fueling stations, 
a situation wholly inadequate to meet the conditions of 
modern warfare. The measure approved today will per- 
mit the acquisition of air and land bases in addition to 
naval bases and fueling stations. I have been informed 
that this action is most welcome to Commonwealth author- 
ities, and that they will gladly cooperate in the establish- 
ment and maintenance of bases both as a restored Com- 
monwealth and as an independent nation. By this we 
shall have an outstanding example of cooperation designed 
to prevent a recurrence of armed aggression and to as- 
sure the peaceful use of a great ocean by those in pursuit 
of peaceful ends. 

The second Joint Resolution signed today brings into 
effect the Joint Economic Commission first organized in 
the present Organic Act, and enlarges its scope to include 
consideration of proposals for the economic and financial 
rehabilitation of the Philippines. 


86 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


We are ever mindful of the heroic role of the Philippines 
and their people in the present conflict. Theirs is the only 
substantial area and theirs the only substantial population 
under the American flag to suffer lengthy invasion by the 
enemy. History will attest the heroic resistance of the 
combined armies of the United States and the Philippines 
in Luzon, Cebu, Iloilo, and other islands of the archipelago. 
Our character as a nation will be judged for years to come 
by the human understanding and the physical efficiency 
with which we help in the immense task of rehabilitating 
the Philippines. The Resolution creates the Philippine Re- 
habilitation Commission whose functions shall be to study 
all aspects of the problem and after due investigation report 
its recommendations to the President of the United States 
and the Congress, and to the Pi*esident and the Congress 
of the Philippines. 

Franklin D. Roosevelt 


Speech delivered by General Douglas MacArthur upon turning over 
to President Sergio Osmeha the full powers and responsibilities of the 
Commonwealth Government under the Constitution at a ceremony 
held in the Reception Hall of Malacanan Palace on the morning of 
February 27, 1945. 

Mr. President: 

More than three years have elapsed — years of bitterness, 
struggle and sacrifice — since I withdrew our forces and in- 
stallations from this beautiful city that, open and unde- 
fended, its churches, monuments and cultural centers, 
might in accordance with the rules of warfare, be spared 
the violence of military ravage. The enemy would not 
have it so and much that I sought to preserve has been 
unnecessarily destroyed by his desperate action at bay but 
by these ashes he has wantonly fixed the future pattern of 
his doom. 

Then we were but a small force struggling to stem the 
advance of overwhelming hordes treacherously hurled 
against us, behind the mask of professed friendship and 
international good-will. That struggle was not in vain ! 
God has indeed blessed our arms! The girded and un- 
leashed power of America supported by our Allies turned 
the tide of battle in the Pacific and resulted in an unbroken 
series of crushing defeats upon the enemy culminating in 
the redemption of your soil and the liberation of your 
people. My country has kept the faith! 

These soldiers have come here as an army of free men, 
dedicated, with your people, to the cause of human liberty 
and committed to the task of destroying those evil forces 
that have sought to suppress it by brutality of the sword. 
An army of free men that has brought your people once 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


87 


again under democracy’s banner, to rededicate their 
churches, long desecrated, to the glory of God and public 
worship ; to reopen their schools to liberal education ; to 
till the soil and reap its harvest without fear of confisca- ' 
tion; to reestablish their industries that they may again 
enjoy the profit from the sw T eat of their own toil, and to 
restore the sanctity and happiness of their homes unafraid 
of violent intrusion. 

Thus to millions of your nov r liberated people comes the 
opportunity to pledge themselves — their hearts, their minds, 
and their hands — to the task of building a new and stronger 
nation — a nation consecrated in the blood nobly shed that 
this day might be — a nation dedicated to making imperish- 
able those sacred liberties for which we have fought and 
many have died. 

On behalf of my Government I now solemnly declare, 
Mr. President, the full powers and responsibilities under 
the Constitution restored to the Commonwealth w'hose seat 
is here reestablished as provided by law. 

Your country thus is again at liberty to pursue its des- 
tiny to an honored position in the family of free nations. 
Your capital city, cruelly punished though it be, has re- 
gained its rightful place — Citadel of Democracy in the 
East. 


President Osmena’s Reply: 

This is an historic event in an historic city. From the 
time our Malay ancestors founded it more than eight 
centuries ago, colonial powers have fought for its con- 
quest and domination. The Spaniards, the Dutch, the 
English, a Chinese pirate, our revolutionary fathers, have 
all vied with each other and shed blood for its possession; 
because its conquest has always meant the ultimate control 
of the entire Archipelago. But today’s event is different 
from any of the previous conquests and victoi ies. The 
present victory of American arms is not a victoi y foi 
power, control or domination, but a victory for freedom, 

democracy and independence. 

In sharing with you today the exultation over the 
triumph of American arms, let us bow our heads in re- 
verent memory of our sacred dead and the dead of our 
Allies, whose lives are the forfeit that these, our liberties, 
might be restored. We mourn the destruction of our once 
beautiful capital city of Manila and the murder ot thou- 
sands of innocent people by the Japanese vandals, but 
this latest dastardly act of a savage enemy which has 
aroused the conscience of an outraged world should steel 
us to the firm resolve to continue the fight with every ounce 


88 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


of our strength until he shall have been completely van- 
quished. 

To President Roosevelt who, in our grim days in Cor- 
regidor and Bataan, solemnly pledged to us in the name 
of the American people, the men and resources of the 
United States for our liberation, this day must be also a 
day of happiness over a pledge fulfilled. We shall be for- 
ever grateful to him and to the American people. 

To General MacArthur, this campaign has been a cru- 
sade. Friend and defender of our race, he never lost faith 
in the spiritual strength of our people. In this crusade, 
he is finishing the noble work begun by his illustrious 
fathei’, General Arthur MacArthur who, on August 13, 1898, 
successfully led another American Army to free Manila 
from a European power. General Douglas MacArthur will 
go down in history not only for his signal military successes 
but also for consistently following truly democratic methods 
in dealing with Philippine civil affairs in areas retaken 
from the enemy. Instead of taking advantage of military 
operations to maintain military government over territo- 
ries already recaptured, he has been faithful in his role 
as liberator in the truest American tradition. Thus, forty- 
eight hours after the occupation of Tacloban by the Amer- 
ican forces, he turned over the functions of government 
to our Commonwealth. And now, in this City of Manila, 
he is following the same procedure. 

To all the gallant members of the United States Forces, 
I bespeak the immeasurable indebtedness, the highest ad- 
miration, and the eternal gratitude of our people for their 
victorious accomplishments. They have come as brothers- 
in-arms enlisted in and dedicated to the sacred cause of 
restoring our liberties. 

The time has come when the world should know that 
when our forces surrendered in Bataan and Corregidor, 
resistance to the enemy was taken up by the people itself — 
resistance which was inarticulate and disorganized at its 
inception but which grew from day to day and from island 
to island, until it broke out into an open warfare against 
the enemy. 

The fight against the enemy was truly a people’s war 
because it counted with the wholehearted support of the 
masses. From the humble peasant to the barrio school 
teacher, from the volunteer guard to the women’s auxi- 
liary service units, from the loyal local official to the barrio 
folk each and every one of these contributed his share 
in the great crusade for liberation. 

The guerrillas knew that without the support of the 
civilian population, they could not survive. Whole towns 
and villages dared enemy reprisal to oppose the hated in- 


April. 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


89 


vader openly or give assistance to the underground move- 
ment. It is thus that the Filipino people drew the ire of the 
Japanese who has never followed the rules of civilized war- 
fare. And now his conduct towards the civilian population 
has become more cruel and brutal, embittered as he is by 
his failure to enlist the support of the people. For this 
reason, it is imperative that the war against him be pros- 
ecuted all over the country relentlessly and with dispatch 
in order that the people’s agony may not be prolonged and 
precious human life may be salvaged. 

As I take over the civil functions of the Commonwealth 
Government in our country, I cannot but pause in all hu- 
mility, for guidance and inspiration before the figures of 
Jose Rizal for his patriotism, Andres Bonifacio for his 
indomitable courage, Apolinario Mabini for his farsighted 
statesmanship, and Manuel L. Quezon for his devotion to 
the cause of independence. 

That no time may be lost in the complete restoration 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the Executive 
and Judicial branches will be reestablished with utmost 
vigor and dispatch and I now call upon all the duly elected 
members of our Congress who have remained steadfast in 
their allegiance to our Government during the period of 
enemy occupation, to be in readiness to meet in Manila as 
soon as conditions permit for the reestablishment of the 
Legislative branch. 

I am fully cognizant that problems of great national sig- 
nificance must be faced immediately. The i*eestablishment 
of law and order in areas already liberated, the reopening 
of schools, the reorganization of the government, both na- 
tional and local, are among the complicated problems that 
have arisen as a consequence of enemy occupation. Fore- 
most among these problems is that of relief and rehabili- 
tation, the urgency of which cannot be overemphasized. 

This war has not only caused untold misery and suffering 
to the individual; it has also brought about wanton de- 
struction, economic dislocation and financial bankruptcy to 
the nation at large. Farms and industiies have to be re- 
habilitated; banks and credit institutions have to be re- 
opened; roads and bridges have to be repaired; schools 
and hospitals have to be rebuilt; destroyed and damaged 
properties, both public and private, have either to be re- 
habilitated or indemnified. The legitimate claim of the 
common laborer and of the small farmer who has lost his 
only work animal and nipa hut must be given preferential 

attention. 

So that these manifold problems may be faced with 
promptness and energy, I shall enlist the assistance of all 
those possessing not only proven ability and loyalty but 


90 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


also the confidence and trust of the people. In Leyte, as 
a recognition of the guerrillas who so valiantly fought 
the Japanese, I appointed Col. Ruperto Kangleon as the 
Acting Governor of that province. Today I have the 
pleasure to announce that, as a tribute to the civilian ele- 
ments of our country who resisted the enemy with courage 
and fortitude, I have chosen Governor Tomas Confesor 
as the ranking member of my Cabinet, appointing him 
Secretary of the Interior, and in charge of the reorgani- 
zation of the City of Manila. 

Our independence is a settled question. Our five de- 
cades of consistent struggles, in peace and war, have come 
to a definite, successful end. Our government, when in 
exile, was considered as possessing the attributes of an 
independent nation. It is a member of the United Na- 
tions. We have President Roosevelt’s word that when 
normal conditions have returned, law and order reestab- 
lished, and democratic processes restored, our request for 
the advancement of the date of independence will be 
granted. I hope this can be accomplished on August 13, 
1945, the forty-seventh anniversary of the landing of the 
American forces in Manila. Thus Occupation Day will 
become Philippine Independence Day. 

The gravity of our new problems demands the collective 
effort of all the people. The government cannot undertake 
to solve them alone. It needs the support of the people — 
a united people. More than ever before, now that the 
rapid advance of our forces is widening its field of action, 
the government needs a united popular support to enable 
it to undertake successfully its tremendous tasks. Not by 
dissension and bickerings, not by resort to violence and 
lawlessness can we serve the national interest. It would 
be tragic indeed if at this last state of our crucial strug- 
gle for nationhood, we should fall apart and be divided 
against ourselves. We have had enough misfortunes and 
sufferings in this war; we cannot bear any more. To 
plunge ourselves into the abyss of disunion would be 
suicidal. 

As the head of your duly constituted government, I there- 
fore appeal to you, my people, to remain united. I urge 
you to forget petty political differences, to bury the hatreds 
and animosities engendered by the struggle, to obey the 
rule of law, justice and reason, and to remember that we 
all belong to one common country, our beloved Philippines. 
United we will continue assisting effectively in the suc- 
cessful prosecution of the war and in the rehabilitation 
of our country. United we can speedily achieve the full 
restoration of the constitutional processes of our govern- 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


91 


April, 1945 


ment, disrupted by the enemy. United and in close co- 
operation with the United States, we can win for ourselves 
and our children all the blessings of democracy, freedom 
and security for which we have sacrificed so much in this 
titanic struggle against the brutal forces of tyranny and 
oppression. 


Below are the texts of cables sent by President Osmena to Secretary 
of War Henry L. Stimson and the Hon. Herbert Lehman, Director 
General of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administra- 
tion, on the occasion of the reestablishment of the Commonwealth 
Government: 

Manila, February 28 , 1945 

Hon. Henry L. Stimson 
Secretary of War 
Washington, D. C. 

On the occasion of the restoration of the Commonwealth 
Government in the City of Manila, allow me to express 
our deepest gratitude to you whose contribution to this 
happy result is highly appreciated. Emerging from three 
long years of enslavement, the Filipino people find their 
number decimated, a large proportion of their homes and 
their property destroyed. Nevertheless, with unshaken 
spirit fortified by the sympathetic understanding of the 
American people they face with grim determination their 
immediate objectives: the vigorous prosecution of the 
struggle in which the United Nations are engaged until 
final victory is achieved and the rehabilitation of the 
country and the relief of millions of destitute and suf- 
fering people. 

Osmena 


Manila, February 28 , 1945 

Hon. Herbert Lehman 
Director General 

United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration 
Washington, D. C. 

On the reestablishment of the Government of the Phil- 
ippines within this ruined capital city we find ourselves 
face to face with problems of relief and rehabilitation of 
staggering proportions. Thousands and thousands of 
families are without shelter and in rags, millions are facing 
hunger and starvation. When the extent of our needs is 
definitely ascertained I shall communicate with you know- 
ing as I do your eagerness to give us a helping hand. 

Sergio OsmeSa 


92 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


Hereinbelow is published the text of the speech delivered by His 
Excellency Sergio Osmeiia, President of the Philippines, on the occasion 
of the induction into office of the members -of his new Cabinet on 
March 8, 1945: 

Today I have inducted into office the members of my 
new Cabinet. I wish to take advantage of this occasion 
when the heads of our various executive departments are 
installed in their posts, to summarize in rough outline the 
developments of the war during the last three years as 
they affected the functioning of our Commonwealth Gov- 
ernment and the carrying out of the independence pro- 
gram as agreed upon between the United States and the 
Philippines. I wish also to lay down the basic principles 
that will guide us as we reestablish the Commonwealth 
Government in our capital city. 

I would like my co-workers in the government to al- 
ways bear in mind two cardinal thoughts : First — That there 
should always be a close relationship between the people 
and their government, and to achieve this the government 
must take the people into its confidence. Second — That 
our government as it is today, is the product of Philippine- 
American collaboration and that every effort should be 
exerted to maintain and foster closer relationship between 
the two peoples. 

The Japanese occupation of the Philippines was not only 
a military invasion. It was also an ideological and cul- 
tural invasion. It was an attempt to foist on our people 
the invader’s totalitarian ideas, his spirit of conquest and 
exploitation, his theories of the superiority of the Yamato 
race, his way of life. 

The Filipinos soon found this out, and closing their ears 
to the alluring promises of the enemy, put up a brave and 
determined opposition. They continued the struggle even 
after organized military resistance, so gallantly maintained 
by American and Filipino soldiers, had to cease before the 
overwhelming numerical superiority of the enemy. 

Now that the veil of secrecy imposed by military ne- 
cessity surrounding the Philippines has been lifted, the out- 
side world has obtained glimpses of the brave and heroic 
deeds of our guerrillas, the intrepid exponents of popular 
resistance. All honor to these soldiers of liberty who 
brilliantly continued the fight of the heroes of Bataan. It 
would be an error, however, to believe that the struggle 
was limited to the sphere of action of the guerrilleros. 
The fountain springs were wider and deeper — they were 
in the very soul of the people itself. Coming from the 
ranks of the people, the guerrillas were in reality the 
people’s army. For this reason, the enemy, inherently 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


93 


despotic and cruel, laid violent hands on the people. But 
in spite of his repressive measures, resistance persisted 
all over the country — on the plains as in the mountains, 
in the population centers as in the remote barrios, in the 
northernmost islands, in the southernmost tip of the coun- 
try. It was the common will of the people ; it was the entire 
nation, resolved to oppose, at any cost, domination by the 
invader. 

Throughout three long years of misery and suffering, of 
persecution and sacrifices, the Filipino people remained 
faithful to their ideals. The military control by the enemy 


i-' — a Aiipuiu i ciiiaiiicu 

faithful to their ideals. The military control by the enemy 
in certain areas, especially near the coasts, did not for a 
moment break the absolute and complete moral resistance 
of the people through the length and breadth of the land. 

To represent this will of the people and to act on their 
behalf abroad, and especially in the United States, the 
highest officials of your constitutional government accepted 
the invitation of the President of the United States to 
evacuate Corregidor, transferring the seat of Government 
^ ls ^ 1 ^ ng ^ on > D. C. This step was authorized by an Act 
of the National Assembly. The Commonwealth officials 
lea lze t at so long as we maintained the nucleus of the 

S=rr al i h . GoVernment abroad > through its head, the 
nowers and by means of the emergency 

status under^nf lm + y the National Assembly, our legal 

if the enety .It" -T?” ^ ^ ^ 

ippine territorv it • d ,, t ? rily to occupy all of the Phil- 

cupation o^a territo'^L T" ‘"f mere military oc ' 
on the invading army con f er sovereign rights 

vasion, our Constitutional Cnv^V espi , te the Japanese in- 
from destruction, but continued* 1 ^ 61 ? W f- S ^ ° nly saved 

na s o r zzs % lnter_ 

States, your Government dnri^t ^ 6111 ° f the United 

' lh k f0ll0win ^ °Wective‘T th! “ 

the redemption of the Philinni f he American People in 
which had been assumed * SaCred ob % a tion 

2. To speed un tn™ y the United States; 
material and plans forYhJ^ 1 ^ 011 neces sary men 

3- To accelerate *5 

4. To obtain adequate gTaj'tees t* 1 '" 1 

our political independence; " the permanen ce of 

5. To work for our economic rphahiiifr,*; 

as the materiai foundation of our independentTtructare' 1 " 
All these objectives have been substantially achieved' 


94 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


The successful landing- of the liberating forces under the 
command of General MacArthur in Leyte, Mindoro, Lin- 
gayen, Zambales, Batangas, Bataan and Corregidor, fol- 
lowed by the complete occupation of the City of Manila, 
represents a partial but eloquent reply to our appeals to 
the United States for aid in our redemption. The might 
of America which has destroyed in a few weeks all the 
power built up by Japan in years will continue to be em- 
ployed until every vestige of the invasion has disappeared 
from our soil. 

We were on the road to independence in accordance with 
the program agreed upon between the United States and 
the Philippines when Japan treacherously attacked us, 
bent on taking away that freedom from us. The leaders 
of your government have taken the necessary steps in the 
United States so that the realization of this independence 
program would not be delayed in spite of the war. Not 
only is the speedy realization of this program already as- 
sured, but we have obtained a new and important conces- 
sion from the United States: the formal pledge that our 
independence will be guaranteed. 

Having been a member during the last twenty years of 
various Philippine missions sent to the United States, I 
may say that during our negotiations for independence 
with the leaders of the two principal parties in the United 
States, we had never before found any interest among them 
in the protection of our independence, once granted. The 
best that we heard from our sympathizers was that since 
we wanted to be independent, and since independence had 
been promised, it would be given to us ; but once given, our 
political connection with the United States would be de- 
finitely terminated. This aroused in the minds of many 
of us serious concern as to the future of our independent 
Philippines. Living in the Orient, surrounded by coun- 
tries with enormous populations, some of them possessing 
the spirit of aggression and conquest, never in the past 
had we discovered a completely satisfactory answer to the 
question frequently addressed to us as to how we could 
assure the inviolability of our territory against aggression 
from a first-class power. It will be recalled in this con- 
nection that after our revolutions of 1896 and 1898 , when 
our people succeeded in establishing a republican govern- 
ment in Malolos, the leading officials of that government 
opened negotiations with the United States for the inde- 
pendence of the Philippines under American protection. 
The proposal failed of acceptance. It will also be recalled 
that throughout the long period of our peaceful campaign 
for independence, all of our political parties always had 
in their platforms planks expressive of the desire of our 
people to obtain guarantees of our independence, after its 




April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


95 


concession by the sovereign power. In these platforms, 
especially in that of the Nationalist Party, the idea of the 
neutralization of the Philippines was repeatedly included. 

On December 28, 1941, President Roosevelt promised 
that our independence would be established and protected. 
This was the first time that a high American official came 
out with the promise of protection after independence. 
This promise which gave great encouragement to our 
soldiers in Bataan, then fighting side by side with the 
Americans, was an important factor in our decision to 
transfer the seat of government to the United States to 
continue there the campaign for independence which seemed 
to be on the verge of defeat in the Philippines despite the 
loyalty and heroism of our people. With our reverses on 
the battlefield, the next phase would have to be fousrht in 


aity <* 1AU rvitii uur reverses on 

the battlefield, the next phase would have to be fought in 
the field of diplomacy. If the leaders of the Common- 
wealth Government had committed the grave error of 
placing themselves within the power of the enemy not 
only would every semblance of constitutional government 
have disappeared, but such a step would have given rise 
in the United States to the belief that our people had re- 
nounced their long-desired independence, the real inde 
pendence pledged by America, and had resigned themselves 
to the status of a mere vassal of the Japanese Empire. 

I take great satisfaction in informing our people that 
the promise of independence 'with American protection 
made by President Roosevelt on December 28, 1941 which 
was reiterated by him on August 13, 1943, was given 
legislative sanction when Congress approved S. J. Res 
No. 93 and which became law on June 29, 1944. This 
Joint Resolution was introduced in the Congress of the 
United States at our request. We gave it our firm support 
w i e it was under consideration by both Houses of Con- 
fmrT Tn fmally a PProved without any party divi- 

Thus, the p’rotL?^ 6 ™ b ° th chambers was unanimous, 
which were initiated^ negotlati ons for our independence 
to the United States in l noo ^ P arliame ntary mission 
Manuel L. Quezon, at th»t +• Under the cha irmanship of 
were happity of the Senate, 

ernment of the Commonwealth wWw y ° f the Cov- 
ington, D. C., from May 13 1940 t n aacti oned i n Wash- 
independence whichWa'afS ^ ^ 

our history dreamed, and for the rlliTaF martyrs h> 

heroes of our revolutions gave their li,ff°” ,?* which the 
a reality but there is now nosi ive f ’ not 
blessings of liberty which 

shall be permanent and enduring. bnng 

Foreseeing the serious problems brought about h 
ravages of war and the imperative need for the rehabffi! 


96 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


tation and reconstruction of the country, your Common- 
wealth Government urged the passage of the necessary le- 
gislation by the Congress of the United States. Such le- 
gislation was approved on June 29, 1944, and under its 
provisions a Filipino Rehabilitation Commission has been 
created, composed of nine Americans and nine Filipinos. 
It is now sitting in Washington and is investigating all 
the war damages and other rehabilitation needs for proper 
action, and is formulating plans for our future economic 
relations with the United States. 

Among its most urgent tasks, which likewise is an in- 
escapable duty of the Commonwealth Government as a 
whole, is that of giving the utmost possible aid to the war 
victims in our country — the war veterans, especially those 
disabled or crippled ; to the widows and orphans who have 
lost their loved ones in this holocaust of war and misery; 
to the lonely fathers and mothers who have sacrificed their 
beloved sons on the altar of freedom and democracy; to 
the peasant family who had lost its work animals and seen 
its productive fields devastated by the enemy; to the ar- 
tisans and the factory workers who are now jobless and 
in want; to the homeless city dwellers, fire victims who 
now live in shambles and in crowded rooms unfit for 
human habitation; to the survivors of the wholesale mas- 
sacres in Manila and other places in the Philippines. 

In the realization of the ideal of independence guar- 
anteed by the United States, the roots of which may be 
traced back to the glorious days of the Philippine Revolu- 
tion, the attitude of the Filipinos in Bataan and through- 
out the whole country has been a vital factor. This is so 
because it has inaugurated a new era in Filipino-Amer- 
ican relationship. It has sealed forever the ties of friend- 
ship and understanding binding the two peoples. In the 
American people it has created a permanent interest in 
our welfare, our freedom, and our security. Into our 
people it has infused a new spirit of high responsibility 
and it has strengthened the friendship and goodwill to- 
wards the United States. To the other democracies of 
the world, this attitude has brought the conviction that the 
Filipino people has already come of age and as a result, 
these nations, anticipating the date of our independence, 
have treated the Philippines as an independent nation so 
that throughout our stay in Washington, D. C., our rep- 
resentatives met the representatives of these nations on 
a basis of complete equality. 

It is for this reason that in the first words I uttered 
upon my stepping on Philippine soil in Leyte in October, 
1944, I affirmed that we came not only to restore the func- 
tions of the Government of the Commonwealth which 
existed at the time of the Japanese attack on December 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


8, 1941, but to reestablish the Commonwealth Government 
in a more advanced and progressive form. With this ad- 
vanced status, we will enjoy new powers which we propose 
to exercise with care and with the welfare of our people 
as our sole guide. Obviously, this new situation imposes 
likewise wider responsibilities which we should shoulder 
without vacillation. 


At this moment when we reestablish our Government in 
the capital of the Philippines, it is fitting that we make 
known the ideals and principles which will guide our 
actions. 

We hereby reaffirm our faith in, and adherence to, the 
principles of freedom and democracy — a faith and an ad- 
herence born in the early days of our Malay history, nur- 
tured by four hundred years of Western contact, conse- 
crated by our revolutionary fathers, invigorated by the 
teachings of America, ratified in the constitutional pro- 
cesses of our Commonwealth, and now sanctified by the 
blood of the thousands of Filipino martyrs and heroes of 
the present war. 

We condemn the totalitarian ideology which the enemy 
has sought to impose on us under a government by self 
constituted or God-chosen rulers, and we hereby reaffirm 
our devotion to the principles of popular sovereignty of a 
government of the people, for the people, and by the people 
We believe in the superiority of a responsible demo' 
cracy, peaceful and law-abiding, loyal to it* i„ 0 « 4 . f 
and determined to fight for its way of life ovL 1 R ^ 

nerate fascism and totalitarianism with its reiiment^ 
devoid of wills of their own. regimented lives, 


We shall reestablish in our country a social and political 
system which is founded on mutual faith, honesty and 
confidence and not on suspicion, corruption and fear and 
in which government officials and employees are not the 
masters of the people but their servants, acting as nec- 
essary instrumentalities through which the public good and 
the individual welfare may be advanced and safeguarded. 

W e denounce the barbarous doctrine of collective re- 
sponsibility for individual acts under which thousands of 
lri nocent men and women have met their death. 

We stand for the individual liberties, guaranteed by our 
Constitution, for the right of every man and woman to 
e njoy life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. 

We reject the theory of the existence of chosen or su- 
perior races j we hold to the self-evident truth that no 
particular race has a monopoly on the capacity for progress 

and self-government. 

We believe in the universality of culture, and we shall 
seek the implements of progress in whatever source they 
may be found. 


60 1 


98 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


We reaffirm our faith in the principle of Philippine- 
American collaboration, its workability having been suc- 
cessfully tested both in peace and in war. This principle 
has been responsible for the unparalleled progress of our 
country during the last 46 years. It is a guarantee for 
the permanence of Christian civilization in the Orient. 

We reiterate our adherence to the Atlantic Charter 
signed by the United Nations of which we are a member; 
for in that document they expressed their desire to effect 
no territorial changes that do not accord with the freely 
expressed will of the people concerned, and “to respect the 
right of all people to choose the form of government under 
wh'ch they will live.” 

We believe in the efficacy of the principle of collective 
security as a guarantee of world peace and the best as- 
surance of the settlement of international disputes not by 
the arbitrament of arms but by the processes of peace and 
justice. The legislation providing for the use, after the 
independence of the Philippines, by the United States of 
naval and air bases here for the mutual protection of the 
Philippines and the United States is a concrete example 
of the. application of this principle. It is a mutual agree- 
ment designed not only for the protection of both nations 
but as a contribution to the peace of the Pacific region 
and the collective security of the nations of the world. 

We stand for a new world free from want and fear, 
provided with greater safeguards for lasting peace and 
offering ample opportunities for friendly negotiations and 
judicial adjudication of international disputes and the self- 
development of nations. We are ready to take part, in 
close association with the United States, in any interna- 
tional pact based on justice and directed toward the or- 
ganization and preservation of the peace of the world. 

On these principles we take our stand. 

By the miseries, the sufferings and the sacrifices under- 
gone by our people during their long night of captivity; 

By the smoke that even now rises from our ravaged cities, 
towns and villages; 

By the blood, Filipino as well as American, which was 
poured out so unstintedly at Bataan and on Corregidor; 
in the hills of Leyte, the mountains and plains of Luzon, 
and all over the Philippines; 

We call on the God of Nations to witness, for ourselves 
and for a people welded into one in the crucible of fire, 
this pledge to consecrate to the determined prosecution of 
this war until final victory is achieved, our lives, and 
that which our fathers have bequeathed to us and without 
which life would be meaningless — our sacred honor. 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


99 


Following is the speech delivered by Secretary Maximo M. Kalaw 
of the Department of Instruction and Information, inaugurating the 
Commonwealth Hour over Radio Manila, on March 15, 1945: 


I am very happy to inaugurate this Commonwealth Hour. 
During this hour, we shall present news and describe ac- 
tivities pertaining to the Commonwealth Government, and 
we shall give, besides, musical programs. 

Over the ruins of Manila, formerly the pride of the 
Orient, we have reestablished the Commonwealth Govern- 
ment, and in all the other ruined cities and villages in the 
Philippines, the various branches and political subdivisions 
of this government are being set up again. 

By the very fact that our cities and villages have been 
done to waste, by the very fact that innocent Filipino men, 
women and children have been massacred, by the very 
fact that our homes have been violated and destroyed, the 
enemy has simply shown his utter inability to subdue the 
spirit of resistance of our people. 

As President Osmefia established the Commonwealth 
Government and administered the oath of office to his 
newly formed Cabinet, he set down certain basic prin- 
ciples and ideals which I would call the new Philippine 
Ideology. They were enunciated by the undisputed leader 
of the Filipino people of today. 


President Sergio Osmena is, as you all know, not a new- 
comer in the political life of our country. During the 
early years of American Occupation, when our capacity for 
self-government was under a question mark and serious 
doubts existed as to whether we could produce leaders nf 
state, President Sergio Osmena was elected Sneaker nf +v, 
National Assembly. That was in 1907. As such Spelter 
Mr. Osmena was .mmediately recognised by the Wash,™ 
on admimstration as the leader of the Pili pln „ pa r t Tc "f 
tion in the government, next in rank only to the Governor' 
General. He retained that leadership until 1923 and th 
progressive legislation that was enacted at that time ^ 
well as his participation in the Administrative Council of 
the government as Vice-Chairman of the Council of State 
since 1916, are already indestructible monuments to his 
political career. From 1923 until last year, President Os- 
meha was the collaborator of President Quezon until the 
latter’s death. 

When the Filipino people elected the President of the 
Philippines in the general elections of 1941, they chose 
really two presidents: President Quezon for the first two 
years, and President Osmena for the succeeding two years • 
and it i s of reC ord that President Osmena received a 
greater number of votes than President Quezon Thm 
terms of office were extended by the Congress of the United 


100 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


States in order to give President Quezon a chance to serve 
longer during the American regime. During the Emer- 
gency, President Quezon died and so President Osmena 
succeeded him. President Osmena, therefore, holds his 
office on two legal bases — first, by virtue of the election 
of 1941 ; and, second, by virtue of the extension of his 
term of office by the Congress of the United States. It 
can be truly said therefore that when President Osmena 
assumed the presidency in 1944, he simply came into his 
own. As the undisputed leader of the people at this stage 
of our history, it would therefore be of interest to know 
the principles and ideals he has set down to guide him in 
his administration of the affairs of his people. 

I shall read to you the new twelve-point Philippine Ideol- 
ogy. This new ideology embraces four cardinal points 
which may be termed the principles of democracy, the prin- 
ciples of freedom, the principles of the new cultural orienta- 
tion of the Philippines, and the principles embraced in the 
Filipino-American collaboration. Here is the new Philip- 
pine Ideology: 

“We hereby reaffirm our faith in, and adherence to, the principles 
of freedom and democracy — a faith and an adherence born in the 
early days of our Malay history, nurtured by four hundred years of 
Western contact, consecrated by our revolutionary fathers, invi- 
gorated by the teachings of America, ratified in the constitutional 
processes of our Commonwealth, and now sanctified by the blood 
of the thousands of Filipino martyrs and heroes of the present war. 

“We condemn the totalitarian ideology which the enemy has sought 
to impose on us under a government by self-constituted or God- 
chosen rulers, and we hereby reaffirm our devotion to the principle 
of popular sovereignty, of a government of the people, for the people, 
and by the people. 

“We believe in the superiority of a responsible democracy, peace- 
ful and law-abiding, loyal to its institutions and determined to fight 
for its way of life over a degenerate fascism and totalitarianism 
with its regimented lives, devoid of wills of their own. 

“We shall reestablish in our country a social and political system 
which is founded on mutual faith, honesty and confidence and not 
on suspicion, corruption and fear. 

“We denounce the barbarous doctrine of collective responsibility 
for individual acts under which thousands of innocent men and 
women have met their death. 

“We stand for the individual liberties, guaranteed by our Consti- 
tution, for the right of every man and woman to enjoy life, liberty 
and the pursuit of happiness. 

“We reject the theory of the existence of chosen or superior races. 
We hold to the self-evident truth that no particular race has a 
monopoly on the capacity for progress and self-government. 

“We believe in the universality of culture, and we shall seek the 
implements of progress in whatever source they may be found. 

“We reaffirm our faith in the principle of Philippine-American 
collaboration, which has worked successfully both in peace and in 
war, which has been responsible for the unparalleled progress of our 
country and which is a guarantee for the permanence of Christian 
civilization in the Far East. 


April, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


101 


“We reiterate our adherence to the Atlantic Charter signed by the 
United Nations of which we are a member. 

“We believe in the efficacy of the principle of collective security 
as a guarantee of world peace and in the settlement of international 
disputes not by the arbitrament of arms but by the processes of 
peace and justice. 

“We stand for a new world free from want and fear, provided 
with greater safeguards for lasting peace and offering ample op- 
portunities for friendly negotiations and the . self-development of 
nations.” 

After stating this pledge, President Osmena concluded 
his address as follows : 

“On these principles we take our stand. 

“By the miseries, the sufferings and the sacrifices undergone by 
our people during their long night of captivity; 

“By the smoke that even now rises from our ravaged cities, 

towns and villages; 

“By the blood, Filipino as well as American, which was poured 
out so unstintedly at Bataan and on Corregidor; in the hills of ’Leyte, 
the mountains and plains of Luzon, and all over the Philippines; 

“We call on the God of Nations to witness, for ourselves and for 
a people welded into one in the crucible of fire, this pledge to con- 
secrate to the determined prosecution of this war until final victory 
is achieved, our lives, that which our fathers have bequeathed to us 
and without which life would be meaningless— our sacred honor.” 


Following is the speech delivered by President Osmena over the Voice 
of Freedom on November 23, 1944: 


Since my return to the Philippines a month ago it has 
been my good fortune to meet a number of guerrilla leaders. 
The world will long remember the epic stand of the guer- 
rillas After the fall of Bataan and Corregidor and the 
t-agic defeat of the Allied armies in Asia our people 
found themselves pitted against the might of Japan. 
Then the guerrilla movement came into being. It was the 
people seontinued fight against the invaders. The guer- 
rillas, almost without arms at the beginning, hungry and 
unclothed, gave battle to the enemy from every nook and 
corner of the land. For three seemingly interminable 
years and despite unbelievable hardships, they carried 
the torch of freedom, confident that America would not 
fail them and that MacArthur would fulfill his pledge to 


Our nation is justly proud of the guerrillas and the 
Philippine Government shall see to it that they are pro- 
perly rewarded. We have taken the initial step of in- 
corporating all guerrillas recognized by the Military 
Command into the Philippine Army, with United States 

Army pay. 

ib But in our praise of the guerrillas we should not be 
' forgetful of the loyal civilian population that was left 


102 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


behind to face the ire of the invader and support the 
guerrillas. It was not possible for all to evade the enemy : 
the fate of the immense majority was to bear the ma- 
nacles of enslavement. Unfortunately, this has given 
rise to different attitudes and actions in relation to the 
Japanese rule causing some misunderstandings among our 
people. This state of affairs has created one of the most 
serious problems with which our Government is con- 
fronted. 

We cannot close our eyes to the realities of the Jap- 
anese occupation. It is cruel and harsh. An arbitrary 
government has been imposed on the Filipino people by 
the sword and the initial misfortune of American and 
Filipino arms left the majority of eighteen million Fili- 
pinos no other recourse but to submit to a despotic regime 
if they were to survive. Not all public officials could take 
to the hills to carry on the heroic struggle. Some had 
to remain in their posts to maintain a semblance of gov- 
ernment, to protect the population from the oppressor to 
the extent possible by human ingenuity and to comfort 
the people in their misery. Had their services not been 
available, the Japanese would either have themselves gov- 
erned directly and completely or utilized unscrupulous Fi- 
lipino followers capable of any treason to their people. 
The result would have been calamitous and the injuries 
inflicted to our body politic beyond cure. 

The problem under consideration must be solved with 
justice and dignity. Every case should be examined im- 
partially and decided on its own merits. Persons holding 
public office during enemy occupation, for the most part, 
fall within three categories; those prompted by a desire 
to protect the people, those actuated by fear of enemy 
reprisals, and those motivated by disloyalty to our govern- 
ment and cause. The motives which caused the retention 
of the office and conduct while in office, rather than the 
sole fact of its occupation, will be the criteria upon which 
such persons will be judged. 

Those charged with giving aid and comfort to the enemy, 
whether office holders or private citizens, with being trai- 
tors and disloyal to the governments of the Philippines and 
of the United States will be dealt with in accordance with 
law. But for the common good and our national welfare, 
I appeal to all the citizens of the Philippines to support 
their government in meeting its responsibilities by lawful 
procedures. Persons in possession of information on acts 
of disloyalty to the Commonwealth Government or that of 
the United States should report it to the authorities. But 
under no circumstances should any person or group take 
the law into their hands. 


Apkil, 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


103 


Ours is a constitutional government, ours is a community 
educated in the norms of a Christian civilization. Due 
respect for the law, rigid adherence to those principles es- 
tablished in civilized countries, complete obedience to the 
decisions of the courts — all these involve forms of char- 
acter and high moral attributes that are the possession of 
enlightened countries like ours. On the threshold of oc- 
cupying a sovereign place in the concert of fiee nations, 
we must live up to our responsibilities. We must prove 
our ability to maintain domestic peace and our capacity to 
mete out justice. Precisely when the eyes of the civilized 
world are focused on our country, we cannot allow acts 
of personal revenge and misguided zeal to cast a reflection 
on our civilization and our ability to maintain an orderly 
government. Ours is a government by law: the splendor 
of its majesty must never be dimmed in our land. 

The dignity and courage of the Filipino people in the 
face of calamity have elicited the admiration of the world. 
With a long tradition of peace, the Filipino nevertheless 
* , war bravely. He died heroically when death was 

? fnrlpd of him by the exigencies of battle. Under the 
" *J Ihe TapInese he toiled to survive. But when 
thl forces of redemption were compelled to rain death on 
^ U destroy his property in order to dislodge the 

hls home and destroy ^ P ^ He ^ 

enemy, free dom is high and was ready to pay the 

the price labors on the wharfs of Tacloban, tills the 

cost. Tod ay t ne an d renders war service everywhere with- 
fields of Ley e ts w ith the enthusiasm of a human 

out hesita ion ° . free to shape his destiny, 
being who is haye come 0 f age. We must move for- 

As a peop e merciful and humane, closely 

ward, just an ^ same social aspirations to hap- . 

united, ^ nim ^ to£re ther as a political state by the wise 
piness, boun constitution and our laws. God help- 

S2T- -ive to this end. 


104 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


Vol. 41, No. 1 


LEGAL AND OFFICIAL NOTICES 


Commonwealth of the Philippines 
Department of Public Works and Communications 

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
Manila 

The Office of the Secretary of the Depart- 
ment of Public Works and Communications 
hereby announces that beginning March 19, 
1945, the Division of Motor Vehicles located 
at 328 Aviles Street (Malacanan Annex), 
will register motor vehicles for operation 
and issue drivers’ licenses under the Revised 
Motor Vehicle Law (Act 3992) as amended 
by Commonwealth Act Nos. 123 and 652 
with the following tariff: 

Private cars manufactured 
for less than 6 passengers 
Private cars manufactured 
for 6 to 8 passengers .... 

Private trucks and trailers 
with metallic tires 

Private trucks and trailers 
with solid and pneumatic 
tires 

Private trucks and trailers 
with pneumatic tires 

Private motorcycles 

Motor vehicle plates 

Driver’s license 


The fees for the registration of cars, 
trucks and motorcycles under hire classifica- 
tion shall be two times the fees prescribed 
for private motor vehicles and the registra- 
tion will be temporary subject to the ap- 
proval of the Public Service Commission. 

iNo refund shall be made for motor ve- 
hicles taken or forced out of service for any 
cause subsequent to the payment of registra- 
tion fees. 

Beginning April 1, 1945, unregistered 
motor vehicles found operating on any public 
highways and persons caught driving with- 
out a license will be subject to the penalties 
prescribed by laws. 

Privately owned cars of the Philippine 
Government must be registered but no fee 
will be collected. 

Motor vehicles of U. S. Army and Navy 
are exempt from this Order. Privately 
owned cars of U. S. Army and Navy per- 
sonnel will be registered only upon written 
approval for registration by the Provost 
Marshal General. No fee will be collected 
for this registration. 

Sotero B. Cabahug 
Secretary of Piiblic Works 

and Communications 


1*35.00 per annum 

60.00 P er annum 

r per 100 kg. 

12 oo 1 maximum 
gross weight 

rper 100 kg. 

] of maximum 

5.00 - gross weight 
r per 100 kg. 

4.00^ of maximum 
gross weight 

12.00 per annum 

1.00 each 

2.00 


April. 1945 


OFFICIAL GAZETTE 


105 




NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS 


Due to wartime conditions, the Official Gazette is going to be published only 
once a month beginning with this issue and until further notice. 

Rates of subscription and selling prices effective April 1, 1945, are as follows: 


One year - - P12.00 

Six months — - 6.50 

Three months - - 3.50 

One month - 120 

Current number * 1.20 

Back number - 1-50 


The editorial office of the Official Gazette is now temporarily established at 
the Centro Escolar University Building, third floor. The publishing office, which also 
attends to subscriptions, circulation and claims, is the Bureau of Printing at the Old 
Bilibid Prison Building, corner Azcarraga and Quezon Boulevard. 

Subscriptions are payable strictly in advance by certified check, official check, 
draft, post-office money order, or cash in Philippine or United States currency, and 
remitted to the Bureau of Printing by registered mail. 

No stamps of any kind will be accepted in payment for subscription or advertise- 
ment. 

Claims for missing numbers must be made immediately upon receipt of the fol- 
lowing number. 


