Sonijoential 



SHECK sheet 



FRCW: Col. D. E. Sttphtne, 

Th«at«r Postal Officer. 



TO: Major Phillip R. North 12 Nov 1944 
PRO, Adv. Ech., GHQ, 



1. Whil« to ny knowl«dg« tharc has b««n no annouac«mant of tha 
aUdTh^^PM?f I^^«rnational Postal Sarvict batwaan tha Unitad Statas 
Md tha Philippinas, it appaars such action will ba takan as soon as 
civilian sarvica has baan astablishad in tha Philippinas. 

sarvica is in oparAtion, tha Arny Postal Sar- 

3. Mail baaring Philippina postaga and avidanca of Unitad Statas 
Army Cansorship claaranca will ba accaptad by tha savaral APOs now 

transportad to tha Unitad Statas by 
tht most txptditious service available • ^ 

4. Major Lambart, attachad to Sixth Army Haadquartars, is in 

charga of cansorship activitias in Layta. ^ ^ 

. suggastad outgoing mail ba dapositad at APO 72. which 

AP0^7^2 Tacloban araa. Tha Postal Officar, 

APO 72, is baing funnishad a copy of this communication. ’ 

+« Isttars, originating in tha Unitad Statas, addrassad 

Osmana and othars, hav« baan forwardad to ma from tha 
?? covar, and I hava forwardad this mail 

^ dalivary to Prasidant Osmana 's haadquartars. Any mail 
subsaquantly racaivad will ba handlad in similar mannar. 

7. Panding tha racaipt of advica to tha contrary, it is baliavad 
assuma that ratas of postaga applicabla prior to tha tampor- 
ary suspansioa of sarvica with tha Philippinas will apply. ^ 

: — ^D.H.S. 



CON P ^I D E N T I 1. 




SOUTHWEST PACIFIC AREA 



.CONFIDENTIAL 



CHECK SHEET 



0 



(Do not remove from attached sheets) 



File No.! 



Subject : 



From: Col, D. H, Stephens, 

Theater Postal Officer 



To: Major Phillip R. North 
PRO, Adv. Ech., GHQ. 



Daio: 12 November 1944. 



1« ^fhile to my knowledge there has been no announcement of the resumption 
of International Post^ Service between the United States and the Philippines, it 
ePpears such action will be taken as soon as civilian service has been established 
in the Philippines, 

2. Until civilian service is in operation, the Army Postal Service v/ill 
assist in every way possible to restore mail service to Philippine civilians. 

3. r,lail bearing Philippine postage and evidence of United States Army Cen- 
sorship clearance will be accepted by the several APOs now operating in Leyte, and 
will be transported to the United States by the most expeditious service available. 

4. Major Lambert, attached to Sixth Army Headquarters, is in charge of cen- 
sorship activities in Leyte, 

5. It is suggested outgoing mail be deposited at APO 72, which is the per- 
manent APO sesTving the Tacloban area. The Postal Officer, APO 72, is being fur- 
nished a copy of this comnnmication, 

6. Several letters, originating in the United States, addressed to President 
Osracna and others, have been forwarded to me from the United States under personal 
cover, and I ha|re forwarded this mail to APO 72 for delivery to President Osmena's 
headquarters. Any mail subsequently received will be handled in similar manner. 

7. Pending the receipt of advice to the contrary, it is believed proper to 
assume that rates of postage applicable prior to the temporary suspension of 
service with the Philippines will apply. 



M 




1 - 











CONFIDENTIAL 




