REPORT 
to 

HIS EXCELLENCI, iMMUEL L. QUEZON 
PRESIDENT OF THE COIvCiONVJEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

on 

INDUSTRIAL EXPANSION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



Project Report No. 1 
May 15, 194-3 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL . i 

THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

Economic Status Prior to Present World War o U 

Change Resulting from War 4. 

Future Potential Position in the Far East 4 

Future Governmental Policy • . • « . o o 6 

INDUSTRIALIZATION PROGRAM 

General Scope of Development ,.•..<, o , 7 

Rehabilitation of the Philippines 8 

Shipbuilding, Repairs, and Steel Construction 9 

Ship Operations 11 

Air Transport and Airplane Manufacture 12 

Iron and Metallm-^gical Developments o . • • I3 

Oil and Refinery Development . • • • <> o , o « , I5 

Manufacture of Industrial Equipment 16 

Salvaging and Rehabilitation of Mining Equipment ...... 16 

Reconstruction of Facilities for the Oil Companies 17 

Other Allied Developments 17 

Processing of Raw Materials • 18 

General Aspects «•.. I9 

PHILIPPINE COPJ^ORATION FOR INDUSTRIAL EXPAJ^ISION 

Establishment of a Philippine Corporation .... 21 

Philippine Associates 22 

American Associates . 22 

Performance Ability of American Associates ......... 23 

Territorial Scope 23 

Diversified Activities 24 

Numerous Clients 25 

Unified and Comprehensive Service 25 

Ife stern Trend of Development 26 

Desired Scope of Activity 26 

Financing ♦ 28 

SUGGESTED PROCEDURE 

Letters of Expression and of Intent 29 

Special Studies 29 

APPENDIX 

Map of the Philippine Islands and the Fax East 31 



ANDRES SORIANO 



LETTER OF TRMSMITTAL 

May 15, 19A3 

His Excellency- 
Manuel L. Quezon, 

President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines 
Washington, D. C. 

My dear Kir. President: 

I beg leave to have the honor of submitting for your consid- 
eration this report on "Industrial Expansion of the Philippines." 

This report has been prepared, in collaboration with myself, 
by a group of outstanding American industrialists and businessmen. 
These American associates have agreed to join me in an endeavor calcu- 
lated to secure for the Philippines a large share of Japan's prepon- 
derant pre-77ar position as the leading carrier and manufacturer in the 
Far East. 

We propose, provided it will meet with Your Excellency's ap- 
proval, to form a Philippine corporation which v/e trust will be instru- 
mental in assisting Your Excellency's Government in bringing to the 
islands an increase and diversification of production, economic inde- 
pendence, and a richer life and wider opportunities of attractive em- 
ployment for the Filipino people. For this purpose, we submit for your 
consideration our desire for this Philippine corporation to establish 
and operate certain shipbuilding and industrial projects as mentioned 
in this report. 



-1- 



In respect to these proposed industries, I beg leave to stress 
e point thau the partners of my group contemplate in no way whatever 
the possible creation of a monopoly. On the very contrary, we are ful- 
ly prepared to reserve a participation in the projected shipbuilding 
and repair prograjn to other existing Philippine shipping interests, more 
particularly to the following: 

De La Rajna Steamship Co*, Inc., 
Madrigal y Cia, 
Fernandez Hermanos, 
Aboitiz - Naviera Filipina. 

P Also, I beg leave to be allov/ed to say I consider myself very 

fortunate in having succeeded in interesting my American partners in 

these projects* 

T We also will welcome the participation of the Philippine Na- 

tional Development Comparajy if such a step idll fit in with the post- 
war policy of Your Excellency's Government. We have agreed to earmark 
ten per cent of the capital for this purpose, and to keep it available 
for the National Development Company, in case that after liberation of 
the Philippines, Your Excellency vd.ll find that the commitments of the 
Government will permit the acquisition of an interest in our projects, 
up to the said ten per cent of the capital. Such a participation would 
have the added advantage of placing a Government representative on our 
boards of directors, and thereby assuring the closest cooperation ;vith 
the Government's industrialization policies. 

.. jjla^y I be allowed to state, as is indicated within this report, 

that I believe that once my group has shovm the way to post-war indus- 
trial developments in the Philippines, many other developments will 



-2- 



follow, either in new departures or in fair competition mth ourselves. 
This is a natural and healthy state of affairs for the gro.rth of our 
country - a growth which .vill benefit the nation as a whole as well as 
all of its nationals. 

I further beg leave to attach a personal letter addressed to 
Your Excellency, in wliich I have tried to express my sincorest appreci- 
ation for the honor and confidence which Your Excellency has almys 
shovjn me, particularly since appointing me to your War Cabinet, 

Ivlay I reiterate the assurance of my appreciation of vihatever 
consideration Your Excellency may see fit to give to this report, 

I beg to remain. Your Excellency, 



pectfully. 




-3- 



T/as con- 



THE PHILIPP INE ISLMDS 
ECONOMIC STATTT.cj m'.vr.^v ^RE SENT WORLD WAR . 

At the outbreak of the second vrorld war, the Far East 
fronted Tvdth a situation where all its countries, with one notable ex- 
ception, possessed only colonial economic systems producing principally 
raw materials which they exchanged for manufactured goods and services. 
The one noted exception was Japan, which in spite of its limited natur- 
al resoxarces had managed to build up a more rounded-off economy, to its 
own immense advantage, and much to the disadvantage of the United Na- 
tions. 

A large portion of Japan's industrial products and services 
filled a very real need in the other countries of the Far East. 

CHAlNlGE RESULTING EROM WAR . 

It is expected that the above situation v;ill not be maintained 
after the war. There is every reason to believe that Japan's industrial 
domination will be destroyed to some extent in the course of a United 
Nations' victory. A portion of Japan's industrial products and services 
which had heretofore filled the major requirements of the other neigh- 
boring comtries, will have to be provided for in the fixture in some 
other manner. A real need and demand v:ill exist after the war. 

T^TTTITRE POTEN T! AT. POSITION IN THE FAR EAST. 

At the conclusion of the present wai^ the Philippine Islands 
will have a splendid unparalleled opportunity for the molding and build- 
ing of their ovm future empire and of assuming a major position in the 



-A- 



Far East. 



The Philippines will be the only country in that pai^t of the 

world which will emer^p mi+ ^-p 4.u 

i«ige out of xhe present war \7ith a stable government 

based on popular support, provided, of course, that its existing econ- 
omic establishment is not destroyed wantonly by Japan. 

Furthermore, the Philippines is the only country in the Far 
East with an Americanized outlook and an occidental population. They 
have absorbed both Western and Eastern culture and traditions, and are 
in an excellent position to bring about better relations between the 
East and the West. They have the necessary human, as well as material 
resotorces for an industrial development. The Filipino people are ma- 
tured and 3Te capable of independent and reasonable self-government. 
Students of colonial history acknowledge that in this respect the 
Philippines are an exceptional country in Southeast Asia. Fortified 
y/ith the post-war Philippine-American relationship, the Philippines 
could serve as the bastion of law and order in the Far East as part of 
T/hatever international force may be established by the United Nations. 
The Philippines v/ill be looked upon with favor by the United States as 
a means of strengthening the forces of peace and order in the Far East. 

The necessary premises for a major industrial development 
are to be found largely in the Philippines. Its politic and economic 
uncertainty no longer exists. This uncertainty in the past had dis- 
couraged large capital from embarking on a project of sufficient indus- 
trial magniifcude. The time is now appropriate whereby the Philippine 
Government and strong business interests could bring about an important 
from a colonial to a modern industrial economy, which would be 



change 



-5- 



a pri33ie factor toimrd the PVi-^n^v,- 

Philxppxnes assuming a major post-war indus- 
trial position in the Par East. 

The void created by Japan's expected exit as the Far East's 
leading industrial power caniaot be filled by any European nation soon 
after the end of hostilities: they ^vill have their hands full with 
their ovai reconstruction problems. 

With the necessary spirit of enterprise, together with the 
far superior potentialities of the Philippines, as vjbU as the excep- 
tionally favorable trade conditions which are imminent for the Philip- 
pines in the Far East after the war, an industrialization program for 
the Islands will encounter no great obstacles. The Philippines should 
greatly supplant Japan in its role as the leading carrier and purveyor 
of manufactured goods in tlie Far East, 

FUTURE GQVERHIiiBHTAL POLICY 

Due to changing conditions iip to the present, the Philippine 
Government may not have settled upon a clearly defined program of indus- 
trialization. Hovfever, steps liave started toivard this end. The Tydings- 
I-IacDuffie Act provides for Philippine Independence on July 4, 1946, and 
also for a committee consisting of three members from each of the United 
States Senate, House of Representatives, and Administration, together 
with an equal number of Philippine representatives, whose task vdll be 
to study Philippine economic conditions and make recomendations regarding 
trade relations after independence. 



- 6 - 



Regardless of the recommendations of this committee, there 

appears no doubt as to +v,o r^^n-o.- -, 

T> as to the political status of the Philippines after 

the war in view of '^(^veu-r^ai -r^^ 

several pronouncements of President Roosevelt since 

December 28, 1941, pledging independence to the Philippines. In addi- 
tion, there are statements from President Roosevelt pledging support 
for Philippine reconstruction. 

The economic policy foUovred by the Comraomjealth Government 
of the Philippines dui'ing that part of the transition period elapsed 
since 1935 has been one of fostering the development of the islands' 
natural resources, shipping and industries through the superior effi- 
ciency of private enterprise, v/here such was forthcoming, and where not, 
then through government-controlled subsidiaries. 

In view of the ground work to-date, and the vast horizon now 
created for the Philippines as a consequence of the v/ar, and engendered 
by the political independence to the islands, then the continuance by 
the Government of the Philippine Republic of fostering the above policy 
toTirard a well planned program of industrialization should be helpful in 
making of the islands a new empire. 

TNPUSTRIALIZATION PROGRAM 

GEMERAL SCQ PT': DRVELOPMT. 

It is expected as a result of future meetings between repre- 
sentatives of both the American and Philippine Governments, that the 
past uncertainties regarding political status and future^dej;elaU 
vd.ll be removed. At the same time the American flag flying over 



-7- 



Philippine air and naval bases Kill be a pormnent guarantee against 
future asgression. Under such circumstances a full industrialization 
program can be wrked out with safety, bringing to the islands a diver- 
sification of production, economic independence, and a richer life and 
\vider opportunities of attractive employment for the Filipino people. 

Such a program for the Philippines vrould involve the local 
processing, refining and manvifacturlng of its many natural resources, 
including minerals, ores, oils and agricultural products; the local de- 
sign and construction of engineering projects; and the local mmufaoturo of 
equipment, particularly that required for manufacturing of the ravr ma- 
terials and natural resources into final products; the local constrxic- 
tion and repair of ships; the establishment of a Philippine merchant 
marine, and the operation of same, sufficient to carry the inter-island 
commerce as vrell as a portion of the export and iu^ort commerce. 

The soundness of this program is predicated upon the post-mr 
need and demand for finished products, upon the abundant supply of raw 
materials in the Far East, upon the wage differential in favor of the 
Philippines, and upon the strategic potential position that the Philip- 
pines can assume in post-war Far Eastern affairs. 

EEIiABILlTATIQH OF THE PH ILIPPINES 

Hot until the Philippines are liberated vdll it be possible 
to gauge the amount of indemnities, nor the extensiveness of reconstruction, 
to be granted by Congress to the Philippines, It would appear probable that 
of necessity reconstruction would be extensive, and furthermore that 



- 8 - 



certain craft in the "R^t- tp,= j. • 

i^ast m certain instances would be probable. 

The high labor cost producing countries, particularly the 

United States, v/ill he^ p+ ^ A-i ^ 

o, wxxx oe at a disadvantage in post-war ship construction, 

as compared v/ith the advantages of Philippine construction, regardless 
of the present reduction in cost of steel cargo vessels from pre-war of 
$205 per ton to the present of §172 per ton through mass production, 
efficiently utilizing sub-assembly and production-line methods. It is 
probable that ship construction as Vvell as repairs of Philippine regis- 
tered ships being done in the Philippines would have a cost advantage 
of from 60% to 1005^ over comparable T/ork in the higher cost producing 
countries — not allowing for subsidized competition. 

During the war Government policies, particularly those of 
Britain, have limited the cash earnings of ships. Consequently, in 
many cases, the replacement of obsolescent tonnage v/hich survives the 
war, and replacement of war losses will require financing. Furthermore, 
the American and British Governments have been made aware by industry 
in general of the effect of their war taxation system on the futm-e re- 
cuperative power of industrial enterprise. No industry is allowed to 
make secure provision for the future. As a result of competitive neces- 
sity, new ship construction will go to the lowest cost producers. This 
opens up a new vista for the Philippines. 

Commercial steel construction and heavy commercial machine 

^co-rnl business allies with shipyard construc- 
shop operations are successful busxnes. 

X- One complements the other, and results in 

tion and repair operations. One comp 

• ovnt and overhead costs. Particularly should 
a minimuin of idle equipment o.nd ov 

Philippines with the post-wax rehabilitation and the 
this be so in the Phi-LiPPi^^ 



-10- 



backlog of steel and equipment requirements of the Far East. 

This Philippine shipbuilding and allied activity (in lieu of 
Japanese shipbuilding) employed for the world trade and the Far East 
business shouid prove a great industry, particularly when linked with 
the chain of the industrial program of the Philippines. 

wSHIP OPERATIONS . 

The Republic of the Philippines v.-ill be in an enviable post- 
war position as regards operations of a Philippine merchant marine, par- 
ticularly if, as in accordance virith the policy of non-discrimination 
which underlies the Atlantic Charter, all nations are willing to main- 
tain and expand international trade in a market reasonably free from 
subsidized competition. 

This probable and logical increase of the Philippine merchant 
marine is in line with the trend of the times. Striking changes in size 
of the fleets under the different flags are expected in the post-war 

shipping position. 

The most practical method of enlarging the Philippine merchant 
marine is through private enterprise fostered by the Republic. Past ex- 
perience indicates that a government financed and operated fleet is an 
expensive luxury and is usually brought to an end by revolt of the tax- 
payer. F^thermore, such a fleet does not always secure the support of 
the exporters and importers of the nation concerned, as traders insist 
on using the best ship carrying power available, whatever might be its 

flag. 

Ship operations are essentially competitive. However, there 



-11- 



should be decided financial and national advantages to this division of 
the industrial program with the favorable operating regulations and also 
the favorable differential of operating costs, as they exist under the 
Philippine flag. It also furnish and constitute a necessary link 

of the industrial chain. A strong Philippine merchant marine will be 
beneficial to the industrialization of the Republic. 

AIR TRMSPORT MID AIRPLME MMIUFACTUilE . 

The transportation link is not complete, hov/ever, without the 
inclusion of modern air transport connecting the various islands of the 
Far East. In post-war time, much high-class traffic previously sea- 
borne v;ill be diverted to the air — v.'orldv.dde . 

Collaboration and coordination betv/een air and sea, with due 
regard to the interests of both forms of transport, vfill be preferable 
to out-and-out competition. The General Council of British Shipping 
ctu-rently indicates that the British shipping industry intends to en- 
ter the air commerce branch of transportation on a large scale, on a 
basis of free competition, and vidthout Government subsidy. It will seek 
to coordinate air transport with shipping services. 

Future plans of transportation after the war could best be 
formulated by giving cognizance to this modern harmonizing- of air and 
sea transport* 

•A practical ally, hoth v/ith the air transport and also with 
the shipbuilding division, would be the construction or assembly of air- 
planes. These might be licensed by American companies in connection 
with the joint united State s-Philippine air defense programs, and as 



-12- 



-ch, enjoy whatever eeono^. .enem= would result tto.efro™, es ,,ell 
- iaprovl^ .trengt.eui„« t.e RepuUiC. po.iUon in the aviation 



industry. 



Of advantage to the industrialization program v.mad be the 
development of the iron deposit in Snrigao on the Island of Mindanao, 
which deposit is held by the Philippine Govex-nment as a National Re- 



serve 



The development should be from iron ore to finished steel. 
If local high-grade coal should not prove available in the Philippines, 
then coking coal will have to be imported from Manchuria, India or Aus- 
tralia. viTiether the entire processing of iron ore to finished steel 
can be accomplished by use of imported coking coal, or whether pig iron 
should be produced hy means of the Krupp process for the production of 
metallic iron of a 94-^ plus Fe content ejnd coking coal only used in the 
steel manufact\aring proper would depend upon economic studies, and also 
upon the use of the Philippine merchant marine for coking coal trans- 
portation. 

In case the Krupp process, which involves appreciable elec- 
tric power, is fomd to be economical, the necessary cheap power can be 
generated from the Maria Cristina waterfall by a hydro-electric develop- 
ment at this site in LaJiao Province in Northwest Mindanao, ebout 130 
miles from Surigao. The power could transmitted this distance to 
Suxigao and the ore processed at the site. 

The island of Mindanao is relatively undeveloped so far. It 



-13- 



has tremendous potentialities - great Mineral resources, lumber, ex- 
cellent cattle land, outstanding pineapple plantations, etc. Surigao, 
as well as the entire island of Mindanao, have the advantage of lying 
outside of the typhoon belt. To supply the lack of indigenous labor, 
men could be imported from the nearby overcrowded Visayan islands. 

An industrial development, including cheap electric power, on 
Mindanao, therefore, would open up further important possibilities which 
would become apparent to the islands' business interests. 

The cost of the hydro-electric development at ilaria Cristina 
could probably be borne by the Philippine Government for the benefit of 
the island of fvlindanao as a v/hole. 

The development of local iron deposits, involving the neces- 
sary blast furnaces and rolling mills, wotild then open up further metal- 
lurgical possibilities. Importing of tin ore from the neighboring 
Netherlands Indies for Philippine refining and local tin plate industry 
•would offer opportunities. 

The refining of the copper concentrates, which up to the be- 
ginning of the war were exported principally to Japan, might in the fu- 
ture be done in the Philippines and advantage be taken of a new copper 
industry. 

Also further metallurgical possibilities vovld present them- 
selves in connection with local deposits of chromite, nickel, manganese, 
lead, silver, etc., as thought becomes concentrated on the industrial 
program. 

The potential supply of local coal, though low grade, might 



-14- 



fill a needed olece -in +y,^ ^ 

.-Lcice _n the enlarged industrial scheme of things. 

OIL MP RF;FTMEg j DEVELQPf.rFW T . 

A geological survey of the islands' oil deposits was made in 
194-0, which gives hope to possible oil developments on the island of 
Cebu. If drilling operations should prove successful, then this would 
yield the islands' first supply of local oil and would constitute a de- 
sirable part of the industrialization program. 

Industrial developments are dependent upon petroleum products. 
In Manila, gasoline sold pre-war for 32<p per gallon wholesale, 6U(^ per 
gallon retail; Diesel oil for 9<p per gallon wholesale. It would appear 
logical for an oil refinery to be constructed say somewhere in the vi- 
cinity of the proposed shipyards near Manila. This refinery could have 
the capacity of a predetermined percentage of Philippine domestic re- 
quirements, depending upon the yield of crude from Cebu. However, if 
crude from Cebu should prove in sufficient quantities, then the refin- 
ery could be increased in capacity to fill a higher percentage of do- 
mestic reqviirements, plus exporting a certain percentage of Far Eastern 
re quireme nt s . 

The transportation of the crude and also of the finished 
products could well be a function of the Philippine merchant marine. 

The by-products of the refinery, such as asphalt, could be a 
very helpful stimulant to a road building or improvement program, when 
one considers the favorable differential of price that would apply to 
this bjr-product as compared to the price of the present supply which is 
imoorted from Southern California, 



-15- 



ndpomt, the United States has changed from an 
exporting covmtrjr to an imn +• 

xraportmg comtrjr. Hence this change will malce 

an independent oil ria^n 

cievelopment in the Philippines particularly impera- 
tive . 

With the new post-Trar era of industrialization should develop 
a good demand for industrial equipment such as pumps, engines, motors, 
oil well equipment and supplies, refinery equipment and supplies, valves 
etc. It may prove practical and beneficial for certain of this equip- 
ment to be manufactured in the Philippines, under American licenses, by 
a manufacturing division located adjacent to the proposed shipyard and 
refinery. The y/ork could be done by specially trained Filipinos mder 
the supervision of experienced leadership and management, 

SALVAGING MP REMBILITATIOM OF MINING EQUIPiilENT . 

Extensive mining equipment of Anglo and American interests 
in Nev/ Gioinea, Suraatra, Malay States, etc., was partially destroyed or 
svmk to -prevent their capture and use by the Japanese. In particular, 
it is reported there are well over 150 large dredges in the tin mines 
that v/ere sunk in depths up to 80 feet of water. These will need re- 
floating and rehabilitating, and possibly some modernization. 

This operation would be attractive to the Philippine program. 
The field work might entail cofferdam construction preparatory to float- 
ation of the dredges. After floatation, the extensive mechanical recon- 
ditioning that would be necessary might logically done in the repair 
shops in^he Philippines. This would augment and be helpful to the 



-16- 



f 



islands^ industriel e.-n^ 

-uax expansion provided the development of the facili- 
ties had s^^ffieiently progressed so as to be available for service to 
the Far East by that time. 

RECOHST RU CTIOM OF PIT, r.m^.^j facILIT_TCR, 

Considerable demolition vms done to the facilities of the oil 
companies, particularly in the Netherlands East Indies, to prevent their 
becoming of use to the Japajaese. Oil wells were permanently cemented, 
refineries were dynamited, pipe lines and submarine loading facilities 
were destroyed. 

The design and reconstruction of these facilities for the oil 
companies would constitute a major specialized operation, appropriate 
phases of which might be correlated with the Philippine industrial pro- 
gram to mutual advantage. 

OTHER ALLIED DEVELOPMENTS . 

Concurrently with the development of the major divisions of 
such a f-undamental industrial program, there would originate many al- 
lied projects of an engineering construction nature, involving trans- 
portation, housing, power supply, water supply, cormnunication, etc. 
In addition, minor industries would spring up in the wake of the basic 
developments. 

This allied activity would help cement together the major di- 
visions, as veil as furnish excellent opportunities for the local busi- 
ness entrepreneurs. 



-17- 



PR0CESSIHG_0|^.AW MTERTA_T.R ' 

Only psoi-t of the raw materials are processed for local con- 
sumption or for p-5n-in-r+ 

export. However, as a result of modern science, cer- 
tain products in many cases could be processed even further with profit- 
able results, depending upon the requirements for the product. The pro- 
cessing of various industrial by-products which are at present throvm 
away would be practical, as well as of raw materials which are now be- 
ing exported vTithout any refining. This will cause an expansion of the 
finishing industry necessitating equipment, scientific leadership, and 
specially trained local skills. 

For example, the bagasse from, the sugar industry is still 
used as fuel, although tliis by-product is good raw ma.terial for the 
maniifacture of wall-boards, paper and rayon. The residues and molasses 
from this industry, for the most pai't exported, are only used to a lim- 
ited extent for alcohol, which in t^rrn could find an additional use as 
motor fuel, etc. This by-product also would be good material for the 
maniifacture of yeast and vitamins. In the rice mills, mountains of 
bran are burned; in the fibre factories some of the material is consid- 
ered worthless and is throvm away; in kapok cleaning a great quantity 
of kapok hearts remain unused; in the production of Manila rope from 
hemp, the ty-products could produce fabrics, and possibly further into 
plastics; the potential uses of cocoanut products in fibre production, 
oils, cattle feed, brushes, brooms, fabrics, has hardly been touched; 

etc. 

The additional processing as above offers a limited but prac- 
tical field for industrial expansion. However, the raw materials which 



-IS- 



are exported in natural form or but slightly processed, offer greater 

opportunities. Thi<:! wmo^ •;>, n ^ 

inxs wouxd include such products as hides, resins and 

gums, tanbarks, etc. Making hides into leather, leather into shoes, 
also for export, was growing steadily, and can undoubtedly be expanded. 
The extraction of tannin from barks could be considered: this produc- 
tion would become greater each year- under intelligent reforestation. 
The fut^u-e may probably see a further development of Philippine rubber 
tlirough a suitable factory process of preparation. For example, rubber 
technology may develop processes whereby latex, the liquid form of rub- 
ber, v/ill assume a greater role, and from this a new rubber teclinology 
might groT/ and hold its place against the inroads of synthetic rubber 
in the future. 

Great possibilities exist in the clearing of forests and the 
manufacture of vood products, including their by-products. In the field 
of turpentine and resin distilling, of synthetic plastics, artificial 
wool, shatterproof glass, new paint bases, and of vfood pulp, paper and 
synthetic silk, the natujral resources of the Philippine forests offer 
many opportunities, particularly when aided with practical reforesta- 
tion work over a score of years. 

GkNFUAL ASPECTS . 

The earnings from the above activities should yield profits 
for the entrepreneurs, but also as a consequence thereof it should 
be possible to build excellent highways, railroads, irrigation works, 
etc. and to make education, agricultural research, health services, etc., 
available. Not only is capital formed by these activities to further 



-19- 



expand the work of the entrepreneur, but also, investments would be made 
by and for the Philippine population. Here foundations are laid for 
further progress of prosperity. 

All of the secondary or allied industries are very important 
in that they provide business activity on the part of the population 
itself. This is essential and should be considered just as important 
as the establishment of the primary industries. Means to this end would 
include expansion of elementaiy education, increase of production and 
consequently of ttie purchasing povrer of the individual farmer, a raw ma- 
terial policy, absorption of Filipinos into secondary industries which 
could be operated by and for them, aiding such developments by lower 
poiver rates, by extensive instruction and where necessary by support 
through Governmental financial grants and commercial policy. 

The Philippine people are now mature and ready for a progrsim 
of intensive cooperation in their future building up of prosperitj'-. 
One of the means of reaching this vd.ll be industrial production organ- 
ized on a broad scale, including production and exportation of consimier 
goods. This will invite the finding of markets generally in the Far 

East and America* 

It would be desirable that American organizing and production 
methods be not transplanted to a Philippine society unless such society 
■would be prepared for them. The above secondary industries would be 
quite helpful in this respect and would open up opportunities for Fili- 
pino leadership, which is vei^ importantj this in turn vrould harmonize 
with the establishment of the primary industries. This combined activ- 
ity, not being artificially created, ^vould grow nationally in a sound 



-20- 



and strong manner, vdth balanced and cooperative relationships between 
them, and with balanced relations maintained betiveen local production 
and local consumption, and between export production and imports. Oie 
national groT^th would be sound in that it -would be under the guidance 
of directed economy and with the absence of commercial imperialism. 

PHILIPPIL^ CQia^ORATIOn FOR II^TDUS TRIAL EXPMSION 

SSXABLISHLm^T OF A PHILIPPBIE C0RPQ11&.TI0N. 

To be effective as a prime mover to the basic industrial ex- 
pansion and to be of assistance to the Philippine Government, it would 
be desirable that a Philippine corporation be established for that pur- 
pose. This corporation, and its aiffiliates, vjould endeavor to create 
some of the major nevf divisions of the program previously mentioned, to 
help engender other allied activities, to cooperate with and encourage 
•the local entrepreneurs in the development of local allied industries, 
to foster the accumulation of domestic capital and the training of 
Filipino management and skilled crafts. Through mutual consultation 
and cooperative action with the Government, such a corporation would 
be effective in the islands' development which should insure to the 
benefit of all, as well as to provide fair returns for the effort in- 
volved • 

It is planned that this Philippine corporation, and its affiliates, 
will be o-wned jointly by Philippine associates and American associates. 



- 21 - 



PHILIPPDIE ASSOCIATES, 

In order to assiire close coordination with the economic 
policies of the Philippine Government^ invitation will be extended 
to the Philippine National Development Company to participate in this 
new corporation, With this in mind it is intended to reserve up to ten 
per cent of the capital stock for this purpose^ provided such action 
should meet with the approval of the Philippine Government^ 

This corporation will be principally of Philippine origin 
and leadership. Its activities will be sponsored by Andres Soriano. 



lir. Soriano^ his accomplishments^ his sound business policy and ex- 
cellent ethics are T;ell known to the Philippine Government and need 
no further introduction in this report. 

B'ISRICAN ASSQGIATaS ^ 

In order to derive the advantage of iimerican industrial 
accomplishment^ and to adopt this knov/ledge and these principles 
for the benefit of the Philippine industrial program^ Andres So- 
riano plans the association of certain American businessmen with 

this program. 

The American associates will consist principally of 
W.A. Bechtel Co*;, San Francisco, Bechtel-McCone-Parsons Corporation, 
Los iingeles, and the Dawson interests, represented by Kenneth D. Daw- 
son, San Francisco. Additional specialized imierican interests may be 
invited to participate, dependnjig upon the projects' need for such 
specialized assistance, and subject to the unanimous approval of all 
concerned. 



-22- 



These Bechtel-McCone-Dawson intei^ests are proven and respon- 
sible leaders in American engineering, construction, industry, ship- 
building, and ship operations. They have financial strength, solidity 
of growth and accomplishments, initiative and resourcefulness of pur- 
pose, a,nd a broad be.se of international construction, industrial exper- 
ience and ship operations. They are particularly qualified to bring to 
their Philippine associates the knowledge, experience, technique and 
the many other advantages derived from the recent American industrial 
expansion, and to apply these for the benefits of the Philippine indus- 
trial program. 

PERFORI'AAMCE ABILITY OF AJvERICAIJ ASSOCIATES . 

For purposes of introduction of the American associates, it 
would be appropriate to present a summary of their performance — al- 
though W, A. Bechtel Co. probably already is knovra to some extent in 
the Philippines in that this company v^as constructing the Cavite Naval 
Base up to the invasion of the Japanese. 

Territorial Scope . 

The territorial scope and diversity of activity of the Ameri- 
can associates is extremely broad. Their field of actual construction 
projects extends over /aaska, the Canadian Northwest, United States, 
Mexico, The Canal Zone, Colombia, Venezuela, the Persian Gulf, the 
Philippines, as well as the Pacific Ocean islands of Hawaii, Johnston, 
Palmj^a, Samoa, Midway, Wake and Guam. Their field of steamship opera- 
tions is world-wide. 



-23- 



ihexr aiversified activities include actual l-arge-scale oper- 
ations in each and every one of the following individual items: 

^' ^:^^ering Projects; The construction of tunnels, power 

projects, brxdges, subways, highways, major pipe lines, ship- 
s' aj?as, harbors, jetties, locks, dry docks, naval air sta- 
txons, etc. 



2. Building: Construction: The construction of office buildings, 
power houses, pumping stations, terminals, cantonments, ware- 
houses, airplane modification center, etc. 

3- Industrial Construction : The construction of refineries, 
chemical plants, laboratories, steel mills, etc. 

Minin:^ Projects : The construction of complete mining pro- 
jects, including open pit mining, copper smelters, rod mills, 
concentrators , etc . 

5. Ships : The construction of ships, including "Liberty" cargo 
ships, "Victory" cargo ships, British cargo ships, tankers, 
tank landing ships, large tug boats and barges. 

6. Industrial Manufacture : The design, construction and owner- 
ship of plants for, and the industrial manufacture of: 

a. Equipment items, including marine steam engines, 
turbines, pumps, electrical equipment and motors, 
Diesel engines, valves, etc. 

b. Cement, and sand and gravel. 

c. Magnesium. 

d. Somastic protective coatings for pipe lines ~ and 
their application. 

. -1 M^rin-Pi nations: The modifications necessary to the 
SsSfia^rators.. Involving the complete output 
of Ford's Vfillow Run factory. 

r^=-i.m- Oonolete reports and engineering designs 
8. Kngi.neerxns "-f^^- j-efinerics, shipyards, power plants 

?L«°i;nd'=nd mi^ine), chemical plants, harhor developments, 

iug boats, industrial programs, etc. 
o ,;nieABm-SM^^SmiSS^' Appreciable cmership a«d 



-24- 



direction of all-io.q 

ment a^encv slltl L^^''"'^^^ enterprises, including eqxiip- 
. caa.es and sei^vice, insurance and underwriting. 

Si5?TS?Tr^^^^ Production of raw materials, 

. mcipally oil and gold in the Western United States. 

|i|jashiiL02e^^^ Operation of steamship lines and ter- 
mxnals on ^7orld routes. 

Numerous Clients . 

Naturally, such a broad activity creates many clients, many 
with whom the relationships have developed into a continuing and mutual- 
ly successfial status. These clients are too numerous to mention in de- 
tail, but consist principally of: 

1. Governmental bodies, particularly the United States Maritime 
Commission; the United States Navy, including the Bureau of 
Ships, and the Bureau of Yards and Docks; the United States 
Army, inclxxding the Engineers Department, Air Corps, Quar- 
termaster Corps and the Ordnance Department; the Defense 
Plant Coi-poration; the Bioreau of Reclamation; and the Public 
Roads Administi'ation. 

2. Public Vn'orlcs Department of various States, Districts, and 
major cities. 

3. Major v/e stern railroads. 

4.. Major oil and gas companies. 

5. Nvimerous public utilities. 

6. Various mining and powder companies. 

7. Numerous industrial companies. 
Unified and nomprehensive S ervice. 

The above represents broad diversified major endeavors of the 

^o+o^ The background of knowledge and experience repre- 
American associates. in« ^ & 

sented thereby enables the rendering of a unified and comprehensive ser- 

. -, o^„T>r>*^ This unification is important and would be 
vice from a single source. 

+ r. floourine the maximum of success in the empire 
most contributory to assuring 



"25- 



building of the Philinnin*:.., + 

axxippmes toward their new and vast horizon in the 

Far East. 

^^^^^^^ :te d_oOevej^2^ 

These American associates have been prime factors and often- 

tiines leaders in +>io ma^r^-^ j. 

^ m ^he ma;3or construction stages of American development 

over the last thirty years. The first era was railroad expansion, then 
came highways and bridges, then hydro-electric developments with their 
dams, tunnels, power houses, etc., correlated concurrently with reclama- 
tion projects, then a cross-country net woi-lc of major pipe lines, then 
the present tremendous national defense era — the trend of development 
ever westv/ard. 

The Bechtel-McCone-Dawson interests have constantly been 
abreast of developments, both territorially and v.dth the trend of the 
times. This is typified by their association with present uncompleted 
contracts of approximately one and eight-tenths billions of dollars 
worth of commitments — mostly shipbuilding and war work. This same 
group, in the same spirit of world development, is most anxious to as- 
sist their still further western associates in the new industrial era 
of the Philippines. 

DESIRED SCnPF; OF ACTIVITY . 

It would appear logical that by virtue of the financial 
strength and diversity of experience and ability of the Philippine and 
American associates, that this Philippine corporation could ^oest contri- 
bute to the islands' industrial development by establishing and engaging 
only in the major or primary industrial projects. This would in no way 



-26- 



create a commercial irnDGT-n^.Tn 

^ i^^-L xcij.ism or monopoly. As previously expressed 

in this report. fh(=i -haon.. 

y one oasic economic plans of the full program are such 

as to encctrage competition. The program is national, broad in scope, 
and the numerous opportunities available from allied developments, pro- 
diicing and processing of raw materials, etc. that will arise, as here- 
tofore mentioned, will invite the attention of many other local entre- 
preneurs* 

Therefore, this corporation's, and its affiliates* desired 
scope of activities for an initial program is as follows: 

1. Shipbuilding, Repairs and Steel Construction . 

a. Repair of general merchant marine vessels, 

b. Repair of United States naval vessels in Pacific 
bases, 

c. Maintenance and repair of the fleet that will oper- 
ate under the Philippine flag, 

d. Construction of new overseas vessels, 

e. Construction of vessels and tugs for coastwise 
trade , 

f. Steel construction in general, including bridges, 
buildings, dredges, derricks, barges, etc. 

g. Local repair and reconstruction of industrial ma- 
chinery, including oil refineries and mining 
dredges for the Netherlands Indies and Malaya, fa- 
cilities for the sugar and mining industries in the 
Philippines, general heavy equipment repair, etc. 

2. f^>nip O perations > 

Assisting in the establishment of a Philippine merchant ma- 
rine . 

3^ pia^and.^efi^^ 

a. Development of oil from local supply at Gebu, if 
available , 



-27- 



fin construction, and operation of an oil re- 

inery which would have the capacity of a predeter- 
mine a percentage of Philippine requirements of 
petroleum products, if and provided crude oil is 
xmported or Cebu produces only in nominal quanti- 
ties. However, if local drilling operations should 
provxde sufficient quantities of crude oil, then 
the refinery would be increased in capacity to fill 
a higher percentage of domestic reqtiirements, plus 
export of certain percentage of Far Eastern require- 
ments. 

^- Air Trans port nnd Airplane Manufacture . 

a. Participation in the existing Philippine Air Lines, 
Inc . 

b. Assembly or construction of airplanes licensed by 
American companies in connection with the joint 
United State s-Pb-ilippine air defense programs, or 
for private or cominercial uses. 

As the industrial program as a whole unfolds, it is very pos- 
sible that the owners of this corporation may desire to expand still 
further into additional fields, subject to the policies of the Philip- 
pine Government, such as the local manufacture of industrial equipment, 
iron ore and allied metallurgical developments, and reconstruction of 
facilities for the mining and oil companies in neighboring lands, ~ 
all provided, however, that such activities would accrue to the econom- 
ic, politic and social benefit of the enlarged industrial program for 
the Philippines. 

FINAHCING. 

Philippine and American capital is interested in undertaking 
these projects in cooperation with and subject to the policies of the 



Philippine Government. 



-28- 



SUGGESTED PBnr.TTT^TTpTT 

-Lt IS evident that negotiations cannot be finalized nor con- 
tracts COncludpn TiM+'TT +u 

unrxx T,h^ re conquest of the Philippines from the Japan- 
ese has been completed. The cessation of .;orld hostilities may well be 
a piecemeal process in time and space. There viill be urgent tasks of 
relief, of repatriation, of rehabilitation, and probably a period of 
commercial respiration before this industrial program can begin to work 
out normally. 

LETTERS OF EXPRE-SSION AMD OF INTENT . 

Hov^ever, as for the immediate future, it would be helpful and 
desirable if there could be discussions between the Philippine Govern- 
ment and the principals involved in the Philippine corporation, v/ith the 
hope and desire that the basic plans expressed herein, or improvements 
thereto, will harmonize v;ith the desires of the Philippine Government 
and also ^vill merit the full approval and endorsement of the Philippine 
Government. It wovld be the further hope and desire that such meetings 
might result in the issuance of "Letters of Expression rmd of Intent" 
by the President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to this corpo- 
ration, whereby fundamental policies regarding such developments would 
be determined so as to permit preliminary organizing and basic plannijig 

^ ov, « m-aetical basis with mutual understandings between the 
to proceed on a pi acx.ic-j,j- uj.p-uw. 

Government and the corporation. 

■qPF.r.TAT. STUDIES. 

The detailed plans and studies of the individual projects 



-29- 



would then proceed in mutimi ^ , 

in mutual consultation and cooperative action with 

the Government. The^p nio^r, . , 

ihese plans and studies would be completed as far as 

possible and submitted in report form for each project for Government 
approval and endorsement. Concurrently .ith these studies would pro- 
ceed arrangements relating to negotiations, tentative contracts, finan 
cing agreements, etc., so that upon cessation of hostilities the con- 
tracts could then be signed and the already prepared plans and well- 
thought-out procedures could immediately be put into execution with 
firm, predetermined intent. 



-){■ -;s- -X- -X- -){• 



Due to readjustments of world markets, of peoples and of 
other conditions that Td.ll be existing upon the ending of the v/ar, the 
early timing and speedy execution o.-^ this program immediately subse- 
quent to the war -STill prove very beneficial to a successful launching 
01, as v/ell as give considerable impetus to, this most inspiring in- 
dustrial program of the Philippines. 



-30- 



110" 



120° 



130" 



140" 



I60« 



20° 



INDIA / 



fl 20° 




40 



20" 



AUSTRAL lA 



PHIMPPINE ISLANDS 

AND THE 

THE FAR EAST 



150° 



