









_ 




*> .*■ - •*' '•y ^ - r _ 




REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION OF 1986 


Uptnrh 
of tljf 

Olonatitotional yin mini a at on 

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES 
VOLUME TWO 


Prepared by the Editorial/Publication Unit 
under the supervision of 

Hon. FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 

Secretary-General 




5 



-r 










0255 








REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION OF 1986 


THE OFFICERS 



CECILIA MUNOZ PALMA 

President 



AMBROSIO B. PADILLA 

Vice-President 



JOSE D. CALDERON 

Asst. Floor Leader 




AHMAD DOMOCAO ALONTO 

Ass?. Floor Leader 



FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 

Secretary-General 


ROBERTO M. SAN ANDRES 

Sergeant-at-A rms 





THE COMMISSIONERS 



teodoro c. bacani 



FLORANGEL ROSARIO BRAID 



EDMUNDO G. GARCIA 



JOSE B. LAUREL, JR. 



AHMAD DOMOCAO ALONTO 




FE LICITAS S. AQUINO 



PONCIANO L. BENNAGEN 



UNO 0. BROCKA 



ROBERTO R. CONCEPCION 




EULOGIO R. LERUM 



JOSE D. CALDERON 



HILARIO G. DAVIDE, JR. 



SERAFIN V.C. GUINGONA 




ADOLFO S. AZCUNA 



JOAQUIN G. BERNAS 



CRISPINO M. DE CASTRO 



VICENTE B. FOZ 



ALBERTO M.K. JAMIR 



CHRISTIAN S. MONSOD 














TEODULO C. NATIVIDAD 



AMBROSIO B. PADILLA 



FLORHNZ D. REGALADO 



RICARDO J. ROMULO 



LORENZO M. SUMULONG 



EFRAIN B. TRERAS 



CECILIA MUNOZ PALMA 



RUSTICO F. DE LOS REYES, JR. 



DECOROSO R. ROSALES 


, ' * .) 


JAIME S.L. TADEO 




MINDA LUZM. QUESADA 



CIRILO A. RIGOS 



FRANCISCO A. RODRIGO 



WILFRIDO V. VILLACORTA 



GREGORIO J.TiftSGSON 
















EDITORIAL STAFF 



PABLO P. LIWANAG 

Chief, Editorial/ Publication 

Editor in Chief 

HEIDI M. PASCUAL 

Supervising Editor 

Avelina M. Atanacio 
Lorna P. Manarang 

Editors 

Ma. Priscila 0. Palmiano 
Herminia N. Saet 

Josefina T. Tamayo 

Ligaya M. Cinco 
Teresita L. Cordial 
Remedios S. Esquivias 

Editorial Assistants 

Milagros M.G. Kagaoan 

Joseph Zeus A. Luna 

Ma. Lina Marciana C.T. Nario 

Angeles S. Hamtig 

Indexers 

Fe B. Evangelista Preciosa I. Perez 

Conchita A. Aquino 
Rhodora L. Pagayon 

Typists 

Yolanda A. Bacero Lydia Abad Malig 

Alfredo D. Recella 


Technical 

FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 

Secretary -General 


Table of Contemns 


Plenary Sessions 

Pages 

R.C.C. No. 34 (July 19, 1986) 1 

R.C.C. No. 35 (July 21, 1986) 37 

R.C.C. No. 36 (July 22, 1986) 77 

R.C.C. No. 37 (July 23, 1986) 121 

R.C.C. No. 38 (July 24, 1986) 173 

R.C.C. No. 39 (July 25, 1986) 221 

R.C.C. No. 40 (July 26, 1986) 261 

R.C.C. No. 41 (July 28, 1986) 311 

R.C.C. No. 42 (July 29, 1986) 377 

R.C.C. No. 43 (July 30, 1986) 429 

R.C.C. No. 44 (July 31, 1986) 487 

R.C.C. No. 45 (August 1,1986) 551 

R.C.C. No. 46 (August 2,1986) 599 

R.C.C. No. 47 (August 4, 1986) 633 

R.C.C. No. 48 (August 5,1986) 681 

R.C.C. No. 49 (August 6,1986) 723 

Appendices 

Suffrage: A Right for Everyone 

by Commissioner Gregorio J. Tingson 771 

Schemes on the Term of Office 772 

Why the Sandiganbayan and the Tanodbayan 
should not be abolished 

by Commissioner Gregorio J. Tingson 773 

Statement Re Proposed Resolution No. 198 775 

Proposed Provision on Impeachment 777 

Proposed Amendment to the Article on Social Justice 779 

Manifestation of Commissioner Guingona 781 

Proposed Resolution No. 517 (Substitute Resolution) 783 

Proposed Resolutions Approved on Third Reading 


786 









REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION OF 1986 

QUEZON CITY. METRO MANILA 

Itecorb of tl|c Constitutional Commission 

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES 


R.C.C. NO. 34 
Saturday, July 19, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:40 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Cirilo A. Rigos. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

REV. RIGOS. Let us pray: 

Most loving and righteous God, who knowest our 
deepest thoughts and divinest the purest longings of our 
hearts, look with mercy upon us. Save us from faithless- 
ness and pride. Remind us of our inadequacy and assure 
us of Thy sufficiency. 

As we gather for another day of work, may we find 
pleasure in the thought that we are investing unto 
eternity a portion of our labors and of ourselves. Help 
us, therefore, to bear the weight of our responsibilities 
and to discharge our duties with a sense of mission. 

May this be another day of fulfilling experiences, a 
glorious time of learning from one another, and a 
precious moment in the life of our nation. 

We pray in Jesus’ name. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar 

Present* 

Monsod . . . 

. . . Present 

Alonto 

Present* 

Natividad . . 

. . . Present* 

Aquino 

Present* 

Nieva 

. . . Present 

Azcuna 

Present* 

Nolledo . . . 

. . . Present 

Bacani 

Present* 

Ople 

. . . Present 

Bengzon 

Present* 

Padilla . . . . 

. . . Present 

Bennagen 

Present 

Quesada . . . 

. . . Present* 

Bernas 

Present 

Rama 

. . . Present 

Rosario Braid . . . 

Present 

Regalado . . . 

. . . Present 

Brocka 

Present* 

Reyes de los 

. . . Present 

Calderon 

Present 

Rigos 

. . . Present 

Castro de 

Present 

Rodrigo . . . 

Present 

Colayco 

Present 

Romulo . . . 

Present 

Concepcion . . . . 

Present 

Rosales . . . . 

, . . . Present 

Davide 

Present 

Suarez . . . 

. . . . Present 

Foz 

Present* 

Sumulong . 

. . . . Present 

Garcia 

Present* 

Tadeo .... 

. Present* 

Guingona 

Present 

Tan 

. . . . Present 

Jarnir 

Present 

Tingson . . 

Present 

T Qiirel . . . . 

. Absent 

Trenas . . . 

. . . . Present 

JL/dul vi •••••• 


Lerum 

. Present* 

Uka 

. . . . Present 

Maambong . . - 

. Present 



Commissioners 

Gascon, 

Sarmiento, 

Villacorta and 


Villegas are on official mission. 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 30 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 


* Appeared after the roll call 


2 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none: the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Just one minor correction on page 6. 
The paragraph starting on line 4 states: “Mr. Bernas, on 
behalf of the Committee, accepted the proposed dele- 
tion but rejected the text of the substitute amendment.” 
This should read: “. . . accepted the proposed deletion 
but ACCEPTED THE SUBSTITUTE TEXT FOR CON- 
SIDERATION IN ANOTHER ARTICLE.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; let the proper correction be 
made. 

There was a previous motion to approve the Journal 
of yesterday’s session. 


.*)? ere an .y objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 


proc^d"to 'the^ Reference^oHJ ushiess n ‘ m ° Ve tha ‘ ' 

The Secretary-General will reari tho d c 
Business. ad the Reference 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 


The Secretary-General read the following Common 
‘references ‘ he c °™P°ndir, 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from the honorable Commissioner Ponciano I 
Bennagen, transmitting a resolution for an autonomoi 
Cordillera region signed by 3,2 1 9 people. 

(Communication No. 236 - Constitutional Commissio 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from the Family Planning Organization of th 
Philippines, signed by Mr. Ramon A. Tagle Jr tran 
mitting two resolutions from the Maguindanao an 
North Cotabato Chapters requesting the inclusion of 
clear statement on the population program and 
provision making the members of the Supreme Cou 
elective. 


(Communication No. 237 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Enrique B. luting. Provincial Fiscal, 
Bohol, proposing the retirement of the justices of the 
Supreme Court and other collegiate courts upon reach- 
ing 70 years and other trial judges upon reaching 65 
years. 

(Communication No. 238 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Communication from the Katipunan ng Bagong Pilipino 
and the Samahan ng Kababaihang Manggagawang Pili- 
pino, proposing provisions on the equality of men and 
women and the retention of Philippine citizenship of a 
Filipino who marries an alien. 

(Communication No. 239 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from the Family Planning Organization of the 
Philippines, Zamboanga Provincial Chapter, signed by 
Dr. Pilar A. Avedillo, transmitting its Resolution No. 10, 
series of 1986, proposing provisions that shall strength- 
en the family as a basic social unit and a policy state- 
ment on population program. 

(Communication No. 240 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from the honorable Commissioner Minda Luz M. 
Quesada, transmitting the following papers: a) protests 
by different groups against the move to make religious 
instruction in public schools compulsory, and b) posi 
tion paper of the Citizen Assembly for Good Govern- 
ment, People’s Welfare, and Human Rights on t ie 
proposed Constitution. 

(Communication No. 241 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter of Mrs. Liceria H. Ona of the Catholic Women’s 
League, San Juan, Batangas, suggesting measures to 
improve health care delivery services. 

(Communication No 242 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from the National Council of Churches in the 
Philippines signed by Bishop La Verne D. Mercado, 
enclosing proposals on separation of church and state, 
human rights, foreign relations, education, rural issues 
and land reform, labor issues, women’s and children s 
rights, among others. 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


3 


(Communication No. 243 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Piux W. Amoguia of Baclayon, Bohol, 
submitting proposals to help achieve economic recovery. 

(Communication No. 244 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from the honorable Commissioner Ponciano L. 
Bennagen, transmitting a resolution for a regional 
autonomous government in the Cordillera, sponsored by 
the Cordillera People’s Alliance and signed by 4,905 
Igorots. 

(Communication No. 245 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from P/Lt. Policarpio F. Joson, Navotas Police 
Station, Metro Manila, proposing the adoption of 
general policies regarding the police organization. 

(Communication No. 246 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from the Philippine Federation for Environ- 
mental Concern signed by Mr. Delfin J. Ganapin, Jr., 
supporting Proposed Resolution No. 205 introduced by 
the Honorable Cirilo A. Rigos which seeks to incor- 
porate in the Declaration of Principles and State Policies 
provisions recognizing the right to a healthy environ- 
ment and providing for the preservation and protection 
of the country’s natural resources; and suggesting that 
similar provisions be incorporated in the Articles on the 
Bill of Rights, National Economy and Patrimony and 
General Provisions. 

(Communication No. 247 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Manuel C. Pore of the Confederation of 
Labor and Allied Social Services, suggesting some pro- 
visions on labor and social justice. 

(Communication No. 248 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1 986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from the honorable Commissioner Ambrosio B. 
Padilla, attaching a letter from Mr. Alejandro P. San 
Pedro regarding the Sabah issue. 

(Communication No. 249 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


Letter from Mr. Ahmad P. Musur of Data Street, Sta. 

Mesa Heights, Quezon City, recommending the federal 
form of government and the change of name of the 
Republic of the Philippines to the United Federal States 
of Luzviminda. 

(Communication No. 250 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Nicolas B. Montenegro of 126 F. Fule 
St., Barangay I, Alaminos, Laguna, suggesting that 
nationalism be taught from kindergarten to the college 
level. 

(Communication No. 251 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. P.S. Caguioa of Quirino, Bacnotan, La 
Union, expressing opposition to the abolition of the 
death penalty. 

(Communication No. 252 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Mr. Generoso B. Sangil of 2561 Molave St., 
United Paranaque Subdivision No. 1 , Paranaque, Metro 
Manila, proposing the presidential type of government, 
declaration of martial law by the legislature upon 
recommendation of the President, synchronization of 
elections, and the retention of U.S. military bases, 
among others. 

(Communication No. 253 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Florencio D. Montalbo of 39 Notre 
Dame, Cubao, Quezon City, expressing his objection to 
the proposal to adopt the postaudit system. 

(Communication No. 254 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from Mr. Alejandro de Jesus of 124 Valero St., 
Salcedo Village, Makati, Metro Manila, proposing a 
transitory provision providing for the review of a final 
decision of the Supreme Court during the martial law 
period when this is manifestly against the evidence and 
is contrary to law, upon a petition filed within one year 
from the ratification of the Constitution. 
(Communication No. 255 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 


4 


SATURDAY, |ULY 19, 1986 


Communication signed by Mr. Pablo R. Lopez of 1557 
Carissa, Dasmarinas Village, Makati, Metro Manila and 
453 others, proposing that the U.S. military bases issue 
be left to the government to negotiate. 

(Communication No. 256 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from the honorable Commissioner Ponciano L. 
Bennagen transmitting an Omnibus Resolution, entitled: 
“Resolution strongly endorsing to the Delegates to the 
Constitutional Commission of 1986 the inclusion of a 
special provision granting autonomy to the Bangsa Moro 
nation.” 

(Communication No. 257 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 486 
(Article on Bill of Rights) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. There was a reservation in yesterday’s 
session to include another amendment to the Article 
on the Bill of Rights. The reservation was made by 
Commissioner Maambong with the consent of the 
Committee Chairman or Vice-Chairman. Commissioner 
Bernas. 

In order to enable us to go into the printing of the 
Article on the Bill of Rights for Third Reading, we 
would like to have this amendment put out of the way 
now. 

TFIE PRESIDENT. So, I would like to ask the honor- 
able members of the Committee on the Bill of Rights to 
please come forward and join Commissioner Bernas. 


PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


m;! R ' J5 AMA - 1 would like to call on the Steering Corr 
ittee Chairman, Commissioner Bengzon. 

Cornrmtt^^^^^^^’ Chairman of the Steerin 
Committee is recognized. 

ha^wo announf G °° d m ° rnin 8’ Mada ™ President, 
nave two announcements to make. 

May I call the attention of thp Cn 

the Committee on Accountability orS^Off 3 

filed an amended Committee Report No 17 a 

notice that much earlier there were two 
reports - Committee Report No 16 T n d p° mm,ttei 
Report No. 17 - filed by the Committee 
bility of Public Officers. Yesterday they conS° ^ * 
these two reports and they have come up now wiJh a' 
amended report on Committee Report No n 3 

we consider the report of the Committee’ on Account 
b.hty of Public Officers, the amended Commute 
Report No. 17 will be used as the basis. We hTe th 
amended committee report now on the Members’ desk' 

has^ 0 ^ d ° eS n0t h3Ve jt yCt ’ 1 think the Secre taric 

Secondly, we are going to take up today the rep OI 
Tf >h c™ incentive. Madam Preside, 

it tile Commission finishes the rennrt o,-, q..pp 
S econd Reading this morning, the Floor I , 1 r3 ®? ? 

Steering Committee will suggest that the h*?’ th 
until Monday, when we tfke u^the report ^1°^ 
Committee on the Legislative. P * th 

Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In line with that reservation made 
last night and in consultation with the other propo- 
nents, Commissioners Ople, de los Reyes and Natividad, 
we have come up with this provision which we seek to 
be included as the second paragraph of Section 22. I 
would like to state that the concept of this provision 
was already conceded as acceptable in principle. What 
we are trying to do now is to put it in the proper 
formulation in order to implement that principle. 

I will now read the amendment by addition to the 
second paragraph of Section 22 of the Bill of Rights. 
It reads: THE EMPLOYMENT OF CORPORAL 

OR PSYCHOLOGICAL PUNISHMENT AGAINST 
PRISONERS OR PRE-TRIAL DETAINEES, OR THE 
USE OF SUBSTANDARD OR OUTMODED PENAL 
ACTIVITIES CHARACTERIZED BY DEGRADING 
SURROUNDINGS, UNSANITARY OR SUBHUMAN 
CONDITIONS SHOULD BE DEALT WITH IN AC- 
CORDANCE WITH LAW. 

I move for the approval of this amendment by 
addition. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Was the Committee furnished a 
copy of the Commissioner’s amendment? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR MONSOD. Madam President, may we ask for a 
copy of the proposal? 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. the Floor Leader is recog. 
nized. e 


THE PRESIDENT. Copies of this proposed amend- 
ment are being made. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized- 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


5 


NOMINAL VOTING ON C.R. NO. 18 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on the Judiciary) 

MR. RAMA. While we are waiting for those copies. 

I move that we take up on Third Reading the Article on 
the J udiciary. 

I HE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed to take up on Third Reading the Article on the 
Judiciary? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I just make a 
reservation with regard to the Article on the Judiciary. 
There are some style corrections that we have to make. 
For example, Integrated Bar is in capital letters, when 
we meant that to be in small letters because we do not 
want to institutionalize the Integrated Bar of the 
Philippines. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, it will just be a matter of 
style, there is nothing of substance. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, there will be some changes as a 
matter of style. 

THE PRESIDENT. With that reservation, is there any 
objection that we proceed to the Article on the Judi- 
ciary on Third Reading? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Committee Report No. 18 were 
distributed on July 16, 1986 pursuant to Section 27, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission 
of 1 986. 

Voting on the proposed resolution on Third Reading 
is, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read the title of the pro- 
posed resolution. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Committee Report 
No. 18, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION AN ARTICLE ON THE JUDICIARY. 

FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on this 
proposed resolution, and the Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


Colayco 

... Yes 

Lerum 

. ... Yes 

Concepcion . . . . 

... Yes 

Maambong . . . 

. . . . Yes 

Davide 

... Yes 

Monsod 

. . . . Yes 

Foz 

Yes 

Natividad .... 


Garcia 

... Yes 

N ieva 

. . . . Yes 

Gascon 


Nolledo 

. . . . Yes 

Guingona 

. . . . Yes 

Ople 

. . . . Yes 

Jamir 

Yes 

Padilla 



Laurel 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I will just make a 
statement. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

COMMISSIONER PADILLA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. PADILLA. As a member of the Committee on 
the Judiciary, I vote in favor of the approved version, 
but I wish to state that I regret that paragraph 3, 
Section 12 of the committee report on the Article 
on the Judiciary — on the right of appeal by the State 
or the offended party from a judgment of acquittal 
by a petition for review on certiorari based on the 
ground that the judgment is manifestly against the 
evidence and with a great abuse of discretion amounting 
to lack or excess of jurisdiction — was finally deleted 
from the approved version. 

The principal objection to the above paragraph was 
that it might violate the principle against double jeo- 
pardy. Thereafter, it was admitted that it does not 
violate the inhibition against the principle of double 
jeopardy, but it was subsequently claimed to be 
unnecessary or even harmful. 

I notice that last night Commissioner de los Reyes 
was among the first to object to my proposed pro- 
vision, but he is now very much concerned with the 
rights of the offended party or the victim of the crime. 
As I had previously explained, said provision was to 
allow the State and/or the offended party the right of 
appeal under the restricted conditions contained there- 
in. I regret that this was not approved because it would 
have clarified the very wrong impression prevailing even 
among top lawyers in this country who are practicing 
law that a judgment of acquittal, under all circum- 
stances, is final, executory and not appealable. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar 
Alonto . 
Aquino . 
Azcuna . 
Bacani . 
Bengzon 



Bennagen 

. . . Yes 

Quesada 

. Yes 

Reyes de los . 

. . . Yes 


Bernas 

. . . Yes 

Rama 

. Yes 

Rigos 

. . Yes 

Yes 

Rosario Braid . . . 

. . . Yes 

Regalado 

. Yes 

Rodrigo .... 



Brocka 

. . . Yes 




vote, Madam 

Yes 

Calderon 

. . . Yes 

MR. RODRIGO. 

May 

I explain my 

Yes 

Castro de 

. . . Yes 

President? 





6 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER RODRIGO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. RODRIGO. During the period of amendments I 
presented an amendment to delete all the provisions 
regarding the creation of a Judicial and Bar Council, but 
my arguments are already on record so I will not repeat 
them. 

Madam President. I have not changed my stand on 
this matter. However, notwithstanding this provision 
which makes me unhappy, the Article as a whole is all 
right. So I vote yes . 


Report No. 30 on Proposed Resolution No. 530 as 
reported out by the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of 
Rights. Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 530 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secreta- 
ry-General will read only the title of the proposed 
resolution without prejudice to inserting in the Record 
the whole text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 530, entitled: 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 

Romulo . . . 

Yes 

Tan 

. . Yes 

TUTION AN ARTICLE ON SUFFRAGE. 

Rosales . . 

Yes 

Tingson 

. . Yes 


Sarmiento 


Trenas 

. . Yes 

(The following is the whole text of the substitute resolution 

Suarez . 


Uka 

. . Yes 

per C.R. No. 30.) 

Sumulong 


Villacorta 



Tadeo . 


Villegas 


COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 30 


SECOND 

ROLL CALL 


The Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Political Rights 


, ™ PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
their vot^ 00 ^ tEose w h° have not registered 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar . VT . . , 

A1 . Natividad 

Alonto ... 0 . 

barmiento 

Tadeo . 


Azcuna 

Gascon 

Laurel 


Villacorta 
Villegas . . 


APPROVAL OF ARTICLE ON THE JUDICTAR v 
ON THIRD READING JUDICIARY 

the PRESIDENT. The President votes *es 
The results show 38 votes in favor and none against. 

I am pleased to inform the Commission that th* 
Ttod e Re°rdfag e » JUdiCiary ’ aS amended ’ iS approved on 
MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor t ^ 
nized. IOOr Leader 1S recog- 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 530 
(Article on Suffrage) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. While we are waiting for those copies to 
be distributed, I move that we consider Committee 

*See Appendix 


and Obligations and Human Rights to which were referred the 

following: 

Proposed Resolution No. 8, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON SUFFRAGE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 99, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE ENTIRE ARTICLE VI OF THE 1973 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 161, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A SEPARATE ARTICLE 
ON SUFFRAGE, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM, 
AND RECALL. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. I 99 t entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO DISQUALIFY THOSE WHO CANNOT 
READ AND WRITE FROM VOTING. 

Introduced by Hon. Rama. 

Proposed Resolution No. 246, entitled: 

RE vS TI x 0N REDEFINING THE CITIZEN’S RIGHT T° 
VOTE AND BE VOTED UPON. 

oduced by Hon. Maambong, Ople and de los Reyes, ^ r ' 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


7 


Proposed Resolution No. 370, entitled: 

RESOLUTION RECOGNIZING THE RIGHT OF A CITIZEN 
TO BOYCOTT AN ELECTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Samiiento. 

Proposed Resolution No. 405, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION ON SUFFRAGE. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson, 


years of age or over, and who shall have resided in the Philippines 
for at least one year and in the place wherein they proposed to 
vote for at least six months preceding the election. 

No literacy, property or other substantive requirement shall be 
imposed on the exercise of suffrage. 

The legislature shall provide a system for the purpose of 
securing the secrecy and sanctity of the vote. 

In the case of the disabled and the illiterate, the legislature 
shall design a mechanism or a system which will not require the 
assistance of another person. 


has considered the same and has the honor to report them back 
to the Constitutional Commission with the recommendation that 
Proposed Resolution No. 530, prepared by the Committee, en- 
titled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON SUFFRAGE, 

be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution Nos. 8, 99, 
161, 199, 246, 370, and 405, with the Honorable Laurel, Jr., 
Bernas, Abubakar, Colayco, Sarmiento, Tadeo, Garcia, Villegas, 
Rodrigo. Bennagen, Lerum, Bacani, Padilla, Natividad, Davide, 
Jr., Bengzon, Jr., de los Reyes, Jr., Rama, Maambong, Ople, and 
Tingson as authors thereof. 


(Sgd.) Joaquin G. Bernas 
Vice-Chairman 
(Sgd.) Jose C. Colayco 

(Sgd.) Jaime S.L. Tadeo 

Bernardo M. Villegas 


(Sgd.) Jose B. Laurel, Jr. 
Chairman 

Committee on Citizenship, 

Bill of Rights, Political Rights 
and Obligations and Human Rights 

(Sgd.) Yusup R. Abubakar 

(Sgd.) Rene V. Sarmiento 

(Sgd.) Edmundo G. Garcia 

(Sgd.) Francisco A. Rodrigo 


(Sgd.) Ponciano L. Bennagen (Sgd.) Eulogio R. Lerum 


(Sgd.) Teodoro C. Bacani (Sgd.) Ambrosio B. Padilla 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized to sponsor the resolution. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER BERNAS 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President and honorable Com- 
missioners, in the absence of our Chairman, Honorable 
Jose Laurel, Jr., I have been asked to sponsor this com- 
mittee report on suffrage. The committee report is 
Committee Report No. 30, and the body or text of the 
report contains 19 lines. Let me just say that except for 
the last sentence on lines 17 to 19 and except for the 
change of the word “Batasang Pambansa” to LEGIS- 
LATURE on line 15, the entire provision is exactly the 
same as that of the 1973 Constitution. The major 
change, therefore, is on lines 17 to 19 which states: 

In the case of the disabled and the illiterate, the legis- 
lature shall design a mechanism or a system which will not 
require the assistance of another person. 

These lines are an effort to reconcile conflicting 
resolutions. Some asked for the simple retention of the 
1973 provision, while others asked for the disenfran- 
chisement of the illiterate mainly on the ground, I be- 
lieve, that the illiterate are used by the literate. So, what 
lines 17 to 19 do is to ask the legislature to formulate a 
procedure so that the illiterate can vote without the 
assistance of a second person, and until such system is 
formulated by the legislature, the illiterate would not 
be able to vote. That is all I have to say on this matter. 


(Sgd.) Teodulo C. Natividad 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 530 
(Substitute Resolution) 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON SUFFRAGE. 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved, by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled, To incorporate in the new 
Constitution the following provisions on Suffrage: 

ARTICLE 

SUFFRAGE 

SECTION 1. Suffrage shall be exercised by all citizens of the 
Philippines not otherwise disqualified by law, who are eighteen 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I was about 
to ask that same question covered by the explanation 
of Father Bernas on the assumption that we will have an 
election sometime in March or April 1987 in which the 
illiterate cannot participate. 

FR. BERNAS. That would be the effect. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I think about 10 to 15 percent 
of our people, although not exactly illiterates in the 


8 


SATURDAY, )ULY 19, 1986 


sense that they cannot completely read and write, are 
having a hard time writing the names of the candidates. 
Kung tawagin po sa amin iyan ay “binubuno na ang 
lapis sa pagsulat.” For all practical purposes, they could 
be classified as illiterates, although if we will be precise 
about it, they are only semi-illiterates. So, I was think- 
ing that perhaps we can reach a better compromise by 
stating that while the legislature has not yet designed 
a mechanism or a system which will not require the 
assistance of another person, these disabled and illi- 
terates who were able to vote during the previous 
elections be allowed to vote. Thus, the last sentence 
will read something like “In the case of the disabled 
and the illiterate, EXISTING LAWS SHALL REMAIN 
IN FORCE UNTIL AFTER the legislature shall have de- 
signed a mechanism or a system which will not re- 
quire the assistance of another person.” If we disen- 
franchise the illiterates by constitutional mandate, 
especially by placing this in this new Constitution of 
1986, I think many people will be dissatisfied; in short, 
they will not like it. 


“ .^ ot ^ er 'Observation is that perhaps the phrast 
eig teen years of age or over” should be consistenl 
wit ot er provisions where we use the words “at least.’ 
e can rewrite the line by saying “who are AT LEAST 

co r r l! a f>? ° mit the word ‘'over.” And, of 

latUre ’" ^ US£ “ NATIONAL 

That 1S my observation, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. I thank the Commissioner 

17 to 19 is .ha, the“ arpThl ’ o reSPeCt t0 lines 
discussion than as a fonued^K “ 


1 URNO EN CONTR4 
OF COMMISSIONER RAMA 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I would like tn 

Ar,,Cl " Mrtcuhri y « <£> rtS 

I thought that one of the major tasks nf tv ^ 
tutional Commission is precisely to estahiM C ° nS 
reforms that would create for us ^ h stab,lsh son 
one of the premises that V wou d | lke to ST 
that a system is oftentimes only as eood here 

run it. Therefore, a system like ours A 16 men th 
ours, should look into a kind of reform h ' 

it possible for the government or the system' "itseT/ 
produce competent people to run that SV L J il 
have to have that kind of reform, we must go to 
most important political exercise of the ner^ u- i 
the election, and , would like to star, 6 * * 

electorate if we have to produce competent leader t 
representing the people. I would like to think th 
instead of swelling the number of voters, our ™ 
concern and a better task would be trying to u maj 
the quality of our electorate. I believe that making™ 


illiterate vote would not achieve that purpose. We will 
recall that in 1935. the great men who drafted the 1935 
Constitution precisely did not allow those who could 
not read and write to vote. It was only in the 1971 
Constitution under President Marcos that the illiterate 
were allowed to vote. 

I recall that during the election in the martial law 
regime, the opposition have been complaining about 
the use of the illiterates to defraud and to cheat the 
election. Mr. Marcos was very proud in saying that 
this is a provision in the Constitution that was intro- 
duced precisely by one of the opposition leaders in the 
1973 Constitution. President Marcos would like to have 
that particular provision in the Constitution retained. I 
believe that we cannot upgrade the electorate without 
removing these illiterates in the most important political 
exercise. I believe that electing our candidates does not 
involve merely a mechanical act of picking candidates 
on a ballot. It involves an intellectual process of know- 
ing the election issues. A voter must know the record of 
the candidate. He must know not only the record of the 
candidate but what he stood for during his last term of 
office or before he got elected. What were the promises 
he made during an election campaign? How did he 
perform during his term of office? And what kind of 
alliance or dalliances he made when he was in office? 
What kind of crony was he? Who were his cronies? 
And particularly what were the election issues? 1 
believe that illiterates are not quite capable of coping 
with these requirements of a democratic election. 


Another thing, Madam President, the illiterates 
cannot perform the requirement of a democratic ballot- 
ing because the first requirement of democratic voting is 
the secrecy of the ballot. As we have seen, illiterates 
were herded to the polling places and assisted mostly 
by the barangay captains who wrote their votes. This is 
an infringement of the most fundamental tenet of 
democratic voting — the secrecy of the ballot. So, there 
is an inherent flaw in this system where illiterates are 
made to vote when they themselves would not be voting 
alone; they themselves would not be voting at all; ant 
they themselves would not know what their assistors 
will be writing on the ballots. So, this flaw opens the 
floodgates to cheating. 

One of the most difficult and, I think, one of the 
most grievous evils now upon this country is cheating 
uring election. That is a tremendous problem that was 
evi ent in the last election when Mrs. Cory Aquino 
m,K . n °f Win . in the counting and had to be cheated 
lc ^ lere * n this one-time Batasang Pambansa hall* 

n^, Ur j 0 * 3 now i s to try to close all those loopholes and 
u/-, °f , C ° 0rS to Seating in the election process. On e 
vnm ° , CO ng is by not allowing the illiterates to 
P ... y returning to the old procedure in the 193-* 
to vnt! l " 0n ~ because when we allow the illiterate 
wlnt w W ) C ° pen floodgates to cheating, and that I s 

to , ‘ d ,° not need - This is now an opportunity lor 

to try ,0 clean up the election process. 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


9 


In Cebu, for instance, 1 found out that in the last 
election of February 7. 1986. they produced hundreds 
of thousands of affidavits of illiterates. This indicated to 
me and to everybody that making illiterates vote was 
one of the major cheating operations of the party in 
power for the simple reason that it is the most effective 
vote-buying procedure. When one buys votes from other 
people who know how to read and write and who go to 
the polling places alone, there is no assurance that they 
can be bought. In the case of the illiterate, the vote 
buyer is 100-percent sure that his vote buying is effec- 
tive because he himself will accompany the illiterate to 
vote for him. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Gentleman please yield to 
interpellations. Madam President? 

MR. RAMA. Willingly. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

My distinguished colleague was also a member of the 
1971 Constitutional Convention. If the Gentleman 
remembers, the main author of the resolution allowing 
illiterates to vote is the Honorable Raul Manglapus. 


I think it stands to reason that very often the kind of 
election, the kind of leaders and public officials we have 
will depend on the kind of electorate we have. As a 
matter of fact, I would even make the qualification tor 
voters higher if we can do it. Some of my friends have 
suggested that they should be at least high school 
students or high school graduates. My experience as a 
political writer is this: Many of the good candidates 
who are recognized for their proven probity and integ- 
rity in a senatorial election, for instance, could win in 
urbanized areas where the media and the schools 
abound, where there is an informed electorate, where 
the voters are more or less informed and intelligent. 
These good candidates in the senatorial election in many 
decades past had a lot of problems when it came to 
voting in places where there were no or few media, 
where there were very few schools and where most of 
the people were either illiterate or semi-illiterate. 

One of the favorite arguments against disqualifying 
illiterate electorates is that these are unfortunate people. 
It is not their fault that they are illiterates. Why do we 
add to their misfortune? My answer is this: We know 
that these people are suffering from a misfortune but 
why do we inflict this misfortune on the whole nation? 
Is that fair to the nation? What we should do is to try 
to cure the misfortune of these illiterates and not to 
inflict it on our most sacred and most important 
political process of choosing the leaders of the country. 
If we analyze the situation in this country, we are con- 
fronted with the fact that we had a lot of rascals that 
were elected to public office, including President 
Marcos. And a lot of the warlords are rascals. The 
reason they were elected to public office was that 
uninformed voters and illiterates voted for them. 

One reason advanced by Commissioner Bernas — and 
I appreciate that he had taken efforts to meet my reso- 
lution halfway by requiring Congress to come up with 
some procedures whereby the illiterate can vote alone, 
although I think that is not enough - is that the Consti- 
tution allowed illiterates to vote. So, it would be a little 
awkward to take away that right to vote. My argument 
is that, precisely because it is there in the Constitution 
we must remove it. If there is an error in the 1973 
Constitution, our job is to try to identify these wrong 
or evil or harmful provisions in the Constitution. 


MR. RAMA. That is right. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And I was one of the coauthors. 
Does the Gentleman agree with me that the purpose of 
that resolution was to widen the political base in the 
country? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, precisely I objected to that and 
I said: “That is a sonorous incantation of principles that 
are not in touch with reality.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. And that is more in keeping with 
the democratic principles that illiterates who are really 
unfortunate people should be allowed to vote. 

MR. RAMA. I disagree, because I believe that we 
must define the function of a voter. The function of a 
voter is to choose the best men for this country so that 
we would not be in trouble. I believe that an illiterate 
cannot inherently perform that function. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It seems to me that the Gentleman 
equates intelligence with capacity to read and write; am 
I right? 

MR. RAMA. To a certain extent, yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Because based on his statements, 
one can conclude that a person who does not know how 
to read and write lacks intelligence. Does the Gentleman 
mean that? 


MR. RAMA. There are people who do not know how 
to read and write that are intelligent, but they are the 
exceptions, in the same manner that there are college 
professors and college graduates who are also semi- 
literate in the sense that they do not know the election 
issues. They are also the exceptions. We are not going 
by exceptions. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I beg to disagree because I think the 
Filipinos are generally intelligent people. If given the 
opportunity and the chance, they will manifest that 
intelligence. I understand that there are at least 1 5 
percent of our total population who are illiterates. That 


10 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


is based on the census many years ago, and perhaps we 
can reasonably say that there are now about 20 percent 
illiterates in the country that will reach easily 10 million 
people. 

MR. RAMA. No, I beg to disagree. In the July issue 
of The Daily Express, the Minister of Education came 
up with the statistics on illiterates, and she said that 
there are 1.2 million illiterates in this country. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I have talked to many illiterates in 
Agusan and Naga City; they did not know how to read 
and write, but they have the capacity to discuss 
important issues. 


MR. RAMA. They are the exceptions. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I do not believe so. I talked to 
hundreds of them and they seem to be brighter than 
people who manifest intelligence. Does the Gentleman 
agree with me if I say that the cheaters are not found 
among the illiterates; they are found among the lite- 
rh( f S ‘ -° es Gentleman agree with me that the 
. ers in previous elections are the literate ones? 

MR. RAMA. No. 1 do not agree. 

nized? SUAREZ - Madam President, may I be recog- 
THE PRESIDENT Yec 

recognized. ’ Commissioner Suarez is 


»on be”f ,he situ 

some guidance. Leader - We w °uld HI 


.SSTASasK 1 

mg en contra. L s alrea dy spea 


MR. RAMA. That is correct. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Does the Gentleman agree with me 
that that is only one of the basic processes in a demo- 
cracy because in a democracy, we have also assemblies 
of men and women discussing public issues and arriving 
at a consensus? 

MR. RAMA. That is one of the main requirements of 
a voter, that he must know the election issues; he must 
know the records of candidates. That is a very impor- 
tant requirement in a democracy for voting purposes, 
particularly. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If we follow the Gentleman’s 
suggestion that only literates should be allowed to vote, 
we will be disenfranchising millions of voters, registered 
voters at that. Would it not be improper, in the sense 
that we are making them second class citizens? 

MR. RAMA. I think there is a misconception about 
democratic voting, Madam President. Democratic voting 
does not require a great majority of people to vote or all 
the people to vote. In 1935, we allowed only the 21- 
year old to vote. Now, we are allowing the 18-year old 
to vote. If we follow the logic that the masses of people 
should vote, then we should allow the 16-year old, the 
15-year old, the blind, the sick and everybody to vote. 
As a matter of fact, under the concept of democracy, 
few people can represent the whole country like, for 
instance, 200 people in Congress can represent the coun- 
try. It is not necessary that there be massive representa- 
tion; it is enough that there is identification of the 
sentiments of the people through the process of voting- 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, there are other 
Commissioners who would like to speak in support ° 
Commissioner Nolledo’s point. So, we would like to gi ve 
them a chance. 


MR. SUAREZ. Can we appoint an A,f 
Leader to take care of the floor proved! ng£ * 

missioner Bengzon take ow fhe UskTr fT'’ l'’ 3 ' 
while I am speaking? task Ooor ,eadc 

THE PRESIDENT. The request is granted. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I continue. Madam Presi 

ZZgT"* P ° ,nts about th * °r 


THE PRESIDENT. 1 he Gentleman may proceed 

MR. NOLLEDO The Gentleman said that voting in- 
volves an intellectual process and, according to him tl t 
seems to be the basic process in a democracy ’ * at 


MR. NOLLEDO. May I ask only two questions. 

Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify the situation, are 
we now in the period of turno en contra, or are we 
through with the interpellations? 

MR. BENGZON. This is the period of turno en con If ^ 
because the Chair gave Commissioner Rama the chance 
to speak en contra. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there no more questions s ° 
t lat we can go back to the period of interpellations, 1 

that is possible? 


here, Madam President. 

PRESIDENT. So, we can call the other speak 
won c i e to speak on behalf of this resolution a 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


11 


proceed first with the interpellation so that we can have 
the opinion of the Committee on several points that it 
desires to be raised. 

MR. BENGZON. In accordance with the suggestion 
of the Chair, I would like to bring back the discussion 
to the period of interpellations. To those who may wish 
to speak in favor of the points raised by Commissioner 
Nollcdo, 1 would like to request them to reserve their 
right when it comes to the period of amendments. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I am not quite 
through with my speech en contra. So. I would just 
make a reservation if we go back to the period of inter- 
pellations. 

THE PRESIDENT. May I ask the Acting Floor 
Leader to call on the first one who would like to inter- 
pellate the Committee. 

MR. BENGZON. The next one to interpellate the 
Committee is Commissioner Ople. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

Will the sponsor yield to a question or two? 

FR. BERNAS. Very willingly. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. With respect to Section 1, it is not clear 
whether the right of suffrage, which here has a residen- 
tial restriction, is not denied to citizens temporarily 
residing or working abroad. Based on the statistics o 
several government agencies, there ought to be about two 
million such Filipinos at this time. Commissioner Bernas 
had earlier pointed out that these provisions are i^ally 
lifted from the two previous Constitutions of 1935 an 
1973, with the exception of the last paragraph. They 
could not therefore have foreseen at that time the 
phenomenon now described as the Filipino labor foice 
explosion overseas. 

According to government data, there are now about 
600,000 contract workers and employees, and althougi 
the major portions of these expatriate communities of 
workers are to be found in the Middle East, they are 
scattered in 1 77 countries in the world. 

In a previous hearing of the Committee on Constitu 
tional Commissions and Agencies, the Chairman ol the 
Commission on Elections, Ramon Felipe, said that there 
was no insuperable obstacle to making effective the 
right of suffrage for Filipinos overseas. Those who have 
adhered to their Filipino citizenship notwithstanding 
strong temptations are exposed to embrace a more con- 
venient foreign citizenship. And those who on their 
own or under pressure of economic necessity here, find 
that they have to detach themselves from their families 
to work in other countries with definite tenures of 
employment. Many of them are on contract employ- 


ment for one, two. or three years. They have no inten- 
tion of changing their residence on a permanent basis, 
but are technically disqualified from exercising the right 
of suffrage in their countries of destination by the 
residential requirement in Section 1 which says: 

Suffrage shall be exercised by all citizens of the Philip- 
pines not otherwise disqualified by law, who are eighteen 
years of age or over, and who shall have resided in the 
Philippines for at least one year and in the place wherein 
they propose to vote for at least six months preceding the 
election. 

I, therefore, ask the Committee whether at the proper 
time they might entertain an amendment that will make 
this exercise of the right to vote abroad for Filipino 
citizens an effective, rather than merely a nominal right 
under this proposed Constitution. 

FR. BERNAS. Certainly, the Committee will consider 
that. But more than just saying that, I would like to 
make a comment on the meaning of “residence” in the 
Constitution because I think it is a concept that has 
been discussed in various decisions of the Supreme 
Court, particularly in the case of Faypon vs. Quirino, a 
1954 case which dealt precisely with the meaning of 
“residence” in the Election Law. Allow me to quote: 

A citizen may leave the place of his birth to look for 
greener pastures, as the saying goes, to improve his lot and 
that, of course, includes study in other places, practice of 
his avocation, reengaging in business. When an election is to 
be held, the citizen who left his birthplace to improve his 
lot may decide to return to his native town, to cast his 
ballot, but for professional or business reasons, or for any 
other reason, he may not absent himself from the place of 
his professional or business activities. 

So, they are here registered as voters as he has the quali- 
fications to be one, and is not willing to give up or lose the 
opportunity to choose the officials who are to run the 
government especially in national elections. Despite such 
registration, the animus revertendi to his home, to his 
domicile or residence of origin has not foresaken him. 

This may be the explanation why the registration of a 
voter in a place other than his residence of origin has 
not been deemed sufficient to consider abandonment or 
loss of such residence of origin. 

In other words, “residence” in this provision refers to 
two residence qualifications: “residence” in the Philip- 
pines and “residence” in the place where he will vote. 
As far as residence in the Philippines is concerned, the 
word “residence” means domicile, but as far as res- 
idence in the place where he will actually cast his ballot 
is concerned, the meaning seems to be different. He 
could have a domicile somewhere else and yet he is a 
resident of a place for six months and he is allowed to 
vote there. So that there may be serious constitutions 
obstacles to absentee voting, unless the vote of the 
person who is absent is a vote which will be considered 
as cast in the place of his domicile. 


12 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


MR. OPLE. Thank you for citing the jurisprudence. 

It gives me scant comfort thinking of about two 
million Filipinos who should enjoy the right of suffrage, 
at least a substantial segment of these overseas Filipino 
communities. The Committee, of course, is aware that 
when this Article of the Constitution explicitly and 
unequivocally extends the right of effective suffrage to 
Filipinos abroad, this will call fora logistical exercise of 
global proportions. In effect, this will require budgetary 
and administrative commitments on the part of the 
Philippine government, mainly through the COMELEC 
and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and perhaps, a more 
extensive elaboration of this mechanism that will be put 
in place to make effective the right to vote. Therefore, 
seeking shelter in some wise jurisprudence of the past 
may not be sufficient to meet the demands of the right 
of suffrage for Filipinos abroad that I have mentioned. 
But I want to thank the Committee for saying that an 
amendment to this effect may be entertained at the 
proper time. 


Lord Acton said there is no class division deeper 
than the division in knowledge. We are speaking here of 
underprivileged classes. The most numerous under- 
classes in Filipino society are the illiterates. They were 
denied by their environment and perhaps by skewed 
priorities of the government the opportunity to enjoy 
some elementary schooling that would make them 
literate, and, therefore, rise to the rigorous standard 
which Commissioner Rama would not set before them, 
which would disqualify them from the right to vote. 

And so, at the proper time. Madam President, 1 hope 
to propose an amendment on behalf of the most help- 
less underclass — most helpless in not being able to be 
heard here — the illiterates — so that this proposed pro- 
vision can be eliminated. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 


<, ay * Proceed to the new provision on the Article 
aT m Fa ^ e already referred to by Commissioner Bernas 
disabled 06 prov * s i° n > a nd this has to do with the 

mem with^h 6 Uliterate - 1 am in comp,ete disa 8 ree - 
Commissioner C R Pr ° POSltl0n PUt forward by my friend, 
illiterate poDulat^ a \ COnCerning the right to vote of the 

the illiterates in Bulacanth 3 h ' gher ° pinion of 

Cebu. 3n than he has of the illiterates in 

Madam President, the illiterai-ec „ 
men are not illiterate on purpose Tf^ 00 ?-,? 1 ^ COUntry ' 
to be illiterate. Presumably the lame a hT Ch °° Se 
burned in the hearts of the poor re b ^ that 
inflamed them in earlier stages of thelrT" 
wanted to bring to the attention of the C ,VeS that 1 
of the Commission many heroic cho \ces°n?' 3nd 

early in their lives by members of families ^ Z 
their own opportunities in life in favor nf f0reg0 
members of the familv in nff Q r °!^. ° s °me other 

ambitions to go to school in favn’ their °wn 

bably in , h J est^afion ^ “ P"> 

™ p c p o°ro? fo f r, h a e sss.a- r »• “ ™ ™ 

Jose Paciano Rizaf, to fore ™ h ’ ' lke the of 

work in the field with the father °„ Wn ., opportunity , to 
brothers and sisters could go to school? ^ younger 
the exception to what I aid £,° ,hlt » 
illiterate not on purpose. There nr e 1 ^ era t es are 
heroic choices. And yet, it does no/fT Wh ° made 
eldest brother, the benefactor of the toI° W f that the 
younger brothers and sisters, is less intHi?J 6 [°.[ tunate 
he decided to forego his own opportunity £ f^orTf 
others. In many cases, this eldest brother fhnt r 
in the countryside who did not go to school i, Tufac? 
more respected by his own more literate brothe h 
sisters because of the self-abnegation that he hadm^ 
in their favor. aae 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. It is observed that we are mixing 
the period of interpellations with the period of debate. 
I do not mind because their arguments are already 
put on the record. May I just request that the Commis- 
sioners be conscious of this matter during the period 
of amendments. 

May we now request that Commissioner Guingona 
be recognized for interpellation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

Madam President, would the Committee be willing 
to entertain at the appropriate time a proposal tha 
the right of suffrage of a qualified voter shall not be 
recalled by law on account of his or her failure to vote 
in previous elections, plebiscites, initiatives or referen- 
da? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, the Committee will 
always entertain consideration of any proposal, bn 
perhaps it can react so that we would save time in no 
presenting this proposal in case the Committee is no 
ready at the moment. 

^ Madam President, if the proposal is not found in the 
report, that would mean that the initial reaction of the 
ommittec is that it would not be necessary, but |S 
open to being proven wrong. 

Thank you. 


nim J 'jvj iinvjuin A. Since Commissioner Ople wa> 

observer ° S3 f 3 feW worc l s in connection with th L 
observations of 0Ur Floor Leader, may I also ask, Ma- 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


13 


dam President, that I be allowed a few minutes to 
react to the statements of Commissioner Rama. 

THE PRESIDENT. As stated by the Floor Leader, 
the Commissioners are requested to confine themselves 
first to the interpellation and then afterwards we can 
have speakers for and against. 

MR. GUINGONA. 1 submit, Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I now 
request that Commissioner Rodrigo be recognized for 
interpellation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
ask my first question. 

Am I right in saying that the issue now is not whether 
or not we should vest the illiterate and the disabled 
with the right to vote but whether or not we should 
divest the illiterate and the disabled said right which 
they already have? 

FR. BERNAS. That is the issue. 

MR. RODRIGO. And if this proposed resolution is 
passed and then approved by the people in the plebis- 
cite, the last paragraph will take effect, to mean: 

Until the legislature shall have enacted a law providing 
for a mechanism or a system by which the disabled and 
illiterate can vote without requiring the assistance of ano- 
ther person, the illiterates and the disabled will not be 
allowed to vote. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, but this does not exclude them 
from voting in the plebiscite. 

MR. RODRIGO. Precisely. So, when they vote in 
the plebiscite, they know that if they vote “y es f° r 
the Constitution, they are practically disenfranchising 
themselves and depriving themselves of their right to 
vote. 

FR. BERNAS. In effect, they would, yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. There are more than a million illi- 
terate voters and they have relatives and friends. Are 
we not jeopardizing the approval of the whole Constitu- 
tion by incorporating this very controversial provision 
in the Constitution? 

FR. BERNAS. I think the honorable Commissioner 
makes a very good point there, that is why, as I said, 
these particular three lines are put in there more as 
subject for discussion and certainly this can be modi- 
fied, for instance, by commanding the COMELEC to 
formulate something better than what we have today. 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much. 

I just wanted to emphasize that we might be jeo- 
pardizing the whole Constitution by incorporating 
this controversial provision. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

May I now request Commissioner Monsod to be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I will abide by the 
rules and not present my arguments for and against 
the position of Commissioner Rama, but I would like 
very much to reserve the right to do so at the proper 
time. 

I just wanted to ask the Committee, in the case of 
lines 18 and 19, whether the Committee equates the 
secrecy and sanctity of the ballot to the nonassistance 
of another person. Line 19 says: “a system which will 
not require the assistance of another person.” Are we 
sayins here that the secrecy of the ballot is not inviolate 
as lone as another person knows about the vote of the 
illiterate at the time that he is voting? That seems to 
be the assumption. 

FR. BERNAS. I am not too sure I understood the 
question. 

MR. MONSOD. Let me go back. The Committee, 

I assume, knows that under these are provisions in the 
present Election Code pursuant to the provision in the 
Constitution on the secrecy and sanctity of the ballot. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. The present Election Code provides 
for a system of assistance to illiterates. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. And this provision in the present 
Election Code has not been declared unconstitutional, 
and as far as I know, has not been questioned on consti- 
tutionality as being violative of the provision of the 
Constitution on secrecy and sanctity of the ballot. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. Are we saying now that the proce- 
dures present in the Omnibus Election Code of 1 986 are 
unconstitutional, if this provision is approved? 

FR. BERNAS. As the proposed three lines are 
worded, they would nullify the existing provisions of 
the Election Code. 

MR. MONSOD. And that, therefore, we are making 
the assumption that assistance violates secrecy. 


14 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. Assistance is a major source of cor- 
rupting the electoral process. 

MR. MONSOD. Under the 1986 Election Code, 
which the Gentleman probably knows, there have been 
improvements and refinements in the assistance provi- 
sion, and Commissioner Rama was referring to abuses 
of barangay captains in the voting of illiterates. We are 
aware that under the 1986 Election Code, the barangay 
captains are no longer allowed to assist illiterates. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. We are also aware that under the 
1986 Election Code, the assistance that was allowed 
unqualifiedly in the 1984 Code has been limited by the 
provision that anybody assisting can only assist three 
persons. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


Madam President, in the places where this occurred, 
there was no direct correlation between literacy or 
illiteracy and an abusive process, and that, in fact, our 
study shows that the abuse of the process arose more 
out of other circumstances and other factors than the 
literacy of the voters in the area. 

FR. BERNAS. If in the judgment of those who have 
more experience with the electoral process these three 
lines are unnecessary, I myself would be most willing 
to end with line 1 6. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may we request 
that Commissioner Regalado be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


th MONSOD. The reason I am mentioning this 
a in t e testimony of Chairman Felipe in the Con 
he wtc 011 *- ons titutional Commissions and Agencie 
illiterates^ 118 aS 006 of the reasons for prohibitin 
assisting 38 n'm'T*"' 8 , 2 Case ,hat involve<l somebod 
28 pecfplf r° P ' e a " d «« difference in the vote wa 

already bought to hf' i" 3 .,"' 8 the P oint tha t this wa 
y sought to be solved ,n the 1986 Election Code 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. Are we ^ 
many ways by which an illiterate^ 6 there are 
vote, other than assistance by ano her be allowed tc 
that this is one of the reaso 

this provision - that there are nth Lomm,t tee put 
having pictures, color codesTnd “ 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

clude R ,he o. N he^ea M ns “ we p re . 

let us say that we 7m°i j, ' ? 1 7 lI aSS1St , ing a " ‘"iterate, 
members of the board of election 6 " 1 sclloolteac heis or 
execute an affidavit under oat, h Sp . ectors ' wh ° must 

secrecy of the ballot because a viola?* t0 , vlolatc th e 
an election offense. atlon °t the oath is 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I would prefer 
to submit my proposed amendments during the period 
of amendments. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much. 

Madam President, may we request that Commissioner 
Suarez be recognized for interpellation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

I just want to follow up two points: the points raised 
by Commissioners Rodrigo and Monsod referring to 
the last sentence under Section 1 of the Article on 
Suffrage. Are we clear to the effect. Madam President, 
that in connection with the plebiscite that is supposed 
to be called for the purpose of ratifying the 1986 
Constitution, if I may call it that, the illiterate and the 
disabled are free to exercise the right of suffrage pur- 
suant to the procedure outlined in the Omnibus Elec- 
tion Code of 1986? 


FR. BERNAS. My understanding, Madam President, 
is that the provision on suffrage in the 1973 Constitu- 
tion has become a part of the Freedom Constitution 
under which the plebiscite will be held. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. There have been o 
system has been abused and the NAmTrftT tha 
evidence to show, quite a bit of evidence f it ® n 
the abusive process and the failure of elect ^ 
precisely from abuse of government officials .'° nS 
maybe a conspiracy at the highest levels, to’ und ^ 
and subvert the election process. cr 


R. SUAREZ. So it is clear to the effect that they 
can reely exercise their right of suffrage. After that, 
le egislature is mandated to provide the mechanism 
o pieserve the sanctity of the ballot in connection with 
te exercise of the right of suffrage by the disabled and 
the illiterate. 


‘ V . “ As ^is is worded, yes. Or it could uv 

legislature V ^ C0MELEC > not necessarily by th e 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


15 


MR. SUAREZ. Docs the Gentleman not feel that a 
transitory provision is necessary to reflect that senti- 
ment. although our Committee has already been over- 
burdened with referrals? 

FR. BERNAS. If we want the illiterate to vote in 
the first elections under the new Constitution and 
if we say the law governing the voting of the illiterate 
must be passed by the legislature, then necessarily we 
would need a transitory provision. 

But if we amend this to say that the rules for the 
illiterate can be promulgated by the COMELEC, then a 
transitory provision may not be necessary because the 
COMELEC can do it right away. In fact, we could ask 
from the President an executive order authorizing the 
COMELEC to design a new way for the illiterate tor 
purposes of the first election. 

MR. SUAREZ. Can we leave that job, filling up that 
constitutional gap, to the Commissioner’s wisdom to 
determine? 

FR. BERNAS. To the collective wisdom of the Com- 
mission, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Let me go to the first sentence in Section 1. The 
Commissioner was saying a while ago that this was prac- 
tically lifted from the 1935 and the 1973 constitutional 
provisions on the right of suffrage. 

FR. BERNAS. From the 1973 provisions. Madam 
President. 

MR. SUAREZ. But as distinguished, the 1973 Consti- 
tution represented a dramatic change which completely 
revolutionized the matter of exercise of suffrage. The 
complexion of this exercise was changed dramatically, 
if I may say so. In the 1935 Constitution, the word 
“may” was employed; in the 1973 Constitution, the 
directory word “may” was changed to “shall,” making 
it mandatory in character. Now we are reemploying 
the use of the term “shall” under the draft proposal. 
Is the proponent conveying the thought to us that he 
would want the right of suffrage to be exercised manda- 
torily by the free citizens of our country? 

FR. BERNAS. That is not my intention, Madam 
President. As a matter of fact, in my understanding 
of the 1973 Constitution, the obligation to vote does 
not arise simply from the word “shall in Article VI 
on Suffrage, but rather comes from the Article on 
Duties and Obligations of Citizens. Apparently, the 
1971 Constitutional Convention felt that by itself, the 
word “shall” here does not connote obligation so 
that, therefore, it became necessary for them to add 
that other provision. And, if the Gentleman would ask 
my personal opinion about the obligation to vote, I 
would rather not have it. 


MR. SUAREZ. So, aside from the conveyance of 
the meaning, that the word “shall” is only directory in 
character as far as Section 1, Article on Suffrage, is 
concerned, the word “shall,” if mandatory in charac- 
ter, applies only to the exercise of the right of suffrage 
by a citizen. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, it is directory as far as the citizen 
is concerned, it is mandatory as far as the State is con- 
cerned, in the sense that the State may not prevent 
any of these from voting. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I request 
that Commissioner Nieva be recognized for inter- 
pellation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nieva is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Does the Commissioner have a 
question? 

MS. NIEVA. No, this is just in support of the Nolledo 
amendment; it is not an interpellation. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

The last interpellator. Madam President, is Commis- 
sioner Bacani. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. My questions were asked by Com- 
missioner Suarez already, so I have gotten the clarifica- 
tion I wanted. 

Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, there are no 
more interpellators. Before we move into the period 
of debate, I move that the period of interpellations be 
terminated and that we proceed to the period of debate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
close the period of interpellations? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, just a few closing 
remarks, perhaps, from the sponsor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. First of all, intelligence is not mea- 
sured by the ability to read and write, and the capacity 
to be informed is not necessarily limited by lack oi 
ability to read and write. 


16 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


If we look at the Philippine situation, the communi- 
cation situation in the Philippines now, the means of 
communication that has the farthest reach is AM 
radio. People get their information not from reading 
newspapers, but from AM radio - farmers while plow- 
ing, and vendors while selling things, listen to the radio. 
Without knowing how to read and write, they are ade- 
quately informed about many things happening in the 
country. So, even those who cannot read and write are 
in a position to make a judgment about what is good 
or bad for the nation. 


Second, illiteracy shows government neglect of educa- 
tion, and if we disenfranchise the illiterate, it will only 
aggravate the situation of the illiterates because their 
voices will not be heard then. 


The representative quality of a government is deter- 
mined by the voting base. When we talk about the 
capacity to vote, we are not talking about the repre- 
sentatives; we are talking precisely about the people 
who will choose their representatives, and representa- 
tives are those who are chosen by those who are repre- 
sented. And, therefore, as many as possible should be 

wh >We f° cboose their representatives so that those 
o pro ess to be representatives can say that “yes, we 

even tbe literates” because they have 
been chosen by the illiterates. 

tendency 6 of dlSturbed ~ ver V disturbed - by the elitist 

retrogressive art^ 0 ^ 1 ” 8 the maSS bast ' 1 is a 

& d U WiH d0 a disserv ice to the efforts 

the conditions of "hTm^Th It^ii l ° UP ' lft 
ident. masses. That is all, Madam Pres- 


MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much. 

Madam President, the situation now is that Comm 
loner Rama has not yet finished his speech en cont, 

to finish anTtL 1 ! 13 ' C ° mmi T 0ner Rama be allow 
sn, and that, since under our Rules two ' 

lowed to speak for and two are allowed to soe 

ag mst I would like to find out if there would b a 

of the poSnofT Wh ° W ° l " d Wi$h Speak in fa ' 
•ake the poZT 

tered V ‘ here are alread y five who have ref 
tered ,0 speak agamst the position of Commissio, 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner 
to continue his speech. 


Rama is 


recognized 


MR. RAMA. Thank you. Madam President 

It is really very easy to go into such romantic art 
merits — that illiterates are also educated and inte 
gent. But the large tact of life here in this count) 
Madam President, is that the illiterate belong to that s< 
merit of the population that is ignorant. We know tl 
there are ignorant people in the country and that th 


make up a large segment. And among those ignorant 
people are the illiterates; many of the ignorant can read 
and write and the most ignorant of them cannot read 
and write. Now, in the business of election, 1 think we 
should not make the ignorant cancel out the votes of 
the thinking and the informed voter. They are unfor- 
tunate; therefore, we should not add to their misfor- 
tune. That is neither here nor there, Madam President, 
because we are talking about a very vital function ol 
electing and choosing the leaders of the country. This 
function will determine not only the quality of leaders 
we are going to have but also the future of this coun- 
try. 

As a matter of fact. Madam President, I made a study 
of other countries that are most successful. They are 
also compassionate, like I am compassionate. I know 
that we should be compassionate to these unfortunate 
illiterates. But that is a misplaced compassion. Other 
countries more advanced than ours do not precisely 
allow the illiterates to vote and to inflict their mis- 
fortune on the country. Like, for instance. New York. 
USA. New York does not allow the illiterates to vote 
for the simple reason that they are going to cause an 
aberration to democracy. We must distinguish the 
function of a voter. Let us put misfortune in its proper 
place. Let us have them educated; let us make all 
efforts to educate them, but do not bring them into the 
system of our election. 

All European countries, Madam President, require 
that their voting must be secret — direct, secret. That 
means no assistor, for that will open the electora 
process to cheating. Our business here is to try to close, 
not to open, our election system to cheating. In t K 
communist countries, all the illiterates are allowe 
to vote and I think that is significant. Mr. Marco ^ 
wanted the illiterate to vote. In all communist cou*^ 
tries, the illiterates can vote. That is why they ' iaVc j i0 
grotesque election process. That is why dictatois, w 
are insane, become leaders of the country. Brazil c 0< -^ 
not allow the illiterates to vote; Chile does not a ° 
the illiterates to vote. In Peru and Ecuador, the P c0 J^ 0 
have studied and have made a survey and they are a 
compassionate, but they would not try to mess up * 
election system with a misplaced sense of compass* ^ 
Japan has no constitution, but has no disqualify* 1 
against the illiterate for the simple reason that ti 
are 99 percent literate. The only other countries ^ 
celebrate this so-called doctrine of compassion lt 
the unfortunate are Indonesia and India. Do we 
the Philippines to be in the same league and lf * g 
same category as Indonesia and India? India a Q f 
the illiterate to vote because, I think, the majority ^ 
her people are illiterate. But the Philippines is ° ne use 
the countries that have the highest literacy rate, beca 
before the war, the 1935 Constitution did forbid P e °P 
to vote if they could not read and write so that eVe ^| e 
body strove to know how to read and write to be a 
to vote. I think we should disabuse ourselves with 
romantic argument that the illiterate are intelbS 1 ' 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


17 


that they are more intelligent than the literate. This 
deserves scant consideration. 

We know very well that in this country, the rascal 
politicians win their elections in benighted regions 
where there are no or few schools and people are mis- 
informed. The rascals and the warlords cannot win in 
urbanized cities because people are educated and well- 
informed. So that if we go over the political history 
of this country, we will find out that the best senatorial 
candidates had difficulty winning in the areas where 
there are many illiterate, in the areas where the schools 
arc very few, but they do not have difficulty winning 
in places where people are informed. With respect to the 
point that the so-called radio as the main medium of 
information is helpful to the illiterate, the point is that 
one has to be civilized and educated to be able to 
understand, analyze, collate the issues and propaganda 
disseminated over the radio and comment on them. 
That is why Mr. Marcos was very successful because 
he controlled the media and the illiterate could not 
distinguish propaganda from truth. So for a person 
to understand and know the election issues, he must 
have some kind of education. This is the reason Jose 
Rizal said that education of the people is the salvation 
of this country. He did not subscribe to the theory 
that the illiterate are innately intelligent. What did 
he mean by education? One must at least go to school 
and know how to read and write. Therefore, a person 
who does not know how to read and write is com- 
pletely uneducated because the most basic element of 
education is knowing how to read and write. As Jose 
Rizal said, we should be educated because that is the 
only salvation of our country. If we have to depend 
on the illiterate to vote and select our leaders now, God 
help us! Another argument. Madam President, is that 
we have to learn from the past experience not to be 
doomed by history. We know that the past election was 
debauched by cheating. The COMELEC Chairman, 
Ramon Felipe himself, came to this Commission to 
tell us to please take out that provision in the Constitu- 
tion which allows the illiterate to vote because that is 
one of the main forms of debauchery of the election 
process. Are we going to ignore that? Of course, we 
have also the NAMFREL, but I believe the COMELEC 
Chairman is a very decent man who knows whereof he 
speaks and yet he asked the Commission to eliminate 
that provision because it is a source of cheating. Our 
democracy cannot survive if our election process is 
vulnerable to cheating. Even Thomas Jefferson himself, 
who is the genius of the republican type of government, 
had to revise his definition of democracy. In his later 
years, he wrote George Washington, and I quote: “Yes, 
we must have a democracy of, for and by the people 
with a certain degree of instruction." He realized that 
a government run by ignorant people, for ignorant 
people and of ignorant people will not long survive. This 
means we must have education. 

Thank you. 


MR. TADEO. Madam President, isang minuto lang 
po. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Is there anyone who wants to 
speak in favor of the position of Commissioner Rama? 
Nobody has registered with me, and one more is allowed 
under the Rules to speak in favor of the position taken 
by Commissioner Rama. 

MR. UKA. Madam President. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will recognize Commissioner 
Tadeo later. 

Is it in favor of or against the position of Commis- 
sioner Rama? 

MR. BENGZON. Is Commissioner Rama finished? 

MR. RAMA. If there is a question, I yield. 

MR. BENGZON. Does Commissioner Uka want to 
interpellate? 

MR. UKA. I want to support the position of Commis- 
sioner Rama in few sentences only. 

MR. BENGZON. I request that Commissioner Uka 
be recognized to speak in favor of the position of Com- 
missioner Rama for one minute. 

SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER UKA 

MR. UKA. How about one-and-a-half or two min- 
utes? What is one-and-a-half minutes among friends? 

My friends, Section 1 of the Article does not actually 
disenfranchise the so-called “illiterate.” Perhaps God 
loves them otherwise, He would not have created 
many of them. May God forgive them for they know 
not how to read and write. It says here in the last part: 

In the case of the disabled and the illiterate, the legis- 
lature shall design a mechanism or a system which will 
not require the assistance of another person. 

That does not entirely disqualify them. 

Let us wait for the day when the legislature would 
design a machine wherein the picture of every candidate 
could be seen secretly by the illiterate and he would 
just punch something there which would decide which 
candidate he wants to elect. But until that time comes 
when the sophisticated machine is invented, let us be 
kind to them although they cannot vote. It is not their 
fault they are illiterate. Maybe it is the fault of society. 
Maybe they did not have any chance to read and write. 
They can recognize which candidate they want. So let 
us not disenfranchise them because as the provision 


18 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


says: “In the case of the disabled and the illiterate, 
the legislature shall design a mechanism.” What is this 
mechanism? It is a machine. So let us elect to the 
legislature inventors who could design that machine. 
I repeat, until that time comes, my friends, let us be 
kind to them. 

Thank you. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session for 
a few minutes. 

In the meantime, I ask the Commissioners who wish 
to speak to please register with the Acting Floor Leader 
so as to have an orderly discussion. 

It was 11:24 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

A 1 11:27 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 530 
(Article on Suffrage) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. BENGZON. I move that wc now continue the 
consideration of Committee Report No. 30 on Resolu- 
tion No. 530 on Second Reading. We are still in the 
period of sponsorship and debate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. I ask that Commissioner Padilla 
be recognized to speak against the resolution. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


TURNO EN CONTRA 
OF COMMISSIONER PADILLA 


RECONSIDERATION OF APPROVAL 
ON THIRD READING OF ARTICLE ; 

ON THE JUDICIARY 

MR. BENGZON. Before we resume our discussion 
on the Article on Suffrage, I move that we reconsider 
the approval on Third Reading of the Article on the 
Judiciary to afford those Members who were not able 
to cast their votes to do so. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will call the roll of Members 
who were not able to cast their votes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading 

Abubakar Yes Lerum 

A * onto Yes Natividad . . . 

Azcuna Yes Sarmiento . . . 

Brocka Tadeo 

Gascon Villacorta . 

Laurel Villegas 

THE PRESIDENT. How many additional votes do 
we have? 

THE SECRETARY-CENERAL. We have additional 5 
affirmative votes. 

THE PRESIDENT. So we have now a total of 43 
votes in favor of the Article on the Judiciary. 


Yes 

Yes 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I am in favor ot 
the requirement in the 1935 Constitution which states 
“and able to read and write,” which was deleted in the 
1973 Constitution. While there are valuable Members 
in this Commission who were members of the 19' 
Constitutional Convention, my position is that, often- 
times, the 1935 Constitution provision is better than 
that of the 1973 Constitution, and that the 19 
Constitution is not always an improvement over 
1 935 Constitution. 


Madam President, we have the reputation that t e 
Philippines is a literate country and that the Filip in ° 
are highly literate. 

During the Spanish regime, while we had the k en( ^ e 
of the Christian faith, there was no real effort on 
part of colonial Spain to fully educate the Filip 111 ^ 
because it is said that it is easier to rule and g 0 '' aJ1 
a nation when the people remain more ignorant 
educated. Whatever be our reactions to the AlTie r , ol , r 
rule, one benefit was the widespread education ° . 

people. Many American teachers devoted their time ^ 
effort in their sacrifice to uplift the educational sta . 
ards of the Philippines. And we have always been IP . 
the biggest share of our national budget to educati • 
However, during the dictatorial regime of Mr. Marc ' 
the budgetary allotment for education was red uC ’ 
and the biggest allotment went to the military’ 
Armed Forces of the Philippines, which, in my °P in ! ’ 
was a big mistake. But the dictator had his own d eSl . 
to make the military powerful so that he could uti 1 
the military strength to support his dictatorship- 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


19 


Madam President, if we delete the qualification of 
the 1935 Constitution on literacy and continue the 
1973 Constitution on illiteracy, I am alarmed that the 
number of illiterate now will keep on increasing. Even 
the 1.2 million Filipinos who are illiterate among the 
electorate is alarming. If we continue qualifying the 
illiterate to vote, we may be fomenting illiteracy; where- 
as, if we return to the 1935 Constitution provision and 
require the voters to be literate, to be able to read and 
write, it will be an incentive for our people. 

It is said that an illiterate is underprivileged, that his 
being an illiterate is not by his own choice or fault. 
Madam President, we pride ourselves in having a system 
of education. We are given at least free elementary 
education where we definitely learn how to read and 
write, which is one of the most elementary acquisitions 
in the ladder of education. 

Assuming there are some who are still illiterate, 

I believe there is an existing movement for adult educa- 
tion, to teach even those who are already beyond the 
school age. Even the parents of our schoolchildren may 
be given the basic instructions to be able to read and 
write. We should have instances wherein the young 
children go to public schools and get the elementary 
rudiments, at least, the ability to read and write. And if 
the parents have not had that chance during the many 
years of martial misrule, they still have the opportunity 
to acquire this rudimentary and fundamental requisite 
of the ability to read and write. 

Madam President, I understand and I agree that there 
are many illiterates who are intelligent. In fact, I would 
even go further. There are some illiterates who are more 
intelligent than the many literates. But it does not mean 
that we should perpetuate this status of illiteracy, 
much less encourage and foment illiteracy. We should 
take every step to uplift the education of our people 
and grant them, at least, this basic essential of citizen- 
ship and the right to vote, based on this minimum quali- 
fication of the ability to read and write. 

In that regard, Madam President, I do not want to 
disenfranchise the illiterate, or the disabled, or even 
the blind. They are citizens and they should have the 
right to vote, but they should be able to read and write 
to exercise this right of suffrage without the assistance 
of other persons. Otherwise, the present situation 
which has been the object of grave abuses in our elec- 
toral process will unfortunately continue and even 
increase because unfortunately, the persons authorized 
to write the ballots for the illiterate oftentimes do not 
follow the choice of the so-called illiterate. And the 
illiterate are in no position to check or verify whether 
their so-called representatives follow their votes because 
they cannot read what the representatives have written 
on their ballots. 

So, Madam President, while I sympathize with some 
people who are illiterate, I fully support the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Rama because we should 
not encourage illiteracy; on the contrary, we should 


reduce illiteracy by all means by including adult educa- 
tion. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. There are no more speakers in 
support of the position of Commissioner Rama. I 
request that Commissioner Monsod be recognized 
to speak against the position of Commissioner Rama. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER MONSOD 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I think Commis- 
sioner Padilla mentioned the 1935 Constitution. May 
I also say that a literacy test is a vestige of a policy to 
limit suffrage to only a few people that has been used 
to deny a truly participative democracy in our country. 

In Act No. 1582 in 1907, the Americans insisted 
that the right of suffrage must be premised on the 
Filipinos’ having the ability to read and write English 
or Spanish. In the 1935 Constitution, this literacy 
test was minimized by the ability to read and write, 
and was finally abolished by the 1973 Constitution. 

There is no Southeast Asian country that imposes 
the literacy requirement. And if the book of Father 
Bernas is to be considered an authority, the United 
States Supreme Court a couple of years ago declared 
unconstitutional any state law that would continue to 
impose this requirement for voting. 

Madam President, the argument that has also been 
imposed here is that many developed countries deny 
illiterate voting while underdeveloped countries allow 
it. I do not know if the proper classifications have been 
made, but there is an axiom, I think, in Latin which 
says: “Post hoc, ergo propter hoc” - after this, there- 
fore, because of this. Just because a country is deve- 
loped does not mean its development arose out of the 
exclusion of illiterate voters. 

It there is one political right that is very precious 
to us, it is the right to vote. We have many rights, but 
the one-man one-vote rule is one of the basic and 
fundamental rights in a democracy. 

I think there is some confusion in Commissioner 
Rama s talk when he said that rascals were elected be- 
cause ot misinformed or uninformed voters and the 
illiterate. There was mention of both uninformed ox 
misinformed voters and the illiterate. Are we talking 
about the illiterate or uninformed or misinformed 
voters? He talked about the abuse by the radio, by the 
barangay captains, by government officials and perhaps 
by the COMELEC. But the presence of abuses is not a 


20 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


ground for denying the illiterate to vote because during 
the 14 years of Mr. Marcos’ misrule, the system of 
abuse and fraud was perfected. We do not throw out the 
baby with the bath. As a matter of fact, NAMFREL 
would like to share with this Commission the finding 
that there is no correlation between illiteracy and 
abusive elections. In fact, one of the most abusive 
election areas was Makati where there was a failure 
of elections. On the other hand, there were areas where 
the elections were considered tolerable and the results 
credible, for instance. Eastern Samar. People would 
say that the level of literacy in Makati is probably higher 
than that in Samar. In all of Metro Manila, our finding 
is that there is only one city where elections could be 
considered tolerable. Yet in the provinces like Benguet, 
Batanes, Southern Leyte, Eastern Samar and Zam- 
boanga, elections were considered tolerable and 
the results credible, even Nueva Vizcaya whose elections 


were tolerable in 1986. So, Madam President, we believi 
that there is no correlation between an abusive proces: 
and illiteracy. If the process was abused, it was becaust 
.1 er ^ q^q^ s 3 COn spiracy of the highest level to subveri 
d' f 4 anc ^ 1986 elections. I also would like to maki 
of p 1I ? c l 10n b etw een the mechanism and the principle 
orinHnip m <- g * brieve Commissioner Rama is for the 
is for a m £ xcludin g; whereas, the proposed Article 

assumption d °“ not make a " 

the areumpnt + t j le educatlon level and so on. As to 

is an Indent ve to yi " 8 ' he iHitera,e thc ri S"< vote 

me that 1 » L ,mprove ,he Vocational system, to 

edu’ctoV V \ ZuTT 7. right ° f ,he pe °ple to 

right. Whether nr social justice and a matter of 

to vote that rieht n tn hT f- ny ^literate the right 
that in ’this Constitution^e *are Granting that ‘ ^"7 

f ct r s:;: 

education of the ill itera 7 ^ .? ™" datin 6 the 

the illiterate are nof P le > and the assumption is that 
end. I think titA ? C3pable of contributing to that 
who do not rea 1 1S ° r ^ Wor * d shows that people 

canaht T n . 0r Wnte somehow manage or are very 
capable of choosing their leaders. As a matter of fact 

ZZZZ : h NAMFREL Whe " "« over the 

turbed bv th v\ 1S ! UCS VCry clearIy ’ the y were undis- 
tit hv n! , S Or °h S ° f . the media a " d m anipula- 
their ability tn^h ° L 6re * s no correlation between 
Jead and writ'e 0 Ch °° Se ' he ‘ r leadws a "<> «-ir ability to 


Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. BENGZON. Thank 
sioner Monsod. 


you very much, Commis- 


Madam President. I request that Commissioner 
Christine Tan be recognized for a short speech 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recog. 
nized. 


SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER TAN 

SR. TAN. Madam President and Members of the 
Commission, I have been living with illiterates for more 
than seven years. I here were very many instances during 
the past elections when these illiterates voted and were 
fooled by the regime. But there were also instances 
when they used the elections to learn how to write, and 
many succeeded in learning how to write and to vote 
intelligently. The reason for their incapacity to write 
was not their lack of interest but their poverty which 
had kept them from formal education. 

I disagree completely with the presumption that the 
illiterate do not possess sufficient political conscious- 
ness. If we, therefore, divest them today, what would 
keep us in the future from divesting other groups like 
the blind, the aged and the moral deviants? 

The crux of the solution, I believe, is in the kind of 
mechanism to be used which will not require the as- 
sistance of another person, for corruption lies in the 
person. And these persons during the past regime were 
all literate. 

I, therefore, support and would dare to use the 
mechanism proposed rather than be guilty of national 
injustice which will further keep us from national unity. 

Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you, Commissioner Tan. 

Madam President, I request that Commissioner 
Bennagen be recognized for a short remark. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER BENNAGEN 


MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Madam President. 

What I want to say has been anticipated by the two 
previous speakers, and I do not wish to belabor the 
point. I just want to add that as an anthropologist and a 
social scientist, I have been exposed to the worst socia 
situations in this country such as those found all tie 
way from the Cordillera to Sierra Madre and to uplan s 
of Mindanao, including the squatters of Metro Manila, as 
well as peasants both in Mindanao and Luzon. And I can 
say that I have learned a lot from people in those areas 
in terms of what it means to be intelligent. There cei 
tainly is no relationship between illiteracy and t‘ie 
capability to make sound moral and intellectua 
judgment. 


As to the argument that disenfranchisement i^ a 

motivation for learning, I am convinced that the motW ' 
tion is not lacking in all of these areas; rather it i s 1 
inability of the State to meet this motivation ° 
learning. 


I am for enfranchising the illiterate. 
Thank you. 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


21 


MR. BENGZON. Thank you. Commissioner Ben- 
in age n. 

Madam President, I request that Commissioner Tadeo 
be recognized for a short remark. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER TADEO 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, sinisikap kong 
makilahok sa interpellation dahil alam kong ang pinaka- 
mahalaga rito ay ang idea in motion. Naniniwala akong 
sa mga illiterate, pinakamarami rito ay mga magbubu- 
kid. Bakit ba sila naging illiterate? Sa kadahilanang 
bunga ito ng kahirapan, naging biktima sila ng isang 
sistema na sa murang edad, kahit na libre ang elemen- 
tarya, hindi nila makuhang mag-aral dahil kinakailangan 
ang survival. Sa murang edad, nagtitinda na sila ng ice 
candy, katulong na sila ng kanilang mga magulang sa 
bukid. Sila ay biktima ng isang mala-kolonyal at mala- 
piyudal na sistema, pagkatapos parurusahan pa natin sila 
sa pamamagitan ng hindi nila pagboto? Napakalaking 
insulto at napakalaking kawalang-katarungan nito sa 
mga magbubukid na bahagi ng pag-unlad ng bansang ito. 

Tungkol sa sinasabing edukasyon, ang edukasyon 
ba ay natatapos sa apat na sulok ng ating kuwarto? 
Ang mga illiterate ay nasa larangan ng buhay kung 
saan naroon ang tamang edukasyon. Bibigyan ko kayo 
ng isang halimbawa. Sa Cuba, walang pormal na edu- 
kasyon kasi inaalis na nila ang feudalism na mayroon 
pang nakapag-aral, mayroon pang abogado, may- 
roon pang duktor. Lahat ng mamamayan ng Cuba 
ay estudyante dahil ang tamang edukasyon ay ang lara- 
ngan ng buhay. Mayroon ngang nakapag-aral ngunit 
sila’y nakahiwalay sa sambayanan, hiwalay sa magbubu- 
kid Ang kanilang edukasyon ay naroon sa apat na sulok 
ng kanilang kuwarto, kaya’t hindi nauunawaan ang 
magbubukid, manggagawa, at urban poor. Napakaliwa- 
nag ng halimbawa ni Hesukristo. Mula sa langit, ipina- 
dala Siya sa mga dukha at tumira, tumawa, gumawa, 
humalakhak at tumangis kasama ng mga dukha dahil 
iyon ang tamang edukasyon. Ang tutoo mga kasama, 
kung kayo ay pupunta sa mga magbubukid, sa mga 
manggagawa, ang agrarian reform at social justice ay 
hindi ninyo babawasan, bagkus ay dadagdagan pa ito 
ang “exposure,” ang pagpunta sa tamang edukasyon - 
bibigyan nila kayo ng tamang edukasyon. Kung tayo 
ay sasama sa mga dukha, pagbalik natin sa Constitu- 
tional Commission ay makagagawa tayo ng isang maka- 
buluhang Saligang Batas at sasabihin ko sa inyo na kapag 
tinalakay natin ang foreign military bases, ang lahat ng 
48 Members ng Commission ay boboto na alisin ito sa 
Pilipinas sapagkat nakasama nila ang mga dukha na 
siyang tamang edukasyon. Ang tutoo, hindi naman 
taHpa illiteracy ang problema natin kung hindi ang ating 
poHtical system na isang elite democracy. Ang mga 
manggagawa at mga magbubukid ay tinanong ako. 


“Jimmy, paano ang gagawin namin? Ang pipiliin namin 
parehong masama o kaya lesser evil.” Laging ang pinag- 
pipilian natin sa eleksiyon ay kung sino lamang iyong 
lesser evil dahil hindi natin binibigyan ng pagkakataon 
ang mga dukha na pumunta sa National Assembly. Ating 
subuking dalhin sa National Assembly ang mga dukha, 
mga magsasaka, mga manggagawa, urban poor at mga 
estudyante at siguradong lilikha sila ng tamang mga 
batas na tutugon sa kanilang pangangailangan at ng 
isang pamahalaang mapagkalinga sa mamamayang 
Pilipino. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. I request that Commissioner 
Guingona be recognized as the last speaker against the 
position of Commissioner Rama. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER GUINGONA 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I share the concern of our distinguished Floor Leader 
for the secrecy of the ballot, that is why I do not favor 
the voting by illiterates with the assistance of other 
persons since this will be conducive to cheating in 
election. But with due respect to the Floor Leader, I do 
not agree with his assumption that there could be no 
mechanism that would allow an illiterate voter to cast 
his ballot without assistance from anyone. May 1 cite 
one such mechanism successfully designed and used by 
India and Malaysia where the illiterates are allowed to 
vote through the use of symbols adopted by the candi- 
dates themselves and reproduced in the ballots which 
the illiterate voters simply check. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, 1 move that the 
period of sponsorship and debate be closed. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I just would like to add a little 
note that as a result of our consultation in the Mountain 
Province with respect to the disenfranchisement of the 
illiterate, a number of suggestions came out which could 
be stated in the following manner: We should not con- 
fuse the capability to vote properly with the capability 
to write. Some other ways could be designed to safe- 
guard the sanctity of the ballot, such as the use of ap- 
propriate symbols and even photographs of candidates 
which are substitutes for the written names. 

Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. I now move that we close the period 
of sponsorship and debate. Madam President. 


22 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Tingson is 
recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. I have a paper here in support of the 
Committee’s stand. May I just submit it for record pur- 
poses.* 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the request is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Acting Floor Leader that we close the 
period of sponsorship and debate? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we proceed to the 
period of amendments, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed to the period of amendments? 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 486 
(Article on the Bill of Rights) 

Continuation 


efforts of Commissioner Nollcdo to whom the propo- 
nents are very grateful. 

Based on the draft, copies of which are now in the 
possession of the Members, on line 2, between the 
words “against” and “prisoners.” insert the word 
CONVICTED. 

On line 3, delete the words “substandard or out- 
moded” and substitute the word INADEQUATE. 

On the same line 3. delete the last word “character- 
ized.” together with all the words on line 4, and substi- 
tute the word UNDER. 

On lines 5 and 6. delete the words “in accordance 
with law” and substitute the words BY LAW. So with 
this Committee modifications, the whole proposed 
amendment would read: “The employment of corporal 
or psychological punishment against CONVICTED 
prisoners or pretrial detainees, or the use of INADE- 
QUATE penal facilities UNDER subhuman conditions 
should be dealt with BY LAW.” 

We now present that before the Committee. Madam 
President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

ceed ^to ^the^ period f adam , Presiden L before we pro- 

where we left off eartij™ t^mo* 5 ’- back t0 
that particular 

that Commissioners Maambong and Bernas ar.^ 
ready to consider that section in the Bill of Rights. n ° W 

ThIchaiM ESIDENT ' IS there any ob J ec tion? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

22of e the 0 BHirf n R C °ht bnU K- t l! e considerati °n of Section 
z oi tne Bill of Rights which reads: 

mem e a e e a 3!° yment ° f C ° rp ° ral ° r Psychological punish- 
men against prisoners or pretrial detainees, or the use of 

substandard or outmoded nenal fo iv ■ 

Hporariinr. j- P enal facilities characterized by 

d hf “ ma " i,ary or subluimil " conditions 

Should be dealt with in accordance with law. 

Commissioner Maambong is recognized 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. , j ust would 
hke to indicate the generous response of the Members of 
the Commission to this proposed amendment, notably 
Commissioners Romulo, Suarez, Davide Ri gos and 
others who offered beautiful suggestions to implement 
the concept. 

I will start, however, with the perfecting modifica- 
tions offered by the Committee, acting through the 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the proponent accept a simple amendment to his 
amendment which will be in connection with line 1 • 

We have heard many discussions regarding the way 
the Bill of Rights should be stated, emphatically by 1 1 ® 
honorable Vice-President. So bearing this in mind, t 1 
is the proposed amendment to the amendment. 

Instead of a statement of a principle, let us begin with 
the word NO such that the proposed amendment w 
now read: NO PHYSICAL OR MENTAL PUNISH- 
MENT SHALL BE EMPLOYED. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I would refer 
that proposed amendment to the Committee foi 
comment so that we can save time. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. As I said in the beginning, as the ^ 
ot Rights is now shaping up, we have two kind s 
rights — rights which are self-implementing and riS 
which need implementation. The rights which are s( f_ 
implementing are generally worded in the way C° nl11 
sioner Suarez would have it. But this particulai ri ^ 
which we are putting in here is something which ^ 
implementation. So, actually, the effective P roV,s ‘ e 
here would be “should be dealt with BY LAW” beca 
we are still dependent on law. 


*See Appendix 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


23 


MR. SUAREZ. May I add that my proposal is to 
make two sentences out of this proposed provision. So 
put a period (.) after “detainees” and continue the next 
sentence: “The use of inadequate . . 

FR. BERNAS. How would it read now? 

MR. SUAREZ. It would read something like this: 
“NO PHYSICAL OR MENTAL PUNISHMENT SHALL 
BE EMPLOYED against CONVICTED prisoners or 
pretrial detainees. The use of INADEQUATE penal 
facilities UNDER subhuman conditions should be dealt 
with BY LAW.” 

FR. BERNAS. I think the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Maambong, when it speaks of “should be 
dealt with BY LAW,” has reference not just to inade- 
quate or substandard conditions, but even also to 
torture. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I confirm that, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. So, it does modify the sense of 
Commissioner Maambong’s proposal. I would leave it to 
Commissioner Maambong to say whether he accepts 
that or not. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Actually, I am amenable to the 
use of the words “NO PHYSICAL or psychological. . 

But I really have a difficulty in separating the two things 
with the words “should be dealt with BY LAW” and I 
would rather agree with the Committee on this point. 

FR. BERNAS. At any rate, what Commissioner 
Suarez wants to be emphasized is already covered by 
other provisions. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. This is more of a command to the 
State saying that beyond having recognized these things 
as prohibited, the State should do something to remedy 
whatever may be a violation. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. But I would just like to 
indicate, even though I cannot accept the amendment, 
that the wording of Commissioner Suarez would indeed 
be more emphatic and it would have served my purpose 
better if it would not destroy the essence of the whole 
provision. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Will the sponsor entertain an 
amendment to his amendment? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We are still on the amendment of 
Commissioner Suarez. 

MR. REGALADO. No. I will address it instead to 
Commissioner Maambong. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I think Commis- 
sioner Suarez is not going to insist on his amendment. 

So, may we allow him to withdraw? 

MR. SUAREZ. Inasmuch as the word “corporal” has 
already been substituted with the word PHYSICAL, as 
stated by the honorable proponent. I will not insist on 
my amendment to the amendment because the sense is 
already very well conveyed. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado desires 
to be recognized in relation to the proposed amend- 
ment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President, but I 
would just like to make a statement. Considering that 
Commissioner Suarez mentioned “PHYSICAL” — I did 
say “corporal” — to save time, I would rather ask the 
Committee to allow me to change “corporal” to PHY- 
SICAL; then, I will accept that amendment on the word 
PHYSICAL by Commissioner Suarez. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I am proposing 
a further amendment to put some standards on this, to 
read: “The employment of PHYSICAL, psychological 
OR DEGRADING punishment ON ANY PRISONER.” 

Please permit me to explain. The punishment may 
not be physical but it could be degrading. Perhaps, the 
Members have seen the picture of that girl who was 
made to parade around the Manila International Airport 
with a placard slung on her neck, reading “I am a thief.” 

That is a degrading form of punishment. It may not 
necessarily be corporal nor physical. That is why I 
ask for the inclusion of OR DEGRADING “punish- 
ment” on this line and employment should be ON ANY 
PRISONER. It includes a convicted prisoner or a de- 
tention prisoner. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Where would the words be? 

MR. REGALADO. “The employment of PHYSICAL, 
psychological OR DEGRADING punishment ON ANY 
PRISONER.” This is all-inclusive. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, the Commis- 
sioner seeks to delete the words “against CONVICTED 


24 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


prisoners or pretrial detainees,” and in its place would 
be “ON ANY PRISONER.” 


MR. REGALADO. Because in penal law. there are 
two kinds of prisoners: the prisoners convicted by final 
judgment and those who are detention prisoners. Delete 
“or pretrial detainees”; then, “or the use of GROSS- 
LY substandard or INADEQUATE penal facilities.” If 
we just say “substandard,” we have no basis to deter- 
mine against what standard it should be considered. But 
if we say “GROSSLY substandard,” that is enough of a 
legislative indication and guideline. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, before we take 
it up one by one, the Committee modification actually 
deleted the words “substandard or outmoded,” and in 
its place, we put the word INADEQUATE. Is it the 
Gentleman’s position that we should put back the word 
“substandard” instead of “INADEQUATE”? 


MR. REGALADO. I put both, “or the use of GROSS- 
LY substandard or INADEQUATE penal facilities,” 
ecause the penal facilities may be adequate for a 
speci ic purpose but it may be substandard when 
j°f S ' collectively and vice-versa; and then, we 
can *f,. the r T est ’ “should be dealt with BY LAW.” That 

amendment thmk ’ the intent ° f the s P onsor of the 


ar e F almost R !i AS ' & add the word “GROSSLY,” we 
if the situation islross 3 ' legisla,ure should “t only 

su Standard? ALAD ° H ° W d ° We determi " e «>«• is 

I BERNAS - We leave that to the legislature. What 
• , llh 7 ln f that tlle le § is,ature could say: “Well this 

d? j 

FR. BERNAS. I do no, think we should so into 
great details on this. We are not legislating 

MR. REGALADO So, the sponsor's position is that 
we just leave it to the legislature to have a Rgislat , 
standard of their own in the form of an ordinary legisla. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. That will be all. Madam President 


MR. MAAMBONG. Before I make any acceptance of 
the offered amendment, may I know from the Commit- 
tee if on line 3, after the word “INADEQUATE.” wc 
should also replace “substandard” which we have can- 
celled earlier? 


FR. BERNAS. I do not know where we are now but 
this is what I have. “The employment of PHYSICAL, 
psychological OR DEGRADING PUNISHMENT against 
CONVICTED PRISONERS . . .” 

MR. MAAMBONG. “against ANY PRISONER. . ” 
They were thinking of any prisoner. 

MR. REGALADO. No, I put the word ON not 
“against.” One inflicts the punishment on a person. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. But the word “inflict” is not used 
but “employment” is used. So, the preposition is 
“against,” not “ON.” 

MR. REGALADO. That is right; it is a matter of style. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


MR. BENGZON. May we just leave that to the Com- 
mittee on Style? What is important is, we decide on t ie 
concept. If we can decide on the concept, then we can 
leave the style to the Committee on Style. 

THE PRESIDENT. It should be left to the Commit- 
tee on Style or to the Committee itself, to the Comm 1 
tee of Commissioner Bernas if they are agreed on 
substance as to what is to be contained in the piopose 
amendment. 


FR. BERNAS. I just have one question on the sub 
stance. If we just say “ANY PRISONER,” that nW 
connote that the person is either a prisoner convic 
ar a pretrial prisoner and, therefore, charged. I ^ou 
much rather have ANY PRISONER OR DETAIN c. 


because a “prisoner” usually connotes someone 
convicted; a “detainee” ho nn nrp.trial oi 


charged at all. 


could be on pretrial or 


THE PRESIDENT. May we now have the ieC .° 0 j e 
mendation of the Committee as to how this w 1 
provision will read? 

FR. BERNAS. So, the recommendation of the Gob* 
mittce would be: “The employment of PHYSIG 
psychological OR DEGRADING punishment aga» n 
ANY PRISONER OR DETAINEE, or the use of 1 
ADEQUATE penal facilities UNDER subhum 
conditions should be dealt with BY LAW.” 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


ssnn®fflfi [iBnfflV' 

25 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to call attention to the 
fact that the word “DEGRADING” is already in the 
first sentence of this section: “Excessive fine shall not 
be imposed nor cruel, degrading or inhuman punishment 
inflicted.” So. why repeat the word “DEGRADING”? 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely, Madam President, yesterday, 
we said that the provision we have in the present Consti- 
tution has reference to the punishment that is pre- 
scribed by the law itself; whereas what we are dealing 
with here is the punishment or condition which is 
actually being practised. In other words, we are, in the 
present Constitution, talking about punishment which, 
if imposed by the law, renders the law invalid. 

In this paragraph, we are describing conditions of 
detainees who may be held under valid laws but are 
being treated in a manner that is subhuman or degrading. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, that is the reason for repeating 
the word “DEGRADING.” 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, that is the reason. 

MR. COLAYCO. Just one suggestion for the Commit- 
tee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Colayco is 
recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. To shorten the sentence, I would 
suggest this: “The employment of PHYSICAL, psy- 
chological OR DEGRADING punishment IN ANY 
PLACE OF DETENTION.” That will cover prisoners 
who are already convicted and those under detention 
or during trial. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am sorry I cannot accept that. 
I think the Committee has made a good job in modi- 
fying the sentence. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Maambong 
please read his proposed amendment with all the sug- 
gestions that have come in? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. It would read like this: “The 
employment of PHYSICAL, psychological OR DE- 
GRADING punishment against ANY PRISONER OR 
DETAINEE or the use of substandard or INADE- 
QUATE penal facilities UNDER subhuman conditions 
should be dealt with BY LAW.” 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 


MR. FOZ. May I just ask one question of the pro- 
ponent of the amendment. I get it that the law shall 
provide penalties for the conditions described by his 
amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In line with the decisions of the 
Supreme Court on the interpretation of cruel and 
unusual punishments, there may be a law which 
punishes this violation precisely or there may not be a 
law. What could happen is that the law could provide 
for some reliefs other than penalties. 

In the United States, there are what is known as 
injunctive or declaratory reliefs and that is not exactly 
in the form of a penalty. But I am not saying that the 
legislature is prevented from passing a law which will 
inflict punishment for violations of this section. 

MR. FOZ. In case the law passed by the legislature 
would impose sanctions, not so much in the case of the 
first part of the amendment but in the case of the 
second part with regard to substandard or outmoded 
legal penal facilities characterized by degrading sur- 
roundings and insanitary or subhuman conditions, on 
whom should such sanctions be applied? 

MR. MAAMBONG. It would have to be applied on 
the administrators of that penal institution. In the 
United States, in my reading of the cases furnished to 
me by Commissioner Natividad, there are instances 
where the law or the courts themselves ordered the 
closure of a penal institution and, in extreme cases, 
in some states, they even set the prisoners free for 
violations of such a provision. 

MR. FOZ. I am concerned about the features de- 
scribed as substandard or outmoded penal facilities 
characterized by degrading surroundings, because we 
know very well the conditions in our jails, particularly 
in the local jails. It is not really the fault of those in 
charge of the jails but these conditions are the result ot 
lack of funds and the support by local government, in 
the first instance, and by the national government. 

Does the Gentleman think we should penalize the 
jailers for outmoded penal facilities? 

MR. MAAMBONG. No, Madam President. What we 
are trying to say is that lack of funds is a very conve- 
nient alibi for the State, and l think with these pro- 
visions, the State should do something about it. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, we are not telling 
the legislature what to do; we are just telling them that 
they should do something about it. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 


26 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

The provision which says: “The employment of 
PHYSICAL, psychological OR DEGRADING PUNISH- 
MENT against ANY PRISONER OR DETAINEE 
SHALL be dealt with BY LAW” is already provided for 
by our present laws. We already have laws against third- 
degree punishments or even psychological punishments. 
Do we still need this provision? 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR.MAAMBONG. As I was saying. Madam President, 
the law need not penalize; the law may only put in 
corrective measures as a remedy. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


R. REGALADO. May I just rejoin the statement of 
ommissioner de Castro that we have laws already 
covering situ^ions like this. The law we have on that in 
whi^r> eV1Se< ^ ^ ena ^ Code is maltreatment of prisoners 
encarrprnHn^ tu™ thc ori 8 inaI text maltratos de los 
SSS at presuppos « that the prisoner is 

onJ he tr°incarMrated at ‘ 0n S ° U8h ' here wil1 apply not 

detainees bUt alS ° 10 °" ,er 

theless kent t’h i 1 u n0t mcarcer ated, are never- 
u f . 15 ’ their llber ty of movement is controlled 

before incarceration. So this is for th„ i . c ° ntroJled 
fill that void in the law. the leglslature to 


MR. MAAMBONG. May I make a very short reply on 
that. Precisely, the Committee has modified the original 
version by deleting the words “characterized by degrad- 
ing surroundings, unsanitary or” because it is felt that 
that is a surplusage. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, please read it now as it is now 
ready to be voted upon. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. It will 
read: “The employment of PHYSICAL, psychological 
OR DEGRADING punishment against ANY PRISONER 
OR DETAINEE or the use of substandard or INADE- 
QUATE penal facilities UNDER subhuman conditions 
should be dealt with BY LAW.” 

I now ask if this is acceptable to the Committee. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. This particular amendment has 
been accepted by the Committee and, therefore, we are 
now ready to vote. 

As many as are in favor of this particular amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( No Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 28 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

re H l!L E n S ^ EN 7- Commissl °ner Guingona seeks to 


MR. BENGZON. I move that we suspend the session 
and resume at two-thirty this afternoon to take up t ie 
period of amendments on the Article on Suffrage. 

THE PRESIDENT. There is lunch being seized but 
may we resume earlier than two-thirty? 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

terized d ^ Cription that our penal facilities are char 
conditions in^iv ^ SUrround ings under subhurr 
standard or inar^ 0pimdn ’ 1S Mready indicative of si 
wonderL w faCilities ' And ’ therefore, I v 

INADEQUATE” might be'a IUrpSge. “ SUbStandard 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President 
is asking for a vote. 


the Committee 


MR. BENGZON. One-thirty? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this agreeable to everybody? 

The session is suspended until one-thirty in th e 
afternoon. 

It was 12:25 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 1:33 p.m . , the session was resumed. 


, 10 ™ E PRESIDENT Yes ' but wl >at is the phrasing 

MR. GUINGONA. May I ask. Madam President for i 
reply to my comment before we vote? 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader i s 
recognized. 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


27 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 530 
(Article on Suffrage) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we go to the period of 
amendments or Committee Report No. 30 on Proposed 
Resolution No. 530 which is the Article on Suffrage. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. May I request that Commissioner 
Rama be recognized to present his amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, my amendment 
would affect Section 1, line 9. After the words 
“eighteen years of age and over,” insert ABLE TO 
READ AND WRITE; delete “and” and “who” then pro- 
ceed with the rest of the sentence “and shall have 
resided in the Philippines . . .” Those arc all my amend- 
ments, and I would like to delete lines 13 to 19 as a 
consequence of said amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Rama please 
repeat? 

MR. RAMA. Line 19 of Section 1 would read: 
‘eighteen years of age or over, ABLE TO READ AND 
WRITE and shall have resided in the Philippines . . .” 
So, we only delete the words “who” and “and.” As a 
consequence, delete lines 13 to 19. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, the Committee does 
not accept the amendment and submits the matter to a 
vote. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to explain my vote by 
taking advantage of the five-minute rule. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. RAMA. What we have here. Madam President, 
against my proposal are the emotional, the patriotic and 
the compassionate arguments. We are not in the business 
of trying to be compassionate, patriotic, etc. when it 
comes to reasoning out our proposal. The first is that 
the illiterate in the Philippines are really intelligent: they 
understand. They are better than the illiterate abroad. 
This is a patriotic argument. 

The other main argument and objection is that these 
illiterates are already unfortunate and we must not add 
to their misfortune by not allowing them to vote. This is 
a compassionate argument and I do not think we should 
consider this as a substitute for rational argument. 


What could be misleading is that the proponent of this 
amendment could be mistaken as to the illiterate as 
such that he condemns the misfortune of these people 
even if they are not at fault for their misfortune, and 
that I am discriminating against the illiterate because of 
their misfortune. That is not the point. The point is that 
the illiterate should not be allowed to vote because they 
cannot function as voters under a democratic rule of 
voting. They cannot know the election issues, the 
records of each candidate comparing them with the rest, 
the performances of these candidates. Therefore, they 
are not in a position to elect the best men as public 
officials and leaders of this country. 

Second, we have had our experience with these 
illiterates. We have seen how they were utilized in the 
past election. I am against the voting of the illiterate 
because they are vulnerable to manipulation by the 
politicians. Precisely, I do not want the illiterate to be 
further exploited by the politicians. That has hap- 
pened. They have already been exploited enough by 
many people and we allow these politicians and war- 
lords to exploit them further during elections. We 
have seen that this provision allowing the illiterate to 
vote makes our electoral process vulnerable to cheating. 
That is the main problem we have in this country. We 
should try our best to try to close the door to and 
minimize this cheating as much as possible. 

This Constitutional Commission whose Members have 
sworn not to run in the next election or in the next 6 
or 1 2 years anyhow are in the best position to pass this 
kind of amendment disauthorizing the illiterate to vote. 
No other body in this country, neither a Congress nor a 
constitutional convention, would have the opportunity 
and courage as this Constitutional Commission to 
approve that kind of a provision in the Constitution 
because it will take some kind of moral courage to 
present a provision disqualifying 1.2 million voters. 

So, for that reason, Madam President, I appeal to the 
Commission to at least look at this issue under the cold 
light of reason, not using the arguments that are either 
patriotic or romantic or compassionate. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, Commissioner 
Concepcion wants to say a few words on the matter 
before we go to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 

recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. Madam President. 

I do not propose to speak in favor or against any ot 
the proposals, but I would like to transmit what hap- 
pened in the Integrated Bar of the Philippines when the 
question of suffrage was taken up. 

One significant feature of the exchange of ideas in the 
Integrated Bar of the Philippines was that some ot the 
experienced politicians there were strongly in favor of 


28 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


the removal of the provision of the 1973 Constitution 
insofar as illiteracy is concerned. Their main reason was 
that during the last presidential elections, most of the 
irregularities were committed through illiterate voters. 
We discussed the propriety or popularity of a measure 
that would eliminate illiteracy as a disqualification to 
vote, but they said that the illiterates have never exer- 
cised the right of suffrage even under the 1973 Consti- 
tution. The reason is, they never knew; they never filled 
their own ballots; and they never knew what their ego 
had written on their ballots. During the last presidential 
elections, the vote-buying by agents of the administra- 
tion was rampant that they even caused many people to 
register as illiterate and sell their votes by receiving half 
of the amount agreed upon and choosing the buyer to 
fill the corresponding ballot. After the same had been 
cast, the balance of the price was delivered to the 
illiterate voter. 


Madam President, the draft provision submitted by 
the Committee has tried to offset that problem by add- 
ing a last sentence which would require Congress to 
design means to ensure voting by an illiterate without 
the intervention of another person. 


1 note, however, that the last sentence is preceded by 
another sentence appearing in the 1973 Constitution 
irecting ongress to take measures to insure the 

ZT C Lf S3nCtity of the ballot - This > notwithstand- 
Conorpcs • secrec y ^ as no * really been protected by 
M,eS 7o a vT C ,h aS t E ' eC,i0n Code authorizes *e 
such Hrnera™ ,l,r ° U8h a "° ,h ' r ballot of 


r ans b > * hich 1 

operation of every democratic society Th m 
should be heard in a democratic society 
b heve , ts their duty to express their vfe'w sand c 
their votes on matters of public concern I share" 
conv,ct,on that every citizen is under moral and ,e 
obligation to be fairly informed on matters of pul 
concern and should contribute to the formation a 

rir. ° f an enii8ht ™ d ^ oSn 


Every registered voter has the duty to cast his vote 
provision to this effect in the 1973 rnnct t 
introduced in response to a Van J Co " Stltu , tlon 1 
occasion of the centenary 0 f r prcpared on 
wherein it was pointed out that the n re f°™ , Aran< 
the right but also the duty to partir^ 0 ? n0t ° 

ment of a democratic community- ^thaVev^ ^ 
carries wifh i, the corresponding 
that sovereignty residing in the people, epitom zV 
people power, entails an assumption of the resnons 
hty to ensure that such power is properly exercis 

One of the remedies proposed in 1970 waseducat 
geared towards the development of political matur 
But our educational system seems to emphasize inst 
technique rather than values or practices devoid 


morality. It is high time that our citizens begin to 
evaluate their priorities on the matter. 

I notice that when we voted on Third Reading 
the other day someone left the session hall with a note 
stating that if a given project or draft were submitted 
to a vote, his vote would be in the manner indicated in 
his note, but that vote was not counted. At least, it 
was not counted. If that is so with respect to the 
literate, why should we make the distinction with the 
illiterate? But, of course, I am familiar with that. I 
think in India there are big pictures of the candidates in 
the polling places with their respective colors and sort of 
logo, and the illiterate voters are instructed on how they 
could vote. They are given a ballot where colors are 
printed on the ballot and they fill the ballot by lighting 
a match or a lighter or punching a hole into the ballot. 
If that could be adopted, I would certainly welcome it. 
But I want to stress the fact that notwithstanding the 
provision in the 1973 Constitution which is reproduced 
in the present draft that Congress shall provide means 
to ensure the secrecy of the ballot, nothing actually has 
been accomplished in that respect. And I am afraid that 
the sentence now being added may not solve the 
question adequately. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. I think the body is ready to vote 
now. Will Commissioner Rama again read the amend- 
ment? 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Uka would like to make a 
correction of what he previously said for the record. 

MR. UKA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recognized. 

MR. UKA. May I explain my statement. My friends, 
this is not a turnabout because I am not a balimbing, 
but I want to explain. Before I spoke, I was asked a 
question: “Are you supporting his amendment ? I 
said, “Yes.” That is why I stood up. We are but human. 
This is not a case of a mistake of the mind, but of the 
tongue. I used the words “not disenfranchise”; that is 
double negative. I should not have used the word “not. 
And so, I would like to correct that sentence. The 
tongue is very naughty sometimes. It is the cause of 
most of our misfortunes. That is why we have libel 
in the criminal code because of the tongue. 

I am not against the illiterate. In fact, I love them and 
because God loves them, as I said, He created many of 
them. But the case of the illiterate is like that of a driver. 
Whom do wc want to drive our car? The one who 
knows how to drive, of course. Whom do we allow to 
vote? The one who knows how to cast his vote. So. 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


29 


my not allowing someone to drive a car especially when 
I am the passenger does not mean that I do not love 
him. I will let him learn how to drive a car first. This is 
the reason why I said that in the case of the disabled 
and the illiterate, the law provides that the legislature 
shall design a mechanism or a system which will not 
require the assistance of another person. And I was 
thinking of that day when that mechanism will be 
designed. Maybe, it will not be a very long time from 
now; maybe it will be very soon especially in this age of 
the invention of sophisticated machines. 1 was explain- 
ing that someday the legislature may find an inventor 
who can invest a machine wherein the picture of the 
candidates will be there and the illiterate one will 
just punch something. He will just ask himself; “Shall 
I vote for this Juan de la Cruz or this one? ” He will 
do it alone by himself; nobody will punch it for him. 
That will be a great day. In the meantime, we must 
postpone his voting until that time when he has learned 
to write, or the sophisticated machine is invented for his 
use. This will also encourage education because he will 
say, “I must learn how to write so that I can vote for 
my candidate.” That will really bolster our educational 
system. So, my sentence there should have been “Let 
us, in the meantime, not allow him to vote or let us, in 
the meantime, disenfranchise him,” not that we love 
him less but we love him more. We want him to learn 
how to write so he can vote independently and wisely. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much. Commis- 
sioner Uka. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

May the honorable Commissioner Rama admit some 
amendments to his amendment? 

MR. RAMA. I would like to listen to them. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I would like to retain lines 15 and 
16 which read: “The Legislature shall provide a system 
for the purpose of securing the secrecy and sanctity of 
the vote.” It is contained in the 1973 Constitution, 
and in the amendment, it is proposed to be deleted. 

MR. RAMA. I accept the amendment joyfully. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

On the amendment of Commissioner Rama, which 
reads: “THOSE WHO ARE ABLE TO READ AND 
WRITE,” at present, we have adult education going on 
in all our barrios, and those who do not know how to 
read and write easily learn in two or three nights of 
adult education. I see no reason why these illiterates 
cannot learn through adult education. 


I saw what happened in the last election when there 
were assistors in the precinct. I saw one assistor from 
the time the precinct opened up to about eleven 
o’clock in the morning. I complained although I was 
only an onlooker, and said, “What is that person doing 
there? ” Those in the board told me that she was an 
assistor. I said, “Assisting who? ” She had been there 
from early morning and she was assisting all voters who 
went inside the booth. I asked the representative of the 
NAMFREL, “Ano ba ang ginagawa ninyo? Nagkaka- 
loko-loko na sa loob, wala pa kayong sinasabi.” They 
could not say anything. There was a policeman there 
with a big .45 caliber gun tucked in his waist guarding 
the whole precinct. So, the assistor was there and my 
complaint came to naught. That is my comment. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. May we now vote on the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Rama as amended by Commis- 
sioner de Castro? So, for purposes of clarity, Commis- 
sioner Concepcion requests that Commissioner Rama 
read again his proposed amendment with the amend- 
ment of Commissioner de Castro. 

MR. RAMA. The amendment, Madam President, is 
merely the insertion of the words ARE ABLE TO 
READ AND WRITE. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please read the whole Section 1. 

MR. RAMA. This has specific reference to line 9. So, 
the whole section will read; “Section 1. Suffrage shall 
be exercised by all citizens of the Philippines not other- 
wise disqualified by law, who are eighteen years of age 
or over, ARE ABLE TO READ AND WRITE and shall 
have resided in the Philippines for at least one year and 
in the place wherein they propose to vote for at least six 
months preceding the election.” 

So, the next amendment would be the deletion of 
lines 13 and 14 and lines 17 to 19. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that clear? Are we ready to 
vote now? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
amendment, as amended, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 6 votes in favor and 21 against; the 
amendment, as amended, is lost. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I request 
that Commissioner Monsod be recognized for an amend- 
ment. 


30 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bengzon is 
recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. I would like to propose an amend- 
ment by deletion. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I have only 
one anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized for his anterior amendment. 


MR. BENGZON. This is just for the information of 
the body. If the body approves the amendment by 
deletion proposed by Commissioner Monsod, there will 
be other Commissioners who will propose amendments 
in place thereof. Commissioner Aquino has an amend- 
ment which will take the place of this particular para- 
graph. So, perhaps, we could dispose of Commissioner 
Monsod’s amendment first. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. On line 
8 of Section 1, after the word “are,” I propose to add 
the words AT LEAST. Then on line 9, delete the words 
“or over,” so that the sentence will read: “Suffrage shall 
be exercised by all citizens of the Philippines not other- 
wise disqualified by law, who are AT LEAST eighteen 
years of age ...” 


FR. BERNAS. The Committee accepts.. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted th 
amendment. 

nnl.1- rtf 1 ® any ob -i ection? (Silence) The Chair heai 
none, the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

delete lta° N 1 S 7°to ‘ l 

word “In" and ending with ,he w„rd fc” 

the PRESIDENT. Wil! Commissioner Monsod ex 
plain his proposed amendment? 


ment^for^H 00 ' Madam President > 1 think the arj 
h against this Provision have already be 
amply discussed here. I just want to say that as far 
the mechanisms and the procedures are concerned th 
are amply covered by the mandate of the legislature 

illiterate should be allowed to vote, and that there • 


THE PRESIDENT. Is this 
tee? 


accepted by the Commit- 


FR BERNAS. I leave the matter to the body because 
I think there are others who prefer to keep or modify 
this provision. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Let us hear the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Aquino. 

MS. AQUINO. My proposed amendment would be an 
amplification of lines 17 to 19 which, when approved, 
should be transposed to the Article on Transitory 
Provisions. Hence, I would oppose the motion to delete 
lines 1 7 to 19. 

THE PRESIDENT. How would the paragraph read? 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I propose that we 
address first the amendment by deletion of Commis- 
sioner Monsod. 

MR. BENGZON. That is why I am proposing that we 
first vote on the amendment of Commissioner Monsod. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us vote first on the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Monsod. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I would like to speak 
against that amendment. 

MR. BENGZON. Commissioner Rama wishes to 
speak against the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, many of our Members 
here voted in favor or against my amendment because 
there is a similar provision on lines 17 to 19. So, it 
would be a little unfair to those people who voted 
against disenfranchising the illiterate in view of this 
method provided for on lines 17 to 19. Another reason 
is that it has been the largest fact of life here that the 
manner of voting by the illiterate through an assistor is 
one of the main sources of cheating. It also violates the 
first requirement of a democratic voting which is 
secrecy of the ballot. That is why it is important that 
this provision remain if we are allowing the illiterate to 
vote. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bernas is 
recognized. 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


31 


FR. BERNAS. The understanding is that if the three 
lines are approved as they are now, they would auto- 
matically disenfranchise the illiterate until the legis- 
lature is able to act. So unless the provisions for the 
nondisenfranchisement will be provided for, we oppose 
the total deletion. 

MR. BENGZON. May we put the matter to a vote 
now. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I know 
the parliamentary situation? Are we saying that we 
will vote on this amendment but we will later on put 
in additional safeguards or whatever wordings in this 
paragraph? 

THE PRESIDENT. Not necessarily. All that we are 
called upon is to vote whether or not we should delete 
lines 17 to 19. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I think if there is a 
motion to amend this provision, it might be a prejudicial 
issue to the question of deletion. 

MS. AQUINO. May I venture a possible explanation 
of the situation as it obtains now? It was clearly men- 
tioned by the honorable sponsors that upon the ratifica- 
tion of this Constitution, the disabled and the illiterate 
will be effectively and eventually disenfranchised - 
meaning, declassified as voters - in the absence of a 
statutory implementation of this Article on Suffrage. 
Since there is a consensus among us not to prematurely 
disenfranchise them, I would propose the insertion of a 
paragraph which would amplify lines 17 to 19 for 
transposition to the Transitory Provisions. It is my 
fear that if lines 17 to 19 are deleted, it will not address 
the problem; it will, in fact, only open the gates again 
f or potential vote cheating and debauchery as Commis- 
sioner Rama would say it. I would think that the right 
solution is to reenforce lines 17 to 19 with a specific 
provision that would address affirmatively the problem. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR BENGZON. Madam President, may I request a 
suspension of around two minutes so that Commis- 
sioners Monsod and Aquino can get together. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 2:00 p.m. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. May we request that Commissioner 
Bernas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, we have more or 
less agreed on a possible compromise. 

We keep the provision on lines 17 to 19 pretty much 
as it is with a minor change. It will now read: “In the 
case of the disabled and the illiterate, the legislature 
shall design a PROCEDURE which will not require the 
assistance of another person. UNTIL THE LEGISLA- 
TURE PROVIDES FOR THE APPROPRIATE PRO- 
CEDURE, THE ILLITERATE AND THE DISABLED 
SHALL BE ALLOWED TO VOTE UNDER THE 
EXISTING LAW AND SUCH RULES AS THE COM- 
MISSION ON ELECTIONS MAY PROMULGATE TO 
PROTECT THE SECRECY OF THE BALLOT.” 

THE PRESIDENT. That is beautiful. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just ask the 
Committee a question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Will the Commissioner please repeat 
the last phrase? 

FR. BERNAS. THE COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS 
MAY PROMULGATE TO PROTECT THE SECRECY 
OF THE BALLOT. 

MR. MONSOD. Is the interpretation of the Commit- 
tee “TO PROTECT THE SECRECY OF THE BAL- 
LOT” under the existing rules and regulations or is the 
Committee equating secrecy of the ballot with the 
phrase “will not require the assistance of another 
person l 

FR. BERNAS. My understanding is that during this 
interregnum, we leave the matter to the COMELEC. 

MR. MONSOD. Then, Madam President, I withdraw 
my previous motion and I endorse this amendment of 
the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, this is now a joint amendment 
by Commissioners Monsod, Nolledo and Aquino. 

FR. BERNAS. We accept. Madam President. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 2:20 p.m . , the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted. 


32 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

Will this amendment that Commissioner Bernas has 
just read take effect during the ratification of our 
Constitution? 


limit my proposals to the Committee only to those lines 
which are not so affected. I propose to delete “or over" 
on line 9, so that the provision would read: “Suffrage 
shall be exercised by all citizens of the Philippines not 
otherwise disqualified by law who are at least eighteen 
years of age.” 

FR. BERNAS. That was the amendment of Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes which was already accepted. 


FR. BERNAS. No, because until this Constitution is 
ratified, it is just a piece of paper. So. in the ratification, 
we will be governed by the Omnibus Election Code. 

MR. DE CASTRO. There will be the same assistor in 
the same booth from morning till afternoon? 

FR. BERNAS. I beg the Commissioner’s pardon? 

MR. DE CASTRO. The Commissioner said that in the 
ratification of the Constitution we are drafting, we 
will be governed by the existing law and that is, the 
Omnibus Election Code. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Then I said that there will be the 
same assistor in the same booth where he will stay from 
morning till afternoon. 


tion CnH ER ^ A , S ' ThC provision of the Omnibus Elec 
ti°n Lode, whatever it is, will govern. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, I am clarified. 

FR. BERNAS. Unless it is amended by the leeislativ 
power of the President at the moment. 8 

MR. BENGZON. The Committee has accepted th 
amendment, so if there are no objections, we T read 

amIndment ESIDENT ‘ ^ Committee has accepted tli 


MR. REGALADO. That is all right. I now propose to 
amend lines 15 to 16 of Section 1 to read as follows: 
“The NATIONAL ASSEMBLY shall PRESCRIBE a 
system WHICH WILL ENABLE QUALIFIED CITI- 
ZENS TEMPORARILY ABSENT FROM THE PHILIP- 
PINES OR THE PLACE WHERE THEY ARE REGIS- 
TERED TO CAST THEIR VOTES.” 

I am referring to overseas Filipinos and to those who, 
at the time of the election, may not be in the place 
where they are registered. They are the so-called 
absentee voters. I will repeat: “The NATIONAL AS- 
SEMBLY shall PRESCRIBE a system WHICH WILL 
ENABLE QUALIFIED CITIZENS TEMPORARILY 
ABSENT FROM THE PHILIPPINES OR THE PLACE 
WHERE THEY ARE REGISTERED TO CAST THEIR 
VOTES. IN ALL CASES SAFEGUARD SHALL BE 
PROVIDED TO SECURE the secrecy and THE sanctity 
of the BALLOT.’ 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR BERNAS Before we consider the amendment of 
Commissioner Regalado, may I ask if we have already 
acted upon the joint amendment of Commiss, oners 
Monsod, Nolledo and Aquino? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we have; it has already been 
approved. 

FR. BERNAS. So, we are into something new? 


Is there any objection to this proposed amendment? 
(Silence) The Chair hears 
approved. 


none; the amendment is 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 
FR. BERNAS. All right. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam Precinct 
that Commissioner Regalado b^recognizel^ ” reqUCS 

n , ™ PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, Commissioner 
Monsod has an amendment to the amendment of Com- 
missioner Regalado insofar as the Filipinos abroad are 
concerned. 


MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 

This morning I submitted to Commissioner Bernas 
in writing an omnibus set of amendments for the entire 
Article. However, since the body has already voted 
favorably on the amendment on lines 17 to 19, I will 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. May I propose a prior amendment? 
On line 7, the first line, we used the word “shall” fol- 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


33 


lowing the 1973 Constitution. The 1935 Constitution, 
however, used the word “may.” I propose to change the 
word “shall” to MAY. 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee accepts. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. PADILLA. There is a typographical error on line 
1 1 . We delete the letter “d” on the word “proposed.” • 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee accepts. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. May we request that Commissioner 
Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, there is a group of 
Commissioners who consolidated their proposals for 
absentee voting: Commissioners Ople, de los Reyes, 
Maambong, Foz and this Member. We would like to 

-noose an amendment to the amendment on line 16 

hich states: “TO SECURE the secrecy and THE 
W -mtitv of the BALLOT.” This should be followed with 
T. phrase AS WELL AS FOR ABSENTEE VOTING 
BY FILIPINOS ABROAD. 

We believe that the phrase “absentee voting” has 
, I . a d v its own meaning, and the other provisions on 
safeguarding secrecy and sanctity of the ballot, and 
Hi ^Qualifications and qualifications are already in the 
Constitution subject only to such modifications as the 
legislature may deem advisable to provide. That is the 
reason for proposing that amendment. Madam President. 

MR REGALADO. Before I act on that, may I inquire 
from Commissioner Monsod if the term “absentee 
oting” also includes transient voting; meaning, those 
V ° ho te let us say, studying in Manila need not go back 
Jo their places of registration, for instance, in Mindanao, 
to cast their votes. 

MR. MONSOD. I think our provision is for absentee 
voting by Filipinos abroad. 

MR REGALADO. How about those people who 
cannot go back to the places where they are registered? 

MR. MONSOD. Under the present Election Code, 
there are provisions for allowing students and military 


people who are temporarily in another place to register 
and vote. I believe that those situations can be covered 
by the Omnibus Election Code. The reason we want 
absentee voting to be in the Constitution as a mandate 
to the legislature is that there could be inconsistency 
on the residence rule if it is just a question of legislation 
by Congress. So, by allowing it and saying that this is 
possible, then legislation can take care of the rest. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 

MR. REGALADO. Just one more clarification. 
Madam President. 

So, in the interim, that rule presently appearing in the 
Omnibus Election Code as w'ell as the COMELEC rules 
on transient voting will be applied. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, whatever the rules may be; and 
at the moment, there are certain rules with respect to 
those situations. 

MR. REGALADO. Since it covers the purpose of the 
amendment, I accept the amendment to my amend- 
ment. This capsulizes my amendment and shortens 
what is expressed in my amendment. 

MR. BENGZON. May I request Commissioner 
Regalado to read his amendment to the amendment of 
Commissioner Monsod which would cover from line 7, 
Section 1, all the way down to lines 15 and 16. 

MR. REGALADO. It is our understanding that it will 
be for the record. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. The Commissioner should read 
from the beginning because he has some changes. 

MR. REGALADO. “Suffrage may be exercised by all 
citizens of the Philippines not otherwise disqualified by 
law, who are at least eighteen years of age and who shall 
have resided in the Philippines for at least one year and 
in the place wherein they propose to vote for at least 
six months preceding the election.” 

There is no change with respect to the second para- 
graph regarding literacy, property or other require- 
ments. 

The amendment to line 15 states: “The NATIONAL 
ASSEMBLY shall PRESCRIBE a system WHICH WILL 
ENABLE QUALIFIED CITIZENS TEMPORARILY 
ABSENT FROM THE PHILIPPINES OR THE PLACE 
WHERE THEY ARE REGISTERED TO CAST THEIR 
VOTES. IN ALL CASES SAFEGUARD SHALL BE 
PROVIDED TO SECURE the secrecy and THE sanctity 
of the BALLOT.” 

Since Commissioner Monsod says that that is already 
considered as the correct interpretation in his amend- 
ment to my proposed amendment with respect to 
“absentee voting,” I will accept the amendment to my 
amendment. 


34 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. So, lines 15 and 16 will read as 
stated by Commissioner Monsod. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. May I request Commissioner 
Monsod to restate his amendment to the amendment on 
lines 15 and 16 which has been accepted? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, lines 15 and 16 
will now read: “The NATIONAL ASSEMBLY shall 
PROVIDE a system for the purpose of securing the 
secrecy and sanctity of the vote AS WELL AS A SYS- 
TEM FOR ABSENTEE VOTING BY FILIPINOS 
ABROAD.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

FR, BERNAS. Is there no distinction between 
national and local elections? Do we leave that to the 
legislature? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, we leave it to the legislature. 

FR. BERNAS. Since this is a very novel thing in our 
system and since the Committee has not had the op- 
portunity to discuss this matter, I would leave it to the 
body rather than simply accept it. 


MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. That is why we do not use the word 
“ABROAD” because they must be domiciled in the 
Philippines. 

MR. MONSOD. That is why we are not repeating 
many of the basic things such as qualifications, disquali- 
fications and domicile requirements. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

. THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May I just be recognized for a clarifi- 
cation. There are certain qualifications for the exercise 
of the right of suffrage like having resided in the Philip- 
pines for at least one year and in the place where they 
propose to vote for at least six months preceding the 
election. What is the effect of these mandatory require- 
ments on the matter of the exercise of the right of 
suffrage by the absentee voters like Filipinos abroad? 

THE PRESIDENT. Would Commissioner Monsod 
care to answer? 


MR. BENGZON. May we ask for a vote, Madai 
President. 

and 16. PRES1DENT Yes - wi" be voting on lines 1 
idenf BENGZ0N - N o, the whole thing. Madam Prc 

haJaJready been approved (,) ° f SeC,i °" 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, lines 15 and 16 only. 

iusf want°t ) o RIC l 0 'f Be ! 0re WC VOte ' Madam P^sident, 

t n as k die word “Filipinos” is a gener; 

voters? D ° eS thlS rCfer t0 Filipinos who are qualifie 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, of course. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, that is the understanding. 

MR. RODRIGO. Should we not spell it out in tl 
provision or is it already understood? P * * “ 

FR. BERNAS. It is already understood 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to tl 
proposed amendments on lines 1 5 and 1 6? 

FR. BERNAS. In other words, these Filipinos must ( 
least be domiciled in the Philippines. 


MR. MONSOD. I believe the answer was already given 
by Commissioner Bernas, that the domicile require- 
ments as well as the qualifications and disqualifications 
would be the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we leaving it to the legisla- 
ture to devise the system? 

FR. BERNAS. I think there is a very legitimate 
problem raised there. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. I believe Commissioner Suarez is 
clarified. 

FR. BERNAS. But I think it should be further 
clarified with regard to the residence requirement or the 
place where they vote in practice; the understanding is 
that it is flexible. For instance, one might be a resident 
of Naga or domiciled therein, but he satisfies the re- 
quirement of residence in Manila, so he is able to vote 
in Manila. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I then suggest 
to the Committee to change the word Filipinos to 
QUALIFIED FILIPINO VOTERS. Instead of VOTING 
BY FILIPINOS ABROAD,” it should be QUALIFIED 
FILIPINO VOTERS. If the Committee wants QUALI- 
FIED VOTERS LIVING ABROAD, would that not 
satisfy the requirement? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Monsod 
say? 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


35 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, 1 think I would 
accept the phrase “QUALIFIED FILIPINOS ABROAD” 
because “QUALIFIED” would assume that he has the 
qualifications and none of the disqualifications to vote. 

MR. TINGSON. That is right. So does the Committee 
accept? 

FR. BERN AS. “QUALIFIED FILIPINOS ABROAD”? 

THE PRESIDENT. Docs the Committee accept the 
amendment? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. When Commissioner Bengzon 
asked me to read my proposed amendment, I speci- 
fically stated that the National Assembly shall prescribe 
a system which will enable qualified citizens, tempora- 
rily absent from the Philippines, to vote. According to 
Commissioner Monsod. the use of the phrase “absentee 
voting” already took that into account as its meaning. 
That is referring to qualified Filipino citizens tempo- 
rarily abroad. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, we accepted that. I would like 
to say that with respect to registration we will leave it 
up to the legislative assembly, for example, to require 
where the registration is. If it is, say, members of the 
diplomatic corps who may be continuously abroad for 
a long time, perhaps, there can be a system of regis- 
tration in the embassies. However, we do not like to 
preempt the legislative assembly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify, Commissioner 
Monsod’s amendment is only to provide a system. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner is not stating 
here that he wants new qualifications for these absentee 
voters. 

MR. MONSOD. That is right. They must have the 
qualifications and none of the disqualifications. 

THE PRESIDENT. It is just to devise a system by 
which they can vote. 

MR. MONSOD. That is right, Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it clear enough? Are we ready 
to vote now? 

Those in favor of the amendment, as amended, on 
lines 15 and 16 which includes “VOTING BY QUALI- 
FIED FILIPINOS ABROAD.” please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand. ) 


Those against the amendment, as amended, please 
raise their hand. (No Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 28 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized for clarification. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. For clarification purposes, we just 
want to state for the record that in the case of qualified 
Filipino citizens residing abroad and exercising their 
right of suffrage, they can cast their votes for the can- 
didates in the place where they were registered to vote 
in the Philippines. So as to avoid any complications, for 
example, if they are registered in Angeles City, they 
could not vote for a mayor in Naga City. 

In other words, if that qualified voter is registered in 
Angeles City, then he can vote only for the local and 
national candidates in Angeles City. I just want to make 
that clear for the record. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner 
Regalado say? 

MR. REGALADO. I just want to make a note on the 
statement of Commissioner Suarez that this envisions 
Filipinos residing abroad. The understanding in the 
amendment is that the Filipino is temporarily abroad. 

He may not be actually residing abroad; he may just be 
there on a business trip. It just so happens that the day 
before the elections he has to fly to the United States, 
so he could not cast his vote. He is temporarily abroad, 
but not residing there. He stays in a hotel for two days 
and comes back. This is not limited only to Filipinos 
temporarily residing abroad. But as long as he is tempo- 
rarily abroad on the date of the elections, then he can 
fall within the prescription of Congress in that situation. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the Commissioner for his 
further clarification. Precisely, we need this clarification 
on record. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, to clarify what we 
mean by “temporarily abroad,” it need not be on very 
short trips. One can be abroad on a treaty traders visa. 
Therefore, when we talk about registration, it is possible 
that his residence is in Angeles and he would be able to 
vote for the candidates in Angeles, but Congress or the 
Assembly may provide the procedure for registration, 
like listing one’s name, in a registry list in the embassy 
abroad. That is still possible under this system. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, just one clarifica- 
tion if Commissioner Monsod agrees with this. 


36 


SATURDAY, JULY 19, 1986 


Suppose we have a situation of a child of a diplomatic 
officer who reaches the voting age while living abroad 
and he has never registered here. Where will he register? 
Will he be a registered voter of a certain locality in the 
Philippines? 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, it is possible that the system 
will enable that child to comply with the registration 
requirements in an embassy in the United States and his 
name is then entered in the official registration book in 
Angeles City, for instance. 

FR. BERNAS. In other words, he is not a registered 
voter of Los Angeles, but a registered voter of a locality 
here. 

MR. MONSOD. That is right. He does not have to 
come home to the Philippines to comply with the 
registration procedure here. 


FR. BERNAS. So, he does not have to come home. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, the Floor Leader 
wishes to inquire if there are more clarifications needed 
from the body. 


Also, the Floor Leader is happy to announce tha 
ere are no more registered Commissioners to propose 

amendments. ^ 1 that We doSe the peri ° d ° 


The Chakh^ar DENT there any ob J ectio n? ( Silence , 
the Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we vote on Seconc 

Reading on the Article on Suffrage. 

Ti/rh PPESIDENT - Is there any objection? ( Silence , 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

poll Re so lu tio^N o.°5 3 0^ °“ SeC ° nd Reading ° n Pr ° 

requested to please read the 


No T 53 E 0 S Sfed ARY ' GENERAL - Pr ° pOSed Resolution 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION AN ARTICLE ON SUFFRAGE 


Those against the proposed resolution, please raise 
their hand. ( One Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 28 votes in favor and one against; 
the motion is approved. 

Proposed Resolution No. 530, as amended, is ap- 
proved on Second Reading. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

The proposed resolution on the Article on Suffrage 
has been approved on Second Reading; hence, the 
illiterate as well as the disabled are allowed to vote. The 
law that shall be followed during the ratification of the 
Constitution shall be the Omnibus Election Code. I 
request the leadership of this Constitutional Commis- 
sion to appeal to our President to issue a proclamation 
or a decree allowing the illiterate to vote and not to 
require the assistance of a third person as contemplated 
in the Omnibus Election Code since, as I said, the vote 
of the disabled and the illiterate is being guided by the 
assistor. I will not be surprised if others who may like to 
approve our Constitution may not do so because of the 
assistor. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


MR. BENGZON. The Floor Leader asks that the 
request of Commissioner de Castro be noted and that it 
be considered by the leadership. The Floor Leader also 
would like to advise the body that Committee Report 
No. 22, which was submitted by the Committee on the 
Legislative, will be considered on Monday. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on Suffrage) 


NO. 530 


THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of this Proposed 
Resolution No. 530, as amended, please raise their hand 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I move for 
adjournment of the session until Monday at nine-thirty 
in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
Monday at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 2:50 p.m. 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


37 


R.C.C. NO. 35 
Monday, July 21, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


At 9:47 a. m. , the President, the Honorable Cecilia ROLL CALL 

Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. call the roll. 


NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Francisco A. Rodrigo. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. RODRIGO. O Diyos na lubhang 
Makapangyarihan: 

Kami’y Iyo sanang damayan, tulungan 
Sana’y liwanagin ang anting isipan; 

Linisin ang anting puso’t kalooban; 

Pasipaging lubos ang anting katawan 
Upang ang tungkuling anting pinapasan 
Ay anting matupad, anting magampanan 
At sa gayo’y anting maisakatuparan 
Ang anting adhikang magharap sa bayan 
Ng Saligang Batas na naglalarawan 
Ng atas ng tanang mga mamantayan 
Na papaghariin sa lupang hinirang 
Ang laya, ang dangal, ang katiwasayan; 

Ang madlang pag-unlad na pangkabultayan. 

At ang katarungan sa aming lipunan. 

Siya Nawa. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

, . Present 

Brocka 

. . Present* 

Calderon . . . . 

. . Present 

Castro de ... 

. . Present 

Colayco .... 

. . Present* 

Concepcion . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. . Present 

Foz 

. . Present* 

Garcia 

. . Present* 

Gascon 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . 

. . Present* 

Jamir 

. . Present 

Laurel 

. . Present* 

Lerum 

. Present* 

Maambong . . 

. . Present* 

Monsod . . . . 

. . Present* 


Natividad . . . . 

. Present* 

Nieva 

. Present 

Nolledo 

. . Present 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Rama 

. . Present* 

Regalado .... 

. . Present* 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present* 

Rodrigo . . . . 

. . Present 

Romulo . . . . 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. Present* 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present* 

Tan 

. . . Present 

Tingson . . . 

Present 

Trenas .... 

Present 

Uka 

Present 

V illacorta . . 

. Present 

Villegas . . . . 

. Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 27 Members responded to the call- 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 9:49 a.m. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 9:51 a.m., the session was resumed. 


MR. CALDERON. I move to dispense with the read 
ing of the Journal of the previous session. 


*Appeared after the roll call 


38 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that 
we proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


Letter from Bulacan Political Science Society signed 
by Mr. Jesus S. Isidoro-Torres, expressing opposition 
to the proposal seeking to “freeze” the powers of the 
Presidential Commission on Good Government. 

(Communication No. 261 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Letter from the Filipino Life Insurance Companies 
Association, Inc., signed by Mr. Daniel M. Mercado, Jr., 
suggesting provisions on the national language, balanced 
budgeting, and nationalization of public utilities, among 
others. 

(Communication No. 262 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 


Communication from 
Maharlika (KASAMA) 
Constitution. 


the Katipunan 
suggesting salient 


ng Samahang 
features of the 


S°98 m 6 U ) niCati °" N °' M8 “ Commission 

To the Steering Committee. 


Communication from Media for Evangelization - 
Development proposing a resolution providing fo 
constitutional provision to promote and protect 
peoples rights and welfare in the use of the air 
broadcast media. 


on986) niCati0n N °' 259 “ Constitu,ional Commission 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Letter from Mr. Raymundo S. Cruz of 202 De Castro 
Subdivision, Paso de Bias, Valenzuela, Metro Manila, 
proposing Filipinization of certain industries and 
provisions on labor, among others. 

(Communication No. 263 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Mr. Jose D. Mandac of 481 A. Mabini St., 
Manggahan, Pasig, Rizal, favoring the retention of the 
U.S. military bases. 

(Communication No. 264 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Letter from Mr. Bernardo R. Sebastian of 471 Shaw 
Boulevard, Mandaluyong, Metro Manila, favoring the 
retention of the U.S. military bases. 

(Communication No. 265 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Communication from Media for Evangelization ; 
Development proposing a resolution providing for a St 
policy to aid and support the natural right and dutv 
parents in the education and moral development of 
youth through a system of free elementary and seco 
ary education, whether in government-owned schc 
or in private community-based schools, at the opt 
of the parents. 


(Communication No. 260 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Letter from Mr. Leo R. Cruz of 6-G Yap Apartment, 
Rizal Avenue Extension, Cebu City, suggesting genuine 
land reform, and more economic assistance to Filipinos, 
among others. 

(Communication No 266 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


39 


MR. ROMULO. I move that we consider Committee 
Report No. 22 on the Proposed Article on the National 
Assembly as reported out by the Committee on the 
Legislative. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, there is a pre- 
judicial question which is involved in this report, and 
that is, whether or not we should have a bicameral oi 
unicameral legislature. I am a member of the Commit- 
tee, Madam President, and when we voted on whether i 
should be unicameral or bicameral, the vote was a tie, 
and so the Chairman, in order to break the tie, voted in 
favor of a unicameral structure. 


And so, the whole report of the Committee is based 
on a unicameral legislature, but it is possi e t ia ie 
body itself as a whole might vote for a bicameral assem- 
bly. In which case, the whole report will have to be 
changed to conform to a bicameral structure. 

And so, when we had that caucus of all the Commis 
sioners, I suggested that we first decide on this pre- 
judicial question so that we will not be wasting too 


much time. 


MR. ROMULO. May 1 suggest, and this was made 

consultation with the Chairman, Commissioner Dav.de 
that he proceed with his sponsorship speech, atte 
we can have a freewheeling discussion on a unicamera 
versus a bicameral legislature and then go into caucus 
thereafter. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to the Commis- 
sioner? 


MR. RODRIGO. If that is the desire of the Chairman 
of the Committee. 


MR. ROMULO. It is, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I conform. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


CONSIDERATION OF C.R. NO. 22 
(Article on the National Assembly) 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Committee Report No. 22 is now in 
order. With the permission of the body, the Secretary- 
General will read only the title of the committee report 
without prejudice to inserting in the Record the whole 
text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Committee Report 
No. 22, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING AN ARTICLE ON THE NA- 
TIONAL ASSEMBLY. 


(The following is the whole text of the proposed Article on 
the National Assembly per C.R. No. 22.) 


COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 22 


The Committee on the Legislative to which were referred the 
following: 


Resolution No. 35, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR SIGNIFICANT MULTI- 
SECTORAL REPRESENTATION IN THE NATIONAL 
LEGISLATURE. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta. 


Resolution No. 92, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION WHICH PROHIBITS CONGRESS 
TO DEFINE, PRESCRIBE, AND APPORTION THE 
JURISDICTION OF INFERIOR COURTS WITHOUT 
THE PRIOR RECOMMENDATION OF THE SUPREME 
COURT. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 


Resolution No. 109, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR INITIATIVE AND 
REFERENDUM IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Romulo, Monsod, Nieva, Bengzon, 
Jr. and Bernas. 


Resolution No. 1 32, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE EXEMPTION OF 
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS FROM REAL ESTATE 
TAXATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 


PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. ROMULO. I move that we consider Committee 
Reoort No. 22 on Proposed Resolution Nos. 35, 92, 
109, 132, 150, 157,189,235,256,290,310,319,321, 
334, 336, 337, 364, 375, 381, 396, 400 and 403 as 
reported out by the Committee on the Legislative. 


Resolution No. 150, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION FIXING THE TERM OF OFFICE 
OF THE MEMBERS OF THE PHILIPPINE CONGRESS/ 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 


40 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


Resolution No. 157, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE POWER OF THE NATION- 
AL ASSEMBLY TO CALL SPECIAL MID-TERM PRES- 
IDENTIAL AND VICE-PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Azcuna. 


Resolution No. 319, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION EXCLUSIVELY 
EMPOWERING THE LEGISLATURE TO DECLARE THE 
EXISTENCE OF A STATE OF WAR. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 


Resolution No. 189, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE CONSTITUTION 
THAT DISCRETIONARY PUBLIC FUNDS SHALL BE 
UNDER SUCH GUIDELINES AND RESTRICTIONS AS 
MAY BE FIXED BY LAW TO AVOID ABUSE OF DIS- 
CRETION AND THAT ALL DISBURSEMENTS OF DIS- 
CRETIONARY FUNDS SHALL BE SUBJECT TO STRICT 
AUDITING REQUIREMENTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

Resolution No. 235, entitled: 


Resolution No. 321, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING FOR THE ADOPTION OF A 
BICAMERAL SYSTEM OF LEGISLATURE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

Resolution No. 334, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING A SYSTEM OF MULTI-PARTY 
AND MULTI-SECTORAL REPRESENTATION IN THE 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. 


RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE DISQUALIFICA- 
TION OF MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE FROM 
PARTICIPATING AS COUNSEL IN JUDICIAL, QUASI- 
JUDICIAL, OR ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS AND 
PROHIBITIONS AGAINST THEIR HAVING FINANCIAL 
INTERESTS IN CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Regalado. 


Resolution No. 256, entitled: 

“ 0N T ° INC0RP0 *ATE IN THE NEW CONS! 

PRINCIPIF S 10N INSTITUTIONALIZING te 
PRINCIPLE OF PEOPLE POWER IN THE CONSTITI 
TIONAL PROCESS THROUGH THE METHOD 0 
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM. METH0D 0 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia and Gascon. 


Resolution No. 290, entitled: 

R =^r G ™ E PRO ™mON FOR LEGI 
FERIOR TO AS C0UNSEL TO COURTS II 

JUR SDIC^ON amh IATE C ° URTS 0F APPELLA1 
Ipmr I C rV? N to A ?o MAKIN G SUCH PROHIBITS 

rUTFS A RMT ™ JJJ E1R FIRM PARTNERS OR ASS< 
M C A Je ES ™ UT ALLOWING THEM AND SUCH PAR 
NERS OR ASSOCIATES TO APPEAR AS COUNSE 

AT TF COMMISSIONS; 0 
IN THE ALTERNATIVE, ALLOWING THEM AS THE 

WERE ALLOWED IN THE 1935 CONSTITUTION T 

W HFRF^I N ^TH F ''r rtVF R \ EXCEPT IN CERTAIN CASE 
WHER THE GOVERNMENT OR AN OFFICER 0 

EMPLOYEE THEREOF IS INVOLVED urr, ^ tK U 
Introduced by Hon. Foz. 


Introduced by Hon. Monsod, Foz and Romulo. 


Resolution No. 336, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION ELEVEN, ARTICLE VIII, OF THE 
1973 CONSTITUTION, WITH MODIFICATION, PRO- 
HIBITING MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY 
FROM HAVING FINANCIAL INTERESTS IN CONFLICT 
WITH THOSE OF THE GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 


Resolution No. 337, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION FOURTEEN, ARTICLE VIII, OF THE 
1973 CONSTITUTION, WITH MODIFICATION, IN 
ORDER TO ADD THERETO THE TERM “INTERNA- 
TIONAL AGREEMENT.” 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 


Resolution No. 364, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE TERM OF THE MEM- 
BERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 


Resolution No. 375, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR TAX EXEMPTION TO 
NON-PROFIT EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS OR 
THOSE WHICH WILL LIMIT DIVIDENDS. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta, Villegas, Trenas and Bacani. 


Resolution No. 310, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR INITIATIVE AND 
REFERENDUM ON THE NATIONAL AND LOCAL 
LEVEL IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon. 


Resolution No. 38] , entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
THE LEGISLATURE PROVISIONS DEFINING THE 
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE LEGISLATURE 
TO EXEMPT FROM TAXATION CHARITABLE AND 
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS AND TO PROHIBIT THE 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


41 


APPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC MONEY OR PROPERTY 
AND OTHER RESOURCES FOR THE USE, BENEFIT 
OR SUPPORT OF ANY CHURCH OR SYSTEM OF 
RELIGION. 

Introduced by Hon. Rigos. 

Resolution No. 396, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

Resolution No. 400, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A BICAMERAL LEGIS- 
LATURE WHICH SHALL BE KNOWN AS CONGRESS 
OF THE PHILIPPINES, WHOSE UPPER HOUSE SHALL 
BE A SENATE OF TWENTY-FOUR (24) MEMBERS 
ELECTED AT LARGE AND WHOSE LOWER HOUSE 
SHALL BE COMPOSED OF REPRESENTATIVES 
ELECTED BY DISTRICTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Calderon, Uka, Alonto, Rigos and 
Tingson. 

Resolution No. 403, entitled: 

RESOLUTION URGING THE CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSION TO CONSIDER THE ADOPTION OF A PAR- 
LIAMENTARY FORM OF GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo and Bennagen. 

has, together with the Malolos Constitution, the 1935 Constitu- 
tion, and the original 1973 Constitution which, under the Rules 
of the Commission, are considered working drafts, as well as 
drafts of the constitution submitted by the 1986 UP Law 
Constitution Project, Philippine Constitution Association, the 
Constitutional Convention Association represented by former 
President Diosdado Macapagal, former Ambassador Jose Ale- 
jandrino, and other proposals from the Integrated Bar of the 
Philippines and the private sector transmitted to the Commission 
and the consensus obtained from the public hearings conducted 
in various places of the country at the instance of the Ad Hoc 
Committee on Public Hearings, studied the same, deliberated 
upon them, and conducted public hearings on certain contro- 
versial issues, and has the honor to report back to the Commis- 
sion on a consolidation thereof in one article on the legislature 
under the heading The National Assembly, with Commissioners 
Davide, Jr., Azcuna, Abubakar, Alonto, Aquino, Calderon, 
Concepcion, de los Reyes, Jr., Garcia, Guingona, Jamir, Lerum, 
Rodrigo, Sumulong and Trefias as sponsors and Commissioners 
Villacorta, Romulo, Regalado, Foz, Gascon, Tingson, Monsod, 
Rigos and Sarmiento as cosponsors. 

(Sgd.) Hilario G. Davide, Jr. 

Chairman 

Committee on the Legislative 

(Sgd.) Adolfo S. Azcuna (Sgd.) Yusup R. Abubakar 

Vice-Chairman 

(Sgd.) Ahmad Domocao Alonto (Sgd.) Felicitas S. Aquino 


(Sgd.) Jose D. Calderon (Sgd.) Roberto C. Concepcion 

(Sgd.) Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr. (Sgd.) Edmundo G. Garcia 
(Sgd.) Serafin V. C. Guingona (Sgd.) Alberto M. K. Jamir 
(Sgd.) Eulogio R. Lerum (Sgd.) Francisco A. Rodrigo 

(Sgd.) Lorenzo M. Sumulong (Sgd.) Efrain B. Trefias 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING AN ARTICLE ON THE NA- 
TIONAL ASSEMBLY 

Be it resolved by the Constitutional Commission in session 
assembled, to incorporate in the new Constitution the following 
Article on the National Assembly: 

ARTICLE 

THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

SECTION 1. The Legislative power shall be vested in the 
National Assembly, except to the extent reserved to the people 
by the provisions on initiative and referendum. 

SEC. 2. The National Assembly shall be composed of not 
more than two hundred and fifty members who shall be elected 
from legislative districts apportioned among the provinces and 
cities in accordance with the number of their respective inhab- 
itants and on the basis of a uniform and progressive ratio, and 
those who, as provided by law, shall be elected from the sectors 
and party list. The sectoral and party list representatives shall in 
no case exceed twenty percent of the entire membership of the 
National Assembly. 

Each legislative district shall comprise, as far as practicable, 
contiguous, compact and adjacent territory, provided, however 
that each city with a population of more than two hundred 
thousand, or each province, shall have at least one representative. 

SEC. 3. Within three years following the return of every 
census, the National Assembly shall make a reapportionment of 
legislative districts based on the standards provided in the 
preceding section. 

SEC. 4. The Members of the National Assembly shall be 
elected for a term of four years which shall begin, unless other- 
wise provided by law, at noon on the thirtieth day of June next 
following their election. 

SEC. 5. No person shall be a Member of the National Assem- 
bly unless he is a natural-born citizen of the Philippines and, on 
the day of the election, is at least twenty -five years of age, able 
to read and write, and, except the sectoral and party list repre- 
sentatives, a registered voter in the district in which he shall be 
elected, and a resident thereof for a period of not less than one 
year immediately preceding the day of the election. 

SEC. 6. Unless otherwise provided by law, the regular election 
of the Members of the National Assembly shall be held on the 
second Monday of May and every four years thereafter. 

SEC. 7. In case a vacancy arises in the National Assembly 
eighteen months or more before a regular election, the Commis 
sion on Elections shall call a special election to be held within 


42 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


sixty days after the vacancy occurs to elect the Member to serve 
the unexpired term. 


SEC. 8. The National Assembly shall convene once every year 
on the fourth Monday of July for its regular session, unless a dif- 
ferent date is fixed by law, and shall continue to be in session for 
such number of days as it may determine until thirty days before 
the opening of its next regular session, exclusive of Saturdays, 
Sundays and legal holidays. However, it may be called to session 
at any time by the President to consider such subjects or legis- 
lation as he may designate. 

SEC. 9. (1) The National Assembly shall, by a majority vote 
of all its Members, elect its Speaker from the Members thereof. It 
shall choose such other officers as it may deem necessary. 

(2) A majority of all the Members of the National Assembly 
shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number 
may adjourn from day to day and may compel the attendance 
of absent Members in such manner, and under such penalties, as 
the National Assembly may provide. 

(3) The National Assembly may determine the rules of its 
proceedings, punish its Members for disorderly behavior, and with 
the concurrence of two-thirds of all its Members, suspend or 
expel a Member, but if the penalty is suspension, this shall not 
exceed sixty days. 


(4) The National Assembly shall keep a Journal of its proceed 
ings, and from lime to t’me publish the same, excepting sue! 
parts, as may, in its judgment, affect national security; and th( 

° n ^ c * uestion at the request of one-fiftl 
the Members present, be entered ir. the Journal. 

Tribunal In' I^fT' Assembl y ^ have an Electora 
Tribunal which shall be the sole judge of all contests relating tc 

the election returns, and qualifications of its Members. It shall be 

omposed of nine members, three of whom shall be Justices ol 

the Supreme Court to be designated by the Chief Justice and the 

T7 e T e Members of ,he N > ,i °"» l A*«'b“ 

“ hetr ,° n baSiS 0f propor,i °“ 1 representatior 
Iron, the political parties or sectors represented therein Th< 

senior justice in the Electoral Tribunal shall be its Chairman 
S EC 11 There shall be a Commission on Appointment' 
TtST ~ r MembCrS ° f the NationaTAssembly 

the nolitirpl' °!' he baS ' S ° f pr °P° rtional ^presentation fron 
the political parties or sectors represented therein. The Speake 

shall be the Chairman ex-officio of the Commission, but shal 

not vote, except in case of tie. 


SEC. 12. The Electoral Tribunal and the Commission 
Appointments shall be constituted within thirty days after 
National Assembly shall have been organized with the election 
Thc Commtarion on Appointments shall meet 0 
while the National Assembly is in session, at the call of its Ch 
man or a majority of its members, to dischar^ . i 
functions as are herein conferred upon it. 


SEC. 13. Unless otherwise provided by law, each Member of 
the National Assembly shall receive an annual salary of 
thousand pesos. The Speaker of the National Assembly shall 

receive an annual salary of thousand pesos. No 

increase in salary shall take effect until after the expiration of the 
term of the Members of the National Assembly approving such 
increase. 


SEC. 14. The records and books of accounts of the National 
Assembly shall be open to the public in accordance with law, and 
such books shall be audited by the Commission on Audit which 
shall publish annually the itemized expenditures for each 
Member. 

SEC. 15. A Member of the National Assembly shall, in all 
offenses punishable by not more than six years imprisonment, be 
privileged from arrest while the National Assembly is in session; 
but the National Assembly shall surrender the Member involved 
to the custody of the law within twenty-foui hours after its 
adjournment for a recess or for its next session, otherwise such 
privilege shall cease upon its failure to do so. A Member shall not 
be questioned nor be held liable in any other place for any speech 
or debate in the National Assembly or in any committee thereof. 

SEC. 16. No Member of the National Assembly shall hold any 
other office or employment in the government, or any subdivi- 
sion, agency, or instrumentality thereof, including government- 
owned or controlled corporations during his tenure. Neither shall 
he be appointed during the term for which he was elected, to any 
office which may have been created or the emoluments thereof 
increased while he was a Member of the National Assembly. 

SEC. 17. No Member of the National Assembly shall appear as 
counsel before any court which is not of collegiate composition, 
before any court in any civil case wherein the Government, or 
any subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof is the adverse 
party, or in any criminal case wherein any officer or employee of 
the government is accused of an offense committed in relation to 
his office, before the Electoral Tribunal, or before any adminis- 
trative body. Neither shall he, directly or indirectly, be interested 
financially in any contract with, or in any franchise or special 
privilege granted by the government, or any subdivision, agency, 
or instrumentality thereof, including any government-owned or 
controlled corporation, during his term of office. He shall not 
intervene in any matter before any office of the government for 
his pecuniary benefit. 

SEC. 18. There shall be a question hour at least once a month 
or as often as the Rules of the National Assembly may provide, 
which shall be included in its agenda, during which the Members 
of the Cabinet and their deputies may be required to appear and 
answer questions and interpellations by Members of the National 
Assembly. Written questions shall be submitted to the Speaker at 
least three days before a scheduled question hour. Interpellations 
shall not be limited to the written questions, but may cover 
matters related thereto. The agenda shall specify the subjects of 
the question hour. When the security of the State so requires and 
the President so states in writing, the question hour shall be 
conducted in executive session. 

SEC. 19. The National Assembly or any of its committees may 
conduct inquiries in aid of legislation in accordance with its duly 
published rules of procedure. The rights of persons appealing in 
or affected by such inquiries shall be respected. 

SEC. 20. (1) No treaty or international agreement shall be 
valid and effective unless concurred in by majority of all the 
Members of the National Assembly. 

(2) The National Assembly, by a vote of two-thirds of all its 
Members, shall have the/^ole power to declare the existence of a 
state of war. ( y j 


MONDAY, JULY 21. 1986 


43 


SEC. 21. In times of war or other national emergency, the 
National Assembly may by law authorize the President, for a 
limited period and subject to such restrictions as it may prescribe, 
to exercise powers necessary and proper to carry out a declared 
national policy. Unless sooner withdrawn by resolution of the 
National Assembly, such power shall cease upon the next 
adjournment of the National Assembly. 

SEC. 22. (1) The President shall submit to the National Assem- 
bly within thirty days from the opening of each regular session, as 
the basis of the general appropriations bill, a budget of receipts 
based on existing and proposed revenue measures, and of ex- 
penditures. The form, content, and manner of preparation of the 
budget shall be prescribed by law. 

(2) No provision or enactment shall be embraced in the general 
appropriations bill unless it relates specifically to some particular 
appropriation therein. Any such provision or enactment shall be 
limited in its operation to the appropriation to which it relates. 

(3) The procedure in approving appropriations for the 
National Assembly shall strictly follow the procedure for approv- 
ing appropriations for other departments and agencies. 

(4) A special appropriations bill shall specify the purpose for 
which it is intended, and shall be supported by funds actually 
available as certified by the National Treasurer, or to be raised by 
a corresponding revenue proposal included therein. 

(5) No law shall be passed authorizing any transfer of appro- 
priations; however, the President, the Speaker, the Chief Justice 
of the Supreme Court, and the heads of Constitutional Commis- 
sions may by law be authorized to augment any item in the 
general appropriations law for their respective offices from 
savings in other items of their respective appropriations. 

(6) If, by the end of any fiscal year, the National Assembly 
shall have failed to pass the general appropriations bill for the 
ensuing fiscal year, the general appropriations law for the pre- 
ceding fiscal year shall be deemed re-enacted and shall remain in 
force and effect until the general appropriations bill is passed by 
the National Assembly. 

SEC. 23. (1) Every bill shall embrace only one subject which 
shall be expressed in the title thereof. 

(2) No bill shall become a law unless it has passed three read- 
ings on separate days, and printed copies thereof in its final form 
have been distributed to the Members three days before its 
passage, except when the President certifies to the necessity or its 
immediate enactment to meet a public calamity or emergency 
Upon the last reading of a bill, no amendment thereto shall 
be allowed, and the vote thereon shall be taken immediately 
thereafter, and the yeas and nays entered in the Journal. 

SEC 24 (1) Every bill passed by the National Assembly shall, 
before it becomes a law, be presented to the President. If he ap- 
proves the same, he shall sign it; otherwise, he shall veto it and 
return the same with his objections to the National Assembly, 
which shall enter the objections at large on its Journal. The bill 
may be reconsidered by the National Assembly and, if approved 
by two-thirds of all its Members, shall become a law. The Pres- 
ident shall act on every bill passed by the National Assembly 
within thirty days after the date of receipt thereof; otherwise, it 
shall become a law as if he had signed it. 


(2) The President shall have the power to veto any particular 
item or items in an appropriation, revenue, or tariff bill, but the 
veto shall not affect the item or items to which he does not 
object. 

SEC. 25. (1) The rule of taxation shall be uniform and equita- 
ble. The National Assembly shall evolve a progressive system of 
taxation. 

(2) The National Assembly may by law authorize the President 
to fix within specified limits, and subject to such limitations and 
restrictions as it may impose, tariff rates, import and export 
quotas, tonnage and wharfage dues, and other duties or imposts. 

(3) Charitable institutions, churches, and parsonages or con- 
vents appurtenant thereto, mosques, non-profit cemeteries, and 
all lands, buildings, and improvements actually, directly and 
exclusively used for religious, charitable, or educational purposes 
shall be exempt from taxation. 

(4) No law granting any tax exemption shall be passed without 
the concurrence of a majority of all the Members of the National 
Assembly. 

SEC. 26. (1) No money shall be paid out of the Treasury 
except in pursuance of an appropriations made by law. 

(2) No public money or property shall ever be appropriated, 
applied, paid, or used, directly or indirectly, for the use, benefit, 
or support of any sect, church, denomination, sectarian institu- 
tion, or system of religion or for the use, benefit, or support of 
any priest, preacher, minister, or other religious teacher or digni- 
tary as such, except when such priest, preacher, minister, or digni- 
tary is assigned to the armed forces, or to any penal institution, 
or government orphanage or leprosarium. 

(3) All money collected on any tax levied for a special purpose 
shall be treated as a special fund and paid out for such purpose 
only. If the purpose for which a special fund was created has been 
fulfilled or abandoned, the balance, if any, shall be transferred to 
the general funds of the Government. 

SEC. 27. The National Assembly shall provide for a system of 
initiative and referendum, and the exceptions therefrom, whereby 
the people can directly propose and enact laws or approve or 
reject any act or law or part thereof passed by the National As- 
sembly or local legislative body after the registration of a petition 
therefor signed by at least ten percent of the registered voters in 
the immediately preceding elections. 

MR. ROMULO. May 1 now request that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized to sponsor the report which 
will thereafter be subject to interpellations. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized to sponsor Committee Report No. 22. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER DAVIDE 

MR. DAVIDE. The institutions best fitted to repre- 
sent people and serve their true interest are not necessar- 
ily those developed in a particular period of history. On 
the contrary, their effectiveness may depend on their 
ability to adapt themselves to changing circumstances in 
the light of experience. 


44 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


Madam President, distinguished colleagues, ladies and 
gentlemen of the Commission, it is in this context that 
I, together with the members of the Committee on the 
Legislative, stand before this august body this morning 
to report the result of the work which the Commission 
has given to us in trust. 

The Committee, composed of 15 members, arrived at 
the 27 proposed sections of the Article on the National 
Assembly after thorough and passionate debates con- 
ducted in 18 formal meetings. For a period of five 
weeks, the Committee subjected to critical analysis and 
deliberations the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutions, 
which under our Rules are to seive as working drafts, 
and 24 resolutions referred to it, as well as the position 
papers and opinions of prominent brilliant minds and 
distinguished constitutionalists, aware of the sentiments 
of our people, particularly in the countryside. The 
Committee also took into cognizance the areas of con- 
cern presented during the public hearings and consulta- 
tions which contributed to a great measure in concretiz- 
ing the merits of the issues involved and in arriving at a 
collective decision. 

Drawing inspiration from the February 1986 peaceful 
revolution and the experiences of our people over the 
last two decades, the draft Article on the National As- 
sembly, embodied in Committee Report No. 22, em- 
braces legislative reforms in order to bring the govern- 
ment that we now try to establish into harmony with 
our own ideals, needs and aspirations. I will now enume- 
rate the salient features of the proposed Article on the 
National Assembly: 

1. A Unicameral Structure of the National Assembly. 

In the records of the 1935 and 1971 Constitutional 
Conventions, and now the 1986 Constitutional Com- 
mission, advocates of unicameralism and bicameralism 
have eloquently discoursed on the matter. The draft 
proposal of the 1986 UP Law Constitution Project 
analyzes exhaustively the best features and the disad- 
vantages of each. Our people, having experienced 
both systems, are faced with a difficult decision to 
make. 

Madam President and my dear colleagues, even in our 
own Committee, I had to break the tie in favor of uni- 
cameralism. Commissioner Sarmiento, in his Resolution 
No. 396, aptly stated that the Philippines needs a uni- 
cameral legislative assembly which is truly representative 
of the people, responsive to their needs and welfare, 
economical to maintain and efficient and effective in 
the exercise of its powers, functions and duties in the 
discharge of its responsibilities. Commissioner Tingson, 
Jiowever, said that despite its simplicity of organization, 
resulting in economy and efficiency, and achieving a 
closer relationship between the legislative and execu- 
tive, it also resulted in the authoritarian manipulation 
by the Chief Executive, depriving in the process the 
people from expressing their true sentiments through 
their chosen representatives. Thus, under Resolution 


No. 321, Commissioner Tingson calls for the restoration 
of the bicameral form of legislature to maximize the 
participation of people in decision-making. 

Recalling, however, the arguments raised in the 1971 
Constitutional Convention which eventually led to the 
approval of a unicameral structure in the 1973 Consti- 
tution, the advantages of a unicameral body far out- 
weighed its disadvantages. It is not only efficient and 
less costly to maintain but it is also simpler, less time- 
consuming and invites minimum conflicts and contro- 
versies, thus, facilitating speedy legislation. In a com- 
parative study on the structure and functioning of 
representative institutions in 55 countries, Michel 
Ameller observed that a unicameral system is better 
suited to the needs of younger countries which are 
evolving politically in circumstances different from 
those obtaining in Western Europe where parliamentary 
government was born. A contemporary constitutional 
theory, used in many arguments in favor of unicameral- 
ism, underscores the fact that the system is more 
appropriate to democracy. Kelsen wrote, and I quote: 

The unicameral system would seem to correspond most 
closely to the idea of democracy. The bicameral system 
that is typical of the constitutional monarchy and the 
federal state is always an attenuation of the democratic 
principle. The two Chambers must be formed according to 
different principles, if one is not to be a useless duplicate of 
the other. If one is perfectly democratic, the other must be 
somewhat lacking in democratic character. 

In this context, therefore, bicameralism is opposed to 
the concept of equality, because while both Houses 
perform equal functions and are vested with equal 
responsibilities, people view the Senators and Congress- 
men differently as regards power and authority. We have 
several more reasons to sustain unicameralism but 
considering the time limit for sponsorship, we would 
just pray at the end of our sponsorship for the insertion 
in the Record of our entire sponsorship speech. 

2. The Composition and Manner of Representation. 
The Committee proposes a 250-membership in the 
National Assembly, to include sectoral and party list 
representatives. Under the proposed scheme, 20 percent 
of the entire membership or 50 members shall comprise 
the sectoral and party list representatives, while 200 
of the elected shall come from legislative districts 
apportioned among the provinces and cities in ac- 
cordance with the number of inhabitants and on the 
basis of a uniform and progressive ratio. The manner 
of election for the sectoral and party list representa- 
tives shall be provided by law. The 250-membership 
was considered the best, considering the projected 
55 million population by 1986. Based on this popula- 
tion, a total of 198 representatives will come from the 
legislative districts, 1 5 of whom will come from the 
highly urbanized cities with populations of more than 
200,000 and 1 83 from the provinces on the basis of 
uniform and progressive ratio, and further taking into 
account the qualification of being a contiguous, com- 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


45 


pact and adjacent territory. The scheme tries to remedy 
the unbalanced and inadequate legislative representation 
prevalent before the 1973 Constitution. Thus, each 
province would be entitled to at least one representative 
including additional representatives if its population so 
warrants. 

Innovation, however, is the proposal of the Commit- 
tee to include sectoral and party list representatives. The 
advocates of this proposal - Commissioners Villacorta, 
Monsod and others — argue that in order to provide the 
broadest participation in policy-making, representatives 
of sectors, particularly those belonging to the marginal 
groups in our society and those who under ordinary 
circumstances cannot hope to win in an election, should 
be afforded the chance to articulate their concerns and 
aspirations. 

3. Term of Office. The Committee proposes for a 
four-year term without limit to reelection. The Com- 
mittee believes that the scheme would afford an oppor- 
tunity for a continuous training experience for future 
leaders whose fate in the political arena should be 
decided by the people and not by law. 

4. Initiative and Referendum. Madam President, after 
the ratification of this Constitution which institu- 
tionalizes people power through the method of initiative 
and referendum, nobody can accuse this Commission 
of being callous and indifferent to the realization of the 
opportunity of the people to initiate legislation and at 
the same time approve or reject such by means of 
referendum, because the Committee has incorporated 
the processes under Section 27 of the proposed draft. 
Guided by the doctrine that sovereignty resides in the 
people, the Committee thus felt that the National As- 
sembly shall provide for the manner, proceduie and 
limits of initiative and referendum. The main propo- 
nents of initiative and referendum are Commissioners 
Romulo, Garcia and Gascon. Before the events in EDSA 
in February, people who have had direct experiences on 
the harshness of life, of arms, already know what the 
problems are, and how to respond and react to these 
problems. Giving them these means of peacefully venti- 
lating their dreams and aspirations will make the demo- 
cracy that we, as a people, so badly aspire for to be very 
participatory and dynamic. 

The realization that these processes are there for the 
people to use will force people to think not as indi- 
viduals but as communities. People will then know 
that they simply cannot depend on individual action 
but on collective, direct action. The presence of these 
in the Constitution will also be a check on a legislature 
that is not responsive to the vital and urgent needs of 
the people. 

Commissioner Garcia so said in one of the Committee 
meetings that the process may never be used at all, but 
the point is, it is there for them to use whenever they 
wish, whenever they desire, and whenever they want to 
struggle. 


5. Electoral Tribunal. The Committee proposes for 
the restoration of an Electoral Tribunal in the National 
Assembly which shall be the sole judge of all contests 
relating to the elections, returns and qualifications of its 
members. This decision was based on the proposal of 
the COMELEC to transfer the responsibility to an 
Electoral Tribunal similar to the bodies formed under 
the 1935 Constitution. The Electoral Tribunal offers a 
mixed system in which both the National Assembly and 
the judiciary play their part, thus reflecting both the 
respect for parliamentary sovereignty and the need for 
legal impartial decisions. 

6. Commission on Appointments. The Committee 
also proposes for the restoration of the Commission on 
Appointments which was a feature of the 1935 Consti- 
tution but deleted in the 1973 Constitution. Owing to 
the penchant of appointing authorities to choose and 
appoint favored friends and relatives whose qualifica- 
tions and integrity are questionable, the Committee was 
compelled to reincorporate in the proposed Constitu- 
tion this body to review and approve the appointments 
of public officials who are directly appointed by the 
President. The interpretation of this proposal, however, 
would be to exclude appointments to the judiciary for 
the reason that under the Article on the Judiciary, the 
members of the judiciary would no longer be subject to 
confirmation by the Commission on Appointments. 
This provision is one of the classical checks and balances 
of the Constitution. Although it might negate the 
concept of separation of powers, it makes sense if one 
regards appointments as an administrative rather than a 
political action. 

7. Immunity from Arrest. The object of parliamen- 
tary immunities is to protect the members from 
repressive measures or from legal actions by the govern- 
ment or by private persons. Immunities may seem to 
derogate from the principle that citizens are equal 
before the law, but the object is to insure the smooth 
running and complete independence of Parliament. As 
Ameller reported, all countries without exception 
endorse this principle of nonaccountability for actions 
which a Member of Parliament carries out in the course 
of his parliamentary duties and which no person other 
than the member can do. In the 1973 Constitution, as 
amended, a member could be arrested if he is not at- 
tending sessions. The Committee amended this provision 
so that the member is privileged from arrest while the 
National Assembly is in session. The immunity governs a 
member’s relationship outside the Assembly, but it does 
not release him from obedience to the rules and order ot 
the Assembly nor does it derogate from his responsibi- 
lity to the public. 

8. Incompatibility of Occupation. Incompatibility is 
the parliamentary rule which forbids a Member of 
Parliament to carry on certain occupations while he is a 
member. This applies to offices held before being 
elected, and those which might be offered to a member 
once he has been elected. The Committee proposes tha 
the intent of the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutions 


46 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


should be maintained and the prohibition should in- 
clude military offices. If this body will recall, under the 
1973 Constitution, the prohibition affects only civil 
offices. But it is the sense of the Committee that this 
prohibition should apply to both military and civil 
offices. Far from depriving the member of being able 
to share his talent outside the Parliament, the pro- 
hibition will insure that public and private offices will 
not exert undue influence on his decisions and prevent 
the opportunity for the promotion of self-interest alone. 

9. Tax Exemptions. The Committee proposes to 
expand exemptions from taxation to include lands, 
buildings and improvements actually, directly and ex- 
clusively used for educational purposes. While this was 
already in the 1935 Constitution in recognition of their 
role in extending quality education to our people, 
it was deleted in the 1973 Constitution. Commissioner 
Guingona pointed out in his Resolution No. 132 that 
the withdrawal of the privilege had adversely affected 
their financial viability and survival. Commissioner 
Villacorta also argued in his Resolution No. 373 that 
these educational institutions could further upgrade 
their academic standards, faculty conditions and learn- 
ing facilities, if they are unburdened with taxes. A 
number of private educational institutions are also 
clamoring for the restoration of the constitutional 
exemption from real estate taxation. The Committee 
a so proposes, Madam President, that mosques and 
nonprofit cemeteries shall continue to enjoy exemption 
trom taxation. 

Option Hour. A regular feature in other parlia- 
ments, this procedure was adopted under the 1973 
onstitution. Its purposes are to elicit concrete informa- 
ion rom the administration, to request its intervention, 
an when necessary, to expose abuses and seek redress. 

ie procedure provides the opposition with a means of 
discovering the government’s weak points and because 
0 je publicity it generates, it has a salutary influence 
on tie administration. On the whole, because of the 
e ai ed facts elicited during the interpellation or in the 
11 cn answers, it will help members to understand the 
complicated subject matter of bills and statutory 
measures laid before the Assembly. It may be added 
lat the popularity of this procedure can be attributed 
o the fact that in making use of his right to ask ques- 
10 ns, the member is a completely free agent of the 
people. The only limits on his actions are the rules 
governing the admissibility of questions concerned with 
ma teis of form and not with the merits of the issue at 
land File fact that we also impose a time limit means 
lat the government is obliged to furnish the informa- 
tion asked for and this obligation is what gives the 
procedure its real strength. This concept is a feature of a 
parliamentary form of government. 

1 1. The prohibition against Members of the National 
Assembly to appear as counsel in certain instances. 
Under the proposed Section 17, it is stated that: 

No Member of the National Assembly shall appear as 
counsel before any court which is not of collegiate compo- 


sition, before any court in any civil case wherein the 
Government or any subdivision, agency or instrumentality 
thereof is the adverse party, or in any criminal case wherein 
any officer or employee of the government is accused of an 
offense committed in relation to his office, before the 
Electoral Tribunal, or before any administrative body. 
Neither shall he, directly or indirectly, be interested 
financially in any contract with, or in any franchise or 
special privilege granted by the government, or any sub- 
division, agency or instrumentality thereof, including any 
government-owned or controlled corporation, during his 
term of office. He shall not intervene in any matter before 
any office of the government for his pecuniary benefit. 

12. We also incorporated here a proposal that the 
sessions of the National Assembly must be continuous 
and be determined unless a different period or date is 
fixed by law. So the sessions shall be continuous for 
such number of days as may be determined until 30 
days before the opening of its next regular session, 
exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 
However, it may be called to session at any time by the 
President to consider such subjects or legislation as he 
may designate. The idea is, we shall have a working 
National Assembly responsive at any time to the needs 
of our people. 

13. Another new proposal is in the matter of the 
authority or the power of the National Assembly to 

concur in treaties or international agreements. Under 
the 1973 Constitution, the authority of the legislature 
to concur in treaties was actually curtailed by a grant 
of an exclusive authority to the President under the 
Article on the National Economy and Patrimony. So, 
now, we restore fully to the legislative body or the 
National Assembly its power to concur by a majority 
of all the Members of the National Assembly in treaties 
as well as international agreements. 

Madam President, the Philippine legislature has been 
earlier categorized as discontinuous and vulnerable and 
this is found in the work of Olson, entitled: The Legis- 
lature Process, A Comparative Approach. Partner in a 
separation of powers system, ours has been observed to 
have asserted itself to the President, to the extent that 
it became an adversary rather than a coequal although 
somewhat a cooperative partner. The result has been the 
suspension and removal of the body. Ours, indeed, is 
vulnerable to outside power. Be that as it may, Madam 
President, our legislative body has demonstrated and has 
the potential to assist our country achieve broad social 
goals. Our legislative body can be a dynamic partner in 
rebuilding a battered economy and in raising the living 
standards of our people. Our legislative body can be a 
means through which population subgroups and our 
diverse regions are integrated and blended towards 
national unity. Finally, our legislative body can be a 
means by which popular knowledge about and concern 
toward governmental policies are gained. 

We look forward to, for the sake of our children and 
our children’s children, when our National Assembly 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


47 


would be called continuous, assertive and cohesive, like 
the parliaments of the United States and Great Britain. 
Notwithstanding the reservations manifested by some 
of our distinguished colleagues when the Committee 
reported out its work on July 10, this humble Chair- 
man, fully confident in the collective wisdom of this 
body, fervently hopes that our report will be considered 
and approved. 

Thank you. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended to enable 
the Floor Leader to make a list of all those who desire 
to speak or interpellate this morning. 

It was 10:24 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:36 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. We are ready for a freewheeling 
debate. 

May I ask the Commissioners who will speak to 
address certain issues such as, if it is a bicameral assem- 
bly, does the speaker want the Senator to be elected on 
a regional basis or on a national basis, because there are 
those who would rather have a unicameral system if the 
Senator will only be elected by region? The other issue 
refers to the Lower House: Does the speaker want the 
Member of the Lower House elected by district or by 
province? And then, of course, the main issue shall be 
on the unicameral versus the bicameral structure. 

For the first speaker, Madam President, I ask that 
Commissioner Tingson be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President and colleagues of 
this honorable Assembly, I would like to speak briefly 
on the need for a bicameral legislature elected on a 
national basis. I would like to thank the Chair and my 
colleagues for giving me this chance to express my 
personal view on the type of legislature that we may 
adopt as we undertake the task of drafting a new 
Constitution. 

Perhaps an approach based on historical perspective 
is relevant at this point in time, when our decision to 
adopt a more receptive form of legislature will not only 
determine our present but also diiect out future as a 


nation. In the Malolos Constitution of 1899. the legisla- 
tive power was exercised by an assembly of representa- 
tives of the nation. Upon the cession of the Philippines 
to the United States under the Treaty of Paris, we had 
a military government which was later replaced by a 
civil government in 1900. During this time, the execu- 
tive and the legislative functions were exercised by a 
Commission. With the passage of the Philippine Bill of 
1902, a bicameral legislature was created, transforming 
the Philippine Commission into the Upper Chamber and 
constituting the Philippine Assembly as the Lower 
House. 

In 1916, pursuant to the Jones Law, legislative power 
was vested in an all-Filipino bicameral legislature with 
the Senate as the Upper Chamber and the House of 
Representatives as the Lower Chamber. The Senators 
then were elected from the twelve senatorial districts. 

In the 1935 Constitution, we again adopted a uni- 
cameral legislative body known as the National Assem- 
bly. The Convention then rejected the proposal for a 
bicameral legislature with an Upper House called the 
Senate. The failure of the bicameralist position was due 
to the division on the question of representation. The 
Committee on the Legislative proposed that Senators 
be elected throughout the Philippines on the basis of 
proportional representation. Others, however, advocated 
that each province shall be entitled to one Senator, as 
the practice in the United States. Still others preferred 
the system of senatorial district under the Jones Law of 
1916. 

During the time of President Manuel L. Quezon, an 
amendment providing for a bicameral legislature was 
adopted. Senators were elected nationwide. I may say 
that the reason President Quezon advocated for a 
bicameral form of legislature is not primarily that he 
was wary of a strong unicameral body that can dislodge 
him anytime by impeachment, but that he believed that 
the Senate affords a sufficient critical and methodica 
review of legislation. It assumes the role of moderating 
force in the formulation of legislative policies. It serves 
as a fiscalizer on the actions of the Lower House, which 
in usual practice is prone to passing excessive appro- 
priations acts and other forms of legislations that may 
prove detrimental to the interest of the nation. The 
Senate, Madam President, according to President 
Quezon, will serve as a balance for harmony between 
the executive and the legislative departments and pro- 
vide a training ground for future leaders. It may be 
said that it also serves as a vanguard against the activities 
of politicians and lobbying pressure groups and, like- 
wise, safeguards any possible encroachment upon the 
constitutional liberties of the people. 

As to representation, the Upper House provides 
national representation which the Lower House canno 
attain. In so doing, a bicameral form fosters nationa 
unity and consciousness, rather than a representative 
form merely based on the respective districts o^ 1C ~ 
members of legislature. The scope ot legislative 


48 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


responsibility is, therefore, unified with the presence of 
the Senate. One of the most important features, of 
course, is that the Senate insures stability of govern- 
mental policies as the Senate is a continuing body. 

According to Justice Jose P. Laurel, the bicameral 
legislature is the traditional form of legislative body 
dating from ancient times. As such, it has been tested 
and proven in the crucible of human experience - 
political experience, that is. In our case, therefore, a 
young nation as ours cannot afford to have experiments 
as to the type of legislature we are to adopt. In our 
short history, the unicameral system has been an easy 
instrument for the executive to usurp. The dictatorial 
temptations cannot be simply avoided by a strong 
executive, wherever a weak legislature exists. During the 
time of Aguinaldo, the legislature was unicameral. 
During the Marcos regime, most of the time our legisla- 
ture was also unicameral. It shows, therefore, that 
however strong our argument is on the merits of a 
unicameral body, our political experience will teach 
us that we are not yet ready for its adoption in the 
mainstream of our governmental format. To do so 
would encourage again a strong executive — nay, a 
dictatorship - and a weak legislature. 

In closing. Madam President and colleagues, I would 
i e to stress the main advantages of bicameralism, to 


^ msentat^ wou ld be more directly rep- 

b)S!r r 11 interest ° f the p e °p ie ; 

each other S W0U , d P roduc e a healthy check upon 

no ontr , 8ard1 ? 8 hasty le 8 islati0 " and should 
no longer rely on the judiciary • 

tl.e T rrfo,ffa«T; r i"Ip 8 3 " ationwide mandate, can 
and a balance and i § xecutlVe w *th an equal strength 

between ,he two 

m/part tut™rnc? ld I C hl’| iS “ pr “ cma,l °" not only ot 

mandate of man } £ eheve ’ also the deling and th< 
mandate of many of the people with whom we ha( 

public hearings during the last few weeks. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, 1 ask that Commis 
sioner Rodrigo be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 6 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I am a member of 
the Committee but I signed the report with reservations 
precisely because this is one of the points with which I 
do not completely agree. 


My stand on this issue is conditional. If the Senators 
are elected at large, I am for a bicameral legislature. 
However, if the Senators are elected regionally. I opt for 
a unicameral legislature, because if the Senators are 
elected by region and not at large, I believe the Senate 
will be a mere duplication of the House of Representa- 
tives in a slightly larger scale. It will not give us the 
advantages derived from a Senate whose Members are 
elected at large. Commissioner Tingson had already- 
advanced my argument, but I just want to emphasize 
some of the points. If we have just one Chamber com- 
posed of representatives elected by districts, it cannot 
be helped that the members would be influenced by 
parochial interests. The main interest of the repre- 
sentatives is their constituents. Our Senators are 
elected at large, elected by the whole nation; they have 
to campaign all over the country — Luzon, Visayas and 
Mindanao. In this way, they see the problems and the 
needs of the different parts of the country. In other 
words, they look at the problems from a national 
perspective, which is a great advantage. I would like also 
to emphasize what Commissioner Tingson has said that 
if we have Senators elected at large we can project 
national figures; whereas, if we have a unicameral legisla- 
ture whose Members are elected by districts, it is very 
difficult to project national figures because they will be 
campaigning only in their districts, so they are known 
in their districts, but not nationally. If we have Senators 
elected at large who will campaign all over the Philip- 
pines, we project national figures, and people will see 
them, hear them and size them up. It had been my own 
experience that candidates for the Senate were proj- 
ected nationally. 

Nobody knew “Rodrigo” until I became a candidate 
for the Senate, but when I campaigned all over the 
Philippines, all of a sudden, undeservedly, my name was 
projected. Padilla, of course, was already known because 
he was the captain of our basketball Olympic team that 
participated in Berlin, but then, he was also projected 
nationally, no longer as an athlete but as a political 
leader when he campaigned nationally. Even Manglapus 
and Ninoy Aquino were not known nationally. They 
were not known in Mindanao until they campaigned as 
Senators nationally. Also, a Senator elected at large is 
less susceptible to pressure. If he wins or loses, he wins 
or loses by hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of 
votes. So, a political ward leader who commands or 
who pledges to command, let us say, 10,000 votes or 
even 20,000 votes cannot scare a Senator, but lie can 
scare a Congressman who is elected only in district and 
who can win or lose by only a hundred votes. This was 
our experience in the Senate of which I was a Member 
for 12 years. There were times when the Members of the 
House of Representatives would come up and say: “Soc, 
mayroon kaming inaprubahang bill doon sa Lower 
House; masama, hindi ko gusto pero hindi ako maka- 
tanggi sa isang lider. Kayo na ang bahala sa Senado, 
patayin ninyo ang bill na iyon.” This happened several 
times. And, of course, since the Senators were elected at 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


49 


large like the President of the Philippines, they could 
stand up to the President, and this can be attested to by 
facts. The Senators could refuse the President or even 
take a stand against that of the President even if the 
President belongs to their own party. 

One objection to having a Senate is that it is ex- 
pensive to campaign nationally. On the contrary, it is 
less expensive than campaigning in a district because it is 
not personalized. We do not buy votes because it is 
futile to buy votes. We do not kowtow; we do not 
finance political ward leaders. As a matter of fact, 
Madam President, it was my experience that when I 
campaigned for the first time for the Senate with a team 
all around the Philippines, I spent only for my airplane 
tickets and hotel expenses. This campaign coincided 
with the local elections in 1955. When I came back to 
my hometown, I found out that the candidate for 
mayor who won in my hometown spent more than 1 
did because he had to buy votes and finance ward 
leaders. 

That is my stand, Madam President. I am for a 
bicameral system of legislature with Senators elected at 
large. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, will the Gentle- 
man please yield to interpellations? 

MR. RODRIGO. Gladly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

Commissioner Rodrigo stated that Senators elected 
at large look at problems from the national perspective 
or level. Perhaps, I can say that they also echo the 
national sentiments. Is the Commissioner aware that 
during martial law, most Members of the legislature 
w ho stood up against Mr. Marcos came from the 

Senate? 

MR RODRIGO. I was no longer a Member of the 
S nate then, but I think Senator Padilla or Senator 
Sumulong can answer that question better. 

MR NOLLEDO. I will answer the question, but in 
l t on to that, the record indicates that Senators 
Aauino Diokno, Salonga, Mitra, Padilla and Roxas, 
g others, vigorously objected to the declaration 
3 f 1 martial law’. Senators Aquino, Diokno and Mitra who 
° e from the Senate were jailed. But I cannot remem- 
£ a member of the Lower House of consequence 

who stood up against Marcos in order to object to the 
declaration of martial law perhaps because, if the Com- 
missioner agrees with me, they were thinking of the 
needs of their districts. 

MR. RODRIGO. I cannot agree with the Commis- 
sioner more. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Therefore, this will strengthen the 
Commissioner’s contention that they echo the national 
sentiments. Does the Commissioner agree with me if I 
say that as far as Senators are concerned, they represent 
the national interest and, therefore, think of the nation- 
al interest as against Members of the Lower House who 
represent the selfish interest of their respective districts 
and think only of the self-centered interest of their 
districts? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, I agree. 

MR. NOLLEDO. But there is a question here, Madam 
President. Should we adopt a bicameral legislature? 

And considering that the Committee on the Legislative 
recommended sectoral representation, is the Commis- 
sioner amenable to extending sectoral representation in 
the Senate? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, this is another 
point on which I made a reservation. I am in favor of 
the idea of having sectoral representation, but from the 
very beginning, I was asking about the mechanics of it, 
something that is practical, something that is feasible. 
But up to now, I cannot see how it can be put into 
practice. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is all. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the next speaker? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I am for a bicameral legislature with Senators elected 
at large and Representatives by legislative districts. I nave 
heard the articulation of Commissioners Tingson and 
Rodrigo and I agree with them. I will not repeat the 
reasons for which they stand for a bicameral system of 
legislature but I will only state in brief our experiences 
in the bicameral system. 

Senators are the hardest people to be convinced and 
controlled by one man. Records show that immediately 
after the declaration of martial law by then President 
Marcos, it was Senator Sumulong, our colleague here, 
who stood up in the Senate and explained the constitu- 
tionality or unconstitutionality of martial law. And it 
was also Commissioner Padilla, our colleague here, who 
questioned Senator Sumulong on the constitutionality 
or unconstitutionality of martial law. Immediately 
thereafter, our friend, Senator Aquino, found himself in 
jail, as Senator Mitra likewise, for he was objecting to 
the martial law regime. But I find no record of any 
congressman who objected to martial law, as apt y 
stated by Commissioner Nolledo. 


50 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


When the Senators were called by the then President 
to his office after he had declared martial law, Senators 
Sumulong and Padilla again objected to martial law. 
Again, in the Record, I find no Congressman who 
objected to such action. I also note that the laws passed 
by our Senate then were better scrutinized and tho- 
roughly studied. I do not say that the Congressmen did 
not study their bills thoroughly, but as expressed here 
by Senator Rodrigo, the Congressmen depended on the 
Senators for the disapproval of a bill. Senators are the 
best material for our country, either for President or for 
ambassadors to foreign countries. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I ask a 
question of Commissioner Rodrigo. 

MR. RODRIGO. Gladly. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Will Commissioner Rodrigo yield to 
a few questions? 

MR. RODRIGO. Gladly. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I still keep an open mind about this establishment 
of a unicameral or a bicameral system of legislature and 
I would like to be clarified about some points, Madam 
President. 

I remember that in the 1935 Constitution, as original- 
ly envisioned, there was established only a unicameral 
system of legislature. Is my recollection correct? 

MR. RODRIGO. That is correct. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon will please 
proceed. 


MR. BENGZON. One of the arguments for uni- 
cameralism is that it would be too expensive to have a 
bicameral form of government because we will have two 
Houses, and, naturally, the budget for these is substan- 
tial. What can the Commissioner say about that? 


RODRIGO. There is no doubt that a bicamei 

onlv Th °t i CglS a i tUre ' nvo ^ ves mor e expense. And n< 

^ h Sh ?* I 8 be less expeditious becau 

the bill has to pass through two Houses. 

vantoaes° AndT'th’-^ 6 a J Vantages outwei gh the disa 
vantages And I think whatever little amount we w 

add for the Senate - after all the Senate, if revived w 
the diiStages nB “ at lar8e outwei < 


MR. SUAREZ. And then in 1940, an amendment was 
introduced whereby a bicameral system of legislature 
was proposed and approved by the people. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. I remember that in previous Constitu- 
tions which were promulgated by the Filipino people, 
they always recommended and suggested the establish- 
ment of a unicameral system of legislature: The Evange- 
lista Constitution of December 1896, the Biak-na-Bato 
Constitution of 1897, the Ponce Constitution of April 
1898, the Autonomous Program of Dr. Paterno of June 
19, 1898, the Organic Decree of June 23, 1898, 
Mabini’s Constitutional Program of the Philippine 
Republic of June 1898, the Malolos Constitution of 
January 21, 1899 and, of course, the original 1935 
Constitution. They all recommended the establishment 
of a unicameral system of legislature on the theory that 
this is more suitable and adapted to the ideals, tradi- 
tions, culture and practices of the Filipino people. Is 
the Commissioner aware of that situation, Madam 
President? 


th E n e l! lf the Comm issioner conside 

the fact that there will be more politicking if we have 

Senate than if we have a unicameral system of legis 


MR. RODRIGO I do not know what the Commis- 
sioner means by more politicking.” But if there is a 
Senate, yes, there will be politicking, but it will be high- 
level politicking based on national issues and on what 
js good for the whole country. It will not be parochial 
politicking where we have to kowtow to ward leaders 


MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 


MR. RODRIGO. I am aware of it because the Com- 
missioner said it. But it was not only suited to the 
Filipino people but also to the time then, because at 
that time Mindanao was very, very far from Luzon. As a 
matter of fact, Bulacan was only 35 kilometers from 
Manila, but many had not been to Manila so I was very 
proud when I came to Manila and told them about the 
trambia. During that time, of course, there were no air- 
planes. So how could we campaign nationally? Remem- 
ber that I was running for the Senate elected at large. In 
1898, it was impossible for anybody to campaign all 
over the Philippines. This was the reason we had a 
unicameral system of legislature. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the Commissioner for the 
clarification. But is it not a fact that basically and 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


51 


fundamentally bicameralism is an Anglo-Saxon political 
institution which was adopted by the United States? 

MR. RODRIGO. I am not aware of that, but why not 
if it happens to be good, whether it came from the 
Anglo-Saxons or from the Americans? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, I pointed out that 
circumstance because it would appear that in the 
Philippines we have no blue-blooded aristocracy as in 
the case of Great Britain wherein they have the House 
of Lords. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, but then we do not want to 
have a House of Lords. What we want is a Senate elected 
by the people in a democratic way; in other words, 
elected at large. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would the Commissioner not equate 
the Senators of the land with the Lords of England? 

MR. RODRIGO. No. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, I would like to 
ask some questions of Commissioner Rodrigo. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. The theory upon which the Senate 
is organized and predicated is the representation of ano- 
ther interest in the nation aside from the common 
interest represented by the Congress. Is there an interest 
diverse and different from the interest of the mass ot 
the Filipino people that we have to institute a Senate 
to protect this other interest? 

In the United States, it is necessary because there are 
in the original composition certain states of diverse 
interests. The bigger states predominate and their 
interests are advanced and protected. If its population 
were small there would have been only one body. 

But here in the Philippines, we do not have this 
differentiation of interest that we have to organize a 
Senate to protect or represent the interest of a par- 
ticular sector. From Batanes to Jolo, the composition 
of the people, their representatives, as well as their 
interests are the same. So the existence ot the Senate 
as a representative body to protect the interest of this 
group could not be justified. I think its existence could 
only be justified on one condition: That it is there to 
serve as a balance or to countercheck in case there is a 
hasty proposition by the Lower House. Outside of this 
point of justification, there are no diverse interests; we 
are all Filipinos. I repeat, our interests are the same, 
there are no states, and the existence of a Senate, there- 


fore, could not be justified. I can think of only one 
justification, and that is, to countercheck a hasty legisla- 
tion as well as to promote general interest on the basis 
of what is right. 

Therefore, how do we justify the existence of a 
Senate? 

MR. RODRIGO. While we do not have federal states 
or different states like the United States, we have dif- 
ferent interests. For example, there is the sugar bloc 
interest; the copra interest; the tobacco interest; and the 
rice and corn interest. In Mindanao, we have other in- 
terests there. And it had been my experience that there 
were bills coming from the House which favored one 
bloc, and at that time, the sugar bloc happened to be 
the most powerful bloc in the House. 

When it comes to the Senate, we see that this interest 
might prejudice Mindanao especially Jolo. So we correct 
this because we have been to Jolo; we campaigned there, 
and if we are running for reelection, we will campaign 
again in Jolo. 

If there is an undue advantage to the sugar bloc 
against another group, let us say, copra or tobacco, then 
we balance. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Since the Commissioner has 
presented and persuaded the body that in a Senate there 
is not exactly a state or group interest but interests of 
various groups being balanced or checked in the interest 
of all, I yield my opposition to this and concede to him, 
having had that experience that we need the Senate. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Bacani be 
recognized, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. First of all, let me report that 
among the people I have had the privilege to ask during 
the public hearings, the overwhelming majority of those 
who responded are for a unicameral system of legisla- 
ture. However, I would like to ask the proponents of the 
unicameral system of legislature this question: Is there 
any reason for the dissatisfaction with the old setup? 
Was not the setup of having a Senate and a House of 
Representatives a satisfactory arrangement? In fact, in 
our own historical experience as has been brought out 
repeatedly here, it would seem that having a bicameral 
system of legislature was indeed more advantageous to 
the people and that it was able to safeguard or at least 
attempted to safeguard more forcefully the freedom ot 
the legislature against manipulation by interested ioices. 


52 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


I have, however, one observation in favor, I think, of 
the unicameral system of government and it is this: De- 
spite the advantages presented before by the previous 
speakers and despite the disadvantages of having only 
selfish interests represented by the unicameral system of 
legislature, let us not forget that 20 years under the 
Marcos regime has “conscienticized” and politicized the 
Filipino people. So that, I think, not only politicians 
but even ordinary people now think on a wider and on 
a national level. For that reason, there is less dan- 
ger today of having a unicameral system of legislature 
composed simply of a group of people represent- 
ing district or sectoral interest, and that there is greater 
hope today of having a unicameral system of legislature 
which has also the national interest very much at heart. 

I just want to present those comments. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Uka be 
recognized, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recognized. 


MR. UKA. Madam President, members of the Com- 
mittee, I am for a bicameral system of legislature. The 
greatest democracies in the world have a bicameral 
system of legislature, examples of which are Great 
n am or ngland, with the House of Lords and the 
House of Commons and the United States, who taught 
us emocracy in this part of the world, with a Senate 
and a House of Representatives. There are many more 
democracies that have a bicameral system of legisla- 
ture. 6 

Their long experience has taught them that a bica- 
meral system of legislature is more useful and practical, 
, pr0vic ! es for the Principle of check and 

rlasc c Th 11C 1 WC iaVe ^ earned * n our political science 
S e T eXe , CUtlVe cannot easily control a bicameral 
1 pok 1 atn fe • ^ at W ^ at happened to our unicameral 

JL h T iTh^a r nt past; we do not have it now i it 

was abolished. A bicameral system of legislature, there- 

ore, wi prevent the growth of a dictatorship which we 
do not like. 

The Senate is usually composed of experienced 
elderly lawmakers and it is a good training ground for 
executives of our country. A bicameral system of legis- 
lature is what we need. I am for it. Moreover, a bica- 
meral system of legislature insures a wider and proper 
representation of all sectors. It insures proper balance 
because there is stability in lawmaking. We often hear 
it said that two heads are better than one I think this is 
in line with nature. Look at what we have: two eyes 
two legs, two hands, two ears, two nostrils, two lips’ 
ad infinitum. I will not mention anymore the others 
which are unmentionable and the very few exceptions 
Most of us have two spare parts really, with very few 
exceptions like the more important ones. I, therefore, 
vote for a bicameral system of legislature because it is 


reasonable, practical, useful and in accordance with 
nature. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Vice- 
President Padilla be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Vice-President Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Madam President. 

I am in favor of a bicameral system of legislature, 
with the Senate elected at large nationwide. This posi- 
tion is not because I had the privilege of being elected 
nationwide by our sovereign people in three senatorial 
elections, 1957, 1963 and 1969 with my last term cut 
short by an unlawful, illegal and unconstitutional 
declaration of martial law. I fully agree and endorse the 
many substantial and correct arguments of Commis- 
sioner Tingson, corroborated by the other Members who 
have spoken before me: Commissioners Rodrigo, de 
Castro and Uka. 

Madam President, instead of repeating some of their 
arguments in favor of a bicameral system of legislature, 
with a Senate elected at large, I would try to argue 
against the so-called advantages expressed by the Chair- 
man of the Committee on the Legislative in favor of a 
unicameral system of legislature when he broke the tie 
of eight to eight. 

Our experience in the 1935 Constitution, after the 
amendment from senatorial districts to election at large 
in a bicameral system of legislature, showed a more 
responsive, more representative system in favor of 
democracy rather than the unicameral system under the 
1973 Constitution wherein we had the interim and 
regular Batasan by the President s edict. I refuse to 
believe, but I think the records will show, without any 
reflection against the members of the 1971 Constitu- 
tional Convention, that even that convention was 
unduly influenced by then incumbent President 
Ferdinand E. Marcos. The provision on unreasonable 
searches and seizures in the Bill ^ 1 n_ 

eluded “or any other officer authorized by aw was 
defeated after lengthy debates, I understand, but it was 
restored upon direction of President Marcos, t was 
rumored, and I think Commissioner Sumulong will 
probably confirm the suspicion, that the 1973 Transi- 
tory Provisions was the product of President Marcos. 
That situation, in the ordinary process of legislation, 
could probably never have happened if we had a 
bicameral system of legislature. 

Madam President, it is argued by those in favor of 
unicameralism that legislation is simplified, that it is 
simple and provides for speedy legislation. We do not 
need many statutes because some of them are not 
carefully considered. What we need are less statutes, 
but more carefully studied to solve the many problems 
of the nation. 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


53 


We say an accused is entitled to a speedy trial, but 
the people will never say they want speedy legislation if 
it is not carefully considered. In other words, we need 
quality rather than quantity. Many say that the best 
government is least government. In other words, the less 
interference, obstruction and control by the State as 
against free private enterprise and less regulation of the 
exercise of constitutional rights, the better is the govern- 
ment. I would say that the less legislative statutes are 
passed, the better for the nation, provided we select the 
few well-studied ones. 


So this argument in favor of unicameralism for 
speedy legislation is, I think, the best argument against 
unicameralism and in favor of bicameralism. 

It is said that unicameralism is more effective, but 
how can we have a better system to check legislation 
before it reaches the President for his approval or veto? 
If we agree on a system of check and balance among the 
three departments of government, we should also 
sponsor and maintain the same system between the 
Senate and the House of Representatives. 


As was already stated, and I agree with Senator 
Rodrigo, there had been many instances where bills 
were approved in the Lower House and some of its 
Members who could not publicly oppose the measures 
would confidentially request a Senator to oppose it as 
said congressmen were against the bills. A congressman 
would admit but could not speak against it on the floor 
of the House and expect the Senate to disapprove that 
particular measure. 


Madam President, another argument is that uni- 
cameralism is more economical, but let us consider the 
fact that there are only 24 Senators elected at large, 
eight every two years for the Senate to be a continuing 
body And if some would say that there is an increase in 
population, therefore, we should also increase the 
number of Senators, say, to 30, which would involve 
only a small sum, Madam President, since the appro- 
priation for the Senate is one of the smallest items in 

the budget. 


The question of expenses for a group ot Senators 
elected by the people throughout the nation who have 
a record of good performance in the public service and 
who are expected to protect the national interest in its 
widest perspective, rather than the district or provincial 
or other sectoral or regional consideration, is, I believe, 
a very poor argument. I believe a National Assembly of 
250 Members is a very big and probably an umuly 
assembly I am not against more representation from the 
people including the sectoral groups, but it is really very 
difficult if we limit the process ot legislation to one 
Chamber especially when it has so many Members. We 
are only 48 Members in this Commission, but it is quite 
more than extensive in its deliberations because many 
Commissioners express their views and counterviews. 

So I agree with the other Commissioners who have 
spoken before me that the Senate is more responsive 


and more representative than the National Assembly 
of many Members, because it is expected that many of 
the Members of the Lower Chamber will have for their 
primary objective the development and the protection 
of the interest of their respective districts or of the 
territory and the people they represent, while the 
Senate, because they are elected at large, has a more 
national and broader perspective. I recall. Madam 
President, when President Marcos declared martial law. 

I suggested to the Members of the Senate, since it was 
our last day of session and there were many pending 
matters for approval on Third Reading, that we no 
longer attend to them but consume the time to oppose 
martial law in writing to form part of the Senate 
Record. The leaders of the Liberal Party, including 
Senators Roxas and Salonga. probably to save time, did 
not run counter to it. Notwithstanding that suggestion, 
it was the distinct honor and privilege of a colleague in 
this Commission. Lorenzo Sumulong, to speak against 
the declaration of martial law and explain its nature and 
effects, and I tried to interpellate only to impress 
further the principles being enunciated by Senator 
Sumulong. 

Some events of the historical past showed that 
when there was that infamous Corregidor training camp, 
the Jabidah, it was the Senate that exposed that 
anomaly. When there was an illegal transfer of P26.2 
million, it was the Senate, through Senator Aquino, that 
exposed that anomaly also. Commissioner Nolledo has 
that in his book; a case was even filed in the Supreme 
Court but it was unfortunately dismissed on the tech- 
nicality that it constituted a political issue which we 
have tried to remedy under the leadership of Chief 
Justice Roberto Concepcion of the judiciary. I recall 
that the landgrabbing in Nueva Vizcaya and Isabela by 
President Marcos through his different corporations was 
exposed by Representative Leonardo Perez of Nueva 
Vizcaya. But soon thereafter, he was silenced presum- 
ably by orders of Mr. Marcos. It was the Senate that 
revived and exposed that landgrabbing anomaly, and 
Senator Rodrigo did actively cooperate with me in the 
Senate. There are many other situations, Madam Pres- 
ident, but what 1 am trying to say is that I do not look 
down on the Members of the House of Representatives 
because there were many illustrious men in it who were 
as capable, as competent, as nationalistic and as pat- 
riotic as the Members of the Senate. And, in fact, many 
of those elected to the Senate were the Congressmen 
who, by the record of their performance, had rendered 
in people’s opinion valuable services in the process ot 
legislation and also considered as a body of responsible 
men against the possible abuses of the President. 

The Record of the Congress would show that when 
the legislation started from the Senate and had to be 
concurred by the other House, it led to better and more 
responsive legislation. There was diversity of provisions^ 
but it was ironed out in a joint conference commi e 
between representatives of the Senate and of the 
House. And it was on that joint conference commi 


54 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


at the Manila Hilton, on the last day of the session, as 
we were trying to reach a satisfactory compromise on 
the conflicting provisions of the Customs Code on the 
import duties, when Senator Aquino was arrested upon 
declaration of martial law and, thereafter, the other 
two, Senators Diokno and Mitra. 

In brief, Madam President, I would like to revive the 
former system of two Chambers, not because I have any 
further intention to be a candidate to the Senate — I 
think I have rendered enough - but for the sake of the 
objectives of President Quezon when he correctly sug- 
gested the election of the Senate nationwide, and the 
advantages thereof having been mentioned by other 
Commissioners including the fact that the Senate has 
been the nursery, we might say, of national leaders who 
aspire to be President and Vice-President elected nation- 
wide. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SUAREZ. What we are trying to point out. 
Madam President, is that one bill being discussed in 
the Senate may have an identical subject matter as ano- 
ther in the House of Representatives, and because of 
some conflicting versions the matter is now tossed to 
the joint conference committee to reconcile these two 
opposing views. That is my understanding of how a joint 
conference committee operates. Am I correct. Madam 
President? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, that is correct. The joint con- 
ference committee is to reconcile what may appear as 
some differences between the two versions. 

For example, in the Customs Code on the import 
taxes, it is very difficult to reconcile because there are 
always two views, not only in the legislature but also in 
our country. Others advocate a higher import duty of. 
say, 20 percent to protect home industry and the other 
a lesser import duty of, say, 10 percent, because it is 
necessary for industrial development. But the same 
principle prevails over both sides for a compromise 
rate, and so they might reach a compromise of 1 5 per- 
cent instead of 10 or 20 percent. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Will the distinguished Vice-President answer only one 
point? 


MR. PADILLA. Very gladly. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 


We are happy 
experiences as a 
Senate. 


the Commissioner is sharing with us his 
distinguished Member of the former 


He mentioned about a joint conference 
and I assume this is composed of Members 
Senate and the House of Representatives. 


committee, 
of both the 


MR. PADILLA. That is correct. The House of Rep 
senta ives and also the Senate appoint some Mem* 
and they meet and confer to iron out the conflict 
provtstons of the same bill as passed by either Chamb 


MR SUAREZ. I assume that discussions were con- 
ducted on a joint conference committee because of dif- 
ferent versions submitted on one particular matter by 
the two Chambers. y 


MR. PADILLA. That is correct tVir. 

.. . . correct, there are some 

conflicting provisions, sometimes on details. 


MR. SUAREZ. And this is tantamount to a dunlica- 
tion of legislation. 

MR. PADILLA. No, it is not duplication but simplifi- 
cation because the two provisions from both Chambers 
are simplified and/or harmonized in the process of one 
system of legislation. 


MR. SUAREZ. So, practically - and this is the charge 
levelled against a bicameral system of legislation - we 
are not only setting up two Houses but we are practical- 
ly setting up three Houses, because the third House is 
represented by the joint conference committee. 

What can the Commissioner say to that, Madam 
President? 

MR. PADILLA. It is very important to reconcile 
the two versions of the same bill. The joint conference 
committee is not a separate institution but a part of the 
legislature. And rather than rush without further dis- 
cussion a bill passed by the legislature, if there is no 
Senate and joint conference committee, this system 
will insure, precisely, better legislation. 

MR. SUAREZ. But that is just the point. Madam 
President. There, is no need for reconciliation if there is 
only one legislative body. 

MR. PADILLA. That is the problem because, if we 
have only one, there is no check or possible review and 
that is the danger of having a unicameral system of 
legislature. There may be some statutes, especially other 
minor laws, that will be passed even without adequate 
discussion and sometimes even without the knowledge 
of some Members. But under the bicameral system of 
legislature that situation will never happen. 

MR. SUAREZ. What we are trying to point out also, 
Madam President, is that not only will legislation be 
delayed but it will also be duplicated, as what happened 
in the United States Congress in the case of the immi- 
gration bill. I understand that that bill passed by the 
House of Representatives has a different connotation 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


55 


insofar as the Senate is concerned, and that was thrown, 
precisely, before the joint conference committee. And 
up to now, for more than a year, that piece of legis- 
lation has been frozen and the two Houses in the joint 
conference committee cannot seem to reconcile the 
interest, as well as the date of the effectivity of that 
law. 

Does the Commissioner not think a situation like 
that would block the principle of speedy disposition 
of legislation? 

MR. PADILLA. As I stated earlier, the more im- 
portant argument is not speed. I do not believe we have 
to rush many legislative measures only at the instance 
of one Chamber. We will have many laws, some of 
which are not good laws. What our people need is less 
legislation, less government. It is a wrong impression 
that our people need more laws, more statutes. 

With regard to that situation in the United States, 

1 am not familiar with it. But if the graver issues are 
involved in a piece of legislation, the more important 
and far-reaching its consequences, the better that there 
be greater discussion, not only separately in the two 
Chambers but also jointly in the conference report, 
and probably greater circulation of the proposed legis- 
lation for a responsive public opinion. I believe that 
this argument on slowness of legislation against speedy 
legislation is, in my opinion, the best argument, not 
for a unicameral legislature, but for a bicameral legis- 
lature. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the clarification. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Will the distinguished Commis- 
sioner yield to a few questions? 

MR. PADILLA. Very gladly. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

First of all, I would like to state that I have no pre- 
conceived notions on this issue, but I cannot pass up 
this opportunity to benefit from the sponsoi s ex- 
perience because I want to learn so that I can vote in- 
telligently when the time comes. I would also like to 
advance the statement that my experience in bicameral 
and unicameral systems is very limited. Although 
served as a private secretary and legal counsel in the 
Seventh Congress, I did not learn much because Congress 
was dissolved. And contrary to the statement ot Com- 
missioner Nolledo, there were really so many Congress- 
men at that time who shouted their lungs out against 
that dissolution. In fact, they wanted to hold sessions 


but the doors were barred. They were locked. And when 
1 was serving in the First Regular Batasang Pambansa — 

I do not mind admitting that our experience in that 
body was also rather limited — there was a saying at 
that time that we in the ruling party were thinking so 
much and talking so little. On the other hand, the 
Opposition at that time was always talking so much. 

There are issues which have been indicated, and if 
the sponsor has already answered them, so that we can 
save time, probably we can skip them. But for purposes 
of the Record, I will mention them. 

The first issue is that a unicameral system is supposed 
to be simple, uncomplicated, efficient; there is no 
duplication of work, of time, energy and it is, more 
or less, a simplified governmental process. There is only 
one body, so there will be no two bodies working at 
cross purposes. Would the sponsor like to add to the 
argument he mentioned on this? 

MR. PADILLA. Only that in my opinion, one Cham- 
ber can rush enough pieces of legislation that may not 
be very good to the nation and our people and these 
may have not been carefully studied and discussed 
while another Chamber, like the Senate, would have 
the opportunity to check or even review, and this is 
vice versa because there are measures that come from 
the Senate to be reviewed also or concurred in by the 
House. And as Commissioner Uka said, “Two heads are 
better than one.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. The second issue of economy 
was already discussed by the Gentleman, so we do not 
have to go into that. But there was a statement that 
the salaries and maintenance for another House could 
be better spent for schools, hospitals and other public 
improvements. 

The other issue, of course, is that they say that a 
unicameral body is more democratic since the repre- 
sentatives are representing identified areas of the coun- 
try; thus, it is more representative of the people. And 
the further argument is that it becomes a little bit un- 
democratic if the Senate is composed of Senators, l° r 
example, who belong to another party, so that t e 
greater mass of the representatives of the people migh 
agree on one kind of legislation, but when it reaches the 
Senate, because the composition is of another party> 
a majority in the Senate can actually defeat the bil 
from the Lower House. 

Could the Gentleman comment on that? 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct; a majority ot Mem 
bers of the Senate may refuse to concur with a piece o 
legislation coming from the House. Similarly, a bi 
from the Senate may also be rejected or not approve 
by the majority of the House. It is not only a check y 
the Senate over the House. It is mutual. 

When we speak of democracy, we speak o! the entir 
people. The different segments of the nation rest 


56 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


in separate provinces and localities are part of the peo- 
ple. But if their representatives will be primarily in- 
terested in promoting the interest of that particular 
portion and the people residing therein, that is de- 
mocracy, but it is only partial. Whereas, a Senate repre- 
sents the people and the entire nation because its 
Members are elected nationwide and at large. That is 
democratic, and I am not going to repeat anymore, 
because that may be the viewpoint of some Members 
of the House - maybe more local, maybe more provin- 
cial. Whereas, it is expected that the viewpoint of the 
Members of the Senate will be more general, more 
nationwide. 


With regard to the majority and the minority in the 
Senate, as well as in the House, that is expected from a 
two-party system. But a minority in the Senate is always 
better than no minority. For example, after the 1949 
election where President Quirino was elected, the 
Nacionalista Party engaged in a campaign that the 
Liberals were the ones responsible for some of the 
frauds especially in some portions of Mindanao or that 
the bees were allowed to vote, etc. In the 1951, 1953 
and 1955 senatorial elections, despite the fact that 
the Liberal Party had very good candidates for the 
Senate - many prominent men, including Justice 
Jose P. Pecson, the Secretary of Finance, Pio Pedrosa, 

eodoro Evangelista and many other illustrious names, 
including Diosdado Macapagal - unfortunately, no 

I* ™, er >ator was elected. Of course, Tanada was 
elected as Nationalist-Citizen but within the party of 

of dfla 0 Rosf Pa ?' S °> * was the privLge 
were able to break um ^ le se ^ ar >d two others who 
Nacionalista Partv f 6 ™ 01 l opol y in the Senate of the 

nated by many illustrious SefSTp'S* was , d ° mi ‘ 

, deluding Senator Recto ^ t'o TZ 
could not prevail; naturally, we were in ,he vast mino 
ity, but at least, we were studying, discussing a ™«Tde- 
batmg the mends of each and every bill that was fifed 
in the Senate. That was the function that I had to dis- 
charge as Senate Minority Floor Leader which con- 
sumed most of my time, if not all my time, like our 
time here in the Commission, and even as against the 
more learned and more experienced senators. 

M R MAAMB °NC. Thank you. Madam President. 
The other rssue is that a unicameral form of legislature 

v° r im r 

discussed this. , would like ^ 0 “ 
,ssue regarding delay because it has been stated by pro- 
ponents of unicameralism that the delay is actually in 
the passage of needed and urgent measures because 
Of conflicting interests between the Lower House and 
the Upper House. Could the Gentleman comment on 
that? 


MR. PADILLA. I should say that when there are 
some urgent and important measures, there should be 
no conflicting interests between the House and the 


Senate. If we have to pass the budget, we have to co- 
operate in passing it because it is necessary. With regard 
to some important measures, especially if they really 
affect the national interest or the good of the people, 
both Chambers should have the nationalism and patriot- 
ism to discharge their duties in a cooperative manner. 
It is wrong to always say that there is antagonism 
between the House and the Senate; that when a measure 
comes from the House, it will be objected to by the 
Senate, or vice versa. I do not believe that is the correct 
situation of our past experience. There should be coope- 
ration, and I believe that there may be honest dif- 
ferences of opinion; but when the nation’s interest 
arises, both Chambers will act in favor of protecting 
and endorsing the national interest. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Let me go to another basic 
issue regarding the check and balance between the 
two Houses. It has been stated by some that the check 
and balance is actually between the three departments 
of the government. In other words, the check is sup- 
posed to be interposed by the executive, and further- 
more, we do not need an Upper House because Mem- 
bers of the legislature, if it is unicameral, can very 
well check on each other. I recall when we were 
serving in the First Regular Batasang Pambansa that 
even in the case of the ruling party, when we passed that 
law which granted authority to the barangay officials 
to administer oaths of office, it was only a one-sentence 
law; but the Members of the Assembly who are here 
with us will attest to the fact that it took us almost one 
month to debate on just one single sentence. 

Is that not a sufficient check in the House itself? 

MR. PADILLA. In that particular example, if it has 
been thoroughly discussed — one sentence discussed in 
one month — I suppose the discussion was thorough, 
but thorough from the point of view of the House. The 
Senate might have another view which may even be 
more important because they represent the nation as 
their election is nationwide. 

MR. MAAMBONG. One final point, Madam President. 
They say that there is a human defect inherent in the 
two-chamber system in the sense that they are bound 
to “pass the buck” to each other. They explained it in 
this manner, that there is a human defect in one body 
which depends on the other. One body might rely on 
the other body, believing that there was thorough 
discussion and there was thorough study of the issues. 
And so, they say, “Well, it has been thoroughly dis- 
cussed in one body; we just have to pass it.” 

How does the Gentleman respond to this? 

MR. PADILLA. I think there is no “passing of the 
buck” or the blame or the credit because in the bica- 
meral system, both Chambers approve the measure by 
at least a majority vote. The Senate cannot say, “This 
is the House’s bill,” because the Senate approved it. 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


57 


The House cannot say. “This is only the Senate’s” 
because the House approved it. 

So. there is no shifting of responsibility. It is a con- 
current. common responsibility of both Chambers. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, there is no 
reliance on one Chamber on the actuations of the other. 


MR. PADILLA. No. I will not say that because if the 
Senate, for example, finds that this measure coming 
from the House has been quite extensively discussed 
and its merits and demerits considered, then the Senate 
may take that into account especially to avoid dupli- 
cation. But the fact that it was considered might lessen 
the degree of discussion on the Senate but it will still 
consider the merits or demerits of that measure. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I thank the Gentleman very 
much; he has been very kind. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, we have three 
more speakers for the unicameral system this time. 
And with the indulgence of the body, I think we can 
finish this before lunch because the three speakers are 
noted not only for their wisdom but for their brevity. 


THE PRESIDENT. Three speakers without inter- 
pellation? 

MR. ROMULO. Three speakers without interpella- 
tion, Madam President. 

May I ask that Commissioner Bernas be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

Maybe we can state that any interpellation can be 
made after lunch. 


FR BERNAS Thank you, Madam President and 
Commissioner Romulo, for a very broad hint for me to 
be brief. I shall try to be brief. 


I would like to place our discussion of unicameralism 
or bicameralism in the context of an ongoing revolution. 
We have been called to this Commission by a revolu- 
tionary government to the extent tliat jt 1S a g° v ^ in 
ment that is a product of the February revolution. And 
very much in the air these days are phrases like people 
power,” “revolutionary Constitution, social justice 
“those who have less in life should have more in law, 
“decentralization.” Therefore, what we are trying to 
formulate here is a constitution that wil set up struc- 
tures capable of continuing the goals ot the revolution. 


It is commonly said that the revolution of February 
was primarily a political revolution. It was a revolution 


that released us from the political oppressions that were 
institutionalized under the old regime; and last week 
we completed what may be characterized as the most 
liberal Bill of Rights this nation has ever had and to 
that extent, it was a further affirmation of the solid 
ground upon which the success of the political revo- 
lution rests. But it is also said that we still have to com- 
plete a social revolution. 


And if we look at the Bill of Rights and the many 
proposals that are being made in this Commission, we 
will see that, among the political guarantees, we find 
guarantees which by themselves are self-executory'. 
But when it comes to the guarantees of social and eco- 
nomic rights, the farthest we can go is to set goals for 
future legislatures to attain. And. therefore, what we 
are looking for is a legislature that will be capable of 
attaining the social and economic goals precisely be- 
cause we, as a Constitutional Commission, cannot 
legislate fully effective means for attaining these social 
and economic goals. Therefore, the legislature which 
we must set up should be a legislature that is capable of 
pushing these social and economic goals. In order for 
this legislature to be able to push these social and 
economic goals, it must be a legislature that is not 
insulated from the pressures of people power. It should 
be a legislature that is more easily subject to the pres- 
sures of people power, and the more than 70 percent 
of the underprivileged masses. 

If we look at a legislative body and the nation, 
essentially, the Upper House is a House that is insulated 
from the pressures from below. It is generally a House 
that is protective of monied interests and propertied 
interests. And if we look at the formation itself of the 
federal government of the United States, the shift from 
isolated stage to a federated government was a move 
among the propertied classes to move government 
away from the people so that it could be less subject 
to the pressures from below, from the poor, the farmers 
and the debtors. 


We have had a social justice provision in our Consti- 
tution since 1935. We amended the social justice provi- 
sion in 1971. We are again going through a process of 
formulating social justice provisions, but I think this 
Commission will not legislate. It will only set social 
justice goals. And so, we must give our nation a legis- 
lature that is susceptible to the pressures of people 
power. And they will be susceptible to the pressures of 
people power, if they are forced to interact with their 
constituency so that if they lose in one constituency, 
they cannot recoup their gains in another constituency 
where they may not be well known. In that sense, a 
unicameral body can be more democratic, more capab e 
of achieving this economic and social revolution whic 
we want to attain. 


It is said that bicameralism would draw to the leS 1 ® 
lature more mature, more experienced and more a ^ 
men. But if we have only one body, these experienc^ 
and more able men will have no other place to go 


58 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


to that one body. And they would have this advantage: 
that they will be people who would be subject to the 
pressures of people power. 

It is also said that bicameralism would be less sus- 
ceptible to bribery and control of the legislature by 
vested interests, thus insuring its independence. But 
again, I say they would also be less susceptible to the 
pressures of people power. 

It is also said that bicameralism would provide a 
means of securing national views on public questions. 
We have innumerable talk shows on television and on 
radio where national issues are discussed more widely 
than they can ever be discussed in any deliberative 
assembly. These talk shows are formulating the think- 
ing of the people now through widespread media 
like FM and AM radio, television, etc. National issues 
are aired, ventilated, debated upon and discussed 
thoroughly in media. We do not need an Upper House 
to do this. 


They say that the Senate serves as a good training 
ground for future leaders. A unicameral body can do 
as well, especially if it is a unicameral body that is sub- 
jected to the glare of the light of television, radio and 
communication media in general. They will be forced 
to think not just in terms of local realities, but also in 
erms o the greater good of the nation. But because 
imT P t r , esence in the legislature will depend very much 

they 1 w iu interac *- ion with their constituency, then 
they will be forced to listen especially to the masses 
of underprivileged in their constituency 

If I may summarize, I would put it this way: What 
we need today is the completion of a peaceful 
social and economic revolution. Therefore what 
we need is a body that is not removed from those 
who will benefit from this revolution. And a unicameral 
body representative of the people and elected by 
constituencies, is in a better position to reflect the 
sentiments of the masses of the underprivileged 
Thank you. 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that 
recognized. 


Commissioner Gascon 


be 


n™ E PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would also like to speak in favnr r,f tu 
legislature and would like to continue from where 
Father Bernas has left off, since I would likeVbedn 
with the same major premise that we are here to con- 
tinue a revolution that was started by the struggles of 
the people since the time of the Katipunan, a revo- 
lution which we must forge towards social revolution 
by responding to the basic social inequality in the 
Philippine society. 


We have seen that after World War II we created 
a political democracy that was denominated by a 
particular ruling economic elite, and I think we have 
to respond to it directly now in this fourth attempt 
at drafting a Constitution by providing the people 
power and direct access to the centers of power and 
decision-making. 

So, I think the basic issue when we discuss the legis- 
lative body is this: How do we make the structures 
of government closer to the people? How do we em- 
power the people directly by providing access to the 
centers of decision-making? 

I think the first thing in assuring the people is 
that the legislative body will not be an interaction among 
representatives of the Senate and the House but rather 
an interaction between the representatives and the 
people themselves, indirectly. 

So, I would like to support Commissioner Bernas’ 
position that what is needed now is that legislature must 
have concrete interaction and must be willing to res- 
pond directly to what the people want. Secondly, I 
think the unicameral legislature will be more appro- 
priate towards the development of a new kind of 
politics, a politics based on issues and not on per- 
sonalities. Only when we try to develop politics based 
on issues will we be able to develop a genuine popular 
democracy. Thirdly, I believe that when we establish a 
unicameral system, we must also assure that in this 
unicameral system, there is direct representation of 
sectors and it is much easier to provide direct sectoral 
representation in a unicameral body rather than in a 
bicameral form of legislature; thereby the legislature 
becomes more responsive to the genuine and imme- 
diate needs of the people. 

Some of my other arguments in favor of unicameral- 
ism are as follows: First, I think it affords a simpler gov- 
ernmental organization. Only one body will exercise the 
responsibility of formulating the nation’s public policy. 
I think we must give confidence to the representatives in 
this House of Representatives; and when the people 
decide who their representatives will be, they will take 
upon themselves that direct responsibility of assuring 
that legislation will be responsive to their needs. Second, 
a unicameral form will provide effective control over 
the country’s fiscal policies and annual budget appro- 
priations. Third, I believe it is more democratic, be- 
cause I do not agree with the premise that there are 
local selfish interests of districts as opposed to national 
interests as has been expressed already by some other 
Commissioners. We are one nation and we have one 
national interest and I think, primarily, this interest is 
to respond to the needs of the poor, the deprived and 
the oppressed and, to create and continue the struggle 
for a social revolution. So, I do not believe that there 
are conflicting interests of the Filipino people based 
on regional interests. I think what is clearer to me is a 
conflicting interest between those who have and those 
who have not. Fourth, I think a single and large Cham- 


MONDAY, JULY 21 , c 1 986 


59 


ber affords greater representation for the various sectors 
of society, and I think this is what the Committee and 
the legislature wish to do. A second House only be- 
comes a tool of special interest groups, because it only 
promotes personalities and issues and we project our 
national leaders based on their popularity or their 
personality, and I think we should not encourage this. 
These special interest groups tend to dominate the 
Upper House simply because of the expense it entails 
to campaign on a national level and we know fora tact 
that the reality in Philippine society is that the majority 
are poor and. therefore, access to the Upper House is 
virtually impossible. 


Fifth, it will eliminate unwarranted distinctions 
between Senators and Representatives which are without 
basis because they exercise the same functions and the 
sense of preeminence accorded a Senator is a vestige 
of aristocratic origins which I do not think we should 


encourage. 


What are the arguments I have against a bicameral 
form of legislature: First, a two-chamber Congress is no 
assurance of a better considered and better deliberated 
legislation. Although it affords double consideration of 
bids, it might, in fact, encourage the two Houses to 
hastily pass legislation on the assumption that the other 
House will review the same. In a unicameral form with 
a larger deliberative body, the responsibility of these 
representatives can be emphasized to provide better 
bills, better legislations which are responsive to the needs 
of the people. Besides, the function ot checking the 
legislature should not be among the two Houses. The 
function of checks and balances should be between the 
legislature and other branches of government; namely, 
the executive and the judiciary. 


Second, bicameralism produces duplication of efforts. 
The Senate has become a stumbling block to progressive 
legislation emanating from the House. 1 do not think it 
is democratic to see a smaller House of Representatives 
vetoing a larger representative body. 

Third, serious deadlocks may occur in the enactment 
of important measures which I think occur when there 
are varying interests between the majority in the House 
of Representatives and the majority in the Senate. 
Moreover, there may be instances when there are legis- 
lations which meet the needs of a particular political 
bloc because, in reality, when we speak of checks and 
balances, it is not a matter of the two Houses opposing 
each other, but an analysis of these will tell more often 
than not that they come from the same political parties. 
Therefore, this check is not a real check because they 
essentially will vote along party lines. 1 think a better 
check is the legislative body with the people. I he people 
will, in fact, be the check and not two representatives 

among themselves. 


Fourth, a bicameral form represents and protects 
the vested interests ot the rich because only the wealthy 
individuals can make it to the Senate due to the pio 
hibitive costs of campaign. 


Fifth, on the matter that it produces future leaders 
in the country, I think our history of struggle against 
the dictatorship has shown that we do not need an elite 
body of nationally elected individuals to represent 
new, future upcoming national leaders. We have seen 
how the people can assert themselves on issues involving 
the national interest. I do not believe that it is the 
stature of being a senator that makes us confront a 
dictator just as what has been mentioned that there 
were some distinguished senators who opposed the 
declaration of martial law. 

I would like to remind the body that over and above 
these distinguished individuals who have opposed the 
dictatorship, the common people, the workers and the 
peasants have continually opposed tyranny, dictatorship 
and oppression. We do not need a bunch of elite people 
to speak for them. The people have learned to speak for 
themselves and they can assert themselves and we 
should provide them greater access towards asserting 
this basic right. 

Thus, if we think that it is a good training ground. 

I would also like to remind the body that there have 
been instances where their national leaders have not 
come from the Senate. Notable in the Philippine con- 
text are Presidents Magsaysay and Macapagal who came 
from the House of Representatives. President Aquino 
herself was never a politician. In the United States, 
there were at least three Presidents who did not come 
from the legislative body but came from a direct execu- 
tive position such as governor or mayor. Franklin 
Roosevelt, Carter and Reagan were governors. My 
point is: We do not need a Senate as a training ground 
for future leaders. I think the best training ground is 
to continue the struggle for truth, freedom and justice. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

Madam President, Commissioner Sarmiento feels 
that all the arguments have been given, and so, he 
withdraws. And now that we have enough food for 
thought, may I suggest that we take care of our bodies. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 12:26 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:49 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, some Commis- 
sioners would like to interpellate Commissioner Bernas, 

so I think we can do that now. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is requested 
to take the microphone. 


60 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Tingson would like 
to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. • 

MR. TINGSON. May I have the honor of asking a 
couple of questions of Commissioner Bernas? 

FR. BERNAS. I have the honor of answering the 
Commissioner’s questions. 


as, according to the veteran Member of Congress, he 
said: “It is very difficult to campaign for the House of 
Representatives because you really have to go to the 
barrios; you have to mix with the people. It was de- 
manded of you that you do this.” Because of that, I 
feel that the Member of the House of Representatives 
is in a better position to really assess the sentiments of 
the people, of the suffering masses, because they were 
not just fleeting through these towns. They were staying 
there, interacting with them and sometimes staying 
with them for a long time. 


MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 

The Commissioner mentioned in his speech before we 
ate our lunch that because of the social and economic 
goals that we must implement, especially in the light of 
the recent peaceful revolution, said goals can be more 
effectively done by a unicameral body. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


MR. TINGSON. If I am not mistaken, such social an< 
economic goals, especially in the light of what happem 
recently, with all of us getting more nationalistic am 
patriotic, are national in scope and not provincial. Doe 
f ,°^™ ss i° n er not think that it would be bes 
* 6 vi y j grou P °f legislators who are electee 

nwi e an who have better expertise on that line? 

that ’they aftelSduais ^hey ' HreThe" ' h<i “T 
purpose of SJS 

abo C uUhi?fhe e ot^ d H° *“ Speakin « in radical term. 

Xce of exposure ^ <>« im 

of an individual so that whitT *** 8 0f an educatior 
i • r T , 5 so tIlat w hat he was trying to sav 

some’ time ^vlnf °°m I™ right ’ iS that if one has ^ a < 
some time living with these individuals, then his per 

ception of what the problem is changes, and one begin 

to see things from their own perspective. 

Looking back to the experience of the senatoria 
and congressional races, I asked myself- Who are in 
better position to underdo ti 1PC « y ' „ 0 are 11 ' 

privileged to listen to two veteran And , 1 Wa 

Members of this body. One was a wmak ® rs w,1 ° ar< 

of Representatives and Z II Veteran of the 
ol Kepresentatives and the other was a veteran of th< 

Senate. Each of them described how they campaigner 

during election time. The Member of the Senate said 

“It was very easy for me to campaign. Why'? Becausi 

you would land in a central city, and you would B( 

from town to town for brief stops, listen to them 

almost with just enough time to be able to shake hands 

not really to feel the sentiments of the people.” Where 


MR. TINGSON. But does the Commissioner not 
agree that the people who are elected to the Upper 
House are not political novices? These are people who 
had proven themselves, to begin with. They are accept- 
able in their own local districts and hometowns. And as 
such, they really are statesmen rather than politicians. 

May I just add here, if I may, that to me a politician 
is a man who only thinks of the next election while the 
statesman prays for the next generation. And it seems 
to me that that is exactly what the Upper House is and 
should be. Does Commissioner Bernas agree? 

FR. BERNAS. I do not fully agree with the Gentle- 
man that that is what is needed by the nation now. We 
do need statesmen first. But his statement suggests that 
with a Lower House only or one legislative body only, 
we will have no similar statesmen. I disagree with him. 
But aside from having these statesmen, we will also have 
people who are in deeper contact with the masses. 

MR. TINGSON. Commissioner Bernas was in America 
for some time; he is also an authority on American 
history. If I am not mistaken, most of those who were 
elevated to the presidency were people who had their 
training in the Senate. And is this not a very logical 
thing indeed — by age, experience and exposure to 
national issues? There is indeed a need for the Senate 
because the presidency involves national leadership, 
not just local. 

FR. BERNAS. I am glad that the Commissioner 
mentioned America because I do not think America 
should be the model for the Philippine government. 
Let me say why: The American government was for- 
mulated, as I said, in reverse of what we are trying to 
do. The American government started from local 
governments. And if we look at the records of the 
Constitutional Convention of the United States, particu- 
larly the debates between the Federalists and the anti- 
Federalists, the tenor of the arguments of the Fede- 
ralists was precisely to create a federal government 
removed from the people in order to silence the masses. 
Is that what we want? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. Is that what we want? Do we want 
to model our government after America with all the 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


61 


defects of America? If one will read the book of 
Charles Beard written in 1915, The Economic History 
of the Constitution of the United States — American 
scholars have not stopped studying that book — the 
conclusion many American scholars draw is that the 
Constitution formulated by the Federalists, precisely, 
was not a democratic Constitution. It was designed to 
silence the oppressed masses of the states. The state 
governments, particularly the landed gentry, found 
themselves pressured by the masses. And they learned 
to protect their interests among themselves. They say, 
“Let us get together so that we can protect ourselves 
from the masses.” Is that what we want for this coun- 
try? 

MR. TINGSON. One will be glad to know that one 
of the schools in America that I have the joy ot attend- 
ing was Loyola University in Chicago, the Commis- 
sioner’s denominational university. And I also studied 
Charles Beard; I remember that very well. I am not 
saying that I am an authority on him but let that be so. 

My next question and my last one is: Commissioner 
Bernas mentioned that this revolution actually did 
happen because, in fact, we were fighting against the 
political structure that gave rise to the despotic rule of 
the discredited leadership then. Do I understand t rat 
right? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


nothing we can learn from them. It is simply that we 
are more articulate and we have been projected more 
in the public eye. And for that reason, we have been 
chosen. But is it a question of wisdom or unwisdom? 

Is it a question of better or worse? I do not think that 
is the point at all. We cannot claim to be better than 
they are. We cannot claim to be wiser than they are. 
We may have had more formal education than they 
have, but we cannot claim that they are less educated 
than we are. And I do not wish the legislature that we 
are formulating to be projected as an elitist legislature. 
If I may go back to the Gentleman’s reference to 
the American Constitution, that was the thrust of the 
Federalists. That was the thrust of Madison. That was 
the thrust of Jefferson. If he will read “Federalist Paper 
No. 10” written by Madison, it is a very clear affirm- 
ation of class superiority. 

MR. TINGSON. I thank Commissioner Bernas. Those 
are his feelings and opinions and I do have mine too. 
But thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Natividad would like 
to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Will the Gentleman yield? 


MR. TINGSON. If so, then was not that revolution 
precisely against the structure of unicameralism because 
it gave rise to a dictator? In answer to that, let us have 
a bicameral system from which a dictatorship or an au 
thoritarian rule will be harder to rise. 


FR. BERNAS. I assure the Commissioner that if we 
were to poll the people who gathered in EDSA, between 
Camp Crame and Camp Aguinaldo, and ask them if 
during that revolution they ever thought of a unicamera 
or bicameral body, the vast majority of them will say 
“It had no relevance whatsoever with what we are 
trying to do. We just wanted to get rid of Marcos. 
Bicameralism or unicameralism was farthest from heir 

mind. 

MR. TINGSON. May I just say that probably it is 
farthest from their mind because some of them do not 
have the political discernment that Father Bernas and 
are supposed to have as Members of the Constitutional 
Commission. So, they find that political matters if I 
am not mistaken, are supposed to be attended by us in 
this Constitutional Commission. And that is why 
and I are debating now on the merits of the two sys- 
tems. Am I not right? 

FR. BERNAS. Basically, we disagree. But 1 do not 
believe that because we are here, we are necessari y 
wiser than the masses. I do not believe that there is 


FR. BERNAS. Very willingly. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I have not really made up my 
mind yet on this issue and that is the reason I would 
like to extricate some answers. There is an example 
here. First, I would just try to confirm what Commis- 
sioner Bernas said about the House of Representatives. 

I served for 12 years in the House of Representatives 
in a province where most people from the barrios know 
how to recite and compose poems on the spot, led 
by our distinguished Senator. But one will believe me 
and our distinguished Senator, who is highly respected 
and adored in Bulacan, that even children in the barrios 
can compose poems and recite the masterpiece of Balag- 
tas. That is why I do not dare compose a poem there, 
am not a Soc Rodrigo so I do not dare compose a poem 
in the barrio. What I would like to confirm is that the 
campaign for a Congressman is quite different from tha 
of a Senator because from my schedule — when 1 was 
campaigning for three terms - during the hottest par 
of the campaign period I had six meetings a night an 
1,000 houses to cover everyday, because we conducte 
a house-to-house campaign. At night we used to have six 
or seven meetings simultaneously going on for one or 
two months before the election. The schedule was quite 
hectic. We had to sleep in the barrios at times when we 

could no longer return to our base for rest. We only 
discover the idiosyncracies of our people when we s ay 
with them. For example, in what we believe is an 


62 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


enlightened province, the voters do not mind if a candi- 
date knocks at the door to campaign at three or four 
o’clock in the morning. They would rather that you 
wake them up at three o’clock in the morning than 
during daytime for it is clear that you stayed awake up 
to three o’clock in the morning just to get their votes. 
Here in Manila, that method of campaigning would have 
been disastrous. But the voters hardest to get are in our 
area. I used to knock at their door at three o’clock in 
the morning to wake them up. However, they still con- 
sidered that a favor because they thought the Congress- 
man did not sleep just to get their votes. That is an 
idiosyncracy that I do not read in books. 

So, my first question is: An example was mentioned 
of a certain Congressman who went to a Senator asking 
that a certain bill he sponsored in the House, in commit- 
ment to a leader, be disapproved in the Senate. Of 
course, I am not one of those Congressmen; I have never 
done that. But is that not an argument in favor of a 
unicameral system? That happened because there were 
two Houses. There was passing of the buck. But if we 
have one House, a unicameral system, it is impossible to 
do that. We stand in our own convictions and commit- 
ments. Whether we like it or not, we have to be guided 
by our conscience. But if we have two Houses, we 
usually pass the buck on to each other. 


FR. BERNAS. Precisely, I agree with the Commis 
sioner. nci entally while I agree with him, I would als( 

wldct? ] aC .* 10wedge t ^ at my example of a Congressmar 

from b leameC 

rienceso»eracup„fcoteT,hl a !X ^ 

MR. NAT1VIDAD. Thank you 

when there are two Houcpc b necessar > 

there will be two dtfS v. “ * ,nevi ' able ,hal 
same bill with a iff , ent versi0ns or two sets of the 

7Z coSnc ^e ™lT iS r $ ' Wha ‘ hap >’ e " a is ' bal 

« Solv'eT ° n , 00 days ' *■»' bi " “ *o»t becaus! 
t\ ii i s P ec ial session where bills considerec 

as far'asour ex^erie * by ,he l 

as far as our experience ,n the Congress is concerned 

The other point I would like to talk about is hash 
legislation. During our time in 1 1 n dSli 

our check and balance u the oId C °ngress, we hac 

Went Md the n ' W3S the Senate ’ the 

If a law went through a^j 

u d ic ia 1 * 

, i , ... s , J ua »cial review, it mielit bt 

declared unconstitutional. glu 0( 

But here again we are considering additional safe 
guards like initiative, referendum and even recall So 
I am asking this question: Would these not suffice a 1 
safeguards for a unicameral legislature? W e shall have 
the committees there and what is more potent is the 
prospect of recall, initiative and referendum. Any o 
these is unusual, and if I know my politics, it will have 


an impact on the future legislators of our country. It 
will be the end of their career. If the law that one 
sponsored, through a mechanism of referendum, is 
rejected by the people, or if an indifferent Congressman 
refuses to propose a bill which was approved through 
initiative resulting in an outrage and outcry of the 
people such that he becomes subject of recall which is 
later on approved, would this not constitute a very 
potent system of check and balance? 

FR. BERNAS. Again, I agree with the Commissioner 
and I might also add that there can be no more potent 
obstacles to maturation than the realization that there 
is somebody there who will always correct you. So, if 
we have a House of Representatives that knows that its 
mistakes will be caught by somebody else for correc- 
tion, then the growth towards maturation will be 
stunted. The sooner we leave them alone to stand by 
themselves, then the more responsibly they will act. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. There is one statement I appre- 
ciate. The Congressmen are really vulnerable to the pork 
barrel system and the public works projects. Many of 
our people translate good performance in terms of 
public works that they take home and how many ap- 
pointments they have engineered into the bureaucracy. I 
think if we have a unicameral system, this problem 
should be addressed. We should make sure that all 
vestiges of the pork barrel system are not returned 
because the legislative is very vulnerable to a President 
who knows how to use and misuse the system of allocat- 
ing public works projects and appointments. This is a 
dangerous problem. This should be the area where the 
unicameral system should be protected from because 
the executive controls the release of funds for these 
projects. The Constitution should not allow the legisla- 
ture to legislate projects without certainty of funding. I 
remember in the old Congress, we had a total public 
works appropriation of PI 8 billion, but not a cent was 
available. Congress used to promulgate public works 
bills every year without certain funding or appropria- 
tions. So, the President could just pick what he wanted 
to be released, and this way he controlled many ot the 
political activities and maneuvers of Congress. In an 
overall situation, does the Commissioner feel that a 
unicameral legislature would be protected from this 
well-known strategy to control and influence it? 

FR. BERNAS. I think the observation about the 
prevalence of the pork barrel system in the premartial 
law Congress is very well-taken. But we should also take 
into consideration the fact that since that time up to the 
present, our people have grown in political maturity. 
They are a people who are less likely to be bought by 
the pork barrel system. They are people who are 
politically mature and who think in terms of what is 
really good for the nation and not just for themselves 
as individuals. So, while the pork barrel system was 
something that was prevalent in the past and in case 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


63 


there will be an attempt to reintroduce this in the 
present, I think our people are in a better position to 
cope with this. So, the unicameral system will not be 
standing by itself. It will be a unicameral system that is 
situated in a political society that has grown in maturity 
because of the experiences in the past 15 years. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 


MR. ROMULO. There are no more interpellators for 
Commissioner Bernas, but Commissioner Bengzon 
would like to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I just have about 
three points in reply to those raised in favor ot the 
unicameral system. One of the main theses ol Commis- 
sioner Bernas in speaking against a bicameral Congress 
is that the Senate is created to be isolated from the 
people. In citing the federal system of government, we 
may have copied the system at the beginning, but as to 
whether that was really the intention or not, I really 
cannot say for certain and much less can I agree to the 
proposition that the Senate in the Philippines was set 
up by the elitist group. 

Perhaps before 1941 and after the war and until 
about the time before martial law, there were instances 
when certain business blocs voted certain people into 
the Senate, but these business blocs also voted people 
into the House of Representatives. 


I grant the proposition that the Members of the House 
of Representatives are closer to the people that they 
represent 1 grant the proposition that the Members of 
the House of Representatives campaign on a one-to-one 
basis with the people in the barrios and their consti- 
tuencies- I also grant the proposition that the candidates 
for Senator do not have as much time to mingle around 
with their constituencies in their respective home bases 
Ts the candidates for the House. I also grant the proposi- 
tion that the candidates for the Senate go around e 
country in their efforts to win the votes of all the 
members of the electorate at a lesser time than that 
™ ven to the candidates for the House of Representa- 
f ves But then the lesson of the last 14 years has made 
s mature in our political thinking and has given us 
nlibca will and self-determination. We really cannot 
disassociate the fact that the Congressman, the Member 
of the House of Representatives, no matter how 
national he would like to think, is very much strongly 
drawn into the problems of his local constituents in his 
own district So that necessarily and even perhaps 
umConsdously . his mind, his efforts, his desire to help 
the nation becomes parochial in many respects because 
he thinks of his constituents in his own district. 


monitor not only the Members of the House of Repre- 
sentatives but also the Members of the Senate. As I said, 
we may have probably adopted the American formula in 
the beginning but over these years, I think we have 
developed that kind of a system and adopted it to our 
own needs. So at this point in time, with people power 
working, it is not only the Members of the House who 
can be subjected to people power but also the Members 
of the Senate because they can also be picketed and 
criticized through written articles and talk shows. And 
even the people not only from their constituencies in 
their respective regions and districts but from the whole 
country can exercise people power against the Members 
of the Senate because they are supposed to represent 
the entire country. So while the Members of Congress 
become unconsciously parochial in their desire to help 
their constituencies, the Members of the Senate are 
there to take a look at all of these parochial proposals 
and coordinate them with the national problems. They 
may be detached in that sense but they are not detached 
from the people because they themselves know and 
realize that they owe their position not only to the 
people from their respective provinces but also to the 
people from the whole country. So, I say that people 
power now will be able to monitor the activities of the 
Members of the House of Representatives and that 
very same people power can be also used to monitor the 
activities of the Members of the Senate. 

The last point I would like to take up is that it is 
unfortunate that the last Members of the defunct Senate 
were belittled and not given much credit for standing up 
against the declaration of martial law despite the fact 
that they risked arrest and that, in fact, a great number 
of them were arrested and incarcerated for a number of 
years. It is not only unfortunate but I think it is most 
unkind. As a matter of fact, if we look in retrospect, a 
lot of Filipinos liked martial law at the beginning 
because of the land reform that was dangled on top of 
our heads. A lot of mothers and wives liked martial law; 
a lot of people liked martial law because at the begin- 
ning it was giving order into our society. The slogan 
was: “Sa ikauunlad ng bayan, disiplina ang kailangan. 

At the beginning it was so. I even noticed it myself in 
the simple manner of conducting oneself in traffic. 
People were beginning to follow traffic rules. They were 
giving way to one another. The economy was beginning 
to improve until cronyism set in. So, we cannot say tha 
people power was against martial law at the beginning 
because we really did not have any parliament of the 
streets at that time. And so, where was people powei . 
It was probably still in the hearts of the Filipinos an 
was not yet really expressed that much. I feel that tie 
last Members of the defunct Senate were the first ones 
who stood up against martial law. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


Due to the maturity of the Filipinos for the last 14 
years and because ot the emergence o peop c power, 
believe that this so-called people power can be used to 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Padilla would like to be recognized. 


64 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President, Commissioner 
Padilla, is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Madam President. 

I have spoken long enough this morning and I did not 
intend to speak any longer but I heard from Commis- 
sioner Gascon the few remarks that I feel need refuta- 
tion. I heard the statements that the Senators usually 
represent special interests; that the Senate blocks 
progressive legislation of the House; and that the Senate 
is an elitist body whose Members are only the wealthy 
because their election is expensive. 

I do not have to refute these statements in a personal 
capacity because I do not feel alluded to by any stretch 
of imagination as being covered by such indictments. 
But to set the record straight, I think the record of the 
Senate is just the opposite of those charges or accusa- 
tions. The many Senators whom I had the privilege to 
work with from 1958, when I was the Minority Floor 
Leader, as only two Liberals were elected in 1957 as 
against 22 Senators, were illustrious men who were 
nationalistic and patriotic like the late Senator Claro M. 

ecto. I do not believe that there is any substance to 
t e charge that the Senators were protecting or rep- 
resentmg special interests and much less served as a 
ocKade to progressive legislation by the House. 

Senatp 1 t0 ^ can ^idacy of Members for the 

camnaien 6 expenses > fact is that the senatorial 

^r“;:r al,y for ,hose wh ° have been 

penses of the candidat ^ muclt less than the ex ' 
believe it, but in mv firsT ° f the ^ ouse - One may not 

P300,000 because the Liberal Partv did noteven s P end 
tial candidate Jose B Ynlr> r rty j Under lts presiden- 

party. Our expenses at thai t^ C ^l^ Sesofthe , 
propaganda materials that had to be circu atS P * rS ° 
we went during t he nationwide campaign 

sioIe\%? r h „a r s f s X?h a ,S WaS , menti0ned by Comrais - 

from ponuk 1, H Senate ,s lsolated or insulated 
alsi^no basisfor^uich Statement ^ ia 

mad 7, b ° p ‘ thp 

or Madison were being accused nf c* 1 ! 3 ? 168 ofJepferson 
the masses of the people. f olatin § or silencing 

I understand that was <• 

but I cannot, even in a small ^ * Certain writer ’ 

because these are the founders the 1 !T ^ Char§e 
responsible not only f or the d eaders who were 

pendence but for the Constitution S !£ at !° r n of inde ' 
which stresses democracy defined by Presided 
later on as: “the .government of th f CSlde " t Lincoln 
people and for the people.” People, by the 

We speak now of social and economic goals That is 
why I proposed the word “progress” in the Preamble 
of our Constitution - to meet the economic goals for 
the betterment of the life of the Filipino people. But 


when we speak of people power, more particularly the 
political miracle of February 22 to 25, the peaceful 
revolution of the people, this refers to the outraged 
feeling of the sovereign people who suffered depressive 
and oppressive misrule by absolute power. But with 
regard to the many problems of the nation, we should 
consult the people, feel their pulse, know their problems 
which I believe is part of leadership to be able to under- 
stand and to provide the solutions therefor. It is not 
enough that there be a sentiment of the people, especial- 
ly when it is local or provincial, or in the adjective of 
Commissioner Bengzon, “parochial,” that we imme- 
diately have to implement or follow because the 
problem of one sector or province may not be the same 
as the problem of another. And yet, we must have a 
solution that is not local but national in scope and is 
effective throughout the nation. I would like to think of 
people power as an enlightened public opinion. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Maambong would like to be recognized for a brief 
interpellation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized to interpellate Commissioner Davide. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President and members of 
the Committee: I mentioned earlier that when I was 
employed in the Seventh Congress, it was dissolved. 
When I was given a chance by the people of Cebu to 
serve in the First Regular Batasang Pambansa, it was 
again dissolved. This dissolution is getting to be a habit, 
and if my luck will run its course, I even entertain 
nightmares that the Commission might even be dissolved. 

So, we are talking here of unicameralism or bica- 
meralism. Will the Committee enlighten us on this 
point: Is there any provision in a unicameral type of 
legislature or bicameral type of legislature wherein the 
head of the government, the President or whatever we 
may call him, will have some respect for the representa- 
tives of the people who serve in the National Assembly 
or in the legislature? Is there such a provision in the 
Article on the Legislative? 

MR. DAVIDE. May we request the other members of 
the Committee to come forward and join us here in 
answering a very difficult question? 

THE PRESIDENT. The members of the Committee 
on the Legislative are being requested to join the Chair- 
man of the Committee. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, in response to the 
question, it should be stated here that we have installed 
a system of government where we recognize the basic 
organs of government, the executive, the legislative, 
and the judiciary, each independent of the other. As a 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


65 


matter of fact, insofar as the judiciary is concerned, we 
have enshrined a judiciary whose independence is en- 
hanced and promoted by the approved Article on the 
Judiciary. In the matter of the legislative or the National 
Assembly, as being proposed now by this Committee, 
we will have one which can withstand any pressure from 
the President. Among others, we recognize the Question 
Hour which will, therefore, subject the members of the 
Cabinet of the President to vigorous questionings and 
to exposures of whatever evils may be committed by the 
executive department. To me that would, in effect, be 
an authority on the part of the legislature to dictate 
even on the President through the Cabinet ministers. 
We also recognize in the Article on the National Assem- 
bly certain powers of the National Assembly. For 
instance, in the matter of treaties and international 
agreements, either cannot be valid or effective without 
the concurrence of at least a majority of all the mem- 
bers of the National Assembly. If we take this into 
account vis-a-vis the provision of the proposed Article 
on the Executive, the legislative would have the author- 
ity over that of the President in the matter of the 
execution of certain presidential prerogatives like the 
proclamation of martial law and the suspension of the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. All of these taken 
together would clearly indicate that, perhaps, the fear of 
a dissolution of the National Assembly, like what was 
done to the Regular Batasang Pambansa of which I was 
a member, may not happen. Of course, we have to 
recognize the fact that if there is a people’s revolution 
again, any existing legislature may also be abolished. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, the Committee is 
saying that we have all the provisions under which the 
legislative can withstand the pressure of the President 
except dissolution. There is nothing there in the Com- 
missioner’s statement of facts which would indicate that 
the President or the head of State could be prevented 
from dissolving the legislative body. 

MR. DAVIDE. There is nothing that is provided for 
here on dissolution as used in a parliamentary form of 
government because we are not adopting the parlia- 
mentary system. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

Just one more very minor point. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I was assured 
by the Floor Leader that we are not yet through with 
the interpellations on the matter of unicameralism and 
bicameralism; that is why I am now proceeding to inter- 
pellate with just one or two questions and then will sit 
down after that. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, the Commis- 
sioner’s interpellation is still related to the problem on 
what system we shall adopt — if it is a unicameral or 
bicameral system. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Precisely, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, with the permission 
of Commissioner Maambong, may we seek the recogni- 
tion of Commissioner Guingona for a supplementary 
statement relevant to the question asked by Commis- 
sioner Maambong? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

Our Chairman has already enumerated certain restric- 
tions and powers of the National Assembly or Congress 
in relation to the presidency and I would like ° 
mention that in spite of the fact that the President is the 
commander-in-chief of all the armed forces, under tms 
committee report, it is still the National Assembly 
which will have the sole power to declare the existen 
of a state of war. 

I just want to mention the fact that we have to look 
at the Constitution as a whole and, therefore, restric- 
tions or limitations on the power of the presidency or 
other related matters would be found in other provi- 
sions or other articles of the Constitution like in the 
matter of impeachment, where the legislature would 
have a say with regard to the initiation and prosecution, 
and, perhaps, in the matter of adjudication. In other 
words, not everything which has to do with the relation- 
ship of the legislative or with the executive would be 
found in this particular article. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, I stand on a point of 
parliamentary inquiry. I thought the arrangement that 
we have agreed upon this morning is that after the dis- 
cussions on the pros and cons of the issue on the 
number of chambers that the legislature would have, 
the body would then proceed to vote on the prejudicial 
question as raised by Commissioner Rodrigo. I suggest 
that we stick to the arrangement as agreed upon this 
morning. Are we going to follow that agreement. 
Madam President? 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, just for a point 
of information with respect to the fears of Commis- 
sioner Maambong about a prospective further dissolu- 
tion of the legislature if one day he will be in the 
legislative body. 


Section 1 5 of the proposed Article on the Executive^ 
provides that a state of martial law does not suspend 
the operation of the Constitution nor supplant j. ® 
functioning of the civil courts or legislative assem 1 


66 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


and that refers to the National Assembly as well as to 
the local legislative assemblies. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

More or less, that is a specific answer but I may be 
just engaging in wishful thinking if I request the Com- 
mittee to formulate probably a definitive statement that 
whatever changes in the executive department, there 
should be no dissolution of a legislative body which is 
composed of representatives of the people. But that is 
not for today, probably some other time when the 
Committee will think about it. 

In line with this question that I have posed is the 
matter of continuity of the legislative body, be it uni- 
cameral or bicameral. There is a statement to the effect 
that if we have an Upper House, considering the stag- 
gered terms of its members, at any time there will 
always be a group of available and experienced men 
who can be depended upon to continue the policies 
of the government, which is not true in the unica- 
meral system because when it adjourns or when there 
is a new election, no member is left around. Will the 
Commissioner comment on the continuity? 


MR. MAAMBONG. That answers my question. 

Although the Committee reported out a unicameral 
system, it is still adopting an open mind. But may I just 
pose this last question: There is a statement here I 
gathered that in the case of a unicameral system, there is 
an easier control by the President and because of that 
easier control, we might wake up one day with an 
uncontrollable President by the grace of a weak single 
Chamber. 

I am quoting this from somewhere; I do not remem- 
ber who said this, but I am repeating it for the body so 
that we can comment on it. 

MR. DAVIDE. That particular statement was a 
statement on the basis of past experience where we had 
a very, very strong President with even dictatorial 
powers. With the report now of the Committee on the 
Executive of which I am a member, I am sure that we 
can never have a very strong President who can dictate 
upon the Members of the National Assembly. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I thank the Commissioner for his 
assurance. 


MR. DAVIDE. I thank the Commissioner for asking 
that question because that exactly is one of the evils ir 
a bicameral system. It might happen that in a given 
election, after the expiration of one-half term of the 
Senate members, a new mandate from the people will 
actually be the outcome in the given election. For a 
very hypothetical situation, let us assume that one-half 
° ! C Tu em ^ ers Senate belong to one particular 

fn r \ * S one '^ a ^ be the one to remain because 
e erm of the others may have expired at a given 

Mpmi f U r tJ ? e commen cement of the term of the 

. rs 0 e Lower House whose term now may be 

nf th n ^ Ve * WI * 1 term rema ining Members 

e ena e, we may have a Lower House elected 
from another political party. 

So we will have a National Assembly with an Uppei 
House composed of people belonging to one party and 
a Lower House composed of Members belonging tc 
another party. So how can we have unity in that legis 

lature . !t would be a chaotic legislature. That situatior 
alone is the best argument ao ,i nc t * • • , . 

meral system of government 8 a b,ca 

MR. MAAMBONG. Actually, the question is mote o, 
he cent, nutty of a legislative body as an argument fo 
those who are in favor of the bicameral system where a 
any gtven moment there is still a continuing legislativ, 


MR. DAVIDE. Under our proposal there will always 
be a continuing legislative body, because the election 
will be on the second Monday of May and they will 
assume on the 30th day of June, which would also be 
the end of the term of the previous National Assembly 
So there is a continuing body - the National Assembly 


Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. There are two Commissioners who 
have registered to speak, and I believe that is the limit. 
This is a very important question so I have been some- 
what liberal. I beg the indulgence of the House. The two 
speakers will be Commissioners Villegas and Bennagen, 
and I enjoin them to be brief. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

Madam President, these are just supplementary 
remarks to what Vice-President Padilla has already said. 

I would like to say that looking at the issue of bica- 
meralism from the standpoint of economics, which is 
one of our most important concerns, we can really say 
that there should be legitimate vested inteiests in a 
democracy. 

Actually, attaining the common good is always a 
process of balancing these legitimate vested interests. 
As long as a Senate will be elected at large, I am in favor 
of a bicameral form of government. I see the Lower 
House as espousing the enlightened parochialism that is 
very necessary for the principle of subsidiarity to actually 
be implemented and that we should encourage the 
Congressmen to defend their legitimate vested interests 
which they alone can see because they are the ones 
closest to the problems. 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


67 


To illustrate the issue, we take the sugar industry 
which is the concern right now. It is quite clear that the 
sugar industry is a dying industry. But. of course, we 
cannot expect people from Negros, trom Bukidnon, and 
from other areas to actually defend a policy that would 
give priority to other crops that are more profitable 
than sugar. They are expected to defend the interest of 
the sugar industry even up to the last possible legisla- 
tion. We can say the same thing about the coconut 
industry. 


If certain research shows that all the coconut trees 
in Bicol should be cut down because the last place tor 
coconut to be planted is Bicol. we can expect the 
Bicolanos to look for all the possible reasons to retain 
the coconut industry in Bicol. 

I am illustrating here the sectoral interests that we 
should consider. As these interests are legitimate, we 
should not in any way give a derogatory or pejorative 
tone to “parochialism.” Parochialism is needed in a 

democracy. 

I see the Lower House as the individuals vvho will be 
experts on “trees.” Now we need some people who will 
be experts on the “forest” to take a look at all ot these 
legitimate vested interests. Who will then be the experts 
in balancing delicately the many legitimate parochial 
interests that are going to come out in the Lower 

House? 

I know that a unicameral House may also take care of 
sorting out these conflicting interests but it is very 
difficult to depend only on this specific House where 
everyone is required to defend his respective legi- 
timate vested interests. That is why I see a Sena e whose 
Members are more detached from sectoral problems and 
are really looking at the common good, from the stand- 
point of experts' of the “forest” as necessary m this 
delicate balancing act, especially in the field of eco- 
nomics which is the science and art of attaining multip 
and oftentimes conflicting objectives with limited 

resources. 

Thank you very much. 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Bennagen 
be recognized as the last speaker. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 


relations and problems. Therefore, it would be extreme- 
ly difficult for them to develop into national leaders. 
That seems the trend of the line of the arguments. 

I hold a contrary view. We as a people and as a State 
have become so integrated into the woild order that 
more and more of us are beginning to see the intercon- 
nectedness of our local lives and our local problems with 
those of the national and international order. 

Let me illustrate. Our national organization of 
anthropologists, the Anthropological Association of the 
Philippines, for the last ten years has been holding 
annual and biannual conferences and symposia where 
we invite not only professionals but also government 
representatives and representatives of various depressed 
communities, not only those of ethnic minorities, but 
also those of the urban poor as well as of the peasants. 
Their testimonies and participations have revealed a 
deep understanding of their local situation, and national 
and international relations. 

I can cite a number of examples but let me just 
mention one experience we had in Midsayap, North 
Cotabato where we had a number of datu representa- 
tives as well as peasants both from the “Christian” 
settlements and from the so-called national minority, as 
well as Muslim communities. One of us coming from the 
national organization started asking about imperialism. 
Whereupon one datu stood up and said: “You are asking 
what imperialism is. I ask you to come to our village. 

I will show you our degraded environment because 
multinational corporations have degraded them. I will 
show you our impoverished people who cannot plant 
what they need to eat because they have to plant for 
multinational agri-business. I ask you to visit our widows 
and orphaned children whose husbands and fathers have 
been killed by the military, often with anus provided by 
the United States.” 

I believe it will be this kind of people, already aware 
of their rights, who will exert pressure on their local 
representatives for them to be more responsive. And 
responsiveness will exert a heavy demand on the rep- 
resentatives for them to acquire a deep and compre- 
hensive understanding not only of the local problems 
but much more so of how these local problems are very 
intimately interconnected with national and interna- 
tional problems. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you tor the fanfare. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

I am supposed to be brief so I wrote down what I 
wanted to say. 

There seems to be a tendency to look at the rep- 
resentatives as parochial in their perspective and in their 
world view, and that because they are bound to the 
narrow confines of their district, it would be difficult 
for them to understand national and international 


I think having a unicameral legislature is no argument 
for the difficulty of evolving competent and numerous 
national leaders. Right now, we already have this evolu- 
tion of national leaders in a number of people’s sectora 
organizations who have acquired a deep understanding, 
as I said earlier, of local problems and of how these loca 
problems are intimately linked with national and inter 
national problems. Let us not underestimate them, 
think a unicameral legislature will be much moie 
democratic and much more responsive. 


68 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


I am, therefore, for a unicameral legislature. 

Thank you. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, since there are no 
other registered speakers, I think we can now vote on 
the main question. May I ask for a short recess so that I 
can frame the question with the Committee, just to 
make sure that it is fairly put? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 3:57 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:06 p.m., the session was resumed. 


dure, this debate was triggered by my statement that we 
should resolve a prejudicial question, and that question 
is: Should we adopt a unicameral or bicameral legisla- 
ture? I suggested that we go into caucus to decide this 
matter. After listening to the extensive debate, 1 with- 
draw the suggestion that we go into a caucus, and I 
agree that we should vote on that matter here. However, 
on the suggestion that those who are absent be allowed 
to vote later, I do not think that is proper. First of all, 
they are absent, and the Rules says that only those who 
are present may vote. Secondly, they have not listened 
to the arguments, pro and con, to the thorough debate 
we had here. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman is objecting to the 
second motion? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

We have reached a point where we have to decide < 
a very important question — the question of whetli 
we s a ave a bicameral or a unicameral legislature. 

Rules 7 thatch 6 ’ alt + houg ^ [ . cannot as yet find it in ti 
no explanation? V ° ^ e indlvidual > nominal but wi 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, by roll call vote. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair he' 

nones the motion is approved. 

idenfthaf thoselh ' °' 1 alS ° request > Madam Pr< 

especially when th ' 6 8iVen 3 " °PP° rtu nity to vo 
especially when their votes mean the crucial vote as 
whether we shall have ^ > dS 

legislature? bicameral or a unicame 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that a motion? 

MR. DE CASTRO I 

who are absent in this important voti^^ese^eda 

K are ^present* 2£?"? y "> •" «'« issue wh 

Nation oOh prob to V °' e * crucial «» ««" 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. The period of debate was already 
terminated. I would like to remind the Gentleman that 
we are now at the point of voting whether we shall have 
a bicameral or a unicameral legislature. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, I agree with that. What I am 
objecting to is to allow the absent Members to reserve 
their vote so that they can vote tomorrow or the day 
after tomorrow. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Suppose the absent Member has 
asked permission because of physical necessity? 

THE PRESIDENT. We will submit this motion - on 
whether those absent now will be allowed to cast their 
votes one way or the other at a later time — to the 
body. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I just say that 
the motion of Commissioner de Castro would, of 
course, require the suspension of the Rules. Secondly, 
this is a very important precedent we are setting. So, I 
would like these things considered when we vote on this 
motion. We have many more important provisions 
coming up and if people will reserve their vote constant- 
ly, there will be disorderly procedures. I think the 
Commissioners have the duty to be present, and if they 
are absent, barring death, that is their misfortune. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, they have a duty 
to be present and one of our Members was here doing 
his duty, but necessity requires that he see his physi- 
cian right away. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will go into that after we have 
already finished the voting. 


MR. RODRIGO. I would like to answer that state- 
ment, but before that, for the sake of orderly proce- 


MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


69 


MR. ROMULO. May we put it to a vote. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will have a roll call vote. We 
will act on the second motion later on. Commissioner 
de Castro. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready now for a roll call 
vote? So, will the Acting Floor Leader please present 
the issue to be voted upon. 

MR. ROMULO. The question on which we shall vote 
is as follows: After consultation with the Committee 
and in view of the committee report, how many are 
in favor of a unicameral legislature? 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, if the vote is 
yes, that vote goes to the unicameral legislature. Is that 
correct? 

MR. ROMULO. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I make a 
suggestion? Since we have a roll call vote, why not just 
ask each person, each Member, to state “unicameral” or 
“bicameral” so that we will just go through the roll call 

once. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable, Mr. Floor 
Leader? 

MR. ROMULO. It is acceptable. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, that is already clear. Please 
cast your vote loud and clear because sometimes we can- 
not hear what you say. So, the vote will either be uni- 
cameral or bicameral. May we start now? 

NOMINAL VOTING 


Regalado 

. Unicameral 

Sumulong . . . 

. . . Bicameral 

Reyes de los . 

. . Unicameral 

Tadeo 

. . Unicameral 

Rigos 


Tan 

. . . Unicameral 

Rodrigo .... 


Tingson . . . . 

. . . Bicameral 

Romulo .... 

. . Bicameral 

Trenas . . . . 

. . . Unicameral 

Rosales 


Uka 

. . . Bicameral 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Unicameral 

Villacorta . . 

. . . Unicameral 

Suarez 

. . Unicameral 

Villegas .... 

. . . Bicameral 


SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Colayco 

Laurel 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 22 votes for the 
unicameral legislature and 23 for bicameral. (Applause) 

The proposal for a bicameral legislature is approved. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session. 

It was 4:20 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 5:07 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner de Castro is 
recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

I withdraw my previous motion to allow those absent 
to vote on this. 

THE PRESIDENT. The second motion of Commis- 
sioner de Castro is withdrawn. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Unicameral 

Alonto Bicameral 

Aquino Bicameral 

Azcuna Unicameral 

Bacani Bicameral 

Bengzon Bicameral 

Bennagen Unicameral 

Bernas Unicameral 

Rosario Braid . . . Bicameral 

Brocka Unicameral 

Calderon Bicameral 

Colayco 

Concepcion .... Unicameral 

Davide Unicameral 

Poz Unicameral 


Garcia Unicameral 

Gascon Unicameral 

Guingona .... Bicameral 

Jamir Bicameral 

Laurel 

Lerum Unicameral 

Maambong . . . Bicameral 

Monsod Unicameral 

Natividad .... Unicameral 

Nieva Bicameral 

Nolledo Bicameral 

Ople Bicameral 

Padilla Bicameral 

Quesada Unicameral 

Rama Bicameral 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. I will not ask 
the Committee on the Legislative what their pleasure is. 
Shall we vote on the second question or would they like 
a discussion on the matter? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog' 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, in order that the 
Committee will be accordingly guided when it drafts ie 
corresponding amendment to accommodate the 1Cl 


70 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


meral legislature, we would rather have a vote on the 
manner of representation in the Upper House - whether 
it would be by region or whether it would be at large. 

MR. ROMULO. We agree with that, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, what is being proposed by the 
Committee is that the Commission now vote on the 
question of what kind of Senate we shall have. Should 
the Senators be elected nationally at large or by regional 
districts? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 

MR. OPLE. May I know whether the Floor Leader 
may welcome one brief argument for a regionally 
elected Senate and another brief argument for a nation- 
ally elected Senate. Before we proceed to a vote, may I 
volunteer to speak for a nationally elected Senate? 

MR. ROMULO. The comments of Commissioner 
Ople are always welcome. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the floor is open for a brief 
debate on this particular point. 

Commissioner Ople may proceed. 

MR OPLE. Yes, Madam President, with one speaker 


MR. GASCON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 


MR. GASCON. If it is possible, let us be liberal on 
this matter and not be limited to one speaker for each 
side. I know that we are breaking the time limit but 
since it is a very important issue, we should at least be 
more liberal and not just limit the discussion to one 
speaker for each side. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right. So, we will welcome as 
many speakers as there are available, only that their 
speeches or their remarks be as brief as possible. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, there should be no 

interpellations. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, no interpellations. 

MR OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

The Constitutional Commission has just voted in 
favor of a bicameral legislature in a voting that was 


extremely close. I think the reason the majority voted 
for a bicameral legislature was that they thought a 
House of Representatives whose members are elected 
by district could be the most effective representatives 
of all the component districts, provinces and cities of 
our country and will guarantee that no specific segment 
of our population will ever be isolated from the con- 
cerns of government. 

At the same time, they undoubtedly thought that 
there could be a second chamber known in the past as 
the Senate which could balance the more parochial 
interest of representatives elected by districts, with a 
wider national and international vision. 

I submit that if the Senate is going to be regionally 
elected, this raison d’etre for the existence of an Upper 
Chamber might actually be nullified. I know for a fact 
that many of the political dynasties in this country 
would rather have a Senate elected by region because 
they are fairly assured of election. They are regionally 
based dynasties that include a lot of my friends who are 
sometimes denigrated as political warlords which is an 
oversimplification of the role they exercise in their 
respective regions. But there will be a premium on 
regional bases of strength, on dynasties, on accumulated 
favors of decades. On the other hand, a nationally 
elected Senate freezes the members of that body 
from Nero allegiances to the political warlords in their 
respective regions. They can be motivated to reciprocate 
the support of a whole nation above any region or any 
segment of the national community, if only because 
they know that they have a mandate from a whole 
nation, rather than merely from specific regions. 

Moreover, Madam President, undei the 1973 Consti- 
tution, we had only two persons voted upon nationally, 
the President and the Vice-President. Of course, if we 
stuck to just one chamber consisting of a House of Rep- 
resentatives elected by district, there would still be only 
two persons voted upon by the whole nation and that 
would be the President and the Vice-President. No 
matter what numerous safeguards we build into the 
Constitution in order to put them under leash, the 
mere fact that they stand out as the only two persons 
in the entire population of 56 million voted by every 
qualified citizen of the Philippines would give them a far 
superior dominant position in the scheme of govern- 
ment. Whereas, if we have a nationally elected Senate, 
let us say there are 24 of them, this monopoly of a 
mandate direct from the people, from the whole nation, 
would be broken. It is on these grounds, Madam Pres- 
ident, that I ask that we support a nationally elected 
Senate, rather than a regionally elected one. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Gascon be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


71 


MR. GASCON. Thank you. Madam President. 

I will try to be brief. I would like to go back to my 
basic premise when I first spoke for the unicameral type 
of legislature. The basic premise I would like us to work 
on is that we are continuing a social revolution. We must 
make the structures of government much closer to the 
people and we must encourage a new kind of politics — 
politics based on issues so that these issues will be the 
guiding posts for the responsiveness of the legislature, a 
bicameral legislature, to the needs of the people. I feel 
that if we do choose, as we have already chosen, a bica- 
meral form, we should also continue in the spirit of 
providing direct access to the people and empowering 
the people. We can only do so by voting for a bicameral 
legislature elected by region. 

First, if the elections will be at large, the tendency 
would be for a gravitation or polarization among two 
contending parties because of the need for a well-oiled 
machinery at the national level. If this is the case, we 
would actually be encouraging a monopoly by two 
political parties on the national level. This is why I 
would like to object to such a case and instead suggest 
to the body to consider bicameralism by region so that 
we may encourage genuine participation of the people 
who are really based in their regions. We would en- 
courage regional parties to develop, to encourage these 
local ^parties - whether they be on a provincial or 
on a regional basis — to compete with other political 
parties. My basic fear is that we might tend towards a 
two-party system dominated by personalities, money 
and machinery. I feel that we should try to encourage 
the new kind of politics based on issues and programs. 
Therefore, to be most responsive, new political parties 
should be encouraged, and this can be achieved if the 
Senate were to be elected by region, because local 
political parties that would not be able to compete on 
a regional basis and would not be able to compete with 
large national parties for the Senate positions could now 
compete. Therefore, we can be assured that the Senate 
members will not come from just one or two parties; 
they can come from various political parties and yet 
have this national perspective or have this perspective of 
looking at the forest instead of the trees. The issue, 
they say, is that we have to elect people at large or 
nationally because they have to take that national and 
international perspective. 

I would like to support Commissioner Bennagen’s 
position that you do not have to be elected at large or 
nationally to have that perspective. We have seen 
through our constant day-to-day struggle for freedom, 
justice and democracy that the real factor towards 
having such an international and national perspective is 
the love of the people, the love for the masses - the 
workers, the peasants, the urban poor, the fishermen 
and the youth. So. we must provide in this bicameral 
system, in the Senate, an avenue for the local parties 
to develop and an avenue for these local parties to 
compete with other parties so that we will not go back 


to a system monopolized by two parties that essentially 
would not have too much contending ideologies. 

So, I would like to encourage the group to support 
the bicameral form, the members of which to be elected 
by region. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Aquino be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I speak for a nationally elected Upper House. The 
paradox is this: A divided legislature is essentially the 
stronger legislature, pitted against the tentacles of an 
executive that would want to encroach upon the 
domains of the legislature. The executive is effectively 
foreclosed by the internecine relationship between an 
Upper House and a Lower House. If the fear of my 
colleagues is that a nationally elected Upper House 
would only consolidate the position of the elite and 
traditional politics, let me share with you my reading 
of the political situation. 

It is my firm resolve that the people’s organizations, 
the cause-oriented groups, are now in a position 
politically and logistically to successfully launch organic 
leaders who would transcend parochial interests and be 
able to capture popular imagination for national leader- 
ship. In other words, a nationally elected Upper House 
and the locally elected, regionally elected Lower House 
now lead us to an era of new people’s politics. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, what else and 
what more can one say if logical arguments are ex- 
pressed especially by a lady? 

Arguments just expressed by Commissioner Aquino 
tell in no uncertain terms the points I wanted to state. 
But let me just say in addition to that that the concepts 
of freedom, justice and democracy are certainly not 
parochial. They transcend and they know no bounds 
insofar as the country and the people of this country 
are concerned. So, when we talk of parochial interests, 
we are not talking of people who would want justice, 
who would want freedom, and who would want de- 
mocracy. When we talk of people, Senators who should 
be elected by region because they have to be closer to 
the people they represent, we are forgetting that we 
already have the Congressmen, the members of the 
Lower House. If we still have to elect the Senators by 
region, then we will have a situation where a Senator 
will only look after the interests of his region. 


72 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


Originally, I must admit that I was going to advocate 
that Senators be elected by region because, as I said, in 
the past, even if the Senators were elected nationally, 
they still looked after the interests of their respective 
regions, coordinating with the various Members of 
Congress in the regions. For example, Region I at that 
time had five Congressmen in Pangasinan. Together 
with the other Congressmen in Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur, 
Abra and the other provinces in Region I, the Senator 
who represented Region I was naturally partial in favor 
of that region. But I overlooked the fact — and I was 
only reminded by the arguments I have heard recently, 
particularly today — that the Senators who were elected 
nationally, although they had unconsciously perhaps 
lent themselves and preferred to work for the interest 
of their region, had in their minds their obligation to 
the national interest. That really made me think, and 
now I say that it is enough that the Congressman attend 
to the day-to-day and close needs of the constituents, 
and that the Senator who hails from the same region 
as the Congressman be the one to act as the catalyst that 
would not only insure the best interest of his region but 
would coordinate and insure further the best interest of 
the nation. As I said, I originally wanted regional rep- 
resentation but now I am convinced that to elect 
Senators at-large is the best for our nation. 

Thank you. 


MR. ROMULO. Vice-President Padilla would like to 
be recognized. 

the PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

tha 1 ? R if P Wnr A ' Mad T mention was made 

H * ‘ ? at ° rs are elected nationwide it mav be 
limited to only two nartipc i„ ’ may D 

campaign was limited tn . the pas *’ electoral 

because our i * wo ma J° r political parties 

“uZ! S l S '™ reCOgnized ‘he rights of the 
the one that ^ highest number of votes and 

o es B„ ,1 e “‘ Ved ."l? *“"<* hi S h “* "umber of 
nationwide In flc, T wT S T' 0rS , Were ele<:ted 

menon we mioht * ” , 7 ’ 1 reca11 a P ollt ical pheno- 
didates fo r ,? V ’, When , there were f °ur sets of can- 
sfnators Thev w and ^-President and for 

Uberr| rS Lrty7thr7rogre^ive^Partv C a° n r| a *th ta N art ^’ ' he 

Citizens Party. Madam President t d the r Natl0nalist 
senatorial districts, I am remindTrf V °J C 5? r r ^. glonal 
senatorial districts which had exnand th > forme J 
the congressional districts Thus tlten tCmt0neS °l 
senatorial district composed of La n • was a sec . ond 
and Zambales. That was quite unfa™"' the"Sler 
provinces of La Union and Zambales because Pangasinan 
was so big in population and in registered votes that it 
enjoyed undue preference in that senatorial district - I 
am not referring to the regions under President Marcos 
but the same principle remains. That undue advantage 
of a candidate coming from a big province which may 
happen in the different regions may again prevail to 


the disadvantage of the smaller provinces; whereas, an 
election nationwide will not suffer from such handicaps 
or disadvantages. 

Mention was made of political dynasties by Commis- 
sioner Ople. Really, if a warlord governs one province 
or one region and if he has a secret army which he uses 
illegally for intimidation or violence or even assassina- 
tion, the chances of an honest but capable candidate in 
a particular district or region may be unduly jeopardized 
by the presence of such a political dynasty or warlord. 
Whereas, if the election of Senators is made nation- 
wide throughout the country, even if a small district is 
unduly controlled by a warlord, still a good candidate 
acceptable to the majority of the people throughout 
the nation will be elected. 

I recall, Madam President, that in 1957 when I was 
first a candidate of the Liberal Party for the Senate, I 
was supported not only by the Catholics but also by the 
Iglesia ni Kristo. But during my first term as Senator, I 
filed a bill on qualified coercion — that is the provision 
in Article 286, Revised Penal Code, that prohibits a 
person to compel another to do something against his 
will or to prevent another from doing something not 
prohibited by law. And the second paragraph of the 
Revised Penal Code made coercion qualified if it 
referred to any religious act. I thought there was no 
more coercion on religious matters but probably only 
on political matters. And my honest and simple bill was 
the introduction or the insertion of the word “political” 
between “religious” and “act” which was misinter- 
preted by many who I think poisoned the mind of the 
leaders of the Iglesia ni Kristo saying that Senator 
Padilla directed that bill against the Iglesia. So, I was not 
supported in my next reelection in 1963. In fact, 
Iglesia ni Kristo campaigned actively against my can- 
didacy. Fortunately, even if this very important and 
solid bloc of one million votes was no longer available 
to me in the 1963 election, I fortunately managed to 
get elected because the election was nationwide through 
the independent votes of not only the political party- 
inclined but likewise those who were not active with 
political parties but who represented the independent 
votes of the people. That might be the experience of 
others not only in the past but in the future. What I am 
saying is that even if a strong political leader, a wailord, 
is against a candidate for the Senate, that candidate 
need not be intimidated nor threatened because nation- 
wide he can be elected, if he counts on the majority 
support of our sovereign people throughout the 
country. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. For closing remarks, may I ask that 
Commissioner Sarmiento be recognized? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, during and 
after martial law, many of those who fought for free- 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


73 


dom, who fought against the forces of tyranny, dicta- 
torship and darkness were Senators who were elected 
at large. They know deep in their hearts that they have 
national support — that people from all walks of life, 
from the north to the south, are behind them. We have • 
names like Tafiada, Aquino, Diokno and, of course, the 
Members of this Commission — Senators Padilla, 
Rodrigo, Sumulong, Rosales and last but not the least. 
Alonto. They fought for freedom because they know 
they have the support and the love of people on a 
national basis. They transcended provincial, regional 
and familial interests. As a matter of fact, one died and 
others suffered financially. 

If we vote for Senators who will be elected regionally, 
we will be electing men who will be tied by regional and 
parochial interests. 

So, on the basis of this manifestation, Madam Pres- 
ident, I am favoring the election of Senators on a 
national basis. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I move that we 
vote on the question of whether a Senator should be 
elected on a national basis or on a regional basis. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, how will the question be 
posed to the body? 

MR. RODRIGO. I think we can start by raising hands 
if we are in favor or against Senators elected at large. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of an 
election at large or on a national basis for the Senate, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 

hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
(One Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 3 1 votes in favor of a Senate elected 
at large, 8 against and one abstention. 

The proposal for a Senate elected at large or on a 
national basis is approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I am a member of 
the Committee. I would like to ask the Chairman of the 
Committee, Commissioner Davide. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to ask the Commis- 
sioner if he also wants a vote on the issue which we dis- 

ussed in the Committee; that is, on how the members 
f the Lower House should be elected. The issue was 


whether the election should be by province, by city like 
in the last election, or by district. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Davide is 
recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee has already recom- 
mended the manner of choosing the Members of the 
National Assembly. It would be by district. So, I under- 
stand that that mode of representation by district may 
be made applicable to the Lower House. I think the 
Committee will just reassess that matter. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. I believe there is more than just an 
issue of electing by province or by legislative district 
because there is also a proposal that some of the rep- 
resentatives be elected on a party list basis. So, it is 
more than just a two-cornered decision. 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we leave this to the Commit- 
tee to study and reassess, and later submit their report? 

Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the Committee 
would like to study those questions and, therefore, in 
the meantime, they suggest that we adjourn the session 
until nine-thirty tomorrow morning. 

MR. SUAREZ. Parliamentary inquiry, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commission has voted in favor of 
a bicameral system of legislature, and we have not dis- 
cussed the composition of the Senate. But I was 
wondering whether the multiparty theory, which was 
already espoused on the National Assembly level, would 
escalate to the level of the Senate because as I under- 
stand it, 20 percent of the Members of the National 
Assembly would come from the multisectoral organiza- 
tions or multiparty system. Do I take it that the same 
proportion would apply in the case of the Members of 
the Senate? I think that is also a prejudicial question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Commissioner not 
believe that that is a matter that should be studied by 
the Committee? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, that is why I am passing that on 
to the Committee for consideration tomorrow morning. 


74 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Bengzon would like to be recognized before we adjourn. 


MR. BENGZON. They need only one day. I would 
like to yield to the Chairman, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide may pro- 
ceed. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, now that we have 
finished voting on those two crucial issues on the report 
of the Committee on the Legislative, I was speaking to 
the Chairman and he said that it would take his 
Committee one day to make the necessary adjustments, 
in accordance with the results of the voting we had 
today. So, the Committee on the Legislative will be off 
tomorrow, and I also understand from the Chairman of 
the Committee on Accountability of Public Officers, 
Commissioner Monsod, that their Committee will have 
to make the adjustments likewise because their report 
was attuned to the unicameral assembly. Therefore, I 
suggest that tomorrow the Committee on the Execu- 
tive - and I would like to alert Commissioner Sumulong 
on this — be on deck to make its report. So, with the 
approval of this body, we would go into the period of 
sponsorship and debate of the committee report of the 
Committee on the Executive while we wait for the 
adjustments to be made by the Committee on the Legis- 
lative and the Committee on Accountability of Public 
Officers. 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, 
nized^ Commissioner Guingona is recog- 


the Commi«ee°^,n' thTlSslaT Started Wit 

number of provisions in ttl 8 slative > and there are 
that do not have to be chan JhT* ° f the Committ£ 
Chairman of the Steering rv^’ 1 wondenn g if tY 
that instead of jumpine fm mittee would consids 
another, we continued d ° ne 3fe3 ° f concern 1 
Legislate Committee subTecfTr' ™ ^ rep0rt ° f * 
proval of our Committee Ch a • ’ ° f C ?y rse ’ to the a] 

versial matters to be t ™ a ", T * leave ,he contr ' 

luncheon meeting, becailse jumping from tht? 6 
tee on the Legislative J ping Irorn the Comrm 

and gorn^bael a 8 m ,oTl°e V° tha ‘ 0,1 Execu.h 
live report may be «"= Legisl 

suggestion might be better, since "there’ ’ PerhapS th 

sions anyway in the proposal of th r* m3ny pr0 ' 
were not affected. 0 Committee th. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President the Chaim 
the Committee on the Legislative would prefer to 
recess to make the adjustments. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but when shall we continue 
the consideration of the report of the Committee on the 
Legislative? 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I think the Committee on the Legislative will be able 
to submit an amended report already embodying the 
approved decision of the Commission on the aspect of a 
bicameral legislature and the mode of representation for 
the Upper House. So, we can start the sponsorship again 
on the basis of the amended report on the 23rd. 
Wednesday. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. As Vice-Chairman of the Commit- 
tee on the Executive, I agree with Commissioner 
Guingona that we should still wait for the outcome of the 
changes by the Committee on the Legislative because 
we will also have to make adjustments. There are a 
number of provisions in the Article on the Executive 
which are attuned, dependent and referred to sections in 
the report of the Committee on the Legislative. I notice, 
however, that we also have on deck the matter of ac- 
countability of public officers so that if instead of going 
directly to the Executive, we could go to the Article on 
Accountability of Public Officers and then confer with 
Commissioner Davide and make our corresponding 
changes. We are also going to submit a corrected 
committee report. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee on Accountability of 
Public Officers will have to amend its report because our 
assumption was based on a unicameral legislature. So, 
we have to review our report and change it. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think our point is that we do 
not want to lose the day tomorrow. In other words, 
since it may not be a useful day, we are trying to see 
what particular subject can be discussed by the body so 
as to make use of the time. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, the commit- 
tee report of the Committee on the Legislative was 


MONDAY, JULY 21, 1986 


75 


scheduled for six sessions. So. if we take up the report 
of the Committee on the Executive tomorrow, many 
of the Commissioners, myself included, would not be 
prepared; we will again be playing these things by ear. I 
think the reason the Steering Committee had given us a 
schedule is to allow us to do some studying in spite of 
the very limited time we have outside of session. But if 
they start the consideration of an article on so impor- 
tant a matter as the executive without preparation on 
our part, we will not be able to participate intelligently 
and give whatever suggestion we may want to give 
because of lack of time to prepare. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear the Chairman of the 
Committee on the Executive on this matter? 

Does the Chairman of the Committee on the Execu- 
tive prefer that we discuss the report of his Committee 
tomorrow or shall we have it after that of the Commit- 
tee on the Legislative? 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President. I really think 
that if the Committee on the Executive will be asked 
to begin sponsoring our committee report tomorrow 
morning, it will only lead to more confusion. We should 
definitely know the form, content and the substance of 
the report of the Committee on the Legislative because 
it may turn out that after they have submitted their 
amended report, we will have to amend again and make 
some adjustments. I think it is better to finish the report 
of the Committee on the Legislative before we start our 
discussion of the report of the Committee on the 
Executive. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think that is clear enough. 

Commissioner Bengzon, how about the Committee 
on Local Governments? Does the Gentleman think its 
report will be ready for tomorrow? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I spoke to 
Commissioner Nolledo and he said that they are still 
iiar shalling a lot of their arguments. I am wondering if 
the Committee on Declaration of Principles and State 
Policies would be ready for tomorrow. 

THE PRESIDENT. Not yet. 

MR. BENGZON. Because if the Committees on the 
Legislat* ve ’ Accountability of Public Officers, the Exe- 


cutive and Local Governments will not be ready, the 
next one on deck is the report of the Committee on 
Declaration of Principles. We have Committee Report 
No. 28. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, the Committee on 
Declaration of Principles would not be ready tomorrow 
because while we have finished half of our report, we 
still have much to amend and change. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 5:51 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:58 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. After discussing with the Chairman 
of the Committee on the Legislative, it was agreed that 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning, the Commis- 
sion will take up those provisions in the report that are 
not affected by the decision of the body taken today. 

In the meantime, the Chairman has requested me to 
also announce that immediately after adjournment 
today, the Committee on the Legislative will meet in 
this hall. 

On that basis, Madam President, I move for the 
adjournment of the session until tomorrow at nine- 
thirty in the morning. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 5:59 p.m. 




















. 























































































TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


77 


R.C.C. NO. 36 
Tuesday, July 22, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:43 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Ricardo J. Roinulo. 


Natividad Present* 

Nieva Present* 

Nolledo Present* 

Ople Present* 

Padilla Present 

Quesada Present* 

Rama Present 

Regalado ....... Present 

Reyes de los ... Present* 

Rigos Present 

Rodrigo Present 

Romulo Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 27 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 


Rosales Present 

Sarmiento Present* 

Suarez Present 

Sumulong Present 

Tadeo Present* 

Tan Present 

Tingson Present* 

Trefias Present 

Uka Present* 

Villacorta Present 

Villegas Present 


Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. a quorum. 


PRAYER 

MR. ROMULO. Dear Lord, we beseech You to grant 
us the faith to believe that we can do the task assigned 
to us; the hope that our people will find our work 
worthy of ratification; and the charity to accept 
graciously the will of the majority in our deliberations. 

In the silence of our hearts, let us now pray for our 
own intentions and the intentions of one another. 
Amen. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present* 

Alonto Present 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present* 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present* 

Bennagen Present* 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present* 

Calderon Present* 

Castro de Present 


Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

Foz Present 

Garcia Present* 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Present* 

Lerum Present* 

Maambong .... Present* 
Monsod Present* 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Comma 
nications and Committee Report, the President making 
the corresponding references: 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


78 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from Mr. Salustiano G. Tengonciang of 
13 Maginhawa, U.P. Village, Quezon City, proposing 
provisions that would provide for the development of a 
national language for understanding and unity, and 
saying that “bilingual education concentrates too much 
of our efforts in learning a language rather than on 
instilling in the youth nationalistic values.” 

(Communication No. 267 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication from Mr. Bonifacio M. Lacdoo of 9-A 
Monserrat St., “MBS” Caloocan City, proposing a legis- 
lature composed of all provincial governors. 

(Communication No. 268 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 


Letter from Mr. Delfin R. Manlapaz of 1707 E. Ro- 
driguez, Sr. Boulevard, Cubao, Quezon City, Metro 
anila, proposing an amendment to Proposed Resolu- 
tion No. 496 (Committee Report No. 24), which would 

^f 0 ^ 1 crea ti° n of a citizen-owned Reservoir 

of National Credit. 


S°“ i0n No ' - Constitutional 


Commission 


To the Committee 
Patrimony. 


on the National Economy and 


Communication from Mr Cesar r q u r 

ACSIE Avenue. Severina InduS Estate Km 'l 6° 
Bicutan, Paranaoue Mpfm Me -i , K.m. 16, \ 

that will require eLted nar ?’ Pr ° posin S a P™vi 
President toTon^ *y 

Program, embodying^ genera 1 ] E f° n ° mic Devel opn 

(CommumeaHon No. 270 - Constitution. Commit 
Patrimony 0mm ‘ ,,ee °" ,he Na,fo " a ' Economy 


Position paper of the American rn u 
of the Philippines, Inc., in summ To" ° f Coramerc 
tion No. 389, introduced by H on o°m ** R f 01 ' 
Padilla, entitled: “RESOLUTION PROPOSING a'Trov 
SION ALLOWING FOREIGN INVPCTn»o ™ A PR0V 
HOLD OR OWN LOTS W,TH 

FOR THE OPERATION OF EXPORT-ORIENTeTinDU 
TRIAL ENTERPRISES.” 1NDU 


(Communication No. 271 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1 986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Position paper of the American Chamber of Commerce 
of the Philippines, Inc. on foreign investments and 
multinational corporations’ role in rebuilding the Philip- 
pine economy. 

(Communication No. 272 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Resolution No. 1, series of 1986, of the Archbishop 
Luis del Rosario Assembly, Pagadian City, proposing a 
provision in the Declaration of Principles that the basic 
and fundamental unit of the nation as a body politic is 
the family institution and that the preservation of its 
solidarity, development and strength is the primordial 
concern of the State. 

(Communication No. 273 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Resolution No. 2, series of 1986, of the Archbishop Luis 
del Rosario Assembly, Pagadian City, proposing a pro- 
vision for the retention of the U.S. military bases in the 
Philippines. 

(Communication No. 274 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from the Alliance of Farmers Union in Zam- 
boanga del Sur, signed by Mr. Wilfredo Alinton, sub- 
mitting a program for genuine land reform. 

(Communication No. 275 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Resolution No. 115 of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of 
Negros Oriental, expressing its objection to the disregard 
of the proprietary rights of the province and suggesting 
that this be corrected through a provision promoting 
local autonomy. 

(Communication No. 276 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Custodio C. Lauron of Bacuag, Surigao 
del Norte, suggesting provisions on citizenship, suffrage, 
qualifications of local candidates, retention of death 
penalty, sessions of Congress from January to Novem- 
ber, fiscal year to coincide with the calendar year, and 
approval of the budget before Congress adjourns, among 
others. 

(Communication No. 277 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


79 


An article by the honorable Commissioners Yusup R. 
Abubakar, Lugum L. Uka, and Ahmad Domocao 
Alonto, entitled: “VICE-PRESIDENT LAUREL’S TRIP TO 
SPAIN UNDERSCORES THE ARABIC INFLUENCE IN THE 
SPANISH LANGUAGE AND HISTORY- Islam is a uni- 
versal faith: 55 million Moslems coexist with 700 
million Buddhists in China, 30 million Moslems live in 
friendship with the Russians, 9 percent of the popula- 
tion in Yugoslavia are Moslems — we had religious unity 
way back in 1930 but Marcos, pursuing the policy of 
divide and rule, promoted religious strife.” 

(Communication No. 278 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The body will now proceed to the consideration on 
Second Reading of the Article on the Legislative/Na- 
tional Assembly. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Rodrigo be 
recognized to interpellate the sponsor. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we request Commissioner 
Davide, Chairman of the Committee on the Legislative, 
to occupy the rostrum, and the members of the Com- 
mittee to please join Commissioner Davide. 

Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 


A detailed list of native folk songs to be taught in the 
elementary and high school levels, to be furnished all 
Members of the Commission for their favorable con- 
sideration, respectfully submitted by the honorable 
Commissioners Hilario G. Davide, Jr., Yusup R. Abu- 
bakar, Napoleon G. Rama, Regalado E. Maambong and 
Lugum L. Uka who are among the authors of Proposed 
Resolution No. 451, for a better understanding of the 
implementation of Section 19 thereof. 

(Communication No. 279 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


COMMITTEE REPORT 


Committee Report No. 32 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 533, prepared by the Committee on the National 
Economy and Patrimony, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
NATIONAL ECONOMY AND PATRIMONY A PROVI- 


SION ON ANCESTRAL LANDS, 
recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 375 and 378. 


Sponsored by Hon. Villegas, Tadeo, Bacani, Bengzon, 
Jr., Bennagen, Foz, Gascon, Monsod, Natividad, Ople, 
Romulo, Sarmiento, Suarez, Uka and Villacorta. 


To the Steering Committee. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


CONSIDERATION OF C.R. NO. 22 
(Article on the Legislative/National Assembly) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. I move that we continue the con- 
sideration of Committee Report No. 22 on the Aitic e 
on the Legislative/National Assembly. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, first of all, I 
would like to announce that I am a member of this 
Committee, but I signed the report with reservations on 
two grounds. I had my reservation on the report of the 
Committee for the unicameral system of legislature and 
also on the novel provisions on election by sector and 
party list and also on the reserved powers of initiative 
and referendum. 

May I premise my question with certain statements. 
Madam President, I am not against the idea of election 
by sector and party list; it is a good idea. But the 
problem is the mechanics, how to implement it. From 
the time this was suggested by certain groups and 
certain Members of this Commission, I already re- 
quested them to submit a plan whereby this idea can be 
implemented in a practical way. Up to now, I have not 
seen nor heard any practical way of implementing this 
election by sector and party list. 

As to initiative and referendum, I am also in favor of 
the idea because this is direct democracy, reserved 
power of the people to act directly instead of through 
elected representatives. But, again, there is the practical 
difficulty. Even the UP Law Constitution Project 
which recommends initiative and referendum calls 
attention to this practical difficulty, and I quote: 

Practical considerations are also important in viewing 
initiative and referendum. If they were extended to the 
national level, the same practical difficulties already noted 
above would obtain. The difficulty, for example, in obtain- 
ing the required number of signatures, as well as the dif- 
ficulty of verifying the number and authenticity of the 
signatures, could hamper the effective use of these powers 
by the people. 

In another page, that same report of UP states, and 
I quote: 

Like recall, the exercise of these powers, namely, ini- 
tiative and referendum is potentially difficult, disruptive 
and expensive. 

But it justifies the inclusion of this in the Constitu- 
tion by the lollowing statement, and I quote: 

A Constitution is, however, envisioned as a system of 
first principles governing the individual and the social 


80 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


relations of people on a political community for a long 
time. In this age of rapid technological advances, it is highly 
likely that soon an efficient mechanical and inexpensive 
device will be available that would solve the practical diffi- 
culties that would at present attend the exercise of these 
processes. 

Section 2, page 6 provides: 

The National Assembly shall be composed of not more 
than two hundred and fifty members who shall be elected 
from legislative districts . . . and those who, as provided by 
law, shall be elected from the sectors and party list. 

My question is: Is this provision mandatory or merely 
directory to the legislature? 


MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, the Committee 
itself has decided to discuss the effects of this particular 
provision. So the issue was whether it would be manda- 
tory or directory, whether it would only be an authority 
to be granted to the legislature. What prevailed was that 
it should only be an authority to be granted to the legis- 
lature, and so we do not qualify it as either directory or 
mandatory. 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much. 

On page 14, Section 27, lines 20 to 21, reads: “The 
ational Assembly shall provide for a system of initia- 
tive and referendum.” Is this mandatory or directory? 


th . . ' A VIDE. The Committee would only say that 
in nrH 3 f 0wer or aut hority vested upon the legislature 
Dnw e / 5* lm Pl em ent a desired policy to allow people 
power to be mst.tutio„alized in the Constitution. 

the M legistata D re 2k mat 2!“* Whe " ? f MemberS °‘ 

mK mat the time is right for it. 
Pr«i!jenL AVIDE ' That Would be ,he effect, Madam 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much 
MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT The Fl™ i ^ 

• me Hoor Leader is recogni 

MR. RAMA. I ask that 

nized to interpellate. Iiissioner Foz be re 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recogn 

MR. FOZ. Madam President r u 
questions if the Committee is willing tolnf t ^ 
I would like to refer to Scctto^oT^ 
resolution on the Article on the National Assemb 
says here, and I quote: 


No Member of the National Assembly shall hold any 
other office or employment in the government, or any sub- 
division, agency, or instrumentality thereof, including 


government-owned or controlled corporations during his 
tenure. 

My question is: Does this mean that a member of the 
National Assembly cannot be appointed to any other 
office in the government or he can be appointed but he 
forfeits his position in the legislature? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we used the word 
“tenure” instead of “term.” So, necessarily, if he 
vacates his office as a Member of the National Assembly, 
resigns or is removed from such office, then he may 
thereafter be appointed to any other office provided 
that such office is not covered by the second sentence. 

MR. FOZ. What I am after is whether this disqualifi- 
cation of holding any other office in the government is 
absolute, meaning, that no appointment whatsoever can 
be extended to him by the President, or he can be ap- 
pointed but he loses or forfeits his membership in the 
National Assembly. 

MR. DAVIDE. In view of the fact. Madam President, 
that the prohibition extends to the period during his 
tenure, it would follow that if a Member accepts any 
position within the period for which he was elected, 
he should vacate his position in the National Assembly 
because that exceeds his tenure. 

MR. FOZ. So his acceptance of a position outside the 
legislature would result in the loss of his membership in 
the legislature. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

I have a related question here. The sponsor will recall 
that in our provisions on the Civil Service Commission, 
we have a more or less similar provision about disability 
or disqualification. I call attention to Section 4 in our 
draft on the Civil Service Commission provision, which 
reads: 

No elective official shall be eligible for appointment or 
designation in any capacity to any public office or position 
during his tenure. 

Will the sponsor consider that this provision and 
Section 16 of the proposed resolution are more or less 
similar as to the extent and scope of the disqualification? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President, but if the idea 
is to delete this because it is already covered by that 
particular provision, we believe this should be retained 
because it would apply specifically to the Members of 
the National Assembly. 

MR. FOZ. Will the sponsor not agree that Section 4 
of the Civil Service Commission provision, which uses 
particularly the phrase “in any capacity to any public 
office or position,” would be a more-embracing extent 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


81 


or scope than what is now contained in Section 16 of 
the resolution? 

MR. DA VIDE. The interpretation would be practical- 
ly the same, because the prohibition is: 

No Member of the National Assembly shall hold any 
other office or employment in the government, or any sub- 
division, agency, or instrumentality thereof, including 
government-owned or controlled corporation during his 
tenure. 

It means the holding in any capacity. 

MR. FOZ. What about the term “government-owned 
or controlled corporations”? Does this cover the sub- 
sidiaries of these government corporations? 

MR. DA VIDE. That is the intention of the Commit- 
tee. We prepared this report before the amendments to 
the concept of government-owned or controlled corpo- 
ration were taken up by the Commission pursuant to 
the amendment of Commissioners Romulo and Ople. So 
at the proper time, probably we could entertain any 
amendment for symmetry. 

MR. FOZ. Is the sponsor saying that possibly we 
should amend this to include the phrase which was 
proposed by Commissioner Romulo in the draft on the 
Civil Service Commission provision which reads: ‘ in- 
cluding government-owned or controlled corporations 
with original charters”? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is what I have just said. Madam 
President. We will entertain any proposal to achieve 
symmetry between that provision and Section 16 of the 
proposed resolution. 

MR. FOZ. But does the sponsor not think, Madam 
President, that if we do that we would delimit the 
extent of the prohibition, so that Members of the 
National Assembly could be appointed and could accept 
positions in the subsidiaries of these government corpo- 
rations? 

MR DAVIDE. I think the amendment of Commis- 
sioners Romulo and Ople was to include the phrase: 
“government-owned or controlled corporations with 
original charters and their subsidiaries. But we could 
get the true input of that upon inquiry from Commis- 
sioner Romulo. 

We would like to seek the assistance of Commissioner 
Romulo, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Our amendment to the provision on 
the Civil Service Commission was restricted to those 
government-owned or controlled corporations with 
original charters. Therefore, those government-owned 


or controlled corporations with original charters would 
continue to fall within the ambit of the Civil Sendee 
Commission. However, the subsidiaries of those corpo- 
rations with original charters would be exempt from the 
Civil Service. 

MR. DAVIDE. From the Civil Service or from the 
Commission on Audit because there were two, if I 
remember correctly? 

MR. ROMULO. No, only from the Civil Service. 

MR. DAVIDE. From the Civil Service. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then at the proper time, Madam 
President, the Committee will be prepared to entertain 
amendments to reflect the intention of the Commission. 

MR. FOZ. Would adoption of such an amendment. 
Madam President, mean that Members of the National 
Assembly may be appointed, let us say, to directorship 
of subsidiaries of government-owned or controlled 
corporations? 

MR. DAVIDE. Unless there is an amendment to 
include their subsidiaries, it can be interpreted to mean 
that they may be, but the real intention of the Commit- 
tee is not to allow them. 

MR. FOZ. In that case, the Committee will not 
accept any proposed amendment that would not ex- 
clude subsidiaries of these government corporations? 

MR. DAVIDE. That “would not exclude” them from 
being appointed to subsidiaries. 

MR. FOZ. In other words, the intention is really to 
extend the coverage of the disqualification even to 
subsidiaries? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is our intention, and we will 
welcome any proposal at the proper time, Madam 
President, to amend this section. 

MR. FOZ. In that connection, Madam President, the 
same term “government-owned or controlled corpora- 
tions during his term of office” appears in the follow- 
ing section, Section 17, in connection with the financial 
interest of the Members in any contract or any franchise 
or special privilege with the government. Would the 
same intention ot the Committee apply in this case that 
the prohibition or disqualification be made applicable 
even to subsidiaries of government-owned or controlled 
corporations? 

MR. DAVIDE. If the subsidiaries have the authority 
or the power to grant any franchise or special privilege 


82 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


or to enter into any contract with any other party, the 
prohibition will extend to them. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. Will 
the sponsor yield to a few questions? 

MR. DAVIDE. Very gladly, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

I notice that the Committee maintained the Commis- 
sion on Appointments consisting of 24 members, as 
provided for in the 1935 Constitution. In maintaining 
this agency, has the Committee considered the many 
misfeasance and nonfeasance of the Commission on 
Appointments? I will say that misfeasance and non- 
feasance are still light words to use considering the 
many misdeeds that the Commission on Appointments 
had brought upon the appointees of the President for 
confirmation. 


MR. DAVIDE. Commissioner de los Reyes will 
answer the question. 

mkfpl ^ REYES. Yes. Undoubtedly, there are 
bertof th?r and nonfeasance committed by the mem- 
greater A PP. ointm ^ts, but the evil is 

because there wilTi^ 0 ^ ommiss i° n on Appointments 
President 6 3 Un ^ atera ^ appointment by the 


Sometime in 1960, when I was a member of the AFP 
Promotions Board, we bypassed one lieutenant colonel 
because he was not fit for the next rank of full colonel. 
We submitted the list, through the President, to the 
Commission on Appointments. The presiding officer, 
upon reading the long list of lieutenant colonels to be 
confirmed to full colonels, found out that his man was 
not there so he put the list under his desk and told the 
majority floor leader of the Commission on Appoint- 
ments to be absent. Only two days were left for the 
Congress to meet, so there was hurried work. The 
Promotions Board was in a hurry as it was under 
pressure to include that man so that the long list of 
lieutenant colonels may not be prejudiced. As Chairman 
of the Committee, I was constrained to include that 
man. And when the Chairman of the Commission on 
Appointments saw the name of his man, he approved 
the list on the last day. I do not know whether or not it 
passed the scrutiny of the Commission on Appoint- 
ments. That man was promoted and confirmed to full 
colonel, and later, again by political attachment, became 
a general of the Armed Forces, but he could not be 
given a command because he could not really command 
men. 

We are insulating the Armed Forces from partisan 
politics. We want the Armed Forces to be free from 
anything that will include political interference because 
we found out that political influence destroys the 
morale of the Armed Forces. We want a new Armed 
Forces today. We do not want a man who will bend on 
his knees to the Commission on Appointments so he can 
be confirmed and we do not want the Commission on 
Appointments a stepping stone for a star. So we thought 
of other means by which the officers of the Armed 
Forces may be confirmed when appointed by the 
President. 


admi«ed D the e^ofthe Comm— 6 Commissioner 
is he willing to substL^ Tt u " ° n A PP° intmei 

MR. DE LOS RFYFS it • 

RE-its. it may also be a Commit 
on Appointments but with a mff * m mis. 

that is the idea so that T J, COmposi,io 

posed of politicians. ' be excluslvc| y c 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. I , hink tha , 

Commissioner. c mea OI 

MR. DE CASTRO. I would only like to put on re< 
the many sad experiences we in the Armed Forces 
fered in the hands of the Commission on Appointme 
There is no question that the Armed Forces is on 
our mainstays for the democratic stability of 
country. 


I would like to state also my little experience, if the 
honorable Chairman permits. The question with me is I 
am old enough to have so many experiences. I was 
appointed Chairman of the Police Commission in 1966. 
My name was submitted for confirmation by the Com- 
mission on Appointments. One member of the Commis- 
sion, a Senator, told me to see him. I was quite busy at 
that time because we were professionalizing the police 
force, so I asked him if we could deal with the matter 
on the telephone. Considering the tenor of his order 
and my temperament, I did not see him. I was bypassed. 

The next year, that Senator was in the Commission 
again; the same situation happened. His temperament 
and my temperament could not meet. I was again 
bypassed. 

For seven years of my stay in the Police Commission, 
I was twice bypassed but always reappointed. I cannot, 
with bended knees, stay in a position where I have to 
beg. I was confirmed only on the last day when martial 
law was declared and the Senate was already to be 
abolished the following day. 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


83 


Madam President, is this the way our Commission on 
Appointments shall deal with the appointees of the 
President? I understand that what that Senatoi wanted 
was to put his men in the police force, whether qualified 
or not, under the Police Act. He recommended 50 
permanent employees and 50 casual employees. 

Madam President, let us not maintain this system. Let 
us, for the first time, be honorable in our position. 

I filed Proposed Resolution No. 330 which seeks to 
create a Committee on Appointments, in place ot the 
Commission on Appointments, the same recommenda- 
tion of the UP Law Center, which was referred to the 
Committee on Constitutional Commissions and Agen- 
cies. I do not know whether or not the Committee has 
taken action on this, but I have not had the honor to be 
invited and asked about this resolution. I think it is s i 
in the dead file or somewhere. The UP Law Center 
recommends that this Commission be under the execu- 
tive. I do not know whether this may fit in the Commit- 
tee on the Legislative as a Committee on Appointments 
in lieu of the Commission on Appointments. Can t us e 
part of the Committee on the Legislative, not o ie 
Committee on the Executive or the Committee on 
Constitutional Commissions and Agencies? 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, that particular 
resolution as stated by the Honorable de Castro was 
referred to the Committee on Constitution 
sions and Agencies, so it was not referred to our oi 
mittee. Anyway, we will try our best to answer 
comment on the observations just made. 


We expect, of course, some injustices which will be 
committed by a commission. But restoring 
mission cannot be prevented simply because o 
occasional errors committed by it before, e co 
the fact that appointments to the government by 
President, without the approval by the Commissio 

Appointments, may result in what we had jus w j 

in the last years when only the President exercised the 
power to appoint without any check y aia i 
department of the government. So the evds sought to 
be avoided by the existence of a Commission on Ap- 
pointments are far lesser than the evils w ic 
produced without the existence of a Commiss 
Appointments. 


MR. DE CASTRO. I agree with the sponsor. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the things which the Commissioner 
has enumerated happened before, it was pro a y e 
cause of the rules of the Commission w ic 
require the concurrence of all its members before an 
appointment may be approved. Probably, we can lave 
a relaxation of the rule as to the number of members 
of the Commission who will vote in order that an 
appointment may be considered as confirmed. Perhaps, 
a lesser number will do. Yesterday, we restored a 
bicameral system of legislature. With the restoration of 


the Senate, we look forward to a new Congress of the 
Philippines with more responsible people, with people 
who would now consider and take into account people 
power itself. So, perhaps, there will be no repetition 
of what happened in the past. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I hope so, and I fully agree with 
the honorable sponsor that there must be a check and 
balance on the appointments made by the President. 

Will the honorable sponsor welcome certain amend- 
ments to the Commission on Appointments at the 
proper time? 

MR. DAVIDE. We will welcome any proposal. 
Madam President, because we have not incorporated in 
this Article the manner of how the Commission on 
Appointments shall vote on a given appointment to be 
confirmed or otherwise by it. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

For the information of the body, the Commission on 
Appointments — may the soul of Congressman Criso- 
logo rest in peace — had been the subject of great talk 
for two years when one man refused to meet him. 

Thank you, Madam President. In due time, we will 
make the proper amendments. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bacani be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Will the members of the Commit- 
tee yield to a few questions? 

MR. DAVIDE. Very gladly, Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

In Section 2, we set the number of Members of the 
National Assembly at not more than 250. I would like 
to ask whether this will remain even with the change 
introduced yesterday. 

MR. DAVIDE. It will remain unless amended during 
the period of amendments because the Senate will be 
an entirely different House to be composed, as proposed 
by the Committee, of 24 Members. 

BISHOP BACANI. Suppose the population of the 
Philippines increases in the year 2025, does the sponsor 
not foresee any flexibility in it? 

MR. DAVIDE. As provided for here the maximum is 
250 Members. Of course, we have a provision here 
which states: 

Within three years following the return of every census, 

the National Assembly shall make a reapportionment of 


84 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


legislative districts based on the standards provided in the 
preceding section. 

Of course, if the intention is to provide for a flexibil- 
ity of the composition depending on the increase in 
population, meaning, we maintain the ratio of popula- 
tion to Representative as in the initial National Assem- 
bly, perhaps, we could add in Section 2 the clause 
UNLESS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY THE NATION- 
AL ASSEMBLY OR THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTA- 
TIVES. 


BISHOP BACANI. So will the sponsor be amenable 
to such a change? 

MR. DA VIDE. The Committee will entertain any 
amendment on Section 2, Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, thank you. I would like to be 
clarified as to the meaning of “sectoral and party list 
representative.” What is embraced within the scope of 
these words? 


MR. DAVIDE. The main proponent for the sectoral 
representation is Commissioner Villacorta and for the 
party list, Commissioner Monsod. May I request, Madam 
President, that we recognize Commissioner Villacorta 
to be followed by Commissioner Monsod. 

m™ PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta will 
make the necessary explanation. 

stan^it V ri^ L t A ?h° R r^ A ' Madam President > if 1 under- 

Legtlabve wou i 6 Ch f man of the Committee on the 
Legislative would want me to elaborate on the concent 

, The idea of givlng «£ 
workers would h ' r W the farmers and the 

extending protecHon to fe m K’L h Tth^ S,Ure ° f 

Te,rrat„rirr d to ,n " u ^ ! 

necessity esiwiaii • + S . ect0ral representation is a 
giving the demn ^- ln ^ ese *' mes w hen the people are 
last chance TS C P T CSS an ° ther chance ’ if not its 
enhance the chances of mechanisms which would 
electing their Representatives Natto . Se A Ct ° rS J” 

will keep their hones aliv P 1" Natl0nal Assembly 
change. This imperative been" ^ pnnc, P le of Peaceful 
Commission recently adopted 65 "I? 16 Urgent when this 
legislature. We have heard arm n ^ icamera * system of 
House might be tha ' “S' 
and might protect vested property SeC f '° rS 

I would like to know if the Comm itf tS ‘ therefore, 
lative would consider identifying thT ° n l he Legls ‘ 
multiparty and multisectoral represenMiotT 8 the 
Constitution instead of leaving the mechanics to the 
legislature and, therefore, unnecessarily ihake our 
masses wait much longer before they are sectorally 
represented in the legislature. Contrary to the claim of 
Commissioner Rodrigo that the proponents of this 


sectoral representation idea have not submitted a single 
proposal for the mechanics, in fact, there have been two 
resolutions which were submitted and considered by 
the Committee. The first was submitted by Commis- 
sioners Monsod, Romulo and Foz and the second 
was actually an amendment of the first by this humble 
Member, together with Commissioners Aquino, Ople, 
Nieva, Suarez, Davide, Sarmiento, Uka, Quesada, 
Azcuna, Jamir, Tadeo, Garcia, Rosario Braid, Bennagen 
and Villegas. The proposals incorporate the concept of 
sectoral representation with that of the multiparty sys- 
tem, and since the Committee is calling on Commis- 
sioner Monsod to explain the mechanics of the multi- 
party system, I will leave it to the honorable Commis- 
sioner to explain the details of that system. But I 
would like to point out that the UP Law Center, in its 
voluminous reference materials, also referred to the 
merits of multisectoral representation. 

On page 31 of Volume I, annotated provisions of the 
UP Law Center’s draft, the advantages of sectoral 
representation include: 

First, it encourages interest in political affairs on the 
part of a large number of citizens who feel they do not 
have the opportunity to elect satisfactory spokesmen 
under the present system. Many who do not vote when 
the result is a foregone conclusion will do so when they 
have the assurance that their vote will likely affect the 
result. 

Second, the minority groups are not forced to resort 
to extraparliamentary means to express their interest 
and to influence governmental policies, since every 
citizen is given a substantial representation which stands 
to develop a feeling of cooperation among all groups. 

There are many other advantages, and I would like 
to emphasize that the UP Law Center devoted almost 
five pages defending the sectoral representation as 
against one page describing the drawbacks of such an 
idea. 

I believe, Madam President, that for as long as the 
sectors, particularly the marginalized sectors, have a 
voice and the ability to influence legislation through 
their direct representatives, the masses will not have to 
seek recourse in institutions and practices that are 
outside the purview of the law. 

Moreover, sectoral representation will lead to a more 
dynamic and vibrant democracy. It will engender the 
rise of nontraditional political parties and greater 
participation of people’s organizations. There will like- 
wise be more genuine grass-roots consultation. The 
people will have direct and firsthand experience in 
electoral process, for sectoral representation merges the 
features and dynamics of both direct and representative 
democracy. 

At huli sa lahat, ibig ko sanang basahin ang ilang 
verses na sinulat ng aking hinahangaang makata, Com- 
missioner Soc Rodrigo: 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


85 


Ang pagseserbisyo sa ating Inang Bayan 
Ay ’di lang sa loob ng pamahalaan, 

0 sa bulwagan lang ng ating Batasan, 

Bagkus kahit saang sulok ng lipunan. 

Ang sinumang anak nitong Inang Bansa 
Mayaman, mahirap, maharlika, duklia 
Guro, magsasaka, tsuper, mangingisda 
Ay bayaning lingkod ng bayang tanging mutya. 

Ang kailangan lamang ay maging taimtim 
Sa kanyang pagtupad ng mga tungkulin 
Upang makatulong ng kahit katiting 
Sa ikauunlad ng bayan natin. 

Leafing through this brilliant book of poems of our 
honorable Commissioner, I found the following 
thoughts of our poet: 

Kapag ang minorya sa ating Batasan 
Ay aapoyohan ng tinig ng bayan, 

Magiging mabisa ang pakikilaban 
Kontra sa abuso ng pangasiwaan, 

Kahit ang minorya ay talo sa bilang. 

Therefore, I appeal to all my colleagues in this 
Commission, including the honorable Commissioner Soc 
Rodrigo, even if my reading did not do justice to his 
beautiful poems: We have to consolidate this new social 
and political order that we are presenting as our gift to 
the people. Let us institutionalize people power through 
sectoral representation. Otherwise, ang mangyayari, my 
honorable Commissioners, ay ang sinulat ni Honorable 
Soc Rodrigo: 

Ang mga panglunas ng pangasiwaan 
Nitong labingwalong taong nakaraan 
Na mas nagpalubha sa sakit ng bayan 
Ay siya pa ring hatol sa kasalukuyan, 

Iniba nga lang ang tatak at balutan. 

Harinawa, honorable Commissioners, ang Konstitus- 
yong ito ay hindi lamang “iniba ang tatak at balutan. 

Marami pong salamat. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bacam is 
recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I thank the Honorable Villacorta 
for the very beautiful defense of the idea of a sectora 
representation, but I am already in basic sympathy wit i 
that. I want that myself. Only, I want to ask wia 
sectors will be included. Will it be the farmers, teachers, 
et cetera? What will be the criteria or the bases for the 
creation of recognition of the sectors that will be 
represented in the Assembly? 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, on the matter of 
the sectoral representation and the mechanics for the 
implementation thereof, the Committee had left it to 
a law to implement the same. That is why the provision 


here reads: “and those who, as provided by law, shall be 
elected from the sectors and party list.” The law itself 
implementing this will provide which sectors to be 
represented. 

BISHOP BACANI. How will we determine these 
sectors? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, since this is also on 
the matter of the party list, may we seek the recognition 
of Commissioner Monsod for the question of Commis- 
sioner Bacani? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to make a distinction from the beginning 
that the proposal for the party list system is not synony- 
mous with that of the sectoral representation. Precisely, 
the party list system seeks to avoid the dilemma of 
choice of sectors and who constitute the members of 
the sectors. In making the proposal on the party list 
system, we were made aware of the problems precisely 
cited by Commissioner Bacani of which sectors will 
have reserved seats. In effect, a sectoral representation 
in the Assembly would mean that certain sectors would 
have reserved seats; that they will choose among them- 
selves who would sit in those reserved seats. And then, 
we have the problem of which sector because as we will 
notice in Proclamation No. 9, the sectors cited were the 
farmers, fishermen, workers, students, professionals, 
business, military, academic, ethnic and other similar 
groups. So these are the nine sectors that were identified 
here as “sectoral representatives” to be represented in 
this Commission. The problem we had in trying to 
approach sectoral representation in the Assembly was 
whether to stop at these nine sectors or include other 
sectors. And we went through the exercise in a caucus 
of which sector should be included which went up to 14 
sectors. And as we all know, the longer we make our 
enumeration, the more limiting the law becomes 
because when we make an enumeration we exclude 
those who are not in the enumeration. Second, we had 
the problem of who comprise the farmers. Let us just 
say the farmers and the laborers. These days, there are 
many citizens who are called “hyphenated citizens.” A 
doctor may be a farmer; a lawyer may also be a farmer. 
And so, it is up to the discretion of the person to say 
“I am a farmer” so he would be included in that sector. 

The third problem is that when we go into a reserved 
seat system of sectoral representation in the Assembly, 
we are, in effect, giving some people two votes and 
other people one vote. We sought to avoid these pro- 
blems by presenting a party list system. Under the party 
list system, there are no reserved seats for sectors. Let 
us say, laborers and farmers can form a sectoral party or 
a sectoral organization that will then register and 
present candidates of their party. How do the mechanics 


86 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


go? Essentially, under the party list system, every voter 
has two votes, so there is no discrimination. First, he 
will vote for the representative of his legislative district. 
That is one vote. In that same ballot, he will be asked: 
What party or organization or coalition do you wish to 
be represented in the Assembly? And here will be at- 
tached a list of the parties, organizations or coalitions 
that have been registered with the COMELEC and are 
entitled to be put in that list. This can be a regional 
party, a sectoral party, a national party, UNIDO, Magsa- 
saka or a regional party in Mindanao. One need not be 
a farmer to say that he wants the farmers’ party to be 
represented in the Assembly. Any citizen can vote for 
any party. At the end of the day, the COMELEC will 
then tabulate the votes that had been garnered by each 
party or each organization — one does not have to be a 
political party and register in order to participate as a 
party - and count the votes and from there derive the 
percentage of the votes that had been cast in favor of a 
party, organization or coalition. 


When such parties register with the COMELEC, we 
are assuming that 50 of the 250 seats will be for the 
party list system. So, we have a limit of 30 percent ol 
50. That means that the maximum that any party car 
get out of these 50 seats is 1 5. When the parties register, 
they then submit a list of 15 names. They have to 
submit these names because these nominees have to 
meet the minimum qualifications of a Member of the 
ationa Assembly. At the end of the day, when the 

TIN mo 6 t3 t u ^ ec *’ one 8 ets the percentages. Let us say, 
UN DO ee s 10 percent or 15 percent of the votes; 

and anybody P X n tasrE\ P m y ^ 2 ' /2 ? erCent 
rmalifipc an a tu at east ^ 1/2 percent of the vote 

these parties who get af least ioned am f ong a11 of 
s i least 2 1/2 percent of the vote. 

* means that any group or 
wide gets a seat in°th ° f ’ Say ’ 500 > 000 nation- 

justification for that* Whe 1131 AsSei ? bly - What is the 
districts, we are sayine^hat ^ legislative 

200,000 votes gets a seat tI ^ dlStnCt that haS 
aroun that has a na r dhere 1S no reason why a 

sectoral or snecrT even if it is a 

voice in the Nation 1 ? 8roup ’ s hould not have a 
n^ sav ttoe are th ' U a,so means that . lel 

regSe; lsTpa«» or as °a lab “ 8rou P s > * hey ali 

only one percent or five of them o r CaCb ° P tbe " 8e,; 
are not entitled to any ^ r !lf' 0ne r rce " t - the > 
begin to think that if they rcallv I,!? S °’ * ’ ey W,! 
terest, they should hand logethe ! fa “ °°™ mon m 
get five percent of the vof S f “™ a coal '*‘°" 

seats in the Assembly. Those are the dmmfeo'n 
party list system. y dmics 01 c 


We feel that this approach gets around the mec 
of sectoral representation while at the same time 
sure that those who really have a national const; 


uu ‘, v, '‘ w "* luc ine same time r 

sure that those who really have a national consti 
sectoral constituency will get a chance to 
f in the National Assembly. These sectors ~ 


or 

seat 


groups may not have the constituency to win a seat on a 
legislative district basis. They may not be able to win a 
seat on a district basis but surely, they will have votes 
on a nationwide basis. 

The purpose of this is to open the system. In the past 
elections, we found out that there were certain groups 
or parties that, if we count their votes nationwide, have 
about 1,000,000 or 1,500,000 votes. But they were 
always third place or fourth place in each of the dis- 
tricts. So, they have no voice in the Assembly. But 
this way, they would have five or six representatives in 
the Assembly even if they would not win individually 
in legislative districts. So, that is essentially the mechan- 
ics, the purpose and objectives of the party list system. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, am I right in 
interpreting that when we speak now of party list sys- 
tem, though we refer to sectors, we would be referring 
to sectoral party list rather than sectors and party list? 

MR. MONSOD. As a matter of fact, if this body 
accepts the party list system, we do not even have to 
mention sectors because the sectors would be included 
in the party list system. They can be sectoral parties 
within the party list system. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 

Madam President, I have two more brief questions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please proceed. 

BISHOP BACANI. In Section 17, lines 22 and 24 
read: “He shall not intervene in any matter before any 
office of the government for his pecuniary benefit. It 
seems the phrase “for his pecuniary benefit” was not 
in the 1973 Constitution. Would it be good to revert to 
the 1973 Constitution’s formulation so that there will 
be no need to prove that such intervention was done for 
pecuniary benefit because that might be a hard thing 
to prove? 

MR. DA VIDE. At the proper time. Madam President, 
meaning, during the period of amendments, the Com- 
mittee will entertain any proposal. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 

And then on Section 18, we speak of the Question 
Hour for the members of the Cabinet and their deputies. 
Is this limited to them? How about heads of govern- 
ment corporations and other functionaries not related 
to any specific ministry? Would they not be also 
comprised within this? 

MR. DAVIDE. Under the proposal and traditionally, 
as a concept in a parliamentary system of government, 
the Question Hour is limited only to the Cabinet mem- 
bers. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


87 


MR. DA VIDE. But the proposal may be taken up 
during the period of amendments. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Nolledo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the Chairman and members of the Committee 
please yield to interpellations? 

MR. DAVIDE. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With respect to Section 5, 1 remem- 
ber that in the 1971 Constitutional Convention, there 
was an attempt to require candidates tor the Assembly 
to be actual residents in the place not less than one 
year immediately preceding the day of the elections. 
So, my question is: What is the Committee’s concept 
of residence of a candidate for the legislature? Is it 
actual residence or is it the concept of domicile or 
constructive residence? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, insofar as the 
regular Members of the National Assembly are con- 
cerned, the proposed section merely provides, among 
others, “and a resident thereof”; that is, in the district, 
for a period of not less than one year immediately 
preceding the day of the election. This was, in effect, 
lifted from the 1973 Constitution. I understand that 
in the 1973 Constitution, the interpretation given to it 
was domicile. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is correct because I under- 
stand also that the word “actual” was deleted by the 
1971 Constitutional Convention in a plenary session. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With respect to the words on line 
3 of Section 5, “on the day of the election,’ would 
the sponsor consider a candidate who turned 25 yeais 
old three days after the election but before his pi o- 
clamation as a winner qualified as a Member of the 
legislature? 

MR. DAVIDE. The requirement is on the day of the 
election as fixed by law which, under this proposal, 
would be the second Monday of May. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And so, it should really be on the 
day of the election. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Because there was an opinion before 
that as long as one is not yet proclaimed and he reached 
the age before proclamation, the qualification will re- 
troact to the date of the election. So, the Committee 
has abandoned that rule. 

MR. DAVIDE. It is not abandoning that rule. This is 
also taken from the 1973 Constitution. If we allow the 
proposal, that is, reckoning the age requirement as of 
the day of proclamation, it would become uncertain. An 
individual who is not really qualified may participate in 
the election but delay his proclamation in order to be 
able to become a Member of the National Assembly. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With respect to Section 9, subsec- 
tion 3. on page 8, it is stated that the National Assembly 
may punish its Members for disorderly behavior, and 
with the concurrence of two-thirds of all its Members, 
suspend or expel a Member. But if the penalty is sus- 
pension, this shall not exceed 60 days. 

My question is this: May the erring Member or the 
Member suspended or expelled appeal to the Supreme 
Court on the ground that his suspension or expulsion 
does not have any legal basis? 

MR. DAVIDE. If my recollection is correct, in the 
case of Senator Osrnena, the Supreme Court considered 
it as a political question. The Rules provided for by the 
Congress of the Philippines on expulsion or suspension 
of its Members is within the exclusive prerogative of 
that body. However, I do not know its effect in view of 
the approval by this Commission of the Article on the 
Judiciary relating precisely to a definition of judicial 
power wherein political questions could no longer be 
an obstacle to a judicial determination of an issue. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is precisely with respect to that 
approved report of the Committee on the Judiciary that 
I am asking this question, because it may turn out that 
the Member suspended or expelled belongs to the 
minority party and by sheer majority vote of the major- 
ity party, he was suspended for reasons that are not 
sufficient for suspension. 

MR. DAVIDE. By the clear intendment of the Article 
on the Judiciary, specifically on political questions, I 
believe that that matter may be inquired into. In other 
words, in this particular case, the doctrine of a political 
question may no longer be available. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree with the sponsor especially 
if the suspended Member raises the question of abuse ot 
discretion amounting to excess of jurisdiction. 

With respect to Sections 10 and 11 on page 8, I 
understand that the Committee has also created an 
Electoral Tribunal in the Senate and a Commission on 
Appointments which may cover membership from both 
Houses. But my question is: It seems to me that the 
committee report does not indicate which body should 


88 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


promulgate the rules that shall govern the Electoral 
Tribunal and the Commission on Appointments. Who 
shall then promulgate the rules of these bodies? 

MR. DA VIDE. The Electoral Tribunal itself will 
establish and promulgate its rules because it is a body 
distinct and independent already from the House, and 
so with the Commission on Appointments also. It will 
have the authority to promulgate its own rules. 

/^MR. NOLLEDO. With respect to Section 21, page 1 1, 
authorizing the legislature by law to grant to the Pres- 
ident powers necessary and proper to carry out a de- 
clared national policy in times of war or other national 
emergency, may I ask about the extent of these 
powers? Do these powers include the right to legislate? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, in times of war 
or national emergency, we have to consider certain 
situations. In times of war, there may be martial law 
proclaimed by the President, of course, with the con- 
currence of the legislature. 

In the draft Article on the Executive, one of the 
effects of a proclamation of martial law is that the 
legislature and any other legislative body are not sup- 
planted, meaning, they continue their functions and the 
exercise of their authority. So, necessarily, it would 
follow that under Section 2 1 , we presuppose a situation 
where the National Assembly can continue to exercise 
its functions. Logically then, the areas over which the 

ational Assembly may delegate to the President 
certain authority must be very limited to meet the 
exigency of the emergency. 


MR NOLLEDO. Do I understand that the rules to b 

SrfiT ' he f PreSident should coextensiv 
existence of war or emergency, after whic 

emergency or war these rules shall cease to have effect' 

MR. DAVIDE. No, because one has to consider th 
last paragraph which reads: consider th 

Unless sooner withdrawn by resolution of the National 
Assembly such power shall cease upon the next adjourn- 
ment of the National Assembly. 

So, it will automatically be set aside upon the ne; 
adjournment, if there is no resolution revoking it earlie 

MR. NOLLEDO. I have two more auestirmc iut. a 
President, if the sponsor does not mind. The first que 
tion refers to Section 22, subsection 5 page 1? of 1 
committee report about the provision that “No law sir 
be passed authorizing any transfer of appropriations' 
This provision was set forth in the 1973 Constitutio 
inspired by the illegal fund transfer of P26.2 millic 
that Senator Padilla was talking about yesterday whic 
was made by President Marcos in order to benefit tl 
Members of the Lower House so that his pet bills wou 
find smooth sailing. I am concerned about the discr 


tionary funds being given to the President every year 
under the budget. Do we have any provision setting 
forth some guidelines for the President in using these 
discretionary funds? I understand Mr. Marcos abused 
this authority. He would transfer a fund from one item 
to another in the guise of using it to suppress insurgency. 
What does the sponsor say about this? 

MR. DAVIDE. If Mr. Marcos was able to do that, it 
was precisely because of the general appropriations 
measure allowing the President to transfer funds. And 
even under P.D. No. 1 177 where the President was also 
given that authority, technically speaking, the provision 
of the proposed draft would necessarily prevent that. 
Mr. Marcos was able to do it because of the decrees 
which he promulgated, but the Committee would 
welcome any proposal at the proper time to totally 
prevent abuse in the disbursements of discretionary 
funds of the President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. My last question. Madam President, 
is with respect to Section 25, subsection 3, on page 13, 
of the report of the Committee. I know that the mem- 
bers of the Committee are aware that educating the 
citizens is a basic purpose of the State. And the private 
schools, including the Catholic schools, are playing, I 
should say, an important role in the attainment of this 
objective of educating the youth of the land. Would the 
sponsor please justify the written statement of the 1935 
constitutional provision granting exemption from realty 
tax to private educational institutions? 

MR. DAVIDE. Before answering that, we should 
qualify the property which would be subject to the real 
estate tax and for which the educational institution may 
now be exempt. Only buildings and lands or improve- 
ments which are actually, directly and exclusively used 
for religious, charitable or educational purposes shall 
be exempt from taxation. So, for the justification on 
why we would now want educational institutions to be 
exempted from real estate taxes with respect to lands, 
buildings and improvements owned by them but which 
are actually, directly and exclusively used for educa- 
tional purposes, may I request the recognition of 
Commissioner Guingona, the main proponent, who 
is a member of the Committee, to speak for the 
Committee? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. I think the honorable Commis- 
sioner Nolledo has already given the justification when he 
spoke on the importance of education. In other words, 
the concern of the Committee is the benefit that will be 
derived by the students from this proviso. Our focus of 
attention, therefore, is the students because the assist- 
ance that may be given to educational institutions is 
expected to redound to the benefit of the students, 
either in the matter of reduction of fees or the improve- 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


89 


ment of the quality of education. As a matter of fact, 
that is one of the main concerns of the Subcommittee 
on Education. We did not only provide for education; 
we also included a proviso regarding the need to ensure 
quality education in our educational institutions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I extend my thanks to the Chairman 
and members of the Committee. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Quesada be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to ask some clarifica- 
tory questions. Madam President. 

I would like to raise some questions on Section 16, 
page 1 0. Earlier, Commissioner Foz already asked if this 
particular limitation to legislators of holding any office 
or employment in the government or any subdivision, 
agency or instrumentality thereof, including govern- 
ment-owned or controlled corporations during their 
tenure would also include appointments to board of 
regents, board of trustees, board of directors of state 
universities and colleges. It has been done in the past; 
and so, we would like to find out it this particular 
provision will preclude them from any such appoint- 
ment. 

MR DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President, during the 
tenure of the Member of the National Assembly. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

In Section 17, a prohibition on a Member of the 
National Assembly appearing as counsel has been 
snecified. Would this also include making representation 
not as a counsel but just making personal representation 
before any court? 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the Commissioner kindly 
specify what kind of representation it will be? 

MS QUESADA. The sponsor knows our “pakiusap, 
“nilalakad” or influence-peddling. 

MR DAVIDE. I think we have RA 3019, the Anti- 
Graft and Corrupt Practices Act. I do not know if there 
is any corresponding provision regarding influence- 
peddling or a prohibition against influence-peddling. 

MS. QUESADA. So, the sponsor thinks that this is 
covered in that particular republic act? 


MR. DAVIDE. I believe so. if that influence, say, on 
an administrative official or an official exercising judi- 
cial functions would cause to prevail upon to render 
any particular decision which would be manifestly 
unjust or prejudicial or would cause undue disadvan- 
tage or prejudice to another party. I think that would 
be covered by RA 3019, as amended. 

MS. QUESADA. As a follow-up question, lines 17 to 
24 talk of pecuniary interest. It states: “neither he shall, 
directly or indirectly, be interested financially in any 
contract with, ...” I wonder now whether this prohibi- 
tion includes retainership of local and foreign mono- 
polies. For instance, a Member of the legislature may 
not be directly getting into any government contract 
but may be actually retained in monopolies or some 
other business interests. 

MR. DAVIDE. That matter of retainership of a 
multinational corporation would not be covered by the 
sentence from lines 17 to 22 for the reason that this is 
strictly limited to direct or indirect financial interests 
in any contract with or in any franchise or special 
privilege granted by the government or any subdivision, 
agency or instrumentality thereof, including govern- 
ment-owned or controlled corporations during his term 
of office. 

MS. QUESADA. Would the sponsor not consider this 
retainership as an indirect way of exerting influence in 
the legislation of bills? Some legislators would initiate 
bills which would tend to promote the interest of their 
client-firms to the detriment of the public welfare. 

MR. DAVIDE. If that would be a pure case of a 
conflict of interest, I think that would mean it can 
fall under indirect interest, and if it is in relation to his 
office, probably we could consider it as, say, an indirect 
appearance before any administrative body or an 
indirect intervention in any matter before any office 
of the government. 

MS. QUESADA. I am not just referring to direct 
representation but actually on how they would be able 
to influence the passage or initiation of legislation that 
would favor the client-firms. 

MR. DAVIDE. He could be disciplined. That may be 
a misbehavior committed by the individual member and, 
therefore, that matter can be the proper subject of an 
inquiry or investigation by the National Assembly itself, 
and he could be expelled or suspended, for that par- 
ticular act amounts really to a conflict of interest on a 
matter over which the legislature may be called upon to 
act. 

MS. QUESADA. So these are provisions that the 

legislature shall insure that such a breach of public trust 
is not broken by any of the Members of the Nations 
Assembly? 


90 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. The National Assembly, under its 
rules on discipline, may provide a disciplinary measure 
or penalty on cases or matters which would cause an 
assault on the integrity of the Assembly itself. 


MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

Another point that I would like to have some clarifi- 
cation on is Section 1 5, page 9 which reads: 

A Member of the National Assembly shall, in all offenses 
punishable by not more than six years imprisonment, be 
privileged from arrest while the National Assembly is in 
session; but the National Assembly shall surrender the 
Member involved to the custody of the law within twenty- 
four hours after its adjournment for a recess or for its next 
session, otherwise such privilege shall cease upon its failure 
to do so. A Member shall not be questioned nor be held 
liable in any other place for any speech or debate in the 
National Assembly or in any committee thereof. 

Has the Committee in its deliberations considered 
some mechanism by which this particular immunity 
granted to Members of the National Assembly shall not 
be abused? 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I request the 
recognition of Commissioner Jamir to answer for the 
Committee? 

MR. JAMIR. Of course, the Committee will be willing 
to consider such matters as will prevent the abuse of 
these privileges granted to them. 

that the^m-^r f^ eS ’ because there is the position 

tempt on & the , inamunity could lead to con ' 

of the peonle nn t e8 ' s * ators w ho, as representatives 
respecting rules dema themselves as examples in 

Privilege ^ th M k by ° rderly Society ' As t0 

be held liab ’ * ^ n0t be questioned or 

in the National Assembfo ^ ** 3 SpeCCh ° r debate 
There is the fear Vhn?e y h ° r H any committee thereof, 
speech extended to w i broadenin S of this freedom of 
may be used S halls Ration 

by making statements thaUn'm pnvate indiv iduals 
So, I was wondering if the Cn rep *i tatl ° ns and feelings, 
any mechanism like for f > v 1Tn J llttee has provided for 
waiver of such immunity W !™P e ’ 3 statcrnerd on the 
special committee of the , lc l would tllen allow the 

Member who abuses his narlia e8 ' S atUre t0 disci Phne a 
■ Parliamentary privileges. 

MR. JAMIR. At the proner f 
be willing to hear and consider nmnn''! C f ommittee wiH 
ment of this in order to avoid abuse oVtho" ^ an ? cnd ' 
But may we inform the Commissioner thauh ^ 
to the Members of the legislature has , tbe pnvile g e 
order to prevent their being harassed in the 
of (heir duties. This is way hack ih' me ' h K 
House ol Commons as well as in the United States 
Congress. This privilege is granted in order that the 


Members of the legislature may perform their duties 
without fear of harassment and persecution. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, we do recognize that. On the 
other hand, we also think of balancing these privileges 
which could be exercised to the detriment of other 
citizens who have just as much right to be heard or be 
protected. 

The final point for clarification is on page 13, Section 
25, subparagraph (3). I came late when Commissioner 
Nolledo did talk about line 13 which says that charita- 
ble institutions, churches, etc., performing educational 
purposes shall be exempted from taxation. Would this 
cover schools which will claim that they are nonprofit? 
Would such an exemption be granted to institutions 
which might claim that they are charitable because they 
are not raking profits? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, what is exempted is 
not the institution itself. Under lines 28 to 30, those 
exempted from real estate taxes are lands, buildings and 
improvements actually, directly and exclusively used 
for religious, charitable or educational purposes. So, if 
that particular nonprofit educational institution has a 
land or a building or an improvement actually, directly 
and exclusively used for educational purposes, that 
educational institution is exempt from the payment of 
realty taxes on such land, building and improvement. 

MS. QUESADA. So the exemption covers educational 
institutions which might claim that they are charitable 
institutions and would have all these functions that were 
mentioned on lines 23 to 25? 

MR. DAVIDE. Insofar as charitable institutions, 
churches and parsonages or convents appurtenant there- 
to, mosques and nonprofit cemeteries are concerned, 
they are totally exempt from taxation. 

MS. QUESADA. The sponsor has not answered my 
question: Would charitable institutions include non- 
profit educational institutions? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, because a nonprofit educational 
institution is for educational purposes. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Suarez be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

I am sorry that I have to go through the full spectrum 
of the Article, but may I start with Section 1. I take it 
that Section 1 has to be interpreted with Section 27. 
Is my understanding correct, especially as regards the 
last sentence? 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


91 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, that is correct. The 
exception there has reference really to the provision on 
initiative and referendum which is specifically Section 
27 of the proposed draft. 

MR. SUAREZ. Because the general rule is, the legisla- 
tive power is vested only in the National Assembly or in 
whatever Houses we arc going to set up under the 
Constitution. And this system of recall and initiative in 
Section 27 would constitute the exception to that 
general rule. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. And Section 27 contemplates a situa- 
tion where the people themselves would enact legisla- 
tions. 

MR. DAVIDE. Or disapprove or reject legislations. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. To carry it to its logical 
conclusion, would this development necessitate a 
presidential approval as required in the case of a law 
enacted by the National Assembly? 

MR. DAVIDE. That would depend on the law imple- 
menting Section 27, although the proposals of the 
principal authors on initiative and referendum esta- 
blished already the necessary mechanics for the full 
implementation of these two concepts. 

MR. SUAREZ. But under Section 27, therein it 
expressly provides that the National Assembly shall 
provide for a system of initiative and referendum. In 
other words, the mechanism for instituting the system 
of initiative and referendum is vested in the National 
Assembly. But the procedure for the final approval 
or veto of whatever may be instituted in pursuance to 
the system of initiative and referendum has not been 
provided under the draft Article. 

MR. DAVIDE. We have not, although we believe that 
under Section 27, the law itself, which will be enacted 
by the National Assembly, will provide for everything 
in respect to the full implementation of the two 
concepts. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, the Committee will 
leave that to the discretion of the National Assembly, 
including the exercise of the veto or approval power of 
the President, which is a constitutional precept oi 
principle. 

MR. DAVIDE. I think the National Assembly will 
consider that matter in the passage of the implementing 
law. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Let me go to Section 2. This provision is about 
electing the 200 Members at the least from legislative 


districts apportioned among the provinces and cities 
in accordance with the number of their respective 
inhabitants. With respect to the first Members of the 
National Assembly to be elected from legislative 
districts, did the Committee append an ordinance to the 
Constitution in order to determine the legislative 
districts contemplated under Section 2? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee intends to approve a 
resolution to append an ordinance on the apportion- 
ment to the Constitution. But we felt that since we are 
still working on it. the Commission will have to take 
that up sometime later. 

MR. SUAREZ. But does the Committee feel that that 
is essential before calling the first elections for the 
Members of the National Assembly? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. And we hope 
that by next week, we can come up already with the 
ordinance to be appended to the Constitution. With the 
assistance of the Commission on Elections, by Friday, 
we will be ready with the apportionment of the seats. 

MR. SUAREZ. For all the provinces and cities? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. When one says “cities,” we have 
problems with respect to the so-called “highly urbanized 
cities” because of the ordinance appended to the 1973 
Constitution in 1984. I have gone over this ordinance 
and I saw that there were seven highly urbanized cities 
consisting of Baguio, Olongapo, Cebu, Zamboanga, 
Cagayan de Oro, Davao and Iligan. But after that, for 
political maneuvering purposes, the City of Angeles was 
included and declared as a highly urbanized city. So, 
would the Committee consider all of these factors when 
they provide for the apportionment of the National 
Assembly by districts? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. And we would 
earnestly solicit the assistance of the Commissioner in 
the preparation of the apportionment bill. We would 
like to call the attention of the body, however, that 
under the last paragraph of Section 2, it is provided 
that each legislative district shall comprise as far as 
practicable contiguous, compact and adjacent territory, 
provided, however, that each city with a population of 
more than 200,000, or each province shall have at least 
one representative. So, cities with a population of more 
than 200,000 will perhaps be entitled to more than one 
representation. In short, under this proposal, a city itself 
may be districted. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, and I would feel comfoH 

able if the Committee will avoid gerrymandering 
political purposes in setting up these legislative distric 


92 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


MR. DA VIDE. It is the special asset of this Com- situation where there is a necessity to call them in an 

mission that we are not elected; that we will work executive session, it must be so conducted, 

according to our conscience. We will not gerrymander 

anything. MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Let me go to Section 1 8, the matter of a possible 
Question Hour for Members of the National Assembly 
to enjoy, as a right, calling upon Cabinet members. I 
take it that we are setting up a presidential system of 
government. Is my understanding correct? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct, and we felt that the 
incorporation of this strictly parliamentary government 
concept into a presidential form of government would 
be very, very helpful and conducive to a further check 
on the executive. 


MR. SUAREZ. But would it not violate the principle 
of separation of powers considering that in a presiden- 
tial system of government, it is the President who is 
accountable to the electorate and he is not accountable 
to the National Assembly which is an independent 
political instrumentality? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we respectfully 
submit that it would not infringe upon that principle 
of separation of powers because that principle would 
not insulate one organ of the government from the 

ot t ' er ' re cisely, it is correlated with another principle 
of check and balance. 


So, the sponsor would want tc 
notwhlitta !c m J*. pres * dent i a l system of governmen 
c o A 6 faC ' that U is e^entiaily a charac 

ter stic of a parliamentary system of government. 

of^he Atriilnf ? S - because while it is a characteristic 

ZZ g r rnment - we dt 

strengthening of the ' h ' 

appearance of a Member oHh" SinS aoS’Kpift 

of rZiS^,^Tit; io " s by M 7 C 

approval considering that his Cahi ? UIfe a presidentia 
extensions of the 

only ^au thority^ o f The KdS r Se iS th 6CeSSary: Th< 
on the last sentence which says: ^ ™ 1S provision * 

When the security of the State so requires and the President 
so states m writing, the question hour shall be conducted 
in executive session. 


MR. SUAREZ. In other words, the duty to appear 
remains. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, but it is mandatory. 

• MR. SUAREZ. But whether they will be conducting a 
public hearing or an executive session is the matter at 
hand. 

MR. DAVIDE. Not a public hearing but a public 
session. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

The next point is on Section 25, subparagraph (3). 
This has already been asked by at least two Commis- 
sioners, because this is bothering quite a number of 
Members. Since under the 1935 Constitution there is a 
similar or identical provision but this was completely 
deleted in the 1973 Constitution, would the sponsor 
like to resuscitate it, revive it and reincorporate it under 
the new Constitution? Is that the meaning, Madam 
President? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, Madam President, because it is 
not true that this particular provision was deleted in the 
1973 Constitution. The 1935 provision on this matter 
was only modified in the 1973 Constitution. For 
instance, mosques and nonprofit cemeteries are all 1973 
amendments to the 1935 Constitution. The, words 
“actually” and “directly” are also 1973 words. Of 
course, in the 1973 Constitution, the word educa- 
tional,” referring to line 30, did not appear. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is exactly the most^ bothersome 
portion, restoring the word “educational” under this 
particular subsection. But let me clarify only if this is 
the intention of the members of the Committee. When 
one says “for educational purposes,” lands, buildings 
and improvements are exempted from the payment of 
realty taxes, is that the thrust of this provision? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. And as an example, that means 
practically that the lands and buildings of the Far 
Eastern University, the Centro Escolar University, the 
University of Santo Tomas, the De La Salle University, 
the Philippine Women’s University would all be exempt 
from the payment of realty taxes? 


MR. SUAREZ. In other words, notwithstanding this 
last sentence, it is mandatory required that when sum- 
moned, the Cabinet members must appear. But in a 


MR. DAVIDE. Subject to the qualifications men- 
tioned. The three qualifications must be together or 
simultaneous, not individually. So, before any 
exemption can be availed of, it must be shown that the 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


93 


lands, buildings or the improvements are actually, 
directly and exclusively used for religious, charitable 
or educational purposes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Let us go to Section 26, subparagraph (2). In the 
1973 Constitution, there were no exceptions; and now, 
it was included here the exception when a priest, 
preacher, minister or dignitary is assigned to the Armed 
Forces, or to any penal institution, or government 
orphanage or leprosarium. This is again substantially a 
reflection of the 1935 Constitution. 

MR. DAVIDE. And the 1973 Constitution. 


MR. SUAREZ. The 1973 Constitution, excuse me. 
May we know the reasons for proposing the inclusion 
of these exceptions? 


MR. DAVIDE. The reason is that when a priest, 
preacher, minister or dignitary is assigned to the Armed 
Forces of the Philippines, he is actually serving the 
interest of the Armed Forces of the Philippines or the 
army of the people; or if he is assigned to a penal insti- 
tution, necessarily, he is performing a duty which oug t 
to be a duty of the government; so, in short, for a time 
he is being divorced from being just an ordinary mem er 
of any sect, church, denomination, sectarian institution 
or system of religion. 


MR. SUAREZ. The last question is: Why did the 
Committee qualify orphanage with “government w len 
there are private orphanages that deserve the help and 
assistance of the government? 


MR. DAVIDE. May I have that again. Madam Pres- 
ident? 


MR. SUAREZ. In this proposal, the Committee is 
qualifying orphanage with the word governmen ' V 
not a fact that there are private orphanages which 
deserve more aid and assistance than government 
orphanages? 

MR DAVIDE. That could probably be a subject of 
an amendment, although we feel that this P-^ 
subsection of Section 26 would refer to public money 

or property. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the clarifications, 
Madam President. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask for the recognition of Commis- 
sioner Bengzon. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I suggest 
that, at this point in time, we suspend interpellations on 
the report of the Committee on the Legislative to be 
continued this afternoon. 

In the meantime, I move that we vote on Third Read- 
ing on the committee reports on Suffrage, Constitu- 
tional Commissions and Bill of Rights. 

I so move, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General is requested to ring the bell so 
that those who may be in the lounge may come in for 
the voting. 

NOMINAL VOTING 
ON PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 468 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on the Constitutional Commissions — 

Common Provisions and Civil Service Commission) 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we vote on Third 
Reading on Proposed Resolution No. 468. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Proposed Resolution No. 468 were 
distributed on July 18, 1986 pursuant to Section 28, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission. 

Voting on the proposed resolution on Third Reading 
is, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read the title of the resolu- 
tion. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 468, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION AN ARTICLE ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSIONS. 


FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on this 
proposed resolution and the Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar 
Alonto . . 
Aquino . 
Azcuna . 
Bacani . 
Bengzon 
Bennagen 
Bernas . 


Yes 

Rosario Braid . . . 

. .Yes 

Yes 

R ro ck a . . 

. . . Yes 

Yes 

P a 1 H p ro n . . 



.Yes 

Yes 


.Yes 


Yes 

Yes 
. Yes 
. Yes 


Yes 


. Yes 


94 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


Garcia Yes Guingona 

Gascon 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I move that we 
vote on Third Reading on Proposed Resolution No. 521. 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I would like to 
be clarified. During the deliberations we divided the 
Article on the Constitutional Commissions into the 
Common Provisions, the Commission on Civil Service, 
the Commission on Audit and the Commission on 
Elections. Are we voting on the entire Article on consti- 
tutional bodies? 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, there are certain errors 
which cropped up in the Third Reading copy. They are 
not exactly for the Committee on Style to correct. I 
think we should correct them before we take a vote on 
Third Reading. 

THE PRESIDENT. Which one? 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, we are voting on 
Proposed Resolution No. 468. There are three other 
resolutions on that respect. We have separate resolu- 
tions for the COMELEC, the Civil Service Commission 
and the Commission on Audit. Proposed Resolution 
No. 468 refers to the Common Provisions and the Civil 
Service Commission. 


MR. FOZ. This is a minor correction on page 2, 
second line of the last paragraph. The word “on” should 
be OR. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other correction? 

MR. FOZ. There are more on page 3. 


MR. GUINGONA. I vote yes. Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Jamir 


Rigos 

Yes 

Laurel 

Lerum .... 


Rodrigo 

Romulo 

Yes 

Yes 

Maambong 
Monsod . 


Rosales 


Natividad 


oarmienio .... 

\1 1 n 


Nieva . . . 


oliaiez 

Sumulong . . 

Yes 

Nolledo . . 


Ople .... 


i aaeo .... 

T on 

Padilla . 


A an ... 
Tingson . . . 
Trenas . 

Uka . 


Munoz Palma . 
Quesada . 



Kama . . . 
Regalado . . 


Villacorta 

Villegas 


Reyes de los 




THE PRESIDENT. There is already a corrected copy. 

MR. FOZ. Has that already been corrected? 

What about on page 3, subsection (10), which reads: 
“Perform such other functions as may be provided by 
law”? Has that been eliminated? That has been trans- 
posed to the Common Provisions on the Constitutional 
Commissions. 

THE PRESIDENT. How should it read, please? 

MR. FOZ. Subsection (10) on page 3, which reads: 
“Perform such other functions as may be provided by 
law” should be deleted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let the proper deletion be made 
on the corrected copy. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you, Madam President. 


SECOND ROLL CALL 

duct a seco E n S d ID c^n T fo r T ?h os SeCr f ' ar ^ General wil1 c < 
their votes. se who have not register 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Azcuna n 

Calderon £ asc ° n 

Kosales . 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO 
ON THIRD READING 

(Article on the Constitutional Commissions 
Common Provisions and Civil Service Comnlissi 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 43 vc 
favor and none against. 

Proposed Resolution No. 468, as amended 
proved on Third Reading. 


THE PRESIDENT. I understand the Secretariat dis- 
tributed this corrected copy yesterday. 

I would suggest that the pages leave the copies on the 
tables. Even if the Commissioners and I are absent, any 
document for distribution should be left on our respec- 
tive tables. 

NOMINAL VOTING 
ON PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 521 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on the Constitutional Commissions — 
Commission on Elections) 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we vote on Third 
Reading on Proposed Resolution No. 521. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Proposed Resolution No. 521 were 
distributed on July 18, 1986 pursuant to Section 28, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission. 5 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


95 


Voting on the proposed resolution on Third Reading 
is, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read the title of the resolu- 
tion. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 521 , entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE PROVISIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS. 

FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on this 
proposed resolution and the Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar 

.... Yes 

Natividad 

Yes 

Alonto 

.... Yes- 

Nieva 

Yes 

Aquino 

.... Yes 

Nolledo 

. ... Yes 

Azcuna 


Ople 

Yes 

Bacani 

.... Yes 

Padilla 

Yes 

Bengzon 

.... Yes 

Munoz Palma . . . 

Yes 

Bennagen 

.... Yes 

Quesada 

Yes 

Bernas 

.... Yes 

Rama 

. ... Yes 

Rosario Braid . . . 

Yes 

Regalado 

. . . .Yes 

Brocka 

.... Yes 

Reyes de los ... 

Yes 

Calderon 


Rigos 

Yes 

Castro de 

.... Yes 

Rodrigo 

Yes 

Colayco 

.... Yes 

Romulo 

Yes 

Concepcion . . . . 

.... Yes 

Rosales 


Davide 

.... Yes 

Sarmiento 

. . . . Yes 

Foz 

.... Yes 

Suarez 

. ... Yes 

Garcia 

.... Yes 

Sumulong 

... Yes 

Gascon 


Tadeo 

.... Yes 

Guingona 

.... Yes 

Tan 

. . . . Yes 

Jamir 

.... Yes 

Tingson ...... 

. . . . Yes 

Laurel 

.... Yes 

Trenas 

. . . . Yes 

Lerum 

.... Yes 

Uka 

. . . . Yes 

Maambong . . . . 

.... Yes 

Villacorta 

. . . . Yes 

Monsod 

.... Yes 

Villegas 

. . . . Yes 


SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
duct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Azcuna Gascon 

Calderon Rosales 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 521 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on the Constitutional Commissions — 
Commission on Elections) 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 44 votes in 
favor and none against. 


Proposed Resolution No. 521, as amended, is ap- 
proved on Third Reading. 

NOMINAL VOTING 
ON PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 469 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on the Constitutional Commissions — 
Commission on Audit) 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we vote on Third 
Reading on Proposed Resolution No. 469. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Proposed Resolution No. 469 were 
distributed on July 18, 1986 pursuant to Section 28, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission. 

Voting on the proposed resolution on Third Reading 
is, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read the title of the resolu- 
tion. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 469, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE PROVISIONS ON 
THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION. 


FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on this 
proposed resolution and the Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . 

Alonto 

Aquino 

Azcuna 

Bacani 

Bengzon 
Bennagen . . . 

Bernas 

Rosario Braid . 
Brocka 


Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 
Yes 
.Yes 
.Yes 
. Yes 
. Yes 


Calderon . . 
Castro de . 
Colayco . . 
Concepcion 
Davide . . . 

Foz 

Garcia . . . 
Gascon . . 
Guingona 


Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

.Yes 

.Yes 


MR. GUINGONA. I abstain. Madam President. May I 
please explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

COMMISSIONER GUINGONA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, it is the opinion 
of this Member that the function of the Commission on 
Audit to serve as guardian of the people’s money has 
been unduly restricted with regard to nongovernmental 
entities receiving subsidy or equity from the govern- 
ment, even where the government’s equity in sue i 


96 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


entities as well as the amount of subsidy thereof might 
be substantial. 

Thank you. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Jamir 

Yes 

Rigos 

Yes 

Laurel 

Yes 

Rodrigo . . . . 

Yes 

Lerum 

Yes 

Romulo . . . . 

...... Yes 

Maambong . . . . 

Yes 

Rosales 


Monsod 

Yes 

Sarmiento . . . 

Yes 

Natividad 

.... Yes 

Suarez 

Yes 

Nieva 

Yes 

Sumulong . . . 

Yes 

Nolledo 

Yes 

Tadeo 

Yes 

Ople 

Yes 

Tan 

Yes 

Padilla 

Yes 

Tingson . . . . 

Yes 

Munoz Palma . . . 

. . . . Yes 

Trenas 

Yes 

Quesada 

Yes 

Uka 

Yes 

Rama 

Yes 

Villacorta . . . . 

Yes 

Regalado 

Yes 

Villegas 

Yes 

Reyes de los . . . . 





the request that we had earlier for the expansion of the 
Bill of Rights to include social, cultural and economic 
rights which we are going to address to the Committee 
on Style? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, that can be taken 
up in the Article on Social Justice. 

THE PRESIDENT. I beg the Commissioner’s par- 
don? 

MS. QUESADA. My inquiry is: Would the approval 
of this Bill of Rights preclude any expansion of the 
Article on the Bill of Rights to include social, cultural 
and economic rights as we had proposed earlier? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Chairman of the 
Steering Committee say? 

MR. BENGZON. It will not. 


SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
duct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Azcuna . 
Calderon 
Davide . 


Gascon 

Rosales 


PROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO 46‘ 
ON THIRD READING 
r ic e on the Constitutional Commissions — 
Commission on Audit) 

fav™one agato^d Th ® f SUltS Sh ° W 42 votes 
, none against and one abstention. 

proved on Thfrd Riding N °' 469 ' 3S amended > is a 
votfonSdi^P President ’ 1 move that v 

on the Bill 0 f Rights. § Proposed Resolution No. 41 


MR. BROCKA. Madam President • ♦ 

tion on page 2 Section Q „ Slden t, just a minor coi 
passed abridging the freedonw Feads: ' N ° law sha 

or .he righ, B oAhe p ™X™lr?-° r0f,he ' ) 

Could we not modify this phrS th ‘f e . m h b ,! e ; 
people peaceably to assemble” to read^s f'n'* ° f 
the right of the people to peaceably asLible”?^ 


THE PRESIDENT. Page 2, Section 6? 

MS. QUESADA. Point of clarification. Would the an 
proval of this Bill of Rights on Third Reading preclude 


MS. QUESADA. It will not. So, it will all be con- 
tained in the Social Justice provisions. 

THE PRESIDENT. If this is approved on Third Read- 
ing, it is approved as is, unless the body approves it with 
that reservation. 

MS. QUESADA. For another clarification from the 
Committee. This is on the section on the right to strike. 
Is this part of the right to form organizations? Would 
the right to form associations exempt the right to 
strike? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 11:59 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 12:02 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to withdraw my clarifi- 
cation; I have already been clarified. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we can proceed to vote on 
Proposed Resolution No. 486 on the Bill of Rights. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


97 


NOMINAL VOTING 
ON PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 486 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on Bill of Rights) 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, I am voting yes but I 
would like to explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz may proceed. 


MR. BENGZON. I move that we vote on Third 
Reading on Proposed Resolution No. 486. 


COMMISSIONER FOZ EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Proposed Resolution No. 486 were 
distributed on July 21, 1986 pursuant to Section 28, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission. 

Voting on the proposed resolution on Third Reading 
is, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read the title ot the 
resolution. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 486, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS. 

FIRST ROLL CALL 


MR. FOZ. In connection with Section 7 of the 
Article on the Bill of Rights which states: 

The right of the people including those employed in the 
public and private sectors to form associations, unions, or 
societies for purposes not contrary to law shall not be 
abridged, 

I would like to say that in answer to certain statements 
here and in the press expressing fear that with this pro- 
vision, employees in the public sector are precluded 
from engaging in concerted activities. Madam President, 
this is not so; that precisely the provision as now 
worded gives those in the public sector the right to form 
unions. This right to organize themselves carries with it 
the right to engage in concerted activities. We can make 
a listing of these concerted activities that public em- 
ployees can get involved in, and among them is the 
right to strike which is an ultimate weapon of labor, if 
all else fail in their negotiations with management. 


THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on this 
proposed resolution and the Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


I should have said this during our voting on Third 
Reading on the provisions on the civil service regarding 
Section 1 on the scope of the civil service which reads: 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


The Civil Service embraces all branches, subdivisions, 
instrumentalities and agencies of the Government, includ- 

Abubakar .... 

Yes 

Bengzon 

. . . Yes 

ing government-owned or controlled corporations with 

Alonto 


Bennagen 

. . . Yes 

original charters. 

Aquino 

Yes 

Bernas 

. . . Yes 

As I have said before, this is a general description of 

Azcuna 

Bacani 

Yes 

Rosario Braid .... 


the scope or extent of what is known as civil service. 
We made the amendment that with reference to govern- 


COMMISSIONER ROSARIO BRAID 
EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

MS ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I vote yjjs 
but I would like to register my comment. The Bill of 
Rights which has expanded the notion of human rights 
is an excellent and progressive document, but I am quite 
disappointed because it has failed to address itself to the 
expanded notion of freedom of information The latter 
states that the freedom of the individual must be accom- 
panied by social responsibility, the State s responsibility, 
to protect these freedoms by providing equal opportuni- 
ties to access of information through such mechanisms 
as appropriate decentralized structures so that the 
common man may have full participation. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


ment-owned or controlled corporations those with 
original charters should be embraced by the civil service. 
That is all we said. We have never made any declaration 
that those in the civil service or in government-owned or 
controlled corporations have no right to organize or to 
enter into collective bargaining with their public em- 
ployers. We were not making any declaration that they 
have no right to engage in concerted activities, including 
the right to strike. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Garcia Yes Laurel Yes 

Gascon Lerum Yes 

Guingona Yes Maambong 

Jamir Yes 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


R rock a . . . 

Yes Concepcion 

... Yes 

Palflpron . . 

Davide 

... Yes 

n p 4" v /~\ Cl a 

Yes Foz 


Lastio ue . • • • 
Colayco 

. . . Yes 



MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may 1 explain 
my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong may 
proceed. 


98 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


COMMISSIONER MAAMBONG EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. MAAMBONG. I vote ves . Madam President, 
but I would just like to indicate for the Committee 
on Style that there is a misprint on page 3, Section 16 
on the Third Reading copy of this Proposed Resolution 
No. 486. I think the proper word would be RECOG- 
NIZANCE, not “cognizance.” 

THE PRESIDENT. That has been corrected. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Monsod 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just have 
two minutes to explain my vote. 

My vote is ves . 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod may pro- 
ceed. 


COMMISSIONER MONSOD EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. MONSOD. I just want to clarify the criticism of 
that labor leader mentioned by Commissioner Foz who 
said that by adding “WITH ORIGINAL CHARTER” to 
the phrase government-owned and controlled corpora- 
t |° n ’ :r e P r °hibited those working in companies that 
o not ave original charters from exercising any rights. 

Pre t f en i’ il is the reverse - Those workers in 
the rieht'rXn'i a \ ° u 0t have ori 8 inal charters have all 
■h. effect ^ ****** That is 

Thank you, Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Natividad 

MR NATIVIDAD. Madam President, may I explain 
yvote? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has three 


COMMISSIONER NATIVIDAD EXPLAINS HIS VOI 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I vote ves Moh d -j 
believe that this Bill of Rights is^ore dyTamfc than t 
one provided for in the 1973 Constitution although 
failed to have one amendment inserted This Bill 
Rights contains vital provisions like: strict prohibits 
on hamletting and wiretapping, the provisions on rele; 
and recognizance, measures against filthy or inhum 
conditions of our jails, and the prohibition on solit; 
confinement and holding prisoners incommunicado. 


I think this Bill of Rights will be more responsive to 
the needs of our people. Again, my vote is ves. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Nieva Yes Ople Yes 

Nolledo Yes Padilla 


COMMISSIONER PADILLA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I vote yj^s for this 
Bill of Rights which is absolutely necessary to protect 
the people from the possible abuses of the exercise of 
the power of government. But I must state that I am dis- 
appointed at the abolition of the death penalty as 
provided for in Section 20. While we will agree to the 
National Assembly to legislate on whether to retain or 
abolish the death penalty, Section 20, as worded, seems 
to be absurd in the sense that the Commission abolishes 
the death penalty in the Constitution, and yet it allows 
the legislature to reinstate it. It should have been other- 
wise — that we retain the death penalty and allow the 
legislature, in case circumstances so demand, either to 
retain or to abolish the death penalty. 

The other point is with regard to the right to bail 
under Section 16. I would have preferred to retain the 
original provision: “All persons except those charged 
with capital offenses . . .” instead of “with offenses 
punishable by reclusion perpetua, because a capital 
offense is not identical with capital punishment. 

With regard to Section 7, there is the insertion of the 
phrase “public sector.” As far as forming unions or self- 
organization is concerned, that has been approved. But 
there should be no right — at least not to be interpreted 
as such - that because of the union of employees in the 
public sector or in the government, the employees now 
have the right to collective bargaining and the right to 
strike. It would be disastrous to public administration 
if employees in the civil service, especially those exeicis- 
ing governmental functions rather than proprietary 
functions, would be accorded the right to collective 
bargaining and, worse, the right to strike. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Munoz Palma Yes Quesada 

COMMISSIONER QUESADA EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

MS. QUESADA. I vote yes, but with that understand- 
ing clarified by Commissioner Foz. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rama Yes Rigos Yes 

Regalado Yes Rodrigo 

Reyes de los Yes 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


99 


COMMISSIONER RODRIGO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I vote y_es, al- 
though, like Commissioner Padilla, I am unhappy about 
the provision in Section 20 wherein by constitutional 
mandate we abolish the death penalty, but in the same 
breath or in the same sentence, we allow the legislature 
to reimpose it. It is my belief that the abolition of the 
death penalty should have been left entirely to t le 
legislature. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Romulo Yes Suarez 


Yes 


Rosales Sumulong Yes 

Sarmiento Yes Tadeo 

COMMISSIONER TADEO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR TADEO. Ang boto ko ay oo. pero gusto ko pong 
magpaliwanag. Rung ang kalikasan ng ibon ay lumipad 
at ang kalikasan ng isda ay lumangoy, ang kalikasan 
naman ng tao ay ang magsama-sama. Ngumt hindi sapa 
ang pagkakaisa; inutil ang pagkakaisa kung walang sama- 
samang pagkilos. Kaya kaisa ako kay Commissioner 

Quesada. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Yes Tingson 


Tan 


COMMISSIONER TINGSON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR TINGSON. Madam President, I joyfully vote y_ei 
with the observation that I am very happy. As far as I 
am concerned, this Bill of Rights of the new proposed 
charter seems to be much better than the provisions that 
we wrote in the 1973 and 1935 Constitutions. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

... Yes Uka 


Trenas 


COMMISSIONER UKA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 
MR UKA. Madam President, I vote y_£S, but with the 

same observation as that of Com^one, 

RoHriPo regarding Section 20. We speak tne same 
language and I think the three of us have mental tele- 

pathy. (Laughter) 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villacorta 


standing that Section 3 is not meant to be a censure of 
the legitimacy or detraction from the efficacy ot the 
Presidential Commission on Good Government as it was 
liberally interpreted in the press. 

I would like to place on record that I am one Com- 
missioner who believes that the PCGG is a potent 
instrument for rectifying the abuses of the past dicta- 
torial regime, and that the PCGG has. in large measure, 
been acting in good faith. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villegas 

COMMISSIONER VILLEGAS EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. VILLEGAS. I vote y_es with the expectation that 
the reference to the fact that life starts at conception 
will be contained in another article. I just want to put 
on record that the idea that life starts at conception 
is not a sectarian one. As is very well known, one of the 
leading proponents for the inclusion of an anti-abortion 
provision in the Constitution is a non-Catholic, Pres- 
ident Reagan, who said last week that he does not in 
any way try to remove a privilege from women even if 
he is against abortion because he does not think that 
women consider murder a privilege. 

Thank you. 


SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
duct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Alonto Gascon 

Azcuna Rosales 

Calderon 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 486 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on Bill of Rights) 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 43 votes in 
favor, none against and no abstention. 

Proposed Resolution No. 486 on the Bill of Rights, as 
amended, is approved on Third Reading. 

MR. BENGZON. Finally, Madam President, I move 
that we vote on Third Reading on Proposed Resolution 
No. 530, the Article on Suffrage. 


COMMISSIONER VILLACORTA 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I vote in 
favor of the Article on the Bill of Rights with the under- 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, before we vote 
on this Article, may I just indicate for the benefit of the 
Committee on Style that the third paragraph of Sec- 
tion 1 , which starts with the words “The National 
Assembly,” having been overtaken by the events of 


100 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


yesterday, should be replaced either by the word 
LEGISLATURE or CONGRESS as the case may be. 


THE PRESIDENT. We shall take note of the correc- 
tion. 


NOMINAL VOTING 
ON PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 530 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on Suffrage) 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we vote on Third 
Reading on Proposed Resolution No. 530. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Proposed Resolution No. 530 were 
distributed on July 21, 1986 pursuant to Section 28, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commis- 
sion. 

Voting on the proposed resolution on Third Read- 
ing is, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read the title of the 
resolution. 


No T ^30 S enthfed ARY " GENERAL ' Pr0posed Reso,ution 
Rl new const, ‘ 


FIRST ROLL CALL 

proposed resolut^on^ an^ t he ^cretary^ °" 

the roll. Secretary -General will c 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar .... Vp« r»„ 

Alonto 65 f nnagen Yes 

Aquino... ernas Yes 

Azcuna Y Posano Braid Yes 

Bacani Yes /ih^ Yes 

Bengzon Yes castro de ;;;;;;;;; 

COMMISSIONER DE CASTRO EXPLAINS HIS VOl 

reason wh^rnoT? 6 " 1 ’ [, abstain f ° r 1 

write are the best sources of ei P ^ n °7, how to read 
less, these people can study how to 
few nights through an ” 

I abstain, Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Colayco 


Gascon . 


Concepcion . . . . 

Yes 

Guingona 


Davide 


Jamir . 


Foz 

Yes 

Laurel . 

v 

Garcia 

Yes 

Lerum . 



Maambong Yes Nolledo Yes 

Monsod Yes Ople Yes 

Natividad Yes Padilla 

Nieva Yes 

COMMISSIONER PADILLA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I vote yes but I 
would like to adopt the observations of Commissioner 
de Castro on those who are not able to read or write. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Munoz Palma Yes Rama 

Quesada Yes 

MR. RAMA. May I explain my vote, Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

COMMISSIONER RAMA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. RAMA. I would like to believe that one of the 
reasons we are here is to institute reforms in our system. 
I thought that one of the great evils in our system is 
cheating during elections. I believe if we have to institute 
reforms we must first look at the electoral process and 
find out what are the sources of cheating. The.COM- 
ELEC itself through its Chairman, Ramon Felipe, then 
the Opposition representative to the COMELEC, has 
told this Commission that this provision that allows 
people who cannot read and write to vote is one of the 
major sources of cheating. According to Chief Justice 
Concepcion, the Integrated Bar of the Philippines has 
also called the attention of this Commission that this 
particular provision in the 1973 Constitution under 
Mr. Marcos which enfranchises the illiterate to vote is a 
great source of cheating. I, myself, observed that cheat- 
ing had been committed because of this provision in the 
1973 Constitution. The very least we could do is to 
listen to these people and to learn from experience. 
Therefore, we should have deleted this provision that 
enfranchises people who cannot read and write nor 
function as a voter in a democratic process. 

So, I vote no. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Regalado 

Reyes de los ... 
Rigos 

Yes 

. . . . Yes 
Yes 

Suarez 

Sumulong .... 
Tadeo 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Rodrigo 

Yes 

Tan 

Yes 

Romulo 

.... Yes 

Tingson 

Yes 

Rosales 


Trenas 


Sarmiento 

.... Yes 

Uka 



COMMISSIONER UKA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. UKA. Madam President, I vote no because I am 
still waiting for the mechanism that will make the 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


101 


illiterate prepare their ballots secretly without the aid ot 
someone. I am also waiting for the day when they will 
learn how to read and write, and that will not take a 
long time. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villacorta Yes Villegas Yes 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I know how my 
vote was recorded? 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. The Commissioner 
voted ves . 

MR. OPLE. May I explain my vote in a few words? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 


COMMISSIONER OPLE EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. OPLE. I think more than 600,000 Filipinos 
working overseas who are scattered in 117 countries ot 
the world right now — I am referring to Filipinos on 
contract employment - will very gladly note the consi- 
deration demonstrated for them by the Constitutional 
Commission in explicitly acknowledging their right to 
pxercise suffrage wherever they may be in accordance 
with one of the new provisions of the Article on 

Suffrage. 

I am also very glad that the Constitutional Commis- 
sion was able to prevent the cruel and unconscionable 
act of disenfranchising several million Filipinos who had 
been denied the opportunity to make themselves 
literate. I think that is also a very great service. 

Thank you, Madam President. - 

SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
duct a second call for those who have not registered 

their votes. 


THE PRESIDENT. May I just make some announce- 
ments. 

The Chair previously stated that in Proposed Resolu- 
tion No. 468, there were only 43 affirmative votes. My 
vote was not recorded, but I voted. So, there should be 
44 affirmative votes for Proposed Resolution No. 468. 

In Proposed Resolution No. 469, Commissioner 
Davide approached the Chair and requested that he be 
permitted to cast his vote because he was out of the 
room. 

Is there any objection to that request? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the request is granted. 

May we now ask Commissioner Davide to cast his 
vote on Proposed Resolution No. 469, regarding the 
Commission on Audit. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

My vote on Proposed Resolution No. 469, entitled: 
A RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE PROVISIONS ON 
THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION, 
is ves . 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, before I move for 
a suspension of session, I suggest that the Committee on 
Style organize its committees because there are enough 
materials for them to work on now. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I please in- 
form the body that the Chairman of the Committee on 
Style, Commissioner Rodrigo, has already agreed with 
me that we will meet our respective committees early 
next week. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I move that we 
suspend the session until this afternoon at two-thirty to 
continue the interpellations on the Article on the Legis- 
lative. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Alonto . 
Azcuna . 
Calderon 


Gascon 

Rosales 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 530 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on Suffrage) 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 12:31 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 2:47 p.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The results show 40 votes in 
favor, 2 against and 1 abstention. 

Proposed Resolution No. 530, as amended, is ap- 
proved on Third Reading. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


102 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


CONSIDERATION OF C.R. NO. 22 
(Article on the Legislative/National Assembly) 

Continuation 


PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we con- 
tinue the consideration of Committee Report No. 22. 
We are now in the period of sponsorship and debate on 
the Article on the Legislative. I ask that Commissioner 
Natividad be recognized to interpellate. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Commissioner Natividad is recognized. The Chairman 
of the Committee on the Legislative, together with the 
members, is requested to please come forward. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President, will the Chair- 
man of the Committee yield to a few clarificatory 
questions? 


MR. DAVIDE. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Section 16 on page 10 states the 
lsqua ifications of the Members of the National Assem- 

choii u m 3<1s: ttNo Member of the National Assembly 
hannpH° f ^ °^ er °^ ce or employment.” Are they 

SXtaS p ins ,heir profcssion? What is ,he 

MR. DE LOS REYF8 w/ a u 

amended copy of the draft. ^ 3 " eW COpy ’ the 


MR. NATIVIDAD. I see. 


now?* DE L0S REYES ' Does the Commissioner hav 


bee” R cha^ge T d. VIDAD ' haVe i,; but the sec,ions ha 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

„i THE PRES, DENT. Commissioner Davide is rec, 

submitted^ ^portTfS ' 
corporating some structural change , 22 

the decision of the Commission vfet* h° co ^ form w 
bicameral system. CopieTTftis^'J H d0P,i ? 8 ' 
been distributed. May ,, 

amended Committee Report No. 22 be formally c< 
sidered as the draft Article* on the Legislative Dep<s 
ment to be the basis of further interpellations a 
amendments and that the same be incorporated into 1 
Record. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


(The following is the whole text of Committee Report No. 22, 
as amended by the Committee.) 


COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 22 
(AS AMENDED BY THE COMMITTEE) 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE LEGISLATIVE DE- 
PARTMENT. 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved, by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled to incorporate in the new 
Constitution, the following provisions: 

Article 

LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 

SECTION 1. The legislative power shall be vested in a 
Congress of the Philippines which shall consist of a Senate and a 
House of Representatives, except to the extent reserved to the 
people by the provision of initiative and referendum. 

SEC. 2. The Senate shall be composed of twenty-four Senators 
who shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of the Philip- 
pines, as may be provided by law. 

SEC. 3. The term of office of Senators shall be four years and 
shall begin, unless otherwise provided by law, on the thirtieth 
day of June next following their election. 

SEC. 4. No person shall be a Senator unless he is a natural- 
born citizen of the Philippines and, on the day of the election, 
is at least thirty-five years of age, able to read and write, a regis- 
tered voter, and a resident of the Philippines for not less than two 
years immediately preceding the day of the election. 

SEC. 5. The House of Representatives shall be composed of 
not more than two hundred and fifty members who shall be 
elected from legislative districts apportioned among the provinces 
and cities in accordance with the number of their respective in- 
habitants, and on the basis of a uniform and progressive ratio, and 
those who, as provided by law, shall be elected from the sectors 
and party list. The sectoral or party list representatives shall in no 
case exceed twenty percent of the entire membership of the 
House of Representatives. 

Each legislative district shall comprise, as far as practicable, 
contiguous, compact and adjacent territory, provided, however, 
that each city with a population of more than two hundred 
thousand, or each province, shall have at least one representative. 

Within three years following the return of every census, the 
Congress shall make a reapportionment of legislative districts 
based on the standards provided in this section. 

SEC. 6. The Members of the House of Representatives shall be 
elected for a term of four years which shall begin, unless other- 
wise provided by law, at noon on the thirtieth day of June next 
following their election. 

SEC. 7. No person shall be a Member of the House of Rep- 
resentatives unless he is a natural-born citizen of the Philippines 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


103 


and. on the day of the election, is at least twenty-five years of 
age, able to read and write, and except the sectoral or party list 
representatives, a registered voter in the district in which he shall 
be elected, and a resident thereof for a period of not less than one 
year immediately preceding the day of the election. 

SEC. 8. Unless otherwise provided by law, the regular election 
of the Senators and the Members of the House ot Representatives 
shall be held on the second Monday of May and every four years 
thereafter. 

SEC. 9. In case a vacancy arises in the Senate or in the House 
of Representatives eighteen months or more before a regular 
election the Commission on Elections shall call a special election 
to be held within sixty days after the vacancy occurs to elect the 
Senators or Members of the House of Representatives, as the case 

may be. 

SEC. 10. The Congress shall convene once every year on the 
fourth Monday of July for its regular session, unless a different 
date is fixed by law, and shall continue to be in session for such 
number of days as it may determine until thirty days before the 
opening of its next regular session, exclusive of Saturdays, 
Sundays and legal holidays. However, it may be called to session 
at any time by the President to consider such subjects or legisla- 
tion as he may designate. 

rpp . , (\) The Senate shall elect its President and the House 
of Representatives its Speaker, by a majority vote of all its 
respective Members. 

Each House shall choose such other officers as each may deem 


necessary. 

(2 \ A majority of each House shall constitute a quorum to do 
busmls, buT, smaller number may abjonrn from day to day a d 
may compel the attendance of absent Members in such 
and under such penalties, as such House may provide. 

/•rj Each House may determine the rules of its proceedings, 

currence of two-tmras ui a shall not exceed 

Member, but if the penalty is suspension, this shall 

sixty days. , 

M'k Far-h House shall keep a Journal of its proceedings, an 

(4) Each House V except ing such parts as may, 

from time to time publish the same, excep s v ^ 

° f ,he Mcmbe,s 

present, be entered in the Journal. 

(5) Neither House during ** three 
Clio “Ctefplace than’tha, in which the two Houses 
shall be sitting. 

SEC I ’ The Senate anti the House of Representatives shall 
each Can Electoral Tribunal which shall be t e^udge ; 
all rnnrests relating to the election, returns, and qualifications ot 
Ir rlec.ive Members, Each Electoral Tribunal shall be com- 
posed of* nine members, three of whom shall be Justices of the 
Supreme Court to be designated by the Chief Justice, and the 
remaining six shall be Members of the Senate or the House of 
Representatives, as the case may be, who shall be chosen on the 
basis of proportional representation from the political parties 


and/or sectors represented therein. The senior justice in the 
Electoral Tribunal shall be its Chairman. 

SEC. 13. There shall be a Commission on Appointments 
consisting of twelve Senators and twelve Members of the House 
of Representatives, elected by each House on the basis of pro- 
portional representation from the political parties or sectors 
represented therein. The President of the Senate shall be the 
Chairman ex officio of the Commission, but shall not vote, 
except in case of tie. 

SEC. 14. The Electoral Tribunals and the Commission on 
Appointments shall be constituted within thirty days after the 
Senate and the House of Representatives shall have been or- 
ganized with the election of the President and the Speaker. The 
Commission on Appointments shall meet only while the Congress 
is in session, at the call of its Chairman or a majority of its mem- 
bers, to discharge such powers and functions as are herein 
conferred upon it. 

SEC. 15. The Senators and the Members of the House of Rep- 
resentatives shall, unless otherwise provided by law, receive an 

annual compensation of — thousand pesos 

each. No increase in said compensation shall take effect until 
after the expiration of the full term of all the Members of the 
Senate and of the House of Representatives approving such 
increase. Until otherwise provided by law, the President of the 
Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall 

each receive an annual compensation of 

thousand pesos. 

SEC. 16. The records and books of accounts of Congress shall 
be open to the public in accordance with law, and such books 
shall be audited by the Commission on Audit which shall publish 
annually the itemized expenditures for each Member. 

SEC. 17. A Senator or Member of the House of Representa- 
tives shall, in all offenses punishable by not more than six years 
imprisonment, be privileged from arrest while the Congress is in 
session; but each House shall surrender the Member involved to 
the custody of the law within twenty-four hours after its adjourn- 
ment for a recess or for its next session, otherwise such privilege 
shall cease upon its failure to do so. A Member shall not be 
questioned nor be held liable in any other place for any speech or 
debate in the Congress or in any committee thereof. 

SEC. 1 8. No Senator or a Member of the House of Representa- 
tives shall hold any other office or employment in the govern- 
ment, or any subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof, 
including government-owned or controlled corporations, during 
his tenure. Neither shall he be appointed during the term for 
which he was elected to any office which may have been created 
or the emoluments thereof increased while he was a Member of 
Congress. 

SEC. 19. No Senator or Member of the House of the Rep- 
resentatives shall appear as counsel before any court which is not 
of collegiate composition, before any court in civil case wherein 
the Government, or any subdivision, agency, or instrumentality 
thereof is the adverse party, or in any criminal case wherein any 
officer or employee of the government is accused of an offense 
committed in relation to his office, before the Electoral Tribu- 
nals, or before any administrative body. Neither shall he, directly 
or indirectly, interested financially in any contract with, 01 in any 


104 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


franchise or special privilege granted by the government, or any 
subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof, including any 
government-owned or controlled corporation, during his term of 
office. He shall not intervene in any matter before any office of 
the government for his pecuniary benefit. 

SEC. 20. There shall be a Question Hour at least once a month 
or as often as the Rules of the Senate or the House of Rep- 
resentatives may provide, which shall be included in the agenda of 
each House, during which the Members of the Cabinet and their 
deputies may be required to appear and answer questions and 
interpellations by Members of each House. Written questions shall 
be submitted to the President of the Senate or the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives at least three days before a scheduled 
Question Hour. Interpellations shall not be limited to written 
questions, but may cover matters related thereto. The agenda 
shall specify the subjects of the Question Hour. When the security 
of the State so requires and the President so states in writing, the 
Question Hour shall be conducted in executive session. 


SEC. 21 . The Senate or the House of Representatives or any o 
their respective committees may conduct inquiries in aid of legis 
lation in accordance with its duly published rules of procedure 
The rights of persons appearing in or affected by such inquirie 
shall be respected. 

SEC. 22. (1) No treaty or international agreement shall b< 
valid and effective unless concurred in by majority of all th< 
Members of the Senate and of the House of Representatives. 

(2) The Congress, by a vote of two-thirds of the Members o] 

each House, shall have th$ sole power to declare the existence oi 
a state of war. ' 

SEC. 3. In times of war or other national emergency, thu 

an ^ aut ^ l0r ^ ze President, for a limited perioc 

Dowers t0 *j estrictions as lt ma Y prescribe, to exercise 

poHcv Un CSSary Pr ° Per t0 Carry 0Ut a declared nationa 

Lch powe Xll 00 " 6 ' Wlthdrawn ^ solution of the Congress 
power shall cease upon the next adjournment thereof. 

izin?L?etse A lIf a tr 0Pn u a . ti0n ’ r6Venue or tariff bills, bills author 
private bills shall ' C debt ’ bdls of local a PPl icati °n, an< 

l-Z bS SfsSST exclusively in the House of Re p fesen 

a y P ro Pose or concur with amendments 

thirty days fmm^th^^ 8 ^ 6111 submit to the Congress withii 
of 0f each regUlar sessi0 "> a * the basi 

existing and nronn l” 3 10nS bd *’ 3 budget of receipts based 01 
The form, content and reVenUe measures > and of expenditures 
be prescribed by law. m3nner of P re P arati °n of the budget shal 

appropriations bill unllsth™ in the genera 

appropriation therein. Any such nm • M l ° S ° me particula 
limited in its operation to the annr V1Sl ° n enactment s h atl b< 
provision or enactment shall be limited in u,ere,n \ An y sucl 
appropriation to which it relates. ' S 0peiatl0n to tb( 

(3) Th u l| Pr “ Ce ?i" r f n” 1 app,ovin 8 appropriations for th 
Congress shall strictly follow the procedure for approving apprc 

priations for other departments and agencies. 6 

(4) A special appropriation bill shall specify the purpose fo 
which it is intended, and shall be supported by funds actuall 


available as certified by the National Treasurer, or to be raised 
by a corresponding revenue proposal included therein. 

(5) No law shall be passed authorizing any transfer of appro- 
priations; however, the President, the President of the Senate and 
the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Chief Justice of 
the Supreme Court, and the heads of Constitutional Commis- 
sions may by law be authorized to augment any item in the 
general appropriations law for their respective offices from 
savings in other items of their respective appropriations. 

(6) If, by the end of any fiscal year, the Congress shall have 
failed to pass the general appropriations bill for the ensuing fiscal 
year, the general appropriations law for the preceding fiscal year 
shall be deemed re-enacted and shall remain in force and effect 
until the general appropriations bill is passed by the Congress. 

SEC. 26. (1) Every bill passed by the Congress shall embrace 
only one subject which shall be expressed in the title thereof. 

(2) No bill passed by either House shall become a law unless it 
has passed three readings on separate days, and printed copies 
thereof in its final form have been distributed to its Members 
three days before its passage, except when the President certifies 
to the necessity of its immediate enactment to meet a public 
calamity or emergency. Upon the last reading of a bill, no amend- 
ment thereto shall be allowed, and the vote thereon shall be taken 
immediately thereafter, and the yeas and nays entered in the 
Journal. 

SEC. 27. (1) Every bill passed by the Congress shall, before it 
becomes a law, be presented to the President. If he approves the 
same, he shall sign it; otherwise, he shall veto it and return the 
same with his objections to the House where it originated, which 
shall enter the objections at large on its Journal and proceed to 
reconsider it. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of all the 
Members of such House shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, 
together with the objections, to the other House by which it shall 
likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two-thirds of all the 
Members of that House, it shall become a law. In all such cases, 
the votes of each House shall be determined by yeas or nays , and 
the names of the Members voting for or against shall be entered 
in its Journal. The President shall act on every bill passed by the 
Congress within thirty days after the date of receipt thereof; 
otherwise, it shall become a law as if he had signed it. 

(2) The President shall have the power to veto any particular 
item or items in an appropriation, revenue, or tariff bill, but the 
veto shall not affect the item or items to which he does not 
object. 

SEC. 28. (1) The rule of taxation shall be uniform and 
equitable. The Congress shall evolve a progressive system of 
taxation. 

(2) The Congress may by law authorize the President to fix 
within specified limits, and subject to such limitations and 
restrictions as it may impose, tariff rates, import and export 
quotas, tonnage and wharfage dues, and other duties or imposts. 

(3) Charitable institutions, churches, and parsonages or 
convents appurtenant thereto, mosques, non-profit cemeteries, 
and all lands, buildings, and improvements actually, directly, and 
exclusively used for religious, charitable, or educational purposes 
shall be exempt from taxation. 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


105 


(4) No law granting any tax exemption shall be passed without 
the concurrence of a majority of all the Members of Congress. 

SEC. 29. (1) No money shall be paid out of the Treasury 
except in pursuance of an appropriations made by law. 

(2) No public money or property shall ever be appropriated, 
applied, paid, or used, directly or indirectly, for the use, benefit, 
or support of any sect, church, denomination, sectarian institu- 
tion, or system of religion or for the use, benefit, or support of 
any priest, preacher, minister, or other religious teacher or 
dignitary as such, except when such priest, preacher, minister, or 
dignitary is assigned to the armed forces, or to any penal institu- 
tion, or government orphanage or leprosarium. 

(3) All money collected on any tax levied for a special purpose 
shall be treated as a special fund and paid out for such purpose 
only. If the purpose for which a special fund was created has been 
fulfilled or abandoned, the balance, if any, shall be transferred to 
the general funds of the Government. 

SEC. 30. No law granting a title of royalty or nobility shall be 
enacted. 

SEC. 31. The Congress shall provide for a system of initiative 
and referendum, and the exceptions therefrom, whereby the 
people can directly propose and enact laws or approve or reject 
any act or law or part thereof passed by the Congress or local 
legislative body after the registration of a petition therefor signed 
by at least ten percent of the total number of registered voters, 
of which every legislative district must be represented by at least 
three percent of the registered voters thereof. 


THE PRESIDENT. Has the Secretary-General dis- 
tributed copies of the amended copy of Committee 
Report No. 22? 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Yes, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Then, as requested by the honor- 
able Chairman, Commissioner Davide, this amended 
copy will be the one used during this period of inter- 
pellations. 

Commissioner Natividad is recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President, may I ask 
questions based on Section 18 on page 5 of the 
amended report. This section enumerates the disqualifi- 
cation of a Senator or Member of the House from 
holding any other office or employment in the govern- 
ment, or any subdivision, agency or instrumentality 
thereof, including government-owned or controlled 
corporations, during his tenure. Neither shall he be 
appointed, during the term for which he was elected, 
to any office which may have been created while he was 
a Member of Congress. Does this imply that a Member 
of Congress cannot practice his profession? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, it would be the 
pleasure of the Committee to request Commissioner 
de los Reyes to answer the question. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, there is 
nothing here about practice of profession. Perhaps, the 
Commissioner is referring to Section 19. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. That includes also Section 19. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The prohibition in Section 18 
is the holding of any other office or employment in the 
government. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. In the practice of a pro- 
fession, for example, as a lawyer, he might enter into a 
legal consultancy contract. Is that prohibited under this 
section? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The prohibition in Section 19 
is to appear as counsel. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. How about in Section 18? If the 
consultancy contract does not establish an employer- 
employee relationship, is this proscribed by Section 18? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Section 18 does not have any- 
thing to do with the practice of any profession in the 
government. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, but the government might 
refer to a government bank like the Central Bank or any 
government-controlled financial institutions. 

If, after being elected in Congress, a practicing lawyer 
is offered a legal consultancy contract in a government- 
controlled banking institution like the Central Bank, 
will this be proscribed or prohibited? If he enters into 
this legal consultancy contract with a government 
financial institution under the concept that he can 
practice his profession, will this be prohibited under 
Section 18? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. There are two views on 
whether or not consultancy agreement is a form of em- 
ployment. The Committee’s intention is to consider 
legal consultancy in the government or any subdivision, 
agency, or instrumentality thereof, including govern- 
ment-owned or controlled corporation as a form of 
employment and, therefore, prohibited. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. In this case, usually a lawyer has 
his law office that enters into legal consultancy and it 
does not establish an employer-employee relationship. 
Again, may I ask the same question. Will the Commis- 
sioner’s answer be the same? First, it is his law office. 
It is not personal as to him. That is a reality in law 
practice. A law office enters into a contract, and he 
happens to be a member of that law office, but he has 
been elected in the legislative branch of our government. 
Will that be proscribed or prohibited under Section 18? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. As intended by the Commit- 
tee, so that he cannot use the influence of his o ,ce - 


106 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


That is really the intention but the distinction is really 
very, very splitting. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I understand from the history of 
these prohibitions against Members of Congress that 
they are prohibited because they might influence the 
agency, especially in the enactment of their appropria- 
tions. But in these agencies, the appropriations of these 
financially supervised institutions do not pass through 
Congress, through the legislature. And I cannot conceive 
of any occasion of a Member of the Congress being able 
to exert any amount of influence on them. So, I am just 
seeking clarification on this. Would that still be the 
answer? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. We have in mind government- 
owned or controlled corporations such as the GSIS and 
the SSS. The intention of the Committee is not to allow 
a Member of Congress to be employed in the GSIS, for 
example. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. No, not employed. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Or to be a legal consultant. 


Central Bank^f^' ° f consultanc y> yes, for th 
Committee? ’ ^ 6Xample - Is that the view of th 


MR. NATIVIDAD. On line 10, it is stated: 

. . . Neither shall he, directly or indirectly, interested 

financially in any contract with, or in any franchise . . . 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Please insert the word BE after 
“he.” 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. There is something lacking 
there. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is a typographical omis- 
sion. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. There is an interregnum there. 

May I continue? 

. . . interested financially in any contract with, or in any 

franchise or special privilege granted by the government, or 

any subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof, . . . 

So, if a Member of Congress is a board member of a 
corporation with contracts with the government, he has 
to resign. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I beg the Gentleman’s pardon? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. If a Member of Congress is a 
member of the board of directors of a private corpora- 
tion having a contract with the government, he has to 
resign under this provision. 


minfe. DE L ° S REYES ' That is ,h ' view of the Co 

pS::? 3 «-e is no ta. 

profession of a Practice of 

live!* He ^an practice '! there is none ’ he als o has 
practice and get private clients. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Under Section 19, page 6, it sa> 

No Senator or Memhpr rxf +u n 
lives shall appear as counsel btf ° f ^ Re P resenta ‘ 

of collegiate composition. ° K * ny C ° Urt Which is n0t 

Senator* o'r e a no e a C 0 ' ' e 2 ‘ a * e composition. Maj 

er appear before the Sandiganbayar 

MR. DE LOS REYES n „ „ 
of the same section, or in anv c. ^ lines 6 anc 
or employee of the government ^ W ^ erein ar, y °ffi ( 
committed in relation to his office dCCUSed of an offer 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. A Member of Congress whose 
wife is a member of the board of directors of a corpora- 
tion having a contract with the government also has to 
resign from the board? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Unless they are separated. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Even then, they are still husband 
and wife. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But if they are separated and 
the wife is trying to earn her own living, the provision 
does not apply. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But the Constitution says “in- 
directly.” What does the Committee say? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It really depends on the facts 
of each case. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But what is the general rule? 


MR. NATIVIDAD. So, they 
Sandiganbayan? 


cannot appear before the 


MR. DE LOS REYES. As a general rule, that will be 
an indirect form of being interested financially. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. U the offended party is the 
government, and the employee or officer is the accused 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Because these are the questions 
we are interested in involving the practice of profession 
of Members of Congress, especially the lawyers. 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


107 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. So, they cannot be members of 
boards of directors of corporations with contracts with 
the government. 

In the next section, the Question Hour has been less 
than perfect in the Batasang Pambansa principally be- 
cause of the fact that many ministers would not try to 
grace the Question Hour. My query is: Would this 
preclude the new Congress or legislature to establish the 
Privilege Hour? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It will not. The Question Hour 
is an additional hour given to Congress. It is an adoption 
of a parliamentary feature without in any way foreclos- 
ing this Privilege Hour or Privilege Speech. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. So, it is clear that despite the 
establishment of the Question Hour, the new Congress is 
not being proscribed from establishing the Privilege 
Hour? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Unless its rules shall provide 
otherwise. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Section 25, page 7, refers to the 
presidential budget, does it not? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, the presidential budget. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. May the Congress increase or 
decrease the presidential budget? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. There is no prohibition. 


MR NATIVIDAD. Is there no prohibition to increase 
the presidential budget? The historic practice is that 
the presidential budget may be decreased but not in- 
creased. Is it good for the country and for the Congress 
to increase the presidential proposal for a budget. 


MR DE LOS REYES. That will be covered by lines 
28 and 29 which state: “The form, content, and manner 
of preparation of the budget shall be prescribed by 

law.” 


MR NATIVIDAD. So, if it is by law, it is by 
Congress; and if Congress wishes to increase the presi- 
dential budget, it can do so. Is that the concept. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. That is the necessary conse- 
quence. 

MR NATIVIDAD. So, we have a situation where the 
President prepares the budget every year based on the 
expected receipts and earnings of the government. 1 he 
Constitution gives the President that duty because the 
President knows the expected earnings ot the govern- 
ment. Traditionally, Congress will decrease certain items 


of the budget but it is not constitutionally authorized to 
increase because if the various items in the budget will 
be increased, the earnings of the government as ex- 
pected from the receipts and taxes may not be enough 
and there will be a big budget deficit. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the further answer 
to the question is contained in the section itself, which 
reads: 

The President shall submit to the Congress within thirty 
days from the opening of each regular session, as the basis 
of the general appropriations bill, a budget of receipts based 
on existing and proposed revenue measures, and of expendi- 
tures. 

In other words. Congress cannot increase because 
there is a limitation; the budget should be based on x 
existing and proposed revenue measures. 

If the Commissioner will further notice, under 
paragraph (4) of the same section, there is a provision to 
the effect that a special appropriations bill shall specify 
the purpose for which it is intended, and shall be sup- 
ported by funds actually available as certified by the 
National Treasurer, or to be raised by a corresponding 
revenue proposal included therein. So, necessarily, there 
is already a maximum limit over which Congress cannot 
anymore go beyond. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Paragraph (4) is a different 
matter, Madam President. This is a new proposal, like a 
public works bill, which one cannot present without the 
corresponding certification of availability of funds or 
the corresponding revenue proposal. But I would just 
like to clarify because the first response of the Commit- 
tee is that the Congress may increase or decrease. The 
distinguished Chairman said Congress may not increase. 
So, which one is the right answer? 

MR. DAVIDE. I think the Commissioner may have in 
mind reincorporating the limitation provided for under 
the 1935 Constitution, prohibiting specifically the 
Congress to increase the recommended appropriations 
made by the President. We can entertain that at the 
proper time although I would like to repeat that the 
requirement under lines 26 and 27 on page 7 — “a 
budget of receipts based on existing and proposed 
revenue measures” — which is actually proposed by 
the President himself cannot be exceeded by Congress. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. As the Gentleman knows, the 
budget of receipts and proposed revenue measures is 
ambivalent. There is nothing sure about that because 
that is just a projection of future earnings and we do not 
know exactly if 80 percent will be realized or not. So, 
this is just a projection of the future earnings of the 
government. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is exactly the reason why 
Congress cannot go beyond that because what may t 


108 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


collected of the expected revenues may be only very 
much less than 100 percent. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. So, will the Committee be willing 
to consider an amendment in due time? 

MR. DA VIDE. Just to clarify that requirement or 
that restriction on the legislature, would the Gentle- 
man be willing to accommodate any proposal in that 
respect? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I cannot locate the specific 
section now. What is the provision on this proposed 
resolution on the increase of salaries of Members of 
Congress? May they increase their salaries, and if so, 
when does it take effect? 

MR. DAVIDE. Page 5, Section 15, of the amended 
copy. 


respective inhabitants, and on the basis of a uniform and 
progressive ratio, and those who, as provided by law, shall 
be elected from the sectors and party list. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, just the uniform and pro- 
gressive ratio. For the record, what does that term or 
phrase indicate? 

MR. DAVIDE. I will consider first the initial compo- 
sition of the legislative body. We foresee the possibility 
of having a ratio of one for every 300,000 inhabitants. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The draft resolution says 

“ 200 , 000 .” 

MR. DAVIDE. We fixed that for a city or a province. 
Right now, under the 1984 apportionment, cities are 
classified into component cities and highly urbanized 
cities. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. I am satisfied with Section 15. 

Who takes care of proclamation contests for the 
members of the House? 

MR. DAVIDE. May we have the question again? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Who has jurisdiction over pre- 
proclamation contests for the House? 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, 
vision regarding the Electoral Tribunal. 


we have a 


pro- 


MR NATIVIDAD. Does i, 
tion of the Electoral Tribunal? 


fall under the jurisdic- 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Preproclamation contests? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. This is on Section 12, page 4. 
ceptf’ NATIVIDAD - y es, I know, but is that the con 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Since tb. T 

signalling me, my last question fs WhaUs^he' 
of progressive ratio for the rer Jh? ?, the ' 

man’s concept of uniform and mn Wl3t 1S the 
do we redistrict the entire Ph .,. pr ° 8ressive rat io 
uniform and progressive ratio? ,PPmes 011 the 1 


A highly urbanized city, as defined under the Local 
Government Code, is a city with an income of not less 
than P30 million and a population of 1 50,000. 

We sought to increase the requirement as to popula- 
tion to make it a minimum of 200,000. So, if a parti- 
cular city will have more, then we also consider the 
progressive ratio of inhabitants. 

By the way, we will be submitting to the Commission 
an ordinance to be appended to the Constitution on the 
apportionment of the seats for the regular Members of 
the Assembly. On that particular basis, we have studied 
the possibility of only having 198 regular Members for 
the first House of Representatives. So, the basis for that 
is one representative for every 300,000 depending on 
the compactness, contiguity and adjacence of territories 
consisting of municipalities and cities with less than 
200,000 inhabitants within a given province. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. We welcome that because several 
congresses failed to do that. We failed to make the re- 
districting because of controversies. But I think the 
Committee’s proposal might go through. And what the 
old Congress failed to do, we might be able to do by 
simply adopting a fair, uniform and progressive ratio. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask for the recogni- 
tion of Commissioner Tan. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. That would ™ 
of the Article on the LegiSe^^S 

The House of Representatives shall be composed of 
more than two hundred and fifty members who shall 
elected from legislative districts apportioned among 
provinces and cities in accordance with the number of tl 


SR. TAN. Madam President and members of the 
Committee, I refer to Section 31, line 9. How did the 
Committee arrive at 10 percent, which is a little more 
than two million of the registered voters? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Vice-Chairman of the Commit- 
tee, Madam President, will answer the question. 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


109 


MR. AZCUNA. The figure of 10 percent was arrived 
at upon the recommendation of various proponents of 
this initiative. The Committee felt that this is a reasona- 
ble figure, as a minimum, to be required. Otherwise, we 
feel it would be too easy to get this initiative referen- 
dum. Other states require a bigger figure such as 20, 15 
or 12 percent. We felt that 10 percent is reasonable as 
a minimum figure. Yes, that was how we arrived at the 
10 percent — mainly on the basis of the proponents. 

SR. TAN. On Section 22, line 6, as a layman, I do 
not know the difference between a treaty and an inter- 
national agreement. 


MR. AZCUNA. Yes. 

SR. TAN. So, maybe in the period of amendments we 
might delete something. 

Thank you. 

MR. AZCUNA. I will just comment on that, Madam 
President. The main reason this was taken from the 
1935 Constitution is that the power to tax is the power 
to destroy. If we want to promote the separation of 
Church and State and prevent the State from destroying 
the Church, we have to exempt the Church from taxa- 
tion. That is the philosophy behind it. 


MR. AZCUNA. A treaty is ratified by the legislature. 
An international agreement may be an executive agree- 
ment, President to President only. 

SR. TAN. Yes, but both are mentioned here. 


SR. TAN. I think it is a very weak reason. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, that is the philosophy because 
the power to tax can really destroy. 

SR. TAN. Thank you. 


MR. AZCUNA. Yes, in other words, we do not want 
executive agreements to go unratified. The philosophy 
/fiere is that henceforth any international commitments 
of the country should have the ratification of the 
popular representatives of the people. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 


SR. TAN. Therefore, the legislature is getting more 
power, is that it? 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, it has more checks, a check on 
foreign relations for one. It is still basically an executive 
power, the conduct of foreign relations, but there is a 
requirement for concurrence in treaties and interna- 
tional agreements. 

SR. TAN. How about simple cultural exchanges like 
what Imelda Marcos used to engage in? 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, even agreements on cultural 
exchanges would still constitute an international agree- 
ment. It should not be difficult to get the legislature 
>6 concur in this simple agreement. It is on the touc y 
/ones, which cover sovereign rights, that I feel lere 
would be some difficulty,- but cultural exchanges s iou 
pass without difficulty. 


SR. TAN. My third one is just an honest bewilder- 
ment, and that is on Section 28, page 10. The para- 
graph has some provisions on churches, conven s an 
the religious. I am bewildered that churches owned by 
some religious who are very wealthy would be tax 
exemp I cannot understand why the poor laborer 
3 pay taxes on land but the religious does no pay 
Taxes l am bewildered about that. I am just talking 
about the Catholic Church, of course. Also at this 
period of our national recovery. I think we should all 
be paying because we are bankrupt. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Will the sponsor yield to a 
few questions? 

MR. DAVIDE. Willingly. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. On Section 9, page 2, 
line 29 up to the end of the section on page 3, what is 
the sanction if the Commission on Elections does not 
call for a special election in case a vacancy arises in the 
Senate? 

MR. AZCUNA. I believe this is an instance where a 
petition for mandamus may lie against the Commis- 
sion on Elections. Where there is a dear duty on the 
part of the COMELEC to schedule elections, a citizen 
may file a petition for mandamus to compel the COM- 
ELEC to call a special election. This has happened in the 
past local elections. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Will the sponsor consider 
amending this to make it mandatory? 

MR. AZCUNA. It already says “shall” and usually 
“shall” is interpreted to mean mandatory. The Com- 
mittee believes that if the grounds are there, that is, 
there is a vacancy, the COMELEC may be compelled by 
a writ of mandamus to hold the elections. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

Section 30 on page 1 1 refers to granting of title ox 
royalty. This is similar to a provision in the Genera 


no 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


Provisions. Would the Committee consider deleting this 
particular provision at the appropriate time? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. This used to be in the Bill of 
Rights. But during the discussion on the Bill of Rights, 
we deleted the same provision to be transferred to any 
appropriate article. Considering that we are now dis- 
cussing what the legislature can do, we deem it wise and 
proper to include this in the Article on the Legislative. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. The next question is on 
Section 7, page 2. I think Commissioner Nolledo has 
raised the same point that “resident” has been inter- 
preted at times as a matter of intention rather than 
actual residence. 


budget was allocated for the military at the expense of 
other ministries. May I know if we have sufficient 
safeguards in this draft resolution to prevent allocation 
of substantial amounts to the military or any ministry 
that will be favored by the President? I ask this ques- 
tion because I am thinking of proposing, at the appro- 
priate time, the inclusion of a paragraph — for the wise 
consideration of the Committee — which will read- 
THE ANNUAL APPROPRIATION FOR NATIONAL 
DEFENSE, INCLUDING ALL COMPONENTS OF THE 
ARMED FORCES, SHALL NOT EXCEED TEN PER- 
CENTUM OF THE TOTAL ANNUAL BUDGET OF 
THE GOVERNMENT EXCEPT WHEN THE PHILIP- 
PINES IS INVOLVED IN A WAR. 

What does the Committee say? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Domicile. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. So, would the Gentle- 
man consider at the proper time to go back to actual 
residence rather than mere intention to reside? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But we might encounter some 
difficulty especially considering that a provision in the 
Article on Suffrage says that Filipinos living abroad 
may vote as enacted by law. So, we have to stick to the 
original concept that it should be by domicile and not 
physical and actual residence. 


thif BRAID ' 0n Sections 6 and 8 > dc 

synchronize th h , ere wi11 be a transitory provision 

tives and the Senate? ° n ^ the H ° USe ° f Re P resen 


MR. DE LOS REYFS Th,t • 
submitted this section' subject C ? ntem P lated > and we 
amendment so that it will 1 t0 an y appropriate 

cover synchronization. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID In rh 0 T .. _ 

• An the Transitory Provisio 

even^n £ *££££ *»*>« 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID 
Madam President. 


Thank you very much, 


MR. DELOS REYES. Thank you. 
S ion^Sa™“tl ad ™„ g P S ent - 1 ask ‘ha. Commis- 


THE PRESIDENT Comm- 

nized. ‘ C ° mmissi °ner Sarmiento is recog- 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I be allowed to ask 
questions? LO asK ' 

The first is on Section 25, about the budge 
general appropriations bill. During the past admir 
tion, we all know that the substantial amount c 


MR. AZCUNA. Yes, the Committee has not provided 
for specific safeguards against gargantuan budgets for 
the military. We do have a provision that the budget be 
a budget of receipts based on existing and proposed 
revenue measures and of expenditures, but the idea was 
not to tie the hands of the legislature and of the Pres- 
ident. Also, there is no specific ceiling. We leave it also 
to their wisdom not to overdo it in case of grave abuse 
of discretion. There is a remedy, as the Gentleman 
knows, in the judicial power but there is none here. 

MR. SARMIENTO. But to prevent a repetition of 
that past national experience, would the Committee be 
willing to consider the amendment I stated? 

MR. AZCUNA. We feel that we might be overreacting 
to our previous experience. We already do have safe- 
guards under the proposed executive power provision 
and regulations on fund transfers and all that. It might 
be too self-limiting to put ceilings because if we put a 
ceiling on the military, somebody will again want a 
ceiling on another provision and there will be no end 
to the limitations. We might have an executive tied 
down by too many ceilings and restrictions and when 
emergency comes, it will be too late. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask another question? My 
question is on Section 20 which provides for the Ques- 
tion Hour. Section 20, lines 21 to 23, partially reads: 

. . . during which the Members of the Cabinet and their 

deputies may be required to appear and answer questions 

and interpellations by Members of each House. 

It appears that members of the Cabinet and their 
deputies may appear before Congress only if they are 
required. What if members of the Cabinet and their 
deputies, upon their own initiative, want to appear be- 
fore Congress? Would the Committee consider the 
inclusion of the phrase UPON THEIR INITIATIVE, 
not only upon the summons served upon them by 
Congress? 

MR. AZCUNA. We will consider such amendments 
when the time comes. 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


111 ' 


MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you very much. 

Then Section 9 of the report reads: 

In case a vacancy arises in the Senate or in the House of 
Representatives eighteen months or more before a regular 
election, the Commission on Elections shall call a special 
election . . . 

Section 7, line 18, of the first draft includes the 
phrase “to serve the unexpired term.” May I know the 
reason for the deletion of the words “to serve the 
unexpired term” ? 

MR. AZCUNA. The phrase was omitted by inad- 
vertence and we thank the Gentleman for calling our at- 
tention to it. It should be there. The Committee would 
take note of that — “to serve the unexpired term.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. I have one question in connection 
with Section 7, now Section 9, about the unexpired 
term. What if the unexpired term is only less than one 
year? Am I correct in understanding this section that 
the Commission on Elections shall still call a special 
election? 


MR. AZCUNA. We do not see how that can arise 
since it is 18 months before the regular election and as 
envisioned, there is no staggered term for the Senate. 
So, that situation cannot arise. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. 

May I proceed to Section 10, lines 9 to 11, which 
reads: 

. . . However, it may be called to session at any time by the 

President to consider such subjects or legislation as he may 

designate. 

Is it the President alone who is empowered to call the 
session at any time, or can the Members of Congress, say, 
25 percent of them, call the Congress to session at any 
time? Would the members of the Committee consider 
this proposal at an appropriate time? 

MR. AZCUNA. We shall consider it, although this is 
the traditional concept. But we are open to new ideas. 


MR. SARMIENTO. I have one last question. Section 
25, paragraph (5) authorizes the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court, the Speaker of the House of Rep- 
resentatives, the President, the President of the Senate 
to augment any item in the General Appropriations 
Law. Do we have a limit in terms of percentage as to 
how much they should augment any item in the General 
Appropriations Law? 


MR AZCUNA. The limit is not in percentage but 
“from savings.” So it is only to the extent of their 
savings. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you very much, Madam 
President. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, members of 
the Committee, I will focus most of my questions only 
on one point, on the electoral tribunal. Did I hear the 
Committee correctly, in reply to one of the questions. 

that the electoral tribunal, either of the House or of the 
Senate, has jurisdiction over preproclamation contests? 

MR. AZCUNA. Just a moment. Madam President; we 
are checking the word. It refers to contest. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I will repeat the question. Does 
the electoral tribunal, either of the House or of the 
Senate, have jurisdiction over preproclamation contests? 

If I heard the answer correctly that it has jurisdiction 
over preproclamation contests, I would sincerely request 
a reconsideration of that answer because as far as I am 
concerned, based on previous experience, these electoral 
tribunals do not have jurisdiction over preproclamation 
contests. If that answer can be corrected, I will be 
happy with it: it will make my day. 

MR AZCUNA. If the answer had been made, then it 
should be corrected. This does not refer to preproclama- 
tion contests. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

My questions will be very basic so we can go as fast as 
we can In the case of the electoral tribunal, either of 
the House or of the Senate, is it correct to say that these 
tribunals are constitutional creations? I will distinguish 
these with the case of the Tanodbayan and the Sandi- 
oanbayan which are created by mandate of the Consti- 
tution but they are not constitutional creations. Is that 
a good distinction? 

MR. AZCUNA. That is an excellent statement. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Could we, therefore, say that 
either the Senate Electoral Tribunal or the House Elec- 
toral Tribunal is a constitutional body? 

MR. AZCUNA. It is, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. If it is a constitutional body, is it 
then subject to constitutional restrictions? 

MR. AZCUNA. It would be subject to constitutional 
restrictions intended for that body. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I see. But I want to find out rt 
the ruling in the case of Vera vs. Avelino, 77 P * • ’ 

will still be applicable to the present bodies w 
creating since it ruled that the electoral tribuna s < 


112 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


separate departments of the government. Would that 
ruling still be valid? 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, they are not separate depart- 
ments because the separate departments are the legisla- 
tive, the executive and the judiciary; but they are 
constitutional bodies. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Although they are not separate 
departments of government, I would like to know again 
if the ruling in Angara vs. Electoral Commission, 53 
Phil. 139, would still be applicable to the present bodies 
we are deciding on, when the Supreme Court said that 
these electoral tribunals are independent from Congress, 
devoid of partisan influence or consideration and, there- 
fore, Congress has no power to regulate proceedings of 
these electoral tribunals. 


MR. AZCUNA. I think that is correct. They are inde- 
pendent although they are not a separate branch of 
government. 

MR. MAAMBONG. There is a statement that in all 
parliaments of the world, the invariable rule is to leave 
unto themselves the determination of controversies with 
respect to the election and qualifications of their mem- 
bers, and precisely they have this Committee on Privi- 
eges w ich takes care of this particular controversy. 

pWt?, U ^ ^ u. e Gentleman say that the creation of 

aDoarentlv™ U °v! S * S 30 exce P t i° n to this rule because 
we ave an independent electoral tribunal? 

tri^unal S A are U ^H T ° , the extent th at the electoral 

notice that the 6nt ’ ^ Ut t * le Gentleman will 
House ReprLZS uT “ The Se " ate a " d 
Tribunal.” It is still the ^ have an Electoral 

the House Electoral Tribun^L^?^ 1 T n ibUnal 3 " d 

- - 

MR. AZCUNA. That is correct. 

MR. MAAMBONG This ic *u > 
question. How can we sav thJtl bot !° m line ° f my 

pendent when we still havLix no n- b ° dieS ^ inde ‘ 
tribunals? Politicians sitting in both 


MR. AZCUNA. Politicians 
Madam President. 


can be independent, 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President when i 
discussed a portion of this in the Committee on t 
Executive, there was a comment by Chief Just 
Concepcion - Commissioner Concepcion - that th' 
seems to be some incongruity in these electoral t 


bunals, considering that politicians still sit in the tri- 
bunals in spite of the fact that in the ruling in the case 
of Sanidad vs. Vera, Senate Electoral Tribunal Case 
No. 1, they are supposed to act in accordance with law 
and justice with complete detachment from all political 
considerations. That is why I am asking now for the 
record how we could achieve such detachment when 
there are six politicians sitting there. 

MR. AZCUNA. The same reason that the Gentleman, 
while chosen on behalf of the opposition, has, with ster- 
ling competence, shown independence in the proceed- 
ings of this Commission. I think we can also trust that 
the members of the tribunals will be independent. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you for that. But just for 
the information of the Committee, in the case of 
presidential and vice-presidential contests, previously 
the traditional tribunal is the Presidential Electoral 
Tribunal. In the committee report now before the 
Members of this Commission, we have changed this con- 
cept. We have now decided — at least the Committee on 
the Executive has decided — that presidential and vice- 
presidential electoral contests will be decided by the 
Supreme Court en banc. So, in effect, we are deviating 
in the case of electoral contests involving presidential 
and vice-presidential election contests. But as far as the 
Senate and the House of Representatives are concerned, 
we are still sticking to the traditional Senate Electoral 
Tribunal and the Electoral Tribunal of the House of 
Representatives. 

MR. AZCUNA. That is correct. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The next point is that considering 
the previous Senate Electoral Tribunal and the Electoral 
Tribunal of the House of Representatives, will the rules 
they had promulgated still apply to these present 
electoral bodies? 

MR. AZCUNA. I believe they will have to adopt the 
rules anew if they want to apply them because these will 
be different bodies from those of the 1935 version. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Another basic question is this: 
I think we had a discussion on the disqualification of 
Senators or Members of the House of Representatives. 
When a Member of the Senate or a Member of the 
House serves in the electoral tribunal of either body, 
would it not be a violation of Section 1 8 which says that 
no Senator or Member of the House of Representa- 
tives shall hold any other office or employment in the 
government? In this formulation of Section 18, I do 
not see any exception. I can understand that there are 
prohibitions of this nature in other parts of the Consti- 
tution, but it specifically provides “except as provided 
under this Constitution.” Will it not violate the section? 

MR. AZCUNA. We believe that the two sections 
should be construed together in line with established 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


113 


principles of statutory and constitutional interpretation. 
But for clarity, if the Gentleman finds a discordance 
between the two, the Committee would be glad to 
consider clarifying it. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

One more question on this point: Could we make a 
general statement that the jurisdiction of this electoral 
tribunal, either of the Senate or of the House, is ex- 
clusive and unlimited and, therefore, there will be no 
appeal to the Supreme Court? 

MR. AZCUNA. It is the sole judge. I think that 
further implies that there is no further appeal elsewhere. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, its judgment is 
final and not appealable. 

MR. AZCUNA. Insofar as the qualifications, returns 
and elections are concerned. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

I would like to address my question now on appor- 
tionment to Commissioner Davide. I understand that 
the criteria in apportionment are based on contiguous 
territory and number of inhabitants. I will just ask one 
question on this and I will clarify it by referring to Cebu 
City. 

In Cebu City, as the Gentleman knows, we have two 
representatives: one of them is now in the Supreme 
Court, Honorable Marcelo Fernan; and the other is the 
Minister for Political Affairs, Honorable Antonio 
Cuenco. 

At the onset of apportionment, we know that in the 
province we have to group together municipalities based 
on their contiguity. Specifically, is it the intention of 
the Committee that when we make the apportionment 
in the City of Cebu, the city will have to be cut into two 
legislative districts, considering that there are two rep- 
resentatives now, or will the two Members of the House 
of Reoresentatives be voted at large in that configura- 
tion of the City of Cebu? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR DAVIDE. Strictly, under the proposal, since the 

. * jj ve districts have to be apportioned to provinces 
^cTcities if a province, therefore, is to be districted if 
a °titled to more than one representative district, the 
city will have to be apportioned into districts if it is 

entitled to one. 

But I understand that there will be corresponding 
proposals later during the period of amendments that 
even if the city may be entitled to two or more, their 
representatives shall have to be voted at large, consider- 
ing a small territory of the city even if the population 
would be several hundreds or thousands. 


MR. MAAMBONG. To clarify that, in the case of the 
province, it is an inflexible rule that we should group 
together municipalities to form one district based on 
population. But in the city, it may not be divided into 
legislative districts; voting may be at large. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, if no amendment is presented to 
the body and the proposal is not altered, there is no 
different rule for the city. There will be a districting also 
of the city itself. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I see. May I know in advance 
what is the thinking of the Committee on that proposed 
amendment or has the Gentleman not yet formed any 
opinion on this? 

MR. DAVIDE. We have not formulated any on that 
matter because it was not yet formally presented. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that case, I will not press the 
question. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Brocka be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. Thank you. Madam President. 

Section 28, paragraph (3) on page 10 states: 

Charitable institutions, churches, and parsonages or 
convents appurtenant thereto, mosques, non-profit ceme- 
teries, and all lands, buildings, and improvements actually, 
directly, and exclusively used for religious, charitable, or 
educational purposes shall be exempt from taxation. 

Just for some clarifications: I can understand that 
charitable institutions are exempted from taxes because 
of their nonprofit nature and because of the explanation 
given by Commissioner Azcuna — although I agree with 
Sister Tan that I do not think they should be exempted 
because some of these churches are very rich, particular- 
ly the Catholic Church and the Iglesia ni Kristo. But 
that is not my question; my question is the inclusion of 
educational institutions being exempted from taxation. 
I want to know why they were included when in the 
1973 Constitution, Section 17, paragraph (3) of Article 
8 says: 

. . . lands, buildings actually, directly and exclusively used 
for religious or charitable purposes shall be exempt from 
taxation. 

This means that, as in the annotation of Commissioner 
Nolledo in his book, realty used for educational pur- 
poses is not exempt from taxation. Nonprofit schools 
are at present taxed not only under the Income Tax 
Law but also under the Real Property Tax Code. So, in 
this particular subsection in the amended committee 
report, distinction is made between a nonprotit oi 


114 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


nonstock and proprietary educational institutions. May 
I know why? 

MR. GUINGONA. This question was asked this 
morning but I presume the Gentleman was not present. 

MR. BROCKA. No, I was here but there was no satis- 
factory answer given. Commissioner Suarez spoke about 
schools like FEU being exempted from it but there was 
no explanation given why they should be exempted 
from taxes. 


MR. GUINGONA. We are talking here of realty taxes. 
Madam President, and these refer to instances which are 
limited by the following words: “lands, buildings, and 
improvements actually, directly, and exclusively used...” 


MR. BROCKA. Yes, I understand that. But in spite 
of the words “actually, directly, and exclusively used,” 
it cannot be denied that some of these educational 
institutions are profit-making institutions. So, why 
should they be exempted from taxes? 


MR. GUINGONA. As I said this morning, the focus 
of attention of the Committee has been the benefit that 
would be derived not by the educational institutions but 
by the students of those institutions. 


MR. BROCKA. In what sense, Madam President? 

rednM-in^f^' ^’ rst a ^*’ there could be either i 
there would t \ which would have to be paid, oi 
ion is^ ^ be n ° increase ’ Aether the institu 
educational *%£££ The fa f Ct of is thai 

universities d P n» u nS ’ exce Pt state colleges anc 
fees paid by studentfAnyrel 3 ^ d almost exclusively or 
educational institution^ would* tb f t0 theS( 

benefiting the students t d ’ th ^ refore > be mdirectlj 
that we are focSt ot at? ° f the faC 

students. The Gentlfman • ^ tl0n ° n the 8 °° d of th( 
on Human R °* th * C ° mmitt « 
that we are not onlv ™ em P hasized the fac 

education but we wVfrT 1 ,he right " 

cation provided by educational'' r" that "’ C ed “ 
I am talking of educate i • lnstltutlons - am 

distinction - should be quality educatton" 0 " 8 W ' th ° U 

MR. BROCKA. Yes but 1 ,i 
we discussed that Article on Fd S ° remember that whe 
distinction of nonstock aL ? ,0 "' ^ madea cl « 

institutions. We did not make a sw!" 15 ™ ed ucation; 

make a sweeping generalizatioi 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, but if the fWi 
recall, that particular provision which we are present!, 
at the proper time refers to all taxes, including Scon 
taxes. Here, we are only talking of realty taxes. 

MR. BROCKA. Yes, precisely. 


MR. GUINGONA. In other words, this is limited in 
the sense that the theory here is that educational insti- 
tutions, whether proprietary or the so-called nonstock, 
nonprofit, require assistance from the government if 
they are going to provide quality education. If our 
concern is to have students receive quality education, 
we either provide this education through the state 
colleges or universities or through the private institu- 
tions. 

MR. BROCKA. Yes, but Madam President, it does 
not follow that just because educational institutions are 
exempted from taxes, quality of education will go 
up. I think, right now, there is a prevailing sentiment 
among the private sector and the general public against 
profit-making institutions, and I do not think we should 
make any exemption as far as proprietary educational 
institutions are concerned. 

MR. GUINGONA. I think the impression is not 
correct. Madam President, because in the first place, 
there is already an existing limitation to the return on 
investment. I mentioned at our meeting of the Subcom- 
mittee on Education that the Fund for Assistance to 
Private Education, which is a very prestigious organiza- 
tion, had conducted a survey and which was reported by 
the vice-president of that organization during one ot our 
committee meetings. The survey shows that the average 
return on investment for the past year or so was only 
three percent. The problem here is that, if we push the 
private educational institutions — which according to 
the Gentleman are profit-making — to the wall, we will 
be forcing them, like what happened to the Univeisity 
of the East, to close. And once these private institutions 
close, the ones who will suffer will be the students, 
because the so-called nonprofit, nonstock educational 
institutions will not have the facilities to admit the 
students who will lose their opportunity to be admitted. 

MR. BROCKA. As far as that is concerned, I think 
that is a bit questionable and debatable. I asked that 
particular question mainly because, let us face it, some 
educational institutions are very rich, and I do not think 
they should be exempted from paying taxes. 

MR. GUINGONA. If by “rich” the Gentleman means 
the facilities, I can say that the so-called nonprofit, 
nonstock corporations have even more impressive 
facilities. 

MR. BROCKA. If that is the case then, I do not think 
we should make any qualification, whether they are 
nonstock, profit or nonprofit. By all means, all educa- 
tional institutions should not be exempted from paying 
taxes. 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, but what I am saying is, it is 
the students who will suffer in the long run. Until the 
State is able to provide the education that the students 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


115 


want and deserve to obtain, I think the private educa- 
tional institutions should be supported. Once the State 
is in a position to provide quality education all by 
itself through its own funds, then there is no problem. 

MR. BROCK A. I do not think I can agree with the 
Gentleman on that point, Madam President. Anyway, 

I mentioned that because I would like to make an 
amendment later when the time comes. 

The next question that I would like to ask is on page 
1 1 , line 9 of Section 3 1 which says: 

. signed by at least ten percent of the total number of 

registered voters, of which every legislative district must be 

represented by at least three percent of the registered voters 

thereof. 

Does this refer to registered voters who actually 
voted, or voters who are just registered? 

MR. AZCUNA. It refers to the total number of 
registered voters, whether they voted or not. 

MR. BROCKA. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I raise a preju- 
dicial question regarding the term of office proposed in 
this report. The suggested term of office in this report is 
four years for the Members of the House and also four 
years for the Members of the Senate. 

Madam President, I have in front of me Committee 
Report No. 26 of the Committee on the Executive and 
this report recommends six years as the term for the 
President. If four years is the term for the Members of 
Congress and six years is the term for the President, it 
will be very difficult, if not impossible, to synchronize 
our elections. So this is a prejudicial question. I think 
we better decide this now, otherwise, we will hold pend- 
ing the term of the Members of Congress, while awaiting 
decision on the term of the President. On the other 
hand, the Committee on the Executive will be hanging 
in midair, too. So, I believe that this has to be decided 
right away, thus saving time. Have the Chamber set the 
term for both Committees to follow. Madam President, 
if the Committee’s recommendation of six years for the 
President is approved, then the term for the Senators 
can be six years, and the term for Members of the House 
and local officials can be three years. But we better 
define this right away. Madam President. 

May I ask the Chairman of the Committee what is his 
thinking on this matter? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, that issue was taken 
up in the Committee and it is the thinking of the Com- 


mittee to consider it really as a prejudicial question. 

And so, I second the motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would suggest that 
the Chairman of the Committee on the Legislative 
confer with the Chairman of the Committee on the 
Executive about this matter, but in the meantime we 
can go to other issues which are not related to the term 
of office. 

Are there other issues that can be discussed inde- 
pendently of the term of office, Mr. Floor Leader? 

MR. RAMA. There are still five Commissioners 
who would like to interpellate, and I would like that 
we move to the period of amendments. Before we can 
do that, probably we can determine this prejudicial 
question on the term of the legislators. 

THE PRESIDENT. Do we understand then that they 
have no more interpellations on other issues? 

Commissioner Monsod is seeking recognition. 

MR. MONSOD. I can wait for my turn, Madam 
President, but I have some questions on some of the 
provisions. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I interject at this point. May 
I suggest that in the conference between the Chairman 
of the Committee on the Legislative and the Chairman 
of the Committee on the Executive, our Chairman of 
the Committee on Amendments and Transitory Pro- 
visions be included in that conference because we are 
also considering the interim term of the incumbent 
President and Vice-President, Madam President. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 3:59 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:09 p.m.., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to announce to the body 
that we will have a caucus at six o’clock on the terms 
ot the President, the legislators and the others foi 


116 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


synchronization purposes, as well as their compensa- 
tion, as suggested by Commissioner Concepcion. 

We would like to finish in the meantime the inter- 
pellations so that tomorrow we will be ready for the 
period of amendments before we go to a caucus. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who will be the next interpel- 
lator? 


those who will become Members of the Congress 
through party list? 

MR. AZCUNA. The intention. Madam President, is to 
apply to all Senators and Members of the House of Rep- 
resentatives, regardless of whether they represent sectors 
or were elected through the party list system or the 
ordinary system. There should be no difference as far 
as these accountability provisions are concerned. 


MR. RAMA. I would like to ask the Chair to recog- 
nize Commissioner Ople. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, the Vice-Chairman 
of the Committee will answer for the Committee. 


MR. OPLE. Will the sponsors yield to two or three 
questions? 


MR. AZCUNA. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

Sections 18 and 19 of the proposed Article deal wi 
conflict of interests. I think this is a good attem] 
between the two sections to hold the Members of tl 
e 0 is a ure accountable for the integrity of their cor 
interact t0 ^ P u ^ c interest so that conflict ( 
wanted S fn Car l f P revented or avoided. However, 
of addin? m ti 6 whether they had thougl 

disclosure of t T ° f guards a requirement for fv 

the case of profeSal^’theh b , US,nes . s interes,s and 
al affiliations anw •’ V* e ^ lstor y of their professio: 

ta j he past s ° that *■« 

disclosed the nnhi; -n u and P r °f essi °nal interests ai 
they had used "'"r aVe 3 wa * «f lowing wheth, 
mandedof fte peol^!! ln * he S° ngreSS and d 

And, perhaps in th a 88 ra ndize their own interes 

prov de for c ; r L admt leS ° f either Ho ™> they a 
volve that may i 

the purview of the d isc iol in wl1 icbcan be placed und 
the Committee, at the nrn^ “f 100 ° f the House ‘ W 

provision for full disclosure o^the^r 6 ’ C01 ? sider such 

and professional interests of M 1 , fmanc,al and busine 
Congress, so that this mav em .^ ers °f botb Houses i 
Houses themselves with V th^i? 6 - the public and tl 
whether in the initiation of bills n? S determinil 
same, conflict of interests 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President th r 
be happy to consider such an amen'dmenuTtte plop 
time. * F 


MR. OPLE. May I also know whether these conflict 
of interest provisions m Sections 18 and 19 are under- 
stood to apply to the future sectoral representatives and 


MR. OPLE. Having in mind potential conflict of 
interests in the case of sectoral representatives who are 
heads of their own organizations — let us say, a labor 
organization, a farmers’ organization, a women’s organi- 
zation or a veterans’ organization — in the contempla- 
tion of the Committee, will they have to resign to be in 
full conformity with Sections 18 and 19 and a full 
disclosure policy? Will they have to resign as heads of 
their respective organizations because otherwise, there 
will be a commingling of their identities as heads of 
such organizations with interest to pursue, especially 
in government and as representatives of the people, 
owing allegiance only to the people in the House of 
Representatives, for example? 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, we do not envision 
a general rule of resignation because prohibited interests 
here are very specific. They refer to contracts or 
franchises or special privileges actually granted by the 
government, or a matter actually pending before any 
office or government wherein the member may act for 
his pecuniary benefit. So being merely a representative 
of the sector does not necessarily mean that there will 
be conflict of interests. It will have to be judged on a 
case-to-case basis. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

I suppose that if they are lawyers, let us say, prac- 
ticing in the Ministry of Labor and in the agrarian 
courts, they will be subject to the same restraints in 
Sections 18 and 19 as the other regularly elected 
Members of the House of Representatives. 

MR. AZCUNA. That is correct, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

I have another question concerning Section 22 on 
treaties and international agreements. May I know why 
the Committee would involve both the Senate and the 
House of Representatives in the ratification of a treaty 
or an international agreement; whereas under the 
previous Constitutions prevailing until the 1973 Consti- 
tution and in accordance with the practice worldwide, 
it is the Senate that ratifies treaties? 

MR. AZCUNA. The Committee will be happy to 
entertain any proposal to amend this portion. But the 
reason for the inclusion of the House of Representa- 
tives in the concurrence on treaties is that the Com- 
mittee believes that the House of Representatives 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


117 


represents the districts directly, the more populous 
representation of the people. We believe in institu- 
tionalizing people power, that treaties should be submit- 
ted to the representatives of the people, especially 
because these treaties may concern sovereignty and 
sovereign rights. But that will be open to amendments. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much for indicating 
openness on this matter. 

I always thought that the Senate and the House 
enjoy a kind of symmetry of exclusive powers. Ap- 
propriations bills may originate only in the House but 
by tradition, the Senate is the treaty-ratifying Chamber. 
Is it correct to say that according to Section 22, even 
/ executive agreements will have to be passed upon by 
the legislature? 

MR. AZCUNA. That is correct. 

MR. OPLE. An executive agreement may take the 
form of, let us say, the military bases agreement which 
is, from the standpoint of the United States, a mere 
executive agreement, but from the standpoint of the 
Philippines, a treaty fully ratified by the Senate of the 
Philippines with the binding force and effect of law on 
the Philippines. Would that be an example of an 
executive agreement? 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Since Section 22 provides that even such 
agreements should be subject to ratification by 
Congress, will this not lead to a repetition of the ignomi- 
nious situation of 1947 where the Philippines ratified a 
bases treaty? And on the other hand, the United States 
refused even to submit this agreement to the American 
Senate for ratification. So that, in effect, we have an 
asymmetry of indignity as I had occasion to refer to it 
earlier. 

Considering that there are many countries in the 
world, presumably including the foremost trading part- 
ners of the Philippines like Europe and Japan, which by 
law and tradition do not submit their executive agree- 
ments to their parliaments or legislature for ratification, 
would there not be a kind of asymmetry again and a 
certain auditing, not counting the concrete disad- 
vantages for this country? And executive agreement, let 
us say, with the Western European community is sub- 
mitted to our Senate for ratification and is given the 
dignity and force and effect of a complete treaty, while 
this is viewed, let us say, in Brussels as just one in a 
series of routine and perfunctory agreements they 
arrived at with other countries. Is that not a possibility? 

MR. AZCUNA. It is a possibility, and we will be 
happy to welcome suggestions, whether by way of 
requiring reciprocity or some other way to avoid such 
disparity. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

My last question will have to do with Section 28. This 
is about taxes and exemption from taxes such as in the 
case of religious, charitable and educational institutions, 
but my concern really is about the uniform standard of 
taxation. Elsewhere in the Constitutional Commission, 
especially in the Committee on Local Governments and, 
perhaps, in other committees as well, is a strong trend 
for decentralization or the grant of autonomy to regions 
and to specific cultural communities. Part of such grant 
is the power of taxation. But I do recall in the past and 
the lawyers know better about this, there were the 
recent cases in the Supreme Court. Was there not such a 
case in Ormoc City where the city government decided 
to exercise its autonomous power of taxation and then 
it was brought to the Supreme Court? I think they 
lost the case on a technicality. They were not violating 
a uniform tax standard required by the Constitution. 
They just forgot to speak in the plural of all the sugar 
centrals there, instead of designating by name for 
purposes of taxation, the only sugar mill in Ormoc City. 

In order to prevent further disputes of this nature, 
and in order to align Section 28 with the requirements 
of local autonomy, including the power of taxation at 
the local level, would the Committee consider at the 
proper time an amendment that would explicitly 
recognize the taxation power of local municipalities as 
part of a grant of autonomy, without having to violate 
the constitutional uniform taxation standard? 

MR. AZCUNA. The Committee will. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rigos be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, my question has 
something to do with line 7 on page 2 of the commit- 
tee report. Let me begin with line 4 which says: 

Each legislative district shall comprise, as far as practica- 
ble, contiguous, compact and adjacent territory, provided, 
however, that each city with a population of more than 
two hundred thousand, or each province, shall have at least 
one representative. 

Does the Committee mean this really, or should it not 
read: “with a population of no more than two hundred 
thousand”? 

MR. AZCUNA. The Committee means more than 
200,000. It the city has more than 200,000, then it shall 
have at least one representative. 

REV. RIGOS. Suppose it has 500.000, that is moie 
than . . . 


118 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


MR. AZCUNA. It can have more than one. It should 
have at least one representative. 

REV. RIGOS. The wording here is “with a popula- 
tion of more than two hundred thousand.” But, 500,000 
is more than 200,000. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes. 

REV. RIGOS. So, it will have one. 

MR. AZCUNA. At least one; it may have more. 

REV. RIGOS. On page 4, Section 13, line 17, says: 

There shall be a Commission on Appointments consist- 
ing of twelve Senators and twelve Members of the House of 

Representatives . . . 

Does the Committee mean that there will be 24 
members of the Commission on Appointments? 

MR. AZCUNA. That is correct, plus the ex officio 
Chairman, so 25 members. 

REV. RIGOS. Perhaps it is better to put the Pres- 
ident of the Senate in that line so that the reader of this 
Section will know right away that there are 25, rather 
than 24, members of the Commission on Appointments. 


Section 25, can 1 conclude that such a budget would not 
be authorized? 

MR. AZCUNA. It may come under special appropria- 
tions but not under the General Appropriations Bill 
because there is a provision on special appropriations 
also under Section 25 (4). 

MR. MONSOD. But Section 25 (4) also says: 

. . . and shall be supported by funds actually available as 

certified by the National Treasurer, or to be raised by a 

corresponding revenue proposal included therein. 

That kind of financing would not be allowed either 
under this paragraph. 

MR. AZCUNA. If it is not a revenue proposal, then 
it would not be allowed. 

MR. MONSOD. My apprehension. Madam President, 
is that under the principles of government budgeting, 
this limitation would be unduly restrictive of a growth 
budget. If we prime the economy, like the present state 
of our economy, there are ways of doing it and one of 
the more effective ways is by an expansionary monetary 
policy. This formulation might be unduly restrictive of 
the government options and flexibility in managing the 
economy. 


MR. AZCUNA. We will entertain an amendment to 
clarify the points raised by the Gentleman. 

REV. RIGOS. Thank you. 


MR. AZCUNA. We will be happy to entertain amend- 
ments to that effect, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 


intprnpii^^^i ^ ac * am . President, we have two mo 
Commissioner Mongol 1 " 1 ' ‘° ‘ he ‘° reCOg " i: 


nized. E PRES1DENT - Commissioner Monsod is recog 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, for the last inter- 
pellator, I ask that Commissioner Gascon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 


Committee a clarifkatory PreS ' dent ’ ma V 1 J ust ask t 
which talks about a budget l ' e f Stlonre S ardlng Section 

and proposed revenue fneasLeT^H b f SCd ° n eX ‘ St ‘ 
There seems to be a presum * a , nd ° f ex P enditur 
to be a balanced budget. Ptl ° n that !t is alwa y s g°* 

MR. AZCUNA. This is realh, u 
“pay-as-you-go” basis, Madam Pr d vi" What they c 
would be the presumption. * esident- Yes, th 


MR. MONSOD. Would this section then nre 
what they would call a growth budget where the 
deficit financed through issuance of money bt 
chases by the Central Bank of debt notes fro i 
government? The reason I am asking this, IV 
President, is that this year, there was a budget < 
ranging from P22 to P26 billion, and it we were to 


MR. GASCON. Thank you, Madam President. 

I beg to ask the members of the Committee very brief 
questions with regard to Section 2 which says. 

The Senate shall be composed of twenty-four Senators 
who shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of the 
Philippines, as may be provided by law. 

I would like to relate this section to Section 5, lines 
28 to 29, which reads: “and those who, as provided by 
law, shall be elected from the sectors and party list. 
Has the Committee contemplated that the Senate can as 
well be elected on a party list system? 

MR. AZCUNA. It is not expressly stated. Madam 
President, but if there is an amendment to that effect, 
we will be happy to consider it, especially because the 
party list system is most fit where there is a representa- 
tion at large of a constituency rather than of a single- 
member district. 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


119 


MR. GASCON. Does the Gentleman mean to say that 
a party list system is easily applicable on a national 
level, even more so than on a district-wide level? 

MR. AZCUNA. On a level where there is multirep- 
resentation such as the Senate elected at large. It is very 
easy to fit in a party list system of proportional rep- 
resentation because there is a bigger number elected 
from the same constituency. So, we can easily reckon, 
let us say, 10 percent of 24 — if we get 10 percent of 
the votes, then we get 10 percent of 24. 

MR. GASCON. So if we implement a party list 
system to the Senate that would provide for, let us say, 
greater access to more political parties in the Senate and 
would avoid monopoly of one, or dominance of one 
political party. Is that correct? 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, because under the traditional 
method of voting, for example, we vote for the Senate 
at large, a party that gets 5 1 percent of the votes gets 
all the 24 seats. 

MR. GASCON. Winner-take-all. 

MR. AZCUNA. It is a winner-take-all. So, the 49 
percent of the voters do not get any seat at all, whereas 
in a proportional representation, one version of which 
is the party list method, if a party gets or a group gets 
10 percent of the votes, then they get 10 percent of the 
24 seats. 

MR. GASCON. They are entitled to 10 percent of the 
24 seats? 

MR. AZCUNA. They are entitled to 10 percent, 
which, of course, is a fraction — 2.4 — but there will 
have to be mechanics on how to allocate fractions. 

MR. GASCON. Does the Gentleman think it is easier 
to implement on that level? 

MR. AZCUNA. It is normally easier to implement the 
party list or proportional representation system where 
there is a multiple representation of a single consti- 
tuency. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. I ask that Commis- 
sioner Monsod be recognized to ask one torgotten 
question, as he stated. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I just wanted to make a comment on 
the question of Commissioner Gascon. Actually, in the 
Senate we do not need to apply the party list system 


because it is already nationwide and from a political 
tactician’s point of view, there are ways to get the pro- 
portional representation. For a sectoral group, there are 
24 seats available, then get the sector to just vote for 
one; that is a negative for the 23. 

MR. GASCON. Let us concentrate on that issue on 
proportional representation. If it does not have to be a 
party list system so long as I shall see the Senate rep- 
resentation based on a proportionate number of votes 
cast for that particular candidate, then I can be assured 
that even a minority of five or 1 0 percent who voted for 
this particular candidate would be represented in the 
Senate. This would be very helpful in establishing 
democracy. 

MR. MONSOD. Actually, for the 24 Senators, a four- 
percent or five-percent vote gets only one seat. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, with regard to 
Section 22, I just want to clarify something on inter- 
national agreement. Would the Committee include there 
the restructuring agreement on our external debt with 
the consortium of banks? 

MR. AZCUNA. If it is a government-to-government 
agreement, Madam President, it would be included — 
but not private bank-to-bank agreement. 

MR. MONSOD. There could be financial institutions 
within the consortium which are government agencies. 

MR. AZCUNA. For instance, . . . 

MR. MONSOD. EXIM Bank. 

MR. AZCUNA. ... if it is with the IMF or EXIM 
Bank, these are not international subjects under inter- 
national law. These would not be covered. We are 
referring here to agreements between subjects of inter- 
national law. , 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized to ask some questions of Commissioner Monsod? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

We are still on the subject of sectoral representation. 
There are two provisions which may be affected by this 
percentaging - one of them is with respect to the 
creation of the Commission on Appointments. This is 
affected by proportional representation, specially as i 
affects the multisectoral representation. We are opeia 


120 


TUESDAY, JULY 22, 1986 


ing on a 20-percent basis and, as proposed, there are 24 
members in the Commission on Appointments. There is 
a provision directing that the appointments should be 
on the basis of proportional representation. Do I take it 
to mean that out of the 24 members in the Commission 
on Appointments at least 20 percent of 24 would come 
from the sectors? 

MR. MONSOD. Essentially, what we are saying is, 
there are 12 members of the House of Representatives 
and, therefore, every bloc of 8 percent would get one 
seat. 

MR. SUAREZ. Therefore, 20 percent of 12 will be 
about 2.4 and we would . . . 

MR. MONSOD. Maybe two, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. And what is one more seat among 
friends? Could we get two or three? We go to the 
matter of the creation of the electoral tribunal which 
is composed of nine members, six of whom will come 
from the Congress. So, again, invoking the 20 percent 
representation for the multisectoral groups, we would 
have 1.2 representation — 20 percent of 6 would be 1.2 
representation — from the multisectoral sector. 

MR. MONSOD. That is arithmetically correct, but at 
t is point we do not know the composition of the 20 
percent. It may well be that 60 percent of the 20 per- 
cent may come from two political parties because there 
is a maximum of, say, 30 percent of the 50 for each 


party. So it is possible that two parties may have 60 
percent of the 20 percent or 60 percent of 50 or 30 
seats. So, it would depend on how the 50 party list 
representatives realign among themselves. 

MR. SUAREZ. For the benefit of the future Members 
of both the Senate and the House of Representatives, 
what do we do with the fractional representation like .2 
and .8, or .4? 

MR. MONSOD. Does the Gentleman mean in deter- 
mining the allocation within the 20 percent? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Then, the way to do that is to list 
down everybody who has 2.5 percent at least. List them 
down and then divide the 50 by those within the list. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, to enable the Mem- 
bers to hold a caucus, I move for adjournment until 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

Let us all proceed to South Caucus Rooms A and B 
for our caucus. 

It was 5:42 p.m. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


121 


R.C.C. NO. 37 
Wednesday, July 23, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:49 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable Jose 
B. Laurel, Jr. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. LAUREL. Almighty God, even as the eagle flies 
at will in the infinite reaches of the skies, so let our 
vision soar untrammeled as we seek that radiant future 
we hope to ensure for our people in the Constitution we 

are writing. 

Let it be a future where all persons are born free, 
relishing their rights but always with deference to the 
rights of others and recognizing authority only as long 
as its highest commitment is to the strengthening and 
defense of liberty. 

Grant that the spirit of freedom shall always reign in 
our land, touching one and all like a benediction and 
igniting that divine spark in every human being that can 
make him, indeed, slightly “lower than angels” in this 
imperfect world. 

Grant us courage, that we may face up to the power- 
ful and defend those who are weak and oppressed. 

Grant us wisdom, that we may distinguish between 
what is right and what is just, for they are not always 
the same. 

Grant us candor, that we may be true to ourselves 
and so not false to others. 

Grant us strength when we are assailed by despair, or 
self-doubt, or temptation. 

And finally, Lord, grant the new Constitution grace 


and beauty of language, so that generations from now, 
when all of us here are gone, our people will still be 
moving reverently to the cadence of its thoughts. 

Bless us all, Eternal Spirit, and keep us free, forever 
and ever. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . . 

. . Present 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Nieva 

. . Present* 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Nolledo . . . . 


Azcuna 

. Present* 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Bacani 

. Present 

Padilla 

. . Present* 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Bernas 

. Present* 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present* 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

, . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

, . Present 

Suarez 


Foz 

Present 

Sumulong . . . 


Garcia 

. . Present* 

Tadeo 


Gascon 

. . Present 

Tan 


Guingona . . . 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . . 


Jamir 

. . Present 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Laurel 

. . Present 

Uka 


Lerum 

. . Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

, . . Present 

Maambong . . 
Monsod .... 

. . Present* 
. . Present 

Villegas 

. . . Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 34 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


122 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move for the 
approval of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence ) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we proceed to the 
Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 


posal for a non-nuclear provision in the Philippine 
Constitution. 

(Communication No. 283 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from Mr. Abraham M. Aboga, Associate 
Professor of Finance and Banking, University of the 
East, submitting constitutional proposals on monetary 
and fiscal policy. 

(Communication No. 284 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


The Secretary-General read the following Communi- 
cations, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 


Letter from Mr. Antonio A. dela Cruz, Captain, PA 
(Ret) > Resident, AFP, CDD, PERS Assn., Inc. ad- 
ressed to the Honorable Teodulo Natividad, submitting 

some proposals for the upliftment of the disabled 
soldiers. 

^80 - Constitutional Commission 
To the Committee on Social Justice. 


BallLsTitf '„n iC “° r B ' P,italino of Concepcior 
government with P a° P0Sm8 the P^ential form c 

ki 

councfl. qUalifiCa, '°" S “"‘oanS.rrr bamnga’ 

on986) niCa,i ° n N °' 281 - Constitutional Commissio 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Bias S pi^„ t, 
les, suggesting that former KBl/ofr^?’ u UbiC ’ Zamb: 
to run for public office in the fn m^ 3 S be disqualifie 
two consecutive terms anri p >rt ^° mmg electl0ns 
bases be retained ’ American ^ ^ ^ militar 

military, be required to dress civihan c 

off-base. properly when goir 


Communication from the Integrated Bar of the Philip- 
pines, Zamboanga del Sur and Pagadian City Chapter, 
signed by its Chairman, Judge Manolo P. Reyes, and 
other members, expressing its stand on some of the 
emerging issues in the Constitutional Commission. 

(Communication No. 285 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Salvador O. Oco of 13 Moonbeam St., 
Moonwalk Subd., Paranaque, Metro Manila, thru Minis- 
ter Juan Ponce Enrile of the Ministry of National 
Defense, submitting constitutional proposals for con- 
sideration by the Constitutional Commission. 

(Communication No. 286 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Petition from the Veterans Federation of the Philip- 
pines, Zamboanga del Sur Chapter, Pagadian City, 
signed by Mr. Eufemio C. Salera, Veterans District 
Commander, Zamboanga del Sur Chapter, proposing a 
presidential form of government with a unicameral 
legislature, among others. 

(Communication No. 287 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


(Communication No. 282 - Co„ stitutional Commissio „ 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication from the Alliance for Philippine Con- 
cerns, signed by Mr. Jorge A. Emmanuel Executive 
Secretary, and endorsed by the National Organization 
Against Nuclear Power and Weapons, submitting a pro 


MR. RAMA. I move that we close the period of 
sponsorship and debate on the Article on the Legislative 
so that we can proceed to the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. I do not understand. Are we 
excluding the provision on the terms of office? 

MR. RAMA. Yes. This will be taken up later in the 
period of amendments. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


123 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

CONSIDERATION OF C.R. NO. 22 
(Article on the Legislative/National Assembly) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the period of amendments on the Article 
on the Legislative. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? What 
does the Chairman of the Committee on the Legislative 
say? Are we ready to proceed? 

MR. DAVIDE. We are ready. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, may we call on the Chairman, 
Commissioner Davide, and the members of the Commit- 
tee on the Legislative. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Colayco be recognized to present an amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to propose an amendment on Section 19. 
Lines 2 up to 4 read as follows: 

No Senator or Member of the House of Representatives 

shall appear as counsel before any court which is not of 

collegiate composition . . . 

I would like to propose that the prohibition on the 
Senators and Members of the House of Representatives 
to appear as counsel before any court of justice be made 
absolute. My reason is that membership in the legisla- 
ture necessarily carries with it a special prestige and, 
therefore, constitutes an unfair advantage over the other 
party. That is one reason. Second, because of the same 
prestige, there is always the fear and suspicion on the 
part of the public that they can easily influence the 
mind of the members of the court in framing their 
decisions. 

We have decided in this Commission, especially in the 
Committee on the Judiciary, to frame a Constitution 
that will not only establish a system whereby the judi- 
ciary can really become independent from any pressure, 
but also will correct the impression among the people 
that it is subject to outside influence and to pressure 
from the government as well as from interested parties. 

One of the most common complaints of lawyers 
appearing in court is that the appearance of a Member 
of the legislature constitutes an unfair advantage. It is, 
therefore, for these reasons that I propose that the first 
line of Section 19 read as follows: “No Senator or 


Member of the House of Representatives MAY appear 
as counsel before any court.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the proposed 
amendment would, therefore, affect the succeeding lines 
where appearance would be allowed except in the cases 
therein provided. The Committee regrets that it cannot 
accept the proposal for the following reasons: First, 
insofar as influence by a Senator or a Member of the 
House of Representatives is concerned, the same can no 
longer obtain because firstly, under the proposed Article 
on the Judiciary, which was already approved on Third 
Reading, appointments to the judiciary will no longer be 
subject to confirmation by the Commission on Appoint- 
ments. Besides, appointments to the judiciary will be 
initiated by the Judicial and Bar Council which will be 
responsible for submitting a list of at least three for any 
vacancy. So, no Senator or ^lember ot the House of 
Representatives can unduly influence appointments to 
the judiciary. Secondly, we would be discouraging 
competent, highly qualified and capable lawyers to run 
for the position of Senator or Member of the Lower 
House. In short, we will be depriving both Houses of 
talents coming from the legal profession: lawmaking 
would really require talents from the legal profession. 

And finally, the appearance here is limited only to 
courts of collegiate composition. Necessarily, these 
courts would mean a court with more than two justices. 
Therefore, any undue influence cannot be expected 
because a Senator or a Member of the House of Rep- 
resentatives cannot be expected to influence more than 
two justices in a given collegiate court. 

MR. COLAYCO. I wish I could believe the sponsors. 

I have been in the judiciary for more than 1 5 years. 
Although I am glad to say that I was never subjected 
to pressures by luck or otherwise, I have seen it hap- 
pened; and although I can say that the majority of the 
justices have been faithful to their duties, there have 
been cases. 

It is true that under the new system of appointing the 
members of the judiciary, the influence of the Congress 
or the National Assembly, through the Commission on 
Appointments, is absent. But it cannot be denied that a 
legislator carries with him a certain aura of influence. He 
carries a certain clout whenever he appears before any 
government body which has any adjudicatory function 
at all. And members of the judiciary are very vulnerable 
to this insidious influence. 

It may be argued that insofar as the Supreme Court is 
concerned, the danger may be minimal because they 
have nothing more to expect as far as promotion is 
concerned. But what about those below the Supreme 
Court? For instance, the members of the Intermediate 
Appellate Courts and the Sandiganbayan always hope 
that they will be promoted. And like good men, they do 
not want to have any negative factor that may be an 
obstacle to their promotion. Legislators are influentia 
people whether they lift a finger or not. There is a wavs 


124 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


/ 


that fear in the mind of the member of the collegiate 
court that sometime in the future, he may need the 
help of the legislative member appearing before them, 
although unsolicited. 

In a collegiate court, there are at least three members 
but there is always the fear of backslapping. And given 
the usually supportive nature of our people, when they 
feel that there is apparently nothing improper, they 
would rather give their conformity in order to accom- 
modate a member of the collegiate court. 

These things have happened in the past and these may 
happen again. These are the reasons why I felt that to 
insulate our courts completely from any improper in- 
fluence, the Members of the National Assembly, both of 
the Upper and the Lower House, should be forbidden to 
appear before courts of justice. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I would like to 
support the amendment. May I be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, since I am prai 
ticing law, I do not want to be accused of trying t 
eliminate competition. But I do have the followin 
° serv j^ ons - The Chairman of the Committee is corre( 
w en e said that we have insulated the judiciary froi 
t . e I ^ ore P ern * c i° us forms of political interference i 
hnLc L 1C 6 ° n tbe Judiciar y> but the legislature sti 
consider 6 <? OWei , of the P urse - So, that is one factor t 
image with 6C ° nd tbe ° ld Con & ress had such a ba 
rather tha^th 68 ^ t0 . influence Piling. We woul 
elected devn^ m P3ld 3 8 °° d Salary and once the y ai 

abr,isr;y a h r “ to iawmak T 8 and forse 

/ be disqualified u^' In any case > the y wou W nc 
. court appearances b t emg legal consulta nts. It is onl 
else in order to imr^ We w * sb to eliminate above a 

because we LustTeZe 6 ^ ^ ^ the publi 

have had the so-called COl ? fldence in government. W 
our habits. H ° E * V r ° lut ;?"' “ - time to chan, 
example and to trulv m a r pubbp servants to lead b 

them the right salary it wil^^H S ' 1 think ’ if We giv 
yers from running for public "2 dls «>urage good lav 

of us who do practice I tv And finall y> thos 

Colayco. When one apnears mk ’ support Commissions 
has an advantage. the lat * 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President th n 
would like to reply. In the matter ^ the Committe 
was taken up by Commissioner ColLco°™h ^ ? 
cord of influence by the Members of rv, ’ 16 ^ mblllCi 
totally cut off by the app^S® 8 ^ 
Judiciary. All appointments to the judiciary will Da . 
through the Judicial and Bar Council composed P r 
seven members headed by the Chief Justice as ex offici 


chairman, a representative from the National Assembly 
and the Minister of Justice as ex officio members, and a 
nominee from the Integrated Bar of the Philippines, a 
law professor, a representative from the private sector 
and a retired Justice. They will submit a list of at least 
three for every vacancy. The President is to appoint 
only one from the three recommended and, therefore, 
the influence exerted by any Senator or Member would 
be all sound and theory. Secondly, the National As- 
sembly would still hold the purse for appropriations. 
The Article on the Judiciary already grants the judiciary 
fiscal autonomy and releases are to be regularly and 
automatically made. And so, we cannot perceive an 
undue influence or pressure by the use of the appro- 
priations authority of the legislature. 

On the matter of service, supposedly a total commit- 
ment to public service, we provided here a continuing 
legislative organ allowing only a recess of 30 days 
between adjournment of a session and the commence- 
ment of another regular session. Besides, the appearance 
will be limited merely to collegiate courts and, therefore, 
we believe that it will not really take much of the time 
of a lawyer since collegiate courts would have limited 
jurisdiction. 

And finally, on the matter of adequate compensation, 
we believe that until it is approved, the aspect of ade- 
quate compensation has no factual and legal basis. As a 
matter of fact, probably, the compensation may not at 
all be adequate. 

We would rather submit the matter to a vote by the 
body, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

May we address some questions to the distinguished 
proponent of the amendment? 

MR. COLAYCO. Of course. 

MR. SUAREZ. I heard the proponent mention that 
he has been serving the government, specifically the 
judiciary, for more than 15 years. His service has been 
very distinguished, I know that as a fact, having been in 
the practice of law, and I would like to respect his 
observations regarding this particular section. He is sug- 
gesting that after the word “court,” add the words “OF 
JUSTICE” and then put a period (.) and delete the 
other provisions governing the disqualification to appear 
in civil and criminal cases. Is my understanding correct? 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. The proponent is aware of the fact 
that there is now a provision proposed under the Article 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


^ 1 25 


on the Legislative that instead of holding only sessions 
for 100 days as in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions, it is 
contemplated that the Members of the Senate and the 
House of Representatives would have sessions the whole 
year until 30 days before the next regular session is 
called. 

MR. COLAYCO. In other words, it would be a full- 
time job. 

MR. SUAREZ. The proponent is aware of that situa- 
tion now. 

MR. COLAYCO. I think that would support my 
position. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. And that is one of the reasons 
why probably, he is agitating for the amendment of 
Section 19. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. There is a phrase here which reads: 
“shall appear as counsel.” I suppose the proponent is 
referring to a pesonal appearance as counsel. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. It would not preclude, for example, 
the law firm to which this Senator or Member of the 
House would be connected from appearing before any 
court? 

MR. COLAYCO. I would include that in my prohibi- 
tion. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, the proponent would 
prohibit even the law firm to which he or she may be a 
partner from appearing before any court of justice. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. The other point which we would like 
to clear up is, this prohibition would be only effective 
during the term or tenure of the Senator or the Member 
of the House. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. It would not preclude him or her 
from appearing in the courts after that. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I am against this 
proposed amendment because it would bar any member 
of the legislature from exercising his profession as a 
practicing lawyer for his appearance as counsel is 
already limited by the Constitution. 

If the limitation be made absolute, I do not believe 
it will be conducive to even good practicing lawyers 
aspiring to receive popular support for their elevation 
by election to the House or to the Senate. 

During my many years as Senator right after the 1957 
election, I refused to be a member of the Commission 
on Appointments for the simple reason that I was in the 
private practice of law. Now, to bar a lawyer-legislator 
from any appearance in the courts is, I think, an undue 
limitation. 

I heard Commissioner Romulo say that they should 
not appear but they can continue their consultancy 
work. In my opinion, there is absolutely no public 
policy to be enhanced by barring court appearances, 
even of Senators or Congressmen, provided they do not 
involve those cases that are presently prohibited in the 
Constitution. There is really no undue advantage of a 
practitioner-lawyer who is a Member of the legislature 
from appearing or even arguing in court. I think the 
more sinister influence of lawyers-legislators is when 
they use their influence behind the scenes, not in open 
court appearances. There are occasions when big law 
firms whose partners are of some renown do not per- 
sonally appear, not even in oral arguments before the 
Supreme Court, much less in the Intermediate Appellate 
Court and in the lower trial courts. But if influence is 
used indirectly, without appearing in court but through 
other extrajudicial connections, such influence is much 
worse and that is an insidious practice that should be 
condemned. But when a lawyer-legislator who is in the 
practice of law appears as any other practicing lawyer, 
even when he personally appears in court or argues the 
merits of the case he is handling and personally presents 
evidence in these courts, I do not believe there is any 
undue advantage. In fact, most judges do not yield to 
any political influence. But the influence, if any, which 
I deny, does not arise from the personal appearance in 
the practice of law. What I would more abhor is the 
backstage or nonappearance influence by some elements 
of those who are practicing law who may be legislators, 
or even if they are not legislators, those who exercise 
some kind of sinister influence, other than personal 
appearance in court. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. May the distinguished Commis- 
sioner Padilla yield to just one or two questions? 

MR. PADILLA. Gladly. 


126 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


MR. NATIVIDAD. In his long experience as a 
Member of the Senate, wherein the constitutional 
restrictions and limitations in the practice of law have 
been present also, did the Commissioner have any feel- 
ing or perception that the other professions which are 
equally involved are not being equally restricted? I 
mean, in the Congress, there are many professions 
involved. There are certified public accountants, land- 
owners and businessmen who sit in the board of corpo- 
rations and as legislators, they also sit in committees to 
draft the taxation measures. Why do we overly restrict 
the one old profession, the profession of law? I remem- 
ber, in my first term in Congress, I wanted to file a 
resolution asking that all Members of Congress declare 
themselves free of other stocks and other possessions in 
order to be able to address the problems more objective- 
ly. But if we will restrict and absolutely prohibit the 
practice of one profession, should we not also do that 
as far as the other professions are concerned, because 
from the five terms that I served, there are many pro- 
fessions involved in the Congress and there was no 
limit to it. We cannot all stop them from practicing then- 
profession. What is the Commissioner’s opinion on 
that? 


MR. PADILLA. That is why I am against an absolute 
prohibition of lawyers-legislators from allowing then- 
personal appearance in the courts of justice, except 
those cases that are provided in the Constitution. I 
accept these exceptions but not an absolute bar. I think 
the Gentleman is right. Why impose the bar only on 
lawyers? Is it because the majority of the members of 
the legislature are lawyers? Even to put some limita- 
tions and even prohibitions on the other professions 
would be very difficult to accomplish. But the Com- 
missioner is correct. As a matter of principle, if one 
proubition is imposed on lawyers, a similar prohibition 
an e reasonably imposed on other professions. 

in^ence A 0 7rM AD K If SP6ak ° f presti g e and the 
businessman-legisLt^S ° f C ° ngre u SS and we allow a 
be the equivalL of th/" 8386 m business > that w °uld 
enjoys. Does not ^ ^ 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I thank th P r 
you, Madam President. ™ Commissioner; thank 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 
niz™ PRESIDENT - Commissioner Tingson is recog- 

Pad® p<“ ' a * °" ~ of Honorable 

MR. PADILLA. Gladly. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, anyone should be 
satisfied by the fact that he has been elected to the 
prestigious office in the Senate, with its honor, high 
dignity and bright future. So, acceding to the amend- 
ment that he bar himself from the practice of law at 
least while he is a Senator, would that not be a reason- 
able request? 

MR. PADILLA. To be elected by the people, especial- 
ly on a nationwide basis, in the Senate is indeed a gift 
from the people and a significant privilege and a distinct 
honor. But under the 1935 Constitution, the compensa- 
tion of Senators was only P600 a month which was 
later increased to, I think, less than P2,000. Of course, a 
Member of the Congress was allotted sums appropriated 
for his staff and sometimes was given the so-called 
pork barrel privilege which was never reasonably ac- 
complished. In other words, that so-called pork barrel 
was an allocation of certain public funds for some 
public projects all over the country in accordance with 
suggestions but, as I have mentioned in my first speech, 
we might say here, the situation has always been that 
there have been so many appropriations and less actual 
collections that the allocations by Congress in the 
budget were never implemented by the President, and it 
required the Members of Congress, the Congressmen 
especially, to request the President to give priority to 
their respective pork barrel allocations. That made the 
Member of Congress dependent on the President. That 
is why I suggested that we eliminate this former prac- 
tice, or at least the future Congress should eliminate the 
practice of overappropriating public funds when they 
are not available. The “colatilla” or excuse is “subject 
to availability of funds.” But the funds are never avail- 
able and, therefore, those suggestions or projects sup- 
ported or encouraged or insinuated by the Members of 
Congress were never accomplished except at the discre- 
tion of the President who had more control over 
Congress. 

MR. TINGSON. A Senator should be satisfied with 
the honor and the privilege of serving in that very high 
category of membership in the Senate. 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. I think that is a great 
honor, short only of being president or vice-president 
because they are elected nationwide. But a legislator 
cannot support his family and the education of his 
children with only a privilege or honor. If a Member of 
Congress has always been in the practice of law and that 
is his legitimate means of livelihood, as well as the 
source of legitimate income to give his family and his 
children the proper support and education, why should 
he be barred from the exercise of that profession, 
especially when the electorate knew that prior to his 
election and before he entered the field of politics and 
subjected himself to popular election, he has been a 
practicing lawyer and that the exercise of his profession 
is his legitimate means of income? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


127 


MR. TINGSON. Finally, could the Commissioner 
please comment on the observation that the Senate is 
supposed to be composed of members who have already 
come of age, so to speak, and in a sense they have 
already succeeded financially in life, for it is a fact that 
one cannot be elected to that body unless somehow he 
is already above average, financially speaking? I under- 
stand that when one becomes a Senator, all kinds of 
organizations’ and business’ managerial or directorship 
positions are given to him. Are those not enough? 

MR. PADILLA. The latter portion of the statement 
would entail more expenses than income and I disagree 
with the common impression that one cannot be elected 
senator unless he is wealthy or he is rich. In fact, in the 
1957 election, the light remark of some observers was 
that Rogelio de la Rosa was elected because he was a 
movie star; and that Ambrosio Padilla was also elected 
because he was a basketball star. And we were the only 
two among the eight good candidates of the Liberal 
Party to the Senate who survived. In the previous elec- 
tions, as a matter of political history in the 1951, 1953 
and 1955 elections, the Nacionalista Party succeeded in 
having its eight senatorial candidates win in said three 
successive national elections. As I said before, no Liberal 
candidate, who counted among the candidates who were 
very prominent, illustrious and competent, was elected. 

I do not know why; maybe temporary prejudice or 
some criticism against the Liberal Party then. But one 
cannot win a nationwide election only with money. In 
fact, many candidates have won despite the lack of 
money. That is a historical fact. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Colayco is 
recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. I would like to say a few words 
before submitting my proposals to the body for a vote. I 
am one of the many persons who have a very high 
respect for Commissioner Padilla. I am afraid I did not 
know that my proposal will be so unpopular especially 
with the lawyers who are Members of the legislature. 
As I said, the main thrust of my proposal is to avoid 
any unintended pressure which a Member of the legis- 
lature, probably without even any intention to do so, 
exerts on the judiciary, because everybody knows that 
he is influential. Everybody knows that he has a clout in 
many matters. Commissioner Padilla said that he is more 
against the practice of behind-the-scene pressures. This 
admission I think bolsters my main premise that there is 
always the threat, the danger that Members of the legis- 
lature may be tempted to pressure justices of the 
collegiate courts in the formulation of their decisions. 
We require the members of our Cabinet to divest them- 
selves of any connection or ownership in businesses 


connected with or which may be influenced by the port- 
folio which they accept. And this is a rule in all govern- 
ment offices. Public office carries with it inhibitions. In 
the case, therefore, of Members of the legislature who 
happen to be lawyers, they have to choose, but they 
cannot have both, in the interest of the public. Members 
of the legislature are not popularly known to be receiv- 
ing low salaries. Certainly, the occupation is not known 
to be impecunious. So, the fear that by depriving them- 
selves of the practice of law when they become 
Members of the legislature is not as real as it is intended 
to be shown. And besides, no one is forced to run for 
Congress; so, if this prohibition is approved, we do not 
have to have lawyers in the legislature, and if they want 
to run for it, then they know that they cannot make use 
of any influence of their profession. 

With this reply, I would like to ask that the proposal 
be submitted to a vote. I would like to read my pro- 
posal, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. COLAYCO. The amendment is on Section 19, 
page 6, lines 2 to 4. I would like to clarify that my 
proposal covers only the personal appearance of the 
Members of the House of Representatives and of the 
Senate. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, how would the proposed 
amendment be? 

MR. COLAYCO. It will read: “No Senator or Mem- 
ber of the House of Representatives MAY PERSON- 
ALLY appear as counsel before any court OF JUS- 
TICE.” With this prohibition, the subsequent lines will 
be covered already. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, lines 4 to 17 will 
be covered? 

MR. COLAYCO. Up to line 10. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote? 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Colayco, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 25 votes in favor and 10 against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Romulo is 
recognized. 


128 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. The next proponent of an amend- 
ment is Commissioner Regalado. Before I call on him, 
may I just make an announcement. I have so far 16 
Members listed for amendments, and I propose that 
instead of going through this rigmarole of anterior 
amendments, when the Commissioner stands up to 
make an amendment, let him complete all of the amend- 
ments that he wants to make. Would the House favor 
that? I- see that they are shaking their heads to indicate 
“yes.” 

So, may I ask that Commissioner Regalado be recog- 
nized, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President. 

My first proposed amendment is addressed to the 
Chairman and members of the Committee. It is on 
Section 19, particularly the last sentence thereof, lines 
15 to 17, which provides: 

He shall not intervene in any matter before any office of 
the government for his pecuniary benefit. 

I notice that this was taken from the 1973 Constitu- 
tion. 


esterday, I took note of the comments of Commis 
sioner Quesada regarding the possibility where a legis 
may Ee retained by a multinational firn 
to nrnvp 6 61 ^ ent Pecuniary benefit there may be hari 
retainer ^ same lawyer-legislator, to favor hi 
pose. So bv r0d y ce bdls in the Congress for the pur 
pose to have the f n ^ amendment by addition, I pro 
OR WHERF HF mav? phrase added after “benefit” 

acc™nt E of ms Y 0FHCE LL ^ UPOt t T0 ACT 

wording in tho ioKe hrlCE. This is also the exac 
entire 193 t C °" stitu «°n, so much so that th, 

read: “He shatl’ 7 ^ ie P r0 P°sed amendment, shal 
office of the an 00 intervene m any matter before an> 
WHERE HF m°a' vTc" 1 ^° r P ecun i ar y benefit OF 

ac H c E oun“ fh, Y soff'ce L - LED W0N 70 act 


happily accepts^the C ° mmitt ' 

THE PRESIDENT Will 

the proposed amendment aS > ^? miSS1 ° ner Regalado rei 

MR. REGALADO OR u, U r nr 
CALLED UPON TO ACT HE MAY B 

OFFICE. I am using thf constih.f ^ AC ^ 0UNT . OF H1 

1935 Constitution for this purpose. 0 provlslon in tl 

• M J^f SU ^ REZ - 1 f adam Pre sident, may I be reco 
nized for only one clanficatory question? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog 
nized. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I am a little intrigued by the phrase “for his pecunia- 
ry benefit.” This is an expression that may be misinter- 
preted and distorted. In other words, this practically 
assumes a situation where he can intervene if it is for the 
pecuniary benefit of one of his relatives, for example. 
Does the proponent envision a situation like that? 

MR. REGALADO. That is the proposal of the Com- 
mittee itself and which they took, I assume, from the 
1 973 Constitution. 

MR. SUAREZ. No. I do not believe that this particu- 
lar phrasing was taken from the' 1973 Constitution. I 
take it that this is a new provision. But it may give the 
impression of allowing his relatives to benefit pecuniari- 
ly from his intervention. So, would the proponent 
consider this in his proposed amendment? 

MR. REGALADO. May we hear from the Committee 
first because this is their original wording? I merely 
added that 1935 clause. 

MR. SUAREZ. I am sorry. I will address this to the 
distinguished sponsor of the committee report. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide may 
answer. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President, the sentence 
“He shall not intervene in any matter before any office 
of the government for his pecuniary benefit” is taken 
from Section 11 of the 1973 Constitution. The qualifi- 
cation “pecuniary benefit” would either be direct or 
indirect. 

MR. SUAREZ. With that clarification, I will not 
propose any amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Regalado has been accepted by the 
Committee. 

Is there any objection? 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yesterday, Madam President, 
when I stood up during the period of interpellations, I 
mentioned that at the proper time, I would move for 
the deletion of that phrase. The Committee members 
said that they were willing to consider that amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. That can be introduced as an amend- 
ment to the amendment, Madam President, but it was 
not touched by the amendment of Commissioner 
Regalado. He only added a clause. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. So, at the proper time, that 
can be reintroduced or can it be introduced now? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


129 


MR. REGALADO. I still have some other amend- 
ments. As stated by the Floor Leader, one proponent of 
amendments can state all of his proposed amendments 
on one occasion. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote? 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment? 

MR. ROMULO. They want the amendment to be 
read again. 

MR. DAVIDE. May we request Commissioner Rega- 
lado to read again the amendment for the benefit of the 
Commissioners? 

MR. REGALADO. The last sentence of Section 19, 
appearing on lines 15, 16 and 17, will now read: “He 
shall not intervene in any matter before any office of 
the government for his pecuniary benefit OR WHERE 
HE MAY BE CALLED UPON TO ACT ON ACCOUNT 
OF HIS OFFICE.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I ask Commissioner Regalado 
to read that again because the sentence seems awk- 
ward at present? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Regalado 
please read again. 

MR. REGALADO. “He shall not intervene in any 
matter before any office of the government for his 
ecuniary benefit OR WHERE HE MAY BE CALLED 
UPON TO ACT ON ACCOUNT OF HIS OFFICE.” 

BISHOP BACANI. Does Commissioner Regalado 
mean that he may not intervene when he is called upon 
on account ot his office? 

MR. REGALADO. What it means is “or in any 
matter where he may be called upon to act on account 
of his office.” That is the exact wording of the 1935 

Constitution. 

BISHOP BACANI. But the first words say: “He shall 
not intervene. . .” 

MR. REGALADO. . . in any matter before any 
office of the government for his pecuniary benefit OR 
WHERE HE MAY BE CALLED UPON TO ACT ON 
ACCOUNT OF HIS OFFICE.” And so, in repeating the 
phrase, there is a diaresis there but this refers to 
“matter” as the antecedent. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that clear? Is Commissioner 
Bacani satisfied? 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Regalado which was accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. REGALADO. My second proposed amendment 
is with respect to Section 22, subsection (1), and the 
amendment that I propose is by way of deletion and 
transposition. This subsection (1) states that: 

No treaty or international agreement shall be valid and 
effective unless concurred in by a majority of all the 
Members of the Senate and of the House of Representa- 
tives. 

This would appear to be a duplication of exactly the 
same provision appearing in the proposed Article on the 
Executive, particularly Section 20 thereof. 

In the 1935 Constitution, this particular provision 
was also placed under the Article on the Executive, 
Section 10, subparagraph (7) thereof; and, I think, 
logically, it should be there because it speaks of the 
treaty-making power of the President which, of course, 
is subject to legislative concurrence. And because of the 
bicameral form that we have adopted, we in the Com- 
mittee on the Executive intend to have this concurrence 
raised to two-thirds vote of the Senate, as it was in the 
1935 Constitution. 

So, my proposal, therefore, is that subsection (1) of 
Section 22 be deleted and transposed, as we have pro- 
vided, to the Article on the Executive because they are 
virtually of the same substance. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the Committee 
agrees to its transfer to the Article on the Executive. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee agrees? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other manifestation? 

Is there any objection to the proposed deletion of sub- 
paragraph (1) of Section 22 which was accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. REGALADO. On subsection (2), I have a pro- 
posal by way also of transposition. Subsection (2) reads: 

The Congress, by a vote of two-thirds of the Members ot 
each House, shall have the sole power to declare the exist- 
ence of a state of war. 

My proposal is that this should constitute the first 
sentence of Section 23, which starts with “In times of 
war or other na-trotfaT emergency, . . .” so that there is a 
more compact relation between the declaration ot wai 
as well as the powers that the President may be grante 
by the legislature in such a situation. 


BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 


130 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. So, there will be no Section 22? 

MR. REGALADO. I will now propose something for 
Section 22, as I have already told the Chairman of the 
Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. DAVIDE. We will seek for a clarification. In 
other words, under the proposal of the proponent, para- 
graph 2 of Section 22 will now become paragraph 1 of 
Section 23? 


In the present Constitution that we are framing, we 
have also saddled the Supreme Court with some addi- 
tional functions and duties. So, my amendment would 
read as follows: NO LAW SHALL BE PASSED IN- 
CREASING THE APPELLATE JURISDICTION OF 
THE SUPREME COURT AS PROVIDED IN THIS 
CONSTITUTION WITHOUT ITS ADVICE AND CON- 
CURRENCE. That would be Section 22 in lieu of those 
that we have already transposed. 

MR. DAVIDE. May we have it again, Madam Pres- 
ident? 


MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. And Section 23, beginning with 
the words “In times of war or other national emergen- 
cy, . . .” will be considered as paragraph 2 of that 
particular section? 

MR. REGALADO. That is correct, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. We have no objection, Madam Pres- 
ident. However, we would suggest that what now 
appears to be Section 23 should be changed to Section 
22 . 

MR. REGALADO. I am intending to propose an 
amendment which will become Section 22, if the Com- 
mittee will accommodate me. 

PRESIDENT. Can we hear the proposed Section 


MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 

Committee 1 wJlbeL me o Chairman of 

of the Committee m thlS ’ dunng a meet 

prohibition against Conw JudlCiary ’ we con sidere< 
Court by investing th P ? 6SS overloadm g the Su Pre 
other cases to fall T' With S ° m£ 

was explained to us bfchi?f w® jurisdiction 
Pambansa Big. i29 whh ? , Justl . Ce Tee hankee. Ba 

tion, of course because it u * V1 .° atmg the Consti 
tion of jurisdiction but m addit^^f 0 ” ° f ^ 
increased the appellate iurkrT *- tl0n ? f Junsdictl 
Court by requiring that all ” dlCtl0n ,° f the Supre 

Labor Relations cLmLtn a ? 10 n S fr ° m the Natio 

like that of the Director of Labor'S ? ^ ° ffl 
should be within the anneh.^ 10nS Commissi 

Supreme Court exclusively P Al so e J Unsdlctl ° n of 
added exclusive appellate iurisdiVr 6 S ! me Act furt 
Court by requiring that all appeals fy n the Sl , ipre 
awards of the Central Board of A L f ° rders 
should also be directly and exclusively "made^ , P 0 P ' 
Supreme Court. The net result was that the Sunre 
Court was unduly swamped with a number of cases 
review as shown in the statistics submitted by Just 
Teehankee. 


MR. REGALADO. It will read: NO LAW SHALL BE 
PASSED INCREASING THE APPELLATE JURISDIC- 
TION OF THE SUPREME COURT AS PROVIDED IN 
THIS CONSTITUTION WITHOUT ITS ADVICE AND 
CONCURRENCE. It will be noted that mention was 
made only of appellate jurisdiction because the original 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is not always ex- 
clusive; it is generally concurrent with the regional trial 
courts or the intermediate appellate courts. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this Section 22 accepted? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee through Commis- 
sioner Aquino would seek some clarification before 
stating its position, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino will please 
proceed. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I remember that in the interpellation on the Article 
on the Judiciary, I asked precisely on whether the 
legislature shall be empowered to increase or diminish 
the jurisdiction of the courts, and there was a categori- 
cal answer from Justice Concepcion that the provisions 
of the judiciary are full and plenary and that it shall not 
authorize in any way the legislature to alter the juris- 
diction of the courts. I was wondering that in the light 
of this reply from the Committee on the Judiciary, the 
proposal might be an unnecessary surplusage on the 
Article on the Legislative. 

MR. REGALADO. No, Madam President. Allow me 
to clarify that. If I recall correctly, what the Commis- 
sioner was discussing with Commissioner Concepcion 
was the matter of the rules to be adopted by the 
Supreme Court which, however, the legislature may 
repeal, alter or supplement. With respect to her observa- 
tion, as formulated, the jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court now is exactly the same as it was in the 1973 
Constitution, which was a little of an improvement over 
that in the 1935 Constitution. Yet, one will note that 
in spite of the provisions of the 1973 Constitution 
enumerating the original and appellate jurisdiction of 
the Supreme Court, that did not prevent Congress from 
thereafter adopting the Judiciary Reorganization Act, 


WEDNESDAY, jULY 23, 1986 


131 


Batas Pambansa Big. 129 in 1980, adding more cases for 
the appellate jurisdiction or review of the Supreme 
Court. In other words, even standing as it is now on the 
matter of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in the 
Article on the Judiciary, there is still no prohibition 
against Congress throwing in so many more cases to an 
already overburdened Supreme Court with a reduced 
membership. That was one of the matters explained to 
us by Justice Teehankee when he cited figures on how 
Batas Pambansa Big. 129 flooded them with labor cases 
which have been very well handled by the Intermediate 
Appellate Court. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, after the explana- 
tion and taking into account a recognition of the right 
or authority of the National Assembly to apportion the 
jurisdiction of the different courts which by the way 
was also deleted from the Article on the Judiciary be- 
cause it is an inherent power, and realizing that there is 
really a need to restrict the authority of the National 
Assembly to increase the appellate jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court, the Committee accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. We now have two proposed 
amendments, to delete and have a new Section 22. 

MR. REGALADO. The original Section 22 was 
deleted and transposed. Section 22 will read: NO LAW 
SHALL BE PASSED INCREASING THE APPELLATE 
JURISDICTION OF THE SUPREME COURT AS PRO- 
VIDED IN THIS CONSTITUTION WITHOUT ITS 
ADVICE AND CONCURRENCE. 

MR. DAVIDE. “ITS” would mean the Supreme 
Court. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Regalado which is a 
new provision of Section 22 and which has been ac- 
cepted by the Committee on the Legislative? 

MR. RODRIGO. May I just ask one question, Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. The prohibition is only against 
increasing; how about decreasing? 

MR. REGALADO. Under the provisions of the 
Article on the Judiciary, since that jurisdiction is 
granted to the Supreme Court by constitutional fiat, 
to decrease that on the part of the legislature would be 
unconstitutional. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, the legislature does not have 
the power anyway to decrease. 


MR. REGALADO. It cannot decrease because it is a 
constitutional conferment. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, the concern of the two amend- 
ments is only about increasing. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to 
pose an inquiry to Commissioner Regalado. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. What will happen now to the 
present laws authorizing appeal to the' Supreme Court, 
like the Labor Code on decisions of the NLRC, P.D. 

No. 902A on jurisdiction over appeals from the deci- 
sions of the Securities and Exchange Commission? Do 
we understand it right that these laws shall exist until 
repealed? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, since this constitutional pro- 
vision would not be self-executing, there must, of course, 
be an enabling law repealing Batas Pambansa Big. 129 
with respect to appeals from the NLRC and the CBAA. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other manifestation? 

Commissioner Colay co is recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. I would like to suggest something, 
Madam President. 

Under the Article on the Judiciary, Section 2, the 
Commission approved this provision: “The National 
Assembly shall have the power to define, prescribe and 
apportion the jurisdiction of the various courts, but may 
not deprive the Supreme Court of its jurisdiction over 
cases enumerated in Section 7 hereof.” 

I feel that the proposed new section under the Article 
on the Legislative would fit here better than the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Regalado. 

MR. REGALADO. Unfortunately, the Article on the 
Judiciary was already approved on Third Reading. 

Madam President, I have been asked by the Floor 
Leader to read this amendment all over again, which 
will now be Section 22. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please pro- 
ceed. 

MR. REGALADO. It will read: NO LAW SHALL BE 
PASSED INCREASING THE APPELLATE JURISD1<£ 
TION OF THE SUPREME COURT AS PROVIDED M 


132 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


THIS CONSTITUTION WITHOUT ITS ADVICE AND 
CONCURRENCE. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other manifestation? 
Are we ready to vote now? 

Is there any objection to this proposed amendment 
which would be Section 22 and which has been ac- 
cepted by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

The next proposed amendment is on Section 23, 
transposing the second paragraph of the original Section 
22 to be the first paragraph of Section 23 which has 
been accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Sarmiento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


INITIATIVE”? Will this be unqualified except their 
own voluntariness to participate? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. Does not the Commissioner anticipate 
the possibility of Cabinet members or their deputies just 
flooding the House of Representatives or the Senate just 
to ventilate their own petty or significant grievances and 
muddle with the proceedings of the House? 

MR. SARMIENTO. The Members of the House or of 
the Senate will be there to check the ventilation of 
petty sentiments, and if they think that the sentiments 
that are being aired are petty, they can easily terminate 
the answers, not necessarily the interpellations. 

MS. AQUINO. My personal concern is that this pro- 
posed amendment, being unqualified and unconditional, 
may destroy the essence of the Question Hour. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I am willing to submit the matter. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, my first 
amendment is with respect to Section 20, page 6, lines 
18 to 24, on the matter of Question Hour, which reads: 

There shall be a Question Hour at least once a month or as 
often as the Rules of the Senate or the House of Rep- 
resentatives may provide, which shall be included in the 
agenda of each House, during which the Members of the 

answer 311 de P udes ma Y b e required to appear and 

House qU6Stl0nS and interpellations by Members of the 

My amendment is an amendment by addition. After 

OWN INITIATIVE OR 3 A 9 ma W ° rds UP0N THEIR 
THE R *° by 

the words “by Members of !?’ 3 " d then delete 
pellations.” ° f the House after “inter- 

of the^ommittee? Plam ’ Madam Presid ent and member: 

and tL^deputi^lho 616 T ^ embers of the Cabine 
patriotism and public serving W ? h 3 deep sense 0 
Congress without waiting to ’ t0 appear befor( 
tions and interpellations.So thlit^ ^ 3nSWer qUeS 
amendment by addition Is the r ^ 1 proposed thi: 
accommodate my humble suggestion? 1111111166 WllUng * 

MR. DAVIDE. Before arrnmm a 

amendment, Commissioner Aquino VoU^likeTSl 
some clanficatory questions. lo as 


MR. ROMULO. May I interrupt, Madam President? 
There are some Commissioners who will propose the 
deletion of Section 20. So, this is one time where I 
think the rule on anterior amendments applies. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 11:12 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:32 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Sarmiento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I am withdraw- 
ing my amendment by addition but with reservations 
that should the amendment by deletion to be proposed 
by Commissioner Monsod be disapproved, then I will 
proceed with my amendment by substitution and 
addition. 

THE PRESIDENT. The request is noted. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Gladly. 

MS. AQUINO. What are the conditions why the Com- 
missioner suggested the phrase “UPON THEIR OWN 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


133 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, actually we were 
going to propose not a deletion but a substitution which 
would consolidate the proposals of several people in- 
cluding Commissioners Sarmiento and Suarez, but we 
will do that at the appropriate time. We just want to 
state some of the reasons we are proposing this change. 

Due to the separation of powers between the execu- 
tive and the legislative and the fact that the assembly- 
men or congressmen are not going to be members of the 
Cabinet, this procedure really would result in inequality 
between the two independent branches of government. 
The purpose of the Question Hour historically was 
really for Members of the legislature who are in the 
executive to answer to their peers and, therefore, the 
Question Hour is conducted on a peer basis. In a separa- 
tion of powers between the executive and the legis- 
lative, the members of the Cabinet have to go through 
the Commission on Appointments in the first place and 
the legislative acts on development programs, tariffs, 
duties, and so on. The requirement where Cabinet mem- 
bers can be mandated to appear before the legislative 
and to account for their actions really puts them on 
unequal terms with the legislators. The Cabinet mem- 
bers are purely alter egos of the President. They are 
no longer Members of the legislature, and to do so 
would violate the separation of powers of the executive 
and the legislative branches. However, we recognize 
that there should be a mechanism by which the Cabinet 
members may be summoned and may, even on their 
own initiative, appear before the legislature because this 
would promote coordination without subordinating one 
body to another. That is why we are willing to suggest a 
substitute provision that would reflect these sentiments. 

May I ask Commissioner Suarez to do it, Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us hear Commissioner Suarez. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

Here is the proposed amendment by substitution and 
this was taken verbatim from the provisions of Section 
24. under the Article on the Legislature in the 1935 
Constitution. So Section 20 as proposed to be amended 
would read as follows: THE HEADS OF DEPART- 
MENTS UPON THEIR OWN INITIATIVE OR UPON 
THE REQUEST OF EITHER HOUSE MAY APPEAR 
BEFORE AND BE HEARD BY SUCH HOUSE ON 
ANY MATTER PERTAINING TO THEIR DEPART- 
MENTS, UNLESS THE PUBLIC INTEREST SHALL 
REQUIRE OTHERWISE AND THE PRESIDENT 
SHALL SO STATE IN WRITING. WRITTEN QUES- 
TIONS SHALL BE SUBMITTED TO THE PRESIDENT 
OF THE SENATE OR THE SPEAKER OF THE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AT LEAST THREE 
DAYS BEFORE A SCHEDULED APPEARANCE. IN 
TERPELLATIONS SHALL NOT BE LIMITED TO 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS, BUT MAY COVER MAT- 
TERS RELATED THERETO. THE AGENDA SHALL 
SPECIFY THE SUBJECTS OF THE APPEARANCE. 


WHEN THE SECURITY OF THE STATE SO RE- 
QUIRES AND THE PRESIDENT SO STATES IN 
WRITING, THE APPEARANCE SHALL BE CON- 
DUCTED IN EXECUTIVE SESSION. 

That is the proposed amendment by substitution to 
Section 20 of the proposed draft. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. DAVIDE. Do we understand from the propo- 
nents that we will retain, therefore, the portion of the 
original Section 20, beginning with the sentence: 

Written questions shall be submitted to the President of 

the Senate or the Speaker of the House of Representa- 
tives . . . 

et cetera, up to the end? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is correct, except that we will 
delete the words “Question Hour” and change them 
with the word APPEARANCE as they appear on lines 
27, 29 and 31, then we incorporate Section 24 of the 
1935 Constitution, Article VI. It is a happy blending. 

MR. DAVIDE. There is indeed a happy blending of 
the pertinent section of the 1935 Constitution and the 
section on the Question Hour of the 1973 Constitution. 
However, we would like to find out from the proponent 
if the appearance of the head of the department may be 
made mandatory. 

MR. SUAREZ. No, that is why we are utilizing the 
wording of the 1935 Constitution which says: “may 
appear.” 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, he cannot be required 
to appear, and if he will not appear, he cannot be com- 
pelled to do so? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is correct. S 

MR. DAVIDE. So, on the other hand, if the minister 
or the head of the department at his own initiative 
would demand that he be allowed to appear, neither the 
Senate nor the House of Representatives can reject such 
a demand? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right; and the only qualifica- 
tion is if the President shall so state in writing that the 
public interest shall require otherwise; meaning, the 
nonappearance of the department head concerned. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is exactly the point. If the 
minister would demand that he be allowed to appear, 
then he can compel either House. 

MR. SUAREZ. No, I think the Commissioner did not 
get the point. It is only upon request. 

MR. DAVIDE. Upon request? 


134 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. But if it is on the initiative of the head 
of the department; in other words, if he volunteers to 
appear, can he be refused by either House? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, since the proposal is 
rather long, may we request that the same be typewrit- 
ten and distributed to the Members for their study. In 
the meantime, probably we can proceed to the other 
sections sought to be amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let copies of the proposed 
amendment be made. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento 
be recognized to continue his proposed amendment. 


Madam President, we will also propose to include in that 
particular amendment, if it would be accepted by Com- 
missioner Sarmiento, to delete the “s” in the words 
“Senators” and “Members” on line 2; and then on line 
3, between the word “be” and the phrase “TO SERVE 
THE UNEXPIRED TERM,” we insert a comma (,). 

MR. SARMIENTO. Gladly accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. DAVIDE. We accept the amendment, as 
amended, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment on lines 2 and 3 of page 3. 

Will the sponsor please read the provision as amended? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. My second amendment is with 
respect to Section 10, lines 9 to 11, which states: 

However, it may be called to session at any time by the 
President to consider such subjects or legislation as he may 
designate. 

After the word “designate,” I propose the inclusion 
? T JiV 0llowin 8 addit ional words: OR BY TWENTY- 
HVE PERCENT OF THE MEMBERS OF CONGRESS; 

th no * ord y ' 3e President who will have 

Derrtnt h T * w Ca11 the Con g ress to session, but also 25 
30 percent ^ Members of Con g ress - It could be 25 or 

MR. DAVIDE. Would that be on line 10? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Lines 10 to 1 1 of Section 10. 

since^undel^m 6 ' W& fed that U might not be necessary, 
Houses will he ^ pi ?. posed draft > the sessions of both 
The conveL, ^*5 nuoU8 Until about 30 days before 
LssirTruploXS", ‘ h ; t f0ll0wi "8 regular 
Will be its sessions. H ° determme h °w long 

MR. SARMIENTO. So with that 
withdraw my amendment by addition. manifestatl0n > 1 

One last point and this is in „ 

jzi : ug s I'sS rs 

UNEXPIRED TERM after “as the case may be.” 

MR. DAVIDE. We are glad that that matter is pointec 
out because that was really deleted by inadvertence 


MR. DAVIDE. So, the two lines, as amended, will 
now read: “. . . vacancy occurs to elect the Senator or 
Member of the House of Representatives, as the case 
may be, TO SERVE THE UNEXPIRED TERM.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, the amendment I 
propose to offer will be on page 9, Section 27, para- 
graph 1, lines 2 1 to 23. The sentence there reads. 

The President shall act on every bill passed by the 

Congress within thirty days after the date of receipt there- 
of; otherwise, it shall become a law as if he had signed it. 

Under this provision, it is very difficult or almost 
impossible to verify whether or not the President has 
acted on the bill within 30 days. What I propose to do is 
to change the language so that there will be a mechan- 
ism for verifying whether or not the President has acted 
on the bill within the prescribed period. So, I propose to 
delete the phrase “act on every bill passed by the 
Congress” and in lieu thereof insert the phrase COM- 
MUNICATE HIS VETO OF ANY BILL TO THE 
HOUSE WHERE IT ORIGINATED, so, the sentence 
now will read: “The President shall COMMUNICATE 
HIS VETO OF ANY BILL TO THE HOUSE WHERE IT 
ORIGINATED within thirty days after the date of 
receipt thereof; otherwise, it shall become a law as if he 
had signed it.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this acceptable? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, before accepting or 
rejecting the proposal, Commissioner Guingona would 
like to propound a question. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 



THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. I presume that when Commis- 
sioner Bernas talks of communication, he is referring to 
notification in writing. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. GUINGONA. Not oral? 

FR. BERNAS. I refer to notification or communica- 
tion in writing. 

MR. GUINGONA. But if the effect of that noncom- 
munication is that the bill shall become a law as if he 
had signed it, is there need for the President to com- 
municate his veto? 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely, unless we have this, the 
President could sit on that bill for a hundred days and 
then when we ask him, “What have you done with it? ” 
he could very well say, “I vetoed it ten days after you 
gave it to me,” and he presents us a bill that is vetoed 
only on that day itself but dated so many months ago. 

MR. GUINGONA. I see, thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized to ask a few questions of the distinguished propo- 
nent? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

In the second sentence of this particular section, 
there is a statement here which reads: 

If he approves the same, he shall sign it, otherwise, he 

shall veto it and return the same with his objections to the 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY . . .” 

That is a situation different from the one the Com- 
missioner seeks to amend because what he seeks to 
amend has something to do with nonaction rather than 
a positive action like a veto. Would not his proposed 
amendment be more relevant to the vetoing situation? 

FR. BERNAS. If we put in there that he must veto a 
bill within 30 days and if he does not, that means he 
accepted it, then it would have the same effect. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is exactly what I am trying to 
point out. Can we reword it the way the Commis- 
sioner and I are thinking about this? 

FR. BERNAS. We can reword it especially if it is 
acceptable to the Committee. But the idea is there that 
if he is going to veto the bill, he must veto it within 30 
days. 


MR. SUAREZ. Yes, I agree to that. 

FR. BERNAS. And there must be a way of verifying 
whether he vetoed it or not. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. GUINGONA. Instead of just referring to the 
veto, why not refer to the action whether it is a veto or 
approval? The President has to communicate in writing 
his action on the bill. 

FR. BERNAS. That would also be acceptable. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, the Committee 
accepts the proposed amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. With rewording? 

THE PRESIDENT. How is it reworded now? 

FR. BERNAS. We have not formulated it yet. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I understand that 
the proper place for the amendment would really be at 
the place indicated by the main proponent because this 
will now control the veto in paragraph 1 of Section 27. 

It provides the limit. That is the thinking of the 
Committee. 

FR. BERNAS. So, the sponsor is accepting my 

amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President, because we 
really believe that the amendment should be in this 
Section 27 since it provides for the limitation of the 
period within which a veto must have to be communi- 
cated by the President. 

MR. ROMULO. Will the proponent read the amend- 
ment, please? 

FR. BERNAS. After consultation with representa- 
tives of the Committee, the proposal now reads: “The 
President shall act on every bill passed by the Congress 

and communicate his action to the house 

WHERE IT ORIGINATED within thirty days after the 
date of receipt thereof; otherwise, it shall BE CON- 
SIDERED AS SIGNED INTO LAW.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. It seems that the first wording 
which refers to veto is better because if he signs it, h 
will be awkward to say “otherwise, it shall become a 
law.” 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 



FR. BERNAS. Under the second wording, we have 
to modify the final clause. 

MR. RODRIGO. But under the first wording where 
the Commissioner used “veto,” we do not have to 
change “otherwise.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we have it now as finally 
reworded? 


My proposed amendment is to reword lines 6 and 7 
to read: . . provided, however, that each city OR 

PROVINCE with a MINIMUM population of two 
hundred thousand, shall have at least one representa- 
tive.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


FR. BERNAS. The amendment reads: “The President 
shall COMMUNICATE HIS VETO OF ANY BILL TO 
THE HOUSE WHERE IT ORIGINATED within thirty 
days after the date of receipt thereof; otherwise, it shall 
become a law as if he had signed it.” 

The sense is all there and the rest could be just a 
matter of style. 


MR. DAVIDE. The Committee accepts. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none, the amendment is approved. 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Rigos be 
recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Just a moment. Madam Presiden 

as alreaH^ the complete reading of the amendmei 

discussioL a ^T V U because 1 reall y 8°t lost in all the: 

another and I av ? ,^ een following up one sentence aft< 
another and I could not get myself through. 

< 0 ™d E D h NT ' Can We ask ,he Secretary-Gener 
read the amendment to see whether it is correct? 

lin™21 S fo C 23 T o A f RY ' GE „ NERAL - The ™endme„t c 
COMMUNICATE HR S vcta 1()S: " The Presidellt shi 
HOUSE WHFrI H ‘ S ,J ET0 0F ANY BILL TO TH 

after the date o/rece^o? ft ATE ? W ‘, thin , thirty da : 
become a law as if he hacfsigne^nt'j ° l erW ‘ Se ’ Sh! 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that clear now? 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that r- 
recognized. Commissioner Rigos 

nj THE PRES, DENT. Commoner Rigos is rect 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. In one of the committee meetings, 
I called attention to the fact that if we adopt a mini- 
mum population for provinces, we will be depriving a 
province that now exists of its one representative, and 
that is Batanes. 

Under the present provision of the Constitution, 
every province, regardless of the population, is entitled 
to at least one representative. And so Batanes, although 
its population is less than even 50,000, has one rep- 
resentative. So if we apply the minimum of 200,000 
population, both in cities and provinces, we will be 
depriving Batanes of a representative. 

REV. RIGOS. That is correct. At any rate, Madam 
President, my concern at the moment is with the 
sentence construction — “provided that each city OR 
PROVINCE ...” I think that is acceptable to the Com- 
mittee. 

Regarding the point raised by Commissioner Rodrigo, 
that can be a subject of another amendment, but do I 
get it that my proposed amendment has been accepted 
by the Committee? 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee accepts the proposed 
amendment with a little modification if the proponent 
would be amenable to it. 

REV. RIGOS. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. The amendments are as follows: On 
line 5, instead of a comma (,) after the word “terri- 
tory,” put a period (.); then on line 6, delete these three 
words “provided, however, that ” and capitalize “e” 
in “each” such that the phrase would read: “Each city 
with a population of AT LEAST.” Then we delete 
“more than.” 

REV. RIGOS. The essence is the same. 


REV. RIGOS. Madam President 
sentence which begins on line 4 reads:' 


° n page 2, the 


Each legislative district shall comprise, as far as practi 
cable, contiguous, compact and adjacent territory pro 
vided, however, that each city with a population of more 
than two hundred thousand, or each province, shall have 
at least one representative. 


MS. AQUINO. Yes. The proposed amendment should 
now read: “Each city with a population of AT LEAST 
two hundred thousand, or each province, shall have at 
least one representative.” 

REV. RIGOS. So, under that proposition, the con- 
cern raised by Commissioner Rodrigo will be accom- 
modated. I accept the suggestion. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


137 


MS. AQUINO. That has been adjusted accordingly. 
Yes, we accept it as amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the proponent kindly read 
again the whole paragraph starting with line 4? 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, the paragraph 
would now read: “Each legislative district shall com- 
prise, as far as practicable, contiguous, compact and 
adjacent territory. Each city with a population of AT 
LEAST two hundred thousand, or each province, shall 
have at least one representative.” 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

The concern of Commissioner Rodrigo is the province. 
My concern now is the city. Palayan City in Nueva Ecija 
has hardly 5,000 inhabitants. I was even joking when it 
was made a city because then there were only three 
houses and two shades for cows. So, I agree with Com- 
missioner Rodrigo that the population should not be the 
gauge for each city and province which shall have at 
least one representative each. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. DAVIDE. We are sorry we cannot accept the 
proposal for the following reasons: First, we will in- 
crease the composition of the Lower House. There are 
many cities with less than 1 50,000 population. 

Under the 1984 apportionment, we classified cities 
into highly urbanized and component cities. Compo- 
nent cities are cities with a population of less than 
150,000 and an income of less than P30 million. Being 
component cities, they were included in the province. 
So, we now seek to limit separate representation for a 
city if that particular city will have a population of at 
least 200,000. But Palayan City will not have to worry; 
it will become a part of a district in that province. It will 
not really be without representation because it shall 
be within a certain territory — compact, contiguous 
and adjacent — consisting of municipalities on that 
particular province. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I ask so because the sentence here 
refers to each city. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, with a population of at least 
200,000. Then a province is without qualification 
because it certainly is much bigger than a city. If we do 
not allow representation to a province which is isolate 
or not a part of a mainland like Camiguin, Batanes or 
Siquijor, then they will be without representation. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Perhaps, we should say that those 
cities and provinces which do not have a population of 
at least 200,000 shall be included in a nearby legislative 
district, so as not to disenfranchise the inhabitants of 
those provinces and cities. Let us take the case of 
Batanes. This province is not contiguous with any 
district and its population is less than 200,000. What 
happens? 

MR. DAVIDE. It will be entitled to one representa- 
tion because it is an entire province, even if its popula- 
tion is less than 200,000. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Then we have to reword this 
amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. There is no need because we precisely 
separated the city with a population of at least 
200,000 from the province by a comma (,). So, the 
200-thousand requirement will apply only to the city 
and not to the province. That was the concern of 
Commissioner Rodrigo. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Then the city shall be a part of 
a legislative district? 

MR. DAVIDE. If its population is less than 200,000 
then, it would only be a component of a district. 
Certainly, it will not be without representation. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Allow me to write our amend- 
ment on this matter. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I address a point of clarifica- 
tion to the Committee? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I understand 
that the proposed amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo 
as modified by the Committee would allow representa- 
tion of a province regardless of population requirement. 

MR. DAVIDE. Correct. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Has the Committee considered 
the logic of this requirement? Let us take the case of 
Batanes. Batanes has seven municipalities with some- 
thing like 25,000 to 30,000 inhabitants. In our alloca- 
tion of seats, we are guided by two things: contiguous 
territory grouped together and the minimum number o 
inhabitants which is 200,000. Another case is Siquijo 
which has only around 50,000 to 60,000 inhabitan s. 


138 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


I wonder if the Committee has taken this matter into 
consideration, because if we are saying that we cannot 
tack a province onto an existing legislative district, I 
think this can be resolved quite easily. An example is 
Siquijor which had always been a part of Negros 
Oriental before, but which all of a sudden became a 
province. What I am trying to say is that if we have a 
city which is not a component city with something like 

195.000 population, we cannot even allow it to have its 
own legislative district, in spite of the fact that it is only 

5.000 less than the minimum requirement of 200,000. 
But we have a province with only 25,000 voters and just 
because it is a province, we give it legislative representa- 
tion. Can the Committee not consider tacking this onto 
a bigger government unit? 

MS. AQUINO. I shall attempt to answer in behalf of 
the Committee. The provisions of Section 5 proceed 
from the general principle that representation is based 
on population not territory such that a constitutional 
provision which would grant a province one representa- 
tive regardless of population requirement is a mere 
exception to the general rule of apportionment. Other- 
wise, we might be facing problems such as fractional 
representation. 


people whereas the rest represent 200,000 people each 
or more. If this can at all be done, I suggest that the 
small provinces should be tacked onto an existing 
government unit so that the whole population of these 
units will be divided equally. 

Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is not 
proposing any amendment, is he? 

MR. MAAMBONG. No, I am not proposing an 
amendment. I am just calling the attention of the Com- 
mittee that perhaps, it could consider tacking these 
provinces onto existing government units. 

THE PRESIDENT. We still have before us the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Rigos. 

Does Commissioner de Castro want to talk about the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Rigos? 

MR. DE CASTRO. I would like to introduce an 
amendment on lines 6 and 7. 


R. MAAMBONG. That is precisely the point. If th< 
mai ” . as * s giving representation to an identified are; 
° a \ C0Untry * s Population, a representative is sup 
v °f t .° re P resent at least 200,000 inhabitants. But thi; 
t ep 10n ’ I think is the intention of the Commit 
h ’ Jf P re P°sterous. Twenty-five thousand people tc 
be represented by one representative? 

fact I have°n^ n ^i a ^ a * ns * these provinces. As a matter ol 
to T whatsol! ''« with them but I an, 

logical ta omtL'of 1 a,Ua,i ° n Where « <° * 

discuss this problem on T ^ Te ^ ntah ° n - 1 am trying tc 

more. I was wondering Vth ^ °- l0§1C and nothin ^ 
this thoroughly If tf*? 6 Com mittee has considered 

would be perfectly ^5 C °" lmittee sa y s so then thal 

further so 8 ° 

The abmd^shuatfon iTH^"f dered ' Ws thoroughly 
apportionment on the bash of We T Ply the m,e ol 
and unqualifiedly then n f populatlon absolutely 
tions will have fr’actionaf ? VmCeS Wlth Sma11 P°P ula ' 

even do more injustice than j U stT c r tatl0n ' ^ W0Uld 

MR. MAAMBONG What i a, 
it is at all possible, is th a / ^ asactuall y suggesting, if 
isolated provinces in the context 'o/th °° k at theSe 
onto which it can be tacked. Siouiinr ^ , I l e f rest area 
very well to Negros Oriental. I do not know th* 6 
province where Batanes can be tacked onto Butthtf i 
just a suggestion in order not to be incongruous in oui 
representation. I think it is a little bit incongruous if we 
have representatives each representing only 25 00C 


THE PRESIDENT. Shall we first dispose of the 
amendment of Commissioner Rigos? 

REV. RIGOS. I will yield to Commissioner de Castro 
because I am through with that section, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, we now move 
to page 2, Section 5, lines 4 up to 8. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Point of order, Madam President. 
I think we had an agreement this morning that the 
Commissioner proposing amendments should be allowed 
to finish all his amendments first before another Com- 
missioner can propose his. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I propose to enter my amendment 
here because we are already on the same section. I do 
not like to go back to it. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would like to be clari- 
fied. Is the proposed amendment of Commissioner de 
Castro, which he is stating now, an amendment to the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Rigos or not? 

MR. DE CASTRO. It is an amendment on lines 6 to 
8, not on the amendment of Commissioner Rigos. 

THE PRESIDENT. Then, just to clarify, let us first 
approve the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Rigos which has been accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection to that proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Rigos which has been accepted by the 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


139 


Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

Commissioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner de 
Castro is listed as No. 6. Could we ask that he wait for 
his turn because Commissioners Bacani and Bengzon are 
ahead of him? 

MR. DE CASTRO. I happen to interfere only because 
we are talking of the same subject matter already. 

Thank you. I will wait for my turn. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

REV. RIGOS. I have one more amendment. 

There are two small items on page 4, Section 13. The 
first amendment is to reword the Section to partially 
read: “THERE shall be a Commission on Appointments 
consisting of THE SENATE PRESIDENT, WHO SHALL 
BE THE EX-OFFICIO CHAIRMAN”; then delete the 
sentence on line 21. The idea here is to enable the 
reader to understand right away that the Senate Pres- 
ident is a member of the Commission. Is that acceptable 
to the Committee? 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear from Chairman 
Davide? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the amendment on 
line 18 consists of the insertion of the words “THE 
SENATE PRESIDENT, WHO SHALL BE THE EX- 
OFFICIO CHAIRMAN.” 

REV. RIGOS. That should be followed by: “twelve 
Senators and twelve Members of the House of Rep- 
resentatives, . . .” Then the second sentence will be. 
THE CHAIRMAN SHALL NOT VOTE EXCEPT IN 
CASE OF TIE. 

MR. DAVIDE. We will agree, Madam President, but 
at this instance, we will also propose this amendment in 
order to complete Section 13: Number 1 _2 in figure 
preceding “Senator” and “Members” should be in 
words. 

REV. RIGOS. It is already indicated in words in our 
copies. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am sorry. Anyway, we accept that 
particular amendment with the last sentence now 
reading as follows: “THE CHAIRMAN SHALL NOT 
VOTE EXCEPT IN CASE OF TIE.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Can we just reword “Senate 
President” to PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE? 

REV. RIGOS. I accept the amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 

The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

REV. RIGOS. The second amendment, Madam Pres- 
ident, is to reduce the membership of the Commission 
from 25 as originally proposed to 13 — six Senators, six 
Members of the House of Representatives plus the 
Senate President. To me 25 is too big a group. An ap- 
pointee will have too many people to deal with and 
quorum is very hard to get if we have 25 people in the 
Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we appreciate the 
concern of Commissioner Rigos, but we do not want to 
break a tradition. The reincorporation of the Commis- 
sion on Appointments was motivated precisely by the 
sound objective of the existence of this Commission and 
the restoration of its tradition being composed of 24 
members and a chairman. We would rather throw it to 
the floor. 

REV. RIGOS. On the other hand, our experience also 
tells us that the number seems a little too large, and so, I 
would like to get the decision of the body on this 
proposal, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I speak in favor of the 
amendment of Commissioner Rigos? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

When my time comes, it is also my perception to 
recommend six Senators and six Congressmen, the same 
as Commissioner Rigos’ amendment for the reason that 
these 25 members of the Commission will be quite 
unwieldy and will make Congress appear like a political 
market. I know this because I used to carry the roster of 
the Armed Forces in the Congress for confirmation and 
we had to meet and talk with so many people. I believe 
that 13 members can work better than 25 just as we 
reduced the membership in the judiciary or in the 
Supreme Court, because according to the present Chief 
Justice, they can better work and there will be better 
harmony if they have a lesser number. So, I am in favor 
of the amendment of Commissioner Rigos. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


140 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. I just want to call attention to the 
fact that the members of the Commission on Appoint- 
ments will be selected on the basis of proportional 
representation from the political parties or sectors 
represented therein. In this Constitution we are 
abandoning the two-party system by means of election 
inspectors. So, in all probability, there will be many 
parties. Hence, if we have only six, it might be difficult 
to apportion the members among the different parties. 


BISHOP BACANI. My understanding is according to 
Commissioner Monsod’s understanding. I would like to 
suggest that on page 1, line 29, we delete the word 
“sectors,” and the wordings on the last line should 
simply read: “. . . shall be elected from the party list.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please 
repeat the section where the amendment by deletion 
will be made? 


THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now? The 
proposed amendment has not been accepted by the 
Committee. Does Commissioner Rigos insist on his 
proposed amendment? 

REV. RIGOS. Yes, Madam President. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Rigos changing the 
number 12 to 6 on line 18, will please raise their hand. 
(Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against the amendment will please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 1 5 votes in favor and 20 against; the 
amendment is lost. 


Comrnk^^’ Madam President, may I ask t 
Commissioner Bacani be recognized. 

nized E PRESIDent - Commissioner Bacani is rec 


BISHOP BACANI tw„ t 

may I ask the members af\h P p° pose my ame ndmer 
Yesterday Commit Committee a question 

sectors could h^Tem" 6 " ex P Iained that tl 

party list system. Doe/th mt ° the Congress through tl 

standing as that of Com 6 S P onsor have the same unde 
e Lnat ot Commissioner Monsod? 

MR. DA VIDE. That 

sioner Monsod. WaS the ex Planation of Comm: 


BISHOP BACANI. It should be on Section 5. The 
amended section will now read: “The House of Rep- 
resentatives shall be composed of not more than two 
hundred and fifty members who shall be elected from 
legislative districts apportioned among the provinces and 
cities in accordance with the number of their respective 
inhabitants, and on the basis of a uniform and pro- 
gressive ratio, and those who, as provided by law, shall 
be elected from the party list.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Commissioner eliminate 
the word “sectors”? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may we request 
that consideration of this proposed amendment be de- 
ferred until we shall have heard the proposal of Commis- 
sioner Monsod? I understand that he and Commissioner 
Villacorta will also propose an amendment on this line. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will defer this proposed 
amendment to give the parties time to confer with each 
other. 

BISHOP BACANI. I submit, Madam President. I now 
go to page 6, line 16, Section 19. I begin with line 15: 
“. . . He shall not intervene in any matter before any 
office of the government for his pecuniary benefit.” I 
move for the deletion of the words “for his pecuniary 
benefit ” because it will not be so easy to establish the 
evidence for this. 


BISHOP BACANI. Ye, n o 
agree with it? ' uoes Commissioner 

MR. DAVIDE. Before • 

to inquire from Commissioner ItfonsoiTif V W ° l 

carries the sense of the la,t + °^ sod lf hls P 

Villacorta on sectoral representaS" ° f C ° mmi 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, as a matter , 
I was going to propose an amendment coautho 
Commissioner Villacorta in order to clarify tlv 
on sectoral representation. But I am still 
away. 


four 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. There was already an amendment 
proposed by Commissioner Regalado, duly elected by 
the Committee and voted favorably by the body which 
starts after the word “benefit.” The added approved 
amendment reads: “or where he may be called upon to 
act on account of his office.” I understand that this 
will now be an all-encompassing prohibition either for 
pecuniary benefit or for any other purpose whatsoever. 
So, we feel that the proposal would have been all right 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


141 


were the Regalado amendment defeated but it was 
accepted. 

BISHOP BACANI. With that understanding, I would 
not press anymore for the amendment. 

I now go to page 6, Section 20, line 22. 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a pending proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Monsod on Section 20. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, it is by substitution. 

BISHOP BACANI. Therefore, I will defer my amend- 
ment. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. As a last proponent of the amend- 
ment, I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be recognized. 
We will schedule the rest of the proponents after lunch. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you, Madam President. 

My amendment is on page 1 0, line 9 of Section 28. 

I propose to add NON-PROFIT after the word “OR” 
at the end of the line. So, the paragraph will read: 
“Charitable institutions, churches, and parsonages or 
convents appurtenant thereto, mosques, non-profit 
cemeteries, and all lands, buildings, and improvements 
actually, directly, and exclusively used for religious, 
charitable, or NON-PROFIT educational purposes shall 
be exempt from taxation.” 

This means that educational institutions which are 
established for profit are not included in the exemption. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. What is meant by nonprofit private 
educational institution? Does this mean no tuition fees, 
no dividends, no nothing? 

MR. BENGZON. No dividends. In other words, none 
of the net income of the institution is tor the benefit of 
any stockholder. 

MR. RODRIGO. I think we should define that 
because profits might be derived by educational institu- 
tions, only they do not declare dividends. So, I think we 
should define that very well, that it refers only to those 
educational institutions which declare profit dividends 
to the stockholders. 


MR. BENGZON. There is already a legal meaning 
to the word “nonprofit” and that is, there is no profit 
or even if the institution profits from its operation it 
is not used for the benefit of any of the members or 
stockholders. But just the same, for the record, we 
could use NON-PROFIT and NON-STOCK. In other 
words, the sense is that none of the profits or revenues 
of that educational institution or school would redound 
to the benefit of any member in case the institution is a 
nonstock corporation, or to any stockholder if it is a 
stock corporation. 

MR. RODRIGO. With that in the record, it is all 
right. 

MR. BENGZON. Perhaps the Committee on Style can 
prepare the wording. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 12:29 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:48 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

Yesterday, I talked about Section 13 on page 4 — the 
Commission on Appointments. As I stated, I have pro- 
posed Resolution No. 330, recommending the substi- 
tution of a Committee on Appointments, instead of the 
Commission on Appointments. According to the com- 
puter, this resolution was sent to the Committee on 
Constitutional Commissions and Agencies, and I think 
we do not have enough time, as of now, to deal with 
that resolution. Instead of that resolution I will propose 
to make amendments to Section 13 of the Article on 
the Legislative on page 4. It will be an amendment by 
addition. After the word “tie” on line 23, add the fol- 
lowing: THE COMMISSION SHALL ACT ON ALL AP- 
POINTMENTS SUBMITTED TO IT WITHIN TEN 
SESSION DAYS. 

The reason for this is that one of the 25 Members can 
keep the papers of an appointee and forever that wil ® 
frozen. So that if we place here THE COM MIS. 
SHALL ACT ON ALL APPOINTMENTS SUBMIT l t,u 


142 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


TO IT WITHIN TEN SESSION DAYS, then there is a 
time limit within which it can act. Sometimes, it acts on 
an appointment after seven years depending on the 
temperament of the one holding the papers. 


Madam President, I will continue: WHEN OFFICERS 
OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES 
ARE TO BE CONSIDERED BY THE COMMISSION, A 
RETIRED CHIEF OF STAFF DESIGNATED BY THE 
CHAIRMAN SHALL SIT AS AN EX-OFFICIO MEM- 
BER THEREOF WITHOUT RIGHT TO VOTE. 

The reason here is that the chief of staff, retired as he 
may be, knows most, if not all, of the officers particular- 
ly from the rank of full colonel up and his will be a wise 
advice to the Commission. As I said last time, we had a 
case of a lieutenant colonel who was not recommended 
by the Board of Promotions and yet, by the insistence 
of the Chairman of the Commission on Appointments, 
that man was put in the list and became a full colonel. 
Later on, he became a general, but was not given a com- 
mand. So that when a retired chief of staff sits with the 
Commission, then he will be able to give advice to the 
Commission as to the officers so qualified to become as 
such. 


Then the next sentence is: THE COMMISSION 
SHALL RULE ON MAJORITY VOTE. 

Again, the reason is, of the 25 members, one who will 
not agree will really put out the appointment of a 
certain person. I will cite the case of a Member here, 
ommissioner de los Reyes. He should have been an 
f - P ? 6 o Urt ^ ust * ce now if he was confirmed as 
haH r P f.? n ^ ^ ecause one member of the Commission 
was lost SC ° approve his appointment, the position 

word’ W th e amendment is by addition. After the 
SHALL AfT nxu/f 6 following: THE COMMISSION 

TO IT WITHIN N tp^o A . PP ° INTMENTS SUBMITTED 
CERS OF THF ™ SESSI0N D AYS. WHEN OFFI- 
PINES ARE TO FORCES OF THE PHILIP- 

SION A RETIRFn SPIDERED BY THE COMMIS- 
BY THE ChSa C m IEF ° F STAFF ’ DESIGNATED 

FICIO ^^MBER tmoo SHALL SIT AS AN EX-OF- 
VOTE. THE mm£° F WITHOUT RIGHT TO 
MAJORITY VOTE. SSION SHALL RULE ON 


THE PRESIDENT What a « ^ 

hat does the Committee say? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam p ro a 
the Committee but I am acting on my own. 3 ° f 


mous vote in the confirmation of appointments. It was 
by majority vote. Secondly, the proposal says that the 
Commission shall act within 10 session days. The Com- 
mission on Appointments, in my time, did not meet 
everyday. As a matter of fact, it met only about five, 
seven times during the regular session. At that time, of 
course, there was a limit on our regular sessions — 100 
days exclusive of Sundays. We were swamped with 
many, many appointments and we had committees 
acting on different appointments. We had the Commit- 
tee on the Armed Forces, Committee on the Judiciary, 
and a committee on different departments. 

Ten days is really too short. I would also like to ask 
what happens if the Commission on Appointments fails 
to act on an appointment within 10 days? The rule at 
that time when I was a member of the Commission on 
Appointments was that if the Commission failed to act 
on an appointment after the adjournment of the session, 
then the appointment was deemed rejected; but the 
President could reappoint the rejected appointee in an 
acting capacity until the next session and in the next 
meeting of the Commission on Appointments, the 
appointment was again submitted to the Commission. 

The recommendations to the Commission on Ap- 
pointments are passed upon by the incumbent chief 
of staff. Perhaps there might be occasions when the 
Commission on Appointments might invite a retired 
chief of staff. But to make it compulsory on the Com- 
mission on Appointments to have an ex-chief of staff as 
ex officio member when appointments to the armed 
forces are being considered is, I think, awkward. The 
Commission on Appointments is composed of all 
elected members and to have an ex officio member who 
is not an elective official looks awkward. Madam Pres- 
ident. Not only that, there might be several ex-chiefs of 
staff. At present, I know at least three former chiefs of 
staff. Who will then decide which ex-chief of staff 
would be the ex officio member? 

In closing I would like to state that I do not know 
why there seems to be a prejudice against the Commis- 
sion on Appointments. As I said, I was a member of the 
Commission on Appointments for over 10 years. It is 
true that there were a few black sheep and we know 
them and we call their attention but the majority of the 
members acted in a way that cannot be criticized. That 
is all, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. If the Chair pleases, may I be 
allowed to refute the statements of the Honorable 
Rodrigo? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ron • • 

n j zec j b °ner Rodrigo is recog- 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I was a member 
of the Commission on Appointments for 10 years from 
1957 to 1967, and I am sure that the rule in the then 
Commission on Appointments was not to have a unani- 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The doings of the Commission on 
Appointments are not unknown to us. A book on the 
Commission on Appointments states that the Philippine 
experience offers a contrast which is impossible to 
exhaust. This is comparing the Commission on Appoint- 
ments with that in the United States. The book further 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


143 


states that the appointment of Guianson, Quirino’s 
Justice Secretary, was bypassed for years. The nomina- 
tion of Ernesto Mata, President Marcos’ Defense Secre- 
tary, was never formally received by the Commission on 
Appointments. For the information of the body, 
General Mata was my classmate in the PMA. We knew 
that his appointment was received in the Commission on 
Appointments, and yet they refused to accept that they 
received it. The book further continues that the ap- 
pointments of Claudio Teehankee and Vicente Abad 
Santos, the Justice Secretary of the Marcos administra- 
tion, were bitterly questioned as that of Rufino 
Hechanova, Macapagal’s Executive Secretary. In 1955 
when Manuel Manahan had seemed discourteous to one 
or two members of the Commission, Chairman Rodri- 
guez asked for a recess, sent for Manahan, who shook 
hands with the members concerned, then resumed the 
session. Manahan’s appointment was confirmed. We can 
see the actions here. 

On the statement of the Honorable Rodrigo on the 
majority rule that I am recommending, maybe the rules 
state that it is a majority rule to pass an appointment. 
But it is not so in actual practice. One man can dissent 
and your appointment is bypassed. 

On the number of session days, I am agreeable to any 
number of session days provided that all appointments 
shall be submitted to the whole Commission and not 
one member keeping the appointment, and only those 
appointments that are there be considered by the 
Commission. I have no qualms about the number of 
session days provided that all appointments are in the 
Commission. 

On the matter of the chief of staff and there are 
about three now, that will depend on the Chairman. 
This man is an ex officio member without the right to 
vote. I know that he cannot have the right to vote 
because he is not among the elected officials of our 
country but his advice will be very, very important. For 
example, last time there were appointments for the 
general’s rank, and particularly during the last regime, 
one can ask every member of the Armed Forces for the 
qualification of the man so appointed. A retired chief of 
staff, without the right to vote, will be a good adviser to 
the Commission. 

I then ask the Committee to accept the amend- 
ments in order to negate the different acts, sometimes 
scandalous, of the members of the Commission on 
Appointments. Our honorable Member here, Mr. de los 
Reyes, should have been a justice ol the appellate couit 
had his appointment not been frozen by one member of 
the Commission on Appointments. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the position of the 
Committee on this matter? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, there are three 
concepts in the proposed amendment. We would like 
that a voting be made on each of the concepts because 


they can be treated separately from each other. As to 
the first, we will have no objection provided the period 
should be, say, 30 session days. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I have no qualms about it, Madam 
President. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, if the proponent agrees to fix it to 
a period of 30 session days instead of 10, the Commit- 
tee is inclined to accept the first. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, I agree. 

MR. RODRIGO. I have no objection. I just want to 
make something clear. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. This refers to the session days of 
Congress, not of the Commission on Appointments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable, 30 session days 
of Congress? 

MR. DE CASTRO. It is acceptable, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we put that first to a vote, 
Mr. Chairman? 

MR DAVIDE. Madam President, as worded, it will 
read- “THE COMMISSION SHALL ACT ON ALL AP- 
POINTMENTS SUBMITTED TO IT WITHIN THIRTY 
SESSION DAYS OF CONGRESS FROM THEIR 
SUBMISSION.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the second concept regarding the 
appointments to the military with the chief of staff as 
ex officio member, we would rather leave it to the 
body. 

MR. DE CASTRO. To be designated by the Chairman; 
meaning, if there are three retired chiefs of staff, the 
Chairman can select who among the three he wants to 
be his adviser in the Commission on Appointments. 

MR. DAVIDE. We would rather leave it to the body 
to decide, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. We submit, Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 


144 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, may I say something, partly 
in support of the proposed amendment with respect to 
seeking the advice of the retired chief of staff. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I like the idea in terms of seeking 
the advice of a concerned ministry or agency, but I do 
not understand why it should be limited to the military. 
I think the idea is for the Commission on Appointments 
to seek the advice of concerned ministries or agencies, 
not only of the military. I do not know how it should 
be worded but that is basically the concept. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


on Appointments with parties who are not to be con- 
sidered anymore as government officials. Besides, other 
organs of the government or other appointments affect- 
ing other branches of the government may also demand 
for a representation by way of consultancy. So, we 
would open the floodgates to a dilution of the prestige 
of the Commission on Appointments. 

THE PRESIDENT. This matter has been sufficiently 
explained by Commissioner de Castro. So, I think we 
are ready to vote on this particular amendment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I just explain with a few 
sentences? 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by Commissioner 
de Castro? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Before I accept or reject the sug- 
gestion, may I know the Gentleman’s recommended 
rewording? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I ask for a suspension of 
the session? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 3:06 p.m. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The rank of general officers in the 
Armed Forces is very, very important. There was even a 
time when the aide-de-camp of a President submitted 
to the President the name of a colonel who was pro- 
moted to general and the President signed it. This is also 
necessary because under the National Defense Act, the 
percentage of general officers is only 1.2 percent and if 
there will be many general officers submitted to the 
Commission without the appropriate advice, it is 
possible that the rate of the number of generals will 
exceed the requirement in the National Defense Act. I 
submit to the body, Madam President. 


resumption of session 

At 3.13 p.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. 


drawn his aSme„?rZTe r s i L e „ n « nagen ^ 

What is thf second^ ^ llfc amen dment is withdraw] 
the second portion of the amendment now? 

MR. DE CASTRO 

ment reads: WHEN OFFirp I RQ P °Ac 0n of m y arnen ' 
FORCES OF THE Vi ° F THE ARME 
SIDERED BY THE COMmtoct ARE T0 BE COr 
CHIEF OF STAFF DFSR^aS ° N ’ A RETIRE 
MAN, SHALL SIT THE CHAI1 

THEREOF WITHOUT RIGHT TO VOTE ‘° 


MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Comm.ssioner 

recognized. 


Davide is 


MR. DA VIDE. The Committee declines to accept t 
amendment because first, it will clutter the Commissi 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner de Castro, please raise their hand. 
( Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 3 votes in favor and 15 against; the 
proposed amendment is lost. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We shall go now to the third 
portion of the amendment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The third portion of the amend- 
ment is: THE COMMISSION SHALL RULE ON A 
MAJORITY VOTE OF ALL ITS MEMBERS. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this acceptable to the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. DAVIDE. We seek the recognition of Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo on the matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


145 


MR. RODRIGO. It is the rule of the Commission on 
Appointments that a decision is made by majority vote. 
Also, the Commission on Appointments will be com- 
posed of elective members, 12 of them elected national- 
ly by the people and 12 elected by districts or by party 
list. 

Madam President, I think a commission such as this 
should be given the discretion to promulgate its own 
rules like other commissions are allowed to promulgate 
their own rules. We should not also impose a rule by 
constitutional mandate. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The sad experiences of the past 
have compelled me to recommend this amendment 
because while the rule in the Commission on Appoint- 
ments is for a majority vote, as stated by the Honorable 
Rodrigo, yet the sad experience is that they seek the 
unanimity of all its members before an appointment 
can push through. This is the reason I have to put this 
amendment. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the Committee 
adopts the position of Commissioner Rodrigo, he being 
a member of the Committee, and would rather throw 
the matter to a vote by the House. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. I am constrained to let this body in 
on the unofficial rules governing the operation of the 
Commission on Appointments. I am speaking of my 
own case. I am sure that Commissioner Rodrigo, who 
must have known me in 1965, did not even know that 
the Chairman on the Judiciary of the then Congress 
had sat on my appointment in the three or four times 
that the Commission met to approve the appointments 
submitted by the President. 

On the last day of the meeting of the Commission on 
Appointments, I heard that Congressman Crisologo had 
again decided not to submit my name. Fortunately I 
met one of the Senators who knew me, and who asked 
me what I was doing there; I told him my problem. 
Right there and then when Congressman Crisologo who 
was called to submit the last names for approval, left the 
podium and said, “That is all, Mr. President, this 
Senator rushed towards Congressman Crisologo and 
practically bodily brought him back. It was only then 
that Congressman Crisologo read my name. 

I know as a fact that others had to pass through this 
exclusive club. The members of the Commission act like 
some kind of secret association that when any member 
gives the black ball, everybody else gives the same. Much 
as I respect the opinion of Commissioner Rodrigo, I am 
afraid there were some goings-on that he was not even 
aware were taking place. * 


For this reason, therefore, I am in favor of the 
proposal of Commissioner de Castro. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

May I have another word, Madam President, because 
to me this is very important. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The honorable Chairman of the 
Committee on the Legislative also has sad experiences 
on this matter. With regard to the appointments in 
Cebu, for example, unless they go to one Senator who is 
a member of the Commission on Appointments, these 
appointments can never be approved; they will never 
pass in the Commission. I think he is a living witness to 
this. He is telling me his story about this. 

So, while the rule speaks of majority vote, one 
member can hold all the appointments in one province 
and bypass them. I, therefore, reiterate my amendment 
that the Commission shall rule on a majority vote of all 
its members. I beg the Chairman to accept my amend- 
ment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Reference was made to me as a living 
witness. On the occasions that I had a chance to talk 
with Commissioner de Castro on this, I said that I heard 
about it but I never was a living witness. I was never 
appointed to any position on an appointment which 
required the consent of the Commission on Appoint- 
ments. 

But I sincerely believe that the experiences related by 
the Gentleman and the Honorable Colayco referred 
specifically to the nonsubmission of the appointment 
and not necessarily on the requirement of a majority. 
So, the rules would stand, an approval by a mere 
majority. 

All I would like to impress upon the Commission is 
that all the sad experiences related referred to the non- 
submission of an appointment. Let us consider the fact 
that at that time, the Senate and the House of Rep- 
resentatives met for only 100 days in a year and, there- 
fore, there really was the risk of nonsubmission because 
of the adjournment of Congress. But under our pro- 
posal, the body will be a continuing body; it will con- 
tinue to meet until 30 days before the opening of the 
regular session of the next Congress. So, there is no 
danger of nonsubmission because the appointment wi 
be immediately known. 

We now throw the matter to a vote by the House, 
Madam President. 


146 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment clear to the 
Members? Will the Gentleman please read again his 
proposed amendment? 

MR. DE CASTRO. The third amendment reads: THE 
COMMISSION SHALL RULE ON A MAJORITY VOTE 
OF ALL ITS MEMBERS. 

VOTING 


legislation, instead of again putting more in the Senate. 
It may be just another body similar to the Lower House. 

So, if we want to have some degree of hierarchical 
values, perhaps the Senate should have a lower number, 
and we believe that 24 is sufficient. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, the number is not based on 
the population but rather on the entirety of the whole 
Republic; am I correct? 


THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner de Castro, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 32 votes in favor and 10 against; 
the amendment is approved. (Applause) 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. I 
also thank the Chairman of the Legislative Committee. 

May I propose another amendment? (Laughter) 

MR. ROMULO. That is what we get for encouraging 
him. 


MR. DE CASTRO. On page 1, Section 2 states: “Th 
ena e shall be composed of twenty-four Senators . . . 

P r ° v i s i°n was in the 1935 Constitution, and a 

normi 11 ? 6 m We had only about 25 million or les 

when wp° n u are a ^ a * n Proposing for 24 Senatoi 
now ave approximately 54 million people. 

based^on nonmTr wlaet ^ er the number of Senators i 
Philippines? ^ ^ ° r JUSt ° n the territorial area of th 

ponton 0 of^the^ Senate *at ^ f ‘ Xing the COrr 

proportion to the number f WC dl , d n0t conslder 11 
was restored when Te 1 2 P ° pulation ' The Senat 
system on a very slim ^° ted ° n a bicamen 

read into the approvS ITrlT °^ nly ° ne vote - So, - 

the composition of practiSSv ‘ the of the Senat ,f wit 
members. ^ same number c 

seconded To ^hafof ^ P^h the Senate as th 

President. Therefore ' and the Vic ' 

Just like the President and nTT- 00 *! in ° Ur min< 
do not consider the total number of 1 ^ e ' Pr ® sldent « w 
represented by a President or so much P f ° PU at,on tot 
to be represented by the President. Populatio 

Since the grounds for the restoration of the Senai 
were those stated on record by the proponents for bic 
merahsm, we believe that the composition of 24 wow 
be sufficient in order, first, to at least attain econom 
and if the idea is quality legislation, we submit that 
Senate with only 24 may be able to achieve qualii 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Then, I withdraw my proposed 
amendment on Section 2. 

May I propose an amendment on Section 5. (Laugh- 
ter) 

On Section 5, line 25, the Committee report states 
that there shall be 250 Members of Congress. On line 
28, it is stated: 

. . . and those who, as provided by law, shall be elected 
from the sectors and party list. 

This will, therefore, be more than 250. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, Madam President. The sectoral 
and party list representatives will only comprise 20 
percent of the total membership of 250. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is 50. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, it means the sectoral representa- 
tives and party list representatives could be only 50. The 
regular members to be elected from the legislative 
district will be a maximum of 200. 

MR. DE CASTRO. But the wording confuses me 
because it states: 

The House of Representatives shall be composed of not 
more than two hundred and fifty members who shall be 
elected from legislative districts . . . 

Then, on line 28, it is stated that those as provided by 
law shall be elected from the sectors and party list. The 
wording confuses me but with the explanation of the 
Gentleman, I will be satisfied, it will only be 250. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. On page 2, lines 4 to 8 state: 

Each legislative district shall comprise, as far as practicable, 
contiguous, compact and adjacent territory. 

After the word “territory,” there is a period (.) by 
virtue of an amendment a while ago. 

My proposed amendment, however, is to put a com- 
ma (,) after “territory” and insert the words: PRO- 
VIDED THAT EACH PROVINCE OR CITY SHALL 
HAVE AT LEAST ONE REPRESENTATIVE. I am 
thinking of Batanes, Palayan City, Siquijor and all other 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


147 S 


areas which, as provinces or cities, should have at least 
one representative each and not based on population. 

MR. DAVIDE. Per the Rigos amendment this 
morning, as amended by Commissioner Aquino, Jines 6 
to 8, after the period (.) following “territory,” read: 
“Each city with a population of at least two hundred 
thousand, or each province, shall have at least one 
representative.” 

So, I think the problem of the Gentleman has been 
solved, except for the city. 


SHALL NOT BE LIMITED TO WRITTEN QUES- 
TIONS BUT MAY COVER MATTERS RELATED 
THERETO. THE AGENDA SHALL SPECIFY THE 
SUBJECTS OF THE APPEARANCE. WHEN THE 
SECURITY OF THE STATE OR THE PUBLIC IN- 
TEREST SO REQUIRES AND THE PRESIDENT SO 
STATES IN WRITING, THE APPEARANCE SHALL 
BE CONDUCTED IN EXECUTIVE SESSION. 

May we know if the proposed amendment by substi- 
tution is accepted by the distinguished sponsors? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


MR. DE CASTRO. No, but it says “of at least two 
hundred thousand.” 

MR. DAVIDE. That refers to the city, Madam Pres- 
ident. Regarding the province, there is no requireinen 
as to population. 

MR. DE CASTRO. But the City of Palayan has not 
even 100,000. 

MR. DAVIDE. We answered this morning that the 
City of Palayan will not be without representation 
because it will be within another territory compos 
of the City of Palayan and other adjacent municipali- 
ties. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the amendment of 

Commissioners Suarez and Monsod on ec *°” u e 
ready. So, may I ask that Commissioner Suarez t> 

recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

This is the amendment by substitution to Section 20 
and copies have already been furnished the Commis- 
sioners. This amendment by substitution is the collec- 
tive thinking of the following Commissioners: Commis- 
sioners Monsod, Rodrigo, Sarmiento, Rosales and 
Quesada. The amendment reads: THE HEADS OF 
MINISTRIES, UPON THEIR OWN INITIATIVE, OR 
UPON THE REQUEST OF EITHER HOUSE, AS THE 
y PULES OF SUCH HOUSE SHALL PROVIDE, MAY, 
WITH THE CONSENT OF THE PRESIDENT, APPEAR 
BEFORE AND BE HEARD BY SUCH HOUSE ON 
ANY MATTER PERTAINING TO THEIR MINIS- 
TRIES. WRITTEN QUESTIONS SHALL BE SUBMIT- 
TED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE OR 
"pup SPFAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTA- 
TIVES AT LEAST THREE (3) DAYS BEFORE THE 
SCHEDULED APPEARANCE. INTERPELLATIONS 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the proposed 
amendment actually weakens the institution known as 
the Question Hour but also the concept embodied in 
Section 24, Article VI of the 1935 Constitution. Under 
the latter, we have the following wordings: 

The heads of departments upon their own initiative or 
upon the request of either House may appear before and be 
heard by such House on any matter pertaining to their 
departments, unless the public interest shall require other- 
wise and the President shall so state in writing. 

Under this particular Section 24, the consent of the 
President was not even necessary; under the proposal 
now the consent of the President is necessary. In short, 
we even destroy the original concept of a nonrequire- 
ment of a presidential consent. The only authority 
of the President under Section 24 of the 1935 Consti- 
tution is in the matter of a determination of the 
necessity of a matter involving public interest; in which 
case, the President would have a very limited say on the 
appearance of the head of a department. 

Finally, as explained this morning, the appearance of 
the head of the ministry would not be mandatory. Upon 
the other hand, if the minister on his own initiative 
wants to appear before the National Assembly, it would 
be mandatory upon the National Assembly to accept 
and receive him. In short, a Cabinet member makes his 
own terms of appearance before the National Assembly. 
Therefore, it will more than rebut the desired objective 
of allowing the National Assembly to check on the 
members of the Cabinet. 

It is, therefore, with deep regret that the Committee 
cannot accept the proposed amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is the Committee disposed to accept 
the wording ol this particular provision as reflected in 
Section 24, Article VI of the 1935 Constitution? In 
other words, would the Committee accept the insertion 
of the following phrase after the word “ministries”: 
UNLESS THE PUBLIC INTEREST SHALL REQUIRE 
OTHERWISE AND THE PRESIDENT SHALL SO 
STATE IN WRITING? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee feels that somehow, if 
there should be a blending of the 1935 concept and the 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 



proposed amendment which is basically in the 1973 
Constitution, it is submitted that the one read this 
morning after the amendment of Commissioner Sar- 
miento would achieve a happy blending. Of course, the 
Committee will have to make some comments on it. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we request a 
suspension of the session? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 3:41 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:44 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we would suggest 
that the comma (,) after “MAY” be deleted. Then after 
“INITIATIVE,” insert a comma (,) before and after t lie 
words “WITH THE CONSENT OF THE PRESIDENT.” 
We would also propose to put a comma (,) after 
“HOUSE.” So, the amendment will read: “THE HEADS 
OF MINISTRIES MAY UPON THEIR OWN INITIA- 
TIVE, WITH THE CONSENT OF THE PRESIDENT, 
OR UPON THE REQUEST OF EITHER HOUSE, AS 
THE RULES OF EACH HOUSE WILL PRESCRIBE 
APPEAR BEFORE AND BE HEARD . . .” 

MR. SUAREZ. We accept the proposed amendment 
on the understanding that the utilization of the word 
“MAY” with or without the comma (,) connotes a 
directory character. 

MR. DAVIDE. Subject to the Rules of the House. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, we will accept that also. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. So, it is clearly understood that it 
should be subject to the Rules of each House. 


MR. SUAREZ. After consultations with the membe 
o the Committee, we have decided to submit th 
amendment by substitution to read as follows: 

inSS?’ TucJ? heads OF MINISTRIES MA^ 
SENT OF E Tun°n N INITI ATIVE WITH THE COh 

QUEST OF f?twkd ESIDENT ’ OR UPON THE RI 
BE LaRD EI W° USE APPEAR BEFORE AN! 
PERTAININC B Tn SU ?o H0USE 0N ANY MATTE! 
QUESTIONS SHat ™ IR mini STRIES. WRITTEl 

romwS 4 B 4 SUBMnTED T0 THE PR E! 

HOUSE OF R FPppcnx^ OR ™ E SPEAKER OF TH 
DAYS BEFORE A SCH^mr 1 ^ AT LEAST THRE 
TERPELLATIONS SHAn xir? T APPEA RANCE. IF 
WRITTEN OI lF < ?Tirv\ic' EE NOT BE LIMITED T< 

SPECIFY THE SUBIFptI 0 ^ J HE AGENDA SHAL 
WHEN THE SECURlTY TS n? F ™ E APPE ARANCI 

t l ®\t ucted «s e s 

We submit this for th* • . 

of the Committee. PPreciation of the membei 


nized 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Will the distinguished proponent 
answer a clarificatory question in the penultimate 
sentence of the proposed amendment which reads: 
“THE AGENDA SHALL SPECIFY THE SUBJECTS 
OF THE APPEARANCE.” Will the Gentleman please 
explain the meaning of this sentence? What exactly 
is the meaning of “SUBJECTS OF THE APPEAR- 
ANCE”? 

MR. SUAREZ. “SUBJECTS OF THE APPEAR- 
ANCE” could mean two things: One, the reason for the 
appearance; and second, what would be taken up in 
connection with the proposed appearance. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would suggest a rewording of 
this, Madam President, so that the intent is clearly 
indicated. If I recall correctly, in the Regular Batasang 
Pambansa, it is the question sent in advance to a Cabinet 
Minister which is classified by subject. So that in the 
presentation on the floor, the Cabinet minister appear- 
ing before the body will answer in a systematic manner 
by the subject of the questions. That is the procedure 
adopted in the First Regular Batasang Pambansa. So, 
perhaps a rewording is in order, Madam President. 


MR. DAVIDE. Just for some clarification Did we 
hear it correctly that there will be a comma’ ( ) after 
“MAY”? 


MR. SUAREZ. Would changing the word “APPEAR- 
ANCE” to INTERPELLATIONS satisfy the observa- 
tions made by the Gentleman because we should benefit 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


from his experience in a parliament. We have not had 
that kind of experience. In other words, the sentence 
should read: THE AGENDA SHALL SPECIFY THE 
SUBJECTS OF THE INTERPELLATIONS. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, point of 
information. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Section 12 of the 1973 Consti- 
tution states: “The agenda shall specify the subjects 
of the Question Hour.” 

MR. SUAREZ. That is why we changed “Question 
Hour” to APPEARANCE. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. “SHALL SPECIFY THE 
SUBJECTS OF THE INTERPELLATIONS. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is what we were suggesting to 
Honorable Maambong, if it would satisfy his pertinen 
observations. 


MR. MAAMBONG. May we hear from Commissio 
de los Reyes the formulation of the sentence so * 
can talk about it before we present it to the Comm 
tee? How would it read now? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. “THE AGENDA SHALL SPE; 
CIFY THE SUBJECTS OF THE INTERPELLATIONS. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I think that is all right. 


whether we should use the word “interpellations” or 
“appearance.” 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee. Madam President, 
would propose APPEARANCE instead of “interpella- 
tions” because we would not know what would be the 
interpellations of the Members of the National Assem- 
bly The paragraph preceding it is: “INTERPELLA- 
TIONS SHALL NOT BE LIMITED TO WRITTEN 
QUESTIONS, BUT MAY COVER MATTERS RE- 
LATED THERETO.” That is broad enough: what 
should be the subject of the agenda is the appearance 
itself. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, why do we not 
just delete the sentence? The whole Article causes con- 
fusion. It does not seem to belong there in the first 
place. We have already clarified in the previous sen- 
tences what is supposed to be the nature, the presence 
of the minister. 

MR. SUAREZ. Personally, we have no objection to 
this. This was drafted and worded by the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say 
with respect to the deletion? 

MR. DAVIDE. We agree to the deletion. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Anyway, it is very clear that the 
matter of the appearance or, shall we say, the Question 
Hour, would be subject to the rules to be prescribed by 
each House of the legislature. 


MR. SUAREZ. We will accept that. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR DAVIDE. The Committee has accepted the pro- 
posal. So, may we be allowed to comment on the pro- 
posed amendment. 

The interpellations, Madam President, cannot be the 
subject of the agenda because we do not know yet what 
would be the agenda. So, what should really be the 
subject of the agenda would be the Question Hour and, 
in lieu thereof, the appearance. What should be taken up 
during the appearance of the Cabinet minister is what is 
meant in the provision. Thus, the Committee requests 
that the original wording of the proposal no longer be 
changed or altered. 

MR. SUAREZ. I think there are a number of expe- 
rienced parliamentarians here who participated in the 
parliament established during the past administration. 
We would certainly appreciate their comments on 


MR. SUAREZ. After all, the sentence prior to 
that reads: “INTERPELLATIONS SHALL NOT BE 
LIMITED TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS, BUT MAY 
COVER MATTERS RELATED THERETO.” I think 
that is broad enough. We agree to the suggestion of the 
Honorable Maambong, as confirmed by the members 
of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we now have the wording of 
Section 20 so that we can submit the amendment to a 
vote? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may we ask 
Commissioner Suarez a few clarificatory questions? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, willingly. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Do I understand that it is only 
when the appearance of the heads of the ministries is on 
their initiative that they need the consent of the Pres- 
ident? 


150 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. That is right. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But if it is upon the request of 
either House, they need not secure the consent of the 
President, and that even if the President objects to their 
appearance, they still have to appear? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. The only qualification 
being that it must be in accordance with the rules that 
each House may provide for the purpose. But we used 
the directory word “may.” In other words, that Gentle- 
man has the right to refuse. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The next question is: Why did 
the Committee change “departments,” as provided in 
the 1935 Constitution to “ministries” when we are 
already adopting the presidential system? I thought 
ministries only refer to a parliamentary system because 
we have a deputy minister; but when we adopt the 
presidential system, it is departments. Also, we call the 
members of the Cabinet secretaries and no longer 
ministers. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the observation. We 
will leave that to the committee headed by the dis- 
tinguished Senator Rodrigo, the Committee on Style. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the body ready to vote? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, just one more 
point. In the second sentence, it already says, “WITH 
THE CONSENT OF THE PRESIDENT.” The last 
phrase of the sentence reads, “UNLESS THE PUBLIC 
INTEREST SHALL REQUIRE OTHERWISE, AND 
THE PRESIDENT SO STATES IN WRITING.” If the 
President does not consent, we do not need the last 
phrase. The phrase “WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
PRESIDENT” is all-embracing. How many consent do 
we need anyway? 

MR. SUAREZ. No, Madam President. The situation 
is different in the last sentence because this has refer- 
ence to the security of the state or the public interest 
and the only condition here is that the appearance shall 
be conducted in an executive session instead of a public 
session, for example, or a session before either of the 
Houses. 

MR. MAAMBONG. No, Madam President. I am not 
referring to the last sentence. I am referring to the first 
sentence. The first sentence on the appearance of the 
heads of ministries upon their own initiative with the 
consent of the President is very clear. In other words, 
they cannot appear without the consent of the Pres- 
ident. But in the last phrase of the first sentence, we 
repeat the phrase “UNLESS THE PUBLIC INTEREST 
SHALL REQUIRE OTHERWISE, AND THE PRES- 
IDENT SO STATES IN WRITING.” 


ment^ tr^nP 1 P ro P os e a very simple amem 
seek clarifi 6 amer *dment but before I do that, may 
tee? Did f h , ° m the Chairman of the Commi 
of a Cabinet nP * bat * ns °f ar as the appearanc 

that is nurelv mi f- 6r ° n b * s own initiative is concerns 
mal thaUndie?t 10nal ° n his P art > but that if he do, 

to appwr ' “ shan 1 

appearance? DidI get thal correct^? hm '° " 

preKHon A ThM E wa?tL7nsw« 'J e Commit,ee ’ s ' nte 

to questions by the Committ mam P ro P one) 

mittee insisted on the S ?' V* 1 is w1 ^ the Cor 
RULES OF EACH HOUSE MaV^ RoVTde'” “ AS ™ 

Committ^e^aUhePnomPPTa mi W T ^ SenSe ° f tl 

before the House, then the HousP *h ^ ants to fPP e 
appearance, not the House to refuse S * authonze h 

MR. DA VIDE. That was the answer to the questic 
of the Committee but the Committee did not want it 
be because of the extent and the scope and the meanin 
Otherwise, we will have a minister commanding tl 
National Assembly. So, it will now be left to the rul 
of each House. 


MR. SUAREZ. No, may I interrupt, Madam President. 
That portion is already deleted. It is not included in our 
proposed amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, the period (.) 
would be after the phrase “OR ANY MATTER PER- 
TAINING TO THEIR MINISTRIES.” 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Will Commissioner Suarez yield to just 
one question? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. It has happened before, and it will likely 
happen again, that a President has invoked the mantle of 
executive privilege in order to prevent a member of the 
Cabinet from appearing in the Senate or in the House of 
Representatives on call of either House under this pro- 
posed provision. What will happen then? Will a dead- 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


151 


lock arise? And is this now not the moment to anti- 
cipate such possibilities that can develop into a crisis 
between two branches of the government? Suppose t le 
President invokes the mantle of executive privilege so 
that a Cabinet minister summoned to the Question Hour 
is unable to appear, what does the proponent think ot 
that? 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, that situation has 
happened time and again in the past, and that is in 
pursuit of the doctrine of separation of powers. So, in a 
situation like that, it is the privilege of the President to 
seek recourse under the mantle of executive privi ege. n 
other words, he may instruct his Cabinet member not to 
respond to the summons or the invitation extende y 
the Congress. 


MR OPLE. This will not be deemed a violation of 
this constitutional provision, simply because a sitting 
President has invoked the mantle of executive privi e 


MR. SUAREZ. I do not believe it is a violation ot this 
particular provision, Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the body ready to vote now? 
Will Commissioner Suarez now read Section - , 
corrected and revised? 

MR. SUAREZ. “THE HEADS OF MINISTRIES 
MAY UPON THEIR OWN INITIATIVE . . . 

THE PRESIDENT. Ministries or departments? 

MR. SUAREZ. It depends on the Committee on Style 
but I might as well use departments. 

So, the amendment, as amended, > s “ ^Lpm 
HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS MAY UP thF 

OWN INITIATIVE, WITH THE CONSE EITH er 
PRESIDENT, OR UPON THE REQUEST g HALL 

& 

SUCH HOUSE ON ANY MA ^^ T pS RT Qu E sTIONS 
tmthTR DFPARTMENTS. WRITTEN Q 

be submitted to the president of 
TOE SENATE OR THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
OF representatives at least three days 
BEFORE HIS SCHEDULED ^PPEARANC _ 
PELLATIONS SHALL NOT BE LIMITED TO WRU 
TEN QUESTIONS, BUT MAY COVER MATTERS 
RELATED THERETO. WHEN THE S ECU R I 
THE STATE OR THE PUBLIC INTEREST SO RE 
QUIRES AND THE PRESIDENT SO ST £T E mN 
WRITING, THE APPEARANCE SHALL BE CON- 
DUCTED IN EXECUTIVE SESSION. 


THE PRESIDENT. The amendment, as amended, has 
been accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment to 
Section 20? (Silence) The Chair hears none: the amend- 
ment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Quesada be 
recognized. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, Chairman and 
members of the Committee, I would like to propose an 
amendment by addition to Section 19, page 6. This 
morning we already approved the following on line 3: 
“No Senator or Member of the House of Representa- 
tives may appear as counsel before any court of justice.” 

I propose that a comma (,) be placed after “justice” and 
after “Electoral Tribunals” the following phrase be in- 
serted: QUASI-JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
BODIES. I think the omission of these bodies is 
very significant because these are areas or bodies where 
a Senator or Member of the House can wield or exert 
undue influence or pressure. It is actually a transposi- 
tion of line 9 with the addition of the .word “QUASI- 
JUDICIAL.” This would include such bodies as the 
Securities and Exchange Commission, the Civil Service 
Commission and other quasi-judicial bodies as well as 
administrative bodies like ministries where a solon can 
exercise some of his power and authority. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please 
repeat the amendment? 


MS. QUESADA. After “court of justice” insert a 
comma (,); then after “Electoral Tribunals,” insert 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of the Com- 
mittee? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we would rather 
request the following amendment: After the comma (,) 
following “justice,” insert OR BEFORE THE. Then 
after the comma (,) following “Tribunals” insert OR 
QUASI-JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES. Is 
that the exact wording? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Such that it would read: “Before any 
court of justice, OR BEFORE THE Electoral Tribunals, 
OR QUASI-JUDICIAL AND OTHER ADMINISTRA- 
TIVE BODIES.” 

MS. QUESADA. I accept the amendment to the 
amendment. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


i 2 


MR. DAVIDE. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment, Madam President, because that was actually the 
original concept in Section 19 before the amendment of 
Commissioner Colayco. 

MS. QUESADA. May I propose my second amend- 
ment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us first dispose of this one. 

Is there any objection to this particular amendment? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Vice-President is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. I am constrained to voice my opposi- 
tion to this further expansion of the prohibition for a 
lawyer-member of Congress to appear as counsel. In 
fact, I think it is unfortunate that the Colayco amend- 
ment was approved without the concurrence of some 
of the Members who were then absent when the votes 
were taken. The amendment would mean that a prac- 
ticing lawyer, who aspires to be a Member of the House 
or of the Senate, will be precluded or prohibited from 
total exercise of his profession as lawyer. Madam Pres- 
ident, a practicing lawyer elected to the House is usually 
approached by his constituents to appear and defend 
their rights or to redress their grievances but the lawyer- 
congressman will be prohibited by this new provision in 
the Constitution to appear and protect the interest of 
us constituents. If we further expand by mentioning 
Electoral Tribunals, COMELEC, quasi-judicial and 
administrative bodies, that means the lawyer-congress- 
man cannot practice law at all. I am afraid that such 
i ban will discourage young promising lawyers who 
can b ® elected to the Congress from even aspiring to be 
a candidate because the moment he is elected he is 

- ed w S a counsel. This new idea. Madam President 
that a Member of Congress because of his position ^ 
such will influence the members of the judiciary or 
other electoral tribunals, quasi-judicial and administra- 
tive bodies has no factual basis and is more apparent 
than real. I have appeared before municipal and trial 
court judges and personally argued cases supported by 
law and jurisprudence. The trial judges had denied those 
motions which compelled me to go to the annellato 
courts and for the appellate courts to reverse the erro- 
neous decisions of the trial judges. What I believe we 
should avoid is not the appearance in court where the 
lawyer-congressman is arguing or showing the merits of 
his position and the demerits of the opposition As I 
stated earlier this morning, what we should provide 
against are the possible influences behind the scenes or 
in chambers or in private consultations but not in public 
appearances before the pourts or before quasi-judicial 
bodies. 

Madam President, I am in favor of the present provi- 
sion in our Constitution to limit in certain cases the 


appearance as counsel of the Members of Congress 
but never to deny in absolute terms and impose an 
all-extensive prohibition for the exercise of the law 
profession. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Quesada is 
recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to submit this to the 
body. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. If courts of justice whose members 
have security of tenure must be protected against 
political pressure, the more reason for quasi-judicial 
bodies and administrative bodies because they do not 
have any security of tenure. Second, the fact alone 
that there is a prohibition for Members of Congress 
to appear in certain judicial or quasi-judicial bodies is 
proof that there is risk of influencing the decision of 
judicial bodies when Members of the legislature appear 
before them. If this body approves the bigger prohi- 
bition, I cannot understand how we can fail to approve 
a more dangerous situation such as when Members of 
Congress appear before quasi-judicial bodies or 
administrative bodies. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now? 

Will Commissioner Quesada please read again the 
insertion desired? 

MS. QUESADA. “No Senator or Member of the 
House of Representatives MAY PERSONALLY appear 
as counsel before any court of justice, OR BEFORE 
THE electoral tribunals OR BEFORE ANY QUASI- 
JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Has this been accepted by the 
Committee? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Quesada which 
has been accepted by the Committee, please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 25 votes in favor and 8 against; the 
amendment is approved. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


153 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President, my second 
proposed amendment is on line 1 1. Section 19. The pro- 
posal is to delete or strike out the term “financially” 
from the phrase “in any contract with, or in any 
franchise or special privilege granted by the government, 
or any subdivision, agency, or instrumentality there- 
of. . .” 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the proposal to eliminate or 
delete the word “financially”? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. Madam President, and I would 
like to explain this. 

This constitutional provision, which appears in the 
1935 and 1973 Constitutions, has been cleverly inter- 
preted by so Ions in the past to serve their interest, 
permitting them or their clients or cronies to borrow 
multimillion-peso loans Irom government financial in- 
stitutions, like the GSIS, the DBP or the SSS. The inter- 
pretation has run thus: Lending institutions make 
money by charging interest on loans. Therefore, when a 
so Ion borrows big loans from government lending 
companies, it is these companies that profit by the 
transaction, not he. Interpreted thus, the pr o v ision 
cannot be invoked against solons whose claim is that the 
real beneficiaries are the lending companies, and that 
they personally do not have any financial interest in the 

transaction. 

This shrewd circumvention of the provision has 
worked against legitimate, deserving businessmen or 
entrepreneurs. Because of built-in advantages jnherent 
in his position, a solon can easily obtain big loans at the 
expense of highly deserving businessmen with more 
feasible business piojects. ^ 

So, I propose the deletion of the word “financially. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear from the Commit- 
tee? 

MR DAVIDE. Madam President, the present provi- 
sion is taken from the original 1973 Constitution and 
, from the 1935 Constitution. The particular 
proposal is in respect to any contract but that is already 
nnalified bv “directly or indirectly - as the wording 
goes - which means that we cannot perceive an interest, 
whether direct or indirect, unless it is financial, because 
it has reference to any contract, a franchise or special 
privilege granted by the government or any subdivision, 
Lencv or instrumentality thereof, including any govern- 
ment-owned or controlled corporation during ; lus tetm 
The concern of the Commissioner had already been 
remedied in effect, rather in a very explicit way by the 
Regalado’ amendment this morning which amended the 
last sentence of this section and which now reads as 
follows: “He shall not intervene in any matter before 
anv office of the government for his pecuniary benefit, 
or where he may be called upon to act on account of 

his office.” 


So, we believe that, as worded, the provision is so 
all-encompassing and all-embracing that we will have a 
Senator or a Member of the House who cannot even 
practice his legal profession, nor be interested in any 
contract for that matter, nor can he even intervene in 
any cause or matter before any office for his pecuniary 
benefit or otherwise, where he may be called upon to 
act on account of his office. We have installed or en- 
throned a Senator or a Member of the legislature whom 
we can consider to be perhaps, like Caesar’s wife, always 
above suspicion. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I withdraw the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment has 
been withdrawn. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Tingson be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you, Madam President. 

My first amendment will affect Section 4 on page 1, 
which reads: 

No person shall be a Senator unless he is a natural-born 
citizen of the Philippines, and, on the day of the election, is 
at least thirty-five years of age, able to read and write, a 
registered voter, and a resident of the Philippines for not 
less than two years immediately preceding the day of the 
election. 

Madam President, members of the Committee, I pro- 
pose to change “thirty-five” years of age to FORTY 
years of age so that the phrase will read “at least 
FORTY years of age.” 

May I reason out briefly, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. The Gentleman 
has five minutes. 

MR. TINGSON. Personally, the reason why I opted 
for an Upper Chamber in the legislature is that we shall 
be able to develop future chief executives of the land. 
The Senators will, therefore, be looked upon as elder 
statesmen like leaders-in-waiting. In other words, I am 
referring, Madam President and members of the Com- 
mittee, to political maturity. It is at this juncture that 
I would like to make my point in stressing why we 
should make the minimum age requirement of our 
Senators to be 40 years. In the oriental milieu, 40 is the 
age of maturity. Such age is when a man begins to be 
more dignified and also experienced. While there are 
exceptional individuals, most of our leaders attain fun 
maturity at this age when they have already expose 
themselves to the many challenges, even frustrations anc 
defeats. To be a leader, therefore, of national stature 


154 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


requires a personality that has already been mellowed 
with experience; a personality that has already been 
tested by time. I think, we have heard this refrain: “Life 
begins at 40.” 

If we look at the age requirement of the President 
in the 1973 Constitution and now in the proposed 
Constitution, the suggestion is he should be at least 40 
years of age; so are the justices of the Supreme Court. 
Our Senator should be of the same prime age so that 
almost immediately, if necessary, and if he succeeds in 
doing it, he could jump into the high executive office of 
the land. In other words, I am talking of the impulsive 
youth or the impulsive temperament of youth against 
the considered temper of matured men; the indecisive- 
ness of the young versus the definitive wisdom of 
their respective older mentors; I am talking of political 
maturity of men, men of experience against the develop- 
ing mental capacities of the rising generation. I know 
that there were exceptions in the past. Ninoy Aquino 
was below 40 when he became a charismatic figure of 
the Philippines. Our own Jose Rizal was only 35 when 
he said, I would die,” and he did die for the Filipino 
people at Bagumbayan Field. My “tokayo,” Gregorio 
del Pilar, was only 30 years old when he defended Tirad 
ass, General Carlos P. Romulo, the father of our own 
Commissioner Romulo, was only 24 when Manuel 
Si 62 - lscov ered him and became editor of The 
whpn newspaper; the Man from Nazareth was only 33 
when he walked by the shores of Galilee. 

pracfical 11 nra!^^’ 1 know , that w e are talking of 
And so ’ f i m fA? nd political considerations here. 

amendment ’and < make '° aC “ P ' " y 

five.” k 1 F0RTY instead of “thirty- 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT Yp* ■ ■ 
recognized. es ’ '“ ommissl oner Sarmiento is 

MR. SARMIENTO Mav T 

the proposal made bv cJ * mterpose m y objection to 
that at the age o? 3? C ° mmisslo "er Tingson? He says 
said that one acquires n? 1S polltlcall y immature. He 
the age of 40, that onJ 1 ? 0na lty or, ly after reaching 
has not bloomed politically ° 1S below 40 is immature, 

Madam President I „ , 

suffered enough, if one has ^ b ^ beve that if one has 
realities, one has interacted whhttf himse,f to Political 
the land, one who has been e H„ rQ+ ^ ? eople throughout 
of life, even if a person ** hard , k " ocks 
sidered politically mature. We havp •’ f Can be con ' 
history, examples of young men who aTth^T 
35, have contributed a lot to our political cu^turaf 3 °h 
social development: We have Aguinaldo; w^ have Emilio 
Jacinto, who at the tender age of 20 or 21 was already 
the editor of a revolutionary paper; we have Alexander 
the Great who at the tender age of 20, before 30, had 


conquered a great portion of the world. We have Ninoy 
Aquino who, at the age of 35, had shown his political 
maturity in the halls of the Senate and had exposed 
many maladies in our society. And we have Rizal who, 
at the age of 30, before reaching the age of 35, had 
written many books that exposed the ills of the Spanish 
regime. 

So, I humbly submit, Madam President, that even at 
the age of 35, before reaching the age of 40, one can be 
politically mature; one can be an asset of our society 
and country. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I answer that 
inasmuch as he was referring to me? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I would vigorously 
like to object to the statements made by Commissioner 
Tingson and support the statements made by Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento. 

The issue here is statesmanship and it seems that the 
implication is that age is the basis for statesmanship. I 
feel that age is not the primary factor for statesmanship. 
As Commissioner Sarmiento has already expressed very 
clearly, it is one’s commitment to the Filipino people; it 
is his continued struggle for national sovereignty, for 
truth, for justice, for democracy that defines one’s 
responsibility to history. The issue that the youth are 
impulsive, indecisive and politically immature is some- 
thing that we, the students and the youth, have con- 
tinually rejected. We have shown in the past and we 
shall continue to show that the youth and students will 
assert their role in Philippine society. We have a re- 
sponsibility to history and we call on our elders to 
encourage the youth to become active participants in 
the political sphere. 

As we have already expressed, some of our greatest 
leaders and those who have provided inspiration to the 
struggle for national independence were very young. 
Even Commissioner Tingson himself has expressed that 
Dr. Jose Rizal, Emilio Jacinto, Aguinaldo, Benigno 
Aquino, and many others were very young. Therefore, 

I believe, it is not age which defines statesmanship; it is 
commitment to the aspirations of the Filipino people. 

Therefore, I object to this proposal and I suggest that 
we put it to a vote. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. I expected this strong opposition 
from our young handsome men and I was not talking 


WEDNESDAY, )ULY 23, 1986 


155 


indeed of immaturity on their part. May I repeat what I 
said — political maturity of men of experience against 
the developing mental capacities of the rising genera- 
tion. We are talking of men who could immediately 
become President of the country and the age that we 
require of the President is at least 40 years. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Will Commissioner Tingson yield to a 
question? 

MR. TINGSON. Gladly so, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. The Gentleman himself cited the 
examples of the founding fathers of this country, none 
of whom exceeded the age of 35 at the time of the full 
flowering of their talents and genius and their service to 
the fatherland. Does not Commissioner Tingson recall 
that President Aguinaldo was 27 years old when he 
presided over the Malolos Republic; Apolinario Mabini 
at the time he was at the zenith of his political career as 
Prime Minister of the War Cabinet of Aguinaldo was 35, 
Andres Bonifacio was 29; Emilio Jacinto was only 19 
when he wrote the cartilla of the Katipunan. I am 
afraid that if we set the age limit for the Senate at 
40, if we assume that all the founding fathers of the 
Philippines as a modern nation had been resurrected in 
our time and place, none of them would qualify to be a 
candidate for Senator of the Philippines. Does Commis- 
sioner Tingson agree? 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, that is precisely 
why I took the initiative before somebody else men- 
tioned it — of Ninoy Aquino, Rizal, Gregorio del Pilar 
and others — because in the case of General Aguinaldo, 
there was a dearth of leadership among men who were 
available at an age more than what he was then, in the 
case of Mabini, in the case of Rizal. But now, Madam 
President, I am not referring anymore to scarcity or 
dearth of men at that particular age and it seems to me 
that the younger men — I am not certainly saying here 
that younger men, like the two honorable young Com 
missioners who spoke a while ago so passionately, 
defending, of course, what they think should be de- 
fended — should not be given the fullest opportunity o 
rise. What I am saying is, “Time in God’s hand is no 
delay.” 

MR. OPLE. Yes. There is, of course, a reverse 
standard with respect to age. In the American campuses 
of the 1960s, the motto was: If you are over 30, we do 
not trust you. In effect, Commissioner Tingson is 
saying: If you are under 40, we do not trust you. 

MR. TINGSON. I do not say that and I did not mean 
that. 


MR. OPLE. In terms of developing the age qualifica- 
tion for a Member of the Senate, under the provision 
that is under discussion we all know that the velocity of 
information has greatly accelerated since those days of 
the founding fathers. 

Today, it is said that a high school student of 
mathematics and of physics would likely know more 
than the sum total of what, let us say, Galileo and 
Copernicus knew in their time, and that it is possible 
because of these factors - the knowledge explosion, the 
velocity of information - that at a lower age in our own 
society one can possess the kind of knowledge that can 
equip him far better to perform the functions of a mem- 
ber of the legislature than, let us say, his own 
counterpart of several generations ago. Therefore, the 
1935 Constitution set an age floor of 35 for the Senate, 

25 for the House of Representatives, 40 for the Pres- 
ident and the Vice-President. I thought this three- 
layered kind of age qualification responded precisely to 
what Commissioner Tingson calls the maturity needs for 
each category: 25 for the House, 35 for the Senate, and 
40 for the President and the Vice-President. 

Will Commissioner Tingson still insist in the face of 
this evidence that we should set the age floor of the 
Senate at 40? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Tingson 
say? 

MR. TINGSON. I would like to leave that to the 
Commission if the Committee does not accept it. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I have one 
more word. In this day and age of possibilities of 
nuclear annihilation, the leadership of the nation 
should as much as possible be given to those with 
political maturity and allow the younger men to assist 
them and develop while awaiting the time when they 
will have their own chance at leadership. 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. It seems from the arguments of 
Commissioner Tingson that he equates political matur- 
ity with age. It is the consensus all over the world that 
a child of five years now knows more about things and 
of life than the children of yesteryears, for the simple 
reason that he is exposed to more modern technological 
advances. The Commissioner probably meant that at the 
age of 40, one tends to be more careful and more 
cautious. It is about time that we give a chance to the 
younger people. I am no longer 35 but some of the bes 
movies that I did were done when I was 30. And some 


156 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


how I could never recapture the feeling that I was 
on top of the world at that time and at that particular 
age. 

I think that thinking of equating political maturity 
with age is being narrow-minded. The Commissioner 
speaks about the impulsiveness of youth. On the other 
hand, he should also speak about the idealism of youth 
at that particular age, who are not yet jaded by ex- 
periences. It is at that moment when one feels strongly 
that he could achieve great things. 

So may I make an amendment to that and probably 
make the age limit at 30. 

Thank you. 

MR. UKA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair thinks much has suffi- 
ciently been said on this matter. Is there anything new? 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Uka would like to be 
heard on so ageless a problem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recognized. 


it . ' u ^ adam President, I do not belong t 
wonlH ri r y * ecause * am neither young nor old. So 
on this matter ma ^ e ^ eSe ^ ew com rnents before we vot 

cee T d HE PRESIDENT - The Gentleman will please prc 


MR. TINGSON. I am withdrawing, Madam President. 
(Applause) 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. I have another amendment. Madam 
President. This is not a matter of age anymore. The 
amendment is on Section 10, page 3, lines 9, 10, 11 and 
12 : 

However, it may be called to session at any time by the 
President to consider such subjects or legislation as he may 
designate. 

I was wondering whether in a sense we should make it 
more in consonance with the enshrining of the people’s 
power in our new Charter. My amendment would read: 
“. . . However, it may be called to session at any time by 
the President OR BY CONGRESS ITSELF UPON REP- 
RESENTATION OF THE MAJORITY OF THE MEM- 
BERS OF BOTH CHAMBERS AND consider such 
subjects or legislation as THE MAJORITY OF CON- 
GRESS MEMBERS may designate.” 

Madam President and members of the Committee, it 
would seem that it is only the Chief Executive who has 
the prerogative to convene Congress to a special session. 
If Congress is given a concurring authority and some 
powers of the President, like his treaty powers, perhaps 
Congress, too, can convene in special session by urging 
the majority of its members when necessary to have a 
session. I say “majority,” in order to have an outright 
quorum. And this prerogative will be adopted or 
resorted to by Congress to consider such subjects that 
need legislation. 


young once^nm! 16 ones should be kind to tl 

each other. They Mv^ffTh they Sh ° Uld understai 
depends unon y J^r ^ eglns at 40. Age real 

a man thinketh in h^ m ^’ ^ ^ act our Bible says: “/ 

a great In ote^d ?”“• f 0 * he ” 0ld “ 

his progeny here w?th\ relatlve term a "d I think th 
does not matter ac l US C3n tes *BV to this. He said a 

(Laughter) So it depends^ ^ "J i atter does not ag 
thinking of what £ n t P ° n the mind ' 1 am n 
both parties, the young and th^ 1 kn ° W th 

say they should be kind tr> 1° ^ Wl realize this ai 
we can al, vote ’ «** » «■> 

Thank you very much. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam Proc - ^ 

Committee from arguing on tlmt T^’ 1 Wl11 Save 41 
this amendment, knowing that I w^h^ r° propo 
reactions and .wanted l \ hear 'hl^utce of°. 
young men. and I am proud that they lived un to o 
expectations. y 


THE PRESIDENT. We will proceed to a vote Is the 
Gentleman withdrawing? 


MR. DA VIDE. May we have again the very specific 
amendment? 

MR. TINGSON. From line 9 of Section 10: “. . . How- 
ever, it may be called to session at any time by the 
President OR BY CONGRESS ITSELF UPON REP- 
RESENTATION OF THE MAJORITY OF THE MEM- 
BERS OF BOTH CHAMBERS AND consider such 
subjects or legislation as THE MAJORITY OF THE 
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS may designate.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, under Section IQ, 
if the Gentleman would consider the first sentence, he 
will notice that we have a working Congress: 

The Congress shall convene once every year on the 
fourth Monday of July for its regular session, unless a dif- 
ferent date is fixed by law, and shall continue to be in 
session for such number of days as it may determine until 
thirty days before the opening of its next regular session 
exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 

We say that it is a working Congress because actually 
the regular adjournment is only for a 30-day period* 
that is, the end of one session and the commencement 
of the next regular session. In between, from the fourth 
Monday of July up to 30 days before the beginning of 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


157 


the next session, we have the Congress working unless 
by law, enacted by itself, it will determine the length 
of its sessions and the length of its recesses. 

And so, we feel that the proposal is not necessary 
anymore. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, compared to the 
Constitution that we did help write in 1973, would 
Congress under our new Charter meet in session much 
longer? 

MR. DAVIDE. This is practically a restatement of 
the 1973 Constitution, as compared to that of the 1935 
Constitution which limited the session to only 100 days 
a year. Hence, the proposal of the Gentleman would 
have been acceptable if we limited the session to only 
1 00 days a year. 

MR. TINGSON. I am satisfied then, if that is the 
explanation. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Foz be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I have only three little amendments. On 
page 5, Section 18, line 27, after the word “shall,” put 
a comma (,) and then insert the words WITHOUT FOR- 
FEITING HIS SEAT, then, comma (,). On line 30, same 
section, same page, delete the comma (,) after the 
word “corporations” and add the words AND THEIR 
SUBSIDIARIES, then put a period (.) but delete the 
words “during his tenure.” 

These twin amendments will only reflect the intent 
of the Committee as stated by the Chairman during 
interpellations yesterday. This will provide that the 
disqualification of a Member of Congress from holding 
any other office or employment in government is not 
absolute. This means that if he accepts an appointment 
outside Congress, he forfeits his membership in the 
legislature. That is the explanation. Madam President. 

MR. AZCUNA. With respect to the first part ^regard- 
ing forfeiture, it is already there because it says during 
his tenure.” So, if he accepts it, he will have to re- 
linquish his position as Member of Congress. ‘ Tenure 
in law means the actual occupancy ot the office. How- 
ever, with respect to the government-owned or con- 
trolled corporations, does the Gentleman propose to 
add “AND THEIR SUBSIDIARIES”? Is that correct. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. AZCUNA. That is acceptable to us. So, the for- 
feiture really is there and it is a matter of style whether 
the Gentleman wants to say “WITHOUT FORFEITING 
HIS SEAT” and then exclude “during his tenure.” 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, I agree that we can do 
without the first amendment. 

As amended, the first sentence of Section 1 8 will now 
read: “No Senator or Member of the House of Rep- 
resentatives shall hold any other office or employment 
in the government, or any subdivision, agency, or 
instrumentality thereof, including government-owned or 
controlled corporations OR THEIR SUBSIDIARIES, 
during his tenure.” 

That is the provision as amended, Madam President. 

MR. AZCUNA. We accept. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment on Section 1 8 which the Commit- 
tee has accepted? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. FOZ. The second amendment, Madam President, 
has to do with page 6, Section 19, line 15. I propose to 
substitute the words “term of office ’ with TENURE. 
May I explain? 

What is forbidden is financial interest in any contract 
or in any franchise or special privilege granted by 
government. It would be unreasonable, a little unjust for 
us to maintain the prohibition if the Member of 
Congress is no longer in office. If he has lett the office, 
then^I think the prohibition of financial interest should 
no longer apply. And, therefore, that is the reason for 
the proposal to change “term of office” to TENURE. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted? 

MR. AZCUNA. The Committee declines the proposed 
amendment, Madam President, because we feel that the 
Member might resign after using his position in order to 
get a financial interest or privilege availed of. So we 
would like to continue the prohibition during the term 
for which he was elected so that it will apply even if 
he resigns. 

MR. FOZ. That would be quite unfair. The reason for 
the prohibition against financial interest is precisely to 
avoid a situation where a Member of Congress will be 
able to use his influence in order to push through, for 
instance, a contract with the government, and also to 
acquire a franchise or special privilege granted by 
government, not only for himself but on behalf of 
others, perhaps his clients. But when he is no longer a 
Member of Congress, he loses the same influence which 
he would otherwise wield if he were a Member of 
Congress. So it would be quite unjust for the prohibi- 
tion to follow him even if he is no longer a Member of 
Congress. 

MR. AZCUNA. We would like to submit this to the 
Commission, Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. It is just a matter of justice, I suppose. 


158 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


MR. AZCUNA. I somehow feel that the dangers are 
still there, that it could easily be circumvented, that this 
could be quid pro quo, given the possibilities . . . 

MR. FOZ. Under ordinary circumstances, a Member 
would not just resign his position. He would stick to his 
position. Could the Commissioner think of a situation 
where a Member would resign just to be able to push 
through a contract with government? It is quite 
unlikely. 

MR. AZCUNA. In the United States, Madam Presi- 
dent, it often happens that a member of Congress re- 
signs and becomes engaged in a private company that 
does business with the government. At least he should 
wait for the end of his term. 

MR. FOZ. I submit, Madam President. 


dad, Lerum, Maambong, Padilla, Tadeo, Romulo and 
Bengzon. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 5:24 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:28 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Davide is 
recognized. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz would like the 
body to vote on his amendment changing the word 
term” on line 15 of Section 19 to “TENURE.” 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
o Commissioner Foz, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

(Several 3re aga * nst > P^ase raise their hand. 

Several Members raised their hand.) 

amlndmemL losT § V ° t6S “ f3V ° r and 17 against; the 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 4:56 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

22 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT Th« * 

E1N 1 • 1 lle session is resumed. 


people rxtrrf"'- We have 12 
save time, may I pronose ments ’ so ’ in orci 
which I would ask each m-n 3 We ^ ave 3 recess 
one to the Chairman and &£? ^pTpoTaH 

SZS der . aS HS,ed ^ --endarS* 


MR. 


...... A IDE. Commissioner Rama’s propo' 

already been entered in to the draft and discussed 
Committee. 


MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

Commissioner Monsod would be next, followed bv 
Commissioners Nolledo, Aquino. Rodrigo, Ople, Nativi- 


MR. DAVIDE. During the recess, there were several 
amendments proposed by the Commissioners which the 
Committee accepted. There were others which the Com- 
mittee did not accept. So, may we be allowed to state 
for the record the amendments the Committee accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please pro- 
ceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. After this, only those to be explained 
and thrown to the floor will be taken up after the ap- 
proved amendments. 

We will begin with Section 5 on page 2, line 8. 
The amendment is to add a new sentence after the 
period (.) following “representative,” to read as fol- 
lows: “WHERE A CITY IS ENTITLED TO MORE 
THAN ONE REPRESENTATIVE THEY SHALL BE 
ELECTED AT LARGE.” This is the amendment of 
Commissioner Rama. 

In other words, a city will not be physically dis- 
tricted since a city is usually small. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, under this amend- 
ment the six Representatives from Manila will now be 
elected at large; and in Quezon City, four will be elected 
at large, though in the previous elections, there were 
already districts in these cities. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, in the 1984 
election, there were no districts; they were elected at 
large. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


159 


MR. MONSOD. That is why in Manila and Quezon 
City, there are already set districts. I think the problem 
is Cebu City should not be projected to all the cities in 
the Philippines. Cebu City does not have a delineation 
of two districts, but I think we are trying to make a 
general rule out of one problem. 

MR. DAVIDE. May we request Commissioner Rama 
to explain his proposal. 

MR. RAMA. This proposal refers to most of the cities 
in the Philippines. Almost all the cities of the Philip- 
pines cover very small areas, and there is no point in 
subdividing the cities into legislative or congressional 
districts. Perhaps we can make an exception with re- 
spect to Manila. But in the last election, the people were 
quite happy with the setup where all congressional 
candidates had to be elected at large within the city. I 
do not see why it is going to be objectionable now. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, perhaps we can 
make an exception of Manila and Quezon City. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, because these are really specially 
big cities. 

MR. MONSOD. And they have a large number of 
voters there. One has 1.2 or one million, and the other 
one has 800,000 or 900.000. 

MR. RAMA. I would accept an amendment to that 
effect. 

MR. DAVIDE. How should the amendment be placed 
on the main amendment? 

MR. RAMA. Except Manila and Quezon City. 

MR. MONSOD. Are we saying, Madam President, 
that the situation would only arise in Manila and 
Quezon City? Are there no others in the Philippines? 

MR. RAMA. None other. 

MR. MONSOD. How about Caloocan? 

MR. RAMA. It is very small. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, please. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. There are no representatives in this Com- 
mission from other significant cities, like Davao City, 
Cagayan de Oro, Bacolod, Iloilo, Baguio, Dagupan. 
Zamboanga, I think, is represented by Commissioner 
Azcuna. I wonder if by generalizing from the specific 
and possibly unique situation of the City of Cebu, we 
might in fact be meeting the criteria for all the other 
cities. 


MR. RAMA. 1 can think of only three big cities 
among all the cities in the Philippines, and these are: 
Manila, Quezon City and Davao City. At any rate, 
in the last election, that was the setup where all the 
congressional candidates or the candidates to the 
Batasang Pambansa were elected at large in the city. 
There is merit there, Madam President, because it would 
be good for the political health and the political educa- 
tion of the people for all the candidates to cover the 
whole city and explain their positions and discuss 
national issues. I do not think there is any harmful 
effect on the people, even in Manila where all the candi- 
dates are supposed to be elected at large. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I really wish that the 
sponsors in the Committee could develop a general 
principle for universal application instead of making 
exceptions. For example, making an exception of the 
cities and the component municipalities of Metro Manila 
might lead to the impression that this is a very formida- 
ble* exception. It covers a population of about eight 
million. Can we not, therefore, develop a general 
principle from the model of Metro Manila which is very 
substantial with a population of 8 million and, perhaps, 
make an exception of the City of Cebu? 

MR. RAMA. That is not really an exception, Madam 
President. If the Commissioner can recall, in 1978, 21 
candidates had to be elected by all the people of Metro 
Manila. If it was all right then, why should it not 
be all right now? In the 1984 election, I think that was 
the same situation, was it not? 

MR. OPLE. No, it was somewhat different. 

MR. RAMA. It was a little different in 1984, but in 
1978, it was all right. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we defer this in view of the 
conflicting views on the matter? May we proceed to the 
next amendment to which there may be no objection? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I have another amend- 
ment to Section 1 . 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, all amendments 
which the Committee did not accept will be taken up 
later. So, we request the Commissioner to defer his pro- 
posed amendment to Section 1 . 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I think the amend- 
ment to Section 1 has been accepted. My amendment 
was to delete the last phrase on lines 8 and 9. May I read 
the entire Section I 

The Legislative power shall be vested in a Congress of 

the Philippines which shall consist of a Senate or a House 

of Representatives, except to the extent reserved to the 

people by the provision of initiative and referendum. 


160 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


The phrase “except to the extent reserved to the 
people by the provision of initiative and referendum” 
is unnecessary. I propose that the entire phrase, from 
the word “except” to the last word “referendum” be 
deleted. It is not necessary because this provision on the 
right of the people to exercise initiative and referendum 
is already defined in Section 3 1 and in other articles 
of the Constitution that we are drafting. Second, 
it is not tidily worded; and third, it does not answer this 
morning’s prayer of Commissioner Laurel who prayed 
that our Constitution would have the grace and beauty 
of language so that our people would move to its 
melodious cadence. 

THE PRESIDENT. This amendment has been ac- 
cepted by the Committee? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we would rather 
yield to the wisdom of the Commission and submit the 
matter to a vote. 

MR. RAMA. I would submit to a vote but I thought 
this was a little unnecessary and a surplusage which 
would only affect the beauty of the language used in 
Section 1. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

!? E REYES. Madam President, may I speak 
against the proposed amendment to delete? 

cee™ E PRESIDENT - The Gentleman will please pro- 

defefthifd^? 100 ’ Madam President ’ should w e not 

recognize P d RESIDENT ' CommissIon er de los Reyes is 
MR. DE LOS rfvpc tu 

we vest the Wido + Ybb ' The sectlon speaks of where 
that the leLut v P 1Ve P ° Wer ' We are Precisely stating 
the Senate, the House of Ren 76 ^ 6 ^ the followin S : in 
the people by the provkin^ 686 "*^ 65 3nd directly in 
endum. In the Article on J 1S T ° n . 1 J lltiatiy e and refer- 

of the Constitution of CaHfoS, f gl atUre “ Artide IV 

stages: California, for example, Section 1 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. It is even presumptuous for us to say 
that legislative power is vested in the people. Everybody 
knows that the people are the fountainhead of all 
government power. It is not necessary to say that this 
power is reserved for the people because it is the people 
who are the fountain of power, and everybody knows 
that. So, it is not necessary to make such an emphasis 
which means nothing and which only clutters up the 
Constitution. We should have an elegant Constitution 
without too much clutter of words. On both scores, it is 
a redundancy; we cannot invest people with legislative 
power because they are the fountainhead of power. We 
should not include this phrase. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We shall now vote on Commis- 
sioner Rama’s amendment to delete. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 14 votes in favor and 21 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the amendment of 
Commissioners Rodrigo and Rosales are on Section 9, 
page 2, beginning from line 29. The entire section 
should be rewritten to read as follows: “IN CASE OF 
VACANCY IN THE SENATE OR IN THE HOUSE 
OF REPRESENTATIVES, A SPECIAL ELECTION 
MAY BE CALLED TO FILL SUCH VACANCY IN 
THE MANNER PRESCRIBED BY LAW, BUT THE 
SENATOR OR MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF REP- 
RESENTATIVES THUS ELECTED SHALL SERVE 
ONLY FOR THE UNEXPIRED TERM.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. DAVIDE. It is accepted, Madam President. 


The legislative power of tliic q*.,* • 
fornia Legislature which consists of the C 

Assembly but the people reserve u the Senate and 
of initiative and referendum. ° * emse * ves P ow 

In other words, although it « 
section of this Article, we glVe emphaTtot^ 
we recognize tne power of the people to legislate 
the concept of initiative and referendum ConL 
that these are new concepts, they must be placed in 
tion 1 to show the importance given to the peot 
amending our Constitution. y 1 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there need to explain to the 
Members? 

MR. DAVIDE. I request that Commissioner Rodrigo 
be recognized to make the explanation. This is just a 
restatement of the provision of the 1935 Constitution. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Section 9 states that in case of 
vacancy in the Senate or in the House of Representa- 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


161 


tives, the Commission on Elections shall call a special 
election to be held within 60 days after the vacancy 
occurs. It is all right for the House of Representatives 
to call a special election because it would be held only 
in one district. But if one Senator should die and a 
special election will be called for the vacant seat of that 
Senator, the election will be nationwide — in the whole 
country — and imagine the expense that will be in- 
curred. 

During my time in the Senate, Senator Kangleon died 
and the special election was held in the subsequent 
regular election. So, instead of eight candidates for the 
Senate, there were nine candidates and the ninth was 
the one who was to fill the unexpired term of Senator 
Kangleon. However, if the Constitution provides that 
the election shall be held within 60 days, then there is 
no discretion to hold the special election in the coming 
regular election, thereby making it very expensive to 
have a special election nationwide for just one Senator. 

The amendment is a restatement of the 1935 provi- 
sion on this matter. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular amendment proposed by Commissioners 
Rodrigo and Rosales and accepted by the Committee? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, on page 3, Section 
10 lines 10 and 11, Commissioner Rodrigo’s amend- 
ment is to insert the word “SPECIAL” between the 
words “to” and “session.” Then after the word “Pres- 
ident,” place a period (.); then delete all that follow 
beginning with the word “to” up to the period (.) at the 
end of line 1 1 . The entire sentence beginning on line 9 
will now read as follows: “However, it may be called to 
SPECIAL session at any time by the President.” 

The Committee has accepted this amendment, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. The next amendment is on page 5, 
Section 15. We accepted the proposal of Commissioner 
Monsod with the explanation that the portion regarding 
the compensation of the first Senators and Members of 
the House of Representatives shall be taken up under 
the Article on Transitory Provisions. Commissioner 
Monsod’s proposal is as follows: On line 1, insert 
between the article “The” at the beginning of the 
sentence and the word “Senators” the words “SALA- 
RIES OF”; on line 2, delete the comma (,) after the 
word “Representatives” and after the word “shall,” de- 


lete the comma (,) and insert the phrase “BE DETER- 
MINED BY LAW.” Then delete the following words: 
“unless otherwise provided by law, receive an annual 

compensation of thousand pesos each.” Then on 

lines 7 to 10, delete the last sentence starting with “Until 
otherwise provided by law,” so that Section 1 5 will only 
read as follows: “The SALARIES OF Senators and the 
Members of the House of Representatives shall BE DE- 
TERMINED BY LAW. No increase in said compensation 
shall take effect until after the expiration of the full 
term of all the Members of the Senate and of the House 
of Representatives approving such increase.” The phrase 
“Until otherwise provided by law” will now be trans- 
ferred to the Article on the Transitory Provisions. 

The Committee has approved these amendments. 
Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will Commissioner Davide please 
read the first sentence again from “The.” 

MR. DAVIDE. The first sentence will read: “The 
SALARIES OF Senators and the Members of the 
House of Representatives shall BE DETERMINED BY 
LAW.” 

MR. RODRIGO. So they themselves will determine. 

MR. DAVIDE. However, we have the second sentence 
which reads: 

No increase in said compensation shall take effect until 

after the expiration of the full term of all the Members of 

the Senate and of the House of Representatives approving 

such increase. 

MR. RODRIGO. So if there is a long debate and it 
takes about a month before they can pass the law, they 
receive no salary yet. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, because in the Transitory Provi- 
sions, there is initial compensation. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is in the Transitory Provisions. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that is why as I said the last 
sentence will be transferred to the Transitory Provi- 
sions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. I just want to make a manifestation 
that the Committee should really take into considera- 
tion changing all of the relevant provisions in the Consti- 
tution that specify compensation, because we know t a 
after three or five years, that compensation is alieady an 


162 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


obsolete figure. So, we might as well leave it to legisla- 
tion and just provide the initial compensation in the 
Transitory Provisions. 


MR. OPLE. Lines 11 to 12 will now read: “The 
records and books of accounts of Congress shall BE 
PRESERVED AND BE opened to the public. . .” 


THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote? 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Monsod? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, on Section 16, the 
same page 5, we have the amendments of Commissioner 
Romulo which the Committee has accepted. On line 1 2 
between the words “be” and “open” insert the follow- 
ing words: PRESERVED AND; on line 14, delete the 
article “the” between “annually” and “itemized” and 
substitute it with AN, and also the word “expendi- 
tures” and substitute it with the following: LIST OF 
AMOUNTS PAID TO AND EXPENSES INCURRED, 
so that the entire Section 16 will now read as follows: 
“The records and books of accounts of Congress shall 
be PRESERVED AND opened to the public in ac- 
cordance with law, and such books shall be audited by 
the Commission on Audit which shall publish annually 
AN itemized LIST OF AMOUNTS PAID TO AND 
EXPENSES INCURRED for each Member.” 


MR. DAVIDE. It is just an insertion of BE. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee also accepts. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Section 16 as amended? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment, as 
amended, is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On Section 18, Madam President, we 
have the amendments of Commissioner Aquino which 
the Committee has also accepted. 

On line 26, delete the letter “a” before “Member.” 

On line 27, substitute the word “shall” after the word 
“Representatives” with the word “MAY.” 

On line 30, delete the word “tenure” and substitute 
it with the word “TERM” and add the following: 
“WITHOUT FORFEITING HIS SEAT.” 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the intention here 
is o prevent the recurrence of abuses of congressional 

rSrfo, S thifm CUIred in the pasl ' May Uust cite the 
g r ^ ten we tne< * to bring the matter to the 

cZ-T. ’ We COuld not filter any evidence be- 
Consrp^ T°" glven was that ln thc practice of the oid 
h °S „Th a T Un ? Were deemed «P*"ded and, 

Simreme To? , ° f aCCOUnts were kept. But the 
preme Court then ordered the COA to investigate 

g?v n rrrr d '? and u was a ^ * 

poena *5® HoUse ' We could not sub- 

tion of powers So^h • • 6 House becau se of the separa- 
P • o this is meant to correct that situatioa 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

la„gu R age°he“; ‘The records'Lh °^ OTati °" °f the 
Congress shall be PRESERVED AN^^ei 00 ” 1 " 1 ** ° f 

public. DAV,DE - “ PRESERVED AND opened to the 


MR. OPLE. We may have to add 
the phrase “shall be PRESERVED 
just does not sound smooth. 


another BE because 
AND opened. . .” 


MR. ROMULO. It is accepted. 


MR. DAVIDE. May we have again the amendment to 
the amendment? 


I will continue so we can have the full picture of 
Section 1 8 after these amendments. 

On line 31, delete the clause “during the term for 
which he was elected” and the comma (,). 

On page 6, line 1, delete the phrase “while he was a 
Member of Congress” and substitute it with the follow- 
ing: “DURING THE TERM FOR WHICH HE WAS 
ELECTED.” 

So the entire Section 18 will now read as follows: 
“No Senator or Member of the House of Representa- 
tives MAY hold any other office or employment in the 
government, or any subdivision, agency, or instru- 
mentality thereof, including government-owned or con- 
trolled corporations, during his TERM WITHOUT FOR- 
FEITING HIS SEAT. Neither shall he be appointed to 
any office which may have been created or the emolu- 
ments thereof increased DURING THE TERM FOR 
WHICH HE WAS ELECTED.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Point of clarification, Madam 
President. 

May I know from the proponent why the word 
“MAY” was substituted for the word “shall”? 

MS. AQUINO. It was substituted on the condition 
that the phrase “WITHOUT FORFEITING HIS SEAT” 
is accommodated, if only to underscore the fact that the 
effect of noncompliance of Section 18 is the automatic 
forfeiture of the position. Because as originally for- 
mulated, Section 18 would seem to be vague on the 
effect of noncompliance. For example, would this mean 
that one is automatically deemed to have vacated his 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


163 


position or does it need the majority vote of the House 
to declare that his position is vacated? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I ask a 
question for clarification? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Lines 29 and 30, as amended read: 
“. . . including government-owned or controlled corpo- 
ration, during his TERM WITHOUT FORFEITING HIS 
SEAT.” Suppose a Member of Congress resigns, may he 
then hold any other office? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. After his resignation, may he be ap- 
pointed? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Then why did the Commissioner 
change “tenure” to “TERM”? 

MS. AQUINO. The reason is that we are referring to 
the entire term of four years. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. If the prohibition is for the 
whole term, then even if he resigns, he is still disquali- 
fied to hold any office. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, if he resigns from 
his office, he himself has forfeited his seat. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. So he can still accept any office be- 
cause he, by his voluntary action, forfeits his seat. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. But his term is not yet over. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, his term is not yet over, but he 
already forfeited his seat. 

MR RODRIGO. But then why was the word “tenure” 
changed to “TERM”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Precisely to emphasize the forfeiture 
of the seat. That was the original proposal of Commis- 
sioner Foz, but we interpreted it to mean that it was not 
also necessary to forfeit his seat because his tenure has 
ended. 

MR. RODRIGO. But even if his term has not yet 
ended and he resigns from his office, he may be ap- 
pointed? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, because as I said, if he accepts 
a position without first resigning, he is deemed to have 


forfeited his seat; but if he voluntarily resigns, he 
himself by his voluntary act forfeits his seat. 

MR. RODRIGO. He ended his tenure but not yet his 
term? 

MR. DAVIDE. The tenure is up to the time that he 
forfeits his seat or he resigns from office because tenure 
is actual occupancy of the position. 

MR. RODRIGO. Anyway, I think the Committee on 
Style can take care of this. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee on Style will really 
repolish the language. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other manifesta- 
tions? Are we now ready to vote? 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendments 
of Commissioner Aquino on Section 18 which have 
been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendments are approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On Section 29 (1), Madam President, 
we have two amendments which the Committee has 
accepted. The first is the amendment of Commissioner 
Monsod which is on line 25 consisting of the insertion 
of the phrase “EXPENDITURES AND SOURCES OF 
FINANCING, INCLUDING” before “receipts” and the 
deletion of the phrase “based on” and its substitution 
with the word “FROM.” On the same line 27, after the 
word “measures,” put a period (.) and delete the word 
“and.” On line 28, delete the words “of expenditures,” 
so that Section 25 (1) will now read as follows: “The 
President shall submit to the Congress within thirty days 
from the opening of each regular session, as the basis of 
the general appropriation bill, a budget of EXPENDI- 
TURES AND SOURCES OF FINANCING, INCLUD- 
ING receipts FROM existing and proposed revenue 
measures.” 

May we request Commissioner Monsod to explain this 
for purposes of interpretation later. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, in the period of 
interpellations yesterday, we tried to bring out the fact 
that there are many ways of financing expenditures 
other than revenue measures, and what we want to 
only confirm or highlight here is that the government 
should not be unduly restricted by the Constitution in 
the ways to finance the budget. 

That is all. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 


164 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


MR. OPLE. Will Commissioner Monsod yield to just 
one question? 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, gladly. 

MR. OPLE. Recently, a portion of the economic 
support fund from the United States was converted into 
a budgetary measure, presumably to help bridge the 
expected budgetary deficit which I understand is rather 
acute. This was a very exceptional accommodation 
granted to the Philippine government by the United 
States. 

When the Commissioner speaks of a budget of ex- 
penditures and sources of financing outside the receipts 
from existing and proposed revenue measures, does he 
contemplate this as one of the sources of financing? 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, that would be 
one of the ways to finance the expenditures because 
that would be an expansionary but not necessarily an 
inflationary form of financing. 

MR. OPLE. And this would also include, let us say, 
portions of the commodity loans from Japan where 

n™t 8 S nt i! ^ T ade to convert th em into a compo- 
nent of the budget? 


the M bud^t N Wan 1 am ^ SUre aboUt those P arts ° 

w h :r«%ro o y „ ,hes , e wouid to - 

the budeet Rut if •+ • loans that go througl 

feally bf pa?« Ut „ f t LV S bu a d r ' r ity ioan - “ may 

expenditure side. 8 1 ° f ex P en ditures on th 


BY THE PRESIDENT FOR THE OPERATION OF 
THE GOVERNMENT AS SPECIFIED IN THE 
BUDGET.” 

I do not think this would require any explanation 
because this is in the 1935 Constitution. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will the sponsor restate the pro- 
posed amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. It reads: “THE CONGRESS MAY 
NOT INCREASE THE APPROPRIATIONS RECOM- 
MENDED BY THE PRESIDENT FOR THE OPERA- 
TION OF THE GOVERNMENT AS SPECIFIED IN 
THE BUDGET.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Natividad which 
has been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. This is an amendment of Commis- 
sioners Nolledo, Sarmiento and Guingona. Insert a new 
paragraph on page 8, between lines 20 and 2 1 to read as 
follows: “(6) DISCRETIONARY FUNDS APPRO- 
PRIATED FOR PARTICULAR OFFICIALS SHALL 
BE DISBURSED ONLY FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES TO 
BE SUPPORTED BY APPROPRIATE VOUCHERS 
AND SUBJECT TO SUCH GUIDELINES AS MAY BE 
PRESCRIBED BY LAW.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to explain the amend- 
ment, Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. With resnppt tr» 
would include equity contnb^^^p^’ * 

Philippines and otter Tuch B *nk of tf 
1 understand have now risen to about PlTbUUon.’ Wh ‘ C 

com*onen° NS a°d' o^oMhe 1 ”* 861 7 Uld have sever 
tnbutions to such institutions! Madam President^ C ° 

MR. OPLE. That is very enlightening. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there an, u- 
proposed amendments on Section^? of T™ t0 the 
Monsod? (Silence) The Chair hears n.°!? miSsion 
ments are approved. ne ’ t * le a men 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President this is «,» 
ment of Commissioner Natividad which the Commin 
has accepted. On the same Section 25 (l) after q* 
missioner Monsod’s amendment, add a new sentence 
read as follows: “THE CONGRESS MAY NOT l 
CREASE THE APPROPRIATIONS RECOMMEND! 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo will please 
proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The purpose is not to destroy but 
merely to regulate the disbursements to avoid abuse of 
discretion in the use of discretionary funds. 

According to the findings of the Commission on 
Audit, Mr. Marcos was granted by the Batasang Pam- 
bansa large amounts of discretionary funds allegedly f Qr 
the insurgency problem, but which were spent for the 
personal aggrandizement of the First Family and some 
of their cronies. Even existing laws, like the National 
Internal Revenue Code, provide for discretionary funds 
for the Office of the President and other executive 
offices. 

The word “discretionary” in relation to public funds 
is an anathema to the public, and it is high time that this 
Constitutional Commission adopt a rule that will ef- 
fectively regulate the disbursements of discretionary 
funds. 

Government officials who discharge their duties upon 
the tinkle of silver or the dazzle of gold have subtle 
ways of stealing the people’s money. And one of these 
ways is through the so-called discretionary funds. So let 
this Constitutional Commission take a bold stand on 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


165 


this question and, to my mind, our proposed amend- 
ment is a step in the right direction. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioners Nolledo, Sar- 
miento and Guingona which has been accepted by the 
Committee inserting a new paragraph after Section 25 
(5)? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment 
is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, on line 21, the sub- 
paragraph should now be numbered _7 instead of “6” as 
a consequence. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we beg permission 
to go back to page 6. 

THE PRESIDENT. The sponsor will please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. On page 6, between lines 17 and 18, 
insert a new section to be denominated as SECTION 20. 
The Committee on Style will do the resectioning later. 

This is the amendment of Commissioner Ople which 
the Committee has also accepted, which reads: “SEC- 
TION 20 ALL MEMBERS OF THE SENATE AND 
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SHALL, UPON 
ASSUMPTION OF OFFICE, MAKE A FULL DIS- 
CLOSURE OF THEIR FINANCIAL AND BUSINESS 
INTERESTS. THEY SHALL NOTIFY THE HOUSE 
CONCERNED OF A POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF 
INTEREST THAT MAY ARISE FROM THE FILING 
OF A PROPOSED LEGISLATION.” 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, just a word of explana- 
tion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople will please 

proceed. 

MR- OPLE. This proposed amendment seeks to build 
a policy of full disclosure of the affairs of future Mem- 
bers of Congress. Some members of the Committee, 
during the consultation, actually proposed that the 
policy of full disclosure should not be restricted only to 
Members of the legislature. And in the spirit of that 
advice, we hope that in the General Provisions or in the 
Declaration of Principles, some such principles can be 
established to guide the conduct of all officials and 
employees of the government. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. I am in favor of the first sentence of 
this Section 20 regarding full disclosure by Members of 
the legislature of their financial and business interests, 
but not with regard to the second sentence because it 
speaks of proposed legislation. 

May we have the second sentence again. 

MR. AZCUNA. The second sentence reads: “THEY 
SHALL NOTIFY THE HOUSE CONCERNED OF A 
POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST THAT MAY 
ARISE FROM THE FILING OF A PROPOSED LEGIS- 
LATION.” 

MR. PADILLA. I would like to delete that second 
sentence because it is rather difficult, if not impossible, 
to know what are the proposed measures that will be 
filed either in the House of Representatives or in the 
Senate. I think it is enough that there be a full dis- 
closure. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, the second sentence 
really completes the intended sense for the entire 
section. 

There is such a rule in the British Parliament, I under- 
stand — I say I understand because I have not seen the 
same rule with respect to the members of Congress in 
the United States — to establish an obligation so that a 
member of Congress authoring or sponsoring some legis- 
lations which involve, precisely, the financial and busi- 
ness interests they had disclosed could just make a mani- 
festation. Among scientists, this is known as confessing 
one’s bias right at the start, so that his peers in the com- 
munity of scholars will know he has a valued judgment, 
that he is exonerated from any cheating because he 
confessed it from the start. And, therefore, he adheres 
to a standard of purity in scholarship. After that they 
will appreciate what he says because he has admitted 
some valued judgment at the start. 

This amendment is not a bar really to a Member of 
Congress later on to sponsor a bill that may actually 
pertain, in a larger sense, to the business interest that he 
has disclosed. A good example is: Let us say I am a 
coconut king and I became a Member of the Senate. 
And I now sponsor a bill creating a levy, the proceeds of 
which will be used to establish a bank. Then under this 
provision, I am obliged to say that I am a coconut king 
but I am filing the bill, not so much to aggrandize me 
but the 1,400,000 small coconut farmers. And, there- 
fore, I can proceed to sponsor that bill. In the full light 
of the knowledge of all my colleagues that my biases 
have been discounted, they could better appreciate the 
kernel of my logic or the intrinsic merit of my proposal. 
It is a means of building an atmosphere of candor and 
honesty in a legislative body. 

So I hope Commissioner Padilla will allow the Com- 
mittee to retain the second sentence. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, will the Gentle 
man from Bulacan yield to some questions? 


166 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


MR. OPLE. Very gladly, to the Gentleman from 
Manila and Pangasinan. 

MR. BENGZON. Under that example of Commis- 
sioner Ople of the coconut king, why does he still have 
to say that he is a coconut king when he has already 
disclosed at the time he took his oath or assumed office 
that he has, in fact, such coconut interests? He has put 
the House and the whole country on notice before he 
even filed this bill on coconut levy. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, just to be congruent 
with his own disclosure, I believe. 

MR. BENGZON. How about a situation where we 
have a Member of the House of Representatives or the 
Senate who, at the beginning of his term or upon as- 
sumption of his office, is not engaged, for example, in 
the manufacture of hog or poultry feeds, but during his 
term he files a bill that has something to do with feeds 
with the intention thereafter of getting into that 
business, would he be prohibited in any way? Or would 
• 6 f .,. ave t0 . d ^l° se beforehand that the reason he 
business? ^ ^ * S ^ at i ntend s to get into that 


thta^gof«i^gj^ IS jn that?" UP bUS ‘" eSS ° r * he mere ' ! 


is TOt eSSfinlh^ 0 ’ f the beeinnin 8 his term 1 
that would\enefit tUf ^ mtH bttsttiess. So he files a b 

,o di 

remote rau^caVbrLde 6 10 ""°'?'^ ° f Pr ° Ximate ar 
nature, Madam President . a ^ y to sltuatlons of th 
proximate relationships. What 1S C u S6 ’ there are r 
remote potential realitv th t u WC ^ ave * s a radl 
future, and a, fcS ^ speakm' ' “ f Ve ‘ “" foW <” >' 
rigor with respect to the seen ^ ° Wn standard 1 
think he will be covered B Ta S6ntence ’ 1 do n 
his business, he ought to be covered S °° n “ ^ St3rtS 1 

MR. BENGZON. Then he win u 
soon as he gets into that business. &Ve t0 dlsclose 

view R ° PLE YeS ’ Madam President > that is my ov 


MR. BENGZON. Thank you, Madam President 
MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. Will the Gentleman from Bulacan 
yield to a few questions from the Gentleman from 
Pampanga? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

Like Commissioner Padilla, I find wisdom in the first 
sentence of the amendment. The burdensome portion is 
the second sentence, especially as it employs ambiguous 
terms like “POTENTIAL CONFLICT” and “PRO- 
POSED LEGISLATION.” It speaks of the future or of 
anticipatory statements, coupled with the Commis- 
sioner’s admission, which is very nice of him to say that 
when one makes a confession, he gets a prior absolution. 
In other words, irrespective of whether or not there is 
conflict of interest later on since he has already made 
the confession, he is absolved. He can go ahead with his 
project with impunity. Will the Commissioner kindly 
tell us — I heard about his observation of the British 
Parliament about this — why he finds absolute necessity 
of coupling the first sentence with the second sentence. 
Madam President? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, in order to build a genuine, meaning- 
ful and operational policy of full disclosure, I think the 
second sentence has to be retained. 

MR. SUAREZ. Notwithstanding the fact that it 
speaks of something in the future because of the em- 
ployment of the words POTENTIAL and PRO- 
POSED”? 

MR. OPLE. The potential conflict of interest is 
precisely the basis for the Member of Congress notifying 
his colleagues that in view of his prior disclosure of 
financial and business interests, he could not be ac- 
cused of aggrandizing himself through a bill. Incidental- 
ly, the “proposed legislation” there really means no- 
thing more than a bill or a resolution. And the situation 
in a Congress is really dynamic. A colleague could be 
held to account by his own colleagues in the Senate or 
in the House of Representatives on a test of intellectual 
honesty. 

I would like to invite the Commissioner from Pam- 
panga to visualize the situation in a Senate where there 
are 24 Members belonging to maybe more than two 
parties, each jealous of the prerogative to guard the 
integrity of the Senate and each determined to scruti- 
nize the motives of a colleague especially when there is 
prior evidence of a potential conflict of interest. So in 
this example of a dynamic multiparty Senate, it is 
necessary that we retain the second sentence because 
the other Members will take the initiative to check the 
veracity and the honesty of a colleague sponsoring a bill 
that has from the start the color of self-aggrandizement. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


167 


I think it is also necessary in building into the section 
the moral suasion so that the Members that I alluded to 
would not in a brazen and barefaced manner author bills 
designed directly to aggrandize their own business and 
financial interests. However, there is nothing here that 
prevents them from doing so, but we are preparing the 
way. at least for the moral censure of his colleagues, if 
he persists in using his office to aggrandize his own 
family fortunes or his own business or financial interest. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Will the Commissioner object to splitting his amend- 
ment into two, so that we vote on these two sentences 
separately? 

MR. OPLE. To accommodate the genial Commis- 
sioner from Pampanga, which is the closest neighbor of 
the Province of Bulacan, I yield to that very unusual 
approach, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Padilla is 

recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Before we split the two sentences, 
may I ask tlle distinguished proponent whether the 
second sentence will only apply to a bill that is per- 
sonally sponsored or filed by a Member of Congress. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Suppose the bill is filed by a col- 
league who is a coauthor of it, will that also apply? 

MR. OPLE. Then he must share equal responsibility 
like a comaker in a bank. 

MR- PADILLA. Suppose he is not a coauthor, but 
during the deliberations, he supports the bill. He also 
makes a confession by way of amnesty of a possible 
conflict of this proposed bill or legislation. 

MR- OPLE. Madam President, what makes this 
second sentence really unobjectionable is that it lays the 
burden, the onus or responsibility, on the Member of 
the Senate or of the House of Representatives. It does 
ot really restrain him of his liberty of action or his 
freedom to act, but what it merely means is that there is 
a kind of accountability to his colleagues, to the in- 
tegrity of the Senate and to the trust of the people, that 
is built into this. To a large extent, the Senator and his 
colleagues will themselves determine what standards of 
rigor to pursue in the implementation of the second pro- 
vision. To a large extent, it is the individual Senator who 
must assume the burden of living up to the standards 


established in the second sentence, as well as in the first 
sentence. Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. On behalf of the Committee, I think I 
shall attempt to crystallize the fear and apprehension of 
the Members of the Commission pertaining to the 
second sentence. And if I get it correctly, I think their 
apprehension is on the effect of the second sentence. 
Does this in effect immunize the proponent of that 
legislation, precisely, from any liability or accountabi- 
lity because he has, in the first place, already notified 
the world of a potential conflict of interest with that 
proposed legislation? Does this give him license to 
proceed on notwithstanding potential conflict of 
interest? 

MR. OPLE. No, I do not think so. But the Senate and 
the House of Representatives — thanks to the wisdom of 
the Committee on the Legislative — have precisely been 
reserved a large area of autonomy when they write the 
Rules. And in the example that has been cited, I do not 
think any Member of the Senate immunizes himself 
from conflict of interest simply by admitting a bias at 
the beginning. But having served notice on his colleagues 
about the honesty of his intentions, he forwards his own 
interest. And if there is any attempt later on by opposi- 
tion members, let us say in that Senate, directed to a 
member of the majority party to raise a conflict of 
interest, I think there will be a presumption in favor of 
the Senator because he has the courage and the honesty 
to admit his own biases at the start of the proceedings. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chairman of the Committee 
on the Legislative is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. In view of the proposal of Commis- 
sioner Suarez, the Committee proposes and, therefore, 
formally moves that the voting be separate for the 
two sentences. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we restate the first sentence? 

MR. DAVIDE. The first sentence would read: “ALL 
MEMBERS OF THE SENATE AND THE HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES SHALL, UPON ASSUMPTION 
OF OFFICE, MAKE A FULL DISCLOSURE OF 
THEIR FINANCIAL AND BUSINESS INTERESTS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular proposed amendment of Commissioner Ople? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 


168 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. The second sentence would read: 
“THEY SHALL NOTIFY THE HOUSE CONCERNED 
OF A POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST THAT 
MAY ARISE FROM THE FILING OF A PROPOSED 
LEGISLATION.” 

VOTING 


numbered more than 3 to 1 by the Members of" the 
House of Representatives. How should it be of each 
House voting separately? 

MR. DAVIDE. This is two-thirds vote of the Members 
of both Houses in a joint session, but the counting, I 
guess, will be separate. 


THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the second 
sentence of the amendment of Commissioner Ople, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand. ) 

The results show 20 votes in favor and 14 against; 
the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we have another 
proposal of Commissioner Ople which the Committee 
has accepted. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


accepts. 


MR. MONSOD. May I introduce an amendment t< 
that approved amendment. 

C ornm issioner proposing ai 
amendment to the new Section 20? 

W^CH^HF^TS^^Ni Ytt’ * "* USt want to add the phrase OI 
WHICH HE IS AN AUTHOR after “legislation ” 

Dlete^chara*^ ( ' le Committee has now com 

acMptable^am^dmenf 1011 * ^ ' his is a " — > 

MR. DAVIDE, The Committee 

am™Lent ES i?®heIe T any C St' tee !'“ i‘ ccepted 11 

amendment nf r . . y °bJ ec tion to the propost 

“;Ve f chTsr;o„: n t to Sec '‘°" 20 

approved. ’ the amendment 

MR ‘ DAVIDE. M adam President, the other amer 
ment of Commissi oner. Ople , ha , the Committw ha s 

stitute it with the following: “Both' 'housJKM 
JOINT SESSION ASSEMBLED ” so ,,,,?°,e SES J 
paragraph will now read as follows- “The rL^ 6 ^ 
vote of two-thirds of the Members of BOT^HOUSl 
IN JOINT SESSION ASSEMBLED, shaulave ,he s 
power to declare the existence of a state of war.” 

MR. RODRIGO. What is meant by “two-thirds of t 
Members of BOTH HOUSES ? The Senators are o 


MR. RODRIGO. That must be clarified, not of both 
Houses but of each House voting separately. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, the intent of the pro- 
ponent, as well as of the Committee, is that there is a 
joint session assembled but the voting will be separate. 

MR. DAVIDE. So in other words, before “shall” we 
insert VOTING SEPARATELY, so lines 9 to 1 1 would 
now read: “The Congress, by a vote of two-thirds of the 
Members of BOTH HOUSES IN JOINT SESSION AS- 
SEMBLED, VOTING SEPARATELY, shall have the 
sole power to declare the existence of a state of war.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. I may not press the amendment in 
connection with the approved section, but I will get 
the desired clarification from the sponsors because the 
phrase used here is “to declare the existence of a state 
of war.” In the 1935 Constitution, the phrase used is 
“sole power to declare war.” Will the sponsor be kind 
enough to tell us the difference between “to declare the 
existence of a state of war” and “the sole power to 
declare war”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Commissioner Azcuna will answer for 
the Committee. 

MR. AZCUNA. The change, Madam President, from 
“sole power to declare war” to to declare the existence 
of a state of war” is in line with the renunciation of war 
by the Philippines, so that we will not start a war, but if 
war is started on us, then we can declare that it exists. 
This is the wording of the 1973 Constitution which 
departed from the 1935 Constitution in order to em- 
phasize that what we renounce is an instrument of 
national policy. 

MR. SUAREZ. So it is a defensive characteristic. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, it is defensive. 

MR. SUAREZ. The “existence of a state of war” 
means we are invaded, not us invading some other 
country. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


169 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. I will not press the 
amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to 
pose an important query to any member of the Commit- 
tee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Where does the sponsor base the 
two-thirds vote of the House? What does he mean by 
“of the House”? Is it two-thirds vote of the entire 
membership of each House or two-thirds vote of the 
quorum? 

MR. DAVIDE. It means two-thirds vote of all the 
Members of each House, but in a joint session. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 

recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I wonder whether the Committee 
could favor us with a very short definition of what it 
means by “war” here, because I understand there are 
two different meanings of war. Considering that Com- 
missioner Azcuna is a professor of international law, 
probably he could enlighten us as to the exact meaning 
of “war” as used in this particular section. 

MR. DAVIDE. Commissioner Azcuna will answer for 
the Committee. 

MR. AZCUNA. War is armed hostilities between two 
states. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we have another 
amendment which the Committee has accepted, and 
that is on page 9, Section 27 (2). 

THE PRESIDENT. Have we approved it? 

MR. DAVIDE. May we request then for a vote on the 
Ople amendment as amended by Commissioner Rod- 
rigo? The Monsod amendment is also subject to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the sponsor please clarify? 

MR- DAVIDE. The amendments of Commissioners 
Ople and Rodrigo were on page 7, Section 22 (2), such 
that Section 22 (2), lines 9 to 11. will now read as 
follows' “The Congress, by a vote of two-thirds of the 
Members of BOTH HOUSES IN JOINT SESSION AS- 
SEMBLED, VOTING SEPARATELY, shall have the 
sole power to declare the existence of a state of war.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to these 
proposed amendments? (Silence) The Chair hears none: 
the amendments are approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. I just want this 
clarified. I understand early this morning the second 
paragraph of Section 22 was transferred to Section 23, 
which was done upon motion of Commissioner de los 
Reyes. I just want to find out if there have been changes 
on that. 

MR. DAVIDE. The observation. Madam President, 
is correct. The second paragraph amended by Commis- 
sioners Ople and Rodrigo has, per the amendment this 
morning, become paragraph 1 of Section 23 as a conse- 
quence of the Regalado amendments. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, at any rate, we 
will remember the sections again because of the addition 
of another Section 20. Section 20 becomes Section 21 
and so on. So it is just a matter of renumbering. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the next amend- 
ment? 

MR. DAVIDE. The next amendment that the Com- 
mittee has accepted is by Commissioner Monsod on 
page 9, line 27, affecting, therefore, the second para- 
graph of Section 27. This consists in the insertion of the 
following phrase between “but” and “bill “EXCEPT 
APPROPRIATIONS OF CONSTITUTIONAL BODIES 
GRANTED FISCAL AUTONOMY UNDER THIS CON- 
STITUTION” and in the addition of a comma (,) after 
it. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Will the proponent of the amendment, 
Commissioner Monsod, yield to a question? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. The exercise of the veto power by the 
President or by the Prime Minister, under most Consti- 
tutions that have come to my knowledge, is subject to 
no restrictions except to the right and the power of the 
legislature to override that veto by a two-thirds vote in 
jurisdictions like the United States and the Philippines, 
prior to the 1973 Constitution, and even under the 
1973 Constitution, through the several permutations in 
the office of the head of government from Pibne 
Minister to President, etc. Will this make this Constitu- 
tion truly unique in the sense that we are restricting i ' 
veto power of the President of the Philippines so tn 
there are areas of the budget that he cannot have acc 
to? Whereas, normally, the procedure wouk e or 


170 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


House of Representatives and the Senate, acting upon 
their perceptions that the budgets of the constitutional 
commissions ought not to be diminished in any manner, 
to proceed to override the veto of the President, here 
the veto of one part of the budget does not mean a veto 
of the whole budget? Does Commissioner Monsod con- 
template that situation where there will be sacrosanct 
areas of the budget, inaccessible to the veto power of 
the President, the logic of which is that that veto power 
can be overturned by a majority or by two-thirds vote 
of the Congress where they believe that the budget of 
the constitutional commissions ought not to be 
diminished in any way? 


MR. MONSOD. The Commissioner will recall tha 
when the provision giving fiscal autonomy to the judi 
ciary was presented to the body, we were the ones whc 
denied to it the percentage of the budget because, pre- 
cisely, we wanted the judiciary to go through the 
process of budget-making to justify its budget and to go 
through the legislature for that justification. But we 
also said that after having gone through this process, it 
s ould have fiscal autonomy so that there will be an 
automatic and regular release of such funds. The whole 
urpose o t at provision is to protect the independence 
iudiri^r\ U '?? wbde at same time not giving the 
moZc ~ Ca " a „ positio " of privilege by an 

the General Appropriations Bm"' f’ residen h t " 

basis of a majority vote And u" t J e 

power to vptn thJ e ‘ . nd ^ President has the 

“ “ rzT„ n r or - say ’ the judicia,y ’ 

the judiciary f r0m i t c * P ° stpone or to intimidate 

are saying is it may b e true than! 1 1 And What W6 

a two-thirds vote of the 1 * m ? y be overcome by 
significant difference in bUt that is a very 

quired. And the veto of th 31 p 0Unt of the vote re- 
happen, precisely in thn 6 resider *t would only 
get back at tl/’judicia™ * ti^T where he wan ts to 
politics involved in the f ° re ’ there would be 

the veto. So my proposed amt °h ^ blU m overridin g 
give the intent of this bodv full^™ 611 * Seeks merely to 
no. frustrated by a veto $ ° ' ha ' “ “ 

maxim to which ^subscrib^T J resident - There is a 
interdependence can become a tv ndependence without 
familiar with the executive tyranny^ t a ,! thoU8h we are 
forms of potential tyranny that o ny ’ there are other 
legislative or a judicial Jy * Tt £* ' he fo ™ of a 
ing the independence of the judiciary ? stren 8 then - 
in converting it into an island of nHviil do . n °! belleve 
that it be spared the equal risks wfth othp 6 ™ Sense 
the exercise of the presidential veto So ° f 

idem, I just want to bring forth these neckary oSseivt 

tions and to manifest my intention that I would like To 
vote against this amendment if presented to the floor 

Thank you very much. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Chairman of the Legisla- 
tive Committee is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee would also like to 
emphasize that the budget is prepared by the President 
himself. So he allocates already the operating expenses 
for the government including those for the constitu- 
tional commissions. And as a consequence of the 
Natividad amendment, the Congress cannot increase 
what is appropriated by the Office of the President for 
the operation of the government as specified in the 
budget. So, necessarily, we feel that there is no sense for 
the President to veto a particular item for the judiciary 
or the constitutional commissions which have been 
granted fiscal autonomy when he, himself, is the original 
proponent of the budget for these entities. 

MR. OPLE. If the possibility of veto is so remote and 
so absurd, why do we have to provide this provision in 
the Constitution? 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. We have to, because there may be 
some other items in the appropriations as approved. 
Perhaps, these may be decreased by the legislature, and 
the President may not agree to a decrease in the appro- 
priations for certain items regarding the operation of the 
government. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I support fiscal autonomy for the 
courts and for the constitutional bodies so I voted in 
favor of fiscal autonomy. But my understanding of 
fiscal autonomy is that there is an automatic release of 
the funds but not insofar as the appropriation of the 
funds is concerned. I would like to ask the sponsor a 
question. It is true that the President recommends the 
line-item budget, but is it possible for the legislature to 
increase the appropriation for, let us say, the Commis- 
sion on Elections or the Commission on Audit? 

MR. DAVIDE. Under the Natividad amendment, 
any appropriation embodied in the budget for the 
general operation of the government may not be in- 
creased by the Congress, which is a restriction also 
embodied in the 1935 Constitution. 

MR. RODRIGO. Is this only for the executive depart- 
ment? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, for the operation of the govern- 
ment. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


171 


MR. RODRIGO. So the items are recommended by 
the President for the operation of the government. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, for the operation of the govern- 
ment. This would refer, therefore, to the current operat- 
ing expenditures of the government, if I am correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. It might not be increased. 

MR. DAVIDE. It cannot be increased. 

MR. RODRIGO. Can the items be changed without 
increasing the amount? Let us say, one item is divided 
into two or three or two items are merged by the 
Congress. 


sioner Ople: “THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, IN THE 
EXERCISE OF THEIR TAXATION POWER. SHALL 
CONFORM TO THIS STANDARD.” So that the entire 
Section 28 (1) will now read as follows: “The rule of 
taxation shall be uniform and equitable. THE LOCAL 
GOVERNMENTS, IN THE EXERCISE OF THEIR 
TAXATION POWER. SHALL CONFORM TO THIS 
STANDARD. The Congress shall evolve a progressive 
system of taxation.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I just want to ask 
a question. 


MR. DAVIDE. That can be done by the Congress. 

MR. RODRIGO. That can be done. Suppose the 
President does not like what the Congress did, can the 
President not veto? Shall we deprive the President? I 
just want to add that I think due to an overreaction to 
what Marcos did, we are emasculating too much the 
power of the President whom we will elect in the future. 
Let us remember that we are for a presidential system of 
government because we believe also in sufficient powers 
given to the President. We do not want to give him 
too much powers which he can abuse, but let us not 
emasculate his powers, otherwise, he will be ineffective. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. This is a chapter on the legislature. 
Is this amendment about the power of a local govern- 
ment? Is this not better transposed to the Article on 
Local Governments? 

MR. DAVIDE. We would like to hear from Com- 
missioners Ople and Nolledo, the Chairman of the 
Committee on Local Governments. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree with Commissioner Rodrigo. 


MR. DAVIDE. In view of the objections, Madam MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

President, we request that the matter be voted by the 

Commission. THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will the sponsor please repeat the 
words to be inserted? 

MR. DAVIDE. The words to be inserted between the 
words “but” and “bill ” on line 27, page 9, are the 
following: “EXCEPT APPROPRIATIONS OF CONSTI- 
TUTIONAL BODIES GRANTED FISCAL AUTO- 
NOMY UNDER THIS CONSTITUTION.” 

VOTING 


MR. OPLE. If there is a joint guarantee of both 
Gentlemen, Commissioners Nolledo and Rodrigo, that 
they will extend the hospitality of the local govern- 
ment’s article to this concept, I would release the Com- 
mittee from its previous acceptance of the amendment. 

Thank you very much, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this an amendment of Commis- 
sioner Ople? 


THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Monsod which has been 
accepted by the Committee, please raise their hand. 
(f e w Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 10 votes in favor and 18 against; the 

amendment is lost. 

MR DAVIDE. There is one final amendment that has 
accepted by the Committee, Madam President, 
I ch is on page 9, line 30, Section 28 (1). After the 
W ^'od (•) following the word “equitable” insert the 
following sentence that was recommended by Commis- 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. I am sorry, I thought it was 
Commissioner Romulo’s. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. Just a word. Madam President, 
before we leave this subject, with the leave of the Com- 
mittee. There is an urgent reason for building this into 
the lule on unitorm and equitable taxation. The 
Supreme Court is cluttered with many cases from the 
provinces and cities, because in using their taxation 
function now under the Local Autonomy Act, they 
are accused of not conforming to the constitutiona 
standard of uniform and equitable taxation. As a result, 
the revenue position is very much impaired and, there- 


172 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 1986 


fore, a clarification by the simple sentence in the 
Constitution that they shall conform to this standard 
of uniform and equitable taxation will, I think, eliminate 
a lot of confusion. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us dispose of this first. 

So, as we understand it, the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Ople is withdrawn. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. It is withdrawn. 

THE PRESIDENT. On the understanding that it will 
be transposed to the Article on Local Governments. 


MR. DAVIDE. To the Article on Local Governments, 
yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. In view of the hour. Madam Pres- 
ident, and of the fact that the other amendments are 
not acceptable to the Committee. I move that we 
adjourn until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 8:02 p.m. 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


173 


R.C.C. NO. 38 
Thursday, July 24, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:44 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody v/ill please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Decoroso R. Rosales. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. ROSALES. Almighty and benevolent God, with 
bowed heads and humble hearts, we fervently beseech 
Thee to baptize this Assembly with the fire of the Holy 
Spirit, that we may be enlightened and inspired to for- 
mulate a new Charter that would truly embody and 
enshrine the dreams, sentiments, ideals and aspirations 
of our suffering people. Grant this to us, O Most Merci- 
ful Lord. 

Holy Virgin, Mother of God, at whose behest our 
Lord, Jesus Christ, performed the first miracle at the 
wedding celebration in Cana, with bended knees, we 
pray for Thy Motherly intercession and invoke Thine 
aid. Mater Christi Ora Pro Nobis. Amen. 

THE PRESIDENT. We wish to acknowledge with 
thanks the presence of the grade school students of St. 
Scholastica’s College and we wish to assure them that 
the Commission is drafting a fundamental law which 
will ensure a peaceful future for our youth and for the 
generations to come. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Aquino 

. Present 

Nolledo . . . . 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Bacani 

. Present 

Padilla 

. . Present* 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Bemas 

. Present* 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. . Present* 

Tadeo 

. . Present* 

Gascon 

. . Present* 

Tan 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . , 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . . 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. . Present 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Laurel 

. . Present* 

Uka 

. . Present 

Lerum 

. . Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

, . . Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present* 

Villegas . . . . 

. . . Present 

Monsod .... 

. . Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 34 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence 
of a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


174 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolution on First Reading, and Communications, the 
President making the corresponding references: 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 532, entitled: 

RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE PROFOUND APPRECIA- 
TION OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION TO 
THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT FOR FREE ELECTIONS 
(NAMFREL) FOR THE INVALUABLE ASSISTANCE IN 
ORGANIZING PROVINCIAL CONSULTATIONS. 

Int Quesada ^ H ° n ' Sarmiento > Villacorta and 

To the Steering Committee. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Sode^^kn^bWtJ P 16 { 5° Uthem) Philippines Physics 
mission into a constitutional*^^ .^ t0nUC Energy C ° m ' 
onm U ) ni “' i0n N °' 288 - Constitutional Commission 
To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Metropolitan Tritfc^rt^f J idallon Ma gtolis of the 
Quezon Chy addressed i Branch XLI > 

Rigos, proposals a r-r> !^ e ^ onora ble Cirilo A. 
teaching of religion in n § l, 11 * 10 ! 131 provis i° n on the 
high schools. lc e l eme ntary schools and 

(Communication No 289 _ . 

of 1986) institutional Commission 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Roque B Daiao 
Southern Leyte, proposing a provision b^mak’ MaaS * n ’ 
tory the establishment of vocational schools rf ma J da ' 
and college level) in all capital towns of the count™ ^ 

(Communication No. 290 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Letter from the Philippine Chamber of Communications, 
Inc., signed by Mr. Santiago Morales of Room 525, SMS 
Bldg., 120 Juan Luna, Binondo, Manila, suggesting a 
constitutional provision that only citizens of the Philip- 
pines shall be allowed to sit in the governing body of 
any public utility and no foreigner or corporation, asso- 
ciation, or any other entity which is not wholly owned 
by Filipinos shall be allowed to manage, control, 
administer or operate public utilities. 

(Communication No. 291 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Resolution from the Philippine Federation of Savings 
and Loan Banks, Inc., Room 306, Puso ng Maynila 
Bldg., comer U.N. Avenue and Mabini Street, Ermita, 
Manila, signed by its President, Noli B. Bajada, and 
other Members of the Board of Directors, proposing a 
constitutional provision which would inculcate credit 
worthiness in the youth. 

(Communication No. 292 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Resolution No. 07, S. 1986, of the Southern Philippine 
Muslim Youth Association, c/o P.O. Box 5452, Uigan 
City, signed by its national Chairman, Datu Camad M. 
Ali, urging consideration and full implementation of the 
Bangsa Moro Autonomous Government within the 
framework of the national sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of the Philippines. 

(Communication No. 293 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Ernesto P. Tupas of Rosal-Grande Sts., 
TWHA Village, Dumoy, Toril, Davao City, suggesting 
that the filing and payment of income tax be embodied 
in the Constitution. 

(Communication No. 294 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Mr. Simeon V. Enriquez of 635-E A. 
Mabini St., Caloocan City, Metro Manila, proposing a 
constitutional provision on social justice. 

(Communication No. 295 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Ms. Roxane S. Rodriguez of Naga City, 
containing her comments and suggestions on the various 
issues under consideration by the Constitutional Com- 
mission. 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


175 


(Communication No. 296 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Santiago R. Merino of 23 Bagtikan St., 
Pilar Village, Las Pinas, Metro Manila, suggesting, among 
others, the adoption of the policy of neutrality. 

(Communication No. 297 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1 986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from LUMAD people, signed by Messrs. 
Precioso M. Tapitan and Vicente Pedrosa and four 
others, proposing a policy of neutrality and nonalign- 
ment, a bill of political and civil rights, a bill of econo- 
mic, social and cultural rights, autonomy for the Cor- 
dillera and LUMAD and Muslim peoples of Mindanao, 
and systems of recall and initiative, among others. 

(Communication No. 298 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Position paper of NAMFREL, Pitogo Municipal 
Chapter, proposing, among others, provisions on the 
legislature, to wit: four-year term for a bicameral legis- 
lature, question hour to include the President, the 
creation of a commission on appointments, the declara- 
tion of martial law for a maximum period of two 
months after consultation with the legislature and that 
the President cannot dissolve the legislature. 

(Communication No. 299 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Letter from Ms. Charito Apao de la Pena of 749 Capis- 
trano Street, Molave, Zamboanga del Sur, proposing the 
retention of the U.S. military bases for economic and 
security reasons; a federal form of government; and the 
principle of self-determination regarding the Sabah 
issue. 

(Communication No. 300 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Antonio S. Rodriguez of Baclay, Tuku- 
ran, Zamboanga del Sur, suggesting that the Members of 
the Commission on Elections and the Commission on 
Audit be appointed by civic and religious groups to 
make them truly independent. 

(Communication No. 301 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 


Letter from Mr. Esmeraldo M. Ignacio of 102 Sta. Maria 
Norte, Binalonan, Pangasinan, suggesting that theft of 
fruits, root crops, and other vegetables be given a 
heavier penalty. 

(Communication No. 302 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Mr. Arsenio D. Castillo of 14 Loans St., 
GSIS Village, Project 8, Quezon City, Metro Manila, 
saying that the present electoral system is the root of 
the evils and difficulties that now plague the country, 
and proposing an electoral system whereby the leaders 
in each barangay shall elect the barangay chairman; the 
barangay chairmen shall elect the municipal mayor from 
among themselves; the municipal mayors shall elect the 
provincial governor from among themselves; and the 
provincial governors shall elect the President also from 
among themselves to minimize expenses on the part of 
the government and the candidates. 

(Communication No. 303 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Position paper of BAGUHIN (Citizen’s Movement for 
Continuing Change), signed by the members of its 
national directorate, on the tenure of the office of 
President Corazon C. Aquino and Vice-President 
Salvador H. Laurel. 

(Communication No. 304 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Pio B. Campaner from BASICA United 
Veterans-VFP, Inc., Bagong Silang, Caloocan City, 
Metro Manila, suggesting that a voter whose name is 
omitted from the voters list of the precinct where he 
registered be allowed to vote upon presentation of a 
voter’s affidavit, with his picture attached, duly signed 
by the members of the board of election inspectors; and 
suggesting the grant of a life pension to veterans who are 
65 years old and above. 

(Communication No. 305 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from Mr. Juan F. de Jesus of 936 Del Monte 
Avenue, San Francisco del Monte, Quezon City, pro- 
posing that elected barangay officials elect the munici- 
pal mayor, vice-mayor, and councilors, who will then 
elect the provincial governor, vice-governor, and boar 
members, who in turn will elect the congressmen ot the 


176 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


different districts of the province, who will in turn elect 
the President and Vice-President. 

(Communication No. 306 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 


honorable members of the Committee to please come 
forward. 

MR. DA VIDE. May we request Commissioners Jamir, 
Trenas, Aquino, Calderon and Rodrigo to join us? We 
still have more amendments to consider. 


Letter from Mr. E. Garcia of 985 Padilla St., San Miguel, 
Manila, for the Kilusang Pangkalahatan Kaunlaran 
(KPK), submitting a position paper, entitled: “Consti- 
tutional Requirements for Genuine Land Reform.” 

(Communication No. 307 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Letter from Mr. Alfredo M. Libit of NBI Sub-Office, 
Calapan, Oriental Mindoro, proposing a provision in the 
Bill of Rights that would deter the wanton killing of 
witnesses by providing for the waiver of the right of the 
accused to confront witnesses against him and the sworn 
statement of said witnesses be received in evidence 
without cross-examination. 

( ^°,n^ nication N°- 308 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

£ * e , fission on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Tarlar- ^ r ° m ^ r ’ ^ or ^ r *° R- Razalan of Mayantoc, 
hectares P n°^ P°sing that small landholders with seven 
tion of P n \r °^>'} 3e exem Pted from the implementa- 

on them £nn °; h 2? xf d that leasehold ^tracts forced 
on them during the Marcos regime be cancelled. 

of mer tl0n ~ Constitutional Commission 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

(A CONSIDERATION OF C.R. NO. 22 
( rticle on the Legislative/National Assembly) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 
act^as th^ Fbo? L^adeTbv^^hTt’ 1 WiU continue to 

ZorTKoT™ ^ 

mentl on the Articl^nthrL^ative ? ' ^ ^ 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, we will take up 
the amendments which were not accepted by the Com- 
mittee, and accordingly, I ask that Commissioner Rama 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, this amendment was 
deferred yesterday. One of the reasons for its deferment 
was the misapprehension that there was an election by 
district in some of the cities in Metro Manila. The fact is 
that there was no election of representatives to the 
Batasang Pambansa by district in any of the cities of 
Metro Manila. So, there is no such thing as double 
standard as one rule for Cebu and other cities, and 
another rule for the cities in Metro Manila. At any rate, 
I am modifying my amendment with the knowledge and 
consent of the Chairman of the Committee. 

Madam President, my amendment would apply to 
Section 5. On page 2, line 8, after the period (.) I pro- 
pose to insert this sentence: UNLESS OTHERWISE 
PROVIDED BY LAW, REPRESENTATIVES OF 
CITIES SHALL BE ELECTED AT LARGE. The reason 
for this, Madam President, is that based on our ex- 
perience in the last election we have discovered that 
electing representatives at large to Congress in a city is 
less expensive than electing them by district because the 
candidate could share with his colleagues who are run- 
ning with him the expenses for election propaganda, 
radio, television, transportation and meetings. There- 
fore, a less expensive election is more democratic, less 
personal, less bitter and less acrimonious because it is 
not a “mano-mano” fight in a small district between 
two candidates for Congress. Our honorable President 
can confirm this, that this system of election is more 
democratic, less expensive, less bitter and less personal. 

Another reason is that if the representatives are 
elected at large, we have a wider field from which we 
can pick the best candidates. We are not limited to a 
certain small district where we have to look for the best 
qualified resident to be put up as a candidate. We have 
the whole city as our field of choice. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there u . . „ y 

The Chair hears none; the motion is^pproved 

The body will now continue the period of amen, 
ments on the proposed resolution on the Article ™ tf 

Legislative. 

May we invite the Chairman of the Committee on tl 
Legislative, the Honorable Hilario G. Davide, Jr., and th 


Madam President, another reason is that if one is 
elected at large as representative of a city, he has an 
overview of the problems of the city. He establishes 
priorities when he solves the problems of the city, not 
on the basis of a small portion of that city but of the 
city as a whole. 

Madam President, I ask that the Committee decide on 
this amendment. 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


177 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the clear understanding that any 
other scheme may be adopted later on by the Congress 
of the Philippines and that in the ordinance to be ap- 
pended to this new Constitution this Commission itself 
will reapportion the seats again taking into account the 
number of inhabitants in a given city and the standard 
prescribed for under this proposal, the Committee 
accepts. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Yesterday, we interposed some 
reservations about this system. May I just ask for a 
suspension of the session because we want to convey 
some statistics to the proponents. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 1 0: 05 a. m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10: 14 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Rama seeks to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, after the conference 
with the leadership of the Commission, I withdraw my 
amendment on the assurance that this matter and the 
purpose for which I presented the amendment will be 
taken up in the ordinance to be appended later. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the honorable Chair- 
man say? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, indeed this matter 
can be resolved in the proposed ordinance to be ap- 
pended to the Constitution with respect to the division 
of the entire Philippines into legislative districts. 

MR. RAMA. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who will be the next? 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, let me explain first 
our procedure. 

We are now discussing section by section the pro- 
posed amendments which the Committee did not accept 
yesterday. 

The next proponent should be Commissioner Lerum 
but he wishes to waive his position until the discussion 
on the party list system comes up. So, the next is Com- 
missioner Gascon. May he be recognized, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. Madam President. 

My amendment is on Section 2, line 12. After the 
words “at large,” insert the phrase THROUGH A 
PARTY LIST SYSTEM; so, the whole section will read: 
“The Senate shall be composed of twenty-four Senators 
who shall be elected at large, THROUGH A PARTY 
LIST SYSTEM, by the qualified voters of the Philip- 
pines, as may be provided by law.” 

Basically, the spirit of this amendment is to at least 
give assurance that the Senate will not be dominated by 
one or, maybe, two parties alone. The party list system 
would assure as much proportionate representation in 
this august body. I believe that through this system in 
the Senate, we can at least approximate a democratiza- 
tion of our legislative system by encouraging even small 
parties which would perhaps lose if they were to be 
pitted against large well-oiled political parties in an 
election for the Senate on a winner-take-all basis. With a 
party list system, even the small political parties with 
political aspirations and ideals and which could be sup- 
ported by a substantial bloc of the electorate could 
perhaps be assured of certain seats. For example, if the 
seats for election were to be 24 at one time, a particular 
party would need only 4.2 percent of the votes to be as- 
sured of one seat. If the seats for election were to be 12, 
a particular party would only need 8.3 percent of the 
votes; and if the seats for election were to be 8, a par- 
ticular party to be assured of one seat will only need 
12.5 percent of the seats. Definitely, the larger and well- 
oiled political parties would be assured of more seats; 
however, we are encouraging smaller parties to com- 
pete evenly with these large political parties in that 
arena. That is the basic spirit of this proposal. 

With regard to sectoral representation, I support 
Commissioner Lerum’s option to even assert that there 
should also be sectoral representation in the Senate on 
the basic principle that we must democratize the legis- 
lative body. I feel that a party list system could suffice 
also if we will be bogged down by the mechanics of 
sectoral representation on the Senate level, so that cer- 
tain sectors could proclaim certain political parties 
adhering to their interests, or even multisectoral bodies 
could unite and form one major political party. These 
are some ideas in my mind. The only point I would like 


178 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


to assert here is — let us try, when we are implementing 
this bicameral system, to veer away from a two-party 
system and to encourage a multiparty setup to as much 
a degree as possible. 

We know for a fact that a bicameral system en- 
courages a two-party system. It encourages the two 
largest or two most well-oiled and well-moneyed parties 
to dominate while the other political parties will be left 
in the dustbin of history. We have a commitment to 
various people’s organizations that have asserted their 
interests in the past 20 years to assure them that even 
the Senate could be an arena where they can compete. 

Thank you. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, may I continue? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 


MR. LERUM. May I request that we defer discussion 
on sectoral representation until after we have finished 
the freewheeling discussion on the party list system? 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Gascon have 
any o jection that we defer this until later in the day? 


MR. GASCON. I have no objection. 


sionw M^tirt h°’ Madam President, I ask that Commi 
sioner Monsod be recognized. 


nize™ PRESIDENT - Commissioner Monsod is recc 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President 
propose an amendment on page 10. 


I would like to 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

™ E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Davide is recog 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Padilla be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Vice-President Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, my proposed 
amendments are on Section 17 on page 5 unless there 
are anterior amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President may proceed. 

MR. PADILLA. My first amendment is to eliminate 
the clause on lines 19 to 23, which reads: 

. . . but each House shall surrender the Member involved 

to the custody of the law within twenty-four hours after its 

adjournment for a recess or for its next session, otherwise 

such privilege shall cease upon its failure to do so. 

My first reason is that said sentence does not appear 
in the 1935 Constitution but was inserted in the 1973 
Constitution. I think it is unnecessary. Moreover, 
the House or the Senate is not the bondsman or the 
custodian of the Member affected thereby. Will the 
Committee accept the proposal? 

MR. DAVIDE. First of all, we would like to find out 
if Commissioner Padilla will not insist on the other 
proposals he made on this particular section. 

MR. PADILLA. No, I still have a few more amend- 
ments, but that is the first one on this Section 17. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee accepts the proposed 
amendment on Section 17 which consists in the deletion 
of the semicolon (;) after the word session on line 19 
and all the words thereafter from lines 19 to 23 up to 
the period (.) following the word “so.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 


ponents wtosTam M d y 1 request that the other pro 
Committee be called "M'TJ by ^ 

sioner Monsod will take up his nrn ° Ug ^ t tEat Commis 
line 29 of page 1 . P pro P° sed amendment or 

MR. MONSOD No, Madam President. Line 29 o 
page 1 would also be deferred until after the freewheel 

^ *“» that * 

MR. ROMULO. In that case, Madam President le 
me call the next person. 

MR. MONSOD. I submit. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. This is in connection with Sec- 
tion 17. May I just know from the Committee the 
offenses punishable by not more than six years im- 
prisonment because in the 1935 Constitution the 
exceptions were specified — treason, felony and breach 
of the peace? In the 1973 Constitution, we have the 
same provision on “offenses punishable by not more 
than six years imprisonment.” Just for purposes of 
clarification, may I know these offenses? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may we first vote 
on the Padilla proposal which the Committee accepted? 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


179 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chairman is asking first fora 
vote on the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Padilla. 

Is there any objection to this particular amendment? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is ap- 
proved. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. On the same Section 17, line 18, I 
propose to insert OR SEARCH between the words 
“arrest” and “while” so that that privilege is “from 
arrest OR SEARCH while the Congress is in session.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the principal pur- 
pose or the rationale of this section is to make the 
Member of the Senate or the House of Representatives 
immune from arrest in order that he should not be pre- 
vented from attending to his duty as a Member of such 
House. But certainly the act of searching will not 
prevent him from attending. So I think this is also the 
philosophy why search was not included in both the 
1935 and the 1973 Constitutions. So we feel that the 
provision without the amendment would be adequate 
enough to protect the Member of either the Senate or 
the House of Representatives while performing his offi- 
cial duty. We regret, therefore, that we have to decline 
the proposal. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, the provision 
penalizing violation of parliamentary immunity under 
Article 145 of the Revised Penal Code mentions both 
arrest or search of any Member thereof. Some juris- 
prudence hold that the right to arrest would include the 
right to search. But I believe that the express mention of 
search would make the privilege of a Member of 
Congress clearer and more emphatic while attending 
sessions or meetings. 

I thought that my proposal to include OR SEARCH 
after “arrest” was acceptable to the Committee yester- 
day. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee had to reassess its 
position after the explanation of Commissioner Rodrigo. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. What is the explanation of Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo? 

MR. RODRIGO. Our Chairman had already arti- 
culated my opinion very well. I did not know about any 
commitment yesterday. I did not sit with the Commit- 
tee yesterday, but when Commissioner Padilla proposed 


the amendment, the Chairman asked me for my reaction 
and I told him that the philosophy behind this provision 
which prohibits arrest of a Member of Congress during 
session is to prevent anybody from preventing this 
Member of Congress from attending the session thus 
leaving his constituents without any representation in 
Congress. So, it was limited to “arrest” in the 1935 
and 1973 Constitutions. The word “search” will not 
prevent a Member of Congress from attending the 
session. 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct physically. But sup- 
pose the Member of Congress has certain documents, 
papers, arguments in writing, which he may want to use 
in expressing his opinions and in casting his vote in his 
attendance of the meetings or the sessions of the 
Congress, why should those documents or papers be 
searched and seized from him while in session? 

MR. RODRIGO. Before a search warrant is issued, 
the judge examines witnesses and specifies the docu- 
ments. So, it is very remote that a judge will issue a 
search warrant including documents which a Member of 
Congress needs in his work as a Member of Congress. 
Granting that such documents are included, the Member 
of Congress can always go to the judge and tell him: 
“May I withdraw this temporarily under receipt be- 
cause I need this in the deliberations of Congress which 
I will attend.” 

MR. PADILLA. This right of parliamentary immunity 
does not consider a judicial process. This is, in fact, far 
richer and greater than the freedom of speech. This is 
an exceptional provision in the Constitution in favor of 
the Members of Congress, so that they can express 
themselves freely without any liability for any speech 
that they utter in the halls of Congress. This is par- 
liamentary immunity. This is even stronger than the 
freedom of speech. There must be absolute right of the 
Members of Congress to speak freely without any 
danger of being questioned in any other place. We can- 
not subject the parliamentary immunity to the ordinary 
process of a private person going to the judge to secure 
a writ of search and seizure against another party or a 
corporation. This is different. This is of a higher level of 
immunity. 

MR. RODRIGO. I think this parliamentary immunity 
does not attach to the first sentence of Section 17. It 
attaches to the last sentence of Section 17. The first 
sentence says: 

A Senatoi or Member of the House of Representatives 
shall, in all offenses punishable by not more than six years 
imprisonment, be privileged from arrest while the Congress 
is in session. 

That is a privilege from arrest during the session so that 
a Member of Congress will not be prevented trom at- 
tending the session and representing his constituents 


180 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


therein. Parliamentary immunity does not emanate from 
that sentence but from the last sentence which reads: 

A Member shall not be questioned nor be held liable in 
any other place for any speech or debate in the Congress or 
in any committee thereof. 


MR. PADILLA. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. The Commissioner’s proposed 
amendment regarding search is in the first sentence, not 
in the last sentence. So, the matter of parliamentary 
immunity is immaterial in this discussion. 


MR. PADILLA. The substance of parliamentary 
immunity is really the last sentence. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. PADILLA. And the last sentence is dependent 
on the attendance to the deliberations of Congress. 

MR. RODRIGO. But “search” will not prevent the 
Member from attending the session. 

MR. PADILLA. The essence of parliamentary im- 
munity is the last sentence. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

str!wpr^h^^^ * . Was §°i n 8 to make this right even 
posa" 8 by makm8 lt “ the "native in my next pro- 

Coi5reK™n C or°Ln"orrouM ITTT * th f at the 

halls of Cnnct 3 p° ute fr ee dom of expression in the 

can^t exerTt- ^ f C ° UrSe ’ 3 Member of Congress 
unless he atte ^ *+ abscdute right or freedom of speech 
stance or lilt * session - That is why the real sub- 
sentence BnTth ° parliamentar Y immunity is the last 

sentence - that a? Sentence is based on the first 
right to attend th 6mber ° f Con 8 ress shall have the 
going to add as i n e t t eSS1 ° n ° r lts meetin gs - and I was 
to exoress his I • prOVlsion of the Penal Code, also 

As to the rishro 10 f t0 C3St his Vote without fear - 

holds “without nr r • reedom speech, jurisprudence 
holds without previous restraint or fear of subsequent 
punishment. But in narliam^r.+a • . osequeni 

further than that. He cannot be questtonedto akyofher 

deliberation J oTcongre^ 0 ^ 5 * h “ ^ •* 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just one sentence, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. It is true that the right of the 
Member of Congress to speak during session is depend- 
ent on the first sentence and that he be able to attend. 
What can prevent him from attending? Is it arrest? But 
search will not prevent him from attending. So, that is 
my argument. 

MR. PADILLA. The mere physical presence of 
attending is not significant. What is important is that in 
attending the session, he has absolute freedom to 
express his opinion and to cast his vote independent of 
any possible scrutiny or liability. A Member who phy- 
sically attends should not be deprived of such docu- 
ments or other papers which will be the basis of the 
expression of his opinions and the casting of his vote. 
Even if those documents are considered to be com- 
munist-inspired or even if branded illegal or unlawful, I 
think a Member of Congress under parliamentary 
immunity has more rights than a citizen in the exercise 
of the freedom of speech. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear now from Commis- 
sioner Suarez? 

MR. RODRIGO. One more sentence. Madam Pres- 
ident. I say that that is very improbable to happen and 
the proof is that the word “search” was not in both the 
1935 and 1973 Constitutions, and no Member of the 
Batasan had even complained that he was searched and 
some documents were taken from him so it diminished 
his effectiveness in debating or talking in session. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we now hear from Commis- 
sioner Suarez? 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

Will the distinguished Vice-President answer a few 
clarificatory questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla may answer, 
if he so desires. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, gladly. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

May I look at it from the other side of the coin. The 
Commissioner’s proposal is to vest unto a parliamentar- 
ian on his way to the session the freedom from search. 
This would contemplate a situation where an Assembly- 
man from Pampanga, for example, coming from Clark 
Air Base is reported to have in his car some hand 
grenades, some unlicensed firearms, a kilo of heroine 
and maybe some jewelries which were funneled from 
the Clark Air Force Base. Would the Commissioner still 
grant immunity from search to that parliamentarian? 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


181 


MR. PADILLA. The provision regarding the at- 
tendance in the sessions of the Congress and in going to 
and returning from the same was specifically indicated 
in both Constitutions. Unfortunately that particular 
provision was omitted in the present text. I propose the 
reinstatement of that provision because it is more ex- 
tensive than the phrase “while the Congress is in 
session,” although it might cover the same situation. 
The privilege should not be limited to the rignt of the 
Member of Congress to attend the session but the 
privilege against arrest should include the word 
SEARCH, and should not be limited to the phrase “in 
going to and returning from the same.” 

So, in the Commissioner’s example, if the Congress- 
man is in his house at night and he keeps heroine, drugs 
or unlicensed firearms, or any other unlawful materials, 

I do not believe that this exemption should apply 
even if the Senate or the Congress is in session. 

MR. SUAREZ. No. Precisely, the situation I envi- 
sioned is “going to attend the session.” 

MR. PADILLA. In the Commissioner’s example, it is 
“going to and returning.” Yes, for that brief moment, 
he should be. 

MR. SUAREZ. He should be searched? 

MR. PADILLA. No, he should be exempt. 

MR. SUAREZ. Even from search? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, on those hours where he is going 
to or returning from the session. But if the session has 
adjourned, and he is in his house or in a place not con- 
nected with his attendance, I believe the prohibition or 
the exemption should not apply. 

MR. SUAREZ. One more clarification. If we add the 
word “SEARCH” would that still be qualified by the 
phrase “in all offenses punishable by not more than six 
years imprisonment” which is attached to the word 
“arrest”? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, definitely. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. May I address some clarificatory 
questions to Commissioner Padilla? 

MR. PADILLA. Gladly. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 


MR. REGALADO. When Commissioner Padilla 
speaks of immunity from arrest under those circum- 
stances, is he envisioning only exemption from search 
of the person of the legislator? Does it extend, for 
instance, to immunity from search of the car which he is 
using in going to and returning from session? 

MR. PADILLA. This is a personal right of the Mem- 
ber of Congress, so it should not apply to his car, house, 
office, or any other place. 

MR. REGALADO. So only his person. 

MR. PADILLA. His person, because he is then going 
to attend the session and he may have documents or 
other papers with him. 

MR. REGALADO. So I think that would take care of 
the clarification of Commissioner Suarez about the 
Congressman’s car having grenades when he is going to 
the session hall. 

Another question. The purpose of search for evidence 
is basically for perpetuating the evidence and holding it 
in custodia legis in the event of future criminal prosecu- 
tion. Considering the fact that as envisioned now in our 
Article on the Legislative the Congress is in session 
virtually the whole year round except for one month 
before the adjournment, would that not thereby defeat 
the purpose of perpetuating the evidence since during 
that entire period of Congress being in session for 
around 1 1 months there may be a possibility that vital 
evidence may be spirited out or may no longer be avail- 
able to the judicial authorities if and when criminal 
prosecution is instituted against that legislator? 

MR. PADILLA. That is why I was saying that the 
provision in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions which 
has been deleted should reappear; namely, “during his 
attendance at its sessions, and in going to and returning 
from the same.” Moreover, this exemption is not abso- 
lute. It only covers offenses whose penalty is less than 
six years — prision mayor. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, the Commissioner 
would want the phrase in the present proposed Article 
“while Congress is in session ” to be replaced by the 
1935 provision? 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. That is also the provi- 
sion repeated in the 1973 Constitution. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. One clarificatory question. I would 
like to address this to Commissioner Padilla and perhaps 


182 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


to the Chair also. This has to do with the interpretation 
of “in going to and coming from the same.” Commis- 
sioner Padilla’s interpretation, as I understand him — 
and correct me if I am wrong — is only the time during 
which the Assemblyman is in transit, either to or from. 

My understanding of this provision has always been 
precisely as the present proposal now reads: “during the 
entire session”; in other words, during the entire session 
of Congress. For as long as Congress is in session, he is 
always going to or coming from the same even when he 
is sleeping. Therefore, the freedom of arrest applies even 
when he is in his house resting. 

Would the Vice-President want to amend that now 
and say that immunity only applies when he is physical- 
ly in transit or in motion? That would seem to defeat 
the purpose of this provision because the law officers 
will not arrest him while he is in transit but wait until he 
goes to bed. 


MR. PADILLA. The term here also speaks of attend- 
ing the session, and more specifically, the act of going to 
and from it. 


FR. BERNAS.That is correct. 

Obviously a Congressman cannot be 

nif^if n W ile ^ sess * on - I n the Commissioner’s exam- 

attenH th 1S arrested at night, he will not be able to 

that the nrntcht” the followin g morning. So, I believe 

so much because™ ffSt'g"" 1 " als0 fP ly , not 
the Pnnoroce c Iaci ttlat he was arrested when 

on^f r on - but that that 

the right to attend the session fUndamental >’ rinci ‘’ le of 

Vice. Pr “- ^°’ d ^ ^ ave tP |S matter clear now, the 
in his house ls . sayin ® t * lat ev en if the Congressman is 
still enjoys immSy Pr ° Vlded Congress is in sessio ". h <= 

be preverne^from a^UndtagThe' 'same* ° ,herWise he wi " 
FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 

the immun^ as limiting 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 
rec™ed PRESIDENT - C ° mmissio "er Maambong is 


MR. MAAMBONG. Will the distinguished Vice- 
President yield to another question on this problem 
of going to and from the sessions? 

MR. PADILLA. Gladly. 


MR. MAAMBONG. May I add a confusing note to 
this provision by asking this question: By way of 
example, while I was serving in the First Regular Bata- 
sang Pambansa, I was representing the Province of Cebu. 
Will this clause “going to and coming from the session” 
cover the period starting from the legislative district to 
the session, or will this only cover that period from the 
residence of the Congressman in Metro Manila to the 
session and back? 

MR. PADILLA. The 1935 and 1973 Constitutions 
speak of freedom from arrest during his attendance in 
sessions and in going to and returning from the same. 
So, it is not limited to the physical time of going to and 
from the Congress, but the main thing is his attendance 
at the sessions of the Congress. 

MR. MAAMBONG. My question really is: What is the 
point of origin and the point of termination of that 
immunity? I refer back to what I said earlier. 

I represented the Province of Cebu. I actually live in 
Asturias, Cebu, 78 kilometers from the City of Cebu. 
When I go to the session, I have to take a car to the City 
of Cebu where I take a plane at Mactan Airport for 
Manila. I alight at the Manila Domestic Airport, go to 
my residence and then proceed to the session. 

Will this cover the time I leave Asturias, Cebu up to 
the time I reach the session? That is the point. 

MR. PADILLA. It covers all that period and more, 
in the sense that anything that would prevent the legis- 
lator’s attendance to the sessions of Congress is pro- 
hibited. 

MR. MAAMBONG. We now go to the next point. In 
the previous administration, we had general orders 
which authorize military personnel to establish check- 
points. At one such instance during the session of the 
First Regular Batasang Pambansa, former MP Jolly 
Fernandez from Masbate articulated on the floor his 
complaint that when he came out of the Batasan area, 
there was a checkpoint somewhere in Don Mariano 
Marcos Avenue and his car was subjected to search in 
spite of the fact that his car carried the Batasang 
Pambansa sticker, he being a Member of Parliament. 

At the present setting, I also understand that there 
are internal rules when we enter various subdivisions. If 
we do not reside there, the security guards will tho- 
roughly ask us to open the trunk of our car. How would 
the Congressman react now when he enters, for exam- 
ple, a subdivision and he is subjected to this or when a 
checkpoint put up by police authorities would search 
his car? What will he say to the police authorities? Will 
he say, “I am a Congressman” so that the trunk of his 
car will not be opened? 

MR. PADILLA. The Commissioner contemplates two 
situations. One is on police checkpoint. I said in my 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


183 


previous statement that this privilege is personal to the 
Congressman. 1 believe that a Member of Congress 
should not be subject to search by police or army check- 
point. 

But on whether his car, although he is in it, should 
also be exempt from search, I leave that to better 
judgment. 

With regard to entry in a subdivision of which the 
Congressman or the Senator occupies a portion, that 
would be a private arrangement within the subdivision. 
That is not a question of the police or the army in the 
name of the State interfering with parliamentary im- 
munity. If the Congressman, as a resident of a subdivi- 
sion, agrees to the rules, he should not be privileged 
from that private arrangement of which he is a party. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

Just one more point, Madam President. 

Just for the record, may I know from the members of 
the Committee if their interpretation varies from that of 
the Vice-President? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, there is a variance 
for the reason that Commissioner Padilla would now 
want to restore the original wordings of the 1935 and 
1 973 Constitutions where the immunity will apply only 
to a Congressman or a Member of the Senate while 
attending session or in going to or returning from it. 

Under our proposal, during the entire period that the 
Congress is in session, that immunity attaches to him. In 
short, we broaden the proposal. For the entire duration 
of the session, he is immune from arrest in cases where 
the penalty imposable is not more than six years. But 
under the proposal of Commissioner Padilla, if we are 
going to restore the wordings of the 1935 and the 1973 
Constitutions, when a member of the legislature re- 
turns home and is resting, he may be arrested at mid- 
night. But in order not to prevent him from attending 
the session the following day, he may be released early 
morning, yet he had already been arrested. 

MR. PADILLA. That is not my position. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I just continue, Madam President. 
In the matter of search again, it should be clearly stated 
here that if the proposal is allowed, we would grant a 
member of the legislative immunity from search even if 
he really had committed a crime. So, we will allow him 
to enjoy his special privilege of committing offenses but 
immune from both arrest and search. Basically, the 
reason for this is not to prevent the member from at- 
tending, and that the search will not prevent him from 
attending. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, will the Gentle- 
man comment on my question as to the point of origin 
and point of termination of the immunity? Does it 
cover the legislative district up to the place of session? 


MR. DAVIDE. It will depend; we will have to inquire 
into the factual basis. For instance, if the sessions of the 
Congress will be from Monday to Friday and the Gentle- 
man goes home to his residence in Asturias, Cebu on a 
Friday afternoon, that is still covered. But if he returns 
to Manila the following day for some other business 
with the intention of going back again to Cebu that 
Sunday, he can be arrested on a Saturday because he did 
not come here to attend a particular session. That is 
precisely the danger. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Vice-President, Commis- 
sioner Padilla, yield to some questions? 

MR. PADILLA. Very gladly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

Does the Gentleman agree with me if I say that par- 
liamentary immunity covers freedom from delay? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, definitely. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It also covers freedom from vin- 
dictiveness? 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Most importantly, does the Gentle- 
man agree with me if I say that parliamentary immunity 
covers freedom from pressures? 

MR. PADILLA. That is again correct. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And that when one is subjected to 
search, there may be delay, there may be pressure, 
and vindictiveness may come into play. 

MR. PADILLA. The Gentleman is correct, Madam 
President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In this connection, with the kind 
indulgence of the Members of this Commission, I would 
like to put into the Record the beautiful observations of 
Justice J.B.L. Reyes, in his dissenting opinion in the 
case of Osmena vs. Pendatun. He said that the plain 
purpose of immunity - that means parliamentary 
immunity - is to protect the freedom of action of each 
Member and to relieve him from the fear of disciplinary 
action taken, upon second thought, as a result o 


184 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


political convenience, vindictiveness or pressures. It is 
unrealistic to overlook that without the immunity so 
provided, no Member of Congress can remain free from 
the haunting fear that its most innocuous expressions 
may at any time afterwards place him in jeopardy of 
punishment. Whenever a majority, however transient, 
should feel that the shifting sands of political expe- 
diency so demands, a rule designed to assure that 
members of the House may freely act as their con- 
science and sense of duty should dictate complements 
the parliamentary immunity from outside pressure 
enshrined in our Constitution. 

Before I end, Madam President, may I observe that 
the Vice-President emphasizes that there is an exception 
to the rule on parliamentary immunity. If the punish- 
ment is more than six years, the exception shall not 
apply. So, it is gratuitous to state that the Member of 
Congress can be free to commit any kind of crime. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, would the Chair- 
man of the Committee and the Committee be allowed 
to react on the quotation read into the Record by 
Commissioner Nolledo? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 


PreSWent’arld mmbere ofther^ quotation - Madar 

on, y ,o the las, sentence of s^s' aPP ' 

in any IT n °' be ques,1 °“' i -or b. held liable 
in any other place fo, any speech or debate in the Confess 
or in any committee thereof. congress 


It has no application to the first 
immunity from arrest. 


sentence referring to 


Gentfem^n L wHl D ?ind h LT 0r a d r S ° f J B ' ReyCS ’ if the 

pressure also So if that FS equated with out side 
second sentence ’it ml tv °? lnion a PP Ues unde r the 
with respect to the first senten^ 1 f0rCe 3lS ° apply 
out that the speeches !! f U because h ma V turn 
Congress may result in in^^ by the Member of 
politicians who are powerful anTma^th °l OUtside 
Member to search in the near f.l? ^ SUbjeCt SUCh 
evidence that may be used in re ln or der to fish for 
Member of Congress. 6 P rosecu tion of the 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we r M a, * 
proposed amendment? y ° vote now on tb i s 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, the decision in 
Osmena vs Pendatun was cited. I was the counsel of 
Osmena who brought this matter to the Supreme Court 
because as will be recalled. Senator Osmena delivered a 
speech on twelve-million reasons which was considered 
by President Garcia derogatory, insulting and libelous 


against him. The House investigated, and I and others 
appeared for Osmena. We were then both in the Liberal 
Party. The decision of the House was that the suspen- 
sion was lawful because it violated the provision against 
disorderly behavior which I think was not the issue. The 
issue was whether, based on that privilege speech, he 
could be suspended, and that involved the question of 
parliamentary immunity. So, when we speak of parlia- 
mentary immunity, we cannot say that it applies only 
to the last sentence and does not apply to the first 
sentence because all this is parliamentary immunity. 
The whole section is on parliamentary immunity. I 
would agree that the substance or the more important is 
the last sentence, and a member cannot be questioned 
because he has absolute freedom of expression. But he 
cannot have absolute freedom of expression unless he 
also has the freedom, we might say, absolute, except 
when he commits an offense punishable by prision 
mayor or more, that he be free from arrest and, I would 
also say, free from search. If a Member of Congress 
commits murder, that is punishable by an afflictive 
penalty, more than prision mayor. He is not entitled to 
this privilege against arrest or search. This refers only to 
offenses that are punishable by correctional penalties or 
light penalties in the Penal Code for not more than six 
years. So, it is not correct to say that because we want 
to include search to arrest, a member of Congress can 
abuse this, commit a crime, and yet be free from search 
or arrest. So, the privilege is limited by the nature or the 
gravity of the offense of which he is charged. 

I also do not agree with the paraphrasing of the 
Committee Chairman that I said he can be arrested at 
night but must be released before morning. I never said 
that because precisely a Congressman or a Senator 
cannot be arrested because he will be deprived of his 
absolute right to attend the sessions, to express with 
absolute freedom his opinions, and to freely cast his 
vote. For any remark or speech uttered during the 
sessions or the meetings of its subcommittees, he can- 
not be questioned, and he has no liability whatsoever 
because that is the essence of parliamentary immunity. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear from Commissioner 
Rosales? 

MR. ROSALES. May I contribute my humble 
opinion on this question of immunity. The provisions in 
the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions mean that when the 
Congress is in session, the provision on immunity is abso- 
lute. Whether a Congressman or a Senator is sleeping, 
whether it is Saturday or Sunday, as long as the 
Congress is in regular session, the immunity from arrest 
of Congressmen and Senators is absolute. That provision 
which refers to the coming to or returning from the 
session refers not to during the session; it refers to when 
the regular session is adjourned. When a Congressman or 
a Senator goes to his province, on his way, that immuni- 
ty still extends. When the session is again reconvened and 
he comes from his own province, on his way to Manila, 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


185 


the immunity applies. That is what is meant by return- 
ing from or coming back or going to the session, but 
that does not apply while the Congress is in session 
because while the Congress is in session, the immunity 
is absolute. That is all. Madam President. 


the present formulation which is all-embracing, that is, 
“while Congress is in session.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Vice-President clarify 
that? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, will Commissioner 
Rosales yield to just one question? 


MR. PADILLA. The proposed amendment was only 
to insert the words OR SEARCH after “arrest” on line 
18 so that the line will read: “privileged from arrest OR 
SEARCH while the Congress is in session.” 


MR. ROSALES. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Let us contemplate a situation where 
there is a drunken Member of Congress driving his car 
and causes injury to some innocent party. Or we can 
vary the example to visualize a Member of the Senate in 
a nightclub who gets into a fracas and the police be- 
lieves he started it. In such situations, I suppose the 

immunity of the Member of Congress remains intact; he 

cannot be arrested, although in recent American exam- 
ples where, let us say, the Chairman of the Committee 
on Ways and Means was caught overspeeding by the 
police and he was booked for drunken driving, I think 
he voluntarily presented himself. In such instances, 
therefore, would the Commissioner hold that the par- 
liamentary immunity remains absolute but that the 
burden is on the Member of Congress to waive his im- 
munity in such situations and present himself for arrest 
and investigation? 

MR. ROSALES. What I mean by “immunity is abso- 
lute” is when the crime committed is not punishable for 
more than six years. That is in the Constitution. If the 
penalty is less than six years, that immunity is absolute. 

MR. OPLE. Is disturbance of the peace — this question 
is for the Committee — and causing tumult be covered 
by the offenses contemplated as the absolute limit of 
immunity in the proposed Article? 

MR. DAVIDE. I did not get the first portion of the 
Gentleman’s question. 

MR. ROSALES. If the penalty is less than six years, it 
is still covered by the immunity. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you for that explanation, Madam 
President. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. That is dear. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
to insert the words OR SEARCH between “arrest” and 
“while” on line 18 of Section 17, please raise their 
hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 

( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 14 votes in favor and 16 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, the last sentence 
of the same section, lines 23 to 25, is worded in the 
affirmative: “. . . A Member shall not be questioned...” I 
propose that we express it in the negative which is more 
emphatic and more prohibitive, to read: “NO MEMBER 
SHALL BE QUESTIONED nor be held liable in any 
other place for any speech or debate in the Congress or 
in any committee thereof.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee accepts very willingly, 
Madam President. So, it will now read: “NO MEMBER 
SHALL BE QUESTIONED nor be held liable in any 
other place for any speech or debate in the Congress or 
in any committee thereof.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment which has been accepted by the Com- 
mittee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment 
is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Vice-President through? 


THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now? 

MR. REGALADO. Before we vote, may we ask the 
Vice-President to restate his proposed amendment? As I 
get it, he would like to broaden the immunity not only 
from arrest but to include immunity from search. On the 
other hand, he would delimit the application by a sub- 
stitute phrase of “during his attendance or when going 
to or returning from the sessions of Congress, unlike 


ivitv. rALULLA. iNot yet. In the first sentence ot 
Section 17, I propose to insert the following: A 
MEMBER OF CONGRESS SHALL HAVE THE 
RIGHT TO ATTEND ITS SESSIONS AND MEET- 
INGS AND OF ITS COMMITTEES TO EXPRESS HIS 
OPINIONS AND TO CAST HIS VOTE. HE SHALL BE 
PRIVILEGED FROM ARREST WHILE THE CON- 
GRESS IS IN SESSION, because the phrase A 
SEARCH was not approved. My reason in proposing 


186 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


this is that one of the important things in parliamentary 
immunity as an absolute right of Members of Congress 
is attendance, not mere physical attendance or presence 
but the expression of his opinions and the casting of his 
vote. 


I am inclined to this amendment because Article 145 
of the Revised Penal Code on violation of parliamentary 
immunity, which is supposed to be the penal sanction to 
this right of parliamentary immunity, mentions that the 
penalty of prision mayor shall be imposed upon any 
person who shall use force, intimidation, threats, or 
fraud to prevent any xMember of the National Assembly 
from attending the meetings of the Assembly or of any 
of its committees or subcommittees, constitutional 
commissions or committees or divisions thereof from 
expressing his opinion or casting his vote. 


It may be argued that it is surplusage; that it is under- 
stood that a Member of Congress should not only be 
physically present but should participate in the delicate 
task of lawmaking. 


I suppose the illustrious members of the commission 
or the committee that drafted the Revised Penal Code, 
although this was in 1932 prior to the 1935 Constitu- 
tion, had good reasons for imposing a penalty for 
violation of parliamentary immunity. 

The phrase while the Congress is in session” remains. 
o a orr m SUbS " tUtin8 il with 3 P hrase the mere going 
mittee 8 ™ ‘ he sessio " s ' 1 » to the Com 


THE PRESIDENT What k th* 
mittee? nat 1S P° sl tion of the Com 


believes tt^ttfproposSTunnec ' Mada h m President ’ 

; M h"„? R r ss ' be he a s ~ r ' Tuzzz 

attend°the IfT™' ^ " 

committees TS, L™' 6 T* to partici P ate 
since it is inhere 'fii 7 be assigned ' Necessarily, 
Constitution. We alrUJ nCed n0t be written into the 
a Member to express his 8ranted absolute immunity to 
the last line which has iustT ' and thlS is contained k 
President It nn J St been amended b Y the Vice- 

tioned nor be helcUiabie N ° Member sha11 be 9 ues ' 

speech or debate in the Cnn ^ ° ther place for any 
thereof.” ngress or in any committee 


TO ATTEND ITS SESSIONS AND MEETINGS AND 
OF ITS COMMITTEES TO EXPRESS HIS OPINIONS 
AND TO CAST HIS VOTE. Then, that will be followed 
by another sentence, which has already been considered: 
HE SHALL BE PRIVILEGED FROM ARREST WHILE 
THE CONGRESS IS IN SESSION. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of the Vice-President, please raise 
their hand. ( Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 2 votes in favor and 23 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

Commissioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I just ask one 
question to be clarified by the Vice-President. 

The Vice-President proposed the deletion of lines 19 
to 22, which say: 

. . . each House shall surrender the Member involved to the 

custody of the law within 24 hours after its adjournment 

for a recess or for its next session, otherwise such privilege 

shall cease upon its failure to do so. 

I would like to be clarified on this. Did this refer to 
offenses incurring more than six years punishment 
referred to in the first line? If it did, then since this is 
already deleted, what should be done now if that 
Member indeed committed an offense punishable by 
more than six years? 

MR. PADILLA. If the felony is punishable by more 
than six years, there is no privilege against arrest. So, 
he can be arrested. If the offense is less, punishable only 
by prision correccional, then he has the privilege from 
arrest. 

MR. TINGSON. I understood - if I am right in 
understanding it — that lines 19 to 22 were precisely 
specific about this offense so that the House will sur- 
render that Member involved in that particular crime to 
the custody of the law. Now that the provision is 
deleted, who will deliver that Member to the custody of 
the law? 


In short, his right to exDrpsc hk • • 

whether in Congress or in any ofZ ° n * S01 ' 

any ot the committees. 

th ™op™“ 

MR. PADILLA. The amendment shall read- A Ml 
BER OF THE CONGRESS SHALL HAVE THE RIC 


MR. PADILLA. He can be arrested anytime. 

MR. TINGSON. So, the House itself does not need 
to do anything about it. The arresting officers will be 
the ones to go after him. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, Madam President, in the usual 
process of law because I found this only in the 1973 
Constitution, not in the 1935 Constitution. I found it 
rather queer that the House or the Senate, which is not 
the custodian of every Member nor the bondsman called 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


187 


upon to keep him under custody or to surrender him, is 
being imposed this, we might say. obligation to do the 
act of surrendering him. If he is subject to arrest, then 
the usual procedure should follow — the police, the 
military, the court order, the warrant of arrest. After he 
has been arrested, he can post bail if it is bailable. 

MR. TINGSON. It is clear to me now. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. May I ask that Commissioner Sar- 
miento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, before we dis- 
cussed the matter of privilege from arrest and search, I 
had asked the Committee for specifications of offenses 
punishable by not more than six years imprisonment. 
To spare the Committee some valuable time, I am with- 
drawing my question. I think the Revised Penal Code 
and other pertinent decrees will take care of my 
question. 

MR. DA VIDE. Yes, that is correct, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. May I ask that Commissioner 
Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I would like to 
propose an amendment on page 8, the situation where 
no appropriations bill is enacted by Congress and this is 

stated in the provision: . . the general appropriations 

law for the preceding fiscal year shall be deemed re- 
enacted.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Gentleman referring to lines 
23 and 24? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, lines 23 and 
24, page 8. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. Lines 23 and 24 state that the general 
appropriations law for the preceding fiscal year shall be 
deemed reenacted. I would like to propose an amend- 
ment by addition, after the word “re-enacted,” insert 
PLUS AN INCREMENT THERETO NOT EXCEEDING 
THE ADDITIONAL REVENUES ACTUALLY COL- 


LECTED BY THE GOVERNMENT FOR THE CUR- 
RENT YEAR. If I may explain. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. This situation would only arise where 
Congress does not enact an appropriations law. So, it is 
an exceptional case; this would either be through the 
inaction or the fault of Congress. What I am trying to 
address myself to is a situation where the government 
cannot really function normally. The appropriations 
from year to year must at least increase by the inflation 
rate. And there is a limitation. The increment cannot 
exceed the actual collections. In other words, it is a pay- 
as-you-go system. They cannot exceed actual collec- 
tions, additional collections that they are able to raise 
in the current year. In other words, they cannot put the 
government in debt or in deficit. The appropriation is 
only limited to the actual collections. But this will 
enable the government to operate normally, while 
Congress has not enacted a general appropriations law. 
When the Congress enacts a general appropriations law, 
then the new appropriations law will then operate. This 
will just give the government a chance to operate 
normally, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Commissioner Guingona of the Com- 
mittee would like to ask some clarificatory questions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

I wonder if the Gentleman could kindly explain the 
meaning of the word “increment.” Would this include 
foreign grants or foreign borrowings that are obtained? 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President. I am limiting it 
to revenues collected. 

MR. GUINGONA. Revenues by the government? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. In other words, these are fiscal 
collections. 

MR. GUINGONA. Fiscal collections. 

MR. MONSOD. That is right, Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. Presumably, most of these would 
be collected by the Bureau of Internal Revenue and the 
Bureau of Customs. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 


188 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


MR. GUINGONA. But, of course, these increments 
need not be necessarily used in favor of these two 
agencies. In other words, they can be spread out to 
other agencies of the government. 

MR. MONSOD. The intent is to enable all the 
branches of government to operate normally. Therefore, 
there would be a proportional distribution to enable all 
of them to operate. 

MR. GUINGONA. So, it is only a presumption. When 
the Gentleman speaks of the government allocating or 
adjusting, which particular person or agency does he 
have in mind? 

MR. MONSOD. This is really the Executive. 


MR. MONSOD. May I respond to that. Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. I am not disputing the fact that there 
will be an appropriation. All I am saying is that the 
operation of the government should not be hampered 
by inaction on the part of Congress. By the way, one 
other reason for proposing this provision is to put an 
incentive on Congress to act on the appropriations law 
and not use the inaction in order to put pressure or to 
try to impose itself on the other bodies of government. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 


MR. GUINGONA. Meaning, the President. 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, however, I would be willing to 
accept an amendment saying that the appropriations be 
proportionately distributed among the items, if that is 
the concern of the Gentleman. 

* n ot ^ er words, even the legisla- 

wm'p nfih’f j and tbe constitutional commissions, 

as the collerti ° f°u really ^ ave an Y increments as far 

get a DroDortio 118 1° tbeSe agenc i es are concerned, would 
get a proportionate amount? 

co£ions°of °the b6CaUSe the collections are 
government . 0 They dT'oTTf' ^ bel ° ng t0 the 
Internal Revenue or Bureau of Customs. ° f 

Th^GentiLman^ks^f a h n appens if there is a dro P ? 
sumably the appropriations £.„ mcrement because pre- 
law, let us say, within the S t half ^ 0 f' ftT*? 
but presumably, it will be T ^ f th flSCaI year; 
half. Suppose in the second L.f ,? dUnng the SeCOnd 
increment, how do we account In 3 dr ° P m the 
increment during the first h ic n !l. for the increa se in 

have spent because of this prOTWOT? W ° U ‘ d a ‘ ready 

MR. MONSOD. The r 0 n^ , 
apply to any kind of appr 0 Driabn t \ Gentleman WOUld 
makes any appropriation*^ he*? s realT beCause when one 
year. All I am saying is that it k , y projecting for " 
collections. 8 that 11 be hmit cd only to act 


MR. GUINGONA. Yes but th. • , 

sion that the general appropriation?!^ the prece 
year shall be deemed reenacted. This means that t 
will already be money for the operation of the go 
ment, only it will be limited until the new appronria 
bill is enacted into law. PPropnal 

Thank you, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the Commissioner answer a few clarificatory 
questions? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I do not know much about government auditing 
but as I understand it, unless there is an appropriation, 
there is no right on the part of the government to 
make disbursements. Is that correct? That is the basic 
fundamental rule. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Here we have a situation where there 
is no general appropriations bill that had been passed by 
Congress. As a result of that failure, the general appro- 
priations law for the preceding fiscal year should govern 
the ensuing fiscal year. Is my understanding correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, under the proposal of the Gentle- 
man, we have a situation where we do not have a general 
appropriations bill for the coming year and, therefore, 
we are obligated to follow the general appropriations 
law that was passed the preceding year but we have 
additional funds or increment, as the Gentleman calls 
them. Is that the situation the Gentleman has in mind? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. For this increment which is in excess 
of what was provided in the general appropriations bill 
for the last year, there is no precise appropriation for 
it? 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


189 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, there is no appropriation for it 
precisely because the appropriations bill for the current 
year has not been acted on by the legislature. 

MR. SUAREZ. Right. Then how can we dispose 
of these increments without a general appropriations 
bill or a special appropriations bill disposing of those 
increments? 

MR. MONSOD. That is the reason I am proposing the 
amendments because without the constitutional provi- 
sion the government would have no right to disburse on 
the basis of the previous appropriation. So, this ex- 
ception is sought to be included here precisely for that 
purpose. It is possible that Congress will not act on 
the new appropriations bill for the year, which has 
happened in the past. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is all right. We have the money, 
only we do not know how to disburse it. That is the 
effect of a failure to pass a general appropriations bill; 
there is also an increment, as the Gentleman calls it. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. In the normal 
functioning of the government, for example, we need 
funds not only for current operating expenses but also 
for current maintenance expenses like infrastructure, 
which cannot wait. And there is a natural increase of 
expenditures from year to year, if only because of 
inflation. 

MR. SUAREZ. Does the Gentleman not think that 
without a specific appropriations bill, these increments 
could be abused by those in the administration? 

MR. MONSOD. That is why I said I would be willing 
to accept a reservation which provides that the funds are 
subject to proportionate distribution among the items. 
We can even put safeguards by giving the COA certain 
rights to look into the expenditures on a preaudit basis. 
In other words, as long as the safeguards are there, it is 
all right. What we want to avoid is a situation where the 
government cannot function properly because of the 
inaction of Congress. 

MR. SUAREZ. Except for the fact that when finally 
the general appropriations bill would have to be ap- 
proved by Congress, necessarily that appropriations bill 
must cover the disbursements of those increments. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Before that, there was no general 
appropriations bill? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. It would only be confirmatory of 
what had already been accomplished or done? 


MR. MONSOD. Actually, the appropriations bill to 
be approved by Congress can be larger than the incre- 
ment in actual collections stated here because, let us 
say, it is passed the middle of the year, there will be 
collections on the second half of the year or there can 
be other forms of financing which, as mentioned yester- 
day, could be programmed as loans in the budget. Those 
are other ways of financing the budget. We are limiting 
ourselves here to just actual revenue collections and we 
can put the safeguards, such as preaudit of the COA, in 
order to make sure that this is not abused. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, I take it that the proposed amend- 
ment is not complete without the additional amend- 
ments that the Gentleman has in mind? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, I am willing to accept amend- 
ments in that respect to reflect that. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I ask Commissioner Monsod to yield 
to just one question? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. This proposed amendment is extremely 
attractive. It is true, as asserted earlier, that in real terms 
the budget for a previous year, especially when the 
situation was volatile, could be significantly reduced by 
inflation although nominally the same. So, I think the 
concern expressed by Commissioner Monsod is very 
well-placed and well-reasoned. There is, however, the 
principle that the legislature controls the purse, and that 
is the strength of a legislature relative to a very powerful 
other branch of the government, which is the executive. 
In this instance, the amendment I suppose contemplates 
a situation where, although the same budget is auto- 
matically made effective for the new fiscal year, the 
executive branch, in effect, can appropriate more than 
that budget by means of increased revenue collections. 
Is that the concept, Madam President? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, perhaps I will say 
yes but only in the context of an exceptional case where 
Congress does not act on the appropriations bill. 

MR. OPLE. It would still vest an appropriations 
power in the executive during this interval that no new 
budget is passed by the Congress. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. Precisely 
because Congress has not exercised or has not, we mig * 
call, done its work of appropriating because an app 
priations bill normally should be approved be ore 
start of the year. 


190 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President, but the responsi- 
bility for a stalled budget is normally two-sided rather 
than a unilateral one. The delay could be attributed 
both to a slow-moving Congress and perhaps, the in- 
tractability of some of the ministers of the government 
who refuse to agree to certain necessary cuts, at least as 
perceived by Congress and, therefore, the bargaining 
process gets prolonged over the intended deadline. What 
disturbs me is the principle that the legislature controls 
the purse. It is the sole appropriating branch among the 
three branches, and it was for that reason that earlier, in 
the matter of the automatic appropriations of two per- 
cent of the national budget for the judiciary, I think 
we raised signals of alarm that the power of the legisla- 
ture to appropriate was being subjected to some subtle 
invasion from some other branches. However, if the 
proponent will agree that such an appropriations author- 
ity, temporarily exercised by the executive, will be 
subject to law, then there is participation by the 
Congress even if only in a concurrent capacity. But I 
think it will help settle the principle that the appropria- 
tions authority continues to reside in the legislative 
power. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I am willing to 
accept an amendment that the conditions under which 
such increments will be allowed be subject to law. 

anmoDriatLvnc ^ . regardin g the principle of the 

executive with “speclVtoemellt eX f ercised by the 
the previous budget, would the r »i° f reve " ues over 
that the amendment should a8r ' e 

MR. MONSOD. Yes T th- n + • 
will be an exceptional case. * 1S qUite clear that 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Madam President. 
MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT Thp rv, • 

Commissioner Davide, is recogn™ ° f ^ Committee ’ 

MR. DAVIDE Thm n 

posed amendment would ^ that the pro ‘ 

following are our reasons- At be + . necessar y, and the 
ment be without a budeet f n ° tlm . e Wl11 the § overn - 
the session of the Congress k 81 ! en year ’ Firstl y’ 
fourth Monday of July of pr ° posed to begin on the 

Congress will act on the budget for th**' Immediatel y> 
So, take the case of the years year ' 

have a budget for 1986 which w as ann?^ 9 ? 8 ' S'® n ° W 
ber or October of 1985. So. for thp P h J V6d m Septem ' 

1 987, Congress will enact that bud get of the year 

after the convening of Congress on 

of July 1986. 16 tourth Monday 

If Congress cannot act on that budget until ^ 

of 1986. the budge, for 1986 will be* ,Ve lulling 


budget for 1987 and the government, on the basis of 
the budget for 1986, can use all the resources that it 
may have, all the revenues that it may have collected 
for the year 1 987 until Congress shall have enacted the 
budget for 1 987. 

If there is a need for an incremental increase over the 
budget of the preceding year, meaning the budget for 
1986, for purposes of the operations of the government 
for 1987, Congress itself may enact a special appropria- 
tions measure under its authority under this particular 
proposed section. If there is really a need by reason of 
the urgency of that particular special appropriations 
measure, the President himself may certify for its early 
approval. So, there is really no problem where the 
government may have no budget whatsoever. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, if there is no 
problem and there is no possibility that the government 
will not be hampered by a budget that is smaller than 
the current needs because of inflation or other reasons, 
then why do we have this Article? This Article precisely 
provides for a situation where the legislature does not 
act. All I am saying is that the provision is inadequate if 
the intention is to allow the government to operate 
normally. And the Congress can itself define the situa- 
tions where an increment would be allowed in case they 
do not act; but to leave a vacuum in there and all the 
government can really use is just the budget for the 
previous year, which from experience is always inade- 
quate for a succeeding year, would be to hamper the 
normal operations of the government. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the provision of the 
1973 Constitution allowing this reenactment of the 
previous budget was just a reaction to the old Congress. 

The Gentleman will recall that the old Congress met 
for only 100 days; we did not then speak of calendar 
years but fiscal years. The sessions of the old Congress 
began on the fourth Monday of January, but the fiscal 
year was supposed to begin July of that particular year 
up to June of the following year. Because of the 100- 
day session, there were instances when the budget 
could not be approved by Congress. But that is not the 
situation now. Nevertheless, if the same provision is 
adopted — that is, the reenactment of the budget — it is 
probably to answer a very, very abnormal situation 
where the Congress cannot approve a budget from July 
up to December of a given year, referring to the budget 
for the succeeding year. 

Therefore, we say that with that period of six months 
from July to December, say, of 1986, the Congress is 
expected to act on the budget for the year 1987. But in 
the event it cannot, despite the length of time, then the 
budget for the current year will be deemed reenacted or 
will be considered as the operational budget for the suc- 
ceeding year. Again, if there is the danger of, say, infla- 
tion and there is a need for additional appropriations. 
Congress itself, being a continuing body, being a work- 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


191 


ing Congress, can immediately enact a special appropria- 
tions measure which can be accomplished in a matter of 
days especially if certified by the President. 

MR. MONSOD. The Gentleman is saying that the 
situation of inaction by the legislature would not 
operate. But the situation we are trying to avoid is 
precisely when Congress does not act. How can we then 
assume that Congress will act on a special appropriations 
measure that is endorsed or certified by the President? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we really feel that 
under such a circumstance, if it would be certified by 
the President, Congress can be compelled to act on the 
given budget. Besides, if it will not act on a special 
appropriations measure, it is not that the government is 
without a budget because the budget of the preceding 
year is deemed reenacted for the current year. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Chairman of 
the Committee said that the President can compel the 
Congress to act on a special appropriations measure. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Congress may be called to a 
special session by the President to act on a particular 
matter as the President may designate. It is an authority 
granted to the President under this particular Article. 

MR. MONSOD. And the Gentleman feels that that is 
sufficient safeguard for the President to ask the 
Congress to supplement an inadequate carry-over 
budget? 

MR. DAVIDE. I do not think the legislature would 
be so unnationalistic, if it requires an additional budget 
over and above the reenacted budget. 

MR. MONSOD. With that manifestation, Madam 
President, I am withdrawing my proposed amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. My second amendment is on page 10, 
line 1. I propose to add a comma (,) after the word 
“law” and insert the following phrase: CONSISTENT 
WITH THE ECONOMIC PROGRAM OF GOVERN- 
MENT. 

The reason I am proposing this insertion is that an 
economic program has to be internally consistent. While 
it is directory to the President — and it says “within 
specified limits” on line 2 — there are situations where 
the limits prescribed to the President might, in fact, be 
distortive of the economic program. 

If I may give an example: When you are setting tariff 
rates, there must be a certain consistency among the 
tariffs for finished goods, intermediate inputs, and basic 
materials. Once you distort this and put a low limit on 
the raw materials or intermediate goods, then we en- 
courage assembly at the end of the production cycle. 


This we did in earlier years — very high tariffs for 
finished products — and what we got was industry that 
was only engaged in assembly and packaging operations. 
On the other hand, an economic program would natural- 
ly rationalize the system of tariffs in order to make sure 
that we have a good industrial structure. 

We are not taking away any power from Congress. 
We are just saying that as a frame of reference, the 
authority and the limits prescribed should be con- 
sistent with the economic program of government which 
the legislature itself approves. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee accepts the proposed 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
proposal. 

MR. BENGZON. I have a question, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. The economic program of govern- 
ment is prepared by the executive department, is it 

not? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, and it is 
presented to the National Assembly and concurred in by 
the National Assembly or legislature. 

MR. BENGZON. Therefore, the economic program 
must first be changed if Congress wishes to pass a law 
that would authorize the President to fix within speci- 
fied limits this Section 2. If the Gentleman’s amend- 
ment is accepted, then Congress is hampered by the 
economic program which they have approved before 
and, therefore, they would have to change that econo- 
mic 1 program before they can pass a law which may 
differ from such economic program. 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President. The economic 
program may not have the specifics of each product in 
each case; but the Congress, under this section, may go 
into details. So, the economic program - the frame of 
reference - may be impaired but we need not change it 
because that does not go into as much detail as this 
paragraph here. 

MR. BENGZON. What I am really trying to drive at is 
under that system, would not the executive be control- 
ling Congress in that respect? 

MR. MONSOD. No, because the power in approving 
the program starts from Congress. We just want to avoid 
a situation where the mandates under this paragraph are 
not in the context of the economic program. We jus 
want it as a frame of reference. 


192 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Will Commissioner Monsod consider a 
slight amendment by transposition? 

MR. MONSOD. The Gentleman will please state his 
proposal. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

I share the concern as expressed by Commissioner 
Bengzon about the relationship between the economic 
development program and the powers of Congress. But I 
think Commissioner Bengzon himself will not mind if 
there is a transposition so that the power of the 
Congress is not immediately subjected to modification 
by an economic program. 

I propose that the paragraph be left intact, but at 
the end of this sentence following “or imposts” on line 
5, there is a comma (,) and a new clause WITHIN THE 
FRAMEWORK OF THE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAM. 

Will that satisfy the concerns of both Commissioner 
Bengzon and Commissioner Monsod? 

President^^*”^’ * acce Pt the amendment, Madam 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

word^ used^hv 1 r NT ° - May 1 make a comment on the 
AL DEVELOPMENtTrwr«'V‘° F ™ E NAT '° N ' 

niz™ PRESIDENT - Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
during fhe^sf^I 0 '- ^ Was a term used and overused 

an^er S ° maybe We ca " use 

’ 0t natlonal development program.” 

what broader pment program is some- 

the duties of the Na L COi ; f0 p rmable l ° the scope of 
Authority than merely \avhL E ‘ C ° n ° miC Develo P ment 
think this is the formal oh™* 8 i economic Program.” I 
by the NEDA itself. The^FDA ° 8y U , Sed in 8° vernment 
al Economic and Development a S Pf ed out as Nation ' 
the meaning given to “development"? * th ? k 
merely the economic part, strictly speaking 5 ™^ tha " 

I have no objection to anv 
upon the language “national develoZ^^m” 
winch I think is broader than the economic program 

originally suggested, and which puts within the nm- 
view of this section social considerations as well as 


the claims of labor, the claims of farmers, the claims of 
small business as against big business. All those are 
comprehended within the broader phrase, within the 
framework of the national development program. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, actually the 
national development program that Commissioner Ople 
refers to is really embodied in a document approved by 
the Congress. In the Committee on National Economy, 
I believe we denominated that as an integrated eco- 
nomic development program. I think we know that is 
what we are talking about here. We can either use 
economic development program or national develop- 
ment program and they would all be the same docu- 
ment passed by Congress. Perhaps, we can leave that 
to the Committee on Style, since we agree on the 
concepts. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Will the distinguished sponsor yield 
to one question? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. This paragraph states: 

The Congress may by law authorize the President to fix 

within specified limits, and subject to such limitations and 

restrictions as it may impose . . . 

Does not the Gentleman think the legislature or the 
Congress and the President being the two most impor- 
tant departments of government on national policy will 
be sufficient without restricting it or referring it to a 
national economic development program because this 
program has to be determined by the Congress, in 
conjunction with the President? 

I am making this remark because I recall that every 
President has an economic program. Usually, the Pres- 
ident has a term of 4 years but his economic program is 
for 5 or 6 years. Most economic programs were good 
in paper, but never implemented to improve our 
economy and the livelihood of our people. 

Why must we still make reference to the so-called 
economic program when that is precisely fixed or deter- 
mined as a national policy by the two highest depart- 
ments of government? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the reason our 
economy is in shambles and we are in bankruptcy is that 
the beautiful programs were never implemented. What 
Congress did or what the President did was to write 
development programs but these were never taken in 
perspective or that framework was not used in actual 
implementation. That is the reason we want to put 
it here, to remind them that with the proper perspec- 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


193 


tive, this program must be the framework within which 
laws must be implemented. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ask Commissioner 
Monsod to please repeat what is to be inserted? 

MR. MONSOD. On Section 28 (2), page 10, line 5, 
where it says: “or imposts,” change the period (.) to 
a comma (,) and add the following: WITHIN THE 
FRAMEWORK OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAM OF GOVERNMENT. We would like to 
leave to the Committee on Style the discretion to 
use NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT or ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM OF GOVERNMENT. To 
repeat, we would like to leave to the Committee on 
Style the discretion to use NATIONAL DEVELOP- 
MENT or ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM as 
we had earlier manifested, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Has this been accepted by the 
Committee? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Monsod which has 
been accepted by the Committee? 

MR. PADILLA. Objection, Madam President. I feel 
that it is not necessary to further restrict the policy- 
making powers of the Congress and the President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We will put the matter to a vote. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 21 votes in favor and 5 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I just have one 
more proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please pro- 
ceed. 

MR. MONSOD. On line 4 of the same page which 
says “quotas,” I propose to change the word “quotas” 
to QUANTITIES. The reason is, “quotas” has a very 
unhappy connotation for us. When we say “quotas,” the 
connotation is that somebody will get either an import 
or an export quota. Whereas, I believe the intent of this 
paragraph is policy level. There are two types of restric- 
tions on imports and exports. These are the quantita- 
tive restrictions and the tariff rates. The quantitative 


restriction simply stops one from accepting or importing 
certain goods. The tariff rate or qualitative restriction 
means one can import or export, subject to certain tariff 
rates. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the position of the Com- 
mittee? 

MR. RODRIGO. I am requested to speak for the 
Committee, and I heard my fellow members saying that 
they understand the meaning of “quotas.” The members 
say that there is already jurisprudence on the word 
“quotas,” so that if we change it to “QUANTITIES^ 
the meaning will not be as clear as the word “quotas.” 
We suggest that we leave it to the body to vote on this. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the only purpose 
of my proposed amendment is to clarify that this does 
not necessarily mean the establishment of a system 
where quotas are given to individuals and companies. If 
we can agree that this is at the macro trade policy level, 
rather than the system of quotas imposed before in the 
country, I would withdraw my amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, that is understood. 

MR. MONSOD. Then I withdraw, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bacani be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, my amendment 
is on Section 29 (2), page 10. I will not press for the 
amendment, if what I am going to say is deemed under- 
stood. Madam President, I propose to add a new sen- 
tence at the end of line 24 to read as follows: EXCEPT 
WHEN SUCH APPROPRIATION WOULD NOT AC- 
CRUE TO THE EXCLUSIVE BENEFIT OF ANY 
SUCH PARTICULAR SECT, CHURCH, DENOMINA- 
TION SECTARIAN INSTITUTION OR SYSTEM OF 
RELIGION, OR WHEN SUCH PRIEST, PREACHER, 
MINISTER OR DIGNITARY PERFORMS WORK 
DIRECTLY BENEFICIAL TO THE GOVERNMENT. 
The whole addition, therefore, comes at the end. Will 
the Chair allow me to explain my amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please pro- 
ceed. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, it seems that 
this is a particular application of the time-honored 
provision regarding the separation of Church and State, 
and that the thrust of the provision is really that there 
should be no established religion and that there shou 
be freedom of worship, profession and religion, that no 
one religion is favored over another. During these times 


194 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


of the ecumenical movement, it is not very far-fetched— 
for it actually happened and can still happen in the 
future — that there may be movements and meetings of 
the different religions which the government may find 
important and even perhaps necessary to finance. For 
example, right after martial law, there was an ecu- 
menical meeting of religions in the Development Acade- 
my of the Philippines (DAP), and this was financed by 
the government. If I am not mistaken, it was the 
government that initiated it and spent for it. In such 
cases, money is appropriated but not for the benefit of 
any religion in particular. 

Regarding the question on the priest, preacher, 
minister or dignitary, we can see that there are already 
exceptions where the government does make appropria- 
tions for them. All I am requesting is that, aside from 
these positions mentioned here, when the activity of the 
priest, minister or rabbi directly benefits the govern- 
ment, the government should also shoulder the expenses 
for that activity. 


deemed to be helpful to the State. Is such an eventuality 
foreclosed should the Philippines decide on such a 
system? 

MR. AZCUNA. We would like to submit this to the 
body, Madam President, because we feel there is no 
need for an amendment to this effect. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. I think the distinguished proponent 
said a while ago that if the Committee would express an 
opinion, which I think they did, in consonance with 
what he feels, according to how he interpreted it, he 
would not press for his amendment. I would join him on 
that if we can agree on what we heard from the Com- 
mittee. I think that would be for the better. 


THE P RESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR AZCUNA. We feel that the amendment is nol 
necessary because what is prohibited under this subsec- 
tion is the use of public funds to support a particulai 
sect, church, denomination or sectarian institution, oi 
system of religion or to support any priest, preacher 
numster and other religious teachers as such. So where 

artivu Un -tv! ar + ^ se d to su PPort an ecumenical type ol 

other y vj 1 t? 1 )- lscldmin ating between one sect or the 
other we believe it will not offend this oarticulai 

mem, he would not be doing it as moh , g ° Vem ' 
That is no, a, so 

SrSupremeCotmto d"temii^° Uld rather leave U ,c 
areas nf rhic i uetermine case-to-case the oper 

rather than definrarthrstan^hat t0 evolvt 

which we may not be able to pursue. 6 6XCeptlons ar( 

anotlw Explanation? Madam President ’ ma V 1 make 

cee™ PRESIDENT - The Gentleman will please pro 

BISHOP BACANI Onr 

separation of Church End slatTT 5 , rega / ding th( 
American model. There is anothe ar ? e ! y fo low thl 
of Church and State which is fouEd °p Separat i 01 
example, in Belgium, which explicitly L '!' 0pe ‘ Fo 
tion of Church and ^ 

Catholic pnests and the Jewish rabbi are paid by th' 
State. In Germany, which also upholds the separation o 
Church and State, a religious tax is collected fron 
among those who profess any religion, and then th 
State pays the ministers for this because they ar 


MR. RODRIGO. May I say something on this? If I 
remember right, there was a decision by the Supreme 
Court regarding commemorative stamps. During the 
Catholic International Eucharistic Congress, our Post 
Office decided to print commemorative stamps and this 
was questioned because they said this was spending 
public money for the benefit of the Catholic religion 
because what was being commemorated in the stamps 
was the Catholic word “Eucharistic Congress.” The 
decision of the Supreme Court was that it was all right, 
that it was not a violation of this provision because that 
was mainly for the benefit of the government. That 
commemorative stamp was good for the State and the 
nation; incidentally, it was in connection with a 
religious celebration. 

BISHOP BACANI. So, the general principle is, if it 
benefits the government directly and is not for the 
benefit simply of any particular religion, then funds can 
be appropriated for that. 

MR. RODRIGO. Even if it benefits a particular 
religion, which was incidental, like in that commemo- 
rative stamp, it is allowed. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 

With that, Madam President, I will not press for an 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, we have three more 
registered speakers, and if we promise to be brief, 
probably we could wind up this period of amendments 
and vote on Third or Second Reading on the Article. 

I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be recognized for a 
manifestation. 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


195 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, yesterday I 
proposed an amendment to Section 28, page 10 , line 9, 
but after 1 proposed the amendment, the Chair sus- 
pended the session. After much reflection, Madam 
President, I realized that if this amendment were ap- 
proved, it might harm the poorer students more than 
benefit the government. So, I would like to state that 
will not pursue my amendment any longer. However, 
Commissioner Brocka has expressed his desire to pick it 
up, but he is not here now. Anybody who may wish to 
pick it up is free to do so. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will make of record the with- 
drawal of the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Bengzon. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee would like to thank 
Commissioner Bengzon for the withdrawal. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Concepcion be recognized. 


MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you, Madam President. 

For a small matter, I have in mind the P ar ^ a ^^^j7 
immunities. I am under the impression that t ie 
tee conceives parliamentary immunities as gr 
ensure or facilitate the performance of the duties o 
Members of the Congress. Am I right? 


During the sessions of Congress, if they are not attend- 
ing the same, would they enjoy the parliamentary 
immunity? 

MR. DAVIDE. They would still enjoy the parliamen- 
tary immunity because we do not know if they will 
decide to attend. 

MR. CONCEPCION. If he had not attended from the 
very beginning, should it not be presumed that he does 
not intend to attend? The point I am trying to drive at 
is this: a parliamentary immunity is incident to the per- 
formance of duties. If one is not performing his duties, 
why should he be allowed to invoke the immunities for 
the performance of those duties which by his action or 
omission he does not seem to perform or intend to 
perform? 

MR. DAVIDE. We appreciate that point. But our 
main problem is, we would never know when he will 
decide to attend. But it is his inherent duty to attend, 
being a representative duly elected by the people. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Would it not be better for him 
to make a statement that he is not attending, instead of 
assuming that he can avail of the privilege inasmuch as 
one can never say up to the end of the session whether 
he will attend or not? 

MR. DAVIDE. That would really be the best proce- 
dure. He should announce that he will not be attending 
the sessions. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. CONCEPCION. But I find that the Proposal or 
the recommended draft of the Commi ee p , 

crimes committed while Congress is ln sessio , . 

of using the phrase in the 1935 Constitution during 
their attendance in the sessions of Congress, 
the text as of now? 


MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. So, I hope that the 
Committee could insert a clause to make this much 
clearer because under that theory we will never know 
until after the end of his term. 

MR. DAVIDE. I think the Rules of each House may 
provide for situations like that and may even discipline a 
Member who would refuse to attend the session. 


MR. DAVIDE. No longer, 
changed that to the phrase 
session.” 


Madam President. We have 
“while the Congress is in 


MR. CONCEPCION. How about their going to or 
coming from the session? 


MR DAVIDE. That would already be included. So, 

while the Congress is still in session, at any time they 
would be privileged from arrest anywhere fot offenses 
punishable by not more than six years imprisonment. 


MR. CONCEPCION. But the Constitution gives the 
privilege and, therefore, the Constitution may impose 
the conditions for the exercise of the privilege of im- 
munity. I hope that the Committee could insert a 
phrase or a sentence or a clause that will ensure that 
when one is not attending or when one intends to at- 
tend the sessions — since he may say at the beginning of 
the term, I will attend four years from now,” and all 
the time — he will be exempted from arrest. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee will look into that 


MR. CONCEPCION. What I would want to clarify is 
about those Members of Congress - and I think there 
had been cases of this nature - who have never attended 
the sessions of Congress. I remember one from Leyte 
and another from Cebu. I think that is my impression. 


MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


196 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Gascon be 
recognized. 


volved in this process of initiative. So, the first proposal 
is from “ten” to “EIGHT percent.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 


MR. GASCON. Madam President, I know it is lunch 
time so I shall try to be brief. Since we are ready to 
close the period of amendments, I have to be clarified 
on some matters with regard to Section 3 1 on initiative 
and referendum. 

I know for a fact that the Committee discussed very 
thoroughly the proposals on initiative and referendum. 
I would just like to know for the record whether the dis- 
cussions made in the Committee will be part of the basic 
documents for the discussion of enabling Congress to 
provide for that system of initiative and referendum 
and maybe the Committee could cite certain specific 
suggestions to that effect. 


MR. DAVIDE. The proceedings in the Committee 
would be part of the records or documents of the 
Constitutional Commission. And, therefore, the intent 
on this particular can very well be determined in the 
light of the Committee discussions especially when the 
Committee took up the resolutions pertinent to 
initiative and referendum. 

GASCON. So, when the Congress tries to enact a 

have to flT' 6 + S1 ?u h ^ s y stem > they would necessarily 
have to look into the Committee 

MR. DAVIDE. They can look into the records. 

MR. GASCON. But they may not also. 

t h e^Me mbe rs ^ otA h e I e g^i s 1 a t u r e* 1 to com P ulsor y on 

of this Commission, 

mechanism, S buP in the evenT th 'P Panning to propose a 
whole process, I would a "L th W ? b ° g d ° Wn the 
Congress to implement sudi a system V 

Co"' TbS To * ^effecuTuhe 

upon its affirmation. MyTfrstUTndmenTtoTctaP^ 

EIGHT W ° ^ t0 Change the word “ten” to 

I feel that since this is on initiative and referendum 
we should try to provide the people with tins reserved 
power and the opportunity to practice it as b^st as thev 
see it- Ten percent is much harder to get than eight 
percent, and if we put it down to eight, maybe it would 
encourage the people to become more politically active 
and provide the opportunity for them to really be in- 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, at the Committee 
level, the proponents of initiative and referendum have 
agreed to strike at a compromise, and the compromise is 
10 percent. As a matter of fact, there was a proposal of 
Commissioner Romulo and others, pegging it at 20 per- 
cent. So, we agreed to the compromised formula and 
put it at 10 percent. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, may we put the 
matter to a vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have again the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Gascon. 

MR. GASCON. On line 9, delete the word “ten” and 
replace it with the word EIGHT so that the phrase 
would read: “or local legislative body after the registra- 
tion of a petition therefor signed by at least EIGHT 
percent of the total number of registered voters.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The body shall now vote on the 
amendment. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Gascon, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 10 votes in favor and 22 against; 
the amendment is lost. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, before I make my 
second proposed amendment, I would like to share 
some of my viewpoints on initiative for the record. 

First, I hope that when this initiative process is finally 
enacted into law, the citizens would take upon them- 
selves this reserved power, and that the legislature 
should take the matter of initiative as a priority law to 
consider, perhaps by enacting a measure as they deem 
fit within 90 days, should the legislature fail to enact 
the measure within the said period or enact a substan- 
tially different law from the original proposal. I also 
hope that the legislature could provide this initiative to 
the people within 45 days after it has been submitted. 
Second, I think it would be best also for the legislature, 
upon any initiative, to conduct public hearings on 
it so that we can elicit a greater majority of people to 
participate in the discussions. 

Therefore, I would like to make an amendment on 
line 5 of Section 3 1 by inserting the phrase WITHIN 
NINETY DAYS AFTER ITS INITIAL SESSION after 
the word “therefrom.” The amended portion will there- 
fore read: “The Congress shall provide for a system 
of initiative and referendum, and the exceptions there- 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


197 


from WITHIN NINETY DAYS AFTER ITS INITIAL 
SESSION.” 


My point is that we should encourage the Congress to 
enact immediately this system of referendum so that the 
people are provided the opportunity as soon as possible 
because it is a possibility that a Congress may — because 
there is no enabling provision in the Constitution to 
mandate them to immediately enact the law — just lull 
and take it up after four years, or six years, or whatever. 
There is no assurance that Congress will take it up 
immediately and, therefore, the people are deprived o 
this opportunity of participating in lawmaking, o, l 
we could provide for a time frame whereby they shou 
enact a law, it would be very helpful for the people. 


that when they act, they have in mind the mandate of 
their constituents, the people who elected them. I do 
not think we should press them. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Would Commissioner Gascon entertain 
a very small amendment to his proposed amendment? 
Instead of specifying the exact number of days, would 
he be willing to say: “The Congress shall. AS EARLY 
AS POSSIBLE, provide for a system of initiative and 
referendum . . .”? 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. RODRIGO. I was requested to speak tor the 
Committee. The Committee does not accept the pro- 
posed amendment. First of all, during the peno o 
debate, I interpellated the Chairman and as e 11111 1 
this provision in Section 3 1 was mandatory oi irec or y> 
and the answer was, it is directory, giving the power an 
prerogative to Congress. Now, setting 90 days wou 
make it mandatory on Congress, and not only 111311 _ 
tory but with a time frame, with a tune limit. o _ 
think we should do that to the Members of Congress 
Senators elected by the whole country, em e 
House elected by district; and perhaps some o 
even elected by party list. Let us remem er 
mechanics of the system of initiative an re e . ’ 
while it sounds good to me - it is good - 1S someth “Jf 
novel, something new in the Philippines. n M ’u ers 
should not hurry and we should not press the M 
of Congress to decide within 90 days on som ^ § 
is novel and untried here in the Philippines. We 
give them enough time to study the matter and as the 
Gentleman said, even hold public hearings. Bu 
limit them to 90 days, we can see the diffici #t y 
will find themselves in. I think we should have 
trust in the Congress that we are going to form in ac- 
cordance with the Constitution and in the Members w 
will be elected by the people. Let us give them the 
discretion to decide on when they want to enact a 
legislation regarding initiative and referendum. 

MR. GASCON. Upon the suggestion that maybe 90 
days is too short, although I would like to stick to the 
principle that it must take the matter into consideration 
immediately, would the Gentleman agiee to an alll< ^ ia 
ment to this effect: That “the Congress shall IMME- 
DIATELY provide for a system of initiative and refer- 
endum.” My only concern is that the Congress will 
consider it and will take steps towards initiating such. 


MR. RODRIGO. We must remember that the Mem- 
bers of Congress are elected by the people and that we 
should not think of them in terms of individual senators 
or representatives of the people. We should presume 


MR. GASCON. “AS EARLY AS POSSIBLE” or 
IMMEDIATELY. 

REV. RIGOS. The sentiment is there, and yet it is 
not really binding the Congress to act within a specific 
period of time. 

MR. GASCON. I agree that we should not bind them 
to a specific time, and I would agree to the proposal of 
Commissioner Rigos. Either IMMEDIATELY or “AS 
EARLY AS POSSIBLE” would suffice to the effect 
that this provision in this Article will not remain in 
paper but there would be sincere attempts to do such. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the body ready to vote now? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, the Committee 
does not accept the proposed amendment. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Just a brief clarificatory question. 

I heard Commissioner Rodrigo say that in the inter- 
pellations during the committee hearings “shall” was 
meant to be directory instead of mandatory. I think in 
other deliberations, “shall” was meant to be directory. 
When do we know that the use of “shall” is directory 
and when is it mandatory? 

MR. RODRIGO. Even in the Supreme Court deci- 
sions, shall is sometimes interpreted as directory, 
sometimes as mandatory. And so, in cases like at- 
tendance in committee meetings, they changed the word 
“shall” to “MUST” to make it very clear that it is 
mandatory. 

MR. BENNAGEN. “MUST” is used instead of 

“shall.” 

MR. RODRIGO. But in order to make it clear that it 
is merely directory, they changed “shall ’ to MA 


198 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 



MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, after conference 
with my friends here who agree with the basic principle 
that we have to allow the Congress to consider the mat- 
ter very seriously, I would withdraw my amendment of 
adding the word IMMEDIATELY and replace it with 
“AS EARLY AS POSSIBLE” so that the sentence will 
now read: “The Congress shall, AS EARLY AS POSSI- 
BLE, provide for a system of initiative and referendum.” 
I would like to ask all the Commissioners to seriously 
consider this because the whole point here is that 
we should assure the people that this section providing 
for initiative and referendum will be provided them 
as soon as possible, and it will not remain simply beauti- 
ful words in this Constitution, but will become meaning- 
ful to them. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. It is almost one o’clock; I move that we 
suspend the session until two-thirty this afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 12:47 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 2:55 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


VOTING 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, we submit it to 
the body for a vote. 


MR. RAMA. We are now in the period of amend- 
ments on the Article on the Legislative. 

I ask that Commissioner Maambong be recognized to 
present an amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Gascon, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

M^\ many • aS / r f against > P lease raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

am?„St" d V ° te ta fa ™ “ d ' > gainst; the 

qu“«o„™as S e° N ' Ma<iam PreSident ' onl '' °" e brief 
niz™ E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Tingson is recog- 

tiative t IF 

r k thou8h 

camouflage and as an excu^thatever?"" 1 “* “ 3 

thtag R may tep^ibie We ^ ab ° U ' P ossibi '»y. any- 

be wnsidered^later ' heManila incid “< could 

Pe considered later as initiative and referendum.” 

MR. DAVIDE We do not know how they would do 
it. We will cross the bridge when we come to it d 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Before the Chair recognizes Com- 
missioner Maambong, I wish to acknowledge the 
presence of the members of the Concerned Women of 
the Philippines who are here. We welcome them and we 
thank them for their interest. 

Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President and members of 
the Committee, before I present my proposed amend- 
ment, if it will be necessary at all, may I reverse the 
process by presenting to the Chairman and the members 
the problem which I intend to solve. 

Under the provisions of the Article on the Legislative, 
we allow Senators or Congressmen to hold office in the 
Commission on Appointments and in the electoral 
tribunal. In the same provisions, we also allow members 
of the Supreme Court to serve in the electoral tribunals. 
Likewise, in the Article on the Executive, we also 
allow the whole membership of the Supreme Court 
to serve as members of the Presidential Electoral 
Tribunal in the case of presidential and vice-presidential 
electoral contests. With this in mind, I hope the Com- 
mittee and I will be able to solve two problems. We have 
two basic provisions in our Constitution which may be 
violated — the first is the provision against serving in 
another office, and the second is the provision against 
additional or double compensation. 

Madam President, as the Chairman of the Subcommit- 
tee on Duties and Responsibilities of Public Officials of 
the Committee on General Provisions, I submitted to 
the Committee a provision which reads as follows: 

No elective or appointive public officer or employee 
shall receive additional, double or indirect compensation, 
except pensions or gratuities, unless specifically authorized 
by law nor accept, without the consent of the National As- 


* 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


199 


sembly, any present, emolument, office or title ot any kind 
from any foreign state. 

Unfortunately, when this provision was taken up by 
the Committee on General Provisions, I was outvoted 
and the clause “unless specifically authorized by ’law 
was deleted. Consequently, in Committee epor 
of the Committee on General Provisions, the^speci ic 
clause “unless specifically authorized by law whicn 

would have solved the problem I just presented was 

deleted. I will now call the attention of t le iai 
of the Committee on General Provisions to consider his 
later. But I would like to ask now the Committee if t 
clause “unless specifically authorized by law, which 
submitted, would be carried in the Constitution, o 
that solve the problem of double compensation whicn 
mentioned earlier? 


provision which I submitted to the Committee on 
General Provisions, and now part of the committee 
report: 

Unless required by law, neither should he hold any 
other office or employment in the government, or any sub- 
division, agency or instrumentality thereof, including 
government-owned or controlled corporations. 

My question is: Will that solve the problem of serving 
in another office as far as Senators, Congressmen or 
members of the Supreme Court serving either in the 
Commission on Appointments, the electoral tribunal or 
the Presidential Electoral Tribunal are concerned? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, no problem is to be 
solved because the Constitution itself allows it. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, it will definite iy 
solve the problem, but insofar as members o 
mission on Appointments and the electoral tnbunak 
are concerned, we feel that they donote^nf^mftm 
that particular prohibition because *6°^ Mem bers 
they will be elected, in addition . would 

of the Senate or of the House of R ^f> res T M o 'r.Tc “lit 
not be incompatible with each other. P - nt _ 

rule which the Gentleman cited would not b PP 
ment to any other office which is compatible with 

office that one is holding. 

MR MAAMBONG. Madam President, I am 
fically addressing the issue of contpensaOon to jhe 
Gentleman because, it he will recall, 
why I provided in the provision I submitted i 
Committee on General Provisions the words jntoert 
compensation” was that the Gen is a 

indirect compensation. And, precisely, i 
member of the Commission on Appointmen 
ZZter of the electoral tribunal, he will recetv^com- 
pensation which, as the Gentleman said, 
and that would fall under the prohibition. 

mt? DAVIDE I am glad that the matter was 

MR ' t H bv the Commissioner. I am sure that the ap- 
propriate coCmee might restore the Cause “unless 
otherwise provided by law. 

MR MAAMBONG. Madam President, before I leave 
, hi" would like to inform the Co— t hat an 
almost exactly the same provts.on had already been p^ 

r^irSetlcetmmfsCom Unfortunately the term 

‘•indirect compensation” and the exception of p^ns 

or gratuities are not found in Section 7. 1 wouM sugge , 
with due deference to my Committee on e c 
visions, that this provision under the Art.de on Genen.1 
Provisions be transposed later on to the Art.cl on the 
Civil Service Commission where it properly belongs. 

I would like to go to another point. Madam Pres,de " t ’ 
regarding service in another office as con ainec in 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. When we amended 
Section 20 yesterday, I noticed that members of the 
Cabinet cannot be compelled anymore to appear before 
the House of Representatives or before the Senate. I 
have a particular problem in this regard. Madam Pres- 
ident, because in our experience in the Regular Batasang 
Pambansa — as the Gentleman himself has experienced 
in the interim Batasang Pambansa — one of the most 
competent inputs that we can put in our committee 
deliberations, either in aid of legislation or in con- 
gressional investigations, is the testimonies of Cabinet 
ministers. We usually invite them, but if they do not 
come and it is a congressional investigation, we usually 
issue subpoenas. 

I want to be clarified on a statement made by Com- 
missioner Suarez when he said that the fact that the 
Cabinet ministers may refuse to come to the House of 
Representatives or the Senate does not mean that they 
need not come when they are invited or subpoenaed by 
the committee of either House when it comes to in- 
quiries in aid of legislation or congressional investiga- 
tion. According to Commissioner Suarez, that is allowed 
and their presence can be had under Section 21. Does 
the Gentleman confirm this, Madam President? 

MR. DAVIDE. We confirm that, Madam President, 
because Section 20 refers only to what was originally 
the Question Hour, whereas. Section 21 would refer 
specifically to inquiries in aid of legislation, under 
which anybody for that matter, may be summoned 
and if he refuses, he can be held in contempt of the 
House. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Let us crystallize this with one 
last question. Is the Commissioner saying now that it 
the member of the Cabinet or the Cabinet minister him- 
self refuses to comply with the subpoena of any 
the committees of either of the House or the Senate, he 
can be held in contempt, just like in the case of Arnau 
vs. Nazar eno (87 Phil. 29)? 


200 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, it is not a member 
of either the House or the Senate who can issue a sub- 
poena. In cases like this, the subpoena must be signed 
by either the President of the Senate or the Speaker of 
the House of Representatives. In short, it is really a 
contempt not of a particular committee but a contempt 
of the House. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that situation, therefore, any 
Cabinet minister can be compelled, through that kind of 
subpoena signed by either the President of the Senate 
or the Speaker of the House, to appear before that 
particular committee. 


MR. SUAREZ. May I call the attention of the dis- 
tinguished sponsors to Section 31, particularly to line 9, 
referring to the word “signed,” because we are all con- 
cerned about the illiterates who would participate in the 
system of initiative and referendum. Do I take it that 
the word “signed” includes the thumbprinting by the 
illiterate who would be assisted by another person? I 
just want to make that very clear so that there will be 
no misunderstanding later on. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President, the thumb- 
print of an illiterate is considered his signature. 


MR. DAVIDE. The answer must be qualified. If it is 
truly in aid of legislation, yes; but if it is in the guise of 
an aid in legislation, then it could be refused. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

With that clarification, I will not press the amend 
ment anymore. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Suppose it is a congressional in- 
vestigation, Madam President? 

MR. DAVIDE. If it is, then necessarily, he can be 
compelled. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


MR RAMA. We have some very concerned and 
patriotic persons who are visiting us this afternoon: so, I 
move that we suspend the session for a few minutes to 
greet the Concerned Women of the Philippines 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 3:06 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 3:14 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Quesada be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I would like to 
introduce an amendment to Section 28 on page 10, line 
10 by inserting the word NON-PROFIT between “or” 
and “educational.” The amended portion will therefore 
read: “Charitable institutions, churches, and parsonages 
or convents appurtenant thereto, mosques, non-profit 
cemeteries and all lands, buildings, and improvements 
actually, directly, and exclusively used for religious, 
charitable, or NON-PROFIT educational purposes shall 
be exempt from taxation.” 

I think a lot has been discussed on this issue, and my 
position is that if we do not introduce this qualifier, 
then it would contribute to a loss by the government of 
much needed resources from these realty taxes. It will 
be a very bad precedent for us to be helping even profit- 
making institutions, regardless of the fact that they are 
contributing to a very basic need of education, but 
which we feel the State should mainly be responsible 
for. 

Madam President, I move that we put this to a vote 
by the body. 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that 
recognized for an amendment. 


Commissioner Suarez 


be 


THE PRESIDENT. How is the amendment of the 
proponent to read? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 

zed. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President 
Actually, this is not an amendment but a clarification. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 


MS. QUESADA. On lines 9 to 10, the amendment 
shall read: “charitable, or NON-PROFIT educational 
purposes.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, would the pro- 
ponent yield to interpellation? 

MS. QUESADA. Gladly, Madam President. 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


201 


MR. NOLLEDO. As the proponent stated, educating 
the young is a basic function of tire government. 

MS. QUESADA. That is true. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And that private schools, whether 
profit or nonprofit, share with the government the 
burden of educating the youth. Is that not true? 

MS. QUESADA. That is true. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And that we cannot deny that now- 
adays because of the high prices of facilities, etc., many 
schools are suffering financially, like the University of 
the East which is a profit institution. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, I understand. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And that because they share in the 
burden of educating the youth, they should be given 
some incentives. Does the proponent agree with me? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, they should. 


MR. NOLLEDO. And one incentive is exemption 
from the payment of realty tax. Is the proponent aware 
that if the school is a profit-making Institution, it also 
pays income tax on its income? Is the proponent like- 
wise aware of the provision of Section 24 of the Nation- 
al Internal Revenue Code which provides that schools 

should pay 10 percent of their income tax on school- 
related income? 


rardon me, but I really hate to say this. I have always 
si e wi i ommissioner Quesada in her amendments 
this time, I beg to disagree because I think 


nermitT 0 ! 8 reall y suffering If the Chair will 
nlinst th ’ 1 WOUld Uke to reserve the rlght t0 SpCak 

against the amendment. 


Thank you, Madam President. 


MS. QUESADA. The Gentleman is entitled to his 
position. 


BISHOP BACANI. I am the director of a nonprofit, 
nonstock school. May I say to this body that our own 
school, which is the biggest Catholic parochial school 
in the whole world, is at present suffering a loss of 
P70,000 a year, without including the losses, due to 
depreciation, despite the fact that we are counting 
among our income the income from investments from 
past earnings. 

So, if this is the situation in a nonprofit, nonstock 
school which is reputedly well-run we can imagine what 
may be the situation among other schools which, 
perhaps, have to pay for the rent or the construction of 
the buildings. And so, even though our interest here is 
not involved, I think the interest of education as a 
whole would forbid us at this point to impose this 
added burden on the private educational institutions in 
the country which have served and helped the govern- 
ment. 

Thank you very much. 


MS. QUESADA. The sad plight of education in the 
Philippines is a reflection of government neglect of 
education. So, it does not mean that providing more 
support to private institutions — private schools for 
profit — would really solve the problem of education. 
We would like to have the citizens enjoy the right to 
education, but I do not think this right can be enjoyed 
by lessening State support to public schools where 70 
percent of our poor people go to. Providing this kind 
of privilege even to profit-making institutions will get 
some of the resources that should rightfully be chan- 
neled to State-supported institutions. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Will the distinguished pro- 
ponent yield to one clarificatory question? 


MS. QUESADA. Willingly, Madam President. 


• PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I would like to 
ask Commissioner Quesada. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

BISHOP BACANI. Is the Commissioner aware that 
the rate of returns on investments for the schools is, at 
most, three percent, which is very much lower than the 
rate of returns on other businesses? Only about tour 
days ago, this was published in the newspapers. 

MS. QUESADA. I am not aware, Madam President. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Does the amendment consist 
in adding the word “NON-PROFIT” only? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, that is the only qualifier. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I think there is no more 
necessity of placing the word “NON-PROFIT” because 
if the purpose is for profit, under existing laws in juris- 
prudence. that portion which is used for profit is really 
taxable. This is established in the case of Montana 
Catholic Missions vs. Louie Clark Country - 13 Monta- 
na, 559-51 American Jurisprudence 5887 which is an 
American case; and in the Philippine case of Herrera vs. 


202 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


Quezon City Board of Assessment Appeals — L-15270- 
September30, 1961. 

The jurisprudence says: 

. . . That what determines the exempt nature is the use of 
the said land, building or improvement, rather than the 
religious or charitable character of the owner. 


When a religious or charitable institution engages in 
business for profit, it becomes liable to taxation as any 
other establishment. In other words, if a portion of the 
church is not exclusively used for religious purposes but 
is leased for business purposes, this provision can be 
applied. So that portion which is devoted to a non- 
religious purpose is already subject to tax. Thus, in the 
case, for example, of YMCA vs. Internal Revenue, the 
Supreme Court held that the YMCA is not subject to 
real property tax because it is devoted to a combination 
of religious, charitable and educational purposes. 


In the case of Herrera vs. Quezon City Board of 
Assessment Appeals, the Supreme Court held that the 
admission of pay patients does not detract from the 
charitable character of a hospital, if all of its funds are 
devoted exclusively to the maintenance of the institution 
as a public charity hospital. In other words, we are ren- 
dering charity its primary objective and the funds derived 
rorn payments made by patients able to pay are devoted 
to the benevolent purposes of the institution, so the 
mere fact that a profit has been made will not deprive the 
ospital of its benevolent character. By analogy we say 
D a f ... eve *? an educational institution derives some 
rLin t “ 3 ° f its funds are devoted exclusively to the 
student!; 311 ^ 6 -^ e ^ nst itution in order to help poor 
educate’ ^ en lt is exem P t from taxation. But when this 
which icT lnstitution is really that kind of institution 
of Intpm°| r then it is up for the Bureau 

should h/t Re Ki Cni J e t0 determine whether or not it 
was inrlud ^fk 6 Constitution, education 

private ednnaf CCa . Use at that time there were very few 
only Drivatp' atl , ona * mstltutlon s. As a matter of fact, the 
the relioi edl *cational institutions were those run by 

them to°e U x S n 0 V rS - J And ’ dlere f° re ’ i n order to enable 
educating thf 3 " • i and t0 , a ^ e to help the youth in 
from taxation"^ 6 t^ S ’ t ^ ese institutions were exempted 
came. So it " £ lt „ later ° n the Profit-oriented schools 
venue whether oA V f n? t0 the Bureau of Eternal Re- 
have to put the word ^NO^-PROFIT” 3 ^ 6 d -f * 
educational institution is reallv fn, FIT , Because lf the 
BIR will run after it But if L/ Pr ° flt pUrpOS6S the 
tion is mainly for education h? purpose of th e institu- 
are made as an incidental n 6 mere ^ act ^ at pro ^ ts 
although these profits are funneHed tl\hT inSt j tUti ° n 
of the educational institution win maintenance 
institution from the ^ 

no need to qualify educational institnti ' X ' S th re 1S 
because it is already serf loH k nstlt utions as nonprofit 

jurisprudence * “ KUng ‘° Cal a " d 


Thank you. 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I am not a lawyer, 
so with this legalistic presentation of Commissioner de 
los Reyes, I withdraw the amendment with the under- 
standing that there is really no need to add “NON- 
PROFIT” before “educational purposes” because there 
are already existing legal provisions concerning this. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I just make 
a comment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. This is only with the use of the 
word “non-profit.” I think there are some who prefer 
to use the word “proprietary” as against “non- 
proprietary” because, unfortunately, the word “non- 
profit” in relation to educational institutions seems to 
have a very bad connotation although, frankly, I do not 
see why this should be because “profit” is not a bad 
word in our dictionary. As a matter of fact, when we 
relate the word “profit” to other pursuits or endeavors 
like hospitals, banking institutions, electric, trans- 
portation and other utility companies, even movie 
production outfits, mass media organizations, there is 
no bad connotation; it is only when it relates to educa- 
tional institutions. And I think that is unfortunate, 
Madam President. May I just invite the attention of the 
honorable Commissioners that as we all know 85 
percent of the students in colleges or universities 
throughout the Philippines are studying in private 
educational institutions. And according to the survey of 
the Fund for Assistance to Private Education, about 
two-thirds, meaning about 60 percent, of all the 
students in colleges and universities today are studying 
in the so-called proprietary schools. Many of these 
students belong to what we call the “masa.” They are 
the students in the urban centers; they are the working 
students. As a matter of fact, most of these students 
study in the evening because they work in the daytime. 
And those who are even professional students in these 
colleges and universities are children of the poor — the 
market vendors, the drivers, the factory workers and so 
forth. In the provinces, it is the same. Why? Why do 
these students go to these proprietary schools and not 
to the nonproprietary schools which generally have a 
higher quality of education? Of course, when I say 
higher quality of education, I do not mean that the 
proprietary schools do not provide quality education 
but they do not provide as high, generally speaking, as 
the nonproprietary schools. The proof of the fact that 
they provide quality education is that in the board 
examinations and the other examinations given by the 
government in accounting, engineering and so forth, 
graduates of proprietary schools have had a very good 
record comparably and sometimes even better than 
those coming from the nonproprietary schools. As a 
matter of fact, there are many distinguished business- 
men, professionals and people in the government who 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


203 


come from proprietary schools. If we push these schools 
to the wall, I could speculate as to what would happen. 

I can only speculate because I do not own a school; I do 
not even own half a share in an educational institution. 
But what would happen if an owner of a school finds 
out that he or she is losing? I think that person would 
be encouraged to transfer his assets to other ventures, 
especially under the condition now of our government 
where the business atmosphere is much improved. And 
who will suffer? It will be the students, particularly 
those who are poor. And why do they not go to the 
higher quality schools? The reason is that they cannot 
afford. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. Just one moment, if the Commis- 
sioner does not mind. 

In the proprietary schools, the charge is generally 
P2,000 a year. In the nonproprietary schools, the 
tuition fee is generally P5,000 a year. Some of them 
even charge more than PI 0,000 a year. These students 
cannot afford to pay such an amount so what will the 
implication be? They will either require the State to 
provide them with more schools which the State could 
not do at present or they will exert pressure on the 
nonproprietary schools by requiring more scholarships 
or asking them to reduce the tuition fee; otherwise, they 
will be forced to stop studying, thereby creating a social 
problem. 

Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Do I understand that Commissioner 
Quesada has withdrawn her proposed amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. She has withdrawn her proposed 

amendment. 

MR- OPLE. I should sit down at this point, but since 
Commissioner Guingona, a member of the Committee, 
raised some very important issues pertaining to private 
tertiary education in particular, I think I will ask him a 
few questions, if this is possible, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona may 
yield, if he so desires. 

MR. GUINGONA. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

Is there a way of quantifying if we want to vote 
intelligently on issues connected with this section? Is 
there a way of quantifying what the government will 
lose and what the private tertiary schools will gain in 
terms of exemptions from real property taxes? 


MR. GUINGONA. At the moment, I do not have the 
figures, Madam President, but I can say that the exemp- 
tion would benefit students, as I mentioned yesterday, 
either in the form of reduced fees or nonincrease in fees 
or in the quality of education that will be offered to 
them, because all these private schools, whether pro- 
prietary or nonproprietary, are heavily dependent on 
tuition fees. And as I said a while ago, the proprietary 
schools are charging relatively low tuition fees, and in 
spite of this there are a lot of students who are not able 
to study because of economic reasons. 

May I just cite one example, Madam President. In the 
case of the Central Colleges of the Philippines, for the 
past three years . . . 

MR. OPLE. Is this located in Manila? 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. It is 
located in Aurora Boulevard. The drop in enrollment 
was in the average of 1,200 students. But their records 
show that less than 10 percent asked for transfer creden- 
tials, which means that more than 90 percent have 
stopped studying, not because they want to transfer to 
another school but generally because of economic 
reasons. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but in the case of the Central 
Colleges of the Philippines, to what extent will the 
subsidy of a tax exemption help relieve its economic 
distress so that it can become more viable? 

MR. GUINGONA. This tax exemption alone would 
not be enough, Madam President. That is why in our 
Subcommittee on Education, which is part of the Com- 
mittee on Human Resources chairmanned by the Honor- 
able Villacorta, we are proposing other incentives and 
other assistance. 

MR. OPLE. So this is a minor palliative in the case 
of schools that are in extremis financially? 

MR. GUINGONA. This is one of the assistance or 
incentives that we in the Subcommittee on Education 
would propose. 

MR. OPLE. Given the noble motive the Commis- 
sioner has stated that the poorest students or the 
poorer students will be the beneficiaries of this exemp- 
tion and, therefore, a subsidy’s money taken away from 
the people in order to vest it in a more specific segment 
of the society, in this case the educational entrepreneurs 
especially at tertiary level, how do we insure that the 
savings from this exemption will benefit the students? 
Is there anything in this section that creates an obliga- 
tion for the owners of tertiary schools to pass on the 
savings to the students? 

MR. GUINGONA. Not in this section, Madam P r ^ s 
ident, but it is provided for in the sections that tie 
Subcommittee on Education will propose. 


204 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


MR. OPLE. Yes. I would like to leave the larger ques- 
tions concerning this subject to the forthcoming debate 
on the educational system as a whole. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA Thank you, Madam President. 


EXEMPTION PROVIDED THEY LIMIT DIVIDENDS 
AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the honorable Chair- 
man of the Committee say? 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Uka has one of his 
irresistible comments, so he wishes to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we still talking about this? 
May the Chair be informed if there is a pending pro- 
posed amendment? 


MR. ROMULO. Just a comment, Madam President. 
MR. UKA. Just for one minute, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recognized. 


MR. UKA. I would like to ask the honorable mem- 
ers of the Committee if they would accept this amend- 
tadV 0 be added t0 Section 2 8 (3), line 10: PROPRIE- 
t jVlu,ToE DUCATI0NAL INSTITUTIONS SHALL 
BE ENTITLED TO THE EXEMPTION 

PRnvmcS ™ EY LIMIT DIVIDENDS AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW. 

.Reason for this ’ Madam President, is that tax 
n „ ^ 10n ^ are one form of reimbursement to the 
country ° mi 10ns °f poor students all over the 

J" Eur T an countries !ike Holland and Germany, 

have nnt 1P K S u re eXtended to schools. Although I 

education there ’ 1 J 1376 read in many articles on 

exemn ted f ^ ° f their P ro P riet ary schools are 

exempted from taxation. 

more' than 7? te ’ “ Commissioner Guihgona said, that 

enroUcd in H,. our poor c °"ese students are 

tions If said school' l '\ f ’ IOi:Hletar V educational institu- 

the dues ?on ? c "I ' C '° Se because of hi S'' taxation, 

chools o at ta? I 80ver " me "< take over these 

schools or at least help the students who are forced 

cat. Even foundation schools are now lostag"'"® they 
are about to close due to low enrollment. We really need 
these proprietary educational institutions: otherwise we 
will increase the number of illiterate voters a situation 
which we would like to avoid. So I would likp t ./ ° n 
mend to the Committee the addition of the following 
provision: PROPRIETARY EDUCATIONAL N^ti 
TUTIONS SHALL LIKEWISE BE ENTITLED TO THE 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may we request 
very kindly Commissioner Uka to defer consideration of 
that proposed amendment and to take that up when the 
Article on Human Resources shall be taken up by the 
body. We feel that that would be the proper situs of the 
proposal. 

MR. UKA. I agree, Madam President. 

Thank you very much. 


CONSIDERATION OF THE SURVEY 
ON SYNCHRONIZATION OF ELECTIONS 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, we have two 
subject matters to be taken up. The first is with regard 
to the synchronization of elections, copies of the results 
of the survey of which, I think, has been provided every- 
body. And the second question is the party list sectoral 
representation issue. 

I move that we proceed to the consideration of the 
survey on the synchronization of the elections for the 
Offices of the President and Vice-President, the Mem- 
bers of the Congress and the local officials. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Acting Floor Leader? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, will the Acting Floor 
Leader yield to a question concerning this agenda? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, certainly. 

MR. OPLE. We are taking up the consideration of the 
survey on the synchronization of the elections, and 
within that context the specific terms of office of the 
President and the Vice-President, the Members of the 
Congress and the local officials. Is that correct? 

MR. ROMULO. That is my proposal inasmuch as the 
survey covers all of those offices. 

MR. OPLE. This will not foreclose a full debate on 
the question of the terms of the President and the Vice- 
President in this Constitution later on? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, firstly, I do not 
think this involves the incumbents. 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


205 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. Does that satisfy Commissioner 
Ople? 

MR. OPLE. That is all the information I wanted. 

Thank you very much, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The term of the incumbents is 
taken up in the Transitory Provisions. Is that correct? 

MR. ROMULO. That is correct, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So the body will now discuss the 
term of office of the President, Vice-President, the 
Members of the Congress and the local officials. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. So in other words, strictly 
speaking, we will discuss the synchronization of elec- 
tions. 

May we ask the Secretary-General to read the result 
of the opinion survey on the term of office. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Madam President, we 
have submitted the survey results to the Chairman of 
the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is asking 
the Secretary-General to read the result ol the survey. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. For Scheme No. I, 
a total of 19 Members opted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Secretary-General please 
state the figures 6-6, 4-4 or whatever is there. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Yes, I hope all the 
Commissioners have copies of the result of the survey 
because we have the columns here for President and 
Vice-President, Senator, Representatives, Local Offi- 
cials Frequency of Elections and the Results or Total. 
So for Scheme No. I, the President and Vice-President 
have a term of six years. 

MR- BENGZON. Madam President, I do not believe 
, at these survey results are complete because as of 
vesterday afternoon, when I received my copy, I had 
y t cast my decision. So this total of 19 here in Scheme 
No I should be 20 because I opted for Scheme No. 1. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will make the total 20. 

MR BENGZON. There may have been other Com- 
missioners who have not yet submitted their survey 
forms like me. 

THE PRESIDENT. But will that preclude us from 
having a look into the result of the survey as of yester- 
day afternoon? 


MR. BENGZON. No, Madam President. I just wanted 
to correct. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Secretary-General please 
continue. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Forty-three Members 
submitted their survey results. 

For Scheme No. I: a total of 20 Members opted. May 
I read the terms of office for Scheme No. 1: President 
and Vice-President, 6 each; Senators, 6; Representa- 
tives, 4; Local Officials, 4; frequency of elections, once 
every two years. Twenty Members opted for Scheme 
No. I. 

For Scheme No. II: President and Vice-President, 6 
each; Senators, 6; Representatives, 3; Local Officials, 3; 
frequency of elections, 3. Twelve Members opted for 
Scheme No. II. 

For Scheme No. Ill: President and Vice-President, 6 
each; Senators, 6; Representatives, 6; Local Officials, 3; 
frequency of elections, 3. Only one Member opted for 
Scheme No. III. 

For Scheme No. IV: President and Vice-President, 6 
each; Senators, 6; Representatives, 3; Local Officials, 6; 
frequency of elections, 3. Nobody opted for it. 

For Scheme No. V: President and Vice-President, 6 
each; Senators, 6; Representatives, 6; Local Officials, 6; 
frequency of elections, 6, without reelection. Only one 
Member opted for Scheme No. V. 

For Scheme No. VI: President and Vice-President, 5 
each; Senators, 5; Representatives, 5; Local Officials, 5; 
frequency of elections, 5, without reelection. Only one 
Member opted for Scheme No. VI. 

For Scheme No. VII: President and Vice-President, 4 
each; Senators, 4; Representatives, 4; Local Officials, 4; 
frequency of elections, 4, with one reelection only, but 
the official is allowed to run again after a one-term 
interval. Five Members opted for Scheme No. VII. 

And for Scheme No. VIII: President and Vice- 
President, 4; Senators, 4; Representatives, 4; Local Of- 
ficials, 4, frequency of elections, 4, with one reelection 
for all except local officials who will be allowed 
unlimited reelections. Two Members opted for Scheme 
No. VIII. 

So, a total of 43 Members submitted their surveys. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I now ask the 
members ol the Committee whether they would like to 
discuss what, in el feet, are the first two schemes because 
the rest are meaningless? 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, before our 
Chairman begins to discuss, I understand there have 
been reservations or remarks made by some Members in 
casting their choices. Perhaps, the Secretary-General 
could let us know. 


206 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. I was coming to that. Will the Secre- 
tary-General please read the accompanying remarks. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. I will read the fol- 
lowing remarks: 

On Scheme No. I: 

1. No reelection for the President; no limit for all 
others. 

2. No immediate reelection for the President; 
Senators, with reelection; Congressmen, with re- 
election; local officials, with one reelection. 

3. Local officials, no immediate reelection. 

4. No limit to reelection. 

5. No reelection for all. 

On Scheme No. II: 

1 . No reelection for President. 

2. No immediate reelection; local officials, limited to 
two reelections; Senators, limited to one reelec- 
tion; Representatives, allowed three reelections. 

3. No reelection for President, immediate or other- 
wise; Senators, no reelection, immediate or other- 
wise; Representatives and local officials, one reelec- 
tion. 

4. Unlimited reelection for Senators, Representatives 
and local officials. 

On Scheme No. VII: National and local officials to be 
elected the same year but not the same date to avoid 
confusion of issues. 

And on Scheme No. VIII: One reelection for Pres- 
ld ent only; Members of the Congress and local officials 
will be allowed unlimited reelection. 


MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 


MR. BENNAGEN. I just would like to ask the Secre 
tary-General a clarificatory question. I cannot seem t< 
make sense out of the remarks. Are these just an enume 
lation of the remarks or are they tabulated in terms o 
frequencies or random remarks? 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL These 

general remarks that we listed down along 
opinion survey given to the Members. 


are just 
with the 


MR. BENNAGEN. It is not exhaustive? 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. No, I am afraid it is 
not. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. So would Chairman Davide indicate 
whether they would like a discussion on the first two 
schemes, after which a voting would follow? How 
would he like to handle this? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee would like to suggest, 
since only Scheme Nos. I and II had obtained a result in 
excess of ten, while the others are five or less, that the 
discussion be limited to Scheme Nos. I and II to 
eliminate the others in the meantime. 

MR. ROMULO. And would the Chairman like a 
general discussion on the first and second schemes? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we leave it to the 
body. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 3:54 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:02 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I move that we 
limit the discussion to three schemes: Scheme No. I, 
Scheme No. II , and Scheme No. VII. 

MR. DAVIDE. I second the motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Acting Floor Leader that we limit our 
discussion this afternoon to Scheme Nos. I, II and VII? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bengzon be recognized to sponsor Scheme No. I. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Before we proceed, may I announce, 
Madam President, that we will decide now on the terms 
of office of six years, four years and five years. After all 
the sponsorships are finished, interpellations will take 
place. Then once we have voted on the term, we will 
then decide the other questions of whether or not 
there will be reelection for a particular official. Is that 
satisfactory? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


207 


MR. RODRIGO. How long is the sponsorship of each 
speaker? How many minutes per sponsorship? 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know from the Acting 
Floor Leader how many minutes we shall give each of 
the sponsors. Is it 15 minutes? 

MR. ROMULO. I guess a maximum of 15 minutes 
would be enough. 

THE PRESIDENT. So it is a maximum of 15 minutes 
for each of the three speakers. May we know who will 
speak for Scheme No. II? 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Aquino will speak on 
Scheme No. II and Commissioner Davide on Scheme 
No. VII. It is being suggested that perhaps five minutes 
may be enough for the sponsorship of each speaker. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will that be enough? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will make it 10 minutes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner de Castro has a 
question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I was asking the Acting Floor Leader whether or not 
we may include the frequency of elections during the 
period of interpellations because the comment on 
Scheme No. I is about frequency of elections. I want to 
know how this was taken because according to my 
computations, it will take until 1995 before there can 
be a synchronized election of Senators, Representatives 
and local officials. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President, it is included. 

MR- DE CASTRO. However, if we get into the 
- uency of election of Senators and give them a term 
treC1 tW o years - the first eight for two years and the 

second eight, four years. . . 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro can bring 
out those issues during the period of interpellations. 

MR DE CASTRO. That is why I asked whether or 
not the frequency of elections shall be included in the 
period of interpellations. 

THE PRESIDENT. It might be. We cannot exclude 
any particular subject in the period of interpellations. 


MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we now proceed? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, a further sug- 
gestion. The Members would like the proponent of a 
scheme to discuss not only the term of office but also 
the frequency of elections, whether with or without 
reelection. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is right. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. Madam President. 

May I now ask that Commissioner Bengzon be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER BENGZON 
ON SCHEME NO. I 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, these issues have 
already been discussed and battered for the last few 
days. It probably would not even take me five minutes 
to sponsor Scheme No. 1 . 

Everybody is familiar with Scheme No. 1 — 6 years 
for the President and Vice-President; 6 years for the 
Senators; 4 years for the Congressmen; and 4 years for 
the local officials. 

Since we have decided to discuss together with these 
numbers the issue of whether or not reelections will 
take place, I shall state that for this proposition there is 
no reelection for the President and Vice-President but 
they will have a term of six years; no reelection for the 
Senators but they will also have a term of six years; 
there will be reelection for the Congressmen; and 
one reelection for the local officials. 

The famous phrase of President Quezon before was: 

Four years is too short for a good President; and, there- 
fore, he should have a reelection. 

I would say, Madam President, six years would be 
good enough for a good President to perform and imple- 
ment his program of government. How about one who is 
a bad President? People will say six years is too long. 
To that I say that in the committee reports, we have 
emasculated the powers of the Executive. We have 
reduced the power of the President. We have strength- 
ened the powers of the Supreme Court. We have institu- 
tionalized all over the committee reports people’s 
power. And, therefore, to me a bad President will not 
be able to carry out his evil deeds with all of these 
checks and balances, with the emasculated powers that 
he would have, with the strengthened Supreme Court 
and judiciary, with the strengthened legislature and, 


208 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


principally and most of all, with people’s power which is 
now recognized in the Constitution. 

Six years for the Senators, I guess, would be suffi- 
cient; one of the arguments being that the Senate, since 
the Senators will be elected at large, would be a training 
ground for national leaders for the presidency. If within 
six years a Senator would not be able to prove himself 
capable of becoming the President of the Philippines, 
then he will never be able to prove that. 

The Congressmen have a four-year term with reelec- 
tion, together with the local officials, because they are 
the ones who are in close touch with the people. And as 
the times change constantly, they would be the ones 
who would implement the parochial programs of their 
constituencies, aided by their colleagues in the Senate 
who would have the overview of the national problems. 

Those are the arguments in favor of Scheme No. I, 
Madam President. 

Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I just ask one 
question of the sponsor? 

MR. ROMULO. The Commissioner may not. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think it was agreed that inter- 
pellations will be entertained later. 


MR. ROMULO. The Commissioner may ask questions 
after the period of sponsorship. 

May I ask that Commissioner Rodrigo be recognized 
to sponsor Scheme No. II. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER RODRIGO 
ON SCHEME NO. II 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I am going to 
sponsor Scheme No. II, although I am not very sanguine 
for this stand. Were it not for the frequency of the elec- 
tions undei Scheme No. I, I would have preferred it. But 
my main objection to it is that under that scheme, we 
cannot avoid election every two years which is too often 
and I believe that it is not good for our country to have 
elections too often Aside from the fact that elections 
are expensive, aside from the fact that elections are 
divisive adam President, it was my experience when I 
was a Senator that elections every two years lead tn 
politicking all the time. We never stop politicking. And 
because of this, I suggested Scheme No II What is the 
difference between Scheme Nos. I and IP First of all 
they are the same insofar as the term of the President is 
concerned - 6 years in both schemes. However if I 
heard the sponsor of Scheme No. I correctly, he said 


that both the President and the Vice-President cannot 
run for reelection. Is that correct? Under our scheme, 
only the President is prohibited from running for rcelec- 
tion; but the Vice-President can run for reelection as 
Vice-President. The Vice-President may even run as Pres- 
ident after his term. Why? Because the reason behind 
not allowing a President to run for reelection does not 
apply to the Vice-President. The main reason we want to 
prohibit a President from running for reelection is that 
he might use his vast powers to assure his reelection. But 
a Vice-President does not have vast powers. As a matter 
of fact, he has no powers at all, unless he is appointed to 
a Cabinet position. He is what we call a spare tire. So 
that is one of the differences. 

The Senators have the same term of six years. But did 
I hear the sponsor of Scheme No. I say that the Senators 
have no reelection either? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I state that 
with respect to the nonreelection of the Vice-President 
and the Senators, I am not very sanguine for that either. 
Whatever the body decides, we certainly will go along 
with it. 

MR. RODRIGO. I am glad that this will not be a 
bloody encounter, Madam President. So as regards the 
Senators, we will allow them indefinite reelection like it 
was before. Under our Scheme No. II, Representatives 
and local officials will have a term of three years, for the 
purpose of having election every three years instead of 
every two years. 

I would like to state that in the United States Federal 
Congress, the term of the members of the Lower House 
is only two years. We have been used to a term of four 
years here but I think three years is long enough. But 
they will be allowed to run for reelection any number of 
times. In this way, we remedy the too frequent elections 
every two years. We will have elections every three 
years under this scheme and we will have a continuing 
Senate. Every election, 12 of the 24 Senators will be 
elected, so that 12 Senators will remain in the Senate. 
We will have a staggered membership in the Senate. In 
other words, we will have a continuing Senate. 

Of course, there are misgivings about this three-year 
term. They say that the local officials, the officers-in- 
charge in provinces and even the ousted governors and 
municipal mayors might not like the fact that their term 
will be reduced from four years, as it was before, to 
three years. But, as I said, were it not for the fact that 
under the first scheme, the election would be too 
frequent every two years, I would like to maintain the 
four-year term for local officials. However, I think the 
lesser of two evils is to give them three years; meaning, 
the term of Representatives and the local officials will be 
three years, so that elections will be held every three 
years instead of every two years. Of course, this can be 
criticized. It has defects, but nothing in this world is 
perfect. Del mal el menor, between two evils, choose the 
lesser. 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


209 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Davide be recognized to sponsor Scheme 
No. VII. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER DAVIDE 
ON SCHEME NO. VII 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

Scheme No. VII provides for a term of four years for 
the President, Vice-President, Senators, Members of the 
Lower House and the local officials allowing them one 
reelection only (except the local officials will be al- 
lowed unlimited reelections); meaning to say, that none 
could serve for more than eight years. It is not a greater 
evil, much less is it the lesser evil; it is a scheme without 
any evil at all. 

The evil of Scheme No. I is easily shown by the 
remarks. They are so divided. There are five separate 
remarks for that. The evil of Scheme No. II is also easily 
reflected in the remarks and there are four remarks; 
meaning to say that both are extremely difficult to 
apply. 

In Scheme No. I, we have election once every two 
years that would be very expensive for the country and 
besides, we will divide the country once every two 
years. Under Scheme No. II we will have election every 
three years, and I do not think that our country could 
also afford elections once every three years. We would 
rather adopt the parliamentary system of government 
if it should be. However, under Scheme No. VII, we will 
have elections once every four years only. So, there is 
time for the people to express their sentiments once 
every four years and to me, this is sufficient already. 

Furthermore, under the scheme that I am proposing, 
we will totally eliminate from our political scene the 
growth and maintenance of political dynasties because 
at no given time may an elective representative serve for 
a total of more than eight consecutive years because he 
would be allowed only one reelection. And if the people 
will opt to elect him again, he can rest only for one term 
0 f four years and after that he can run again on the 13th 
year following the first eight consecutive years. 

And so at the very most then, we can say that an 
elective official can hold on to office for a total of eight 
consecutive years only. And necessarily, we will give 
rtunity to the others to seek election for a public 
ffice A public office is not the monopoly of any one 
° olitician or any one family where forever the father or 
the wife and the son or the daughter will hold on to a 
particular position. We are a country of 56 million 
Filipinos already. Why create a political elite group 
concentrated only to a few families? 

So if we would allow only a maximum of eight-year 
term, we can share the sacred task of serving a public 


office with many more Filipinos, especially the young. 
Our electorate is a young electorate. And so I appeal to 
the young people. This is the only chance for us to be 
able to have an opportunity to win against the tyranny 
of political dynasties. 

Furthermore, Madam President, if we will adopt this 
particular scheme of four-four-four, we will have a self- 
rejuvenating office. Like in the presidency, a President 
can hold on to office for a total of eight years because 
we will allow one reelection, the idea being that six 
years may be too long indeed for a bad President, but 
not too long for a good President. So we will allow one 
reelection for the President, the Vice-President, Senators 
and Representatives so at least every eight years, grant- 
ing that they would be reelected, we will have a new 
face in Malacanang, a new face at the Executive House, 
new faces in the Senate and new faces in the Lower 
House. 

But again I would say that to allow a six-year term 
for the Senate would be to make it an elitist group for a 
long time. And the danger is that if the Senate and the 
Lower House would have different terms, say, six years 
for the Upper House and four years for the Lower 
House, we might come to a situation where, despite the 
mandate of the people for a change in leadership be- 
cause the people voted for one political party, we might 
preserve in the Senate the mandate supposedly earlier 
acquired in favor of one political party. So we might 
have a divided Congress because of the so-called conti- 
nuing Upper House, divided in the sense that the Upper 
House may be maintained only by one political party 
but the new Members of the Lower House, attaining a 
fresh mandate of the people, may belong to another 
party. So we will always have a Senate which cannot 
cooperate with the Lower House and a Lower House 
which cannot cooperate with the Upper House and that 
is what is happening now in the United States Congress 
where they have an Upper House controlled by one 
party and a Lower House controlled by the other party. 

So we will have legislation derailed or even the 
national interest and public welfare imperiled because 
the mandate for the Lower House is different from the 
mandate for the Upper House. 

And finally, Madam President, this is the only way 
where we could immediately have synchronization of 
elections. 

The only opposition to this scheme is that the 
citizens in one given election may be voting for so many 
candidates, but that is not a problem. We know for a 
fact that political leaders or political parties who have 
their own people voting in a given election would even 
practice the voters by preparing a sample ballot, and this 
sample ballot will be brought inside the polling place for 
the people to copy it. In short, it is not an obstacle; it is 
not a hindrance. The number of candidates to be voted 
in a synchronized election is not a hindrance. As a 
matter of fact, it is a demonstration of democracy ol 
the highest order. 


210 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


So I plead that we be supported in this scheme. To 
the old Members of the Commission, we plead that they 
give the young a chance. To the young, give ourselves a 
chance. 

Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


innovations which will be effectively diluted in Scheme 
Nos. I and II, as presented; whereas, these innovations 
would find healthy fruition in Scheme No. VII as dis- 
cussed by Commissioner Davide. Let us give it a chance. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Tingson be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 


MR. OPLE. May I seek guidance from the Acting 
Floor Leader on whether a Member of the Commission 
can interpellate at will any one of the three sponsors? 

MR. ROMULO. As I stated while the Commissioner 
was out, we will now proceed to the period of inter- 
pellations since the sponsorship is already finished. And 
any Member may interpellate the three sponsors. Com- 
missioner Aquino is listed to be the first to interpellate. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much for the clarifica- 
tion. 


MR. ROMULO. May I ask that Commissioner Aquino 
be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. The Chair asks the Commissioner to please de- 
signate the sponsor to be interpellated. 

c A Q UINo - Madam President. I will speak against 
c erne os^ I and II, and consequently endorse Scheme 
ino. vn ot Commissioner Davide, which calls for a 4-4-4 
term. 


Scheme No. II provides holding of elections every 
four years for the House of Representatives, and Scheme 
No. I, every two years for the Senate. 

The holding of an election for the Representatives 
once every four years and for one-third of the Members 
of the Senate every two years would necessarily change 
the composition of the Senate twice during its term, 
while the House of Representatives would have a 
chance to change its composition only once after 
four years. This kind of an arrangement can produce 

Y P °,h “I '' 5111 ' 5 ' 11 can Present serious 

mnltinLv 1“* and health y operation of 
the mu p rty system within the bicameral legisla- 

ture. It has, m fact, a tendency of multiplvine unneces- 
sanly the possibilities f or one party to gain control of 

c r.roTof*nother Hour''" 


In effect, therefore, Scheme Nos. 
breed & relationship of factionalism, 

inefficiency. 


I and II would 
disharmony and 


Ladies and gentlemen of this Commission, we are 
now a part of the creation of something new, and there 
is a very strong collective drift in favor of adopting a 
multiparty system and sectoral representation. These are 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I favor Scheme 
No. VII except that, personally, I will not compromise 
on the term of the presidency. I would like to have the 
President serve only one term without reelection, 
because by so deciding, it seems to me that much of our 
irrational political attitudes, practices and tendencies 
would be solved. 

So I would agree with the Senators, Representatives 
and local officials serving also a four-year term. But I 
was just wondering whether somebody could answer me 
now. I know that Commissioner Monsod is our expert 
on this, but whoever could enlighten me, would it be 
possible to have Scheme No. VII and then have a six- 
year term for the President without reelection and with 
the same frequency of election of four years? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, mathematically, 
it is not possible. If we have a President with a six-year 
term and the rest have a four-year term, then there must 
be a “bi-election” at some point in time. 

MR. TINGSON. Then the proponent of this was 
mistaken a while ago. There is also an evil thing on this 
Scheme No. VII. (Laughter) So I would vote for the less 
evil and that is Schema No. I. And I can justify now, 
however, the election every two years as a consonant 
thing to what we are doing, giving our people the right 
to initiate referendum as often as they want to to take 
away public officials who do not serve our people well. 

So if that is the case, I am going to vote for Scheme 
No. I. (Laughter) 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Ople be 
recognized, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

May I request the sponsor of Scheme No. I to answer 
a question or two. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Can we settle what some Members of the 
Commission consider a prejudicial matter with respect 
to Scheme No. I? I heard the sponsor say that he did 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


211 


not feel particularly sanguine about the ban on the 
reelection of the Vice-President and the Senators. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Can he now make an explicit statement 
to the effect that under Scheme No. I, there is no bar to 
the reelection of the Vice-President and ot the Members 
of the Senate and of the House of Representatives? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. With respect to the Vice- 
President to run again as Vice-President, I have no 
problem with that; we should not have any problem 
with that; he should not be banned from running again 
for reelection as Vice-President. 

MR. OPLE. He is not barred as well from seeking the 
presidency? 

MR. BENGZON. Of course, he is not barred as well 
from seeking the presidency. The theory being that if he 
is not barred to seek the presidency, then he should not 
be barred to seek reelection for the vice-presidency. 

MR. OPLE. Yes; otherwise, I would like to inquire 
into the reason for preventing by this Constitution the 
Vice-President and the Members of the legislature trom 
seeking reelection under Scheme No. I. 

MR. BENGZON. As I said, one at a time. The Vice- 
President, considering that he can seek the presidency 
should not be barred to seek reelection as Vice-President 
There should be no reason why he cannot seek reelec- 
tion as Vice-President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. With respect to the Senators, I said 
I am not sanguine about barring them for reelection 
because what I have in mind is to allow one reelection 
for the Members of the Senate. 

MR. OPLE. Only one reelection? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, because that would mean one 
would serve for a total of 1 2 consecutive years. If he 
gets reelected, then he will have served the country as a 
Senator for 12 years. And since, as I said, one of the 
reasons for allowing a Senate is that it would serve as 
a training area for national leaders, I guess a Senator who 
shall not have proven himself capable of being a national 
leader, being a President, within a period of 1 2 years is 
just hopeless. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, in returning to the 
model of the 1935 Constitution resurrecting the two- 
chamber legislature, with respect to the Senate, I think 
we are, in effect, emulating the original model of 
the United States Senate, otherwise known as the most 


powerful club in the world. And is it not a fact, Madam 
President, that in the case of the United States Senate, a 
great part of its strength is owed to the fact that a high 
proportion of its members have served most of their 
adult professional lives in that Chamber and, therefore, 
among themselves constitute a major repository of the 
wisdom and experience and knowledge of their times? 
Is it not a fact that some of these Senators have been 
reelected time and again — I cannot mention specific 
examples now — so that there are a good number of 
them who have served in the Senate for as long as thirty 
years, sometimes forty years and, therefore, during that 
long period of time, they accumulated such a wealth of 
knowledge and presumably wisdom that they can apply 
to their tasks as representatives of their states in the 
American Senate. 


MR. BENGZON. That may be so. But if we translate 
that in Philippine situation, it may also be so that we 
have a lot of our distinguished Senators who accumulate 
this wealth of experience and knowledge. But at the 
same time we have also a wealth of young bright people 
willing, ready, able and raring to serve our country. We 
should also give them a chance. We can have those 
Senators, distinguished by experience and age, to offer 
their experience and services to the younger ones as 
consultants in their respective districts and constituen- 
cies. They are not barred from continuing to serve their 
country, not necessarily as Senators but, shall we say, 
as members of the council of elders for the younger 
ones who wouid be elected. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, as a rule — and I am 
sure this will be corroborated by experts in comparative 
parliamentary systems, unless I stand to be corrected - 
no Constitution prevents the reelection of members of 


legislatures. And rare are constitutions, a good example 
is Mexico’s, which provide for only a single term for the 
President; and I know of no jurisdiction where the Vice- 
President is subject to a ban on reelection. The point is 
that the right to stand for an office is inherent in the 
right to be voted upon with the exceptions that 1 have 
mentioned. And I think we are in danger of curtailing 
he right of suffrage when we put into the Constitution 
these numerous prohibitions on the candidates who are 
otherwise fully qualified Filipino citizens. The principal 
objection to Scheme No. 1 that I gather. Madam Pres- 
ident, is that it provides for too frequent elections. Is it 
correct that under Scheme No. I, we shall be holding 
elections once every two years 7 


MR. BENGZON. That is true. 

MR. OPLE. This will then bring us back to that 
normal political rhythm of the decade before martia 
law was proclaimed when we held elections every two 
years. Is that correct? 


212 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. Yes, we will be brought back to the 
old system of having elections every two years, except 
that I would not want to admit that prospectively, when 
we have elections every two years, we will go back to 
the bad habits of the past because the maturity of the 
people then and the maturity of the people now has a 
world of difference. 


Does the sponsor think that those who are concerned 
about the divisiveness of elections ought instead to 
focus on constitutional measures to guarantee clean and 
free elections, instead of putting all the blame on the 
exercise of suffrage itself as being tremendously divisive 
to a nation or to a community? 


MR. OPLE. Elections every two years do not necessa- 
rily mean that the same combinations of offices will be 
voted for. Is that right? What I mean is that in one 
biennial election, probably, we will have a combination 
of the eight Senators and the local officials. And then, 
in a subsequent election after two years, perhaps we will 
have the Members of the House of Representatives and 
the local officials. No, it is not the local elections but 
the presidential elections combined with, let us say, the 
eight Senators. They will always be there, is that right? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. But, in addition, the people will vote for 
their Congressmen through the different legislative 
districts? 


MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. And so, that one election need not 
duplicate the next or subsequent elections. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 


Does the s P° ns or agree with the propos 
on uttered here earlier that elections tend to be costl 
an , erefore, harmful to the economy, and that the 
are necessarily divisive? 


MR. BENGZON. The fact of divisiveness really 
depends on the particular area in this country. There are 
certain areas and provinces in this country where 
election is unifying instead of dividing. There are certain 
areas also where no matter what one does and how less 
frequent the elections are, elections are divisive in 
nature. I guess it depends on the temperament of the 
people in those areas. 

MR. OPLE. Does the sponsor agree that a national 
consensus can never be achieved if there are no elec- 
tions, in which the people have expressed themselves 
on issues in a manner that elected government would 
then be able to derive its guidance from the will of 
the people? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. That is why Scheme No. I is 
the best. 

MR. OPLE. Does the sponsor also agree that by 
holding elections once every two years, the opportuni- 
ties for people’s organizations to use the power of 
initiative and referendum will be multiplied? Normally, 
they would be stuck to an election for purposes of 
economy, although this is not necessarily true at all 
times. But the legislature stands to think of initiative 
in connection with an election so that, just like in 
the United States, nearly all acts of initiative and 
referendum have to piggyback on the elections. 


MR- BENGZON. According to Commission* 
Mo f°d ~ I guess this was based on the data that he h; 
on hand as JJAMFREL Chairman - the cost of one ele 

‘° n , !! P i 9 ? ,0 f 00 j 00 ?’ and on the basis of his arithm 
. • h< r. fee I s that that is not to o much an expen; 

the Filininn ^ 6 ect . lons ’ if one considers the fact th; 

tpino as a political animal requires that amoui 
to exercise his political rights every so often. 

— P ^ E * thought elections are unifying rathr 
than divisive, unless they are marked by fraudTr 
terrorism. Elections are supposed to be the opportu 
ties to present issues and to achieve a consensus on vvh 
a nation or a community should do. Of course wle 
elect, ons are generally clean and honest, they oughM 
leave no bitter aftermath; they ought not to exc 
partisan passions. The partisan passions ought to d 
down as quickly as they used to abate after a very fieri 
electoral contest. Everyone knows that the rules ha' 
been scrupulously observed and, of course, politics is 
zero-sum game. For every winner, there is a loser 


MR. BENGZON. The Gentleman has never been so 
right. 

MR. OPLE. When we speak, therefore, of the concern 
of those espousing a multiparty system and people’s 
power and the use of the ultimate reserve of people’s 
power which is initiative and referendum, rising to 
the height of a constitutional amending power in the 
Transitory Provisions, meaning, one can use initiative 
even to challenge an existing provision of the Constitu- 
tion if one is dissatisfied with the indifference, neglect 
and intractability of a sitting National Assembly or 
Congress, the more frequent the elections, the more 
abundant the opportunities for the exercise of the 
power of initiative and referendum. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. And, as a matter of fact, I 
would like to thank the Gentleman for making those 
statements because, in effect, they would reply to the 
arguments of our dear colleague, Commissioner Aquino, 
in saying that Scheme No. VII is the scheme that would 
provide the best opportunity for the many sections 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


213 


of our society to get into political power. I think 
that Scheme No. I also provides that, because for every 
election that we have, these multisectoral organizations 
would have every opportunity to express themselves 
and to serve the government. 


hold elections of such a frequency. Is it once every 
two years? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. My last point, Madam President, has to 
do with the concern of the economists, as a rule — this 
comes from economic circles — on the possibility of 
aggravating inflation through wanton expenditures 
during elections; and if they occur once every two years, 
then there must be some grounds for such a concern. Is 
there a way associated with Scheme No. I to control 
campaign expenditures of political parties? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. In 1970, 
when Congress called for a Constitutional Convention, 
they passed a law limiting the expenses ot the candi- 
dates by providing for certain measurements of posters, 
prohibiting streamers, billboards and things like that. I 
was one of those who ran for the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention and was restricted by that rule, and I was 
successful. Of course, I told my constituents that of all 
the candidates, I was the only one who was allowed to 
have billboards and streamers because all the Pepsi bill- 
boards are for my votes. But that is beside the point. 
The fact is that all the candidates to the Constitutional 
Convention in 1971 stuck to that rule and expenses 
were at a minimum. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, is the sponsor now in a 
position to show this Commission any specific part ot 
the Constitution where this concern is addressed. 


MR BENGZON. I cannot mention this offhand but 
rertainlv the Committee can take this into account if we 
can introduce that kind of concept so that Congress 
would be guided accordingly and the necessary law can 
be passed to ensure that expenses can be hmited to a 
minimum level. 


MR. OPLE. Of course, campaign expenditures are 
sometimes seen as having the redistribution effect 
especially if one runs into a deflationary situation as 
distinguished from an inflationary situation. Has the 
sponsor formed an opinion concerning this theory that 
lections have a redistribution effect and that, therefore, 
they can be democratizing because some resources in 
ft country which are concentrated in a few hands will 
now have to shift down to various layers of the people? 

MR BENGZON. That is a positive way of looking at 
it. 


MR OPLE. But just the same, the sponsor agrees that 
in direct proportion to the frequency of elections, there 
must be effective safeguards against overspending 
so as not to threaten the economy when we have to 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Just one point with regard to 
Scheme No. I. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I recall I was the author of an 
amendment that was approved already by the body 
regarding the power of the COMELEC to designate 
places where propaganda materials can be displayed 
during the campaign period in order to minimize elec- 
tion expenses. It was the practice before that we splurge 
the whole community with all kinds, shapes and sizes 
of banners and other propaganda materials which were 
pasted on walls and all possible places. Future elections 
will have a good and effective equalizer in that provision 
that we have just approved. And I believe from ex- 
perience that this will cut down campaign expenses. 
Therefore, a poor candidate will be the equal of the 
richest candidate when it comes to propaganda 
materials. 

MR. BENGZON. The Gentleman has answered the 
question of Commissioner Ople when he asked if there 
is anything in the Constitution which we have already 
approved pointing to these particular places. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I just have a few questions to the sponsors of Scheme 
Nos. I and II. The term of office for Senators is six 
years. Do the sponsors contemplate two years for the 
fiist eight, then four years for the next eight and six 
years ior the last eight? Is that the staggering situation 
that will happen to the 24 Senators? 

MR. RODRIGO. The term is really six years tor every 
Senator. But in the first election, in order that we can 
stagger, then it will be two years for the eight Senators; 


214 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


four years for the other eight; and six years for the last 
eight. 

My own thinking is, we should decide it this way: 
those on the top eight will have six years; the second 
eight will have four years; and the last eight will have 
two years. 

MR. DE CASTRO. This holds true in the first elec- 
tion? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Is this also true with Scheme 
No. I? May I ask the sponsor please? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, Commissioner 
Monsod has it all worked out in a sketch. May I request 
that Commissioner Monsod be recognized to answer the 
questions? 


MR. DE CASTRO. Scheme No. VII looks very nice; 
we will have elections every four years. But as the 
sponsor mentioned, everytime there is an election, there 
will be 49 names — I do not know whether my arithme- 
tic is right — from President, Vice-President, up to the 
12 councilors in the municipality. There are 49 names 
to be written on the ballot. Is that right, Madam 
President? 

MR. DAVIDE. Under that scheme, it may be a little 
over 40. We have the President and the Vice-President, 
the Senators . . . 

MR. DE CASTRO. Twenty-four Senators? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, plus one member of the Lower 
House in one’s district, one governor, one vice-governor, 
and members of the provincial board. There are probably 
six local officials. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. I am only asking a simple ques- 
tion. Is this staggering of the Senators in Scheme No. I 
the same as that in Scheme No. II? 

MR. RODRIGO. No. I did not mention Scheme 

o. II. I thought the Gentleman is asking about Scheme 
No. I. 

In Scheme No. II, it will be staggered. Since the 
election will be every three years, then 1 2 Senators will 
be elected every three years. 


MR. DE CASTRO. I see. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. With respect to the staggering of 
c eme o. I, I would like to request Commissioner 
Monsod to answer the question. 


\ MONSOD. Madam President, it would be stag- 
gered in that eight Senators will be voted every two 

a^dihSjustmem. 116 ^ ^ adjUStment ’ rather 0 " e ‘ 

For the first election in 1987, eight Senators will be 

In 1990 r thnJ e i? 1 6 wiU be voted three years. 
In 199°, those 16 will now be divided this way: eight 

will be voted for four years and eight for six years After 
that, there is no more need for any adjustment. We will 
have elections for Senators every two years 


MR. DE CASTRO. So, on the first election 
1 987, eight Senators will be voted. 


that is, in 


MR. MONSOD. No, we will vote for 24 Senators 
except that the top eight Senators will have a term of 
five years and the lower 16 will have a term of three 
years. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Six. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. We have the mayor, the vice- 
mayor and probably 12 councilors. 

MR. DE CASTRO. If we add that, it will be 49. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, not 12 councilors, only eight 
councilors. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The score is 45. The first election 
in 1987 will have the same number, and we really 
wonder during our deliberation what the ballot will be 
about. I do not know, a meter long to accommodate all 
these names? And every four years, there will be about 
a meter-long ballot, and still considering the illiterates, 
who are authorized to vote, I really wonder. 

In the last election for the President and the Vice- 
President, I saw a voter enter the booth at eight o’clock. 
She would write only two names. She could hardly 
finish it at ten o’clock. That is no exaggeration. Those 
are two names only. Did the sponsor realize the difficul- 
ty? Even myself, if I will write 45 names and think 
about who is better among the candidates, it will take 
me no less than 30 minutes, perhaps, 40 minutes. Has 
the sponsor realized the folly of Scheme No. VII? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we have realized 
that, but we do not contemplate the situation the way 
the Commissioner did. Firstly, any voter who goes to a 
polling booth knows already for whom he will be 
voting. And it is really the strategy of political parties to 
prepare sample ballots. They know who their people 
are. So, the voter will only copy on the ballot the names 
in the sample ballot. Insofar as the illiterates are con- 
cerned, under our proposal, the illiterates can vote faster 
than the literates. Probably, they will just check a box 
on the ballots. 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


215 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you for the information. I 
am really working on Scheme No. I, and I like it. In 
fact, I was not included in the survey. The survey here 
indicated 20 respondents; if my name were to be added, 
it will be 21. But I really wonder how there can be an 
election every two years. Let us assume this: In the 
Transitory Provisions, the incumbent President will be 
given a term of six years, so that will be until 1992. So, 
the next election, if it is after six years, will be in 1998. 
Am I correct? 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Her term will not be reduced to 
1991. 


MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President, because there 
will be no election in 1991. 


MR DE CASTRO. There will be an election in 1991. 


MR MONSOD. No, Madam President. The adjust- 
t is a three-year term. And, therefore, the 16 
j^ en tors anc j the Members of the House will be up for 

election in 1990, not 1991. 

MR DE CASTRO. Yes. The election will be in 1987, 

am I correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 


_ pg CASTRO. And a term of four years for the 
^ h rs of the House of Representatives and the local 
Sion® will be in 1991. 


MONSOD. Madam President, as I said earlier, 
^ ' one adjustment there. The initial term will be 
there is ^ on jy wa y that we can give them four 

three ye • beginning i s by extending the term of the 
f n e cumSnt President by one year. 

nE CASTRO. I thought the adjustment is on the 
MR- ^>nlv Do we also adjust the Congressmen to 

Senators V- election? 

three years in 


iuoNSOD. Yes. The Congressmen will have three 
MR- i the local government officials will have five 
years and ^ already synchronized that way. The 
years. we can change it, if the Gentleman wants 

only way 1 rs and s j x years from the beginning, 
to gi ve * 01 - ve t j ie President seven years. And I think 
would be o ^ ^- omnl jt;tee is to give the incumbent 
the decision r$ we a re looking at the 1992 
pSdenlial'election a® a point °f reference. 

MR DE CASTRO. It is very hard to go to Scheme 
No I now Which was my decision last night, because we 
are reducing the term of the Congressmen to three years 


in the first election while increasing the term of the 
local officials to five years. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. That is why 
we said that there has to be an adjustment. Otherwise, it 
is mathematically impossible, as the Gentleman himself 
has figured out. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I think it is not mathematically 
impossible. I have a poor arithmetical mind. If we will 
continue the term of local officials for four years, in 
1991, there will be an election. If we consider the 
Senators to be elected for two years, four years, six 
years, we will have a sole election in 1989 for Senators 
which is not good; that is the time we adjust. The next 
election will be in 1995 for Senators, Congressmen and 
local officials; and the next election will be in 1997 if 
we reduce the term of the incumbent to 1991 as well as 
the Senators. Then, the next election will be in 1999 
and that will again jibe with the election of Senators, 
Congressmen and local officials without tampering with 
the term of the Congressmen to three years and giving 
five years to the local officials. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, maybe this is not the time for it. 

I notice that there is also an adjustment there because 
at some point, he reduces the term of the President. 
Secondly, he does not want the House and the local 
officials to be elected in the same year; he wants them 
to be elected separately every two years. Otherwise, he 
will not have the benefit of holding elections every two 
years. But if the Gentleman wants them, not on the 
same year. 

MR. DE CASTRO. My only comment there is, it is 
very difficult to reduce to three years the term of the 
Congressmen and then increase by one year the term of 
the local officials. But nevertheless, I would request 
Scheme No. II. Under this scheme, to my poor arith- 
metical mind, again, the only time that we will have 
elections would be every three years, for all the Rep- 
resentatives and the local officials, because we will 
eventually have elections in 1998 for President and in 
1995 for Senators. And then, there will be an election 
in 1993 for the Representatives and local officials, 
meaning, there will be an election every two years, and 
then, there will be a sole election in 1998. It is not every 
three years, unless we begin to adjust again the number 
of years for Senators, etc. 

MR. RODRIGO. I have not made my own computa- 
tion. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Regalado be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President. 


216 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


Although I belong to a profession which is reputed 
for its loquacity especially when one is speaking in 
defense of the indefensible, I will be brief and to the 
point. I assume that all the Commissioners here have 
done their homework. And we are not wanting in 
political background, history and experience, with the 
plethora of arguments, pro and con, as to have to reach 
over to the jurisprudence and the laws of other coun- 
tries. So, I will just address the first question to the 
sponsor of Scheme No. II, Commissioner Rodrigo, 
because neither the sponsors of Scheme Nos. I and II 
which bar the President from reelection after the first 
six years, has made any qualificative mention of the 
possibility of the President after the six-year term as not 
being eligible after the lapse of six years immediately 
following the term. 

Under the present proposed Article on the Executive, 
a natural-born citizen, at the age of 40, is entitled to run 
for President. Assuming he gets elected, by the time the 
term ends he will be 46; then he goes into a six-year 
period of political hibernation and things may change 
such that, later his sterling qualities displayed during his 
term may warrant his being reharnessed and reimpressed 
into the public service. Would Commissioner Rodrigo 
consider the possibility that although we maintain the 
six-year term for the President, he shall only be barred 
from immediate reelection and that after the interven- 
ing six years, he could thereafter be eligible for another 
term? 


MR. RODRIGO. I would not be averse to such a 
suggestion, meaning to say, after the six-year term, he 
cannot run for reelection on that year, but two years 
later, there will be another election but that will be a 
local election. He will have to wait for six years. I 
cannot mathematically make a computation on how he 

can run for reelection after a shorter period than six 
years. 


MR. REGALADO. Because, after all, he would only 
be about 52 years old when he runs for reelection, 
assuming he gets elected at the age of 40. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, then he finishes his term at 46. 
he next presidential election would be six years later. 

MR. REGALADO. Six years later, he will only be 52. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, he can run for reelection. 

MR. REGALADO. My second question is addressed 
to the sponsor of Scheme No VII I thinv r d 
sioner Davide. After «he 

eligible for another four years and then, no further 
reelection thereafter is allowed because he shall have 
already served a maximum of eight consecutive years 
Commissioner Davide has mentioned that the only 
drawback in this is the fact that the voter will have to be 
voting for so many people and for which he already sug- 
gested a possible solution. The proponents of those who 


are for a six-year term without immediate reelection, 
however, point to the fact that under the four-year 
term, four years and with eligibility for another four 
years, there is the tendency for the President, during the 
first four years of his term, to play the role of a poli- 
tician. There would be too much politicking, too much 
regrouping of his resources for the purpose of insuring 
his reelection after the first term. Will Commissioner 
Davide give us some arguments which can disabuse our 
mind on the possibility that during the first four years, 
the President is purely a politician and it is only during 
the second term that he tries his best to be a statesman? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, if we allow a 
politician to seek one reelection, it is not so that he will 
spend the first four years politicking. If at all it is 
politicking, it is politicking for good because he will 
stand a reelection. If he will really be a bad politician, 
then certainly, the people will not vote for him. So, one 
seeking immediate reelection will try his best to be a 
very good executive, otherwise he will lose his bid for 
a reelection. And at this instance, I would like to partly 
answer the criticism on a long list. It should be remem- 
bered that the first election in 1987 will contain already 
that long list of candidates and, therefore, with that as a 
basis, the succeeding election would be a matter of 
habit. 

MR. REGALADO. Then if the sponsor says that the 
President, during his first term of four years and looking 
forward to a reelection, would try to implement some 
substantial programs and prove himself by some very 
good achievements for the country because he wants to 
be reelected, would that not also be an argument in 
favor of a President, with a term of six years to also try 
his very best and thereafter seek another reelection? 

MR. DAVIDE. That would not be true because six 
years would be too long. In other words, if we allow 
him one reelection, this President may be assured of 
a dynasty of 12 years. And that, indeed, would be too 
long. The danger is, he might proclaim martial law. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner de los Reyes 
be recognized, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I would like 
to make a few observations and to ask some questions 
of the proponents of the different schemes. It is obvious 
that none of the schemes is perfect. On Scheme No. I, 
for example, the criticism is that it does not solve the 
frequency of elections because we shall also hold elec- 
tions every two years; whereas, the desire of many 
people is to have less frequent elections, which could be 
solved by Scheme No. II whereby we can only hold 
elections every three years. 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


217 


The problem with Scheme No. II, as expounded by 
the honorable Commissioner Rodrigo, is that the rep- 
resentatives and local officials are not used to serving 
for three years only. They will call it “bitin.” We might 
be having difficulty in asking the help of these prospec- 
tive candidates for Congressmen and local positions* to 
campaign for the ratification of this Constitution if they 
will only have a term of three years. 

With respect to Scheme No. VII, according to Com- 
missioner Davide, the purpose is to prevent the forma- 
tion of political dynasties. But this will not prevent 
political dynasties because there is nothing which 
prevents the public officials concerned to run for 
another office. He cannot run, for example, as member 
of the House of Representatives after one reelection, 
but then, there is no prohibition that he cannot run for 


mayor or governor. 

In Cebu for example, we have seen that a certain 
political figure there runs for mayor, for Congressman 
and then for Senator. So, it does not solve the problem 
of dynasty. And it does not solve the problem of giving 
the voung people a chance. For example, one is 40 years 
old 'after’ serving for two terms, he is 48 Then he rests 
forone-term interval. By the time he is 54 he can run 
a ainSo, that does not solve the problem of the young. 
a§ Rnt mv question is: In these different schemes are 
tolinp into account the term of the incumbent Pres- 
t and Vice-President? In other words, what is the 
lden . t point? Let us say that the term of the in- 
startmg P dent and Vice-President is fixed up to 
eum e 1992, as proposed by the Committee on 
J une , ’ ts a nd Transitory Provisions. Will all these 
Amendm 1992 Qr is it this; after we determine 

S u h61 ?iff e rent schemes, we apply it to the incumbent 

President^nd Vice-President? 

, t octr the Chairman of the Committee to en- 
lighten us oiPhis matter? 

MONSOD. Madam President, since by the time 

MR- f election, the remaining term of the in- 
0 f the ident is five years and we are talking about 

cumbent ^ a f our .year term, there has to be an 
a six-year a etime whether we adjust the term of the 
adjustmen - dent or Vice-President or we adjust the 
incumbent ^ yj Q have to have an adjustment. 

terms ° adjustment as well because we do not 

We ! ie Hnuse and the local officials to be voted on 
want the no ^ want them tQ be on a bi-election 

the same ye ' they are the officials who have local 
basis becau not national constituencies. So, probably 
constituent > e i ec ted on the same year. So, no 

we do not we have to have an adjustment, 

matter what we ao, 


F ,qs REYES. In other words, the intent in 
MR. . different schemes is, if, for example, 

determining v.year term for the President and Vice- 
we decide on S p 0ns0 r says, it will start in 1987, 

President an ^ . ncumbent President and Vice-President, 
the ter m c 


aside from being fixed by a constitutional mandate, 
would be increased by one year. Is that the idea? 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President, at least as I 
understand it, the term of the incumbent President is 
six years, beginning from 1986. I believe that is the pro- 
posal of the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. So, it is better probably not to adjust the 
term of the incumbent whose term has already been 
vested, but adjust the terms of those who will be elected 
so that they know for what term they are being voted, 
what term they are facing. So, we adjust the terms of 
those who will be in the elections in 1987; instead of 
giving them the full 4 years, we give some 3 years and 
the local officials, 5 years. Then, we start synchronizing 
in 1992 which is the sixth year of the incumbent 
President and Vice-President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Let us concretize the situation. 
Let us assume that we fix the term of the incumbent 
President and Vice-President up to June 30, 1992. How 
will we elect the Senators, Representatives and local 
officials assuming that we adopt Scheme No. I? 

MR. MONSOD. In Scheme No. I, as I told Commis- 
sioner de Castro earlier, the first 8 Senators will be 
elected for five years, their term of office ending in 
1992, simultaneous with the incumbent President; 

16 Senators, the bottom 16, will have a three-year 
term ending in 1990; the Members of the House will 
have a three-year term ending in 1990; and the local 
officials will have a five-year term ending in 1992. In 
1990, therefore, we will have 16 Senators and the Mem- 
bers of the House up for election. The Members of the 
House, by that time, will already have their regular 
four-year term. The top eight Senators will serve the 
regular six-year term and the bottom eight will serve 
a four-year term. After that, all elections are synchro- 
nized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I see. So, there will be a transi- 
tory provision which will have a different term of office 
prior to 1 992? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I see. Suppose, although the 
possibility is remote, that this Commission approves a 
proposal that the question of whether the incumbency 
of the President or Vice-President be submitted to the 
people as a separate question during the ratification of 
this Constitution and that there is a mandate from the 
people that the incumbent President and Vice-President 
submit themselves to an election, how will this scheme 
work? 

MR. MONSOD. Then, we just move the base y ea * 
from 1992 to 1993 and the terms will be four instead 
of three years, and six instead of five years for the 
first adjustment. 


218 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Maambong be recognized. 


and local government officials would actually have a 
term of five years as an adjustment, in effect, because 
we will be counting from June 30, 1987 up to June 30, 
1992. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

First of all, I would like to thank those who made 
this opinion survey and I am very happy for the fact 
that Scheme No. VII, which I tried to passionately 
present in the last caucus, is now included in the survey. 
There were several contributions made by other Com- 
missioners to this scheme, but I really do not know if 
they voted on this because the voting was secret and I 
do not know where they went. Anyway, Commissioner 
Davide made a very lucid presentation of Scheme 
No. VII. Unfortunately, he was no longer around. The 
fact is that Commissioner Davide failed to indicate, and 
this is what I would like to get from him: Considering 
that there should be adjustments on the incoming term, 

I made some computations and it would appear that in 
the assumption that we will follow the date of the 
election as indicated in the provisions of the legislature, 
which means that the election would be conducted on 
the second Monday of May 1 987 and the term of office 
W f > n, , s * ar * 0n J un e 30, 1987, actually, the first term 
0 e lncu mbent President and Vice-President, starting 
° n , ® rua P' 1986, would be six years, four months 
ZiS™? days U P to June 30, 1992. Would that be 


MR. DAVIDE. That is correct, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. And then, finally, in Scheme 
No. VII, from the starting point of June 30, 1992 on- 
wards, all their terms would be for four years, meaning, 
the President, Vice-President, Senators, Representa- 
tives and local government officials. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is all, Mr. Chairman and 
Madam President. 

Thank you very much. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 5:28 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:52 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Rigos wants to be 
recognized. 


R. DAVIDE. Five years, four months and five days. 

c„^;, 5 AAM , B0NG ' That does "<* to be my 

Febmare 25 miT® " 1 J' I cora P u ‘ a «on, starting from 
wn,,M S „• 1986 “P to June 30. 1992, shows that it 

ould be six years, four months and five days. 

eleSn^tmhf' Second P arlia mentary and local 

elections will be on the second Monday of May 1992. 

on M the ^hiU^^^f^ren^^oT theY^ 6 ^’^ am p starting 
and Vice-President wYth tte IsuLT^w 
going to let her submit herselMo ^ 

compute from February 25 1986 h ectlon - So ; lf we 

on June 30, 1992 and acYu ,1v h tenn W ° Uld end 
February 25, 1986 would bes x ;YY term from 

five days. I just want a confirmation of that m ° nthS ^ 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Another adjustment would be 
although Scheme No. VII refers to four years for ah 
officials, if the e lection would be held on the second 
Monday of May 1987 and the term starts on June 30 
1987, in the first election, the Senators, Representatives 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I just want to 
express some of my feelings on the issues that are before 
us. 

I think part of our difficulty is that we try to mix, for 
instance, the issue of the term of the President with the 
issue of the frequency of elections. Perhaps, this is 
unavoidable, but it looks like we have to weigh the 
advantages or disadvantages of one over the other. 
Perhaps, in the long run, what we should do is to decide 
whether or not the term of the President will be four 
years or six years, and whether or not we should hold 
elections every two or three or four years. And if we 
are to consider the sentiments of the people that we 
have heard in the various public hearings we conducted, 
I think we may have to opt for a President who would 
not run for reelection. If we follow that route, Madam 
President, we may have to give him or her six years, 
because a four-year term will almost mean that we 
should agree to a reelection. So, if this issue were to be 
settled by the Commission, I for one would go for it, 
meaning, six years for the President, without immediate 
reelection, and later on talk about other issues, like the 
Senators, whether they should be allowed to have an 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


219 


immediate reelection or not. But whatever scheme we 
choose, it looks like we have to have some adjustments 
to make because if the proposed Constitution will be 
approved, we will have an election sometime next year. 
And we will also have an election in 1992 in case the 
Commission agrees on the proposed term of the in- 
cumbent President and Vice-President. On the whole, I 
guess I have to go for Scheme No. I as recommended. 

Salamat po. 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Garcia be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you, Madam President. 

The three schemes that have been presented to us 
have been helpful, but I believe that in order to come up 
with a decision, we may have to break them into parts. 
What I consider important are. first, the term of the 
President - whether it will be six years without reelec- 
t'on or four years with reelection; second, the term of 
S nators Congressmen and the local officials and the 
" hpr of reelections; and finally, and perhaps more 
nUm rtant are the other features that could facilitate or 
Trpnsthen popular participation like the system of 
s ,f whic h I think, we should try to discuss, the party 
rt svstem, the multiparty system, sectoral representa- 
. ^ ncl th ’ e system of initiative and referendum. 

Allow me to express my thoughts on the question 
f the term of office then. For me, the more important 
° . . tbat we should focus our attention on how to 

thing i fi eTnocia cy. And, therefore, there are two 
deepen s ^ WQU jd like to share with everyone. One is 
Principle of no reelection in the presidency and 
the ree j eC tion in the other offices. The other is the 
limits ^ popular participation which, I think, could 
principle ne( j we further give substance to the five 
be streng DO pular participation that I mentioned 

m easures ox v v 

earlier. presidency, I think it is very clear that 

Regarding^ ut ree i ec tion is a very important measure 
six years w to make the person who assumes 

that we can p res jdent realize that he or she only has 

the office o beCom e a good President. And I think 
one chance tunity . g im p 0rtant enough so that one 
that one OPP within that one period, and that history 

puts all hi wil] nQt abso i ve him if he fails in that 

will judge him an 

taSk ’ au, I support the frequency of election once 
Sec °ndiy, & As f or reelection, Senators will have 
every thre ®.' h on i y G ne reelection and Representatives 
SiX X officials, three years with only two reelections. 

+ mp explain why I am for no reelection or limited 
, et . t know that some of us here have been in 
ree .®pti° • j time an( j i do not wish to offend 

them. C But I simply think that there should be no special 


caste of professional politicians. It should not be a life- 
time profession or a career, but rather an opportunity 
for public service to be broadened to as great number 
of people and there should be no effort to accumulate 
power. Accumulation of power, at one time, really 
brings about that desire to accumulate more, and rather 
than providing a structure or a setup which strengthens 
this trend, the alternative must be to provide structural 
safeguards for this kind of practice. Therefore, I would 
not subscribe to more than one reelection for Senators 
and more than two reelections for Representatives or 
local officials. 

The features regarding popular participation are, I 
think, important. On the President and Senators, 
especially because their term is six years, I would like 
to ask the question: How can we make the system of 
recall effective? If the Senators or the President is not 
acting well, how will the people be able to question this 
kind of actuation or that person in office? 

I was also made to understand that the party list 
system and the sectoral representation will be a topic 
to be discussed after we decide on the term of office. 
This is another question which, I think, deserves an 
even more time and attention on our part to be able to 
make this an effective tool for popular participation. 
Many people have spoken before me regarding the 
multiparty system. And I would like to support this. 

Finally, on the system of initiative and referendum, I 
think that every three years, the election should be 
marked by a discussion of issues. In other words, I agree 
with some sentiments already expressed here on the 
floor that every time we have an election, perhaps, other 
issues should also be on the vote so that people will be 
learning to vote more on principles, programs and issues 
rather than just on the personalities who present 
themselves for election. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento, 
the last speaker, be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I think all of 
us Filipinos are most familiar with Scheme No. VII. It 
was the scheme under the 1935 Constitution, as 
amended, and before Marcos was overthrown from his 
power. My question is; Does not the honorable Chair- 
man of the Committee think that his four-year term 
with one reelection is dangerous because it breeds dicta- 
torship? We have that experience under Marcos, having 
tasted power too long — four years and one reelection. 

e will only think of perpetuating himself in power and 
nothing more. A four-year term with one reelection is 
dangerous because before his term expires, his main 
concern will only be mending his political fences, 
politicking, winning the hearts of his people just to win 


220 


THURSDAY, JULY 24, 1986 


another reelection. It has been said that one becomes a 
statesman only after winning the reelection. So, does 
not the sponsor think that this is a very dangerous 
scheme as shown by our historical experience? 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the Acting Floor Leader asking 
for a suspension? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, the experience that 
was demonstrated to us was the experience under Pres- 
ident Marcos. With the excruciatingly painful experience 
we had under President Marcos, I do not think that the 
Filipinos can allow another dictator. Second, if we allow 
a six-year term for the President, the possibility of a 
President becoming a dictator would be more because 
we do not allow him a reelection. So, it may be that it 
would be a term dedicated for the good of the country 
or it may be a term for self-aggrandizement of the 
individual himself. But if we allow him a term of four 
years with one reelection, I am almost certain that the 
first four years, if they be years of politicking, would be 
politicking for good; otherwise, he will not secure a 
fresh mandate in his reelection bid. 


MR. SARMIENTO. I have nothing against Scheme 
No. II because I voted for it. I think this is the best 
compromise between Scheme No. VII and Scheme 
No. I. May I address my question to the proponent of 
Scheme No. I? I think he has left already. Anyway, my 
comment is this: I think Scheme No. I will not be bene- 
lcial to all of us because it would mean elections every 
two years, and that will not be good for our economy, 
s a matter of fact, our colleague, Commissioner 
lllegas, in one of his speeches, said that it will take us 
nve to ten years to recover because of our debt prob- 
an . d because the economy is in shambles, ac- 
coramg to Commissioner Monsod. So, Scheme No. II 
is the best compromise that we can have. 

Thank you. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 6:06 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6: 10 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. The voting system that was agreed 
upon. Madam President, is as follows: The first step will 
be a process of elimination. We will vote on the three 
schemes, and if one scheme gets a majority vote, then, 
of course, that is the scheme to be considered by the 
body; otherwise, the scheme with the lowest vote will 
be eliminated. And then we will vote again on the 
remaining two. After we vote on the winning scheme, 
then we will go into the various elements of that 
scheme, meaning, whether the President will have an 
immediate reelection, no reelection, etc. 

The party list will be taken up tomorrow also after 
the voting, because there is a big group here interested 
in it. 

So, I move that we adjourn until tomorrow at nine- 
thirty in the morning. 


pJf.J?* ^° t MUL0 - There are no more speakers, Mada 

can Inf' l SU88 t St that we su$ P end the session so i 

andin Wh.t qU6Stions will be posed tomorrc 

ana in what manner. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 6:11 p.m. 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


221 


R.C.C. NO. 39 
Friday, July 25, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:41 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Renato V. Sarmiento. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


people’s Charter we will do what is right in Your sight, 
and do it without fear or vacillation. Guide us to place 
in our Constitution provisions that will, for the genera- 
tions to come, give happiness to our fellowmen, hope to 
our youth, security for our fathers and mothers, con- 
fidence to our farmers and fishermen, optimism to our 
workers and assurance to our prisoners. 

When, in the appointed time, our task is finished, 
may we, alone or in the company of our loved ones, 
rejoice in the thought that we have done our best for 
Your glory and for the lasting peace, prosperity and 
progress of our country. 

This we pray in Jesus’ name. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


PRAYER 

]VIR SARMIENTO. a reading from the Book of 
Psalms, 136: 1-3. 

rive thanks to the Lord, for He is good, for His 
mercy endures forever; 

Give thanks to the God of gods, for His mercy 

endures forever, 

• thanks to the Lord of lords, for His mercy 

G Tndures forever. 

. . ty an d ever loving Father, our mighty protector 

Alims we thank You for the countless graces and 
and for r ® ’ fully give us, as we, in this hallowed 

blessings ^ an( j n jght to draft our people’s 
assemb y, ^ ^ particular, we thank You for the joys 
Constitu 1 • ag we j n f erac t with our colleagues and 

we ex P en i^ them; we thank You for the patience 
J^iWow upon us as we perform diligently and 
Y °V • ctirallv our noble task; we thank You for the 
enthusia ece j ve from the Secretariat without whose 
support w ^ eX p e rience our work will be difficult; 
untiring for t he life You have generously given us 

WC Tt we can, with all our virtues and weaknesses, 
1° luu, serve not the mighty and powerful but the least 
of out b«Xen, the thirsty, the hungry, the sick, the 
prisoners, and the naked. 

As we thank You today for Your love and mercy, we 
ask for Your wisdom so that in the framing of our 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar 

Present* 

Natividad 

Present* 

Alonto 

Present* 

Nieva 

Present 

Aquino 

Present* 

Nolledo 

Present 

Azcuna 

Present 

Ople 

Present* 

Bacani 

, Present 

Padilla 

Present 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Quesada 

Present* 

Bennagen .... 

. Present 

Rama 

Present 

Bern as 

. Present 

Regalado 

Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los ... 

Present 

Brocka 

. Present 

Rigos 

Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo . . 

Present 

Castro de .... 

. Present 

Romulo . . . 

Present 

Colayco 

. Present* 

Rosales . . . 

Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . 

Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Suarez . . 

Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Sumulong . . 

Present 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Tadeo . . . 

. Present 

Gascon 

. Present* 

Tan .... 

. Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Present 

Tingson 

. Present 

Jamir 

. Present 

Trefias 

. Present 

Laurel 


Uka 

. Present 

Lemm .... 


Villacorta .... 

. Present 

Maambong . . 

. Present 

Villegas 

Present* 

Monsod .... 




The President 

is present. 



The loll call shows 35 Members responded 

to the call. 


Appeared after the roll call 


222 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 


a constitutional provision on the development of a 
national language. 

(Communication No. 312 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from the Solidarity of 53 1 Padre Faura, Manila, 
requesting appropriate action on the proposal concern- 
ing “Constitution Framers Urged to Adopt Decentraliza- 
tion Proviso.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

Thlrh PRESIDEN T. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
air ears none; the motion is approved. 

Bu^es S SeCretary General WiU read the Reference of 






The Secretary-General read the following C, 
'references^’ Presidem «g the corresponc 


COMMUNICATIONS 


Corporate “of P E d ji Le ™. Resident of RF1 
gesting a constitute 1 * St *’ Pasig > Metro Manila, su| 
ture investment, allowing 0 /' 510 " f ° r foreign infr astrui 

government-approved ‘° inVeS ‘ ' 

(Communieation No . 310 _ Constitutions, Commissio 

Patrimony ° mmittee °" the Nati °"al Economy an 


(Communication No. 313 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Alberto T. Lustestica of Pangpang, 
Sorsogon, Sorsogon, proposing a provision in the new 
Charter banning from any elective post those next of 
kin of public officials to avoid the propagation of 
“Political Dynasties” and warlordism. 

(Communication No. 314 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from Pastor Cornelio R. Dalisay of the Philippine 
Evangelical Mission, Inc., submitting various proposals 
for the consideration of the Constitutional Commission. 

(Communication No. 315 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Judge Alex L. Macalawi, Municipal Circuit 
Trial Court, Balindong, Lanao del Sur, urging proposal 
to incorporate in the Article on the Bill of Rights in the 
new Constitution that detention prisoners shall be 
compensated upon acquittal by the government cor- 
responding to the number of days of their detention. 

(Communication No. 316 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Communication from the Bulacan Social Action Move- 
ment, 844 Paseo De F. Estrella, Barangay San Juan, 
Malolos, Bulacan, signed by its Secretary-General, Tirso 
G. Robles, Jr., proposing a provision which would 
require the legislature to enact laws on “socialized 
medicine.” 


Draft constitution submittpH k„ XI 

on 986 ) mCatl ° n N °' 31 1 - Constitutional Cornu 
To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Paterno S. Garcia of 3822 D 
Street, Sun Valley, Paranaque, Metro Manila, p JO | 


(Communication No. 317 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Letter from Mr. Eduardo Salas of 2271 F.B. Harrison 
St., Pasay City, and Atty. Joveno Angel of 170 Villaruel 
St., Pasay City, submitting, among others, proposals 
that election of President, Vice-President and other 
elective national officials should be based on equal 
geographical representation. 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


223 


(Communication No. 318 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Letter from Ricardo L. Magno of Mangaldan, Pangasi- 
nan, stressing the need to create the People’s Consulta- 
tive Council to give life and meaning to an effective 
involvement of the citizens in government affairs. 

(Communication No. 319 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Letter from Datu Ebrahim Bakar of Kabuntalan, 
Maguindanao, suggesting some qualifications of candi- 
dates for mayors, vice-mayors, barangay captains, 
among others. 

(Communication No. 320 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1 986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 


Communication from the Sangguniang Panglungsod of 
the City of Puerto Princesa, requesting the Constitu- 
tional Commission to abolish the component city classi- 
fication. 

(Communication No. 321 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 


ter from Mr. Jorge C. Magno, Local Government Of- 
^ r I c/° Ministry of Local Government, Region III, 
Fernando, Pampanga, suggesting, among others, 
that compulsory retirement age be reduced from 65 to 
60 years old. 

munication No. 322 — Constitutional Commission 

of 1 986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 

Agencies. 


munication from Messrs. Florencio L. Garcia, Jesse 
pGemora, and Eugenio H. Cadelina and residents of 
*• , oc j City, Negros Occidental, requesting the 
adoption of a provision on old age pension. 
Communication No. 323 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


from Mr. D. M. Niere, President of the Central 
Philiooines Union Mission of Seventh Day Adventists, 
r bu City, urging the separation of Church and State 
and saying that the teaching of religion is primarily an 
individual and a church function. 


Communication No. 324 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Letter from Mr. Allan G. Wawie of La Trinidad, Benguet, 
expressing his hope for the establishment of a Cordillera 
Autonomous Region, among others. 

(Communication No. 325 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Communication from the Society of Philippine Sculp- 
tors, Penthouse, Labrador Bldg., 435 Remedios St., 
Malate, Manila, proposing the creation of a national 
art institution, among others. 

(Communication No. 326 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication from Mr. Jose P. Gatus of Bulua, 
Cagayan de Oro City, containing constitutional pro- 
posals on the structure of government, patrimony of the 
country, and productivity and land reform. 

(Communication No. 327 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Ponciano M. Ponce, one of the nomi- 
nees for the Constitutional Commission of 1837 Isagani 
St., cor. Cavite St., Blumentritt, Sta. Cruz, Manila, 
urging the consideration of his thesis on People’s Power 
Movement, entitled: “Ang Pamahalaan At Ang Kapang- 
yarihan Ng Tao Sa Pilipinas: Isang Pag-aaral, ” copy of 
which was enclosed in his nomination paper submitted 
to the Secretariat. 

(Communication No. 328 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Resolution of the Manila Archdiocesan and Parochial 
Schools Association (MAPS A) signed by Bishop Manuel 
C. Sobrevinas, Chairman, MAPSA Executive Board, sub- 
mitted thru the Honorable Teodoro C. Bacani, request- 
ing the Constitutional Commission to provide (1) tax 
exemption of private schools, (2) optional religious 
instruction in public schools, and (3) optional military 
training in public and private schools. 

(Communication No. 329 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


CONSIDERATION OF SCHEMES 
ON TENURE OF OFFICE 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, per motion of 
Commissioner Romulo, we have scheduled today the 
voting on the schemes concerning the tenure of office of 
the legislators, the President, the Vice-President and the 
local officials. The motion calls for a voting on the three 


224 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


most popular schemes, Scheme No. I, Scheme No. II 
and Scheme No. VII, and going to a process of elimina- 
tion, if none of these three schemes would garner the 
majority vote. I now ask that Commissioner Romulo be 
recognized to restate the procedure of voting and to 
conduct the voting. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, as explained by 
the Floor Leader, the first step in the voting will involve 
an elimination of Scheme Nos. I, II and VII. If none gets 
the majority vote, then the scheme with the least num- 
ber of votes will be dropped. Then we will proceed with 
the second stage which is to choose between the two 
with the highest plurality, after which we will then go 
into the separate elements of the scheme that is finally 
chosen. This means that we will then decide whether the 
President will serve for a term of six years or whatever 
the term is with or without reelection. 

I move that we now proceed to the voting, as de- 
scribed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

RECONSIDERATION OF APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. DAVIDE. While the ballots are still being dis- 
tributed, may I request a reconsideration of the approv- 
al of the Journal of the Constitutional Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. By inadvertence, a correction should 
be made on the second paragraph of page 48. Instead of 
“Mr. Davide,” it should be MR. SARMIENTO. So, the 
sentence should read: “MR. SARMIENTO stated that 
Scheme No. I shall not be beneficial to the country and 
the economy inasmuch as it would involve elections 
every two years.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Let the proper correction be 
made. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I confirm 
the correction made by the honorable Commissioner 
Davide. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Before we vote, may I be allowed 
° speak for one or two minutes on Scheme Nos. I 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Scheme No. I does not necessaril 
can tor an election every two years. There will be 
period when there will be voting every year in 1991 an 
an a noting of about four years’ frequency. I 
Scheme No II, with a little adjustment on the senators 

everyth ! 16 election, we will have election 

verv J? f ears ' 1 believe that three years would be 

moMnn d P v f eqU f enCy ’ considering that we will nee 
more money for frequent elections. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I ask the Chair a 
question concerning Journal corrections. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. Day-to-day when we go over the Jour- 
nals, there are certain minor errors of style that we 
would like corrected. On the other hand, we feel guilty 
about taking the precious time of the Commission when 
they have to be requested on the floor. 

What do we do in such instances, Madam President? 
If they are matters essentially pertaining to style, may 
we just take them up with the President or the Secreta- 
riat? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair o, , , 

for a few minutes. spends the ses 

It was 9:57 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 10.16 a.m., the session was pesumeci 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed 
Pieces of paper are being distributed for the voting 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, so long as the Chair is in- 
formed about it. But if it is one of substance, then we 
will have to refer it to the body. 

Is that all right? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, thank you for that ruling, Madam 
President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, considering 
that the approval of the Journal has been reconsidered— 
actually I have informed the person in charge of the 
transcript to correct certain grammatical errors — I 
might as well mention a correction on page 28, third 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


225 


paragraph, line 14. After the words “Public Officers,” 
the word to be used should be OF, instead of “and.” 

On page 30, line 4, insert the word BE between the 
words “can” and “held.” It should read “can BE held.” 

On the same page, line 7, delete the word “member.” 

On line 9, delete the words “Member who” and in 
lieu thereof insert COMMITTEE WHICH. So, line 9 
would read: . . not a COMMITTEE WHICH issues the 

subpoena.” 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Maybe this is what we could do. 
Inasmuch as the Journal of the previous session, which 
is quite lengthy, is distributed on this very day, we can 
have a reservation that any other corrections be made 
the following day so as to give time to the Commis- 
sioner to read the lengthy Journal. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may we request that 
somebody from the Secretariat collect the ballots. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. May I be allowed to make a 
reservation for a minor correction regarding the Journal 
of two days ago? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman please submit 
it in writing? 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. In view of the fact that the approval of 
the Journal was reconsidered and amendments were 
presented, I move that the Journal of yesterday’s 
session, as amended, be approved. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. May I suggest that if there are 
clerical errors or some inaccuracies in the Journal, the 
correction need not be made on the floor. We will 
just lose time. I think the Journal people will readily 
accept any correction that pertains to the Members who 
are quoted and are referred to in the Journal. If every 
Member, whose remarks were noted by the Journal, 
were to ask the correction of the Journal during the 


deliberations, we will lose plenty of time. I believe that 
the Journal will readily accept a matter of style or 
correction of inaccurate or grammatical errors. 

THE PRESIDENT. That was already indicated by the 
Chair. So long as the Chair is also informed about it in 
writing, if possible, so as not to be mistaken about the 
correction to be made. 

Thank you. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. There was a previous motion. Madam 
President, for the approval of the Journal of yesterday’s 
session, as amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the Journal of yesterday’s session, 
as amended, is hereby approved. 

At this juncture, the Members submitted their ballots. 

THE PRESIDENT. Do we understand from Commis- 
sioner Romulo that after we have decided or taken the 
vote on the term, the next issue would be whether there 
should be reelection or not? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, once we make the 
final choice, then we will go into the elements of reelec- 
tion or no reelection. 


COUNTING OF BALLOTS 

THE PRESIDENT. May we request the Secretary- 
General to count the votes with the assistance of Mr. 
Roberto Nazareno. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Scheme No. I — /////—/// 

Scheme No. II - /////—/////—/////—/////—/////_// 
Scheme No. VII - /////-// 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 8 votes for 
Scheme No. I, 27 votes for Scheme No. II, and 7 votes 

for Scheme No. VII; Scheme No II is approved. (Ap- 
plause) 

MR. ROMULO. To summarize: Under Scheme No. II, 
the President and Vice-President shall have a term of six 
years, enators, six years; Representatives, three years; 
and local officials, three years. The frequency of 
election shall be every three years. 

We now go to the specific elements for each office 
concerned. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I just have a word, Madam 
President. 


226 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. I second the motion, without the 
amendment. 


MR. DE CASTRO. On Scheme No. II, there is an 
adjustment at the very beginning. The local officials will 
have to be elected for five years and from then on, the 
Senators will be divided into two groups — three and six 
years. After 1992, it can already proceed with the 
number of years as stated in Scheme No. II, and the 
frequency will be every three years. 

This is for the information of the body. Madam 
President. 

MR. ROMULO. I adopt the manifestation of Com- 
missioner de Castro. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this an innovation of what 
Commissioner Romulo stated here? 


THE PRESIDENT. All right. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. I thought we already voted on Scheme 
No. II which clearly defines that the term of the Pres- 
ident is six years. But now there is a motion that the 
term of the President be six years. 

MR. ROMULO. It is a question of with reelection or 
without reelection. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is what we will vote on. 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. What Com- 
missioner de Castro has mentioned is a consequence of 
choosing Scheme No. II, and I adopt his manifestation. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right. 


MR. ROMULO. That is what we have to vote on. 

REV. RIGOS. The Gentleman is only referring to 
whether or not there will be reelection. We have already 
agreed on the six-year term? 


R. ROMULO. Subject to suggestions, Madai 
resident, perhaps we can proceed in this way wit 
regard to the Office of the President. For example, I ca 
move that the term of the President be six years withoi 
imme late reelection. I suppose amendments can b 
proposed at that point and then we vote on that pa 
ticular proposition. Is that acceptable? 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, and I am using the terms that 
we have voted on. 

REV. RIGOS. All right. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. It is acceptable. 

,. IS i 7 , there r an ^ ° 0 bjection to that particular motion of 

6 ti?° a t ad %\ Excuse me > is Commissioner Romulo 
now the Acting Floor Leader? 

^r MR ^ R ? w 1 ; 0 ' 1 d ° not know ’ M adam President. 
' aug er) I take it as the proponent of the election 
scheme. 


MR. GARCIA. Madam President, could we resolve 
the prior question of “without reelection ” then, we 
can go on to “without immediate reelection”? 

MR. ROMULO. I accept the amendment. I move that 
the term of the President be six years without reelec- 
tion. 


THE PRESIDENT. Scheme No. II. 


MR. ROMULO. I, therefore, move that the ten 
the President be six years, without immediate reelec 


THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this par- 
ticular motion of a six-year term for the President with- 
out reelection . . . may I vote? 

MR. ROMULO. No. (Laughter) 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. 

nized. 


Commissioner Davide is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


I 


MR. DAVIDE. I am willing to second the 
will include the Vice-President. 


motion, but 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable? 


BISHOP BACANI. I would like a clarification first. 
Does “no reelection” mean the President can never be 
reelected? 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, one by one. 


THE PRESIDENT. I believe the motion is just for 
nonreelection, is it not? 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


227 


MR. ROMULO. No reelection. 

THE PRESIDENT. But it does not say forever. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the meaning of 
“without reelection” is that the person can never run 
again — absolute bar. 

BISHOP BACANI. Therefore, if she ceases from of- 
fice she cannot run even after six years. 

THE PRESIDENT. Even after? 

BISHOP BACANI. That is the understanding. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Shall we vote again, Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. I am voting against. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I suggest we 
vote on the issue? I am sorry for the confusion. Let me 
restate the motion. It is six years for the President, 
without reelection, meaning that the person will be 
barred forever, for life. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. The first issue presented was by 
Commissioner Romulo, without immediate reelection. 
Then Commissioner Garcia made a suggestion. Should 
we not vote first on “without reelection”? 

MR. ROMULO. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. Now that we are voting on “without 
reelection,” is this without prejudice to the Gentleman’s 
bringing up again “without immediate reelection”? 

MR. ROMULO. I would assume, but if the majority 
votes for . . . 

MR. RODRIGO. That makes a lot of difference, 
Madam President. So, this is not final. We will vote first 
on “without reelection” but then after this, we vote on 
the original proposal of “without immediate reelection. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May I just clarify this, please 
correct me if I am wrong. The proposition being 
presented by Commissioner Romulo is that no ie 


election” means no reelection forever. So, if you are not 
in favor, do not raise your hand because if you desire 
one reelection for at least in the future after one term, 
then that would be another proposition. Is that correct. 
Commissioner Romulo? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, why do we not 
go back to the original proposition of Commissioner 
Romulo because that is logically prior to the proposi- 
tion presented now? The question of whether there can 
be no immediate reelection should be prior to whether 
there can never be any reelection. I think we should first 
vote on that, whether there should be any immediate 
reelection or not. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Assuming that no one here is 
espousing the reelection of the President after six years, 
perhaps the voting could be done this way — those in 
favor of no immediate reelection as against those in 
favor of no reelection whatsoever. Those are the two 
choices that we would be given because apparently, no 
one here is espousing the reelection of the President 
without restriction. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I correct Commis- 
sioner Guingona. I am for a single reelection. I used to 
be against any reelection, but since Scheme No. II has 
prevailed, I would like to change my mind and seek a 
single reelection for the President. 

Will the Chair allow me to state briefly the reason for 
this unorthodox position, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a motion on the floor by 
Commissioner Romulo. To me it appears very simple: 
Does the Gentleman favor or not favor a perpetual dis- 
qualification for one who has already been elected 
President for one term? That is all. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, let us vote on that and then 
we will go to the other proposal. Is Commissioner 
Romulo abandoning his motion? 

MR. ROMULO. No, Madam President. I want the 
sense of the House, I am not bound to this motion; I 
made a manifestation only to force a vote on the issues. 

THE PRESIDENT. Then, let us vote. The proposition 
is, no reelection for one who has been elected President. 


228 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, to be fair there are 
some Commissioners who feel that the logical sequence 
should begin with “no immediate reelection,” after 
which we vote for “no reelection.” 

THE PRESIDENT. I leave it to Commissioner 
Romulo. 

MR. ROMULO. All right; I will stick by my original 
proposition. The President shall have a term of six years 
without immediate reelection. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 32 votes in favor and 5 against; the 
proposition is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. For the sake of formality, I propose 
that the President shall have a term of six years without 
any reelection. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, with 
unlimited reelection. 

MR. ROMULO. I will begin with Commissioner de 
los Reyes’ alternative. Assuming someone is willing to 
always be the bridesmaid and never the bride, I move 
for the proposition that the Vice-President shall have a 
term of six years with unlimited reelection for the same 
office. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor, please 
raise their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 22 votes in favor and 8 against; the 
proposition is approved. 

Commissioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, the effect is that 
the Vice-President has the unlimited right to run for 
reelection as Vice-President and, of course, necessarily, 
has the right to run for the presidency. 


vuniNU 


__3?, PRESID ENT. As many as are in favor of this 

Mrmh™ P r °P° 7 sltlon ’ P leas e raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

thdr hand ' 

proposition's kST * 5 V ° teS “ faV ° r a " d 2 1 againSt; the 

Pre-fident^sh iaIU^ ^ here * s a third variation: The 

diate reelection 13Ve * ^ ° f SiX y6arS ’ With ° ne imme ‘ 

1 2™^rs? RESIDENT In ° ther WOrds ’ he can serve for 
MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT As mar, 
raise their hand. (One Meml^edZ ZndT’ ^ 

rSeta?ZLlsZe77^Z7 ^ han< 

proposi.?on Ul “lot W ‘ ^ * faTOr *> against; th 


MR. ROMULO. Thank you, Madam President. 

The next official will be the Vice-President, and we 
will go through the same alternatives - without imme- 
diate reelection, and with one immediate reelection. 


MR. ROMULO. Yes. I do not see that we need the 
other alternatives, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, there is no need. 

MR. ROMULO. Unless somebody disagrees. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair leaves it to the propo- 
nent. 

What is the pleasure of Commissioner Rodrigo? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, there is another 
problem regarding the Vice-President. In case the Vice- 
President succeeds as President due to death or incapa- 
city of the President, does he have the right to run for 
election in the next succeeding election? I would like to 
call the attention of the body to the provision of the 
United States Constitution regarding this. Of course, we 
can just use this as an example or basis because in the 
United States, a President has a term of four years with 
one reelection. No person who has held the office of 
President or acted as President for more than two years 
of a term, to which some other person was elected Presi- 
dent, shall be elected to the Office of President more 
than once. I think we can change this to read as follows: 
NO PERSON WHO HAS HELD THE OFFICE OF 
PRESIDENT OR ACTED AS PRESIDENT FOR MORE 
THAN THREE YEARS OF A TERM, TO WHICH 
SOME OTHER PERSON WAS ELECTED PRESIDENT, 
SHALL BE ELECTED TO THE OFFICE OF THE 
PRESIDENT IN THE NEXT SUCCEEDING ELEC- 
TION. 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


229 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I suggest that 
Commissioner Rodrigo put that to a motion, as he had 
suggested during our caucus, and then we can vote on 
the alternatives. 

MR. RODRIGO. I move that in the provision regard- 
ing the term of the Vice-President and also the President, 
the following provision be incorporated: NO PERSON 
WHO HAS HELD THE OFFICE OF PRESIDENT OR 
ACTED AS PRESIDENT FOR MORE THAN THREE 
YEARS OF A TERM, TO WHICH SOME OTHER 
PERSON WAS ELECTED PRESIDENT, SHALL BE 
ELECTED TO THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN 
THE NEXT SUCCEEDING ELECTION. This means 
that if he succeeded less than three years, then he can 
run; but if more than three years, he cannot run. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. I would like to suggest an amend- 
ment to the amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Wait a minute, I have a comment. 
Suppose it is exactly three years — because that is more 
than two years of a term — then he can run. What is one 
day between friends? So, if a Vice-President has already 
acted as President for more than three years, then he has 
consolidated the powers of the President in his hands, 
and he can use those powers to assure his election. 
However, let us take a case where he had succeeded only 
six months before the end of the term. He could run for 
President in the next subsequent years. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suggests that Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo write it down so that we will not be 
confused in the voting. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 

recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. If it is all right with Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo, once he has formulated it in a perfect 
manner, perhaps we should submit it to the Commit- 
tee on the Executive. Then when we consider the 
provisions of the Article on the Executive, that will be 
the time to take it up. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair has requested Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo to write it down. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. Thank you, Madam Pres- 
ident. 


THE PRESIDENT. We will proceed now to the 
Senators. 

MR. GARCIA. Excuse me. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I asked for recognition a while ago 
before Commissioner Maambong. May I have the floor? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. In the formula mentioned by Com- 
missioner Rodrigo, if the Vice-President succeeds during 
the first three years, he is barred from running in the 
elections, so that he will have, in effect, three years as 
President. My suggestion is, if he succeeds to the 
presidency during the first three years of that term, then 
there should be a special election — because there are 
elections every three years anyway — where he can run 
so that then he will have his own mandate for six years. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we just wait for its formula- 
tion? 

May we now take up the matter of the Senators? 

MR. ROMULO. All right. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, may I just have a 
word? I would like to request a reconsideration of the 
vote on the Vice-President for this reason: I think 
a number of Commissioners took the vote rather lightly 
because of the fact that they consider the Vice-President 
as a spare tire and, therefore, would not have much 
power. But I think a more important principle is at 
stake here - the principle of unlimited reelection - 
for a public official can view the office almost as a 
property right. I think this is one thing rejected by 
many people in many of the hearings. I would, there- 
fore, ask for a reconsideration of the vote on the un- 
limited reelection of the Vice-President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I respectful- 
ly but very strongly object to his motion for recon- 
sideration for the reason that Commissioner Garcia 
voted against, and under the Rules, one who voted 
against cannot ask for a reconsideration. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will take that up later on. 

What is the pleasure of Commissioner Guingona? 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, Commissioner 
Garcia is not qualified to ask for a reconsideration 
because he voted against, whereas I did not vote in 


230 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


favor, but abstained. I wonder what the ruling of the 
Chair would be on this. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Rules says that one who has 
voted in favor can seek for a reconsideration. That is 
why we will call that particular incident later on. The 
Chair is not making any ruling. We just like to proceed 
now to that of Senators so that we can dispose of this 
matter. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, with regard to the 
Senators, we can again use the same formula. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, what is now before the body 
is six years for the Senator with no immediate reelec- 
tion. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular motion for the Senators to serve their full 
term without reelection, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand. ) 

The results show 5 votes in favor and 21 votes 
against; the motion is lost. 

What is the next proposal? 

MR. ROMULO. The Senators will have a term of six 
years with one immediate reelection. Therefore, they 
serve for 1 2 years only. 

VOTING 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

Before we go to the voting, before we go to th 
c oice as to whether it will be six years without reelec 
ion, would like to advise the body that we hav^ 
approve c erne No. II on the theory of election ever; 
ree years, nder this scheme, the Senators are divide* 

0 .Lh 0 ° ~ the flrst group of 12 and th* 

second group of 12 - to attain an interval of three year 

thp f 6< lt enC J e ^ ec ti° n - The first election will be fo 
e first and second groups for a term of five years. Thi 
l be m 992 and will coincide with the term of th* 

shanlfavl’ ^ the *° Cal offic ials for the first electioi 
shall have a term of five years also. Therefore, by 1992 

a Pre f dent > a Vice-President, 24 Senator 
and the local officials. One-half of the Senators will havi 

the 6 p^L S1 ? Yea f at the Same time with the term ° 
t ’ and one ‘ half of the Senators will have 

term of thill years; and the loca l officials will have 
term of three years. From then on, we shall be able t< 
have a frequency of three years. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this par- 
ticular proposal, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand. ) 

The results show 8 votes in favor and 1 8 votes 
against; the motion is lost. 

MR. ROMULO. The next proposition is for six years 
without immediate reelection. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, after one term, 
they can run again for Senator. 

MR. ROMULO. But there has to be a gap, Madam 
President. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
third proposal, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 9 votes in favor and 1 8 votes 
against; the proposal is lost. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam PresiH^ni u e i 

spe " »* 

abs“r W ° U,dbe Morion. That mean 

The second would be with one immediate reelect 
The third would be without immediate reelection 
And finally, the fourth would be no limit. 

Madam President, I move that the Senators be ele 
for six years without reelection. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the final alterna- 
tive is reelection without limit. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
final alternative, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand. ) 

The results show 18 votes in favor and 17 votes 
against; the final alternative is approved. 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


231 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May I suggest that we vote again on a 
multiple choice? There are four choices so that each 
one will only have one vote. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, before acting on the 
motion of Commissioner Monsod, we would like to find 
out what was the vote for the first option. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 11:08 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:28 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we request 
a clarification of the previous vote on the Senators and 
ma y we ask for a recount on the basis of three options, 
where each Commissioner can vote for only one option, 
so that the total of the three should not exceed 48 
votes; otherwise, there would be a flying voter. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair notes that there have 
been instances where one Commissioner voted twice 
which led to the confusion. Therefore, we will have 
another balloting. Pieces of paper have been distributed 
for the Members to write their votes on. Just for the 
record may we know what are Scheme Nos. I, II 
and HI? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the following are 
the various alternatives: 

Scheme No. I is without reelection; Scheme No. II is 
with one reelection; and Scheme No. Ill is reelection 
without limit. This is for the Senators. 

At this juncture, pieces of paper were distributed 
and the Commissioners wrote down their votes. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair asks the Chairman, 
Commissioner Davide, to please consolidate the results 
of the voting for President and Vice-President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Madam President, we 
are ready. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
proceed. 

COUNTING OF BALLOTS 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Scheme No. I — /// 

Scheme No. II - /////-/////_/////-/////_// 

Scheme No. Ill - /////-/////-/////-// 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 3 votes for 
Scheme No. I; 22 votes for Scheme No. II; and 17 votes 
for Scheme No. Ill; Scheme No. II is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the next position 
is for the House of Representatives, the Congressmen. I 
would assume we can use the same choices. Does any 
one want any variation? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. For the record, I would like to ask 
Commissioner Romulo some questions. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Scheme No. II says “the Vice- 
President — with one reelection.” 

THE PRESIDENT.. No, that is for Senators. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Guingona is 
recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. May I suggest one more scheme — 
with two reelections for the Members of the House of 
Representatives? 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we shall distribute ballots 
again. 

MR. ROMULO. While the ballots are being dis- 
tributed, may I read the following four propositions for 
Congressmen: 

Scheme No. I, without reelection. 

Scheme No. II, with one reelection. 


232 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


Scheme No. Ill, with two reelections. 

Scheme No. IV, no limit on reelection. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The term of the Members of 
the House of Representatives will be three years, ac- 
cording to the first voting; the term of the Senators, if 
they are entitled to one reelection, will be 1 2 years. So, 
in order for a Member of the House of Representatives 
to have also 12 years, he must be entitled to three 
reelections. I propose another scheme with three 
reelections to make it equal. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will the Gentleman maintain the 
number there and add that as No. V. I filled up my 
ballot already and if I erase, this might be disqualified 
as a marked ballot. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo may 
change his ballot. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 


MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I would suggest that 
the two schemes with the highest votes be voted upon 
to get the key majority. For example, if the schemes 
with two reelections and no limit to election get the 
highest number of votes, then we vote again to get the 
key majority. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will do that. Are all the votes 
in? 

COUNTING OF BALLOTS 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Madam President, we 
have 43 ballots. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
proceed. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Scheme No. I — 0 

Scheme No. II — // 

Scheme No. Ill - ///// -///// -///// -///// -/ 

Scheme No. IV - /////-/////-//// 

Scheme No. V — /////—/ 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. The situation stated by Commi: 

NaTt It r ReyeS 1S a PP arentl Y covered by Schem 
f . ici we agreed upon earlier. The situation wi 
not happen, because both the Senators and the Congres: 
men wil have five (5) years on the first election. So th 
possibility that the Senators will have a longer term tha 
the Congressmen is remote. 


THE PRESIDENT. The results show no vote for 
Scheme No. I; 2 votes for Scheme No. II; 21 votes for 
Scheme No. Ill; 14 votes for Scheme for No. IV; and 6 
votes for Scheme No. V; Scheme No. Ill is approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


md uAucAn MR. RODRIGO. I would like to ask a question for 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. clarification. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod 
mzed. 


is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam Procia * 

that the three ahprnat ™ President > Jt occurred t< 
that tlie three alternatives are not really mutually 

elusive. Can we have only these three: without ret 

tton, with reflection and with unlimited reelection’ 

for plura,i,y r-r,: 


MR. RODRIGO. If the Members of the Lower House 
can have two reelections, does this mean two immediate 
reelections, or a term of nine consecutive years? Let us 
say that a Member of the Lower House has been re- 
elected twice; that means he will serve for nine years. 
Can he let three years elapse and then run again? 


THE PRESIDENT. In other , 
sam e schemes as those for Senators 'wk^ufreele" 
with one reelection and unlimited reelection 

R EV. R*GOS^ Mada m President, besides we 

already submitted our ballots. 


M R. MONSOD. I withdraw my proposal, Madam 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. We will ask the Chairman of the 
Committee on the Legislative to answer the question. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct, Madam President, be- 
cause two reelections mean two successive reelections. 
So he cannot serve beyond nine consecutive years. 

MR. RODRIGO. Consecutively? 

MR. DAVIDE. Consecutively. 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


233 


MR. RODRIGO. But after nine years he can let one... 

MR. DAVIDE. He can rest. He can hibernate for 
three years. 

MR. RODRIGO. And run again. 

MR. DAVIDE. He can run again. 

MR. RODRIGO. And again have nine years as a 
maximum. 

MR. DAVIDE. I do not know if that is also the 
thinking of Commissioner Garcia who is the main pro- 
ponent of this proposal on two reelections. I would seek 
the opinion of Commissioner Garcia for the record. 

MR. GARCIA. I would actually prefer that after nine 
years he does not serve anymore. But if the body wishes 
to get the consensus on this point, we can perhaps 
divide. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other business? 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, is it not the 
agreement that if there is no absolute majority, the 
body will vote again to get such? There is no absolute 
majority yet. Scheme No. Ill has only 2 1 ; there were 43 
who voted. So, there should be 22 votes in order to get 
the absolute majority. 

THE PRESIDENT. What was the proposal of Com- 
missioner Monsod? Did it get a majority vote? 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President. We do not 
have the majority because there are 43 votes. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we will vote again. 

MR. MONSOD. May we have a runoff, Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we again distribute ballots 
or shall we do it by raising the hand? 


MR. DAVIDE. I think we should submit this to a 
vote because the concept of this Representation is really 
that it should be a total of nine consecutive years only, 
similar to the 1935 provision on the presidency where a 
President cannot serve for more than eight consecutive 
years. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there anyone objecting to the 
interpretation given by the Chairman of the Committee 

on the Legislative? 

• 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, point of inquiry. 
Under Scheme No. II, the first election of the Congress- 
men is for five years; the next election will be for three 
years; so that is eight. If one is reelected for the second 
time, that will give him 12 years. However, if the rule 
says that no Congressman will serve for more than nine 
years, I think he will need only one reelection because 
his first term is for five years if we apply Scheme No. II. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would like to believe that the 
requirement of the majority applies to those instances 
where there is only one issue which we are trying to 
resolve. We are resolving five issues, four issues . . . 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but we are just being guided 
by the understanding made among the Members before 
we voted. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I submit, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will vote only .once 
between Scheme Nos. Ill and IV - Scheme No III with 
two reelections; and Scheme No. IV with three reelec- 
tions. Is that correct? 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I think that can be 
reconciled in the Committee on Amendments and 
Transitory Provisions. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is why the Chair was asking 
the Chairman of the Committee on the Legislative to 
coordinate all these results and restate before the body 
just exactly where we stand regarding the terms of the 
president, Vice-President, Senators and Congressmen, 
and presumably on the frequency of elections so that 
that can be clarified. Is that possible? 

MR. DAVIDE. It can be done in the Committee on 
Amendments and Transitory Provisions, and in the 
Committee on the Executive, Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Do 
floor ready? 


we call for a vote now? Is the 


for^ot^ 00 ^ 00 ’ YeS ’ Madam Presi dent. We are ready 


THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of 
Scheme No III, pi ea se raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

As many as are in favor of Scheme No. IV, please 
iaise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 


234 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


The results show 27 votes in favor of Scheme No. Ill 
and 12 votes in favor of Scheme No. IV; Scheme No. Ill 
is approved. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. There was an issue raised a while 
ago because of the objection raised by Commissioner 
Garcia as to the interpretation of Scheme No. III. I was 
wondering if there has already been a final decision on 
whether or not these two reelections refer to immediate 
reelections. 


the number of years. I think the three issues that should 
face us at the moment would be: Is there going to be no 
reelection? Would there be no limit on reelection? 
Should there be reelection? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable, Commissioner 
Romulo? 

MR. ROMULO. No, Madam President. I do not think 
the others will agree. They will want the schemes as is. 

THE PRESIDENT. They prefer the same schemes, 
only this time the choice is for local officials. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, is it understood 
that even the governors have a three-year term? 


THE PRESIDENT. That is why the Chair was request- 
ing the Chairman of the Committee on the Legislative to 
consolidate all these reports and then come out with 
the Committee’s own interpretation. The body will be 
guided by this or we will vote on it. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Point of parliamentary inquiry 
Madam President. Will what we have decided on b 

t™fion? mt ° 3 provision or Provisions in the Const: 


MR. DAVIDE. We will do that, Madam Presider 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the body have to vote c 
the term of the local officials? 

the^ Committee^ M \ y W6 , refer this to the Chairman < 
Sen? °" L ° Cal Govern ments, Madam Pre 


MR. DAVIDE. The local officials referred to here are 
the governors, vice-governors, members of the provincial 
board, the city mayor, the city vice-mayor, and the 
members of the city board; the municipal mayor, the 
municipal vice-mayor and the members of the municipal 
council. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are the barangays not included? 

MR. DAVIDE. The barangay would be governed, I 
think, by a special law. I do not know the proposal of 
the Committee on Local Governments regarding the 
barangay officials. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We have not touched on that topic, 
Madam President. But I think I agree with the Chairman 
of the Committee on the Legislative that barangay offi- 
cials should be governed by a special law. 

At this juncture, pieces of paper were distributed, 
and the Commissioners wrote down their votes. 


THE PRESIDENT. What k th a i .. _ 

sioner Nolledo? 6 p easure °f Comm 


MR. NOLLEDO. We have 

this; but we can decide on this provision 

We have no objection if the body sodedde? 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President 
the number of schemes from five to ’three s^hat , 
proceeding would not be too confusing? We have \ 
scheme without reelection; another scheme with reel 
tion; and the third, no limit on reelection. If the schei 
on a reelection comes out, perhaps we can decide as 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I gathered 
from Commissioner Nolledo that the barangays are not 
included in this decision that we are going to make. I 
would just like to call the attention of Commissioner... 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before the Gentleman proceeds, 
regardless of any provision of existing law, I think 
barangay officials should be covered by a special law. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is precisely the point, 
Madam President, because under the Local Government 
Code, B.P. Big. 337, which was approved on February 
19, 1983, the barangays are included therein, so why 
make a special law when they are already covered by the 
Local Government Code? 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


235 


MR. NOLLEDO. I think that is the sense of some 
Members of this Commission and a number of the 
members of the Committee on Local Governments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Why do we not consider that 
matter when we come to the Committee Report on 
Local Governments? Besides, when we voted for this, 
we only had the public officials mentioned by Commis- 
sioner Davide; that is, excluding the barangay officials. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Do we defer action on that, 
Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, on that particular subject. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Madam President, we 
have 39 ballots here and there are 39 Commissioners 
present, so everyone has cast his or her ballot. May we 
start the tally. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
proceed. 

COUNTING OF BALLOTS 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Scheme No. I — 0 

Scheme No. II - III 

Scheme No. Ill - /////—///// —///// -///// -///// 'I 1111 

Scheme No. IV - /// 

Scheme No. V — /// 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show no vote for 
Scheme No. I; 3 votes for Scheme No. II; 30 votes or 
Scheme No. Ill; 3 votes for Scheme No. IV; and vo es 
for Scheme No. V; Scheme No. Ill is approved. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may we inquire 
if our Chairman of the Committee has alrea y, a ® 
consultation, decided on the interpretation o 
provision on two reelections? 

MR. ROMULO. We will put that to a vote now, 
Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. I so move that it be put to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but are we ready with that 
now, or shall we have it after lunch? 

MR. ROMULO. I think we can have it now on a show 
of hands, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I think the vote on 
continuous service of nine years for the Members of the 
House of Representatives or the lifetime limitation of 
three terms has a very serious implication. The inter- 
pretation of Commissioner Davide in the case of the 
Members of the House is that they are allowed three 
consecutive terms. They can hibernate for one term and 
can have another three terms. 

The interpretation of Commissioner Garcia is that the 
limitation of three terms is a lifetime limitation. This is 
a very important distinction for the future: and perhaps, 
this should be discussed or at least we can think about it 
a little longer, rather than vote on it immediately. 

MR. ROMULO. I withdraw the motion. Madam 
President. We can handle this after lunch. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we have the proposals now, 
so that when we resume, we are ready to vote on these? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, in essence, is it the 
Davide interpretation or is it the Garcia interpretation? 

Madam President, if it is the Davide interpretation. . . 

THE PRESIDENT. May we state that the interpreta- 
tion of Commissioner Davide or whatever proposal 
Commissioner Davide will say now is the proposal of the 
Committee on the Legislative as part of its committee 
report? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. We want a vote on that particular 
issue so the Committee can now finalize the substitute 
proposal in the draft. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, as manifested 
by Commissioner Monsod, this is a very important 
question. Maybe we could allow one speaker to explain 
very briefly each side of the issue. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we have those speeches after 
lunch? 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. I would just like to have the pio- 
posals now so that during lunch break, at least we can 
think about them, although I suppose we will have some 
indigestion in the process. May we now have the pro- 
posal we are going to speak about or vote on when we 
resume the session? 


236 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. Yes. the Garcia interpretation. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We ask Commissioner Garcia 
to please state his interpretation. 

MR. GARCIA. I propose that the local officials be 
reelected twice and that they be prohibited from 
running again after a total term of nine years in public 
service for the same office. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:51 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. How about the Congressmen? 

MR. GARCIA. This is both for the Representatives 
and the local officials. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right, for both Representatives 
and the local officials. 

MR. ROMULO. I think the same question can be 
raised as to Senators. 


THE PRESIDENT. Senators have one reelection. 


MR. RODRIGO. Before we take our lunch break, 

may ask Commissioner Garcia a question on his pro- 
posal. 1 


Let us 
after that 


say, a mayor has served for nine years, can he, 
, run as governor? 


wished GARCIA. He can run for other offices if he 


MR. RODRIGO. As long as it is another office. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the other propos; 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Davide would like 
be recognized. 

niz™ E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Davide is recc 


is Thefe A omcF l The n° ther proposa1 ’ Madam Preside 
is. Ihese officials who can seek two reelections c 
serve for a total term of iceiecuons c 

cannot seek another reelection Th 631 ^ thaE th 

term or more, but u wO? 2 IS' 1<>U ' d reSt f ° r 0 

again after the lapse of the term foSowin^e™"^ 
tion of the nine-year period ^ ine expi 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. I move that U /« 

Madam President. suspend the sessio 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended un 
two-thirty in the afternoon. 1 u un 

It was 12:23p.m. 


MR. ROMULO. We are now ready to discuss the two 
issues, as indicated on the blackboard, and these are 
Alternative No. 1 where there is no further election after 
a total of three terms and Alternative No. 2 where there 
is no immediate reclection after three successive terms. 

The proponents are now ready to explain briefly. I 
ask that Commissioner Garcia be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized to speak on Alternative No. 1 . 

MR. GARCIA. I would like to advocate the proposi- 
tion that no further election for local and legislative 
officials be allowed after a total of three terms or nine 
years. I have four reasons why I would like to advocate 
this proposal, which are as follows: ( 1 ) to prevent 
monopoly of political power; (2) to broaden the choice 
of the people; (3) so that no one is indispensable in 
running the affairs of the country; and (4) to create a 
reserve of statesmen both in the national and local 
levels. May I explain briefly these four reasons. 

First: To prevent monopoly of political power — Our 
history has shown that prolonged stay in public office 
can lead to the creation of entrenched preserves of 
political dynasties. In this regard, I would also like to 
advocate that immediate members of the families 
of public officials be barred from occupying the same 
position being vacated. 

Second: To broaden the choice of the people - 
Although individuals have the right to present themselves 
for public office, our times demand that we create 
structures that will enable more aspirants to offer to 
serve and to provide the people a broader choice of 
those who will serve them; in other words, to broaden 
the choice so that more and more people can be enlisted 
to the cause of public service, not just limited only to 
those who may have the reason or the advantage due 
to their position. 

Third: No one is indispensable in running the affairs 
of the country - After the official’s more than a decade 
or nearly a decade of occupying the same public office 
I think we should try to encourage a more team- 
oriented consensual approach to governance favored by 
a proposal that will limit public servants to occupy the 
same office for three terms. And this would also favor 
not relying on personalities no matter how heroic, some 
of whom, in fact, are now in our midst. 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


237 


Lastly, the fact that we will not reelect people after 
three terms would also favor the creation of a reserve of 
statesmen both in the national and local levels. 

Turnovers in public office after nine years will ensure 
that new ideas and new approaches will be welcome. 
Public office will no longer be a preserve of conserva- 
tism and tradition. At the same time, we will create a 
reserve of statesmen, both in the national and local 
levels, since we will not deprive the community of the 
wealth of experience and advice that could come from 
those who have served for nine years in public office. 

Finally, the concept of public service, if political 
dynasty symbolized by prolonged stay in particular 
public offices is barred, will have fuller meaning. It will 
not be limited only to those who directly hold public 
office, but also to consultative bodies organized by the 
people, among whom could be counted those who have 
served in public office with accomplishment and dis- 
tinction, for public service must no longer be limited 
only to public office. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. May I just ask Commissioner 
Garcia for a clarification. Under Alternative No. 1, 
which says: “No further election after a total of three 
terms,” the three terms referred to here need not have 
been served consecutively? 

MR. GARCIA. The Commissioner is correct. Madam 
President. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, whether there 
were interruptions, whether the interruption took over 
a span of 20 or 25 years, as long as he has been in that 
office for a total of nine years, he is banned from 
running for the same office. 

MR. GARCIA. The Commissioner is right, Madam 
President. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I was reflecting on 
this issue earlier and I asked to speak because in this 
draft Constitution, we are recognizing people’s power. 
We have said that now there is a new awareness, a new 
kind of voter, a new kind of Filipino. And yet at the 
same time, we are prescreening candidates among whom 
they will choose. We are saying that this 48-member 


Constitutional Commission has decreed that those who 
have served for a period of nine years are barred from 
running for the same position. 

The argument is that there may be other positions. 
But there are some people who are very skilled and good 
at legislation, and yet are not of a national stature to be 
Senators. They may be perfectly honest, perfectly 
competent and with integrity. They get voted into 
office at the age of 25, which is the age we provide for 
Congressmen. And at 34 years old we put them to 
pasture. 

Second, we say that we want to broaden the choices 
of the people. We are talking here only of congressional 
or senatorial seats. We want to broaden the people’s 
choice but we are making a prejudgment today because 
we exclude a certain number of people. We are, in 
effect, putting an additional qualification for office — 
that the officials must not have served a total of more 
than a number of years in their lifetime. 

Third, we are saying that by putting people to pasture, 
we are creating a reserve of statesmen, but the future 
participation of these statesmen is limited. Their skills 
may be only in some areas, but we are saying that they 
are going to be barred from running for the same 
position. 

Madam President, the ability and capacity of a 
statesman depend as well on the day-to-day honing of 
his skills and competence, in intellectual combat, in 
concern and contact with the people, and here we are 
saying that he is going to be barred from the same 
kind of public service. 

I do not think it is in our place today to make such a 
very important and momentous decision with respect to 
many of our countrymen in the future who may have a 
lot more years ahead of them in the service of their 
country. 

If we agree that we will make sure that these people 
do not set up structures that will perpetuate them, then 
let us give them this rest period of three years or what- 
ever it is. Maybe during that time, we would even agree 
that their fathers or mothers or relatives of the second 
degree should not run. But let us not bar them for life 
after serving the public for a number of years. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I speak briefly to second Commis- 
sioner Monsod. Am I allowed, Madam President? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog 
nized. 


238 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. Before Commissioner Ople speaks 
for one or two minutes to second Commissioner 
Monsod, may I ask Commissioner Monsod one question. 

Madam President, this morning when we voted on the 
alternative that the Senators will be allowed to run only 
for one reelection, so that means they will be serving a 
maximum period of 12 years, was not the intention to 
bar them also forever, after 1 2 years? 

MR. MONSOD. I was not sure. I thought that there 
might be opportunities for them later, particularly since 
in the case of the President, we are even allowing a 
person who attains the highest political position on this 
land to serve again after a period of rest. 

MR. BENGZON. That is what I would like to find 
out. When we voted this morning barring the Senator 
from running for the same office after the first reelec- 
tion, I thought that after 12 years of service, he is 
barred forever. That is the impression I had. Am I wrong 
or am I correct? 

MR. MONSOD. I think that is the reason we are 

avmg a debate this afternoon, precisely in order to 

it Should b PerCeP ^° nS peo ^ e an< ^ finally decide what 


of tbe Co ENGZ ° N ' But We Were just talkin § of the tern 
of the Congressmen and the local officials. 

cided^to^e^nff ' 1 before lunch break, we de 

our intern refppt' d l £ decide this afternoon on wha 
reelecdon 10n ° Uld be With respect to the ba " or 


on^e tel N ofT, S ° ^ means We wil1 dec ^ aga 
on tne term of the Senators after this? 

THE PRESIDENT In fart th.ru- 
Chairman nf r m tact ’ the Chair requested tl 

consolidate all thr ommittee on the Legislative 
will really come out' of ttem! ' ha ' *' made ‘° See Wh 


MR. BENGZON. Yes Madam President. 

Thank you. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla 


is recog- 


local government unit who is only one in power. Just 
like the President, he is only one in power. 

I think we should distinguish or vote separately, 
because there may be some who would be supporting 
the proposition that a local executive, governor or 
mayor who has served for nine successive years should 
no longer be allowed reelection even if there be a 
rest period of one term. 

Whereas, with regard to the Members of Congress, let 
us determine whether the majority sentiment is that a 
Member of the Lower House after serving for nine years 
or a Member of the Senate after serving for 12 years will 
no longer be allowed reelection, even if there is an 
intermediate period of nonincumbency. 

Madam President, I feel that the two situations are 
different. A Member of the Congress is only one of so 
many members; whereas, a local executive is similar to 
the President, only on a very limited sense. He is one 
chief and, perhaps, a powerful executive. That is my 
suggestion, that we should distinguish or vote separately 
so that we will not confuse the two issues. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I agree with the honorable Commis- 
sioner Padilla that we should decide separately on the 
term of office of the Senators, the Congressmen and the 
local officials. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
call attention to the fact that when we say l° ca 0 
cials” that term embraces not only the provincial 
governor and the municipal mayor but also the vice- 
governor, vice-mayor, members of the provincial board 
and members of the municipal and city councils. So if 
we will make a distinction now between Members of 
Congress and local officials, we might have to make 
subdistinctions again between the mayor and the vice- 
mayor; between the vice-mayor and the councilors; 
between the governor and the vice-governor; and 
between the two higher officials and the provincial 
board members. We might get too involved in 
distinctions, Madam President. 


MR. PADILLA. I think we shrmin 
, ion of a Senator or a Congressman a ^Member o'f 
legislative body - a Senator, one of a compoStion of 
Members; a Congressman, one of a composition of 
or 250 Members - from a governor or a mayor c 


THE PRESIDENT. Maybe it will be of help if we just 
remind ourselves that what we have before us now is the 
report of the Committee on the Legislative. Therefore, 
maybe we should confine ourselves first to what is 
covered by the report which is the term of office of the 
Senators and the Representatives. 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


239 


And with respect to the local officials, let us await 
the report of the Committee on Local Governments as 
to its recommendation on this matter. 

MR. RODRIGO. As a matter of fact, I will go further 
than that. It is my belief, as regards local officials, that 
we should leave this matter to the legislature. 

THE PRESIDENT. So what is the pleasure now of 
the Acting Floor Leader or of the Chairman of the 
Committee on the Legislative? 

MR. RODRIGO. I wonder if the two proponents, 
Madam President, will agree that we first talk about the 
term of office of the Representatives because we are 
now discussing the legislative department. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will agree really that this matter 
should relate only to the term of office of the Rep- 
resentatives. 

THE PRESIDENT. But are we agreed on these two 
proposals — the one of Commissioner Garcia where 
there is no further election after a total of three terms 
and the other where there is no immediate reelection 
after three successive terms? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, originally if I remem- 
ber right, the Commission decided to consider the 
synchronization of elections. And from that original 
commitment, we proceeded to fix the terms and 
decided related questions within the context of syn- 
chronization. Are we now abandoning the original task 
of synchronization which could only be fully settled in 
terms of delimitations on the proposed terms of the 
President and the Vice-President, the Members of 
Congress and the local officials, or do we want to post- 
pone the synchronization task to a later time after we 
hear from the Committee on Local Governments and 
the other concerned committees? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Acting Floor 
Leader say to this particular question of Commissioner 
Ople? 

MR. ROMULO. In a way, Madam President, we have 
settled the synchronization task, because we have de- 
cided on the officials’ absolute terms. All we are really 
talking about now is whether or not they are eligible for 
reelection, and I think those are separable issues. 

MR. OPLE. If they are separable, and we have already 
settled the synchronization task, then I think that is 
something to be thankful about. But considering the 
immediate business at hand, is it the wish of the Acting 


Floor Leader that the election of the local officials 
should be eliminated from the consideration of those 
two choices? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. I think the sense of the body 
now is to limit this choice to the Members of the House 
of Representatives. 

MR. OPLE. And do the manifestations of both 
Commissioners Garcia and Monsod still stand after the 
elimination of the election of the local officials? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I think so. 

MR. OPLE. Am I now allowed to support briefly the 
manifestation made by Commissioner Monsod, Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this also in favor of Proposal 
No. 2, or just a comment on Proposal No. 1? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, it is in support of Commissioner 
Monsod’s proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

The principle involved is really whether this Commis- 
sion shall impose a temporary or a perpetual disqualifi- 
cation on those who have served their terms in ac- 
cordance with the limits on consecutive service as 
decided by the Constitutional Commission. I would be 
very wary about this Commission exercising a sort of 
omnipotent power in order to disqualify those who will 
already have served their terms from perpetuating them- 
selves in office. I think the Commission achieves its 
purpose in establishing safeguards against the excessive 
accumulation of power as a result of consecutive terms. 
We do put a gap on consecutive service — in the case of 
the President, six years; in the case of the Vice-President, 
unlimited; and in the case of the Senators, one reelec- 
tion. In the case of the Members of Congress, both from 
the legislative districts and from the party list and 
sectoral representation, this is now under discussion and 
later on the policy concerning local officials will be 
taken up by the Committee on Local Governments. The 
principle remains the same. I think we want to prevent 
future situations where, as a result of continuous service 
and frequent reelections, officials from the President 
down to the municipal mayor tend to develop a pro- 
prietary interest in their positions and to accumulate 
those powers and perquisites that permit them to stay 
on indefinitely or to transfer these posts to members of 
their families in a subsequent election. I think that is 
taken care of because we put a gap on the continuity or 
the unbroken service of all of these officials. But where 
we now decide to put these prospective servants ot the 
people or politicians, if we want to use the coarser term, 


240 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


under a perpetual disqualification, I have a feeling that 
we are taking away too much from the people, whereas 
we should be giving as much to the people as we can in 
terms of their own freedom of choice. 

I think the veterans of the Senate and of the House 
of Representatives here will say that simply getting 
nominated on a party ticket is a very poor assurance 
that the people will return them to the Senate or to the 
House of Representatives. There are many casualties 
along the way of those who want to return to their 
office, and it is the people’s decision that matters. They 
judge whether or not a Soc Rodrigo, a Sumulong, a 
Padilla, an Alonto and a Rosales, after a first or a second 
term, should go back to the Senate. That is a prerogative 
of the people that we should not take away from them— 
the right to judge those who have served. In any case, 
we already take away from the people the freedom to 
vote for the third termers because we say that a Senator, 
say, Mr. Rodrigo, is only good for twelve years. But if he 
wants to be like Cincinnatus, if he is called back by his 
people to serve again, let us say after a period of six 
years — which Commissioner Davide called a period of 
hibernation which is spent at his fishpond in Bulacan, 
Bulacan — because there is a new situation in the coun- 
t !^ at fairly i m P e l s the people to summon him back, 
i e incinnatus in the past, then there will no longer 
be any Cincinnatus. 

Ti } at is , not perhaps a very important point, but I 
think we already have succeeded in striking a balance of 
po icies^ so that the structures, about which Commis- 
sioner arcia expressed a very legitimate concern, could 
henceforth develop to redistribute opportunities, both 
erms o political and economic power, to the great 
majon y o the people, because very soon, we will also 
iscuss e multiparty system. We have unshackled 
ippine politics from the two-party system, which 
rea y was the most critical support for the perpetuation 
p i ica y nasties in the Philippines. That is quite 

a y* C .. V* a * same time, let us not despise the 
Parties. The strength of democracy will 

anH a Qrh - ^ ° n b< l W stron g our democratic parties are, 
a s P hnt enng of all these parties so that we fall back 

’ t in«Q say ’ nontra ^tional parties entirely will mean a 

rv I am fn V1 . ta * ty an d resiliency of our democra- 

q , , r . app * n 8 the terms of our legislators, both 

and evervhr h e ^ n hers of the House of Representatives 

not Y for n 6 S6 t W ! llch we have already done, but I 

mrincinle T dis <l uali Action from office, a 

from ?he commit d establish if We were to de P art 

from the committee proposal of Commissioner Davide. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President 
what Commissioner Ople has said? C ° U d 1 respond to 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I think the issue is on Alternative No. 1 which is: “no 
further election after a total of three terms.’’ I will just 
put into action what we have approved this morning 
which is Scheme No. II, providing for a term of three 
years for the Members of the Lower House of Congress 
and a term of three years also for the local officials, 
from governor down. We also approved this morning the 
alternative that the Members of the Lower House shall 
have only two reelections, meaning, one basic election 
plus two reelections will give them three terms in the 
House; that the local officials shall have two reelec- 
tions, meaning, one basic election plus two reelections 
or three terms. Let us compare that now to the number 
of years in accordance with Scheme No. II. Under 
Scheme No. II, the Members of the Lower House and 
the local officials shall serve for the first term of not 
three years but five years so that we can synchronize 
elections after that for every three years. So the Rep- 
resentatives have already a term of five years on the first 
term, and another of six years. So they will serve for 
eleven years before they will be disqualified under that 
first issue. I understand that the three terms mentioned 
there are only for nine years. It is not so if we follow 
what we approved this morning. 

In the case of the Senators, we approved that there is 
one reelection. Under Scheme No. II, the Senators will 
have a term of five years for the first election, and one 
reelection for a term of six years, which will give them a 
total term of eleven years. 

Where does Alternative No. 1 stand now? May I ask 
the proponent where it stands now? Is it for nine years 
or for two reelections as we approved this morning? 
May I ask the proponent of Alternative No. L Madam 
President. 

MR. GARCIA. I am sorry but I think there are two 
different questions here: for the term of office of the 
Senators, it is a maximum of 12 years; for the Represen- 
tatives, it is a maximum of nine years. 

MR. DE CASTRO. What happens now to what we 
approved this morning? We approved Scheme No. II 
which provides a term of five years for the Representa- 
tives. 

MR. GARCIA. I am sorry again, but for the first 
election, the term of office will have to be fixed by the 
Commission on Elections simply for adjustment pur- 
poses because of the current term of the President, for 
synchronization and for transitory purposes. But once 
it is regularized, it will be different. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Is it a total of nine years? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, it is still a total of nine years. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Excluding those who were first 
elected under Scheme No. II? 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


241 


MR. GARCIA. Proper adjustments will have to be 
made for the first election. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Who will make the proper adjust- 
ments? 

MR. GARCIA. The Commission on Elections will 
make the proper adjustments. 

MR. DE CASTRO. And what proper adjustments can 
it do? 

MR. GARCIA. To make sure that the term is not 
more than nine years, if possible and if not, we can give 
them a term of more or less one or two years, depending 
on how it can be adjusted. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So it is not exactly nine years. It 
is either more or less in order to adjust to Scheme No. II 
and come out with what we approved this morning. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. GARCIA. Could I please answer Commissioner 
Ople, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may please 
proceed. 

MR. GARCIA. Very briefly, I think there are two 
principles involved in the first proposal. First, the 
recognition of the ambivalent nature of political power. 
Second, the recognition of alternative forms of public 
service. I think what is important for this Commission 
to remember is that we must learn from the lessons of 
our recent past. We must see public service primarily, if 
not exclusively, as a service to the people rather than 
the opportunity to accumulate political power. Pro- 
longed stay in a specific public office has been utilized 
in our past political history as the base through which 
political dynasties or vested interests pursue limited 
goals. Regarding the question of the political parties, 
in fact, it will encourage the constant renewal of new 
blood in party leadership, in approach, in style and 
ideas. I think this is healthy for a pluralist and multi- 
party democracy. 

Commissioner Ople mentioned four of our distin- 
guished colleagues who are, in fact, political giants of 
the previous generation. That is why I mentioned that 
there are among us political heroes in some senses, but 
they are rare men. They belong to a rare breed. What 
am trying to say is this: that we must now try to look at 
alternative forms of public service. Public service cannot 
be limited solely to staying in public office. It is 
abundantly clear from the history of martial law years 
a good number of leaders, of men who were in jail, o 
men who were in the streets, fought the martial law 
dictatorship outside of public office. They were not 
holding public office but they fought, they struggled, 
they made people aware. What I am trying to say is that 


we must be conscious and bring this awareness that 
public service can also mean, for example, belonging to 
consultative bodies, to people’s councils in different 
localities in the nation that bring about new forms of 
service and leadership. Those who have more experience 
in the legislature and other offices can precisely bring 
this idea of a different form of service to the people. 

MR. OPLE. One-sentence rejoinder. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I agree with all that Commissioner Garcia 
said that we should seek them as indeed we are seeking 
them through means other than the perpetual disqualifi- 
cation of elected public officials. 

Thank you. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I have heard the arguments for and 
against this perpetual disqualification. We are Members 
of the Constitutional Commission appointed by the 
President. In any democracy, the voice of the people is 
the voice of God. If the people want to elect a Rep- 
resentative on whom they have faith, who has demon- 
strated not only his patriotism but his unselfish love for 
his constituents who want him to hold position as their 
spokesman for a number of years, why should we 
arrogate unto ourselves the right to decide what the 
people want? I want a Gentleman here to stand and say 
that he is against the judgment of the people that their 
Representative serve for a number of years. Who is better 
qualified to judge? Mr. Guingona who comes from 
Iloilo believes that the Representative he has chosen can 
represent the best interests of his people maybe for 10 
or 1 5 years. Do we deprive him of his right of choice? 

I have talked to some American Senators, one of 
whom was the late William Borja of Idaho who later was 
accepted by most leaders and presidents of the world 
as the spokesman of the American people in foreign 
policy. He stayed in the U.S. Senate for more than 
30 years. 

Madam President, we are in a new democracy. We 
have developing leaders. We can find one in whom we 
have confidence, whose ability has been demonstrated 
in the crosstire of debates or election arguments. 

Why should we deprive the Representative the chance 
to serve for 12 or 15 years, if the people in their collec- 
tive judgment want him to continue? What right do we 
have in this Commission to limit the right of a district to 
choose its own Representative to serve for a number of 
years? Why do we arrogate unto ourselves that right to 
determine for our respective districts and our peop e 
how many years a Representative should serve? 


242 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


Had we imposed this disqualification in 1904, we 
would not have developed a Quezon, an Osmena, a 
Roxas and a Laurel in 1916, because after one term 
they would have gone to Batangas, to Capiz or else- 
where. 


So if the people find that their Representative is 
competent, we must have confidence in them because 
they know their Representative has demonstrated his 
competence by action, because he lives with them. Why 
should we defy the wishes of the people of that dis- 
trict? Let one Gentleman answer me and it be on 
record that he is against my position. As I said, the voice 
of the people is the voice of God. We should not dictate 
what the people want. Why should we arrogate unto 
ourselves the right of that district or that province to 
choose its leaders and limit their total number of years 
of service to only nine years? 


I would not speak for Batangas nor speak for Laguna, 
because their people have the right to choose their own 
Representatives fora term that they think is appropriate. 
We cannot speak for Sulu or even for Cotabato because 
the situation is different. Maybe we will have more 

om™°r7 ayb l! e will have only one of our faith and 

• t 1 6nCe limit his total number of years of 
service to nine years? * 

their riehTto d U t nt ° electorate the right of suffrage, 
years of se^i^rTm 6 their leaders ’ Iet us not limit the 
years Let the n ° , heir candldates to mere six or nine 

iryears because ^ JU u ge if they want him for 15 

strated Tavahac + choice tlle P eo P* e is demon- 

so they had hk f" i d n PreSident Quezon for 30 years 

Osmena for 2^ ° r ^ ^ ears - Cebu wanted President 
Osmena for 25 years, and for 30 years they had him. 

wanMo 2 °o f t U o S t^ v Wh ° ^ from Luzon wiU not even 

we determine th ° r t0 Mindanao - But how can 

7h J temperament of the people there, 

their passions? S> “ PreJUdiCCS ’ their * »d 


I think this matter of term of the Members of th< 
legislature should be left tr, b OI m 

decide As I close Z the people themselves tc 

decide, as 1 close, let me reiterate that the voice of tin 

people is the voice of God Wp i u , f 

we are not communists so let m P ®.^ ere are re hgious 

five or a local official to only one tern™* * ReprCSenta 

Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT The 

nized. A ng Floor Leader is 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that r 1 • • 
recognized. ‘ ha * C °"™«,oner Tan 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recogni: 

SR. TAN. I will just have one minute. 

I think we are giving too much importance to ele< 
officials. This is an entirely different era. Where v 


these officials during martial law? I only know very 
few who were in the resistance who tried to fight the 
dictatorship. 

The truth of the matter is that we are tired of 
politicians and we want a different kind of election. I 
think years in office is relative. One can become a 
monster in one year without being reelected. One also 
can do very much good in one year. One does not need 
1 2 years to prove his capacity as a good leader. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we now have the speaker on 
Alternative No. 2. We are through with Alternative No.l. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Aquino be 
recognized to speak on Alternative No. 2. 

MS. AQUINO. I will speak to endorse Alternative 
No. 2, and it is very unfortunate that I would have to 
differ with my distinguished colleagues. Commissioners 
Garcia and Tan, on this important point. Apparently, 
we speak of the same premises; we come from the same 
experience, but we vary in conclusion. We are in agree- 
ment that leaders need not be projected and developed 
publicly in an election. Leaders are, in fact, better 
tempered and better tested in the various forms of mass 
struggles and organized work. And if the people are to 
be encouraged to have their own sense of responsibility 
in national leadership, what ultimately matters is the 
political determination of the citizenry to chart their 
own national destiny. I believe that we should allow the 
people to exercise their own sense of proportion and 
imbibe the salutary effects of their own strength to 
curtail power when it overreaches itself. In the final 
analysis, we cannot legislate into the Constitution the 
essence of new politics. Politics is a chastening ex- 
perience of learning and unlearning. It was Commis- 
sioner Garcia himself who said that politics is an 
imperfect art. And, therefore, if it is an imperfect art, all 
of us go into it with feet of clay. We cannot correct 
politics with all of its imperfections and flaws by a 
constitutional provision. Let it take its course; let it be 
chastened by our own mistakes. A perpetual disqualifi- 
cation for potential politicians will not provide the cure. 
At best, it will only be symptomatic; it will not kill the 
bacteria which are, after all, in the essence of power. 
Perpetual disqualification is, at best, a palliative which 
could effectively foil the possibilities of real public 
service. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Bacani be 
recognized as the last speaker. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I just want to advance or strengthen 
one argument in favor of Alternative No. 2. 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


243 


I think when we voted on the provision that the 
illiterate be allowed to vote and when we proposed in 
this Constitutional Commission for initiative as a way 
also of empowering our people to engage in the legisla- 
tive exercise, we are really presupposing the political 
maturity of our people. Why is it that that political 
maturity seems now to be denied by asking that we 
should put a constitutional bar to a further election of 
any Representative after a term of three years? Why 
should we not leave that to the premise accepted by 
practically everybody here that our people are political- 
ly mature? Should we use this assumption only when it 
is convenient for us, and not when it may also lead to a 
freedom of choice for the people and for politicians 
who may aspire to serve them longer? 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. GARCIA. Just one brief rejoinder. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. I would like to answer Commissioner 
Bacani. We put a constitutional bar to reelection of any 
Representative basically because of the undue advantage 
of the incumbent. It is not because of lack of trust in 
the people. We realize from history that Mexico fought 
a revolution simply because of the issue of reelection. 
No reeleccion, sufragio universal. Basically, it is because 
of the undue advantage of the incumbent that he accu- 
mulates power, money, party machine or patronage. As 
regards what Commissioner Aquino has said, politics 
is not won by ideals alone; it is won by solid organizing 
work by organizations that have the capacity to s °> 
and normally the incumbent has all the advantages. That 
is why we say after three terms a Representative or a 
local official may have served the people enough. Can he 
not look for other vehicles of public service? Is it only 
in public office that he can serve? Is 12 years not 
enough for a man to make a mark in this world? Twelve 
years is plenty of time. 

That is all. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, just one point of 
clarification. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. This is addressed to the sponsor. 
Does the prohibition in Alternative No. 2 that an 
elective official who has served for three consecutive 
terms cannot have an immediate reelection include the 
immediate members of his family? In other words, can 
his wife run in his place? I want to know that. 

MR. ROMULO. Does the Chairman of the Committee 
wish to reply? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, as worded, it is a 
personal disqualification. 

MR. ROMULO. We are now ready to vote. Madam 
President. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. We are now ready to vote by 
ballot. Let us distribute the ballots. Anyway the voting 
would take only about 1 0 minutes. 

The session is suspended. 

It was 3:40 p.m. 

At this juncture, pieces of paper were distributed, 
and the Commissioners wrote down their votes. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:50 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, may I have a clarifi- 
cation before we count the ballots. The voting now is 
just for Representatives. We are not speaking of the 
term of office of the Senators yet. Is that correct? 

THE PRESIDENT. The term of office of the Senators 
was disposed of this morning. 

This voting now is only for Representatives. 

MR. GASCON. I think the issue of whether the 
Senators could run again for election after their two 
consecutive terms or 1 2 years after a lapse of a period of 
time has not yet been finalized. 

THE PRESIDENT. I beg the Commissioner’s pardon. 

MR. GASCON. Is this voting just for Congressmen? 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

The Secretary-General will now please proceed to 
count the votes. 

COUNTING OF BALLOTS 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Madam President, 
we have here 43 ballots cast. We will now start the 
counting. 

Alternative No. 1 — no further election after a total 
of three terms: /////-/////—/////_// 

Alternative No. 2 — no immediate reelection after 
three successive terms: ///// _/////_/////_/////—/////—/ 


244 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The results show 17 votes for 
Alternative No. 1 and 26 votes for Alternative No. 2; 
Alternative No. 2 is approved. 

What does the Acting Floor Leader say? 


REV. RIGOS. Another point, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. And then, after that, if there is a 
gap, when he is not a Senator, then he can run for the 
same office. 


MR. ROMULO. Alternative No. 2 has won, Madam 
President. It seems there are some doubts as to the term 
of office of the Senators, so I propose that we similarly 
vote on that to end any doubt. It was my understanding 
this morning that when we voted for the term of office 
of the Senators, they would not be perpetually dis- 
qualified. 

THE PRESIDENT. From the transcripts, it appears 
here that with respect to Senators, 22 votes went to 
Scheme No. II; that is, with one reelection. This is 
already a majority. So, does the Acting Floor Leader 
propose that we vote again? 

MR. ROMULO. The question is whether or not that 
will be perpetual, Madam President, or after resting for- 
six years they can run again. That is the question that is 
not answered. I am talking of the Senators. 


THE PRESIDENT. This morning, Scheme No. I, 

W1 . °y. ree ec * : ° n ’ ^ as ^ votes; Scheme No. II, with one 
ree ectKm - 22 votes; Scheme No. Ill, no limit on 
reelection — 1 7 votes. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

Se™.™„S T ' “ ay We f,rS ‘ Clarify th,S fr ° m ,he 

MR. ROMULO. The question is whether or not in 
voting for the term of six years with one reelection, the 
Senator is perpetually disqualified, so that is a similar 

rc~r had posed with regard to «» h — 

onI H rLecUon D thIther or"" no" 0 }!? 1 af ‘ er T' If W ] th 

qualified after ;e„i„g 12 yea ^° ‘ S pe,petually dls ‘ 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes Com™- • 

recognized. ’ mmissi °ner Rodrigo is 


MR. KUUKiw. ur, it after one reelection, he 

petually disqualified or he can hibernate th 

word used — for six years and then run again for 
tion but not consecutive, not immediate. In 
words, he is entitled to one immediate reelection. 


REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. In relation to that, if he will be 
allowed to run again as Senator after a period of hiber- 
nation, we have to clarify how long that should be. It 
could be three years, because in the proposed scheme, 
every three years we can elect the Senators. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, Madam President, it can be 
three years. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. I will suspend the session again so 
as to allow the parties to compare with the Acting Floor 
Leader so that we will know what we are going to vote 
on. 

The session is suspended. 

It was 3:58 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:05 p.m. , the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, we are now ready 
to vote on the question of the Senators, and the schemes 
are as follows: The first scheme is, no further election 
after two terms; the second scheme is, no immediate 
reelection after two successive tenns. 

Madam President, inasmuch as the principles ap- 
plicable here are the same as those for the House of 
Representatives, I move that we go directly to the 
voting and forego any further discussions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please distribute the ballots for 
this particular item for Senators. 

Are we ready now? 

The Secretary-General will please count the ballots. 


COUNTING OF BALLOTS 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. We have 43 ballots 
here, Madam President. We shall now begin to count. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


245 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Scheme No. I - /////-/////-// 

Scheme No. II - /////-/////-/////-/////-/////-/////- 

// 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 12 votes for 
Scheme No. I and 32 votes for Scheme No. II; Scheme 
No. II is approved. 

All the results will be considered by the Committee 
on the Legislative in preparation of their report. 

So, can we leave this matter now? 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I have a clarifica- 
tory question to the Chairman of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon will please 
proceed. 

MR. GASCON. So, we have just approved the scheme 
where they can run again after a rest period. The ques- 
tion is basically after serving 12 years. What will be 
the rest period of that particular Senator? In our 
scheme, there will be elections every three years, but the 
term for Senators is six years. So, after 12 years in the 
service, will he be resting for six years or one whole 
term or for one-half term only, since the next election 
will be after three years? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I already an- 
swered that question upon interpellation of Commis- 
sioner Rigos. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Rodrigo please 
repeat it for Commissioner Gascon’s satisfaction? 

MR. RODRIGO. The question asked was, if the 
interval is only three years, may an ex-Senator run for 
election? And the answer is yes. 

MR. GASCON. So, it is just a three-year interval; he 
will not rest for one whole term? 

MR. RODRIGO. That is the maximum, as long as 
there is that gap of three years. But, of course, he can 
run after six years; after nine years, he might not run at 
all. 

MR. GASCON. I spoke to the Chairman of the Com- 
mittee during a suspension and he gave me a different 
interpretation, that it will be a six-year rest, not three 
years. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, that was a personal 
view that I expressed because the reference really is two 
terms. Therefore, after two successive terms, he cannot 
run in the next election for another term, so he has to 
rest for one term. And the term of the Senator is six 
years. 


THE PRESIDENT. It is six years. 

MR. DAVIDE. That was a personal view, but it seems 
that there is another view on that. I think the House 
should also decide on that. (Laughter) 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suggests that this 
matter on whatever position the Commission is taking 
on this particular question be clarified, so that when we 
take it up again, we will consider the report, and then 
we can vote on that. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. If there will be amendments, then 
we can accept the amendments. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee will take that up. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

We can proceed now to the other issue. Will it be the 
party list or the multiparty system? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Before going to the other issue, this 
morning, I presented an amendment regarding the Vice- 
President if he succeeds as President. Upon the advice 
of the other Members, I decided to just refer this to the 
Chairman of the Committee on the Executive. So, I 
referred the written amendment to Commissioner 
Sumulong as Chairman of the Committee on the 
Executive. 

And so, I withdraw my amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, this morning, 
Commissioner Garcia raised a point requesting a recon- 
sideration of the Commission’s vote on the unlimited 
reelection of the Vice-President. And, I believe, Madam 
President, that based on the objection of Commissioner 
de los Reyes that Commissioner Garcia had voted 
against it, he cannot raise the issue. His representation 
was shelved. I was one of those who voted in favor, and 
I would like to request the same reconsideration, 
ticularly in the context of the recent voting we have 
made on the issue of reelection. May we secure the 
Chair s indulgence, if we could raise the issue again on 


246 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


the question of the Vice-President’s perpetual capacity 
to run for reelection? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Monsod submit- 
ting a motion for reconsideration? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, I would like 
to propose that the reelection of the Vice-President be 
similar to the rule on the President. There is one reelec- 
tion only for the Vice-President. 

THE PRESIDENT. But he can run again for the 
position of Vice-President after the lapse of one term. 

MR. MONSOD. Excuse me, Madam President. Let me 
just clarify it. I believe what we would like to reconsider 
is that the Vice-President should not hold the office of 
Vice-President for more than 12 years. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, it is the same as that of the 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. That is the reconsideration. 

MR. RODRIGO. On the motion for reconsideration? 

THE PRESIDENT. There is one abstention. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe that 
Commissioner Rodrigo has introduced an amendment 
that the prohibition should only be beyond 12 con- 
secutive years. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, to harmonize it with the Pres- 
ident, 6 consecutive years after a lapse of one term, 
he can run; the same for the Senators and the Congress- 
men. 

MR. MONSOD. I would accept the amendment, 
Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 


MR. MONSOD. No, in the case of the President, there 
is no immediate reelection. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, how would the Commissioner 
phrase it again? 


THE PRESIDENT. So, the motion to be approved is 
for the Vice-President to be eligible for reelection to 
serve for 12 consecutive years. Is that correct, Commis- 
sioner Monsod? Am I taking it correctly? 


cprvw * Woidd to propose that a person 

sate term nfl r6Sldent should have a maximum aggre- 
gate term of 1 2 years as Vice-President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

that^W^^^r? ^ adam ^ res ident, may I amend 
nrovisi^ re V 2 c ° nsecutive Years? I think that is the 
f , gar Senators. He can run for reelection 
for 12 consecutive years, and then, after that, there 
must be a gap. 3 

MR ROMULO. Madam President, as a matter of 
formality, we have to get this motion for reconsidera 
t,on approved before be proposes his amendment 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT As m^,, . „ 

motion of Commissioner Monsod ' to "econs^ Z 
decision that was arrived at tv.,o . * er [ne 

their hand. (Several Members raised me^handT* ““ 

MembTZTedZeT^if^ — ‘heir hand. (Few 

The results show 32 votes in r, 
the motion is approved. vor and against; 

MR- MONSOD. In view of the nmnnr.d 
of Commissioner Rodrigo ... P amendment 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, that would be 
the maximum. He cannot serve for more than 12 con- 
secutive years. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify, after the lapse of 
one term, can he be eligible again to run for Vice- 
President? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, under the 
amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. After serving for 12 years, then he 
takes a rest: he can run again for Vice-President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
motion of Commissioner Monsod, please raise then- 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 33 votes in favor, none against and 
one abstention; the motion is approved. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


MR LAUREL. Madam President ivnn ™ • , THE PRESIDEN T. The Vice-President is recognized. 

ivii . . 3 yon pong pinagbo- 

tohan kanma, l agay na po mnyong nag-abstain ako. MR. PADILLA. With regard to the President, my vote 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


247 


was for no reelection. I understand that the majority 
vote was for no immediate reelection. I would like to 
ask for a reconsideration of that decision by qualifying 
the reelection to “immediate,” because I believe that 
the prohibition on reelection for the President should 
be permanent, or one might want to use the word 
“perpetual.” My reason is this: There was an occasion, 

I believe, in Mexico where the term of the President was 
six years without reelection. But to formally comply 
with that prohibition, the very strong political party 
that controlled Mexico, without practically any opposi- 
tion, worked for the incumbent President who has 
served six years to choose the man who will run for 
President, who was for all political and party purposes 
the same as the former President, with a view that 
as the Second President, he was his alter ego. The former 
President ran during the third election, and thus perpe- 
tuated the power that he has accumulated during his 
first term. 

I think the evil that we have been trying to prevent, 
and which I thought was already concurred in by the 
majority, not practically by all, is that we do not want 
the President to control the nation and govern the 
people for more than six years, with the idea that he 
should never return to the presidency even if he allows 
another, probably of his own party, to run in the mean- 
time because that will not cure the evil of reelection 
on the part of the President. In other words, Madam 
President, I want to eliminate that word “immediate. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, first, I think there 
should be a motion for reconsideration, and I would like 
to ask Commissioner Padilla if he voted with the major- 
ity, because only one who voted with the majority can 
present a motion for reconsideration. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, my early remark 
was that I voted for the President without reelection. 
But it turns out that what was approved was: “President 
— without immediate reelection.” I did not vote for that. 
I also mentioned that I was seeking for a reconsidera- 
tion. 

MR. RODRIGO. How is that? But, precisely, the 
Rules says that only one who voted with the majority 
can file a motion for reconsideration. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I voted with the 
majority and I can file that motion. 

MR. RODRIGO. Then I second the motion. This is 
just to follow the Rules. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. This morning - I was reviewing 
our transcripts — what I said was: “Is that clear, without 
immediate reelection? ” And then we got the vote and 
the results showed 32 votes in favor and 5 against. In 
other words, 32 Members were in favor of the phrase 
“without immediate reelection.” 


There being a motion to reconsider, let us vote on 
this motion, whether we shall reconsider the decision 
that was arrived at this morning on the Office of the 
President. 

As many as are in favor of the motion to reconsider, 
please raised their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 22 votes in favor and 5 against; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I think the pro- 
posed amendment of the Gentleman is already clear. He 
wants to remove the word “immediate,” and the result 
of that will be a perpetual and lifelong disqualification 
of the President. I would like to say a few words against 
that proposal. 

The philosophy behind disqualifying a President from 
immediate reelection is so he cannot use his power as 
President to help him in his reelection bid. But if it is 
not immediate reelection, if he is out of office for six 
years and he runs after six years not being President, 
he cannot use that power of the President to help him 
win his election bid. 

Commissioner Padilla mentioned the case of Mexico. 
But he himself said that Mexico had one party with 
practically no other party. While here, not only did we 
have two parties before, we are even dismantling the 
two-party system and establishing a multiparty system. 

I believe that that example in Mexico will not apply to 
the Philippines. And so, I oppose the amendment. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to speak in favor of the 
motion of Commissioner Padilla. I have read and studied 
that event and episode in Mexico where the President, 
using a “tuta,” circumvented the provision in the 
Constitution where he is not allowed a reelection. And 
the commentary was that the Mexican President circum- 
vented that provision and perpetuated the evil that is 
sought to be corrected because, in using a “tuta” or 
somebody that he could manipulate, he was using again 
the funds and facilities of the government in perpetuat- 
ing himself in power because he was just setting up that 
person to pave the way for his return. And he returned 
to office, as a matter of fact, after the term of that 

tuta expired. So, that was an evil that all historians of 
Mexico have isolated as an evil that should be cured. 
Therefore, I agree with Commissioner Padilla that we 
should eliminate this word “immediate,” because we are 
trying to prevent precisely the use of tremendous 
presidential powers to perpetuate the person in office. 


248 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Since the Commission subsequent- 
ly approved the motion for reconsideration, I was 
wondering whether in the voting that will follow, we 
would limit ourselves to the two choices that have been 
expressed so far. Actually, when I came here this 
morning, I was in favor of a four-year term plus re- 
election. But, of course, the four-year term did not 
prosper. But now that we have reconsidered, and 
after hearing the eloquence of Commissioners Ople and 
Abubakar when they talked about people’s power and 
since every other official has been given the privilege 
of being reelected, from the Vice-President down 
to the local officials, I was wondering if I could propose 
a term of six years, which we have approved, with one 
immediate reelection. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. I also would like to state briefly my 
stand in favor of the reconsidered motion; that is, a 
permanent ban for the President to run again. I think we 
all know that the presidency, especially here in the 
Philippines, has become in a sense very omnipotent, 
omniscient and omnipresent that even if we bar him to 
run for immediate reelection, like it was stated a while 
ago, we become so imaginative and clever as politicians. 
There is always a way for him to see to it that some- 
body in his own party would run; in a sense, he is the 
one still running. And then after the lapse of that 
particular period, he can again grasp the power for 
himself. 

I think what we are doing here is a reaction against 
what we saw in the last repressive regime in our country. 
And so, Madam President, I would vote for a permanent 
ban on the President. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I think there is a 
motion now on the floor by Commissioner Padilla. So, 

it is up to him whether he wants to accept the amend- 
ment or not. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 


amendment^C 1 haV6 ° ne word in su PP ort of 
not condnrt th om ^ 1 . lss i° ner Padilla. I believe we d 
pines for no nu publlc hearin 8s throughout the Phili 
hearings so that^° Se at ^ U \ We conducted those publ 

this hall we ma ^ our . deliberations of many issues 
this hall, we may be guided by the wish of our peopl 

°f !"? r ! 3d the reports on a H the public hearings^ v 
conducted throughout the land, the vast majority of 

of°sii%e°ars n0 Tht 0r ' beyond aler 

this wish of T t S Wh . y 1 beheve We have to res P e 
amendment of Commissioner Padilla POrt ^ pr ° pOS€ 

sidled ^ fte L p A rop M on d em £'j dent ’ * ' am 5,1,1 co 
with Commissioner Rigos I ?,. am ® ndment <°geth 
accept the proposed Tm md men.Tf r° r ’ d ° n 

Guingona. ament of Commission 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President. 

Commissioner Rigos has adverted to the so-called 
reactions of the people in the public hearings that we 
have conducted. I have gone over all the minutes of 
those public hearings furnished us. This particular issue 
was never brought to the people. The only question 
there was: Would there be no reelection? They said yes. 
But this particular issue about immediate reelection was 
never brought up; perhaps, in some, but it was always 
just six years with no reelection. But if the matter were 
to be explained to them — that there may be no imme- 
diate reelection — it would have been different. That 
was not brought to their attention. That is not reflective 
of the collective sentiment of the people. We cannot 
proceed on conjectures and surmises and present that to 
the floor as the collective will and sentiment of the 
people. 

Secondly, with respect to the situation in Mexico, 
may I know from the distinguished Gentleman what was 
the term of office of the President of Mexico? Was it 
four years or six years? 


MR. GUINGONA. Would that nrp' a - 
posal? that P re J ud ice my 

THE PRESIDENT. The Genti 
support and afterwards this would ’be"^ 111 ***% 
posal that will be voted upon. ,he second 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 
MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 


MR. PADILLA. It was six years without reelection. 

MR. REGALADO. It is said that the danger is, the 
incumbent President knowing that he is disqualified for 
immediate reelection may resort to the stratagem of 
having somebody, a pawn of his, elected during the 
intervening period and then later seek reelection. What 
do we have the 24 Senators for? What do we have the 
250 Congressmen for? Can these brilliant stalwarts of 
the legislature not see through that scheme and de- 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


249 


nounce it to the public? We have a new set of electo- 
rate. They are “conscienticized,” “civicized” and 
“politicized.” Is this not a very bad reflection on the 
people, that they are incapable of seeing through the 
stratagems and maneuvers of such a President? 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, may I speak briefly 
in support of Commissioner Padilla’s position? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. The problem we face here is the 
problem of the accumulation of power in the Office of 
the President. Furthermore, the problem is not the 
accumulation of power in one man, but the accumula- 
tion of power in the dominant party. The problem in 
Mexico is that the Partido Revolucionario Institutional 
is the dominant party manipulating the succession to 
the presidency in such a way that the Tapado, the person 
chosen by the President to go on to the next term, is a 
succession in the dominant political party itself. There 
are many parties in Mexico right now, but the one 
dominant party determines the country’s future and 
political direction. That is what we want to avoid, not 
just the accumulation of political power in the person 
of the President but in one dominant party. And I think 
this is a very important thing that we can stop now, 
by making sure that no reelection takes place. That is 
why I am supporting the position of Commissioner 
Padilla. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I would like to point out that 
when we try to disbar or disqualify people perpetually 
as a reaction to a past experience, we may also be 
closing the possibility for good people to be reelected 
when there is necessity for them in the future. If I 
remember right, de Gaulle was called from retirement in 
his old age. There may be cases in the future, we do not 
know, when the Philippines may need somebody to 
return like that. So, what I am trying to say is, let us not 
see only the negative but also the positive aspects of a 
proposition. 

Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I be recog* 
nized again? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I went to the public hearings in 
different provinces, and it is true many people were 
for the term of six years without reelection. Invariably, 


it was premised on the fact that the President has such 
tremendous powers that if he seeks immediate reelec- 
tion while he is the incumbent President, he can use 
those tremendous powers to have himself reelected. But 
what we are talking about here is not immediate reelec- 
tion. What we are talking about is: Can a President who 
has served his term run again after six years? During 
those six years, he was not the President of the country. 

I was about to mention de Gaulle. I might mention 
Ramon Magsaysay who was very much loved by our 
people. Suppose he did not die and he was elected for 
six years. During those years, he conducted himself like 
he did before he died, and the love of the people for 
him would be the same as when he died, but he can 
no longer run for immediate reelection. But six years 
later, the people might say: “Well, we want him again.” 
Should we deprive our people of that wish? 

Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote on the 
proposal of Commissioner Padilla? Will Vice-President 
Padilla please state his proposal? 

MR. PADILLA. The proposal. Madam President, is to 
eliminate the word “immediate,” so that the President 
shall have a six-year term without reelection. I under- 
stand that in the public hearings, the people were all in 
favor of that proposition. A few of us now wish to 
insert the word “immediate” which was never approved 
or considered by the people favorably. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the effect of this is, the 
President will serve for six years without reelection. 
That carries a total ban on his being elected again at any 
future time to the position of President. 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. It is a continuing 
prohibition for reelection. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just a minute please. Can we vote 
by ballot or just by hand? What is the pleasure of the 
proponent? 

MR. PADILLA. I submit it to the Chair, Madam 
President, whether it be by secret ballot or by raising 
of hands. 

THE PRESIDENT. We better do it by ballot. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The vote will be “yes” if ° ne * s ^ 
favor of Commissioner Padilla’s proposal or “no” if one 
is against it. 


250 


FRIDAY, |ULY 25, 1986 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:51 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 5:13 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Secretary-General is requested to count the 
votes. 


COUNTING OF BALLOTS 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Madam President, we 
have 42 ballots here now. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. Is somebody 
recording? 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 
Yes - /////-/////-/////-/////_/////_/ 

No - /////-/////-///// 

Abstention — / 


THE PRESIDENT. The results show 26 votes in 

President ^ abstention ; the proposal that the 

anv time is J e , a six_ y ear term without reelection al 
any time is approved. 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 
niz!d. E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Guingona is recog- 


MR GUINGONA. I beg the Chair’s indulgence to 
present my proposal. indulgence to 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

shall be™cte?for A a ' S ,hat the Presiden t 

one reelection iedtoteW aft may rUn for 

that no President may serve fn ^ hlS term ’ P rovi <ied 
tive years. V fVe for more than 12 consecu- 

May I please be given r, v » 
proposal, Madam President? minutes to explain my 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. I realize that 

perceptions regarding this issu e h I ^elt ?h fferent 
ceptions of my esteemed colleagues anrl tv p ? r ‘ 

various perceptions we may Ce, ttugHhe/may 
differ, anse from a sincere desire on thenar ofh!!! 
look after the best interest of OUr country aL our 
people. 


Looking back at the past, there are those who say 
that the President who may be reelected is disposed 
to abuse his office. There is the saying that the past is 
gone, it is only a dream. For us who have endured the 
14 years of Marcos dictatorship, perhaps it would be 
better to say, “The past is gone; it is only a nightmare.” 

I think, Madam President, we should not look back. 
We should instead look to the future. And what does 
the future hold for us? For one, we would have — 
thanks to the efforts of the Committee on Constitu- 
tional Commissions and Agencies — a truly independent 
COMELEC, with powers that could, if not insure, at 
least safeguard substantially the holding of free, orderly, 
and honest elections, particularly with the help and 
support of civic and cause-oriented groups. 

In the future, we will also have — thanks to the 
Committee on the Executive — a President who will find 
it most difficult to become a dictator because of the 
limitations on his or her powers, such as the power to 
declare martial law, the power to suspend the writ of 
habeas corpus and others. We will also have a stronger 
and more independent judiciary, thanks to the efforts 
of the Committee on the Judiciary. We would have a 
Supreme Court that will be mandated to review the 
so-called political questions. 

All these, I believe, would considerably discourage a 
President from engaging in politics to insure his 
reelection. 

At this point, perhaps, it might be mentioned that 
politics, if we stop to consider it seriously, is not after 
all a dirty word. The word is, of course, associated with 
political parties. 

Chief Justice Waite, speaking of political parties in 
the case of ex parte Curtis, 106 U.S., 371-375, has said, 
and I quote: “Political parties must almost necessarily 
exist under a republican form of government.” And 
ours, of course, is a republican government. 

We ourselves in the Commission recognize the useful- 
ness of political parties when we provide, for example, 
for proportional representation of political parties in 
our legislative department. Perhaps we should take note 
of the fact that political parties and politics are like a 
knife. In the hands of unscrupulous persons, it could 
well be an instrument of evil, but in the hands of skilled 
medical specialists, the knife could save many lives. 

There is every reason to believe that in the future, 
the political parties that we have at present: the UNIDO, 
the PDP-Laban, the Liberals, the Nacionalistas, the PNP 
which is represented by our four esteemed colleagues, 
would be instruments for good. And if one of their 
standard-bearers should become President, the political 
party would support him, not to insure his reelection 
but to carry out a declared platform and program of 
government which they will present to the people for 
approval. 

But most important of all, in looking to the future, 
we should take note with pride the political maturity of 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


251 


our people. The EDSA revolution may not have been re- 
enacted in other parts of the country. The people in 
Kabangkalan and the Cordilleras did not meet armored 
tanks; they did not offer roses and prayers to soldiers, 
but there is no doubt, Madam President, that' the over- 
whelming majority of our people shared the sentiments, 
the determination, the hope and the joy manifested at 
EDSA. Very few protested what happened there. 

Looking to the future, I say that I do not consider 
the events of February 1986 as freak events. I know 
that the political maturity manifested by the people will 
be repeated in the future, particularly in the electoral 
process. This, to my mind, is the biggest safeguard 
against the fear that a President may try to win a 
reelection by hook or by crook. I say that the people 
will not allow this. 

Let us give ourselves a chance to participate actively 
and decisively in the choice of the highest magistrate in 
our land. When a person seeks the presidency for the 
first time, we would have no way of ascertaining how 
good he will perform as President. But once he is Pres- 
ident, we would have a definite and reliable gauge of his 
performance and ability. I think we should not let the 
people be mere bystanders in the presidential race with 
nothing to do but to tell the President at the finish line, 
who has served not only satisfactorily but remarkably 
well like Presidents Quezon and Magsaysay: Good 

work,” and nothing more. We, our children and those 
who will come after us,should be given the opportunity 
and the pleasure of standing at the end of the line 
saying, “Good work; we are ready to reward you with a 
reelection.” 

It is this reward, my esteemed colleagues, that I know 
future Presidents, in their first term, would think of and 
would impel them to faithfully and conscientiously 
fulfill their duties, to do justice to every man and to 
concentrate themselves to the service of the nation. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just one question from the Chair. 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. This morning, the body voted for 
the proposition that the President will serve a six-year 
term without immediate reelection. 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to clear my doubt, this was 
reconsidered. 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. There was a vote taken on the 
proposal of Vice-President Padilla for a six-year term 
without reelection. 


MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. How will the Gentleman’s pro- 
posal be? 

MR. GUINGONA. As I manifested earlier before the 
suspension, since the Chair and the honorable Commis- 
sioners have allowed a reconsideration, then I was of the 
belief that we are not bound by the agreement as far as 
the term of six years is concerned. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Will the Commissioner allow me to sup- 
plement tlie Chair’s summary of the record on the 
subject this morning? If the Chairman of the Commit- 
tee on the Legislative will recall, I asked that an option 
be included in the set of questions, and that was a single 
reelection for the President. I was the only one who 
voted for my own proposal this morning. Was it this 
morning? Yes. Does the record confirm that? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, that was listed on the black- 
board, in fact. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I am happy now to have a colleague 
who shares this belief in a single reelection for the 
President. But I thought the facts should be recalled 
that we did vote on this already this morning and that I 
was the only one who voted for the reelection of the 
President. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. So, in fact, Madam President, that 
twice compounds our situation now. Firstly, the pro- 
posal just made has already been voted on and turned 
down. Secondly, the proposal actually should have been 
a motion for reconsideration before the proposal was 
made because the motion of Commissioner Padilla was 
not an omnibus motion for reconsideration. It was a 
specific motion to reconsider that one aspect of the 
question. 

So, Madam President, I believe that the question is 
already foreclosed. 


MR. GUINGONA. May I be allowed to react, Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. It is true, as the Acting Floor 
Leader says, that the particular proposal that I made has 
already been turned down this morning, but may 
respectfully observe, so was the proposal of our Vice- 
President which has been reconsidered. 


252 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


In connection with the reconsideration, if the body 
will recall, when Vice-President Padilla asked for a 
reconsideration and the reconsideration was allowed, I 
stood up and made a manifestation that I would make a 
proposal. As a matter of fact, I made it as an amend- 
ment to the Vice-President’s proposal. But it was 
rejected and the President said that we could take this 
up after we have acted on the proposal of our Vice- 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but the fact is, the proposal 
of Vice-President Padilla was approved by a majority 
vote of 26. So actually, the proposal of Commissioner 
Guingona would really be a reconsideration of the 
action taken by the body on Vice-President Padilla’s 
amendment. 

MR. GUINGONA. If that formality is required, 
Madam President, I would like to move for a recon- 
sideration, if I may. 

THE PRESIDENT. Was the Commissioner’s vote 
with the 26? 


MR. SARMIENTO. To settle the case once and for 
all, may I respectfully move that the matter be put to a 
vote. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. To facilitate the proceedings, it 
is my humble submission that the motion has been 
rendered moot and academic by the approval of that 
amendment by Commissioner Padilla. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We will just put to a vote this 
motion to reconsider. 

As many as are in favor of the motion of Commis- 
sioner Guingona to reconsider the action we have just 
taken this afternoon, please raise their hand. ( Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 10 votes in favor and 3 1 against; the 
motion is lost. 


MR. ROMULO. Did the Commissioner vote affirma- 
tively? 

fnr M r?™ GU i N G^N A. If we are talking about the motion 
nsi er ation, I voted in favor, Madam President. 

favor^of ^°» th e Commissioner vote in 
favor of the motion of Vice-President Padilla? 

should considw is^the vote f beCause ’ precisel y> what we 
r is tne vote for reconsideration. 

seeIfa P SHe NT ;. N °- the -J™ .ha. one who 
man° n has voted* 

Commissioner Padilla’s proposal “ faV ° r ° f 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, we are ready now 
to discuss party list, and for that purpose, may I ask 
that Commissioner Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

Do we need the Chairman and the members of the 
Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I would just like to 
revive for the moment a motion for amendment that 
was deferred earlier and then perhaps, if there are ques- 
tions regarding the party list system as a consequence of 
that amendment, we would be very happy to yield to 
any question. 

My proposed amendment is on page 1, line 29. 


because ^ wTs^dt' to^uT- President ’ 1 ab: 
earlier, that I could present mv Wh ? n 1 StC 
would have voted “yes” i n nrH y P ro P°sal; other 

reconsideration. I dM not k^VS. aWe to as 
the action of the Commission ; thou §ht all aloi 
for reconsideration wouM ope n th^n 0 ™ 8 ,he ' 
other than that which may have he. °?' to pr< 
Vice-President. V 3Ve been Emitted 


recognized? RM,ENT ° ^ -y , be 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner 

recognized. 


Sarmiento is 


THE PRESIDENT. Page 1, line 29. 

MR. MONSOD. The amendment would start after the 
word “elected.” 

May I read the proposed amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. The last line would then read: “shall 
be elected THROUGH A PARTY LIST SYSTEM OF 
REGISTERED NATIONAL, REGIONAL OR SEC- 
TORAL PARTIES OR ORGANIZATIONS.” 

May I repeat? Line 29, which presently reads: “shall 
be elected from the sectors and party list,” will now 
read: “shall be elected THROUGH A PARTY LIST 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


253 


SYSTEM OF REGISTERED NATIONAL, REGIONAL 
OR SECTORAL PARTIES OR ORGANIZATIONS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know the position of the 
Committee? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, before accepting 
the proposed amendment, the Committee would like to 
get some clarifications. 

When the proponent speaks of “OR SECTORAL 
PARTIES OR ORGANIZATIONS,” is he referring to 
any sector which the law may subsequently define? 

MR. MONSOD. My amendment is that the parties 
that will be listed may either be national, regional, or 
sectoral parties or organizations. That means that any 
sector or any party may register provided it meets the 
criteria of the Commission on Elections and the Consti- 
tution on prohibited organizations and the requirements 
for registration. In other words, the party list system 
that is being advocated by this amendment is a system 
that opens up the list to any regional, national or 
sectoral party. There are no limitations, except the 
general criteria and requirements for parties or organiza- 
tions as we have discussed during the interpellation and 
debate on the COMELEC, if the Chairman will recall. 

MR. DAVIDE. Another question for clarification, 
Madam President. 

The law itself which shall implement the party list 
system cannot exclude a sector, if the sector would wish 
to register under the party system. 


Do we understand the proponent correctly that this 
party list system is not necessarily synonymous to 
sectoral representation? 

MR. MONSOD. No, it is not necessarily synonymous, 
but it does include the right of sectoral parties or or- 
ganizations to register, but it is not exclusive to sectoral 
parties or organizations. 

MS. AQUINO. And that it does not likewise reserve 
any institutional seat for any sector? In other words, it 
only enables it to be a part of the party list if it has the 
capacity to do so, but it does not reserve any seat for 
the sectors. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, this is not a 
reserve seat system. . 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. May I be permitted to ask some ques- 
tions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. LERUM. Under the proposed amendment, are 
the sectors included? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. But it has to be a sectoral party or 
organization. 


MR. LERUM. Do I understand from this amendment 
that the representatives of the sector will be voted on by 
all the voters of the Philippines and not by voters 
coming from the sectors themselves? 


MR. MONSOD. No, it need not be a sectoral party 
or organization. It can be a political party; it can be a 
regional party; or it can be a sectoral party or organiza- 


tion. 

I also would like to manifest that my suggestion is 
that the detailed implementation of the party list 
system should be or may be an appended or " ia a n ? e 
this Constitution, so that the Commission on ec l 
may implement immediately or in the nex e ec ion 
after the ratification of the Constitution the par y is 
system for purposes of the legislature. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO The Committee would like to be 
clarified on this. 


MR. MONSOD. What the voters will vote on is the 
party, whether it is UNIDO, Christian Democrats, 
BAYAN, KMU or Federation of Free Farmers, not the 
individuals. When these parties register with the COM- 
ELEC, they would simultaneously submit a list of the 
people who would sit in case they win the required 
number of votes in the order in which they place them. 
Let us say that this Commission decides that of those 
50 seats allocated under the party list system, the 
maximum for any party is 10 seats. At the time of 
registration of the parties or organizations, each of them 
submits 10 names. Some may submit five, but they can 
submit up to 10 names who must meet the qualifica- 
tions of candidates under the Constitution and the 
Omnibus Election Code. If they win the required 
number of votes, let us say they win 400.000 votes, 
then they will have one seat. If they win 2 million votes, 
then they will have five seats. In the latter case, the 
party will nominate the first five in its list; and in case 


254 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


there is one seat, the party will nominate the number 
one on the list. 

But as far as the voters are concerned, they would be 
voting for party list or organizations, not for individuals. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, in view of the 
explanation, I am objecting to this amendment because 
it is possible that the labor sector will not be rep- 
resented considering that those who will vote are all the 
voters of the Philippines. In other words, the representa- 
tive of labor will be chosen by all the electors of the 
Philippines, and that is not correct. My contention is 
that the sectoral representative must be selected by his 
own constituents, and for that reason, I am objecting 
to this amendment. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, this is only for 
clarification. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Para sa marginalized sector, kung saan 
kaisa ang magbubukid, ang Sections 5 at 3 1 ang pinaka- 
mahalaga dito. Sinasabi namin na hindi na mahalaga 
kung ang porma ng pamahalaan ay presidential o par- 
liamentary; and pinakamahalaga ay ang “substance.” 

Sinasabi naming nasa amin ang people, pero wala sa 
amm ang power. At sinasabi nga ni Commissioner 
nacani, noong tayo ay nagsisimula pa lamang, 70 por- 

u ang mg ? duk ha at limang porsiyento lamang ang 
• t a arm S uri. Ngunit ang iniwan niyang tanong ay 

lima S>m ° ang may hawak ng political power? Ang 
hmang porsiyento lamang. 8 

^2??™ T!"’ ‘ t0 a " 8 P inakam ahalaga. Sa nakita 

maekaLrn™ , ay ganito: Sa bawat 200 > 000 tao W 
kabunano tay ° ng 1Sang le § lslatlve district, at ang 

naLresefbaT" ^ T- A " g ibig sabihin > ito 
NP PNP LP PDP i PO i ltlCal P3 u tieS tUlad ng UNIDO > 
rin itonl’n,^ ? 3n ’ at lba pa ’ ngunit P^ede 

nahan ang lehislatur mad ° mi ' 

dapat itong'ibigay 1 ^ h°' S& P3nig namin > 

ang katugunan § sa tinatawf & 1Zed sector sapagkat ito 
kapangyarihang pampulitika ^ m £. pe ? ple ’ s P ° Wer ° 
sabihin ay ganito: Mula doon g - lblg aman § naming 
na nagpapalawig ng feudal or p?.. 1Sang pobtical system 
tayo sa isang nagtU " g ° 

Ibig naming mula doon sa politics P of Y dem ° crac y- 
pumunta tayo sa politics of issue ay 

sabihin? Kaming marginalized sector nf 'k 8 naming 
ang pinagpipilian lang namin sa two-narw bumoboto > 
lesser evil. Ngunit pag pumasok na kamf' Tt ^ ang 
Section 5 ang pinakamahalaga sa amin Ano /f°’ , ang 
nami „ ay ang ka.angian n g ana.n 
bobotohan namin ay ang issue at ana DlatfWm g 

dinadala at hindi na iyang lesser evil o ana tinat™ 1118 
nating “personality.” Para sa amin ito ay napakaha^ 8 


Kung sina Commissioners de Castro at Uka ay naki- 
usap sa inyo, ano ba iyong isa pa para sa isang kaibigan? 

Ang nakikiusap sa inyong harapan, kagalanggalang 
kong mga kasama, ay ang marginalized sector. Alam 
ba ninyong kapag ito’y naipasok, hindi na natin kaila- 
ngang mangampanya upang mapagtibay itong Saligang 
Batas? Ang sasabihin ng marginalized sector ay 
ganito: “Ang Saligang Batas na ginawa ngCon-Com ay 
amin sapagkat ito ay nagbibigay ng kapangyarihang 
pampulitika at pangkabuhayan sa amin. Ito ay nag- 
bibigay ng soberiniya sa amin.” Kaya hindi na natin 
kailangan pang mangampanya. 

Ito lang ang hinihingi namin sa inyo. Kung kinaka- 
ilangang manikluhod ang marginalized sector na aking 
kinakatawan, gagawin ko sa inyo maipasa lamang ito 
sapagkat ito ang kabuuan ng tinatawag nating people’s 
power. Sabi nga sa Lukas 6:20, “Hindi lahat ng tumata- 
wag sa Akin ng Panginoon ay makararating sa kaharian 
ng Ama.” Sa mga naniniwala sa people’s power, ang 
sinasabi nila: “Ang makararating sa kaharian ng Ama ay 
ang gumagawa ayon sa kalooban ng Ama.” Iyong doer. 
Ang ibig sabihin nito ay magkakaroon ng laman, dugo at 
buhay ang people’s power kapag ito ay ipinasok natin. 
Kapag inilagay natin ang party list, papasukin ng 
political parties. Mangingibabaw at kakainin din niyan 
hanggang mawala ang sektor. 

Bibigyan ko kayo ng isang halimbawa. Paano mana- 
nalo ang urban poor na pinamumunuan ni Ka Eddie 
Guazon? May panalo ba iyan? Paano mananalo ang 
kapalit ni Macling Dulag, tulad ni Ka Mario sa tribal 
Filipinos? Pero kung ilalaan natin ito, ang people’s 
power ay magkakaroon ng dugo, laman at buhay. 
Uulitin ko, kung si Commissioner de Castro at si Com- 
missioner Uka ay inyong pinagbigyan, pagbigyan din 
ninyo ako at ang marginalized sector, na ang kapang- 
yarihang ito ay huwag na nating ibigay pa sa political 
parties. Ibigay na natin ito sa marginalized sector. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, may I be 
recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is 
recognized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Would Honorable Monsod yield 
to an amendment to his amendment? I would like to 
propose the following amendment, also for lines 28 to 
29: THIRTY PERCENT OF THE SEATS SHALL BE 
ALLOCATED EQUALLY BETWEEN THE SECTORS 
AND THE PARTY LIST OF REGISTERED PARTIES 
OR ORGANIZATIONS. May I explain why I am 
making this amendment to his amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. VILLACORTA. We already have an Upper 
House which will likely be dominated by charismatic 
nationally known political figures. We have allocated 80 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


255 


percent of the Lower House for district representatives 
who will most likely win on the basis of economic and 
political power. We are purportedly allowing 20 percent 
of the Lower House seats to be allocated to representa- 
tives of parties and organizations who are not traditional 
politicians. And yet, because we subject the sectoral 
candidates to the rough-and-tumble of party politics 
and pit them against veteran politicians, the framers 
of the Constitution are actually predetermining their 
political massacre. 

Madam President, the party list system in the form 
that it is being proposed will only exacerbate the 
frustrations of the marginalized sectors. In this our 
reborn democracy, I think we should turn the political 
revolution of February into a veritable social revolution 
by enshrining people’s power in the legislature. A joint 
study of the UP School of Economics, the UP Popula- 
tion Institute and the Development Academy of the 
Philippines projects that: 

If nothing is done to change the current development 
pattern, there are bound to be, in the year 2000, over 3 
million poverty-stricken households than there are today. 

This means an addition of over 15 million impover- 
ished Filipinos and an average yearly addition of 600,000 
persons to the poor sector of the population. 

Yesterday’s issue of the Daily Inquirer reported that 
the Food and Nutrition Research Institute found out 
that 12 million Filipinos can barely afford a decent 
meal. I heard from some Commissioners just now that 
this is an emotional appeal. I do not think so. 

For too long since our people attained a semblance of 
self-government at the start of this century, our legis 
lators were elected based on their promise that they 
would represent the little people of our land. With the 
exception of a few patriotic legislators, some of w 10 m 
are in our Commission today, members of the National 
Assemblies, the Congresses, and the Batasans of the past 
did not devote themselves enough to the alleviation o 
the dismal condition of our country’s poor and lower 
classes. 

The authors of the book, Bureaucracy and the Poor 
could not have described the situation more aptly, an 
I quote: 

For most of human history the plight of the poor has 
been easily excluded from the consciousness of those wit i 
the power to act. Inaction was justified by elaborate tieo 
ries that the poor were by nature inferior or happy in t leir 
condition or both. Most government contact with the poor 
has been limited to collecting their taxes, insuring a 
modicum of law and order, and providing some limited 
welfare service. 

These realities convince us that there are no spokes 
men and legislators who can best repiesent the poor, te 
underprivileged, the marginalized than those coming 
from within their ranks. 


So, may I ask Commissioner Monsod if he would 
accept this amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. May I ask some questions on the 
amendment before I answer? Would the honorable 
Commissioner yield? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Gladly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod may 
proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. Would the Commissioner tell us 
which sectors he considers marginalized and should 
be given, in effect, the concept of reserve seats? In 
other words, we would exclude everybody else who 
would not belong to these sectors. 

MR. VILLACORTA. This can be a subject of dis- 
cussion now, but offhand, I can think of the following 
classification: (1) rural and urban workers; (2) farmers 
and fishermen; (3) cultural communities; (4) women; 
(5) youth; and (6) professionals, including artists and 
health workers. 

MR. MONSOD. What about the professionals? 

MR. TADEO. Puwede bang tumulong ako para 
makita natin kung alin ang tinutukoy kong mar- 
ginalized sector? Baka makatulong ako kay Commis- 
sioner Villacorta. 

MR. MONSOD. Sige po. The Commissioner may go 
ahead. 

MR. TADEO. In deciding which sectors should be 
represented, the criteria should adhere to the principle 
of social justice and popular representation. On this 
basis, the criteria have to include: 

1 . The number of people belonging to the sector; 

2. The extent of “marginalization,” exploitation and 
deprivation of social and economic rights suffered by 
the sector; 

3. The absence of representation in the government, 
particularly in the legislature, through the years; 

4. The sector s decisive role in production and in 
bringing about the basic social services needed by the 
people. 

Narito po iyong marginalized sectors: 

(1.) Peasants — 34 million; (2.) labor sector — 
12.235 million; (3.) urban poor — 5 million; (4.) teachers 
— 500,000; (5.) health workers and other professional 
artists and cultural workers - 465,966; (6.) youth - 
14.6 million; (7.) women - 24 million or 45 percent of 
the population, and (8.) the indigenous communities. At 
puwede nating dagdagan para isama natin ang ating 
sarili. Other sectors could be added as may be provided 
by law. 


256 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, my question is that 
if I add up the figures cited by Commissioner Tadeo, they 
total about 80 million. There are, in effect, people who 
belong to several sectors. First of all, these criteria could 
apply to more sectors than those cited. Secondly, how 
do we determine who vote within each sector? Suppose 
it is a woman who is 18 years old and who belongs 
to the rural poor, does she vote as a woman, as a youth, 
or as a rural poor, or does she vote for all three? In 
effect, if she votes for all three, she has four votes — one 
for legislative district, one for the woman sector rep- 
resentative, one for the peasant poor representative, one 
for the youth representative. How do we solve this 
problem in operational terms? 

MR. TADEO. Iyong sinasabi ni Commissioner 
Monsod ay lagpas sa bilang. Hindi ko pa nga naisama 
rito iyong indigenous communities - 9 to 12 million. 
Kapag sinabi nating 45 percent ang women, kasama rito 
ang peasant women; kapag sinabi naman nating youth, 
anak ito ng^ magsasaka; kapag sinabi naman nating 
indigenous,” kasama rito ang tribal communities. Hindi 
nangangahulugang magiging “double” ang ating entry. 
Ang kabuuang bilang pa rin ng mamamayan ay 55 
million. 


R. MONSOD. Papaano po nating malalaman kunj 
smo ang boboto para sa representative ng women’ 

sector, ahat ng babae, hindi po ba? Paano po iyoni 
rural poor? 

TADE °- An ® mec hanics po ay isinumite namir 

,nama,T 1S T ner Villacorta - Nandoon na po kung anc 
ang mga dapat na gawin. 

thaf R we M suKe?f D rf Madam President > 1 "ant to sal 

because we warn h Z proposed ‘he party list systen 
anted to open up the political system to ; 

thr ° U t h 3 multipart y system But wi 
also wanted to avoid the problems of mechanics am 

operation the implementation of a concept that ha 

o”vo, S es ' ZTT ° f ' Classif “ a «°" -d ofdouS 
would like very much fZ ° penm S up the system, and w 
Why one of the ways to do T '° be * here - Tha ‘ 1 
number of representative *5 * * S t0 pUt . a ceihn 8 on th ' 
can sit within the 50 alio any S ^ ng ^ e P art y t* 13 
system. This way we i t 3 ' 6 Under the P art V lis 
groups, or maybe regional^™* U? and 6nable sectora 
among the fifty. When w e tafk ahnVr 6a ™ thdr seat 
are two parties, then we are on ° Ut imitln 8 lta lf ther< 
of 30 seats. We are amen^r 8 ^ to . the eXten 
minimum percentage of votes Oi modlflcatlons in th< 
body who has two-and-a-half nercLT?!? iS that any 
seat. There are about 20 million who ?L\ h fJ 0tes getS! 
the last elections. Two-and-a-half C& * tbeir VOtes 11 
500,000 votes. Anybody who has T *.° uld meai 
500,000 votes nationwide, deserves a seal ‘in “ma” 
sembly. If "e bring that down to two percent we an 


talking about 400,000 votes. The average vote per 
family is three. So, here we are talking about 134,000 
families. We believe that there are many sectors who will 
be able to get seats in the Assembly because many of 
them have memberships of over 10,000. In effect, that 
is the operational implication of our proposal. What we 
are trying to avoid is this selection of sectors, the 
reserve seat system. We believe that it is our job to 
open up the system and that we should not have within 
that system a reserve seat. We think that people should 
organize, should work hard, and should earn their seats 
within that system. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, may I reply 
to the statement of Commissioner Monsod? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. First of all, I question the 
assumption that sectoral candidates will have an equal 
chance of winning a party list election when they com- 
pete with the politicians who belong to the traditional 
political parties. I question this assumption because, 
even if the sectoral groups were forced to organize, their 
machineries would not be as well-oiled or as well-funded 
as those of the traditional political parties. Chances are, 
in such a party list election, that does not give priority 
to these sectors; the traditional politicians will prevail 
over the sectoral candidates. Secondly, I still cannot 
understand why Commissioner Monsod, while he agrees 
in principle in giving a bigger voice to the marginalized 
sectors, would be against the idea of reserve seats. I 
think this manner of providing guaranteed seats to the 
basic marginalized sectors would be our way of 
protecting the interests of those groups which have 
much less in life. Thirdly, with respect to the Commis- 
sioner’s question of what would be the mechanics for 
electing the sectoral representatives, we can reply that 
there .are many ways. We can either leave the question 
to the National Assembly to decide, or we can append 
these mechanics to the Constitution as an ordinance. 
But I think if we are agreed in principle that we should 
give significant representation to these sectors, then 
we must help each other in coming up with these 
mechanics rather than straightaway shelving the whole 
idea just because we find it difficult to define the 
procedures. 

For one, I can think of the party list as an instrument 
for electing sectoral representatives. I would be in favor 
of the party list system on condition that this system 
be only for the sectoral candidates. If we allow the 
politicians to run under this system, then we are giving 
much more to those who already have power and 
resources. We have, in a way, already allocated seats to 
the powerful by having an Upper House. Then, again, 
would it not likewise be a form of allocating reserve 
seats to the politicians to say that 80 percent of the 
Lower House will be composed of district representa- 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


257 


tives? By making this stipulation, we are reserving 
seats for politicians. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the candidacy 
for the 198 seats is not limited to political parties. My 
question is this: Are we going to classify for example 
Christian Democrats and Social Democrats as political 
parties? Can they run under the party list concept or 
must they be under the district legislation side of it 
only? 

MR. VILLACORTA. In reply to that query, I think 
these parties that the Commissioner mentioned can 
field candidates for the Senate as well as for the House 
of Representatives. Likewise, they can also field sectoral 
candidates for the 20 percent or 30 percent, whichever 
is adopted, of the seats that we are allocating under the 
party list system. 

MR. MONSOD. In other words, the Christian Demo- 
crats can field district candidates and can also parti- 
cipate in the party list system? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Why not? When they come to 
the party list system, they will be fielding only sectoral 
candidates. 

MR. MONSOD. May I be clarified on that? Can 
UNIDO participate in the party list system? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, why not? For as long as 
they field candidates who come from the different 
marginalized sectors that we shall designate in this 
Constitution. 

MR. MONSOD. Suppose Senator Tanada wants to 
run under BAY AN group and says that he represents 
the farmers, would he qualify? 

MR. VILLACORTA. No, Senator Tanada would not 
qualify. 

MR. MONSOD. But UNIDO can field candidates under 
the party list system and say Juan de la Cruz is a farmer. 
Who would pass on whether he is a farmer or not? 

MR. TADEO. Kay Commissioner Monsod, gusto ko 
lamang linawin ito. Political parties, particularly minori- 
ty political parties, are not prohibited to participate in 
the party list election if they can prove that they are 
also organized along sectoral lines. 

MR. MONSOD. What the Commissioner is saying is 
that all political parties can participate because it is 
precisely the contention ot political parties that they 
represent the broad base of citizens and that all sectors 
are represented in them. Would the Commissioner 
agree? 


MR. TADEO. Ang punto lamang namin, pag pinaya- 
gan mo ang UNIDO na isang political party, it will 
dominate the party list at mawawalang saysay din iyong 
sector. Lalamunin mismo ng political parties ang party 
list system. Gusto ko lamang bigyan ng diin ang “re- 
serve.” Hindi ito reserve seat sa marginalized sectors. 
Kung titingnan natin itong 1 98 seats, reserved din ito sa 
political parties. 

MR. MONSOD. Hindi po reserved iyon kasi anybody 
can run there. But my question to Commissioner 
Villacorta and probably also to Commissioner Tadeo is 
that under this sytem, would UNIDO be banned from 
running under the party list system? 

MR. VILLACORTA. No, as I said, UNIDO may field 
sectoral candidates. On that condition alone, UNIDO 
may be allowed to register for the party list system. 

MR. MONSOD. May I inquire from Commissioner 
Tadeo if he shares that answer? 

MR. TADEO. The same. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Puwede po ang UNIDO, pero sa 
sectoral lines. 

MR. MONSOD. Sino po ang magsasabi kung iyong 
kandidato ng UNIDO ay hindi talagang labor leader or 
isang laborer? Halimbawa, abogado ito. 

MR. TADEO. Iyong mechanics. 

MR. MONSOD. Hindi po mechanics iyon because we 
are trying to solve an inherent problem of sectoral rep- 
resentation. My question is: Suppose UNIDO fields a 
labor leader, would he qualify? 

MR. TADEO. The COMELEC may look into the 
truth of whether or not a political party is really or- 
ganized along a specific sectoral line. If such is verified 
or confirmed, the political party may submit a list of 
individuals who are actually members of such sectors. 
The lists are to be published to give individuals or 
organizations belonging to such sector the chance to 
present evidence contradicting claims of membership in 
the said sector or to question the claims of the existence 
of such sectoral organizations or parties. This proceed- 
ing shall be conducted by the COMELEC and shall be 
summarily in character. In other words, COMELEC 
decisions on this matter are final and unappealable. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, just a very 
brief answer. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just a minute, there are already 
three Gentlemen standing on the floor. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


258 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair will recognize first 
Commissioner Monsod so that we can settle the dispute. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe that the 
amendment I submitted started this discussion. 

In view of the answers of Commissioners Villacorta 
and Tadeo that as a general rule, UNIDO can participate 
in the party list system under their concept, do they 
have any objection to my amendment which says: 
THRU A PARTY LIST SYSTEM OF REGISTERED 
NATIONAL, REGIONAL OR SECTORAL PARTIES 
OR ORGANIZATIONS? 


THE PRESIDENT. What is the answer of Commis- 
sioner Villacorta? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, first, Com- 
missioner Monsod has a question which I have not yet 
answered. He asked who would determine whether or 
not the candidates who claimed to represent different 
sectors were bona fide members of those sectors or not. 
I think the electorate will decide on that. 

Secondly, I do not quite understand the meaning of 
his question. 

Is the Commissioner saying that he is incorporating 
the element of sectoral representation as the sole 
rationale for his party list system? 


Tuoniipu^^^ amen dment merely says that it is 

??D?n x?.^,.! ARTY LIST SYSTEM OF REGIS- 

PiPTicc^ T i ( i NAL ’ REGIONAL or sectoral 
PARTIES OR ORGANIZATIONS. 

nhi^ct is: J Does the Honorable Commissioner 

object to this amendment? 


MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, because it does not 
guarantee that the seats reserved for the party list rep- 
resentatives will be reserved for the sectors. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will call on others who may 

0 q rr Co ~ ■ 

Commissioner Monsod? ° P aVe “ question t0 


if the C ° m 


MR. MONSOD. Yes. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may procee 

MR. OPLE. It appears that the Commission 
historical reasons, suffers from a larV “ l J® slon > 
about the party list system. Hupp^ f th ° a 
really reinventing the wheel here when we incoreor 
a party list system as among the modes of select 
representatives of the people. SiTe CommMo 
Monsod, for the reason that he has taken a keen inte* 
in electoral science, if we might call it that way, see 


to be the sole authority on the party list system as far 
as we can see this in the Commission, can he share with 
the Members of the Commission his knowledge of how 
the party list system works in its country of origin like 
Germany and Switzerland? As a general principle, does 
it contemplate making up through a party list for the 
general weakness of what Commissioner Villacorta calls 
the “marginalized” sectors, so that the preponderance 
of traditional parties is overcome and that the less- 
privileged sectors in society could have their own access 
to Congress? 

In the case of Germany, I understand that the Greens, 
who otherwise would understand their chance at the 
beginning, had gotten there through a party list system. 

Will Commissioner Monsod oblige by answering this 
question? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I do not presume 
to be an expert on the party list system. We are using 
the party list system in a generic sense. However, I 
believe Commissioner Ople himself is an expert on this. 
It is true that the party list system can specify those 
who may sit in it. In fact, if 1 remember right, in the 
case of Belgium, it was quite detailed. But if we take a 
look at that list, it seems that almost 90 or over 90 per- 
cent of the country’s population would be qualified to 
be in the party list system because one of the general 
qualifications is that the member must be a holder of a 
secondary degree. So, what I am saying is that the party 
list system can be designed in order to allow for an 
opening up of the system. My reservation with respect 
to what I would call a reserve seat system where we au- 
tomatically exclude some sectors is the difficulty to 
make it operational. At this point in time in our country, 
this is already a novel idea as it is. I believe that all of us 
really are not yet experts on this and we are still learn- 
ing through the process. Thus, for us to introduce 
complications at this time might bring difficulty in 
implementation. 

We can put a cap on the number of seats that a party 
or organization can have in the system consistent with 
our objective of opening it up. But to put the complica- 
tion by saying, for instance, that UNIDO can register 
provided that 10 or 15 of its candidates must be 
farmers, laborers, urban poor and so on, I think would 
be very difficult to implement. 

MR. OPLE. So, Commissioner Monsod grants that the 
basic principle for a party list system is that it is a 
countervailing means for the weaker segments of our 
society, if they want to seek seats in the legislature, to 
overcome the preponderant advantages of the more 
entrenched and well-established political parties, but 
he is concerned that the mechanics might be inadequate 
at this time. 

MR. MONSOD. Not only that; talking about labor, 
for example - I think Commissioner Tadeo said there 
are 10 to 12 million laborers and I understand that 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


259 


organized labor is about 4.8 million or 4.5 million — if 
the laborers get together, they can have seats. With 4 
million votes, they would have 10 seats under the party 
list system. 

MR. OPLE. So, the Commissioner would favor a 
party list system that is open to all and would not agree 
to a party list system which seeks to accommodate, in 
particular, the so-called sectoral groups that are predo- 
minantly workers and peasants? 

MR. MONSOD. If one puts a ceiling on the number 
that each party can put within the 50, and I am assum- 
ing that maybe there are just two major parties or three 
at the most, then it is already a form of opening it up 
for other groups to come in. All we are asking is that 
they produce 400,000 votes nationwide. The whole 
purpose of the system is precisely to give room for those 
who have a national constituency who may never be 
able to win a seat on a legislative district basis. But they 
must have a constituency of at least 400,000 in order 
to claim a voice in the National Assembly. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I want to thank Com- 
missioner Monsod for his answers. I think I would like 
to wait for the proposed amendments of Commissioner 
Villacorta before I ask more important questions on this 
point. 

Thank you very much. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. TADEO. Madam President , may I ask for a 
suspension of the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 6:20 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 7:07 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, can we defer the 
consideration of this motion while we arc thinking over 
these problems? 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the Commissioner is asking 
that his motion before the body be considered some 
other time? 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, I move that we defer it because 
I believe that there are many other counterproposals 
and issues that have to be discussed. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment of Commissioner 
Monsod is deferred for tomorrow’s session. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader may 
proceed. 

MR. ROMULO. I move that we adjourn until to- 
morrow. Madam President, at what time? 

THE PRESIDENT. At nine-thirty. 

MR. ROMULO. I thought there was a suggestion that 
we meet at nine o’clock up to one o’clock and then 
adjourn on Saturdays. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Chairman of the 
Steering Committee say to this? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, that was last 
week when we were on target. But as of now we are 
already three days behind the schedule. So, I would pro- 
pose that we meet tomorrow at nine-thirty in the 
morning up to twelve o’clock noon, then we have our 
lunch and resume at two o’clock or at two-thirty in the 
afternoon so that we can adjourn early after finishing 
this issue tomorrow. 

We would also like to defer the sponsorship on the 
Article on the Executive for Monday, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair requests the body to 
work tomorrow in order to finish the report of the 
Committee on the Legislative. So we have the under- 
standing that we will devote time tomorrow for the 
remaining issues on the Article on the Legislative and 
that we will work until we finish it. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. 1 would like to support the proposal 
to defer but I do not know if this will complicate 
matters. We could take another committee report 
tomorrow like the Articles on Accountability of Public 
Officers and on the Executive, and if it is possible we 
can discuss the Article on the Legislative on Monday in - 
stead of trying to finish it this weekend. This will give 
us moie time to discuss the mechanics. Without pre 
judice to the other committees, if we could do that i 


260 


FRIDAY, JULY 25, 1986 


could be very helpful, particularly to myself, because I 
was asked by the Commission to go to Makati for a 
postponed public hearing tomorrow. I would like to 
participate in this issue of sectoral representation but I 
will not be here tomorrow. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Chairman of the 
Steering Committee say? 

MR. BENGZON. The Chairman of the Committee on 
Social Justice has requested the Steering Committee to 
schedule the consideration of the Article on Social 
Justice on the first or second week of August. The 
Steering Committee would have gladly accommodated 
that but now we are already late. Commissioner Nieva 
has spoken to Commissioner Nolledo of the Committee 
on Local Governments and to Commissioner Monsod of 
the Committee on Accountability of Public Officers if 
they could postpone their reports so that we could take 
up the Article on the Executive immediately after the 
Article on the Legislative, followed by the Declaration 
of Principles, then the Committee Report on Social 
Justice. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but what is the Commis- 
sioner s comment on the request of Commissioner 
Gascon? 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. The only problem is that we will be 
cutting again the sponsorship of the Article on the 
Executive. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee on Accountability of 
Public Officers is prepared to sponsor its report tomor- 
row. It is a shorter Article so maybe we can get it out of 
our way so that we can resume the discussion on the 
Article on the Legislative on Monday. 

MR. BENGZON. Does the Commissioner think we 
can finish the Article on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers on Second Reading tomorrow? 

MR. MONSOD. Hopefully. 


MR. BENGZON. Instead of considering the Article 
on Accountability of Public Officers, we could start 
with the sponsorship of the Article on the Executive 
because Commissioner Sumulong is ready. 


THE PRESIDENT. So, we will have the Committee 
Report on the Article on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers and the continuation of the party list system and 
the Article on the Legislative on Monday. 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, we should start with the Artie 
on the Executive, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is all right. 

MR. GASCON. So, w e will discuss the Article on tl 
Legislative on Monday and finish it by then. 


MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at ninety-thirty in the morning. 

It was 7:13 p.m. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


261 


R.C.C. IMO. 40 
Saturday, July 26, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:44 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Lorenzo M. Sumulong. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


amongst us, and I, for one, welcome this clash of ideas 
if done openly rather than clandestinely, for letting 
off steam is a good safety valve to prevent violent 
explosions. 

Heavenly Father, we thank Thee for keeping us 
united despite diversification in our views every now 
and then. Pray, O Lord, that whenever we agree to dis- 
agree, we take it as a sign of the restoration of our 
freedom of expression — for as Voltaire said, “I do not 
agree with a word of what you say, but I will fight to 
the death your right to say it.” So that when we agree 
to disagree, we are not weakening our unity, but rather 
we are strengthening the unity in our diversity. 

Heavenly Father, we beseech Your continued guid- 
ance and assistance. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 


PRAYER 

MR. SUMULONG. Heavenly Father, everytime we 
come here to perform the task assigned to us of writing 
a new Constitution for our people, we begin with a 
prayer. We decided to do this because the task en- 
trusted to us is a difficult and most exacting task. The 
document we are framing is not intended to meet and 
provide solutions to passing problems and momentary 
difficulties. We are here to frame a fundamental law that 
our people can use not just for a year, not just for a 
decade, not just for a generation, but for all times. 

To produce such a charter for our people, Heavenly 
Father, we need Your help. Pour unto us the power of 
the Holy Spirit so that we may have the strength, the 
perseverance, and the determination to wash away pride 
or prejudice from our hearts and minds so that the light 
of truth and reason and unalloyed love of country, 
rather than the darkness of preconceived ideas and 
theories, will be the controlling factors to guide us in the 
discharge of the grave responsibility that has been 
placed on our shoulders. 

Heavenly Father, we are mortals; we are human 
beings with feet of clay; we have our own views and our 
own philosophies, depending on the heredity and 
environment which have influenced our lives. Thus, we 
oftentimes see the same subject in different lights. It is 
unavoidable that there should be a clash of ideas 


THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present* 

Alonto Present* 

Aquino Present* 

Azcuna Absent 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

F° z Present* 

Garcia Present* 

Gascon Absent 

Guingona Present 

J ani ' r Present 

Laurel Present* 

Ler um Present* 

Maambong . . . Present 

Monsod Present 


Natividad Present* 

Nieva Present 

Nolledo Present 

Opl e Present* 

P a dilla Present 

Quesada Present* 

^ ama Present 

Regalado Present 

Reyes de los . . . Present 

^g° s Present 

Rodrigo Present 

Romulo Present 

Rosales Absent 

Sarmiento Present 

Suarez Absent 

Sumulong Present 

Tadeo Present 

Tan Present 

Tingson Present 

Trefias Present 

Uka Present* 

Villacorta Present 

Villegas Present 


*Appeared after the roll call 


262 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 32 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 


(Communication No. 332 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Teofilo B. Cruzat of Poblacion, Cata- 
nauan, Quezon, proposing a provision in the new Consti- 
tution requiring all candidates for elective positions to 
secure clearances before filing their certificates of 
candidacy. 

(Communication No. 333 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Communication from Mr. Ignacio C. Badeo, a sidewalk 
vendor of 864 R. Papa St., Sampaloc, Manila, proposing 
that Philippine Presidents be awarded an end-term 
bonus of P10 million if they have rendered an untar- 
nished 6-year term. 

(Communication No. 334 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 


RESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


Communication from Mr. Prudencio S. Serrano of 784 
Don M. Marcos Avenue, Mati, Davao Oriental, submit- 
ting various proposals for the consideration of the 
Constitutional Commission. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 


The Secre tary-General read the following Com- 
Teferences^’ ^ President makin S the corresponding 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Mr Manuel A. Sanico of 4107 Corregidor- 
Pi ogo, Makati, Metro Manila, proposing the adoption of 
Filipino as our national language. 

(C— cation No. 330 - Constitutional Commission 
To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Manuel A. Sanico of dim r 
Pitogo. Makati, Metro Manila nmol Corregidof 
a "Veterans Affairs Commission 8 Crea “° n °' 

(Communieation No. 331 - Constitutional Commission 
To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Communication from Mr. Eufemio C. Salera Dis 
Commander, Veterans Federation of the Philipp 
Zamboanga del Sur Chapter, Pagadian City, submi 
a consolidated report of veterans’ petitions. 


(Communication No. 335 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


Communication from Nur-Hussein A. Ututalum, A1 
Hadj, Speaker, Batasang Pampook, Autonomous Region 
IX, Zamboanga City, transmitting, for consideration by 
the Constitutional Commission of 1986, Resolution 
No. 117, entitled: RESOLUTION RESPECTFULLY 
REQUESTING THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMIS- 
SION TO GRANT POLITICAL RIGHT OF SUF- 
FRAGE TO ILLITERATES. 

(Communication No. 336 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Communication from Mr. Ambrosio C. Sumalbag, Chair- 
man, LAYA Community, Inc. of 740 CBCP Gen. Luna 
St., Intramuros, Manila, proposing a provision in the 
Bill of Rights that prisoners who have lawfully and fully 
served their sentence will enjoy full restoration of their 
civil rights. 

(Communication No. 337 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


263 


Communication from the National Secretariat of Social 
Action (NASSA), Justice and Peace of the Catholic 
Bishops’ Conference of the Philippines, proposing the 
abrogation of the Military Bases Agreement between the 
United States and the Philippines, genuine land reform, 
and rights of indigenous people, among others. 

(Communication No. 338 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Position paper submitted by Mr. Arturo M. Erasmo of 
Purok Sweet Rose, Dumagok Fishing Village, Pagadian 
City, recommending the adoption of measures that will 
reduce the incidence of poverty in urban and rural areas 
and promote further utilization of the country’s human 
and natural resources, among others. 

(Communication No. 339 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Position paper submitted by Promotion of Church 
People’s Right, Zamboanga del Sur Chapter, Pagadian 
City, signed by thirty-two (32) people, suggesting 
among others the removal of U.S. bases in the Philip- 
pines, institution of a genuine land reform program, 
nationalization and Filipinization of existing industries, 
and reexamination of the Tripoli Agreement. 

(Communication No. 340 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Crescencio A. Yaco, Chairman, Center 
for Solidarity Tourism, c/o PR Desk, Sociology Depart- 
ment, Asian Social Institute, 1518 Leon Guinto Street, 
Malate, Manila, submitting a resolution urging the 
Constitutional Commission to incorporate in the Consti- 
tution provisions on the enjoyment of travel and tour- 
ism and state support for the development and 
promotion of indigenous tourism programs. 

(Communication No. 341 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Messrs. Jerry B. Beo, Provincial Chairman, 
League of Filipino Students, and Teofilo Isorena, Jr., 
Provincial Chairman, Kabataan Pam sa Demokrasya at 
Nasyonalismo, expressing strong objection to the 
following proposals of the so-called “cause-oriented” 
group: (1) retention of the U.S. military bases or their 
transfer to Catanduanes, (2) retention of the capital 
punishment, and (3) annual psychiatric examinations 
for all government and military men. 

(Communication No. 342 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1 986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF C.R. NO. 1 7 
(Article on Accountability of Public Officers) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA I move that we consider Committee 
Report No. 17 as reported out by the Committee on 
Accountability of Public Officers. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Committee Report No. 17 is now in 
order. With the permission of the body, the Secretary- 
General will read only the title of the committee report 
without prejudice to inserting in the Record the whole 
text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Committee Report 
No. 17, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
1986 CONSTITUTION AN ARTICLE ON ACCOUNTA- 
BILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICERS. 


(The following is the whole text of the resolution per C.R. 
No. 17.) 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 17 
(As amended and consolidated by the Committee 
on Accountability of Public Officers) 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
1986 CONSTITUTION AN ARTICLE ON ACCOUNTA- 
BILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICERS 

Resolved, as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional Com- 
mission in session assembled, To incorporate in the 1986 Consti- 
tution an article: 

Aticle 

ACCOUNTABILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICERS 

Section 1. Public office is a public trust. Public officers and 
employees shall be accountable to the people, serve them with 
utmost fidelity, integrity and efficiency, act with justice and lead 
modest lives. 

Section 2. The President, the Vice-President, Members of the 
Supreme Court, the Members of the Constitutional Commissions 
and the Ombudsman may be removed from office on impeach- 
ment for and conviction of, culpable violation of the constitu- 
tion, treason, bribery, other high crimes, graft and corruption or 
betrayal of public trust. 

Section 3. (1) The House of Representatives shall have the 
exclusive power to initiate all cases of impeachment. 


264 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


(2) A verified complaint for impeachment may be filed by 
any of its members or by a citizen which shall be referred to the 
proper committee of the House for investigation and report. A 
vote of the majority of all the members of the House is necessary 
to initiate impeachment proceedings. 

(3) However, when the complaint is signed and verified by a 
majority of the members of the House, the same shall constitute 
the Articles of Impeachment and the trial by the Senate shall 
forthwith proceed. 

(4) No impeachment proceedings shall be initiated against 
the same official more than once within a period of one year. 

(5) The Senate shall have the sole power to try all impeach- 
ment. When sitting for that purpose, the Senators shall be on oath 
or affirmation. When the President of the Philippines is on trial, 
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall preside. No person 
shall be convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of all 
the Members of the Senate. 

(6) Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further 
than the removal from office and disqualification to hold and 
enjoy any office of honor, trust, or profit under the Government 
of the Philippines, but the party convicted shall nevertheless be 
liable and subject to prosecution, trial and punishment according 
to law. 

Section 4. The Sandiganbayan, created pursuant to the 
mandate of Section 5 of Article XIII of the 1973 Constitution, 
shall hereafter be known as the Anti-Graft Court. It shall conti- 
nue to function and exercise its jurisdiction as provided by law. 

Section 5. The Tanodbayan, created pursuant to the mandate 
of Section 6 of Article XIII of the 1973 Constitution, shall con- 
tinue to unction and exercise its powers as provided by law, 

except t ose conferred on the office of the Ombudsman created 
under this Constitution. 


t , n 1°". 6 ' Th6re 18 h6reby Created the ^dependent office of 
the Ombudsman, composed of the Ombudsman, one over-all 

Deputy, and one Deputy each for Luzon, Visayas and Minda- 


nao. 


• ! e fu n £ o 0mbudsman a nd his Deputies shall be ; 
pointed by the President from a list of at least six nomirn 

prepared by the Judicial and Bar Council, and from a list of thi 
nominees for every vacancy thereafter, without any confirmath 
AU^acance, shall be filled within three m J ths ^ 

bonf t°r ieS “ bC 

college degree, or a member of the Phntan° rt V ear Ti, 0l<i ’ Wltl 
y "‘ HaVe been «■ Practice of ,aw , for a,“, 

an^lfoi ,en “ re ' th ‘ y ** ™ - * practice 

Section 9. The Ombudsman and hk rw *• . . 

term of seven years without reappointment. S 3 SerVe f ° 

Section 10. The Ombudsman shall have the rank of a Civ 
man of a Constitutional Commission, and shall receive the S a 
salary, which shall not be decreased during his term of office 
Deputy of the Ombudsman shall have the rank of aCommissio 


of a Constitutional Commission and his salary shall not be 
decreased during his term of office. 

Section 1 1. The Ombudsman and his Deputies, as champions 
of the people, shall act promptly on the complaints filed, in any 
form or manner, against public officials or employees of the 
government, including government-owned corporations, agencies 
or instrumentalities, and shall notify the complainants of the 
action taken and the results thereof. 

Section 12. The Office of the Ombudsman shall have the 
following powers, functions and duties: 

(1) To direct, upon complaint or at its own instance, any 
public official or employee of the government, as well as of any 
government-owned corporation or institution, to perform and 
expedite any act or duty required of him by law, or to stop, 
prevent, and correct any abuse or impropriety in the performance 
of duties; 

(2) To direct the officer concerned to take appropriate action 
against a public official or employee at fault, and to recommend 
his removal, suspension, demotion, fine, censure or prosecution, 
and to see to the compliance of the directive; 

(3) To direct the officer concerned to furnish it with copies of 
documents relating to contracts or transactions entered into by 
his office involving the disbursement of public funds, and report 
any irregularity to the Commission on Audit for appropriate 
action; 

(4) To request any government agency for assistance and 
information necessary to the’ discharge of its responsibilities, and 
to examine, if necessary, pertinent records and documents; 

(5) To publicize, when circumstances so warrant, matters 
covered by its investigation; 

(6) To exercise such powers or perform such functions or 
duties as may be provided by law. 

Section 13. The right of the State to recover properties 
unlawfully acquired by public officials or employees shall not be 
barred by prescription. 

Section 14. No loan, guaranty or other form of financial 
accommodation for any business purpose may be granted by any 
government-owned or controlled bank or financial institution to 
any public official, or to any firm or entity in which he has 
substantial interest, during his tenure. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just for the record. Are we post- 
poning consideration of the Committee Report on the 
Legislative? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. It was decided yesterday that 
we will continue the consideration on Monday. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


265 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER MONSOD 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee on 
Accountability of Public Officers is respectfully submit- 
ting its proposed Article in the Constitution, and we 
would just want to make a few remarks on the articles 
and sections that we have included. 

“Section 1. Public office is a public trust.” We have 
amended the 1973 provision in order to incorporate the 
resolution of Commissioner Tadeo to invest public 
office with more than just the normal requirements of 
fidelity, integrity and efficiency, but also as an example 
of modest lives or simplified lifestyle. 

With respect to the section on impeachment, we 
would like the honorable Commissioners to note the 
inclusion of the Ombudsman among the offices that are 
subject to impeachment, and the addition of betrayal of 
public trust as a ground for impeachment. This is 
derived from a resolution of Commissioner de los Reyes. 
In the section on the procedure for impeachment, we 
were benefitted by the suggestions and advice of the 
honorable President of the Commission. The principal 
author of this section is Commissioner Romulo. What 
we seek to institute here is a more liberal interpretation 
of the impeachment procedures in order to avoid, for 
example, the deadlock which happened in the last 
Batasan. While incorporating the procedures arising 
from the bicameral nature of the future legislation, the 
body will note that we provided here that a majority of 
the Members of the House can initiate impeachment 
upon vote. But what is important is that any Member 
of the House or any citizen can file a verified complaint. 
We used the majority rule of the House, although in 
1973 the provision was for 20 percent of the Members 
of the National Assembly. In that case since it was 
unicameral, the trying body was also the National 
Assembly. 

In the 1935 Constitution, the rule was two-thirds of 
the House may initiate impeachment proceedings and 
three-fourths of the Senate shall convict. However, in 
our proposal, majority of the Members of the House 
may initiate and two-thirds of the Senate shall convict. 
This is one section on which we would like to consult 
with the Members of this body. This is a very impor- 
tant provision, and we would be advised by the con- 
sultations and wisdom of this body with respect to this 
provision, particularly on the numbers and vote 
necessary to initiate, to try or to convict. 

With respect to the Sandiganbayan and the Tanod- 
bayan the Committee decided to make a distinction 
between the purely prosecutory function of the Tanod- 
bayan and the function of a pure Ombudsman who will 
use the prestige and persuasive powers of his office. To 
call the attention of government officials to any impro- 


priety, misconduct or injustice, we conceive the 
Ombudsman as a champion of the citizens. As part of the 
sponsorship presentation, we would like to ask Vice- 
Chairman Colayco of the Committee, who is the main 
author of this section, to give us a few words on the 
ideas of the Committee in this regard, as well as Com- 
missioner Nolledo who also has contributed his ideas 
in the framing of this section. The concept of the 
Ombudsman here is admittedly a little bit different 
from the 1973 concept. But I will leave that to Com- 
missioner Colayco to explain later. With respect to the 
section on the right of the State to recover properties 
unlawfully acquired — Section 13, page 5 — this is based 
mainly on the resolution of Commissioner Nolledo, with 
the assistance of Commissioner Azcuna in its formula- 
tion. The idea here is to address ourselves to the 
problem that those who have unlawfully benefitted 
from the acquisition of public property over the years, 
through technicalities or practice, have gained immunity 
and that, therefore, the right of the people to recover 
should be respected. With that, I would now like to call 
on Commissioner Colayco to give us his remarks 
regarding our concept of the Ombudsman. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 


SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER COLAYCO 


MR. COLAYCO. Thank you, Madam President. 

The Committee is proposing the creation of an office 
which can act in a quick, inexpensive and effective man- 
ner on complaints against the administrative inaction, 
abuse and arbitrariness of government officials and 
employees in dealing with the people. Under the present 
Rules, the available remedies are time-consuming and 
entail expenses beyond the means of many persons with 
legitimate grounds to complain. On this point, I would 
like to read a portion of the book prepared by a well- 
known authority on the Ombudsman and who is a 
professor at Columbia University. He says: 

An important feature of the Ombudsman office is that, 
because of the simple and cheap way in which complaints 
are handled, many minor complaints can be satisfied; 
though important to the complainant, they would not be 
worth the cost of an elaborate court procedure. 

This is the most common situation which confronts 
most of our economically disadvantaged people. Excuse 
me for citing a few personal experiences in this regard. 

any a time, people have come to me complaining 
about the refusal or at least inability, much worse, the 
imposition of material consideration before they can 
act. I remember very well a lady from Batangas who 
came to see me in my office a few years back complain* 
ing that she had applied for the issuance of a birth 
certificate ot her son who had applied for service in t ie 
U S. Navy. This was one last requirement she could no 


266 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


comply with because she was made to return for more 
than three weeks, and everytime the lady would go 
back, the answer was that they could not find the 
record. Fortunately, I had some acquaintances in the 
office of Mayor Bagatsing and after calling up one of his 
executive secretaries, the certificate of birth was issued 
in less than one hour after the call. This is one of the 
many instances when poor illiterate people feel that the 
government does not care. 


It is true that the office of the Tanodbayan has 
jurisdiction over these simple matters, so we requested 
Justice Gonzalez to give us his opinion on this, and 
he said: “How can I attend to these minor matters 
when I am swamped with investigative and prosecutory 
duties? ” The Justice even suggested that it might be 
advisable to re-create an honest-to-goodness office of the 
Ombudsman which the 1971 Constitutional Convention 
tried to create. I would like to read a portion of the 
report of the Committee which submitted this proposal 
to the then Constitutional Convention. By the way, 
during the 1971 Convention, 27 resolutions were filed 
for the creation of the office of the Ombudsman and 
the thrust behind these resolutions was stated very elo- 
quently in this passage of the report. After saying that 
i is e uty of the State to provide a system where- 

pHpva°n 0 ppc P +n P 6 C3n haVe easy access for their petty 
grievances, the report said: ^ 3 

What we find, however, is a system characterized by the 
supremacy of the powerful and the wealthy; respect for the 
dignity and personality of the elite, the ruling feudal 
mas er, an superabundance of opportunity for the op- 
pression of the weak, the poor and the “unconnected.” 

Present reliefs for the protection of citizen’s rights are 
expensive cumbersome, circuitous and usually available 
on y o t e rich and the powerful. Government is plagued 
• ^ ff' 13 an< ^ corru Ption, callous indifference and gross 
inefficiency, political meddling, immorality, compart- 
menta ization of justice and bankruptcy in national and 
oc ea ers ip. The helpless disillusioned citizen may not 
ear more already he has raised his voice in protest and 
defiance. Because this voice has not reached an official 

into 6 re ^ 1Sters ^' S P rotes t in the streets. Disillusion turns 
ntagomsm and antagonism to bitterness towards the 
government and the nennl** 

& people m the government. The people’s 

a siim ,hread a,,d is 

s „b™^,fL\le“d Pl f t 1 27 resoiutio " s 

tee seeking the establishment 0 r a t^Xa^i 

two definite objectives namriv rt . W1 n 

higher efficiency and justice in the a'dmi'nisfrSroTthe 
laws, and, two, the protection of tVi» 

of the people by securing the right f C ° nstltUlional ri S hts 
,, ' . 6 ue “SM of the citizens to peti- 

tion the government for redress of grievances. 

So, what happened to this beautiful proposal? What 
came out ol it is Presidential Decree No i « n „ 
the Office of the Tanodbayan. There ^as tte’Xel 
failure to implement this specific, explicit proposal to 


create a body that would act as guardian and protector 
of the rights especially of the underprivileged. 
Therefore, we have proposed as briefly as possible in 
our resolution an office which will not require any 
formal condition for the filing of a complaint. Under 
our proposal, a person can file a complaint even by 
telephone and without much ado, the office of the 
Ombudsman is under obligation to see to it that the 
complaint is acted upon, not merely attended to but 
acted upon. Even in the United States, in the Nassau 
County, the Ombudsman merely picks up the telephone 
and calls up the errant employee. If the employee admits 
that there was reason behind the complaint, he is told 
to do what the complainant wanted him to do without 
much ado. And then that is followed up by the cor- 
responding report to the department of the government 
which has supervision over the employee at fault, with 
the proper recommendation. 

Under this proposal, the main thrust is remedial 
action, not the usual one where the poor complainant 
is told: “Maghanda ka muna ng affidavit,” but he is not 
even helped in that. So, the complainant, if he is illite- 
rate or poor, is turned off. He says: “Ni wala akong 
kilalang abogado. Wala akong ibabayad sa abogado.” 
This is the situation which the Committee is proposing 
to remedy. One of the most common complaints which 
I have received myself is the inaction of many judges. 
They would come to me saying: “Sir, kilala ba ninyo si 
gano’ng judge? Eh, matagal na po iyong aming asunto, 
wala pa hanggang ngayon.” If I know the judge, I could 
do it; if I do not know him, I could do it through 
another judge who could do it. This role can be very 
well filled by the Ombudsman whose office we are 
proposing to create. But that is on the minor level. 

Under our proposal, the Ombudsman is empowered 
to investigate, to inquire into and to demand the pro- 
duction of documents involving transactions and con- 
tracts of the government where disbursement of public 
funds is reported. We read almost everyday of how 
certain buildings have been constructed improperly and 
of many other irregularities which are merely reported 
but which nobody in the government dares or bothers 
to look into. That role which should have been per- 
formed by our own Tanodbayan is not attended to 
because the Tanodbayan is swamped with work — this 
was confessed to us during our hearing. The main thrust 
is action; the disciplinary or punitive remedy is seconda- 
ry. On a higher level then, the Ombudsman is going to 
be the eyes and ears of the people. Where administra- 
tive action demanded is not forthcoming because under 
our rules the Ombudsman is required to ask the govern- 
ment official concerned to impose the disciplinary 
action on the employee at fault and to follow it up and 
to see to it that it is complied with, he is authorized to 
make public the nature of the complaint and the inac- 
tion of the official concerned, because generally, public 
officials are afraid of publicity. This measure is com- 
monly followed in the European system of Ombudsman, 
as well as in the United States. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


267 


To give the Ombudsman stature and a certain clout, 
vve are proposing that he be given the status, the role or 
the rank of a chairman of a constitutional commission, 
as well as the same salary. If we are going to create an 
office which will have a lower rank than this, not even 
an ordinary employee of the government will bother to 
obey him. Second, to free him from political pressure, 
the Ombudsman cannot be removed except by impeach- 
ment. We hope that with the help of this body, we will 
receive better and more practical ideas. But we certainly 
appeal to the Members not to fail our people. 

In 1950, for instance, President Quirino created the 
Integrity Board in an attempt to formalize the pro- 
cedure for executive direction and control of the 
bureaucracy. This Board lasted only for six months. 
When President Magsaysay took over the reins of 
government in 1953, he created the Presidential Com- 
plaints and Action Committee. The primary purpose of 
this Committee was to expedite action on complaints 
received by the Office of the President against the man- 
ner in which the officials of the executive departments 
and offices were performing the duties entrusted to 
them by law, or against their acts, conduct or behavior. 
So we can see that as early as the time of President 
Magsaysay, the President already saw the necessity of 
the Ombudsman as we are now proposing. But again 
politics came in — this office did not last long. Two 
months after President Magsaysay’s death, the office 
was abolished. 

Next, President Garcia created his own Presidential 
Committee on Administration, Performance and Effi- 
ciency. Again this office did not last long and was 
replaced by the Presidential Agency on Reforms and 
Government Operations or PARGO under the regime 
of President Marcos. Although these programs were 
good per se, especially the program ot President Mag- 
saysay, the new President discarded it — this is a 
political block. The incoming President generally tends 
to discard the policies and the programs of the previous 
President. The intention, therefore, of our proposal is 
to constitutionalize the office so that it cannot be 
touched by the Presidents as they come and go. 

This is a very brief summary of our plan; we beg the 
Commission to give this very careful attention and 
consideration. Let us not fail our common masses again, 
as we have failed them in the past. 

Thank you. 

MR MONSOD. Madam President, may I ask Commis- 
sioner Nolledo to give his remarks. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

SPONSORSHIP REMARKS 
OF COMMISSIONER NOLLEDO 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to talk briefly on the creation of the 


Ombudsman because I am the author of Resolution 
No. 280, entitled: “RESOLUTION TO STRENGTHEN, 
INVIGORATE AND CONSTITUTIONALIZE THE OMBUDS- 
MAN KNOWN AS THE TANODBAYAN.” I would like to 
talk also in support of my Resolution No. 61 which 
the Committee incorporated in its report, and which 
states in essence that the right of the government to 
forfeit ill-gotten wealth of public officials shall not 
prescribe. 

Madam President, the creation of an Ombudsman 
which is a proposal, in the words of Commissioner 
Romulo, “worth dying for,” is in answer to the crying 
need of our people for an honest and responsive govern- 
ment. The office of the Ombudsman as proposed by the 
Committee on Accountability of Public Officers, ably 
headed by Commissioner Monsod, is really an institu- 
tion primarily for the citizen as against the malprac- 
tices and corruption in the government. As an official 
critic, the Ombudsman will study the law, the procedure 
and practice in the government, and make appropriate 
recommendations for a more systematic operation of 
the governmental machinery, free from bureaucratic 
inconveniences. As a mobilizer, the Ombudsman will see 
to it that there be a steady flow of services to the 
individual consumers of government. And as a watch- 
dog, the Ombudsman will look after the general, as well 
as specific, performance of all government officials and 
employees so that the law may not be administered with 
an evil eye or an uneven hand. 

The graft and corruption at all levels of our govern- 
ment is to be deplored, Madam President. Our public 
officers act as if they are the masters when they are 
really the servants of the people. The “lagay” system 
has been condemnably institutionalized in all govern- 
ment offices, including the courts. The day will come, 
Madam President, when our people will accept corrup- 
tion as a way of life and will lose their will to fight this 
corruption, thus resulting in the total decay of our 
national character and the imminent collapse of our 
national conscience. The effects of this situation are 
terrible to contemplate because there would emerge 
again a system of dictatorship to contain the chaos, 
widespread dissatisfaction, indifference and anarchy 
that are the effects of insensitiveness of government to 
the rightful demands of the people. The emergence of 
totalitarianism in China, in many countries in South 
America and other places in the world could easily be 
traced to unrestricted corrupt ways of government 
officials. 

And so. Madam President, let our Ombudsman, called 
the eyes and ears of the people, the super lawyer-for- 
fiee of the oppressed and the downtrodden, raise a new 
hope in our people who must be given the reassurance 
that the government really cares for them. Along with 
the creation of the office of Ombudsman, I feel grateful 
to our Committee for embodying substantially my 
resolution providing that the right of the State to 
recover properties unlawfully acquired by public o 


268 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


cials or employees shall not prescribe. This is a provision 
designed to enable the government to forfeit ill-gotten 
wealth of public officers, regardless of the lapse of time. 

Madam President, we hear of public officers who 
believe in the Avelino question of “What are we in 
power for? ” and in the Perez question of “What is 
wrong with the government officials providing for their 
future? ” and who, after several years in service, find 
themselves graduating from “pauperism” to “millionair- 
ism. They live in palatial homes, ride in high-class auto- 
mobiles, hold extravagant parties, go abroad and wear 
expensive jewelries in utter disregard of the basic rules 
of decency and honor. Madam President, granting the 
State the constitutional, imprescriptible right to forfeit 
ill-gotten wealth of erring public officers is, to my 
mind, a highly significant reform in public service. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. NOLLEDO. If we go over the provisions of 
P.D. No. 1607, which amended P.D. No. 1487, creating 
the Office of the Tanodbayan, also called by Mr. Marcos 
as Ombudsman, there are two parts in the functions of 
the Tanodbayan: First, to act as prosecutor of anti- 
graft cases, and to entertain complaints from the public. 
The second part constitutes the basic function of the 
Ombudsman. And if we turn to page 3 of the report of 
the Committee, Section 5 provides, and I quote: 

The Tanodbayan, created pursuant to the mandate of 
Section 6 of Article XIII of the 1973 Constitution, shall 
continue to function and exercise its powers as provided 
by law, except those conferred on the office of the 
Ombudsman created under this Constitution. 

This means that we are removing the second part of 
the functions of the Tanodbayan and vesting the same 
in the office of the Ombudsman; and, therefore, the 
Tanodbayan shall continue to discharge his functions 
under the first part merely as prosecutor, like a fiscal, 
of anti-graft cases which are filed with the Anti-Graft 
Court. 


MR. MONSOD. May I just close this presentation by 
saying a in reflecting and trying to put these sections 
together we realized that there are no one-time solutions 

cumnlarivp pff F problerns > that good government is the 

tution and ° f many safe 8 uards within the Consti- 

the Omhnd “ ° Ur m ° dest opinion that the concept of 

£nt2h!, b ri ' T n ’ a i presently formulated, will make a 
contribution towards that end. 

the M disrJ r „f^ n r ‘ he Committee "O'* Puts itself at 
the disposal of the Commission for interpellation. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


MR. RODRIGO. So, the Ombudsman cannot pro- 
secute? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, he cannot. He can refer the 
cases that should be prosecuted to the appropriate 
official — he may be the Tanodbayan or he may be the 
ordinary fiscal. 

MR. RODRIGO. Has the Ombudsman any power to 
compel the prosecuting arm to prosecute or can he only 
recommend? 

MR. NOLLEDO. He can direct. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo 
nized. 


is recog- 


qu“uon*° DR,G0 ' WiU ‘ he Commi,tee yWd to a f 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. I notice that tn 
visions on the Ombudsman retain he t/T P 
there seems to be an overlannino- • *t Tanodbayan ’ a 
Tanodbayan and the Ombudsman '"what^th 0 ”? ° f 1 
dividing line between the funrtir, /A 1S c ear ' c 
and the Tanodbayan so that o, °[ 16 0mbudsm 
to go to the Tanodbayan ^ Pe " p,e wil1 know wh 

Ombudsman? y “ and when to go to t 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President essentially , 
difference lies in one being a prosecutory arm and I 
other a champion of the citizen who is not bound 
legal technicalities or legal forms, but I would like 
ask Commissioner Nolledo to explain this in detail. 


MR. RODRIGO. Can he command? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is equivalent to commanding 
the fiscal if the fiscal refuses to file the case. And then 
in that case, if the fiscal refuses, then there are available 
remedies. He may appeal to the Ministry of Justice. 

MR. RODRIGO. Can the Ombudsman act on his 
own? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, even without a complaint. 

MR. RODRIGO. If the fiscal refuses to file the in- 
formation, can the Ombudsman file the information? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No. I understand he will appeal to 
the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Justice will 
correspondingly decide on the appeal. If the Ministry 
of Justice, for example, upholds the Ombudsman, there 
is no question about that. But if the Ministry of Justice 
does not uphold him, the Ombudsman perhaps, based 
on the presidential form of government, may appeal to 
the President. And the President, where the Minister of 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


269 


Justice is merely his alter ego, may overrule the Minister should we rank the Ombudsman with the Justices of the 
of Justice. Supreme Court? 


MR. RODRIGO. An ordinary citizen now can do 
that. He goes to the fiscal; the fiscal does not want to 
listen to him or to prosecute, so he goes to the Minis- 
ter of Justice. And if the Minister of Justice does 
not want to act, he can appeal to the President. So, 
what is the use of the Ombudsman then? 


MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, of course, he can 
do that if he has his own lawyer, and he can afford it. 
But the main thrust of this office is precisely for the 
Ombudsman to take over after the complainant has filed 
his complaint. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I beg the Gentleman’s pardon? 

MR. COLAYCO. All that the complainant has to do 
is to file his complaint and the Ombudsman will do the 
rest. For instance, there may be a case where another 
government office could properly attend to the com- 
plaint. Now under this provision, he will not tell the 
complainant, “Pumunta ka doon, puwedeng gawin 
’yan.” No. The Ombudsman must act on his own. And 
if he thinks that the other office can do it better, he has 
to take the steps himself to refer the case there and 
follow it up. The reason why our common people are 
turned off is that they are not attended to. That is the 
main point. 


MR. RODRIGO. How can we be sure that the 
Ombudsman will attend to these people? Kung pinaba- 
bayaan noong fiscal, paano nating masisiguro na hindi 
pababayaan ng Ombudsman? 


MR. COLAYCO. That is a good question, but then 
that is why we have to choose the right people. 

MR RODRIGO. We try to choose the right people 
for fiscals and all that. 

COLAYCO. We are humans and judges fail in 
their duties. 


MR. RODRIGO. What I am driving at is, we might be 

providing for a useless appendage. 

mr COLAYCO. No, I do not think so because the 
• fmpnt will be made by the Judicial and Bar 
we already have. 


MR RODRIGO. That is another point I want to 
M Why should the appointment be done by the 
Judicial and Bar Council or through its recommends- 
? That is done only to the members of the Supreme 
Court while the members of the Constitutional Com- 
missions are appointed by the President with the con- 
firmation of the Commission on Appointments. Why 


MR. COLAYCO. Let me correct the Gentleman’s 
impression. The Judicial and Bar Council will choose 
all the members of the judiciary, from the Supreme 
Court down to the lowest level. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, and the judges. But then the 
Judicial and Bar Council has nothing to do with the 
appointment of the members of the Constitutional 
Commissions. The Gentleman also stated that the 
Ombudsman will have the rank of a chairman of a 
Constitutional Commission and the members will also 
have the rank of the members of the Constitutional 
Commissions. 

But then we have already approved the report on the 
Constitutional Commissions, and the chairman and the 
members of the Constitutional Commissions do not go 
through the Judicial and Bar Council; they are just 
appointed by the President with the confirmation of the 
Commission on Appointments. Why do we segregate 
the Ombudsman from the Constitutional Commissions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I think the 
purpose is very basic and obvious: to maintain the 
independence of the Ombudsman. If we will allow the 
Commission on Appointments to interfere in the ap- 
pointment of an Ombudsman, knowing how politicians 
are, they can appoint their men, perhaps their followers, 
to be Ombudsman. And, therefore, the Ombudsman 
will be subjected to possible future interference from 
these politicians. 


MR. RODRIGO. If the intention is to maintain the 
independence of the Ombudsman, with more reason do 
we want to maintain the independence of the Constitu- 
tional Commissions — the Commission on Elections or 
the COMELEC; the Commission on Audit or the COA; 
and the Civil Service Commission — and we have already 
acted on it. 


wuy is U mat in me case ot the Ombudsman, the 
sponsor would want to rank them with judges and 

S l SIG ^T* T ™ the Constitutional Commissions - 
the COMELEC, COA, Civil Service — whose members 
are appointed by the President with the confirmation of 
the Commission on Appointments? The sponsor wants 
to make a class out of the Ombudsman. 


, , , — * ivaiuciiL mere is a uiaunv 

ion e ween tie qualifications required of an Ombuds 
man and the qualifications required of the members o 
tlie Constitutional Commissions. In the case of th 
Commission on Civil Service, the members are peopl' 
who have experience in public administration; in th' 
case of the Commission on Audit, they could be pe° 
pie with auditing experience and certified publn 
accountants, and in the case of the Commission 01 


270 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


Elections, they could be people with a college degree 
who are not necessarily lawyers. 

In the case of the Constitutional Commissions, it 
might not be proper to have the prescreening done by 
the Judicial and Bar Council because the reach of the 
nominees goes beyond experience in law. In the case 
of the qualifications of the Ombudsman, the proposal 
is that they be members of the bar and, therefore, we 
made the presumption — rightly or wrongly - that 
perhaps the Judicial and Bar Council would be an appro- 
priate prescreening body as far as looking for the right 
man for the job is concerned. 


MR. RODRIGO. Does the Committee feel very 
strongly about this stand? 

MR. COLAYCO. I was going to say that. I think the 
Committee, as I announced earlier, is open to sug- 
gestions. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

CC *LAYCO. Yes, because what we want is that 
is ° y e created, and so, we are inviting suggestions 
because this is something new to us. 

ment R ‘thl°r S °?‘ ^ 1 JUSt g ° back to another com ' 
nrnsprntn Gentk:man made earlier on the lack of 

this in tb? r UnC 1( ? nS tbe Ombudsman. We discussed 
fnrtion an d I will admit that the dis- 

TthTn K°i clear ' cut - However, one of the concepts 

and u/ f it* I" 1311 1S b * S abiIit y to persuade reforms, 
f rf- 6 , at P er haps, giving him a prosecutory 
h 6 a b ! 1 contradictory with that function 

e i is etter if he attains it through goodwill. 
However we also wanted to invest in the event that 
pu co lcia s are not responsive by investing him with 
cer am powers he can resort to in order to see to it that 
the omission or the act is rectified. For example, he may 

i T v, P u°5 er °^ c * a ^ s to do so. Another power that 
o e ba ; b ,7 b l! h d6pendS a lot on his P^stige is his ability 
have nuhhr l™ 8 or an injustice, because then you 
official ^ Pmi0n 0 P era ting against the erring public 


MR. RODRIGO. So, the Ombudsman does not ha 
prosecutory function nor punitive powers 


MR. COLAYCO. None. 


MR. RODRIGO. All that he 
suasive power. 


relies upon is his per- 


MR. COLAYCO. Yes. Pe rsuasive power 

ability to require that the proper legal stem Lt T 
compel the officer to comply. 831 Steps be take " 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes, but what is meant bv “ 
quired” is that the Ombudsman cannot compel. V ^ 


MR. COLAYCO. We must distinguish this. 

MR. RODRIGO. Can the Ombudsman compel a Fiscal 
to file . . . 

MR. COLAYCO. Not to file but to investigate. That 
is a duty which is compellable by mandamus, and the 
Ombudsman will be empowered to do that. 

MR. RODRIGO. To file a mandamus case? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes, to compel him to investigate. 

MR. RODRIGO. But on his own power, the Ombuds- 
man cannot compel; he has to go to court. If the fiscal 
does not want it done, he has to go to court to file. 

MR. COLAYCO. But that can be easily inserted 
among the powers. That is our idea. We would like to 
receive fresh ideas. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let us go back to the division 
between the powers of the Tanodbayan and the 
Ombudsman which says that: 

The Tanodbayan . . . shall continue to function and 

exercise its powers as provided by law, except those con- 
ferred on the office of the Ombudsman created under this 

Constitution. 

The powers of the Ombudsman are enumerated in 
Section 12. 

MR. COLAYCO. They are not exclusive. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, these powers can also be exer- 
cised by the Tanodbayan? 

MR. COLAYCO. No, I was saying that the powers 
enumerated here for the Ombudsman are not exclusive. 

MR. RODRIGO. Precisely, I am coming to that. The 
last of the enumerated functions of the Ombudsman is: 
“to exercise such powers or perform such functions or 
duties as may be provided by law.” So, the legislature 
may vest him with powers taken away from the Tanod- 
bayan, may it not? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. And it is possible that pretty soon 
the Tanodbayan will be a useless appendage and will 
lose all his powers. 

MR. COLAYCO. No. I am afraid the Gentleman has 
the wrong perception of the system. We are leaving to 
the Tanodbayan the continuance of his functions and 
the exercise of the jurisidiction given to him pursuant 
to . . . 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


271 


MR. RODRIGO. Law. 

MR. COLAYCO. No. Pursuant first to the Constitu- 
tion and the law which mandated the creation of the 
office. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. Section 5 reads: 
“The Tanodbayan shall continue to function and 
exercise its powers as provided by law.” 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct, because it is un- 
der P.D. No. 1630. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, if it is provided by law, it can be 
taken away by law, I suppose. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. And precisely, Section 12 (6) says 
that among the functions that can be performed by the 
Ombudsman are “such functions or duties as may be 
provided by law.” The sponsors admitted that the legis- 
lature later on might remove some powers from the 
Tanodbayan and transfer these to the Ombudsman. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, that is correct. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, perhaps, it might 
be helpful if we give the spirit and intendment of the 
Committee. What we wanted to avoid is the situation 
where it deteriorates into a prosecution arm. We wanted 
to give the idea of the Ombudsman a chance, with 
prestige and persuasive powers, and also a chance to 
really function as a champion of the citizen. 

However, we do not want to foreclose the possibility 
that in the future, the Assembly, as it may see fit, 
may have to give additional powers to the Ombudsman: 
we want to give the concept of a pure Ombudsman a 
chance under the Constitution. 


MR. RODRIGO. Another question. Madam President. 
This office will be composed of five members. Will they 
all come from Manila? 

MR. MONSOD. No, please read further. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does the office of the Ombudsman 
have to act as a body? 

MR. COLAYCO. It can act both as a body and alone, 
because the head of the office is the Ombudsman 
himself. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let us say that one Ombudsman 
comes from Mindanao. What I know is that this 
Ombudsman should be appointed but will have his 
office in Manila. 

MR. COLAYCO. No, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does the Ombudsman have to be in 
Mindanao? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes, that is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. How about somebody from Sulu or 
Zamboanga who wants to complain? 

MR. COLAYCO. Unless we make a start, when can 
we begin to comply and fulfill the needs of our people? 
Unfortunately, we know that there are many of us 
who need this. Of course, we cannot say from the 
very start that there will be five Deputy Ombudsmen for 
Mindanao alone. 

MR. RODRIGO. No, I did not say that. It says here 
there will be five, one Ombudsman and four members. 

MR. COLAYCO. For a start. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, what I am 
worried about is, if we create a constitutional body 
which has neither punitive nor prosecutory powers but 
only persuasive powers, we might be raising the hopes 
of our people too much and then disappoint them. 

MR. MONSOD. I agree with the Commissioner. 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes. I just want to get right to the 
point. There are five members, and we have 54 million 
Filipinos, who all want to complain. Will the Ombuds- 
men be accessible to all, especially the poor people in 
the barrios who are the ones supposed to be benefited 
by this provision? How can they make themselves 
available? 


MR. RODRIGO. Anyway, since we state that the 
powers of the Ombudsman can later on be implemented 
by the legislature, why not leave this to the legislature? 


MR MONSOD. Yes, because we want to avoid what 
hardened in 1973. I read the committee report which 
recommended the approval of the 27 resolutions for the 
creation of the office of the Ombudsman, but notwith- 
tZ Stag t explicit purpose enunciated in that report, 
the implementing law - the last one P ^ D ; No - 16 
did not follow the main thrust; instead it created the 

Tanodbayan. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the intention of 
the provision is that there will be an office of the 
Ombudsman, not that there will be only five people 
in that oftice. I think we prefaced our presentation with 
the qualification that there are no one-time solutions to 
all the problems. But we would like to institute one 
office that could be an answer to some of the problems 
of our countrymen. This is certainly not a solution 
to all the complaints of 55 million Filipinos. If we use 
that argument, then why institute offices that are not 
located in each and every barrio? Why have courts on y 
in certain areas? Why not in each and every barangay* 


272 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


I think our position is that, as Commissioner Colayco 
said, we want to give the concept a chance because it 
could be a vehicle for our people to correct injustices 
and misconduct and impropriety. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, my question is, 
will this Ombudsmen have a representative in every 
municipality, like there is a court in every municipality 
and city in the Philippines, so that the office will be 
accessible to the people who want to complain? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, it is possible in 
time as the concept is developed, refined and accepted 
by the people, like in other countries where they have 
set up different types of Ombudsman - there is an 
Ombudsman for the military affairs; an Ombudsman for 
the youth and so on. But then this becomes a com- 
plicated and comprehensive view which can be handled 
subsequently by Congress. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. The reason I proposed this 
amendment is that during the Regular Batasang Pam- 
bansa when there was a move to impeach then President 
Marcos, there were arguments to the effect that there 
is no ground for impeachment because there is no proof 
that President Marcos committed criminal acts which 
are punishable, or considered penal offenses. And so the 
term “betrayal of public trust,” as explained by Com- 
missioner Romulo. is a catchall phrase to include all acts 
which are not punishable by statutes as penal offenses 
but, nonetheless, render the officer unfit to continue in 
office. It includes betrayal of public interest, inexcusa- 
ble negligence of duty, tyrannical abuse of power, 
breach of official duty by malfeasance or misfeasance, 
cronyism, favoritism, etc. to the prejudice of public 
interest and which tend to bring the office into dis- 
repute. That is the purpose. Madam President. 

Thank you. 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Regalado be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 


MR. ROMULO. Jf I may add another example, 
because Commissioner Regalado asked a very good 
question. This concept would include, I think, obstruc- 
tion of justice since in his oath he swears to do justice 
to every man; so if he does anything that obstructs 
justice, it could be construed as a betrayal of the public 
trust. 


MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President, 
tion Tome 3 ^ ues ^ ons here, some for clarifica- 

members of th^CommiUee 30 " 1 pIeasure of the 

2 ’ °" theSr ° UndS 

others 16 Vi ° lati0n ° f thC Constitut >on, treason, bribery, 
public trust. CnmeS ’ ■"* -d corruption or betrayal of 

envision f as a betrTyal^of ^ Committee 

otherwise covered bv thn tn publlc trust which is not 
to? Y the other terms antecedent there- 

MR. ROMULO I thini, r- T 
Committee and subiert t \ . 1 may speak for tlle 

missioner de los R evp<5 h Urt ler c °rnments of Com- 
catchall phrase. Reallv i’t e concept is that this is a 
the end that the idea of a t0 his ° ath of office ’ in 

the oath of office of the Hfl- tmst 1S conn ected with 

oath of office, then he has and if he violates that 

ne has betrayed that trust. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you . 

MR. MONSOD. Madam 
sioner de los Reyes to perhaps ad^oThosI 

rec ™Ud RES,DENT C ° mmiSSi0 "" d * - ^yes is 


Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In pursuing that statement of 
Commissioner Romulo, Madam President, we will notice 
that in the presidential oath of then President Marcos, 
he stated that he will do justice to every man. If he 
appoints a Minister of Justice and orders him to issue or 
to prepare repressive decrees denying justice to a com- 
mon man without the President being held liable, I 
think this act will not fall near the category of treason, 
nor will it fall under bribery nor other high crimes, 
neither will it fall under graft and corruption. And so 
when the President tolerates violations of human rights 
through the repressive decrees authored by his Minister 
of Justice, the President betrays the public trust. 

MR. REGALADO. On Section 3 (2), of course, 
without prejudice later to our discussing what should be 
the required number of votes for the filing of the arti- 
cles of impeachment for which under the 1935 Constitu- 
tion, a two-thirds vote was required and under the 1973 
Constitution, a one-fifth vote was required, perhaps 
later we may come to a happy compromise. But I notice 
the first sentence of Section 3 (2) says; 

A verified complaint for impeachment may be filed by 
any of its Members or by a citizen which shall be referred 
to the proper committee of the House for investigation and 
report. 

I suggest that the Committee should also consider 
within what time that report should be submitted 
because it could be frozen in the Committee. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


273 


MR. REGALADO. Tins is with respect to Section 4, 
regarding the Sandiganbayan, otherwise known as the 
Anti-Graft Court. It has been noted in the proposed 
resolution that it shall continue to function and exercise 
its jurisdiction as provided by law. If I am not mistaken, 
the law referred to is P.D. No. 1 606 and this law, insofar 
as the Sandiganbayan justices are concerned, appears 
to be an anachronism in itself in the matter of their 
removal by impeachment. Under the present state of the 
law, the presiding justice of the Sandiganbayan has the 
rank of a presiding justice of the Intermediate Appellate 
Court and the associate justices of the Sandiganbayan 
have the rank of associate justices of the Intermediate 
Appellate Court. Yet the anachronism is this: While the 
members of the Sandiganbayan are, and the Sandigan- 
bayan itself is, a part of the judicial department, these 
justices can be removed only by impeachment. If 
Section 4 says that the Sandiganbayan shall continue to 
function and exercise its jurisdiction as provided by law, 
then it would appear that these justices can be removed 
only by impeachment because of the statutory provision 
under P.D. No. 1606, and yet, they are not among those 
mentioned as the impeachable officials under the pre- 
ceding Section 2. Does the Committee intend to 
continue the state of things wherein these justices of a 
special court can be removed only by impeachment, 
whereas their counterparts in the Intermediate Ap- 
pellate Court can be removed not necessarily by 
impeachment? I ask the Committee to look into that. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to say something in 
connection with the Commissioner’s last statement. 

MR. REGALADO. My question is: Under Section 4, 
can the justices of the Sandiganbayan be removed only 
by impeachment as is the present state of the law? 

MR- NOLLEDO. What law is that, before I answer 
the Commissioner’s question? 

MR. REGALADO. If I am not mistaken, it is P.D. 
No. 1606. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In that case, assuming that we give 
that P.D. No. 1606 a category of the law, if that law is 
repealed by the legislature, the basis will be lost, mean- 
ing, the provision on whether or not they are removable 
by impeachment will also be correspondingly repealed. 
So I do not see any anachronism involved in the situa- 
tion because the provision authorizing impeachment is 
not a constitutional provision, but a mere statutory 
provision. And when it is a statutory provision, it can be 
repealed. 

MR. REGALADO. When I said the provision is an 
anachronism, I am referring to the present state of the 
law. But if the Commissioner will agree that this pro- 
vision be eliminated, then the anachronism will not 
exist. 


MR. MONSOD. For the information of the Com- 
missioner, we were addressing ourselves here to the 
continuity of the institution, and we would welcome 
any suggestions or amendments at the proper time. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, that is why I said that this is 
without prejudice to an amendment, so that the Com- 
mittee can enjoy its weekend going over these pro- 
visions. I think we should clarify Section 8 a little more, 
because it says: 

The Ombudsman and his Deputies shall be natural-born 

citizens of the Philippines, at least forty years old, with a 

college degree, or a member of the Philippine Bar. 

Unless otherwise recast, it would appear that the 
Ombudsman himself need not be a member of the 
Philippine Bar, but with only a college degree. 

MR. MONSOD. I believe there might have been a 
typographical error here and, again, an amendment 
would be in order. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, thank you. 

On Section 10, regarding the Ombudsman, there has 
been concern aired by Commissioner Rodrigo about 
who will see to it that the Ombudsman will perform his 
duties because he is something like a guardian of the 
government. This recalls the statement of Juvenal that 
while the Ombudsman is the guardian of the people, 
“Quis custodiet ipsos custodies,” who will guard the 
guardians? I understand here that the Ombudsman 
who has the rank of a chairman of a constitutional 
commission is also removable only by impeachment. 

MR. ROMULO. That is the intention, Madam 
President. 

MR. REGALADO. Only the Ombudsman? 

MR. MONSOD. Only the Ombudsman. 

MR. REGALADO. So not his deputies, because I am 
concerned with the phrase “have the rank of” We 
know, for instance, that the City Fiscal of Manila has 
the rank of a justice of the Intermediate Appellate 
Court, and yet he is not a part of the judiciary. So I 
think we should clarify that also and read our discus- 
sions into the Record for purposes of the Commission 
and the Committee. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. If I m ay just comment: the 
Ombudsman in this provision is a rank in itself really. 
That is how we look at it. But for purposes of govern- 
ment classitication and salary, we thought we have to 
give him a recognizable or an existing rank as a point of 
reference more than anything else. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, but my concern is whether 
or not he is removable only by impeachment, because 


274 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


Section 2 enumerates the impeachable officials, and 
it does not mention public officers with the rank of 
constitutional commissioners. 


MR. ROMULO. But we do mention them as the 
Ombudsman is mentioned in that enumeration. We use 
the word “Ombudsman” because we would like it to be 
his title; we do not want him called “Chairman” or 
“Justice.” We want him called Ombudsman. 


MR. REGALADO. In connection also with that 
concern of Commissioner Rodrigo regarding the 
Ombudsman being merely a duplication, I have here the 
records of the former Ombudsman to show that one of 
the reasons he could not function in his administrative 
or recommendatory capacity was the number of cases 
for prosecution which took almost all his time. So 
I believe that there should really be an Ombudsman 
to take care of the recommendatory, policy-determining, 
policy-suggesting or administrative aspect of his posi- 
tion. The whole task of prosecution should be left to a 
regular Tanodbayan. 


One more thing, and I think the Commissioner should 
look into this: In the Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies where the Chairman and I 

Prn°nn< : e p a H Ch p 0t , e V S C °™ pany ’ the ™ has been submitted 
fionXe a Re r solutlon N °- 365 which seeks to constitu- 

! a rp C °— n 0n Human Ri S hts with inves- 

tigatory, reportonal and recommendatory powers 

Wou?d r thee™ 10 " 3 0f hUman are concerned 

having thpcp f mi . ssi0ner consider the possibility of 
Commission unc * ons °t die proposed constitutional 

fancHons of ,2 n T2 R ‘ ghts ingrafted tha 

need to crest.. Ptbudsman so that there will be no 

for that nnmo anodier const i tL, tional commission only 

bv T Smh BU ' lf u' heSe func,io " s ‘ak en over 

officer thM no m m ° himSelf is a constitutional 
officer, then, possibly, it will not only be economical 

o/ the 80 s V amr em T “ Wil ‘ resul1 in nonduplication 
of the same investigatory, recommendatory and 

reportonal functions because these are limited unte this 

vi rr- 1 think 

Ombudsman because 0 'aft^ad^hi^unctions^cover^H 

governmental institutions. cover an 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President tho ru • 
the Committee on Constitute i Chairrnan °* 

Agencies is not here, but I am a'm ° ,nrn ]. sslons ar| d 
mittee and we would like to tell th ? C ° m ‘ 

Chainnan and the members have 6 + b< ^ dy u that the 
setting up a Commission on Human R^hte became**. 

violation of human rights is a vnn, S • . Decause tn< 
our country, and the Ombudsman reallv ^ roblem . “ 
enough area of activities already I think vJe !hn ?h 
a. the Ombudsman no. h O„,y 

MO offenses or crimes but also into governmenUneffl 
ciency, impropriety and misconduct that may not real b 
amount to crime And by definition that is already quit 
a wide and broad range of functions. 4 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President. I am the 
Chairman of the Subcommittee on Proposed Additional 
Constitutional Commissions in the same Committee, but 
I was never consulted on this matter. That is why when 
I went over this proposed resolution which seeks to 
create a new and additional constitutional commission, 
that was the first time I went over the proposed func- 
tions of that Commission on Human Rights and I had 
toyed with the idea that possibly they could be placed 
also under the duties and functions of the Ombudsman. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I was informed by 
the Chairman that he is sorry if the same views have not 
been shared with the Commissioner. Perhaps, it is a 
tentative conclusion on his part, and I am sure that that 
can be ironed out over the weekend. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, because I got my copy of 
that proposed resolution only yesterday, although I am 
the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Proposed Addi- 
tional Commissions. 

Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, this Member is 
now the Acting Floor Leader by substitution. 

Madam President, may I ask that the honorable 
Commissioner from Pangasinan, Commissioner Bengzon, 
be recognized. Also, I ask the interpellators to limit 
their comments and interpellations to only five minutes. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

On Section 1, line 10, what does the phrase lead 
modest lives” really mean? Suppose a public official, by 
nature, is moneyed, can he not live according to the 
standard of living that he is used to? I mean he is not 
really flaunting. For example, he has been riding in a 
Rolls Royce and he really can afford it, but just because 
he is a public official, would we want him to ride in a 
Toyota? Is that what this phrase means? 

MR. ROMULO. No, I think the Commissioner said 
it himself, not to flaunt, not for conspicuous con- 
sumption. Even the Civil Code has a provision regarding 
this during times of economic distress, and we want to 
emphasize that. Actually, in his official capacity, we 
may want him to ride in a Toyota, as a matter of 
example. When he goes out on his own, he may ride in 
his Rolls Royce, but for his official functions, there 
is no harm in riding in a Toyota. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, perhaps it would 
also be good for us to hear from Commissioner Tadeo, 
the proponent of this resolution accepted by the 
Committee. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


275 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Ang ibig naming sabihin dito ay ’yung 
“living within your means.” Nang malaman ko na ang 
suweldo ni Presidente Cory Aquino ay P8,333, ang sabi 
ko ay Hindi sapat iyon para makabili ng isang Mer- 
cedes Benz, bagamat may mga simpleng kapitan na 
nakatira sa mga malalaking mansyon sa Forbes Park at 
may kotse pa ang mga anak gayong ang Hit ng suweldo 
nila. 

Kaya ko ito ipinasok ay napakahalaga nitong ac- 
countability of public officers. Sa pagsusuri sa ating 
lipunan, tatlo ang nakitang suliranin: una, ang imperia- 
lism; pangalawa, ang bureaucrat capitalism at ang 
pangatlo, ang feudalism. Ang ibig sabihin ng bureau- 
crat capitalism ay ang pagpapayaman sa tungkulin at ang 
pagpapatakbo sa pamahalaan bilang isang negosyo. Sa 
pagsusuri ng UP College of Public Administration, 
noong panahon ng diktadura, ang graft and corruption 
ay umaabot sa P20 billion bawat taon. Napakagrabe 
po nito, P20 billion per annum. Kaya dito sa provision 
on the accountability of public officers, sa pangalawang 
ugat, baka sakaling malunasan natin. Kaya ko nilagyan 
ang Section 1 ng “lead modest lives” ay sa kadahilanang 
noong makita ko iyong suweldo ni Presidente Cory 
Aquino, ako ay nagtaka kung bakit ’yung ibang mga 
officials na may mas mababang suweldo ay nakatira 
sa mga mansyon, mayroong Mercedes Benz at ang 
mga anak ay tig-iisa ng kotse. Ang punto ko lang ay 
ganito: kung gaano ang kinikita ng isang official ay iyon 
lang ang siyang dapat makita sa pamamagitan ng 
simpleng pamumuhay. « 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. That changes the interpretation, 
because if a public official is earning P8,000 a year but 
is moneyed on his own, must he live within that P8,000 
a year? That is precisely my question. 

SR. TAN. I think there is a little difference. It is the 
recognizable excess after he got into office. So if he was 
very rich before and he still is rich, it is all right, just like 
President Cory Aquino. But if there is a recognizable 
excess like the cronies, ’yung mga biglang-yaman, that is 
a different story. 

MR. BENGZON. That is precisely why I wanted that 
interpretation entered into the Record so that we will 
not have any misunderstanding. The proper word would 
probably be “exemplary” instead of “modest” and we 
will make the proper amendment at the proper time. 

My question on page 3 regarding the Ombudsman 
being a member of the Philippine Bar has been asked by 
Commissioner Regalado. 

So I will proceed to page 4, line 18 which states: 
“government-owned corporations. So we aie excluding 


complaints against officials of government-controlled 
corporations like, for example, Manila Gas which is 
60 percent government-owned and 40 percent privately 
owned. 

MR. COLAYCO. We will welcome these amendments 
at the proper time. 

MR. BENGZON. But what is the intention? Does the 
Committee intend to exclude complaints against offi- 
cials of these companies? 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President. The intention 
is not to exclude them. We thank the Commissioner for 
pointing that out. 


MR. BENGZON. Apropos of the points raised by 
Commissioner Rodrigo, in all of these enumerated 
functions of the Ombudsman, am I correct in saying 
that the Ombudsman is a troubleshooter and some kind 
of a “sumbongero” for the people? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, he is a busybody. 


MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that the 
honorable Commissioner Maambong be recognized 
to speak for five minutes. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

Considering that the Acting Floor Leader said that I 
will speak for five minutes, I will now manifest my 
intention that after my time I might have to ask for an 
extension of just a few minutes because I feel that there 
are very important matters that I have to discuss with 
the Committee. 


. 7 r, , . \ ‘ ^ ouncerns or tom- 

missioners Rodrigo and Bengzon about the creation of 
the Ombudsman. I would just like to indicate for the 
record my objection to this creation considering the 
following: I have made a comparative study between the 
Sandiganbayan, the Tanodbayan and the Ombudsman. 

As far as powers are concerned, the Sandiganbayan is 
a court of law. It is created not directly by the Constitu- 
,on but by P D. No 1606 by virtue of the mandate of 
the Constitution. We will notice that the Sandigan- 
bayan as a court of law, according to Section 1 of P. D. 
No 1606, has the same level as the Intermediate Ap- 
pellate Court with all the inherent powers of a court of 
justice. And yet in the present formulation of impeach- 
able otficers, the Committee failed to indicate whether 
its members or justices are impeachable or not, in spite 
of the fact that in the same Section 1 of P.D. No. 1606, 
it is clearly indicated that the justices of the Sandigan 


276 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


bayan are impeachable officers. Incidentally on this 
note, I would like to recall that when we filed a petition 
before the Supreme Court in the case of Rufino Nunez 
vs. Sandiganbayan and the Republic of the Philippines, 
which incidentally we lost, we questioned the mention 
of justices of the Sandiganbayan as impeachable offi- 
cers because they have never been indicated as such in 
the Constitution. 


bayan which has immunities and we have the Ombuds- 
man which has none. 

I would like the Committee to please consider these 
things because I understand from the Chairman that the 
Committee will think about this during this weekend. 

I will now go to the more important point, I have 
already reached my time. 


Compared to the Tanodbayan, while the Sandigan- 
bayan is a court of law, the Tanodbayan is a pro- 
secutory body. When we go down the line to the 
Ombudsman, what is it under the present configuration 
of the proposal? Its power is only recommendatory; it 
directs people to do something, nothing more. As far 
as I am concerned, the Ombudsman under the present 
proposal is inutile as far as powers are concerned. On 
the other hand, it is mentioned that it has the duty to 
act promptly on complaints. And I would like to agree 
with Commissioner Bengzon on this point. So I would 
repeat that its power is only recommendatory; it only 
directs, nothing more. Of course, there is that phrase 
in the proposal which says: “and perform other 

functions and duties as may be provided by law.” 

Second point: As far as impeachability of officers is 
concerned, in the present configuration of the proposal, 
as said, the Sandiganbayan justices do not appear 
I? b ^l aChable ’ althou g h u nder Section 1 of P.D. 

°L t au 3re su PP° se d to be impeachable. As far 
inrlnLH an ° dbayan u JUSticeS are con cemed, they are not 
Ued - ong the mpeacha ble officers. As regards 

hev a?e \ WS depUtieS ’ the Proposal says 

ecommenTt eaChable - ^ * 3 bod V which is only 
secuto^ hnH ry ’ T' a COUrt of l3w ’ nor even a pro- 
TeachaWe offL“ ^ "* C ° nSider its raemb <= K 

m ™, ir . d P01 " t: 0 The Sa ndiganbayan is created by a 
the Constitution. That is why we have P.D. 
t j. amending P.D. No. 1486. In the case of the 
anodbayan, it is also created by a mandate of the 
Constitution. That is why we have P.D. No. 1607 
amending P.D. No. 1487. In the case of the Ombuds- 
S If a pro P° sal now is to create this directly on the 

refer back'tofifpowel - Tt^T' ^ ^ “ 1 
and directory. ° nly recommendatory 

immunitL^The classificatio " as to their 

immunities" under TsoiTm d ° " 0t f haVe 
Tanodbayan justices, however, Section' "rf V d 

incidentally are j™” uni,ie . s . "’ hich 

. , i ^ immunities which had 

been copied almost verbatim in the case of the executive 
order granting powers to the Presidential r executlve 
on Good Government. In the case of the 

and his deputies, there is no mention that thevTre 
immune from civil prosecution. y 

So we have a situation where a court of law has no 
immunities. We have a prosecutory arm in the Tanod- 


MR. NOLLEDO. May we have the questions? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Does the Commissioner have 
questions to ask of the Committee? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I have questions on the next 
matter which I will discuss, and I now move, Madam 
President, that I be given a time extension of a few 
minutes, if it is all right with the body. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

I will now concern myself with the statement of the 
Chairman that this impeachment proceeding is very 
important in the light of the previous happenings in this 
country. I would like to believe that he was referring to 
the impeachment case filed against the former President 
which was covered by Resolution No. 644. 

My questions will be directed to this point in order 
that in the future we will not have difficulties. I will not 
ask on the procedural aspect. I understand Commis- 
sioner Davide will take care of that. I am more con- 
cerned about the nature of the impeachment proceed- 
ings on which we, members of the Committee on Justice 
and Good Government that took cognizance of that 
impeachment proceeding against the former President, 
really had a lot of difficulty. 

We have now in the present proposal the following 
grounds for impeachment: culpable violation of the 
Constitution, treason, bribery, other high crimes, graft 
and corruption or betrayal of trust. I think we have no 
problem in the case of treason and bribery because these 
are all covered by law. I do not think we have also any 
problem in the case of graft and corruption because it is 
covered by RA 1319, which was promulgated on 
August 17, 1960. We will now concern ourselves with 
the interpretation of the phrases “other high crimes” 
and “betrayal of trust.” I will start by asking the Com- 
mittee this question: What is really the thinking of the 
Committee as far as impeachment proceedings are con- 
cerned? Are impeachment proceedings criminal in 
nature or not? In order to answer this very clearly, I 
would like to indicate the following: In the case of State 
v. Lerse, 70 Nebraska 92, which is a United States case, 
the Supreme Court ruled that the proceeding is likened 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


277 


to a proceeding by indictment in a court of criminal 
jurisdiction. It is in its natu're highly penal and is 
governed by rules of law applicable to criminal prosecu- 
tion. On the other hand, I would like to indicate this to 
the Committee that in the case of official misconduct, 
we have here statements which I think the Committee 
should comment on. Official misconduct is supposed to 
fall into three categories: One, exceeding the constitu- 
tional bounds of the powers of the office in derogation 
of the powers of another branch of government; two, 
behaving in a manner grossly incompatible with the 
proper function and purpose of the office; and, three, 
employing the power of the office for an improper 
purpose or personal gain. 

The provision which we have here says: 

. . . impeachment and the criminal law serve funda- 
mentally different purposes. Impeachment is the first step 
in a remedial process. The purpose is not personal punish- 
ment. Its function is primarily to maintain constitutional 
government. The general applicability of the criminal law 
also makes it inappropriate as the standard. In an im- 
peachment proceeding, a President is called to account for 
abusing powers which only a President possesses. Im- 
peachable conduct may include the serious failure to dis- 
charge the affirmative duties imposed on the President by 
the Constitution. Unlike a criminal case, the cause for 
removal may be based on his entire course of conduct 
in office. It may be a course of conduct more than in- 
dividual acts that has a tendency to subvert constitutional 
government. (Power of Impeachment - Guide to Congress, 
p. 149) 

For purposes of proper elucidation, what is the 
thinking now of the Committee as far as this impeach- 
ment procedure is concerned? Is this a criminal pro- 
ceeding? If so, we have to use the principle of criminal 
law. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. Firstly, we agree with the quota- 
tion that the Commissioner has just read. Insofar as we 
are concerned, the procedure is analogous to a criminal 
trial but it is not a criminal prosecution per se. The goal 
of an impeachment is merely to remove the fellow from 
office for the crimes indicated. However, Section 3 (6) 
of this proposed Article itself — and this is really very 
close to the provision of the 1935 Constitution - says: 

Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend 
further than the removal from office and disqualification 
to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust, or profit 
under the Government of the Philippines, but the party 
convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to pro- 
secution, trial and punishment according to law. 

In essence, I think that answers the Commissioner’s 
question. He is then subject to a separate prosecution, 
whether civilly or criminally, for the acts that he had 
committed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I proceed now to two very 
short questions considering that we have already identi- 


fied the problem and the answer is that it is not a purely 
criminal prosecution in terms of procedure. We have 
here a statement in the book of Simpson which reads: 

A person subject to impeachment by Congress is entitled 
to due process of law although presently there is little 
judicial authority. It can be suggested that he is also enti- 
tled to his privilege against self-incrimination, right to 
counsel, right to be informed of the nature and the cause 
of the accusation against him, and the right to be con- 
fronted with adversary witnesses. (Treaties on Federal 
Impeachment, p. 27) 

Would this statement be applicable to an impeach- 
ment proceeding? 

MR. ROMULO. As the provisions now read, I think 
the Senate, as well as the House, will set up its own 
rules. I do not know whether or not we have to adhere 
to that because what the Commissioner has read, strictly 
speaking, is a criminal proceeding. But the President like 
any citizen is entitled to the bill of rights, like con- 
frontation of witnesses, notice of the charges and so on. 

I think those are fundamental and he is entitled to 
them. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Let us go to a bottom-line 
question then. When the Senate acting as a body will 
now try the impeachment case, will it conduct the pro- 
ceeding using principles of criminal procedure? 

MR. ROMULO. I do not think, strictly speaking, that 
it need be criminal procedures. The important thing, I 
believe, is that the involved party should know the 
charges. He must have the opportunity to answer the 
charges and the proceedings must be, in total, fair 
and impartial. I do not think we have to go to the 
minutiae of a criminal proceeding because that is not 
the intention. This is not a criminal proceeding per se. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In the matter of presentation, for 
example, of evidence, when it comes to treason and 
biibery , would the rules on criminal procedure be ap- 
plied, considering that I am now particularizing on the 
ground which is punishable by the Revised Penal Code, 
like treason or bribery? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, but we will notice that, strictly 
speaking, for the crime of treason under the Revised 
Penal Code, he is answerable for that crime somewhere 
else. So my conclusion is that obviously, it is in the 
criminal court where we will apply all the minutiae of 
evidence and proceedings and all these due processes. 
But we can be more liberal when it comes to the 
impeachment proceedings, for instance, in the Senate, 
because we are after the removal of that fellow, and 
conviction in that case really amounts to his remova 
fiom office. The courts of justice will take care of the 
criminal and civil aspects. 


278 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


MR. MAAMBONG. Last point, just to enrich our 
records. I would like the Committee to comment on this 
quotation from Philippine Constitution by Former 
Chief Justice Fernando, wherein he said: 

In the United States Constitution, the term is high crime 
and misdemeanors. The Philippine Constitution speaks only 
of high crimes.' There is support for the view that while 
there need not be a showing of the criminal character of 
the act imputed, it must be of sufficient seriousness as to 
justify the belief that there was a grave violation of the 
trust imposed on the official sought to be impeached, 
(pp. 460-461) 

Would the Committee agree to this statement? 


MR. ROMULO. Yes. Let me say that essentially, 
impeachment is a political act. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. I will also quote the report 
of the General Committee on the impeachment of 
President Quirino, Volume IV, Congressional Records 
House of Representatives, 1553: 

High crimes refer to those offenses which, like treason 
and bribery, are indictable offenses and are of such enor- 
mous gravity that they strike at the very life or orderly 
working of the government. 

Would the Committee agree to this? 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, of 
President is involved. 


course, especially if the 


committed ^ BC ? NG ' F i nall y> 1 will again refer to thi 
Quirino on th? 0 ^ ° n impeac hment of Presiden 

taZ” an<n quoted Vi ° la,i ° n ° f the C °" sti 

Culpable violation of the Constitution means willful 
and intentional violation of the Constitution and not 
violation committed unintentionally or involuntarily or 
in good faith or thru an honest mistake of judgment. 

Would the Committee agree? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, we agree with that. 

And this is really the final auot- 
tion which I would like the Cnm™u+ V 6 Iina qUOt< 

Chief Justice Fernando also Sjl 6 C ° mment OI 

Culpable violation implies deliberate intent perhaps 

for 'v 5 “ 

commands. 0 * “ ‘° ^ 

Could this be an agreeable interpretation to tf 

Committee/ 


MR. MAAMBONG. The Commissioner has been very 
kind. 

Thank you very much. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, before the Acting 
Floor Leader calls for the next interpellator, I would 
like to make a comment on the statements of Com- 
missioners Rodrigo and Maambong that the function of 
the Ombudsman is merely recommendatory and that 
the office may constitute as a useless appendage in the 
government . . . 

Suppose a common tao goes to a public office and he 
is not attended to, so he complains to the chief of the 
division. The usual happening is that there is indif- 
ference. He feels aggrieved, he goes home and he does 
not pursue his case anymore. He does not know where 
to go. So he goes to the Ombudsman, and the Ombuds- 
man assists him by being his lawyer for free. In this 
case, does the Commissioner think we are not doing 
service to our people by giving him a lawyer for free 
to champion his cause in order that possible abuse 
on the part of government officials may be minimized, 
if not eradicated? 

I would like the body to know that it is not exactly 
true to state that the basic function of the Ombudsman 
is recommendatory. If we look on page 4, Section 12, 
one of the functions of the Ombudsman is: 

To direct, upon complaint or at its own instance, any 
public official or employee of the government, as well as of 
any government-owned corporation or institution, to per- 
form and expedite any act or duty required of him by law, 
or to stop, prevent, and correct any abuse or impropriety 
in the performance of duties. 

Many of the valid complaints of the common tao who 
go to public offices are not publicized; no one assists 
them, so they just leave the government offices in utter 
exasperation. But when the public officers know that 
there is an office of the Ombudsman that will champion 
his cause, government officials will also be careful in 
mistreating the common tao. They know that their 
actions can be publicized. They know that the Ombuds- 
man can recommend their removal. They know that the 
Ombudsman will direct them to perform their duties. 
And when they do not perform their duties, they will 
be investigated. These are factors that should be con- 
sidered to deter public officials from discharging their 
duties with inefficiency. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that the 
honorable Commissioner Hilario G. Davide be recog- 
nized. 


MR- ROMULO. Yes, subject to exception 
last administrator we had. 


such as the 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


279 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the Committee yield to some clarificatory 
questions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Gladly. 

MR. DAVIDE. On impeachment, the Committee 
has now added as another ground the betrayal of public 
trust. Would not the Committee consider culpable 
violation of the Constitution, treason, bribery, other 
high crimes, graft and corruption as included in the 
phrase “betrayal of public trust”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think they are, if we will stretch 
the meaning of “betrayal of public trust.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. If all these — culpable violation 
of the Constitution, treason, bribery, other high crimes, 
graft and corruption — are already included in the 
phrase “betrayal of public trust,” can we not just, there- 
fore, limit the ground for impeachment to betrayal of 
public trust? 

MR. NOLLEDO. As I said, the violation of an oath of 
office does not necessarily constitute any of the fore- 
going instances. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, precisely. A violation of an oath 
of office is itself a violation of the Constitution because 
a public official’s oath is in the Constitution. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The provision says that the violation 
must be culpable. Suppose it is not culpable, it will not 
be categorized as such, but it is serious enough to justify 
the impeachment proceedings? 

MR. DAVIDE. In any case, even the violation of the 
Constitution is betrayal of trust. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is the reason we put betrayal 
of trust in order to remedy the loophole that will be 
created in view of the use of the word “culpable.” 

MR. DAVIDE. The idea then of the proposal is really 
to relax impeachment as a ground for the removal of the 
President. 

MR- NOLLEDO. I think the Commissioner is right, 
Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. It that is so, since even culpable 
violation of the Constitution is already included in the 
betrayal of public trust, why can we not just limit the 
ground to mere betrayal of public trust? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We will consider any possible 
amendment at the proper time. 


MR. DAVIDE. So the thrust of the report is really to 
relax impeachment as a process. I notice, however, that 
the proposal now requires a majority vote of all the 
members of the House to initiate impeachment, while 
the present constitutional provision requires only a vote 
of one-fifth of the Members. The provision of the 1935 
Constitution is also one-fifth vote of the Members. Why 
did we increase it to a majority vote of all the Members, 
if the idea is to relax impeachment? Does not the Com- 
mittee realize that we will now have a House of Rep- 
resentatives with a membership of 250? A majority of 
the membership will be 126, yet one-fifth would only 
be 50. So if we are going to relax impeachment, we 
should retain the one-fifth requirement to initiate 
impeachment and, perhaps, even reduce the requirement 
for conviction. 

MR MONSOD. If we will recall, during the sponsor- 
ship, we precisely said that this is a matter that we 
would like very much to be discussed on the floor, 
because there is a very delicate balancing here of the 
right to demand accountability with the right of the 
government to a certain amount of stability and 
freedom from harassment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is correct. 

MR. MONSOD. And we would like very much to be 
advised by the body on this. We were looking at the past 
where, in the 1973 Constitution, a vote of 20 percent of 
the membership of the House and, in the 1935 Consti- 
tution, a vote of two-thirds of the membership of the 
House were required to initiate impeachment proceed- 
ings. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is for conviction, but not for 
initiation. Initiation of impeachment proceedings still 
requires a vote of one-fifth of the membership of the 
House under the 1935 Constitution. 

MR. MONSOD. A two-thirds vote of the membership 
of the House is required to initiate proceedings. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, tor initiation of impeachment 
proceedings, only one-fifth vote of the membership of 
the House is required; for conviction, a two-thirds vote 
of the membership is required. 

MR MONSOD. For conviction, it is a three-fourths 
vote of the Senate, Madam President. 

MR DAVIDE. I see. 

MR. ROMULO. No, it is two-thirds vote. 

MR DAVIDE. Here we now recognize the right of 
every citizen and a Member of the Lower House to file a 
complaint. However, the proposal would require a 
referral of the complaint to a committee. Would it no 


280 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


make the process rigorous because the committee can 
kill the proposal? Suppose the committee now votes 
against the impeachment complaint, may one-fifth or ^ 
majority of the Members of the National Assembly 
overturn that rejection by the committee? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. These are the 
points that we would like to be discussed. 

MR. DAVIDE. However, if we will allow one-fifth of 
the membership of the legislature to overturn a report 
of the committee, we have here Section 3 (4) which 
reads: 


MR. DAVIDE. What could be the nature of the 
evidence which the Committee would require? Would it 
be mere preponderance of evidence, just like in the 
fiscal’s office? Thus, if it believes that there is reason- 
able ground to believe that a probable cause exists, the 
committee must have to make a report for the articles 
of impeachment? 

MR. ROMULO. We did not go into that precisely 
because it would then partake too much of a criminal 
proceeding. As I said, we believe this is a political act 
more than anything else. 


No impeachment proceedings shall be initiated against 
the same official more than once within a period of one 
year. 

So, necessarily, under this particular subsection, we 
will, in effect, disallow one-fifth of the Members of the 
National Assembly to revive an impeachment move by 
an individual or an ordinary Member. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. May I say that Section 3 (4) is 
there to look towards the possibility of a very liberal 
impeachment proceeding. Second, we were ourselves 
struggling with that problem where we are faced with 
com Plaint rather than the signatures of 
one-fifth, or whatever it is we decide, of the Members of 
the House. So whether to put a period for the Commit- 
ee o report, whether we should not allow the Com- 
mittee to overrule a mere verified complaint, are some 
of the questions we would like to be discussed. 


MR. DAVIDE. While it may not necessarily be a 
criminal proceeding, does not the Committee believe 
that we have to give some guidelines to the committee 
because it can just kill any proposal for that matter? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. There are two ways of handling 
that, either we put it specifically in this provision or we 
put it in the Journal for the guidance of the House when 
it establishes its rules. 

MR. DAVIDE. When an impeachment charge is, as 
recommended by the Committee, signed by a majority 
of all the members of the House, should it always be in 
the nature of a complaint which must be verified, or is 
it enough that it is in the nature of a resolution? 

MR. ROMULO. No, in our thinking it should be 
under oath. 


, We can probably overrule a rejectioi 

by the Committee by providing that it can be over 
turned by say, one-half or a majority, or one-fifth o 
the members of the legislature, and that such ovei 
turning will not amount to a refiling which is prohibite* 
under Section 3 (4). 

Another point, Madam President. May the Committee 
taking into account evidence obtained in the course o 

o t h e ror rn ° ° f * charge for impeachment, ad< 

other grounds for impeachment? 


MR. ROMULO. That is not prohibited per se in our 
proposal, and again we are willing to consider that. 


MR. DAVIDE. Another question. Suppose the < 
mittee’s report is a rejection, under the proposal 
not very clear whether the overturning of “hat le 
can be done by the legislature. Does it mean ?l at 
a report shall have to be archived if it is a reject on’ 


MR. DAVIDE. Must all of the signatories swear to the 
oath, or would only one of them be enough? 

MR. ROMULO. No, in Section 3 (3) that would be all 
of them, as distinguished from Section 2 (2) where only 
one Member can sign. 

MR. DAVIDE. All of them must have to swear to the 
oath. 

Under the impeachment rules of the Interim Batasang 
Pambansa, an impeachment charge may be filed by a 
Member of the Batasan either by a verified complaint or 
an ordinary resolution, and must forthwith be calen- 
dared within three session days from its filing. It would 
not even require a certification by the Speaker as to its 
correctness in form. But in the matter now of a 
complaint filed by an ordinary citizen, would it be im- 
mediately calendared also, or shall it pass the Speaker 
for him to determine the correctness in form of the 
complaint? 


MR. ROMULO. Yes. 


MR. DAVIDE. In other words, no Member o 
Lower House can even comment on the report? 


MR. ROMULO. That is not contemplated here. 


MR. ROMULO. We leave that to the procedures of 
the House. 

MR. DAVIDE. And, finally, for convicting a person 
for impeachment, would proof beyond reasonable 
doubt be required? 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


281 


MR. ROMULO. Again, since this is not a criminal 
proceeding, I would not think so. 

MR. DAVIDE. If a President or anybody else who is 
impeachable is prosecuted in an impeachment proceed- 
ing for graft and corrupt practices and is convicted, 
would such a conviction not bar a succeeding criminal 
prosecution in court for graft and corruption or for the 
same offense? 

MR. ROMULO. Absolutely it would not bar a suc- 
ceeding criminal prosecution in court for the same of- 
fense because the provision of Section 6 is very clear. 

MR. DAVIDE. So it would not bar a succeeding pro- 
secution in court. 

But would that decision of the Senate convicting him 
for graft and corruption be an admissible evidence to 
prove the crime in court for the same offense, or should 
it be considered as not admissible because otherwise it 
might unduly influence the judge? 

MR. ROMULO. I should think it would be admissible 
but subject to the quantum of evidence that the par- 
ticular charge in court would normally require under 
our rules on evidence. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, that decision itself 
would not be considered as the evidence for the con- 
viction. 

MR. ROMULO. No. That would not be permitted in 
a regular court of justice. 

MR. DAVIDE. I notice in the report and from the 
answers during the period of interpellations that the 
Ombudsman would have no right to conduct investiga- 
tions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, that is not true. 

MR. ROMULO. The Ombudsman has the right to 
conduct investigations. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, it can conduct investigations. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It can conduct investigations but it 
cannot prosecute before a court of justice. 

MR* COLAYCO. At the inception, no. I mean when a 
complaint is filed, from the inception of the complaint 
he can already act because it is a question of finding 
0U t from the person being complained about whether 
or not the complaint is valid. It is a very simple pro- 
cedure. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, to determine whether 
the complaint is valid or not, necessarily he has to 
conduct an investigation. 


MR. COLAYCO. Afterwards, yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under Section 12 (2), we empower 
the Ombudsman to direct the officer concerned to take 
appropriate action against a public official or employee 
at fault, and to recommend his removal, suspension, 
demotion, fine, censure or prosecution, and to see to 
the compliance of the directive. My first question is 
with regard to the recommendation for removal. Does it 
mean that the offending public official or employee may 
be deprived of due process because there is already a 
recommendation for removal? 

MR. COLAYCO. Of course not. 

MR. DAVIDE. And since he is to see the compliance 
of the directive, which is to recommend his removal, 
etc., what if the person to whom the directive is ad- 
dressed will not comply with it? 

MR. COLAYCO. There are always administrative 
remedies against that. 

MR. DAVIDE. Could the offending party be pro- 
secuted then for disobedience? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes, as the case may be and as the 
regulations of the civil service so require. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, in effect, we will have a superbody 
in this case which can be even more powerful than any 
other administrative body. 

MR. COLAYCO. More or less that is the intention. 

MR. MONSOD. Except that we do not precisely give 
him the prosecutory functions in order to have some 
balance here, and we do not precisely want him to be a 
supergovernment overseer. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is exactly the reason I am afraid 
it might be a superbody because it does not have by 
itself the prosecutory power, so it will necessarily 
recommend to the fiscal’s office the prosecution of an 
individual. But we know for a fact that the fiscal’s office 
cannot just immediately file the case. It will have to 
conduct the preliminary investigation and decide for 
itself whether there is a reasonable ground to believe 
that a case may be filed. 

MR. COLAYCO. The Commissioner is correct. 

MR. DAVIDE. So if the fiscal’s office believes that 
there is really no basis to the recommendation, yet it 
will be at the mercy of the Ombudsman because the 
Ombudsman will now prosecute him for disobeying t ic 
recommendation of the directive. 


282 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


MR. COLAYCO. No; the Commissioner is wrong 
there. The Ombudsman can only order the investigation, 
that is all. 

MR. DA VIDE. I see. 

MR. COLAYCO. He cannot overrule. 


MR. ROMULO. We would just like to observe that 
actually there will not be a total duplication of func- 
tions because the fiscal is not allowed to investigate 
motu proprio, that is, by himself; whereas the Ombuds- 
man, precisely, as I said, is a busybody, so he can 
initiate investigations on his own. So, from that point 
of view, there is a division of functions. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


MR. DA VIDE. There is the danger of duplication of 
functions because the Ombudsman will investigate and 
the result may be forwarded to the fiscal’s office. The 
fiscal’s office will then review it before filing the case. 
So two bodies will have to investigate before the same 
matter reaches the court. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Why not? It will lessen the burden 
of the fiscal. We will notice that under the law on 
criminal investigation, as now embodied in the 1985 
Law on Criminal Procedure, mere affidavits on the part 
of the respondents would suffice for the fiscal to deter- 
mine whether or not there is a prima facie case. And it is 
only when the fiscal needs clarification that he may 
propound questions to the parties before the case. If the 
mbudsman had done his duty, we cannot deny that 
his w, 11 lessen to a considerable degree the burden of 
e isca an , thus, expedite the appropriate action. 

fi\^l R h P r a AVI ? E ' !t WiH multi P I y th e burden of the 
vestiea b fion T e n tW ih agencies wil1 have to conduct the in- 
of functions. ° er Words > 11 will result in duplication 

MR. NOLLEDO. I do not think so. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is all, Madam President. 

Thank you very much. 

nizld E PRESIDENT ' The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I would just 
like to ask the Committee three questions. 

On Section 3, page 2, lines 12 to 14, the last para- 
graph reads as follows: “No impeachment proceedings 
shall be initiated against the same official more than 
once within a period of one year.” Does this mean that 
even if an evidence is discovered to support another 
charge or ground for impeachment, a second or subse- 
quent proceeding cannot be initiated against the same 
official within a period of one year? In other words, 
one year has to elapse before a second or subsequent 
charge or proceeding can be initiated. The intention 
may be to protect the public official from undue 
harassment. On the other hand, is this not undue limita- 
tion on the accountability of public officers? Anyway, 
when a person accepts a public trust, does he not 
consider taking the risk of accounting for his acts or 
misfeasance in office? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, the intention here really is to 
limit. This is not only to protect public officials who, in 
this case, are of the highest category from harassment 
but also to allow the legislative body to do its work 
which is lawmaking. Impeachment proceedings take a 
lot of time. And if we allow multiple impeachment 
charges on the same individual to take place, the legisla- 
ture will do nothing else but that. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President mav I ask 
Comra.ss.oner Villacorta be recognized. ’ ' * 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, 

THE PRESIDENT. What k th , 
sioner Monsod? e Pl eas ure of Commis- 


MR. MONSOD. Madam Pr P «m * 
tional explanation. May We jus" ’aTk C^ ^ 
Romulo to address himself to a iw / Sk Cornrniss, o n ei 
sioner Davide? point raised by Commis- 


MR. SARMIEN 1 O. May I ask. Madam 
Commissioner Romulo be recognized 


President, that 


MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you, Madam President. 

I have another question. I would like to know why of 
all the provisions we have discussed, Section 5, lines 
7 to 12, has to refer to a particular provision in the 
1973 Constitution. May I repeat that? Section 5, 
page 3, lines 7 to 1 2. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I would like to know why this 
section has to refer to a particular provision in the 1973 
Constitution, instead of just repeating the desired 1973 
provisions as was done in other articles that we have 
approved. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog 

nized. 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, it is a shorthand way of identi- 
fying exactly who this Tanodbayan is. It is a point of 
reference, more than anything else. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


283 


MR. VILLACORTA. Yes. because, as I have observed 
in the other articles that we have approved and arc still 
considering, whenever we would like to use provisions 
in the previous Constitutions, we would simply repeat 
the wording rather than refer to these provisions. 
Referring to these provisions would confuse the user of 
the Constitution. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, that is an alterna- 
tive that we can consider. But if we mention only the 
phrase to repeat the words in the 1973 Constitution, we 
realize that we would have to have a separate provision 
in the Transitory Provisions and we were trying to con- 
solidate it here. But we would be open to amendments 
or suggestions in that regard. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you very much. 

I am also wondering why P.D. No. 1630 was 
referred to, if I am not mistaken, by Honorable Co- 
layco and Nolledo as a basis of the powers ot the 
Tanodbayan as provided by law. Would it not be 
hazardous to anchor the constitutional powers of the 
Tanodbayan from a decree of a discredited regime 
considering that the decrees of Mr. Marcos may all be 
repealed one day? 

MR. COLAYCO. We were referring to an established 
agency of the government already. And the intent of the 
Committee is merely to make a plain statement that it is 
its intention to retain the agency as it was functioning 
before the new Constitution is written. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I find it hazardous because we 
seem to be enshrining the decrees of Mr. Marcos, and 
even the immunities contained in those decrees. 

MR. COLAYCO. Some of those decrees are all right, 
I think. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, but should this Con- 
stitution be confined to certain decrees? We are not 
referring only to the decrees of Mr. Marcos. But should 
we be bound by the executive orders of certain previous 
presidents? 

MR. COLAYCO. With reference to Sections 4 and 5, 
as I said, the intention of the Committee is to make a 
statement retaining the Sandiganbayan and the Tanod- 
bayan. Since these two agencies are functioning under 
the laws mandated by the original Constitution, short of 
requiring another piece ol legislation to allow them to 
continue as before and to avoid complications, we 
thought it is a misinformation to simply refer to them 
as functioning and exercising their jurisdiction as 
provided under the law which established them. 

MR. VILLACORTA. If that is so, may I submit my 
humble suggestion to the Committee that we just state 
this in the manner that we desire, without reference 


to these decrees because of the dangers inherent in 
doing so. But I understand from the discussions that 
that is the intent of the Committee, that the records of 
our deliberations be consulted in the future. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, there are some 
realities that we cannot wish out of existence. The fact 
is that the Tanodbayan and the Sandiganbayan have 
been created pursuant to the mandate of the Constitu- 
tion and the enabling acts were decrees. We have men- 
tioned here in this Constitution that the reference is 
only to the particular section of the Constitution, and 
there are laws or decrees that enable this particular 
provision to be implemented. We were concerned about 
creating confusion, ambiguity or a vacuum because 
these institutions are in place. We even mentioned them 
here; and, in any case, they have to be mentioned in the 
Transitory Provisions. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you. I do not want to 
belabor that point. 

One last matter with respect to the use of the words 
“betrayal of trust” as embodying a ground for impeach- 
ment that has been raised by the Honorable Regalado. I 
am not a lawyer so I can anticipate the difficulties that a 
layman may encounter in understanding this provision 
and also the possible abuses that the legislature can com- 
mit in interpreting this phrase. It is to be noted that this 
ground was also suggested in the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention. A review of the Journals of that Conven- 
tion will show that it was not included; it was construed 
as encompassing acts which are just short of being crimi- 
nal but which constitute gross faithlessness against public 
trust, tyrannical abuse of power, inexcusable negligence 
of duty, favoritism and gross abuse of discretionary 
powers. I understand from the earlier discussions that 
these constitute violations of the oath of office, and I 
also heard the Honorable Davide say that even the 
criminal acts that were enumerated in the earlier 1973 
provision on this matter constitute betrayal of public 
trust as well. In order to avoid confusion, would it not 
be clearer to stick to the wording of Section 2 which 
reads, may be removed from office on impeachment 
for and conviction of, culpable violation of the Consti- 
tution, treason, bribery, and other high crimes, graft 
and corruption or VIOLATION OF HIS OATH OF 
OFFICE ” because if betrayal of public trust encom- 
passes the earlier acts that were enumerated, then it 

would behoove us to be equally clear about this last 
provision or phrase. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree with the Commissioner that 
there were a lot of resolutions in the 1971 Constitution- 
al Convention making betrayal of public trust as one of 
the grounds for impeachment, and the Commissioner 
knows already what happened in the Convention. 
Marcos was very afraid of the term “betrayal of public 
trust because at that time, he was already guilty o 


284 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


violating that expression. And so, the Marcos boys did 
not like that to be placed in the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention. I think we will miss a golden opportunity 
if we fail to adopt the words “betrayal of public trust” 
in the 1986 Constitution. But I would like him to know 
that we are amenable to any possible amendment. 
Besides, I think plain error of judgment, where circum- 
stances may indicate that there is good faith, to my 
mind, will not constitute betrayal of public trust if 
that statement will allay the fears of difficulty in inter- 
preting the term. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you very much, Madam 
President. 


MR. SUAREZ. I thank Commissioner Villacorta. 

Madam President, may I ask that Commissioner 
Roberto Concepcion be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you, Madam President. 

I am not so sure if I am clear about the distinction 
b ® tv J e ® n tbe Tanodbayan and the Ombudsman. The 
1973 Constitution mentioned Tanodbayan. It seems the 

pa " n< T 1S -° Create tw ° separate Offices, and I am 

r jec i ln my mind the role of one as dis- 
tinguished from the other. 

office 'J 16 percept i° n that the Ombudsman, as the 

sioner Romn^ 0 111 Sweden, performs what Commis- 

as a “busvhnH ^^doned in a very flattering language 

is some sort of y impress * on is that an Ombudsman 

cises sunerei, f “ °X erseer ’ not in a sense that it exer- 

anTdutv 7o tT aUthorit y’ but that it has the power 

offices /f the 1 ke measures to assu re himself that the 

efficientlv as assi § ned to him function as 

man fo the ev 7 le ' ° f COUrse ’ there is a " Ombuds- 
man tor the executive department; there is one for the 

1 ,hmk *heVe‘ urOmbudL'aS 

In the exercise of thJeTunction^t 1 ,°" n ?, lll<ary affairs ' 
the dutv to fin h o.,f u ^ . lon > it has the power and 

and, of course, to recommend' ° mg ° n ^ 311 theSe offices 
practices in these offices n artist ™ odl . flcations in the 
not entail graft and corrunfi™ £ V th ° Se which d ° 
greater problems. So at least th ° m3y lead later ° n t0 
man from Sweden fc 

dismissed; some are merely warned^ ?™ p t 1 ? yee * a , re 
head of the office is sometimes called to 10 " 16 

or deficiencies or irregularities in h d t0 SOme practlces 
office. Perhaps, it would help the c ° peratlon of the 
visage the role, because I notice thaUs^h? 810 ' 1 !° 
whether the function is purely recomm* tbe questlon ~ 
have the power to prosecute. I think thaf 7^ 
generally, ordinary crimes are referred to the ^ eden ' 
prosecutory branches. Sometimes onlv J h dinary 
action is needed while a recommen^o^rSe^ 
that effect. 


I am not aware whether or not any of these officials 
to whom the Ombudsman has referred a number of cases 
have overruled the Ombudsman in the sense that the 
pronouncements of the Ombudsman carry great weight. 
The institution has existed in Sweden for over one-and- 
a-half centuries, I think, since 1815. It is an institution 
originally established to play the role of the king in a 
way; that is, to assure the king that the offices of the 
government are properly run, to make suggestions or 
point out or call attention to certain practices that are 
irregular or improper and the improvements that can be 
introduced in the operation of the offices and what 
administrative action should be taken against some 
officials, including their dismissal. 

And so, I hope the Committee will give us, at least, 
an explanation as to the main difference between the 
one and the other. At least, under the proposed draft 
of the Committee, there will be two separate offices. It 
would seem that the Tanodbayan is higher than the 
Ombudsman, yet there is no constitutional guarantee. I 
think the right of impeachment exists as to the 
Ombudsman, not against the Tanodbayan. And so, in a 
way, that might be a misconception among the Members 
of the Commission. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. We would like to thank Commis- 
sioner Concepcion for his very pertinent remarks. 
However, I would like to add that there are really signi- 
ficant variations even among the Scandinavian countries 
which follow the system. As the Commissioner pointed 
out, Sweden has no fewer than three of the so-called 
guardians of the law. And in the three Scandinavian 
countries, except Finland, they have no power to over- 
turn administrative or judicial decisions. But in Finland, 
they have. So, while the system that we are proposing 
is definitely not perfect — and for this reason we are 
welcoming constructive suggestions — we have tried to 
adopt those features which we believe will be adoptable, 
necessary and practicable in the Philippines. We will 
repeat, we have an open mind on this and we welcome 
good suggestions. 

MR. MONSOD. May I just add a comment. We would 
like the system to evolve. We know that the effective- 
ness of this kind of a system depends on the perform- 
ance of those who are appointed in that office and how 
the citizens would respond to it. So, we hope that this is 
a seed that will evolve into something like the traditions 
in Sweden. And what we wanted to avoid was what hap- 
pened in 1973 where it was purely relegated as a special 
prosecutor, and its true task was forgotten. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


285 


MR. CONCEPCION. My first problem is to distin- 
guish the Tanodbayan from the Ombudsman. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I answered a 
similar question a few minutes ago. One will notice that 
in Section 5, page 3 of the report, the sentence reads: 
“The Tanodbayan created pursuant . . . ,” and then we 
jump to line 10 and the last words read: “except those 
conferred on the Office of the Ombudsman created 
under this Constitution.” In other words, we separated 
the duties of the Ombudsman from the duties of the 
Tanodbayan, and we are asking now the Tanodbayan 
merely to exercise prosecutory duties. And so, Section 
5, lines 10 and 12, will expressly state that the Ombuds- 
man is now separate and apart from that of the Tanod- 
bayan. 

MR. CONCEPCION. If the Ombudsman performs a 
prosecutory function, what is the function ot the 
Tanodbayan? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The function is merely to prosecute. 

MR. CONCEPCION. How is that? 

MR. NOLLEDO. To prosecute, like a fiscal. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The Tanodbayan will prose- 
cute? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, it will prosecute anti-graft 
cases. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The Ombudsman? 

MR NOLLEDO. He exercises the duties of . . . 

MR. COLAYCO. Let us clarify that. Under our pro- 
posal, the Ombudsman does not have any prosecutorial 
powers. 

MR. CONCEPCION. And the Tanodbayan is the pro- 
secutor? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I move for a 
suspension of the session until one-thirty this afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
one-thirty this afternoon. 

It was 12:16p.m. 

RESUMPTION of session 

At 1:38p.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I respect- 
fully move that we proceed to the period of amend- 
ments, and in order to expedite the proceedings, any 
Member could present his amendment after a brief 
interpellation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

In other words, if a Commissioner has an amendment, 
he can already proceed after his brief interpellation to 
this proposed amendment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. And may 
I ask that Commissioner Guingona be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I would like to 
inquire because some of my points are just clarificatory 
and I am not sure whether I would propose amend- 
ments or not-, does this mean that I am precluded from 
suggesting amendments later? 

MR. SARMIENTO. May we suggest that the Commis- 
sioner make his amendments now including his inter- 
pellations? 

MR. GUINGONA. I will not be in a position to pro- 
pose all my amendments. I wanted to get a clarification 
first. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we will decide that when we 
reach that particular matter. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I make a 
comment? I have no objection that we proceed to the 
peiiod of amendments now. However, I do not think we 
should close the period of amendments this afternoon if 
the Members present are as many or as few as they are 
now, because those who are absent might want to 
submit some amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo, we can- 
not always be waiting for all the Members to be present; 
otherwise, we will not be able to do any business here in 
this Commission. But one thing, the intent of the Floor 
Leader is that, if there is a Commissioner who already 
has an amendment, he can make use of his time and 
interpellate and introduce his amendment. 


286 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. I have no objection to that, as I said. 
Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

My first question concerns the matter of the addition- 
al ground for impeachment which is betrayal of trust. I 
presume that the Members are aware of the UP Law 
Center Constitutional Project which made mention of 
this additional ground for impeachment, to wit: 

Acts which are just short of being criminal but consti- 
tute gross faithlessness against public trust, tyrannical abuse 
of power, inexcusable negligence of duty, favoritism, and 
gross exercise of discretionary powers. 

Does the Committee accept this definition? 


MR. MONSOD. If the Commissioner will recall, that 
was covered already this morning. 

MR. GUINGONA. I know. But the reference was to 

no^'Xtg^o"*' = 0 p ns « tu " 0 "‘> 1 Convention; I am 
Project. 8 th UP Law Center Constitutional 


MR. ROMULO. We accept. 


response to an interpellation, said that I gave as an 
example an instance where the President orders the 
Minister of Justice to perform acts that would violate 
human rights. My proposed additional ground for 
impeachment which has been submitted to the Commit- 
tee is: WHEN THERE IS A NATIONAL FAILURE OF 
JUSTICE EVIDENCED BY GROSS VIOLATIONS OF 
HUMAN RIGHTS. In other words, I am not contem- 
plating an instance where there is an act performed by 
the President. Here, I am contemplating an inaction on 
the part of the President which would result in gross 
violation of human rights. Perhaps, this would sort of 
supplement the concept which was proposed by Com- 
missioner Ople regarding command responsibility 
especially when the violation of human rights is per- 
petrated by the Armed Forces because the President is 
the Commander-in-Chief. Would the Committee be 
willing to consider an amendment by adding this 
ground which I have proposed? 


MR. ROMULO. We believe that would be compre- 
hended in the phrase “betrayal of trust.” 

MR. GUINGONA. I see. So it is understood that the 
betrayal of trust would include inaction on the part of 
the President which will result in a failure of justice as 
evidenced by gross violation of human rights. 


impeachment memionld t Z moteiis^T 

T ,hat 1 *>"• ju« 

forming officiardl n t7”Wo b u!“tL drUnkenneSS WhUe 1 
uuiy. would the sponsor agree? 

MR. ROMULO. No, we do not agree to that. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you In the 1986 
proposal which the sponsor hi th 986 
this statement refenW to The ^ aWare f of ’ ther 
“betrayal of trust,” which reads- ° ° f the W ° 

standard may be too brnaH , 7 ' ch an overr each 

and arbitrary exercise bv f„" d !" ay , be SU ^ ect to ab 
sponsor agree to this? legislature. Would 

MR. ROMULO. In view of th , ... 
read into the Record wo h,r e clarification alre; 

to guide the future Congress 1CVe tbat that is suffici 

MR. GUINGONA Would ,t * , 
word GROSS to the words “1^ b ? better to add 
the statement less broad? raya trust ” to m 

MR. ROMULO. If the Commission, •„ 
as an amendment, we will consider it W * submit 1 

MR. GUINGONA. Actually, I presenf . 
resolution which contained an additional 1™°^° 
impeachment. I recalled that the Honorable No "do 


MR. MONSOD. While it is his duty to act, I believe 
that we can really make a thorough enumeration of 
everything that we have in mind. But, perhaps, the 
guideline that we already have in the Record would be 
sufficient. 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes. I just wanted to read into the 
Record this particular ground to make sure that the 
understanding ol the Committee is that this is included 
in the concept of betrayal of trust. 

The second matter concerns impeachment. With 
respect to this, specifically adjudication in case of 
impeachment because, as we will note, there are two 
classes of officials that are subject to impeachment, 
elective officials and appointive officials. I was wonder- 
ing whether or not the Committee has considered a 
situation where the President is not only a member of a 
political party but the titular head of that party and an 
overwhelming majority of the Members of the Senate 
belong to the same party and even if some of the 
Senators would be willing to cross party lines, it would 
be almost an impossibility to secure conviction. As I 
told our Acting Floor Leader, I have no definite amend- 
ment as of now, although someone was saying, “Reduce 
the number of votes required of the majority to con- 
vict. And another one said, “Why not let the impeach- 
ment proceedings of an elective official be adjudicated 
by the Supreme Court? ” Of course, others say that we 
will expose the Supreme Court to political reactions, 
but I think we are already exposing the Supreme Court 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


287 


to political reactions with the provisions in the Article 
on the Executive, by making them the sole judge of 
all elections and the terms and qualifications of the 
President and the Vice-President. Perhaps, this could be 
a solution. I do not know if 1 have enough time, but I 
know of at least 1 5 countries where impeachment pro- 
ceedings are actually adjudicated by courts and not by 
the legislative department. May I just read very briefly 
into the Record some statements made regarding this 
matter* as contained in the 1971 Constitutional Revision 
Project. It says: “Ideally, the prosecution and trial of 
public officials, no matter how highly placed, should be 
in the hands of an objective, non-political and highly 
qualified judicial tribunal.” Such a procedure, however, 
requires a strong awareness of constitutionalism and a 
general acceptance in the country of the rule of law over 
the rule of personalities. And in support of this, they 
added the following: 

Under the present system, the power to impeach and to 

try impeachment cases is vested in public officials who are 

highly responsive to political and partisan influences. 

If impeachment is a political device, we could perhaps 
say that it partakes also of the nature of a legal proceed- 
ing or a legal device. It is ineffective as against political 
officials. It is almost impossible to impeach a President. 
Finally, a pertinent observation is that a removal on 
illegal grounds should be determined by a body less 
susceptible to political consideration such as a consti- 
tutional court of impeachment. 

I have two more very short questions, Madam Pres- 
ident. One is the matter on the Ombudsman. We have 
adopted this, but this was derived from Scandinavian 
countries specifically Sweden. I think I mentioned here 
before that according to Justice Roberts of the U.S. 
Supreme Court, the Constitution should be written in 
words that can be understood by the people. I do not 
think “Ombudsman” can be understood by our people, 
and I thought, maybe — and again I have no amendment 
to offer — we should use either a Filipino word or an 
English word. A Filipino word may be “Bantay Bayan” 
as suggested by our Acting Floor Leader and in English, 
it could be “Vigilantes of the People,” as suggested by 
the late Dr. Salvador Araneta, a distinguished mem- 
ber of the Constitutional Convention. Of course, I leave 
that to the wisdom of my other colleagues and the 
members of the Committee to think of another name, 
but I strongly suggest that we do not use the word 
“Ombudsman” which is not in our own language. We 
only have two official languages: English and Filipino. 

And the last item, Madam President, if I may, con- 
cerns the matter suggested by the Honorable Tadeo 
which is modest living. Since we are allowing, in this 
report, that even citizens can file a complaint, we should 
aive the citizens or even the government a basis to deter- 
mine whether or not a person is living beyond his 
means. I do not know if there is a provision in other 
articles on this matter. If there is none, maybe we 
should suggest that at least these impeachable officers 


should present or file or submit their statement of assets 
and liabilities upon assumption of office so that we 
would be guided. Although my personal view is that even 
if a person has P50 million, it would not justify him to 
use Rolls Royce, considering the economic conditions of 
our people today. 

I thank the sponsor; thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Treiias be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Treiias is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TRENAS. Madam President, may I just ask a few 
questions of the Committee for clarification. 

According to Section 3, subparagraph 2, after a com- 
plaint for impeachment is filed, it is referred to the 
proper committee of the House for investigation and 
report. My question now is: If after the investigation 
and report, notwithstanding the overwhelming evidence 
in support of the complaint for impeachment and taking 
into account political considerations, especially if it is 
an impeachment against the President and the House is 
controlled by his party, and necessarily the committee 
also, it is dismissed, the complaint is already denied; 
am I right? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, that is right. 

MR. TRENAS. Will the person who filed the impeach- 
ment have any remedy in view of the overwhelming 
evidence and the fact that the committee acted in a 
capricious and whimsical manner? 

MR. ROMULO. Under this proposal, the answer must 
be “no that is why I think Commissioner Davide has 
some amendments in mind to cure these gaps in the 
procedure. 

MR. TRENAS. May it not be subject of a judicial 
review? 

MR. ROMULO. As the Commissioner knows, in the 
definition of judicial power, one might be able to secure 
a review by certiorari, but that is not an expeditious 
remedy. So, we are open to suggestions. 

MR. TREftAS. Just one last point, and I am just 
echoing the concern of Commissioner Villacorta insofar 
as 1011 ° the 1973 Constitution regarding the 

Tanodbayan is concerned. May I suggest a proper 
amendment, either by the Committee itself, that we do 
not dignity the 1973 Constitution, especially since a 
great majority of the people, including six of the 10 
Justices, said that it was not validly ratified. 

Thank you very much. 


288 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. We would be very happy to accept or 
work with the Commissioner on the appropriate amend- 
ments. 


MR. MONSOD. We regret that we cannot accept the 
amendment for the reasons, I believe, already stated by 
the members of the Committee. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


MR. RODRIGO. May I explain my amendment? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, my list shows 
that there are still 19 interpellators or 19 who wish to 
propose amendments. May I respectfully move for the 
suspension of the session so that these Commissioners 
can approach the members of the Committee and pro- 
pose their amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 1:56 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 2:41 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 


fulW^no^^h 11 ^ 70 ' Madam President, may I respe ( 
y move that we continue the period of amendmcni 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. RODRIGO. I want to state first my amendment. 
On page 1, lines 13 to 14, after the words “Constitu- 
tional Commissions,” delete the words “and the 
Ombudsman.” So that Section 2 would read: “The 
President, the Vice-President, Members of the Supreme 
Court, the Members of the Constitutional Commissions 
may be removed from office ... BY IMPEACHMENT.” 

On page 3, lines 10 to 12, after the word “law,” 
delete the words “except those conferred on the office 
of the Ombudsman created under this Constitution.” 
So, Section 5 will read: “The Tanodbayan, created pur- 
suant to the mandate of Section 6 of Article XIII of the 
1973 Constitution, shall continue to function and 
exercise its powers as provided by law.” And then, 
delete all the rest of the lines on pages 3, 4 and up to 
line 22 of page 5 until the words “provided by law.” 

Madam President, may I now proceed? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


Th™™!s D „ E o N ne ; .he ™ ^ ° a “d ? ^ 

may ' 3Sk ' f 

nizecf E PRESIDENt - Commissioner Guingona is rec< 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

man^be Stutid withZ WOrd “° mbu ' 

in all the nertinZ!* th the Words BANTAY BAY; 

the LmmitS " P ° rtl ° nS ° f the Article Presented 


MR. RODRIGO, 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. 

nized. 


Madam President, an anterior 
Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 


MR. RODRIGO. My ampnH 

word “Ombudsman” and all th 6 " 1 - 8 t0 delete the 

Ombudsman so that there creatin S the 

changing the name. 1 be no necessity of 


THE PRESIDENT. What is the rP ^- 
mittee to the proposed amendment of C° f ^ 

„Hn» n? ‘ ° f C ° mmiss 


Rodrigo? 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, we now have an 
Ombudsman. As a matter of fact, this very committee 
report provides for an Ombudsman in Section 5, which 
reads: 

The Tanodbayan, created pursuant to the mandate of 
Section 6 of Article XIII of the 1973 Constitution, shall 
continue to function and exercise its powers as provided 
by law. 

The Tanodbayan is an Ombudsman. This was the 
intention of the 1973 Constitution. And may I read 
Article XIII, Section 6 which was referred to in this 
report: 

Section 6. The Batasang Pambansa shall create an office 
of the Ombudsman, to be known as Tanodbayan, which 
shall receive and investigate complaints relative to public 
office including those in government-owned or controlled 
corporations, make appropriate recommendations, and in 
case of failure of justice as defined by law, file and pro- 
secute the corresponding criminal, civil, or administrative 
case before the proper court or body. 

So, we have the Ombudsman and it is an Ombudsman 
with teeth. It is an Ombudsman that is vested with 
power to prosecute. And now, we will add another 
Ombudsman, a toothless Ombudsman; it can be 
expensive but a useless appendage. 

Madam President, during the interpellations, it was 
admitted that the Ombudsman which we plan to create 
may direct. Then, upon questioning on what the pro- 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


289 


posed Ombudsman can do in case its direction is not 
complied with, they said nothing; it can just appeal to 
other offices. So, it is very clear that the proposed 
Ombudsman may not prosecute, punish or compel. It 
has no coercive power. As was stated by one of the 
members of the Committee, it only plays a persuasive 
function. What is the use of creating an office and spend- 
ing millions of pesos of the people’s money in which it 
will only have persuasive functions? It is very clear that 
it has no power to compel. It can have no coercive func- 
tion. Why? Because this office is independent from 
the President. And the President is the Executive; lie is 
the one who has control over the civilian offices and 
the army that can compel compliance with directives. 
What is more, the way I see the concept of the Ombuds- 
man, it will not perform the services expected of that 
office. It will consist of one man, the Chairman, and 


four members — one for Mindanao, one for the Visayas, 
one for Luzon and one nationwide. It does not say that 
it will have branches in every province and municipality, 
much less in every barrio. And yet, the purpose of this 
proposed Ombudsman is so that the people, especially 
the poor and underprivileged, will have a place to air 
their complaints against government officials who fail 
to perform their function. But where will the people 
go? There will be one Ombudsman member from 
Mindanao and maybe he will be in Cagayan de Oro City 
or Davao City. How about the people in Jolo, Zam- 
boanga, and the other barrios of Mindanao? There may 
be one Ombudsman in Cebu. How about the people 
from the distant barrios of Cebu and Siquijor? And so, 
it will just be a useless appendage. On the other hand, it 
we try to make it accessible to the people then it wi 
be a very expensive though useless appendage. We will 
have to create a central office, branch offices in the 
regions, provincial and municipal offices extending up 
to the barrios, if we really want this to be effective and 
accessible to the people. 


Madam President, we do not have that kind of money 
now. So, I suggest that the proposal be left to the legis- 
lature for consideration at a later date when we 
stand this better and when we can afford finanoa y 
to put offices all over the Philippines so that tins 
Ombudsman office can perform its functions as 
expected. 


And what is worse, this will be an interrogation of 
presidential functions. I think the function, the woik 
and the duty to see to it that our laws are complied with 
and that government officials perform their functions 
belongs to the President. The President is elected by all 
the people in the Philippines. They repose their trust in 
him. The members of the Ombudsman are only ap- 
pointed and there are only five members. Why should 
we allow these five persons to perform, independent of 
the President, a function which is essentially a presiden- 
tial function? 


And finally - I do not want to speak long. Madam 
President - it will raise false hopes in the minds of 


our people. This is a Constitution that we are drafting. 
People look up to the Constitution. They think that 
every provision of the Constitution is important and 
effective. But the way I see it, as I already explained, we 
will raise the hopes of the people. There is now an 
Ombudsman and they want to go to its office but they 
cannot find where it is. We will just disillusion our 
people. 

And so. Madam President, I think these functions 
should be left to the executive. And who knows, may- 
be, if an executive wants to make this as an instrument 
to what we call “pamunasan,” he can even use this 
as a scapegoat. He can say, “Well, there is graft and 
corruption; that is not my fault. You go to the Om- 
budsman which is anyway a toothless and useless 
appendage.” 

Thank you. 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President, may I direct a 
few questions to Commissioner Rodrigo? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sumulong is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Gladly. 

MR. SUMULONG. I just want to find out how the 
provisions in this resolution will work out. I refer to this 
power given to the Ombudsman. Section 12, paragraph 
1 reads: 

To direct, upon complaint or at its own instance, any 
public official or employee of the government, as well as 
of any government-owned corporation or institution, to 
perform and expedite any act or duty required of him by 
law, or to stop, prevent, and correct any abuse or impro- 
priety in the performance of duties. 

Suppose I go to the office ot the Land Registration 
Commission in order to register a deed of absolute sale. 

1 bring with me the duplicate certificate of title. When I 
presented this document, the one in charge of accepting 
documents for registration would not attend to me. He 
would not give any attention to me. Do I go to the 
Ombudsman who has no supervision or control over this 
said employee in the Land Registration Commission or 
should I file my complaint before the Land Registration 
Commissioner himself? Or else, do I go to the Minister 
of Justice? 

MR. RODRIGO. He is a minor employee. In the 
Bureau of Lands, we have to go first to the bureau 
director, and il the bureau director does not act ac- 
cordingly, we go to the Minister of Agriculture and even 
t le Ministei ot Justice, if prosecution is necessary. 

MR. SUMULONG. May I refer to paragraph 2 of the 
same section. It says: 

xxx To direct the officer concerned to take appropriate 
action against a public official or employee at fault, and to 


290 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


recommend his removal, suspension, demotion, fine, cen- 
sure or prosecution, and to see to the compliance of the 
directive. 

Suppose under this provision, I go to the Office of 
the City Fiscal of Manila in order to file a criminal com- 
plaint and the Assistant Fiscal to whom I brought the 
case would not attend to me, shall I go to the office of 
the Ombudsman who has no supervision and control 
over this Assistant Fiscal, or should I file my complaint 
before the City Fiscal himself or before the Minister of 
Justice? 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Now, I will go further, Madam 
President. 

MR. RODRIGO. If it is to be created, I think it 
should not be completely independent of the Pres- 
ident. As a matter of fact, I think it should be a body 
that is under the President, otherwise it will have no 
coercive function; it will have no coercive power. 


MR. RODRIGO. Before the City Fiscal himself or the 
Minister of Justice. 


MR. SUMULONG. Thank you very much. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, will Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo yield to a few questions? 

MR. RODRIGO. Gladly. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


mon^p M T A ^^° NG ‘ Madam President, early this 
sioneJ fbon^h Share concern -> us t like the Commis- 

separate from th^T 63 * 1 °Jl ° f thiS 0mbudsrnan which is 
Sit Tanodbayan. But I was thinking that 
probably we can still save this provision if we can agree 

woulcf lik^e S f V6S T*™ t0 ab out it. First of ah, 1 
of the Omhi'ri r6a j 16 phiIoso P h y behind the creation 
using ° mbudsman - lt says here in the book that I am 


MR. RODRIGO. Is that in 1971? 


P i“co“«^o°by G . 11,18 ‘ S aCtUa% * hC 


MR RODRIGO. So, that was on the creation of tl 
Ombudsman called the Tanodbayan in the 1973 Cons' 

he“ R MAAMBONG - Yes. i, does relate to it. I, sa; 

The Ombudsman proceed from 
olain ordinary citi 7 Pn • u * be Proposition that the 

ate the bureaucracy. The pIoplT 1116 monster that 

distant and impersonal treatment^ the 1Cnated by the cold ’ 
government. The main drS of 1 ^ Ved frora the 

upon government officials and em^ « 

servants rather than masters of the nmnio , y e 
or “lagay” system is ^ 

to them actually come from the pockets of (he 
through taxes. H p 

Does the Commissioner agree with this philosophy 
the creation of the Ombudsman? y y 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President, the Com- 
missioner already said that. 

The same book also mentions that in the Philip- 
pines the concept is not entirely new although we do 
not call such body or agency an Ombudsman. As early 
as 1949, this idea came out in the form of President 
Quirino’s Integrity Board, the Presidential Complaints 
and Action Committee (PC AC) of President Magsaysay, 
the Presidential Committee on Administrative Per- 
formance Efficiency (PCAPE) of President Garcia, the 
Presidential Anti-Graft Committee (PAGCOM) of 
President Macapagal and the Presidential Agency on 
Reforms and Government Operations (PARGO) of 
President Marcos. However, these bodies are not inde- 
pendent; they are not immune from political inter- 
ference and necessarily, they fail as they have, in fact, 
failed. Would the Commissioner agree that this is also 
the purpose for the creation of the Ombudsman, similar 
to the mentioned agencies created by the previous 
Presidents? 

MR RODRIGO. I do not admit that those agencies 
failed. I am not acquainted with the others but I am 
acquainted with PCAPE with Manny Manahan as the 
Chairman. I think it did a very good work because it 
had the backing of the President with all the powers 
and resources of the President. Aid I think that is 
true also of the other agencies which the Commissioner 
mentioned. 

MR MAAMBONG. The Commissioner really does 
not want to include the provision of Ombudsman in the 
Constitution. But would he be amenable to include the 
functions of the Ombudsman in the present Tanodba- 
yan as if they were actually in the present configuration 
of the law creating the Tanodbayan? 

MR RODRIGO. The concept of the Tanodbayan, I 
think, is to have a constitutional body that will take 
care of these graft and corruption cases. But even that, 
if it were to be independent completely from the 
President, is preferable than the proposed Ombuds- 
man because at least it has teeth; the Tanodbayan can 
prosecute. But then as we saw, unless the Tanodbayan 
just plays the role of an investigating body for the Sandi- 
ganbayan, the original purpose of the Tanodbayan was 
really lost. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


291 


MR. M A AMBON G. In other words, the Commis- 
sioner is willing to live with the idea that we should not 
constitutionalize the Ombudsman and at the same time 
the Tanodbayan, as it is presently created under 
P.D. No. 1607, can continue its work? 


MR. RODRIGO. I have not made a thorough study 
on that. 

MR. MAAMBONG. What I am trying to envision is, if 
we cannot really put the Ombudsman in the Constitu- 
tion — of course, that has not been decided yet —may- 
be under Section 5, we can just say: THE TANODBA- 
YAN CREATED BY LAW PURSUANT TO THE 
MANDATE OF THE PREVIOUS CONSTITUTION 
SHALL CONTINUE TO FUNCTION AND EXERCISE 
ITS POWERS PROVIDED BY LAW. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is how it would read after I 
amended that section by deleting the words “except 
those conferred on the office of the Ombudsman. . .” 
But then at least, if we maintain the Tanodbayan, we 
will not be raising false hopes in the mind of our people, 
because our people do not think of the Tanodbayan as 
an agency which can receive their complaints nationwide. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Will the Commissioner agree that 
on the assumption that the Ombudsman will be so 
constitutionalized, this would still need an implement- 
ing law because a very big organization would have 
to spend money and this needs again the consent of 
Congress? 


MR. MAAMBONG. That is really my point. Madam 
President, because in the present proposal the Ombuds- 
man is actually a constitutional creation while the 
Tanodbayan and the Sandiganbayan are not. They were 
created by a mandate of the Constitution. But, actually, 

I am more interested on the appropriation aspect. What 
I was saying is that even if we constitutionalize the 
Ombudsman, without the proper appropriation from 
the Congress, the Senate and the House of Representa- 
tives, then this will not be operationalized anyway. 

MR. RODRIGO. Correct, and that will place us in an 
ugly situation. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you very much, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is the next Commissioner to 
introduce an amendment? 

MR.M AAMBON G. There is a pending motion. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, there is a pending 
motion to delete all references to Ombudsman in this 
Article. 

THE PRESIDENT. And this proposed amendment 
has not been accepted. 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President. 


MR. RODRIGO. No, because the wording of Section 
6 is: “There is hereby created ...” 

MR MAAMBONG. I am talking of the appropria- 
tions. 


THE PRESIDENT. So, we will proceed to vote. 

MR DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I speak 
against the amendment to delete? 


MR. RODRIGO. Unlike the creation of the Tanod- 
bayan which says: “Sec. 6. The Batasang Pambansa 
shall create an office of the Ombudsman to be known as 
the Tanodbayan,” in the 1973 Constitution, it was very 
clear that the Tanodbayan needed an enabling act in 
order to exist. And the Batasan did enact a law or was 
it by presidential decree? 

MR. MAAMBONG. The implementing law of the 
Tanodbayan is contained in a republic act. I think we 
clarified that this morning. 

MR. RODRIGO. But here it is categorical: “There is 
hereby created an independent office of the Ombuds- 
man.” It is hereby created by means of this Constitu- 
tion. But, of course, if the legislature does not provide 
the funds, I do not see how this office that is created 
by the Constitution can survive. 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR. DE LOS REYES The arguments of Commis- 
sioner Rodngo are as follows: The Tanodbayan has 
already been visualized as the Ombudsman. That is true. 

was a member of the Constitutional Convention and 
die intention was really to make the Tanodbayan the 
Ombudsman but as ,t turned out, the functions of the 
present Tanodbayan are so unlike the functions as pro- 
po "°* °1 ‘h® Ombudsman. And. therefore, inas- 
much as the Tanodbayan is already specializing in pro 
secu ting anti-graft and corruption cases, there is need 
for another body which will attend to the needs of the 
little man, the common tao. It will be some sort of a 
superprotector or guardian of the small people. 


I have some experience in going to different offices. 
For example, we have the GSIS and the SSS. Some- 
times, the employees of these institutions do not attend 


292 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


to a poor laborer who is working on his pension and 
other benefits. So at least with an Ombudsman, this 
poor laborer can go to the office of the Ombudsman, 
but the Ombudsman will not necessarily direct the SSS 
to pay the laborer. In its actual operation, perhaps, the 
Ombudsman will simply write a letter to the Director of 
the SSS or the Director of the GSIS inquiring about the 
reason for the delay in the payment of the benefits of 
this laborer. 


In connection with the question of Commissioner 
Sumulong, the Register of Deeds does not register the 
document of a poor man who does not know what to 
do. It does not mean that the Ombudsman will directly 
order the Register of Deeds to register that document. 
The Ombudsman in its actual operation can inquire 
from the Register of Deeds about the reason. Maybe 
there is some defect in the document. But if he finds 
out, for example, that the Register of Deeds is simply 
delaying the registration because he is waiting for some 
consideration, the Ombudsman then can advise the 
person concerned to complain to the Commissioner of 
Land Registration and even help that person in the pre- 
paration of his complaint. That is how I understand the 
purpose of the Ombudsman. 


f I he a /fy m ® nt of Commissioner Rodrigo that the 
c°c! 1Ce the Ombudsman is toothless, and then later on 
S! 311 Would be Performing the functions of an 
because if j° mewbad contradictory. It is not toothless 

sDite of th ^ 6 thC efforts °f tlle Ombudsman, in 
, e ie P ersu asion to these public employees 

Omhnrkm ^ J° n0t P erform their tasks, the 
™ an has the right to publicize, when circum- 

and that°k War i rant ’v, matterS covered b V bis investigation, 
ran 15 where hls Power lies. And that is where he 

m" dT rr Pe ° Ple V6ry effecti vely. He can recom- 
mend the officer concerned to take appropriate action 

whTw n P h Ub K,° ffiClal - So ’ il: is reall V the Ombudsman 

cannot iff 6 ^ hdP the Sma11 P eo P le > those who 
cannot afford lawyers, by serving as some sort of a 

soT thinkTf °^ lCl ° foT the P° or complainants. And 

of the ienorant 316 r ? a y concerned for the protection 

there is a ne.d l ? OP t Wh ° do not know what to do. 

And as stated hv c*" 16 creatio n of this Ombudsman. 

And as stated by Commissioner Maambong before this 

PreS C e e , 0f ‘ he C 

purposes. But if we make^miude 5 " 1°" political 
nendentlv nerform h r lnde Pendent, he will inde- 
pendently perform hts funettons of serving the people. 

So, with all due respect to thr hriir t 
Commissioner Rodrigo, I am nainfnii argument ol 
object to the deletion of the P provi J constrai ned tc 
budsman. I think this is a good ° n the ° m ‘ 

volutionary provision, which should slay "in" this "ne^ 
Constitution. y Inis ncVl 


Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong has 
already been given a chance. We will recognize Commis- 
sioner Aquino first. 

MR MAAMBONG. No, I will just ask the previous 
speaker a question. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Will my colleague from the 
Partido Nacionalista ng Pilipinas yield to one question? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Gladly. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Will the creation of the Ombuds- 
man perhaps give effect to the constitutional right of 
the people to petition the government for redress of 
grievances and to promote higher standards of integrity 
and efficiency in the government service? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I beg the Commissioner’s 
pardon? Will he please repeat the question? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Will the creation of the Ombuds- 
man give effect to the constitutional right of the people 
to petition the government for redress of grievances and 
to promote higher standards of integrity and efficiency 
in the government service? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I think so, yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The Commissioner mentioned 
something which struck my mind. He was saying that 
probably the Ombudsman can make follow-up jobs for 
the citizens. I thought that was our extralegal function 
while we were in Congress. I would be very happy to get 
that thing off my back because as we all know, when we 
were in Congress, we were always harassed by our 
constituencies to make follow-up jobs for them. If that 
is one of the functions, I will be very happy that it will 
be taken away from us. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, that will be one of the 
functions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would have to respectfully differ with Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo in his motion to delete the concept of an 
Ombudsman. I am in full agreement and concurrence 
with the philosophy behind the Ombudsman. However, 
like him, I would have a lot of discomfort with the idea 
of accepting the Ombudsman the way it is now being 
envisioned by the Committee, to be like a lame duck and 
an institutionally sterile appendage. As presented, the 
trappings of an Ombudsman would deal with the pre- 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


293 


tensions of moral courage and a provocative presence 
which, according to Commissioner Romulo, would be 
intended to exert some kind of moral pressure. 

There is an agreement among us that the reason we 
are institutionalizing an Ombudsman is that we are 
fighting an attritional warfare against graft and cor- 
ruption which is deeply entrenched and indifference in 
the public service which is almost intransigent. If we are 
addressing these problems, we need more than the 
institutionally sterile Ombudsman being proposed now. 

However, my suggestion is, instead of deleting the 
concept, we give it more muscle by reinforcing its func- 
tions and vesting in it some functions that are quasi- 
compulsory or prosecutorial. Otherwise, if we are 
unable to address this problem, I will be in full agree- 
ment with Commissioner Rodrigo that what we have 
now is an Ombudsman and that is nothing more than a 
constitutional eunuch. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR NATIVIDAD. Will Commissioner Rodrigo please 
yield to one or two questions? 

MR. RODRIGO. Gladly. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The Commissioner stated that the 
Ombudsman, as now conceived, is a toothless tiger. 

MR. RODRIGO. I said it is toothless. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. It can be a dog? 

MR. RODRIGO. A tiger, even if it is toothless, has 
claws. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The Ombudsman does not even 
have claws. But in answer to that, our colleague. Com- 
missioner de los Reyes, said it is not toothless. It has 
some artificial teeth. 

The Commissioner said that it has the power to call 
the attention of the public official concerned or to 
publicize failure to perform duties and to recommend 
administrative action. My question is: Is it not that 
these powers belong to the citizens? Even without an 
Ombudsman we have the power to publicize failings of 
government officials or agencies. An ordinary citizen 
can publish a complaint which is not entertained 
properly by any government agency. Is that correct? 


MR. RODRIGO. That is correct, especially now, with 
the proliferation of so many newspapers and radio and 
television stations, we do not have to create a constitu- 
tional office just so the failings of some government 
officials will be publicized in the papers. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Insofar as recommending admi- 
nistrative action, that is also a prerogative of citizens. 
They can write a letter to the President asking for admi- 
nistrative action. Is that not correct? 


MR. RODRIGO. That is correct. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I think what the Commissioner 
said about the lack of teeth is correct. Due to our ex- 
perience in administrative proceedings, being toothless 
is going to be a difficult situation. 

The other point I would like to raise is: If an 
Ombudsman, who is without real powers, keeps writing 
to the bureau directors and to the Cabinet members, 
we will have a confrontation between the Ombudsman 
and the President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. That is true because he has consti- 
tutional powers to be a busybody and the President is 
the constitutional chief executive. So, we have two 
agencies that are positioned for confrontation: one with 
teeth, the other without any tooth. I am just perceiving 
it from my own experience because this Ombudsman, as 
a matter of duty, will be writing letters everyday. But 
absolutely he has no power to compel obedience espe- 
cially from high-ranking officials. As I can see it, there 
will be some pompous bureau directors who will say: 
“Who is he to dictate upon me? I take orders from the 
President or the minister. Who is that Ombudsman 
ordering my ministry? My ministry is only answerable 
to the President and no less.” 

We now have a complicated situation. But suppose 
instead of abolishing the Ombudsman, we make the 
Tanodbayan the prosecuting arm of the Ombudsman 
so that it has some kind of teeth even if it is an artificial 
denture? It will have power to prosecute administrative 
cases as the Ombudsman under the 1973 Constitution 
who can prosecute civil or administrative cases. 

MR. RODRIGO. That would be the result if my 
amendment is approved. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. I agree with our beautiful Com- 
missioner here Commissioner Aquino, that instead of 
abolishing an office that has potentials for serving our 
people let us reinforce it; make the Tanodbayan its 
prosecuting arm so that it can, when necessary, pro- 
secute grave misconduct committed by any public 
official who would refuse to obey its legitimate orders. 
Does the Commissioner agree? 

MR. RODRIGO. I agree 


^ The powers envisioned in the 

1973 Constitution, its enabling law, and the new pro- 
posed Constitution as I can glean from the present 
Ombudsman provision are not really limited to legal 


294 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


matters. They speak of efficiency. Why should it be 
the exclusive territory of lawyers like the Commissioner 
and me? There should be a management expert here or 
an economist. When we say efficiency in the govern- 
ment, we do not leave this exclusively to lawyers like 
us. We must have a true Ombudsman who has to be 
equipped with personnel who can assess the perform- 
ance efficiency of agencies even in the case of graft and 
corruption. Those who have experience against graft and 
corruption in the recent campaign will tell us that one 
of the best ways to fight graft and corruption is through 
an initial management survey because without a 
management survey, we could not locate and detect the 
points where graft and corruption persistently occurs. 
In the management of an agency, there is duplication of 
duties, there is passing of the buck so that the clientele 
or the public could not get action enough, and there is 
opportunity to delay action. Graft and corruption 
comes up especially in financial institutions. Therefore, 
does the Commissioner agree with me that the overall 
totality of this concept is that it should also have room 
for an economist, a management expert, and even a 
human rights expert? 

MR RODRIGO. Yes. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 
MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


MR. RODRIGO. I would like 
fact that at this moment, there 
the floor. 


to call attention to the 
are three Bulakenos on 


Thank you. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognize* 

MR. OPLE. Before Commissioner Rodrigo sits dow 
will he yield to a question or two? 

MR. RODRIGO. Gladly. 

dir^c^ed^fc^^he^pro^nrn^^the inte * el,ation wil1 1 

second part, just another q UeS “ d ? 
tinguished sponsors. r tWo ’ to ^ 

Rodrigo '^amendment, ‘'ih'e “mosfim ‘° < r oramission 

that an independent office 'oZ ^LTou 

encroach upon the principal responsibilitv oTn, n 

»»r controls a " - 


man fails, then it just lapses into oblivion since the 
citizens will no longer come before it for help. If it 
succeeds, then it becomes a competitor to the President 
of the Philippines who under the Constitution is in 
command of the entire government and presumably 
responsible for its success or failure in its totality. 

If we try to correct this orientation of the office of 
the Ombudsman so that it becomes a constitutional 
arm of the President of the Philippines, the powers of 
the executive, in effect, being placed behind the high 
mission of the office of the Ombudsman and the 
cooperation of the President insuring that the entire 
organization of government will support the work of 
the Ombudsman as a matter of administrative and legal 
responsibilities, will the distinguished Gentleman from 
Bulacan reconsider his amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. The Commissioner will consider it. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

May I direct a question to the Committee? In the 
light of the previous discussion and in the interest of a 
compromise that would save this Commission from the 
pain of having to vote, perhaps with a very close and 
divisive result, will the Committee consider later an 
amendment to the amendment of Commissioner 
Rodrigo that would close this chasm, which I myself 
agree can be embarrassing and dangerous for the Pres- 
ident of the Philippines, by way of designating the 
office of the Ombudsman as a constitutional ann for 
good government, efficiency of the public service and 
the integrity of the President of the Philippines, instead 
of creating another agency in a kind of administrative 
limbo which would be accountable to no one on the 
pretext that it is a constitutional body? 

MR MONSOD. The Committee discussed that during 
our committee deliberations and when we prepared the 
report, it was the opinion of the Committee — and I 
believe it still is — that it may not contribute to the 
effectiveness of this office of the Ombudsman precisely 
because many of the culprits in inefficiency, injustice 
and impropriety are in the executive department. There- 
fore, as we saw the wrong implementation of the 
Tanodbayan which was under the tremendous influence 
of the President, it was an ineffectual body and was 
reduced to the function of a special fiscal. 

The whole purpose of our proposal is precisely to 
separate those functions and to produce a vehicle that 
will give true meaning to the concept of Ombudsman. 
Therefore, we regret that we cannot accept the proposi- 
tion. 


MR RODRIGO. Yes. 


MR OPLE. I share some of the Comm 
concern about that. Perhaps if this office of 


MR. OPLE. Yes. Madam President, just one last 
manifestation on my part. I think there is a tendency, 
partly healthy and partly unhealthy, for us to create 
constitutional umbrellas of immunity from executive 
intervention on the part of bodies that are embedded 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


295 


within the executive branch of the government. There 
is a propensity sometimes to fall into a state of consti- 
tutional paranoia where we automatically suspect that 
even as lofty an office as that of the President of the 
Philippines will have to be protected from its own 
innate propensities for evil. 

I think the Constitution vests the powers of the 
executive and the responsibility for the government as a 
whole in the presidency, and that in writing this Consti- 
tution we ought to take a balanced approach, partly 
skeptical, partly paranoid that is healthy; if it is only 
partly paranoid, we ought to be on guard. 

But to think of the presidency as a power to be cir- 
cumvented, avoided, evaded at all times so that we seek 
refuge in constitutional immunities from the interven- 
tion of the presidency is, I think, not a very rational 
approach to the task of writing a Constitution, espe- 
cially with respect to the structure of government. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May we just state that perhaps the 
honorable Commissioner has looked at it in too much 
of an absolutist position. The Ombudsman is seen as a 
civil advocate or a champion of the citizens against the 
bureaucracy, not against the President. On one hand, we 
are told he has no teeth and he lacks other things. On 
the other hand, there is the interpretation that he is a 
competitor to the President, as if he is being brought up 
to the same level as the President. 

With respect to the argument that he is a toothless 
animal, we would like to say that we are promoting the 
concept in its form at the present, but we are also saying 
that he can exercise such powers and functions as may 
be provided by law in accordance with the direction of 
the thinking of Commissioner Rodrigo. We do not think 
that at this time we should prescribe this, but we leave 
it up to Congress at some future time if it feels that it 
may need to designate what powers the Ombudsman 
need in order that he be more effective. That is not fore- 
closed. 

So, this is a reversible disability, unlike that of a 
eunuch; it is not an irreversible disability. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I fully concur in the observations of Commissioner 
Maambong regarding the background of the creation ol 
the Ombudsman or the Tanodbayan. 


As originally envisioned, it was supposed to perform 
the function of fiscalizing the different departments of 
the government as well as governmental offices in the 
traditional Scandinavian concept. Unfortunately, 
however, it was not a constitutional creation but a 
constitutionally mandated body. Therefore, it needed 
legislative support. Then we had, of course, the creation 
by presidential decree of the Tanodbayan. Unfor- 
tunately, by presidential decree enumerating the 
functions and duties of the Ombudsman, too much 
stress was placed on his prosecutory functions and less 
on his administrative fiscalization functions. That is 
where, I think, the Ombudsman as the Tanodbayan 
failed to discharge that other part of its duties, aside 
from the consideration that, taking into account the 
political ambiance at the time, while the President with 
the right hand granted it administrative fiscalization 
powers, with the left hand, he withdrew from those 
functions the capability of the Tanodbayan to perform 
what was granted by law. 


This is just like the practice of heads of law offices, 
telling their assistants: “You will be paid so much; you 
are free to have private practice.” However, office cases 
must be given priority. Therefore, the statement “I 
allow you private practice” is, in effect, a hollow grant 
of assistance. 


I have gone over the records of the Tanodbayan in 
its annual report to the President in connection with its 
prosecutory and administrative functions in fiscalizing 
the different offices of the government. I have talked 
with two former justices of the Tanodbayan and they 
gave me the same complaint: They are so swamped with 
prosecution work such that even if they work up to six 
or seven o’clock in the evening, they still cannot finish 
their work as prosecutors, especially in serious cases 
which they cannot just delegate to their deputies. 
Tanodbayan Justices Ericta and Fernandez were never 
able to submit policy recommendations because they 
were, in effect, preempted by their prosecutory duties. 






*; ~ lanouoayan, the percentage 

of work that they performed were as follows- pro- 
secutory functions under Title VII of the Revised Penal 
Code, that is crimes committed by public officers- 

’ m 8 (27 , ^r^ t); ° ther crimes ^ relation to 
public office- 1,1 27 (25 98 percent); violation of cor- 
rupt law practices- 1,049 (24.18 percent)- other 

C °7 h nt h r' inVOlVing cr ' nles “439 00.12 percent) 

conmla. C nt7 2 o 49 7“ P'™ PerCe " ,): atimSati" 

officer but whic? jo ™,“°" *° ‘ h * ° fr ' Ce ° f «*? >>!' bliC 
f _„ ,, . uo not a mount to crimes and, there- 

func«on S -60.M P perce d „t tO ’* Wi * hin th ‘ ir P rosecu,ory 


In other words, Madam President, what actually 
spawne oi caused the failure of the justices of the 
Tanodbayan insofar as monitoring and fiscalizing the 
government offices are concerned was due to two 
reasons: First, almost all their time was taken up by 


296 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


criminal cases; and second, since they were under the 
Office of the President, their funds came from that 
office. I have a sneaking suspicion that they were 
prevented from making administrative monitoring 
because of the sensitivity of the then head of that 
office, because if the Tanodbayan would make the 
corresponding reports about failures, malfunctions or 
omissions of the different ministries, then that would 
reflect upon the President who wanted to claim the 
alleged confidence of the people. 


Not only in the Philippines but anywhere in the 
world, bureaucratic red tape has always been the bane 
of democratic institutions, and this bureaucratic red 
tape, omissions or nonfeasance, malfeasance or mis- 
feasance do not amount to a crime. 

The purpose of the Tanodbayan, on its secondary 
function, is to respond to the complaints of the 
common citizen. It has been said here that Juan de la 
Cruz, if he has not been given attention by the head of 
a bureau or office, could always make the corresponding 
complaints to the head of that office. If even a minor 
clerk will not listen to poor little Juan de la Cruz, does 
the Commissioner expect him to go to the bureau 
director or to the minister? What will he do? It has 
been said here that he can go to the Ministry of Justice. 
That bureaucratic practice does not amount to a crime 
so the Minister of Justice will just tell him that it is 
outside of his jurisdiction. 

A f ain ’ ltbas also been sai d here that the Tanodbayan 
would, in effect, be competing with the President in the 
performance of executive powers because he would be 
in confrontation with the President. I think a sincere 
President who is fully dedicated to public service would 
appreciate his attention being called by the Tanodbayan 
about the shortcomings of his ministries, bureaus or 
offices over which under the Constitution he is sup- 
posed to have full control. But the President is only a 
human being; he has to work for and protect those 
different appointive officials under him. 

The mynad of details that go to the Office of the 
President are such that they are enough to break his 
health they are back-break, ng burden® such that so 

rtL‘ hl Kt TCar^Tri at n tion 

taken care of by his alter egos but q ?■ haVG 

" eg ° S HeS the fault the causToV'uTeaicrlt" 


U is said here that the Tanodbayan or the Oml 
man would be a toothless or a paper tiger That h 
necessarily so. If he is toothless, then let us give h 
little more teeth by making him independent n 
Office of the President because it is now a constitut 
creation, so that ie insidious tentacles of politic 
, iaS always been our problem, even with PAI 
PCAPE and so forth, will not deprive him of th< 
portunity to render service to Juan de l a Cruz. W 
more concerned about the little men; we are not 


cerned about those of the middle income, upper middle 
income classes or the rich, for they can always hire 
lawyers. But the moral suasion of a letter from the 
Tanodbayan or the Ombudsman addressed to a head 
of the ministry or a bureau or office, telling him that it 
has come to the former’s attention, whether by letter 
or of his own knowledge, that Mr. So and So has been 
following up for the last three months his salary voucher 
which he intends to use for the support of his family 
who cannot live forever on one meal or no meals at all 
in one day, invites action. “Will you please take action 
on this matter or explain to us why no action has been 
taken? Or are there any other supporting papers neces- 
sary to justify his claim? ” We can be sure that a letter 
from such a personality addressed even to a minister will 
make him sit up and take notice. But if Mr. Juan de la 
Cruz, poor as he is and benighted in education, would 
send a letter, I doubt very much if even a well-meaning 
head of a ministry would be able to attend to that 
because it will just pass through the lower echelons who 
will say, “this is a minor matter.” So, it goes into the 
wastebasket. There is supposed to be created a constitu- 
tional office — constitutionalized to free it from those 
tentacles of politics — and we give it more teeth and 
have the corresponding legislative provisions for its 
budget, not a budget under the Office of the President. 
This will not require a confrontation. Confrontation 
presupposes contradictory motives or contradictory 
objectives. If the President is really interested in good 
government, the more he will welcome the fact that 
here is an arm of his, independent from him as known 
to the people, but in cooperation with him for the 
purpose of good government, where the little men in the 
street, a member of the Great Unwashed, can always go 
to and lay his head on a shoulder and say, “Mr. 
Ombudsman, ang pamilya ko po ay tatlong araw nang 
hindi kumakain. Hindi ko na masabing no more rice 
tayo, magmemorize na lang kayo.” That is actually the 
purpose of the office of the Ombudsman. 

Of course, there is a question of whether it is, as it 
was in the past, only to be constitutionally mandated or 
must be of constitutional creation. The former Tanod- 
bayan was only constitutionally mandated, hence it 
required an enabling legislative act to exist and to 
operate. The purpose of this is to have it constitu- 
tionalized to free it from any inroads of pressures with 
the corresponding logistical support given to it. 

Bureaucratic red tape has been with us for genera- 
tions, as far as I can recall, and I am old enough to have 
had that experience. Try following up your papers in 
the government. Even judges and justices have to go 
through the hegira of rounds of offices and bureaus just 
to collect their retirement pay, and these are people 
who stand tall in stature in society. If that could hap- 
pen even to those people of eminence, what chance 
has a member of the Great Unwashed, like little Juan 
de la Cruz, who cannot even express himself properly in 
either English or Tagalog? For that reason, Madam 
President, I support this committee report on a constitu- 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


297 


tionally created Ombudsman and I further ask that to 
avoid having a toothless tiger, there should be further 
provisions for statistical and logistical support. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Uka be the last speaker to speak on the 
issues. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right, Commissioner Uka is 
recognized. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, only fora few minutes. 
I would like to ask a few clarificatory questions of 
the honorable members of the Committee. 

By the way, my friends, from what language is this 
word “Ombudsman”? Where does it come from? I do 
not quite understand it. Can we not translate it into 
Tagalog or Ilocano for that matter? 

MR. COLAYCO. We are open to suggestions. 


The results show 5 votes in favor and 21 against; the 
proposed amendment is lost. 

May we have the next amendment? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I will present 
my amendment which has been accepted by the Com- 
mittee. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. On page 1, Section 1, line 10, I 
propose to insert the words PATRIOTISM AND be- 
tween the words “with” and “justice.” 

May I briefly explain my amendment. Patriotism is 
not fidelity. It is not integrity nor efficiency; it is love 
of country. Mabini, in his True Decalogue, discussed the 
importance of patriotism or love of country. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. It is accepted. 


MR UKA. Can we not translate it into, say, Tanod- 
bavan 9 It is easy to understand the word “Sandigan- 
b van ” So I suggest that it be translated into a word 
that we can understand before we vote on this. This 
word “Ombudsman” is quite confusing. Suppose a lady 
• , tpr | Ho we call her Ombudswoman? (Laughter) 
I s , Tuld be more confusing. Shall we call her 0,ubud, 
hnh _ p or Ombudslalaki if he is a male? (Laughter) 
Daoa , there is a charge that the Ombudsman is 

An °o to be toothless. If it is really toothless, well, some 
most beautiful smiles I have seen are from tooth- 
ot U uths i am not thinking of what the Cornmis- 
less mo thinking wliy no t transfer all the powers and 
si oner is ^ 0mbu( jsman to the Tanodbayan, and then 
du V. eS the Tanodbayan an independent entity, or 
ma the whole thing; that is, if we do not want to 

h°7e an expensive additional office? 

sooken for less than one minute; thank you 
ve^much Madam President. 

SARMIENTO. Madam President, the motion of 
^ . • „ pr Rodrigo has been sufficiently discussed. 

« pul.be matter to a vole. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. I have, heretofore, submitted in 
writing to the Chairman of the Committee a series of 
proposed amendments, and I would like to find out 
what happened to them because whether adopted or 
not, they will at least have made my day. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Regalado will follow Commissioner Foz. He is No. 
27 in my list. So, may I respectfully suggest that we 
follow the listing. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, who will be next? 


VOTING 


PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that the issue 
*7 t > ie proposed amendment of Commissioner 
posed y enough. We now put the matter to a 


votC ’ favor of the proposed amendment of Com- 

Those w tQ delete all provisions relating to the 

missioner , ase ra j se their hand. (Few Members 

Ombudsman, P ied:>c 
raised their hand.) 

Tlin5P a „ ains t the amendment, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand. ) 


MR SARMIENTO. We recognize Commissioner 
Irenas for Ins amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Trenas is recog- 
nized. 


t^tvno. iviaaam President, I have aireauy 
suggested an amendment to Section 5, lines 7 to 9, on 
page 3, which is to delete the phrase “created pursuant 
to the mandate of Section 6 of Article III 1 973 

Constitution, and in lieu thereof, insert 


PRESENTLY 


in 

existing. 


It will now 


III of the 1973 
the words 
read: “The 


298 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


Tanodbayan, PRESENTLY EXISTING shall continue to 
function and exercise its powers as provided by law, 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the reaction of the 
Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we accept the 
amendment. Also, we would like to suggest on line 10, 
which is also an amendment of Commissioner Regalado, 
to insert IS NOW OR HEREAFTER MAY BE between 
the words “as” and “provided.” Secondly, we would 
like to apply Commissioner Trenas’ former amendment 
to Section 4 on the Sandiganbayan; that is, with the 
approval of the proponent. 

MR. TRENAS. Yes, I accept. 


ELECTED. Section 14 will now read: “No loan, 
guaranty or other form of financial accommodation for 
any business purpose may be granted by any govern- 
ment-owned or controlled bank or financial institution 
to any MEMBER OF THE CABINET OR ELECTED 
official, or to any firm or entity in which he has sub- 
stantial interest during his tenure.” 

The wording of this section is too embracing to any 
public official. We have hundreds of public officials who 
will be deprived of financial assistance. Usually, it is the 
higher appointive or elective officials in the government, 
like the members of Cabinet who take advantage of this 
provision. 

MR. COLAYCO. May I react to that. Madam Pres- 
ident? 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 


MR. FOZ. Madam President. 


MR. MONSOD. The amendment is accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the prc 
posed amendments to Sections 4 and 5? (Silence) Th 
Chair hears none; the amendments are approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President we just wan 
LuSn W “ readS "° W beCause « *°< 'ost in th, 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. We will just sit with the Committee. 

MR. COLAYCO. May I be recognized, Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 


MR TRENAS. The Committee 
ink. 


has formulated it, I 


MR. MONSOD. Section 4 will now read- “The San 

eX ; S T g Sha » h-aft letao, 

MR. TRENAS. That is correct. 

MR. MONSOD. Then SerH™ s •„ 

may be provided by law excent th * ,° r hereaf 

office of the Ombudsman 


MR. COLAYCO. The Commissioner mentioned 
“elective officials.” 

Would this cover all elective officials down to the 
lowest officials? 

MR. TRENAS. They fall within that category, but 
the term “elective” is more restrictive than “public 
officials.” 

MR. COLAYCO. I know. But the barangay captain 
is an elective official, and I hardly think that he has any 
clout or influence. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, in that connection, I 
have an amendment to the amendment, if the propo- 
nent will accept. 


1 HE PRESIDENT. 


* T ^ HU W 


lu me next 


MR. TRENAS. May I pronose m,, i ♦ 

must state that I have nnt o, P Se , my ast arT »endmer 
must state mat i nave not cleared this with the Corr 

tee, but it may be acceptable. e ^ orr 

THE PRESIDENT. On what page? 

MR. TRENAS. That is on page 6, Section 14 h 
I propose to delete the word “public” and in lie,, 
of insert the words MEMBER OF THE CAB1NE1 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, I would like to propose 
an amendment to the amendment in this wise: MEM- 
BERS OF CONGRESS instead of “ELECTED official.” 

MR. TRENAS. To limit the prohibition, I accept the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the position of the Com- 
mittee on this? 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


299 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President , may I pro- 
pose an anterior amendment to delete Section 14. 

THE PRESIDENT. To delete? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. My 
reason is as follows: Just imagine a mere councilor or 
a barangay captain who wants to engage in a piggery 
business or a poultry business not being granted a loan 
for it. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, precisely, the amend- 
ment to the amendment would limit the prohibition to 
Members of the Congress. 


No loan, guaranty or other form of financial accorm 
modation for any business purpose may be granted by any 
government-owned or controlled bank or financial institu- 
tion to any public official, or to any firm or entity in which 
he has substantial interest, during his tenure. 

MR. MONSOD. We cannot accept the deletion of the 
entire section, but we are open to amendments within 
the section. 

MR. TRENAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us go back to Commissioner 
Trenas. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. But that is already covered in 
our provisions on the Article on the Legislative regard- 
ing conflict of interests and all those things. With 
respect to the members of the Cabinet, that is covered in 
the report of the Committee on the Executive because 
that is where the influence is. But to a lowly councilor 
or even a vice-mayor or mayor of a town, there is no 
influence that he can exert on the DBP or the GSIS. So 
I suggest that we delete this section. This is very dis- 
criminatory against small public officials. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. One problem that usually arises is 
that the mayor may himself not have any influence to 
force DBP or PNB or a government bank to lend him, 
but it is part of the political spoils system that word 
comes down to lend him money. This is one of the 
problems that we wanted to address. This is only for a 
business, not for residential, personal purpose, or things 

like that. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, but business 
purpose could embrace small business purpose. If a 
small official wants to engage in a little piggery or poul- 
try business, or a little sari-sari store, he cannot even 
borrow. How can he survive? 


MR. MONSOD. My understanding is that about 50 
percent of the resources of the banking system are 
controlled or owned by the government. One of the 
reforms in the banking system is to reduce the role o 
the government to 25 percent. Therefore, this would 
mean that if a mayor or governor really has a merito- 
rious project, there would be no reason why he would 
not be able to borrow from the private banking sector. 
What we are only trying to avoid here is the use o 
government financial institutions for political purposes. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, but that is not so clearly 
stated in the provision. The way it is worded, it is an 
all-embracing prohibition. It says: 


MR. TRENAS. I have accepted the amendment of 
Commissioner Foz. 

THE PRESIDENT. How would the Commissioner’s 
amendment go? 

MR. TRENAS. As amended by Commissioner Foz, 
the persons covered are members of the Cabinet and 
Members of the Congress. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. If that is the amendment, I 
will withdraw my amendment to delete. Small public 
officials are protected. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote, I would like to 
propound a question to the members of the Committee. 

The prohibition here is limited to the grant of loan or 
guarantee for business purpose. Why? Let us say a 
Congressman wants to borrow money to travel to 
Europe or to go gambling. He does not come under 
the prohibition because he is not going to use it for 
business purpose but for “monkey business.” Why? I 
would like to know the reason for limiting this to 
“business purpose.” 

MR. MONSOD. The thinking of the Committee when 
this was considered was that most of the ills associated 
with the use of government financial institutions, the 
massive ones, were really for business purposes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Suppose he wants to build a 
mansion as has been done in many cases. 

MR. MONSOD. A residential purpose was not en- 
visaged in this prohibition. 

MR. RODRIGO. But why? What is the philosophy? 
Why can a Senator borrow money from or be guaran 


300 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


teed by government financing institutions for building 
a mansion, for travel abroad, for gambling, but he is 
not allowed to borrow for business? 

MR. MONSOD. As we had mentioned we were 
addressing ourselves to the bigger problem which was 
what is usually the case — the vast resources of the 
financial institutions go to big accommodations for 
business purposes. So we did not want to have an all- 
embracing net on this. But we would be happy to have 
the body vote on this. 

The Committee is accepting the amendment of 
Commissioner Trenas. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will Commissioner Trenas admit an 
amendment to the amendment by deleting the word 
“business”? Will the Committee accede to that amend- 
ment? 


THE PRESIDENT. In other words, that would cover 
any purpose even building a house? 


MR. RODRIGO. Any purpose, yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President may I make 
comment on that? y maKe 


put up a piggery project and they want to borrow 
money from the DBP for this purpose. 

MR. MONSOD. Under the amendment, they would 
not be covered anymore. 

MR. NOLLEDO. They will not be barred. 

MR. RODRIGO. They will not be covered. Let us say 
that a Congressman wants to borrow from DBP to use 
for prawn business which is now a very good business. 
Can he not borrow? 

MR. MONSOD. I think we answered that earlier. We 
are trying to avoid the use of political power. If it is a 
truly meritorious project, it can be financed by the 
private sector. 

MR. RODRIGO. But why should the government 
sector discriminate against the borrower who will use it 
for business vis-a-vis a borrower who will just waste the 
money? 

MR. MONSOD. Where did the Commissioner get the 
example of the borrower who will waste the money? I 
do not remember it in our discussion. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recoe ^ MR ' RODRIGa 1 was not in discussion with the 

nized. w is iccug- Gentleman. 


public Madam Presid ent, there are mai 

the CSIS i! t h h0 ^ members of the GSIS. Und 

£e amendment^ 67 6 " titled t0 personal loans. Wi 
the amendment, we will also prohibit the grant of loa 

Zs ™ Why we the word “bu 

in terms STmSS “ ^ ^ pe ° ple borrc 

I have not heard of any public official who borrow 
money for the purpose of going abroad or for buZ 
mansions. It is all right But an • i buildl 

for the entire amount for that 1 Cannot b ° m 
limitations imposed by the GSIS I°Z there 2 

institutions of the gove™™nf PeVhlr he e' h 3 "* 1 ' 
his own equity. remaps, he can inv< 

So, I think deleting the nlm^ • 
may be most unfair to many public officialT PUrP ° S 


MR. NOLLEDO. I think we can understand this 
better if we consider the public officials who are in- 
hibited from getting these loans. They are the members 
of the Cabinet and Members of the Congress who can 
easily impose influence upon the proper officials in 
charge of granting these loans. 

MR. RODRIGO. All right. But they are inhibited 
only if they borrow for business, not if they are going 
to borrow for something else. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, because statistically the problem 
arose out of business loans that involve large amounts. 

MR. RODRIGO. But is it possible that Congressmen, 
Senators and Cabinet members might borrow substantial 
amounts also for purposes other than business? 


proposition of «“ 

the logic in limiting the prohibition J ? 1 d ° 

tees to be used for business. As a matte °? T ° r 
prefer that we accommodate somebody who"^ 

[he "ortte. than S ° meb0d * wi„ £ 


The Commissioner mentioned the GSIS 
mention the Development Bank of the PhiliDoini Til 
us say that some councilors in a certain town want to 


MR. MONSOD. Statistically those happened but 
apparently those are mere exceptions. It is really the 
business loans that are quite large. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, the distinction should be on the 
amount of the loan, not on whether it is going to be for 
business or for something else. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, the problem is that this is a 
Constitution that will last for 100 years. What may be 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


301 


a good limitation now of PI million or PI 0 million may 
be nothing 50 years from now or whatever. 

MR. RODRIGO. I was not proposing that. I was just 
saying that it would be a more logical consequence of 
what the Commissioner said that the Committee limited 
the prohibition to business because it is for business 
that substantial amounts are borrowed. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Anyway, if we are going to be con- 
sistent, then I will defer my proposed amendment. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, in support of the Com- 
mittee, do I have the recognition? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. In the sense of proportion, I think the 
Committee is right that it is behind the prohibition on 
business loans. When we take account of the most 
recent disclosures, the PNB had P67 billion of non- 
performing assets and the Development Bank of the 
Philippines, P97 billion of nonperfonning assets. I think 
a close look at many of these loans will show the inter- 
vention of powerful officials of the government and 
some letters of instructions expressly directing the PNB 
and the DBP to grant loans, sometimes of mind-boggling 
magnitude. The P67 billion plus P97 billion should 
be more than PI 50 billion. I think the Committee is 
right in taking cognizance of these unconscionable 
errors and wastes arising from the exercise of undue 
influence. Therefore, I would like to support the posi- 
tion of the Committee concerning the prohibition of 
business loans in particular. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think we are ready to vote. 

We will vote first on the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Rodrigo to the amendment of Commis- 
Soner Trenas, that is, the deletion of the word “busi- 
ness.” 

MR. RODRIGO. I withdraw my proposed amend- 
ment to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I have a question to ask of the Committee 
regarding the same section which has to do with the 
words “substantial interest.” Just what do the words 
“substantial interest” refer to, Madam President? 


MR. NOLLEDO. If we consider the provisions of the 
National Internal Revenue Code in relation to the Cor- 
poration Code, 20 percent will amount to substantial 
interest. 

MR. FOZ. In other words, under this provision if a 
member of the Cabinet or a Member of the Congress has 
at least 20-percent interest in a company or enterprise, 
would the prohibition apply to such company? 

MR. NOLLEDO. If the word “substantially” remains. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we vote on 
the proposed amendment, and then we would be willing 
to consider an amendment as well. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we will proceed to vote first 
on the amendment of Commissioner Trenas to insert on 
line 1, page 6, the words “MEMBER OF THE CABINET 
AND MEMBER OF CONGRESS.” 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe I missed 
the answer earlier. Members of the Cabinet would in- 
clude deputy ministers or just the ministers themselves? 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the President and the Vice- 
President are not included? 

MR. TRENAS. So far; that is my amendment. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to introduce an amend- 
ment to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. This is precisely to include the Pres- 
ident and the Vice-President and also the Members of 
the Constitutional Commission and the judiciary. 
Between the words “to” and “any” insert the following: 
THE PRESIDENT OR VICE-PRESIDENT OR ANY 
MEMBER OF THE CABINET, OF CONGRESS CON- 
STITUTIONAL COMMISSION, OR THE JUDICIARY. 

MR. TRENAS. I regret I cannot accept the amend- 
ment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Which portion of the amendment? 

MR. TRENAS. The Gentleman’s amendment to 
include members of the judiciary and Constitutional 
Commissions. I stick to the amendment I presented. 

MR. DAVIDE. I defer the presentation of my amend- 
ment. 


302 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Would the proponent accept the 
President and Vice-President? 


MR. MONSOD. Under this Article, the Gentleman 
would be correct. 


MR. TRENAS. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, we know very well that 
in the case of the President, he is not supposed to 
engage in business nor practice any profession unless 
the Committee on the Executive will change the dis- 
abilities in the case of the President. 

MR. DA VIDE. Since it affects my amendment, I will 
only cite the first portion of this section: 

No loan, guaranty or other form of financial accommo- 
dation for any business purpose ... or to any firm or 
entity in which he has substantial interest, during his 
tenure ... 

The President or the Vice-President may have sub- 
stantial interest in any firm or entity but he may not be 
engaged in the management of any business. So, it is still 
necessary that he should be included. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Then where is the strength of this 
provision, if the purpose is to prevent the President, the 
Vice-President, the Members of the Congress and the 
members of the Cabinet from exercising political 
power? 

MR. MONSOD. This provision was only meant to 
address the direct relationship but if the Gentleman has 
any amendment, we would be happy to consider it after 
the voting on this present one. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, it is still open to further 
amendments after that? 

MR. MONSOD. We would be open to any suggestions 
the Gentleman may have in that regard. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. So, how is it now? 


VOTING 


MR. MONSOD. The Committee has accepted th( 
proposed amendment, as amended. So, line 1 will read 

VTFF ppp«inc\iT institution to THE PRESIDENT 
VICE-PRESIDENT OR ANY MEMRFR OF THF 
CABINET OR CONGRESS.” MtMBER OF THE 


THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 


THE PRESIDENT. Let us vote on that first. 

Is there any objection to this particular propose 
amendment which has been accepted by the CoZi 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

rec™ze P d RESIDENT ' C ° mmissioner Castro 
MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

exLc^TpomS ‘ he PUrP ° Se here is >» avoid tt 

bank o, bankS g in S “ T'"® 1 «™ «*» an 
correct? institution of the government. Is th; 


MR. RODRIGO. I want to record my abstention. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 22 votes in 
favor, none against and one abstention; the amendment 
is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, we have just 
run out of Assistant Floor Leaders, so with the consent 
of the Chair and the body, I am appropriating the 
position in the meantime. 

May I ask for the recognition of Commissioner 
Guingona for his amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. For hucinaoo 

or ousiness purposes, yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. If the * 

the Congress exercises political nnv ^ ° r , a ^ ernE>e 
not a Member of the Co ngre L can^ h “ Crc 
government banking institution is that a k™ 

prohibition? ’ 18 that cove red by 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President 

MR. DE CASTRO. Then he can still exercise polii 
power and use his crony to get loans from anyVov 
ment institution? 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

In connection with my manifestations earlier, I would 
like to propose the change of the v/ord “Ombudsman” 
to BANTAY BAY AN in the pertinent portions of 
Sections 5 to 1 2. 

MR. MONSOD. We regret we cannot accept that 
because it might be misconstrued as NAMFREL. 
NAMFREL uses the “Bantay Bayan” theme and we do 
not want to be accused of inserting ourselves into the 
Constitution. However, we appreciate the intent of the 
proponent and we would be happy to accept any other 
substitute. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


303 


MR. GUINGONA. May I offer a substitute. Madam 
President? 

I would like to propose TANGGOL BAYAN. 

MR. MONSOD. This would then be a coauthorship 
between the Gentleman and Bishop Bacani. 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, I originally had in mind this 
word but Commissioner Brocka objected. He was in- 
sisting on “BANTAY BAYAN.” So. I have no objection 
to having Commissioner Bacani be coauthor. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I offer an amendment to 
the amendment coauthored by Commissioner Regalado 
- SUMBUNGAN NG BAYAN. 

MR. GUINGONA. I am sorry I cannot accept the 
amendment. My proposal is TANGGOL BAYAN. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 

MR. MONSOD. May we request that we deferjhis? I 
think we know that the intent is to create a iagalog 
word for “Ombudsman.” And I was wondering if we 
can defer this because I believe there may be other 
options and we do not want to foreclose them. As a 
matter of fact, we think Commissioner Rodrigo can be 
of help to us. 

So, if it is all right with the body, I request a defer- 
ment, with a reservation that this be handled in the 
Committee on Style, with suggestions from the Com- 
missioners. 

THE PRESIDENT. In the meantime, will the Com- 
mittee accept the word “TANGGOL BAYAN”? 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, we already broached this 
matter this morning and I think we have had a pretty 
long discussion. 

MR. MONSOD. If it is found that “TANGGOL 
BAYAN” is the best substitute, we will give appropriate 
Qmdit to the Gentleman. 

MR. GUINGONA. No, it is not the credit. It is just 
that I want to make sure that we do not use a foreign 
word. That is my only concern. What I am afraid of is, 
since we are rushing the approval of this particular 
committee report, we may end up without being able to 
take up this matter. 

This was proposed earlier and has been discussed 
quite extensively and I have asked if there is anybody 
else who would like to suggest, I would welcome any 
suggested amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. May we defer it? 

MR. GUINGONA. For when? On Monday we are 
supposed to take up the Article on the Legislative. 


MR. MONSOD. We have up to August 1 5. 

MR. GUINGONA. The Gentleman means the period 
of amendments will not be closed. The problem is that 
after the other amendments are presented, the period 
of amendments will be closed. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, this is not the first 
time we have made a reservation on a question of style. 

MR. GUINGONA. All right, with that reservation, I 
submit, Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I understand that there is a term 
in Maguindanao which captures the concept of Ombuds- 
man, but I will have to ask Datu Michael Mastura about 
that tomorrow. 

MR. MONSOD. We would welcome suggestions. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, on the matter of the name to 
be given to this particular office, this is being deferred 
to some later time, as suggested by the Committee 
Chairman. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I ask that Commissioner 
Quesada be recognized for her amendments? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, this is actually not 
an amendment but a clarification, which I would like 
entered into the Journal. This has reference to the 
Ombudsman and his deputies being considered as 
champions. I felt concerned that it might preempt 
people power. We are trying to make people become 
concerned and interested, and yet we talk of the 
champion of the people. This could discount the con- 
tribution of the people who have organized themselves 
to coirect injustice and to contribute to good govern- 
ment. 

MR. MONSOD. We do accept that the Ombudsman 
cannot possibly preempt or substitute for a lot oi tilings 
in our country and in the Constitution, among them and 


304 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


more importantly, people’s power. It is just one of the amendment on line 7. Instead of the word “shall,” 
safeguards. insert MUST AT ALL TIMES. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Davide be recognized for his amend- 
ments? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept the 
amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendment, Madam 
President. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I have several 
amendments. On Section 1, on line 7, after the word 
“employees,” insert a comma (,) and the following: 
INCLUDING THOSE IN GOVERNMENT-OWNED 
AND CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS WITH 
ORIGINAL CHARTERS AND THEIR SUBSIDIARIES, 
then put another comma (,). 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 


MR. ROMULO. We have no real objection excep 
that it makes the paragraph so long. It loses some of it: 
, T ^ e definition of a public officer, I think 

SSSS wh0 are eraployed in 8oremme " 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 9, Madam President, between 
the words “integrity” and “efficiency,” insert a comma 
(,) and the word HONESTY. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Does “integrity” not include 
“honesty”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Not necessarily. Honesty should also 
include one’s conduct even outside the office. So, he 
should really be an example. Integrity may only be 
related to his office. 


o^Si:; 6 Can agree because in all the 

always included i fr, We ^ ave a PP rove d so far, we 
always included in the concept of public officers and 

Zl7 e a S nd cn hr f aS n ‘T ClUdin6 th °* * government 

charters and the? Wi ' h ,° riginal 
x r Auiaiics. lx we can onlv 3.sree 

the term “pTbhToffLerrand^ 5111 ? ° f £ UbUc officers ^ 
include and • , J d em P lo yees is deemed tc 

and controlled mclu de those in government-owned 
their subsid originai charters and 

MR. ROMULO We n„Pn, ^ 
because suhsldiar^c e query only the subsidiaries 
because subsidiaries of government corporations with 

D?es he GenSemT "° l C<Wred by the Civil S^Tce 
colorations? r<!member ,he ““"Pfe of suci 

MR. DAVIDE. So, only those with original charters 
MR. ROMULO. We agree. 

MR- DAVIDE. It shoiilH k 

Record, for purposes of interpret!^ n ° W in th< 

ficers and employees include tho° n ’ tlat publlc of 

owned and controlled corporati^ ^ g ® vernment 
charters. corporations with origina 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President *. ^ 

accepts that interpretation. ’ le c °mmittei 


MR. ROMULO. I think we meant “integrity” to in- 
clude one’s conduct in and out of the office. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then I will not insist. 

On line 10, instead of “modest,” substitute it with 
EXEMPLARY. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted? 

MR. ROMULO. It does not convey the intention of 
the original proponent, if we make it “EXEMPLARY. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then I would modify. Between 
“modest” and “lives,” insert AND EXEMPLARY. 

MR. ROMULO. Will the Gentleman please explain 
“EXEMPLARY” as far as he is concerned? 

MR. DAVIDE. He should really be a paragon of 
virtue as a public official or employee. The mere fact 
that he is leading a modest life does not necessarily 
mean that he is a paragon of virtue, that he is an 
example in the community. Modesty in living does not 
necessarily mean a life worthy of emulation by the 
other members of the community. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. So, I will not insist then t 
repetition of the same words. However, I rn OV < 


SR. TAN. I would humbly object because we will be 
a cause of more frustration to the people if we put so 
many words which we cannot reach. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


305 


MR. DAVIDE. I will not insist. 

On lines 13 and 14, I move for the deletion of the 
words “and the Ombudsman.” The Ombudsman should 
not be placed on the level of the President and the Vice- 
President, the members of the judiciary and the mem- 
bers of the Constitutional Commissions in the matter 
of removal from office. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. We regret we cannot accept the 
amendment because we feel that the Ombudsman is at 
least on the same level as the Constitutional Commis- 
sioners and this is one way of insulating it from politics. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, to make the 
members of the Ombudsman removable only by im- 
peachment would be to enshrine and install an officer 
whose functions are not as delicate as the others whom 
we wanted to protect from immediate removal by way 
of an impeachment. 

MR. MONSOD. We feel that an officer in the Om- 
budsman, if he does his work well, could be stepping 
on a lot of toes. We would really prefer to keep him 
there but we would like the body to vote on it, although 
I would like to ask if we still have a quorum. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Do we have a quorum? There are 
Members who are in the lounge. 

The Secretary-General and the pages conduct an 
actual count of the Commissioners present. 

THE PRESIDENT. We have a quorum. 

MR- MONSOD. May we restate the proposed amend- 
ment for the benefit of those who were not here a few 
minutes ago. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, parlia- 
mentary inquiry. I thought that amendment was already 
covered in the amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo. 
One of those amendments proposed by Commissioner 
Rodrigo was to delete the word “Ombudsman” and, 
therefore, we have already voted on it. 

MR- DAVIDE. Madam President, may I comment on 
that. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. The proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo was the total deletion of the office of 
the Ombudsman and all sections relating to it. It was 
rejected by the body and, therefore, we can have in- 
dividual amendments now on the particular sections. 


THE PRESIDENT. The purpose of the amendment of 
Commissioner Davide is not just to include the Ombuds- 
man among those officials who have to be removed 
from office only on impeachment. Is that right? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote on the amendment, 
may I ask a question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. The Ombudsman, is this only one 
man? 

MR. DAVIDE. Only one man. 

MR. RODRIGO. Not including his deputies. 

MR. MONSOD. No. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We will now vote on the amend- 
ment. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Davide, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 10 votes in favor and 14 against; 
the amendment is lost. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I have a proposed 
amendment by substitution to paragraphs (2) to (4) of 
Section 3, beginning on lines 1 to 14 of page 2. I 
wonder if the Committee had decided on the substitute 
amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. This is such an important and quite a 
lengthy amendment, and we were wondering if we can 
take this up later after the Members of the Commission 
have been given copies of the proposed amendment 
because the amendment would involve the procedures 
for impeachment, and perhaps the Members of the 
Commission should have a chance to read them. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Gentleman have any 
objection? 

MR. DAVIDE. I would have no objection, Madam 
President. 


306 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. We will consider it later. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the same concept again on 
impeachment, on line 20, page 2, after the word 
“preside,” I seek to add the following words: BUT 
SHALL NOT VOTE. The Chief Justice as the presiding 
officer in the impeachment trial shall not vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendment, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We can proceed to vote on this. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment 
on line 20? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 26, instead of “Government,” 
substitute it with REPUBLIC with the R capitalized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted? 


words “and enjoy” and the phrases “of honor, trust or 
profit” on line 26, so that the whole sentence will read: 
“Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend 
further than the removal from office and disqualifica- 
tion to hold any office under the Republic of the 
Philippines.” 

I think the word “enjoy” is superfluous and un- 
necessary. The words “of honor, trust or profit” are 
also superfluous because he could be disqualified from 
any office. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee 
accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I would object to 
the proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right, Commissioner Davide is 
recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. May we ask the proponent if it would 

meanin § were we just say IN THE 
GOVERNMENT, or would it have a different meaning 

from saying under the REPUBLIC of the Philip- 
pines ? y 


MR. DAVIDE It might really be different because 
my purpose is only to restore the original provision both 
the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. It would appear 
more elegant if it is the “REPUBLIC of the Philippines.” 

accents th? NS °H' Madam Pre sident, the Committee 
accepts the amendment. 


MR DAVIDE. Since there are many other prc 
ponents, I would give way to the others until we reac 
the provisions on the Sandiganbayan 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to thi 
proposed amendment on line 26 of page 2? (SUence 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 
THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner 

recognized. 


Maambong is 


MR. MAAMBONG. i asK that Commissioner 
de los Reyes be recognized for his amendments 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner 

recognized. 


de los Reyes is 


MR. DE LOS REYES Madam President, will the 
Committee agree to the following amendments: Online 
25 of page 2, Section 2 (6), I propose to delete the 


MR. DAVIDE. Not only because both in the 1935 
and 1973 Constitutions are the words “honor, trust or 
profit” included, but also because each has a particular 
meaning. 

An office of honor may be just an honorary office. If 
a person is impeached, he cannot even receive any 
honorary office. So, we should not destroy the original 
concept of the effects of impeachment on any office 
qualified as an office of honor, an office of trust or an 
office of profit. We should restore these concepts as 
embodied in the two important Constitutions. 

M R DE LOS REYES. May I reply to the distinguished 
Commissioner. 

I am deleting the words “honor, trust or profit” 
precisely because they will be more embracing to in- 
clude even honorary offices. For example, the word 
“profit” may have no particular meaning in the 1935 
Constitution, but we are precisely amending the Consti- 
tution to conform to contemporary events. And 
“profit” has a different connotation nowadays. 

If we remove the words “of honor, trust or profit,” 
they will embrace all kinds of office. Once a person is 
impeached, he cannot hold any other office, whether it 
is an office of honor, trust or profit in the government. 
Even as consultant at one peso a year, he cannot. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is to be left entirely to interpre- 
tation that the word “office” would now relate to any 
kind of office, whether one of honor or of trust or of 
profit. 

I will not insist on my objection provided that that 
should really be the interpretation. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right. 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


307 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The body has not yet acted on 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner de los 
Reyes. So, will the Commissioner restate his amend- 
ments? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Would Commissioner Maam- 
bong be agreeable to the insertion of the word RES- 
PECTIVELY? 

MR. MAAMBONG. In what portion of the amend- 
ment? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. On line 25, delete the words MR D £ LOS REYES. “CHAIRMAN AND MEM- 
“and enjoy” and on line 26, delete the words “of honor, gERS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION, 

trust or profit.” RESPECTIVELY.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Has the amendment been ac- MR. MAAMBONG. The amendment is accepted, 
cepted by the Committee? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The amendment is also ac- 
MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. cepted. (Laughter) 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On lines 9 and 1 0 of page 4, it 
is stated: 

A Deputy of the Ombudsman shall have the rank of a 

Commissioner of a Constitutional Commission and his 

salary, which shall not be decreased during his term of 

office. 

The sentence does not sound right. 

Will the Committee agree that we adopt the same 
arrangement in the first sentence, so that the Deputy 
of the Ombudsman shall have the same rank of a Com- 
missioner and shall receive the same salary, which s a 
not be decreased during his term of office? 

THE PRESIDENT. So, what is the proposed amend- 
ment? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The proposed amendment 
is to delete the phrase “and his salary” on line 1 1 and 
instead, substitute it with the phrase: AND SHALL 
RECEIVE THE SAME SALARY. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 


THE PRESIDENT. It is accepted by the Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment on Section 10? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I read the sentence for the 
record so that we will not be confused. Section 10 
reads: “The Ombudsman and his deputies shall have 
the rank of a Chairman and members of a Constitutional 
Commission, respectively, and they shall receive the 
same salary, which shall not be decreased during their 
term of office.” The next sentence is deleted. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. My next amendment will be 
the same as that of Commissioner Davide on the manner 
the impeachment shall be enunciated. Therefore, I will 
just submit my written amendment so that it can be 
taken up later on. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I ask that 
Commissioner Bias F. Ople be recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. The amendment is accepted, Madam 
President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I am sorry if I 
am taking a dual role here but I have an anterior amend- 
ment to the same Section 10. 

On page 4, Section 10, I propose to simplify the 
whole paragraph by deleting the second sentence from 
lines 9 to 13. The first sentence of Section 10, starting 
on line 6, should read: “The Ombudsman AND HIS 
DEPUTIES shall have the rank of a Chairman AND 
MEMBERS OF A CONSTITUTIONAL COMMIS- 
SION and THEY shall receive the salary, which shall 
not be decreased during THEIR term of office.” 

In that manner, we save one sentence because it 
would be too long to have two sentences in one section. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 


r 1TAauain r resident. Will the Commit- 

tee entertain a proposal which shall consist of an addi- 
tional section at the end of the draft article to read as 
follows: NO PUBLIC OFFICER MAY DURING HIS 

T ° CHANGE HIS CITIZENSHIP OR 
ACQUIRE THE STATUS OF AN IMMIGRANT IN 
ANOTHER COUNTRY WITHOUT FORFEITING HIS 
POST . 


May I explain briefly the principle behind the pro- 
posed amendment, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 
MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 


308 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


When we speak of accountability of public officers, 
we can presume that this derives from the allegiance to 
the state and to its Constitution. That allegiance must 
always be clear and I think most of the Members of this 
Commission may have heard by now of reports more 
rampant than before about members of our public 
service, including those in the diplomatic and consular 
services abroad, seeking to apply for a change of citizen- 
ship in their countries, temporary domicile or acquiring 
what is known as a green card. Of course, there is now 
in the Omnibus Election Code a prohibition against 
running for office. I think these acts imputed to a good 
number of Filipino members of our public service or 
public officers have now reached the sort of critical 
mass to cause genuine concern to our government. 
Therefore, this is by way of establishing a constitutional 
directive so that by itself it can become a major deter- 
rent to these violations of public policy. The Committee 
had, of course, previously considered this in our con- 
sultation and they found it meritorious and worthy of 
their support. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 
nized E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Regalado is recog- 


ments I submit-t H In ^ ° f the P ro P° sed amend 

man — there 6 3n< ^ ^ ese are with the Chair 

man there is an amendment closely allied with tha; 

uLerTcZ n 8 r T' ^ * in my ^written note: 
merits together 8 P ° SS ' bly " «“ «■* -end 


dis«n R gu°he L d E c' S" ‘° be 3SSOdated -•'> 


MR. REGALADO. The Chairman will please read m 
proposed amendments on Section 8, which may have 
connection with the proposal of Commissioner Ople 

MR. MONSOD. The proposed amendment of Cor 
missioner Regalado on Sprtinn o L 01 ^ or 

manner: “THE OMBUDSMAN AND° msTtFPtmi 

and heTl anlth^ AST FORTY YEARS OLD 
Bennagen - “Of'^ECOGN^ED* 

PENDENCE AND PATRIOTISM RFsStI ? 

p T , H ne P bar' PP,NES AND «mbe M rs R o E f S S il ^ 


That is the one that has some connection with the 
green card or the immigrant status that Commissioner 
Ople mentioned. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I think it is a more specific provi- 
sion than the general principle that this new section 
seeks to establish. So for all purposes, I think this 
proposed new section can be considered separately and 
on its own merits by the Committee. Madam President. 

May I read my proposed amendment again: NO 

PUBLIC OFFICER MAY DURING HIS TENURE 
SEEK TO CHANGE HIS CITIZENSHIP OR ACQUIRE 
THE STATUS OF AN IMMIGRANT IN ANOTHER 
COUNTRY WITHOUT FORFEITING HIS POST. So, 
there are two categories of actions contemplated here, 
both of which may result in the forfeiture of post. The 
first is when a public officer, during his tenure, applies 
for a change of citizenship. The application alone will 
have the effect of exposing him to forfeiture. But in 
the case of the immigrant, I suppose this assumes a 
completed status of an immigrant. In either case, this is 
considered inconsistent with the accountability of 
public officers and, therefore, I would like to seek the 
Committee’s support for this amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, there are so many 
empty seats; I am just wondering if we have a quorum. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we may not have a 
quorum anymore, I was wondering if we should take a 
vote, and if we can adjourn and take this up on Monday. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, I would like to make it of 
record that we have to adjourn because of lack of 
quorum. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Excuse me, Madam 
President, we have 24 Commissioners now. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That still will not form a quorum. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Including the Pres- 
ident, we have 25 Commissioners. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we have a quorum. But there 
is a motion to adjourn. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 


MR. REGALADO. My pronoun o 
has something to do with the residence of the'onj 
man and his Deputies reads: THE OMBUDSMAN 
HIS DEPUTIES SHALL BE NATURAL BORN 
ZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES, AT LEAST pc 
YEARS OLD, AND RESIDENTS OF THE PF 
PINES. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I do not like to accuse my co- 
Members of the Commission, but sometimes they leave 
this hall without the permission of the President or 
anybody else. To me it is a very ungentlemanly act of 
any Member of this Commission, so much so that we 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


309 


cannot do business if the quorum is being questioned. 
I will suggest that strict measures be taken against 
anybody who leaves this hall without the permission of 
the President. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a motion by the Chair- 
man to adjourn. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I did not hear that motion. 
Madam President, and the motion is supposed to come 
from the Floor Leader. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of the Acting 
Floor Leader? 

MR. MAAMBONG. The Floor Leader did not make 
any motion to adjourn, considering that according to 
the Secretary-General we still have a quorum. But we 
are ready to accept suggestions. 

THE PRESIDENT. To adjourn? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Any suggestion, Madam President, 
because the Floor Leader has not made any motion to 
adjourn. We still have a quorum. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, if we have a 
quorum, I object to the adjournment. Let us continue 
the business. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

It seems to me that the proposed provision con- 
templates a situation where the public officer is a 
Filipino citizen. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. While I know that generally, public 
officers are Filipino citizens, whether natural-born or 
otherwise, there is a possibility that a public officer 
working under the Republic of the Philippines may be 
an alien. The Gentleman will note that there are 
positions that are highly technical where Filipinos may 
not qualify. So, literally, it may happen that the alien 
employee who is working in the Republic of the Philip- 
pines may change his citizenship into that of a Filipino. 
Will he then forfeit his seat? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. I admit that that can cause an 
absurdity. But at the same time, I think, the reference 
is clear. We refer to 99.99 percent of our public officers 
who are all presumed to be Filipino citizens. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other Commissioner 
who would like to interpellate? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. May we ask for a suspension of 
session, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 5:03 p.m. 


THE PRESIDENT. Let us proceed. There is still the 
pending amendment of Commissioner Ople. May we act 
on that first? 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5: 18 p.m., the session was resumed. 


MR. ROMULO. Will Commissioner Ople please re- 
state the amendment? 


MR. OPLE. Yes, gladly, Madam President. 

I propose that this be denominated Section 1 5 in the 
draft article of the committee report. The section shall 
read as follows: NO PUBLIC OFFICER MAY DURING 
HIS TENURE SEEK A CHANGE IN HIS Cl HZENSHIP 
OR ACQUIRE THE STATUS OF AN IMMIGRANT IN 
ANOTHER COUNTRY WITHOUT FORFEITING HIS 
POST. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to 
pose some queries to Commissioner Ople. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Tire Acting Floor Leader is recog- 


MR. MAAMBONG. We still have a quorum. Madam 
President, and we are prepared to go on but per request 
of the Members of the body, I would like to articulate 
the fact that they are really very tired. I would like to 
know fiom the Committee if the Committee has no 
objection to our intention to adjourn. I would like to 
know from the Committee, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. We would like to request that 
adjourn until Monday. 


we 


310 


SATURDAY, JULY 26, 1986 


MR. MAAMBONG. Before that, Madam President, in 
view of that manifestation, I move to suspend considera- 
tion of the Article on Accountability of Public Officers 
until such other date as may be scheduled by the 
Steering Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we continue within the first 
hour of our session on Monday so that we can finish this 
particular Article? 

MR MONSOD. We are prepared to continue, Madam 
President, except that we may have to consult the Chair- 
man of the Steering Committee. I believe there was a 
schedule but we are at the disposal of the Commission. 


tive will be taken up on Monday, morning or afternoon, 
to accommodate the report of the Committee on 
Accountability? 

THE PRESIDENT. Chairman Monsod, how many 
hours do you think it will take, at least based on the 
number of amendments that had been submitted? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we believe we can 
finish this in the morning session; that is our expecta- 
tion. 

SUSPENSION OF CONSIDERATION OF C.R. NO. 17 
(Article on Accountability of Public Officers) 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, as the proponent of 
the amendment that is being overtaken, I look forward 
to the resumption of this amendment process by the 
first hour on Monday morning in accordance with the 
agreement with the Committee and the Acting Floor 
Leader. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR DAVIDE. I understand that yesterday the 
Chairman of the Steering Committee had scheduled the 
continuation of the report of the Committee on the 
Legislative on Monday. We would like to find out 
what time the report of the Committee on the Legisla- 


MR. MAAMBONG. With that manifestation, Madam 
President, I restate my motion to defer consideration of 
the Article on Accountability of Public Officers for 
Monday morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR MAAMBONG. I move for adjournment of 
session until Monday at nine-thirty in the morning, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
Monday at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 5:21 p.m. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


311 


R.C.C. IMO. 41 
Monday, July 28, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:42 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Jaime S. L. Tadeo. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. TADEO. Aming Amang Diyos at Allah, Diyos ni 
Abraham, Moises, Jacob, Lapu-Lapu, Rizal at Bonifacio, 
Diyos ng Kasaysayan at ng sambayanang Pilipino: 

Kami ay lumalapit sa Iyo sa mga sandaling ito na 
kung saan kami ay nagtatalakayan tungkol sa aming 
Saligang Batas. Tinipon Mo kami mula sa iba’t ibang 
kaabalahan, antas ng buhay, pananaw at simulain. 
Bagainat magkakaiba ang aming katayuan at pananaw, 
pinapag-isa Mo kami sa iisang adhikain — na makamtang 
ganap ang aming kalayaan at kasarinlan. 

O Diyos, sa mga sandaling ito inilalapit ko sa Iyo ang 
mga magbubukid, manggagawa at iba pang aping uri at 
sektor. Patuloy pa rin kaming bihag ng mala-kolonyal at 
mala-piyudal na sistema na nagbabaon sa amin sa 
kumunoy ng kahirapan. Kaming magbubukid na lumilik- 
ha ng pagkain at yaman ng bansa na siyang mayroong 
kapangyarihang paningningin sa ginto ang kabukiran ang 
siyang walang pagkain. 

Sa gitna ng katotohanang ito, kaming mga Commis- 
sioners ay nagtitipon sa isang lugar na mistulang malayo 
sa kapaitan ng buhay. Ilayo Mo kami sa tukso ng kasaga- 
naan, ng karangyaan, ng kariwasaan na maaaringmaglayo 
sa aming adhikain at maghiwalay sa amin sa naghihirap 
na sambayanang Pilipino at sa kanilang kapakanang 
nais naming tugunan. Patnubayan Mo kami ng Iyong 
banal na diwa upang sa aming pagtatalakayan ay maka- 


likha kami ng isang makabuluhang Saligang Batas na 
magbibigay ng pampulitika, pangkabuhayang kapangya- 
rihan sa mga dukha at ganap na kasarinlan sa aming 
bay an, isang Saligang Batas na magbibigay tiwala sa 
kakayahan ng sambayanang Pilipinong mangalaga at 
magpaunlad ng kanyang likas na yaman, umugit sa 
sariling pag-unlad at ipagtanggol ang sarili laban sa 
pampulitika at pangkabuhayang kontrol at monopolyo 
ng mga dayuhan. 

Ito ang aming dalangin sa ngalan ng pakikibaka para 
sa katotohanan, katarungan at kalayaan. Amen. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 


call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . . 

. Present* 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Nieva 

. Present 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Nolle do 

. Present 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

Ople 

. Present 

Bacani 

. Present* 

Padilla 


Bengzon 

. Present 

Quesada 


Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 


Bernas 

. Present 

Regalado 


Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . . 

. . Present* 

Brock a 


Rigos 


Calderon 


Rodrigo . . 


Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 


Rosales . 


Concepcion . . , 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present* 

Davide 


Suarez . . 


Foz 


Sumulong . 


Garcia 


Tadeo . . 


Gascon 


Tan . . 


Guingona . . . 


Tingson . . . . 


Jamir 


Trefias . . 

. . Present 

Laurel 


Uka .... 


Lerum .... 


Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

Maambong . . 

• • Present 

Villegas 

. . Present 

Monsod .... 

• • Present 



The President is present. 

The roll call shows 34 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


Appeared after the roll call 


312 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we dis- 
pense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we ap- 
prove the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


(Communication No. 343 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Officers. 

Letter from Mr. David D. Boaz, Cato Institute, 224 
Second St. SE, Washington, D.C. 20003, transmitting a 
copy of Cato Policy Report containing an article by 
Dr. Paul Craig Roberts, entitled: “The Constitutional 
Protection of Economic Freedom.” 

(Communication No. 344 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Mr. Joaquin J. Pascual of 63-C P. Burgos 
St., Batangas City, urging the Constitutional Commis- 
sion to adopt provisions for the welfare of senior 
citizens and government retirees. 

(Communication No. 345 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Petitior 

and Communications, the President making the cor 
responding references: waiting me cor 


Uka^Yusun R he AK°K°i rabIe Commis sioners Lugum 

E MaaZon^' t ^t^ 0160 " G * Rama, Regala 

HilarioT n 8 ’vi ? N ‘ N ° lledo ’ Ma ' Teresa F. Nie 1 
Hilano G. Davide, Jr. and Florenz D. Regalado reque 

call a meednTorth 011 Resources to immediate 

sectionTof Prnno tbe p Co ™ mittee to consider articles 
sections of Proposed Resolution No. 451, entitled: 

A sTZJr P R T r?v! NCORPORATE IN ™ NEW CC 

T TUTION PROVISIONS RELATIVE TO THF P* 

Mo“e 0 R F t E ™ SPAN1SH hlipino, o' 

TOATFrTS 2L? ' NAT,VE LANGUAGES A 

DIALECTS. AND OTHER RELATED SUBJECTS, 

new Constitution!'' 66 "" Sh t0 incor P°rate into t 
(Petition No. I - Constitutions! Co mmissio „ of 1986 
To the Committee on Human Resources. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from Mr. Mariano 7 Po^-i 
552! Devonshire, Detroit, MxchTgan n™ ’ u' 
be the policy of the State to stamp out graft and & c 
ruption and hidden wealth and suggesting to this 
that the burden of proof that said wealth 0 r prone 
was amassed legitimately be shifted to the owner 
possessor thereof. 


Letter from Mr. Potenciano M. Alcala, Sr. of 1 1 JG 
Village, Bakyas, Bacolod City, favoring the retention of 
U.S. military bases and saying that Russian imperialism 
is worse than American imperialism. 

(Communication No. 346 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication from Mr. Bartolome Banaken and 
Ms. Lourdes Calde, submitting the following preferences 
of the people of Bontoc and Bauko, Mountain Province 
who attended the public consultations conducted by the 
honorable Commissioner Ponciano L. Bennagen: On 
education — Cordillera Province be represented in the 
Textbooks Board to ensure inclusion of culture in the 
areas, guidance counselling and special education 
scheme for children with behavioral problems; on suf- 
frage — adoption of measures to ensure that the illite- 
rate voters’ choices are truly reflected; on national 
language — English is preferred; on emergency powers— 
declaration of martial law and suspension of the writ of 
habeas corpus be vested in the legislature; abolition of 
death penalty; retention of U.S. military bases and the 
presidential form of government with a unicameral 
legislature. 

(Communication No. 347 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


Letter from Sinub-badan ka mga Bagobo na Mekatanod 
(Association of Awakened Bagobos), requesting the 
Commission to give favorable consideration to the rights 
and privileges of national minorities. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


313 


(Communication No. 348 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Ricardo R. Lozano of 58 Gastambide 
St., Sampaloc, Manila, suggesting provisions for the right 
of the State to appeal from a decision of a lower court 
or tribunal, and for extrajudicial confessions freely and 
voluntarily given even without the assistance of counsel 
to be admissible in evidence. 

(Communication No. 349 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Mr. Marlo-Rodrigo R. de Jesus of Para- 
naque Political Science Society, Sto. Nino Executive 
Village, Barangay Sun Valley, Paranaque, Metro Manila, 
proposing provisions reiterating the prohibition against 
servants in the civil service, including military and 
barangay officials, from engaging in partisan politics and 
condemning violation thereof by ouster or dismissal 
from office. 

(Communication No. 350 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Resolution No. 355 of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan 
of Cebu, proposing a nuclear-free Philippines, banning 
the establishment of foreign military bases, depots 
and/or facilities intended for the storage of nuclear 
weapons or materiels, setting up of nuclear power plants 
and the transit or overflight of any vehicle or airplane 
carrying nuclear weapons or materiels. 

(Communication No. 351 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

I et ter from Mr. Mario P. Arenas of 3064 Brandywine 
p r jve, San Jose, California, proposing a tenure of two 
consecutive terms with the right to run for the same 
office after a reasonable time for elective officials from 
councilor level to senatorial level. 

(Communication No. 352 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Letter from Bro. Peter de Groot, FSC of La Salle Green 
Hills, Metro Manila, proposing the inclusion of the 
following provision: “Parents should have the oppor- 
tunity to send their children to the school of their 

choice.” 

(Communication No. 353 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from Mr. Leopoldo C. Segovia of Atlag, 
Malolos, Bulacan, requesting a provision protecting 
consumers from the common practice of short-weighing 
and similar forms of deceit. 

(Communication No. 354 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble. National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Position paper submitted by the Seventh Day Adventist 
Church in the Philippines on religious liberty and separa- 
tion of Church and State. 

(Communication No. 355 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Vicente K. Cal, Sr. of Philippine Vete- 
rans Legion, Legion Home Bldg., PVAO Compound, 
Arroceros St., Manila, expressing apprehension on the 
ratification of the new Constitution if a provision on the 
prohibition of foreign military bases in the Philippines 
is incorporated therein. 

(Communication No. 356 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Ricardo M. Talusan, no address, op- 
posing the abolition of the death penalty and proposing 
the taxing of religious organizations’ property and in- 
come, and provisions for free education from elemen- 
tary school to college levels, among others. 

(Communication No. 357 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF C.R. NO 17 
(Article on Accountability of Public Officers) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. I move that we continue the considera- 
tion of Committee Report No. 17 on the Article on 
Accountability of Public Officers. We are now in the 
period of amendments. I ask that the Chairman of the 
omrmttee as well as the members come forward and 
take his seat in front. 

THE PRESIDENT. Before we proceed to the period 
of amendments, the Chair wishes to acknowledge t ie 


314 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


presence of the second year high school students of the 
Philippine Science High School. 

Is there any objection that we continue the considera- 
tion of Committee Report No. 17 on the Article on 
Accountability of Public Officers? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the motion is approved. 

May we call on the honorable Chairman and members 
of the Committee. 


I seek the Committee’s response to this proposal, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Ople be recog- 
nized to present his amendment. 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask the honorable Commis- 
sioner a few questions? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. MR - OPLE - Very gladly. Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Madam President. 

I propose an amendment on Section 2, page 1, line 17 
of the draft Article to insert the phrase MANIFEST 
AND GROSS DISREGARD OF THE POPULAR WILL 
between “corruption” and “or,” so that the entire 
Section 2 will now read: “The President, the Vice- 

f S? 6 ?’ Members of the Supreme Court, the Members 
ot tne Constitutional Commissions and the Ombudsman 
may e removed from office on impeachment for and 
’ cu lP a bl e violation of the Constitution, 

MANIFFST ei 4 Nn he rn §l1 crimes, graft and corruption, 
GR0SS DISREGARD OF THE 
o ULAR WILL or betrayal of public trust.” 

May I briefly explain, Madam President, the reason 
tor this amendment. 

proceed RRR ^DENT. Th e Commissioner may please 


t - !f 2 PL o ' I V S tme that the Perpetual disqualific 
alreadv H 6 fr ° m Seekin S a reelection, which 

direct contend ^ £ hlS Commissi °n, removes him fro 

political party In the* nature" ^ tltU ’ ar leader °£ h 
idpnt win , , , nature of this system, the Pre 

of ■o«ernin»n| U n T?V 0 Pressures, to use the powe 

for°the legislative for loc , andidates of his P ar 
President anH ViJ v> the oca ^ governments and f 

thS ^ConsHtmio^ i re u dent - An ex P |ki * P™«sion 
herein designated as election frau 

REGARD OF THE PoK GR ° SS , D 1 I 

offense will give the President ,,, 7 a " m,f ! eachab 
pressures. He will have to be i a 8 ainst SU< 

and authority for clean and ^ P + Uttlng his P resti 
tional mandate, and he mav rit? tl e " e( ' tlo ^ ls b y constit 
peril. The existence of such ^ the electlons at his ov 
powerful signal to the entire nation th" ltSelf ^ ndS 
tution shall not brook massive elect 3 | ^ neW C ° nS 

, s against the popular will, and which certaWyde^rv 
to be ranked as an impeachable offend * '“v ULServ 

culpable violation of the Constitution, treason, brib« 
other high crimes, graft and corruption and betrayal 

the public trust. 


MR. SARMIENTO. For the information of Commis- 
sioner Ople, last Friday, Commissioner Roinulo ex- 
plained that the phrase “culpable violation of the Con- 
stitution, treason, bribery, other high crimes, graft and 
corruption or betrayal of public trust” is a catch-all 
provision to cover all offenses against the Constitution. 
Does not the honorable Commissioner think the phrase 
“MANIFEST AND GROSS DISREGARD OF THE 
POPULAR WILL” would be embraced by this catch-all 
provision? 

MR. OPLE. There is a sense in that we can really stop 
after the phrase “culpable violation of the Constitu- 
tion” which, in a sense, spares this provision the obliga- 
tion to define other offenses already embraced by “cul- 
pable violation of the Constitution.” With the 1935 and 
the 1973 Constitutions, however, the phrases “graft and 
corruption” and “betrayal of public trust ” have been 
allowed to complement the more general phrase “cul- 
pable violation of the Constitution” to include treason, 
bribery, other high crimes, graft and corruption or 
betrayal of public trust. But may I submit, Madam Pres- 
ident, that if there is anything contemporary history 
teaches us, it is the massive prostitution of the popular 
will through electoral cheating that can destroy demo- 
cracy. If it is such an imminent threat to democracy, 
even more imminent and more direct, aimed at the heart 
of the existence of a democracy than betrayal of public 
trust, and graft and corruption, I see no reason why in 
recognition of this central threat to the life of a demo- 
cracy and of the preeminent place of upholding the 
Constitution and popular sovereignty in the oath of the 
President, this proposal inserted in this draft Article, 
Madam President, should not be considered as an 
impeachable offense. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President and members of 
the Committee, if we include the phrase “MANIFEST 
AND GROSS DISREGARD OF THE POPULAR WILL” 
as one of the impeachable offenses, no one will be 
prevented from including crimes against public order 
or national security and nepotism as impeachable 
offenses. My humble submission, with due respect to 
Commissioner Ople, is that the words “MANIFEST 
AND GROSS DISREGARD OF THE POPULAR WILL” 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


315 


are included in the catch-all provisions “betrayal of 
public trust” and “violation of the Constitution.” 

Thank you very much. 

MR. OPLE. I can grant that, but if I seek to define it 
here by amendment, it is because of a major perception 
of our own people that the prostitution of the electoral 
process is a real dagger aimed at the very heart of the 
existence of a democracy. Therefore, no less than the 
other offenses listed here, it deserves to be made explicit, 
given the sharp formulation in Section 2 as an addi- 
tional ground for the impeachment of the President. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Last Friday, this Member made a 
manifestation that I had submitted Proposed Resolution 
No. 354 which added as a ground for impeachment of 
the President the national failure of justice evidenced 
by gross violation of human rights. Actually, my original 
proposal included “or of election laws”; however, after 
the manifestation, I asked the honorable members of 
the Committee if they thought the first part of my addi- 
tional ground which was “national failure of justice 
evidenced by gross violation of human rights” would 
already be included in the concept of “betrayal of public 
trust.” The answer was in the affirmative, so I did not 
insist on the inclusion of this additional ground. May I, 
however, explain, Madam President, that I had speci- 
fically eliminated my original suggestion making the 
President subject to impeachment for national failure of 
justice evidenced by gross violation of election laws, 
because of the fact that we have already instituted an 
independent Commission on Elections. And it is my 
humble opinion that to make the President liable for an 
obligation or a duty of an independent Commission on 
Elections that we have created would not be in con- 
sonance with the rationale behind the creation of that 
independent Commission on Elections. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would just like to be 
clarified. Is Commissioner Guingona propounding a 
question to Commissioner Ople? 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. I would 
like to ask the honorable proponent, with due respect to 
his opinion, whether or not in conformity with the 
response of the Committee that the national failure ot 
justice evidenced by gross violation of human rights 
which I had suggested would already be included in the 
concept of betrayal of trust, and national failure of 
justice evidenced by gross violation of election laws 
would also be conveyed or embraced in that same con- 
cept of betrayal of public trust. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, we are speaking of 
proportional ways given to certain offenses in terms of 
the degree of their lethal effects on the fragile life of a 
democracy. May I also point out that when I introduced 
this amendment. I was not thinking of the more recent 
past which is very instructive for all of us. I was not 
thinking of the immediate future because I have com- 
plete trust in the ability of President Aquino to keep the 
elections clean and free and probably to advance the 
purity of the electoral process to a higher level. I was 
thinking beyond that point. I was thinking of future 
Presidents whose own vulnerability to temptations 
would be difficult to measure at this time. We are 
writing a constitution not only for this time but for the 
future generations. So, I think there is no redundant 
effect if the Constitutional Commission takes cognizance 
of a central fact in our own contemporary history; 
namely, that the prostitution of the popular will can 
directly threaten the heart of democracy; it can kill 
democracy perhaps to a degree not inferior to the 
ability of the other offenses. And, therefore, I think 
it is right that the Constitutional Commission signal in 
the future that we are not indifferent to the serious 
symptoms of the failure of democracy that we have just 
experienced and which, in terms of the lethal values in 
this provision, can outrank the others for stifling and 
killing outright a democracy in the Philippines. 

MR. TRE5JAS. I shall be brief in my opposition to 
the proposed amendment. First, I believe, as manifested 
by Commissioner Sarmiento, the phrase “MANIFEST 
AND GROSS DISREGARD OF THE PUBLIC WILL” is 
included in “violation of the Constitution” and “be- 
trayal of public trust.” Furthermore, the President, 
under our new Constitution, cannot run for reelection 
anymore. So he cannot take advantage of his office to 
seek or act in gross disregard of public trust or popular 
will. There is no more need, therefore, for the proposed 

amendment. 

Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I said earlier that the President may 
not be in direct contention but he remains the titular 
leader of his political party according to tradition. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Concepcion has registered 
to speak against the amendment. I ask that he be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. Madam President. 

We have been discussing the grounds for impeach- 
ment in the apparent belief that the actual provisions on 


316 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


impeachment are not sufficiently embracing. There is 
this all-embracing phrase in the Constitution which says: 
“other high crimes.” As Commissioner Romulo stated, 
this is a political matter more than a legal one. And 
jurisprudence has settled that “other high crimes” does 
not even have to be a crime, but it is any act, omission 
or conduct that renders an official unworthy to remain 
in office. My apprehension is that the more we parti- 
cularize the grounds for impeachment, the more we 
reduce its ambit because we would be subject to the 
rule: expressio unius est exclusio alterius. I would prefer 
if the enumeration ended with the phrase “other high 
crimes” because this phrase includes anything that in 
the opinion of the impeaching body renders the subject 
of impeachment unworthy to remain in office. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Bemas 
will speak against the amendment for two minutes. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. While I agree with the lofty objectives 
° t e amendment proposed, I am afraid that the effect 
° ? e . P ro P° se d amendment is, in fact, to weaken the 

provisions on impeachment. The amendment speaks of 
massive e ection frauds. We have a very general principle 

111 tr, 6 onstltubon which says that sovereignty resides 
in e people and all government authority emanates 

HnaM lem soverei 8 n ty of the people is prin- 

3 y expressed in the election process and in the 
referendum and plebiscite processes. 

virUofif/i P ro yrsion on sovereignty of the people can be 
tint ft cu P a bly even if not massively. By requiring 
effect le V1 ° atlon °/ the election law be massive, in 
sovereign tv a f e , saying tbat the impairment of the 
be a aronnH f • 6 ^ eo P^ e must be massive in order to 

strengthens ^ 

Commissioner Bem^ an" 'update’ ThT 1 ° ^ 

frauds which are covered u ? maSS1Ve electlon 
intended to be proposed h the phrase originally 
FEST AND C,ROSS P DI8RP?AD een replaced b y MANI- 

WILL. w„,ch is?eat !„“ C d R ,° ° F ™ P ° PULAR 

d to mean the same thing. 

FR. BERNAS. Even with tho* u 
it may be more strict than culnJhT’ 1 T afraid that 
Constitution on sovereignty and^h V1 ° latlon of the 
strengthening the provision I am af the , reby > instead of 
the provision. ’ raid rnay weaken 


MR. OPLE. Thank you for that explanation 

THE PRESIDENT. May we now hear first 
tion of the Committee. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, I would like to ask the Committee 
just one question. Will the Committee oblige? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, gladly. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

Does the Committee support the remarks of Commis- 
sioner Bernas concerning the possibility that the offense 
“MANIFEST AND GROSS DISREGARD OF THE 
POPULAR WILL” is already embraced in the under- 
lying meaning of the other impeachable offenses, and 
also the remarks of Chief Justice Concepcion that it is 
already embraced under the category of other high 
crimes? 

Is it also the intention of the Commission to make 
this offense part of “betrayal of public trust,” which is 
the latest ground for impeachment adduced in this 
provision? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee 
agrees with the opinions of Commissioners Concepcion 
and Bernas in that the phrase “MANIFEST AND 
GROSS DISREGARD OF THE POPULAR WILL” is 
more limiting and, secondly, this offense could be con- 
sidered embraced in the other grounds for impeachment 
enumerated in Section 2. 

MR OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. It will not 
be necessary for me to press this amendment then. 

May I proceed to the next proposal, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So for the record, the first pro- 
posed amendment is withdrawn. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, on that understanding, which I hope 
the record of this debate will very clearly register. May I 
propose a new sentence on Section 11, line 21, page 4 
of the draft Article. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I make a comment in relation 
to this proposed amendment of Commissioner Ople on 
Section 1 1. 

On page 3, Section 7 has reference to the Ombuds- 
man. Madam President, copies of a letter sent by 
Tanodbayan Raul Gonzalez were distributed to us only 
five minutes ago. It is a three-page letter which states 
the position of the Tanodbayan regarding the creation 
of a separate office called the Ombudsman. As it is a 
prejudicial question, I think the Commissioners should 
be given a little time to read this letter before we deal 
with particular amendments on the Ombudsman, 
because this can result in the elimination of the 
Ombudsman or in a merger of the Ombudsman and the 
Tanodbayan. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


317 


MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just for the record, may we hear 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Ople first; 
afterwards Commissioner Rodrigo may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. May I submit that no prejudicial 
question arises from this proposed amendment just 
because a letter has been received from a source, no 
matter how important it is, which is external to the 
Constitutional Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the proposed amendment on 
Section 1 1, line 21? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. And, in any case, 
the proposed amendment will not likely collide with 
any outside proposal that may have been received in 
the Commission. I have not seen a copy of the said 
letter. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople may please 
proceed. 

MR. OPLE. With the indulgence of Commissioner 
Rodrigo and of the Committee, may I proceed to 
read the amendment which is to add a last sentence to 
Section 11, line 21: THE OMBUDSMAN MAY DE- 
SIGNATE A SEPARATE DEPUTY FOR THE MILI- 
TARY ESTABLISHMENT, so that the entire Section 11 
will now read as follows: “The Ombudsman and his 
Deputies, as champions of the people, shall act prompt- 
ly on the complaints filed, in any form or manner, 
against public officials or employees of the government, 
including governrnent-owned corporations, agencies or 
instrumentalities, and shall notify the complainants of 
the action taken and the results thereof. THE OMBUDS- 
MAN MAY DESIGNATE A SEPARATE DEPUTY FOR 
THE MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT.” 

May I state a brief reason for this amendment, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has five 
minutes to explain his proposed amendment. 

M R. OPLE. Thank you. 

/ The original Ombudsman was created in Sweden in 
1810 and has survived practically unchanged for ovei 
170 years. The military Ombudsman appeared foi the 
first time in history in Norway in 1952 and in West Gei- 
many in 1956. In Norway, the military Ombudsman, 
known as ombudsmannen for forsvaret, was superim- 
posed on an existing structure of enlisted spo esmen 
chosen by each unit of the Norwegian Armed Forces. 

In our own Philippine Armed Forces, there has arisen 
in recent years a type of fraternal association outside 
the chain of command proposing reformist objectives. 
They constitute, in fact, an informal grievance machine- 
ry against injustices to the rank and file soldiery and 


perceive graft in higher rank and neglect of the needs 
of troops in combat zones. The Reform the Armed 
Forces Movement or RAM has kept precincts for push- 
ing logistics to the field, the implied accusation being 
that most of the resources are used up in Manila instead 
of sent to soldiers in the field. The Guardians, the El 
Diablo and other organizations dominated by enlisted 
men function, more or less, as grievance collectors and 
as mutual aid societies. 

This proposed amendment merely seeks to extend 
the office of the Ombudsman to the military establish- 
ment, just as it champions the common people against 
bureaucratic indifference. The Ombudsman can de- 
signate a deputy to help the ordinary foot soldier get' 
through with his grievance to higher authorities. This 
deputy will, of course, work in close cooperation with 
the Minister of National Defense and the Armed Forces 
of the Philippines’ Chief of Staff because of the necessity 
to maintain the integrity of the chain of command. 
Ordinary soldiers, when they know they can turn to a 
military Ombudsman for their complaints, may not have 
to fall back on their own informal devices to obtain 
redress for their grievances. The Ombudsman will help 
raise troop morale in accordance with a major professed 
goal of the President and the military authorities them- 
selves. I seek the Committee’s kind concurrence to this 
proposal. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. This is the second time that I will 
be objecting to the proposal of the honorable Commis- 
sioner Ople. I supported all his proposals in the past, but 
this is the second time that I will be objecting to his 
proposal. 

Madam President, if we ingraft this proposal to our 
Constitution, what will prevent other sectors to suggest 
the creation of a cultural minority Ombudsman, a 
health Ombudsman, a justice Ombudsman, a workers’ 
Ombudsman? I think we should not favor an establish- 
ment or an entity by suggesting the creation of an 
Ombudsman particularly for that entity. The Ombuds- 
man should be for all sectors. Secondly, we have filed a 
resolution with the Constitutional Commission, as 
agreed in principle by the Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies, for the creation of a Com- 
mission on Human Rights to handle precisely these 
problems. And, thirdly, we have other offices now 
existing that could handle these problems of the foot 
soldiers or any civilian against the military, for instance, 
the Judge Advocate General’s Office and the Office ot 
the Inspector General. Also, we have the Complaints 
Division of Malacanang which receives complaints 
against officials of the government. I think what we 


318 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


need is not the creation of another entity to answer or 
respond to the problems of employees of a particular 
establishment but the selection of good people to 
occupy existing offices. So, I humbly submit, Madam 
President, that this proposal is not necessary. This will 
merely create or expand more mechanisms; this would 
mean duplication of efforts of existing offices. 

Thank you. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

MR OPLE. Madam President, may I reply briefly to 
Commissioner Sarmiento? 

THE PRESIDENT. May we just hear first from Com- 
missioner de Castro so that there will be only one reply. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 


MR DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

If the proposal of the Honorable Ople is to create a 
system by which the lowly soldier in the military may 
have the means to file his complaints with anybody, the 
mi itary has already a system for this purpose. Starting 
rom the commanding officer of the company, to the 
a a ion, to the regiment, to the division, and to the 
o ice of the Chief of Staff, there is the Inspector 
enera w o conducts inspection every now and then 
fti- 3S ^ !u 6ry so ^ er > without the presence of his of- 
^ , e er le bas an y complaint against his officer/s, 
S 1S I l oncomr nissioned officers or against the 
0 ^ere is already a system in the Armed 
h .• f . 0 * le corn Plaint of the lowly soldier, and I 

in Hip 1 Wl n0t necessar y to create another system 
in the government for this purpose. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

sionere de C L astro M an y d LSn t0 ^ Commis ' 

in the civiliL be govtrn t mL C t°T 1 t 1 T tS 30 d aCtion services 
sioners that the area where ’the uT* the Commis ' 
as a truly innovative benefit <• ® mbud sman can be felt 
and file win be *•*■? " nk 

I am not at liberty, I sunnn, J Phlh PP ines ' 
more horrifying complainbfi^a \°n dlS f. Iose some of the 
submitted by the Reform the Arm "Ip 5 * of particulars 
to former President Marcos bTl F ° rCeS Moveme "* 
ought to share with this Commission " th ° n ^ that 1 
some of the soldiers killed in action in M' ^ Wldc ! ws of 
follow up their gratuity papers, their deTth^i° ^ t0 
tion claims, in one of the headquarter AcroT 6 "?' 
one of those complaints that was very clear some o^the 
processors in that headquarters took advantage of the 


widows of soldiers slain in battle to the extent of 
subjecting them to unconscionable molestations. 

I am not saying that this is endemic, but since we 
have created the office of the Ombudsman, what is 
wrong if we vest it with the power to extend itself as a 
champion of the common man — in this context, the 
ordinary foot soldier - so that he will have a friend? 
And I say here very categorically that the Ombudsman 
will have to work in close cooperation with the Minister 
of National Defense and the Chief of Staff of the Armed 
Forces of the Philippines. There will be no attempt to 
disrupt the integrity of the chain of command. The 
Ombudsman, in this case, will be a friend also of the 
highest authorities in the Ministry of National Defense. I 
submit, Madam President, because I have only five 
minutes and I hope Commissioner de Castro’s time is 
not charged to mine. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. It is not at all charged to Commis- 
sioner Ople’s time. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

When we talk of the Ombudsman in the military to 
take care particularly of the complaints of the widows 
and orphans of soldiers as stated by the Honorable 
Ople, we have two organizations which look after these. 
These organizations are: the Last Watering Hole which 
meets today and every 28th day of the month to 
check on the complaints of soldiers, of officers, of 
widows and orphans; and the Association of Generals 
and Flag Officers which also looks after the welfare of 
the veterans, their widows and their orphans. And I have 
a resolution to also look after the welfare of these war 
veterans, their orphans and their widows. So, I believe 
that to create an Ombudsman for the military in the 
Constitution is no longer necessary. 

This time is not charged to the Honorable Ople’s. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. I submit, Madam President. I seek the 
honorable Committee’s benediction for this amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear the position of the 
Committee on this particular amendment of Commis- 
sioner Ople? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we just ask 
one question of the proponent. The Ombudsman for the 
military will deal with relationships between the soldier 
and the hierarchy. Is that correct? 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


319 


MR. OPLE. It can be lateral or it can be vertical. 
With higher authority, yes, but also with fellow soldiers 
occupying positions of trust. 

MR. MONSOD. In other words, within the military? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. It would not include human rights 
violations by soldiers against civilians? 

MR. OPLE. No, that belongs to another jurisdiction, 
Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. So, in effect, it could not be inconsis- 
tent with a Commission on Human Rights? 

MR. OPLE. No, there is absolutely no overlap or 
inconsistency. 

MR MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee 
accepts the amendment of the proponent. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would have no objection to the 
proposed amendment, but it should not be on Section 
1 1. It should be placed on Section 6 because if we put 
it here, the appointing authority will no longer be the 
President but the Ombudsman, and that is not, I think, 
the philosophy of the provision. 

So it should also be covered by the manner by which 
an appointment may be extended to it. So I would 
propose that it be transferred principally to Section 6. 

MR. OPLE. The Committee has no jurisdiction; 
personally, I have no objection, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. But I would propose that the wording 
would be: A SEPARATE DEPUTY FOR THE MILI- 
TARY ESTABLISHMENT MAY BE APPOINTED, 
after “Mindanao” on Section 6, line 16, page 3. 

MR. OPLE. I accept the amendment, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople has accepted 
the amendment. How about the Committee? 

MR MONSOD. We accept, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, I object to the 
proposed amendment on two grounds: First, as already 
stated, there is already a system within the military to 
entertain all the complaints of the lowly soldiers up to 


the highest level. Second, there is a provision which we 
already approved that no military men shall occupy any 
civilian office at any one time. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to propose an amend- 
ment to the amendment of Commissioner Ople, and 
that is to install the Ombudsman not only for the mili- 
tary establishment but also for the health establishment. 

I feel that the problems of the health situation in the 
country are more far-reaching and more demanding of 
this kind of Ombudsman who will speak for and in 
behalf of the powerless, the voiceless people of our 
country who are deprived of the right to life and the 
right to health because they are unable to seek or to 
have access to much-needed health services. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear Commissioner Ople 
first. Does Commissioner Ople accept the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Quesada? 

MR. OPLE. No, the Committee has no jurisdiction, 
Madam President. I am sorry I have to decline the kind 
offer. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I would like to amend the amendment to 
the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us dispose first of the pro- 
posed amendment to the amendment; afterwards, we 
will entertain amendments to this proposed amendment 
that has to be accepted by the Committee. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee 
regrets that it cannot accept that amendment for the 
following reason: We realize that there are many 
sectors who would want the concept of Ombudsman 
installed to protect them or to look after their welfare, 
but this is not the place for it. We are creating an office 
of the Ombudsman with an Ombudsman at the head; 
and we realize that over time, the concept has been 
successful, and found by the people to be very effective 
in correcting or redressing their grievances. There is no 
impediment to many Ombudsmen being appointed as 
assistants in many sectors as, in fact, has happened m 
many countries. We have to allow the system to evolve 


320 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


and to be refined and to perfect itself in the process. If 
we open it up now, there will be 1 0 or 1 2 or 1 5 sectors 
who will want to be identified specifically in the Con- 
stitution, and we feel that this is something that could 
be a matter of legislation. 

In the case of the military, it is a very big, strategic 
and important sector at this time, and we feel that there 
is a justification for making a special mention of the 
military now. 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The body will first proceed to 
vote on the amendment of Commissioner Ople as 
amended by Commissioner Davide and as has been ac- 
cepted by the Committee. Afterwards, the body will 
accept other amendments. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I make a 
comment on the amendment, as amended? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RODRIGO. I think the amendment to the 
amendment reads: “A SEPARATE DEPUTY FOR 
THE MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT MAY BE AP- 
POINTED.” So it is discretionary; the President may or 
may not appoint him. 


inJt HE H PRESIDENT ‘ Is Commi ssioner Rodrigo objec 
mg to the amendment, as amended? 


man. We are putting in this provision that a separate 
deputy may be appointed. It is the President who would 
appoint. Madam President. 

We submit it to the body. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the amendment now 
as phrased by the Committee. 

MR. MONSOD. May we ask Commissioner Davide to 
restate the amendment, as amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, on line 16, page 3, 
add a new sentence after the period (.) following “Min- 
danao” to read as follows: A SEPARATE DEPUTY 
FOR THE MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT MAY LIKE- 
WISE BE APPOINTED. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of this particular 
amendment, as amended, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 22 votes in favor and 1 1 against; 
the proposed amendment, jointly submitted by Com- 
missioners Ople and Davide and accepted by the 
Committee, is approved. 


Secondlv^^^^ N °’ 1 JUSt Want to be clarifie 

•he C0mma , nder - in<hW ' 

seem tr» k. ces , the Philippines. I notice that v 
President w emascu ^ atin g too much the powers of tl 
I Mnk thtl t0 be l0Sing faith in the Presidenc 
the term of t , an , overreact ’ on to what happened durii 

MarC0S ‘ 1 think ^ere is on 
we are framing kV ^ ThlS Constit ution whic 

future Presidents whT t l , e , present President and f< 

repeat, the President is'the Co by the people ' 

Armed Forces of the Ph Commar *der-in-Chief of tf 

discipline of its members inn? Wh ° 1S ln charge of tl 
ing again another office provislon we are crea 

President to perform fnnr-t ming y inde Pendent of tl 

should be performed by thePre^^ constitutiona11 
will be in derogation of Uia esid ent and, therefor 

Commander-in-Chief 1 of the Arnmd^orces ' ‘ 

THE PRESIDENT. May we he.rf 

firs t. y We hear from the Committe 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President 

may we repb 

Yesterday afternoon, we went over this san 
ground. In fact the argument that was posed yesterd 
was that a good President would welcome an Ombuc 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other amendment? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I am still on the floor. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know from the Floor 
Leader who will have the floor. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Ople still has the floor. 
He has other amendments to propose. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

On previous clearance with the Floor Leader and the 
Committee, Madam President, I would like to submit 
just two more amendments to the Article on Accounta- 
bility of Public Officers. I propose to add a new section 
to be denominated as Section 15 which reads: A PUB- 
LIC OFFICER SHALL, UPON ASSUMPTION OF OF- 
FICE, DECLARE HIS ASSETS AND LIABILITIES. 
THE PRESIDENT, THE VICE-PRESIDENT, MEM- 
BERS OF THE CABINET, MEMBERS OF CONGRESS, 
THE HEADS AND DIRECTORS OF GOVERNMENT- 
OWNED OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS AND 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


321 


FLAG OFFICERS OF THE ARMED FORCES SHALL 
DISCLOSE TO THE PUBLIC THEIR NET WORTH AT 
THE BEGINNING OF THEIR TERMS AND EVERY 
TWO (2) YEARS THEREAFTER. 

May I explain briefly, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may please 
proceed under the five-minute rule. 

MR. OPLE. It will take me only one minute to 
explain this amendment. We had previously met this 
principle in the Article on the Legislative but this was 
made applicable only to the Members of the Congress. 
It was especially Commissioner Serafin Guingona and 
Chairman Hilario Davide, Jr. of the Committee on the 
Legislative who called my attention to the fact that if 
this is made to apply to the Members of the Congress, it 
should be made a universal principle elsewhere in the 
Constitution to apply to public officers of the govern- 
ment, and this is what this additional new section seeks 
to do, Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

As the distinguished proponent said, I had called 
his attention to the need for this particular amendment 
that he is now proposing. May I just mention that in the 
Journal of Saturday’s session, July 26, on page 28, 
paragraph 7, the following appears, and I quote: 

Referring to Mr. Tadeo’s concern on modest living, Mr. 

Guingona suggested that impeachable officers submit their 

statements of assets and liabilities upon assumption of 

office. 

I, therefore, would like to assure the distinguished 
proponent that I fully support his amendment. How- 
ever, I wish to offer two amendments to his amend- 
ment, which are to remove the period (.) after “LIABI- 
LITIES” and add UNDER OATH and to add AND AT 
THE END OF THEIR TERMS after “YEARS THERE- 
AFTER.” 

In the case, for example, of a member of the Cabinet 
who leaves his office one-and-a-half years after his last ^ 
disclosure, under this provision he would not be re- 
quired to submit a statement of his assets and liabilities. 

I am, therefore, proposing these two amendments for 
the consideration of the distinguished proponent. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I accept the amend- 
ment on my behalf and on behalf of Commissioner 
Bennagen who had another resolution to this effect but 
who kindly agreed to combine it with the one I had 
put forward. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the proponents accept an 
amendment by substitution? The amendment will read 
as follows: EVERY PUBLIC OFFICER OR EM- 
PLOYEE SHALL, UPON ASSUMPTION OF OFFICE 
AND EVERY TWO (2) YEARS THEREAFTER AND 
WITHIN THIRTY (30) DAYS FOLLOWING HIS 
CESSATION FROM OFFICE, DECLARE UNDER 
OATH HIS ASSETS AND LIABILITIES AND DIS- 
CLOSE TO THE PUBLIC HIS NET WORTH. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment by substitution 
acceptable? 

MR. OPLE. I am sorry that we have to decline the 
proposed amendment to the amendment on this 
ground: That Commissioner Davide is, in fact, talking 
about a provision already in the Anti-Graft Law that 
pertains to all employees of the government. In this 
proposed amendment, Commissioner Bennagen and I 
are not requiring every employee of the government to 
disclose his net worth to the public. There is no multi- 
plier effect when a common employee of the govern- 
ment is required to disclose his net worth, and maybe 
other than himself and his immediate neighbors in the 
office, no one will really care. But in our proposed 
amendment, we would like to introduce a new form of 
accountability. In a society, it is understood that we 
have to lead by example and those who have this 
burden more than the others are the holders of the 
greatest power. Therefore, this provision is specific with 
respect to the President, the Vice-President, members 
of the Cabinet, Members of the Congress, the heads and 
directors of government-owned or controlled corpora- 
tions, and flag officers of the Armed Forces of the 
Philippines. The obligations of the rest can be left to the 
law and, in fact, there are already laws to that effect. 
But there is no law so far and no explicit constitutional 
mandate that requires the highest officials of the land to 
disclose their net worth to the public. In the case of the 
United States, comparable officers are required by law 
to so disclose their assets and liabilities to the public. 
Here in the Philippines, it is a matter of voluntary act, 
and when we put that on a voluntary basis, the results 
are uneven because some disclose and the others do 
not. I think throughout this Constitution, we are trying 
to build a policy ot candor and full disclosure and 
accountability, and this provision supports that goal for 
the entire Constitution, although at present it has to be 
located in the Article on Accountability of Public 
Officers. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is iecog 
nized. 


322 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


MR. DA VIDE. If the idea really is to impress upon 
the public officer or employee the particular duty of 
disclosing his assets and liabilities upon the assumption 
to office, then that should apply to all, not just to 
the public officer but to all employees because graft and 
corruption can be committed not only by those in the 
upper bracket in public service but even by those in the 
lower bracket. As a matter of fact, Madam President, 
insofar as graft and corruption is concerned, we cannot 
distinguish a separate hierarchy for those in the upper 
bracket and for those in the lower bracket. Both of 
them are equally liable to disclose their assets and liabili- 
ties. And besides, when a public officer discloses his 
assets and liabilities, we know already what his net 
worth is. So there is no need for a disclosure of net 
worth because it can easily be determined from the 
statement of assets and liabilities. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I prefer to leave the 
case of the generality of employees of the government 
to law, while we treat the highest public officers in 
terms of a constitutional accountability to disclose to 
the public, not merely to submit to the civil service or 
to the head ot the ministry; in practice this really 
means archiving all of these statements of assets and 
liabilities. In the case of the higher echelons of the 
government, just like in the United States and in other 
countries, the obligation to disclose to the public means 

at t ere is no choice; they do not send these to the 
archives. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 
h h FAA * A - The amendment has been sufficiently 


MR. DAVIDE. Just for clarification, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may please 
proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Is it “ONE YEAR THEREAFTER”? 

THE PRESIDENT. It is “EVERY YEAR THERE- 
AFTER.” 

MR. DAVIDE. I would propose an amendment to 
read: AND EVERY TWO YEARS THEREAFTER, 
because disclosing one’s net worth to the public might 
involve the publication of his assets and liabilities, and 
that would be very expensive for the public official. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 10:56 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:05 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I request that the Chairman of 
the Committee be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


th™om P nhftee DENT ' May W6 haVe the reaction first of 

accepts Sn princi^bllt the Committee 

editorial suggestions ?o that JUS ! Want to make some 
OFFICER SHALL iTpS A c ^° uld read: “A PUBLIC 

AND EVERY YEAR ?hfrI a U ^ PTI ° N T ° 0FFICE 

CLARATION OF MAKE A DE ‘ 

NET WORTH, WHICH IN THF^ BILITIES AND 
IDENT, VICE-P R^ID^t HE \^fmr c ™ E PRES ‘ 
CABINET, MEMBERS OF^ CONGrf^ ™ E 
DIRECTORS OF GOVERNMEN^wm c ^ ADS AND 
TROLLED CORPORATIONS, AND OFFICER S^F 

™ e % A ub M lic DF0RCES - SHaLl be ™sed ?c 


M R. OPLE. I accept the amendment. Madam Pres- 
ident, on behalf of Commissioner Bennagen and the 
other author. 


MR. MONSOD. May we have thirty seconds more? 
We are just writing the amendment out, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. It is granted. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we are ready to 
suggest a proposed rewording, as consulted with the 
proponents. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chairman may please pro- 
ceed. 

MR. MONSOD. The amendment as reworded will 
now read: “A PUBLIC OFFICER SHALL UPON AS- 
SUMPTION TO OFFICE AND AS OFTEN THERE- 
AFTER AS MAY BE REQUIRED BY LAW MAKE A 
DECLARATION UNDER OATH OF HIS ASSETS, 
LIABILITIES AND NET WORTH WHICH IN THE 
CASE OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT, 
MEMBERS OF THE SUPREME COURT, MEMBERS 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


323 


OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS, MEM- 
BERS OF THE CABINET AND OF CONGRESS AND 
FLAG OFFICERS OF THE ARMED FORCES SHALL 
BE DISCLOSED TO THE PUBLIC IN THE MANNER 
PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

I am sorry, we forgot to mention the Ombudsman, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the heads and direc- 
tors of the government, are they omitted also? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we forgot to 
mention also the generals and flag officers of the Armed 
Forces. 


MR. PADILLA. And instead of specifying the 
Ombudsman alone, can we add, let us say, AND 
OTHER CONSTITUTIONAL OFFICES, so that the 
provision will be all-embracing? 

MR. MONSOD. We are amenable to that amendment. 
MR. OPLE. I support the change. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. Parliamentary inquiry. Madam President. 
THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 


MR. OPLE. The flag rank officers include the com- 
modores of the Navy. 


MR. MONSOD. Yes. May we restate the amendment, 
as amended: “A PUBLIC OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE 
SHALL UPON ASSUMPTION TO OFFICE AND AS 
OFTEN THEREAFTER AS MAY BE REQUIRED BY 
LAW MAKE A DECLARATION UNDER OATH OF 
HIS ASSETS, LIABILITIES AND NET WORTH WHICH 
IN THE CASE OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESI- 
DENT, MEMBERS OF THE SUPREME COURT, MEM- 
BERS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS, 
OMBUDSMAN, MEMBERS OF THE CABINET MEM- 
BERS OF CONGRESS, GENERALS AND OFFICERS 
OF GENERAL OR FLAG RANK OF THE ARMED 
FORCES SHALL BE DISCLOSED TO THE PUBLIC 
IN THE MANNER PROVIDED BY LAW.” 


MR. FOZ. In connection with the enumeration of the 
public officials who shall be covered by such require- 
ment of disclosure, is the enumeration inclusive, mean- 
ing to say, that all those not so named or mentioned 
shall not come within the coverage of the requirement, 
so that the ordinary employees will not be required to 
make such disclosure? 

MR. OPLE. No, Madam President. The disclosure is 
mandatory for the President, the Vice-President, mem- 
bers of the Cabinet and so forth. But ordinary govern- 
ment employees, as a rule, are already required to file 
their statements of assets and liabilities not for public 
disclosure but for purposes of examination by their 
superiors, since public interest in their assets and liabili- 
ties would, in any case, be very limited. 


THE PRESIDENT. This amendment is jointly pro- 
posed by Commissioners Ople, Bennagen, Guingona an 
Davide. Is that correct? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, and also Commissioners Padilla and 
Sarmiento and Chief Justice Concepcion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


MR. FOZ. But the statements of assets and liabilities 
filed by the rest of the government personnel constitute 
public records, and they are available at any time upon 
request of anybody, like the members of media, etc. I 
fear that the enumeration of the officials covered by 
such requirement of disclosure would, in effect, prohibit 
any law from requiring any other officials not so named 
in the listing from making such disclosure. So I suggest 
we make such changes in the phraseology so that the 
legislature would be tree to add other officials to be 
within the ambit of the requirement of disclosure. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. For just a matter of form, may we 
suggest that the members of the Cabinet, ot the on 8 
ress, of the Supreme Court and of the constitu iona 
commissions be in that order, instead ot putting ie 
members of the Cabinet and of Congress at t ie en 
of the enumeration. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, maybe we can refer that to the 
Committee on Style. 

MR. OPLE. I support the proposal. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

C omStfee? C DEN ^‘ What iS the inter Pretation of the 
Committee. Commissioner Nolledo is recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, in reply to the 
inquiry of Commissioner Foz, the enumeration of 
pu lie officials, from the President down, for purposes 
of public disclosure should not prohibit the legislature 
trom requiring public disclosure of the statements of 
assets and liabilities, including net worth of other 
inferior officials. That is the sense of consensus of the 
members of the Committee 


324 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


MR. FOZ. If that is the meaning being attached to it, 
I accept. 

Thank you. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We now proceed to the voting. 

Those in favor of this proposed amendment which 
has been read by the Chairman of the Committee, please 
raise their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (No Member 
raised his hand.) 

The results show 31 votes in favor and none against; 
the proposed amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Ople is recognized. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I state my very 
last proposed amendment which consists in the addi- 
tion of a new section to the Article on Accountability 
of Public Officers, which is already cleared with the 
Committee headed by Chairman Christian Monsod. This 
is actually a combined draft in which the Committee’s 
reservations were fully overcome. Again, may I say that 
Commissioner Bennagen is my coauthor of this amend- 
ment, together with the rest of the members of the 
Committee on Accountability of Public Officers. It will 
read as follows: PUBLIC OFFICERS OWE THE STATE 
AND ITS CONSTITUTION UNCONDITIONAL AL- 
LEGIANCE AT ALL TIMES. ANY PUBLIC OFFICER 
WHO SEEKS TO CHANGE HIS CITIZENSHIP OR 

acquire the status of an immigrant of 

ANOTHER COUNTRY DURING HIS TENURE 

■ . „ DEALT WITH BY LAW. May I explain 

briefly, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

exa^le°on E t Pl !i bllC i officers are expected to set the 
nation and to the p^bli Slngle-minded allegiance to the 
already PKp^ P ^ ,ntere!t ,: Where are seen as 

country because of lack of°f , outside , their own 

government and of thpir 31t ^ m * stat3i li ty °f their 
citizens is demoralizina anri° Wn so . ciety ’ th e effect on 

because it flaunts a class m-ivn^ mg ' 11 iS als0 divisive 
afford at any time to buy securkv ® ° nly 3 feW Ca " 
most Filipinos, it is still tme wh a t M foreign shores ' For 
in his time: “Love your count** at Manuel Quezon said 
God has given you.” I n the fa 2 f ? r , lt is the only one 
reflex calls for flight or fight P„Kr da « er ’ the human 
be seen as running away or nref^rr * C offlcers must not 
must, together with the rest of theh 8 ro°V° fight They 
face of danger and insecurity not v, Untrymen > in the 
in their dedication to the nation^ inS whT^ 8 
stay on as public officers. They are how P f h t 6 they 
>o choose. What thts 

clarity of choice. Those who want to change their 
citizenship or to live in a foreign country are free to do 


so. But when they do it, it is clear that they forfeit their 
office as public officers of the Philippines. However, this 
is not stated categorically. The draft provision leaves to 
the future legislature ample discretion to address the 
specific implications of this policy based not only on 
the national interest but also on equity and fairness for 
those concerned. 

I seek the Committee’s approval, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. May I propose an amendment to 
the proposed amendment to make it a little more em- 
bracing as to also include employees? In the case of a 
public officer, his acts are generally publicly visible; 
whereas in the case of lower officials or lower em- 
ployees, sometimes they may actually be the ones 
performing these acts but they are not generally known. 
And to add a little more teeth to this last portion, it 
should read: NO PUBLIC OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE 
MAY DURING HIS TENURE SEEK A CHANGE IN 
HIS CITIZENSHIP OR ACQUIRE THE STATUS OF 
AN IMMIGRANT IN ANOTHER COUNTRY WITH- 
OUT AUTOMATICALLY FORFEITING HIS OFFICE 
OR POSITION. 

MR. ROMULO. We do not like the word “AUTO- 
MATICALLY”; we prefer the words “SHOULD BE 
DEALT WITH BY LAW” because there are so many 
different situations. 

MR. REGALADO. But the cause of the forfeiture is 
the same; that is, by applying for naturalization or seek- 
ing a change in citizenship or status. Would there be any 
other situation of positive basis? 

MR. OPLE. We want to leave maximum flexibility to 
future legislatures. We merely stated a general principle 
here. We know that there will be numerous conse- 
quences that are now unforeseen for hundreds of 
thousands of our countrymen both here and abroad; 
and so, we want to take the safe side by asking Congress 
to deal with those implications at the proper time. 
However, with respect to Commissioner Regalado’s 
observation about employees of the government, I see 
no reason why we cannot expand this to include them if 
the Committee, which has previously approved this, is 
willing to accept it. 

MR. ROMULO. We accept the inclusion of other 
employees. 

MR. REGALADO. And by way of substitution of 
the last phrase which says: “WITHOUT FORFEITING 
HIS POST,” I propose an amendment to read: WITH- 
OUT FORFEITING HIS OFFICE OR POSITION. 


MONDAY. JULY 28, 1986 


325 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe that the 
proponent has reworded his proposal and we are not 
talking anymore about forfeiture of post or office which 
shall be dealt with by law. 

MR. REGALADO. I withdraw then, because I got the 
original copy, not the amended one. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? Will Com- 
missioner Ople please read again his proposed amend- 
ment? 

MR. OPLE. The proposed amendment reads: PUBLIC 
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OWE THE STATE 
AND ITS CONSTITUTION UNCONDITIONAL AL- 
LEGIANCE AT ALL TIMES. ANY PUBLIC OFFICER 
OR EMPLOYEE WHO SEEKS TO CHANGE HIS CITI- 
ZENSHIP OR ACQUIRE THE STATUS OF AN IM- 
MIGRANT OF ANOTHER COUNTRY DURING HIS 
TENURE SHALL BE DEALT WITH BY LAW. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I just propose an amend- 
ment, if the Commissioner is willing? 

I think one does not pledge allegiance to the State but 
to the Constitution, the State being a group of persons, 
more or less numerous, occupying a definite portion o 
a territory as defined traditionally. But I think one owes 
allegiance to the Constitution, not to this group o 
persons. 

MR. OPLE. May I state in reply, Madam President, 
that the State so denominated in this paragraph re ers 
to the generic State which is really the term that P er 
both to the nation and to its government; it is a S a e 
that is in many ways immutable and fixed because ie 
leadership can change tomorrow and the governmen 
can be transformed by a 360-degree turn, but ia 
Philippine State will still be there. It is in that con 
templation that the word “STATE” in its generic sense 
is used in this paragraph. It does not refer to any se o 
people. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I then withdraw my proposed 
amendment, Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I would like to propose some 
amendments by deletion. We should not include the 


words “UNCONDITIONAL ALLEGIANCE” precisely 
because the State, whether it be the people or the 
government, can at one time or another commit a mis- 
take, and I do not think we should give any uncondi- 
tional allegiance to any creature or human being. That is 
tantamount really to an act of faith. 

MR. OPLE. That is a good point and I want to know 
if Commissioner Bacani will be satisfied either with the 
word UNAMBIGUOUS or UNEQUIVOCAL. 

BISHOP BACANI. Is there “ALLEGIANCE? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. We can eliminate the adjective if the 
Commissioner likes. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. It is the Committee’s adjective, inci- 
dentally. 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee is willing to let go of 
its adjective. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. I have no objection to inserting the 
word “EMPLOYEE” after “PUBLIC OFFICER,” but I 
would like to state that under Article 203 of the Revised 
Penal Code, the words “PUBLIC OFFICER” include 
employees even of the lowest rank. The distinction 
being made in the Code is only between or among 
persons in authority, agents of persons in authority and 
public officers. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, may I make a 
reply to that. 

What Commissioner Padilla stated is applicable only 
to criminal law, but for purposes of political or adminis- 
trative law, there is a distinction between a public offi- 
cer and a public employee since the public officer is one 
vested with discretion whereas a public employee is one 
with purely ministerial functions. I agree that that is the 
concept in the Revised Penal Code; that the phrase “or 
employee in the epigraphs of hearing in the provisions 
of the Penal Code, specifically in Title VII, is even a 
surplusage inasmuch as it has been decided that any- 
body who takes part in governmental functions, what- 
ever his rank is in the plantilla, is a public officer. But 
this one is for political or administrative purposes and 
there is a substantial distinction. 

MR. OPLE. I think the Committee’s text stands with 
that clarification on both sides. 


326 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready now to vote? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President, we are ready. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment? They are asking that it be read, 
Commissioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. It shall read: PUBLIC OFFICERS AND 
EMPLOYEES OWE THE STATE AND ITS CONSTITU- 
TION ALLEGIANCE AT ALL TIMES, AND A PUBLIC 
OFFICER WHO SEEKS TO CHANGE HIS CITIZEN- 
SHIP OR ACQUIRE STATUS OF AN IMMIGRANT OF 
ANOTHER COUNTRY DURING HIS TENURE 
SHALL BE DEALT WITH BY LAW 


letter of the Tanodbayan. And I do think that there 
were not enough of us present on that day to give a real 
sounding of the thought of the body on the matter 
because we were gradually dwindling in number. I think 
there was barely a quorum when the matter was decided 

THE PRESIDENT. But we had a quorum, excuse me; 
just for the record. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, we had a quorum. 

THE PRESIDENT. We had a quorum and the pro- 
ceedings that were held last Saturday afternoon were 
perfectly in order. 


MR. REGALADO. On the second sentence read by 
Commissioner Ople, the words “OR EMPLOYEE” 
were not included by him. 


MR. ROMULO. No, they were not. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, it should include the words OR EM- 
PLOYEE. Thank you for the correction. 

PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
lhe Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 


s inn5 R R ^ MA u Madam President > I ask that Comn 
sioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

ni™ PRESIDENT - Commissioner Rodrigo is rec 


amendment is on the method ™ y pr ° pos( 

man and his deputies a f appoi " tin g Ombud 

the Ombudsman and hk d T 8 t0 , SeCtion 7 ’ page 

Following the manner of the^ 165 be appointe ' 
Judicial and Bar Council i h rec °mmendations by tl 

they be appointed by the PrS 8 T 8 !° propose thi 
tion of the Commission S ! dent . w Rh the confirm 
Madam President I °! ^PP°mtments. Howeve 
Bacani would like to filc^ ° rmed tha t Commissionc 
prejudicial question to mv n?° tl0n Which wil1 raise 
so, I would like to give wav^n ^ p° sed amend ment. An 
yield to Commissioner Bacani omm issioner Bacani. 


THE PRESIDENT. Comm 


nized. 


issioner Bacani 


is 


recog- 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam Pre^ * , 

sioner Rodrigo moved for the deletion oAhe" ( 
regarding the Ombudsman in our session lasts 
I voted against his proposition which was turne 
Therefore, I move that we reconsider that amenc 
view of the information that we have received f 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes, I do not question that but I 
mean we were barely beyond the required number and 
it might be that the persons who were not present at 
that time may actually have voted in favor of the 
amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo, especially in 
view of the arguments advanced by Raul Gonzalez. May 
I just read a portion of that argument. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

BISHOP BACANI. I am going to read from page 2, 
paragraphs 1 and 2. It says: 

In other words, the solution is not to divide the present 
Tanodbayan into two separate agencies but to keep its 
present powers, functions and responsibilities and to make 
it work effectively, give it the needed funding support. 

And here I think is the more relevant part: 

I cannot properly envision a situation that will ensue as 
now proposed in the Constitutional Commission. If the 
Tanodbayan now will be retained as the prosecution arm of 
the Sandiganbayan, what will happen to the cases inves- 
tigated by the Ombudsman? Will these have to be sent to 
the Tanodbayan for prosecution? If so, will the Tanod- 
bayan again conduct the preliminary investigation man- 
dated by law, as part of due process, as condition sine qua 
non for filing of the information with the Sandiganbayan 
or anti-graft court? Is this not duplication of work and, 
therefore, more expensive? If W e create the Office of 
Ombudsman, giving it lofty powers but without teeth to 
enforce its findings, if any, against public officers it inves- 
tigates, how will this new Ombudsman be effective? Fur- 
thermore, to retain the present Tanodbayan as mere pro- 
secutor may even duplicate the powers of the fiscals and 
state prosecutors under the Ministry of Justice. It should be 
remembered that the present Tanodbayan (Ombudsman) 
under P.D. No. 1630 does not only investigate and pro- 
secute charges under the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices 
Law, but also violations of the Penal Code provisions under 
Title VII, from Articles 203 to 245. 

So, for these reasons, Madam President, I move for a 
reconsideration of the vote last Saturday. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


327 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 11:31 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:48 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bacani be recognized for his motion for recon- 
sideration. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Before Commissioner Bacani 
restates his motion for reconsideration, may I just be 
allowed to make a comment on the letter? 

Madam President, this issue was comprehensively 
debated upon and discussed by the body and the Com- 
mittee for more than two hours last Friday. We devoted 
our time, our efforts just to be clarified on this vital 
issue. This morning, we again suspended the session for 
about 15 to 20 minutes just to accommodate one letter. 

Madam President, I was looking at the Order of 
Business and I notice that there are also several letters. 
For us to accommodate this letter after substantially 
discussing this point is to me interference in our work. 
This is an infringement on our independence as a consti- 
tutional body. So, may I ask, Madam President, that we 
set aside or disregard this letter. 

I recall that one letter was also addressed to the body, 
a letter from BAYAN, but upon motion of one of our 
colleagues, the body decided not to consider nor discuss 
that letter. And here comes another letter. Madam Pres- 
ident, this will open the floodgates for more letters to 
come asking for the reconsideration of actions that were 
already acted upon by this constitutional body. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I reply? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. We receive hundreds of letters, but 
this is a different kind of letter because this is the letter 
of the Tanodbayan, also the Ombudsman, whose office 
will be directly affected by the proposed amendment. 
And I do not know, I would like to ask first the Com- 


mittee: Was Tanodbayan Raul Gonzalez invited to any 
meetings of the Committee regarding the creation of a 
separate office called the “Ombudsman”? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we reply to 
the query of the honorable Commissioner? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please. 

MR. MONSOD. As a matter of fact. Justice Raul 
Gonzalez was invited, and we had a very long session 
with him. The arguments that he presented to the Com- 
mittee were given full consideration in the Committee’s 
deliberation of the concept that is now being presented 
to this body. 

Secondly, the arguments that he has in the letter were 
the same issues that were posed last Saturday by the 
Honorable Rodrigo and which was the subject of 
discussion for two hours. 

MR. RODRIGO. My only point is its propriety. It 
seems the idea is: Why are we giving importance to 
this particular letter? Why not to a letter from 
BAYAN? A letter from BAYAN is different; a letter 
from UNIDO will be different from this letter because 
this is a letter from the head of the office which will be 
directly affected and whose functions will be duplicated 
by the creation of the Ombudsman. 

So, that is the only point I would like to raise, but it 
is not improper for us to give importance to this letter. 
And this is not interference; I think this is helping us. 
This is the right of any citizen to write a letter to us, 
especially the head of an office that will be affected by 
a proposed amendment to the Constitution. 

THE PRESIDENT. We have the motion of Commis- 
sioner Bacani to reconsider the decision. So, we will put 
that to a vote or would the Commissioner want to 
explain? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Madam President, I find it 
difficult to do this, but in the interval, some explana- 
tions were given to me. 

The first purpose of my motion is to give a chance to 
the people who are not here to hear the reasons for and 
against and to vote on it. But the Gentleman pointed 
out that if we were to do this for every item, we may 
not be able to finish the work of the Commission. 

Second, some other matter was explained to me 
regarding the function of the Ombudsman which I did 
not understand before and did not get as clearly before; 
and that is, it can admonish even in noncriminal charges 
and that, therefore, its function would not simply be 
prosecutory. It will serve a useful purpose even if it need 
not duplicate the prosecution function of the present 
Tanodbayan. 

And so, even though I find it difficult to do this - it 
is a bit humiliating — I withdraw my motion. 


328 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The motion to reconsider has 
been withdrawn. So, we will proceed now to another 
business. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de Castro be recognized for a new amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


are ranked, with these, why should they be an excep- 
tion? Why should they not be appointed by the 
President with the confirmation of the Commission on 
Appointments? Why should they be ranked with the 
members of the judiciary? 

That is my explanation, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I have a proposed 
amendment but I only gave way to the motion of Com- 
missioner Bacani because I thought he was going to 
pursue his motion. His motion involved a prejudicial 
question to my amendment. But since the motion is 
withdrawn, then there is no more prejudicial question 
to the amendment that I want to present. 


THE PRESIDENT. So, Commissioner Rodrigo has 
an amendment. 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I will give way to the Honorable 
Rodrigo. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will call on Commissioner de 
Castro later. 

Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 


MR. RODRIGO. This is an amendment v/ithoi 
prejudice to my stand regarding the creation of th 
Ombudsman which, I believe, is a toothless duplicate 
of the work of the Tanodbayan. 

iri P nt ” Pa8 HH 3 «,i^ ti0n 7 ’ line 18 > after the w °rd “Pre: 
™ E CONFIRMATION OF TH 

n aJd S th APP0INTMENT S, then put a perio 
LI and delete the rest of the section so that th 
section would read: “Section 7 Th. nuV th 
his Deputies shall h* a . 0n '■ The Ombudsman am 

THE CONFIRMATin£ P ^ ted by the President WITI 
APPOINTMENTS.” I0N ° F ™ E COMM ISSION 01 

THE PRESIDENT. Dops r • 
desire to explain? '-ommissioner Rodrigi 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes UnrW c .• 
man and his deputies would h P ectl0n 7 > the Ombuds 
method of the Indicia! an d t thrOUgh th 

method followed in the case of ann^T 0 Whlch 1S th 
and other members of the judicia?v 3 ^ rr ? en ^ s of justice 
very proposed amendment that th^Omhnrf 13 ^ ln thl 
deputies would have the same rank a ?th P Sman hi 
the constitutional commissions like the r 6 " 1 ^ 0 
on Elections, the Commission on AucHt and^hTc ° 
Service Commission. All the commits n the! 
constitutional commissions are appointed by th 
President with the confirmation of the Commission o 
Appointments. So, if the Ombudsman and his deputie 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, last Saturday, 
Commissioner Rodrigo raised this point and we told him 
that the Committee believes that there is a difference 
between the Ombudsman and the constitutional com- 
missions. 

We have an amendment because there was an error 
on Section 8. It was the intention of the Committee 
to put the phrase “AND A MEMBER OF THE PHILIP- 
PINE BAR.” In other words, the Ombudsman must be a 
member of the Philippine Bar. 

The reason we feel that there is a difference is 
that in the case of the COA, the members of the 
COA would be either lawyers or CPAs with auditing 
experience; in the case of the Civil Service Commission, 
they could be lawyers or others who have demonstrated 
a capability in public administration; and in the case of 
the COMELEC, under the constitutional provision, only 
a majority out of the seven should be lawyers, so there 
can be three nonlawyers. 

/So, we felt that the prescreening by the Judicial and 
Bar Council would not be applicable to the other 
constitutional commissions but would be applicable 
in the case of the Ombudsman. 

I also would like to ask Justice Colay co for some 
additional remarks on this point. 

MR. COLAYCO. I would like to state here a very 
important function of the Ombudsman as proposed by 
the Committee. I agree with Commissioner Rodrigo that 
the likes of the Marcoses will not appear every year nor 
even every 10 years. But notwithstanding, Presidents 
are human beings, and as human beings, they can be 
corrupted by the power that they have. 

I understand from the objection of Commissioner 
Rodrigo that we already have the Tanodbayan and, 
therefore, he can continue functioning or performing 
the functions that are proposed to be performed by the 
Ombudsman. The present Tanodbayan is appointed by 
the President. Let us see the performance of the former 
Tanodbayans that we had. Let us start with Justice 
Ericta. What did Justice Ericta say upon taking his 
oath — this is in the papers — “I will brook no inter- 
ference unless the President orders me.” That was a 
logical statement because he was a creature of the 
President. What happened with the next Ombudsman? 

I hate to name names, but up to the last Ombudsman 
that we had, with the exception, of course, of Justice 
Gonzalez now, they were all total failures. They were 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


329 


supposed to be fiscalizers of the government. How can 
they fiscalize the Office of the President when they 
were appointed by the President? 

Our proposal is for the President to appoint him, but 
his choice is limited to the persons who will be chosen 
by a known political body. So, although chosen by this 
known political body, he will not owe any debt of 
gratitude to the Judicial and Bar Council. 

Let us take the example of what happened to Mr. 
Marcos. The President’s office was supposed to be under 
the supervision of the COA. But what happened was 
that the Commissioners then were told, “Don’t touch 
us,” and that is what they did, and that is why we have 
the effect of the known performance of a constitutional 
officer no less. He could do that because the Commis- 
sioners of COA were appointed by him. That cannot be 
repeated if we appoint the Ombudsman from a list 
selected by a known political body. 

We have been talking about the practice in the United 
States. Let me read something about that. In connection 
with the appointment of the Ombudsman in some states 
in the United States, some persons favored direct legisla- 
tive selection without participation by the executive. 
This is an American author talking, not a European 
author. Thus, a Florida bill proposes simply that the 
Ombudsman be appointed by agreement of the Pres- 
ident of the Senate and the Speaker of the House, 
subject to confirmation by the majority of the members 
of each chamber of the legislature. And then there is 
the summary that says that all the plans emphasized the 
desirability of depoliticalizing the selection process. 
How can we have a fiscalizer who is appointed by the 
President whose office is supposed to be under the 
jurisdiction of such an appointee? It does not make 
sense. 

Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just a few remarks in reply. In the 

case of Ericta that was mentioned and the other cases 
whose names were not mentioned, these people were 
working under martial law, and we should not use as a 
norm what happened during the martial law. 

May I add that in this very proposal in Section 4, the 
Sandiganbayan is retained. This is a very important 
judicial body, and the members and the chairman of the 
Sandiganbayan are appointed by the President with the 
concurrence of the Commission on Appointments. In 
Section 5, the Tanodbayan is mentioned, and the 
Tanodbayan is to be appointed by the President with 
the concurrence of the Commission on Appointments. 

In the case mentioned about the practice in the 
United States, I do not know why we should follow 


individual states in the United States, but even then, it 
is stated there that the governor of the state has nothing 
to do with the appointment. But here, the President 
anyway is the one going to appoint, so there is no 
similarity. The only difference is that, in case we follow 
the method of having a Judicial and Bar Council, the 
choice of the President will be limited to six in the 
beginning, and after that, from a list of three. But when 
I opposed the creation of this Judicial and Bar Council, 
even for the judiciary, I -ptnnted out the fact that any- , 
way almost all the members of the Judicial and Bar 
Council are appointees of the President, and the Pres- 
ident, while lirhited to the three recommendees, may 
refuse to appoint any of those three and ask the Council 
to submit another three. He may refuse again to appoint 
from those three and ask the Council to submit another 
three. And so, Madam President, I do not see why all 
the other high officials of the government, aside from 
the members of the judiciary, are appointed by the 
President with the confirmation of the Commission on 
Appointments. And we make an exception of this 
Ombudsman who, after all, is toothless; he has no 
coercive power; he cannot even prosecute. He can only 
advise or direct, but has no power whatsoever. 

I know that we are pressed for time, I think we are 
ready. I ask that we vote on this amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Did the Committee accept? 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee regrets that it cannot 
accept the proposed amendment for the reasons already 
discussed at length. May we submit it to a vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Rodrigo kindly 
repeat the amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. With the amendment, Section 7 on 
page 3, line 17, will read: “The Ombudsman and his 
Deputies shall be appointed by the President WITH THE 
CONFIRMATION OF THE COMMISSION ON AP- 
POINTMENTS.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, before we 
vote, a parliamentary inquiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will the Committee please 
infoim us again who are the members of the Judicial 
and Bar Council? 


MR. ROMULO. The Judicial and Bar Council consists 
of the Chief Justice, the Minister of Justice, and a rep- 
resentative of the Congress as ex officio members. The 
regular members are a representative of the Integrated 
Bar, a law professor, a retired Justice of the Supreme 
Court and a representative of the private sector. 


330 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


MR. DE LOS REYES. So, it is practically a Commis- 
sion on Appointments, with the difference that it is a 
balanced composition of nonpolitical and political 
personages. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I explain my predicament for a 
minute? Last Saturday, I found myself in a very small 
minority of this Commission supporting Commissioner 
Rodrigo. And this morning, the Committee and the 
Commission were kind enough to approve a proposed 
amendment which would extend the jurisdiction of the 
Ombudsman to the military establishment. I think I find 
myself now torn between two loyalties and two obliga- 
tions. But may I say that although I would much rather 
have this office of the Ombudsman directly accountable 
to the President of the Philippines, I find the proposal 
now, as amended, quite bearable in that the office of 
the Ombudsman, if possible, ought to help the future 
Congress monitor the effects of its laws, especially on 
the efficiency and integrity of the government. 

Thank you very much, Madam President. 


VUlliNO 

PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of t 
anaendment °f Commissioner Rodrigo, plea 
ieir hand. (Few Members raised their hanc 

<s£r raise ,heir h “ 

ameidme^Us losT § V ° t6S in faV ° r and 28 against; t] 

sioner de Castro be^tcos PreS * dent ’ 1 ask that Comm: 
gnized for an amendment. 

nized. E PRESIDENT Commissioner de Castro is reco 


already ten mi„ u ,°' a ^"^ ; “^am ftesi 

During the period of sormQ^i,- 
missioner Nolledo, with his n 1P and . deb 
people, talked about graft and cormmS “ C 
ment. I cannot add nor subtract. The ory tl 
say is: even as a joke, it i s common 
“Ang lagay ba’y ano? ” It is a joke, but it sL 
the dignity of a person. er 

I remember when I was young and w 
military academy for four years, only three tl 


taught to us: duty, honor, country. Yet, the Armed 
Forces was not spared from graft and corruption so 
much so that we now have a board composed mostly of 
retired military men. I am saying this because, while we 
recognize that graft and corruption is the cancerous 
malady that seeps into our society, we do not have a 
state policy on what to do about graft and corruption. 
The Article on Accountability of Public Officers 
mentioned graft and corruption only in two sections: in 
Section 2 and another one in Section 4. In so stating, 
graft and corruption on line 17, page 1 was mentioned 
as one of the causes for impeachment only; and on page 
3 the Anti-Graft Court only describes what a Sandigan- 
bayan should be. The State has no policy regarding graft 
and corruption. 

Madam President, I have a resolution about graft and 
corruption as a matter of state policy. It was referred to 
the Committee on Accountability of Public Officers, 
and yet there is nothing in the report about it. Appa- 
rently, we want to continue graft and corruption in our 
society, the very malady that seeps into our country. I 
was informed that this resolution was sent to the Com- 
mittee on Preamble, National Territory, and Declara- 
tion of Principles. I am a member of this Committee 
but I do not find it there. May I know from the Com- 
mittee whether or not they want a state policy on 
graft and corruption? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the resolution was 
referred by this Committee to the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of Princi- 
ples. And if such was not done procedurally, we would 
like to state today for the record that it properly 
belongs to the Article on Declaration of Principles and 
should be considered by that Committee. But we do 
agree with the Commissioner on the policy against 
graft and corruption. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. I will wait for it in 
our Committee. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, may I be 
recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I consulted with the Com- 
mittee last Saturday on my proposal to have a declara- 
tion and they referred me to the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of Princi- 
ples. And it reads: IT IS THE DUTY OF GOVERN- 
MENT TO ERADICATE NEPOTISM, FAVORITISM, 
CORRUPTION AND WASTE IN PUBLIC LIFE. And 
so, this will be referred to said Committee. I think this 
supports Commissioner de Castro’s proposal. 

I 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. But considering the 
import of graft and corruption in our government and 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


331 


in our society, I would still insist that a particular 
section on graft and corruption be made a matter 
of state policy. I will wait for it in our Committee. 

Madam President, my next and last amendment is 
on page 5, Section 14, lines 26 to 28. It was accepted 
by the Committee during our interpellation that the 
cronies are the ones most responsible in debauching our 
banks and our treasury, not the President, the Vice- 
President, the Congressmen nor the members of the 
Cabinet. I would request, therefore, on suggestion of 
somebody, that the words DIRECTLY OR INDIRECT- 
LY be inserted between the words “granted” and 
“by” on line 28, page 5. So, the section now will read: 
“No loan, guaranty or other form of financial accom- 
modation for any business purpose may be granted, 
DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, by any government- 
owned or controlled bank . . .” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote? 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, may I submit 
three proposals which, in principle, have already been 
accepted by the Committee. 

The first amendment is on page 3, line 27. After the 
words “Philippine Bar,” insert the following: THEY 
MUST BE OF RECOGNIZED PROBITY AND INDE- 
PENDENCE. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, how will the section read 
now? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. We are accepting that phrase. May we 
await the amendment of Commissioner Regalado for 
purposes of locating it within the paragraph, if that is all 
right with Commissioner Bennagen. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. But the phrase “OF RECOGNIZED 
PROBITY AND INDEPENDENCE” is accepted by the 
Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the amendment of Com- 
missioner Regalado? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


MR. REGALADO. On Section 1 . 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we sus- 
pend the session until one-thirty this afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for lunch 
until one-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 12:19 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 1:46 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Before we start our agenda for this afternoon, may 
we acknowledge the presence of our guests from Indo- 
nesia led by Dr. Abdul Ghani, adviser to the President 
of Indonesia. He is very much interested in the proceed- 
ings of the Constitutional Commission of 1986. 

We welcome you, Dr. Abdul Ghani, and your party. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bennagen be 
recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. Shall we go to Section 8 so that we 
can complete Section 8? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 

This is one of my proposed amendments, to read: 
“The Ombudsman and his Deputies shall be natural- 
born citizens of the Philippines, at least forty years 
old, AND OF RECOGNIZED PROBITY AND INDE- 
PENDENCE.” 


MR. MONSOD. AND MEMBERS of the Philippine 
Bar,” Madam President. 


MR. REGALADO. Let me have it again, Madam 
President, because my writing here is already confusing. 
“The Ombudsman and his Deputies shall be natural- 
born citizens of the Philippines, at least forty years old, 
OF RECOGNIZED PROBITY AND INDEPENDENCE 
AND MEMBERS of the Philippine Bar.” 


THE PRESIDENT. How about “AND MEMBERS of 
the Philippine Bar”? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- MR. BENNAGEN. I thought we are in the phrase “OF 
nized. ' RECOGNIZED PROBITY AND INDEPENDENCE’? 


332 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. It was added already, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. BENNAGEN. That is going to be the final form. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I restate the 
paragraph as it will now read? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please. 

MR. MONSOD. “The Ombudsman and his Deputies 
shall be natural-born citizens of the Philippines, at least 
forty years old, WITH RECOGNIZED PROBITY AND 
INDEPENDENCE, AND MEMBERS of the Philippine 
Bar. The Ombudsman must have been engaged in the 
practice of law for at least ten years.” 

MR. ABUBAKAR. May I interpellate the sponsor on 
the phrase “RECOGNIZED PROBITY AND INDE- 
PENDENCE”? Who shall determine the disqualifica- 
tions? These two words have different meanings. So, 
how would the sponsor determine probity and inde- 
pendence? Will he leave it to the appointing power or 
must he attain a certain standard to meet the quality of 
probity and independence? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may the Commit- 
tee answer that? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. ROMULO. The Committee’s plan, as the Con 
missioner knows, is that the nominees will come froi 
he Judicial and Bar Council. So, initially, the Judici; 

,, 3 [. ou . ncB will determine whether they posse: 

le qua 1 ication of probity and independence. 

thata^nHH?^ Part ° f the <! uest ion, I would assum 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Thank you. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT Cn m 

nized. ' Comi ™ssioner Davide is reco^ 

MR. DAVIDE. Since thic • , 

I wonder if the Committee will accent? 0 ^ 8 alread> 
ments to the proposal of r accep f furt her amenc 

The proposed amendment would n ^ ,SS10ne l r Benna S er 
27. On line 25, after the comma n f°n ‘" eS 25 “ 
pines,” add the following: AND Philit 

THEIR APPOINTMENT, then out a T ™ E ™ E 01 

27 . after the word -Bar;" adS AhID MUST NOT Ha'vi 
been CANDIDATES FOR ANY ELECTIVF OFP.r 
IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDInJ ELECTION 
and, finally, on line 28, delete the word “been ” an 


substitute it with the following: FOR TEN YEARS OR 
MORE BEEN A JUDGE OR; then delete the word 
“for” on line 28 and all the words on line 29, and sub- 
stitute the same with the words IN THE PHILIPPINES. 
So that the entire section will now read as follows: 
“The Ombudsman and his Deputies shall be natural- 
born citizens of the Philippines, AND AT THE TIME OF 
THEIR APPOINTMENT, at least forty years old, WITH 
RECOGNIZED PROBITY AND INDEPENDENCE, 
AND MEMBERS of the Philippine Bar, AND MUST 
NOT HAVE BEEN CANDIDATES FOR ANY ELEC- 
TIVE OFFICE IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 
ELECTION. The Ombudsman must have FOR TEN 
YEARS OR MORE BEEN A JUDGE OR engaged in the 
practice of law IN THE PHILIPPINES.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by Commissioner 
Bennagen and the Committee? 

MR. BENNAGEN. I do not think that is an amend- 
ment to my amendment. I think the Committee should 
answer it. 

MR. REGALADO. That was an amendment to my 
proposed amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. I see. What does the Committee 
say? 


MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendment, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So then, can we state that this 
will be a joint amendment of Commissioners Bennagen, 
Davide and Regalado? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have this read again, Mr. 
Chairman? 

MR. MONSOD. “The Ombudsman and his Deputies 
shall be natural-born citizens of the Philippines, AND 
AT THE TIME OF THEIR APPOINTMENTS, at least 
forty years old, WITH RECOGNIZED PROBITY AND 
INDEPENDENCE, AND MEMBERS of the Philippine 
Bar, AND MUST NOT HAVE BEEN CANDIDATES 
FOR ANY ELECTIVE OFFICE IN THE IMME- 
DIATELY PRECEDING ELECTION. The Ombudsman 
must have FOR TEN YEARS OR MORE BEEN A 
JUDGE OR engaged in the practice of law IN THE 
PHILIPPINES.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, may I proceed 
with the second amendment? 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


333 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. This is on page 4: after line 24, I 
propose to restore to the section the first function that 
was in Committee Report No. 16 which was not in- 
cluded in Committee Report No. 17. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, what line? 

MR. BENNAGEN. It should be included after the 
word “duties” on line 24. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. This will be a paragraph insertion, 1 
believe. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, it is a whole paragraph. So, it 
is an amendment by insertion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Before subparagraph (1). 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. It used to be Section 6-A of 
Committee Report No. 16, and it reads: TO INVES- 
TIGATE ON ITS OWN OR ON COMPLAINT BY 
ANY PERSON ANY ACT OR OMISSION OF AN. 
PUBLIC OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE, OFFICE OR 
AGENCY WHEN SUCH ACT OR OMISSION IS IL- 
LEGAL, UNJUST, IMPROPER OR INEFFICIENT. 

I think the reason for restoring this is that it is a 
direct function of the Ombudsman without having to 
delegate it to others. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, before we accept, 
could we ask Commissioner Bennagen to get toget ler 
with Commissioner Natividad because he has the same 
idea. The principle being enunciated is acceptable to us 
but so as not to duplicate efforts, I suggest that ie 
proponent confer with Commissioner Natividad. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioners Bennagen and 
Natividad are requested to confer. 

In the meantime, may we proceed to another amend 
ment and we will call this amendment later on. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Jamir be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 


MR. JAMIR. Madam President, my amendment is on 
page 3, line 9 of Section 5. After the word “shall” add 
HEREAFTER BE KNOWN AS SPECIAL PROSE- 
CUTOR. The rest of the sentence will read: “It shall 
continue to function and exercise its powers as NOW 
OR HEREAFTER MAY BE provided by law, except 
those conferred on the office of the Ombudsman 
created under this Constitution.” 

The reason for this. Madam President, is that we have 
already changed the name of the Sandiganbayan to 
Anti-Graft Court under Section 4 of the draft. So, to 
harmonize the changes and to remove confusion arising 
from the use of the word “Tanodbayan” with respect to 
the prosecutorial function of the office, it is believed 
that the term “SPECIAL PROSECUTOR” will be a 
happier choice. 

I request the Committee to accept the amendment if 
it is all right. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the reaction of the Com- 
mittee? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the amendment 
reflects the Committee’s thinking. It is time for us to 
restate here for the record that it has been brought to 
our attention by Commissioners Concepcion and Bacani 
that the Tanodbayan is already identified with 
Ombudsman and, therefore, we should retain Ombuds- 
man or Tanodbayan and rename the prosecutorial office 
as Special Prosecutor. In view of this, Madam President, 
the Committee is accepting the amendment. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Just a point of inquiry about the change of 
nomenclature from Tanodbayan to Special Prosecutor. 
In effect, we are now reducing the status of the Tanod- 
bayan to a mere special prosecutor. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I answer that 
because I believe this is an important point. 

What the present proposal of the Committee does is 
to separate two functions presently in the office of the 
Tanodbayan, which is the prosecutory and other func- 
tions related to it and separating it from the pure 
Ombudsman functions which are enumerated now in 
the Constitution. What we are saying is, the office of the 
Ombudsman as presently contemplated in the Constitu- 
tion will continue to be named Tanodbayan and the 
prosecutory function will be put in another office 
which, as proposed now, will be called Special Prose- 
cutor. The present Tanodbayan may end up as the 
Ombudsman of the Tanodbayan. 

MR. FOZ. But under this provision now, he will just 
be a mere special prosecutor. 


334 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President, I think the 
statement is not accurate. 

MR. FOZ. But that is the phrase used; that is the 
nomenclature used. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, because the function has been 
divided. So, it is not the same person and the same 
office anymore. 

MR. FOZ. We know for a fact that at present the 
Tanodbayan enjoys the rank of a justice of the Inter- 
mediate Appellate Court, so if we reduce the office to 
that of a special prosecutor, attached to the Anti-Graft 
Court under this provision, then the effect would be to 
reduce his rank from that of a justice of the Inter- 
mediate Appellate Court to a mere member or officer of 
the Prosecution Division of the Ministry of Justice. 


MR. MONSOD. That does not follow, Madam 
President. The constitutional provision is silent as to the 
rank; that may be provided by law. It does not auto- 
matically follow that if he is a special prosecutor, he is 
at a certain level as one in the Ministry of Justice. 


**•">2. This is really the question, Madam Pres- 

th ^ n 1Q7 ” * he case of the Sandiganbayan which, under 

hv i 7 , C °r stltution was authorized to be established 

esta hfkh eglS !f tU J 6> there is no P rovis ion here for the 

eanbavtm ° f SUCh 3 COUrt P reviousl y called Sandi- 

Do I Jlk t U , n ? W t0 be renamed as Anti-Graft Court. 

the die? Y tha l 'l WlU be something that will be left to 

not them ° f the , leglslature - whether to establish or 

for the estahfvh^ no . lo " ger an V constitutional mandate 
ior the establishment of such a court? 


MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. 

I would like to point out though that actually we are 
not depriving the present position of Tanodbayan, or 
which the Commissioner is now proposing to be called 
Special Prosecutor, of any powers that it has not been 
exercising. We are only taking away those which he has 
not been able to perform under the present setup. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. My question is related to the 
question of Commissioner Foz. In the case of the Sandi- 
ganbayan, according to Section 4 of the proposal, its 
name is changed but its jurisdiction is not changed. So, 
the last sentence of Section 4 reads: “It shall continue 
to function and exercise its jurisdiction as provided by 
law.” But in Section 5, not only is the name of Tanod- 
bayan changed but its functions are reduced because 
according to Section 6 of the 1973 Constitution, which 
is reproduced in Section 5: 

The Batasang Pambansa shall create an office of the 
Ombudsman, to be known as Tanodbayan, which shall 
receive and investigate complaints relative to public office, 
including those in government-owned or controlled corpo- 
rations, make appropriate recommendations, and in case 
of failure of justice as defined by law, file and prosecute the 
corresponding criminal, civil, or administrative case before 
the proper court or body. 

According to the proposed amendment, the function of 
the Tanodbayan as renamed will only be prosecutory. 
So, that is a diminution of the powers of the Tanod- 
bayan. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, it is, Madam President. 


qufstion? LAYC0 ' Mad3m President - may I answer 

we have apprwed^wufbe^lkMM^W 11 ^ 61 ^ T™' 

any jurisdictional powers J h are not deduc1 
presently existing; We are iiit° n | 1 ^ Sandiganba : 
that. -* us t changing the name, j 

MR. FOZ. It is just a ^ 

J ust a change of name? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. So, the const;*. +■ 
creation of collegiate courts «till^M in ™ date for 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. And in the case of the Tancriv... . 
name has been changed also, the office for^h 
officer or official is also mandated by this Const 
tion? 


MR. RODRIGO. So, we are reducing the powers of 
the Tanodbayan here? 

MR. MONSOD. As defined in the 1973 Constitution, 
they are being reduced in this new Constitution. 

MR. RODRIGO. Was the attention of Tanodbayan 
Raul Gonzalez called to the fact that the functions will 
be reduced, or was it that when he appeared he was 
under the impression that there will only be created an 
Ombudsman? 

MR. MONSOD. 1 suppose that is the reason he 
wrote the letter. 

MR. RODRIGO. But in his letter that I read, my 
impression is not that he did not have the impression 
that the powers of the Tanodbayan, of his office now, 
will be reduced. From the tenor of the letter, his im- 
pression was that there would be duplication of the 
functions of that office, and he said there is no need to 
create another office. All that the Tanodbayan needs, he 
says, is added appropriation. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


335 


MR. MONSOD. I suppose the answer to that is, the 
premise of his letter is wrong but it is clear that he 
recognizes the two functions, and this constitutional 
provision now will make that explicit. 

MR. RODRIGO. But then, another problem arises. 
We make the Tanodbayan, as renamed, a prosecuting 
arm. So, this will just be a duplication of the work of 
the fiscals under the Ministry of Justice. 

MR. MONSOD. I believe we discussed that issue 
earlier. That is another issue unrelated to what is being 
discussed but, in any case, we believe that a special 
prosecutor for anti-graft cases is still needed because 
that is a specialization and there are many cases now 
falling under the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act. 
During the hearings of the Committee, which were at- 
tended by Tanodbayan Justice Gonzalez and also Sandi- 
ganbayan Justice Garchitorena, it was highlighted that 
there is a need for specialization in anti-graft cases. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, do I take it that the functions of 
the Tanodbayan will not only be reduced to purely 
prosecutory functions but they will further be limited 
to prosecution of anti-graft cases? Is that it? 

MR. MONSOD. That is the intent, Madam President, 
of renaming the Sandiganbayan as the Anti-Graft Court 
and the prosecutory arm as the Special Prosecutor in 
anti-graft cases. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, may I just make a resume? Do I 
get it right that the powers of the Tanodbayan un er 
the 1973 Constitution - to receive and investigate 
complaints relative to public officials and make recom- 
mendations — are taken away and these will be limite 
not only to prosecution of special cases but anti-gra 
cases? 

MR. MONSOD. That is what the Tanodbayan is 
limited to prosecute now. In fact, if one were to reac 
through the letter of Justice Gonzalez, he himself con- 
ceives the prosecution to be limited within the con mes 
of the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act. 

MR. RODRIGO. And other cases then will be filed 
with the Sandiganbayan. Is that correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. In connection with that, Madam President, 
there is another point. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Rodrigo 
through? 


MR. RODRIGO. No, not yet; I just want to clarify. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Foz please 
allow Commissioner Rodrigo to finish first? 

MR. FOZ. There is one point in connection with the 
matter being raised by Commissioner Rodrigo. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just a minute. I am not yet through, 
but I am willing to wait. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, the question was whether the Special 
Prosecutor, the former Tanodbayan, will be limited to 
prosecution of anti-graft cases; in other words, cases 
arising from violations of our present law, the Anti- 
Graft and Corrupt Practices Act. But actually even 
our Constitution on the Tanodbayan provides that it 
shall have jurisdiction on offenses involving public offi- 
cials and employees committed in relation to the per- 
formance of their office. So, it is not just mere anti-graft 
cases, but offenses involving performance of the 
functions of office by public officers and employees. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, perhaps we should 
restate our answer. We stand corrected on that. What we 
are saying here in the provisions is that the functions 
exercised by the present Tanodbayan will continue, 
except those that have been separated from it by reason 
of the establishment of the Ombudsman under this con- 
cept. And that would include violations under Article 
VII of the Revised Penal Code, referring to the per- 
formance by public officials of their duties. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us allow Commissioner 
Rodrigo to finish and then maybe we can have the other 
speakers. 

Please proceed, Commissioner Rodrigo. 

MR. RODRIGO. What is the proposed name for the 
Tanodbayan? 

MR. MONSOD. Special Prosecutor. 

MR. RODRIGO. The very name itself implies that its 
functions will then be limited to prosecution of special 
cases only. 

I wonder if the Committee will accept an amendment 
to abolish the Tanodbayan completely. That is the 
result of this, because prosecution can be done by the 
fiscals. 

MR. MONSOD. If the Commissioner wishes to put 
that in the form of an amendment, we will ask the body 
to decide on it on the floor. 

MR. RODRIGO. No, I just wanted to emphasize a 
point. 


336 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


REV. RIGOS. That is my amendment, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me. Was there any amend- 
ment by Commissioner Rodrigo? What was the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Rodrigo? 

REV. RIGOS. No, I will propose the amendment. 


better to put it here, so that in the sequence of the para- 
graphs, the concepts will stand out on what the intent 
of the Committee was. 

REV. RIGOS. The Committee’s decision, as recom- 
mended in Section 5, constitutionalizes Section 6 of 
Article XIII of the 1973 Constitution which will pre- 
cisely avoid confusion. 


MR. BENNAGEN. What is the parliamentary situa- 
tion? 

MR. JAMIR. He is not pursuing his amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. I am not pursuing. I just used that 
to emphasize the point that we have emasculated 
completely the Tanodbayan. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we wanted to 
constitutionalize the Ombudsman, but in the dis- 
cussions yesterday, it was the preference of the body 
that the 1973 Constitution not be mentioned here, 
and that is the reason we accepted an amendment 
from Commissioners Trefias and Regalado. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair inquire from the 
Chairman of the Committee what office would have 
administrative supervision now over the Tanodbayan? 
Is there any office that would have administrative super- 
vision over the Tanodbayan, as described in Section 5? 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Jamir still has three 
amendments. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, as the decree now 
reads, no one has jurisdiction over the Tanodbayan. He 
may be removed by the President for a cause. 

THE PRESIDENT. So he is directly under the Office 
of the President? 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, because it is the President who 
may remove him for a cause. In effect, he comes under 
the Office of the President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

Section sfpage^j ‘he difficulty in 

tn ® s the Tanodbayan is understood 

ConstitmL Same H a fl the 0mbu dsman under the 1973 
XI I of r’i Q 7 , 5“ reference to Section 6 of Article 
fusL I would . v ? S ? Ution contnbut es to the con- 

would consider Ihe p^s^biliw ^*7 ^ Committee 

the Tanodbayan at ah andhS °h J c mentioning 
simnlv sav- THcpr ,7 lnstead - m Section 5, we will 
simpiy say. 1HERE IS HERFRY rRFATcn 'rue 

which w "‘ be 

reference Artrcle X„, 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President that • ti 
of Section 5. However, the new Constitutin' 5 ^ ln ?7 
completely silent on this because the reaUty “(here fa 
an office existing; so, somehow, it has to be dealt w7th 
which the Committee had decided would be a better 
way to do it, eitliei in the main body or in the Tran 
sitory Provisions of the Constitution. Those were the 
options we had. And the Committee decided that it is 


THE PRESIDENT. Has the Committee accepted the 
first proposed amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. We have accepted it, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, then we submit it to a vote 
first before we proceed to the next amendment. 

Will Commissioner Jamir please read the proposed 
amendment? 

MR. JAMIR. The proposed amendment. Madam 
President, reads: “The Tanodbayan, created pursuant to 
the mandate of Section 6 of Article XIII.” 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, that has been 
changed. May I read it? 

MR. JAMIR. Yes, please. 

MR. MONSOD. “The Tanodbayan, PRESENTLY 
EXISTING, SHALL HEREAFTER BE KNOWN AS 
SPECIAL PROSECUTOR. IT shall continue to func- 
tion and exercise its powers as NOW OR MAY HERE- 
AFTER BE provided by law, except those conferred on 
the office of the Ombudsman created under this Consti- 
tution.” 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
amendment, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 


MONDAY, jULY 28, 1986 


337 


The results show 24 votes in favor and 4 votes 
against; the amendment is approved. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May I be recognized for a clarification 
regarding the creation of the Office of Special Pro- 
secutor. Is my understanding clear to the effect that the 
functions of this office is different from the Office of 
the State Prosecutor? This is for purposes of the record 
because the Office of the State Prosecutor is under the 
Ministry of Justice and the Office of Special Prosecutor 
that we are creating under Section 5 is a constitutional 
body. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, they are separate and, in effect, 
the Special Prosecutor is a mandated office by the 
Constitution. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, the Office of Special 
Prosecutor will handle exclusively graft and corruption 
cases, unlike the case of the State Prosecutor which 
could handle any and all kinds of criminal cases to 
avoid overlapping of functions. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, that is correct. He will handle all 
of the prosecution that comes to the Sandiganbayan by 
virtue of the jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, that will exclude or preclude the 
state prosecutors from acting as prosecutors in the 
Office of the Special Prosecutor. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is clear. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. But will that also preclude the state 
prosecutors from acting as special prosecutors? 

MR. ROMULO. I think the Special Prosecutor may 
appoint such deputies as he may choose. So, in that 
way, the so-called State Prosecutor could be utilized by 
the Special Prosecutor, if he likes. 

MR. SUAREZ. It might be a little confusing. May I 
suggest that this matter be further clarified, because 
there could be a duplication of functions between the 
Office of the Special Prosecutor which is constitutional 
in character and the Office of the State Prosecutoi 
which is only under the Ministry of Justice. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. Let us put it this way. They are 
separate offices; we do not intend to get them mixed 
up. The Special Prosecutor’s Office is really the Tanod- 
bayan’s office now. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, let us go to a specific case, Madam 
President, because this is important for the record. Let 
us say an anti-graft case is filed against a public official, 
Juan de la Cruz, so that will be handled by the Special 
Prosecutor’s Office. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, as is the present practice. 

MR. SUAREZ. And when the formal complaint is 
filed with the Anti-Graft Court, the one who will appear 
to prosecute that will be the Special Prosecutor and not 
the State Prosecutor? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. May I add a point of information 
on that based on Commissioner Suarez’ observation? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. The present practice of the 
Tanodbayan, which will now be known as the Special 
Prosecutor, is to deputize or designate provincial fiscals 
in remote areas of the Philippines to handle the pre- 
liminary investigation. But the actual prosecution in the 
Sandiganbayan is handled by the Tanodbayan — now 
this is supposed to' be called the Special Prosecutor — to 
prevent the need for people in the provinces to come to 
Manila just for preliminary investigation. That is the 
present practice now. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Jamir 
has the floor. May we finish his amendments? 

MR. GUINGONA. This is just in reaction to the 
remarks of Commissioner Regalado where he spoke 
about deputation. Since there are two separate bodies 
undei diffeient jurisdictions — one under the Ministry 
of Justice and the other apparently under the Office of 
the Piesident — I was wondering whether the Special 
Piosecutor now could deputize even without the 
approval of the Minister of Justice. 

MR. ROMULO. That is the present practice now. 

MR. REGALADO. May I add to that? The practice is 
based on the rules of the Tanodbayan. But, of course, 
before they can deputize a particular provincial oi city 
fiscal in any of the provinces outside Manila, they 


338 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


usually get the concurrence of the Minister of Justice 
to determine the availability and the number of the 
fiscals in that particular region. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the next amendment of 
Commissioner Jamir? 

MR. JAMIR. My next amendment is with respect to 
the name “Ombudsman.” I propose that the word 
TANODBAYAN be placed before the word “Ombuds- 
man” and that the word “Ombudsman” be enclosed in 
parentheses. My reason is that the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention used the name “Tanodbayan” as the most 
appropriate translation in Pilipino for the word “Om- 
budsman.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Which section then — Section 5? 


MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to introduce an amend- 
ment to the accepted amendment, the idea being that 
it would not look elegant to indicate “Office of the 
Ombudsman or Tanodbayan.” Why do we not just say 
OFFICE OF THE OMBUDSMAN TO BE KNOWN AS 
THE TANODBAYAN so we do not have to use the 
word “or” in the stationery of the Ombudsman? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. If Commissioner Jamir accepts it, 
we will accept. 


MR. JAMIR. It should apply to all sections of the 
proposal, beginning with Section 2, line 14. 


MR. JAMIR. I have already expressed my agreement 
with the Committee. 


THE PRESIDENT. All references to “Ombudsman” 
should be preceded by the word “TANODBAYAN”? 


MR. JAMIR. And the word “Ombudsman” should be 
enclosed in parentheses. 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

c 9 M ‘TA\ionD°*v Would the proponent be willing 1 
say TANODBAYAN OR Ombudsman”? We are su 

«nK 8 i hat k ecause in over 50 countries, the woi 
Ombudsman has acquired a certain internation; 
meaning and practice. 


MR. JAMIR. I welcome the Committee’s suggestion. 

• M a R f R0DRIG0 - Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized for a question? y ug 

nized. E PRESIDENT Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 


MR. RODRIGO. There k a • • ~ 

of the Tanodbayan which k S m8 ° f ‘ 

1973 Constitution. I think this '^ Cro^sman in 
exist. Under what section W H1 ' vlll c continue 

Section 6? " W|U 11 exist: Section 5 


^?t NS m D R Wil1 COnt mue to exist 
Section 5. It will now be called Snerki p X1St 

the new Office of the Ombudsman or T^oTayan 

one that is mandated as a creation of this Constit 


MR. RODRIGO. So, this emasculated office will 
continue to exist under Section 5. 

Thank you. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, this is just an 
amendment to the amendment of Commissioner Jamir 
who speaks of the Tanodbayan as the Ombudsman. 
However, Section 1 1 defines the Ombudsman as the 
champion of the people. When he speaks of Tanodba- 
yan, he is referring to a protector or guardian. “Tanod” 
means guardian or watchman, not champion. Is Com- 
missioner Jamir willing to accept the word LINGKOD- 
BAYAN which would embrace all concepts — tanod, 
guardian, watchman or anything? 

MR. MONSOD. We regret that the Committee cannot 
accept that. It will just lead to confusion. 

MR. SARMIENTO. For clarity and simplicity, I with- 
draw the amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair hear the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Davide. 

MR. MONSOD. The amendment states: On line 1 1, it 
will say “. . . conferred on the office of the Ombudsman 
TO BE KNOWN AS TANODBAYAN.” Then the subse- 
quent adjustments will be made wherever the word 
“Ombudsman” appears. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just for clarification, what 
happens now to the word “Tanodbayan” in Section 5? 

MR. MONSOD. The “Tanodbayan” under Section 5 
shall hereafter be known as Special Prosecutor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Instead of “Tanodbayan”? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


339 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Will Commissioner Jamir accept as 
an amendment to his amendment the word TANGGOL- 
BAYAN instead of “Tanodbayan” to avoid any con- 
fusion among the Members? 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 


up to suggest the appropriate term for Ombudsman, and 
I was informed by the Chairman of the Committee that 
they could not accept it because they would like to 
defer and refer the matter to the Committee on Style. I 
did not press my amendment, but today they are con- 
sidering and even accepting a name. I do not see why 
there should be any discrimination against me. The 
name that I proposed was sent to the Committee on 
Style but when another Commissioner proposed a name, 
the Committee is now considering whether or not they 
would accept it. I suggest that every name that is 
presented should be referred to the Committee on Style. 


MR. JAMIR. I will be happy to accept the proposed 
amendment, but my amendment has been accepted by 
the Committee and it is now for the Committee to ac- 
cept or reject the proposal of Commissioner Bacani. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept the 
amendment of Commissioner Bacani? 

MR. ROMULO. Will the Commissioner explicate 
what that word means? 

BISHOP BACANI. When I consulted the Committee 
yesterday to know the literal meaning of the word 
“Ombudsman,” I was told by two members of the 
Committee that its literal translation is protector of the 
people. So, if we wish to convey the idea of a protector 
of the people, the word TANGGOL-BAYAN should be 
used It would be more expressive than “Tanodbayan. 
Besides the word TANGGOL-BAYAN connotes more 
the idea of championing the cause of the people. That is 
why I propose TANGGOL-BAYAN. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 2:31 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:37 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that the Chair- 
man of the Committee, Commissioner Monsod, be 

recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 
OF COMMISSIONER GUINGONA 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I would like to 
stand on a question of privilege. Last Saturday, I stood 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair was about to call the 
attention of the body regarding this proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Guingona that was presented 
yesterday and the Chair was going to suggest that this 
be a joint amendment of Commissioner Guingona and 
other Commissioners who have also proposed names. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we now be 
given a chance to speak? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. We had the floor before and we were 
interrupted. Before we were interrupted we were about 
to say that we were proposing to retain temporarily or 
provisionally the phrase “Ombudsman, TO BE KNOWN 
AS TANODBAYAN” and then to refer it to the Com- 
mittee on Style as we had earlier suggested and agreed 
upon last Saturday. We have one month to think over 
the possible options including “TANGGOL-BAYAN” 
in order for us to really reflect on what would be a good 
name for this Ombudsman. That was the proposition we 
were going to say before we were interrupted. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, in the first 
place, I did not interrupt, because the honorable Chair- 
man has not started speaking yet. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we were the ones 
recognized. 


ib M k R ;h G T G ?, NA - ThiS iS 3 matter of Privilege, and I 
lb” ci“' d ,he ™ f ^ honor- 


p ““ 'f Ulair b *ves that there is no intent 
th ' . ina e a § ains t anyone. In fact, we suspern 
. ion so iat the Commissioners may be able 
confer on tins issue about the names. 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I respect- 
u y submit Bishop Bacani’s view to which I concurred. 
1 his matter of changing the name cannot be referred to 
the Committee on Style. I do not think that the Chair- 


340 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


man of the Committee or even this Commission can 
share its responsibility of deciding a name or pass it on 
to the Committee on Style. That is not the function of 
the Committee on Style. 

THE PRESIDENT. We now go to the pending amend- 
ment. Who proposed the amendment? Was it Commis- 
sioner Jamir? 

MR. JAMIR. I proposed the amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. May we speak, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. JAMIR. I think the Committee accepted that 
amendment of Commissioner Davide. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. It was at that point that I sug- 
gested TANGGOL-BAYAN as an amendment to the 
amendment of Commissioner Jamir, and I thought he 
accepted the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, that was the time when we 
called a suspension of the session. May the Chair know 
the result of the conference, if there was any, on this 
name to be given to the Ombudsman? 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I thought the 
honorable Commissioner complained on a matter of 
privilege because he wanted us to follow the original 
agreement last Saturday of referring his proposal to the 
Committee on Style. Is he now taking the position that 
that referral is out of order? 


THE PRESIDENT. To clarify the situation once and 
for all, the Chair believes that there was a proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Guingona about the name 
Bantaybayan and the resolution or action taken by 
the Committee was that the same would be referred to 
the Committee on Style. 


This afternoon there is a proposed amendment with 
respect to the name, which resurrects the whole idea 
again. The Chair believes that there is merit to what 
Commissioner Guingona said that this name, referring 
o e o ice of the Ombudsman, is one that cannot just 
be referred to the Committee on Style and that the 
matter should be decided by the body now. 


Would^the body decide to change the name “Om- 
rnnSw ° r ., retain ll ’ as explained by the Chairman 
notation nr that lt h o aS acquired an international con- 

Commissin So, what is the amendment of 

Commissioner Jamir, with respect to the name? 


wonTir ANODB AY A^°before m ent is *° add 

and to enclose the word “Omh ^° r p m budsman 
theses. However, I accepted th 0130 W * th paren ' 
Committee that the word “OR” Z ugg ® stl ' ° n of the 
TANODBAYAN and “OmbudLa!? T“" 
subsequently reamended by Commissioner’ Day™ 

THE PRESIDE^ What was the amendment of 
Commissioner Davide? 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. The consensus reached was to give it 
to the Committee on Style. But since we are now 
deciding on that, we would rather that the body vote 
on the name. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of this particular 
proposed amendment, “Ombudsman TO BE KNOWN 
AS TANODBAYAN,” please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

MR. RODRIGO. I register my abstention. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 28 votes in 
favor, 6 against and 1 abstention. 

Just for the record: those in favor of “TANGGOL- 
BAYAN,” please raise their hand. (Few Members raised 
their hand. ) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand. ) 

The results show 28 votes in favor of the term 
“TANODBAYAN” for Ombudsman and 9 votes in favor 
of “TANGGOL-BAYAN.” 

The amendment which reads “Ombudsman TO BE 
KNOWN AS TANODBAYAN” is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


MR. DAVIDE. It should read: “Ombudsman TO BE 
KNOWN AS TANODBAYAN.” 

THE PRESIDENT. So, those two names are being 
kept. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just a minor point of parliamen- 
tary inquiry. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


341 


Since we have already approved that the word “Om- 
budsman” should be known as Tanodbayan, what 
happens now to the original Tanodbayan? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Commissioner asking about 
the existing Tanodbayan? 

MR. MAAMBONG. We will have two Tanodbayans 
now. 

MR. MONSOD. May we answer the question, Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. This is the third time we have 
answered that question. Section 5 is the relevant article. 
The original Tanodbayan would be known as the Special 
Prosecutor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other amendment 
by Commissioner Jamir? 


So, is Commissioner Jamir willing to accept the 
amendment to his amendment? 

MR. JAMIR. I deeply regret that I cannot accept the 
proposed amendment because it will, in effect, overload 
the Tanodbayan or the Sandiganbayan or the Ombuds- 
man with duties far beyond the comprehension of the 
Committee as stated in this proposal. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, to consolidate 
our proposals, may I ask for a suspension of the 
session? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 2:50 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:57 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MR. JAMIR. Madam President, my next amendment 
is an insertion of a new subparagraph after subparagraph 
5 of Section 12 on page 5, and it reads: TO FIND 
WAYS AND MEANS OF REDUCING RED TAPE IN 
GOVERNMENT OPERATION AND IN GOVERN- 
MENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Is Commissioner Jamir willing to 
accept an amendment to his amendment? 

MR. JAMIR. I would be glad to hear it first. 

MR. SARMIENTO. This amendment is sponsored by 
this Member and cosponsored by Chief Justice Roberto 
Concepcion. 

The additional provision will read: TO EXAMINE 

and study the actual operations of the 
government, and to make recommenda- 
tions TO ENSURE efficiency, coordination 
of various offices, and correct irregu- 
larities AND PRACTICES. 

Madam President and Chairman of the Committee, 
the purpose of this amendment is that the Ombudsman 
has three functions; namely, as mobilizer, watchdog and 
official critic. The first two functions, mobilizer and 
watchdog, are reflected in the enumeration of functions, 
but the function as official critic, meaning, making 
recommendations to cut red tape and to improve 
efficiency, is not. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. This is just a matter of informa- 
tion, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

This morning, we approved Commissioner Ople’s 
amendment on Section 6, lines 13 to 16, that a separate 
deputy for the military be created. On Section 8, we 
said that the Ombudsman and his deputies shall be 
members of the Bar with at least 10 years of law 
practice. I doubt whether we could have in the military 
somebody who is a member of the Philippine Bar and 
has engaged in law practice for at least 10 years. I know 
that there are several members of the Bar in active 
du y now but they do not have 10 years of law prac- 

of th " I ° t t r er f retifed ° fficers who are members 

|L rlmirp r, U mT u ° not P rac ti ce their profession. So 
the choice here will be very limited 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I think that in Section 8, the require- 
ment ot at least 10 years as judge or a 10-year experience 
in the practice of law is only for the Ombudsman but 


342 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


not for his deputies. The only requirement for the There are features which seem to be objectionable to 
deputies is that they be members of the Philippine Bar. the Committee. 


THE PRESIDENT. Does he have to be a military 
man? 


MR. MONSOD. No, he does not have to be a military 
man and need not have practiced law for 1 0 years or 
need not have been a judge for 10 years. 

Section 8 has been corrected, amended and accepted. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Will the Commissioner please read 
the correction? 


MR. MONSOD. Section 8, as amended, now reads: 
“The Ombudsman and his Deputies shall be natural- 
born citizens of the Philippines, and at the time of their 
appointments, at least forty years old, with recognized 
probity and independence, and members of the Philip- 
pine Bar, and must not have been candidates for any 
elective office in the immediately preceding election.” 

The Ombudsman refers to just one person. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, 
sioner Maambong be recognized. 


I ask that Commis- 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I suggest that in the interest 
of a more coherent debate, we go back to the procedure 
of anterior amendments. Right now what we are doing 
is by random amendments. I still have two pending 
amendments and now we are already discussing the pro- 
posal of Commissioner Maambong. I think we are 
sacrificing the quality of the debate. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. We have not followed the old procedure 
because those who came here to register did not indicate 
which section they are going to amend. 

In the case of Commissioner Bennagen, he is sup- 
posed to coordinate with Commissioner Natividad for a 
certain amendment. I do not know whether or not he 
has already done that. He has two more amendments. I 
am under the impression that he has not yet consulted 
with Commissioner Natividad. 


recogibzed RESIDENT ’ Commissioner Maambong is 


THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Ben- 
nagen say? 


“ 5 : MAAMBONG. With reference to Section 
regarding the procedure and the substantive provisio 

IpSlTf;' U r nderS,and lhare ^ been™, 
Committee action ' W ° U ‘ d need SOme time f 

ted H °to e the crm Uld ,; USt " ke ‘° indicate that 1 sub " : 
proceedings, copi™' oTwWch°h Ut ' OI I, 0 " im P eachmei 
Members of this bodv Th K been furnished tJ 
perience as a membw of S e ‘V ^ ° Ut ° f my 6 
Human Rights and Good Govp” 1 ™ 11166 * ° n JuStlC 
charge of the last impeachment rnr ! lent which toe 

the First Batasang Pambansa Forth^f 0 " fll ® d bef ° 

Committee, the resolution cover, T atl ° n ° f t! 
impeachment proceedings starting u S fi Vera ■ StepS in 

of the Speaker, committee 

I feel very strongly that the proposal I submitted tv 

more or less solve the problem which was also the pre 

Jem of the First Batasang Pambansa. In the formu 

tion of these proposed provisions, I consulted the Rul 

of the House of Representatives and the Rules of t 
Senate of the United States. 


MR. BENNAGEN. I did, as a matter of fact, I have 
already informed the Floor Leader that I already made 
consultations with Commissioner Natividad, but this is 
for another amendment. It does not refer to the subject 
matter that we discussed earlier, which was for the in- 
sertion of a subsection present in Committee Report 
No. 16 but not included in Committee Report No. 17. 
We have not acted on that. I gave in to the amendments 
of Commissioner Jamir because those had to do with 
the decision on the name of the office. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of the Floor 
Leader? 

MR. RAMA. I think the Commissioner has still two 
more amendments. So I ask that he be recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, what is now the 
procedure? Shall we defer this after Commissioner 
Bennagen has spoken, or shall we revert now to the 
process of anterior amendments? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is calling the 
Commissioners in accordance with their having signified 
their intention to propose amendments. So the Chair 
believes that we will just continue the procedure that 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


343 


has been employed and followed by the Floor Leader, 
at least, for this afternoon. But inasmuch as Commis- 
sioner Bennagen is already on the floor, we will con- 
tinue considering his amendments. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. On what particular section? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 


MR. BENNAGEN. May I be clarified as to the 
method of proposing amendments, because my belief is 
that there is a certain logical sequence in the articles? 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the Commissioner’s pro- 
posed amendment that he wants the body to consider 
now? The Commissioner has several amendments. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Before we go to the amendments, 
I want to be clarified first as to the method of pro- 
posing amendments to be followed. Should we go back 
to the process of anterior amendments or the random 
amendments that we have been following for a number 
of days? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. The list of Commissioners who regis- 
tered was made last Saturday. So, I suggest that we just 
follow the sequence as they are listed. 

MR. BENNAGEN. For now. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, for now. 

THE PRESIDENT. In fact, this morning, we gave 
Commissioner Ople all the time to finish his amend- 
ments. So, that is the procedure we will try to follow 
this afternoon. The Chair has already recognized Com- 
missioner Bennagen, so he may submit his amendments 
now. 


MR. BENNAGEN. I am making a formal motion that 
after the deliberations on the Article on Accountability 
of Public Officers we will go back to the procedure of 
anterior amendments, section by section. I think that is 
more orderly and that respects the logical sequence of 
the articles. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of Commissioner Bennagen that after this par- 
ticular Article on Accountability of Public Officers, we 
shall follow the procedure — although we have not 
followed that procedure — of proceeding section by 
section? Is that how I understand the Commissioner’s 
motion? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 
May I now go back to my amendment. 

Somehow I lost my way after that semantic con- 
fusion about the Tanodbayan. 

My amendment is on page 4, Section 1 2. After line 
24, insert Section 6(a) of the earlier Committee Report 
No. 16, which reads as follows: TO INVESTIGATE ON 
ITS OWN OR ON COMPLAINT BY ANY PERSON 
ANY ACT OR OMISSION OF ANY PUBLIC OFFI- 
CIAL, EMPLOYEE, OFFICE OR AGENCY WHEN 
SUCH ACT OR OMISSION IS ILLEGAL, UNJUST IM- 
PROPER OR INEFFICIENT; and this was previously 
accepted by the Committee. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Is it my understanding also that 
after this, we will go back to the process of anterior 
amendments? 


THE PRESIDENT. Has it been accepted? 
MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Whether it is anterior or posterior, 
we are just calling the Commissioners as listed. 

MR. JAMIR. Excuse me, Madam President. 


ment of the first draft of tb7r ' “ a r6Sta 
nncal of rnrr. m ic • the Committee and the pro- 

Bennagen is to restate it. The 
Committee accepts the proposal 


THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Jamir through 
already? 

MR. JAMIR. Not yet, Madam President. When the 
session was suspended, I had the floor, and we went into 
a huddle with the other proponents of other matters 
similar to mine. We have agreed now, and I would like 
to proceed with it. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the body vote on this? 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


344 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


BISHOP BACANI. The phrase “WHEN SUCH ACT 
OR OMISSION IS ILLEGAL” seems the only investiga- 
tory phrase that seems to already prejudge the outcome. 
Can we use a better phrase such as SUSPECTED TO BE 
ILLEGAL or APPEARS TO BE ILLEGAL? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. BENNAGEN. The Committee takes jurisdiction 
over that since it has accepted the amendment. 


AGEMENT, FRAUDS AND CORRUPTION IN THE 
GOVERNMENT. 

This is a consolidation of the proposals of Commis- 
sioners Natividad, Sarmiento, Bennagen, Concepcion 
and myself. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
MR. ROMULO. The Committee accepts. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner read the 
proposed amendment again? 


MR. BENNAGEN. My proposed amendment by 
insertion reads: TO INVESTIGATE ON ITS OWN OR 
ON COMPLAINT BY ANY PERSON, ANY ACT OR 
OMISSION OF ANY PUBLIC OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE, 
OFFICE OR AGENCY WHEN SUCH ACT OR 
OMISSION IS ILLEGAL, UNJUST, IMPROPER OR 
INEFFICIENT. 


BISHOP BACANI. May I suggest that this be amended 
by using the phrase ALLEGED TO BE. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. COLAYCO. Or we might add APPEARS TO BE. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I accept. 


THE PRESIDENT. It is accepted. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) 
none, the amendment is approved. 


The Chair hears 


Commissioner Bennagen is recognized. 


incomorafed NAGEN ‘ The next amendment is alres 
Commkc' lr \ a ^ rou P amendment to be presented 

S °' 1 Commissioi 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. JAMIR. My last amendment is to be inserted 
after the last portion of the proposal and it reads: THE 
TANODBAYAN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES, 
OTHER THAN THE DEPUTIES, SHALL BE AP- 
POINTED BY THE TANODBAYAN ACCORDING TO 
THE CIVIL SERVICE LAW. 

MR. ROMULO. Is the Commissioner subjecting the 
Tanodbayan Deputies to the Civil Service? 

MR. JAMIR. No, precisely, it says: THE TANOD- 
BAYAN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES, OTHER 
THAN THE DEPUTIES, SHALL BE APPOINTED BY 
THE TANODBAYAN ACCORDING TO THE CIVIL 
SERVICE LAW. 

MR. ROMULO. We accept. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 


THE PRESIDENT. The r nmm ' • > , MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Maambong be 

amendment? issioner has no other recognized. 


MR. BENNAGEN I win ,4 • 
of the reasons after Commit mt ° the reCOrd son 
presented the amendment. S10ner Ja mir shall ha 

Thank you, Madam President. 

JHE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recc 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, my amendment * 
be an amen merit by insertion. On page 5, after Secti 
12 (5), insert the following: TO DETERMINE Ab 
MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE OBSER 
ANCE OF HIGH STANDARDS OF ETHICS A> 
EFFICIENCY AND TO ELIMINATE THE ROC 
CAUSES OF INEFFICIENCY, RED TAPE, MISMA 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, before I was 
interrupted I was saying that the proposed provision on 
impeachment which I have submitted to the Committee 
might have some objectionable points because some of 
the members say it is unduly long. However, I would 
just like to indicate for the record that I am doing this 
precisely to correct the deficiencies which happened in 
the last Regular Batasang Pambansa. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there copies of this proposed 
amendment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


345 


THE PRESIDENT. We do not have copies. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Right now we have three pro- 
posals: the proposal of Commissioner Regalado, that of 
Commissioner Davide and my own proposal. In order to 
save time for the Committee I am now formally asking 
that this six-paragraph provision which has exactly the 
same number of paragraphs that is now being indicated 
in the committee report except for paragraph 7 which is 
on rule-making be inserted in the Record. Then I ask 
that we defer the consideration of this until the three 
proposals have been worked out by the Committee. 

I will not proceed to another amendment, Madam 
President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee has 
sat down with Commissioners Davide and Regalado 
regarding the draft. The only difference between that 
formulation and that of Commissioner Maambong is on 
the question of the need for an investigation before it 
goes into the Order of Business and it is a little bit 
shorter. 

So, if Commissioner Maambong is willing to accept 
that insertion in the version of Commissioners Davide 
and Regalado, we may already have the proposal subject 
only to whatever refinements of style may be done by 
the Committee on Style. 


MR. DAVIDE. The reconciliation could be easily 
accomplished by merely inserting a comma (,) after 
“Members” in the Committee modification, and the 
words UPON A RESOLUTION OF INDORSEMENT 
BY ANY MEMBER OF THE HOUSE after the word 
“citizen.” That would take care of everything. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I do not want to debate on this 
point right now. I would rather ask the Committee 
members to go over the three proposals maybe a few 
minutes from now so they can put in the exact wording 
so that we will not waste so much time, Madam Pres- 
ident. The proposal of Commissioner Davide is more or 
less acceptable but I am also concerned of the presenta- 
tion of the totality of the Rules on Impeachment be- 
cause — I am sorry to use the word — it seems to be a 
very confusing proposal. The proposal I have put for- 
ward took me several hours, in fact the whole day 
yesterday, to formulate based on my experience as a 
member of the Committee on Justice, Human Rights 
and Good Government, so I ask the Committee to look 
at it closely. 

I will now proceed to another amendment which is 
very simple. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right, so we will defer this 
particular amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. We will abide by the request of the 
Commissioner. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Now that the Commissioner has 
mentioned it, I might as well inform the Chair that the 
reason I am insisting that before a complaint is for- 
mally received by the legislature, it has to be accom- 
panied by a resolution of a number of Members of the 
House is that it is the standard procedure under the 
Rules of the House of Representatives of the United 
States of which I have a copy here. If we do not follow 
this procedure by a resolution, the resultant effect would 
be that impeachable officers will be subject to harass- 
ment because of baseless charges. We can just imagine if 
any Tom, Dick and Harry will just pay P5 to a notary 
public to verify a complaint, and when the complaint 
reaches the legislature it will go immediately into the 
Order of Business. What will happen to all our impeach- 
able officers? That is why we indicated that we need 
something like one-fifth of the membership or even a 
lower number to sign a resolution with which the veri- 
fied complaint of the citizen or a member will be 
attached. That is the nonnal procedure all throughout 
the parliaments of the world. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we believe we are 
close to a formulation here. May we request Commis- 
sioner Davide to inform us of the status ot the recon- 
ciliation? 


THE PRESIDENT. We now go to the next amend- 
ment. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to propose an amendment on page 4, 
Section 11, line 15, which is to delete the first clause 
“as champions of the people” and in lieu thereof to 
insert the following phrase: SHALL GIVE EFFECT TO 
THE RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE TO PETITION THE 
GOVERNMENT FOR REDRESS OF GRIEVANCES 
AND TO PROMOTE HIGHER STANDARDS OF 

mf T nt S T R Y virF D Tn FFICIENCY IN ™ GOVERN- 
MENT SERVICE. The reason for this is that this state- 
ment is a constitutional provision. In fact, I called the 
attention of the Committee by way of interpellations 
ot other Commissioners that this is specifically the 
function and duty of the Ombudsman as constitu- 
tionally mandated elsewhere in the Constitution. 

May I know the response of the Committee? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


MR. MONSOD. We regret we cannot accept it 
because if one goes through the functions of the Om- 
budsman, including the proposed amendments that 


346 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


have been discussed with the Committee, that function 
in that respect will really come out. Thus it is not 
necessary to insert that phrase. 

The other point is that last Saturday, Commissioner 
Quesada raised the point of whether or not the Ombuds- 
man will preempt people power. We said that it would 
be complementary to and supportive of people power. 
So, we do not want to identify the Ombudsman as a 
vehicle for the people to express their sentiments. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, so that I would 
not press this amendment, may I just know from the 
Committee if one of the functions of the Ombudsman 
is to give effect to the right of the people to petition 
the government for redress of grievances and to promote 
higher standards of integrity and efficiency in the 
government service? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Then I will not press anymor 

at amendment. I ask that I be allowed to withdrav 
the same. * 

I will go now to page 5, Section 13, line 23. 

th/c WOUl J to indicate before the Committee tha 

1 1 iT i ? C a 1C ) ?!! V * S * 0n * n Section 13 is found in Sectioi 

favor f fu o' " w h* c h is ar > act declaring forfeiture ir 

fullv To 6 A te any P ro P ert y to have been unlaw 

providing 1 fe y 3ny pul:)lic officer or employee anc 

providing for the procedure therefor. 

Section 11 of RA 1379 says: 

Dresrrint° ,( ^ >rcs< ^ r 'P t ion. — The laws concerning acquisitive 
bv nnr 1 i° n H ^ *’ m * tat * on °f actions cannot be invoked 
nronert S 3 . * benefit the respondent in respect of any 

property unlawfully acquired by him. 
1379,TtT n n dVi h f e th?r tenCe - ° f this P rovision in RA 

Section 13 be deleted C ° mm,ttee would allow that this 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think th* r 
basic distinction betw PP the Commissl °ner knows the 
constitutional provision ” & Statutor Y Provision and a 

MR. MAAMBONG. Very well. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I sav sn h. 

section can be repealed hv tv, e f ause at an Y time this 

importance of SeSn «>« to the 

Commissioner correctly Quoted 379, Whlch the 

same provision but in different’ word repr J duced the 

page 5 of our committee report so as t m Sectlon 13 - 
f ze it port so as to constitutional- 


MR. MAAMBONG. I succumb 
Commissioner Nolledo. 


to the answer of 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Considering that the Committee 
does not feel that this Section 13 should be eliminated, 
then I would propose its rewording. 

So that we do not have to go to the usual procedure 
of deleting and putting forward certain words. Section 
13, as reworded, would read as follows: THE LAWS 
CONCERNING ACQUISITIVE PRESCRIPTION AND 
LIMITATION OF ACTIONS CANNOT BE INVOKED 
BY, NOR SHALL THEY BENEFIT PUBLIC OFFI- 
CIALS OR EMPLOYEES, IN RESPECT TO ANY 
PROPERTY UNLAWFULLY ACQUIRED. 

I think this would be more encompassing than the 
present formulation of Section 13. As we envision it, 
it will cover acquisitive prescription and limitation of 
actions. This means that the prescription actually covers 
two things — either a criminal action or a civil action. 
The way I look at the present formulation of Section 
13, it covers only civil prescription and not criminal 
prescription. That is why I am proposing an article on 
prescription or nonprescription which will cover both 
civil and criminal actions. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Would the proponent accept some 
amendments? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Gladly. 

MR. DAVIDE. The amendment of Section 13 will 
consist of the following: On line 25, after the word 
“employees,” add the following: OR THEIR CO- 
PRINCIPALS, ACCOMPLICES OR ACCESSORIES OR 
TO PROSECUTE OFFENSES IN CONNECTION 
THEREWITH; then on line 25, after the word “pre- 
scription,” add a comma (,) and the words LACHES OR 
ESTOPPEL. So the entire Section 13 will read as 
follows: “The right of the State to recover properties 
unlawfully acquired by public officials or employees OR 
THEIR CO-PRINCIPALS, ACCOMPLICES OR AC- 
CESSORIES OR TO PROSECUTE OFFENSES IN 
CONNECTION THEREWITH shall not be barred by 
prescription, LACHES OR ESTOPPEL.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I inform my distinguished 
colleagues in the Commission that all these words were 
taken into account when we discussed the provision in 
the Committee. I do not know whether it will satisfy 
them it I say that the intention of the Committee is to 
embrace all the consequences, meanings and intentions 
gleaned from the words which they recommended. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


347 


They are all contemplated in this provision. I think we 
should not clutter the Constitution with words, no 
matter how beautiful they may be. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


MR. MAAMBONG. With that assurance and unless 
Commissioner Davide will not press his amendment 
to my amendment, I am willing to withdraw, with the 
understanding that this provision of Section 1 3 covers 
nonprescriptibility of civil and criminal actions. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I thank the Commissioner for his 
magnanimity. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I think my amendment was clut- 
tered a little bit because of the proposed amendment to 
my amendment. (Laughter) 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the Commissioner accepting the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Considering that the Commis- 
sioner is from Cebu, I would like to accept it. However, 
the problem is that he is trying to introduce an amend- 
ment not to my amendment, but to the original pro- 
vision of Section 13. How in heaven’s name could I 
accept that? So, I would rather stick to the present 
formulation which I have proposed. Considering that 
the Committee did not get a copy of my proposal, I am 
willing to have this deferred in the meantime for them 
to go over my proposal because I still maintain that the 
proposal I am putting forward is more encompassing 
since I practically copied it from an existing law and this 
covers civil and criminal prescriptions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I have a copy of 
Section 11 of RA 1379, known as “An Act for For- 
feiture of Unlawfully Acquired Property,” so the 
Gentleman need not furnish me a copy. The provision 
of Section 13 which the Commissioner proposes to 
amend covers both the civil and the criminal aspects. 
In relation to the proposed amendment to the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Davide, we also feel that the 
property unlawfully acquired by public officials is 
considered res criminis and whoever is in possession of 
that property, whether he is an accessory, a principal, 
an accomplice or otherwise, should return the property 
to the State, and the right of the State to forfeit the 
same does not prescribe. 

MR- MAAMBONG. Madam President, if the purpose 
of the Committee is to really encompass civil and 
criminal actions in relation to the nonprescriptibility, I 
suggest that the Committee take seriously the proposal. 
Anyway, what is wrong with improving the provision 
at this time? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that the point 
of the Committee is that it prefers a simple presentation 
of the whole issue. The Committee believes that what 
are included in the Commissioner’s proposed statement 
are already included in the simple sentence of Section 
13. 


MR. DAVIDE. I would like to insist on my proposal 
for the plain and simple reason that the republic act 
on forfeiture of ill-gotten wealth would cover only the 
civil aspect. As a matter of fact, any prosecution for the 
criminal aspect of that will have to be taken under the 
Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act. That is why it is 
necessary to include here, specifically, the criminal 
action and the imprescriptibility of the criminal action. 
Besides, what is stated in the law on ill-gotten wealth 
and recovery thereof would refer to prescription or 
statute of limitations. We know for a fact that there are 
two other concepts in Civil Law. We have laches and 
estoppel. Laches, for instance, is a concept entirely 
different from prescription. While an action may not 
prescribe, it may be barred by laches and while an 
action may not prescribe or may not be barred by 
laches, it may also be a limitation because of estoppel. 
So, if we really want to strengthen this particular con- 
cept, we should be very specific in having it related 
to both criminal and civil actions. In addition to pre- 
scription, we should also include laches and estoppel. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the issue has been 
sufficiently debated. 


Ihb rKESlDEN 1 . Will Commissioner Davide state 
his proposed amendment to Section 13? 

MR. DAVIDE The proposed amendment will be on 

line 25 done. After _the word “employees,” add the 

° R ™ol R CO-PRINCIPALS, ACCOM- 

nVpFNSFtf tte' C SS? R1ES OR T0 PROSECUTE 
OFFENSES IN CONNECTION THEREWITH. Then 

Lords Ache* P nl SC A P,ion ” add a comma (,) and the 
rfWead ?? “TOWEL. So. the entire section 

i f ii 16 ri ^ ^ the State to recover properties 
unlawfully acquired by public officials or employees, 

THEIR CO-PRINCIPALS, K 

TO PROSECUTE^ O^NSES IN 
CONNECTION THEREWITH shall not be barred by 
prescription, LACHES OR ESTOPPEL.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it accepted by the Committee: 


348 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. After consultations, the Committee 
is happy to announce that we are accepting the amend- 
ment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President; I also 
thank the members of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bacani be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I wish to pro- 
pose an amendment to Section 6 on page 3, line 15. 
Between the words “and” and “one,” insert the words 
AT LEAST. 

In the period of sponsorship and debate last Saturday, 
Commissioner Rodrigo spoke very forcefully pointing 
out that the office of the Ombudsman will be quite 
powerless because it will have only one deputy for each 
o t ese big subdivisions of the Philippine Archipelago. 

aVteact^ infirmity, may I suggest that the words 
AST be added so that in the future, should the 
nee anse then, we can easily add more deputies. 

S °’ Section 6 should go this way: “There is hereby 
crea e the independent office of the Ombudsman 
composed of the Ombudsman, one over-all Deputy and 

Mindanao * Deputy each for Luz on, Visayas and 

MR. COLAYCO. We accept. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
men?' N ° LLED0 - Th e Committee accepts the amend- 


On Section 1, the 1973 Constitution uses the terms 
“responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efficiency.” Our 
proposed Constitution uses the words “fidelity, in- 
tegrity and efficiency.” Should we not reinsert the 
omitted words RESPONSIBILITY and LOYALTY? 

MR. ROMULO. We have accepted Commissioner 
Sarmiento’s amendment of “PATRIOTISM”; so perhaps 
the concept of “loyalty” as well as “fidelity” would be 
included, but we have no objection to “RESPONSIBIL- 
ITY.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Padilla satisfied? 

MR. PADILLA. Of course, “patriotism” is a much 
stronger word than all of these words combined, but I 
think “loyalty” has a meaning separate from the all- 
embracing word “patriotism.” In other words, the 
public officer must serve with responsibility, fidelity, 
integrity, efficiency and loyalty. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, with due 
respect to the honorable Vice-President and for the 
information of the members of the Committee, I 
checked last week the meaning and synonym of 
“fidelity,” and it is “loyalty.” 

MR. ROMULO. We would be willing to substitute 
“LOYALTY” for “fidelity.” 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, how will that section read 
now? What are the words that have been changed? 

MR. PADILLA. Lines 8 and 9 should read “. . . ut- 
most RESPONSIBILITY, integrity, LOYALTY and 
efficiency.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Th P 

amendment. nunittee has accepted 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President r , 
sioner Padilla be recognized. ’ asE that Con 

THE PRESIDENT. Co mmissioner Padi 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. Madam Presiden 

I am a member of the Committee but I am si 
inr corrections. 


1 am a inuiiuvi wi mv. 

few minor corrections. 


MR. PADILLA. On page 2, paragraph 6 of Section 3, 
from line 23 was copied from the previous Constitution 
but I wonder whether the word “not” on line 24 is 
misplaced or is erroneous because this Section 6 speaks 
of removal from office and also prosecution. But as it is 
worded, it says: 

Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend 
further than the removal from office . . . the party con- 
victed shall nevertheless be liable and subject to prosecu- 
tion, trial and punishment according to law. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


349 


It seems to me that the word “not” should be deleted 
to read: “shall extend further than the removal.” Then 
on line 27, change the word “but” to AND. So, it will 
read: “AND the party convicted shall nevertheless be 
liable . . 

MR. ROMULO. The sense in using the word “not” is 
to convey that the Senate should not go further than 
removing the impeachable officer and that the reserved 
clause belongs then to his prosecution .outside the 
Senate. That is why we believe that the original wording 
of the 1935 Constitution is appropriate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Padilla insist? 

MR. PADILLA. With that explanation I will not insist 
on my amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


by describing the Ombudsman as the champion or as the 
protector, the insinuation would probably be that the 
other officials just as important are not champions of 
the people. So it seems to me that we should just delete 
that and say: “The Ombudsman and his Deputies shall 
act promptly on the complaints filed.” 

MR. ROMULO. We cannot accept that because we 
are not saying that the other officials are less capable of 
being champions of the people, but we want to em- 
phasize that the special character of the Ombudsman or 
Tanodbayan is that he should be the protector of the 
people. It is meant to be instructive as well. 

MR. TINGSON. At least the Committee has said so. I 
will tell the people that when I campaign for ratification 
of our Constitution. 

While I am on my feet. Madam President, may I pro- 
ceed? I have just two simple amendments. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Has the Committee accepted the 
change of the word “champion” to “PROTECTOR”? 


MR. DAVIDE. Would the proponent yield to an 
amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. I believe Commissioner Padilla is 
not insisting on his proposed amendment. 


MR. DAVIDE. I am sorry. 

MR. PADILLA. On page 4, lines 14 and 15 state: 
“The Ombudsman and his Deputies, as champions of 
the neonle . . .” Can we not find a substitute for the 
word “champions”? Can we not use DEFENDERS or 
PROTECTORS? I ask so because the word ‘ champions 
gives the idea of an athletic competition. Of course, I 
like the word “champion” because in my youth, I had 
been in athletic competitions for many years. 


MR. MONSOD. We have accepted. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. May I have the floor now? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, sometimes there 
are so many amendments and we get lost. We do not 
know whether the line is still there or not. May I ask the 
Committee if lines 9 and 10 of page 1 are still there? 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Does the Vice-President have a sug- 
gestion? We are open to any suggestion. 

MR. PADILLA. I suggest to change the word 
“champions” to PROTECTORS. 

MR. ROMULO. We accept. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, lines 9 and 10, as 
amended, now read: “. . . with utmost responsibility, 
integrity, loyalty and efficiency, act with patriotism and 
justice and lead modest lives.” 


“X“ umcm would De to change 
the word modes to FRUITFUL, so that it would 
read. ... act with justice and lead FRUITFUL lives.” 
May I just explain my amendment briefly? 


THE PRESIDENT, 
ceed. 


Commissioner Tingson may pro- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. Is it on the same amendment? 

MR. TINGSON. I do not know whether or not I am 
already late, but that is one of the amendments I was 
going to make. It is an amendment by deletion because 






. . , „ , mouesi carries wan « 

it • m u n a w hich, in a sense, is a negative virtue. 

1S n a m>fiT-rr-fff S ^ 0n ^ or citizenship whereas, the 
W01 TFUL would be a suggestion of a mandate 

to be not a spectator but a participant in a truly free 
and progressive Philippines. 


350 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


I am just wondering if the Committee would accept 
my amendment — changing the word “modest” to 
FRUITFUL. 

At this juncture, the President relinquished the Chair 
to the Honorable Efrain B. Trehas. 

MR. ROMULO. We regret we cannot accept because 
there was a specific resolution filed on this matter by 
Commissioner Tadeo and the purpose is really for the 
public official to set an example and to avoid conspi- 
cuous display of wealth and power. So, when we say 
“FRUITFUL,” it may, in fact, be misunderstood that 
he should aggrandize himself while he is in office be- 
cause that would be fruitful indeed, but in the wrong 
sense. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, if we put some 
malicious intention to the word, we can always do that. 
But I was trying to say that the word “FRUITFUL” 
carnes a mandate not just to be a spectator but a par- 
ticipant to make the Philippines fruitful. The original 
proponent of that resolution, Commissioner Tadeo, may 
perhaps agree with me. 


wonJ R “ HU HTFn?'” 1 f the Gentlernan wi U permit it, the 
cations- it m™ * S Feally sub -i ect to malicious irnpli- 

tend?oavo^ LT an D nriChment - That is what we in ‘ 
tend to avoid, Madam President. 

Preaden™ t G |,?, N K ThCre iS another one here . Madam 
listen to the f , en 3 ms P' rH, g experience to 

deputies f nC, ' 0nS of ,he Ombudsman and his 

a said he is a mobilizer; he is 

he is a crusaH 1 ^ a . cntlc - Others say he is a reformist 
moral sune^ u “ 30 arbiter ‘ He is ’ in other words, a 
the vim P fhe w' He S ! 10uld ’ there fore, be a man with 

to Propose a InH 3nd the Vig ° r ° f y° uth - 1 going 

to be at least 40 ments tbat inst ead of requiring him 

old; Instead^of'lt/vear's ^ ""T Wm ‘° be 35 

if only to satisfy r ° practice > w e reduce it to 7. 

Brocka and' Ople thaM d-d 0 " 61 ? ? SCOn ’ Sarmiento ’ 
intent when I tried tn dld V 0t have any ma l lc ious 
be 40 years old instead ofS^ bef0re that the Senators 

JyZTX puC^ 0 ^ c T mittee — 

language of Commissioner Nolledo i iSTfo ^ 

old because I understand the nfr 5 * r aS t0 be 40 years 
is being elevated to that of a Comm' ° f the 0mbudsman 
wanted 40 years old. Hav e ^v -° f ^ 
since I talked to them this mornta*’ c2 the >r minds 

°' d ' a " d inS ‘ ead ° f 10 of practice' 


MR MONSOD. We considered different ages and in a 
way, it was a judgment call. But we felt that 40 years 
might be the appropriate minimum age because we are 


requiring a lot of moral suasion to be exercised by this 
person. 

Hopefully, he would need some experience and, 
probably, the age of 40 would be the appropriate age. 

MR. TINGSON. Could not the same argument hold 
when I tried to change the age requirement for Senator 
from 35 to 40 years old? 

MR. MONSOD. I believe the Gentleman did make the 
argument but the judgment of the body was otherwise. 

MR. ROMULO. If I may add, we have nothing against 
youth. In fact, we did vote with the Gentleman but in 
this case, they have different functions. The Senator has 
no administrative function. The Ombudsman has 
separate functions and extensive ones and he needs 
administrative experience. So, that is the reason for the 
age requirement of 40 years. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Natividad be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Natividad is recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Just a 
minute. It is not comfortable to be addressed as Madam 
President. (Laughter) May I suggest that the Gentleman 
address the Chair Mr. Presiding Officer. ( Laughter) 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am sorry, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I was not looking at the Chair; I was reading my notes. 

(Laughter) So, if I have inadvertently or accidentally 
changed his gender, I am sorry; I did not mean to 
change his sex. I was merely looking at my notes when I 
took the microphone. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am a little bit bored because all 
my amendments had already been presented and I am 
not even sure if my amendments are still proper I do 
not mean to change his sex, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). It is all 
right. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. May I present an amendment on 
page 3, Section 5. I am not really sure how Section 5 
looks now because at the start of this discussion, I in- 
tended to propose an amendment. I intended to 
improve the situation by proposing that the Tanodba- 
yan, now the Special Prosecutor, shall — and this is the 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


351 


phrase I will insert after the word “shall” — FUNCTION 
AS AN INVESTIGATIVE AND PROSECUTION ARM 
OF THE OMBUDSMAN. I am not sure how the whole 
section looks right now or if my amendment is still 
proper. What I intend to say is that the Special Prosecu- 
tor shall function as an investigation and prosecution 
arm of the Ombudsman. 

MR. ROMULO. Can we not make it a separate 
sentence and simply say HE BE THE SPECIAL PRO- 
SECUTOR? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The Special Prosecutor? 

MR. ROMULO. Something like that, as the prosecut- 
ing arm of the Ombudsman. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I will use the word “an” so the 
Ombudsman can also assign investigative functions to 
any other unit or agency of the government it might see 
fit. 

MR. ROMULO. As “a prosecutor,” meaning, not 
exclusive. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am using the phrase “AS AN 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION ARM OF 
THE OMBUDSMAN.” So, it is not exclusive, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

MR. ROMULO. May we add the phrase IN APPRO- 
PRIATE CASES, so we have some discretion on the 
part of the Ombudsman? 

MR NATIVIDAD. So, the amendment as a separate 
sentence shall read: THE SPECIAL PROSECUTOR 
SHALL FUNCTION AS AN INVESTIGATION AND 
PROSECUTION ARM OF THE OMBUDSMAN IN 
APPROPRIATE CASES. 

MR. ROMULO. Would the Gentleman consider 
leaving him just as a prosecutor rather than an investiga- 
tor because we have made quite a point in saying that 
the Ombudsman is the investigator, and the Special 
Prosecutor is the prosecutor? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. So, as a prosecution arm. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR NATIVIDAD. So, the amendment will read: 
THE SPECIAL PROSECUTOR SHALL FUNCTION 
AS A PROSECUTION ARM OF THE OMBUDSMAN 
IN APPROPRIATE CASES. 

MR. ROMULO. We accept the amendment, and I 
think that gives him false teeth at least. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. This morning I was already com- 
plaining that we are emasculating too much the functions 
of the Tanodbayan. Here we are again demoting the 
poor Tanodbayan as a mere arm of the Ombudsman in 
special cases. So, if this is the case, if I were Raul 
Gonzalez, I would resign my position: I would become 
so useless. I think Commissioner Guingona has a 
proposed amendment which might remedy the situatioa 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Constitu- 
tional Commission is recommending proposals regardless 
of the wishes of Mr. Gonzalez. 

MR. GUINGONA. May I just ask the proponent some 
questions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Yes, Com- 
missioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Does this proposal mean that the 
Special Prosecutor will now fall under the jurisdiction of 
the Ombudsman? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. No. 

MR. GUINGONA. Would it still be under the Office 
of the President as previously envisioned? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. What I understand from my prior 
conversation with the Committee is that it does not fall 
under the Ombudsman. 

MR. GUINGONA. So, it will still be under the Office 
of the President but may be deputized by the Ombuds- 
man or may also be assigned work by the Ministry of 
Justice. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. As to the exact location of the 
proposed Special Prosecutor, I think the Committee 
should respond to this. 

MR. MONSOD The sentence was accepted because it 
is a recognition that for the cases that will go to the 
Sandiganbayan, the prosecution arm is the Special Pro- 
secutor. Some people may consider that a redundance - 
not to say anymore something that is understood - but 
,t was a matter of form for us to accept because it did 

confirm or affirm the role of the Special Prosecutor in 
appropriate cases. 

MR RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I say 
something on this. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 


352 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. Up to now, it has been emphasized 
that the role of the Ombudsman is not to prosecute. It 
is only a “sumbungan ng bayan” to help the people and 
make the government officials act; but prosecution is 
not its function. And now, we are giving it an arm to 
prosecute. I do not understand now what the principal 
role of the Ombudsman is. 

MR. MONSOD. There is a difference between the 
Ombudsman exercising a prosecutory function, and 
saying that in appropriate cases, the Ombudsman refers 
to the Special Prosecutor. 

MR. RODRIGO. No, that is different. But to call it 
the prosecution arm of the Ombudsman makes a lot of 
difference. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Maybe we can remove the word 
“ARM.” 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, anyway it is in the record 
already. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). For the 
record, the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Natividad has been withdrawn. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 


MR. ROMULO. If we will accept that amendment, 
it seems the Gentleman would not want our Ombuds- 


man to have any teeth nor any arm, nor any unmen- 
tionables. 


MR. RODRIGO. That is what the Gentleman said. I 
just want to be consistent with the definition by the 
Committee of the functions of the Ombudsman. 

MR. MONSOD. We will accept that amendment in 
order to clarify that position. 

read'T RODRIGO. So, how will the amendment now 


ecutor sH| T pInc AD ' Maybe . . the Special Pros- 
BY THE OMB^SMAN 1 ” CASES REFERRED TO IT 

MR. ROMULO. In appropriate cases. 

proposed ‘ 2m?nt P b reSiding ° fficer - 1 ob J'-« <° the 
Section ,2 (2) „„ ^ 

To direct the nffw 

action against a public offirT 6 ™^ t0 ^ a PP r0 P riate 
recommend his removal 13 ° l em P lo y ee at fault , and to 
sure or prosecution and * USpension ’ Emotion, fine, cen- 
directive. ° see t0 compliance of the 

In short, the Ombudsman non j* 

Prosecutor to prosecute m 30 dlrect even tlle Special 
cerning which the Ombudsma^^ 1 * 1 ^ complaint con ' 
that an action is proper to be filed™^ ^ determined 

MR If ? h A ™ D - That is clear, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer If that is encompassed within the meaning of that 
power, maybe I should withdraw the amendment 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, maybe the proper thing to do is 
to withdraw it in view of that manifestation. 


MS. AQUINO. My questions would pertain to Section 
3 on impeachment procedures. 

I have a lot of doubts about the effectivity and 
validity of the impeachment procedure as it is now 
provided for in the Constitution when it adopted verba- 
tim the procedures in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. 

Impeachment originated in England but it had been 
in disuse for one century and a half ago. In fact, the last 
time it was used was sometime in the first years of the 
19th century. It had been partly discredited and proven 
to be practically obsolete when the English countries 
adopted the principle of ministerial responsibility, such 
that in the trend of legal history, there was a growing 
tendency to vest the powers of impeachment, not in 
the legislature but in the judiciary. This procedure of 
vesting impeachment powers in the legislature found its 
way in the constitutions of the American colonies and 
eventually in the Constitution of the United States. 

But let me call the Gentleman’s attention to the 
Philippine experience. In the Philippines, all of the 
efforts to impeach the President have been effectively 
frustrated by the simple reason of partisanship and 
political loyalties. In fact, when there was a serious 
attempt to impeach President Quirino on the grounds 
of willful breach and deliberate violations of the Consti- 
tution, it was overwhelmingly voted down by the House 
of Representatives for the simple reason that the polit- 
ical party in control of the House of Representatives 
was the same political party as that of President Quirino. 

That experience was very instructive; in fact, it led us 
to the same conclusion that impeachment proceedings 
vested in a legislature are practically futile and inutile. 

The same experience was borne out in the attempt of 
the Batasan, the defunct Batasan, to impeach President 
Marcos. All of these would be instructive and indica- 
tive, and leading to a conclusion that the very brief ex- 
periment of the Philippines with impeachment proceed- 
ings shows ample proof that decisions on impeachment 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


353 


proceedings are rendered on purely -partisan and 
political reasons, totally disregarding the merits of the 
allegations or the accusations against the President. This 
is a defect that is inherent in impeachment powers 
vested in the legislature. Experience shows that im- 
peachment power, which is essentially a judicial 
function, once vested in the legislature, is almost 
always unsatisfactory in realizing its vested objective 
which is protecting the State. Therefore, the process as 
it goes is impracticable. It is also cumbersome and 
complicated and, to say the least, grossly inadequate in 
terms of exacting responsibility from the public officers 
to the Constitution and to the State. 

I might be trailblazing here, but I am seriously 
considering the idea of transferring the powers of 
impeachment trial, after it has been initiated by the 
joint action of the legislative chamber to the judicial 
courts, the way it is being adopted now in the countries 
of the United States and in Europe. 

Is the Committee’s benediction on this matter forth- 
coming, or am I a lonely voice on this matter? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, when we were 
reviewing the provisions on impeachment, those same 
questions were asked in our discussions. The Committee 
decided that the presence of the impeachment provision 
by itself, even if it has not been successful, would act 
even as a deterrent if liberalized. We accepted the fact 
that the impeachment proceeding is primarily a political 
act, and we are not sure that it did not serve its purpose, 
for example, the last time it was used, even if it ap- 
peared that it failed. The events and the sequence of 
decisions after that seem to indicate that the President 
at the time really exerted all his efforts to defeat the 
impeachment proceeding. This, by itself, showed that it 
had impact. Second, this subsequent calling of snap 
elections may have been influenced to some extent by 
the fact that there was an attempt at impeachment. 

So in terms of achieving its purpose, it being a 
political act, and calling the attention of the people to 
certain actions that would make the incumbent seek a 
fresh mandate from the people, keeping it in the Consti- 
tution would still serve a purpose. 

As far as judicial action is concerned, the resort to 
judicial action for certain crimes, as the provision itself 
says, is still there. It does not preclude the judicial 
process. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


ponent here would be necessary in recognizing that an 
impeachment procedure, which is a judicial function, 
covers not only political matters but even legal matters. 

MR. MONSOD. We realize that there is a judicial 
function involved in the impeachment process. But I 
think the questions we want to address ourselves are: Is 
the provision on impeachment still necessary? Does it 
serve a useful purpose as far as the political processes 
are concerned? 

MS. AQUINO. I may be launching a lonely crusade 
here. Even as I would concede that the powers of 
impeachment might have to be vested in the legislature, 
I would conduct a massive overhaul of the procedures to 
make impeachment procedure a viable option. 

MR. MONSOD. We would be very happy to take a 
look at any suggestion that would improve our Consti- 
tution. 

MS. AQUINO. Do I take it to mean that I am effec- 
tively foreclosed in terms of a conceptual redefinition of 
impeachment procedures when I would attempt to vest 
it in the judicial courts insofar as the presidency is 
concerned? • 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, I believe 
the Committee at this point believes that an overhaul 
in that direction might not be appropriate. But we 
would be amenable to other suggestions in order to 
make it a more effective deterrent. 


MS. AQUINO. My only concern is that experience 
has shown that impeachment procedures as they are 
now stated in the draft would be nothing more - 
pardon the Freudian slip but there is no better term for 
this — than a glorified act of political masturbation. 
There should be a conscious and deliberate attempt to 
make this a feasible and viable option in the exercise of 
a concern to protect the State against erring officers for 
malfeasance or misfeasance. 


MR- MONSOD. Yes. Mr. Presiding Officer. We under- 
stand the Commissioner’s appreciation of the problem 
What we are saying is that perhaps our perception of its 
do errent effect even in cases where it seems to have 
tailed may be different. 


MR. NOLLEDO. May I 
Commissioner Aquino? 


propound an inquiry 


to 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. I appreciate the explanation of the 
Committee Chairman. But for purposes of conceptual 
clarity, we might as well underscore, the fact that 
impeachment, although it is an exercise ot a political 
act, is essentially a judicial function. The political com 


MS. AQUINO Yes, gladly, 

innWl N0LLED0 - The Commissioner need not over 
ie pioceduie. But it seems to me that she is sug* 
gestmg some sort of judicial review: am I right? 

MS. AQUINO. No, what I am suggesting is to transfei 
the impeachment power after the impeachment articles 


354 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


have been initiated and formulated by the joint action 
of the legislative chambers to the judicial courts. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


when a sword in the scabbard is as good as a sword 
drawn. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner Aquino? 


MR. OPLE. Will Commissioner Aquino yield to a 
question, too? 

MS. AQUINO. Gladly. 


MR. OPLE. Commissioner Aquino must be aware 
that the main provision on impeachment in the draft 
article under discussion was lifted virtually from the two 
previous Constitutions, actually almost a verbatim copy 
of Article VII of the United States Constitution that 
was framed and ratified in 1787. May I briefly read 
Article VII: 


Judgment in case of impeachment shall not extend 
further than the removal from office and disqualification 
to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust or profit under 
the United States, but the party convicted shall nevertheless 
be liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment, and 
punishment according to law. 


It is almost unchanged since the American constitu 
lona ramers established this impeachment rule in th 
Constitution of 1787. 

But the reason I brought this up was to indue 
?™ I ^ 1 f loner Ac l uino to recall a more recent even 
a e o impeachment in the United States Congress o 
an mencan President, Richard Nixon, who was facin 

"TrS h r ent :- As a matter of fact, the charges ha< 
eady been formulated in a committee of the House o 

th e e P S n r Ve V nd he Was to be tried by the Senate i 
to imnpaH fe ° World television. Instead of submittin 
was erantpd 160 proceedin 8 s > he resigned, and later o 
that fmnearh amn f Sty by President Ford. The point i 
good as P a sworTi 1S 3 SW ° rd in the scabbard - It is a 

tion of an American' Pr^deT C3USed ^ reS ' 8m 
President Ford before h e gave ^ CaUSe ’ m the words c 
Nixon, the presidency 0 f the n am ! le ^ ty to Pres i d ^ 
could not withstand the rigor and* ^ St3teS P robabl 
a public trial in the Sena?e hv '"'"l anSI " g 2 °! 
President of the United States lm P eac hment of th 

Since this section i s indubitably of America 
origin, I think we are justified in recalling some Am 
rican examples in the contemporary period. I do 2 
want to share Commissioner Aquino’s despair that th 
impeachment or trial by the Senate, through the origin; 
t jon of charges in the House of Representatives, 
equivalent to a constitutional decoration or tinsel. It 
actually a powerful check on the presidency. It may t 
a sword in the scabbard but there are circumstance 


MS. AQUINO. I appreciate Commissioner Ople’s 
setting the stimulus of the discussion on this line. But 
there may be a variance of conceptual appreciation here. 

Impeachment is not intended to punish the offender. 
Impeachment is a method of national inquest to protect 
the State. It does not intend to prosecute; it is not 
intended for its retributory or restitutory effects. 
Rather, it is in the nature of an exemplary act by which 
the State infuses the highest sense of responsibility to 
public service. 

In other words, when the Constitution provides that 
the intent of an impeachment proceeding is not only to 
remove from office, it follows as a necessary concur- 
rent effect the disqualification of that erring public 
officer from positions of trust or responsibility. It may 
be true that it is a sword in the scabbard but the sword 
in the scabbard can rust unless it is drawn. 

MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair 
would like to understand the present parliamentary 
situation. Is Commissioner Aquino proposing a specific 
amendment? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). On what 
section and what is the nature of the amendment? 

MS. AQUINO. It will overhaul massively Section 3 in 
the sense that I am contemplating the possibility of 
amending Section 3 to vest in the judicial courts the 
power of impeachment trials after the impeachment 
articles have been formulated and initiated by the joint 
action of the legislative chambers. But the Committee 
has expressed reluctance to this position. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Precisely, 
the Chair would like to know the reaction of the Com- 
mittee on the proposed amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
explained its position that we believe the present pro- 
vision serves a very useful purpose, and we want to see it 
retained. Furthermore, if I get the drift of the argu- 
ments of Commissioner Aquino, the overhaul would 
involve the introduction of the judicial branch of the 
government into the process in the case of the President. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


355 


Our position is that the President has been directly 
elected by the people. Since this is a political act, the 
more appropriate judge of the President in this matter 
should probably be the direct representatives of the 
people as well, which are the Senate and the House. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am presently 
inclined to respect the position of the Committee. How- 
ever, without foreclosing the possibility of introducing 
pertinent amendments on the basis of their position, 
may I make two inquiries? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Com- 
missioner may proceed. 

MS. AQUINO. Am I in agreement with the Commit- 
tee that impeachment proceedings are essentially 
judicial in nature? 

MR. ROMULO. No, we believe that they are political. 
Judicial aspects may come in the procedures such as the 
forming of the articles, the actual trial being presided 
over by the Chief Justice, and so on. But we still believe 
that they are essentially a political act rather than a 
judicial act. 

MS. AQUINO. Precisely, -I was very careful on my 
formulation of terms when I said impeachment proceed- 
ings, not impeachment power. So, we are agreed on the 
premise that impeachment proceedings are essentially 
judicial in nature. Does it follow, therefore, that when 
the legislative chamber sits to undertake impeachment 
proceedings, it sits not as a legislative body but as a 
judicial body; rather, it sits as a court of justice? 

MR. ROMULO. In a way, they probably sit more like 
jurists, as finders of fact and the law, I suppose. They 
combine those functions. We could say that there is an 
exercise of judicial power involved. 

MS. AQUINO. On the basis of these shared premises, 
would the legislature then, sitting to undertake im- 
peachment proceedings, still be bound by the rules of 
legislative sessions? Specifically, if the legislature 
adjourns, are the Members duty-bound to terminate or 
preterminate — as the case may be — the impeachment 
proceedings if the supervening circumstance of adjourn- 
ment of the sessions come in? 


Assuming that the session is adjourned, impeachment 
proceedings should not, in any way, be affected by the 
adjournment of the session. 

MR. ROMULO. That is not precluded from our 
proposal. If the Commissioner wants to make it explicit 
and to suggest amendments to that effect, I suppose we 
would not object. Our thinking is that if the Commis- 
sioner’s premise is that it is like a court of justice, 
maybe an adjournment of the hearing will certainly not 
preclude it from continuing the proceedings on some 
other day. In other words, it could not lose jurisdiction 
just because of adjournment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair, 
therefore, understands from Commissioner Aquino that 
her proposed massive amendment is considered with- 
drawn. 

MS. AQUINO. Not yet, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Com- 
missioner may proceed. 

MS. AQUINO. On another point, if an impeachment 
proceeding has been filed against the President, for 
example, and the President resigns before judgment of 
conviction has been rendered by the impeachment court 
or by the body, how does it affect the impeachment 
proceeding? Will it be necessarily dropped? 

MR. ROMULO. If we decide the purpose of impeach- 
ment to remove one from office, then his resignation 
would render the case moot and academic. However, 
as the provision says, the criminal and civil aspects of it 
may continue in the ordinary courts. 

MS. AQUINO. I am not so much concerned about the 
civil and criminal aspects as I am concerned with the 
necessary effect of a judgment of conviction in an 
impeachment proceeding. A judgment of conviction also 
means disqualification from office; it does not only 
mean removal from office. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I see that point. It is my per- 
sonal opinion that if he resigns, that in itself would end 
the impeachment proceeding. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. ROMULO. I think that would depend on the 
rules they would adopt. Certainly, the Constitution 
does not settle that. 

MS. AQUINO. Because I would proceed from settled 
jurisprudence that impeachment proceedings are essen- 
tially judicial in nature, such that it follows that when 
the legislative chamber undertakes these proceedings, it 
sits as a court of justice and, therefore, it is not bound 
by the rules of legislative sessions. It cannot adjourn. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER 
recognizes the Floor Leader. 


(Mr. Trenas). The Chair 


MR. RAMA. There are several other Commissioners 
who would like to amend the Article. May I ask that 
Commissioner Regalado be recognized? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Just a 
minute. May we consider Commissioner Aquino s 
proposed amendment withdrawn? 


356 


MONDAY, ) ULY 28, 1986 


MS. AQUINO. No, Mr. Presiding Officer. I have to 
consult Commissioner Guingona about it. 


MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Regalado 
be recognized? 


MR. GUINGONA. Precisely, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
I was going to ask Commissioner Aquino a couple of 
questions, if I may, in connection with her proposal. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Guingona is recognized. 


MR. GUINGONA. Is the Commissioner’s perception 
of an impeachment proceeding an exclusively political 
device or proceeding or an essentially political pro- 
ceeding? If it is an essentially political proceeding, then 
there would be no objection to exceptions where courts 
may be allowed to be given the power to adjudicate on 
this particular proceeding. On the other hand, if it is 
exclusive because the President is elected by the people, 
the judgment about the President’s tenure or term of 
office should be judged by the representatives of the 
people, if the courts are not empowered to decide cases 
or questions relating to elections, and terms and qualifi- 
cations of the President. 


MS AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I briefly 

lepy. t is my humble submission that an impeach 

ment proceeding and an impeachment power are essen 

ia y po itical acts. But because of the nature of the 

ju e ment of conviction in an impeachment proceeding 

it requires the process of adjudication. If we divorce 

ourselves from the conceptual definition of impeach 

™ * nd f ° c u us 0,1 the practicality of impeachmem 

the nro^H 5 ’ hei i U becomes necessary for us to reassess 

concentuaf UrC } ^ n0t S ° mUCh concern cd in the 

in it be?na P / ° f u ,m P eacllment as I am conccrncc 

exercise of nmt fe f aSlble r and viablc alternative in the 
exercise ot protection of the State. 

cer MR ' GUING0NA - Last question. Mr. Presiding Offi- 

proceeding we^rTadoDt^ ab ° Ut the im P eachme nt 
United States Is the E § , being COpied from the 
that in other countries ^1°™? 6 Com missioner aware 
to initiate and th' co urK ' 8 ‘ Sla,urc * 8™, the powe, 
adjudicate an impeachment nm”*!? Y h llle P ower tc 
cite, among others, the foil' Ceedin S ? 1 would like tc 
Arab Republic, Zambia the R° W "u?- countries: United 
di, Cameroon, the Repubh^ °J France - Burun 

Cabon, Somalia, Iran, Iraq, Law, and' o“erT' CyPnlS 

MS. AQUINO. I am not aware of that iu 

Officer, But I am thankful for that Station h ' S ‘ 
reinforces my position. on because 1 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 

Leader is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Still on 
the same proposed amendment? 

MR. RAMA. On impeachment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). We have 
to dispose of the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Aquino which was not accepted by the Committee. 

Does Commissioner Aquino insist on a vote if she will 
not withdraw it? 

MR. RAMA. There was no amendment, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MS. AQUINO. There are no specific amendments yet 
and on the prompting of the kibitzers around me I have 
been pressured not to withdraw it. A possibility is that 
wc can intermarry this proposal with the procedural 
amendments ol Commissioner Davide and Commis- 
sioner Maambong. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair 
recognizes the Floor Leader. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Regalado be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Before we leave that matter of Section 3 on impeach- 
ment, I suppose Commissioner Aquino could submit her 
proposed amendment which, together with my amend- 
ment and that of Commissioners Maambong and Davide, 
had been deferred for consideration. 

My proposed amendments would, therefore, leave 
only Sections 2, 9 and 12. Without prejudice to my talk- 
ing, let us go to the consideration of the amendment on 
Section 3. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is given five minutes. 

MR. REGALADO. I propose to add in Section 2 as a 
last sentence thereof as already amended the following: 
ALL OTHER PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
MAY BE REMOVED FROM OFFICE AS PROVIDED 
BY LAW BUT NOT BY IMPEACHMENT. The reason 
for the amendment is this: While Section 2 enumerates 
the impeachable officers, there is nothing that will 
prevent the legislature as it stands now from providing 
also that other officers not enumerated therein shall also 
be removable only by impeachment, and that has 
already happened. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


357 


Under Section 1 of P.D. No. 1606, the Sandiganbayan 
Decree, justices of the Sandiganbayan may be removed 
only by impeachment, unlike their counterparts in the 
then Court of Appeals. They are, therefore, a privileged 
class on the level of the Supreme Court. In the Commit- 
tee on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies, there 
are many commissions which are sought to be constitu- 
tionalized — if I may use the phrase — and the end result 
would be that if they are constitutional commissions, 
the commissioners there could also be removed only by 
impeachment. What is there to prevent the Congress 
later — because of the lack of this sentence that I am 
seeking to add — from providing that officials of certain 
offices, although nonconstitutional, cannot also be 
removed except by impeachment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say on the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Regalado? 

MR. MONSOD. May we ask Commissioner Regalado 
a few questions? 

Does this mean that with this provision, the other 
officers in the case of the Sandiganbayan would not be 
removable by impeachment? 

MR. REGALADO. For the present and during the 
interim and until the new Congress amends P.D. 
No. 1606, that provision still stands. But the proposed 
amendment will not prevent the legislature from subse- 
quently repealing or amending that portion of the law. 
Also, it will prevent the legislature from providing for 
favored public officials as not removable except by 
impeachment. 

That is the purpose of this proposal. 


MR. REGALADO. On Section 9, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, regarding the Ombudsman and his deputies 
serving for a term of seven years without reappoint- 
ment. I propose to add a sentence to read as follows: 
THEY SHALL NOT BE QUALIFIED TO RUN FOR 
ANY OFFICE IN THE ELECTION IMMEDIATELY 
SUCCEEDING THE END OF THEIR TERM OR 
RESIGNATION FROM OFFICE. 

May I explain the reason. Mr. Presiding Officer? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. REGALADO. The reason is that the Ombudsman 
as now visualized by us will be a person who will have 
some powers, although as they say he is “toothless.” 
Nevertheless, he is publicly visible and highly capable of 
projecting himself into the public limelight; whether he 
likes it or not, he will have to do so. We would like to 
avoid the possibility that an Ombudsman may use his 
position as a springboard for the coming elections. Or 
if he is caught in midstream in his term and the elections 
are coming up, he may resign and having already the 
aura of public acceptance, he may immediately go into 
politics. In other words, he should not use his position 
as a springboard for political purposes but we are not 
going to deprive the electorate completely of such a 
man if he is really capable and competent. All I am 
trying to introduce here is that there be an interval 
before he can run in the next election. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
is willing to accept the amendment of Commissioner 
Regalado. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Regalado has been 
accepted by the Committee. 

MR. REGALADO. After the last sentence in Section 
2 the amendment will read: ALL OTHER PUBLIC OF- 
FICERS AND EMPLOYEES MAY BE REMOVED 
FROM OFFICE AS PROVIDED BY LAW BUT NOT 

by impeachment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Precisely, 
that has been accepted by the Committee. 

MR. REGALADO. They wanted me to read before 
we vote. 


MR. DAVIDE. Will the proponent accept some 
amendments? 

MR. REGALADO. May I hear the proposed amend- 
ment? 

MR. DAVIDE. The amendment would be on the 
election immediately following their cessation from of- 
“ n,ay . M by removal; it may be by a declaration of 

read^THEIR 

a menrlmpn ^ A L A D O . Under that concept, the proposed 
amendment to my amendment is willingly accepted. 

™ E wqf AIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). For clarifi- 
cation will Commissioner Regalado read his proposed 
amendment, taking into account the amendment sug- 
gested by Commissioner Davide? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). All right. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 


MR. REGALADO. The amendment, as amended, will 
"°^, read: “THEY SHALL NOT BE QUALIFIED TO 
RUN FOR ANY OFFICE IN THE ELECTION IMME- 


358 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


DIATELY SUCCEEDING THEIR CESSATION FROM 
OFFICE.” In other words, the amendment makes the 
provision all-embracing. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. Just one clarificatory question. Does 
the Gentleman realize that if that is three years, that 
was the consensus of this Assembly, of this Commis- 
sion? 

MR. REGALADO. Three years. 

MR. MONSOD. With that clarification, the Commit- 
tee is willing to accept the proposed amendment. 

MR. REGALADO. As amended further by Commis- 
sioner Davide. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Foz is recognized. 


In order to preclude a politicking Ombudsman, we 
should so provide that aside from prohibiting him from 
resigning his office and then running for public office 
within the term for which he was appointed and for the 
succeeding election, we should lengthen the period 
during which he should be prohibited from running for 
public office precisely to dissuade him from harboring 
political ambitions during the time he will be discharg- 
ing the functions of his office. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, we regret we 
cannot accept the amendment. The reasons given by 
Commissioner Foz were the same reasons given by 
Commissioner Regalado. 

It we extend it to two elections, the prohibition 
could reach nine years. We feel that probably that is not 
really the intention of the original proponent. We just 
want to deter politicking; on the other hand, nine years 
may be a little too long for a really good man who 
might be able to serve the people. 


MR. FOZ. May I amend the amendment? Will the 
proponent accept an amendment to his amendment? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
Lommissioner Regalado say? 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee has already 
^ccep e t re amendment. Is the Committee willing to 
e er acceptance in the meantime to give Commissioner 
oz an opportunity to introduce a proposed amend- 
ment to the amendment, as amended? 

MONSOD. May we hear the proposed amend- 
ment to the amendment? 


instead of^ Th ® amendm ent is to the effect tl 
succeeding ^ the 

THE NEXT TWO SUCC^^IN^E^ECTTON^AFTI 
THE EXPIRATION OF HIS TERM m ? ^ 

amendment, if the Chair will plmit mS ^ ' 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr Trenas) 1 
Gentleman may proceed. irenasj. i 

vtafoffte rr«l4 fi ?hetX? D UdSman Y " 

of the Ombudsman make it a natural subject oft lot 
publicity. As a matter of fact, one of its functions is 
publicize, when circumstances so warrant matt 
covered by its investigation. We expect therefore 
very active Ombudsman who will most probably be 
the glare of publicity almost everyday. If he does his 
well, he will be popular. In other words, lie may use 
office as a launching pad for his political ambitions 


MR. FOZ. May we respond to the statement? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Foz has two minutes. 

MR. FOZ. Under the provisions we have approved 
regarding the term of office of Members of the Congress, 
we have provided for a term of office of only three 
years for Members of the Lower House. So, we have 
provided that every three years there shall be an 
election. Therefore, after six years, it is possible for a 
former Ombudsman to run for public office. It is not 
really nine years straight. 

MR. MONSOD. No, Mr. Presiding Officer, if the 
Ombudsman ceases from office shortly after one elec- 
tion, then he has to wait almost nine years before he can 
run. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will Com- 
missioner Foz insist on a vote? 

MR. REGALADO. My position, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
is that providing for the next succeeding election is a 
happy compromise because the country may also need 
the services of such an Ombudsman who has proved true 
to his worth. If we provide for two successive elections 
— in the case of animals, they hibernate; in the case of 
fish, they estivate — the Ombudsman might politi- 
cally vegetate. That is why if the prohibition is only for 
the immediately succeeding election, this offers a happy 
compromise. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
matter has been sufficiently discussed. 

Will Commissioner Foz insist on a vote? 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


359 


MR. FOZ. I withdraw my amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Foz has been 
withdrawn. 

MR. REGALADO. Having been accepted by the 
Committee, was the amendment submitted to a vote 
or was there an objection? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will 
Commissioner Regalado restate his proposed amend- 
ment? 

MR. REGALADO. The additional sentence on 
Section 9 will be: THEY SHALL NOT BE QUALIFIED 
TO RUN FOR ANY OFFICE IN THE ELECTION 
IMMEDIATELY SUCCEEDING THEIR CESSATION 
FROM OFFICE. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. REGALADO. One more proposed amendment, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Section 12 (1) on page 5, lines 1 to 3, reads: “any 
act or duty required of him by law, or to stop, prevent, 
and correct any abuse or impropriety in the per- 
formance of duties.” I propose to add a comma (,) and 
the phrase ESPECIALLY ANY VIOLATION OF 
CIVIL, POLITICAL, NATURAL OR HUMAN RIGHTS. 
May I explain, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. REGALADO. In the subcommittee on additional 
Constitutional Commissions and Agencies, there is a 
pending resolution to create a Constitutional Commis- 
sion on Human Rights. We do not know what will be 
the fate of that resolution but we are nevertheless con- 
cerned about human rights. Therefore, this addition I 
am proposing would be a sort of a backup measure in 
the event that that proposed Constitutional Commis- 
sion on Human Rights is not approved. At least there is 
an expression of concern for the protection of civil, 
political, natural or human rights this time through the 
graces of the Ombudsman. That is the only purpose for 
the amendment. 

** 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I interpose my objection to 
the proposed amendment? If we expand the powers of 
the Ombudsman, then we will be giving the body too 
much powers. We will be expanding it and making it a 


superbody. I think the Commission on Human Rights 
should be the appropriate body to conduct investiga- 
tions on human rights violations. These are serious 
matters, matters like salvaging, tortures, hamletting. 
This cannot be the duty of the Ombudsman considering 
its multifarious duties. I think we should limit the 
Ombudsman to investigation of cases involving graft and 
corruption, how to make the government efficient, to 
avoid waste, graft and corruption, and mismanagement. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a point of 
information on the matter. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is the 
Gentleman’s question addressed to Commissioner 
Regalado? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, and to the body. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will Com- 
missioner Regalado answer the point of clarification? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. FOZ. Actually, we would like to inform the 
body that in the Committee on Constitutional Commis- 
sions and Agencies, there is a consensus on the establish- 
ment of a Commission on Human Rights which would 
have jurisdiction over the matters which are now being 
proposed by the proponent of the amendment regarding 
the function of the Ombudsman. So, I think we should 
not include such a function under the office of the 
Ombudsman because that is precisely the main function 
of the proposed Commission on Human Rights, which 
the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies is about to take up in a meeting. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I 
respond to that? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
Gentleman is given two minutes. 

M . R - REGAL ADO. I specifically prefaced my state- 
ment by saying that this proposed additional phrase is 
° n y a ac U P measu re in the event that the proposed 
Constitutional Commission on Human Rights is not 
approved. Commissioner Foz says there is a consensus. 
1 am not aware how many voted for or against the same. 
Secondly , I said that I do not know what would be the 
tate of that proposed Constitutional Commission on 
Human Rights. 1 think there are only a few members 
in the Committee that we cannot even reach a unani- 
mous decision. If Commissioner Foz can assure me will) 
certainty that that proposed Constitutional Commission 
on Human Rights will be approved by the entire mem 


360 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


bership of the plenum, I will withdraw my amendment. rights or civil rights. That is also a catch-all phrase for 
Can he assure me now that that is assured of approval? the natural rights of a person. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will 
Commissioner Foz respond? 

MR. FOZ. First of all, I would like to report that 7 
out of 1 3 members have voted to establish such a com- 
mission, of course, with a lot of reservations as to func- 
tions and powers. With that as basis, I think we can 
more or less be assured of the possibility of having the 
same body be reported out in a committee report, 
unless the members change their minds, particularly 
those who voted for its establishment. 

If we can be assured that the approval of such an 
amendment now being proposed by Commissioner 
Regalado will not be a stumbling block to the Commit- 
tee acting and reporting out in a committee report a 
proposal to establish a Commission on Human Rights, 
then we will have no objection to such a proposal. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair 
believes the matter has been sufficiently discussed. What 
is the reaction of the Committee to the proposed 
amendment? 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
has accepted the proposal. May we respond to the pro- 
posed modification of Commissioner Davide? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. We would like to reconsider with 
respect to that point. We agree that the word “NATU- 
RAL” should be removed. 

MR. REGALADO. If it is understood and there is 
such an assurance that all the rights considered under 
the jus naturale are covered by statutory provisions on 
civil or political rights or the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, I will agree. 

MR. MONSOD. We will accept that interpretation. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved, subject to the reservation. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, we believe that 
e intent of the proponent in making the amendment is 
very clear. He would like to insert this phrase so that if, 
or any reason, a Commission on Human Rights is not 
approved, then there is a corresponding phrase here that 
me Ombudsman can act on. However, if the proponent 
is wi mg, we are prepared to accept the proposed 
amendment with the understanding that should the 
Commission on Human Rights be established under this 

removed tl0n ’ ^ PhfaSe that WOUld be redundant be 

udoiT * s wholeheartedly agreed 

tiallv berai y ^ eason hteral redundancy but substan- 
tially because it would be academic. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER r M r t ~ t ^ 
sioner Davide is recognized ^ * Trenas - ) - Comrnis - 

MR. DAVIDE. I would litre +■ 
ments. b * e to Propose some amend- 

Instead of “ESPECIALLY ” 

INCLUDING and we should 'deMe Z 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Foz be recog- 
nized to present an amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, this is a very simple 
amendment and this has been cleared with the Commit- 
tee last week. 

On page 6, line 2, the amendment is to substitute the 
word CONTROLLING for “substantial.” Last week, we 
asked the Committee for the meaning of the word 
substantial and Commissioner Nolledo answered that 
under the National Internal Revenue Code, “substantial 
interest means at least 20 percent. So, I took up with 
him the matter of having this amended or changed to 
the word CONTROLLING. As a matter of fact, it was 
he who suggested the word CONTROLLING. 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee has already accepted 
that amendment and we are reiterating it. 


THE PRESIDING officer (Mr. Trenas). What doe- 

Commissioner Regalado say? 

MR. REGALADO. I have no objection to the use oi 
the word “INCLUDING” but the jus natural? has no! 
always been translated into statutory rights or political 


MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


361 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I have some proposed amendments on Section 3 (5). 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. This is without prejudice to whatever 
amendments may be accepted by the Committee when 
the Aquino amendments shall be taken up. It would 
consist in adding a new sentence on line 20. Before the 
phrase “No person shall be convicted,” insert the fol- 
lowing: IN ALL OTHER CASES. THE PRESIDENT 
OF THE SENATE SHALL PRESIDE. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). What 
does the Committee say? 


MR. DAVIDE. On line 1, page 4. after “not,” insert 
the following: HOLD ANY OTHER OFFICE OR EM- 
PLOYMENT, OR. On line 2, after “profession,” add the 
following: OR IN THE MANAGEMENT OF ANY 
BUSINESS WHICH IN ANY WAY MAY BE AF- 
FECTED BY THE FUNCTIONS OF THEIR OFFICE, 
OR BE FINANCIALLY INTERESTED, DIRECTLY 
OR INDIRECTLY, IN ANY CONTRACT WITH, OR 
IN ANY FRANCHISE OR PRIVILEGE GRANTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT, OR ANY OF ITS SUB- 
DIVISIONS, AGENCIES OR INSTRUMENTALITIES, 
INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CON- 
TROLLED CORPORATIONS OR THEIR SUBSIDIA- 
RIES. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will Commissioner Davide 
accept an amendment to his amendment which will 
embody the same concept? 

MR. DAVIDE. May we hear the proposed amend- 
ment? 


MR. MONSOD. Is it not understood that when the 
President of the Philippines is on trial, it is the only 
time when the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
will preside? Is it necessary to say that the Senate 
President shall preside during all other times? 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I precisely 
presented that because we had a distinction when it 
comes to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. But 
with that clarification, that in all other cases it would 
be the President of the Senate who will preside, I 
withdraw the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The 
amendment has been withdrawn. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I propose another amendment. 
On page 3, line 21, after “thereafter,” delete “without 
any confirmation” and insert a period (.) then add a 
new sentence to read: SUCH APPOINTMENTS SHALL 
REQUIRE NO CONFIRMATION. 

This is just to have a symmetry with the same provi- 
sion in the Article on the Judiciary. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendment, Mr. Pres- 
iding Officer. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. It is obvious that Commis- 
sioner Davide restated the disabilities against members 
of a constitutional commission as provided for in Article 
XII, Section 3 of the Constitution. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
because we have raised the position of the Ombudsman 
to that of a member of a constitutional commission. 
Therefore, all the disqualifications and prohibitions 
attaching to a member of the commission must also 
similarly attach to the Ombudsman. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is why to make the 
sentence shorter, my proposed amendment would be to 
simply state that they shall be subject to the same dis- 
abilities as provided for in Article XII, Section 3 of this 

Constitution. Then delete the words on lines 1 and 2, 
page 4. 


MR. DAVIDE. I would have no objection to that; it 

wcuM embody he full Idea. But 1 wonder if we must 
use disabilities. 


we used. 


MR DAVIDE. “Disqualifications,” I guess, would be 
\ T b T Uer Word - “ BE SUBJECT TO THE SAME 
DISQUALIFICATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.” 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Is there MR. DE LOS REYES “They shall BE SUBJECT TO 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the THE SAME DISQUALIFICATIONS AND PROHIBI- 
proposed amendment is approved. TIONS AS PROVIDED FOR IN ARTICLE XII. SEC- 


362 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


TION 3 OF THIS CONSTITUTION.” Then delete lines 
1 and 2 of page 4. Is that all right with the Commis- 
sioner? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the pro- 
posed amendments are approved. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept the proposed amendment, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. I have a proposal on Section 9 but I 
would like to get first the position of the Committee. 
Does not the Committee also contemplate a staggered 
term for those first appointed? 

MR. MONSOD. We did not contemplate that because 
unlike in the other constitutional commissions, the 

°™ budsman * s Bie on ly °ne who is a constitutional 
officer; the others are not. 


R. DAVIDE. In that particular case then, I will not 
insist on an amendment to Section 9. But on Section 
> page 4, line 15, I would like to propose an amend- 
ment It is just an insertion between the words “shall” 

Arr'Droi^r,^® followin g : AT NO EXPENSE TO AN 
AGGRIEVED PARTY. Then add a comma (,). 


the T Sf,e'“™ G ° FF,CER <Mr ' Tre " aS) Wha * 


accent thl° NS °?' We regret that we prefer not X 
properlv witlv ^ because we believe that those ai 

leave, ha, PerhaPS " “ 

amafdm^nt VIDE ' W ‘ th that assurance ’ I withdraw m 
On lines 17 to 19 t u 

ing amendments at the «,! ■ lke }° P ro P° se the follow 
linked with one a„„,t r a S: lme , because ,hey are inte, 
following “government ” ^ ' a ^ ter the comma (. 

AGENCY OR ^TRUMP^f ANY SUBDIVISION 
line 18, before CpSl ? Y THEREOF - O 
TROLLED, and then delete he 5 ' ° R COb 

end. On line 1 9, delete the wo l ‘° agencies ” at th 

c , w °rds or instrumentalities. 

So, the entire three lines win 
“public officials or employees of the ^ 3S follows 
ANY SUBDIVISION, AGENCY O R n\t Inn? ! niTi? \ i‘ ’ 01 
ITY THEREOF, including 

TROLLED corporations, and shall notify ” R C ° N 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, we accept the 
amendments. This is merely a realignment with other 
provisions in the other articles. 


MR. DAVIDE. On Section 12, line 27, after the 
comma (,) following “government,” insert the follow- 
ing: OR ANY SUBDIVISION, AGENCY, OR INSTRU- 
MENTALITY THEREOF. On line 28, insert the words 
OR CONTROLLED before “corporation,” then delete 
“institution” and substitute it with THEIR SUBSIDIA- 
RIES. So, lines 27 and 28 will read: “government OR 
ANY SUBDIVISION, AGENCY, OR INSTRUMENTA- 
LITY THEREOF as well as of government-owned OR 
CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS AND THEIR SUB- 
SIDIARIES, . . .” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Per the reservation we made before, 
subsidiaries of government corporations with original 
charters are not covered. 


MR. DAVIDE. So, it should be “government-owned 
OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS WITH ORIGI- 
NAL CHARTERS AND THEIR SUBSIDIARIES.” 


MR. ROMULO. We had agreed before that subsi- 
diaries will not be covered. 


MR. DAVIDE. So I 
THEIR SUBSIDIARIES. 


am willing to strike out “AND 


MR. ROMULO. We accept the amendment, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 


MR.DAVIDE. On page 5, line 9, change the capital 
letter T of the word “To” to a small letter t. Be- 
fore the word “To,” insert the following: IN ANY AP- 
PROPRIATE CASE AND SUBJECT TO SUCH 
LIMITATIONS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. On 
line 12, between “disbursement” and “of,” insert OR 
USE; and after “funds,” add OR PROPERTIES. So, 
subparagraph (3) will now read as follows: “IN ANY 
APPROPRIATE CASE AND SUBJECT TO SUCH 
LIMITATIONS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW to 
iiect the officer concerned to furnish it with copies of 
c ocuments relating to contracts or transactions entered 
into by his office involving the disbursement OR USE of 
public funds OR PROPERTIES 


MR. MONSOD. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ments. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


363 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none: the 
proposed amendments are approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the same page, between lines 20 
and 21, I seek to insert two new phrases. The first 
is: TO PROMULGATE ITS RULES OF PROCEDURE. 
The second had already been adopted by a previous 
amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. Can it not be combined with Sub- 
section 6? 

MR. DAVIDE. I would have no objection to com- 
bining it with subparagraph (6) but I really want this 
particular power to be vested. So. it can be placed in 
subparagraph (6). But in subparagraph (6), I propose 
to insert OTHER between “such” and “powers” on 
line 2 1 . 

As recommended by the Committee, the proposed 
powers should be dovetailed with subparagraph (6) on 
line 21. So, subparagraph (6), as amended, will read as 
follows: “TO PROMULGATE ITS RULES OF PRO- 
CEDURE AND to exercise such OTHER powers or 
perform such functions or duties as may be provided 
by law.” 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Finally, on page 6 — this is the last — 
after the amendment of Commissioner Trenas yester- 
day, I would like to add a comma (,) after the word 
“Congress” that was adopted and the following phrase: 

any member of the constitutional COM- 
MISSIONS, THE JUDICIARY OR THE OMBUDSMAN. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). How shall 
the whole section read? 

MR. DAVIDE. The whole section, together with the 
Trenas and do Castro amendments, will now read as 
follows: “No loan, guaranty or other form of financial 
accommodation for any business purpose may be 
granted, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY by any govern- 
ment-owned or controlled bank or financial institution 
to THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT, MEMBER 
OF THE CABINET, MEMBER OF CONGRESS, ANY 
MEMBER OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMIS- 
SIONS, THE JUDICIARY OR THE OMBUDSMAN.” 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Foz is recognized. 


MR. FOZ. In connection with that proposed amend- 
ment which would include the members of the constitu- 
tional commissions, I think we should not place the 
members of the constitutional commissions — which 
include the Ombudsman or the Tanodbayan — on the 
same level as members of the Cabinet or Members of 
Congress. In the last two categories, we can safely say 
that they belong to political offices. 

In the case of members of constitutional commis- 
sions, precisely we have included provisions in the 
Article on the three commissions to make or transform 
them into independent nonpartisan, nonpolitical offi- 
cials. There is no reason, therefore, for lumping them 
together with the politicians on the same level as to 
extend a prohibition on the grant of loans from govern- 
ment financial institutions to members of constitutional 
commissions. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be 
allowed to react? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Precisely, we have to do this because 
we have enshrined the commissions as independent 
bodies, and the Ombudsman as another body similar in 
rank to the different constitutional commissions. The 
loans or accommodations or credits to be obtained here 
are for a business purpose. They can use their pressure 
because they are beyond politics. More pressure can 
even be exerted by them especially by the Ombudsman 
because the Ombudsman is the superbody. So, the 
danger of a political pressure is even worse because it is 
not just a political but a real clout of an enshrined 
superbody. Insofar as a politician is concerned, he 
would be concerned with the public because he is 
elected by the people. But members of the constitu- 
tional commissions and the Ombudsman are not elected 
by the people; they have no responsibility to the people 
in effect. There is more reason, therefore, that they be 
prevented to use undue influence in the matter of 
obtaining loans for business purposes. I hope Commis- 
sioner Foz would realize the significance of the dis- 
tinction because the distinction on the contrary would 
necessitate the imposition of the prohibition. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

I would oppose the inclusion of judicial officials 
unless we categorize them into those of the Supreme 
Court, intermediate appellate courts, et cetera. The pool 
municipal tiial court judge receives a very low salary and 
he, in tact, borrows money from banks in order to do 
some business, say, poultry, piggery or some other prey 


364 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


ects. If the whole judiciary is included in toto, we 
should consider the municipal trial court judge who 
received a very low salary. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are trying 
to prevent an evil. If a judge is allowed to borrow 
money for business purposes, and that particular bank 
or financial institution may have a case in his sala, 
therefore, his judgment in a given case will be affected. 
Besides, the members of the judiciary will be adequately 
compensated and this is related only to loans for 
business purposes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That will be quite remote in the 
case of a municipal trial judge because his jurisdiction 
is very limited. 


MR. DAVIDE. But the bank will be located in the 
municipality where he is sitting. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I have registered my objection, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

r ijr E Wh a R t ES ^ ING OFFICER Trenas). It is all 

trfn a 1S j be act,on °f the Committee with regard 
to the proposed amendment of Commissioner David!? 

° fficer - yes,erda y this 

r™i:^„rsU o cu^ c it e , d or ? xciuded from 

de los Reves anH • ussed * 1 belleve Commissioners 
and it seems to uc h ng ° part * c (P ate d in this discussion, 

day was to limit the ^ ° f the bod y Iast Sa ^ 
the amendments of r ® numeratl0n to those included in 
would like theref mmissl oners Trenas and Foz. We 
whether or not ^ the bod V to vote on 

constitutional comrafi^T ? h ?. U ! d 6Xtend to the 
budsman. ns ’ the judiciary, or the Om- 


Se IN re G adTis ,CER <Mr Wi " C °' 

we tan put these to a vote? Pr ° P ° Sed amendmenls so th 

MR. MONSOD Mr -j- ^ 

poueut wish break down 'the amendmentst*^ ,h ' 

MR.D A V,DE., TO u, dliketobreakthera 

First, members of the n~ .• 
as I said, would be in a bett nstltutlonal Commissior 
influence. er Position to exert undi 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER tiu 
proponent please read the ai * f ^ ref5as )- Wi| l the 

Members may not be able to follo^ mCnt because the 


MR. DAVIDE. I propose to add 
after the Trenas amendment on the 
missions: MEMBER OF THE 

COMMISSIONS. 


the following phrase 
constitutional com- 
CONSTITUTIONAL 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). As many 
as are in favor of the amendment, please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 17 votes in favor and 5 votes 
against; the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. The next would be the members of 
the judiciary. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a point of clari- 
fication. Is the Ombudsman covered by the phrase 
“MEMBER OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMIS- 
SIONS”? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, that would be the third matter to 
be voted upon. 

MR. MONSOD. That is right. We are taking this one 
at a time and the Ombudsman is last. We are talking 
about the judiciary which, I understand, would include 
all members down to the municipal trial court. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). We shall 
now vote on the second amendment of Commissioner 
Davide. 

As many as are in favor of including the judiciary in 
the proposed amendment, please raise their hand. 

( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. ( Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 18 votes in favor and 16 votes 
against; the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. And finally, I propose to add the 
phrase: “OR THE OMBUDSMAN.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). As many 
as are in favor of the proposed amendment, please raise 
their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 35 votes in favor and no vote 
against; the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. FOZ. Point of clarification. Does the prohibi- 
tion cover members of the family of those mentioned in 
the provision? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will the 
Committee please answer the inquiry? v 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


365 


MR. MONSOD. The immediate family would be 
included because of the words directly or indirectly, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. FOZ. What about relatives within the third 
degree of affinity or consanguinity? 

MR. MONSOD. No, Mr. Presiding Officer, they are 
not included. I think we are looking at beneficial inte- 
rest given directly or indirectly. So they woul no e 
included, unless it can be proven that they are ummies. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer, just for 
clarification. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. When we voted with regard to the 
constitutional commissions, we, of course, re erre o 
the Chairman and the members. What about in the case 
of the Ombudsman, do we refer to the Ombudsman, o 
the Ombudsman and his deputy? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr.. Presiding Officer, we refer only 
to the Ombudsman because only he is a constitu iona 
officer, unlike in the case of the constitutional com- 
missions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Act- 
ing Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I request that Commissioner 
Sarmiento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, my first 
amendment is an amendment by addition. Alter ec ioi 
14 on page 6, I propose to add a new section tha 
give fiscal autonomy to the Ombudsman. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, we gave fiscal autonomy to the 
constitutional commissions and to the judiciary m 
order to give independence to these bodies and, second- 
ly, to free them from political pressures. I believe that 
the Ombudsman, being the champion and protector of 
the people’s cause, should also be given this fiscal 
autonomy. Therefore, this proposed section will read: 
THE TANODBAYAN OR THE OMBUDSMAN SHALL 
ENJOY FISCAL AUTONOMY. THE APPROVED AN- 
NUAL APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE OMBUDSMAN 
SHALL BE AUTOMATICALLY AND REGULARLY 
RELEASED. 


This proposal, Mr. Presiding Officer, has the fatherly 
support of Commissioner Nolledo. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The new 
section would therefore be Section 15? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept it, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
but can we align it with the similar provision on the 
constitutional commissions? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, I copied verbatim the 
provisions on the constitutional commissions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the pro- 
posed amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I 
proceed with my next amendment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Please 
proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. My amendment is with respect to 
Section 1 0, lines 9 to 1 1 which reads: “A Deputy of the 
Ombudsman shall have the rank of a Commissioner of a 
Constitutional Commission.” The term “Constitutional 
Commission” is quite vague as it may refer to the 
Constitutional Commission of 1986, this Constitutional 
Commission. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, instead of capitalizing the 
letters “C” and “C” in the words Constitutional Com- 
mission, I propose to change the capital “C” to a small 
c so that the amended phrase will read: “Commissioner 
of a constitutional commission.” 

Will the Committee, with its fatherly support, accom- 
modate my amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I believe this 
provision was amended yesterday by Commissioner 
de los Reyes but the intent of the proponent now is 
to clarify. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Just to clarify. 

MR. MONSOD. We accept it, Mr. Presiding Officer, if 
that is the purpose. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
pioposed amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. My third amendment is with 
respect to Section 12 (5) which reads: “To publicize. 


/ 


366 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


when circumstances so warrant . . To me, the word 
“circumstances” is vague so may I suggest that instead 
of “circumstances,” we say “when PUBLIC INTEREST 
so warrant.” 

Will the Committee accommodate my proposed 
amendment? 


MR. MONSOD. Would the provision apply only to 
elective officials other than those? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. Excluding Congressmen? 


MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, we used “when 
circumstances so warrant” rather than “PUBLIC IN- 
TEREST” because we did not want to find the Ombuds- 
man too strict, thus opening up the possibility of libel. 
Commissioner Ople also has, I believe, a suggested 
amendment for this section. 


MR. SARMIENTO. So with that explanation, I with- 
draw my amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The pro- 
posed amendment is considered withdrawn. 

mem R W S e A hfve ENT °- ^ * my laSt prop °- d ^end- 
referendum as approved th e system of initiative and 

peS Sre is stm reSerVe P ° WerS of the sovereign 
not approved I I °Y reSerVe power which we have 
These fhree systems the System of "call, 

people’s power I hi 8 ki la ° d 10 kand as a tribute to 

recall makes our public Yffic'T ^ the SyStem ° f 
people. It is a mnriA r fficials accountable to the 

elective officials in ° , erminat i n 8 the positions of our 
officials. ° er coun tries, even appointive 

a provision that would 56 t0 J n tu* 6 * n this same section 
VIDE FOR a SYSTFM a ^ THE LAW SHALL PRO- 
OFFICERS. I unde Jtaii n F t RECALL 0F PUBLIC 
vision appearing i n the a Y there IS a sirnilar pro- 
But I humbly submit thY C f ? n Foca l Governments, 
should be transferred to th' ‘ * should have a place; it 
of Public Officers, not Jnf ° n Accoun tability 

ments because recall ie e on Local Govern- 

officers accountable to the ^p™ ° f making our publk 

MR. MONSOD Is ; t th . 

to subject the constitutio^f?** 0 " ° f the Gentlema n 
section to recall? officers mentioned in this 


MR. SARMIENTO. Only tl 

ing tiie President, the Vice-P & pub h c officers, exclud- 
of the constitutional commissions ^ and t * 1C mernbers 


MR. SARMIENTO. Excluding Congressmen. 

MR. MONSOD. Then only the local government offi- 
cials are left, so perhaps, the appropriate place for that 
should really be the Article on Local Governments. 

MR. SARMIENTO. What if we include the Congress- 
men? 

MR. MONSOD. We believe that the elective officials— 
Congressmen and Senators — are really subject to 
accountability to the people. But if the Gentleman will 
recall, the Congressmen, for example, have only three- 
year terms, and they do not hold executive positions, 
unlike local government officials. They are legislators. 
When the Committee met on this, we thought that 
the Senators and the Congressmen should not really 
be subjected to recall. Since the other officers holding 
executive positions like the President are already 
subject to impeachment, then the Local Government 
Code or the Article on Local Governments should be 
the more appropriate place for a system of recall. 

We regret that we cannot accept the amendment, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I hear a brief explanation 
from the Chairman of the Committee on Local Govern- 
ments? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I can assure the Gentleman that I 
will accept any amendment to that effect when we 
report our provisions on local government later. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you for the explanation 
and assurance. 

Then I am withdrawing my amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The pro- 
posed amendment is considered withdrawn. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I request 
that Commissioner Rigos be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas) Commis- 
sioner Rigos is recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. Would be excluded 9 

MR. SARMIENTO. They woulrl f 
only the public officials, the local officiate I?’ 
covered by this system of recall. e tne 


REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer, my proposed 
amendments have already been presented by the 
previous speakers; so, I will just proceed with two very 
minor suggestions. 

On page 2. Section 3 (5), line 16, I propose to insert 
the words CASES OF between the words “try all” and 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


367 


“impeachment,” so that the sentence will read: “The 
Senate shall have the sole power to try all CASES OF 
impeachment.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none: the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

REV. RIGOS. On page 4. line 2 of Section 8, 1 
propose to insert the word OTHER between “any” 
and “profession.” 

Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. The amendment is accepted, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I request 
Commissioner Guingona to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

At the outset, may I say that my proposed amend- 
ment would, in my opinion, have meaning only if two 
other proposed amendments could go with the same. 

My first proposed amendment is to delete the entire 
Section 5 on the office of the Special Prosecutor. T ie 
supplementary amendments I shall propose later won 
either be in this Article on Accountability ot Pu ic 
Officers or in the Article on. Transitory Provisions, 
provided that the incumbent Tanodbayan won 
serve as the Ombudsman or the Tanodbayan. 

And thirdly, I propose that as a last resort in extra 
ordinary cases, the Ombudsman be given prosecutory 
power. 

w ith respect to the first amendment. Mr. Presiding 
Officer, may I say that I question the need to provide 
tor an office of a Special Prosecutor under the Ottice 
of the President, but which could serve as a prosecutory 
ar m of other offices of the government when, in fact, 
3,1 °f the other prosecutors are supposed to be under 
the Ministry of Justice. This situation could bring abou 
either conflicts or duplication of work. 

I question the need of providing for a special pro- 
secutor whose functions and powers, as mentioned y 
Commissioner Rodrigo, have been emasculated to 
point of almost relative impotence. 


I question the allegation that there are many cases 
of graft and corruption, First, because this statement 
has been made as a general statement without any fact, 
without any statistics or figures. Granting arguendo that 
there are a lot of cases of graft and corruption, I respect- 
fully submit, Mr. Presiding Officer, that considering our 
administration now under President Aquino — the 
officials serving in this administration — and the provi- 
sions which have been carefully drafted by the Commit- 
tee on Accountability of Public Officers which are in- 
tended to make public officials serve the people with 
utmost responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efficiency 
and act with justice and lead modest lives, I predict that 
within a generation, the so-called many cases of graft 
and corruption would be considerably reduced. 

I do not see the point of putting in a constitution an 
office which, after a generation or after a century, 
would be a useless appendage. If we really have a lot of 
graft and corruption cases, and this is perceived by the 
people, I am sure that the legislature will provide for 
the necessary legislation to address this problem. But in 
justice to the present Tanodbayan, the Tanodbayan 
should not be deprived of an office, and should now 
therefore be considered as the Ombudsman. I see the 
point mentioned yesterday at the public hearing by the 
Honorable Colayco that the main function of the 
Ombudsman is public relations, matter of persuasion. I 
think that should still be his principal function. He 
should still try to persuade; he should still try to make 
the directions enumerated here. But there are cases 
when he will meet officials who will simply refuse to 
cooperate. In those very rare cases, I think he should be 
gi ven some powers, some prosecutory powers, some 
teeth, but teeth enough to be able to make his presence 
felt. I would suggest later on, Mr. Presiding Officer, that 
we add another function for the Ombudsman, that in 
case of failure of justice as defined by law, and as a last 
resort in extraordinary cases, the Ombudsman can file 
and prosecute the corresponding criminal, civil or 
administrative case before the proper court or body. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). May we 
take the proposed amendments of Commissioner 
Guingona one by one? 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I raise a 
parliamentary question? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Please 

proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. If we will take a look at the records 
since Saturday and today, we will note that the points 
raised by Commissioner Guingona have all been raised, 
voted on, and discussed. If his proposal now is a motion 
for reconsideration, then perhaps we should take that 
up first. 


368 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
Commissioner Guingona say? 

MR. GUINGONA. I am not aware that there was a 
motion acted upon to delete this particular section. But 
if there was and if I would be allowed, I would like to 
move for reconsideration, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, the first 
motion made last Saturday afternoon was precisely to 
delete the office of the Ombudsman because it did not 
have prosecutory functions, the same reasons now being 
used by Commissioner Guingona. Therefore, would the 
Commissioner like to move for reconsideration of all of 
these points that have been discussed several times and 
debated in this Commission? 

MR. GUINGONA. May I reply by saying, as I said at 
ie outset, that this particular proposal of mine is linked 
W1 a er P ro P° sa l s - And even if this proposal was 
made yesterday, I do not think that the same has been 
con si ere m the light of what I have said — that we 
th^T e ^ Vln ^ O m tmdsman prosecutory power and 

^ a ayan Woulc * now serve as the Ombudsman, 

as provided m this Constitution. 


MR. JAMIR. Mr. Presiding Officer, before we vote, 
there is a prejudicial question because it has not yet 
been shown that the Gentleman voted with the majority 
when we voted with respect to this particular provision. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair 
would like to inquire how Commissioner Guingona 
voted. 

MR. GUINGONA. There were so many votings held 
that I do not recall, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Floor 
Leader raises a point of order. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Yes, what 
is the point of order? 

MR. BENGZON. The point of order is that, as in- 
dicated by Commissioner Jamir, it has to be shown first 
that the proponent voted with the majority and since 
he could not indicate whether or not he voted with the 
majority, then I regret to say that he is out of order. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Since 
Commissioner Guingona cannot tell us definitely how 
he voted, much to the regret of the Chair, it must rule 
that Commissioner Guingona is out of order. 


MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Actin e E Flnn E T SID f NG 0FFICER (Mr. Trenas). T1 
Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

01 ^ sfn^?i Z ° N ' May We take U P the matter one l 
raised last W3S already a resolution of the poi 

and since the f deletion ofSection 
for the samp i desire of Commissioner Guingona 

cide is whether or eSS ^ thing that We should d 
reconsideration If ?? T j ha11 aII ° W this motion f 

motion for reconcH 15 b ° dy decides in favor of tl 
whether „,„„ tSect iff“". be «he^»e will voic < 

MR. GUINGONA Ypc i 

but may I add that I am ’ . a i5 ree ’ ^ r ' Presid ing Office 
intention of transferrin 1 . 1 | ' ak,ng tE is proposal with tl 
former Tanodbayan to th prosecut °ry power of tl 
matter which was not coik^? 0mbud sman. It is 
beration, if my memory sen^me right"* PrcVi0llS 

THE PRESIDING OFFICFR m ^ 
will make a ruling. Whatever is refias) ' The Ch ‘ 

present motion of the Gentleman par Kelta 
of a reconsideration. y es tlle natu 

The Chain therefore, asks the body to vote Is the 
any objection? 


MR. RODRIGO. Parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. I was the one who moved for the deletion of all 
the provisions creating the Ombudsman, from Section 
6 down. But the motion of Commissioner Guingona is 
not to delete Section 6 but to delete Section 5 — so, it is 
a different motion altogether. We have not yet voted 
on the issue whether to delete Section 5 or not; we 
voted on the deletion ofSection 6. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). May the 
Chair ask for enlightenment from the Committee. 

MR. ROMULO. Section 5 was amended several times 
by Commissioners Jamir, Trenas, Regalado and others. 
All those amendments were accepted and voted upon by 
the body. So, one would presume, therefore, that we 
have accepted and the Commission has decided that 
Section 5 should be retained; otherwise, why would we 
be voting on an amendment on Section 5 and accepting 


MR. GUINGONA. May I say, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
that we are following today a procedure whereby we do 
not consider anterior amendments and have to wait for 
our turn to be called. Although people might have voted 
in favor of an amendment, this does not mean that if a 
proposal to delete is presented they would not prefer 
the proposal to delete. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


369 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Nolledo is recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In connection with that statement. 
I think Commissioner Guingona should have raised a 
prejudicial question, or he should have filed a motion 
to delete first before allowing the others to amend 
the same provision several times. 

MR. GUINGONA. 1 could not. Mr. Presiding Officer. 
As a matter of fact, I approached the Floor Leader 
two times and he said: “You have to wait for your 
turn.” So. I obediently waited for my turn. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Maybe we should just give due course 
to the proposed amendment of Commissioner Guingona 
in order to resolve the issue. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair 
recalls its ruling insofar as the proposed motion of Com- 
missioner Guingona is concerned. 

We, therefore, ask for a vote. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I believe the 
vote is not for a reconsideration at this point because 
there has been no finding that this has been voted on, 
but on his proposal to delete Section 5. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair 
appreciates the correction. The body shall proceed to 
vote. 

All those in favor of the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Guingona to delete the whole of Section 
5, please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand.) 

All those against, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 7 votes in favor and 24 votes 
against; the proposed amendment is lost. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I request that Commissioner 
Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Villacorta is recognized. 


MR. VILLACORTA. I am sorry, I registered for 
another Committee. My name was not erased by Com- 
missioner Rama. I am sorry about that. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
apology is accepted. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I request 
that Commissioner Suarez be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

My amendments are rather simple. May I call the 
attention of the Committee members to Section 11, 
particularly line 16. There is mention here about 
complaints filed without the qualifying word “verified” 
and the phrase which reads “in any form or manner,” 
which is susceptible to various interpretations and could 
contemplate even the filing of a telephone complaint. 
We do not like to constitutionalize harassment under 
Section 11, but this could be used as a weapon of 
harassment by unscrupulous individuals against even 
honest public officials. So to avoid that possibility, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, may we suggest this amendment: 

On line 16, I propose to delete the word “the” and 
instead insert the word VERIFIED before “complaints,” 
and then after “filed” delete the comma (,) together 
with the phrase “in any form or manner.” Therefore, 
Section 11, as proposed to be amended, would read: 
“The Ombudsman and his Deputies, as protectors of the 
people, shall act promptly on VERIFIED complaints 
filed against public officials or employees of the govern- 
ment, including government-owned corporations, 
agencies or instrumentalities, and shall notify the 
complainants of the action taken and the results 
thereof.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. COLAYCO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I wonder if 
Commissioner Suarez was present during the discussion 
last Saturday when we explained the main thrust of 
Section 1 1 . One of the principal functions of the officer 
contemplated in this section is the capability to attend 
and act immediately on complaints not leading to pro- 
secution but to correction or implementation of the 
request, either phoned in, or simply made orally or even 
m writing. What we wish to cure is the despair of the 
common people with our government officials. We 
have entrenched the administration with public officials 
who are beyond the reach of common people. It is a 
very common and sad spectacle to see people going 
from one government office to another, trying to secure 
iediess for their common complaints of inaction, abuse, 
arbitrariness on the part of public officials. In other 
places like Nassau County, the United States, Singa- 


370 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


pore and Japan, people are free to call in, to use the 
telephone simply. For instance, when going to an office, 
they are made to return day after day, either because 
the official concerned did not come to work or simply 
they are told, “I am very busy. Will you please come 
back this afternoon? ” These are common complaints of 
our people. 


MR. NOLLEDO. In addition to that, most of the 
complainants are fishermen, peasants, the poor, and to 
require them to have verified complaints would be fool- 
hardy. They will have to go to a lawyer and perhaps, if 
they cannot afford one, shall decide not to complain 
anymore. Besides, Mr. Presiding Officer, the Ombuds- 
man is empowered to publicize and, therefore, will not 
readily publicize any complaint. He will take into 
account all the factors involved in connection with the 
complaint and so there will be no harassment. I think it 
is understood that the Ombudsman, in taking into 
account complaints filed with his office, should see to it 
that no undue harassment shall result. 

Thank you. 


. I thank the Gentleman for the 

tion n f tv ° * 16 no ^^ e sentiment behind the formula- 

and ?n , 1S P rovi si°n but it may not jibe with lines 19 

nvmniK . ^ ause 11 i s an anonymous call or an ano- 

his Demit" ‘° W d ° We expect Ombudsman or 

taken and 'tT ° I ) 0t ^ y tde complainants of the action 
taken and the results thereof’? 

that ^ ^ * s anon ymous, there is nothing 

that the Ombudsman can act upon. 

torv wnfrV^ifn' But the Cornniitt ee used the manda- 
tory words shall notify,” Mr. Presiding Officer. 

stances ^ at * s correct > under circum- 

make it possible. I suppose that is clear. 

MR. SUAREZ Thic 

expression ”i n anv fW " 0t harmon,ze with the 
be filed” y u or manner the complaint can 

GenUeman with explanation of the 

arguments,’ but let' usV° c . on ^ ede f,1e validity of the 
scription for this rem ,- t J y t0 formulat e another pre- 

That is my humble ^ iremen t regarding notification, 
my humble suggestion, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD Mr .• ^ 

Gentleman suggest that ,? ff,cer ' would the 

APPLICABLE, notify”? S3y and sha11 WHERE 

MR. SUAREZ. That is bettor i n 

Wlth that nronnsed a " Wl11 80 for that - So 
with that proposed amendment from the Committee I 

will not press my original amendment anymore 
Thank you. 


MR. COLAYCO. What would Commissioner Suarez 
suggest? 


MR. SUAREZ. I would suggest “and shall, WHEN- 
EVER APPLICABLE, notify the complainants of the 
action taken and the results thereof.” 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection to this proposed amendment? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the proposed amendment is 
approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, before we 
proceed further, I have been asked to announce that if 
possible the body should adjourn at about six-thirty 
because of Commissioner Calderon’s affair. 

May I request that Commissioner de los Reyes be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a point of 
inquiry. We have a substantial amendment on the pro- 
cedure for impeachment that needs to be considered by 
the body. This might be the appropriate time to take it 
up and with due indulgence of the others, if theirs are 
perfecting amendments and not substantial amend- 
ments, would it be possible to take up the procedure for 
impeachment as agreed upon by the three major pro- 
ponents of this Article? 

MR. BENGZON. With the permission of Commis- 
sioners de los Reyes and Ople — the last Commissioner 
actually to propose that amendment was Commissioner 
Aquino — I would like to request that Commissioner 
Aquino be called. 

MR. MONSOD. I believe that the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Ople is quite short. May we ask 
Commissioner de los Reyes? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It is also short. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On line 20 of page 2, after the 
phrase “preside but shall not vote” — because we 
amended that yesterday — I propose to add the fol- 
lowing sentence: IN CASE OF DEATH, DISABILITY, 
REMOVAL OR RESIGNATION OF THE CHIEF 
JUSTICE THE MOST SENIOR ASSOCIATE JUSTICE 
SHALL PRESIDE AND IF FOR THE SAME REASONS 
HE COULD NOT PRESIDE, THE NEXT SENIOR 
ASSOCIATE JUSTICE SHALL PRESIDE. THE SAME 
RULE SHALL APPLY IF THE NEXT SUCCEEDING 
SENIOR ASSOCIATE JUSTICE COULD NOT PRE- 
SIDE FOR THE SAME REASONS. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


371 


Mr. Presiding Officer, it is possible that during an 
impeachment process something happens to the Chief 
Justice in which case the President can frustrate his 
impeachment by not appointing a Chief Justice. That is 
the concept. 

MR. ROMULO. May we just suggest? Normally, if 
the Chief Justice cannot preside, an Acting Chief Justice 
is appointed. May we not refer to the Acting Chief 
Justice instead? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, but suppose the President 
does not appoint any Acting Chief Justice because he is 
the one under impeachment? So, we must make an 
automatic rule in the Constitution itself. 

MR. ROMULO. May we ask Commissioner Concep- 
cion if the appointment of an Acting Chief Justice is 
automatic or done by the President? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. There is no need under the law. 
Whenever the Chief Justice is absent or the position is 
vacant, the Senior Associate Justice will perform his 
duties. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I refer to Section 12 (5) on page 5. May I propose an 
amendment by transposition and the addition of just 
a phrase which will read as follows: TO PUBLICIZE 
MATTERS COVERED BY ITS INVESTIGATIONS 
WHEN CIRCUMSTANCES SO WARRANT AND WITH 
DUE PRUDENCE. The reason, Mr. Presiding Officer, is 
that publicity will be a major tool of the Sandigan- 
bayan in creating the moral pressures it will need in 
order to perform. At the same time, not all those who 
will file complaints are well-meaning persons and they 
can avail of the presence of the Sandiganbayan and its 
powers to give the color of privilege to complaints that 
may not be well-founded. Therefore, we simply urge the 
office of the Ombudsman to exercise due care and 
prudence in publicizing matters covered by its inves- 
tigations so that there is no undue injury to the reputa- 
tion of persons. I seek the Committee’s approval of this 
proposed amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
accepts the proposed amendment also; this has refer- 
ence to the earlier comments of Commissioners 
Sarmiento and Suarez. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. With the explanation of Com- 
missioner Concepcion, I withdraw my amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The pro- 
posed amendment is considered withdrawn. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On Section 4, page 3, I pro- 
pose to insert the words PRESENT ANTI-GRAFT 
COURT KNOWN AS THE between “The” and “Sandi- 
ganbayan,” and to delete “created” and the whole of 
lines 2 to 4 up to the word “it.” The whole amended 
sentence will therefore read as follows: “The PRESENT 
ANTI-GRAFT COURT KNOWN AS THE Sandigan- 
bayan shall continue to function and exercise its juris- 
diction as provided by law.” My point is that there are 
some who believe that the word “Sandiganbayan” 
should not be deleted from the Constitution. So, this is 
a compromise between those who want to call it an 
Anti-Graft Court and those who want to retain the 
name “Sandiganbayan.” 

MR. MONSOD. We will accept the amendment, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection to the proposed amendment? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the proposed amendment is ap- 
proved. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we 
request Commissioner Ople to be recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Act- 
ing Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask 
that Commissioner Aquino be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 


*"“• V o uumm S mincer, the proposet 
amendment on Section 3 (5) would seek to transfe 
the jurisdiction of the impeachment trial pertainin 
only to the President from the Senate to the Suprem 
Court, such that I would seek cosponsorship will 
Commissioner Guingona to propose an amendment b 
substi ution on Section 3 (5), page 2, beginning on lin 
15. The proposed amendment reads: “The Senate sha 
p S °th c° try im P eac hment CASES AF 

thp TI «st£ Xi CE ' PRESIDENT ’ MEMBERS Ol 
COURT AND MEMBERS OF TH1 
CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS When th 
is on trial, the Supreme Court shall BE CON 
VENED AS THE COURT OF IMPEACHMENT. Nc 
person shall be convicted without the concurrence o 
two-thiids of all the Members of the Senate IN THE 


372 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


CASE OF THE. VICE-PRESIDENT, MEMBERS OF 
THE SUPREME COURT AND MEMBERS OF THE 
CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS OR OF THE 
MEMBERS OF THE SUPREME COURT IN THE CASE 
OF THE PRESIDENT. 


the notation that it is a joint proposal of Commissioners 
Maambong, Davide and Regalado. And it is on Section 3. 

MR. REGALADO. I received it just now; I really have 
not had the time to scrutinize it carefully. 


MR. ROMULO. For reasons we have already ex- 
plained, the Committee regrets that we cannot accept 
that amendment principally because we believe this is a 
political act. The President’s peers who are equally 
elected are a better judge of the matter; finally, we 
feel it would politicize the Supreme Court. 

^ THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Does 
Commissioner Aquino ask for a vote? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). As many 
as are in favor of the proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner Aquino, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
[several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 13 votes in favor and 25 votes 
against, the proposed amendment is lost. 


MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

• ™ P * ESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Ac 
mg Floor Leader is recognized. 

RegaMo be recSize M d ay ‘ reqU ' S * Comraission 

(Mr - ™ c — 

the folloehng^amendm^t J >residin 8 Officer, I propo 
(5), There S , eC ' i0n 3 (2) ’ (3) - <4) ai 

the Members although i 3 rea ? y circulated amoi 
phrases on Section 3 o\ ? Ut m , a few minor Perfectii 
complaint for impeachment r6ad 3S fo | lows: “ A verifit 
members or by ANY citi 7 m ? y any ] 

IN THE ORDER OF BlraNEoe h sha " be IN «.UDE 
SION DAYS AND reS ,^ W, ™ IN TEN SE 

WITHIN THREE SESSION DAYS VhERE^FTeT'" 
MR. ROMULO. Excuse me, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr tw y ^ 
sioner Romulo is recognized. ' nas ' Comm 


MR. ROMULO. Will the Committee seek clarific- 
because the provision on impeachment given to us i 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. To clarify matters, I would like 
to explain that I culled all these provisions from the 
proposals of Commissioners Davide, Regalado and 
myself. If the body will notice, I was the only one who 
signed it because I really had no time to confer directly 
with Commissioner Regalado. But all the things in- 
cluded in the various proposals are inside and, as stated 
by Commissioner Regalado, it is only a matter of 
probably arranging them. The substance is all there. So, 
we need not worry that there will be substantial 
deviation. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have 
decided to put in an additional section because, for 
instance, under Section 3 (2), there is mention of in- 
dorsing a verified complaint for impeachment by any 
citizen alleging ultimate facts constituting a ground or 
grounds for impeachment. In other words, it is just like 
a provision in the rules of court. Instead, I propose that 
this procedural requirement, like indorsement of a com- 
plaint by a citizen to avoid harassment or crank com- 
plaints, could very well be taken up in a new Section 4 
which shall read as follows: THE CONGRESS SHALL 
PROMULGATE ITS RULES ON IMPEACHMENT TO 
EFFECTIVELY CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES 
THEREOF. I think all these other procedural require- 
ments could be taken care of by the Rules of the 
Congress. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Has Com- 
missioner Regalado circulated the proposed amendment 
to all the Members? 

MR. REGALADO. I already did this morning, Mr. 
Presiding Officer, although after consultation I decided 
to add something more. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I suggest that we suspend 
the session for two or three minutes so we can approach 
the Committee. Probably, we can iron this out without 
clogging so much our records. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


373 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 6:10 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 6:15 p.m. , the session was resumed. 


Of course, there will be the additional section, which 
reads: “THE CONGRESS SHALL PROMULGATE ITS 
RULES ON IMPEACHMENT TO EFFECTIVELY CAR- 
RY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I request that Commissioner 
Regalado be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 


MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I am now on Section 3 (2), which I propose to be 
reworded as follows: “A verified complaint for impeach- 
ment may be filed by any of its members, or by ANY 
citizen UPON A RESOLUTION OF ENDORSEMENT 
BY ANY MEMBER OF THE HOUSE, WHICH SHALL 
BE INCLUDED IN THE ORDER OF BUSINESS 
WITHIN TEN SESSION DAYS AND REFERRED TO 
THE PROPER COMMITTEE WITHIN THREE SES- 
SION DAYS THEREAFTER. THE COMMITTEE, 
AFTER HEARING AND BY A MAJORITY VOTE OF 
ALL ITS MEMBERS, SHALL SUBMIT ITS REPORT 
TO THE HOUSE WITHIN SIXTY SESSION DAYS 
FROM SUCH REFERRAL, TOGETHER WITH THE 
CORRESPONDING RESOLUTION. THE RESOLU- 
TION SHALL BE CALENDARED FOR CONSIDER- 
ATION BY THE HOUSE WITHIN TEN SESSION 
DAYS FROM RECEIPT THEREOF FROM THE 
COMMITTEES 

Section 3 (3) is proposed to read: A VOTE OF AT 
LEAST ONE-THIRD OF ALL THE MEMBERS OF 
THE HOUSE SHALL BE NECESSARY TO INITIATE 
IMPEACHMENT PROCEEDINGS, EITHER TO AF- 
FIRM A RESOLUTION OF IMPEACHMENT BY THE 
COMMITTEE OR OVERRIDE ITS CONTRARY 
RESOLUTION. THE VOTES OF EACH MEMBER 
SHALL BE RECORDED. 

Section 3 (4) shall read: IN CASE THE VERIFIED 
COMPLAINT OR RESOLUTION OF IMPEACHMENT 
IS FILED BY AT LEAST ONE-THIRD OF ALL THE 
MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE, THE SAME SHALL 
CONSTITUTE THE ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT 
AND THE TRIAL BY THE SENATE SHALL FORTH- 
WITH PROCEED. 

Section 3 (5) remains as such: 

No impeachment proceedings shall be initiated against 
the same official more than once within a period of one 
year. 


MR. RODRIGO. I would like to ask a few questions 
if the Gentleman will yield. 

Under the 1935 Constitution, the vote needed in the 
Senate was three-fourths. Now it is being reduced to 
two-thirds, is that correct? 

MR. REGALADO. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. And under the 1935 Constitution, 
the vote needed in the House was two-thirds. 

MR. REGALADO. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. Now it is being reduced to one- 
third. 


MR. REGALADO. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. Why the very big jump in the case of 
the House? Why not from two-thirds to one-half? 

MR. REGALADO. In conjunction with the 1973 
Constitution, the vote required to initiate impeachment 
proceedings was one-fifth; the vote needed to convict 
was two-thirds. The Committee originally proposed a 
majority. We considered, however, the fact that, as con- 
templated in the constitutional framework, there may 
be 200 to 250 Members of the House of Representa- 
tives. Therefore, if we follow the 1973 Constitution 
which requires one-fifth, with a maximum of 250 Mem- 
bers of the House of Representatives, the votes of only 
50 will be required. We feel that it would be very easy 
to get that vote to initiate impeachment proceedings, 
especially considering first, that impeachment pro- 
ceedings will necessarily be upon the initiation of the 
opposition and that we do not discount the fact that 
the opposition could easily get or muster the required 
number of votes if we stick to the 1973 Constitution. 

On the other hand, the 1935 Constitution which 
requires a vote of two-thirds to initiate the impeach- 
men procee ings was a little too demanding because a 
bigger number of votes is needed just to Initiate the 
proceedings. If we stick to the 1973 Constitution, the 
res, en may be the subject of harassment by the 
ini la ion o impeachment proceedings every year. On 
the other hand, if there is really a need for impeachment 
proceedings to be initiated, and if we stick to the 1935 
Constitution which requires a vote of two-thirds, then 
167 votes will be required. 


374 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


So, we thought that a happy compromise could be 
drawn by putting it at one-third, neither to make it very 
easy to initiate nor to make it very difficult to initiate. 
And one-third of 250 will be somewhere in the neigh- 
borhood of 83 or 84. 


MR. REGALADO. I regret I cannot accept. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say on the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Regalado? 


MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, in order that 
the body can vote, I propose an amendment to the 
amendment. Instead of one-third, I propose one-half 
of all the Members of the House. I will explain in two 
or three sentences. 

Impeachment is a very serious matter, that is why in 
the 1935 Constitution, a two-thirds vote of the House 
was required. Now, we are reducing it to one-third, 
which is too drastic a drop. Let us reduce it to one-half. 
Secondly, the proponent himself was afraid of harass- 
ment but one-third is easy to get. The President as well 
as the Members of the Senate can be harassed because if 
one-third of the Members of the House voted in favor of 
the impeachment, the Members of the Senate will be 
compelled to sit in judgment. Even the Chief Justice of 
the Supreme Court will be harassed because he will be 
compelled constitutionally to preside in the Senate 
during the impeachment trial. 

Thank you. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
ommissioner Regalado say on the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Rodrigo? 

Mr. Residing Officer, I think 

rpnniro 1S + 3 llappy com Promise between the exacting 

liberal S Under tbe 1935 Constitution and the very 

of whirhh 1 * 11 ^! 11 ^ ntS Under die 1973 Constitution, either 
oi which has its dangers. 

will the GentP^^ OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Therefore, 
win the Gentleman not accept? 

MR. RODRIGO 

Constitution w!ttdifrIL.T 1, ™ em under ,he 1973 
body and the bodv it because we had a unicameral 
her/ ttisa b'arneral boly” 5 ‘ he °" e ‘° * ry ' Whereas ’ 

MR. REGALADO TW u 

bicameral, the fact rema n/ th'/'o/ WaS unicameral or 
ings are in the same “ 

mattef hafbe^SSH- <Mr ' Trefias >- Yes - the 

Acting Floor Leader desire? dlScussed - What does the 


MR. BENGZON. W e should 


Officer. 


v ote now, Mr. Presiding 


MR. ROMULO. We are accepting Commissioner 
Regalado’s amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Act- 
ing Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Just a matter of parliamentary 
procedure. We should vote first on the amendment of 
Commissioner Rodrigo before the Committee accepts 
the amendment of Commissioner Regalado. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The body 
shall proceed to vote. 

As many as are in favor of the amendment proposed 
by Commissioner Rodrigo, please raise their hand. 

( Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 14 votes in favor and 24 votes 
against; the proposed amendment is lost. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I request 
that the Chairman of the Committee be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair- 
man of the Committee is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are accept- 
ing the amendment of Commissioner Regalado. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. May we have the amendment 
stated again, so we can understand it. Will the propo- 
nent please state the amendment before we vote? 

MR. REGALADO. The amendment is on Section 3 
(3) which shall read as follows: A VOTE OF AT 

LEAST ONE-THIRD OF ALL THE MEMBERS OF 
THE HOUSE SHALL BE NECESSARY TO INITIATE 
IMPEACHMENT PROCEEDINGS, EITHER TO AF- 
FIRM A RESOLUTION OF IMPEACHMENT BY THE 
COMMITTEE OR TO OVERRIDE ITS CONTRARY 
RESOLUTION. THE VOTES OF EACH MEMBER 
SHALL BE RECORDED. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo ac- 
cepted by Commissioner Regalado? 


MR. NATIVIDAD. How many votes are needed to 
initiate? 

MR. BENGZON. One-third. 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


375 


MR. NATIVIDAD. To initiate is different from to 
impeach; to impeach is different from to' convict. To 
impeach means to file the case before the Senate. 

MR. REGALADO. When we speak of “initiative,” we 
refer here to the Articles of Impeachment. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. So, that is the impeachment itself, 
because when we impeach, we are charging him with the 
Articles of Impeachment. That is my understanding. 

MR. BENGZON. Shall we vote, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection to the proposed amendment having been 
accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I do not 
believe there are any other Commissioners that would 
want to present amendment; therefore, I move that the 
period of amendments be closed. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, we have 
already approved Section 3 (3), so may I know whether 
(2), (4) and (5) are also considered accepted by the 
Committee? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). May we 
hear from the Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, we have 
accepted those amendments. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. We have already approved the 
amendment proposed by Commissioner Regalado, but I 
would just like to enter into the Record a fact ... I will 
wait for my turn, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Act- 
ing Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Since the Committee has also 
accepted the amendments in Section 3 (2), (4) and (5), 
perhaps the Chair should now call for a division of the 
House or should ask whether or not there would be any 
objections to wrap up the whole thing. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection to the proposed amendments of Commis- 
sioner Regalado on Section 3 (2), (4) and (5)? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the proposed amendments are 
hereby approved. 


MR. REGALADO. There is still one more question 
with respect to the proposed amendment by addition, 
reading: “THE CONGRESS SHALL PROMULGATE 
ITS RULES ON IMPEACHMENT TO EFFECTIVELY 
CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION.” 
This can either be Section 3 (6) or as a matter of style it 
may become Section 4. It does not matter where it will 
be placed, but at least the substance is that the Congress 
shall promulgate its rules on impeachment to effectively 
carry out the purposes or the purpose of this section. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. REGALADO. If it will be in Section 3 (6), it will 
be for the purpose of carrying out the purpose of this 
section. If it will be incorporated as a new Section 4, it 
will merely read: “TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSE 
OF THE PRECEDING SECTION.” 

MR. ROMULO. I suggest that we make it Section 3 

( 6 ). 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Does the 
Committee accept? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the pro- 
posed amendment is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we 
request that Commissioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am not 
moving for a reconsideration of the approval of the 
amendment submitted by Commissioner Regalado, but 
I will just make of record my thinking that we do not 
really initiate the filing of the Articles of Impeachment 
on the floor The procedure, as I have pointed out 
earlier, was that the initiation starts with the filing of 
the complaint. And what is actually done on the floor 
is tia le committee resolution containing the Articles 
of Impeachment is the one approved by the body. 

^ P* 1 ^ 6010 ^ now runs ' which may be cor- 
rec e y le om *Tiittee on Style, it appears that the 
initiation starts on the floor. If we only have time, I 
cou ci e examples in the case of the impeachment 
proceedings of President Richard Nixon wherein the 
Committee on the Judiciary submitted the recom- 
mendation, the resolution, and the Articles of Impeach- 
ment to the body, and it was the body who approved 
the resolution. It is not the body which initiates it. It 
only approves or disapproves the resolution. So, on that 
score, probably the Committee on Style could help in 


376 


MONDAY, JULY 28, 1986 


rearranging these words because we have to be very 
technical about this. I have been bringing with me The 
Rules of the House of Representatives of the U.S. 
Congress. The Senate Rules are with me. The proceed- 
ings on the case of Richard Nixon are with me. I have 
submitted my proposal, but the Committee has already 
decided. Nevertheless, I just want to indicate this on 
record. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The Act- 
ing Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I finally move that we ter- 
minate the period of amendments on the Article on the 
Accountability of Public Officers. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 


MR. BENGZON. May I move that the Secretariat 
furnish us tomorrow morning with a clean copy of the 
Article on the Accountability of Public Officers before 
we vote on Second Reading. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Secre- 
tariat is so requested to furnish all Members with the 
Article on the Accountability of Public Officers as 
requested by the Acting Floor Leader. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
adjourn until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the 
morning. 

It was 6:33 p.m. 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


377 


R.C.C. NO. 42 
Tuesday, July 29, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:40 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Jose E. Suarez. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. SUAREZ. Dear Lord, I am not much at saying 
prayers. I do not have to tell You because You already 
know that I have been privately communicating with 
You rather frequently since the beginning of June, seek- 
ing Your divine guidance in making correct decisions for 
our people. 

I entered this Commission awed by the enormity of 
the task before us. Having just emerged from the streets 
battling the evil forces of the dictatorship, I did not feel 
exactly comfortable in the presence of a select group. 
Midway to our common goal, however, I feel so relaxed 
with my colleagues. Everybody is so contributive and 
supportive. I have never worked with a nicer bunch of 
ladies and gentlemen. Imbued with a deep sense of 
nationalism, they serve as an inspiration to me. 

And, dear Lord, there is so much talent and decency 
around me that I pray to see the day when, in the not- 
too-distant future, these colleagues of mine will walk 
the corridors of power. Then, perchance, if they see me 
pounding once again the streets of Central Luzon 
clamoring for justice for our people, they will give me a 
knowing smile of recognition, or perhaps even a shaking 
of the head which, after all, if we are to believe Dick, 
could signify an approval. 

Dear Lord, take good care of my colleagues, especial- 
ly the frail and fragile Fely, the ailing Pepe, Cosoy and 

♦ Appeared after the roll call 


Efrain who, I was cheered to learn last night, has not 
changed his sex at all. I pray that our dear leader, the 
kindly Celing, shall be in good health in order that we 
may continue making honest decisions for our country 
and our people, that we may succeed in finally establish- 
ing a just and humane government. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar .... 

. Present* 

Natividad . . 

. . . Present* 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Nieva 

. . . Present 

Aquino 

. Present 

Nolledo . . . 

. . . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

Ople 

. . . Present* 

Bacani 

. Present* 

Padilla . . . . 

. . . Present 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Quesada . . . 

. . . Present 

Bennagen .... 

. Present 

Rama 

, . . . Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Regalado . . . 

. . . . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los 

. . . Present* 

Brocka 

. Present 

Rigos . . . . 

. . . . Present 

Calderon 

. Present* 

Rodrigo . . 

. . . . Present 

Castro de .... 

. Present 

Romulo . . 


Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales . . . 


Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . 


Davide 

. Present 

Suarez . . . 


Foz 

. Present 

Sumulong . 


Garcia 

. Present* 

Tadeo .... 


Gascon 

. Present 

Tan 


Guingona . . . . 

. Present 

Tingson . . 


Jamir 

. Present 

Trenas . . . 


Laurel 


Uka . . . 


Lerum 


Villacorta 


Maambong . . . 

. Present 

Villegas . 


Monsod .... 


The President 

is present. 




The roll call shows 34 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


378 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


a Constitution for the Filipino People, Today and for 
the Future.” 

(Communication No. 359 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we ap- 
prove the Journal of yesterday’s session. 


Communication signed by Ms. Mila Polotan and seven 
hundred seventy-seven others, urging the Constitutional 
Commission not to incorporate in the Constitution the 
issue of the U.S. bases. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 
The Secretary-General read the following Propose 
Cnrnnitt* 1 °p F * rSt Readin 8> Communications an 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION ON FIRST READING 
Proposed Resolution No. 535, entitled: 

in RECOGNITION by the constit 
J oRT ANH^f I0N 0F THE INVALUABlI sJ 
SOCIAL SCIENrp T S? UTI0N ° F THE PHILIPPW 
SULTATIONS ANn ^ CIL W THE PUBLIC C0 
MATERIALS 8 FOR THr 0R n D PR0VIDING RESOURI 

constitution 011 ™ E drafting of the ne 

To the^t^ ^ H ° n Bennagen ’ Vi Uacorta and Garc 
To the Steering Committee. 


(Communication No. 360 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Wilfred D. Asis of Room 207, Ong Hoc 
Bldg., Butuan City, submitting various constitutional 
proposals for consideration by the Constitutional Com- 
jnission. 

(Communication No. 361 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Prof. L. V. Toralballa of 4762 Neptune 
Drive, Alexandria, Va., U.S. A. 22309, expressing his 
thoughts in a political synthesis, entitled: “A Democra- 
cy for the Philippines.” 

(Communication No. 362 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Msgr. Manuel Dormido of P.O. Box 883, 
Bacolod City, suggesting a Maharlika system of govern- 
ment which is similar to the parliamentary system of 
government. 

(Communication No. 363 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Mr. Jose i. 

St., San Juan, Metro M «nT 38 ° f 128 N - Domin 
Commission to adont 3 ’ Urglng the Constitute 
tion of the environmental bal^ce* 111 ^ ^ ^ preSer 

(Communication No 3 SR n 

of ] 986) ' ~ Constitutional Commissi 

To the Committee on the N,r , „ 
Patrimony. tlonal Economy a 

Communication from Bishop Emerito P w 
Mr. Emmanuel G. Cleto both of the j 

Church in the Philippines, submitting sugg^stwns fn 
a group of lay persons and clergy, entitled “Theories 


Letter from Mr. Candido B. Talosig of Saint Mary’s 
College, Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya, containing various 
constitutional proposals for consideration by the Consti- 
tutional Commission. 

(Communication No. 364 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Meletico Palomata of 31 Camias St., 
Zone 1, Purok 2, Signal Village, Taguig, Metro Manila, 
containing some revelations regarding the “Sabah” issue. 

(Communication No. 365 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


379 


Position paper submitted by Mr. William H. Quasha of 
Don Pablo Bldg., 114 Amorsolo St., Makati, Metro 
Manila, proposing that foreign investors be allowed to 
acquire and own land in the Philippines as an investment 
incentive, with appropriate restrictions. 

(Communication No. 366 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication from Mr. Moises B. Dayon, Acting 
Secretary, Sangguniang Panlungsod, Davao City, submit- 
ting Resolution No. 240, S. 1986 of said sanggunian, 
supporting the move in the Constitutional Commission 
to incorporate in the Constitution provisions on free 
secondary education in public schools. 

(Communication No. 367 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication signed by Miss Josefa de Lange of 39 
1 1th St., New Manila, Quezon City, and four hundred 
ninety-eight others with their respective addresses, 
seeking the inclusion in the Constitution of a provision 
obliging the State to protect the life of the unborn from 
the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 368 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Dionito B. Aplacador of Cataingan 
West, Masbate, containing suggestions on the various 
issues in the Constitutional Commission. 
(Communication No. 369 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Sr. Luz Emel Soriano, r.a., and two 
hundred seventy-six others, saying that the issue of U.S. 
military bases should not be in the Constitution and 
should be left to the government to negotiate so as to 
protect the national interest. 

(Communication No. 370 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Ms. Perla Golez of Bacolod City and sixty- 
nine others also of Bacolod City and other municipali- 
ties/cities in Negros Occidental, requesting the inclusion 
of provisions providing for religious instruction during 
regular school hours to be materially and financially 
supported by the government. 

(Communication No. 371 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Letter from Mr. Vicente Roy L. Kayaban, Jr. of 1649 
Concepcion Aguila St., San Beda Subdivision, San 
Miguel, Manila, submitting a paper, entitled: “Land Re- 
form: a Landowner’s Introspection,” and requesting 
that small landowners be accorded legislative seats: at 
least one for the agrarian sector and at least one for 
small apartment owners. 

(Communication No. 372 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Laufred I. Hernandez for the students 
of the College of Public Administration, University of 
the Philippines, submitting recommendations on the 
right of civil servants to collective bargaining, prohibi- 
tion of government resources for electioneering pur- 
poses, prohibition of nepotism and provisions for 
human resources development. 

(Communication No. 373 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Communication from Muslim and Christian leaders who 
attended a SOLIDARITY-sponsored seminar on Minda- 
nao, urging a clear policy statement regarding Mindanao 
and Muslim affairs, among others. 

(Communication No. 374 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

COMMITTEE REPORT 

Committee Report No. 34 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 534, as reported out by the Committee on Social 
Justice, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 19, 20, 25, 37, 82, 91, 93, 100 113 
126, 167, 171, 180,181,227,253,277,279,316,320’, 
340, 342, 343, 366, 376, 379, 397, 398, 413 419 421 
425, 426, 429, 431, 479, 491, 504, 509, 513, 515 and 


Sponsored by Hon. Nieva, Gascon, Tadeo, Monsod, 
Aquino, Brocka, Suarez, Ople, Quesada, Bacani, Garcia, 
Lerum, Tan, Villacorta, Bennagen, Bengzon, Jr. and 
Rodrigo. 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. The copies of the Article on Accounta- 
bility of Public Officers have not yet been distributed, 


380 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


and, therefore, the voting on Second Reading on the 
said Article has to be deferred. 

On the other hand, the Chairman and the members of 
the Committee on the Executive are ready to sponsor 
their Article on the Executive. So, I move that we con- 
sider Committee Report No. 26 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 517 as reported out by the Committee on the 
Executive. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


Before we proceed further, the Chair wishes to 
acknowledge the presence of students from St. Scholas- 
tica’s College and other schools and a group of women 
led by Deputy Foreign Minister Leticia Ramos Shahani, 
who are here to witness our proceedings this morning. 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 5 1 7 
(Article on the Executive) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. I move that we consider Committee 
Report No. 26 on Proposed Resolution No. 517 as 
reported out by the Committee on the Executive. 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I be clarified, Madam 
President, on whether or not we have to discuss a pend- 
ing incident not yet resolved by this body which is the 
matter of sectoral representation? 


MR. RAMA. I have been informed, Madam President 
issupHfhnt tr, 6 prota8 ° nists °f the party list and sectora 

mise schem e 6 Southey ^re askinef t0 Pr6Sent 3 7™^° 
Strike a • ey are askin 8 for some more time tc 

sirixe a compromise agreement. 


issue later hftta day T S °’ WC WiH haVe that P articular 

MR. RAMA. We will take it up later in the day. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President. 

niz!d. E PRESIDENT - C °mmissioner Lerum is recog- 


tagonists L who My M that'th e t nOW ^ " ame of the 1 

are ready? are n °t ready, because 


*9 

up this matter. vmacorta a 


that Com 
are going to i 


MK. LERUM. Thant , 

information. you ’ Madam President, for the 

THE PRESIDENT. The Pi. T 

°r Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask «,** *i ^ 

Committee on the Executive andth^™" ° f the 
forward and take their seats? 16 mem t )ers come 

THE PRESIDENT. The Honorable q 

the other members of the Committee on^hTuTeLtive 
will please come forward. ne txecut,ve 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 5 1 7 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secreta- 
ry-General will read only the title of the proposed 
resolution without prejudice to inserting in the Record 
the whole text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 517, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE EXECUTIVE. 


(The following is the whole text of the substitute resolution 
per C.R. No. 26.) 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 26 

The Committee on the Executive to which were referred the 
following: 

Proposed Resolution No. 9, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION LIMITATIONS ON THE EXERCISE OF THE 
AUTHORITY TO PROCLAIM MARTIAL LAW OR SUS- 
PEND THE PRIVILEGE OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS 
CORPUS BY LIMITING ITS DURATION AND REQUIR- 
ING CONCURRENCE BY THE LEGISLATURE, EX- 
PRESSLY VESTING UPON THE SUPREME COURT 
JURISDICTION TO INQUIRE INTO THE SUFFICIENCY 
OF THE BASIS OF SUCH PROCLAMATION OR SUS- 
PENSION AND TO SET ASIDE THE SAME IF NO BASIS 
EXISTS, AND GRANTING THE LEGISLATURE THE 
AUTHORITY TO REVOKE OR EXTEND A PROCLAMA- 
TION OR SUSPENSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

Note: The Committee adopted P.R. No. 9 in consolidation 
with P.R. Nos. 107 (Foz), 151 (Bengzon, Jr.), 152 (Romulo) 
and 158 (Azcuna) as its joint working draft and submitted a 
Report (designated as C.R. No. 5) dated June 24, 1986 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


381 


Proposed Resolution No. 55, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FURTHER LIMITATIONS 
ON THE POWER OF THE PRESIDENT TO GRANT 
PARDONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

Note: This is covered by C.R. No. 6, dated June 25, 1986 

Proposed Resolution No. 56, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING THE PRESIDENT 
FROM EXTENDING APPOINTMENTS WITHIN SIX 
MONTHS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE COM- 
MENCEMENT OF THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENT. 


Proposed Resolution No. 128, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROHIBITING THE PRESIDENT, VICE 
PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE CABINET AND 
THEIR DEPUTIES FROM HOLDING ANY OTHER OF- 
FICE AND FROM ENGAGING IN ACTIVITIES WHICH 
MAY GIVE RISE DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY TO CON- 
FLICT OF INTEREST IN THE CONDUCT OF THEIR 
OFFICE, AND TO PROHIBIT THE PRACTICE OF 
NEPOTISM BY SAID OFFICIALS. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, de los Reyes, Jr. and Maambong. 

Note: The Committee adopted P.R. No. 128 in consolidation 
with P.R. No. 183 (Nolledo) as its working draft; is covered 
by C.R. No. 9, June 27, 1986 


Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

Note: Covered by C.R. No. 8 dated June 27, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 59, entitled: 

RESOLUTION RESTRICTING FOREIGN BORROWINGS 
OR LOANS. 

Introduced by Hon. de Castro. 

Note: The Committee adopted P.R. Nos. 59 and 124 (Ople, 
de los Reyes and Maambong) as its joint working drafts, is 
covered by C.R. No. 12, July 3, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 107, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE THAT IN A STATE OF 
MARTIAL LAW, THE CIVILIAN AUTHORITY SHALL 
CONTINUE TO BE SUPREME OVER THE MILITARY, 
THE BASIC RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE SHALL REMAIN 
INVIOLABLE, AND THE CIVILIAN COURTS SHALL 
CONTINUE TO FUNCTION AND EXERCISE THEIR 
JURISDICTION. 


Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

Note: Consolidated with P.R. No. 9 


Proposed Resolution No. 118, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE APPROVAL 
OR CONSENT OF THE LEGISLATURE FOR THE EF- 
FECTIVITY AND VALIDITY OF TREATIES, EXECU- 
TIVE AGREEMENTS AND RECOGNITION OF STATES 
OR GOVERNMENTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

Note: This is covered by C.R. No. 10 


proposed Resolution No. 124, entitled: 

RESOLUTION REQUIRING CONCURRENCE OF THE CEN- 
TRAL MONETARY AUTHORITY AND DUE NOTICE 
TO THE LEGISLATURE BEFORE GOVERNMENT 
GUARANTEES ARE EXTENDED TO FOREIGN BOR- 
ROWINGS. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, de los Reyes, Jr. and Maambong. 
Note: Consolidated with P.R. No. 59 


Proposed Resolution No. 151, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO LIMIT THE POWER OF THE PRES- 
IDENT TO DECLARE MARTIAL LAW OR SUSPEND 
THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS TO THIRTY DAYS 
ONLY UNLESS AUTHORIZED BY CONGRESS/NA- 
TIONAL ASSEMBLY FOR A LONGER PERIOD. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

Note: Consolidated with P.R. No. 9 

Proposed Resolution No. 152, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE LIMITS TO THE EXERCISE 
OF MARTIAL LAW POWERS BY THE EXECUTIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Romulo. 

Note: Consolidated with P.R. No. 9 


Proposed Resolution No. 156, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING A SIX-YEAR TERM OF THE 
PRESIDENT, PROHIBITING IMMEDIATE REELEC- 
TION, AND PROVIDING FOR A POSSIBLE MID-TERM 
ELECTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Azcuna. 

Note: Tire Committee considered this incorporated into C.R. 
No. 13, July 7, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 158, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING RESTRICTIONS ON THE 
POWER OF THE PRESIDENT TO SUSPEND THE PRIV- 
ILEGE OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS OR TO DE- 
CLARE MARTIAL LAW BY PROVIDING FOR THE 
CONCURRENCE OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, RE- 
VIEW BY THE SUPREME COURT UPON A WRIT OF 
AMPARO, AND OTHER LIMITS. 

Introduced by Hon. Azcuna. 

Note: Consolidated with P.R. No. 9 


Pioposed Resolution No. 183, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT THE SPOUSE OF THE PRESIDENT OR ANY PER- 
SON RELATED TO THE PRESIDENT WITHIN THE 
THIRD DEGREE OF CONSANGUINITY OR AFFINITY 
SHALL NOT BE APPOINTED TO THE CABINET. 


382 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

Note: Consolidated with P.R. No. 128 


Proposed Resolution No. 197, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE CONCUR- 
RENCE OF AN INDEPENDENT COMMISSION ON 
APPOINTMENTS TO HIGH RANKING POSITIONS IN 
THE GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

Note: Covered byC.R. No. 14, July 7, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 198, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT THE CANVASSING OF 
VOTES IN A PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION BY THE 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY IS PURELY A MINISTERIAL 
DUTY. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad, Ople, Maambong and de los 
Reyes, Jr. 

Note: Under Committee Report No. 13, July 7, 1986 

Proposed Resolution No. 234, entitled: 

LUSI ON IN THE ARTICLE 
VISION REDEFuiyMr DEPAR ™ ENT A SPECIFIC p RO- 

BXBCUT,VEOVER^If co ^»™ E 
Introduced by Hon. Regalado 

Note: Reported out under C.R. No. 11, July 3 , i 9 8 6 

Proposed Resolution No. 255 , entitled: 

presidential system 
PORATINCHN thf nT F ° R ™ IS PURP0SE INCOR- 
TION THE PRQVTcISf/ 1 ° F THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TIVE DEPARTMENT G0VERNING THE EXECU- 
CONSTITUTION app^ C ° NTAINED IN THE dr AFT 
1971 CONSTITUDON^ P^ BY ™ E REC °NVENED 

nomenclatured T unn ° Nvent i° n WHICH were 

THE title “Sj®® AS ARTICLE VIII WITH 

, ntrn , executive department ” 

Introduced by Hon. Calderon 

Note: Considered as covered by C.R. No. 13 

Proposed Resolution No. 257 , entitled- 

RESOLUTION PROVlDlNr ,v 
FOR A PRESIDENTIAL P ™ E NEW CONSTITUTION 
SPECIFYING THEREIN thpS, ° F G0VE RNMENT 
AND MANNER OF ELFCTTnxr QUALIFICATIONS 
TIVE. ° N 0F THE CHIEF EXECU- 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

Note: The Committee considered this as in - * , 
substitute proposed resolution covered by C R^o^i"' 10 ^ 


Proposed Resolution No. 352, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE TERM OF OFFICE OF 
THE PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

Note: Considered incorporated in C.R. No. 13 

Proposed Resolution No. 433, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO LIMIT THE TERM OF PRESIDENT TO 
SIX (6) YEARS WITHOUT REELECTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Rama. 

Note: Considered covered by C.R. No. 13 

Proposed Resolution No. 67, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO DELETE FROM THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION THE PROVISION GRANTING PRESIDENTIAL 
IMMUNITY FROM SUITS AND TO PROVIDE IN THE 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS THAT SUCH DELETION 
BE MADE RETROACTIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

Note: Was referred to the Committee on Transitory Provisions, 

has considered the same and has the honor to report them back 
to the Constitutional Commission with the recommendation that 
Proposed Resolution No. 517, prepared by the Committee, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE EXECUTIVE 
DEPARTMENT, 

be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution Nos. 9, 55, 
56, 59, 107, 118, 124, 128, 151, 152, 156, 158, 183, 197, 198, 
234, 255, 257, 352, and 433, with Hon. Sumulong, Regalado, 
Alonto, Aquino, Bernas, Calderon, Concepcion, Davide, Jr., Foz, 
Jamir, Lerum, Maambong, Natividad, Rama, Sarmiento, de 
Castro, Ople, de los Reyes, Jr., Bengzon, Jr., Romulo, Azcuna, 
Nolledo, Tingson and Guingona as authors thereof. 

Each proposed resolution accepted by the Committee was not 
considered and amended on a line-by-line basis. Rather it adopted 
the basic concept or substance of the proposed resolution and 
embodied it in the attached draft of the Article on the Executive. 
Thus in this report we indicated in which section of the pro- 
posed Article on the Executive Department a particular proposed 
resolution is reflected: 

Proposed Resolution 
No. 9 
No. 107 
No. 151 
No. 152 
No. 158 
No. 55 
No. 56 
No. 59 
No. 124 
No. 118 
No. 128 
No. 183 


Section Embodied In 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 

17 
13 

18 
18 
20 
19 
19 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


383 


No. 156 
No. 198 
No. 255 
No. 257 
No. 352 
No. 433 
No. 197 
No. 234 

(Sgd.) Lorenzo M. Sumulong 
Chairman 

Committee on the Executive 

(Sgd.) Florenz D. Regalado 
Vice-Chairman 


4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

16 

14 


(Sgd.) Ahmad Domocao Alonto 
(Sgd.) Joaquin G. Bernas 
(Sgd.) Roberto C. Concepcion 
(Sgd.) Vicente B. Foz 
(Sgd.) Eulogio R. Lerum 
(Sgd.) Teodulo C. Natividad 


(Sgd.) FelicitasS. Aquino 
Jose D. Calderon 
(Sgd.) Hilario G. Davide, Jr. 
(Sgd.) Alberto M.K. Jamir 
(Sgd.) Regalado E. Maambong 


(Sgd.) Napoleon G. Rama 

(Sgd.) Rene V.Sarmiento 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 5 17 
(SUBSTITUTE RESOLUTION) 
Adjusted to Bicameral Legislature 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ■ NE’ W CONSTI 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE EXECUTI 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved, by the 
Commission in session assembled, To ,n ^°™ e Depart . 
Constitution the following provisions on the Execut 

ment: 

ARTICLE 

EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 


SECTION 1. The executive power shall be vested in a 
ident of the Philippines. 

SEC. 2. No person may be elected President unless he is a 
natural-born citizen of the Philippines, a registered voter, a e 0 
read and write, at least forty years of age on the day o ie 
election, and resident of the Philippines for at least ten years 
immediately preceding such election. 

SEC. 3. There shall be a Vice-President who shall be elected 
with and in the same manner as the President and who shall have 
the same qualifications and term of office. He may be removed 
from office in the same manner as the President as provided in 
this Constitution. 

The Vice-President may be appointed as a member of the 
Cabinet. 


SEC. 4. The President shall be elected by direct vote of the 
people for a term of six years which shall begin at noon on the 

thirtieth day of following the day of the election 

and shall end at noon of the same date six years thereafter. He 
shall be disqualified from immediate reelection. 

The returns of every election for President and Vice-President 
duly certified by the board of canvassers of each province or city 
shall be transmitted to the seat of the National Government, 
directed to the President of the Senate. Upon receipt of the certi- 
ficates of canvass, the President of the Senate shall, not later than 
thirty (30) days after the day of the election, open all the certifi- 
cates in the presence of the Senate and the House of Representa- 
tives in joint public session, and upon determination of the 
authenticity and due execution thereof in the manner provided 
by law, canvass the votes. 

The person having the highest number of votes shall be pro- 
claimed elected, but in case two or more shall have an equal and 
highest number of votes, one of them shall forthwith be chosen 
by the vote of a majority of all the members of the Congress. 

The Supreme Court, sitting en banc, shall be the sole judge of 
all contests relating to the election, returns and qualifications of 
the President or Vice-President. 

SEC. 5. If, at the time fixed for the beginning of his term, the 
President-elect shall have died, the Vice-President-elect shall 
become President. If a President shall not have been chosen 
before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if the 
President shall have failed to qualify, then the Vice-President shall 
act as President until a President shall have qualified. The 
Congress shall by law provide for the case where neither a Pres- 
ident-elect nor a Vice-President-elect shall have been chosen or 
shall have qualified, or both shall have died at the time fixed for 
the beginning of their term, declaring who shall then act as 
President or the manner in which one who is to act shall be 
selected, and such person shall act accordingly until a President 
or Vice-President shall have qualified. 

SEC. 6. Before he enters on the execution of his office, the 
President or Acting President shall take the following oath or 
affirmation: 

“I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully 
and conscientiously fulfill my duties as President (or Act- 
ing President) of the Philippines, preserve and defend its 
Constitution, execute its laws, dojustice to every man, and 
consecrate myself to the service of the Nation. So help 
me God.” (In case of affirmation, last sentence will be 
omitted) 

SEC. 7. The President shall have an official residence. The 
President and Vice-President shall receive a salary to be fixed by 
law, which shall not be increased or decreased during their term 
of office. They shall not receive during their tenure any other 
emolument from the government or any other source. Unless the 
Congress shall provide otherwise, the President and the Vice- 

President shall receive an annual salary of and 

—pesos, respectively. 

SEC. 8. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice- 
President during the term for which he was elected, the President 
shall nominate a Vice-President from among the members of the 
Senate and the House of Representatives who shall take office 


384 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


upon confirmation by a majority vote of all the members of both 
Houses of Congress. 


SEC. 9. In case of permanent disability, death, removal from 
office or resignation of the President, the Vice-President shall 
become the President to serve the unexpired term. The Congress 
shall by law provide for the case of permanent disability, death, 
removal from office or resignation of both the President and 
Vice-President, declaring which officer shall then become Acting 
President or the manner in which one shall be selected. 

The Congress shall by law provide for the case of death, 
permanent disability or resignation of the Acting President at the 
time the vacancy in the Office of the President occurs or subse- 
quently thereafter, declaring who shall serve as President until 
the President and the Vice-President shall have been elected and 
qualified, subject to the same restrictions of powers and disquali- 
fications as the Acting President. 


SEC. 10. The Congress shall, at ten o’clock in the morning of 
the third day after the vacancy occurs, convene in accordance 
with its rules without need of a call and within seven days enact a 
law calling for a special election to elect a President and a Vice- 
President to be held not earlier than forty-five days nor later than 
sixty days from the time of such call. The bill calling such special 

election shall be deemed certified under paragraph , Section 

Article VIII of this Constitution and shall become law 

upon its approval on third reading by the Congress. Appropria- 
tions for the special election shall be charged against any current 
appropriations and shall be exempt from the requirements of 

paragraph. Section Article VIII of this Constitu- 

10n '. ® convening of the Congress cannot be suspended nor the 

special election postponed. No special election shall be called if 

n ; f V “ y ° CC . UT * within seventy days before the date of the 
next presidential election. 

Of ttaSenl Whe . nev i er the President transmits to the President 

his written deT Speaker of the Hou se of Representatives 

and duties of hiTfr" ^ ^ is unable t0 discharge the powers 

declaration to the 1Ce ’ and untl1 he transmits to them a written 

discharged by the ViceP SUCh P ° Wers 3,1(1 duties shall be 
e n oy the Vice-President as Acting President. 

mit to the Presidellof 0 ^ members of the Cabinet trans- 
House of Representatives the*"* 6 ^ l ° ^ Speaker of the 
President is unable to disch * ^ ntten declaration that the 
office, the Vice-President shair He P ° Wers and duties of his 

and duties of the office as Acting^rTs^dent^ 3SSUme ^ P ° W6rS 

Thereafter, when the President tr 
the Senate and to the Speaker of t0 ^ President of 

his written declaration that no • kt H ° USe ° f Re P res entatives 
the powers and duties of his offil ' ex,sts ’ he sha11 resume 
members of the Cabinet transmits with ^1?°^ ° f 3,1 the 
ident of the Senate and to the Sne.u ! Ve days t0 the p res- 
sentatives their written declaration that tUp* ° f Repre ' 
to discharge the powers and duties of his officllt"' ' S Unable 
Congress shall decide the issue conv^n* ’ * lereu P on > the 
hours for that purpose, if not in session If^hlcoT forty e, f ht 
twenty-one days after receipt of the latter written Tcl’amSon" 
or, if not in session, within twenty-one days after it is required 
to assemble, determines by a two-thirds vote of both Houses of 


Congress that the President is unable to discharge the powers 
and duties of his office, the Vice-President shall continue to 
discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President 
shall resume the powers and duties of his office. 

SEC. 12. An Acting President shall not declare martial law 
or suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus without 
the concurrence of at least a majority of all the members of the 
Congress. 

Appointments extended by an Acting President shall remain 
effective, unless revoked by the elected President within ninety 
days from his assumption or reassumption of office. 

SEC. 13. An incumbent or Acting President shall not make 
appointments within two (2) months preceding the date of the 
next presidential election and thereafter until the expiration of 
the term of the former or the tenure of the latter, except tem- 
porary appointments to executive positions when continued 
vacancies would prejudice public service or endanger public 
safety. 

SEC. 14. The President shall have control of all the executive 
departments, bureaus, and offices. He shall exercise general 
supervision over all local governments as may be provided by 
law, and shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed. 

SEC. 15. The President shall be the commander-in-chief of 
all the armed forces of the Philippines and, whenever it becomes 
necessary, he may call out such armed forces to prevent or sup- 
press lawless violence, invasion or rebellion. In case of invasion 
or rebellion, when the public safety requires it, he may, for a 
period not exceeding sixty days, and, with the concurrence of at 
least a majority of all the members of the Congress, suspend the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus , or place the Philippines or 
any part thereof under martial law. The Congress, by a vote of at 
least a majority of all its members in regular or special session, 
may revoke such proclamation or suspension, or extend the same 
if the invasion or rebellion shall persist and public safety requires 
it. 

The Supreme Court may review, in* an appropriate proceeding 
filed by any citizen, the sufficiency of the factual basis of the 
proclamation of martial law or the suspension of the privilege 
of the writ or the extension thereof and must promulgate its 
decision on the same within thirty (30) days from its filing. 

A state of martial law does not suspend the operation of the 
Constitution, nor supplant the functioning of the civil courts or 
legislative assemblies, nor authorize the conferment of jurisdic- 
tion on military courts and agencies over civilians where civil 
courts are able to function, nor automatically suspend the privil- 
ege of the writ. 

The suspension of the privilege of the writ shall apply only to 
persons judicially charged for rebellion or for offenses inherent 
in or directly connected with invasion. 

SEC. 16. The President shall nominate and, with the consent 
of a Commission on Appointments, shall appoint the heads of 
the executive departments and bureaus, ambassadors, other 
public ministers and consuls, or officers of the armed forces from 
the lank of colonel or naval captain and all other officers of the 
Government whose appointments are not otherwise provided for 
by law, and those whom he may be authorized by law to appoint. 
The Congress may by law vest the appointment of inferior of- 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


385 


ficers in the President alone, in the courts, or in the heads of 
departments. 

SEC. 17. Except in cases of impeachment, or as otherwise 
provided in this Constitution, the President may grant reprieves 
commutations, and pardons, and remit fines and forfeitures, 
after conviction. However, the power to grant executive clemency 
for violations of corrupt practices laws may be limited by legis- 
lation. 

He shall also have the power to grant amnesty with the con- 
currence of a majority of all the members of the Congress. 

SEC. 18. The President may contract or guarantee foreign and 
domestic loans on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines with 
the prior concurrence of the Monetary Board. The Monetary 
Board shall, within thirty (30) days from the end of every quarter 
of the calendar year, submit to the Congress a complete report 
of its decisions on applications for loans to be contracted or 
guaranteed by the government or government-owned and con- 
trolled corporations which would have the effect of increasing 
the foreign debt and containing other matters as may be provided 
by law. 

SEC. 19. The President, Vice-President, members of the 
Cabinet, and chiefs of bureaus or offices and their assistants shall 
not, during their term, hold any other office or employment, 
nor may they practice any profession, participate directly or 
indirectly in any business, or be financially interested directly in 
any contract with, or in any financial or special privilege granted 
by the government or any subdivision, agency or instrumentality 
thereof, including any government-owned or controlled cor- 
poration, and shall strictly avoid conflict of interest in the con- 
duct of their office. 

The spouse and relatives by consanguinity or affinity within 
the third civil degree of the President shall not be appointed as 
minister, deputy minister or head of bureau or office. 

SEC. 20. No treaty or international agreement shall be valid 
and effective unless concurred in by at least two-thirds of all the 
members of the Senate. 

SEC. 21. The President shall submit within fifteen days of 
the opening of each regular session of the Congress a budget of 
receipts and expenditures, which shall be the basis of the general 
appropriations bill. 

SEC. 22. The President shall address the Congress at the 
opening of its regular session. He may also appear before it at 
any other time. 

MR. RAMA. I move that Commissioner Sumulong be 
recognized to sponsor the Article. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sumulong is 
recognized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER SUMULONG 

MR. SUMULONG. May we request the other mem- 
bers of the Committee on the Executive to come and sit 
with us? 

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen of the Com- 
mission: 


The Committee on the Executive has the honor to 
submit, for consideration and approval, Proposed Reso- 
lution No. 517, proposing to incorporate in the new 
Constitution an Article on the Executive. This Article 
on the Executive is based mainly on the many reso- 
lutions referred to our Committee for study and report. 
The members of the Committee have studied and dis- 
cussed these resolutions which dealt with concrete 
instances of misuse and abuse of executive power during 
the Marcos regime especially after the declaration of 
martial law. The members of the Committee made an 
intensive and exhaustive study on the constitutional 
proposals contained in those resolutions intended to 
prevent a repetition of the misuse and abuse of execu- 
tive power. At the same time, the members of the Com- 
mittee were always on guard and careful in their intense 
desire to undo and correct the misdeeds and mistakes 
of the Marcos regime, because we might impose safe- 
guards and restrictions which may be unreasonable 
and unduly harsh and which might emasculate our 
future presidents in the exercise of executive power. 

After giving a brief sketch of how our Committee 
worked, I shall now enumerate the salient constitutional 
changes or reforms that the members of the Committee, 
in collaboration with the authors of the many resolu- 
tions referred to us, have introduced in the Article on 
the Executive now submitted to the body for con- 
sideration. 

The first constitutional change that I will mention 
is the canvassing of votes for President and Vice-Pres- 
ident. In the 1973 Constitution, the provision on can- 
vassing of votes for President and Vice-President is as 
follows: 

The returns of every election for President, duly certi- 
fied by the board of canvassers of each province or city, 
shall be transmitted to the Speaker of the Batasang Pam- 
bansa, who shall, not later than thirty days after the day of 
the election, and in the presence of the Batasang Pambansa, 
open all the certificates, and the votes shall then be 
counted. 


It will be remembered that many of the certificates 
of canvass received from each province and city bv the 
Batasang Pambansa were objected to by the supporters 

° f A , q 0 u ”° r , and ,. I r a “ rel - based on this provision of 
the 1973 Constitution after the certificates of canvass 

^X’oTrh the Speak « ^mediately announced 
the results of the canvass and proclaimed President 

Marcos and Mr. Tolentmo as elected ^ Presided and 
Vice-President, respectively. siaent an 

In the Article on the Executive that is submitted for 
considerabon, it is now provided that after the certi- 
ficates of canvass had been opened, the counting and 
canvassing of the votes for President and Vice-President 
shall not immediately be made because, first, there 
should be a determination of the authenticity and due 
execution of the certificates of canvass before the 
votes may be canvassed. That appears in Section 4 of 
the Article. It is also provided in Section 4 that the 


386 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


Supreme Court, sitting en banc , shall be the sole judge 
of all election contests relating to the election, returns 
and qualifications of the President and Vice-President. 
The term of office of the President and the Vice-Pres- 
ident is also in Section 4. We wish to call the attention 
of the Members that we have introduced some changes 
in this section so that it will conform with the decision 
reached by the Commission disqualifying the President 
from any reelection after a term of six years and allow- 
ing the Vice-President one reelection provided he shall 
serve for not more than 12 years. So that, subject to 
the Transitory Provisions in this Constitution, Section 
4 of the Article should read as follows: 


SEC. 4. The President shall be elected by direct vote of 
the people for a term of six years which shall begin at noon 
on the thirtieth day of June following the day of the elec- 
tion and shall end at noon of the same date six years there- 
after. He shall be disqualified from reelection. 

We deleted the word “immediate.” That is the change 
we made in Section 4. 


The next constitutional change concerns the powers 
P n 6 P I® sldent as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed 

reads as STs- “ S ' Cti °" ’ 5 ' 6 ° f ,h ' Article 


aJe h d f^‘‘"' t r Sh r a l be ,he Commander-in-chief of all the 
necessarv he ° hllippines and > whenever it becomes 
supTre^i 1 y C f ° Ut $UCh armed forces *> preven t or 
invasion or , .. Vlolence ’ invasion or rebellion. In case of 

may, for a ptt,T’ 7^ 1116 PUblk Safety requires il ’ he 
concurrence of 1 ”°* eXCeedlng sbct y da y s > and, with the 
Congress susnena tt^ arna i orit y ° PaP the members of the 
or place the Phil' & privdege tlie writ °f habeas corpus, 
law. The Congress^h 165 ° r ^ part thereof under martial 
its °! at lea * a majority of all 

proclamation or L • p lal sessi °n, may revoke such 

invasion or rebellion shan 0 "’ ° X eXt6nd the same if 1116 
it. persist and public safety requires 


The next paragraphs read: 

The Supreme Cr mrt ^ 

ceeding filed by anv citi?^ re / ieW ’ m 311 appropriate pro- 
basis of the proclamaf ^ ^ su ^ ic i enc y of the factual 
of the privilege of the 0 ” ° martial law or the suspension 

«* operation of 

courts or legislative assemhi functioning of the civil 
ferment of jurisdiction on mlT’ ” 0r authorize the con- 
civilians where civil courts are ^ble^oT ^ agenCieS 0ver 
matically suspend the privilege of the wrir 01 ' 0 "’ aUt °’ 

The suspension of the privilege of the writ shall apply 
only to persons judicially charged for rebellion or J of- 
fenses inherent in or directly connected with invasion. 

Thus, one will note that insurrection has been elim 
nated as a ground for declaring martial law or ft 


suspending the writ of habeas corpus and the phrase 
“imminent danger thereof” has also been deleted. So 
that under this Article, the grounds for declaring martial 
law or suspending the writ of habeas corpus are inva- 
sion and rebellion when public safety requires it. 

It will also be noted that if martial law were to be 
declared, it has to receive the concurrence of a majority 
of the Members of the Congress in order for it to be 
effective, and it will only be for 60 days. This 60-day 
period may be shortened or extended by a majority vote 
of the Members of the Congress. And, whereas before 
the Supreme Court cannot review the grounds relied 
upon by the President in declaring martial law or in 
suspending the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, 
the Supreme Court now has the power of review upon 
the filing of an appropriate petition by any citizen, and 
then the Supreme Court is required to promulgate its 
decision on the matter within 30 days from the filing of 
the petition. 

It is also stated in this Article the meaning and effect 
of martial law. It is made clear that a state of martial 
law does not suspend the operation of the Constitution 
and it does not supplant the functioning of our civil 
courts or of our legislative assemblies. A state of martial 
law does not authorize the conferment of jurisdiction 
on military courts and agencies over civilians where civil 
courts are able to function. It will be remembered that 
when President Marcos proclaimed martial law on 
September 21, 1972, at the same time, he issued a 
general order, as I remember it, stating that our civil 
courts shall continue to exercise the jurisdiction and 
powers they have been exercising. But it was also stated 
there that our courts cannot take cognizance of cases 
where the validity of the acts performed by President 
Marcos is in question. In other words, when an order 
or letter of instructions or presidential decree is issued 
by President Marcos, that cannot be taken cognizance of 
by the civil courts but rather, it will be the military 
courts that will decide the matter. 

Also, the declaration of martial law does not auto- 
matically suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus, which was not the case when President Marcos 
declared martial law in September 1972. He issued an 
order, I think it was General Order No. 3, which allowed 
the arrest and detention of any person simply upon an 
order authorized by him and issued by the Minister of 
National Defense. So that many persons were arrested 
and detained without any warrant of arrest. Soldiers 
simply went to the houses of these persons and ar- 
rested them, which was completely not authorized 
because the declaration of martial law does not auto- 
matically suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus. 

I remember that when this matter was being discussed 
in the Committee, there was one resolution referred 
to the Committee which proposed that a state of 
martial law should last for only 30 days and, in order 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


387 


that a declaration of martial law may be effective, there 
should be a concurrence of not only a majority but a 
two-thirds vote of the legislature. We thought that to 
require a two-thirds concurrence might be quite difficult 
for the Chief Executive, considering that the only 
grounds now for martial law are actual invasion and 
actual rebellion. And so, this creates a very dangerous 
situation in the country and the enemies of the State 
may try to prevent Members of the Congress to attend a 
session just to prevent a two-thirds concurrence in the 
declaration of martial law. That is the reason we re- 
quired only a majority concurrence. 

The next constitutional change concerns the appoint- 
ing power of the President. In the 1935 Constitution, 
the power of the President to appoint heads of execu- 
tive departments, bureaus, offices, and officers in the 
Armed Forces from the rank of colonel in the army to 
naval captain in the navy, and other government offi- 
cials was subject to confirmation by the Commission 
on Appointments. So, there was a check and balance on 
the appointing power of the President. But in the 1973 
Constitution, that requirement of confirmation by the 
Commission on Appointments was omitted. And so, 
from that time, President Marcos could appoint any- 
body without the necessity of obtaining the consent of 
a Commission on Appointments. His power to appoint 
became absolute. Because of that, there was no check or 
balance in the appointments he made especially in the 
judiciary and the executive departments. 

In this Article, we are restoring that limitation, that 
the appointing power of the President should be made 
subject to consent and confirmation by the Commis- 
sion on Appointments. Besides restoring the require- 
ment of confirmation by the Commission on Appoint- 
ments, we have introduced a provision, authored by 
Commissioner Davide and approved by the Committee, 
that the President shall not make appointments within 
two months preceding the date of the next presidential 
election. This is to avoid what is known as “midnight 


appointments.” 

An exception was placed on this provision to the 
effect that temporary appointments may be made to 
executive positions which, if left vacant, would pre- 
judice the public service or endanger the public safety. 
This provision appears in Section 13, pages 5 and 6 o 
the Article. 


The next constitutional change that I would like to 
bring to the body’s attention is the power of the 
President to contract or guarantee domestic or foreign 
loans in behalf of the Republic of the Philippine. We 
studied this provision as it appears in the 1973 Constitu 
tion. In the 1973 Constitution, it is provided that the 
President may contract or guarantee domestic or foreign 
loans in behalf of the Republic of the Philippines 
subject to such limitations as may be provided by law. 


In view of the fact that our foreign debt has 
amounted to $26 billion - it may reach up to $36 
billion including interests - we studied this provision in 


the 1973 Constitution, so that some limitations may be 
placed upon this power of the President. We consulted 
representatives of the Central Bank and the National 
Economic Development Authority on this matter. After 
studying this matter, we decided to provide in Section 
18 that insofar as the power of the President to contract 
or guarantee foreign loans is concerned, it must receive 
the prior concurrence of the Monetary Board. 

We placed this limitation because, as everyone knows, 
the Central Bank is the custodian of the foreign reserves 
of our country, and so, it is in the best position to 
determine whether an application for foreign loan ini- 
tiated by the President is within the paying capacity of 
our country or not. That is the reason we require prior 
concurrence of the Monetary Board insofar as contract- 
ing and guaranteeing of foreign loans are concerned. 

We also provided that the Monetary Board should 
submit complete quarterly reports of the decisions it 
has rendered on applications for loans to be contracted 
or guaranteed by the Republic of the Philippines so that 
Congress, after receiving these reports, can study the 
matter. If it believes that the borrowing is not justified 
by the amount of foreign reserves that we have, it 
can make the necessary investigation in aid of legisla- 
tion, so that if any further legislation is necessary, it 
can do so. 


Another constitutional change that we proposed is on 
the appointing power of the President insofar as his 
spouse, relatives and cronies are concerned. The first 
paragraph of Section 1 9 states the prohibitions: 

The President, Vice-President, members of the Cabinet 
and chiefs of bureaus or offices and their assistants shall 
not, during their term, hold any other office or employ- 
ment, nor may they practice any profession, participate 
directly or indirectly in any business, or be financially in- 
terested directly in any contract with, or in any financial 
or special privilege granted by the government or any sub- 
division, agency or instrumentality thereof, including any 
government- owned or controlled corporation, and shall 
strictly avoid conflict of interest in the conduct of their 
office. 


Regarding the spouse and relatives, the second para- 
graph reads as follows: 


. . . vwHooiiguuiiiy ui aiiiimy 

wi in le lr civil degree of the President shall not be 

appointed as minister, deputy minister or head of bureau 
or office. 


. “otiLunuiidi cnange is on the treaty 

making power of the President. In the 1935 Consti 
tution, it is clearly provided that the President ma: 
en ei into treaties and other international agreement 
with the concurrence of a majority of the Congress 
but in the 1973 Constitution, while there is a provisioi 
un er the legislative department which says that the 
power of the President to enter into treaties and inter 
national agreements shall be subject to the ratificatior 


388 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


and concurrence of a majority of Congress, when one 
comes to the Article on the National Economy and 
Patrimony of the nation, there was inserted a para- 
graph to the effect that the President alone can 
enter into treaties and international agreements by 
simply stating that it is in the interest of the national 
welfare. Because of this provision, we have made it clear 
in this Article on the Executive that no treaty or inter- 
national agreement entered into by the President shall 
be valid and/or effective without the concurrence of a 
majority of Congress. There are also new provisions here 
which were not covered in previous Constitutions re- 
garding what should be done in case of vacancy in the 
Office of the Vice-President or what shall be done in 
case the President is no longer capable of exercising the 
powers and the duties of his office. And on that matter, 
I would like to yield this sponsorship to our Vice- 
Chairman, Commissioner Regalado, who has studied 
the provisions on that matter. 

T? E RESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 


MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President 

a vtc C S^L n n f r had the SitUation where wa 
^ ° f the Vice - Pr esident and it wa 

drawing from the’ W3S n ° necessit y for that. Bt 
OfficHf Z VW P PC T nCe ° f the United Stat es, th 

times%° n V t LTTwh1 ^ th6re h3d been Vacant 1 

becomes important Alth™ ^ , purpose of this positio 
called just a “spare tie” he 1S sometim es derisivel 
cially in the orrlpr r>f ’ be assumes importance esp< 
the Philippi” h ° f su f :ss '°" because just as it is i 
President to the Vie.* p’ succession is from th 
b«h. then' £^rS& ta ">* absence « 

Vice-President'has bee^n vacant lT t the ,??‘ Ce of ,h 

February 10, 1967 _ c n( tment which was ratified c 

the Office of the Vice JWh^ 831 ^” 18 thevacanc y i 
attention at that time Th P S ? C ? t , received very litt 
significance was in thp tlrst time that it assume 
stances created bv th* Unantlcl Pated set of circur 
Agnew, if the body will rp^uw* 1011 of Vice - p residej 
charges. And at the samp t; ’ avoid federal crimin 
was under a cloud of susnin 6 ’ President Nixon himse 
gate affair. President Nixon ^ n o 8enerated b y the Wate 
Republican, who was then th p minated Gerald Ford, 
House. But the De m t"atS leader in 11 

chambers of Congress, and Congress j° n ? olled bo 
the Constitution, limited its investigation k f P \ ng Wl 
tions of the fitness of Mr. Ford. During the interi! 
between Ford s nomination by Nixon and his confiru 
tion by Congress, there were constitutional questio 
raised: What would happen if President Nixon resigns 
is removed from office? Who would now recommend 


the Congress the acting President? That is the impor- 
tance of this constitutional provision in case there is a 
vacancy in the Office of the Vice-President. 

With respect to the question of incapacity of the 
President, of course, the concomitant question is: Who 
will determine whether or not he is capable of discharg- 
ing the functions of his office? Just in the recent past, 
we had the problem where our President disappeared 
from public view and there were speculations and 
rumors. Despite the contentions that he was incapable, 
he stayed on and insisted that he was capable of dis- 
charging the functions of his office, and the reason for 
his disappearance from public view for a number of 
weeks was that he was writing a book. So, again, we 
took into account Section 3 of the Twenty-Fifth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution, because 
it deals with that situation. And that is translated in 
Section 1 1 of our proposed draft Article, that whenever 
the President transmits to the National Assembly his 
written declaration that he is unable to discharge the 
powers and duties of his office, well and good, because 
he has transmitted it. But he may not be in a position to 
make a written declaration or he may not want to send 
a declaration or a recognition of his incapacity. Conse- 
quently, if he just agrees or admits that he is incapable 
of performing the duties of his office, then the powers 
and duties shall be discharged by the Vice-President as 
acting President. But if the President fails or refuses to 
do so, then the remedy is to have a majority of all the 
members of the Cabinet transmit to the National As- 
sembly their written declaration that the President is 
unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, 
in which case the Vice-President shall immediately 
assume the powers. However, if after that the President 
again transmits to Congress his written declaration that 
the “no inability” exists and he wants to resume the 
powers of his office, then a majority of all the members 
of the Cabinet shall transmit their written declaration 
within five days to Congress that the President is unable 
to discharge the powers and duties of his office. There 
is, therefore, a deadlock here — the President contend- 
ing that he is capable and the majority of the members 
of the Cabinet saying that he is incapable. And the 
solution, under this Twenty-Fifth Amendment to the 
United States Constitution, is that thereupon Congress 
shall decide the conflicting contentions, convening with- 
in 48 hours for that purpose if not in session. And Cong- 
ress shall, within 21 days after receipt of the written 
declaration of the Cabinet, or if not in session within 
21 days after it is required to assemble, determine by a 
two-thirds vote of all the Members whether the President 
is in truth unable or is able to discharge the functions or 
his duties. In the United States, they have had that 
experience four times: 1 ) When President Garfield suf- 
fered a lingering death from an assassin’s bullet; 2) when 
President Wilson had a physical breakdown during the 
closing years of his second term; 3) when there was 
concern about the health of President Roosevelt prior to 
his fatal attack; and 4) when President Eisenhower was 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


389 


temporarily disabled by a heart attack at first and later 
by a serious operation. 

So far, we have not had such problems which could 
have precipitated a constitutional crisis, but it is best to 
anticipate that possibility and withdraw from the ex- 
perience of those who had to go through that constitu- 
tional ordeal without a settled rule in the Constitution. 

MR. SUMULONG. I will just bring to the attention of 
the body a last constitutional change concerning the 
pardoning power of the President. In the 1935 Constitu- 
tion, it is clearly stated and provided that the pardoning 
power of the President may be exercised after convic- 
tion. But in the 1973 Constitution, as amended, the 
phrase “after conviction” was deleted, so that President 
Marcos was able to pardon accused persons even be- 
fore they have been tried and convicted. That was a 
scandalous situation and that is the reason why we 
restore the phrase “after conviction” in Section 1 7 of 
the Article now submitted for consideration. The 
provision reads: 

Except in cases of impeachment, or as otherwise pro- 
vided in this Constitution, the President may grant re- 
prieves, commutations, and pardons, and remit fines and 
forfeitures, after conviction. However, the power to grant 
executive clemency for violations of corrupt practices laws 
may be limited by legislation. 

He shall also have the power to grant amnesty with the 
concurrence of a majority of all the members of the Con 
gress. 

With these explanations, the Committee will now 
welcome interpellations. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, we have very impor- 
tant and very beautiful ladies who are visiting us here, so 
I move that we suspend the session for a few minutes 
so we can meet them. 


* 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session 
for a brief time. The women have requested that they be 
allowed to present a scroll on women s rights through 
the honorable Deputy Foreign Minister Leticia Ramos- 
Shahani. 

It was 10:47 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 11:08 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask the Chairman and the mem- 
bers of the Committee to take their seats at the commit- 
tee table? 


Madam President, may I ask that Commissioner 
Nolledo be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to propound some questions to the 
Chairman and the members of the Committee on the 
Executive. 

MR. SUMULONG. With pleasure. 

MR. NOLLEDO. On page 1, line 12 of the report, 
the words “resident of the Philippines” should be under- 
stood to mean not actual residence but constructive 
residence or domicile as applied to Members of the 
Congress. Am I right, Madam President? 

I would like to follow that up with another question. 
For example, Mr. Rafael Salas, who is now the Chair- 
man of the Commission on Population Control of the 
United Nations, has been absent for more than 10 years 
from the Republic of the Philippines. When he comes 
back to the Philippines, may he run for the position of 
President? 

MR. SUMULONG. The requirement of residence 
should be actual residence. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Should it be actual residence? 

MR. SUMULONG. Yes. If one has been abroad for 
10 years and he comes back to the Philippines one year 
before he runs for the Office of the President, he is 
qualified. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, there is a distinction now on the 
meaning of residence with respect to Members of the 
legislature and the President. It seems to me that this 
should mean merely domicile. He may be temporarily 
absent from the Philippines in the exercise of his pro- 
fession oi in order to discharge certain duties in an 
agency like the UN but with the intention to come back 
to the Philippines. I think he should not be disqualified 
to run tor President. Would the Chairman reconsider 
that statement? I would like to refer the question to 
Commissioner Regalado, if the Chairman does not mind. 

MR^ REGALADO. Actually, this provision was taken 
from Section 3, Article VII of the 1935 Constitution. 
And I understand that from the records of the 1935 
Constitutional Convention what they envisioned was 
actual physical residence in the Philippines, although it 
may be punctuated every now and then by occasional 
trips abroad, even, say, three months or four months. 
But the reason they made the distinction, if such a 
distinction really exists between the executive and the 
Members of the legislature, is that the legislature as a 
separate branch of the government is collective in 


390 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


nature; whereas, in the case of the executive depart- 
ment, only one person comprises the power of the 
executive. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Suppose he was a political exile like 
Raul Manglapus who stayed in the United States by 
reason of the repressive regime in the country, he 
cannot run for President when he comes back to the 
Philippines after democracy has been restored. 

MR. REGALADO. As I said, it may be punctuated by 
voluntary absence for a justifiable reason or because of 
compulsion to be temporarily absent from the Philip- 
pines. But what is envisioned here is that he was origi- 
nally an actual resident of the Philippines and, there- 
fore, it was his domicile. Then his trips or stay abroad 
was for justifiable causes but he is still considered a 
resident in the concept of domicile because there is the 
animus revertendi. But if his stay abroad was with the 
animus manendi to stay there, then that break of 
residence might be taken into account. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, I take it that this should mean 
domicile? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

. REGALADO. Commissioner Bernas would like 
to clarify that point. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

can be hS! AS f If ,he understand ' ri S is domicile, this 
manent rS. * 3 person ' let us establishes a per- 
green-card 5* s ° mew here else. Perhaps, becoming a 
green card holder of the United States could break this. 

M R. NOLLEDO. Thank you very much. 

It will be remembered That r L? eC 'iv llne 19 olpase *• 

won as Vice-President « f v ^ hen Diosdado Macapagal 
ident, he was a jobless Vice P Ga „ ia as the Pres ' 
around, shaking hands with th ® Slden J- He used to roam 
for President, and he won tho Peop e and campaigning 
position of President. At that^bm ^ V™ ™ n f ° r the 
constitutional law deplored n me ’ 3 P rofess ors of 

the 1935 Constitution No" ^ void in 

void has not been cured perfectly Teh ^ -tu the 
ment: “The Vice-President mav he * the , State ‘ 

member of the Cahinpt ” tu 3y a PP° lnte d as a 
mem Dei or tne cabinet. The words “may be” indicate 

that .1 ,s dtscret.onaty on the part of the Presided to 

appomt the Vice-President. So, it may turn out, in view 

Of the multiparty system that we are adopting that the 

Vice-President-elect may not belong to the party of the 

President and a constitutional void again may take place 

because one does not expect the President to appoint 


him as a member of the Cabinet; or even if they belong 
to the same party, there is indifference between the 
two, in which case, the President will have no interest 
in appointing the Vice-President as a member of the 
Cabinet. Will the Committee agree at the appropriate 
time that the words “may be” be changed to SHALL 
because we will have another jobless Vice-President? 
His position would amount to a useless appendage in 
the administrative hierarchy of the country. What does 
the Committee say about this, please? 

MR. REGALADO. We used . the permissive word 
“may” because it should be taken into account that 
when the Vice-President runs for that office, he is not 
running with the intention or expectation or desire to 
be a member of the Cabinet. It would be embarrassing 
for the President to be compelled to appoint a Vice- 
President who refuses to serve in the Cabinet. That will 
also be an incursion into the appointing power of the 
President. 

Commissioner Bernas will add some more. 

FR. BERNAS. We still follow the principle that a 
Cabinet member should be of the President’s bosom 
which is very important in the application of the doc- 
trine of qualified political agency, which says that the 
acts of Cabinet members are presumed to be the acts of 
the President, so that it is necessary that whoever is 
appointed a member of the Cabinet should be some- 
body who is completely trusted by the President. So, 
he is the alter ego; but if the Vice-President happens to 
be very different from the President, we should not 
expect the President to appoint him member of the 
Cabinet. 

MR. NOLLEDO. On page 2, lines 7 and 8, because of 
the use of the words “upon determination of the 
authenticity and due execution thereof” having 
reference to the certificates of canvass covering the 
positions of President and Vice-President, am I right if I 
say that the duty of the legislature; that is, the Congress 
in joint session assembled, is no longer ministerial in the 
canvass of the returns for the offices of the President 
and Vice-President? 

MR. SUMULONG. I will refer the Gentleman to 
Commissioner Maambong, who is a member of the Com- 
mittee and the one who discussed this very extensively 
during the committee meetings. 

Will Commissioner Maambong answer that inter- 
pellation, please. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I did not get the question quite 
well. 

MR. ^NOLLEDO. I am referring to the use of the 
words “upon determination of the authenticity and due 
execution thereof” on lines 7 and 8, page 2, referring to 
the certificates of canvass of the President and Vice- 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


391 


President. Am I right if I say that because of the use of 
these words, the duty of the legislature to canvass is no 
longer ministerial? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, the word 
“ministerial” has always been interpreted by the 
Supreme Court as applicable to the canvass made by 
the National Assembly, and the reason why we did not 
put the word “ministerial” in the Article is, it has been 
understood in the case of Roxas vs. Lopez and in other 
cases. When we used the words “authenticity” and 
“genuineness,” the question refers to the problem 
of whether or not the ministerial function is already 
nonministerial. The answer is, it is still ministerial 
but when we say “authenticity and due execution,” 
what it really means is that the National Assembly 
will look at the certificates of canvass and find out 
from the face of the document whether there are flaws 
in the execution and authenticity of the document. 
That is what it means. 


may elect the person who will act as President until the 
President and Vice-President shall have qualified. I do 
not see any valid reason for the Committee not to adopt 
that latter provision because there may be some consti- 
tutional chaos that may happen if there should be no 
one who will assume immediately the offices of the 
President and Vice-President in case of vacancy. Why 
do we not simplify matters? 

MR. REGALADO. We will appreciate the formula- 
tion of an amendment to that. But the reason why we 
did so is that we felt that a constitutional provision 
specifically stating the order of succession after the 
Vice-President would make any future changes a little 
less flexible, because then we will have to have a 
plebiscite to amend the Constitution. In the United 
States, up to now, the order of succession after the 
Speaker is also provided by law, not by a constitutional 
provision. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, in the event that 
the legislature finds out that there are serious defects m 
the certificates of canvass - as when the seals are 
broken, there are a lot of erasures and then many ot 
them are unsigned and, therefore, authenticity appears 
to be questionable — what will happen? 


MR. MAAMBONG. The answer to that is in the 
phrase “in the manner provided by law.” The Commi ' 
tee had to insert the phrase “in the manner proyi e 
by law” so that the legislature itself will find out and 
will make it very specific as to what flaws or deficien it 
in the certificates of canvass can be taken cogmzan 
by the canvassing board of tellers, because as o 
guiding regulations that govern the National Assemby, 
as I mentioned in the Committee, are. ie r . 
regulations of the COMELEC, the Omnibus Election 
Code, the jurisprudence from the decisions of t 

Supreme Court. All these things taken together 
legislature is given a notice by using t e P in * s j te _ 
manner provided by law,” so that it wi nl£ j , , 0 f 

mination now of what are the points w uc 1 
tellers can take cognizance of, because it is y 

clear right now under the laws and regulations, and as a 
matter of fact, that was one of the controversies wh eh 
arose during the canvassing of the vo cs ° 

Aquino and former President Marcos in the last Batasan. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to propound the next question to any 
member of the Committee, of course, including 

Chairman. 

I notice that in case of vacancy in the position ot the 
President, as well as Vice-President, the Committee is 
leaving it to Congress to determine the manner of suc- 
cession Why do we not provide in the Constitution now 
that in case of vacancy in the offices of the President 
and Vice-President, Congress, in joint session assembled, 


MR. NOLLEDO. The next question is with respect 
to the incapacity of the President. It is said here that in 
case of conflict between the claim of the President that 
he is capacitated and the claim of the members of the 
Cabinet — I think the majority thereof — that he is inca- 
pacitated, it seems to me that the conflict shall be 
resolved by a majority vote of the legislature — the 
House of Representatives and the Senate. We all know 
that the members of the Cabinet are under the control 
of the President, as specified in Section 14 on page 6 
of the committee report, and they are alter egos of 
the President. Does not the Commissioner foresee the 
possibility that should the members of the Cabinet, 
a majority thereof, decide to declare that the President 
is incapacitated, the President who is still temporarily 
discharging his duties or still discharging his duties may 
remove them and then change them with persons who 
are friendly to him? What is the safeguard against that 
possibility? Sometimes the President may sense that 
the members of the Cabinet are meeting secretly with 
intention to vote and declare that he is incapacitated. 
So, he can change them immediately, being alter egos 
of the President and under his control. 


... ,, , udb control over me 

ministers or the secretaries, as they may later be called, 

Wlff f 2T nanCe T f thGir res P ec tive duties as minis- 
ter^ When they meet here for that purpose, they are not 

rewonH^n 1 ^ 86 !^ dut * es °f their ministries but to 
nf P m V T 1 ^ 1 problem because of the incapacity 
of the President. If the President can do that and is 

capa e o nowing about the cabalistic designs of his 
ministers then that shows he is capacitated, not incapa- 
citated. Secondly, the mere fact that they appear to be 
a ei egos is for legal purposes; that is, that the act of 
the minister is the act of the President. That does not 
rule out the possibility of independent-minded and 

perceptive ministers. 


392 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


In the Twenty-Fifth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution, the Vice-President was among those who 
should, together with the Cabinet members, participate 
in sending a written declaration of incapacity or capa- 
city. However, the Committee decided to exclude parti- 
cipation on the part of the Vice-President because in 
law he would appear to be an interested party. 

MR. NOLLEDO. On page 6, line 23, with emphasis 
on the word “revoke,” I have a question which I think 
is very important: When the President suspends the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus or when he de- 
clares martial law, must such declaration or suspension 
be simultaneously concurred in by the Congress? Or is 
there a possibility that in view of the existence of cir- 
cumstances justifying the proclamation or suspension, 
the President may immediately suspend the privilege of 
the writ of habeas corpus or immediately declare martial 
law and submit the same to the Congress for concur- 
rence? It seems to me that with the word “revoke,” 
the report of the Committee implies that the President 
may immediately declare martial law or suspend the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus without the 
simultaneous concurrence of the legislature. Am I 


MR. SUMULONG. The Committee 
pellation to Commissioner Concepcion. 


refers that inter- 


m£ bvThf C r I0N The draft ° f *• proposals 
of Congress. ^ C ° mm,,tee the concurr 


MR. SUMULONG. That interpellation is referred to 
Commissioner Davide. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

This particular proposal was lifted from a resolution 
filed by this Member limiting the power of the President 
to grant executive clemency. Among the curtailments 
provided for in that resolution is that in cases of convic- 
tion for graft and corruption, no executive clemency 
can be extended to the offender without the favorable 
recommendation of the court which rendered the final 
decision. But it was the thinking of the Committee that 
in that respect we should rather leave it to the legisla- 
ture to enact the necessary legislation, if there is a need 
to really curtail. 

My own personal thinking when I submitted that 
resolution is that in case of graft and corruption, no 
executive clemency should be granted without the 
concurrence or favorable recommendation of the con- 
victing court, the idea being that graft and corruption 
goes into the fabric of public service. Therefore, no 
person so convicted for a violation of the public trust 
or violation of election laws should be allowed or 
granted executive clemency without the favorable 
recommendation of the convicting court. 

As mandated in the Article on the COMELEC, no 
pardon or parole can be granted to a person convicted 
for an election offense without the favorable recom- 
mendation of the COMELEC. So that is why the 
Committee merely left it to ordinary legislation. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Therefor the i , 
n.ar„a, law sha„ take effect SL uL 

cu“e R n ce C0NCEPC,0N - N °- '< be with the , 

on line^^pfge^' *'7 raspect t0 th <= word "citi; 

not be a taxpayer Mart al 7! a '’ d th . at a citizen 1 
disbursement of public fund involve additi 

ruling of the Supreme cw “ has been a 

but in the Unite7sm.es a, " 0t ,° nly in ,he Phili M 

citizen of the Philippines m* ° n V a tax P a y er who 

government official concerned Tvt^tT ?* Ch aCt ° f 
concerned. Must he be a taxpaj 

MR. CONCEPCION Th* „ 
does not require the citizen tobe a txpayer. C ° mm 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

Lines 23, 24 and 25 are an entimh; 
but let me begin from the latter part of ^"^23^°™ 

However, the power to grant executive clemcncv f 
violations of corrupt practices laws may be limited I 
legislation. 

May we know the rationale behind this provisi 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

Madam President, I have one last question on page 7, 
Section 18, lines 31 to 32. It says here that the Pres- 
ident may contract foreign loans with the concurrence 
of the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of the 
Philippines. It seems to me that the 1973 Constitution 
recognizes the Central Bank as the central monetary 
authority, but it does not consider the Central Bank as 
an independent body. 

I think under the Central Bank Act, RA 265, as 
amended, the members of the Monetary Board are 
appointees of the President and most of whom — 
correct me if I am wrong — are alter egos of the Pres- 
ident, like the Minister of Finance, the head of the 
Board of Investments and their alternates. 

Can we not say that this will not preclude the 
possibility of considering the contracting of foreign 
loans as an exclusive presidential prerogative consider- 
ing that the composition of the Monetary Board reflects 
membership under the control of the President? 

MR. REGALADO. In response to that, it is not 
correct to state that the entire membership of the 
Monetary Board is composed of persons who appear to 
be close to or are alter egos of, the President. There are 
also representatives there of the private sectors. As a 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


393 


matter of fact, in the last hearing we had, there was a 
move on the part of businessmen to ask for more 
paticipation as members of the Monetary Board. 

The reason we put the Monetary Board here is that 
it is the present central monetary authority. I under- 
stand that in another committee, they are planning to 
change its name to Central Monetary Authority or 
retain the name Monetary Board. 

We were impaled on the horns of a dilemma. If we 
were to give the President unlimited power to contract 
foreign loans, then we may have a repeat performance 
of what we went through. On the other hand, if we were 
to be very strict with the President so much so that by 
the time the authorities here or the legislature give their 
consent, that foreign loan sought to be contracted is no 
longer available, or the purpose which it was intended to 
subserve is already academic. Instead, we put this as a 
medium arrangement, a middle ground, but with the 
participation also of the legislature in the sense that any 
action of the Monetary Board shall periodically be 
reported quarterly to the legislature. Instead ot requir- 
ing approval of the Congress which might defeat the 
purpose for contracting the foreign loan, at least a 
quarterly report should be submitted within 30 days 
from the beginning of each quarter to inform the legis- 
lature about the foreign loans that it has acted upon or 
still to be contracted. Then, the legislature now partici- 
pates either to give its concurrence if it is for a meri- 
torious purpose or to curtail by law the powers ot the 
Monetary Board. 

While it is not stated here - although it says here that 
the prior concurrence of the Monetary Board is re- 
quired — it is, of course, implicit therein that the 
Monetary Board shall act as may be provided by law. In 
fact, right now the powers of the Monetary Board are 
provided by law. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. SUMULONG. May we give the floor to Commis- 
sioner Villegas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I will just volunteer an informa- 
tion about the Monetary Board or the central monetary 
authority. There is a provision in the committee report 
on the national economy stipulating that the Monetary 
Board should have majority membership from the 
private sector, and there is even the possibility that in 
the future, there will be no government official in the 
Monetary Board, very much like the Federal Reserve 
System in the United States. 

So, definitely the thinking is that the Monetary Board 
should be released from any dependence on the execu- 
tive, on the President’s men, so to speak. 


However, in the last meeting Central Bank Governor 
Fernandez said that temporarily they want to have at 
least the Finance Minister as a member of the Monetary 
Board for coordination purposes. But definitely the 
thinking is that the Monetary Board should be com- 
pletely independent of the executive. 

MR. SUMULONG. Thank you for that information. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to 
commend the Committee for deleting Section 17, 
Article VII, one of the most immoral provisions of the 
1973 Constitution, granting the President and his 
cronies immunity from suits. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Incidentally, my intention has 
been called by our committee secretary, that some of 
the Commissioners may be using the previous version of 
the committee report. I request the Commissioners to 
look at their copies. It is the one that has on the upper 
right hand corner, in parentheses, the words “Substitute 
Resolution,” so that we will not be confused with the 
pages and the lines. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

1 have a few observations and questions on Section 
1 5, page 6. 

I understand that during the hearing on the Article on 
the Legislative, the term “imminent danger thereof” was 
eliminated in the proviso authorizing the President to 
declare martial law or to suspend the writ of habeas 
corpus because of the alleged abuse of the previous 
regime. So the term now is “invasion or rebellion.” 
When there is an actual rebellion or invasion, the Presi- 
dent still cannot declare martial law nor suspend the 
writ of habeas corpus because he still has to go to 
Congress for its concurrence. Is that how 1 understand 
this Section 15? 

MR. SUMULONG. The first lines of Section 15 read: 
The President shall be the commander-in-chief of all the 
armed forces of the Philippines and, whenever it becomes 
necessary , he may call out such armed forces to prevent or 
suppress lawless violence, invasion or rebellion. 

So, even without a declaration of martial law, he can 

call out the Armed Forces to prevent or suppress in- 
vasion or rebellion. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Correct, but that is related to the 
next sentence which reads: 


394 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


In case of invasion or rebellion, when the public safety 
requires it. he may, for a period not exceeding sixty days, 
and, with the concurrence of at least a majority of all the 
members of the Congress, suspend the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus. 


I am now putting myself either as Chief of Staff of 
the Armed Forces or as President of the Philippines. Of 
course, that is very far and very remote. But when I 
see that there is actual rebellion and people are already 
marching up the streets of Metro Manila or up the 
streets of San Pablo City in my province and the Armed 
Forces engage them in actual combat and then arrest, 
say, 50 of them and put them in jail, it will take time 
before we can go to judicial proceedings. Judicial pro- 
ceedings at that moment may be a little remote because 
the Armed Forces are busy fighting. 

To require the President to suspend the writ of 
habeas corpus with the concurrence of Congress will be 
very difficult because by that time, some people would 
have been arrested or jailed and some would have been 
killed because of actual shooting. Actually, the Pres- 
ident in this case will suspend the writ of habeas corpus 
without the concurrence of a majority of the Members 
of the Congress. That is the situation I can see when we 
talk of actual invasion. 


I questioned the members of the Committee on th 
Legislative why they deleted the term “imminent dang< 

ere< V sa * d *bis is actual invasion; the enemie 

are actually kndmg on the shores of our coasts. The 

h! d p^r H ,f the Ships are sti11 in Tok V° en route t 
the Philippines, we cannot call that invasion because w 

f° ° P ntT U they WiU land ’ alth °ugh there is a 
imminent danger thereof. 

a ,r LvT ? f CtU f inVasion the Philippines, that , 

capture nri 1 War ' The possiblIlt y th ^ we ma 

and we ^ l enemy agents and spies is not remot 

judicial action^ f them in jaiL However, to require 

difficult for o e r° re * 1Cy Can w dl be ver 

fhe powers of o' Co ™ mande ™-Chief. We are clippin 
ne Powers of our Commander-in-Chief because nf 
experience with the previous regime 

mander-in-Chief^of'tlie n U rr President is the Com 
for everything that lt r n ed ' F ° rCes - He is «Ponsibl. 
should not clip his powers 13PPen ln this country. Wi 

proper time comes? 


MR. REGALADO. Of 

amendments. 


course. 


We will welcome 


MR. SUMULONG. Certainly at th 

Iy ' at thc appropriate 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

I am only most concerned with what is I . 
in our country today. There are strikes here a nH 
loyalists are rallying here; and there is shooting 


countryside. If these escalate into a worse situation as 
an actual rebellion, we have clipped the powers of the 
President to suspend the writ of habeas corpus or to 
declare martial law. 

My next point is on page 7, line 14. When we say 
that the confirmation by the Commission on Appoint- 
ments on appointees of the President must begin from 
the rank of colonel or captain in the navy, this provi- 
sion is taken from the 1935 Constitution. During that 
time, a full colonel in the Armed Forces was a rare 
breed, more so a captain in the navy. I think there were 
only two generals then. But now, we have so many gen- 
erals, colonels, major generals, rear admirals and so on. 
This is brought about by the increase of our Armed 
Forces to some 250,000. About 1.2 percent of these 
are the general officers. Our general officers up to briga- 
dier generals are the front line generals. They are the ones 
fighting the war for us against insurgency. The major 
generals are normally the major service commanders of 
the Armed Forces, such as the commanding general of 
the army, flag officer of the navy, the commanding 
generals of the air force and the constabulary. But now, 
we are limiting the confirmation to colonels. They are 
the hardworking grades; these are the fighting grades up 
to brigadier general. May we not raise this a little, so 
that the confirmation will only be required beginning 
with the grade of major general, the service command- 
ing general of the Armed Forces? This was recommended 
to me very strongly by General Ramos and Deputy 
Minister Ileto. I fully appreciate their stand on the 
matter considering that those with the rank of one-star 
general are the front line generals against insurgency. 
May the Committee relent when the proper time comes? 

MR. REGALADO. In other words. Commissioner de 
Castro would go beyond the prescription in the 1973 
Constitution which would require confirmation from 
the rank of brigadier general or commodore in the navy. 

MR. DE CASTRO. No, from major general or rear 
admiral in the navy. 

MR. REGALADO. We will consider that at the 
proper time and subject to the corresponding justifica- 
tion. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I will do that. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I am a member of the 
Committee on the Executive and I was the one who 
lowered the rank from general to colonel. The reason 
for this is that if we study history, both the recent and 
the older history, we will find out that most of the 
coup d’ etats were staged by colonels. 

MR. REGALADO. That is right. 

MR. RAMA. Coming closer home, we would notice 
that the February revolution was staged mostly by the 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


395 


colonels in the Reform the Armed Forces Movement. 
I know because I interviewed most of them. They were 
the ones who executed the plan which culminated 
in the revolution. 

I was thinking that the President should have a hand 
in appointing the colonels in order to help stop this 
political instability. So that is the reason for the inser- 
tion of that word. 

MR. DE CASTRO. We should take note' that the 
President appoints even the newly graduated cadets in 
the Philippine Military Academy as second lieutenants. 
So, the appointment in the military by the President 
is from the time one becomes a cadet up to the time 
he retires from the Armed Forces. So, the President does 
not only appoint generals; he appoints the lowest 
lieutenants in the Armed Forces. 

Talking of the last February revolution and the RAM, 

I beg to disagree so far that the RAM is instrumental in 
the February revolution. I have always questioned the 
position of the RAM because, there must not be anothei 
organization within the entire military organization as 
this will create divisiveness, as what has been noted now 
by the present Chief of Staff, of the Armed Forces. In 
fact, during the February revolution, we, the retire 
generals of the Armed Forces, questioned the existence 
of the RAM. We have questioned its members one by 
one on many occasions about their business in the 
Armed Forces creating an organization within the 
organization. 

This is the first time in the history of the armed 
forces anywhere in the world that an organization was 
created within the military organization. 

I repeat that I beg to differ with the Commissioner’s 
belief that the RAM is instrumental in the February 
revolution of 1986. History will show that it is no 
colonels but normally majors and captains who s age 
coup d’ etats. We have not had any coup d ctat ye m 
our country. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to tell the Commissioner 
that my statement about the role of the RAM in t le as 
February revolution is based upon my interviews wi i 
the members of the RAM about their history, how t ley 
formed that organization, their objectives, et cetera, 
harking back to about three years ago. So, I came o 
the conclusion that they played a very big role in t le 
1986 revolution. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I hate to say this but the leaders 
of the RAM are asking civic organizations to invite them 
so that they can project themselves in the country an 
put themselves in the newspapers. I know this because 
an organization in my town of Binan. Laguna invitee 
me to interpellate a member of the RAM who was sup- 
posed to be their guest speaker. I asked them: Why is 

the guest speaker a RAM member? ” The answer was 


that the leadership of the RAM asked themselves to be 
invited. So I said I cannot question them because if I 
do, the truth will come out, and if I do not question 
them on the truth, I might as well not be there. So. I 
did not go there. But I know for a fact that the RAM 
induced this civic organization in my hometown to 
invite them as guest speakers so they can be projected 
in the newspapers. 

Now, let us go back to our subject matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. Any other question? 

MR. DE CASTRO. One last matter is on the question 
of Commissioner Nolledo about the Monetary Board, 
which was answered by Commissioner Regalado. To me, 
this will not be a check and balance in our presidential 
system of government. To me, the check and balance 
would be this way: the executive by the legislative; 
and the legislative and the executive by the judiciary. 

When we talk of any foreign loan, this is not only 
thought of in one night, nor is it thought of in one 
week. It is a monetary plan or a business plan which 
says, for instance, that this year, I will have this amount. 
Since this is a plan and not a business proposition 
thought of in one night, then the Monetary Board and 
the executive should have more time in planning for 
foreign loans or for guaranteeing other loans. Why not 
let Congress approve foreign loans so as to have a truly 
effective check and balance in the presidential system? 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rama be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. With the indulgence of the Committee 
of which I am a member, I would just like to point out 
that although it .is concerned about the scandal that 
happened during the last administration, where the 
President would grant pardons or reprieves before con- 
viction, I do not believe that the present draft of the 
Committee would fully solve that problem because 
even after conviction, a conviction can be appealed. 
Therefore, I think we should tighten up the phrase by 
saying “after FINAL conviction,” so that we would not 
allow the President to exercise judicial powers in deroga- 
tion of the judicial power vested in the judiciary. So, at 
the proper time, may we insert the word FINAL? 

MR. REGALADO. It has always been the under- 
standing that the word “conviction” means “final 
conviction because an appealable conviction is not yet 
considered as such. At any rate, we will appreciate it ij 
Commissioner Rama can remind us to insert the wok 
at the proper time for better clarity. 


396 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


MR. RAMA. Another point is regarding the Office 
of the Vice-President which is one of the most awk- 
ward offices in our government, as shown by the past 
experience. The Vice-President has been considered only 
as a spare tire. At one time, the Vice-President did 
nothing but campaign all over the country against the 
President and finally, defeated the President who did 
not give him any job, because in the Constitution, there 
was no constitutional function for the Vice-President. 
I do not know whether studies have been made by the 
Committee about the possible official function we can 
give to the Vice-President such as, perhaps, as ex officio 
President of the Senate, so that he would have a definite 
constitutional function. 


or Singson appeared in the Committee chaired by 
Commissioner Villegas, they pointed out that they have 
no fiscal authority insofar as domestic loans are con- 
cerned. That is why the Committee motu proprio 
decided to cancel the words “and domestic.” 

MR. MONSOD. I am sorry I did not hear that. I 
submit. 

On page 8. in the recent remarks made by the Com- 
missioner on the intent of this article on the submission 
of a report by the Monetary Board to Congress, did the 
Commissioner say that the intent here is for Congress 
to review and pass on the merits of the loans? 


MR. REGALADO. We will consider that at the 
proper time. We are aware of the fact that in the United 
States th e Vice-President acts as the Senate President. 
We will consider that in conjunction also with the Com- 

Le ff latlVe because we might be intruding 
into the affairs of the legislature. 

POWM oniW A Pr1 n H° th . er , POint ‘ S ° n ‘ he mart ‘ al laW 

can dec°Le’:J SnE ' ha ‘ ,h<! Presid “' 

Tt hoc w iaW Wlt “ the concurrence of Con- 

s- sSofh th ,r e ; s n ° •«**“ 

concurred in by Congress n by the , President until 
think that we should 8 akn t D °f S n0t the Cornmissi oner 
•»n where 

urgent need for the Pt-pcIh * session and there is an 
So on Section 1 5 betwe^^i! t0 declare martial law? 
“suspend,” Tpropo ‘ W ° rdS '‘ A «"ibly" and 

IS AUTOMATICALLY TnwvcJo' words W HICH 
SESSION. ALLY CONVENED IF NOT IN 

. MR. REGALADO I recall tha t ^ 
tions, I invited the attend dunn 8 °ur delibera- 

draft proposal of former PresH* 16 S'. 0111111411126 to that 
group where they did proDoS th®" 1 Macapa S al and his 
by Congress without call bv ^ t . the p lmmed « ate convening 
this contingency arises It ^ • th ®, Pr f ldent the moment 
So I thmk we can act on hS £ pro P° sal - 

"is at the proper time. 

MR. RAMA. Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO Madam P 

sioner Monsod be recogni ze d reSldent ’ 1 3Sk that C °mmis- 

THE PRESIDENT. Com 


nized. 


missioner Monsod 


is recog- 


MR. REGALADO. No, actually, this portion was 
taken from a bill which was introduced in the past 
Batasan but was overtaken by its abolition. The purpose 
here is actually just to inform Congress, and we will 
note that what it should submit to Congress is a com- 
plete report of its decisions on applications for loans to 
be contracted or guaranteed by the government. 


MR. MONSOD. That is my question. Is the Commis- 
sioner saying that the Monetary Board is obligated to 
submit a report to Congress or the National Assembly 
before the loans become effective? Does it refer to 
loans to be contracted or guaranteed? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, because it will be within 
thirty days from the end of every quarter of the 
calendar year that such a report shall be submitted so 
that Congress may also make representations with the 
corresponding monetary officials. But actually, it does 
not require congressional approval for contracting of 
foreign loans because to do so would make the whole 
procedure tedious- and cumbersome. At least. Congress 
knows what is going on, since it consists of the rep- 
resentatives of the people who ultimately will have to 
pay such loans. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. My only concern is that this 
provision, as it now reads, seems to say that the loans 
do not become effective unless they are first reported 
to Congress. And we are talking here about quarterly 
reports. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. Should this not be a report on the 
loans contracted or guaranteed rather than on loans to 
be contracted or guaranteed? 


MR. MONSOD. On page 7 , 

want to know what is meant by "domes,* *>• 1 just 

MR. REGALADO. As alreadv a „ 

Chairman we have deleted “dome™ loans” 1 Vem 
because when Governor Fernandez and Deputy Govern 


KbGALADO. What was envisioned in that bill 
introduced in the past Batasan was that Congress would 
t| e i'J' are ^e loans to be contracted because I assume 
ia betore that, this matter about contracting loans has 
ong een on the drawing boards. Hence the Monetary 

| P «Li 1 ! r !h dy knows in its Programming just, more or 
en the government is going to contract the loan. If 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


397 


the President, however, decides to go right ahead, 
Congress cannot stop him from contracting that loan, 
although it is the more desirable feature that Congress 
be informed in advance. 

MR. MONSOD. It is clear that the intent of this 
provision is for information purposes only. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, for information purposes 
only. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

I just want to refer to page 6. This may occur in 
other sections. When this provision was first drafted by 
the Committee, was it before or after this body had 
decided on a bicameral legislature? Is it the intent now 
that it is only the Lower House that will concur in the 
suspension of the writ of habeas corpus as provided for 
in Section 1 5? 

MR. REGALADO. I regret that when the substitute 
resolution was printed, obviously, the Secretariat over- 
looked the change from “National Assembly to 
“Congress,” although we had told them that all refer- 
ences to the words “National Assembly” there should 
be changed to “Congress” because we have already 
shifted to bicameralism. Unfortunately, as it came out, 
the words “National Assembly” still remain. We, there- 
fore, request all Commissioners to please indicate in 
their copies that any reference to “National Assembly 
in all the provisions on the executive department be 
changed to “Congress.” 

MR. MONSOD. Section 15 has been raised earlier, but 
I just want to clarify that even for the first declaration 
of martial law which has a time fuse of 60 days, the 
President would need to get the concurrence of the two 
Houses as a precondition for the eftectivity ot martial 
law. 

MR. REGALADO. That is right, and the majority 
vote of all the Members of Congress. 

MR. MONSOD. . . . and of the Senate. 

MR. REGALADO. Of course, the concurrence of 
both the House of Representatives and the Senate is 
needed. We just simply used “Congress.” 

MR. MONSOD. Would the Committee consider pro- 
posals along these lines that would not be too restrictive 
on the President under these circumstances? It seems 
that this provision is too restrictive as far as the ability 
of the President to act during the first 60 days is 
concerned. 

MR. REGALADO. We will entertain that at the 
proper time, although this has been discussed by us 
because in the event of a rebellion or an invasion which 


may not be of such a magnitude as to require the 
suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
or the declaration of martial law, the first sentence takes 
care of it. The President, as Commander-in-Chief, can 
right away order all the Armed Forces to suppress the 
lawless violence, invasion or insurrection. 

Where, however, the matter has deteriorated to the 
point, and the situation has been so aggravated, that the 
President may have to declare martial law or suspend 
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, that is where 
the second clause comes in. And during that intervening 
period, I assume that the Members of Congress are also 
aware of the situation and will seek to convene pre- 
cisely to meet the situation as a second option now. The 
initial problem of actual invasion or insurrection, or 
rather, rebellion is taken care of by the first sentence. 
That does not require concurrence of Congress. The 
President as Commander-in-Chief, can right away order 
the entire Armed Forces to meet the situation. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, may I be allowed 
a question on the same point? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you very much. 

Line 18 of the same section says: “with the con- 
currence of at least a majority of all the members of the 
Congress.” Is the Commissioner referring to the numeri- 
cal majority of 250 plus 24, or to the majority of both 
Houses? 

MR. SUMULONG. Majority of both Houses. 

MR. COLAYCO. Both Houses. I asked so because if 
we retain this phrase, and all the members of the Lower 
House will vote solidly, even if the Senate votes against 
it, the votes of the Lower House will be carried. So, it 
would be a majority of both Houses. 

MR. SUMULONG. I think that would give the intent 
in a clearer form — “both Houses.” 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Tan be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. I just have a couple of clarificatory ques- 
tions. 

On page 7, Section 15, line 9 reads: “for offenses 
inherent in or directly connected with invasion.’ What 
particular offenses are included in this phrase? Is sub- 
veision, for example, excluded or implied? 


398 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. Actually, the offenses involved in 
case of an invasion are those found in Title I, Book II of 
the Revised Penal Code; that is, crimes against national 
security and the law of nations. Among them are 
treason, espionage, communication in wartime with the 
hostile country and giving of information. They are all 
enumerated there. 

We now go to subversion. Subversion is the peacetime 
counterpart of the treason law because in peacetime, 
there is no crime of treason. The crime of treason in 
peacetime is incubated. If the prohibited acts take place 
in wartime, that is treason. We will notice that even the 
penalties are virtually the same for treason and for sub- 
version, that is, prision mayor to death. Only, treason 
cannot be committed in peacetime. 


SR. TAN. So, subversion is included? 

MR. REGALADO. Subversion, if committed in war- 
time, is actually treason. 


during rnttiaUaw* * ” 0t ^ definition we used to h ear 


I am giv^gU^ L ^ 0 ’ That was Mr ‘ Marcos’ definition 
am giving the Commissioner the legal definition. 

SR. TAN. Yes. Thank you. 

martal7aw r aut”matLal| a v ISO ' °" o me sect ' on - Woulc 
of legislation through decrees?* Pres,dent the P owei 

cepcion to “swe° NG ' Wil ‘ ask Commissioner Con 

mr. Concepcion, i, is stated i„ section is- 

or theTonsnS^.I™ d0es , n0 ' SUS|,e " d operation 
civil courts or legislative * SUpp * ant the functioning of the 

au,ho,i “ * he - 

decreases or increases th2Do St '° n r whe,her martial Ian 

cases the power of the President? 

SR. TAN. Decreases? 

MR. CONCEPCION Nm- 

1N - N °t necessarily. 

SR. TAN. So what sn r 

the President c™ proctamarMaUaw? "' CeSSary bcfort 

MR. CONCEPCION. I n , 
the President would have m case of invasion 

in the army. 311 the P° w ers of a genera 


MR. SUMULONG. We ask 

answer. 


Commissioner Bernas 


to 


martial law add to the power of the President to call on 
the armed forces? The first and second lines in this 
provision state: 

A state of martial law does not suspend the operation 
of the Constitution, nor supplant the functioning of the 
civil courts or legislative assemblies . . . 

The provision is put there, precisely, to reverse the 
doctrine of the Sppreme Court. I think it is the case 
Aquino us. COMELEC where the Supreme Court said 
that in times of martial law, the President automatically 
has legislative power. So these two clauses denied that. 
A state of martial law does not suspend the operation 
of the Constitution; therefore, it does not suspend the 
principle of separation of powers. 

The question now is: During martial law, can the 
President issue decrees? The answer we gave to that 
question in the Committee was: During martial law, the 
President may have the powers of a commanding general 
irua theatre of war. In actual war when there is fighting 
in an area, the President as the commanding general has 
the authority to issue orders which have the effect of 
law but strictly in a theatre of war, not in the situation 
we had during the period of martial law. In other words, 
there is an effort here to return to the traditional con- 
cept of martial law as it was developed especially in 
American jurisprudence, where martial law has reference 
to the theatre of war. 


SR. TAN. Thank you. 

That clarifies my questions. I still have a little doubt 
on Section 18 which was already mentioned by Com- 
missioners de Castro and Monsod. I notice the omission 
of the congressional approval for foreign loans. My 
dilemma is on the reason for requiring congressional 
approval for treaties, while for foreign loans, we do not 
have any, as if to say these are not equally crucial. Is the 
concurrence of the Monetary Board sufficient? 

MR. REGALADO. I have already given my answer 
to the same question and Commissioner Villegas has also 
clarified the participation of the Monetary Board and its 
membership. The purposes of not requiring congressional 
concurrence are: First, it would take some time before 
such concurrence may be obtained and there might be 
an urgent need for the loan or, thereafter, if concur- 
rence is finally obtained, the offered loan may no longer 
be available; second, it was thought that if the congres- 
sional concurrence is required, an obstructionist 
Congress could prevent the President from contracting 
foreign loans which may be urgently needed especially in 
case ol a national calamity which requires immediate 
action. 

SR. TAN. Thank you. 


FK. BLKiNAb. that same question was ask* 
the meetings of the Committee: What preci 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, point of clarifi- 
cation. 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


399 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader wants to 
say something. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, in view of the 
time, I ask for a suspension of the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended and we 
will resume at two-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 12:19 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:41 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, this Member is 
now the Acting Floor Leader. 

I request that Commissioner Quesada be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUMULONG. May I request the members of the 
Committee on the Executive to come forward and join 
us here. 

May I inform the Members of the Commission that 
the latest copy which we will use has just been dis- 
tributed and on the first page, right upper hand corner, 
we will read the following as stated: “Substitute Reso- 
lution-Adjusted to Bicameral Legislature.” So this will 
be the copy which will guide our discussions from now 
on. 

Thank you. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, honorable mem- 
bers of the Committee on the Executive, I would like to 
raise three points for clarification. The first one is on 
page 6, line 8 which reads: 

He shall exercise general supervision over all local 

governments as may be provided by law, and shall take care 

that the laws be faithfully executed. 

MR. REGALADO. Is that on page 6? 

MS. QUESADA. Page 6, Section 14. line 8. 

MR. REGALADO. That is line 23 here. The Commis- 
sioner will please look at her copy. Is that the one w lie i 
bears on the upper right hand corner the tit e. u s l 
tute Resolution-Adjusted to Bicameral Legislatuie . 

MS. QUESADA. I am sorry, I do not have the 
amended copy, but this has something to do with tic 
local governments. 


MR. MAAMBONG. In what section? 

MS. QUESADA. Sorry. I have a different copy. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Can we go by section so that we 
will not get lost? 

MS. QUESADA. Is it going to be by section now? 

MR. SUMULONG. Yes, by section. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The Commissioner must refer to 
the correct section so that we will not get lost. 

MS. QUESADA. This is Section 14 already. I do not 
have any question as regards the other sections. I just 
would like to seek clarification about Section 14 but 
I do not know where it is found in the amended copy. 

MR. REGALADO. That' is on page 6; Section 14 
starts from line 2 1 . 

MS. QUESADA. My question: Would this partic- 
ular section now define the specific areas for general 
supervision by the Office of the President over local 
governments? 

MR. REGALADO. May I answer that, please? 

MS. QUESADA. It says here “as may be provided by 
law,” but I was wondering how it would dovetail with 
the autonomy that we are now trying to give local 
governments. 

MR. REGALADO. The entire Section 14 is an exact 
copy of the 1935 Constitution, Section 10 (1) thereof. 
The phrase “general supervision over all local govern- 
ments” is used to distinguish it from “control” over 
executive departments, bureaus and offices. Since 1935, 
the phrase “exercise general supervision” has already 
had a settled meaning. The powers of the President over 
local governments are defined by law as to whether he 
can cause the investigation of a lower official of a local 
government or his suspension but always subject to law. 
either a special law or the Administrative Code. If the 
Commissioner s question is with respect to autonomous 
governments and the degree of general supervision 
thereover, that will have to be provided by law because, 
as we will note, under the 1973 Constitution the auto- 
nomous regions are not considered political or geo- 
graphical divisions. It is only now that we are consider- 
ing them here. Since I am also a member of the Commit- 
tee on Local Governments, I informed the members 
thereof that the extent of the general supervision of the 
President ovei this type of local government, meaning 
the autonomous region, shall have to be provided for by 
the incoming legislature. 

MS. QUESADA. I am not really referring to the auto 
nomous regions but I am talking about the clamor now 


400 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


of local governments to have more autonomy and more 
decentralization of powers. It is perceived that the cause 
of local autonomy will suffer some setbacks by adopting 
this particular clause. Many of the present ills of our 
local government system are attributed to presidential 
intervention in purely local affairs. This provision will, 
therefore, strengthen its hold on local governments. 


MR. REGALADO. That was so under the previous 
regime because we will note that the last phrase there 
says: “and shall take care that the laws be faithfully 
executed.” At that time the laws were promulgated as 
prepared by one man, so there was a little emasculation 
of local autonomy. We hope that our incoming legisla- 
ture will do away with those very restrictive decrees. 

Commissioner Bernas will also add some comments. 


FR. BERNAS. This phrase “as may be provided by 
law will have to be adjusted to whatever we approve on 
the Article on Local Governments. If the local govern- 
ments allow very little leeway for the law to say any- 
t ing about them, then the law will be very little. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

• sec °nd point I would like to raise will be on an 
' l Ue , i at W3S ear ** er presented by Commissioner Tan 
ici ias something to do with the President contract- 
g or guaranteeing foreign and domestic loans on behalf 
le epu Mi c °f the Philippines with the prior con- 
<rn th 11Ce °^ 6 t ^ le Monetary Board without having to 
cf-m iJ 0U ^ 1 ® n 8 ress - I wonder if the Committee would 
amendments on how we could put a 
check to this particular right of the President. 


I would like to ask some clarification on the coverage 
or the scope of these treaties or international agree- 
ments. 

MR. REGALADO. The phrase “international agree- 
ment” here was used by the Committee because, 
formerly, the provision spoke only of treaties. However, 
treaties alone are not the only vehicles for international 
accord. Later, there developed in the United States 
things like executive agreements which did not require 
the concurrence of the U.S. Congress, although in the 
Philippines, our President entered into an executive 
agreement with the United States on the Bell Trade Act 
but with prior approval of Congress. 

There are other agreements in other countries which 
are called “administrative agreements” instead of 
“executive agreements.” This kind is the one existing 
between the United States and Japan. The reason for 
that is simple; they could not call it an executive agree- 
ment because at the time the agreement was signed. 
Emperor Hirohito had been virtually divested of powers 
because it was General MacArthur who was running the 
show. So, they called it an administrative agreement, 
which actually was not strictly an executive agreement. 

There are also things like multilateral treaties or 
international conventions — like the Convention on the 
Law of the Sea that we have been discussing. So it was 
felt that all these international agreements, since they 
deal with our external relations, should also require 
the concurrence of the Senate. 

MS. QUESADA. So, this would include conventions 
like that adopted by the International Labor Organiza- 
tion (ILO). 


missionp RE ? ALAD °' 1 have § iven th e answer to Com- MR. REGALADO. The Convention on the Law of 
morninf r f n 2 nd another one who asked me this the Sea, the Universal Copyright Convention - those are 
at the prope r\ C ° UrSe ’ We Wil1 Certain amendments things that we took into account. 


MS. QUESADA. So 
closed on the subject^ 


the Committee is not entirely 


MR. REGALADO it • 

Commissioner is reaupcJn * 0t < T losed - Incidentally, the 
Committee has causpH tu p ease take note that the 
domestic” on line 14 c e . de * et ion of the phrase “and 
now. ’ ° lls ,e fei"s only to foreign loans 


MS. QUESADA. I am rpoii 
loans that we are contracting V mterested in I 

- p 

The third point is on page 9, Section 20. line 7 
reads. 


No treaty or international agreement shall be valid and 
effective unless concurred in by at least two-thirds of all 
the members of the Senate. 


MS. QUESADA. So, it would have to be concurred 
in by Congress. I had to seek this clarification because in 
the past regime, there was this organization trying to 
work out with the Members of the Assembly to ratify 
a treaty or a convention that had been adopted by ILO 
in which the Philippines was a signatory. But in the long 
run, we found out that it needed only the President to 
ratify that ILO Convention. I am speaking of ILO Con- 
vention 149 which had something to do with the condi- 
tions of life and work of nursing and other health 
personnel. So, this should now be covered not merely 
by a presidential act but with the concurrence of 
Congress. 

MR. REGALADO. Under the former regime, there 
was no counterpart provision of concurrence by 
Congress with respect to international agreements 
There was also none in the 1935 Constitution and the 
truth is many of us did not know what were the inter- 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


401 


national agreements being concluded by the President 
on his own authority. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I respect- 
fully request that Commissioner Foz be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I have a few questions on Section 4 re- 
garding the certificates of canvass. 

Lines 15 and 16, page 2, state: “. . . upon determina- 
tion of the authenticity and due execution of the 
certificates of canvass.” I really do not know if this was 
touched upon by Commissioner Nolledo but just the 
same, let me ask the question. 

How does the Congress — the Senate and the House 
of Representatives — in joint public session determine 
the authenticity and due execution of the certificates of 
canvass? 

A corollary question, will it require the testimony or 
affirmation of the very persons who executed the certi- 
ficates? 

MR. REGALADO. May we refer this to Commis- 
sioner Maambong who introduced a resolution to that 
effect and which was adopted by the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. We explained early this morning, 
in answer to the query of Commissioner Nolledo, that 
under the present laws, the authenticity and due execu- 
tion are determined by the rules and regulations pro- 
mulgated by the Commission on Elections by the exact 
provisions of the Omnibus Election Code and by the 
rulings and decisions of the Supreme Court. But the 
Gentleman will notice in the formulation of the present 
section that we inserted the words “IN THE MANNER 
PROVIDED BY LAW” because in the last canvassing of 
votes of the President and Vice-President before the 
Batasang Pambansa, there were so many objections as to 
the manner of determination of due execution and 
authenticity. So, in future canvassings we will expect 
that the national legislature will promulgate or enact a 
law where they will set out in formal terms the guide- 
lines to be followed by the board of tellers of the 
Congress in the canvass of votes of the President and 
the Vice-President. But as I have mentioned earlier, as of 
this moment we are guided by the rules and regulations 
of the COMELEC, by the provisions of the Omnibus 
Election Code and by the rulings of the Supreme Court. 

MR. FOZ. Under existing provisions of law and the 
rules of the old Batasan, how is it determined? 


MR. MAAMBONG. There are so many corollary 
factors in the determination of the due execution and 
genuineness of the document. The first thing that the 
board of canvassers or the board of tellers — if we call 
it that — will look at is the certificate of canvass coming 
from the different provincial board of canvassers, city 
board of canvassers, or in the case of Metro Manila, the 
district board of canvassers. The first step taken is to 
look at the document itself to find out if it is regular on 
its face, whether it is signed, for example, by the mem- 
bers of the city, provincial or district board of can- 
vassers, whether the thumbmarks are there, and more 
importantly, whether the words and figures are clearly 
indicated. With these, the board of tellers will start 
tabulating the votes. But the problem, as I said, is that 
there are corollary factors like whether or not the 
envelope in which the certificate of canvass was con- 
tained is the genuine envelope furnished by the COM- 
ELEC, whether the COMELEC paper seal is affixed on 
the envelope, whether the certificate of canvass has the 
COMELEC paper seal. These are corollary issues, and in 
resolving these issues, the board of canvassers were 
guided by the resolutions and regulations of the COM- 
ELEC, the exact provisions of the Omnibus Election 
Code and the rulings of the Supreme Court. Just to give 
an example, in one ruling of the Supreme Court where 
election returns transmitted to the board of canvassers 
were contained in jute sacks and not in the proper 
boxes, the Supreme Court said that these are mere 
formalities; if the election returns do not contain 
irregularities on their face, they may be considered in 
the canvassing of votes. 

MR. FOZ. Is the question of whether signatures 
appearing on the certificates are genuine or not also 

considered? 

MR. MAAMBONG. It is considered, in the sense 
that in the actual canvassing of votes, the opposition 
party has a copy of the certificate of canvass being used 
by the Speaker and the board of canvassers with the 
signature appearing on the copy of the opposition party 
and the ruling party, then the Speaker and the board of 
tellers can determine whether there is a deviation in the 
signatures in the three copies. That is how it is done. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

May I go to the next question? This is about the 
declaration of martial law or the suspension of the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus on page 7, on the 
second to the last paragraph of Section 15. Is it possible 
to delete the clause where civil courts are able to 
function”? In the earlier portion of the same sentence, 
it says, noi supplant the functioning of the civil 
courts . • I was just thinking that if this provision 
states the effects ot the declaration of martial law — one 
of which is that it does not supplant the functioning of 
the civil courts - I cannot see how civil courts would be 
unable to function even in a state of martial law. 


402 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


MR. SUMULONG. May we refer that interpellation 
to Commissioner Bernas? 

FR. BERNAS. This phrase was precisely put here 
because we have clarified the meaning of martial law; 
meaning, limiting it to martial law as it has existed in 
the jurisprudence in international law, that it is a law for 
the theater of war. In a theater of war, civil courts are 
unable to function. If in the actual theater of war civil 
courts, in fact, are unable to function, then the military 
commander is authorized to give jurisdiction even over 
civilians to military courts precisely because the civil 
courts are closed in that area. But in the general area 
where the civil courts are opened then in no case can the 
military courts be given jurisdiction over civilians. This 
is in reference to a theater of war where the civil courts, 
in fact, are unable to function. 

MR. FOZ. It is a state of things brought about by the 
realities of the situation in that specified critical area. 


MR. FOZ. This provision would put a mere chief of 
an office or a mere director of a bureau and his as- 
sistants on the same level as members of the Cabinet and 
their assistants, the President and the Vice-President, 
and would prohibit them from doing so many things as 
enumerated here. The philosophy of this provision, I 
understand, is to avoid conflict of interest. What are 
the other purposes? 

MR. REGALADO. They are all enumerated there. 

MR. FOZ. Prohibiting them from having any financial 
interest in any transaction with the government and 
from practicing any profession. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, like the prohibition against 
the practice of a profession. 

MR. FOZ. In other words, I think we can sum up the 
purpose in conflict of interest. 


FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 


MR. FOZ. And it is not something that is brought 
about by a declaration of the Commander-in-Chief. 


FR. BERNAS. It is not brought about by a declara- 
tion of the Commander-in-Chief. The understanding here 
• S f^, at dle Phrase “nor authorize the conferment of 
juris iction on military courts and agencies over 
civ ians has reference to the practice under the Marcos 
regime where military courts were given jurisdiction 
over civilians. We say here that we will never allow that 
excep m areas where civil courts are, in fact, unable to 
unc ion and it becomes necessary for some kind of 
court to function. 


MR. FOZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

draft V^ St t qUe i Sti0n ° n ^ ection 19, page 8 of the revisi 
imposed on°ti ° D With the disqualification or disabili 
of the Cabinpf 0 *, es ! dent ' th e Vice-President, membe 

assS:„ c te a . b, F T r : t an „? ° f , bure r ° r ° fn “ s and ,iu 

does it refer? * ’ the term assista nts,” to who 

MR. REGALAHO r* 

be with respect to u !' Understar >ding of that wou 

deputy minister. With resnert f Cabinet ’ then t! 
it would be the assistant^, to cbiefs of bureaus, th< 

to other governmental offices^th With ^ 

to the head of that office th ’ JV" 6 " eXt In hl 
not refer to one particular heaH W f° r ass * stants ’ do 
,he assistants of those different header' oflfc£ ^ 

MR. FOZ. So. one assistant for eaeh of those er 
m era ted. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, that is right. 


MR. REGALADO. Not necessarily, because prac- 
ticing a profession does not necessarily conflict with 
their financial interest. 

MR. FOZ. Would it be that the reason is to enable 
them to devote all their time or most of their time to 
their offices? 

MR. REGALADO. The most desirable trait of any 
public officer is to give full attention and devotion to 
his duties. 

MR. FOZ. Has the Committee not considered also the 
reality that a director of a bureau or a chief of an office 
and his assistants do not receive sufficient remunera- 
tion and, therefore, should not be unduly prevented 
from engaging in certain activities that would enable 
them to meet the rising cost of living? What I am trying 
to say is that maybe their inclusion in such a provision- 
prohibiting them from engaging, for instance, in the 
practice of their profession which would not after all 
conflict with the functions of their office — and thus, 
being placed on the same level as the President, Vice- 
President and members of the Cabinet and their assist- 
ants would be quite harsh. After all, they are not vested 
with vast powers. So, the evil sought to be prevented in 
the case of the President, the Vice-President and mem- 
bers of the Cabinet is perhaps not present. So, in their 
case, the provisions of the Anti-Graft Law would be 
sufficient to make sure that there is no conflict of in- 
terest whatsoever in the discharge of their duties and in 
whatever activities they may engage in on the side, 
private in nature but completely legal and moral, which 
would sustain themselves and their family. 

MR. REGALADO. In the first place, we have stated 
that the purpose here is not only conflict of interest 
but to enable them to give full-time attention to their 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


403 


duties. It is assumed that when they sought appoint- 
ment to this office, they were aware that there are 
limitations in the Constitution. 

The mere fact that bureau directors are not on the 
level of the President is not a correct stratification 
because whether one is a bureau director, a deputy ora 
minister, the same devotion to duty is required. 

If we say that we have to be realistic considering the 
rising cost of living, aside from the low salaries they are 
receiving, this can be remedied by increasing their 
compensation if the government can afford it or by 
their engaging in other activities not contrary to these 
specific disqualifications. Some of them teach to 
augment their income; that is why we pointed out to 
Commissioner de Castro that teaching is not a practice 
of a profession. In other words, they can engage in any 
other revenue-producing, income-producing activity 
legitimate in nature provided it does not conflict with 
the objective sought in this section. 

MR. FOZ. But as the provision is worded there is 
practically no other activity from which they would 
derive additional income because the provision pro- 
hibits one to “practice any profession, participate 
directly or indirectly in any business.” I cannot see 
any other activity from which a lowly chief ol office 
getting, let us say, PI, 500 a month with a family ot five 
can possibly derive income that would sustain himself 
and his family. 

MR. REGALADO. This does not preclude the mem- 
bers of their families from engaging in business. It is a 
personal disqualification to insure full-time attention to 
duties. 

MR. FOZ. What will happen here is that there will be 
circumventions of the prohibition in view of realities. 

MR. REGALADO. It is not circumvention because it 
is not prohibited. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, but there will be circumvention 
somewhere because the prohibition will be against t le 
harsh realities of modern living now. It is very di icu 
to comply with . . . 

MR. REGALADO. If it is just a question of circum- 
vention, we live in a world of men and not of ange s. 

MR. FOZ. The provision has a clause which states: 
“hold any other office or employment.” Does this refer 
to a private office or a public office? 

MR. REGALADO. There is a law prohibiting holding 
two public offices at the same time; but primarily, this 
is directed against the holding of a private office. 

MR. FOZ. Does the Committee recall of any existing 
provision of law or of the Constitution which prohibits 
an employee from holding another government office? 


MR. REGALADO. There is the rule on incompatibil- 
ity of duties of public officers. 

MR. FOZ. But if there is no incompatibility, a 
government official or employee can hold another 
government office. 

MR. REGALADO. There are certain prohibited 
offices; the prohibitions entail that they cannot hold 
two offices at the same time. 

MR. FOZ. The last question is on the last page, page 
9, about the spouse and relatives of the President. It 
says: 

The spouse and relatives by consanguinity or affinity 

within the third civil degree of the President shall not be 

appointed as minister, deputy minister or head of bureau 

or office. 

A relative by consanguinity or affinity within the 
third civil degree would include a first cousin, am I 
correct? 

MR. REGALADO. No, Madam President, that would 
be within the fourth civil degree. 

MR. FOZ. So, who among the relatives, for instance, 
would come within the third civil degree? 

MR. REGALADO. The brother, the sister, and the 
niece or the nephew, according to the rules of civil law. 

MR. FOZ. The Committee thinks, therefore, that this 
is sufficient prohibition insofar as preventing the Pres- 
ident from appointing his relatives to government 
offices, is that correct? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. Actually I 
was for following the standard rule against nepotism up 
to the fourth civil degree, which the Gentleman will 
notice is a standard norm in most statute books. How- 
ever, the Committee overruled me by limiting it to the 
third civil degree. 

MR. FOZ. So, the Committee thinks that if it is 
within the fourth civil degree, it would be a harsh pro- 
hibition. 

MR. REGALADO. Because there might be a first 
cousin who is competent and acceptable to the people. 

MR. FOZ. But in the same manner, a brother of the 
President might also be as competent. 

MR. REGALADO. We have to draw a line some- 
where^ Why is it that the age of majority is 2 1 years and 
not 20 or 22? 

MR. FOZ. Would the Committee consider an amend 
ment to this provision that would include govern- 


404 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


ment-owned or controlled corporations and their 
subsidiaries? 

MR. REGALADO. That is on line 32 of page 8 up to 
the first word of line 1 on page 9. We will entertain any 
proposed amendment with its justification. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask 
that Commissioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I have a few 
questions. 

My first question has reference to Section 8 on page 
3, starting with line 28, which reads: 

Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice- 
President during the term for which he was elected, the 
President shall nominate a Vice-President from among 
the members of the Senate and the House of Representa- 
tives who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority 
vote of all the members of both Houses of Congress. 

My question is, in view of the fact that the Vice- 
resi en is elected by the whole country, is it not 
v f\ Ca . ^ t le nomination or choice of his successor 

“ e . t0 Members of the Senate who are also 
elected nationally? 


REGALADO. We took this from the Twenl 
States wh ment T of tlle Constitution of the Unit 
ratified OT FebruarvTo n,0 ™ ng ’ " 

T»Pntv.ciffK a y 10 ’ 1967 • 11 was stated in t 
House of r mendrn ent that the Senate and t 
House of Representatives should have a “say ” F 

udonZr.; Presid r. N,xon appointed Gerald Fo 

the Republican 1 leader 'in ‘the^H^ "T. F ° rlJ W “ S ‘ h 

er in the House of Representativ 

freedom ^fcLiSfno't^r^f 6 ^ Sh ° Uld be given 1 

may wish to appoint an^ ° f ^ leglslators whom 
which he belongs. regardless of the House 


MR. RODRIGO r»f „ 

that there is a differenceT^t the Committee real ‘ 
United States and the S e l,. " '" e Se " ate of 
tion . S,e Proposed in our Consti 


MR. REGALADO. That is tm* m a 

nat ls tri| e, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Our Senators are elected hv 
whole country like the Vice-President, whife ta 

United States, two Senators are elected by every sh 

MR. REGALADO. We will entertain amendments 
the proper time. 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

My next question has reference to Section 1 1 , line 
1 2, which states: 

Whenever a majority of all the members of the Cabinet 
transmit to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker 
of the House of Representatives their written declaration 
that the President is unable to discharge the powers and 
duties of his office, the Vice-President shall immediately 
assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting 
President. 

Thereafter, when the President transmits to the Pres- 
ident of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Rep- 
resentatives his written declaration that no inability exists, 
he shall resume the powers and duties of his office . . . 

In the first paragraph, the Vice-President takes over. 
In the second paragraph, after the President transmits 
his message, the President takes over unless a majority 
of all the members of the Cabinet transmit within five 
days to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker 
of the House ot Representatives their written declara- 
tion that the President is unable to discharge the powers 
and duties of his office. 

What happens then? 

MR. REGALADO. Then the next sentence says: 
“Thereupon, the Congress shall decide the issue.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, but while Congress is deciding 
the issue, who takes over? Does the President continue 
or does the Vice-President take over? 

MR. REGALADO. The President continues; he re- 
assumes . . . 

MR. RODRIGO. No, not “reassume” because at this 
stage, he is already the one holding office. Before this, 
the first stage is when majority of the Cabinet members 
send their message to the Senate President and to the 
Speaker. 

MR. REGALADO. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. After that, the Vice-President takes 
over. Then, the second stage is: the President sends a 
message. He says, “No, I am all right. I jog every 
morning.” 

MR. REGALADO. He shall resume the powers and 
duties of the office. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, he assumes the powers. Then the 
Cabinet again sends a message, “No, he is sick.” 

MR. REGALADO. In the meantime, the President 
continues. In other words, he shall resume powers 
and duties and shall continue to do so unless a majority 
of the Cabinet members transmit a written declaration 
and until Congress decides on the issue. 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


405 


MR. RODRIGO. Why is it then that at the end of the 
paragraph on pages 5 and 6, it is stated, and I quote: 

If the Congress . . . within twenty-one days after it is 
required to assemble, detenninesby two-thirds vote of both 
Houses of Congress that the President is unable to discharge 
the powers and duties of his office, the Vice-President shall 
continue to discharge the same as Acting President . . . 

This means that the Vice-President is the one in office. 
Then the provision continues: . . otherwise the Pres- 

ident shall resume the powers and duties of his office.’ 
This means he was not the one holding the office. 

MR. REGALADO. That can be replaced with the 
word “continue.” The Vice-President shall then dis- 
charge the same as acting President. That is the purpose. 

MR. RODRIGO. What is the intention of the Com- 
mittee? Let us go over it again. The first step is when 
the Cabinet sends the message. 

MR. REGALADO. No, the very first step is when the 
President himself informs . . . 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, that is the first step. There is 
no controversy there. Then the Cabinet sends the 
message; the Vice-President takes over. The President 
sends the message and he takes over. The Cabinet again 
sends the message. Does the President continue? 

MR. REGALADO. When the Cabinet sends the 
message, the President in the meantime shall continue 
while Congress decides the issue. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, that is the intention? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President If the 
Congress decides in favor of the Vice-President, t en ie 
Vice-President shall take over to discharge the duties. 

MR. RODRIGO. On page 5, lines 21 to 23, it is 
stated: 

. . . unless a majority of all the members of the Cabinet 
transmits within five days to the President of the Senate 
and to the Speaker of the House of Representatives their 
written declaration . . . 

If the five days elapsed, what happens? Can the Cabinet 
still send the message? 

MR. REGALADO. If the Cabinet members do not 
question the certification of the President that he is no 
longer unable, that means they agree with him. 

MR. RODRIGO. But let us say that it takes the 
Cabinet six days to find out if the President is telling the 
truth or not, so on the sixtli day they transmit their 
message. 


MR. REGALADO. They should act within the 
period. In the Twenty-Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution, it is four days. I suggested five days 
because we do not have the same transportation and 
communication facilities. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does this mean to say that after the 
lapse of five days, the Cabinet may no longer send the 
message? 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, the Cabinet im- 
pliedly acquiesces with the President’s declaration. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let us say the Cabinet not only 
implies but agrees that the President is capable. The five 
days lapsed. Then after 15 days the President gets 
seriously ill; may the Cabinet again send a message? 

MR. REGALADO. Then we start the process all over 
again. 

MR. RODRIGO. Even after the lapse of five days? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, because this is a new super- 
vening and subsequent fact. 

MR. RODRIGO. Why place the five-day limit? That 
can be confusing. Let us say on the seventh day, there 
was a relapse. So, the five-day period had already 
elapsed. May the Cabinet still send a message so the 
Vice-President can take over? 

MR. REGALADO. The process starts all over again 
because there was that supervening fact that the Pres- 
ident was capable. So, why should we deprive him of his 
office? 

MR. RODRIGO. In spite of the fact that the five-day 
period had lapsed? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, because that was the five-day 
period within which they should have objected to the 
President’s declaration. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. And since they did not object 
thereto, they agreed that he was already capable, as in 
fact he was capable. So, in the meantime, they could 
not deprive him of the power to discharge the functions 
ot bus duties. But when on the seventh or eighth day the 
President gets sick, in other words, he is really unable to 
discharge his duties, then finding that he is unable to 
discharge his duties they can again ask for the declara- 
tion and transmit it to the Speaker and the Senate 
President. 

MR. RODRIGO. And nobody can say that they 
cannot send the declaration anymore because five days 
have lapsed. 


406 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. No, it is not so. 

MR. RODRIGO. Is it necessary to provide this period 
of five days which can lead to confusion? 

FR. BERNAS. If they give the declaration within the 
five-day period, then their message is not automatically 
effective; it has to be reviewed by the Congress. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 


FR. BERNAS. But if they give it after the five-day 
period because there is a new ailment, then we start the 
process again and the Vice-President can take over right 
away. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, if the Cabinet want the Vice- 
President to take over immediately, they might as well 
allow the five days to lapse and start all over again on 
the seventh day. That can be done. 

FR. BERNAS. It can be done, as we can see 
although we hope this will not happen. 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Bacani be recognized/ 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 


Committee * ^ ave a ^ ew questions for th 

SeS 4 ’ Pr6Sident The first is o 

tute resolution ’ 5 3nd 6 ' We have here a subst 

wonderi^^w^ p Was alrea ^ Copied. I ar 

approved arnenrim * Committee took account of th 
whatsoever. ^ 13t t * lere should be no reelectio 


MR. REGALADO. Is the Commissioner referring to... 

BISHOP BACANI “vr u „ 
immediate reelection 6 S " 3 disqualified from 


MR. REGALADO, 
announced that that 
deleted because of the 
Legislative Committee. 


This morning the Committee 
provision should be considered 
Proceedings the other day in the 


BISHOP BACANI. Thank 


you. 


MR. REGALADO. The worn «• 
be deleted because that was placed hlf 0 '*'*'*'”./ 11 
on its elimination the other day We de ‘ 


BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 

Let us go to Section 15, page 7, lines 4 to 8. The 
provision states: 


The Congress, by a vote of at least a majority of all its 
members in regular or special session, may revoke such 
proclamation or suspension, or extend the same if the 
invasion or rebellion shall persist and public safety 
requires it. 

So, it will be the Senate which extends the suspension 
of the writ, while it is the President who declares it with 
the concurrence of the Congress. Suppose the President 
does not agree with the extension, what happens? 

MR. REGALADO. Incidentally, we should first go to 
the basic premise on line 2. This morning Commissioner 
Colayco pointed out what appeared to be an oversight. 
The lines should read: “. . . with the concurrence of at 
least a majority of all the members of EACH HOUSE 
OF CONGRESS.” That is the way it should be worded. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. My question is, suppose they 
decide to extend the suspension of the writ? 

MR. REGALADO. Commissioner Bernas would like 
to answer that. 

FR. BERNAS. It has no effect because the imposition 
of martial law means presidential assumption of extra- 
ordinary powers. So, if he does not want to assume the 
extraordinary powers, it has no effect. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 

Finally, Section 19 on page 9, lines 3 to 6, states: 

The spouse and relatives by consanguinity or affinity 
within the third civil degree of the President shall not be 
appointed as minister, deputy minister or head of bureau 
or office. 

I remember that the Article on the Civil Service 
Commission provides for exceptions in the case of 
policy determining, highly technical or primarily con- 
fidential positions. Does the Gentleman not want to 
provide here for the same exceptions with respect to the 
President so that the President will have more leeway? 

MR. REGALADO. We feel that the powers of the 
Civil Service Commission would not be at par with the 
powers vested in the President. We would like to be a 
little bit more strict because of the vast cornucopia of 
powers of the President. 

BISHOP BACANI. But suppose it is only the head of 
an office, would the Gentleman accept a greater lenien- 
cy in that regard? 

MR. REGALADO. In the first place, as Commissioner 
Bernas has just noted, we cannot conceive of the posi- 
tion of minister, deputy minister, or head of a bureau or 
office that is primarily confidential. The very nature of 
the position shows that it is not primarily confidential. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


407 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Villacorta be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, may I ask the 
Committee some questions? 

The first sentence of Section 5, page 2, provides. 

If, at the time fixed for tire beginning of his term, the 
President-elect shall have died, the Vice-President-elect 
shall become President. 


My question refers to the situation in which the 
President-elect is incapacitated and cannot assume ojtice 
at the time fixed for the beginning of his term. Shall tne 
Vice-President-elect merely assume office until the Pres- 
ident-elect is able to assume office and qualify, or wi 
the Vice-President-elect become President? In the latte 
case, would it be possible to amend this section by in- 
serting on line 27 after the word “died’ and before the 
comma (,) the words OR INCAPACITATED 
SUME OFFICE? 


MR REGALADO. That presupposes that the Pres- 
ident-elect shall have died which, in a manner or 
speaking, is a permanent incapacity and, there tor , 
Vice-President-elect shall become President. But 
President-elect is merely temporarily incapacita e , 
is without prejudice to his recovery, of course then the 
Vice-President may, in the meantime, act as Pre 


MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, but a President-elect can be 
permanently incapacitated without having died. 


in all these cases, whether he has been proclaimed, he 
has taken his oath, or he has actually assumed office, as 
long as the incapacity is permanent or it is outright 
death the Vice-President becomes President. 1 lie only- 
instance where the Vice-President shall act as President 
is in the case where the President is not elected; he is 
elected but not proclaimed; he is proclaimed but he fails 
to qualify, or he qualifies but did not assume office. In 
all these instances, the Vice-President shall only act as 
President for the simple reason that there is always the 
possibility that the President who has been elected but 
has not yet been proclaimed might be proclaimed, or if 
he has been proclaimed but has not yet qualified, might 
qualify; or if he has qualified but has not yet assumed 
office, will assume office. So, in these instances, na- 
turally, the Vice-President will act as President. 

I hope that is clear. Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Perhaps at the proper time, we 
may consider a possible amendment to line 27 wherein 
the President died or has been definitively established 
to be permanently incapacitated. 

MR. VILLACORTA. So, perhaps we could present 
that as an amendment, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Incidentally, there is the possibil- 
ity that we will realign the sections — Sections 5 and 
9 _ so that we will not be confused. The Gentleman 
will notice that I mention Section 9 in relation to 
Section 5. These sections should be sequential in the 
sense that Section 9 should actually follow Section 5. 
We will do that later on. 

MR. REGALADO. That is what happens when we try 
to beat the deadline, like newspapermen. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Regarding the incapacity of the 
President, I think we should make it clear consi en g 
that the provision the Gentleman is referring o 
Section 5. 

MR. VILLACORTA. That is right. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Section 5 should be read togethci 
with Section 9. But just for the sake of clarity, there are 
several points to consider when it comes to election. 
The first point of reference, of course, is the dechon D <y 
the people. The second point of reference would be tne 
canvass of the votes and proclamation. The thir P oin 
of reference would be the qualification wherein ie 
person who has been proclaimed takes his oath, n 1C 
fourth point of reference will be the beginning o 
term which is the assumption of office. 

If the Gentleman will go over the provision of Section 
5 and Section 9, whenever the President is permanently 
disabled, either before he is proclaimed or even after tie 
has qualified and has begun his term ot office, if it is a 
permanent disability or death, the rule ol thum * s 
always that the Vice-President becomes President. So, 


MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you very much, Madam 
President. 

I am not sure whether Commissioner Suarez has 
expressed his point. On page 2, the fourth paragraph of 
Section 4 provides: 

The Supreme Court, sitting en banc, shall be the sole 
judge of all contests relating to the election, returns and 
qualifications of the President or Vice-President. 

May I seek clarification as to whether or not the 
matter ot determining the outcome of the contests 
relating to the election returns and qualifications of the 
President or Vice-President is purely a political matter 
and. therefore, should not be left entirely to the judi- 
ciary. Will the above-quoted provision not impinge on 
the doctrine ol separation of powers between the 
executive and the judicial departments of the govern- 
ment? 

MR. REGALADO. No, I really do not feel that would 
be a problem. This is a new provision incidentally- H 
was not in the 1935 Constitution nor in the 1973 
Constitution. 


408 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


MR. VILLACORTA. That is right. 

MR. REGALADO. We feel that it will not be an 
intrusion into the separation of powers guaranteed to 
the judiciary because this is strictly an adversarial and 
judicial proceeding. 

MR. VILLACORTA. May I know the rationale of the 
Committee because this supersedes Republic Act 7950 
which provides for the Presidential Electoral Tribunal? 


FR. BERNAS. Precisely, this is necessary. Election 
contests are, by their nature, judicial. Therefore, they are 
cognizable only by courts. If, for instance, we did not 
have a constitutional provision on an electoral tribunal 
for the Senate or an electoral tribunal for the House, 
normally, as composed, that cannot be given jurisdiction 
over contests. 


So, the background of this is really the case of Roxa 
vs. Lopez. The Gentleman will remember that in tha 
e ection, Lopez was declared winner. He filed a protes 
e ore the Supreme Court because there was a republi 
c which created the Supreme Court as the Presidents 
whpth Fa r ’bunal. The question in this case wa 
bv law F p ° Wers cou ld be given the Supreme Cour 
thf'rp n e fect > ^e conflict was actually whethe 
the answpr 30 /^ 61 ^ 131 to creatc two Supreme Courts am 

involve the creationT?™ 6 c ° Urt ^ “ N °’ tWs did "° 
lv wp arp • • tl0n oftwo Supreme Courts, but precise 

as it is aiin 1V1 ^ 8 u neW j u nsdiction to the Supreme Court 

cate varioii^ 6 • 1- ^ Constitution. Congress may alio 
cate various jurisdictions.” 

was any come^t^pt 6 ° f that republic act ’ in case t,ier 
two vice-nresidp r 7 Cen two Presidential candidates o 
tion overT So rL C3ndidates ’ one had jurisdic 
idential Electoral 't .^ cam f ne cessary to create a Pres 

constitutionalize what 0 " 3 ' What We have done is t( 
infringement on the W3S statutor y but it is not ai 
power being given t eparatl on of powers because th 
judicial power. ° 1 16 Supreme Court here is 


MR. VILLACORTA Tha u 

President. ' rila nk you very much, Ma 

On y 

have control of alHhe 14 Sa ^ S: * The President 
and offices.” I k no .„ ^* ecu tive departments, bur 
the 1935 and the 197T 1S n Was . tbe wor ding in 1 
Constitution, there wer V' ° nstitutio ns. In the 1 
Article IX, Section 9 saV s th W ° conflicti ng provisi 
have supervision over all - 3t . Prime Minister : 
Section 10 says that the p!!! St I ies< while Arti cle 
of the ministries. My question^ Cnt shatl have cor 
“control ” Our experience '° d ° w ’ th the * 
President liad absolute control LcYii? Iha ‘ lhc 
decisions of people in ,i le executive departm, 
bureaus and offices. Even their extraofficW ac 
were infringed upon by the then President. I wond 


the Committee would consider using another term 
because “control” smacks of tyrannical control. Could 
we use a softer term or a more objective term such as 
ADMINISTER or SUPERVISE? “The President shall 
ADMINISTER all the executive departments.” 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, this is based on the 
principle that under a presidential form of government, 
there is only one executive and it is the President. And 
the power of control in jurisprudence is acquired very 
definitely. It means the authority of a superior to 
substitute his judgment for the judgment of an inferior. 
It has reference only to the exercise of judgment. It has 
nothing to do with discipline but just the exercise of 
discretion. The discretion of the superior who has power 
of control can always be substituted for that exercise of 
jurisdiction of the inferior. This is to be distinguished 
from the power of general supervision which is nothing 
more than the power to see to it that the inferior 
follows the law. The power of general supervision does 
not allow the superior to substitute his judgment. Just 
to give an example, there is a power of general supervi- 
sion over local governments. Let us suppose now that 
the local legislative body passes a law. The President 
does not like it. Can he substitute his judgment for the 
judgment of the local government? No. All he can do 
is say: “Well, you did not do it according to law and 
you have to do something about it.” But if everything 
was done according to law, he cannot substitute his 
judgment for that of the inferior. But in the case of 
those covered by the first sentence they all belong to 
the executive department and under the principle that 
there is only one executive, this executive has the final 
say on the exercise of judgment. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you, Madam President. 

Just two more short questions. Section 1 5, lines 26 to 
28, states: 

The President shall be the commander-in-chief of all the 

armed forces of the Philippines and, whenever it becomes 

necessary, he may call out such armed forces . . . 

I wonder if it would be better to transfer the phrase 
“whenever it becomes necessary” after the phrase 
“armed forces,” so that it would read: “The President 
shall be the commander-in-chief of all the armed forces 
of the Philippines and HE MAY CALL OUT SUCH 
ARMED FORCES WHENEVER IT BECOMES 
NECESSARY to prevent or suppress lawless violence, 
invasion or rebellion.” My point here is that the calling 
out of the Armed Forces will be limited only to the 
necessity of preventing or suppressing lawless violence, 
invasion or rebellion. As it is situated now, the phrase 
“whenever it becomes necessary” becomes too discre- 
tionary on the part of the President. And we know that 
in the past, it had been abused because the perception 
and judgment as to necessity was completely left to the 
discretion of the President. Whereas if it is placed in the 
manner that I am suggesting, the necessity would only 
pertain to suppression and prevention of lawless 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


409 


violence, invasion or rebellion. May I know the reaction 
of the Committee to that observation? 

MR. REGALADO. We feel that substantially there 
would be no difference because that is the qualificative 
basis for his calling out the Armed Forces. It is, of 
course, a matter of style and it does not violate the 
rules on syntax, but the idea is still there. These are 
taken from the provisions of the 1935 Constitution. 
Section 10 (2) and also the 1973 Constitution, as 
amended, under Section 1 1 thereof. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I see. Therefore, the Committee 
does not see any difference wherever the phrase “when- 
ever it becomes necessary” is placed. 

FR. BERNAS. It will not make any difference. I may 
add that there is a graduated power of the President as 
Commander-in-Chief. First, he can call out such Armed 
Forces as may be necessary to suppress lawless violence; 
then he can suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus, then he can impose martial law. This is a 
graduated sequence. 

When he judges that it is necessary to impose martial 
law or suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas cor- 
pus, his judgment is subject to review. We are making it 
subject to review by the Supreme Court and subject to 
concurrence by the National Assembly. But when he 
exercises this lesser power of calling on the Armed 
Forces, when he says it is necessary, it is my opinion 
that his judgment cannot be reviewed by anybody. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I see. Thank you. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

One last question, Madam President. On page 9, 
Section 19, lines 3 to 4, states: “The spouse and rela- 
tives by consanguinity or affinity within the third civil 
degree of the President . . .” Could we add OR THE 
VICE-PRESIDENT since the Vice-President could take 
over the position of the President? Should we not apply 
this prohibition to the Vice-President? 

MR. REGALADO; We considered that in the Com- 
mittee and we felt that it should not apply t0 ^ ie 
Vice-President because he has no appointing power 
unless, of course, he is acting as President. But then, 
there are safeguards insofar as an acting President, in 
the person of the Vice-President, is concerned. 


MR. VILLACORTA. I was just anticipating the 
possibility that this Vice-President might be President 
one day. and the same argument that the Gentleman 
posited in defense of this prohibition as applied to the 
President should probably also apply to the Vice- 
President who could be a President. Nonetheless, thank 
you very much. 

MR. REGALADO. We will consider that at the 
proper time, but we will try to find a remedy to qualm 
the Gentleman’s apprehensions. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Garcia be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Before the Chair does that, we 
wish to acknowledge the presence in the gallery of high 
school students from Maryknoll, and also the students 
of a political science class of the University of the 
Philippines. 

Commissioner Garcia is recognized. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would simply like to make two brief comments 
regarding Sections 1 8 and 20. I think we have here two 
instances where we can democratize the exercise of 
political power by the President with regard to the 
responsibility of the President to contract or guarantee 
foreign loans on behalf of the Republic, and also the 
right of the President to make effective international 
agreements or treaties. Has the Committee considered 
the possibility of creating a mechanism for popular 
consultations with regard to this specific power to 
contract foreign loans and also make effective inter- 
national agreements? Our experience in the past shows 
that, for example, in the friendship and amity treaty 
with Japan which included foreign loans, the social costs 
were passed on to the greater number when the IMF 
required austerity measures. So, very often, when the 
social costs are passed on to the majority, they do not 
have a way of responding to this order of priorities- 
they would consider that those loans are not to their 
benefit. But if a system of popular consultation were 
instituted, it would in fact help to democratize the 
power of the President in this regard. I would like to ask 
the Gentleman whether it has been discussed in the 


MR. VILLACORTA. It is true that the Vice-President 
has no appointing power, but does the Gentleman not 
think that the President should be prevented from 
appointing relatives of his or her Vice-President as 
minister, deputy minister or as bureau head? 

MR. REGALADO. We could possibly consider that 
but I think it would be extending the ban a little too 
far, and depriving the country of services of people who, 
by the accident of relationship, happen to be within the 
restricted ambit. 


we 


MR REGALADO. It has not been discussed but ... 
wdl entertain a proposal, a configuration of that system 
of popular consultation. 


' GA ^ CI ^: Yes ' With regard to Sections 18 and 
20, I was thinking of providing a direct and regular 
mechanism of popular consultation so that the people 
can have an input in the decision-making regarding these 
two very critical issues of foreign loans and international 
agreements. 


410 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. How would it be done? Would it 
be nationwide in the nature of a referendum? 

MR. GARCIA. I thought the presidential visits to 
Cagayan de Oro or Davao were significant in that the 
President was actually face to face with the people, 
listening to their different ideas. Secondly, after a wide 
consultation, perhaps some kind of referendum could 
also be instituted. So, I think some thought could be 
given to this. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, we are open to suggestions. 
But we cannot conceive of a mechanism whereby this 
can be institutionalized. For instance, we may, over a 
period of one year, have to seek five foreign loans which 
were earlier intended to be taken in one sitting. We 
could have a referendum or something. 

MR. GARCIA. I was thinking of a general direction. 
The direct experience I had which led me to think along 
this line was the public consultation in Legaspi where 
the fishermen spoke against the treaty of friendship 
with Japan. I remember also in Capiz where the fisher- 
' t '? en us tbat trawlers were coming in and they felt 

iat i they had a say regarding the friendship treaty, 
„ eS , e , , ng , fishermen regarding aquatic reforms 

could have benefitted them largely. 


effective unless concurred in by at least two-thirds of 
all the members of the legislature. That by itself is a 
safeguard. This may be modified since the House of 
Representatives is the more popular body, and one way 
of institutionalizing it is to give a role to the House of 
Representatives which is more directly in touch with the 
people. 

MR. GARCIA. I think that would be a good safe- 
guard. But still I would subscribe for a far more direct 
mechanism of popular consultation which I think is 
built-in in the Office of the President. We will make the 
President keep in touch far more regularly and directly. 
The other point I wanted to make is regarding the 
Monetary Board. It was mentioned by Commissioner 
Villegas in his earlier remark regarding this question of 
contracting foreign loans that the Monetary Board will 
be more and more in the hands of the private sector 
with the participation of private interest. I consider 
important for the Monetary Board the character of 
independence as well as a social character in order to 
safeguard public interest. I was wondering whether the 
Committee on the National Economy and Patrimony, 
when they were suggesting private interest to be part of 
the Monetary Board, had in mind who would compose 
the Board, together with presidential appointments like 
the Minister of Finance and the Central Bank Governor. 


th^uv ^^^ADO. I am completely sympathetic 

whn wm n- beCaUSC after a11 would be the P e °P 
doec th r Ir ? ate '^ bave *° Pay f° r these loans. Bi 
brnnirn ent , eman not think that if the matter we 
concern t0 the attention of the Cabinet minist 

of the Pri-H ha ! C0Uld a,SO eventually end in the Offi 
,i pnth 1 ent > P ro Perly articulated with the proper i 
seaic and the corresponding statistical supporl 

good^ontHb^^ I™’ * think that would be a ve 

institutionalized™ U |I 1 W ° Uld StiU feel that if We COU 

would genuine! ecba msm of popular consultation, 

power bT^ Chief e Ex° Crat ; Ze ? e eXCrdse ° f 
built-in mechanism t cut,ve - 1 think it will provide 

tives are constantly , that presidential preroj 

good. y Wlt hm the constraints of pub: 

FR. BERNAS. Correct m •, , 
ship treaty, I guess mf r d 1 am wrong, the fricn 

the martial law period U " der President Marcos durii 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly. 

FR. BERNAS. And it was Pnt , • 
safeguards we have here. ° rC mt0 witllout 1 


MR. GARCIA. Yes, that is it. 


in 


FR. BERNAS. Let us consider that a treaty is an 
ternational agreement and shall not be valid and 


MR. REGALADO. We can ask Commissioner Villegas 
to explain to us the present membership. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, the situation can 
still be worked out by the legislature so we are leaving 
it up to the legislature. But when we talk about private 
interest, they could be either full-time members of the 
Board taken from the private sector and the private 
sector can mean the business sector, labor sector, 
private foundations — so anything nongovernmental. It 
could be from private volunteer organizations. During 
the transition, the members from the private sector 
could be the majority chosen from any one of these 
sectors referred to and qualified as private. But eventual- 
ly the ideal situation would be for all of them to really 
be full-time members of the Board, and the moment 
they are full-time, they become government officials. 
That is going to be a problem that the legislature will 
have to work on. As I said, in countries like the United 
States, the Federal Reserve System is completely 
independent of the President and the executive branch, 
but they are full-time officials of the government. So 
that is also one way of keeping its independence - to 
have a board made up of full-time members chosen in a 
way that will be designated by the legislature. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


411 


MR. DE CASTRO. May I ask one question of Com- 
missioner Villegas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia has still the 
floor. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia may 
proceed. 

MR. GARCIA. My concern in asking the question is 
simply this, that I did not wish to confine private 
interest to banking interests alone. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, it is very clear. 

MR. GARCIA. In other words, when we say that it is 
private, I see the importance of the independent charac- 
ter of the board, but at the same time it must have its 
social character and, finally, its public dimension, so 
that if we can insure that it can be opened to the diverse 
social sectors of our society, especially those who com- 
pose the majority, then I believe that that will protect 
the interest we wish to see protected. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, it always has to be stressed 
that the word “private” is not synonymous with busi- 
ness. Private is anything nongovernmental. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Garcia through 
with the Committee or does he still have other ques- 
tions? 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I am not really 
pleased with the way it was presented. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please continue the interpellation. 

MR. GARCIA. With regard to foreign loans, I hope 
we can be assured that the Monetary Board will exercise 
enough independence, and be guardians of public in- 
terests so that no longer will we have governments that 
will contract loans regardless of social costs. The costs 
that are imposed, especially upon negotiation with the 
IMF for austerity measures that have to be shouldered 
by the great majority, will not benefit that social 
sector. So, I am looking for mechanisms that will 
protect that social group. That is simply the concern 
wanted to express before the Committee. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Will the honorable Commissioner 
Villegas answer just one question? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Gladly. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

Who appoints the members of the private sector to 
the Monetary Board? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We have not identified the mechan- 
ism; we will leave it up to the legislature. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Does the Gentleman mean that 
the Congress will be the one to appoint them? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, Congress will pass a law speci- 
fying how they will be appointed. We did not want to 
go into the mechanics of the appointment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. This is precisely my intent. 
Madam President, and I have a resolution providing that 
foreign loans should bear the concurrence of Congress 
so that there will be a check and balance on this matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, that question can be asked of 
the Committee when the time of Commissioner de 
Castro comes up. 

Are there other speakers in the list? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we have six 
more interpellators; thereafter we will close the period 
of interpellations. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the next speaker. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner de los Reyes be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 

recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I ask 
some questions of the Committee. 

One of the significant changes in Section 1 5 is that 
phrase “imminent danger thereof’ was deleted, includ- 
ing the word ‘insurrection.” I can understand the 
reason for the deletion of insurrection” since the word 
is of Spanish origin and no longer applies, but I would 
like to be clarified as to the reason for the deletion of 
the phrase or imminent danger thereof” in justifying 
the imposition of martial law and the suspension of the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee considered that, 
and the Gentleman will recall that in the 1935 Consti- 
tution the phrase imminent danger thereof” did not 
appear in the Bill ot Rights. However, the framers of the 
1973 Constitution wanted to have a strong President 


412 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


and they added the phrase “imminent danger thereof” 
in the provisions on the Commander-in-Chief which in 
turn was taken, I think, from the Philippine Bill of 1902 
which granted that power to the then military governor. 
I suppose they considered the insurrectos a serious 
threat to their attempt to colonize the Philippines, but 
recent events have shown that the phrase “imminent 
danger thereof” is fraught with possibilities of abuse. 
Where the President states that there is an imminent 
danger of rebellion, it appears that he would have to 
rely on his word on that because he could always say 
that this is the military intelligence report. The military 
intelligence report consists of generally classified docu- 
ments which, even with the Supreme Court trying to 
look into their factual basis under the present proposed 
Constitution, can still be thwarted because the Supreme 
Court cannot just disregard a so-called classified, highly 
reliable intelligence report coming from different 
intelligence agencies which for all we know could easily 
be contrived in the hands of a scheming President. So, 
in choosing between two evils, we felt that this was the 
esser evil — the elimination of the phrase “imminent 
danger thereof.” 


FR. BERNAS. Let me just add that when we onl 
ave imminent danger, the matter can be handled by th 

arm ^ “ The Pr ^ident ... may call out sue 

v „ • orc ® s to prevent or suppress lawless violence, ii 

handii ° r . re e **i° n - So we feel that that is sufficient ft 
Handling imminent danger. 


suspension of the privilege of the writ; (3) but if both 
measures calling out the Armed Forces and the suspen- 
sion of the privilege of the writ still prove unavailing in 
the face of developments and exacerbated situation, this 
time he goes to the ultimate which would be martial 
law. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. As I see it now, the Committee 
envisions actual rebellion and no longer imminent 
rebellion. Does the Committee mean that there should 
be actual shooting or actual attack on the legislature or 
Malacanang, for example? Let us take for example a 
contemporary event — this Manila Hotel incident- 
everybody knows what happened. Would the Com- 
mittee consider that an actual act of rebellion? 

MR. REGALADO. If we consider the definition of 
rebellion under Articles 134 and 135 of the Revised 
Penal Code, that presupposes an actual assemblage of 
men in an armed public uprising for the purposes 
mentioned in Article 134 and by the means employed 
under Article 135. I am not trying to pose as an expert 
about this rebellion that took place in the Manila Hotel, 
because what I know about it is what I only read in the 
papers. I do not know whether we can consider that 
there was really an armed public uprising. Frankly, I 
have my doubts on that because we were not privy to 
the investigations conducted there. 

Commissioner Bernas would like to add something. 


that , I,™ L0S REYES ' So actual >y. if a President ( 
instead nf - S UTlm ^ nent danger of invasion or rebell 
of hahpnv m '* ,OSin ® martial law or suspending the 
ArmS u he n mUSt necessarily have to call 

Chief. Is that 6 the idea? hlhPPmeS 38 ^ Commande 


rence by ^h^i d ° eS n0t require an V concl 
review. eglslature nor is it subject to judic 

Mr. de los reyf^ d * . 

the privilege of the writ of ? 2°* the sus P ension 
imposition of martial i J * f habeas corpus and t 
before the President ci ^ ore the preparatory ste 
the Philippines as Comm^H Cal1 the Armed Forces 
before calling the a^h T n ‘ Chief? In °ther won 
should he not take the Dren* 0l ? eS ° f the Phili PP ir 
the privilege of the wri^of ^ atory ste P of suspendi 
martial law? Habeas corpus or imposi 

MR. REGALADO Ac o 

President outlined the stenc ° f fact ’ dle f° rrr 

as follows; (1) When it j s n ^ ave put them ht 
although, of course, he did noTuL *?™ inent dan 8' 
already call out the Armed Forces i.Jw term ' he c 
suppress violence (2) .if the situation's woS a 
there is a need for stronger measures then Sf f 
merely calling out the Armed Forces he goes fnto^t 


FR. BERNAS. Besides, it is not enough that there is 
actual rebellion. Even if we will suppose for instance 
that the Manila Hotel incident was an actual rebellion, 
that by itself would not justify the imposition of martial 
law or the suspension of the privilege of the writ be- 
cause the Constitution further says: “when the public 
safety requires it.” So, even if there is a rebellion but 
the rebellion can be handled and public safety can be 
protected without imposing martial law or suspending 
the privilege of the writ, the President need not. There- 
fore, even if we consider that a rebellion, clearly, it was 
something which did not call for imposition of martial 
law. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I ask that question because I 
think modern rebellion can be carried out nowadays in 
a more sophisticated manner because of the advance of 
technology, mass media and others. Let us consider this 
for example: There is an obvious synchronized or or- 
chestrated strike in all industrial firms, then there is a 
strike of drivers so that employees and students cannot 
attend school nor go to their places of work, practically 
paralyzing the government. Then in some remote 
barrios, there are ambushes by so-called subversives, so 
that the scene is that there is an orchestrated attempt to 
destabilize the government and ultimately supplant the 
constitutional government. 

Would the Committee call that an actual rebellion, or 
is it an imminent rebellion? 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


413 


MR. REGALADO. At the early stages where there 
was just an attempt to paralyze the government or some 
sporadic incidents in other areas but without armed 
public uprising, that would only amount to sedition 
under Article 138, or it can only be considered a 
tumultuous disturbance. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The public uprisings are not 
concentrated in one place, which used to be the concept 
of rebellion before. 

MR. REGALADO. No. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But the public uprisings 
consist of isolated attacks in several places — for 
example in one camp here; another in the province of 
Quezon; and then in another camp in Laguna; no at- 
tack in Malacanang — but there is complete paralysis 
of the industry in the whole country. If we place these 
things together, the impression is clear - that there is an 
attempt to destabilize the government in order to 
supplant it with a new government. 

MR. REGALADO. It becomes a matter of factual 
appreciation and evaluation. The magnitude is to be 
taken into account when we talk about tumultuous 
disturbance, to sedition, then graduating to rebellion. 
All these things are variances of magnitude and scope. 
So, the President determines, based on the circum- 
stances, if there is presence of a rebellion. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. With the concurrence of 
Congress. 

MR. REGALADO. And another is, if there is pub- 
licity involved, not only the isolated situations. If they 
conclude that there is really an armed public uprising 
although not all over the country, not only to de- 
stabilize but to overthrow the government, that would 
already be considered within the ambit of rebellion. If 
the President considers it, it is not yet necessary to 
suspend the privilege of the writ. It is not necessary to 
declare martial law because he can still resort to the 
lesser remedy of just calling out the Armed Forces for 
the purpose of preventing or suppressing lawlessness or 
rebellion. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. And then here is the qualifying 
phrase: “with the concurrence of at least a majority of 
all the Members of the National Assembly.” I suppose 
the Members of the National Assembly would hold 
session in the place where they should hold it, like the 
Batasang Pambansa. But it could be a very real possi- 
bility that the Batasang Pambansa will be blocked by all 
these demonstrators. If they will not allow any of the 
Members of the Congress to go to the Batasan, how can 
we secure the concurrence of Congress? 

MR. REGALADO. Let me point out that the Com- 
mittee has already corrected this. Line 2 should now 


read: “the members of EACH HOUSE of the Congress.” 

With respect to the statement of the Gentleman 
regarding the Batasan being blockaded by people, I am 
reminded of a question asked of me by Justice Concep- 
cion when I was in the fourth year political law review. 
He said, “You are talking about Congress, where is 
Congress? ” So I said. “The legislative building over 
there.” “Suppose,” he said, “that is destroyed by fire, 
earthquake or any other calamity, where is Congress”? 
Then I realized that when I thought I knew. I did not 
really know because the Congress as projected here is 
any place wherein the Members of the House of Repre- 
sentatives and the Senate lawfully congregate, assemble, 
deliberate and hold sessions, whether it is in the Batasan 
building or under a grove of mango trees. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Anywhere, in other words. I 
would like to direct this last question to Commissioner 
Maambong. 

Commissioner Maambong stated earlier that it is still 
the ministerial duty of the National Assembly to canvass 
the votes and examine the certificate of canvass. In 
other words, the National Assembly has no alternative 
but to proceed with the certificate of canvass without 
necessarily being bound by the alleged authenticity of 
the canvass. Is that correct? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. That is what I 
said. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The Commissioner also said 
“upon determination of the authenticity and due 
execution thereof in the manner provided by law.” The 
phrase “manner provided by law” does not only refer 
to statutory law, but to jurisprudence; in other words, 
stare decisis or decisions of the Supreme Court on the 
matter. Is that correct? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

Although I have other points, I will just limit my 
points to these two and reserve other matters during the 
presentation of amendments. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May I just ask one follow-up question 
with respect to the interpellation of Commissioner de 
los Reyes? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. If 1 heard Commissioner de los Reyes 
right, he mentioned that it is a ministerial right of 


414 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


Congress to canvass the presidential elections, and if I 
also heard him right, he said that Congress has no 
choice but to go ahead regardless of the authenticity of 
the canvassing results. Is that correct? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No. I said, “without being 
bound.” This means that the Congress still has the 
power to determine the genuineness and authenticity of 
the certificates, but the duty to canvass is there. The 
Congress should canvass, but with respect to the deter- 
mination of the genuineness and authenticity of the 
certificates of canvass based on existing laws and juris- 
prudence. I just clarified whether it is limited to statu- 
tory laws or to the decisions of the Supreme Court or 
what constitutes genuine and authentic certificates. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, if a prudent 
examination will show that canvassing results are not 
authentic, not duly executed, and do not reflect the 
votes because the canvassing results do not have the 
attached statement of votes of each polling place, what 
is the responsibility of the Congress? 


• MAAMBONG. May I respond to that? In the 
r „rt -f 11 f 3W l bat We have, we have only one copy of the 
tin/p 3 ) 2 ° canvass - According to the Omnibus Elec 
thp «r.° C i an f be ^ aw w hich mandated the holding o 
of thf> e p 13 pf reS ^ ent * a ^ e * ect i° n ’ attached to this copj 
That k aV 1C f te °^. canvass i s the statement of votes 
eoes nvpr re 4 u hement. When the board of teller: 
figures sion t cer tificate of canvass and the words 
the question 3 thumbmarks are clearly written 

they do if thp^ 0 3b ^ adam President, is, what wil 

The answer to tha^The S f tatement of votes? 

to susoend thV The b ° ard of tellers would hav « 

Elections to nron 31 ™ 3 ^ * n ^ orm the Commission or 
certificate of canv^ ^ the bod V their copy of the 

also attached. The L^d r o? fn Statement of votes i: 

the opposition partv to f ? 6rS COuld also infonT 
certificate of canvas Produce their copy of the 
tached to the same a and the statement of votes at 
That would be tI \ e 0 n a b ° inform the majority party 
Madam President P P er se 9 uence of procedure 


cate R of“i S ir° Se thC numbers in the cer 
which are realty the votes'^lin^a^e? att3Chm< 

MR. MAAMBONG. If the r 
figures appearing in the certify*? 5 "? ich arc the { 
tally with the figures, that w ^ te canvass will 
That is precisely the’ reason why ^thT^ 3 Pr ° b ' 
guration of the provision, w e placed th! pr ^ ent cc 
tion of the authenticity and due PY , re determ 
the manner provided by law” becauseTo tlon thereo 
,„ore is no law which 

stance. As a matter of fact, in the actual canvass of v 
of the President in the last presidential election, we 


not encounter that kind of problem. And there is no 
such equivalent provision in the Omnibus Election Code 
or in the Special Election Law for the President. 

MR. MONSOD. Were there instances where the 
certificates of canvass after examination were shown not 
to have been authentic on their faces or had irregular- 
ities and the Assembly still read those certificates of 
canvass? I am asking now if there were instances like 
those. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is a very valid question. The 
usual objection was that not all the members of the 
board of canvassers, whether by the province or city or 
district, signed some certificates of canvass. But that is 
remedied by the provision of the Omnibus Election 
Code which says that in case one or two members of the 
board of canvassers did not sign, but a majority of the 
membership thereof signed, then that particular certifi- 
cate of canvass can be used in the tabulation. But that 
was the decision because there was a law. But the 
problem is when there is such a circumstance and there 
is no law covering it. That is the reason we placed 
here “in the manner provided by law” so that we can 
more or less anticipate problems of this nature. 

MR. MONSOD. Commissioner de los Reyes also 
mentioned that in the absence of a law, jurisprudence 
would be taken into account. Does that in any way 
mean that the practice in the last Batasan canvassing of 
the presidential election would have any binding effect 
on the future? 

MR. MAAMBONG. The practice adopted by the 
Batasang Pambansa in the last presidential election, 
specifically that conducted by the board of tellers 
composed of the members of the opposition and of the 
ruling party then, could not be considered, to my mind, 
as jurisprudence. We are talking of decisions of the 
Supreme Court just like the decision of the Supreme 
Court which I mentioned earlier where the certificate 
of canvass or the election returns brought forward to 
the canvassing authority were not in the ballot box as 
provided by law but were instead in a jute sack. The 
Supreme Court said that if the election returns itself 
are regular on its face in spite of the fact that these were 
not placed in the ballot box, then the canvassing author- 
ity may proceed with the canvass. 

MR. MONSOD. That would not be considered a good 
precedent either. 

MR. MAAMBONG. As parallel authority perhaps. 
Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. In that connection, may I add 
that what Commissioner de los Reyes was referring to 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


415 


were the decisions of the appellate courts which under 
the Civil Code form part of the legal system of the 
Philippines; although, of course, the doctrine of stare 
decisis docs not mean blind adherence to precedents. If 
not applicable in the contemporaneous situation or they 
arc not in pari materia, the distinctions could always be 
made. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we now have 
copies of the Article on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers, as amended. 

May I move for the suspension of the session for at 
least three minutes for us to study this Article. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there still other interpel- 
lators? 

MR. SARMIENTO. There are five more interpellators. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:27 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:57 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The Commissioners have care- 
fully studied the Article on Accountability of Public 
Officers; I move that we put it to a vote on Second 
Reading. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

RECONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 456 
(Article on Accountability of Public Officers) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. Madam President. 

1 am constrained to seek a reconsideration of the 
voting on Section 14 which included the judiciary in 
the prohibition of the availments of loans and guaran- 
tees from government-owned or controlled banks. There 
is an overwhelming reaction against the approval of the 


inclusion of the judiciary, without distinction, among 
the groups prohibited from availing of the loans and 
guarantees of government-owned or controlled banks. 

Madam President, I am actually taking up the cudgels 
for the senior citizens of the Commission who, for one 
reason or another, have appointed me and designated 
me to seek reconsideration of this section. They may be 
a little timid about it. but just the same, I share their 
sentiment on this matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion to reconsider, as submitted by Commissioner 
Aquino? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

What is the particular amendment of Commissioner 
Aquino? 

MS. AQUINO. The amendment would be on line 17 
of the same section. After the comma (,) after the word 
“Congress,” insert MEMBERS OF THE SUPREME 
COURT, delete “and” before “Members of the Consti- 
tutional Commissions,” and insert AND before the 
words “the Ombudsman.” The amended section will 
now read: “No loan, guaranty or other form of financial 
accommodation for any business purpose may be 
granted directly or indirectly by any government- 
owned or controlled bank or financial institution to the 
President, Vice-President, Members of the Cabinet. 
Members of Congress, MEMBERS OF THE SUPREME 
COURT, Members OF the Constitutional Commissions, 
AND the Ombudsman or to any firm or entity in which 
he has controlling interest, during his tenure.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee Chair- 
man on Accountability of Public Officers say? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee has 
discussed this and the Committee accepts the proposed 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendment inserting the words “MEMBERS 
OF THE SUPREME COURT and eliminatig the word 
“Judiciary”? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. In the copy that is being circulated 
to the Members, there are some typographical and styl- 
ing amendments that need to be made. We will just refer 
those to the Committee on Style. However, there is one 
phrase which, I think, was inadvertently omitted on 
page 5, line 21 which says: “and shall notify the com- 
plainants of the action taken.” 


416 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the amendment of 
Commissioner Suarez and which was accepted by the 
Committee is to insert between “shall” and “notify” 
the phrase “IN APPROPRIATE CASES.” 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 5:04 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. We will leave it to the Committee on 
Style whether to put it before or after the word “noti- 
fy,” Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would just like to move for a 
reconsideration of the approval of Section 3 (3). My 
reconsideration will not at all affect the substance, but 
it is only in keeping with the exact formulation of the 
ules of the House of Representatives of the United 
states regarding impeachment. 

I am proposing, Madam President, without doing 
amage ° ar W °t this provision, that on page 2, Section 
rpnrt- ’ “t° m - ineS ^7 to we delete the words which 
comma r°\ lru * la . te impeachment proceedings” and the 
tion” th 3 ? d lnserton line 19 after the word “resolu- 

capitate , h P e“ t e ,er W '^ ™ AR , TICLE ?- a " d thc " 

the word “k ” er . 1 ln impeachment and replace 

will now read Y *° F 'e S ° that the whole section 

Members of A u VOte of at least one-third of all the 

affirm a resnli slla11 * 3e necessar y either to 

men" OF thl r" WI ™ ™ E AR TICLES of Impeach- 

resolution Th Co ™ mi f ttee or to override its contrary 
esolution. The vote of each Member shall be recorded ” 

initiattrts faTas^' 1 ^ earUer yesterday that the 

United States^ conr^ H °. USe °,f Re P resenta twes of the 

of the verified complaint ^n^ fr ° m the fiUng 
impeach alwavs carri^ P ^ 3nd every resolution to 

ment. As a matter of fact* the^ 16 A ^ U< :! es of Im peach- 
peachment” are mention^’ the ,. Words Articles of Im- 
direct filing of a verified r ° n l” 6 25 in the case of tlie 
the Members of the Hon^ ° m P axnt of one-third of all 
President, that my amen rim! m ? ntion again, Madam 
stance in any way. I t h WlU not vary the sut) - 
uniform procedure of tlm h ” y 111 kee Pi«g with the 
the United States Congress ° USe ° f Re P resen tatives of 

Thank you. Madam President 

THE PRESIDENT. May w e hear f ^ 

Davide and Regalado because 1 *'° rn Commissioners 

coauthors of this section. e rstand they are 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President mav i 
minute to confer with Commissioner Regalado?^ 6 ° ne 


At 5:06 p.m. , the session is resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I have con- 
ferred with the principal proponent of this provision 
on impeachment, Commissioner Regalado, in colla- 
boration with the Chairman of the Committee on Ac- 
countability of Public Officers, and they have no 
objection to the amendment. I will just make it of 
record, Madam President, that with regard to the last 
phrase of line 20 which says: “to override its contrary 
resolution,” whenever the body will override the resolu- 
tion of impeachment of the Committee, it is understood 
that the body itself will prepare the Article of Impeach- 
ment. That is the only clarification which Commissioner 
Regalado and the Chairman of the Committee wanted 
me to put on record. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us first submit to the body 
the motion of Commissioner Maambong to reconsider 
the approval of Section 3 (3). 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

The proposed amendment which has been submitted 
by Commissioner Maambong was clarified and has been 
accepted by the Committee on Accountability of Public 
Officers. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I read 
again the whole section? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. As amended, the whole Section 
3 (3) will read: “A vote of at least one-third of all the 
Members of the House shall be necessary either to 
affirm a resolution WITH THE ARTICLES of Impeach- 
ment OF the Committee or to override its contrary 
resolution. The vote of each Member shall be recorded.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hear none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


417 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask that Commissioner 
Tingson be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, some of us have 
exercised self-abnegation in making speeches because of 
time constraint. I have written a speech on why the 
Sandiganbayan and the Tanodbayan should not be 
abolished. May I just submit it for insertion in the 
Record? * 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask that Commissioner 
Bennagen be the last speaker before we vote on Second 
Reading? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

I do not know whether this is in order, but for the 
sake of the record, I want to read part of the debates 
that would have been included in yesterday’s proceed- 
ings were it not for the fact that the amendment I shall 
now refer to was really a consolidated amendment of 
Commissioners Jamir. Sarmiento, Natividad and myself. 
I feel very strongly about this because we of the Philip- 
pine Social Science Council have been so deeply in- 
volved in the effort to link up the Council with the 
efforts to arrive at a modicum of ethics and efficiency in 
the public service. For sometime, we were involved in 
efforts to address ourselves to government, but our 
experiences proved that government, particularly the 
last Batasang Pambansa, was unresponsive to the efforts 
of the social science council. To illustrate, in 1984. we 
launched a public forum series, trying to set up some 
kind of working relationship between the Philippine 
Social Science Council and the Batasang Pambansa 
through a monthly forum. In the first forum, we had 
something like eight Members of the Batasang Pamban- 
sa; however, we finally ended up with only one par- 
ticipant from the Batasang Pambansa. Because of this 
rather traumatic experience, we thought that we should 
direct our efforts to the people’s organizations them- 
selves. For this reason, we set up the Resources for the 
People’s Program to allow social scientists to work 
directly with the people’s organizations as well as 
advocates of people’s organizations. 

It is one of our main concerns that those in the public 
service should indeed maintain high standards of ethics 
and efficiency. For this reason, I just want to point out 
in relation to Section 1 2 (7), which has something to do 
with efforts to determine and make recommendations 
for the observance of high standards of ethics and effi- 
ciency, the root causes of inefficiency, red tape, mis- 
management, frauds and corruption in the government 
that most of the provisions that have to do with the 


functions of the Tanodbayan or Ombudsman are 
reactive and corrective in character. We thought that 
these provisions should allow for anticipation and. 
therefore, should be preventive of bureaucratic cor- 
ruption. Nonetheless, the provisions, I think, fail to 
underscore the fact that we cannot isolate bureaucratic 
corruption from the larger problems of society. Let us 
quote, for instance, from a study of bureaucratic 
corruption in Asia, which says: 

The major lacuna in the anticorruption policies adopted 
by all of these countries is that they seem to view the 
problem of governmental corruption in very myopic terms 
— in isolation from other forms of white-collar crime. 
Underlying most anticorruption policies, there is the 
assumption that the problem of corruption in government 
has very little to do with the other forms of white-collar 
criminality. This in fact accounts for a sizeable part of the 
ineffectiveness of their anticorruption policies or strategies. 

As a matter of fact, corruption in public bureaucracy and 
government - as will be shown below - constitutes a part 
of the wider area of white-collar crimes. White-collar crime 
in every sense is real crime. It has been overlooked and 
underplayed far too long. 

For the record, let me just read the definition of 
white-collar crimes by the United States Department of 
Justice: 

Those classes of non-violent illegal activities which 
principally involve traditional notions of deceit, deception, 
concealment, manipulation, breach of trust, subterfuge or 
illegal circumvention. 

The point is that we really should not isolate efforts 
at combating bureaucratic corruption from the larger 
crimes that take place in the larger society. I think that 
it should be part of the duties of the Ombudsman to 
anticipate and make necessary corrections with respect 
to bureaucratic corruption. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO 456 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on Accountability of Public Officers) 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I move 
that we vote on Proposed Resolution No. 456, as 
amended, on Second Reading. 


hY i f M ™° $e Who are in favor of Pro- 
f. ose , h S / 9 10n / aj as amended, please raise 

their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand ) 

Those who are against, please raise their hand. (One 
Member raised his hand.) 

'f* 10 are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 35 votes in favor, one against and 
one abstention. 

Proposed Resolution No. 456, as amended, is ap- 
proved on Second Reading. 


*See Appendix 


418 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 5 1 7 
(Article on the Executive) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may we pro- 
ceed to the period of interpellations of Proposed Reso- 
lution No. 517? 

I ask that Commissioner Bennagen be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

We will continue the period of interpellations on 
the Article on the Executive. 

Commissioner Bennagen is recognized. 


tory or directory. The answer was, sometimes it is 
directory, sometimes it is mandatory. It would seem 
that in the context of the overall provision, the tendency 
may be to use it in its directory sense because of the use 
of “may” in the next sentence. In the deliberation of 
the Committee, is the meaning of “shall” directory or 
mandatory? 

MR. REGALADO. Under the rules of statutory 
construction, when we use the word “shall” alone there 
may be instances when it may be considered “may,” but 
when this is used in a negative — “shall not” — then that 
is mandatory. 

MR. BENNAGEN. We take it to mean, therefore, that 
“may” in the second sentence is also mandatory? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, it is mandatory. 


MR. BENNAGEN. I have two rather simple questions 
*vhich, although simple, rest on the proposition that as 
worded, they constitute very concrete ways of consti- 
tuting and reconstituting thought and reality. I refer 

° n pa ® e ^st bne °f which origin- 

ates on page 7: 

f f 0n ^ reSS ma ^ ^ * aw vest appointment of in- 

hp 'IT °r ^ CrS ' n l * ie Presic ^ ent alone, in the courts, or in the 
heads of department. 

that dUring the discussion on the judi- 

“lower courts 6 ” 6 ! 006 ^ inf ^ rior courts was changed to 
of “inferior” \ ,. w ° nc * er tf by the same reason the use 
think it ran t, 13 , a so use d a t some future time, or I 
Congress shaikh done . even now - I do not think the 

a certain kind J app ? mtin S inferior officers in terms of 
“ ^ 0f , qUahty of P ersons ’ but rather in terms 
of ranks, unless that is the intent of the provision. 

(3) M Arhchf Vn A of°thr\ a LTco ak r t ?° m SeCti ° n 10 

from Section 12 of the 1973 ^ Part ’ V 

the word “inferior ” Do Constltu tion which used 

a proposal for a more feUcSZT" B ' nnaSen ^ 
for‘ <- *» time when the tim, 

ferior” means ^owe'r'in rank th* that the term " iri 
above. k than the officers mentione, 

MR. BENNAGEN. So it mMnt i 
next question refers to Section 19 which reads- ^ ^ 

The President, Vice-President, members of the’cabinet 
and chiefs of bureaus or offices and their assistants shall' 
not, during the, r term, hold any other office or employ- 
ment, nor may they practice any profession, participate. 

I asked one time the question as to the meaning c 
“shall” in the Constitution, whether “shall” is mand; 


MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we have four 
more interpellators. May I ask that Commissioner 
Rosario Braid be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President and 
honorable sponsors, my comment is on Section 18, page 
8, which has to do with the powers of the President to 
contract foreign loans. I quite concur with my fellow 
Commissioners that perhaps we should have a more 
specific provision not necessarily in the Article on the 
Executive, and that the Committee on the National 
Economy and Patrimony come up with specific criteria 
and mechanisms that would ensure the broadening of 
the membership of this Monetary Board to include 
those in the social sector and would ensure the Board’s 
independence. 

My second comment has to do with Section 17, the 
last sentence of the first paragraph which does not 
appear in the previous Constitutions. Is there a reason 
for including it in the section? What is its rationale? 

MR. REGALADO. May we know what last sentence 
the Commissioner is referring to. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. The last sentence of the first 
paragraph of Section 1 7 which reads: 

However, the power to grant executive clemency for 

violations of corrupt practices laws may be limited by 

legislation. 

MR. REGALADO. Actually this is an addition to the 
already existing limitations to the pardoning power of 
the President. The Commissioner will notice that we 
took into account those crimes which are of such 
magnitude as to affect not only the political but also 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


419 


the economic life of the country, as, for instance, 
violations of election laws. In convictions of electoral 
offenses, the President cannot grant pardons and so 
forth without the favorable recommendation of the 
Commission on Elections because such violations affect 
and go into the very political system. These frauds we 
are referring to here, which also shall be subject to legis- 
lation insofar as the pardoning power of the President 
is concerned, are violations of corrupt practices laws 
which go into the very economic life of the country, 
considering the massive frauds that we have experienced 
and which we are trying to remedy. 


be deleted perhaps because we may not want to specify 
the salary on account of the fluctuating value of the 
peso. 

MR. REGALADO. For the information of Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid, there was a proposal from Com- 
missioner Monsod to follow what they did in the salaries 
of the judiciary so that we could adopt that formulation 
for the salaries of the executive as well as of the legisla- 
tive departments. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. May I add something. Actually, this 
last sentence is a compromise because the original pro- 
posal was that violations of the Anti-Graft Law should 
not be pardoned without the recommendation of the 
convicting court, whereas others felt that the pardoning 
power of the President should not be further limited. 
So, as a compromise, this provision was put in. Let us 
leave to the legislature the matter of whether or not it 
would want to limit it. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

My third comment is on the question of style. In the 
light of the recognition of women’s equal rights, would 
the Committee consider recommending to the Commit- 
tee on Style the rewriting of some phrases of the Article 
to minimize the use of the masculine gender when 
referring to public officials? I made a few changes not 
only in this Article but also in the Article on the Ac- 
countability of Public Officers, and I find that we could 
substitute the third person without making it less 
readable. If this could be done where it is possible, we 
would like to strongly recommend the rewriting of it. 

MR. REGALADO. We can assure Commissioner 
Rosario Braid that no Commissioner here is a misogyn- 
ist. We have nothing against the fair sex. However, under 
the rules of statutory construction, “he” may mean 
“she” or “she” may mean “he,” although we would 
consider it a little awkward if we use the word she 
and “her” to include “he” and “him.” It would be, 1 
think, a complete reversal of the order of things. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. No, we will not refer to 
“she” or “he” but we could say the “President or the 
“aforementioned official” or we may omit the reference 
altogether. 

MR. REGALADO. We will ask Commissioner 
Rodrigo, the defender of the fair sex and Chairman of 
the Committee on Style, to look for a felicitous substi- 
tute for that. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
the honorable Commissioner Suarez be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

May I go over this Article and let me begin with page 
2, Section 4, line 5. I do not know if this point had 
already been clarified but the term “National Assem- 
bly” is being used. In conducting the canvass of presiden- 
tial and vice-presidential elections, is our understanding 
correct that this will be done jointly by the House of 
Representatives and the Senate in joint session assem- 
bled? 

MR. REGALADO. May we ask for the page, section 
and line number. 

MR. SUAREZ. This is on page 2, line 5, Section 4. 


MR. REGALADO. Page 2. I think Commissioner 
Suarez might be using the original resolution. Does the 
copy of the Commissioner have on the upper right hand 
comer this parenthetical phrase “Adjusted to Bicameral 
Legislature”? 


1 iw, wiidL i nave is the one with the 

parenthetical phrase “Substitute Resolution.” 

MR. REGALADO. There is a subsequent one. 

Will the Secretariat kindly furnish Commissioner 
Suarez a copy of the latest adjustment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Under the latest draft, it says: 

xxx open all the cei tificates in the presence of the Senate 

an tie ouse of Representatives in joint public session. 

Is “joint public session” equivalent to “in joint 
session assembled” that was used under the 1935 
Constitution? 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Lastly, on page 3, which 
refers to the salary of the executive, lines 24 to 27 may 


MR. REGALADO. That is right. It was emphasized 
that it should be in joint public session. 


420 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Let me proceed to line 
23, page 2, wherein it is provided, and I quote: 

The Supreme Court, sitting en banc shall be the sole 
judge of all contests relating to the election, returns and 
qualifications of the President or Vice-President. 

Are we not giving enormous work to the Supreme 
Court especially when it is directed to sit en banc as 
the sole judge of all presidential and vice-presidential 
election contests? 


this matter of resolving presidential and vice-presidential 
contests? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Personally, I would not have any 
objection. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Would the Commissioner not consider that violative 
of the doctrine of separation of powers? 


MR. SUMULONG. That question will be referred to 
Commissioner Concepcion. 


MR. CONCEPCION. This function was discharged by 
the Supreme Court twice and the Supreme Court was 
able to dispose of each case in a period of one year as 
provided by law. Of course, that was probably during 
the late 1960s and early 1970s. I do not know how the 
present Supreme Court would react to such circum- 
stances, but there is also the question of who else would 
hear the election protests. 


MR. SUAREZ. We are asking this question becau: 
tn "^ en . bnes 23 to 25, there are no rules provided f( 
55* ^ ar “8 s and there is no time limit or duration f< 
Court Ai° n C ° nteSt to be dec ided by the Supren 
background 0 ’^? bave to consider the historic 
Presidential F, t^T RA 1793 ’ which organized tl 
line 2^ 19,7 Ct °5 al Tdbuna1 ' was Promulgated c 
were presented 3 j e + St three famous election contes 
dmwal hv ? d tW ° ° f them ended “P ^ wit] 

because of the^eUy^th ^ ° U , t -° f sheer frustratic 
referring to th^ ^ res °i u tron of the cases. I a: 

former President CarloTp WaS lodged b 

former President n . , Garcia a iamst our “kabaler 
vicTpLidentf I ? 10 ! dad0 Ma ^ a Pagal in 1961 and tl 
SenatorGerardo p ectlon contest filed by the la 
Lopez in 1965 . R ™ agamst Vlc e-President Femanc 


MR. CONCEPCION. I think Commissioner Bernas 
explained that this is a contest between two parties. 
This is a judicial power. 

MR. SUAREZ. We know, but practically the Commit- 
tee is giving to the judiciary the right to declare who 
will be the President of our country, which to me is a 
political action. 

MR. CONCEPCION. There are legal rights which are 
enforceable under the law, and these are essentially 
justiciable questions. 

MR. SUAREZ. If the election contest proved to be 
long, burdensome and tedious, practically all the time 
of the Supreme Court sitting en banc would be occupied 
with it considering that they will be going over millions 
and millions of ballots or election returns, Madam 
President. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The time consumed or to be 
consumed in this contest for President is dependent 
upon the key number of teams of revisors. I have no 
experience insofar as contests in other offices are 
concerned. 

MR. SUAREZ. Although there is a requirement here 
that the Supreme Court is mandated to sit en banc? 


protestants^ad* >< ^n°rni n d TT T f ° r What “ 

Senator Roxas was withdrawn Pr ° teSt C 

available. Senator Roxas H?H . h results Were alread 
adverse to him. The vnt d n0t warit to have a decisic 
and he did not get what^e? bei f 8 , counted alread; 
have a decision adverse to hk xpe . cted so rather tha 
case. t0 hls P rote st, he withdrew tl 

MR. SUAREZ. Also, there k tv, 

Senator Sergio Osmena filed * • e ^ ase of tile la 
in 1969 . against President Marc< 

MR. CONCEPCION. The same thi„„ k 

withdrawals took place when the refuhf were atoc 
about to be announced. re aireac 

MR. SUAREZ. I see. So the Commissioner woe 
not have any objection to vesting in the Supreme Coi 


MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. I see. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The steps involved in this 
contest are: First, the ballot boxes are opened before 
teams of three, generally, a representative each of the 
court, of the protestant and of the “protestee.” It is all 
a question of how many teams are organized. Of course, 
that can be expensive, but it would be expensive what- 
ever court one would choose. There were times that the 
Supreme Court, with sometimes 50 teams at the same 
time working, would classify the objections, the kind of 
problems, and the court would only go over the ob- 
jected votes on which the parties could not agree. So it 
is not as awesome as it would appear insofar as theCourt 
is concerned. What is awesome is the cost of the revision 
of the ballots because each party would have to appoint 
one representative for every team, and that may take 
quite a big amount. 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


421 


MR. SUAREZ. If we draw from the Commissioner’s 
experience which he is sharing with us, what would be 
the reasonable period for the election contest to be 
decided? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Insofar as the Supreme Court is 
concerned, the Supreme Court always manages to dis- 
pose of the case in one year. 

MR. SUAREZ. In one year. Thank you for the clarifi- 
cation. 

May I now go to page 4, Section 9, lines 17 and 18. 
Let me just read it so the Committee will understand 
me. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Will the Commissioner refer by 
section. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, I thought I was working on the 
amended draft. Section 1 1, lines 10 to 11, states: “such 
powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice- 
President as Acting President.” It is not Section 9, 
Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Section 11. 

MR. REGALADO. Where are we now? 

MR. SUAREZ. Section 11, second paragraph states: 
“Whenever a majority of all the members of the Cabinet 
transmit to the President.” This is different again, is it 
not? 

MR. REGALADO. Page 5, Section 1 1. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. No, I have it on Section 9 of my 
copy. Section 9, page 4, lines 1 1 to 18 states: 

The Congress shall by law provide pennanent disability 
or resignation of the Acting President at the time the 
vacancy in the Office of the President occurs or subse- 
quently thereafter, declaring who shall serve as President 
until the President and the Vice-President shall have been 
elected and qualified, subject to the same restrictions of 
powers and disqualifications as the Acting President. 

My clarificatory question, Madam President, is this: Is 
it necessary for the one declared as Acting President to 
be a Member of Congress or could he or she, if I may be 
clear on that point, be drawn even from the private 
nonpolitical sector? 

MR. REGALADO. Will Commissioner Suarez please 
repeat the question. Is he referring to page 4, lines 1 1 to 
18 ? 

MR. SUAREZ. It is the whole Section 9 which reads: 

In case of permanent disability, death, removal from of- 
fice or resignation of the President, the Vice-President shall 
become the President to serve the unexpired term. 


There is no problem in this provision, but the next 
sentence reads: 

The Congress shall by law provide for the case of per- 
manent disability, death, removal from office or resignation 
of both the President and Vice-President, declaring which 
officer shall then become Acting President or the manner 
in which one shall be selected. 

My question is: Is it necessary to draw this officer 
from the ranks of the Members of Congress or is it theo- 
retically possible that even a nonpublic official can be 
appointed by Congress as Acting President of our 
country? 

MR. REGALADO. The contemplation here, in line 
with the other relevant provisions of this Article, was 
that he shall be chosen from the elected representatives 
of the people. 

MR. SUAREZ. Does the Commissioner not agree 
with me that that is not clear in this particular section? 

MR. REGALADO. We will entertain an amendment 
at the proper time to make this particular section very 
clear. 

MR. SUAREZ. So it is clear that the intention of the 
Committee in proposing this provision is to the effect 
that the Acting President should come from the 
Members of Congress. 

MR. REGALADO. That is right, from the Members 
of Congress. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

May we now go to Section 1 1, page 5. This refers to 
the President’s written declaration of inability to dis- 
charge the powers and duties of the Office of the 
President. Can this written declaration be done for and 
in behalf of the President if, for example, the President 
is in no position to sign his name, like if he suffers an 
accident and both of his arms get to be amputated? 

MR. REGALADO. We have not had a situation like 
that even in the jurisdiction from which we borrowed 
this provision, but we feel that in that remote situation 
that the Commissioner has cited in that the President 
cannot make a written declaration, I suppose an alter- 
native wou d be considered wherein he can so expressly 
manifest in an authentic manner what should be con- 
tained in a written declaration. The purpose of a written 
declaration is to establish authenticity. 

MR. SUAREZ. But the phrase “written declaration” 
precludes any other kind of declaration. I am thinking 
in terms of what happened to President Wilson. Really, 
the physical disability of that Gentleman was never 
made clear to the historians. But suppose a situation will 
happen in our country where the President may suffer a 


422 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


coma and gets to be unconscious, which is practically a 
total inability to discharge the powers and duties of his 
office, how can he submit a written declaration of 
inability to perform the duties and functions of his 
office? 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. And they will not have to wait for the 
written declaration coming from the President who is in 
coma? 


FR. BERNAS. It is not the President who will make a 
written declaration that he is disabled. 


FR. BERNAS. Precisely, because he will never be able 
to make the written declaration. 


MR. SUAREZ. That applies to the second paragraph. 
FR. BERNAS. What line? 


MR. SUAREZ. That is why we really have to inter- 
pret the first sentence of Section 11, first paragraph 
with the second paragraph. 


MR. SUAREZ. I am referring to the first line of 
Section 1 1 , not to the second situation contemplated 
under the second paragraph of Section 11, Madam 
President. 

FR. BERNAS. Is it the line which states: “Whenever 
a majority of all the members of the Cabinet . . .”? 

MR. SUAREZ. No, it is the line which reads: “When- 
ever the President transmits . . .” 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

whn^c h° w can we expect a President 
written Hp°i ma + t0 transm ^ to the National Assembly his 
adn,itun8 ,ha * he * *» 

declaranVin^t'llY .^ 0 ’ * am referring to the written 
rione takes ??* "° Ability. If the Comntis- 

aecC„ k r, h \^4X 20 w -- ,ch s,a,es: “■* written 

MR. SUAREZ. “. . . that he is unable to discharge.” 

text, Madam A presfdent ,t V'T " f Ti “ e USlng the same 
•‘Thereafter wh?„ T? p a 11 ’ ltae 18 > stat “: 
ident of . . resident transmits to the Pres- 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, lines 5 to 1 1 . 

FR. BERNAS. I beheve we are using different texts. 
1 J MR * SUAREZ - 1 ^ Confuse d- Section 11, lines 5 to 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, the Cnnw • 
there. When the President Snn^TT'J? 38 3 P ° int 
applicable is the second paragraph ° 1 ’ then what is 

MR. SUAREZ. That means it is th™ • , 

after a certain period of time, for the LmbeTs^fThe 
Cabinet to transmit to the President of the Senate thei 
written declaration that the President is unable tr 
discharge his functions. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. With the indulgence of Com- 
missioner Suarez, what it means is that the second 
paragraph comes into play whenever the President, 
although capable of making a written declaration, 
refuses to do so or although he is willing to make that 
written declaration, he is incapable of doing so, then the 
initiative shall be taken by the majority of the members 
of the Cabinet. 

MR. SUAREZ. That changes the complexion of the 
answer of the Honorable Bemas insofar as the first 
paragraph of Section 1 1 is concerned, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Under Section 11, Commissioner 
Bemas was correct in that if the President is capable of 
making the written declaration himself, he may do so; 
but if he is really incapable or in coma, as the Commis- 
sioner said, I think Commissioner Bemas’ answer was 
that it can be done. 

MR. SUAREZ. Under paragraph 2? But we are 
precluding that under the second paragraph. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. The situation the Commissioner 
contemplates under the first paragraph is that of a per- 
son whose only defect is that both his hands were 
amputated. 

MR. SUAREZ. Or he is completely or totally uncon- 
scious. 

FR. BERNAS. If he is totally unconscious, then what 
is applicable is the second paragraph. 

MR. SUAREZ. But I heard Commissioner Regalado 
say that it is only when the President who is capable of 
making a written declaration but refuses to submit one 
that the second paragraph would apply. 

FR. BERNAS. No. 

MR. SUAREZ. Which is the correct interpretation 
then? 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


423 


MR. REGALADO. I said, whenever the President is 
capable but refuses to do so, and when he wants to do 
so but is incapable of doing so. It covers both situations. 

MR. SUAREZ. I am still a little confused but, none- 
theless, maybe the interpretation that we would like the 
Committee to give governing Section 1 1 has a quite 
clear meaning. Let us clear up any confusion regarding 
this matter. 

FR. BERNAS. I think what is meant here is that 
there are times when a President may be completely 
reasonable; he knows he is incapable so he signs a writ- 
ten declaration. And then we may have a situation of a 
President who goes out of his mind, and everybody 
thinks he is really out of his mind; he, therefore, refuses 
to sign a written declaration that he is incapable. In such 
a case, the Cabinet members can say that he is incapable 
under the second paragraph. 

MR. SUAREZ. And no time limit is provided within 
which the President should transmit that written de- 
claration? 

FR. BERNAS. There is no time limit. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

The last question is with reference to the Commit- 
tee’s omitting in the draft proposal tire immunity suit 
provision for the President. I agree with Commissioner 
Nolledo that the Committee did very well in striking out 
this second sentence, at the very least, of the original 
provision on immunity from suit under the 1973 Con- 
stitution. But would the Committee members not agree 
to a restoration of at least the first sentence that the 
President shall be immune from suit during his tenure, 
considering that if we do not provide him that kind of 
an immunity he might be spending all of his time facing 
litigations, as the President-in-exile in Hawaii is now 
facing litigations almost daily? 

FR. BERNAS. The reason for the omission is that we 
consider it understood in present jurisprudence that 
during his tenure he is immune from suit. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, there is no need to express it here. 

FR. BERNAS. There is no need. It was that way 
before. The only innovation made by the 1973 Consti- 
tution was to make that explicit and to add other 
things. 


MR. SUAREZ. We may have a Wilson situation in our 
hands one of these days. 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely, the second paragraph is to 
take care of a Wilson situation. 

MR. SUAREZ. I see. 

MR. REGALADO. The Wilson situation was in 1917. 
Precisely, this Twenty-Fifth Amendment to the Ameri- 
can Constitution was adopted on February 10, 1967 
to prevent a recurrence of such a situation. Besides, it 
was not only the Wilson matter. As I have already men- 
tioned here, they have had five situations in the United 
States, including those of President Garfield, President 
Wilson, President Roosevelt and President Eisenhower. 

MR. SUAREZ. Let me go to Section 19. I do not 
know if in the latest draft this has already been 
amended because what was stated here was only “direct- 
ly,” and probably the Commissioner would have noticed 
that in the matter of special or financial privilege, it 
should also include “indirectly.” 

I wonder if the Committee had already taken note of 
the phrase in Section 19, line 29 which states: “finan- 
cially interested directly in any contract . . .’’ Did the 
Committee deliberately omit the phrase “or indirectly, 
which refers to financial or special privilege? 

MR. REGALADO. We will entertain an amendment 
to that. We took that from Section 11(2) of the 1935 
Constitution. But I suppose the Committee will enter- 
tain a perfecting amendment at the proper time. 


MR. SUAREZ. On that understanding, I will not 
press for any more query, Madam President. 

I thank the Commissioner for the clarification. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
the honorable Commissioner Tingson be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President and Committee 
members, I am very interested in the Office of the Vice- 
President. 


From the 1935 Constitution up to the 1973 Constitu- 
tion, even in the United States Constitution, the vice- 
presidency has been a solitary, ineffectual, half-heartedly 
wanted kind of an office that is looked down on as 
worse than a spare tire in its category, so much so that a 
former Vice-President of the United States said: “Don’t 
run for that otfice; it is not worth a spit.” 


. ,, '-uusuiution now emergm 

in our midst and through our humble hands would d< 
something about this position, which, although it i 
simi ar o a a y-in-waiting, nevertheless, is so importan 
ecause as we rave said it time and time again, trite as i 

is, he is only a heartbeat away.” 

vLftn 3 + l ttle disappointed because Section 3 pro 
p pciri n e * ecte d in the same manner as the 

President that he must have the same qualifications anc 
term of office; and that he may be removed from office 
m the same manner as the President, but then in the 
next sentence, it says: “The Vice-President may be ap- 


424 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


pointed as a member of the Cabinet.” It is not even 
mandatory but only directory. 

Also, we mention in Section 5 that he shall become 
President when the President-elect shall have died, 
which is a good consolation. But on page 8, Section 19, 
to make matters even worse — if I may use the phrase 
“adding insult to injury to his dignity” — he shall not 
even be allowed during his term of office to hold any 
other office or employment, nor may he practice any 
profession, etc. 


I am just wondering why we did not, in a sense, 
upgrade the category of the Vice-President and make 
him, say, a Vice-President truly in waiting to take over 
the presidency so that he will be, as a result, a knowl- 
edgeable, effective kind of a leader. We know that in our 
history, there was more than one Vice-President 
elevated to the presidency, and one of them was not 
given any kind of job whatsoever; fortunately, the 
Fihpmo people saw to it that that was rectified so he 
got elected to the presidency later on. 

definite^ that *l\r° !° methin g by way of making it 

mted tbe h fn ^ VlCe ~F reSident ’ 6Ven 38 We have enume - 
ties ^shall be iT ° f ?? President “ ^ responsibili- 
would laueh It hi n °l k " OW if Commissioner Monsod 

on of the 1 ~ the 0mb udsman and the champi- 

will become a knowle^geabte b Jff 8 r ® ategory ’ he 

when he becomes Presided kmd ofaleader 

that. “resident? I am just wondering about 


by F the ^n^rable^ RodriJ 5 ^ * h W 6re faised this morr 
certainly would pnt d ^ 8 . ’ and our answer was that 
attempt „ ™ amendments wMch wc 

President H?weve“ .T*"' POsm " <° V 

which say: “The Vire p r ® spect to bnes 19 and 
member of the Cabinet ,^ esident , ma V be appointed ; 
to make this mandatory ^ that 11 is necessar y 
presidential system. ^ because of the nature of 

necessarily in tivfbosmn' ofth r ^ em b er of the Cabim 
principle of qualifier) President , and under 

Cabinet member is an ac^of Thip 3861 !? 7 ’ an aCt C 

fically repudiated by hirn So , President > unless sp 
any member of the r a m„ ? that necessard y, theref 

the President absolutely tn^ts^ W S ° mebody wl 
Cabinet members on hinV q mstS- , We cannot imj 

make the Vice-President a Cabinet 8 ™ 6 ^ the libert 
c , 1 a Cabinet member or not 

So while we would notviein ^ . 

to take him as a Cabinet mem hi* f °/ cing the Presi( 
other positions for him, perhaps^ a ^ e ^° U ), d enter 
Senate. P aps ’ as President of 


FR. BERNAS. It is just an example, Madam Pres- 
ident, and if the Commissioner can think of a preeminent 
position for the Vice-President, we will entertain it. 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, I already sent a note to Com- 
missioner Rodrigo this morning regarding this matter. 
Being my seatmate, he was the one who told me what 
the technicalities were, so I told him to kindly support 
me in my proposed amendment about which I am very 
much concerned, which is to make the position of the 
Vice-President more dignified, more respectable and 
more meaningful. And I think Commissioner Rodrigo 
is in sympathy with it now that the Commissioner 
mentioned that he asked questions about it. 

So I would be very happy if the Committee would 
entertain an amendment regarding the position of the 
Vice-President at the proper time. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask, Madam President, that 
the honorable Chancellor and Commissioner Guingona 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

In reply to the interpellation of Commissioner Suarez 
regarding the first paragraph of Section 9, the Commit- 
tee said that the officer who shall be declared Acting 
President will be chosen from among the Members of 
Congress; am I correct? 

FR. BERNAS. That was the answer given. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. And we also said that that does not 
come out very clearly in the text so that, therefore, we 
will entertain amendments to clarify it. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

With regard to the second paragraph, I suppose the 
same answer will hold regarding the person declared by 
Congress to become the Acting President. 

When we say that the Congress shall declare which 
officer shall become the Acting President, I presume 
that we are talking of Congress in joint session assem- 
bled, which means that in practically all cases, it will be 
a Member of the House who will be selected because of 
its sheer number of Members. 


MR. ™GSOR Madam President, that is a, 

consuelo de bobo because if we make him the ore 
officer of the Senate, we even take aw ay the privil 
voting because he only votes when there is a tie 


FR. BERNAS. Section 9, second paragraph says that 
Congress shall by law provide for it. 

MR. GUINGONA. So it will have to be by law, if 
both Houses will have to concur? 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


425 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

Is the word “shall” in Section 10 mandatory or 
directory? 

FR. BERNAS. It is mandatory. 

MR. GUINGONA. It is mandatory. 

I see that Congress now is required, under this Consti- 
tution, to call a special election in case of a vacancy as 
specified in Section 9, but the last sentence of Section 
10 says: 

No special election shall be called if the vacancy occurs 

within seventy days before the date of the next presidential 

election. 

I presume we are contemplating here a situation 
where there would be someone serving as President 
under Section 9. I was wondering whether or not the 
Committee would agree with me that 70 days before the 
next presidential election might seem too short because 
under this section, the Constitution requires that the 
special election shall be held not earlier than 45 days 
nor later than 60 days. Assuming that 60 days elapses 
from the time that Congress shall call the special 
election, there will only be roughly 1 0 days before the 
date of the next presidential election. We should con- 
sider the expense because I presume that the person 
who shall be elected in the special election would only 
serve for the unexpired term of maybe a month or two. 
I wonder if, at the appropriate time, the honorable 
members of the Committee would be willing to consider 
lengthening the period of 70 days. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The Commissioner has a very 
good point there, and if I recall correctly, the parallel 
provision to this mentions something like a period of 
18 months. So, we would certainly entertain amend- 
ments considering the Commissioner’s computation 
that it would be only around 10 days left before the 
next election. 

I thank the Commissioner for that reminder. 

MR. GUINGONA. I also thank the Commissioner; 
thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we have the 
last two interpellators, and I hope there will be no 
more interpellators after them. I ask that the honorable 
Commissioner Jamir be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 

MR. JAMIR. This is not exactly an interpellation, 
Madam President, but merely a clarification. I refer to 
Section 4, lines 20 to 22, page 2, where two or more 


candidates for President obtained equal and the highest 
number of votes, which says: 

. . . one of them shall forthwith be chosen by the vote of a 

majority of all the members of the Congress. 

May I know whether the two Houses of Congress 
will be sitting together in joint session or separately. 

MR. REGALADO. The antecedent to that in the 
matter of the canvass already speaks of a joint public 
session as we will note on lines 14 to 15. So in case 
there is a tie, that very same joint public session will so 
determine. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. My last clarificatory ques- 
tion is with reference to Section 6, page 3 of the draft 
Article regarding the oath to be taken by the President 
or Acting President, where there is no mention of the 
Vice-President. Is he going to take the same oath as 
provided here or not? 

MR. REGALADO. There is no mention of the Vice- 
President in this section because he may already be the 
President himself in case of death or permanent incapa- 
city of the elected President, in which case he takes the 
oath as President. 

MR. JAMIR. No, but when the President and the 
Vice-President take their oath together upon inception 
to office, what oath shall the Vice-President take? 

MR. REGALADO. Actually, in the previous Consti- 
tutions there were no such provisions. It was assumed 
that he would take the same oath as the President since 
after all, he is just “a heartbeat away” as has been 
mentioned here. I think in actual practice, they take 
the same oath. 

MR. JAMIR. What made me doubt was the phrase 
here “President or Acting President.” It seems that he 
will take his oath only when he becomes the Acting 
President. 

MR. REGALADO. No, we added the phrase “Acting 
President because there are actually three situations 
where there can be an Acting President. But we have not 
provided for any oath, I think, in the 1935 or the 1973 
Constitution insofar as the Vice-President is concerned, 
it being assumed that he would also take the same oath 
as the President but in his capacity as Vice-President. 

MR. JAMIR. Will there be any harm if instead of put- 
ting there or Acting President,” we put “President and 
Vice-President”? 

MR. REGALADO. Perhaps, we can include under 
Section 6, line 9 the Vice-President. I do not think there 
will be any harm if we now specify that he should take 
the same oath. 


426 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


MR. JAMIR. When the time for the period of amend- 
ments comes, we will introduce an amendment. 

Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that the 
honorable Vice-President, Commissioner Padilla, be 
recognized as the last interpellator. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Madam President. 

I agree with most of the changes introduced by the 
Committee as explained by its distinguished Chairman. 

I would like to go back to Section 15, on the com- 
mander-in-chief provision of the Constitution on the 
Armed Forces. 


I realize that without the restrictions or limitation' 
■ W f rC j nserted > this provision is basically a copy oi 
both the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutions. The firsl 

or snr>rf spea ^ s ot calling the Armed Forces to prevenl 
invasion^or reh violence > although it mentions alsc 
violence or nnKr ^ ^ d ’ 1 Would feel > als ° lawless 
together the sns ° dlsorder - The second sentence joins 

K cZ^ZTZ of th f privUeg,j ° f the ol 

partly or whollv h \ proclamati °n of martial law 
In th thr ° Ugh0Ut the p hmPPine Archipelago 

CommulfcoSv Pa Z aPhS ,° f that Section 15 ’ th( 

the declaration of martial Taw^ ‘shed between a state o 
privilege of the writ of u u nd the sus P ension of th< 
tee consider dividino abeas corpus. Will the Commit 

Paragraph of Section 1 5 lo^th 0 ^ Sentence of the firs 

lege of the writ of hahon th Suspension of the pnvi 
or proclamation of f and to the declaratio, 

correct? disZu iLZT? 1&W ’ since the Committee 

sion of the writ n f h u etween a state of the suspen 

proclamation of martianaw^^ and the state of th ' 
Committee itself th a . W because according to th 

between the two situations? 8 3 Substantia l differenc 


martial law may be unduly delayed. Will the Committee 
consider an amendment to the effect that the President 
may suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
or even proclaim martial law, but the period shall be 
limited unless there be subsequent concurrence of the 
Congress since the Committee itself provides that the 
Congress may revoke, reduce or even extend the period 
of 60 days? The point is for the insipiency of the suspen- 
sion or the proclamation, it must not be preaccom- 
panied by the concurrence of a majority of the Members 
of the Congress. 

MR. REGALADO. If the Commissioner will propose 
an amendment at the proper time, I think we can even 
subject it to the reactions of the body. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, thank you very much. And pro- 
bably because of some substantial difference between 
the state of the suspension of the privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus and the state of the proclamation of 
martial law, perhaps we can also make some distinc- 
tions as to the grounds for each of these two situations. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

On Section 17, I am referring to the Substitute 
Resolution No. 517, as adjusted to the bicameral legis- 
lature, page 8, lines 8 and 9, which mentions violations 
of corrupt practices laws. Tliis might refer exclusively 
to the so-called Tolentino version, RA 3019. 

MR. REGALADO. Republic Acts 3019 and 1379. 

MR. PADILLA. Republic Acts 3019 and 3017. 
Should we not expand the phrase “corrupt practices 
laws” to say “anti-graft and corruption laws,” and that 
would include RA 1379, Articles of the Revised Penal 
Code under Title VII entitled “Crimes Committed by 
Public Officers” and other laws that are existing or 
enacted? 


Ciate an C«nnutte e will ap, 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you 

The way it now appears n . 
mander-in-Chief of all the k th Preside nt as the G 
diately suspend the writ orm! i d ' F ° rces cannot im 
with the period mentioned^?^™ 3 ^ 1 iaw ’ 1 a * 
the concurrence of at i P a C + °° days ’ but rec l u 
Members of the Congress. 3 majority of all 

Should we not allow the p,. q „v4 

privilege of the writ of habeas corpus or^vTnprocl 
martial law without requiring « priori< or JJS 

the concurrence of the majority of the Member' 
Congress? If we wait for the congressional concurred 
the suspension of the writ or the proclamation 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, the Commis- 
sioner will notice that we have just put it as a generic 
phraseology “violations of corrupt practices laws,” 
whether the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act, 
RA 3019 or the law on the forfeiture of illegally ac- 
quired wealth, RA 1379 or those under Title VII, Book 
II of the Revised Penal Code, which covers bribery, 
malversation, among others. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. They are all covered here because 
they are corrupt practices laws, aside from those that 
the future Congress may still enact. 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. That is why the mere 
expression of corrupt practices laws, although stated in 


TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986 


427 


the plural, might make specific reference to that special 
law. 

MR. REGALADO. No, Madam President. We will put 
it on record that that was not the intention. 

MR. PADILLA. Section 9, lines 11 to 12, mentions 
“death, permanent disability or resignation . . .” but 
it makes no mention of “removal” which is one of the 
four cases to create a vacancy in the Office of the 
President or perhaps also in the Office of the Vice- 
President. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, line 11 et 
sequentiae refers to death, disability or resignation of 
the Acting President because there are only three 
situations wherein there can be an Acting President. 

MR. PADILLA. So it purposely did not include 
“removal” because he is just a temporary Acting Pres- 
ident. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, my last point is on 
Section 5, which, I notice, covers the beginning of the 
term. In fact, the word “beginning” in that section is 
mentioned three times. Can we not simplify this 
provision so as not to make it too long? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, we can as a matter of style. 
We can simplify that. Actually, we just took that from 
Section 6, Article VII of the 1935 Constitution and 
from the same section and article of the 1973 Consti- 
tution, but we can improve on the phraseology. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, so that one 
colleague would have a good night’s rest tonight, may I 
ask that the Gentleman from Pampanga, Commissioner 
Suarez, be recognized for one quick clarificatory 
question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

This is very simple but very vital. May I call the 
sponsor’s attention to page 7, Section 15, line 22, which 
mentions the phrase “judicially charged.” Do I take it 
that this does not refer to cases pending before the 
fiscal’s office or before the prosecution department of 
the Ministry of Justice? I am very concerned about this 
because it means the interpretation of the suspension of 
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. 

MR. SUMULONG. Commissioner Concepcion will 
answer that question. 

MR. CONCEPCION. May I know what section it is. 


MR. SUAREZ. It is Section 15, page 7, line 22. When 
the Committee employed the phrase “judicially 
charged,” does that mean it is referring specifically and 
categorically to a criminal charge filed in court and 
not to a pending investigation, preliminary or other- 
wise custodial, before the office of the fiscal or the 
prosecutor’s office of the Ministry of Justice? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the sponsor for the clarifica- 
tion. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I might add that the purpose is 
that as soon as a person is apprehended, he must be 
turned over to a court for such actions as may be 
necessary. 

MR. SUAREZ. Just for purposes of the record, 
suppose Juan de la Cruz is charged before the fiscal’s 
office for rebellion or for offenses inherent in or 
directly connected with invasion, does not the suspen- 
sion of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus apply 
to him yet? 

MR. CONCEPCION. It does not. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I move that we 
close the period of sponsorship and debate and that we 
proceed to the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the body ready to proceed to 
the period of amendments? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I divide 
my motion? 

First, I move that we close the period of sponsorship 
and debate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
close the period of sponsorship and debate on this 
Proposed Resolution No. 517? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I move that we 
now proceed to the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed to the period of amendments? 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. On the basis of popular clamor, 
Madam President, I move that we adjourn until tomor- 
row at nine-thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomonow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 6:26 p.m. 




















. 







































WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


429 


R.C.C. NO. 43 
Wednesday, July 30, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:43 am., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Efrain B. Trenas. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. TRENAS. Heavenly Father, we humbly ask 
Your divine guidance in our noble task to fulfill the 
sacred trust reposed in us to frame a fundamental law 
for our people. 

Imbue us with Your Holy Spirit to enable us to 
enshrine in a Constitution the principles of brother- 
hood, liberty, justice and democracy which You have so 
kindly restored to us in Your miracle last February. 

Inspire us with the same fervor of Your Holy Passion 
of the Cross so that we may be able to overcome the 
hatred and vindictiveness that are the natural fruits of 
more than a decade of ruthless suppression and persecu- 
tion. 

Lead us along the path of forgiveness and reconcilia- 
tion towards the altar of wisdom and statesmanship so 
that in the end we may achieve our solemn goal of pro- 
viding our people with a framework of government that 
guarantees to us our human rights and fundamental 
freedoms, secures to us and our posterity our God-given 
resources, and finds for us and the generations yet to 
come a respected place under the sun and among the 
family of nations. 

This we ask You, Almighty Father, in the name of 
Jesus Christ, Your Son. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Nieva 

. . Present* 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Bacani 

. Present* 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Bernas 

. Present* 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

Brocka 

. Present* 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 


Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present* 

Davide 

. Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Foz 

. Present* 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Tadeo 


Gascon 

. Present* 

Tan 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Present 

Tingson .... 

. . Present 

Jamir 

, . Present 

Trenas 


Laurel 

. . Present 

Uka 


Lerum 

. . Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present* 

Maambong . . 

. . Present* 

Villegas 

. . Present 

Monsod 

. . Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 29 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 

recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL of journal 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 


Appeared after the roll call 


430 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary -General read the following Communi- 
cations \ the President making the corresponding refer- 
ences: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Cn!? r fr p m N< T Sgt- T a w asil A. Hataie, Bureau ( 
Drovktnn ° rt °- amb °anga, proposing a constitution 
tarian ^ government to extend human 

S e s r h — 1 p r nne 

regardless of position, desig™J"„ g0vernm “ t sem ‘ 

on986) niCat '° n N °' 375 ' Constitutional Commissio 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Ms. Ester r c„ r\ • 

Population, Welfareville y ,? umisiam ' Commission c 
Metro Manila transmitr om P° u nd, Mandaluyon 

by a group of private orea n nh a t POSltl0n paper submitte 

tion problem, saying that a n ^ Fegardijlg the Popul 
welfare prograrn has h P tr peo P le -°nented populatic 
bloom into full fin • • er an< ^ S re ater chances l 

of the new governments 'l lmplemented along the lim 
call for self-renewal humane concern and since 

(Communication No 37fi r 

of 1 986) ,b ~ Constitutional Commissic 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr Jp 

mocrito T. MendozaToTtT ^ontemayor and Mr. D 
the Philippines (TUCPi Union Congress i 

the American mUitary ltS P° slt,on P a P er c 

mending that the present pi i- . the Philippines recoi 
Treaty be respected until * PPme ' lJ - S - Mutu al Defen 

(Communication No 3 

of 1 986) ‘ - Constitutional Commissic 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Resolution from the Oloneano i 

— of ,he United s,a,es h^rPMSSiS 


(Communication No. 378 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Stop Trafficking of Pilipinos Foundation. 
Inc. signed by its President. Minerva G. Laudico, and the 
other officers and members of the Board of Directors, 
calling attention to the alarming resurgence of in- 
decency in mass media and entertainment and express- 
ing alarm at the manner in which the courts have ruled 
in favor of those who have no apparent regard for the 
dignity of women and for decent family relationship. 

(Communication No. 379 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication signed by Ms. Elsa M. Gavino and one 
hundred fifty others, urging that regulations on foreign 
investments and the determination of the areas of 
investment should be left to the legislature. 

(Communication No. 380 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from the Honorable Minister Candu I. Muarip of 
the Office of Muslim Affairs and Cultural Communities, 
transmitting proposals and resolutions drafted by a 
group of Muslim professionals, scholars, and academi- 
cians, embodying the general sentiments and common 
aspirations of the Muslim Filipihos and the tribal 
communities. 

(Communication No. 381 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication from the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, La 
Trinidad, Benguet, and signed by its temporary Presid- 
ing Officer, Felix T. Cabading, transmitting Resolution 
No. 273, entitled: RESOLUTION THAT THE HONORABLE 
BODY ADOPT A STAND IN FAVOR OF ADMINISTRATIVE 
REGIONALIZATION AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO STATUS 
QUO. 

(Communication No. 382 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Communication from the Stop Trafficking of Pilipinos 
Foundation, Inc. signed by its President, Minerva G. 
Laudico, urging inclusion in the Constitution provisions 
mandating the State to ensure an out-of-school environ- 
ment conducive to the moral education of the youth 
and reinforcing the right of children and young people 
to a sound intellectual and moral formation. 

(Communication No. 383 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


431 


Letter from Dr. Helen Agustin de Guzman of U.P. 
Medicine 1967, saying that it would be a wiser and 
more prudent move for the Constitutional Commission 
not to make a final pronouncement on the U.S. bases 
issue at this time and at such a hurried pace. 

(Communication No. 384 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 517 
(Article on the Executive) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. I move that we continue the considera- 
tion of Proposed Resolution No.517 on the Article on 
the Executive. We are still in the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence ) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The honorable Chairman and members of the Com- 
mittee on the Executive are requested to please come 
forward to receive the proposed amendments of the 
Commissioners. 

At this juncture, may we take advantage of informing 
our Commissioners of our guests this morning. To my 
left, we have students from St. Scholastica’s Grade 
School, St. Scholastica’s College, the UP Physiology 
class and the Philippine Normal College. To my right, 
we have students from St. Bridget’s High School and the 
Polytechnic University of the Philippines. We thank 
these students very much for attending and showing 
their interest in the deliberations of the Commission. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissiorler Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

I have amendments to Section 3, page 1 of the 
substitute resolution adjusted to the bicameral legisla- 
ture. The first portion would be just a transposition and 
would affect lines 14 and 16. After the second word 
“shall” on line 14, I propose to transpose thereto the 
portion of line 1 6 which reads: “have the same qualifi- 
cations and term of office” and then add the word 
AND, so that the first sentence now will read as follows: 
“There shall be a Vice-President who shall HAVE THE 
SAME QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM OF OFFICE 


AND be elected with and in the same manner as the 
President.” 

MR. SUMULONG. The Committee accepts the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide restate 
his amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. The first line of Section 3, as amended, 
would read as follows: “There shall be a Vice-President 
who shall HAVE THE SAME QUALIFICATIONS AND 
TERM OF OFFICE AND be elected with and in the 
same manner as the President.” 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 1 8 of the same section, I move 
for the deletion of the phrase “as provided in this 
Constitution.” 

MR. SUMULONG. The Committee accepts, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 

amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 20, I seek to introduce a new 
sentence after the period (.) following the word 
“cabinet.” It reads: SUCH APPOINTMENT REQUIRES 
NO CONFIRMATION. 

MR. REGALADO. For the record, will Commissioner 
Davide state the reason for his proposed amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. The reason for this is to appoint the 
Vice-President as a member of the Cabinet and to 
require a confirmation by the Commission on Appoint- 
ments on this might rather be degrading to the Office of 
the Vice-President. As a matter of fact, for the judiciary 
and for the Ombudsman as well, we do not require 
confirmation by the Commission on Appointments. In 
line, therefore, with the prestige of the Office of the 
Vice-President, I propose that the appointment of the 
Vice-President to any Cabinet position should also not 
necessitate a confirmation by the Commission on 
Appointments. 

MR. SUMULONG. With the explanation given by the 
proponent, we accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner read once 
more his proposed amendment? 


432 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. The amendment would be another 
sentence after the period (.) following “cabinet” on 
page 1, line 20: SUCH APPOINTMENT REQUIRES 
NO CONFIRMATION. 


THE PRESIDENT. In other words. Commissioner 
Davide’s position is that the word “reelection” necessa- 
rily implies that it is for the same office. Is this accepted 
by the Committee? 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 


MR. SUMULONG. The Committee accepts. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, on page 2, more 
particularly Section 4, line 5, the amendments are: 
(1) Delete the word “He” and substitute it with the 
words THE PRESIDENT; (2) delete also the following 
words found on lines 5 and 6: “disqualified from imme- 
diate” and substitute the same with INELIGIBLE FOR 
ANY, so that the sentence will only read as follows: 
“THE PRESIDENT shall be INELIGIBLE FOR ANY 
reelection.” 

? be P ur Po se of this amendment is to be consistent 

Term ^ ? y had a PP roved in the matter of the 
term of the President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

sioner Davide^why'he nr^ ^ 1 | lquire from Commis- 
be completely ineligible for? the President shall 
lower than the presidency? V UtUre elective office 

voted on th^tern^oV???? 1 ?? 51 Friday when we 
early resolution allowing the Presid*? ° fflCials ’ our 
reelection was reconsidered bv S t? n ° lmmediate 
opted to allow no reelection SS b ° dy and the bod y 
convey, therefore, that derJ him at any time - To 
the rewording, as proposed, is neM^y*' Commission ' 

MR. REGALADO D 

issue, I think what w?" 8 the deliber afions on that 

Set b “ fOT a a s 

MR DAV,D E- ^ es > Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO WonlH 

Perhaps a former President ntv T be P ossible that 

and experience with the neoni t0 share his talents 
position like that of a Senator? V mnning for a lower 

MR. DAVIDE. He can. He is onl h 
tion, meaning to the same office u banned from reelec- 
for any office. So the word? . ut not from running 

PRESIDENT shall be INELIGIBLE FOP “ THE 

tion .” hOR ANY reelec- 


MR 


REGALADO. Yes, with that understanding. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, will the distin- 
guished sponsor agree to say “shall NOT be ELIGIBLE,” 
instead of “shall be INELIGIBLE.” This is the same 
thing. 

MR. DAVIDE. “Shall NOT be ELIGIBLE” is ac- 
cepted. 


MR. REGALADO. It is a matter of style; the Com- 
mittee accepts. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? ( Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, to be consistent 
with the approved amendment and to allow the Vice- 
President only one reelection, I propose a new sentence 
which will be added after the amendment that has been 
approved, to read as follows: NO VICE-PRESIDENT 
SHALL SERVE FOR MORE THAN TWO SUCCES- 
SIVE TERMS. VOLUNTARY RENUNCIATION OF 
THE OFFICE FOR ANY LENGTH OF TIME SHALL 
NOT BE CONSIDERED AS AN INTERRUPTION IN 
THE CONTINUITY OF THE SERVICE FOR THE 
FULL TERM FOR WHICH HE WAS ELECTED. 

MR. REGALADO. May we have that again but slowly 
for the benefit of the other Commissioners because the 
Committee members are already aware of the amend- 
ments of Commissioner Davide although the others may 
wish to have these amendments duly noted in their own 
copies so that they can also participate. 


THE PRESIDENT. May we request Commissioner 
Davide to read it slowly. 


MR. DAVIDE. I will read it very slowly, Madam 
President. 

On line 6, following the amendment that has just 
been approved, add the following: NO VICE-PRES- 
IDENT SHALL SERVE FOR MORE THAN TWO 
SUCCESSIVE TERMS. VOLUNTARY RENUNCIA- 
TION OF THE OFFICE FOR ANY LENGTH OF TIME 
SHALL NOT BE CONSIDERED AS AN INTERRUP- 
TION IN THE CONTINUITY OF THE SERVICE FOR 
THE FULL TERM FOR WHICH HE WAS ELECTED 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


433 


MR. SUMULONG. Wc accept the amendment 
because I think the Commission has already reached the 
same decision previously. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the same page, the same Section 4, 
lines 9 and 10, delete the words “seat of the National 
Government” and substitute the same with the word 
CONGRESS. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. SUMULONG. The Committee accepts. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On page 2, between lines 22 and 23, 1 
propose to insert a new paragraph to read as follows: 
CONGRESS SHALL PROMULGATE ITS RULES FOR 
THE CANVASSING OF THE CERTIFICATES. 

MR. SUMULONG. Will Commissioner Davide repeat 
the proposed amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. CONGRESS SHALL PROMULGATE 
ITS RULES FOR THE CANVASSING OF THE CER- 
TIFICATES. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. REGALADO. For the benefit of the other 
Commissioners, will Commissioner Davide explain his 
proposal? 

MR. DAVIDE. This is necessary in order that 
Congress will have the authority now to promulgate 
the necessary rules for the canvassing of the certificates 
of canvass for the Offices of the President and the 
Vice-President. 

MR. REGALADO. How will that tie up with line 16 
regarding the determination of the authenticity and due 
execution of the certificates of canvass in the manner 
provided by law? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is entirely a different matter. 
Madam President, because it would relate to the rules 
concerning the determination of the authenticity and 


due execution thereof, whereas the other one would 
be the rules of procedure. 

MR. SUMULONG. We have no objection to the 
proposed amendment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner read again 
the proposed new paragraph? 

MR. DAVIDE. CONGRESS SHALL PROMULGATE 
ITS RULES FOR THE CANVASSING OF THE CER- 
TIFICATES. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 25, after the words “Vice- 
President,” I propose to add AND MAY PROMUL- 
GATE ITS RULES FOR THE PURPOSE. This refers 
to the Supreme Court sitting en banc. This is also to 
confer on the Supreme Court exclusive authority to 
enact the necessary rules while acting as sole judge of 
all contests relating to the election, returns^and qualifi- 
cations of the President or Vice-President. 

MR. REGALADO. My personal position is that the 
rule-making power of the Supreme Court with respect 
to its internal procedure is already implicit under the 
Article on the Judiciary; considering, however, that 
according to the Commissioner, the purpose of this is to 
indicate the sole power of the Supreme Court without 
intervention by the legislature in the promulgation of 
its rules on this particular point, I think I will personally 
recommend its acceptance to the Committee. 

MR. SUMULONG. The Committee accepts the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 

amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. If there are no other anterior amend- 
ments, I have some proposals for Section 5. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us inquire from the Floor 
Leader. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are anterior 
amendments. 

May I ask that Commissioner Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will call Commissioner Davide 
later. 

Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. With the Chair’s indulgence, 1 just 
want to take a few minutes of our time to lay the basis 


434 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


for some of the amendments that I would like to pro- 
pose to the Committee this morning. The reason I am 
looking at the total report on the executive department 
is that I have gone through some of the amendments that 
we have already approved and considered in this Assem- 
bly, and I am a little bit concerned about the emascula- 
tion of the executive department. I remember very well, 
when we first started our deliberations, the explanation 
of Commissioner Bernas on what we will try to do. 
We have set objectives and now we are trying to build 
structures and systems in this Constitution so that 
we can have a government that will operate, that will 
work for the achievement of those objectives. In this 
Constitution, we have eliminated Amendment No. 6 
which was the source of many problems. We have 
eliminated the lifetime immunity of the President and 
his representatives from every action they have done. In 
the Article on Accountability of Public Officers, we 
have done the reverse. We have turned 1 80 degrees by 
sa ying that the action to recover property unlawfully 
gained or acquired shall not prescribe; and, in fact, we 
ave even said there that even prosecution for criminal 
o enses related thereto shall not be barred by pre- 

tionl l0 h’ f h I S and est0 PP e l- I have my own reserva- 
prosecution th adv * sabilit y of Pitting the criminal 
of future discusrions ^ C3n be the SUbjeCt 

question ^Trom^th^’ ^ e . bave eliminated the political 
Judicial and Bar r JU -i C * ary ’ bave established the 

:r«h P e U V b t,r iCiar r^r 

presidency. We have g |ven , he 

Perham fTk^’e We voted for a bicameral legislature. 

group is, tha/Th of^the ^ Wh3t the thinking of this 
drafted up to that tim P provi sions that were being 
ment. 6 assume< J a unicameral govern- 

would be a unicameral Satcguards assu med that there 
be under the undue infin^ 6 ™' 1 ] 6111 which mi 8 ht a g ain 
did decide that w e would"? ° f executive - But we 
That means that not r, i ,, aVe a bicameral legislature, 
the appropriation functio 16 lawrnakin 8 function and 
Houses of legislature^ hn? 7 Uld 8 ° through the two 
special actions that would ? S ° special cven ts and 
Houses, among them the i ^ quirc the a PProval of both 
So thprp ? declaration of martial law. 

because the President wfn lTave t blCameral !e S lslatur e, 
approval not only of ono h ° cor >tend and get the 

have the unanimous appreva?^ „ bW ? f tw °- He 

the approval of ihe other With th ° e , bllt l11ay not get 
balance, what wc have tasmuted bv^ t" 1 ° f cl,cck a " d 
ture is really two other bodies to cheekX^resident' 

We have also made the constitutional commissions 
more independent We have enacted prohibitions' on 
double offices, double compensation and other sources 
of income. We have made full disclosure of net worth a 
requirement. 


In the case of the COMELEC, we have given it power 
to initiate court proceedings and to initiate the deputa- 
tion of the military. The President can no longer initiate 
that; it is only with the concurrence of the COMELEC. 
Also, all three constitutional commissions have been 
given fiscal autonomy. 

In the Bill of Rights, we have eliminated the word 
“insurrection” and the phrase “imminent danger there- 
of.” We have refined and put all the safeguards in 
seizures and searches, and warrants of arrest. 

In the Article on Accountability of Public Officers, 
we have liberalized the procedures for impeachment and 
included betrayal of trust as a ground therefor. We have 
created a constitutional ombudsman. We have declared 
imprescriptible the right to recover property. 

At the same time — and these will be forthcoming — 
there will be great demands for funds and resources and 
efficient management of the government. There will be 
proposals for socialized pricing, housing and education. 
There will be agrarian reform requirements which I 
estimate could be as much as P10 to P20 billion at the 
beginning. There is the proposal for a national health 
care. All of these are meant to institute safeguards 
against abuse of power. 

But, first, may we ask that we caution ourselves 
because when we put individual safeguards, they may 
look all right by themselves and yet, if we look at the 
total system about which Commissioner Bernas spoke 
to us at the beginning, we may be instituting too many 
safeguards and imponderable possibilities that the 
Executive will be unable to act. 

We are opening up the system of initiative in amend- 
ing the Constitution. We have deconstitutionalized the 
two-party system. Hopefully, we will allow the opening 
up of party list representatives and sectors in order to 
allow minorities and the sectors to enter the legislature. 
We will be decentralizing authority of local governments 
and we are constitutionalizing the power of recall. 

We have chosen a presidential system. It seems to be 
the real preference of our people. As the name implies, 
the presidential system places responsibility and reliance 
on a Chief Executive to lead and act unlike a President in 
a parliamentary system. For a President to be effective, 
he must have adequate powers and flexibility to deal 
with problems. Our present problems are enormous. We 
have the economic recovery and growth problem. We 
have some problems of political instability, insurgency, 
sporadic lawless violence, dissatisfaction with local 
appointments and the need for a new Constitution. 

Today, that part of our Constitution that we are 
dealing with is the presidency which, for some reasons 
and by our decision, has lesser powers now and is sub- 
jected to more checks both institutionally and directly. 
We took away from the President one political leverage; 
that is, the possibility of returning to power. A good 
President needs some leverage in order to be effective. 
Much as we would like to think that we have attained 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


435 


complete maturity, we have not. We need time and even 
people power to be able to make sure that the presiden- 
cy will work. Maybe in the future, we will be able to 
attain that kind of maturity. 


But our long-term vision must also take account of 
continuing realities and the dynamics and imperfectibil- 
ity of human institutions. 


So, today, we are looking at the presidency. Given 
the premises I have cited, let us honestly ask ourselves: 
Have we created a self-destructing presidency? Will the 
safeguards, no matter how noble and uplifting they are 
individually, cumulatively effect a paralysis of our 
presidency? Is it a presidency that can still operate 
effectively? Can it engage in effective management and 
problem solving which are essentially executive func- 
tions? I refer particularly to the following: Is it possible 
for us to rethink the immediate reelection of the 
President as a prohibition but opening it up to future 
canvass which could be a leverage of a good President? 

Specifically, I would also like to suggest an amend- 
ment to Section 1 5 on the declaration of martial law, 
which says that even during the first 60 days, in case of 
invasion or rebellion, the concurrence of the legislature 
is needed for the President to declare martial law. 
Madam President, I believe that at least for the first 60 
days, which is a time fuse for it automatically expires at 
the end of 60 days, we should at least give the President 
the flexibility to act in cases of invasion and rebellion. 


I also would like to propose the following amend- 
ments in addition to that: In Section 21, where we talk 
about the budget of the government, I would like to add 
that the basis for the appropriations should be within an 
economic development framework. We want the legis- 
lature to honor or respect the authority of the Execu- 
tive to formulate the economic development program 
and for the legislature to enact an appropriations law 
that is within that framework and supportive of the 
long-term thrust of the country. 


With regard to foreign loans which is on Section 18, 
I would like to suggest to my colleagues who may be 
thinking of putting that power of concurrence in the 
Congress not to emasculate the Executive that way. We 
are trying to put an independent Monetary Board which 
should be a sufficient safeguard to the presidency. 

On Section 16, 1 would like to suggest that the powei 
of the Commission on Appointments be limited to the 
department heads, ambassadors, generals and so on but 
not to the levels of bureau heads and colonels. 


I would like to request that if it is at all possible, 
maybe we should discuss again the question of imme- 
diate or future reelection. 

The last one is on the question of judicially charged 
persons in case of suspension of the writ of habeas 
corpus which 1 believe Commissioner Bengzon will also 
raise at the proper time. Madam President, these are 
the sections I would like to amend. 1 am sony that I 
took some of my colleagues’ time, but I wanted to set 


the bases of these amendments and inform the body 
why I would like to propose these amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. We request the Commissioner to 
please submit his amendments to the Committee so 
that the members can study them. But in the meantime, 
we will go ahead because we adopted already the pro- 
cedure of calling the amendments section by section as 
requested. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, and as the 
appropriate section comes, I will ask for recognition. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rigos be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. Is this for an anterior amendment, Mr. Floor 
Leader? 

MR. RAMA. Yes; it is on Section 5. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may now 
proceed. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, before I submit my 
proposed amendment which is coauthored by Commis- 
sioner Nolledo, may I ask the Committee one question? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

REV. RIGOS. In the Article the Commission ap- 
proved the other day and reiterated by Commissioner 
Davide this morning, the President may serve only for 
one full term without reelection. It was made clear, 
however, by Commissioner Regalado that a President or 
a former President may run for another position pro- 
bably for Senator or for Vice-President. 

MR. REGALADO. That was Commissioner Davide’s 
amendment. 


D ., ' “hi-’'-’:*, mis iormer President runs for 

Vice-President and he gets elected. During his term, 

t t pj a Y ea r °i two the President becomes incapaci- 

iHpnt t- 1- 0 t/f lce 'Tresident, who was a former Pres- 
ident, take the place of the President? 

tl-i-rf k As it stands now, he can because 

t) p ^°, ree l cct ' 0n - That is succession to the Office of 
t e resident by the Vice-President as provided for in 
the Constitution. 


REV. RIGOS. I thought we approved sometime last 
week that a President who has served the full term of six 
years could not serve as President again. 


436 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. He cannot serve as President again 
by running for reelection, so he can run for Vice- 
President. 

REV. RIGOS. But he can hope that something 
happens to the President so he becomes President again. 

MR. REGALADO. Possibly with that hope which 
may either be an emptio spei or an emptio rei speratae. 

REV. RIGOS. That answers my question. 

Thank you very much. 

Our proposed amendment now is on pages 2 and 3, 
starting from line 32 which states: 


The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the proponents of the 
amendment to Section 5 have come to some agreement; 
I ask that Vice-President Padilla be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Vice-President Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I yield to my 
cosponsor, Commissioner de los Reyes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 


The Congress shall by law provide for the case where 
neither a President-elect nor a Vice-President-elect shall 
have been chosen or shall have qualified, or both shall have 
died at the time fixed for the beginning of their term, de- 
claring who shall then act as President or the manner in 
which one who is to act shall be selected, and such person 

shall act accordingly until a President or Vice-President 
shall have qualified. 


amendment is to delete the wliol 
Ueu thereof ^h t> 81 ? S ^ ith “ The Congress shall” and i 
NFTTHFR f 1 b DDcc e , the followin g sentence: WHERI 
PREMDFNT ft S S ™ LECT NOR A VICE 
OR SHAT 7 ' H L a E x/ J ^ ALL HAVE BEEN CHOSE! 

HAVE DIED AT THF Q TmV FIED ° R B0TH SHAL] 
NING OF THFtVtp E d!]^ E FIXED F0R THE BEGIN 
OR ?N°HIS ARSFMPP toJ HE SENATE PRESIDED 

THE HOUSE OF REPRKENTATWES SHA^THf! 

PRKmE P N\ E SHT, T H u 4 N v T,L A PRE “debtor ™c 

rKfcMULN T SHALL HAVE QUALIFIED. 


Rigos get ^gtthtr D witMh y e t wo^th ^ Commissior 
amendments on the verv l * ther P ro P onent s of t 
Maambong and Davide Commission< 
three Commissioner/ h their own versions. T 

suggested^ re:,:: a :; d marry ,h 

in a “fertilized” section. ther S ° they Can resi 


REV. RIGOS. We 
los Reyes. 


can also include Commissioner de 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
MR. REGALADO. May We ask for 
the SeSS ‘° n ,0 faCilltate «» Fgsolving^of The^mendmer 


THE PRESIDENT. The 

It was 10:28 a.m. 


session is suspended. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. This is an amendment of 
Commissioners Padilla, Nolledo, Rigos and this humble 
Member. 

On page 2, Section 5, we propose to delete lines 26 to 
32 and in lieu thereof substitute simpler words to read 
as follows: THE PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL QUAL- 
IFY AT THE BEGINNING OF HIS TERM. IF HE 
FAILS TO QUALIFY, THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT 
SHALL ACT AS PRESIDENT. IF THE PRESIDENT- 
ELECT DIES, THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL 
BECOME PRESIDENT. That is the end of the sentence. 

Then, the second portion of the amendment will be 
proposed by Commissioner Rigos. 

MR. REGALADO. There was mention yesterday in 
the course of the interpellations of the possibility of 
the President having died or becoming permanently 
incapacitated. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. We can add that so the line 
reads: IF THE PRESIDENT-ELECT DIES OR BE- 
COMES PERMANENTLY INCAPACITATED THE 
VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL BECOME PRES- 
IDENT. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please read 
how this particular portion of Section 5 will read 
now? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. THE PRESIDENT-ELECT 
SHALL QUALIFY AT THE BEGINNING OF HIS 
TERM. IF HE FAILS TO QUALIFY THE VICE- 
PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL ACT AS PRESIDENT. 
IF THE PRESIDENT-ELECT DIES OR BECOMES 
INCAPACITATED THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT 
SHALL BECOME PRESIDENT. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:35 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under that particular proposal, we 
will have a Vice-President who will become a permanent 
President because of failure to qualify. However, the 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


437 


President may later qualify. That is why the Vice- 
President will only act until the President shall have 
qualified. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No. the sentence is clear: IF 
HE FAILS TO QUALIFY THE VICE-PRESIDENT- 
ELECT SHALL ACT AS PRESIDENT. 

MR. DAVIDE. It says, “SHALL ACT AS PRES- 
IDENT”? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Until the President shall have quali- 
fied? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is covered in the second 
amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. May we hear all the amendments 
to Section 5, so we will have the total picture of the 
. new Section 5? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I yield to Commissioner Rigos 
who will have the honor to read the consolidated 
amendments. 

MR. REGALADO. I think Commissioner Padilla has 
also some suggestions. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that we called 
a recess in order that the Commissioners involved coul 
confer and just submit to the Committee a consolidate 
substitute for Section 5. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, we had a division of 
labor. Commissioners Padilla and de los Reyes wor e 
on the first portion of Section 5 and the rest of us 
worked on the latter portion of Section 5. I will now 
present the latter portion. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will then request the Commis- 
sioners to consolidate their labor because, as state y 
Commissioner Davide, what is to be presented in tie 
first portion should be guided also by what is in ie 
latter portion or vice versa. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, we do not have 
to consolidate the amendments because there are two 
parts. Either amendment can stand on its own. 

MR. REGALADO. Since there are two parts with 
several sentences, could we have them also lepro uce 
in several copies to guide the other Commissioners on 
how to vote? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 10:41 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 10:58 a.m. , the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader, Com- 
missioner Sarmiento, is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. This Member is now the Acting 
Floor Leader. I ask that Commissioner Jamir be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you, Madam President. 

I propose to insert a new paragraph between the first 
and second paragraphs of Section 4, on page 2. which 
reads: NO PERSON WHO HAS SERVED MORE THAN 
THREE YEARS AS PRESIDENT SHALL BE QUAL- 
IFIED FOR ELECTION TO THE SAME OFFICE AT 
ANY TIME. 

May I state my reasons very briefly. If the President 
dies, let us say, two years after assuming office, and die 
Vice-President takes over, the Vice-President will be 
serving for four years. In that case he cannot run for 
election as President, according to my proposed amend- 
ment. But if the President dies, let us say, three years 
after assuming office, then the Vice-President will serve 
for less than three years. In this case, he can run for 
election as President. That is why I propose: NO PER- 
SON WHO HAS SERVED MORE THAN THREE 
YEARS AS PRESIDENT SHALL BE QUALIFIED FOR 
ELECTION TO THE SAME OFFICE AT ANY TIME. 
May I know the response of the Committee? 

MR. REGALADO. I notice that the amendment of 
Commissioner Jamir is almost tile same as the Twenty- 
Second Amendment to the United States Constitution 
ratified on March 1, 1951, which says: 

No person who has held the office of President or acted 
as President for more than three years of a term to which 
some other person was elected President shall be elected 

to the office of the President in the next succeeding elec- 
tion. b 


MR. JAMIR. Substantially. 

MR. REGALADO. But the Gentleman’s proposal is 
for permanent disqualification thereafter? 


’ Yes, because of the present proposals 

ma e y the Committee or approved on the floor, 
w uc i disqualify the President from being reelected. 


438 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. That amendment is substantially 
the same as the Twenty-Second Amendment to the 
United States Constitution but prohibition therein is 
only with respect to the next succeeding election. 

MR. JAMIR. The difference is that under the United 
States Constitution, the President has eight years to 
serve, whereas under our present proposal there is no 
reelection whatsoever for the President. 

MR. SUMULONG. If I remember right. Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo made that proposal previously and that 
was acted upon by the Commission favorably. 


MR. JAMIR. But there is none in the present pro- 
posal. 

MR. SUMULONG. But I remember that there was a 
similar proposal made by Commissioner Rodrigo. 

MR^ RODRIGO. May I clarify the matter. When we 
were discussing the Article on the Legislative, I men- 

excent Hw 3 pi ? po j al and it seemed to be acceptable 
the Exernti^ 6 d to . transfer it to the Article on 

proposal S ° 11 lS timely now to discuss that 

Jamir that wm ^e ^ in j,° rm Commissioner 

posal here to reop en that ^ * 3 Pr °' 

whether the President shall not be eliSbfef ^ 4 ?■ t0 
reelection or whether it *h m [ lglb e for immediate 

from reelection. That has ort n! 0tal h Pr ° hibit r 
because as I pointed out in m ^ f a bearmg also 
posal it will also be a comnleteh Con ; missloner ’ s P r °- 
American version, it is - P et ® bar wher eas under the 
election. J * * or next succeeding 

body has acted 1 on^thaf 386 ’ 1 WiU Wait until after the 
Commissioner. Proposal mentioned by the 


My proposed amendment is on page 1, Section 3, 
lines 19 and 20. The proposal is to provide a constitu- 
tional function for the Vice-President. So we delete the 
words “may be appointed as a member of the Cabinet” 
on lines 19 and 20 and in lieu thereof substitute the 
following: THE VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL BE THE 
EX OFFICIO PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE. The 
reason for this is that we have to address a problem 
that has existed for many years. All the Vice-Presidents 
of this country had complained that they did not 
have any job. Because of their joblessness a lot of 
anomalies and aberrations had arisen. For instance, 
there was one Vice-President who did nothing but 
campaign all over the country for four years against the 
President. Likewise, there was President Marcos who, 
because of this experience with the joblessness of the 
Vice-President, perceived the Vice-President as a vulture 
whose main and only job is to wait for the President to 
die. Mr. Marcos developed a phobia so that he did not 
want to create a position for Vice-President. I think this 
anomaly can be solved now by the Constitutional Com- 
mission by providing the Vice-President a constitutional 
function such as ex officio President of the Senate. 
We should eliminate this portion “may be appointed 
as a member of the Cabinet” because this is a little 
derogatory to the Vice-President, but the arguments 
proposed and set forth by Commissioner Bernas 
and the rest of the Committee members that the Pres- 
ident should not be compelled to appoint a Vice- 
President as a Cabinet member because a Cabinet 
member is an alter ego of the President and he should 
not be compelled to appoint somebody in whom he has 
no complete trust are powerful arguments. There- 
fore, we come up with the same problem that a Vice- 
President really does not have a function or a job to do. 
So I propose that we give him a constitutional function, 
the same function that is given to the Vice-President of 
the United States. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


,htak «“« * - 


proposa 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. JAMIR. So for tl t 

ing my motion to insert until?? 6 being ’ 1 am withd 
insert until the right time comes. 

MR SARMIENTO r, 

Commissioner Rama be re? re . s * den L may I ask 
amendment. °gnized for an ant< 


THt PRESIDENT. Co mmissioner Rama 


nized. 


is recog- 


MR. RAMA. Madam President i u„ 
amendment after a conference with the^ice'ch^ 
of the Committee on the Executive and the fo, 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Commissi. 
Concepcion. 


MR. RODRIGO. Will the Gentleman yield to a few 
questions? 

MR. RAMA. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. In the beginning I was of the same 
thinking that the Vice-President should be the President 
of the Senate. However, may I ask the proponent, if 
the person concerned is constitutionally the President of 
the Senate may he be appointed to a Cabinet position? 

MR. RAMA. Not anymore, because the position of 
Senate President is a very high position and the matter 
of appointing him as a minister or a member of the 
Cabinet is really just an appointment at the pleasure of 
the President and there is the principle that a minister 


WEDNESDAY, jULY 30, 1986 


439 


is an alter ego of the President. Hence, the President 
should not be compelled to appoint him as Cabinet 
member. 

MR. RODRIGO. I know that. Madam President. So 
my next question is this: Let us take the situation now 
of Vice-President Laurel. If we have a constitutional 
provision such as this, he would be the Presiding Of- 
ficer or the President of the Senate which is another 
powerless position. Now. which will give Vice-President 
Laurel more power, his position as Minister of Foreign 
Affairs or as President of the Senate or Presiding Officer 
of the Senate with no right to vote except to break a 
tie? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the most important 
thing is that he is the head of a powerful body. The 
Senate is next to the presidency which is the highest 
office in the country. It determines the policies ot the 
nation. Through its powers, it determines even the 
decision to enter into treaties to a certain extent. In the 
United States, the Vice-President is happy to have that 
position of Senate President. It is much better than 
being a jobless Vice-President or a minister of the 
Cabinet, where the position is subject to the pleasure ot 
the President. 

MR. RODRIGO. As I said, I was of the same thinking 
until I started analyzing the power of a President ot the 
Senate. If a Vice-President is powerless, so is the Presid- 
ing Officer of the Senate, especially if he cannot vote 
except in case of a tie. He cannot even argue on the 
floor of the Senate. So, that is my misgiving. 

Are we not giving him another useless, inutile posi- 
tion? Is it not better or will he not have more power 
being a member of the Cabinet? 

I will give as an example, the case of Vice-President 
Laurel as Minister of Foreign Affairs. I think he has 
more power than if he were a Presiding Officer ol the 
Senate. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I think former 
Senator Rodrigo has forgotten the battles that they 
fought to get somebody to be Senate President. As a 
matter of fact, one of the strategies of President Marcos 
was precisely to capture that very prestigious office ot 
Senate President as a launching pad to become Pres- 
ident. That was his strategy and he was correct. The 
people in the Senate would die just to get the pres- 
idency of the Senate. It may not have tremendous 
power, but it has tremendous prestige. 

MR. RODRIGO. A Senate President who is elected 
by the Senate from among the Senators is powerful 
because he can vote in the Senate. He can yield the 
Chair to somebody else and go to the floor and argue. 
But the Vice-President as honorary ex officio President 
of the Senate cannot do that. He can just preside. I do 
not know if lie can vote in case of a tie. But he, cei- 


tainly. cannot yield the Chair to somebody else and 
come down and argue. He certainly cannot file bills, 
motions and resolutions of his own. His is a purely 
honorary ex officio function. That is why I changed 
my mind about such a constitutional provision. I think 
wc will just be giving the Vice-President two useless 
positions. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
May we have first the reaction of the Committee to this 
particular amendment of Commissioner Rama? 

MR. SUMULONG. We would rather leave the deci- 
sion to the Commission. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I would like to raise 
a point of order. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide may raise 
his point of order. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Commission had adopted an 
earlier amendment reading as follows: “SUCH AP- 
POINTMENT REQUIRES NO CONFIRMATION.” The 
proposal would, in effect, call for a reconsideration of 
that approved amendment first before we could add 
the proposed amendment. 

MR. RAMA. That is correct, Madam President; so. 
may I ask for a reconsideration of that decision. 

THE PRESIDENT. Of lines 1 9 and 20? 

MR. RAMA. I move to reconsider the approval of the 
amendment on lines 19 and 20 to the effect that the 
appointment of the Vice-President as a member of the 
Cabinet needs no confirmation by the Commission on 
Appointments. 

MR. DAVIDE. I object to such a motion, Madam 
Presiden , because that amendment had already been 
approved. Moreover, 1 agree with the contention of 
Commissioner Rodrigo, and in addition thereto. I would 
state for the record that if the Vice-President would be 
mandated to act as the ex officio President of the 
Senate in the event that he succeeds to the presidency, 
we wdl have a Senate without any help. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us vote first. 

MR. RAMA. 1 think that is the least of the problem, 
Madam President. Under the Rules the Senate can 
always provide itself a head. That is not a big problem. 


440 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us first vote whether or not 
we shall consider the approval of the amendments to 
lines 19 and 20. 

Those in favor of reconsidering lines 19 and 20 so as 
to make them open to another proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand. ) 

Those against reconsideration, please raise their 
hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 25 votes in favor and 4 against; the 
motion to reconsider is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we just finish this particular 
item please? 


“■r^ R \r RAI ^ A ' ° n line 19 ’ Section after the words 
A be T _ yi ce - Pres i den t,” insert SHALL BE THE EX- 
OFFICIO PRESmENT OF THE SENATE and delete 

of e treltoet.” entenCe: ‘‘ m ^ be appointed as a mem ber 


MR. TINGSON. In connection with the subject of the 
vice-presidency, I made a manifestation yesterday, 
which was suggested by Commissioner Bernas, that I 
will formulate an amendment towards dignifying more 
the office of the Vice-President and giving him some- 
thing more definite to be included in our Constitution; 
that is, a responsibility which he would take upon 
election without necessarily putting it under the discre- 
tion of the President. So, I would like to tell the pro- 
ponent of this amendment that I have a little amendment 
to be presented in due time along these lines. 

THE PRESIDENT. If the Commissioner has any 
amendment, now is the appropriate time. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, may we seek a 
clarification from Commissioner Tingson since this is 
the matter under consideration. If I recall correctly 
yesterday, he toyed with the idea of the Vice-President 
being appointed as the Ombudsman, am I correct? 

MR. TINGSON. No, that was just made more in a 
spirit of a suggestion rather than a substantial proposal. 


cuKions on^Kis^rt^ular p^ojiit 3 ’ 6 bCC " sufficie ”' dis 

pro M pL C rame° dmcrt a toTho PreSide 'l t ' ' W ° Uk ' " 

sioner Rama. th amendm cnt of Commis 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed 

the M Vicc-pSmn' A as I thfexVffi? ^P des , ignation ° 

Senate would involve him in the i P i ^ csident of th 
affect the principle of separation of ^ migh 

extent. My amendment «! , ° f povvers to som 

20, as amended I W ° Uldbe to retain 'ines 19 an 

CRESS CONVENES FOR d its vv F0RE THE co ^ 
THE VICE-PRESIDENT R K T MOT tGlJLAR SESS1 ° N 
IF SO NOMINATE^ HaViSt N ° MINATED 0F 
NOMINATION AS MFMRPp NC !T ACCEPTE D TH 

THEN HE WOULD E BE R Ex°o F F Ji!J^ CAB,NE1 
PRESIDENT. b E ^ OFFICIO SENAT 

In other words, we are giving the P rP • , 
to name the Vice-President aA Pr ^ sld ent the optio 
Then, we are giving the Vi * n l ember of his Cabine 
whether he would like to be a 111 °" [ cs dcnt tlle choic 
Senate President. ° bt d member °f the Cabinet c 


MR. REGALADO. If the Vice-President should be 
appointed as the Ombudsman, will lie still be eligible to 
be a member of the Cabinet? 

MR. TINGSON. That would depend; as it is stated 
here in the committee report, the President is given the 
privilege to appoint him. He may be appointed as 
member of the Cabinet. 

MR. REGALADO. So, he could be appointed as the 
Ombudsman. 

MR. TINGSON. If that would not run counter to- 
wards the executive department’s scheme, why not? 

MR. REGALADO. We have a situation where three 
alternative positions for the Vice-President are being 
proposed: either as ex officio President of the Senate 
or as a member of the Cabinet as the Ombudsman. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, in connection with 
the Ombudsman, we have certain qualifications for that 
position, and the Vice-President may not possess the 
qualifications of the Ombudsman as defined in the 
Constitution. That is another problem to consider. 


MR. RAMA. I regret I cannot ^ 

Guingona’s amendment because th^ 
whole amendment. uuute 


THE PRESIDENT. Let us go back to the Vice- 
President as President of the Senate. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

T HP; PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 


MR. BROCK A. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


441 


MR. BROCKA. Thank you, Madam President. 

I just want to make an observation. We have been 
discussing particularly the issue of looking for a job for 
the Vice-President. A Commissioner said to appoint him 
as Ombudsman; another said to give him the position of 
Senate President. But I think we are all agreed here that 
it is a useless position in terms of functions. So, we do 
not know what to do with that particular position. What 
happens is that the Vice-President is elected and he 
makes use of his term of six years or seven years to 
establish his credentials for the position of the presiden- 
cy. This may sound very naive but if our problem is 
looking for a job for a position like the Vice-President, 
why do we not do away with that position? (Laughter) 

It may sound very naive but I cannot understand why 
we have been talking about what to do with the posi- 
tion. I get the feeling now that the reason we have the 
Vice-President is that of tradition. Could we not do 
something radical and revolutionary by doing away 
with it? If we are thinking of who will replace the 
President in case of incapacity, disability or death, then 
probably we can set up a mechanism wherein the Senate 
President or the Speaker of the House of Representa- 
tives . . . 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka, I had an 
inkling that was the idea behind the Gentleman’s mind. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. There was a motion to reconsider 
the approval of the amendment, which motion was 
approved by the body. May I ask Commissioner Rama 
to please state again his proposed amendment so as to 
make it clear in the minds of the Commissioners. May 
we have the amendment now, Commissioner Rama. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to restate the amendment, 
Madam President. The amendment concerns line 19, 
Section 3. After the words “The Vice-President,” insert 
the following words: SHALL BE THE EX OFFICIO 
PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE. The rest of the words- 
“may be appointed as a member of the cabinet” — are 
deleted. 

MR. JAMIR. I have a simple amendment, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized to propose an amendment to the amendment. 

MR. JAMIR. After the word “SENATE,” insert 
WITH RIGHT TO VOTE ONLY IN CASE OF A TIE 
because I do not believe the internal rules of the Sena e 
will qualify the Vice-President to vote in affairs . . • 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted? 

MR. RAMA. I regret I cannot accept that amend- 
ment. I think the Senate would be able to provide its 


own rules on what to do with the Senate President 
because they are the most affected. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment has not been 
accepted. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, I think they 
have finished the discussion. May I have the floor? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Gentleman going to object 
to the proposed amendment? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Will the proposed amendment be 
clearly restated so that I can see where I can fit? 
(Laughter) 

MR. RAMA. For the third time, I will restate the 
amendment. On line 19, under Section 3, after the 
words “The Vice-President,” insert the words SHALL 
BE EX OFFICIO PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE. So, 
the whole sentence on line 19 would read: “The Vice- 
President SHALL BE THE EX OFFICIO PRESIDENT 
OF THE SENATE.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Abubakar 
objecting or does he want to support the proposed 
amendment? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I would like to object to the 

amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I would say that the proponent of 
the amendment would really like to give an appropriate 
office to the Vice-President because he has nothing else 
to do. But let us not elevate the Vice-President to a posi- 
tion only because it is open for him such as sitting in a 
body, presiding over Senators when he is not a Member 
of the Senate. Whatever his influence may be, he could 
not adapt himself to the thinking, to the maneuver, to 
the other contingencies that might happen in the 
Senate. 

In other words, he would not be an effective leader 
of the body. The President of the Senate is elected by 
his peers in the Senate; so is the Speaker of the House 
elected by his peers in the House. Then why would the 
Gentleman insist on putting a stranger to the Senate just 
because he is Vice-President'? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the most democratic 
country , America, has adopted the same system and the 
people are happy with the results of the system of the 
Vice-President being the Senate President. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, may 1 answer 
the Gentleman? 


442 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me. The matter has been 
sufficiently discussed and I think the body is now ready 
to vote. 

As many as are in favor of the amendment to make 
the Vice-President President of the Senate, please raise 
their hand. ( Few Members raised their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand. ) 

The results show 10 votes in favor and 24 against; the 
amendment is lost. 


President who has the nationwide mandate of the 
people. Another reason is that the term of office of the 
Vice-President is six years; the term of office of the 
Senators is also six years but the term of office of the 
Members of the House is only three years. So, I believe 
it is logical and practical that the choice by the Pres- 
ident of who should succeed a Vice-President who 
dies should be limited to Senators. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. SUMULONG. The Committee would leave the 
matter to the Commission. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

R SARMIENTO. May I ask that Commissioner 
Rodrigo be recognized. 

niz™ E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 

on^ectfonT^age President ’ m V amendment is 

words “and House of R amendrnent is to delete the 
that the whole°section w TrlT^f ° " Hne 31 S ° 
vacancy in the office of the y d ' D Whencver th ere is a 

term for which he was eleme^t^p"* dUring the 
nominate a Vice-PresiHent r eCtCd ’ the Pres ident shall 
the Senate who shall take off? ™ among the members of 
majority vote of all Hi offlce Upon confirmation by a 
Congress.” 311 the membcrs of both Houses of 

May I explain my amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT The fVn« 
is given five minutes. ' ntleman may proceed; he 

MR. RODRIGO T\ * 

situation where the Vice Pr!^ 0 " 8 haS refe rence to a 
according to this Tec tion £ ^ In Such a case, 

somebody to be the Vice p Pr . esident sha M nominate 

both Houses of Congress. ent ' if conf ‘ r med by 

The section as it is now gives the p 
to choose either from the Sen V Fresid ent the power 
resentatives. My amendment dtC ? r the House of Rep- 
tile President to the Members c lmit the choice of 
TI 55 OI the Senate 

The reasons are: First a Vic-P • 
official; he is elected nationwide^Tt^ 6 " 1 is 3 national 
that the one who should be nomiLt e , peoplc - 1 believe 
should also be an official elected JL to succeed him 
people, and those are Senators. For^mnl^ 
Member of the House from Bulacan with f n , P .’ lf 3 
would be elected only by six municipalities, j, 
incongruous for such an elected official to be the Vice- 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I object to 
the amendment. I think the choice should not be 
limited to the Senate which is only composed of 24 
Senators. In the House of Representatives, we have as 
many as 250 Members and the President will have a 
wider choice. It really does not depend on whether one 
is a Member of the Senate or whether one is a Mem- 
ber of the House of Representatives. A Member of the 
House of Representatives can have a national outlook 
like that of a Member of the Senate. Just because 
he was elected by Representatives does not mean that 
he has a parochial outlook. An example is our Commis- 
sion. If Members of this Commission, for example, are 
elected only by districts, we have here Senate timbers or 
vice-presidential timbers who could also be good Vice- 
Presidents even if they are elected by districts. There- 
fore, by limiting the choice to the Senate, we are 
actually limiting the choice of good men. For these 
reasons, I respectfully object to the amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bernas is 
recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Although I am speaking for myself, 

I think I will be speaking for the sentiments of some 
members of the Committee. In the first place, I agree 
with the position taken by Commissioner de los Reyes 
that we should not limit the choice of Vice-President 
to a small group like the Senate of 24 people and that 
there could be very good and experienced people in the 
House of Representatives. Secondly, I am consistent 
with the original position I took for unicameralism in 
the desire that we give importance to a body which is 
closer to the masses because of the fact that the Mem- 
bers of this body have to campaign more closely among 
the people. 

MR. RODRIGO. We ask for a vote. 

FR. BERNAS. We ask the body to vote on this. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Rodrigo want 
to say something? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


443 


MR. RODRIGO. I have said enough, Madam President. 
So, the amendment is to delete the words “and the 
House of Representatives” on line 3 1 of page 3 so that 
the section would read: “Whenever there is a vacancy in 
the office of the Vice-President during the term for 
which he was elected, the President shall nominate a 
Vice-President from among the members of the Senate 
who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority 
vote of all the members of both Houses of Congress.” 
So, even the Members of the House will vote. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Senator Rodrigo, please raise 
their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 13 votes in favor and 18 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask that Commissioner 
Tingson be recognized for an anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized for an anterior amendment. 

MR. TINGSON. Again on the subject of the vice- 
presidency, I would like to add a sentence on line 20, 
page 1, of the amended committee report. The amend- 
ment would be: THE VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL 

HEAD THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL. 

May I reason out my amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, members of the 
Committee, as I have stated earlier, the office of the 
Vice-President should be vested with a responsibility as 
the next in rank in the pyramid of government. As 
such, he should hold an office with a definite function 
and task that do not necessarily encroach on the func- 
tions of the President. I agree with Commissioner 
Bernas’ explanation that the Vice-President’s appoint- 
ment to the Cabinet is not mandatory due to the prin- 
ciple of qualified political agency. And human nature 
will tell us that the President sometimes finds the 
presence of the Vice-President in his office awkward 
since, as two contending stars, the Vice-President may 
steal the glory from the President. 

My concept, therefore, of the functional role ol the 
Vice-President is that of an entity that is independent, 
constitutionally mandated, relevant and of national 
importance. 


Let me, therefore, expound my idea based on the 
concept of the National Security Council of the United 
States. As everyone knows, historically, United States 
Presidents have relied on their Secretaries of State to 
handle the questions of policy in international rela- 
tions or had personally stepped in, as Wilson and F.D. 
Roosevelt did, and did the job themselves. But the 
change in the nature of foreign policy-making, the signi- 
ficance of trade and economic aid programs, par- 
ticularly the impossibility of treating diplomatic and 
military decisions as if they had no bearing on each 
other was reflected in the National Security Act passed 
by Congress in 1947. Under this statute was established 
the National Security Council headed by the President, 
and including the Vice-President, the Secretaries of 
State and Defense, the Director of the Office of Civil 
and Defense Mobilization, and such agency heads as 
the President may appoint to it or invite to attend the 
meetings. 

Not that I am an expert in the United States’ or other 
foreign countries’ policy-making, but based on my 
readings, among those invited in regular attendance were 
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Atomic 
Energy Commission, the Secretary of the Treasury, the 
Director of the Budget, and the Director of the Central 
Intelligence Agency, among many other vital agencies of 
the government. 

The National Security Council has a full-time staff 
with a planning board whose function is to clarify 
issues and present possible alternative courses of action 
to the Council for consideration. Actually, the National 
Security Council is more of an advisory body than a 
decision-making or operating one. In our case, we can 
institutionalize perhaps the entity by having a National 
Advisory Council which can be headed by the Vice- 
President, not by the President himself, if only to give 
the Vice-President one definite and very important 
position mandated in our Constitution uniquely for 
him. 

Sectoral representations will also be fully enshrined 
in this body, if ever they shall not be able to ventilate 
their ideas in interest in the legislature. 

While the National Security Council of the United 
States was created by statute, we can adopt a novel idea 
or view perhaps in our new Constitution by making it a 
creation of the Constitution like the Monetary Board or 
the NEDA. 

My proposal then is to make the Vice-President much 
more effective because he is next in line to the presiden- 
cy of the Philippines and in case, indeed, he takes 
over the national leadership, his will be a knowledgeable 
and effective leadership. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


444 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. DE CASTRO. I object to the proposed amend- 
ment by Commissioner Tingson on the ground that the 
President, our President, is the presiding officer of the 
National Security Council in his capacity as Commander- 
in-Chief of the Armed Forces. There are many, many 
important items concerning the military and the securi- 
ty of our nation that are to be decided by the National 
Security Council. As Commander-in-Chief, the President 
is the presiding officer of that council. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 


reports. If, indeed, it is a sensible suggestion, then 
probably the answer would also sound sensible. Proba- 
bly, the Committee would consider the suggestion on 
the National Advisory Council as another sensible idea 
now being propounded . . . But let us not make the 
office of the Vice-President a very solitary one, an 
almost half-hearted kind of office, considering that we 
are all agreed that it is important — in case the President 
dies, almost overnight, he automatically becomes our 
President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


MR. TINGSON. I am referring, of course, to a body 
known as the National Advisory Council. It is just an 
advisory council but it is a council that will have a full- 
time staff and a planning board. In a sense, the Vice- 
President, by being the head of that National Advisory 
Council, will go through a period of actual leadership 
training. Having been selected by the President himself 
° ^ini, We it for granted that he has the 

nfan t * 16 Eres ^ ent himself. And being the head 

will hp r rV a C r, Cil nat ^ ona ^ importance, the office 
in office - § Cnrt f t ^ la ^ muc h- In case the President dies 

a knowledoSw f J >rb j d ~ the Vice - p resident will truly be 
a knowledgeable leader, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

the am end me rrf becau se & t h (Tc ^ r ^? ld e n 1 ’ 1 objected to 
the National Security C ? en T tleman was talking of 

National Advisory Counch ^ 1 Understand ft is the 


NaUona™?urRv Co 3 " 1 ^* 7 ’ 1 WaS referrin S not to 1 
Council! Cl1 bUt to the National Adv isc 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In order to intelligently vote on 
the subject matter, the Committee would like to inform 
the body of the following facts. Under Executive Order 
No. 708 promulgated in 1981, the following bodies and 
entities, among 1 8 agencies, were under the chairman- 
ship of the President of the Philippines: The Council 
of Leaders, the Foreign Policy Council, the General 
Military Council, the National Security Council, the 
National Economic and Development Authority and the 
Special Presidential Reorganization Committee. The 
National Advisory Council mentioned by Commis- 
sioner Tingson is not here. Assuming that it was under 
the Office of the President — which actually it was not — 
we also do not know whether Executive Order No. 708 
has already been affected by the proposed reorganiza- 
tion being worked on presently by Minister Luis Villa- 
fuerte. So, we really do not know as of this moment if a 
National Advisory Council exists. But definitely, under 
Executive Order No. 708 in 1981, there is no such thing 
as a National Advisory Council. 


visor" Cou„ C cfI t R ? hi W ?. do have a Nationt 

Security Council. Ume but we have a Na 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

niz!d. E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Bernas is 


MR. TINGSON. It seems to me that the idea of a 
National Advisory Council would fit in in any kind of 
national revision of our government’s scheme. I am 
personally wondering why we are almost half-forgetting 
the Vice-President. The idea is to propose, by way of an 
amendment, that a National Advisory Council be 
headed by the Vice-President. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think the body is ready for a 
vote. 


i xv. u l r\ in /\ o. in our effort tr, i 
the vice-presidency, we said tv, , e evate the positior 

him Vice-President becLse?h« a L W L Sh ° Uld " ot m 

his position. Now we want to makJ v," 0 * ele ' 

head of a nonexisting advisory bodv U H C ° nStltUtl ° 
that is even worse. “ seems to 

MR. TINGSON. Some of us naturally have to ^ 
ideas here knowing or half-knowing whether that b 
has already been incorporated in one of our commit 


MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Tingson which 
has been sufficiently explained, please raise their hand. 

( One Member raised his hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand. ) 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


445 


The results show one vote in favor and 26 against; 
the amendment is lost. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, the joint 
proposed amendment of Vice-President Padilla and 
Commissioners Nolledo, Rigos, de los Reyes, Maambong 
and Davide has been formulated. May I ask that Com- 
missioner de los Reyes be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, the pro- 
posed amendment on Section 5 has been distributed to 
the Members of this Commission and it reads as follows: 
THE PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL QUALIFY AT THE 
BEGINNING OF HIS TERM. IF HE HAS NOT BEEN 
CHOSEN OR IF HE FAILS TO QUALIFY, THE 
VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL ACT AS PRES- 
IDENT UNTIL A PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE BEEN 
CHOSEN AND QUALIFIED. IF THE PRESIDENT- 
ELECT DIES OR BECOMES PERMANENTLY 
DISABLED, THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL 
BECOME PRESIDENT. WHERE NEITHER A 
PRESIDENT-ELECT NOR VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT 
SHALL HAVE BEEN CHOSEN OR SHALL HAVE 
QUALIFIED OR BOTH SHALL HAVE DIED OR 
BECOME PERMANENTLY DISABLED AT THE TIME 
FIXED FOR THE BEGINNING OF THEIR TERMS, 
THE SENATE PRESIDENT OR, IN HIS ABSENCE, 
THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTA- 
TIVES SHALL THEN ACT AS PRESIDENT UNTIL A 
PRESIDENT OR VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE 
BEEN ELECTED AND QUALIFIED. 

Although there is a footnote stating that “assume 
office” is more specific, actually it is farfetched for a 
President-elect and a Vice-President-elect to qualify and 
not assume office. I think it very rarely happens — if it 
happens at all — and, therefore, we prefer to use the 
word “qualified” which has been the word used in the 
1935 Constitution, the 1973 Constitution and the 
Election Code. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I just react to that statement 
of Commissioner de los Reyes? I have no disagreement 
with that statement but the fact remains that an official 
may have taken his oath and, therefore, technically he 
has qualified. But before he could take oath or assume 
his office, something may happen to him. That is why 
we feel that the better phrase would be “assumed of- 
fice” because there is always that possibility that after 
an official has qualified or has taken his oath, he may 
not be able to assume office either because he gets sick 
or he dies. That is the point I wanted to clarify. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bernas is 
recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. The word “qualify” in political law 
and administrative law has two meanings. One means to 
have the qualifications; the other is to assume office, to 
take the necessary action needed in order to actually 
assume the office. It could mean taking the oath or 
posting a bond, depending upon the nature of the 
office. “To assume office” makes it clear but I think 
the jurisprudence on the meaning of the word “qualify” 
is quite clear also. So, I would not be inclined to change 
the word “qualify” because, I think, in jurisprudence 
that has a clear meaning. What is meant here is to 
assume office. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. To compromise on this choice of 
words and for the record, I assume that it could be 
agreed that the word “qualify” as used in this Section 5 
means assumption of office. 

I would like to ask a few questions of Commissioner 
de los Reyes on some words. The amendment states: 
“THE PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL QUALIFY AT 
THE BEGINNING OF HIS TERM. IF HE HAS NOT 
BEEN CHOSEN OR IF HE FAILS TO QUALIFY, THE 
VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL ACT AS PRES- 
IDENT UNTIL A PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE BEEN 
CHOSEN OR QUALIFIED.” 

I suggest that the word “OR” here should be changed 
to AND: “UNTIL A PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE 
BEEN CHOSEN AND QUALIFIED.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I agree. 

MR- REGALADO. The next line says: “IF THE 
PRESIDENT-ELECT DIES OR BECOMES PERMA- 
NENTLY DISABLED, THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT 
SHALL BECOME PRESIDENT. WHERE NEITHER A 
PRESIDENT-ELECT NOR VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT 
SHALL HAVE BEEN CHOSEN OR SHALL HAVE 
QUALIFIED . . .” Again, change the word “OR” to 
AND. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. “AND QUALIFIED.” 

MR. REGALADO. “AND SHALL HAVE QUALI- 
FIED. OR BOTH SHALL HAVE DIED OR BECOME 
PERMANENTLY DISABLED AT THE TIME FIXED 
FOR THE BEGINNING OF THEIR TERMS, THE 
SENATE PRESIDENT, OR, IF HE IS UNABLE,” 
instead of “IN HIS ABSENCE” because he might just be 
temporarily out of the country. 


446 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. FOZ. Madam President. 


MR. DA VIDE. That is correct. 


MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I would like first to reply to 
Commissioner Regalado. 


FR. BERNAS. So, if either one is missing, the office 
is vacant, and we have a situation where the office has 
to be filled. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Davide satis- 
fied? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

tt MR. FOZ. May I suggest that instead of the word 
“QUALIFY” on the first line, we substitute TAKE HIS 
UATFI UF OFFICE so that the sentence will read: 
THE PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL TAKE HIS OATH 
OF OFFICE AT THE BEGINNING OF HIS TERM.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I think “QUALIFY” is the 
more embracing term and has an established meaning in 
jurisprudence. 

+v.^r? E PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

IFY’Msb?tter° S REYES ’ 1 am SOTTy ’ 1 think “QUAL- 

onthat^f read^sf 00 ' Besides ’ Section 6 is already clear 

President d" the execution of his office, the 
or affirmation. 0 ^ r6Sldent Sha " take the followin 8 oath 

NO M T R B E F E 0 N Z C T H^S°- *® ntence reads: “IF HE HAS 
THE VICE ^PRF?rnpKS RIF HE FAILS T0 QUALIFY, 
UNTIL A PRFSmp E xS r c? HALL ACT AS PRESIDENT 
AND QUALfFlED^ T SHALL HAVE BEEN CH0SEN 
Regalado. I think ther^ SUggested h V Commissioner 
the word “QUALIFTFn ” r L SOI ? e words missing before 
“OR HAVE”- otw • the missing words are 

construction. Any wav - ther6 1S an Un S ra mmatical 

pose. YWay ’ it is a matter of style, I sup- 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Com • • 
to be recognized. missioner Davide was seeking 

The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. My co 

Committee amendment is on the Proposed 

“AND” because “CHOSEN” word “ 0R ” to 

refer to two different situation • ^ AE IFIED” would 
ident-elect fails to qualify orti/ p 006 ’ w ^ ere the Pres- 
been chosen. So, if we put “AN%’ eSU ! ent " elect has not 
destroy the two concepts. ln ieu of “QR,” we 

FR. BERNAS. But the thing is the offing • 
until he is both chosen and qualified. 1S n0t fl led 


MR. DAVIDE. I am satisfied with the explanation, 
but that is really the meaning there. It would have 
reference to the two instances where there was failure 
to qualify and there was failure to choose. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

In the proposed draft for Section 5 of the Honorable 
de los Reyes, he employed the phrase “BECOMES PER- 
MANENTLY DISABLED.” I suppose this would refer 
to a physical disability, or does it also include mental 
disability? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It includes all kinds of disabili- 
ties which will disable or incapacitate the President or 
Vice-President from the performance of his duties. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

And who would determine the permanent disability 
of the President-elect? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I think that is covered in 
subsequent articles. I think the same principles will 
apply. 

MR. SUAREZ. Meaning, is it himself or the Cabi- 
net? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. As provided in the subsequent 
articles. 

MR. SUAREZ. And is there any period whereby the 
permanent disability should be determined in the case 
of the President-elect because, according to the first 
sentence, he is under obligation to qualify or assume 
office at the beginning of his term? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. So, if he is permanently 
disabled . . . permanent is permanent. It has no definite 
period. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is correct. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


447 


MR. DE LOS REYES. It is forever. 

MR. SUAREZ. No. What I am referring to is the 
period when the Vice-President should assume office, 
referring only to the so-called “permanent disability.” 
Let us say that the President-elect, under sentence one 
of the proposed Section 5. would have to assume office 
on January 1, 1987. But because of some disability, he 
is unable to assume office from the beginning of his 
term. That disability turns out to be permanent in 
character after a while. So, is there no duration for the 
determination as to whether or not the President-elect 
from the time he should have assumed office at the 
beginning of his term up to the time he is declared 
permanently disabled in order that the Vice-President- 
elect can immediately assume the presidency? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. There are two situations: If 
the President-elect has not been chosen or has failed to 
qualify, the Vice-President-elect simply acts as Pres- 
ident. So, there will be an election for President. But if 
the President-elect dies or becomes permanently dis- 
abled, that is no longer simply failing to qualify or not 
having been chosen; he actually dies or becomes per- 
manently disabled. The Vice-President then shall 
become permanent President up to the expiration of the 
term of the regular President. That is how I understand 
it. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, under the example I have given, if 
the President-elect for one reason or another would not 
assume office or would not qualify on January 3, for 
example, then the Vice-President-elect should auto- 
matically assume office as President? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. He shall act as President in 
case he fails to qualify or he has not been chosen at the 
beginning of the term. That is covered by the first 
sentence. 

MR. SUAREZ. Again, just to be clear, I will get a 
little closer to the date. Let us say, the President-elect 
is supposed to begin his term on January 1 and he fails 
to take his oath or assume office on January 1. So, on 
the midnight of January 1 or January 2, the Vice- 
President-elect should already assume office as acting 
President. Is my understanding correct in interpreting 
this Section 5? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, one question foi 
Commissioner de los Reyes. The first sentence ol the 
consolidated amendment provides that the President- 
elect shall qualify at the beginning of his term. We want 
to be clarified on the word “shall”; we take it to be 
mandatory. If he does not, can that be interpreted as 
abandonment of office? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. If he does not qualify? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, or refusal to assume office in 
which permanent vacancy is created. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. If he fails to qualify . . . 

FR. BERNAS. Maybe the President shall qualify. 
Suppose he does not assume office, is that abandonment 
of office or refusal to assume office which makes the 
office vacant? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. If he does not want to assume 
office, that can be construed as abandonment of office. 
There is no other interpretation. 

FR. BERNAS. We could have a problem there. In 
other words, perhaps we should specify what “beginning 
of the term” means. If on the very first day he does not 
assume, he does not qualify, is that already abandon- 
ment of office or refusal to assume office? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The question is that if he is 
qualified but does not assume office. 

FR. BERNAS. He does not assume office. He was 
chosen; he has all the qualifications but lie does not 
follow this command in the first sentence which tells 
him that he shall qualify at the beginning of his term. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Insofar as Section 5 is con- 
cerned, I would say that the Vice-President can start 
acting as President. But whether that will be abandon- 
ment of office, I think there are several variables which 
can be decided only on a case-to-case basis. When we 
say abandonment, we should take into consideration the 
intent of the public official — whether he would really 
abandon the office or whether he could not assume 
office for one reason or another but may have the 
intention to assume it later on. That is only my personal 
opinion. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
ask a few questions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Bernas satisfied 
with the explanation? 

FR. BERNAS. In other words, so long as the inten- 
tion is clear that the mere failure to qualify, let us say, 
on the first day should not be interpreted as abandon- 
ment of office or refusal to assume office, the language 
now is subject to that interpretation. In the original 
language. I think it was not. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


448 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. We will just finish with the 
Committee. 

Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Perhaps I could help a little if we 
will resolve the problem in relation to the second 
sentence because the second sentence cites a situation 
where a President-elect has not been chosen or he fails 
to qualify. In other words, a President-elect who is well 
and hearty and in total possession of his faculties should 
qualify at the beginning of his term, but if for one 
reason or another he fails to qualify, then I assume the 
second sentence would apply and in that case the Vice- 
President shall only act as President. 


The reason why the President-elect failed to qualify is 
another thing; it may be that he does not really want to 
take the office or it may be that he is prevented by 
some insuperable cause. But just the same, what I am 
saying is that we just have to apply the second sentence 
m that regard, which means that whatever the reason he 
tn "° . f quah ?’ we wil1 apply the fact that he failed 
President ^ ^ Vice ' President will have to act as 


sav “UNTTT^a* ddc * ben the sentence goes on tc 
CHOSEN » m A h PR k ESIDE NT SHALL HAVE BEEN 

sibility that in fact'a r. '^ We are opening ,he P° s 
a permanent vacancy was created 

SHALL HAVpS' “UNTIL THE PRESIDEN1 

meaM that mere t a p CH n SEN AND Q UALIFIED ' 

but has nnt r. r/, 3 Pres ident who has been choser 
second sente nr 13 lfl ® d ' That mean s the first part of th< 
failed to qualify. Wl 3PPly that he haS been chosen bu 

That is just my interpretation, Madam President. 

that he w^hose^J* 16 firSt sentence already assume: 
was chosen; the only thing is he did not qualify 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS Th 

language avoids this one 1S Wby * think the origina 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam P resident 

THE PRESIDENT Com • 
nized. '“Ornmissioner Rodrigo is recog 


MR. RODRIGO. And he does not lose his position as 
Senator either? 

MR. REGALADO. I think he does not because he is 
only acting as President. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, after a President or a Vice- 
President shall have been elected and qualified, the 
Senate President goes back to the Senate as, first of all, 
a member of the Senate and secondly, as Senate Pres- 
ident, unless the Senate had elected somebody else. Am 
I correct? 

MR. REGALADO. That is my interpretation, Madam 
President. 

MR. RODRIGO. And the same is true of the Speaker 
of the House of Representatives? 

MR. REGALADO. The same interpretation. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. In response to the previous question as to 
whether in case the President-elect fails to qualify at the 
beginning of his term will mean abandonment of his 
office, I think there is a rule in the law of public officers 
that the date that a public officer should qualify is 
expressly stated as in this case; if he fails to qualify, 
then he is deemed to have abandoned the office. But in 
this case, after the first sentence, it is clear that the sub- 
sequent provisions expressly provide that in case of 
failure to qualify, the Vice-President shall act as Pres- 
ident until a President shall have been chosen or have 
qualified. Therefore, there is no abandonment of office. 

FR. BERNAS. If I may propose a change to the 
language presented, the first two sentences shall read: 
“THE PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL QUALIFY AT 
THE BEGINNING OF HIS TERM. IF HE HAS NOT 
BEEN CHOSEN OR IF HE FAILS TO QUALIFY, THE 
VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL ACT AS PRES- 
IDENT UNTIL THE PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL 
HAVE QUALIFIED.” We just drop the word “CHOSEN” 
to suggest that it is not a question of choosing another 
President but just waiting for the one already chosen to 
qualify. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam Pro -a 
tions for the record for clarification"*’ jUSt 3 feW q 
If the Senate President tak« ™ 
death or disability of both the President 6 ^ S ?v, °! 
President, does he lose his position as Senate P re ^de 

MR. REGALADO. While he is acting as President. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. So under that concept, there 
will be no more need for an election of a new President 
but the same President. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Because if it involves the 
election of another President, it will fall under the 
subsequent sentences. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


449 


FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I will accept the suggestion of 
Commissioner Bernas. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one more point which I 
would like to clarify. When the proponent used the 
word “CHOSEN,” I would assume that that is the point 
in the electoral process where the President-elect is 
proclaimed. Is that the correct interpretation. Madam 
President? The electoral process goes like this: First, 
we have the election at large done by the people; 
then there is the canvass and proclamation of the votes 
during which time we say that the President has been 
chosen. We are referring to the point in time when the 
votes have been canvassed and the President-elect has 
been proclaimed by the proper canvassing authority. 
That is the meaning of the word “CHOSEN.” Is that the 
meaning, Madam President? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I was distracted. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I will repeat the question because 
I feel this is important. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, please. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The meaning of the word 
“CHOSEN” has harassed several law students before in 
the past. In the electoral process, we start with the 
election. The election is being participated in by people 
at large. After the election, there is the canvass of votes 
and proclamation. When the Gentleman used the term 
“CHOSEN” in this section, is he actually referring to 
the proclamation? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. To that point in time. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, that point in time. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I thank the Commissioner. 

MR. REGALADO. And I think that is solved by the 
word “President-elect” because he could not be referred 
to as President-elect unless he has been proclaimed. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. This is just a matter of style. 
In the phrase “OR BOTH SHALL HAVE DIED,” I 
think there is a missing word. It should be “OR WHERE 
BOTH SHALL HAVE DIED.” After “SHALL HAVE 
QUALIFIED OR WHERE BOTH SHALL HAVE DIED 
OR BECOME PERMANENTLY DISABLED,” the 
phrase “AT THE TIME FIXED FOR THE BEGINNING 
OF THEIR TERMS” is a little ambiguous. I wonder if 
we could rephrase it with the phrase ON OR BEFORE 
THE BEGINNING OF THEIR TERMS. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is a matter of style. 
We already understand the meaning of “AT THE TIME 
FIXED FOR THE BEGINNING OF THEIR TERMS” 
and these have always been the words used in the 
previous constitutions. 

MR. REGALADO. It is on the beginning of their 
terms. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It is clear at the time fixed 
from the beginning of their terms because the law fixes 
the terms of elected public officials. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, on lines 2 and 3 
of the amendment by substitution, we can eliminate 
the phrase “HAS NOT BEEN CHOSEN OR IF HE.” 
In other words, if he fails to qualify, then the Vice- 
President-elect shall act as President until the President- 
elect shall have qualified. The phrase “HAS NOT 
BEEN CHOSEN OR IF HE” should be eliminated be- 
cause it is understood that Section 5 follows Section 4. 
There has already been a proclamation and he has been 
chosen. 

In my original suggestion, I did not have that phrase. 

I merely suggested: THE PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL 
QUALIFY AT THE BEGINNING OF HIS TERM. IF 
HE FAILS TO QUALIFY, THE VICE-PRESIDENT 
SHALL ACT AS PRESIDENT UNTIL THE PRES- 
IDENT SHALL HAVE QUALIFIED. That was our 
original amendment, but we conferred with Commis- 
sioners Maambong and Davide who made some dis- 
tinctions about “CHOSEN” and “QUALIFIED.” So, 
I think they should answer the question. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, it was actually 
Commissioner Davide who caused all these confusions, 
so he should untangle it. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog 
nized. 


450 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to explain why the 
word “CHOSEN” must appear there? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. It might happen that in a presidential 
election, a President may not have been chosen at all. 
There may be a failure of election for the President, but 
not for the Vice-President. 

Qualification there presupposes a candidate who had 
actually been elected but failed to qualify. So, that is 
another area. The other is, failure of the election of a 
President but a Vice-President is elected. So, in that 
particular respect, we allow the Vice-President to act as 
President until a President shall have been chosen 
accordingly. That is the wording of the 1973 Constitu- 
tion. So, there are two separate instances: first, mere 
failure to qualify; and second, the failure to really 
choose a President. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, this Section 5 
?2v °p n 4 '. , And under Section 4, the President 

electoral retu^ e h nt ^ already been elected - The 

verified - There has 

the *V ice-Pr^slden t 1 elecT ft* sho Pr ® sident ' elect and 

the President-elect fSs 1 n should reall y be simple. If 
President-elect shall acf as PreS *5“ the Vice ‘ 
shall have qualified. The section! n^ 1 the Presiden1 
ident and Vice-President who fc ! ^ to the Pres 
proclaimed and, therefore, chosen . be6n 6leCted 

CoIm^ssfonefDavfdl incZe ■ the Comment ° 

tion and no one h™ been Serf"* “ “ Mure ° f eleC 


ACT AS PRESIDENT UNTIL THE PRESIDENT- 
ELECT SHALL HAVE QUALIFIED. IF THE PRES- 
IDENT-ELECT DIES OR BECOMES PERMANENTLY 
DISABLED, THE VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL BECOME 
PRESIDENT. WHERE NEITHER A PRESIDENT- 
ELECT NOR A VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL 
HAVE BEEN CHOSEN AND HAVE QUALIFIED, OR 
WHERE BOTH SHALL HAVE DIED OR BECOME 
PERMANENTLY DISABLED AT THE TIME FIXED 
FOR THE BEGINNING OF THEIR TERMS, THE 
SENATE PRESIDENT, OR IF HE IS UNABLE, THE 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 
SHALL THEN ACT AS PRESIDENT UNTIL A PRES- 
IDENT OR VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE BEEN 
ELECTED AND QUALIFIED.” 


THE PRESIDENT. So, the proposal of Commissioner 
Padilla is not being considered? 


MR. PADILLA. Will Commissioner de los Reyes yield 
to a suggestion to eliminate the phrase “HAS NOT 
BEEN CHOSEN OR IF HE” on lines 2 and 3, and 
simply say: “IF HE FAILS TO QUALIFY”? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am now speaking as one of the 
proponents. After the explanation of Commissioner 
Davide, I am more inclined to agree with the statement 
of Commissioner Davide that it is indeed necessary that 
the words “IF HE HAS NOT BEEN CHOSEN remain 
in the Article. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


sentence wWch^talf Under the secc 

IDENT-ELECT NOR' NEIT HER A PR 

SHALL HAVE BEEN CHOSEN 1 PRESIDE NT-ELE 
QUALIFIED.” Then th.^° SEN OR SHa LL HA 
unable, the Speaker of the" 3 !? President or > if hl 
President until a President n v° US l sha11 then ac1 
been elected and qualified So ^ Ce ' President shall Y 
by the second sentence Th V that sltuatl on is cov< 
President-elect who for 6 tlfSt sente nce refers 

The provision merely says that Th^v-’ ^ to qua 
shall act as President. tbe Vice-President-e 

THE PRESIDENT. What does th. 
Commissioner de los Reyes, say? the main spor 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I n the liaht r „ , 
given, the proposed amendment win u 

Madam President: “THE PRESIDENT-ELECT sh 
QUALIFY AT THE BEGINNING OF HIS TFR^ 
HE HAS NOT BEEN CHOSEN, OR IF HE FAIT < 
QUALIFY, THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SH 


MR. DE LOS REYES. What shall we vote on, the sug- 
gestion of Commissioner Padilla . . .? 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner de los Reyes 
accept the amendment of Commissioner Padilla? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It is not that I am not accept- 
ing the amendment because I share the same view as 
Commissioner Padilla’s, but when we consolidated the 
amendments with the assistance of Commissioners 
Davide and Maambong, the word “CHOSEN” was in- 
serted. That is why I leave this to the body for decision. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I think we should ask the opinion 
of the Committee on this. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, what is the opinion of the 
Chairman? 

MR. REGALADO. The opinion of the Committee, 
Madam President, is that if we leave that phrase “IF HE 
HAS NOT BEEN CHOSEN OR IF HE FAILS TO 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


451 


QUALIFY” there, it does not change the meaning 
anyway. In fact, it may provide for a future contingency 
envisioned by Commissioner Davide. Even if it stays 
there, it does not affect the fact that he should be 
chosen and qualified. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. This Section 5 follows Section 4, 
that the President-elect and the Vice-President have 
already been chosen. The first sentence only contem- 
plates the unusual situation where the President-elect 
fails to qualify. The fact that there may be some oc- 
casion about being chosen is covered by the second 
sentence. So, I suggest we vote on my amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, before we vote, 
may I ask a question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo may 
proceed. 

MR. RODRIGO. The fourth sentence states: “WHERE 
NEITHER A PRESIDENT-ELECT NOR A VICE- 
PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL HAVE BEEN CHOSEN 
OR HAVE QUALIFIED . . .” Is it not a fact that a 
President-elect and a Vice- President-elect are already 
chosen that is why they are called “elect”? 

THE PRESIDENT. As the Chair sees it, the second 
sentence refers to a situation where the President-elect 
has not been chosen. So, it is not really covered by this 
other sentence “WHERE NEITHER A PRESIDENT- 
ELECT ...” 

MR. RODRIGO. But it will have something to do 
with my voting because I am looking at the section as a 
whole. 

THE PRESIDENT. In view of the difference of 
opinion on this particular Section 5, we will ask again 
the Commissioners concerned to confer about this so 
maybe we can suspend the session at this particular 
time. 

Before we do so, we wish to acknowledge the 
presence of our guests who compose a fact-finding good- 
will mission to the Philippines and whose names have 
been circulated to all of you. So, we welcome you and 
we hope you will have a fruitful visit. (Applause) We 
invite you to lunch so that you will have time to meet 
with our Commissioners, as you desire. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I move for a 
suspension of the session until two-thirty this afternoon. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 12:27 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:38 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask that Commissioner 
Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the proposed 
amendment is supposed to be on Section 8. On Section 
8, page 4, the following amendments are sought to be 
introduced: Instead of “take” on line 1, use the word 
ASSUME, and after “Congress” on line 2, add the 
following words: VOTING SEPARATELY. 

MR. SUMULONG. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just a minute. Is there any objec- 
tion to these proposed amendments on lines 1 and 2 of 
page 4 which have been accepted by the Committee? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I just 
ask Commissioner Davide a clarificatory question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, if it is 
to be voted separately, what happens if the House 
of Representatives confirmed the nomination while the 
Senate votes otherwise? 

david E. What will happen is he cannot assume 
the office. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So, we will have a case where 
the Senate, having its own candidate from the Senate, 
rejects a nominee of the President who is a Member of 
the House of Representatives. If the President nomi- 
nates a Member of the Senate who is not acceptable to 
the House of Representatives, the House of Representa- 
tives can likewise reject the nominee. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, the proposal ot the 
Gentleman is for the Congress to be in joint session? 


452 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. DE LOS REYES. I think that is preferable. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then, let me finish. The voting will be 
by all, and it is necessary to get the majority vote of all. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, I think that is the better 
procedure. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT OR THE VICE- 
PRESIDENT, or the manner in which one shall be 
selected.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Will the Commissioner state the 
page and the line again for the benefit of the other 
Commissioners? 


THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo? 

MR. RODRIGO. That has never been done during my 
12 years in the Senate. Whenever we have a joint 
session, the House and the Senate vote separately be- 
cause otherwise the Senators are outnumbered by the 
Members of the House. 


MR. DAVIDE. On page 4, line 9 with the proposed 
amendment will now read as follows: “which officer 
shall then become Acting President AND SUCH OFFI- 
CER SHALL ACT ACCORDINGLY, UNTIL THE DIS- 
ABILITY OF THE PRESIDENT OR VICE-PRESIDENT 
BE REMOVED, OR UNTIL THE ELECTION OF THE 
PRESIDENT OR VICE-PRESIDENT, or the manner in 
which one shall be selected.” 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the 
that? 


Gentleman 


say to 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we be recog- 
nized? 


R DAVI °E. Madam President, that is exactly th 
insk 5 t? E PRESIDENT - Does Commissioner de los Reye 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Does Commissioner Davide not think that his pro- 
posal is no longer necessary because this particular 
sentence assumes a permanent disability, death, removal 
from office or resignation? In other words, the vacancy 
is permanent. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, Madam President. 


the^amendmem m "°' «*“ <**«■«. 

pointing ouT?ha« i, Z7r ner DaVide ' 1 am ’ 

acceptable to both Houses u bothji “ a ‘ 
or less partisan in their election ° me "" 

find an acceptable Member of VtJ lf u he pur P° se 1S 
Houses are forced to agree then A” H ° USe Until b< 
the amendment of Commissioner DwS™ 

been accepted b^ E thJco^mine°e P ° Sed amendment 

none; the amendmenTL^approSr^ 6 ^ The Chair he 

“President^Tnd 1’ between the wo 

following: AND SUCH OFFICFR of 

CORDINGLY, UNTIL THE S A S * CT ' 

PRESIDENT OR VICE-PRESIDENT be reSto^ 
OR UNTIL THE ELECTION OF THE PRpSnrSi 1 
THE VICE-PRESIDENT. So, the entire 
“which officer shall then become Acting PreniH * i ^ 
SUCH OFFICER SHALL ACT ACCORdJSq 
UNTIL Hit DISABILITY OF THE PRESIDENT 
VICE-PRESIDENT BE REMOVED. OR UNTIL T 


MR. SUAREZ. It does not contemplate a return of 
the permanently disabled, Madam President. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I believe my amend- 
ment on this section can be considered as an anterior 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Commissioner’s amend- 
ment have reference to this one? So as not to break the 
line of thought of Section 9, may we consider the 
amendment later? 

MR. SUAREZ. So may we respectfully suggest that 
Commissioner Davide withdraw the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am willing to drop the clause 
“UNTIL THE DISABILITY OF THE PRESIDENT OR 
VICE-PRESIDENT BE REMOVED.” So I will read 
again as amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide kindly 
read from line 6? 

MR. DAVIDE. “The Congress shall by law provide 
for the case of permanent disability, death, removal 
from office or resignation of both the President and 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


453 


Vice-President, declaring which officer shall then be- 
come Acting President AND SUCH OFFICER SHALL 
ACT ACCORDINGLY, UNTIL THE ELECTION OF 
THE PRESIDENT OR VICE-PRESIDENT, or the 
manner in which one shall be selected.” 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I believe my pro- 
posed amendment is an anterior amendment because my 
proposal is to delete the entire Section 9 on page 4, and 
substitute it with another provision. 


because that may involve and affect the provisions in 
Section 9. He and Commissioner Davide can get toge- 
ther thereafter so that they can be coauthors of a 
proposed amendment. 

REV. RIGOS. I agree. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Bacani be recognized for an anterior 
amendment. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The Committee, in fact, has 
received the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Rigos, and I wonder if Commissioner Davide would 
allow Commissioner Rigos to proceed with his amend- 
ment with the concurrence of the Chair. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us hear Commissioner Rigos if 
he wants to delete the whole section. 

REV. RIGOS. I am proposing to substitute it with a 
new provision which I will read, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

REV. RIGOS. The suggested substitute provision will 
read as follows: IN CASE OF PERMANENT DISABIL- 
ITY, DEATH, REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OR RE- 
SIGNATION OF BOTH THE PRESIDENT AND 
VICE-PRESIDENT, THE SENATE PRESIDENT OR, 
IN HIS ABSENCE, THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
OF REPRESENTATIVES SHALL THEN ACT AS 
PRESIDENT UNTIL THE PRESIDENT AND VICE- 
PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE BEEN ELECTED AND 
QUALIFIED. 

This is related to the other proposed amendment 
that the Commission still has to act upon on Section 5, 
pages 2 to 3. The members of the Committee have 
copies of this proposed amendment. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. For the benefit of all the Commis- 
sioners here, we have caused a reformulation of Section 
5 with the assistance of the different sponsors, and 
which is now being reproduced for distribution to all 
the Commissioners so that they can follow the dis- 
cussion. If Commissioner Rigos says that this also has 
reference to Section 5, then we request that we defer 
consideration of any proposed amendment to Section 
9 until we have had reviewed and voted upon Section 5 


BISHOP BACANI. I beg the indulgence of the Com- 
mittee since I was absent this morning. May I propose 
an amendment on Section 7, page 3, line 21 which 
reads, “The President and Vice-President shall receive a 
salary to be fixed by law.” I would like to substitute the 
words “fixed by law” with “DETERMINED by law,” the 
reason being that I would like to ask that the salary of 
the President not be fixed, to take account of possible 
high rates of inflation afterwards. The succeeding 
sentence which says, “They shall not receive during 
their tenure of office any other emolument from the 
government or any other source” is, therefore, retained. 

I v/ould, however, suggest that it be deleted and trans- 
ferred to the Transitory Provisions of the Constitution. 
The amended section will now read: “The President and 
Vice-President shall receive a salary to be DETER- 
MINED by law. They shall not receive during then- 
tenure of office any other emolument from the govern- 
ment or any other source.” 

In places like Italy, salary adjustments among govern- 
ment employees are made automatic when there is an 
inflation. So it may not be good to fix the salary of the 
President, but just to have it determined by law, and 
that future determination may be made such that for 
every rate of inflation, there will be a corresponding 
increase in the salary of the President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept the 
proposed amendment on line 2 1 ? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


i Ht rKbMUblNi. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. & 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, in connection with 

1 ^’. e +f, ( WaS an omn ibus motion to correct the 
sec ions^ la specify salaries and precisely to use the 
phrase shall be determined by law.” I thought we had 
a f iee a ^ le Transitory Provisions will provide for 
e s ar mg salaries. In that way we resolve all the 
remuneration provisions in the Constitution. 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes. My amendment will then be 
according to that. 


454 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani desires to 
change the word “fixed” to “DETERMINED.” Is this 
acceptable to the Committee? 

Is there any objection on the part of the Committee 
to change the word “fixed” on line 21 to “DETER- 
MINED”? 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes. Therefore, it cannot be 
decreased. 

FR. BERNAS. It cannot be decreased. 

THE PRESIDENT. It cannot be decreased. 


MR. SUMULONG. The Committee accepts the 
amendment, Madam President. 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes, that is the one that should 
not be deleted. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, is the Commissioner 
also deleting the clause ‘‘which shall not be increased 
or decreased during their term of office”? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Madam President, because 
my understanding is that the law itself later on will 
provide for an automatic increase or decrease, as the 
case may be, in case of inflation or deflation. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I am sorry, but in the omnibus reso- 
lution, we said salaries shall not be decreased but we 
also said that any increase shall not be applicable to the 
incumbent. We leave it to the Committee on Style to 
harmonize all the resolutions to that effect. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, may I just 
simplify my amendment. 


agreed toTamoniziT the' ° mnibUS amendment we 


would sav “shall resolutions; therefore, we 

office ” 6 decrease d during their term of 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but we are concerned now 
with the Office of the Executive. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


BISHOP BACANI. I will be agreeable to that, 
nowf PRESIDEN T- So, how will the sentence re; 

sh^ rec^Ne^sa^J t ' h^nc 68 '^ 111 and Vice - p reside 

shall not be decreased dur' DE | ERMINED by law whii 
ecreased during their term of office.” 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President, 
niz™ PRESIDENT - Comm issioner Sumulong is recc 
MR. SUMULONG We 

clause “which shall not f annot acce Pt deleting t 

during their term of office ’’ lncreased or decreas 
THE PRESIDENT. Is To 

to delete that? m nussioner Bacani seeki 

BISHOP BACANI. Onlv th* 
decreased during their term of officf » W T hiC \ says ’ ‘ 
the salary can be increased, but not decreased^ ^ 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President thic r • 
the power to decrease the salaries is put in ' ‘uf 10 " 
cisely to protect the independence of the President^ 
the legislature. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I am the Chairman of the Commit- 
tee on Style and I did not know that this matter would 
be left to the discretion of the Committee. This is not 
merely a matter of style; this involves substance. For 
example, if my Committee should delete the clause 
“which shall not be decreased during their term of 
office,” we would be changing the substance and that is 
not within our power. 

Madam President, this amendment would embrace 
not only the salaries of the President and the Vice- 
President but also the salaries of many other officials— 
the members of the Supreme Court; justices of the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals; those in the constitu- 
tional offices and others. So, let us lay down a general 
principle — a general rule for all. The issue or the 
question is: In all these offices, whether in the Supreme 
Court, in the Congress or in the constitutional commis- 
sions, should we leave it entirely to the Congress 
to determine how much their Members would receive, 
and whether these salaries be increased or decreased 
even during their tenure or term of office? Should we 
maintain the present provision of the Constitution, 
restricting the powers of Congress to either decrease 
or increase these salaries? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I recall that 
Commissioner Monsod was the original proponent of 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


455 


that uniform rule with respect to salaries and with 
respect to what would be placed in the Transitory 
Provisions. 

May we ask Commissioner Monsod if he has a copy 
of his original proposal which applies to all officers, plus 
his formulation of what he expected to be placed in the 
Transitory Provisions, so that there will be an equal 
application and a uniform rule? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we just defer 
this matter for a few minutes and take up other mat- 
ters? I will look for the formulation. 


THE PRESIDENT. May we call on Commissioner 
Bacani again later? 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much, Madam 
President. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Jamir be recognized for an anterior 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 


MR. JAMIR. Thank you. Madam President. 

My amendment is with respect to Section 6, appear- 
ing on page 3 of the Committee’s draft. On line 8, I 
propose to change the word “he” to THEY and elimi- 
nate the letter “s” in “enters” and change the word 
“his” to THEIR. On line 9, after the word “President,” 
put a comma (,) and add THE VICE-PRESIDENT 
OR THE ACTING PRESIDENT shall take the following 
oath or affirmation: 


“I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully 
and conscientiously fulfill my duties as President (or the 
VICE-PRESIDENT or the ACTING PRESIDENT) of the 
Philippines, preserve and defend its Constitution . . .” 

In other words, the amendment consists of adding the 
words VICE-PRESIDENT to the pertinent portions ot 
the draft so that the oath provided herein should be 
used by all of the three officers mentioned: the Pres- 
ident, the Vice-President and the Acting President. 

May I know the response of the Committee, Madam 
President? 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


MR. SUMULONG. We accept the amendment, 
Madam President. 


MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
we put this to a vote. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Jamir which has 
been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Rigos be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I propose to delete 
the entire Section 1 0 on page 4, and in lieu thereof, 
substitute the following proposed provision: IN CASE 
OF VACANCY IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
OCCURRING AT LEAST EIGHTEEN MONTHS BE- 
FORE THE REGULAR ELECTION, THE SAME 
SHALL BE FILLED BY SPECIAL ELECTION TO BE 
CONDUCTED BY THE COMMISSION ON ELEC- 
TIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW AND THE 
PRESIDENT THUS ELECTED SHALL SERVE FOR 
THE UNEXPIRED TERM. 

MR. REGALADO. May we ask Commissioner Rigos 
if we can have that proposed amendment by substitu- 
tion reproduced so that copies can be distributed. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, I just wish to make a 
slight correction or manifestation for the record. In this 
portion of the “oath” on line 15, Section 6, the phrase 
“execute its laws” does not apply to the Vice-President 
until he assumes the office of President. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee Chairman 
have no objection to the insertion? 

MR. SUMULONG. We have no objection. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So let the proper insertion be 
made. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, my amendment is 
on Section 1, pages 5 to 6. May I explain the purpose 
of my amendment. 

According to Section 11, if a majority of the mem- 
bers of the Cabinet transmit to the President of the 
Senate or to the Speaker of the House a written declara- 
tion that the President is unable to discharge the powers 
and duties of his office, then the Vice-President takes 
over the duties of the President and he becomes Acting 
President. Then subsequently, if the President transmits 


456 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


a message to the President of the Senate and to the 
Speaker declaring that no inability exists, then the 
President takes over. Then within five days, the majority 
of the members of the Cabinet may again send a written 
communication stating that the President is incapable, 
and in that case. Congress will make an investigation and 
will make a decision. 

But it is not clear in this provision who will act as 
President during the time that Congress is making the 
investigation and arriving at a decision. As a matter of 
fact, if we were to read the end of the section, it would 
appear that the Vice-President would also be the one in 
charge during the time that Congress is making its 
studies. However, during my interpellation, the Com- 
mittee said that that was not their intention. That the 
intention of the Committee is to have the President act 

as President during the time that Congress is studying 
the matter. J b 


ex^afned it ht “ PUrP ° Se ° f my amendment. 

ius P t •L be ,T Se my amendment would consist o 
and mhthtrmt h feW /° rds ’ a few, punctuation marks 

Un.^xX t .“ d T 0 pafe I ,“££ ^ 

ut 

MEANWHILE, SHOULD d * d substltute the word 

pJod n (°) n t o n a y**- c * lan ge «h, 

upon.” On page 6 l e 3 ?? ? T the Word "there 
to discharge,” and instead nfo 6 tbe Words “continue 
line 4, delete the word Resume ” ! T* ASSUME ‘ 0l 
word CONTINUE. The whnl^ ’ d lnstead P^ce th. 
“Thereafter, when the now read 
ident of the Senate and to tn c transmits to the Pres 

Representatives his written decla^t^** ° f the House ° 
exists, he shall resume th d Iaratlon that no inability 
office. MEANWHILE SHnm°n erS and duties of hi 
members of the Cabinet t™V . 3 majorit y of all th. 
President of the Senate and t /n W d thm five days to th ' 
of Representatives their d t0 J he Speaker of the Hous ' 
President is unable to iLT ^ declara tion that th 
of his office, the Congressman T 3nd dUtie 

vemng within forty-eight h l d de the issue > con 
in session. If the Congress w^th f °t that purpose > if no 
receipt of the latter written tkln , tWenty - one da YS afte 
session, within twenty-one l, 3 / 3 * 00 or > if not ii 
assemble, determines bv a ? 3fter il is required t« 
Houses of Congress that the p' V °^ hlrds vote of botl 
charge the powers and dutieVS u- nt is Unable to d * 
President shall ASSUME the s f hlS office > the Vice 
otherwise, the President shall fnln^ ing p residen 1 
and duties of his office.” C °NTINUE the power 


the President is unable to discharge. . .” Does the 
Gentleman envision the voting of the two Houses 
of Congress here as voting in joint session or voting 
separately? 

MR. RODRIGO. Voting separately, yes. May I 
propose that on page 6, line 1, after the word “Con- 
gress,” we place a comma (,) and insert VOTING 
SEPARATELY and another comma (,). 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, may I suggest that 
instead of using the word “MEANWHILE,” we use the 
word HOWEVER. 

MR. RODRIGO. The word “HOWEVER” seems to 
denote a contrary situation and it follows very closely 
the sentence where the President is the Acting President. 
And so, if we follow this sentence with “HOWEVER,” 
it might denote that the President is no longer the one 
who continues to act but the Vice-President. 

MR. SUMULONG. The Committee accepts the 
amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is asked to 
read the entire paragraph with his proposed amend- 
ments. 

MR. RODRIGO. “Thereafter, when the President 
transmits to the President of the Senate and to the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives his written 
declaration that no inability exists, he shall resume 
the powers and duties of his office. MEANWHILE, 
SHOULD a majority of all the members of the Cabinet 
transmit within five days to the President of the Senate 
and to the Speaker of the House of Representatives 
their written declaration that the President is unable to 
discharge the powers and duties of his office, the 
Congress shall decide the issue, convening within forty- 
eight hours for that purpose, if not in session. If the 
Congress within twenty-one days after receipt of the 
latter written declaration or, if not in session, within 
twenty-one days after it is required to assemble, deter- 
mines by a two-thirds vote of both Houses of Congress, 
VOTING SEPARATELY, that the President is unable to 
discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice- 
President shall ASSUME the same as Acting President; 
otherwise, the President shall CONTINUE the powers 
and duties of his office.” 


MR. REGALADO. Madam Presid 
Committee makes its decision on whether bef ° re 
amendment or subject it to a vote on the 0 3CCep! 
verify some points. Line 31 on page 5 says- “detd™ 
by a two-thirds vote of both Houses of Congress 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, just on a matter 
of style, after all. it is addressed to the Chairman of the 
Committee on Style — may we say on line 4, “the 
President shall CONTINUE EXERCISING the powers 
and duties of his office”? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


457 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I move that we 
put the matter to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this par- 
ticular amendment which has been accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Guingona be recognized for an anterior 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

May I say that for this proposed amendment I have 
the following as my coproponents: the honorable Com- 
missioners Regalado, Maambong, Davide, Ople and 
Rodrigo. I refer to page 5, Section 10, lines 2 to 4, and 
the amendment is to change the word “seventy” to 
ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY so that the last sen- 
tence will read as follows: “No special election shall be 
called if the vacancy occurs within ONE HUNDRED 
AND EIGHTY days before the date of the next presi- 
dential election.” 

THE PRESIDENT. How many days did the Gentle- 
man propose? 

MR. GUINGONA. One hundred and eighty days, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. There is a pending motion to delete 
the entire paragraph, but if Commissioner Guingona 
could wait, we would appreciate it very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ask if Commissioner 
Guingona is willing to defer this amendment? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Ople be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

I propose to insert a new section to be numbered 
Section 11, immediately prior to Section 12 on page 6, 
line 6, and which shall read: IN CASE OF SERIOUS 
ILLNESS OF THE PRESIDENT THE PUBLIC SHALL 
BE INFORMED OF THE STATE OF HIS HEALTH 
THROUGH THE MINISTER OF HEALTH OR OTHER 
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY. THE CABINET MEM- 
BER IN-CHARGE OF NATIONAL SECURITY AND 
FOREIGN RELATIONS AND THE CHIEF OF STAFF 
OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES 


DURING SUCH TIMES SHALL NOT BE DENIED 
ACCESS TO THE PRESIDENT AS COMMANDER-IN- 
CHIEF. 

May I briefly explain the reason for this amendment. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. OPLE. I think throughout history, there had 
been many recorded instances when the health of the 
President, or the emperor in Roman times, or the 
Chinese emperor in dynasties long past was concealed 
from the public. Generally, the wife conspires with 
others in order to conceal the leader’s state of health. 
One effect of this has been on the necessary inputs to 
policy coming from Cabinet ministers which have been 
blocked from reaching the attention of the President in 
that state. This illness can occur during an awkward 
moment in the life of a nation when national survival 
ought to be secured in the face of a major threat short 
of, let us say, the proclamation of martial law or the sus- 
pension of the writ of habeas corpus when Congress 
comes in in order to exercise a monitoring function and, 
perhaps, a remedial function. We have not yet, in this 
example, attained that level of the seriousness of the 
situation. And yet the national security might be at 
stake. The national survival can hang in the balance and, 
therefore, the right of the people to know ought to be 
included in this Article on the Executive, not only the 
right of the people to urgent access to a President in a 
state of illness, but especially those who deal with the 
safety and survival of the nation. The Cabinet minister 
in charge of national security and foreign relations and 
the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces ought to have 
access to the President as commander-in-chief. The 
people as well should have access to this man in that 
kind of dubious state so that even in that critical and 
awkward moment in the fortunes of the national leader, 
we can be sure that the people have access to him for 
purposes of safeguarding the national security. That is 
the reason the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces is also 
mentioned in the proposal. I think this is based on 
contemporary experience as well. And if we delegate 
this merely to a forthcoming legislature, there will arise 
situations oi embarrassment considering mat many who 
will compose this legislature will be very deferential 
towards those in power and may not even mention this 
at all in their agenda. 

Therefore, I feel that there should be a constitutional 
cognizance of that danger, and the right of the people 
to know ought to be built into this Article on the 
Executive. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Gentleman yield to only 
one question? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog 
nized. 


458 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. Will the proposed provisions apply 
if the President is absent because he claims to be writing 
a book? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but we put the burden on him to tell 
a lie to the people in derogation of his duties in the 
Constitution. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. Is Commissioner Abubakar suggesting 
that we eliminate the phrase “THROUGH THE MINIS- 
TER OF HEALTH OR OTHER APPROPRIATE 
AUTHORITY”? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. We accept the amendment, Madam Pres- 
ident. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- MR. ABUBAKAR. Thank you. 
nized. 


REV. RIGOS. Madam President, will the proponent 
entertain one very small amendment? In his proposal, 
the proponent says, “IN CASE OF SERIOUS ILLNESS 

Would Ee consider deleting the 
^° rd so that the Phrase only reads: “IN 

C . ASE t ? ILLNESS ” ? ^ we say “serious illness,” we 
Lvwh ? Ve n° * 13Ve someone who should determine 
^ , th , t h “ lllness 1S serious or not. So, I suggest that 
we delete the word “SERIOUS.” B 


MR. OPLE. The first sentence will now read: IN 

CASE OF SERIOUS ILLNESS OF THE PRESIDENT 
THE PUBLIC SHALL BE INFORMED OF THE STATE 
OF HIS HEALTH. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


down with V*" u President is me rel 

to operate. But' medical authorWiM and 8Uar<i h 0U8 ‘ 

ample supply of them in th- ll6S and we have a 

exact,y„he„a „, lln ^ ^ 

to be suffeJSg f r om U fiu\ e n d°v m t er P ,!' esident Was reporte 
8 tlU and y et nobody believed it. 

standard to satisfy. ^ tlme ’ he had no constitution 


qufstiontf UBAKAR - May I «* the proponent a 

state, his Stfp B S: nt do ° r the Execut ive of 
nation but also his f ami ! do f not onl y concern 
sonal advisers and physician Th° bably Ws ° Wn 
subject the state of health e 16n ’ wE y should 
institution or entity wh ch °v! he Preside nt to anoi 
his health and ma y * ? n has ™ direct conce m < 
illness? V not know the background of 

MR. OPLE. Is the CV 

of Health or other the MW 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes H P 
Health in as far as the Preside^ 011 - d be the Ministe 
tion of the country and his people ^nt health si 
matter concerning the health of th« © thlS 1S a pers ' 
the Members of the Commission w/h^" 1 Like 
sonal physicians, and this is a matter beivll* ° Ur 
own physicians. So, the state of health n? US 1° d 
to the actual condition of the President should h* 
to the President and his doctor. d 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

Will the Gentleman yield to only one clarificatory 
question? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

In all seriousness, will the proponent give us examples 
of what he would consider a serious illness? This is 
for purposes of clarification in the record, Madam 
President. 

MR. OPLE. A serious illness in my layman’s opinion 
ought to be one that almost but not quite incapacitates 
the President for that period of the serious illness. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is there no duration as to the physical 
incapability or incapacity of the incumbent President? 

MR. OPLE. I feel that as the proponent of this 
amendment, I might be usurping the competence of 
others technically better prepared to answer this ques- 
tion. If there is a doctor in the Commission, maybe we 
can recruit him right now for his expert advice. 

MR. SUAREZ. Maybe the Honorable Quesada could 
be of some assistance to us in this regard. 

MR. ROSALES. Will the Gentleman yield to one 
question. Madam President? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. 

MR. ROSALES. Is a President, receiving dialysis 
treatment, considered seriously ill? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


459 


MR. OPLE. Since this deals with what is generally 
considered a serious organic ailment, a systemic disease, 

I suppose that, yes, this could come under the class of 
serious illness. 

MR. ROSALES. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. I think in fairness to future inter- 
preters of our Constitution, we have to give examples 
of what would constitute serious illness on the part of 
the President that would necessitate the issuance of a 
medical bulletin, in a manner of speaking, Madam 
President. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. I already defined the standard that 
if this illness is systemic or organic, it affects the 
whole organism. An example mentioned by Commis- 
sioner Rosales is a more or less advanced state of kidney 
illness that requires treatment by dialysis. There are, of 
course, infinite examples. But the standard I would like 
to suggest is one where he is not really incapacitated but 
seriously inconvenienced in the conduct of his urgent 
duties as President. 

THE PRESIDENT. At any rate, the thrust of the 
amendment is that at least the public should be in- 
formed. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. It is the public’s 
right to know; besides, the safeguarding of our national 
survival and security can be irretrievably impaired if the 
access of those in charge of national security and 
foreign relations is cut off through confabulations in the 
household, so that the President is kept in a state of 
ignorance about a period of national danger. 

THE PRESIDENT. With the elimination of the 
Minister of Health, who will then inform the public? I 
just want to clarify that. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I think we will leave 
the burden to the Office of the President to choose the 
appropriate means of releasing information to the 
public. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I was going to 
propose an amendment because, from the discussion, it 
would seem that there are many details that have to be 
filled in. Commissioner Ople mentioned about who 
should give the information, and Commissioner Suarez 
was talking about what kind of illness would fall within 
the perception of the proponent. So, I thought, if the 
distinguished proponent would accept, the details 
should be left to the Congress to determine by law, 
because we have no physician in this body, and perhaps 
the legislature would be able to provide the details. I 
agree fully with the principle or the concept expressed 
by the honorable proponent. 


MR. OPLE. I accept the amendment, and so the first 
sentence will now read: IN CASE OF SERIOUS ILL- 

NESS OF THE PRESIDENT, THE PUBLIC SHALL BE 
INFORMED OF THE STATE OF HIS HEALTH AS 
MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 

Madam President, I think I have just changed my 
mind after an expert on medical matters came around. 
We are called upon to be more trusting with respect to 
the Office of the President that they will know what 
appropriate means to take in order to release this infor- 
mation to the public in satisfaction of the public’s right 
to know about the presidency. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I explain? 

I thought all along that the honorable proponent was 
thinking of a situation such as when recently there was 
an attempt on the part of the Executive not to inform 
the public. And now, we are going to entrust this obliga- 
tion or duty . . . 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, we will leave some- 
thing for people power to do. Maybe Commissioner 
Aquino can lead a march, if they are not satisfied 
with the information coming from the Office of the 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the proponent does not 
accept the amendment. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Guingona also 
not insisting on his proposed amendment? 

MR. GUINGONA. No, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, just one question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. If there is such a provision in the 
Constitution, there must be a sanction for the violation 
of that provision. So, for the record, if the incumbent 
President fails to comply with this provision, will this 
be considered as culpable violation of the Constitution 
which is ground for impeachment? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Ople 
say? 

MR. OPLE. Did the Gentleman ask if this will be a 
culpable violation of the Constitution? 

MR. RODRIGO. If the President fails to comply with 
this, would it be classified as culpable violation of the 
Constitution? 


460 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. OPLE. I think we are using the moral pressure of 
the Constitution. 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask that Commissioner 
Davide be recognized. 


MR. RODRIGO. For the record, would failure to 
comply with this constitutional mandate be considered 
culpable violation of the Constitution which is one 
of the grounds for impeachment? 

MR. OPLE. In the sense that a constitutional standard 
was violated, I think that is a perfectly censurable act. 
But I am not inclined to say at this point that it attains 
to the level of a culpable violation. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. On 
Section 10, line 20, page 4, I propose to insert between 
“vacancy” and “occur” the following phrase: IN THE 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT AND THE VICE- 
PRESIDENT. The whole line as amended will read: 
“morning of the third day after the vacancy IN THE 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT AND THE VICE- 
PRESIDENT occurs, convene.” 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, since it is not clear 
who is commanded to make the revelation, we cannot 
determme really who culpably violates the Constitution. 

Kt ,“J, he intention of the proponent is merely to 
establish a principle in general terms. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 


qufstiont BUBAKAR ‘ WU1 the P ro Ponent yield to 


on the same subject 5 by the^lT all ° W tW ° inter P ellations 
allows then I wfl be havvvZ P T ? IftheRulesso 
Abubakar. pp ^ ° y ie ^ d to Commissioner 

MR. ABUBAKAR Sinr tu 

expressed a wish no. to be in.eZZed!"' ^ M tadirectIy 

iz * 8,ad to 

MR. ABUBAKAR if ; t • • 

Rules that there be nn a ^u!" accorda nce with the 
yield. no double interpellation, I also 

THE PRESIDENT wu* ^ 

the Committee reacting f f v ° es Commi ttee say? Is 

amendment of CommissionLopb? t0 ^ pro P° sed 

MR. SUMULONG The r 
amendment. ‘ e '-ommittee accepts the 

MR. OPLE. Thank x, 

ou Very much. Madam President. 
THE PRESIDENT. The nr 
been sufficiently explained and 7r t d J amendment has 

Is there any objection to th? ^ Upon ‘ 

Commissioner Ople which h^ P K° POSed amend ment of 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair I *** accepted b Y the 
ment is approved. lears n °ne; the amend- 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President 
nized* E PRESIDENT The Actln § Floor Leader is recog- 


REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I think we have a 
pending motion on Section 10. The copies of the pro- 
posed provision have been distributed. 

THE PRESIDENT. So we will defer that. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, if I may be allowed 
to explain to the Committee. 

Section 10 is lifted from the 1984 Amendments to the 
1973 Constitution and is related precisely to the situa- 
tion then obtaining where we did not have a Vice- 
President. And so, Section 10 was inserted in the 1973 
Constitution pursuant to the 1984 Amendments to take 
care of a rule on succession before the mandated elec- 
tion of the President in 1987. The situation now con- 
templated is a vacancy in the offices of the President 
and the Vice-President; therefore, there is an immediate 
need for a special law calling for the election of the 
President and the Vice-President at the same time. 

FR. BERNAS. This is just a clarificatory amendment 
because it really follows from the preceding paragraph. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. Even if it is not there, what is meant 
is vacancy in the offices of the President and the Vice- 
President. So all it does is clarify the matter. 

MR. DAVIDE. It will clarify the matter. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, the proposed 
amendment on Section 10 follows Section 9. This is 
why in Section 10 we speak only of the vacancy in the 
Office of the President. The vacancy in the Office of the 
Vice-President is taken care of in Section 8. 

MR. DAVIDE. I can defer my proposal. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. I think the Chair will give time to 
the Committee to confer and see how Section 10 is 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


461 


affected by the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Rigos. 

The session is suspended. 

It was 3:38 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:51 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask that the Vice-Chairman 
of the Committee on the Executive be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, with respect to 
the proposed amendments on Section 10, the pro- 
ponents have agreed to withdraw their amendments 
after it had been explained to them that they refer to 
the election of the President and the Vice-President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Gentleman referring to 
Commissioners Rigos and Nolledo? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. With 
respect to the same Section 10, the only other pro- 
posed amendment is the proposal of Commissioners 
Nolledo and Guingona to change “seventy days” on line 
4, page 5, to “ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY days.” The 
Committee accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The body shall now vote on the 
proposed amendment. 

Is there any objection to change the word “seventy’ 
to “ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY”? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I just 
clarify. My coproponents are Commissioners Maam- 
bong, Davide, Ople and Rodrigo. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, there was a 
proposed amendment by Commissioner Bacani which 
we deferred until we had conferred with Commissioner 
Monsod. The latter has informed me that they Have 
come to a happy meeting of the minds. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Gentleman referring to 
Section 7? 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Madam President. Commis- 
sioner Monsod and I propose to reword Section 7 as 
follows: THE SALARIES OF THE PRESIDENT AND 
VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL BE DETERMINED BY 
LAW AND SHALL NOT BE DECREASED. NO IN- 
CREASE IN SAID COMPENSATION SHALL TAKE 
EFFECT UNTIL AFTER THE EXPIRATION OF THE 
TERM OF THE INCUMBENT DURING WHICH SUCH 
INCREASE WAS APPROVED. THEY SHALL NOT 
RECEIVE DURING THEIR TENURE ANY OTHER 
EMOLUMENT FROM THE GOVERNMENT OR ANY 
OTHER SOURCE. 

That is the first part of the amendment. 

MR. REGALADO. May we have it a little slowly, 
Commissioner Bacani? Do we maintain the first 
sentence? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, the first sentence is main- 
tained. 

MR. REGALADO. “The President shall have an offi- 
cial residence.” 

BISHOP BACANI. And then, THE SALARIES OF 
THE PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL BE 
DETERMINED BY LAW AND SHALL NOT BE DE- 
CREASED. NO INCREASE IN SAID COMPENSATION 
SHALL TAKE EFFECT UNTIL AFTER THE EXPIRA- 
TION OF THE TERM OF THE INCUMBENT DURING 
WHICH SUCH INCREASE WAS APPROVED. THEY 
SHALL NOT RECEIVE DURING THEIR TENURE 
ANY OTHER EMOLUMENT FROM THE GOVERN- 
MENT OR ANY OTHER SOURCE. 

The sentence that follows, it is presumed, will be 
transferred to the Transitory Provisions. 

MR. REGALADO. For the sake of uniformity, and 
because we have applied this in the other departments 
and offices, the Committee accepts the amendment and 
with the reservation for the Transitory Provisions of the 
corresponding provision. May we call the attention of 
Commissioner Suarez to please take note of that. Com- 
missioner Suarez has been complaining that there have 
been no formulations. So, we will also request Com- 
missioners Bacani and Monsod to make a formulation so 
that there will be less transiting on the part of Commis- 
sioner Suarez. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, we will do so, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I would like to 
present the situation that since we are drafting a Consti- 
tution not only for a few years but for centuries, 
perhaps, there is a possibility of an extraordinary 
inflation. For example, at the beginning of the term of a 
Senator or a President, there is a devaluation. I think it 
would be unfair to tie down the President and the 


462 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


Senator to their salaries in these cases. Perhaps, we could 
leave this matter of salaries to the Committee on 
Amendments and Transitory Provisions for further 
study so that we could make a study in case there are 
extraordinary events that will require an increase in the 
salaries of our officials; otherwise, they would be receiv- 
ing compensations which would not be adequate to 
their responsibilities. 


circulated, the word “DEATH” was omitted on line 19 
after the word “OF.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. And on line 14, between “or” 
and “both,” we insert WHERE. That is the amendment 
of Commissioner Rosario Braid. May I now proceed to 
read the reformulated Section 5, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR. REGALADO. Insofar as the President and the 
Vice-President are concerned, they have allowances to 
make up for the inadequacy. The observation may be 
valid with respect to, say, the constitutional commis- 
sioners. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

*' he f e i" y ° b i ecti °n to the proposed amendment? 
approved. “ n ° ne " the ^„d meri t is 

Commi^'de te Tr' ^ 

formulated amendment rec °gnized for his re- 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


nizld E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Davide is reo 

pe“f„g D a3dmem f whic W h e wa? SeC,i ° n ‘ 0> ‘ ha ' 
subject of the motion of CnZ SUpposed to 1 
of their so-called anterior ^ T' 0 " 61 RlgOS becai 
withdrawn. I wonder if the ? dment > but which v 
to accept that amendment. C ° mmittee 1S now Prepai 

IN THE OFFICE OfTh^pp? t0 insert the wo 
VICE-PRESIDENT betw^ < PRESIDen T AND T1 

on line 20 , page 4 . between vacancy” and “occu 


MR. REGALADO. I think tu /-> 
to accept that because it V l C ° mmittee is w 
offices involved. “ C anfies and specifies 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT Is th 
proposed amendent on line 20 To ob i ecti on to 
which has been accepted bv th P °r Section 10 > Pa 

The Chair hears none; the amendm C °T mittee? (Sih 

endment is approved. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President u 
sioner de Jos Reyes proceeds with t ’, befor ® Coir 
Section 5 which was made in collahn, e a t reformu 
Committee and Commissioners Davide anH°\l Wlth 
may I call the attention of the body £ ^ 


MR. DE LOS REYES. SECTION 5. THE PRES- 
IDENT-ELECT AND THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT 
SHALL ASSUME OFFICE AT THE BEGINNING OF 
THEIR TERMS. 

Second paragraph: IF THE PRESIDENT-ELECT 

FAILS TO QUALIFY, THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT 
SHALL ACT AS PRESIDENT UNTIL THE PRES- 
IDENT-ELECT SHALL HAVE QUALIFIED. 

Third Paragraph: IF A PRESIDENT SHALL NOT 
HAVE BEEN CHOSEN, THE VICE-PRESIDENT- 
ELECT SHALL ACT AS PRESIDENT UNTIL A 
PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE BEEN CHOSEN AND 
QUALIFIED. 

Fourth paragraph: IF AT THE BEGINNING OF THE 
TERM OF THE PRESIDENT, THE PRESIDENT- 
ELECT SHALL HAVE DIED OR SHALL HAVE 
BECOME PERMANENTLY DISABLED, THE VICE- 
PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL BECOME PRESIDENT. 

Fifth paragraph: WHERE NO PRESIDENT AND 
VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE BEEN CHOSEN OR 
SHALL HAVE QUALIFIED, OR WHERE BOTH 
SHALL HAVE DIED OR BECOME PERMANENTLY 
DISABLED, THE SENATE PRESIDENT, OR IN 
CASE OF HIS INABILITY, THE SPEAKER OF THE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SHALL ACT AS 
PRESIDENT UNTIL A PRESIDENT OR A VICE- 
PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE BEEN CHOSEN AND 
QUALIFIED. 

Sixth paragraph: THE CONGRESS SHALL PRO- 
VIDE BY LAW FOR THE CASE OF DEATH, PER- 
MANENT DISABILITY OR INABILITY OF THE 
OFFICIALS MENTIONED IN THE NEXT PRECED- 
ING PARAGRAPH AND THE MANNER IN WHICH 
ONE WHO IS TO ACT AS PRESIDENT SHALL BE 
SELECTED UNTIL A PRESIDENT OR A VICE- 
PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE QUALIFIED. 

This is a consolidated amendment of Commissioners 
Padilla, Nolledo, Rigos, Maambong, Davide and Guingo- 
na, in collaboration with Commissioner Regalado. 

MR. REGALADO. The Chairman has asked me to 
announce that the Committee accepts the reformulated 
amendment on Section 5. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ask Commissioner de los 
Reyes to read the amendment so that we can put this to 
a vote. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


463 


MR. DE LOS REYES. THE PRESIDENT-ELECT 
AND THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL AS- 
SUME OFFICE AT THE BEGINNING OF THEIR 
TERMS. 

IF THE PRESIDENT-ELECT FAILS TO QUALIFY, 
THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL ACT AS 
PRESIDENT UNTIL THE PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL 
HAVE QUALIFIED. 

IF A PRESIDENT SHALL NOT HAVE BEEN 
CHOSEN, THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL 
ACT AS PRESIDENT UNTIL A PRESIDENT SHALL 
HAVE BEEN CHOSEN AND QUALIFIED. 

IF AT THE BEGINNING OF THE TERM OF THE 
PRESIDENT, THE PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL HAVE 
DIED OR SHALL HAVE BECOME PERMANENTLY 
DISABLED, THE VICE-PRESIDENT-ELECT SHALL 
BECOME PRESIDENT. 

WHERE NO PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT 
HAVE BEEN CHOSEN OR SHALL HAVE QUALI- 
FIED OR WHERE BOTH SHALL HAVE DIED OR 
BECOME PERMANENTLY DISABLED, THE SENATE 
PRESIDENT, OR IN CASE OF HIS INABILITY, THE 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
SHALL ACT AS PRESIDENT UNTIL A PRESIDENT 
OR A VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE BEEN 
CHOSEN AND QUALIFIED. 

THE CONGRESS SHALL PROVIDE BY LAW FOR 
THE CASE OF DEATH, PERMANENT DISABILITY 
OR INABILITY OF THE OFFICIALS MENTIONED IN 
THE NEXT PRECEDING PARAGRAPH AND THE 
MANNER IN WHICH ONE WHO IS TO ACT AS PRES- 
IDENT SHALL BE SELECTED UNTIL A PRESIDENT 
OR VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE QUALIFIED. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we just clarify 
one point from the distinguished proponent. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, gladly. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will please 
proceed. 

MR. SUAREZ. May I call Commissioner de los Reyes’ 
attention to the first and second paragraphs, lines 1 to 
5, of his draft. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. On line 2, the word “ASSUME” was 
used and on line 3, the phrase “FAILS TO QUALIFY 
was used. Suppose the President-elect does not assume 
office at the beginning of his term? Questions have 
already been raised here sometime ago that that could 
possibly constitute an abandonment of office, and that 


is not equivalent to failure to qualify which appears on 
line 3. 

So in a situation which I envision in that a President- 
elect will not assume office at the beginning of his term, 
who would assume the presidency, and in what charac- 
ter would the assumption be? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Although the situation is 
rather remote, the successor will, of course, be the Vice- 
President. 

MR. SUAREZ. In a permanent capacity? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. If the failure to assume office 
reaches that stage where it constitutes abandonment, 
then the Vice-President assumes presidency in a per- 
manent capacity. 

FR. BERNAS. But, Madam President, I think it is 
clear that failure to assume office is something that is 
temporary, and that is explained by lines 4 and 5 — that 
the Vice-President-elect shall act as President until the 
President-elect shall have qualified. 

It is the same President-elect, on line 2, who fails to 
qualify, and on lines 4 and 5, who shall have quali- 
fied. So it is clear that it is not an abandonment of 
office. 

But if we have a situation where there is a clear 
abandonment of office, then this section is not applica- 
ble. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank Commissioner Bernas for the 
clarification, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other comment on 
this particular Section 5 as redrafted? 

Does the Committee accept the amendment? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 

amendment. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment 
as read? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, this second 
amendment which is on Section 9, lines 6 to 18, is 
related to Section 5. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear the second amend- 
ment of Commissioner de los Reyes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The proposal is to delete the 
sentences on Section 9 from lines 6 to 1 8 starting from 
“The Congress” up to “Acting President” and insert the 
following: THE RULES SET FORTH IN SECTION 5 
HEREOF SHALL APPLY ALSO IN CASE OF PER- 


464 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MANENT DISABILITY, DEATH, REMOVAL FROM 
OFFICE OR RESIGNATION OF BOTH THE PRES- 
IDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. We regret to state that it is differ- 
ent because this refers to the situation of the death, per- 
manent disability or resignation of the Acting President. 


assemble,” so that lines 26 to 31 will now read:“There- 
upon, the Congress shall decide the issue, convening IN 
ACCORDANCE WITH ITS RULES WITHOUT NEED 
OF CALL, within forty-eight hours for that purpose, if 
IT IS not in session. If the Congress, within TEN days 
after receipt of the latter written declaration determines 
by a two-thirds vote of both Houses . . .” 

MR. REGALADO. Will Commissioner Davide kindly 
explain why he requests to delete “or if not in session, 
within twenty-one days after it is required to assemble”? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. No, the first paragraph of 
Section 9 does not refer to the Acting President. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that is necessary because it is a 
consequence of the convening of the Congress without 
need of call within 48 hours if it is not in session. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, Section 9 refers to 
the period when somebody is actually in office. Section 
5 deals with the situation before the assumption of of- 
fice or before the beginning of the term of office; 

whereas Section 9 deals with the situation during the 
term. 6 


MR DE LOS REYES. No. The idea of the pn 

the* Co naress P .*.° poaal is that instead of still makin 

cy or the vic^nr^vf & success i° n to the presidei 

death or removalfrom 'of ? 6 ° f permanent d isabilit; 
President or Vice-p/esidL^iT v* resi § nation of th 
Speaker of the House ofR^ Senate President or th 
may be, shall be the succeLor' ^ reSentatives ’ as the cas 


Since there is an immediate call in the event that the 
Congress is not in session, necessarily the Congress can 
act immediately, which I limit to 10 days because there 
might be a constitutional crisis if the period is too long. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, the Congress shall 
remain in session the moment it has immediately con- 
vened without call, or the moment the situation arises, 
and until it has eventually determined the conflicting 
views of the members of the Cabinet and the President 
as to his inability. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, and it should be limited to 10 
days because a longer period might be dangerous consti- 
tutionally because there might be a constitutional crisis. 


sioner ifto^tke that ^ * the Com 

would be lines 19 to 23 of Section 5 W ° Uld ^ 3PPUC 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Lines 19 to 23 of Section 5 

only porttonthat theC° f Sectlon 5 ' That would be 
St there *pp 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I withdraw the amendment 

Co m m i ssio n^D^tid b e iz P J e S ^ d en * > * ask 

niz!d. E PRESIDENt - Commissioner Davide is re 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President 
on page 5, Section 1 1, ii nes 27 to 3 1 ’ V amendmei 

On line 27, nfter C *convenino ” a i 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS p m ? follow 
NEED OF CALL and acL™ ( * ,THC 

and “not,” insert IT IS. nd betw een 


On line 28, delete “twenty-one" and substitute TEN 
On lines 29 to 31, delete the phrase “or if no t in 
session, within twenty-one days after it is required to 


FR. BERNAS. If the Congress has to convene within 
48 hours, that is two days. The applicable limit to a 
situation when Congress is not in session should be two 
days longer. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, 12 days. 

FR. BERNAS. So instead of “TEN” it must be 
TWELVE. So it will read: “or, if not in session within 
TWELVE days after it is required to assemble . . .” 

MR. DAVIDE. So “TWELVE days.” That would be a 
good compromise. I accept, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. We will delete that portion refer- 
ring to the situation where the Congress is not in 
session, to read: “within TWELVE days au^r receipt of 
the latter written declaration.” 

MR. DAVIDE. We will make a uniform rule whether 
or not the Congress is in actual session — at the time of 
the receipt of the written declaration. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, it will read: “If the 
Congress, within TEN days after receipt of the latter 
written declaration, or if not in session, within 
TWELVE days after it is required to assemble . . .” 

MR. DAVIDE. That is on line 30. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


465 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. I agree, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. So line 27 would read: “conven- 
ing IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS RULES WITHOUT 
NEED OF CALL,” but line 30 would read: “within 
TWELVE days after it is required to assemble.” 

MR. DAVIDE. “After it is required to assemble,” 
because there is no need of a call. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, “within TWELVE days after 
it is required to assemble.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. A moment, please, so that we can 
clarify this. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
ask a question or two for the record. What would be the 
consequence if the Congress fails to get the two-thirds 
vote of both Houses within the time limit of 10 days or 
12 days? 

MR. DAVIDE. In that particular case, I understand 
that the President will continue in his functions. 

MR. RODRIGO. And Congress may no longer declare 
the incapacity of the President? 

MR. DAVIDE. Pursuant to the Commissioner’s 
amendment earlier. 

MR. RODRIGO. No, that was not covered by my 
amendment. What I mean is the Congress is limited to 
10 days or 12 days to act on the issue, and that is to 
gather the two-thirds vote of both Houses. Let me make 
the question specific. After the lapse of 10 days, if 
Congress is in session, may it still on the 15th day, if it 
gets two-thirds vote of both Houses, reinstate or declare 
the President incapacitated? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that should really be. 

MR. RODRIGO. So even if the 10-day period lapses, 
the Congress can still act. 

MR. DAVIDE. It might until it has voted; the Pres- 
ident anyway continues exercising his powers and 
functions. 

MR. RODRIGO. Then what is the use of the amend- 
ment? 

MR. DAVIDE. The idea is to compel the legislature 
to act immediately, because otherwise a prolonged 
period for it to decide may constitute or may give way 
to a constitutional crisis. 


MR. RODRIGO. The only way anybody can be com- 
pelled to act is to state what would be the consequence 
if he does not comply with the compulsion. 

FR. BERNAS. For that matter, the Commissioner’s 
question applies also even if the limit were 2 1 days. 

MR. RODRIGO. My question now is: We are pre- 
scribing a limit. If we are prescribing a limit within 
which the Congress should act, then there must be a 
consequence in case the Congress fails to act within the 
limit; otherwise, the limit is useless. So my question is: 
If the time limit of 10 days or 12 days lapses and the 
Congress fails to act, fails to get the two-thirds vote of 
both Houses, what is the consequence? May the 
Congress still act or not and thereby the President 
continues indefinitely to occupy the position? 

FR. BERNAS. I would say that if the Congress does 
not act within that period, that means the President 
stays. And if the situation is changed, then we have to 
restart the process. 

MR. RODRIGO. We have to restart the process, 
which means the Cabinet by a majority vote of its 
members will send a letter to the Senate President and 
the Speaker? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, we will restart the process. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much. 

MR. REGALADO. Will Commissioner Davide please 
restate the provision starting from line 21? May I 
remind Commissioner Davide that there was an amend- 
ment here which is to add a period (.) after “office.” 

MR. DAVIDE. That will not be affected by my 
amendment. 

MR. REGALADO. On line 26, before “his office,” 
the word “Thereupon” has been eliminated. This is just 
for purposes of Commissioner Davide reading this 
portion. 

MR. DAVIDE. So I will begin from line 26. The pro- 
posed amendment as modified and as accepted by the 
Committee is as follows: “The Congress shall decide the 
issue convening IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS RULES 
WITHOUT NEED OF CALL, within forty-eight hours 
for that purpose, if IT IS not in session. If the Congress 
within TEN days after receipt of the latter written 
declaration, or, if not in session, within TWELVE days 
after it is required to assemble, determines by a two- 
thirds vote of both Houses ...” 

MR. REGALADO. No, two days plus 10 days. 

FR. BERNAS. No, but if it is after it has assembled, 
we might as well make it 10 days. 


466 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


The additional two days was precisely to give the 
Congress the opportunity to assemble. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. If we make the starting point after it 
has assembled, then we might as well make it 10 days 
also. 

MR. DAVIDE. That was the original proposal, to 
make it uniform. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I have no objec- 
tion to the clarifications, but to probably make the 
provision clearer, why do we not say “If the Congress 
is in session,” then continue with the others? This is just 
a suggestion. 

MR. DAVIDE. With that intention, I will leave it to 
the Committee on Style. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendments are approved. 


FR. BERNAS. That is why my recommendation was: 
if not in session, within TWELVE days after it is 
required to assemble.” 


“"ru/cT So the amendment is as is then, 

ELVE days after it is required to assemble.” 

FR. BERNAS. The additional two days is to give the 
Congress tune to assemble. 


Co^p ° A YP E - So Unes 28 to 31 will read: “If the 

writfen d X m at™ ° f ,he la " eI 

twelve days after 'i, is required^ 

FR. BERNAS. . . within TEN days ...” 

MR. DAVIDE. “. . . within TEN days,” rather. 

quired toaslmV”’^™ a LVE days after » « «• 
them to assemb” ^ addW ° nal tw ° * f °' 


aft«Tt isrequfted toassem b le!”** Wit,dn ™ ELVE da 
amen R d„,e R „L GALADO ' ^ accepts t 

fo™alo„ P T,h EE c 0 T m Eor dar * ca * i °n and the 
Commissioner Davicte S° nerS before they vote > v 
starting from line 26 P &Se restate the provisi 

MR. DAVIDE. Thp 

will now read as follows P “Th^ Starting ^ rom hne 
issue, convening IN AcrnorfAx?^ ess shaU decide 1 
WITHOUT NEED OF CMT NC ? WlTH ITS RUL 
for that purpose, if IT IS not In'! • f °rty-eight hoi 

within TEN days after Se^thiV^ ^ 

declaration, or, if not in session, withta 

after it is required to assemble, determine™*^ 

THE PRESIDENT. This proposed ^ 
been accepted by the Committee. endment 1 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendmi 
on page 5, lines 26 to 3 1 ? 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, another amendment 
on Section 12, page 6, line 6: to delete the word “shall” 
and substitute it with MAY. On lines 8 and 9, delete the 
following phrase: “without the concurrence of at least 
a majority of all the members of the Congress” and 
substitute it with the following: EXCEPT IN THE 
MANNER AND SUBJECT TO THE CONDITIONS 
PRESCRIBED IN SECTION 15 OF THIS ARTICLE; so 
that Section 12 will read: “An Acting President MAY 
not declare martial law or suspend the privilege of the 
writ of habeas corpus EXCEPT IN THE MANNER AND 
SUBJECT TO THE CONDITIONS PRESCRIBED IN 
SECTION 1 5 OF THIS ARTICLE.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I submitted a similar amendment to 
the Committee, and I presume the Committee has 
accepted it. Will Commissioner Davide please accept my 
amendment to his amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. If it was accepted by the Committee, 
then we could consider it as a joint amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, my amendment is 
with respect to lines 8 and 9, which should now read: 
EXCEPT UNDER THE CONDITIONS OF AND SUB- 
JECT TO THE PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN SEC- 
TION 15 HEREOF, so that Section 12 would now read: 
“An Acting President MAY not declare martial law or 
suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
EXCEPT UNDER THE CONDITIONS OF AND 
SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN 
SECTION 15 HEREOF.” 

What does Commissioner Davide say? The Commit- 
tee has already accepted this amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the Committee has accepted the 
amendment, it would carry the same intention and 
effect. 

FR. BERNAS. Let me just ask. Is it really necessary 
to say this? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


467 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, because if I may answer also 
on behalf of Commissioner Davide, as originally worded, 
Section 12 states “without the concurrence of at least 
a majority of all the members of the Congress” and the 
amendment to Section 12 which refers to Section 15 
states: EXCEPT UNDER THE CONDITIONS OF AND 
SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN 
SECTION 15 HEREOF. So that if we adopt the 
original provision, it will carry the impression that a 
vote of a majority of all the Members of Congress will 
suffice without the other provision set forth in Section 
1 5 as applicable. So we would like the other provision 
of Section 1 5 likewise apply to a declaration of martial 
law or suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus even if made merely by an Acting President. 

FR. BERNAS. But if we do not say anything about 
his power to impose martial law, then it is understood 
that if he is going to impose martial law at all, it will 
have to be according to Section 15. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. Otherwise, he will have more powers 
than the President. So it would seem to me that the first 
paragraph of Section 1 2 is unnecessary. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. I think we better delete Sec- 
tion 12. 


he may would be subject to Section 15. So it is not 
really necessary to insert in the first paragraph of 
Section 12 the right of the Acting President to declare 
martial law because, in effect, we would be conceding to 
him a greater power than that of a regular President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to support the idea of 
Commissioner Davide that there is absolutely no need 
for this Article defining the powers of the Acting 
President which powers will be the same as the Pres- 
ident. The situation stated by Commissioner Regalado 
that an Acting President’s power must be defined would 
create a lot of complications because we have to define 
also the powers of the Acting Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court, the Acting Vice-President, etc. There is 
no need to define their powers because they have the 
powers of the office that they are acting in. And I think 
we should not clutter up the Constitution with all these 
unnecessary provisions which would yield to varying 
interpretations. 

MR. REGALADO. If it is on record that that is the 
understanding, then the first paragraph may be deleted. 

MR. RAMA. Thank you. 


FR. BERNAS. Not the whole Section 12, but its first 
paragraph. 

MR. DAVIDE. The first paragraph of Section 12 
should be deleted. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, we can delete the first para- 
graph of Section 12. I agree. 

MR. REGALADO. There were those in the Commit- 
tee who wanted this clarified because Section 15 refers 
to a President. There might always be a little loophole 
where the Acting President whose position is only 
temporary in character will say: “Well, that was with 
respect to the President who is permanent in nature.’ 
So to avoid precisely the possibility of hairsplitting 
technicalities, we make it specific that just like the 
President, the Acting President also cannot just declare 
martial law, and conjointly with the second paragraph, 
the limitations on his power of appointment. Making it 
specific will avoid any questions later because we know 
how lawyers are; they can always try to squeeze out of 
a situation and make distinctions where distinctions 
should not really exist. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the idea of deleting 
the first paragraph is simply this: An Acting President 
exercises all the powers of the President and, therefore, 
he can declare martial law, but the manner under which 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does everybody agree? Does 
Commissioner Nolledo agree to the deletion? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree, Madam President. 

Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about Commissioner Davide, 
does he also agree? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, but only with the deletion of the 
first paragraph of Section 1 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. So the first paragraph of Section 
12 is deleted. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

May we know the sponsors of this amendment to 
delete the first paragraph of Section 1 2. 


MR. SARMIENTO. The 
Davide, Nolledo and Rama. 

Madam President, I ask 
be recognized. 


sponsors are Commissioners 
that Commissioner Monsod 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


468 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I would like to 
propose an amendment to Section 15, lines 1 and 2, 
page 7, which is to delete the phrase “and, with the 
concurrence of at least a majority of all the members 
of the Congress.” 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 


President as commander-in-chief when public safety 
demands. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, it being our 
snack time, could the Commissioner get together with 
Commissioner Monsod to discuss the matter? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, and with all other Commis- 
sioners who may have proposed amendments to Section 
15. 


FR. BERNAS. Yesterday during our deliberations, 
Commissioner Padilla made a proposal that we treat the 
suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
separately from the declaration of martial law. And 
whereas concurrence of at least a majority of all the 
Members of Congress might not be necessary or might 
be harmful for purposes of imposing martial law, it may 
not be harmful for purposes of suspending the privilege 
of the writ of habeas corpus - two different effects. So 

l„ P .7te, We .. W . OUM yield to the desire of Commis- 
sioner Padilla that we treat these separately, if in the 

“te W we a cr„nUn' conc i us i°n that we use the same 

t .° 8e,her again - Bu * 1 > h “ » it 

-HSSSSSS 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

&mm PRESID p NT ' S ° "" Wi " en,er,ain ,his lato - 

Commissioner Padilla is recognized, 
of Commissione^Momod b? ° bjection to the proposal 

sion of the writ of hnho m sense that the suspen- 
certain cL™o„°s d t ITS £ Presid '"* “ der 

majority of the Members of Co ^ Con A currence of the 
further that even the nrnri C n f eSS ‘ And 1 would §° 
martial law under certafn an ) atlon of the state of 
secure the a priori con™ cond itions also should not 
Members of Congress for^af^ 6 °l the ma J° rit y of the 
vides, the Congress m ay revoke ^ ? the Section pr(> 
suspension or even extPnH Ke SUch Proclamation or 
for the initial declaration either ° f 60 days - But 
wnLor of the proclamation f * the sus P ension of the 
be necessary to secure the c° mart ^ * aw , it should not 
the Members of Congress oncurre nce of a majority of 


MR. DE CASTRO. May we omit the first paragraph, 
Madam President? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 4:38 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:17 p.m. , the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Monsod be recognized for an amendment on 
Section 15. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, before Commis- 
sioner Monsod takes the rostrum, may I just add this 
for the record. Upon the request of Commissioner 
Ople, I went to our Medical Service and Dr. Fe Soriano, 
Chief of the Medical Service of our Constitutional 
Commission Secretariat, gave this opinion about serious 
illness. So for the record, may I read what she wrote, 
Madam President. 


FR. BERNAS. So in other 
Padilla is not pushing his idea ofse^ttag^hTm iSSi °" er 

MR. PADILLA. I have my own nron„ a 
to classify Section 15 into three sh3 d ame r ndment 
(1) to prevent or suppress 

pend the writ of habeas corpus; and (3) to proclaim 
martial Jaw. Because it seems to me that these fhree am 
separate stages in the exercise of the powers of the 


THE PRESIDING. Commissioner Tingson will please 
proceed. 

MR. TINGSON. Dr. Fe Soriano, Chief of our Medical 
Service, said that serious illness means any condition 
that could cause imminent death or would incapacitate 
the person to the extent, for example, that his mental 
faculties would deteriorate. 

I thought that that might be good for our record, 
Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


469 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the intention there is to put a 
definition of serious illness, I do not think the Commis- 
sion or those who will interpret the Constitution should 
be bound by that particular opinion. We leave the 
matter to the Supreme Court to interpret it later. 

MR. OPLE. We intended to have nothing more than 
the persuasive weight of the definition, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is the opinion of a doctor; 
that is all. 

Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we were not able 
to get together with the Committee on a consolidated 
amendment, so we are back to my original amendment, 
except that I believe Commissioner Padilla would like to 
discuss his proposal because that is anterior. 

So may I request that my proposed amendment be 
temporarily held in abeyance in order that Commis- 
sioner Padilla may be given a chance to propose his. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, some of the Com- 
missioners who have proposed amendments on Section 
15 have met together, although we could not directly 
confer with all the members of the Committee, but its 
distinguished Chairman knows of these proposed 
amendments. 

On Section 15, page 6, line 26, the first sentence 
remains: “The President shall be the commander-in- 
chief of all the armed forces of the Philippines and, 
whenever it becomes necessary, he may call out such 
armed forces to prevent or suppress lawless violence...” 
My amendment is to substitute OR PUBLIC DISOR- 
DER in lieu of “invasion or rebellion” on line 29. That 
is the first situation. 

On the same page, line 30, insert the word ACTUAL 
between “of’ and “invasion” and on line 3 1 insert the 
clause BY PROCLAMATION, PLACE THE PHILIP- 
PINES OR ANY PART THEREOF UNDER MARTIAL 
LAW. THE PERIOD OF SUCH SUSPENSION OR PRO- 
CLAMATION SHALL NOT EXCEED . . . 

On page 7, lines 1 to 4, delete “and, with the con- 
currence of at least a majority of all the Members of the 
Congress, suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus, or place the Philippines or any part thereof 
under martial law.” 


On the same page 7, lines 21 to 23, substitute the 
whole paragraph with: DURING THE SUSPENSION 
OF THE PRIVILEGE OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS 
CORPUS, ANY PERSON WHO HAS BEEN AR- 
RESTED AND DETAINED SHALL BE JUDICIALLY 
CHARGED WITHIN FIVE WORKING DAYS OTHER- 
WISE HE SHALL BE RELEASED. 

The reason for the substitution of these last three 
lines is that during the martial law regime, several in- 
nocent persons were arrested by virtue of ASSO, PCO 
and PDA and some of them had been detained not only 
for one month, but for one year or more without any 
charge in court, and some of these persons did not know 
why they were arrested. 

As worded, however, it says that it shall apply only 
to persons judicially charged. So if the person has been 
judicially charged, there must have been a warrant of 
arrest issued. There would be no problem as to that 
because the person arrested would have his judicial 
remedies. What we are avoiding or preventing is the 
situation wherein a person is arrested during the suspen- 
sion of the writ of habeas corpus without any criminal 
information or judicial charge filed. 

With regard to the distinction that we try to make 
among, first, the situation of lawless violence; second, 
the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus; and, third, the proclamation of martial law, 
it seems to us that these situations are really three 
different stages. 

We all agree that the suspension of the writ or the 
proclamation of martial law should not require before- 
hand the concurrence of the majority of all the Mem- 
bers of the Congress. However, as provided by the 
Committee, the Congress may revoke, amend, shorten 
or even increase the period of such suspension. 

I realize that in the provisions of the Article on the 
Bill of Rights on the suspension of the writ of habeas 
corpus, there was a great deal of discussion regarding the 
words “imminent danger” of rebellion or invasion. 
Many of us wanted to retain the words “imminent 
danger” as provided in the 1935 and 1973 Constitu- 
tions. And I know that the majority decision was to 
delete the words “imminent danger,” so that it would 
be limited to actual invasion or rebellion. 

We feel, Madam President, that if there is already an 
actual invasion or rebellion, then the suspension of the 
writ may become a useless formality. But, precisely, the 
intention is to provide for the suspension of the writ 
under certain conditions short of actual rebellion or 
invasion. 

I recall that during the time of President Quirino, he 
never declared martial law although he suspended the 
writ of habeas corpus. So we feel that the two situations 
are not similar. Martial law contemplates a graver 
situation than the mere suspension of the writ. 

This morning Commissioner Monsod gave us a copy 
of his reminders stating that in our effort to prevent 


470 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


abuses by government, we are unduly curtailing and 
restricting the exercise of the powers of the President. 
One such restriction is the elimination of the words 
“imminent danger” because under that provision, the 
President as commander-in-chief of all the Armed 
Forces cannot suspend the writ of habeas corpus unless 
there be actual invasion or rebellion. 

I realize that there may be many objections to this 
differentiation between suspension of the writ and the 
declaration of martial law, particularly in that others 
may attempt to reconsider the provision on the Article 
on the Bill of Rights and to reinsert this phrase “im- 
minent danger.” I believe. Madam President, that while 
we respect the majority decision in the consideration of 
the Article on the Bill of Rights, particularly that provi- 
sion on the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, this 
body should not be completely deprived of an oppor- 
tunity to reconsider or improve provisions that we have 
already approved in past sessions. In fact, it would be 
ealthy if after many of these committee reports have 
there ^ ’ ^* scusse( *> debated on and approved, 

important a„rt PPOrt r ity f ° r aU t0 resubmit * few 
deliberation by'th^Ctjmmi^ioners. 16 f ” fUr ‘ her 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 
niz™. E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Natividad is recog- 

yield to a few que^tfon* 1 ' 1 ^ distin S uishe d Gentleman 


MR. PADILLA. Very gladly. 


memta^r^fd ? a T ° f ha « am 

questions than propose th??" 8 ' ask , some clanfica 

mind if we were satisfied with r^swe e rs. tS 


MR. PADILLA. Yes, very gladly. 


MR. NATIVIDAD First an n r 
the Commissioner’s thesTs We agree 

of martial law there is no need fo 16 ^ imp ° 
majority of the Members of r f concurrer >ce < 
vision says “in case of actual C ° ngress because thi 
there is actual invasion an i 1 ” v ^ slon ar >d rebellio 
Crispino de Cas™*M r 0 "’ f Commi * 

response because there is an attach"? 1 * f °, r llmn 
securing a concurrence may Se “ nd . tb e f 

roads might be blocked or barricaded. jhey^aTt 

case of a rebellion, one cannot even tak* 5L y 
to the Congress, which is possible because^he^ 3 
blocked or barricaded. And maybe if the revoUio 
are smart, they would have an individual team o 
and every Member of the Congress so he would r 
able to respond to a call for a session. So the re 
ment of an initial concurrence of the majority of 


Members of the Congress in case of an invasion or 
rebellion might be impractical as I can see it. 

Second, Section 15 states that the Congress may 
revoke the declaration or lift the suspension. 

And third, the matter of declaring martial law is 
already a justiciable question and no longer a political 
one in that it is subject to judicial review at any point 
in time. So on that basis, I agree that there is no need 
for concurrence as a prerequisite to declare martial law 
or to suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. 
I notice in the Commissioner’s proposal that he is 
requiring less factors for the suspension of the privilege 
of the writ of habeas corpus than for the declaration 
of martial law. Is that correct? 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. And the Commissioner said that 
in case of subversion, sedition or imminent danger of 
rebellion or invasion, that would be the causus beli for 
the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus. But I wonder whether or not the Commis- 
sioner would consider intelligence reports of military 
officers as evidence of imminent danger of rebellion 
or invasion because this is usually the evidence 
presented. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, as credible evidence, especially 
if they are based on actual reports and investigation of 
facts that might soon happen. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Then the difficulty here is, of 
course, that the authors and the witnesses in intelligence 
reports may not be forthcoming under the rule of 
classified evidence or documents. Does the Commis- 
sioner still accept that as evidence? 

MR. PADILLA. It is for the President as commander- 
in-chief of the Armed Forces to appraise these reports 
and be satisfied that the public safety demands the 
suspension of the writ. After all, this can also be raised 
before the Supreme Court as in the declaration of 
martial law because it will no longer be, as the former 
Solicitor General always contended, a political issue. It 
becomes now a justiciable issue. The Supreme Court 
may even investigate the factual background in support 
of the suspension of the writ or the declaration of 
martial law. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. As far as the Commissioner is 
concerned, would he respect the exercise of the right 
to, say, classified documents, and when authors of or 
witnesses to these documents may not be revealed? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, because the President, in making 
this decision of suspending the writ, will have to base his 
judgment on the document because, after all, we are 
restricting the period to only 60 days and further we 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


471 


are giving the Congress or the Senate the right or the 
power to revoke, reduce or extend its period. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I heard the Commissioner 
mention that it is possible under his proposal to get the 
concurrence not of the Congress, but of the Senate. 
This, again, is an area where I vacillate because the 
House is composed of elected Members who are closer 
to the people. It might be a little bit more difficult to 
consult with the House, but then it is a factor that will 
give support to the President later on if we are able to 
get the consent and concurrence of the House. And in 
the case of the declaration of martial law, I think the 
Chief Executive would need all the friends that he or 
she can get and, therefore, getting the nod of the House 
in a matter of the declaration of martial law, I think, 
should not be given up as far as this Constitution is 
concerned. 

MR. PADILLA. Personally, I am not very emphatic 
as to the change of “Congress” to SENATE. It could 
remain with the Congress. Some other Commissioners, 
especially Commissioner Monsod and, as concurred in 
by the Chairman of the Committee, I think that the 
word “Congress” could be substituted by SENATE. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Lastly, the Commissioner pro- 
posed the substitution of the whole paragraph on page 
7, lines 21 to 23, to: “DURING THE SUSPENSION 
OF THE PRIVILEGE OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS 
CORPUS, ANY PERSON WHO HAS BEEN AR- 
RESTED AND DETAINED SHALL BE JUDICIALLY 
CHARGED WITHIN FIVE WORKING DAYS OTHER- 
WISE HE SHALL BE RELEASED.” 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. If the government claims to 
charge him, then he will have to be released. 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I think this is a satisfactory 
compromise because this would prevent the recurrence 
of the incidents in the past when people under such a 
situation were detained for hundreds of days. 

MR. PADILLA. That proposal is to prevent that 
odious occurrence before. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Under any circumstances, they 
cannot be detained beyond five working days. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, unless the proper criminal 
information is filed. In which case, it becomes the 
judicial prerogative whether or not the accused will 
be entitled to bail. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. By that, the case is filed in 
court, not in the fiscal’s office. 


MR. PADILLA. Yes. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, the criminal information 
must be filed in court. I would just like to make it of 
record that the accused must be charged in court. It 
is not enough that they are charged in the fiscal’s office. 

MR. PADILLA. We have not changed the wording in 
the committee report regarding persons judicially 
charged. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Judicially, yes. I would just like 
to clarify the record because in law enforcement there is 
always that loophole that the accused had been properly 
charged. But what we mean by “charged” is judicially 
charged in court and not in the fiscal’s office. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Does Commissioner Padilla agree 
with that view? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, that is why we maintain the 
phrase “judicially charged.” 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Suarez would like to interpellate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

Will the distinguished Vice-President yield to a few 
clarificatory questions? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, very gladly. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

The Commissioner is suggesting that in connection 
with Section 15, we delete the phrase “and, with the 
concurrence of at least a majority of all the Members 
of the Congress ...” 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct especially for the 
initial suspension of the privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus or also the declaration of martial law. 

MR. SUAREZ. So in both instances, the Commis- 
sioner is suggesting that this would be an exclusive 
prerogative of the President? 

MR. PADILLA. At least initially, for a period of 60 
days. But even that period of 60 days may be shortened 
by the Congress or the Senate because the next 
sentence says that the Congress or the Senate may even 
revoke the proclamation. 


472 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, when we started 
on this amendment by Commissioner Padilla, I wanted 
to present my amendment but I gave way because of 
the anterior proposals of Commissioner Padilla. But I 
have a series of amendments on lines 1 , 4, 5 and 7, page 
7 that would have a different effect from the discussions 
now. I wonder if we can take these because the answers 
would be different, depending on whether or not my 
amendments would be accepted by the Committee. 


MR. DE CASTRO. The Honorable Padilla proposed 
the deletion of the phrase “and, with the concurrence 
of at least a majority of the members of the Congress” 
as appearing on page 7, line 1, which was also my 
amendment, so I did not propose it anymore. However, 
on the second sentence I would also like to propose 
an amendment as a result of Commissioner Monsod’s 
amendment substituting “Congress” with SENATE. 

THE PRESIDENT. So these are all joint amendments 
in that the Commissioners who proposed these amend- 
ments will be considered joint sponsors. 


THE PRESIDENT. Has Commissioner Monsod con- 
ferred with the Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, I have 

on^hl 641 “ Chairman ’ Commissioner Sumulong, 

whh Commit XOn p° f SENATE for “Congress” and 

“revoke Tuxlf d roH a ^ ° n the deletion of the phrase 
revoke such proclamation or suspension.” 

thJpropo^Im^ndrnim^fC “° ^ ° f consolidatin g 

«ha, of Co m miss“„„M on s„« 0mm,SS, °^ Padilla w,th 

President °nd°ta feet' The ‘,° d ° that - Madam 

that we tried to present to C ° n ^ lldated formulation 
all of these. Some of the ^ Eomrnittee contained 
solidated formulation amendments in that con- 

not. So I gave wav to^C and ° therS Were 

could discuss the parts th mmissloner Padilla so he 
Committee. at Were not accepted by the 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

nizld E PRESIDENt - Commissioner de Castro is recog- 

We wm E rec^l S ™ d ^ nk y ° U ’ Madam President 
and debate, I was the f* m ? P er * oc * of sponsorship 
need for the concurrence S r,f°?p who - objected to tht 
Members of the Conere^ h r the majority of all th« 
claim martial law or susDen^fJ* 16 President can P ro 
amendment on this, but I e the Writ ‘ * have 
of Commissioner Padilla becln t0 the . am endmen 
initial concurrence of Conprp«e ^ P rovision on th< 

minated. My next amendment is on th &hQady , been eli 

m 1S ° n th e second sentence 

MR. MONSOD. For the inform 
sioner de Castro, there has been no elimination yeT™* 

THE PRESIDENT. Let Commissioner de Castro 
finish first his amendment. Castro 


MR. DE CASTRO. The Chairman of the Steering 
Committee informed us that we will not talk first of 
the first paragraph of Section 15, instead we will talk 
of the second paragraph. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. After conferring with Commis- 
sioner Padilla, he has agreed that he will confine himself 
to the first paragraph of Section 1 5 on page 6 to which 
he has an amendment. So we will take that up first. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it on line 29? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. Thereafter, 
Commissioner Monsod will take over and present his 
amendments on page 7 and this is where an arrangement 
has been arrived at between Commissioners de Castro 
and Monsod on those amendments. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, I do not agree 
with Commissioner Monsod on the substitution of 
“Congress” with “SENATE.” I agree that we take up 
the first sentence first before we go to the second 
sentence of Section 15. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, let us call first the amendment 
of Commissioner Padilla. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, so that the 
Committee can also follow the discussion, we will take 
up the amendments step by step; first, the grounds for 
the declaration of martial law or the suspension of the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. 

THE PRESIDENT. No. We will first hear the pro- 
posed amendment on line 29. May the Chair know the 
proposed amendment? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


473 


MR. PADILLA. On page 6, line 29, substitute “in- 
vasion or rebellion” with OR PUBLIC DISORDER. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept 
the amendment on line 29 to substitute “invasion or 
rebellion” with OR PUBLIC DISORDER? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we continue 
our interpellation of the distinguished Vice-President 
on paragraph 1 ? 

THE PRESIDENT. No, the amendment is on line 
29. 

MR. SUAREZ. I am sorry. 

MR. SUMULONG. The Committee cannot accept the 
amendment on Section 15, line 29, to delete the phrase 
“invasion or rebellion” and to substitute it with “OR 
PUBLIC DISORDER” because under this first sentence 
of Section 15, the President may call out and make use 
of the Armed Forces to prevent or suppress not only 
lawless violence but even invasion or rebellion without 
declaring martial law. If we delete “invasion or rebel- 
lion” and substitute it with “OR PUBLIC DISORDER,” 
then the President will have to declare martial law 
before he can make use of the Armed Forces to prevent 
or suppress invasion or rebellion. That is the reason we 
regret that we cannot accept the proposed amendment 
of the Commissioner on the first sentence of Section 1 5. 

MR. PADILLA. The first sentence contemplates a 
lighter situation where there is some lawless violence in 
a small portion of the country or public disorder in 
another barrio. Naturally, the Armed Forces can be used 
to prevent or suppress that situation. And if the com- 
mander-in-chief can do that in a smaller degree, with 
more reason can he exercise the powers of the com- 
mander-in-chief when the situation becomes graver. 
What I mean is that the elimination of the phrase 
“invasion or rebellion” does not mean that in case of 
invasion or rebellion, the President cannot call on the 
Armed Forces to prevent or suppress the same. That 
will be a little absurd. 

MR. REGALADO. Our problem, Madam President, is 
that both the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutions men- 
tioned invasion and rebellion as among those instances 
where the President can call out the Armed Forces with- 
out the need of declaration of martial law or suspension 
of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. If we 
eliminate that, the necessary implication would be that 
there must have been a reason why we eliminated that 
which was enshrined in those two Constitutions. The 
construction of it would be that this Commission 
deliberately eliminated that because then the President 
should not be permitted to call out the Armed Forces in 
case of actual invasion or rebellion but can only do so 


by a proclamation of martial law and suspension of the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. 

MR. PADILLA. That is not the intention, Madam 
President. 

. MR. REGALADO. Public disorder is already more or 
less covered by “lawless violence.” 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. That is the lighter 
situation. 

MR. REGALADO. So why do we not just let the 
phrase “invasion and rebellion” remain as it is? 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the inclusion of “OR 
PUBLiC DISORDER”? 

MR. REGALADO. “Public disorder” could already 
be covered by “lawless violence.” But we should retain 
“invasion or rebellion.” 

MR. PADILLA. The only problem is that invasion 
or rebellion has been understood as actual invasion or 
actual rebellion. 

The President can call on the Armed Forces to sup- 
press lawless violence and anything that affects public 
safety. That is understood. There is no intention that, if 
the situation becomes graver, he will have less power. 

MR. REGALADO. But it could be argued the other 
way around also in that we specifically eliminated the 
power to call the Armed Forces because in case of in- 
vasion or rebellion, there must be a proclamation of 
martial law. 

MR. PADILLA. If that is the fear of the members of 
the Committee, I will not insist on my amendment 
because that is not my primary purpose. I am just trying 
to distinguish three different stages or three separate 
situations. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we could proceed to line 30. 
Is there any proposed amendment on line 30? 

MR. PADILLA. On line 30, I propose to include: 
IN CASE OF SUBVERSION, SEDITION OR IM- 
MINENT DANGER OF REBELLION OR INVASION 
WHEN THE PUBLIC SAFETY DEMANDS IT, HE 
MAY SUSPEND THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS 
IN ANY PART OF THE PHILIPPINES. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment would 
increase the grounds for the suspension of the privilege 
of the writ of habeas corpus. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 


474 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I just be allowed to ask one 
question of Commissioner Padilla. The Commissioner 
added the word “SUBVERSION” as one of the grounds 
for the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus. As defined, is the Commissioner referring to 
RA 1700 as amended by P.D. No. 885, which is the 
Anti-Subversion Law as amended? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, with the stress that subversion, 
as correctly understood, is with the aid or assistance, 
overt or covert, of an alien power. 


respect to sedition, this only involves a public up- 
rising; not an armed public uprising. The purpose of 
sedition is only to prevent the public authorities, in- 
cluding the judiciary, from carrying out their functions. 
It is not rebellion. Also, sedition is for the purpose 
of despoiling a particular social class, or an attack 
upon the lives of persons or private property of public 
officers just because they are public officers. It is on a 
much lesser magnitude because it does not involve an 
armed public uprising. The moment there is an armed 
public uprising, it becomes rebellion. 


FR. BERNAS. Point of order. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 


FR. BERNAS. The matter proposed adds nev 
grounds for the suspension of the privilege of the writ o 
habeas corpus. In the Article on the Bill of Right 

S h , W ® have alread V approved on Third Reading, w< 
limited the grounds for the suspension of the privilege 

actual invasion 2°^ to ac tual rebelhon anc 

would have to rer° be f° re we can rediscuss this, we 
of the Article on the^lTo?R ■ 1 ? t ird Readin 8 approva 
reconsider that we will hav^ 8 ^’ 3nd before we car 
cause the period of ~I! f ° sus P end the Rules be- 
penod of reconsideration has already passed. 

THE PRESIDENT Is that th» 
tee not accepting the oronnc i reason for the Commit- 
sioner Padilla? P P sed amendm ent of Commis- 


MR. REGALADO. That is „ ot all, Madam Presid, 

line 30, on1h' D a ddmon 7 f ° r this Une; we are i ust 

the privilege of the writ of habTas co^ SUSPenSi ° r 

MR. REGALADO Yes aa a 
Committee does not accept tl f dam Presid ent. 
not only because it has irf he proposed amendm 
foreclosed by the Artir’i* & "l 30061- of speaking, b 
been passed on Third R M H- n th u Bil1 of Ri 8 hts ha\ 
additional grounds like spH’^ 8, bUt also because of 
danger thereof. Of coui-r/ ^ subversion or immin 
phrase “imminent danger” in ^ !? e eliminati °n of 
Bill of Rights and on the F b ° th the Articles on 
been explained thoroughlv h xecutlVe > that has alre; 
fear tha, the President' ^couM bas°" , ‘ he n °”- ™ere 
writ on alleged intelligence mnn * S ’ aspension of 
looked into and the veracity c/wt? , Whlch cann °t 
the classification by the military Tv 1S dependent 
Situation where these repo^ou^eaTbe^ ‘ 
factured and attributed to anybodv «,:« y * b ma 
judiciary being in a position to refuse oHont 
truth of the same. If they say it is classified as <C°“ 
or class B, how can even the judiciary dispute 
authenticity and the truth of those classifications? vv 


MR. PADILLA. It is correct that sedition is of a 
lesser magnitude than rebellion. That is why it is one 
of the grounds proposed for the suspension of the writ; 
whereas, actual rebellion or invasion is one of the 
grounds for the declaration of martial law. Admittedly, 
sedition is of a lesser magnitude than rebellion but 
sedition also involves a public uprising, maybe, for 
political or social ends. Under Article 139 of the Re- 
vised Penal Code, there are a number of offenses men- 
tioned that can fall under sedition. Whereas, under 
Article 134, the purpose of rebellion is to overthrow 
the government or to deprive the government of a 
portion of a territory, or to disrupt the prerogatives of 
the President or of the legislature. Definitely, rebellion 
is more serious than sedition and that is the reason I 
suggested that short of actual invasion or rebellion, 
which is considered as the admitted ground for the 
declaration of martial law, there will be lesser grounds 
to justify the suspension of the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee not believe 
that we can submit this proposed amendment to a vote 
now? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Before we discuss any additional 
ground for the suspension of the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus, may I ask for a ruling on the point 
of order raised? May we reopen that considering that 
the matter has been approved on Third Reading? 


RULING OF THE CHAIR 

THE PRESIDENT. The ruling of the Chair is that 
what has been approved on Third Reading can no longer 
be reconsidered. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, these are now the 
powers ot the President as commander-in-chief. Of 
course, we have to harmonize the different provisions 
of the Constitution. But the fact that a majority voted 
to eliminate the phrase “imminent danger thereof ” 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


475 


should not be conclusive, final and unappealable. As 
stated earlier, I realized that when the others and I were 
insisting on the retention of the phrase that was already 
in our two Constitutions, a majority decided otherwise. 

I admitted that in my statement, but if we consider 
these powers of the President and the majority should 
find some merit in these proposed amendments, I 
believe there is nothing that will prevent us from also 
harmonizing the provision previously approved on the 
Bill of Rights. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. As a matter of fact, I made a sug- 
gestion. 

MR. OPLE. Point of inquiry. 

MR. PADILLA. Just one more sentence, please. I 
thought I made the suggestion in my remarks that the 
fact that we have approved on Third Reading a certain 
article of the Constitution should not prevent us later 
on, if circumstances so permit and justify, from making 
improvements on the amendments without considering 
this technicality, because otherwise we will be pre- 
vented from improving the Constitution. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 

MR. OPLE. My point of inquiry consists of asking 
whether or not Commissioner Padilla is appealing the 
ruling of the Chair. 

MR. PADILLA. No, Madam President, because we 
are now talking about the Article on the Executive, 
and we are discussing Section 1 5 as is or as proposed. 

I am not asking that the provision of the Bill ol 
Rights on the suspension be reconsidered as yet or in 
the future. We are not talking now of the Bill of Rights, 
although I realize there must be a harmony. Two 
provisions cannot be contradictory in a good Constitu- 
tion. But we are discussing this Section 15 now. The 
fact that several weeks ago we approved the Ai tide on 
the Bill of Rights by eliminating some grounds for the 
suspension, I do not think that should prevent a delib- 
erative body like this which is considering the Constitu- 
tion to say that because of a previous decision on a prior 
article, we are now helpless, precluded, prevented and 
deprived of some careful consideration of this particular 
section on the Article on the Executive. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, there was no 
attempt at all to stop any debate on this, but if we have 
to debate on it, we have to do so according to the Rules. 
In order to reopen that question, there should first be 
a motion for reconsideration, but before one^can have a 
motion for reconsideration, there must be a suspension 


of the Rules. So, if we pass those two hurdles, then we 
discuss additional grounds for a suspension. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I am not asking 
now for an explanation. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a 
few minutes. 

It was 6:05 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:12 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

When the Chair suspended the session to clarify 
the situation and also our Rules with the parties con- 
cerned, the Chair regrets that it had to maintain its 
ruling that the proposed amendment of Vice-President 
Padilla was out of order because it would involve 
a reconsideration of what had been approved in the 
Bill of Rights. So then, we can proceed to another 
proposed amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I respect the 
decision of the Chair, but I regret to state that if any 
and all decisions on Third Reading will become final, 
not subject to any future deliberation even if we are 
restricting the power of the President to suspend the 
writ, unless there be actual invasion or rebellion that 
will nullify the suspension of the writ and even the 
declaration of martial law — and which is like a rock 
that cannot even be moved — I am afraid we will have a 
bad Constitution. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the next proposed amend- 
ment? 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

We are back to Section 15, page 7, lines 1 and 2. I 
just want to reiterate my previous proposal to amend 
by deletion the phrase “and, with the concurrence of 
at least a majority of all the members of Congress.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Who are the Commissioners 
with similar proposals? 

MR. MON SOD. They are Commissioners de Castro, 
Bengzon, Natividad, de los Reyes, Colayco, Foz, Rig° s 
and Nolledo. 


476 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

May we interpellate the distinguished Gentleman? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


the Bill of Rights, as I understand it, the interpretation 
is a situation of actual invasion or rebellion. In these 
situations, the President has to act quickly. Secondly, 
this declaration has a time fuse. It is only good for a 
maximum of 60 days. At the end of 60 days, it auto- 
matically terminates. Thirdly, the right of the judiciary 
to inquire into the sufficiency of the factual basis of 
the proclamation always exists, even during those first 
60 days. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I request the 
Acting Floor Leader to tell us about the precedence 
of the interpellators according to his list? 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Suarez has registered 
to interpellate; after him would be Commissioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 
r J t ^ PRESIDENT. And then Commissioner de 


wn liic; 


S iono„ re be5;ton? ROMayIhaVeaWOrd 

pelMng ROMULO ' Is Comm issioner de Castro ini 


ex^atata^why^Jraone'ofTh "°‘ er P ellatin S 1 

the words stated by Commissar MoZd^ e '' mi,lat 


sor? 


MR. ROMULO. So, the Commissioner i 


is a cospon- 


MR. DE CASTRO. May I have my turn now? 

recognized 1 Chair has ah 
thaT correct? 1 * CaS *° ^ 

MR. de CASTRO. Yes, thank you 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President 

Thl c UAREZ ' Thank VOU ’ Mad am President 
The Commissioner is Dm resident. 

amendment because thk ™ ° posin 8 a very substa 

clusively unto the President! that he is vestin l 

the factors which may lead tn tu* nght to deter 

law and the suspension of the^rif 1 ^^" ° f mi 

I suppose he has strong and comnSr ° f kabeaS CO ‘ 

ing to delete this particular phrase m " 8 reaS K 0ns in : 

of his good and substantial reasons? V W6 be inf °' 

MR. MONSOD. This situation arises in 
invasion or rebellion. And in previous interpe^ 
regarding this phrase, even during the disculs'on 


MR. SUAREZ. Given our traumatic experience 
during the past administration, if we give exclusive 
right to the President to determine these factors, espe- 
cially the existence of an invasion or rebellion and the 
second factor of determining whether the public safety 
requires it or not, may I call the attention of the Gentle- 
man to what happened to us during the past adminis- 
tration. Proclamation No. 1081 was issued by Ferdi- 
nand E. Marcos in his capacity as President of the 
Philippines by virtue of the powers vested upon him 
purportedly under Article VII, Section 10 (2) of the 
Constitution, wherein he made this predicate under 
the “Whereas” provision: 

Whereas, the rebellion and armed action undertaken 
by these lawless elements of the Communists and other 
armed aggrupations organized to overthrow the Republic 
of the Philippines by armed violence and force have as- 
sumed the magnitude of an actual state of war against 
our people and the Republic of the Philippines. 

And may I also call the attention of the Gentleman 
to General Order No. 3, also promulgated by Ferdi- 
nand E. Marcos, in his capacity as Commander-in- 
Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines and 
pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 
21, 1972 wherein he said, among other things: 

Whereas, martial law having been declared because 
of wanton destruction of lives and properties, widespread 
lawlessness and anarchy and chaos and disorder now pre- 
vailing throughout the country, which condition has 
been brought about by groups of men who are actively 
engaged in a criminal conspiracy to seize political and 
state power in the Philippines in order to take over the 
government by force and violence, the extent of which has 
now assumed the proportion of an actual war against our 
people and the legitimate government . . . 

And he gave all reasons in order to suspend the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus and declare 
martial law in our country without justifiable reason. 
Would the Gentleman still insist on the deletion of 
the phrase “and, with the concurrence of at least a 
majority of all the members of the Congress”? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, in the case of 
Mr. Marcos he is undoubtedly an aberration in our 
history and national consciousness. But given the 
possibility that there would be another Marcos, our 
Constitution now has sufficient safeguards. As I said, it 
is not really true, as the Gentleman has mentioned, that 
there is an exclusive right to determine the factual basis 
because the paragraph beginning on line 9 precisely tells 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


477 


us that the Supreme Court may review, in an appro- 
priate proceeding filed by any citizen, the sufficiency 
of the factual basis of the proclamation of martial law 
or the suspension of the privilege of the writ or the 
extension thereof and must promulgate its decision on 
the same within 30 days from its filing. 

I believe that there are enough safeguards. The Con- 
stitution is supposed to balance the interests of the 
country. And here we are trying to balance the public 
interest in case of invasion or rebellion as against the 
rights of citizens. And I am saying that there are enough 
safeguards, unlike in 1972 when Mr. Marcos was able to 
do all those things mentioned. 

MR. SUAREZ. Will that prevent a future President 
from doing what Mr. Marcos had done? 

MR. MONSOD. There is nothing absolute in this 
world, and there may be another Marcos. What we are 
looking for are safeguards that are reasonable and, 
I believe, adequate at this point. On the other hand, in 
case of invasion or rebellion, even during the first 60 
days when the intention here is to protect the country 
in that situation, it would be unreasonable to ask that 
there should be a concurrence on the part of the 
Congress, which situation is automatically terminated at 
the end of such 60 days. 

MR. SUAREZ. Do we not have to make a distinction 
between invasion and rebellion? The Gentleman con- 
centrated on the matter of actual invasion and if we are 
going to go by international rules, there need not really 
be an actual invasion in that concept. That can also 
serve as a predicate by the unscrupulous President to 
declare a state of war or invasion. 

MR. MONSOD. This provision previously contained 
the words “insurrection” and “imminent danger there- 
of.” And any interpretation of this section very clearly 
will see the intention of this body that by removing 
those two phrases, the right of the President is limited 
to invasion or rebellion. And in the interpellations, 
those have been interpreted as actual invasion or actual 
rebellion. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would the Gentleman not feel more 
comfortable if we provide for a legislative check on this 
awesome power of the Chief Executive acting as 
C om m ander-in-Chief? 

MR. MONSOD. I would be less comfortable if we 
have a presidency that cannot act under those condi 
tions. 

MR. SUAREZ. But he can act with the concurrence 
of the proper or appropriate authority. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. But when those situations arise, 
it is very unlikely that the concurrence of Congress 


would be available; and, secondly, the President will be 
able to act quickly in order to deal with the circum- 
stances. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, we would be subordinating actual 
circumstances to expediency. 

MR. MONSOD. I do not believe it is expediency 
when one is trying to protect the country in the event 
of an invasion or a rebellion. 

MR. SUAREZ. No. But in both instances, we would 
be seeking to protect not only the country but the 
rights of simple citizens. We have to balance these in- 
terests without sacrificing the security of the State. 

MR. MONSOD. I agree with the Gentleman that is 
why in the Article on the Bill of Rights, which was 
approved on Third Reading, the safeguards and the 
protection of the citizens have been strengthened. 
And on line 21 of this paragraph, I endorsed the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Padilla. We are 
saying that those who are arrested should be judicially 
charged within five days; otherwise, they shall be 
released. So, there are enough safeguards. 

MR. SUAREZ. These are safeguards after the declara- 
tion of martial law and after the suspension of the writ 
of habeas corpus. 

MR. MONSOD. That is true. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

Will the sponsor consider an amendment to his 
amendment? 1 refer to lines 1 and 2 on page 7, Section 
15. May I state the proposed amendment, Madam 
President? It consists of substituting the word “con- 
currence” with the word CONSULTATION, so that 
this particular clause will read: “IN CONSULTATION 
WITH members of the Congress.” And may I explain 
briefly my proposed amendment to the amendment. 

Madam President, the proclamation of martial law by 
a President, under the proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner Monsod and the other authors, can now be uni- 
laterally made by the President. Nevertheless, it is a 
decision of the highest importance and with the most 
critical implications for the life of every Filipino citizen. 
That is why I think the representatives of the people 
should be consulted. The views of the Congress in a 
system of consultation will not bind the President, but 
as a rational leader willing to take advice from the 
elected representatives of the people, consultation need 
not be a useless and futile exercise. 


478 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


May I point out, Madam President, a case in the 
United States, specifically referring to the war powers’ 
resolution of 1973, which was vetoed by President 
Nixon and that veto was overridden. What did it say? 
Congress links its power under the necessary and proper 
clause with the commander-in-chief clause so as to 
restrain the executive deployment of the United States 
Armed Forces. It did so by enumerating the circum- 
stances — I am now quoting from this book by Laurence 
H. Tribe of Harvard: 

... in which deployment abroad is permitted and by 
limiting such deployment in any situation to 60 days unless 
Congress in the interim passes authorizing legislation. 

The resolution which became law on November 7, 
1973, upon receiving the two-thirds vote necessary to 
override President Nixon’s veto, announced that its 
purpose was, and I quote: 

To fulfill the intent of the framers of the Constitution 
of the United States and insure that the collective judgment 
of both the Congress and the President will apply to the 
introduction of United States armed forces into hostilities. 

President* 1 ^ 1 1USt contlnue this paragraph. Madam 


possible instance, *. 

President is 0 ^ntedTtrtiftou« h0!, ? i,ie! ' Wh '" * he 
however Ct Wlthout Pnor consultation 

May I repeat that — “When th^ p -a 

act without prior consultation " -T™ "Tiff 
happen as when those tr> Ko V because that a 

en tnose to be consulted are not availabl 

in writing 48 h ° UrS C ° n ^ss a report 

United^atera^ed^rces” eCeSSitatin ^ introduction of 

Which sul!h Sucttnlok ^ ^llcf ^d 6 aUth0rlty Under 
invohment StUnated SC ° PC 3nd duration of the hostilities or 

merely contempia^ Madam Presider 

Congress. If this is not possibl^ Wlth Members oft 
an alternative amendment l’- 1 Would like to P ro P° 
President of the PhaZ"* Wh ‘ Cl ? would require t 
proclamation of martSl law W f lthm 48 hours of t 

writing to the Congress of the km P p“es er “ reP ° r ‘ 

THE PRESIDENT. So, let us , v 
posed amendment on consultation 3 n Up flrst the P r 
Monsod accept? n ‘ ^ oes Commission 


MR. ua ^iru. Madam President befc 
the amendment to the amendment’ m a 
mission to say something about the sta 
ter Ople. a 


up the amendment 
permission to say i 
Commissioner Ople. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but the Chair will first ask 
Commissioner Monsod if he is accepting the amendment 
to the amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. I regret, Madam President, that I 
cannot accept the proposed amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Ople insist 
on his proposed amendment to the amendment? 

MR. OPLE. I will then fall back on the alternative 
amendment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we will take that up later. 

Commissioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

The matter we are discussing now is on line 30, page 
6, which says: “In case of invasion or rebellion . . 
Those are the two situations by which the President 
may be given the authority to suspend the privilege of 
the writ or to proclaim martial law. 

Let us consider invasion. In my interpellation, even 
during the period that we were discussing the Bill of 
Rights, I was given the answer that invasion is actual 
invasion. When I asked, “If you see the ships coming 
from Japan or somewhere else already within sight at 
Lingayen Gulf, is that invasion? ” They said that is not 
yet actual invasion because the troops of the enemy 
have not yet landed. 

Madam President, when we talk of invasion, we are 
talking of an external force, an enemy force ready to 
invade the Philippines; and if I were the invader, the 
first thing that I will do is to land within the easy 
shores, perhaps Lingayen Gulf, and have a vertical 
envelopment of Manila. There will be no chance for the 
President of the Philippines to declare martial law or 
to suspend the privilege of the writ. There will be fight- 
ing right then and there, and the rules of land warfare 
shall take over. The suspension of the privilege of the 
writ or declaration of martial law would not fit anymore 
in case an enemy force or an external force invades the 
Philippines because, as I said, if I were the invading 
force, there will be vertical envelopment, perhaps 
capturing already the President in Malacanang. That is 
why the proposition of Commissioner Padilla is in order 
with regard to subversion, sedition or imminent danger 
thereof, because the proclamation of martial law and 
the suspension of the writ will become useless if there is 
an actual invasion of the country by an external force. 

Let us now consider rebellion. Allow me to answer 
Commissioner Ople. He stated that the President of the 
United States is in consultation with the Members 
of Congress before the employment of U.S. forces. 
Certainly, they are to be employed outside the United 
States. There is no invasion in the United States, and 
therefore, he has all the time to consult the Members 
of Congress. After all, before I employ my forces, who 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


479 


are being killed? It is not the citizens of the United 
States but the citizens of a Third World country in 
which the U.S. would like to employ their forces. 

This is the very defect of the Mutual Defense Treaty 
between the Philippines and the United States. They 
say that they will employ their forces only in accord- 
ance with constitutional processes. And this was what 
this humble servant had been objecting to when he was 
in the Armed Forces — that this Mutual Defense Treaty 
is useless because before the United States can help us 
or can comply with the treaty, we are already con- 
quered because they will still have to talk about consti- 
tutional processes in the employment of their forces 
here. This is in answer to Commissioner Ople’s 
statements regarding consultations. 

But how about our President when there is already 
actual invasion and actual rebellion? Will he still be 
consulting Members of the Congress? Will he still be 
asking the Congress that he be authorized to declare 
martial law or suspend the writ? I do not believe that 
the President will have that time; neither shall we have 
the time during actual invasion. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Please, I still have the floor. 

Let us consider actual rebellion, Madam President. 
We have heard and read in the newspapers that hundreds 
and hundreds of NPAs, sometimes 200 in number, can 
get into a municipality and capture that municipality, 
and I was even asking; Why? What happened to our 
intelligence system? Do we not know that hundreds 
and hundreds of NPAs are concentrating on attacking 
a certain area? And if our intelligence system and the 
various units that we have are deficient, what will 
prevent hundreds of NPAs from marching along the 
streets of Metro Manila and attacking Malacafiang or the 
Congress? Will our President still have the time to 
consult the Congress when there is actual rebellion? 
Will our President have the time to declare martial law? 
The first thing she will do is to employ all the Armed 
Forces. A declaration of martial law may be done later. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Gentleman yield to some 
questions? 

MR. DE CASTRO. This is an answer. Allow me to 
finish, please. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will call on Commissioner 
Nolledo later. 

MR. DE CASTRO. When the Gentleman was the one 
talking I did not prevent him, never. ( Laughter) 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, please. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro will 
please proceed. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I am just stating the facts; I am just stating what is 
happening, what may happen and what we have wit- 
nessed. I am pointing out the defect of our Mutual 
Defense Treaty. When we come to it, I will expose in 
this hall why we do not like the Mutual Defense Treaty 
of the United States, which resulted in the installation 
of the military bases. I am not anti-bases; I am for not 
stating in our Constitution anything about the bases 
in order to give the Chief Executive and the legislative 
an opportunity to have their options. 

Now, Commissioner Nolledo may have the floor, if 
the President will allow him. (Laughter) 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may I be allowed 
to propound some questions to the Gentleman? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner de Castro willing 
to be interpellated? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Just a few questions to my distin- 
guished classmate in the College of Law. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Willingly, to my distinguished 
classmate. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. But, Madam President, may I just 
say something before the two engage in their inter- 
pellations. We still have another amendment which 
Commissioner Ople would like to propose. 

THE PRESIDENT. But the Chair said that we will 
take the alternative amendment later on. We will just 
finish this interpellation. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The questions are highly pertinent, 
Madam President. Thank you very much. 

Does Commissioner de Castro agree with me that the 
President need not declare martial law or suspend the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus if there is actual 
invasion of rebellion because he is authorized under 
Section 1 5 of the committee report to call out such 
Armed Forces to prevent or suppress lawless violence, 
invasion or rebellion? 

MR. DE CASTRO. We are talking of the next 
sentence with the words “in case of invasion or rebel- 
lion. This becomes a useless sentence. In fact, the 
questions of Honorable Suarez and the statements of 
Honorable Ople do not fall on these two situations. 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, the first sentence is very 
material because if there is an invasion, the President 
can immediately call upon the Armed Forces. 


480 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


MR. DE CASTRO. That is why I said in case of 
invasion . . . 


THE PRESIDENT. One at a time, please. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is why I said in case of actual 
invasion or actual rebellion, the President will have no 
more time to say “I declare martial law.” He will just 
order the Armed Forces to go there and repel the enemy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the argument of 
Commissioner de Castro seems to indicate that the 
President is powerless without declaring martial law. 
The first sentence is very clear, that in case of lawless 
violence, invasion or rebellion, the President may 
immediately call the Armed Forces to prevent or sup- 
press the same. And it is only when public safety re- 
quires it that the President may decide to declare 
martial law or suspend the privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus. So, I would like to correct the im- 
pression that the President has no power to meet the 
invasion or rebellion without the declaration of martial 


you. 


That is all, Madam President. Thank 

Pr^denh E in C fct™?n v r hat 1 ^ thinking is this: The 
have the’ time to declarrm^rtfaf y 31 rebellion ’ wiU not 
privilege of the writ much mi ^ n ° r suspend the 
Congress for a majority rule for ° C ° n$Ult ° r ask 
privilege of the writ Thai • u the sus P ens i°n of the 

nfag we have b r en fS '^ 0 h r Lt inCe She 
phrase “or imminent danger ° f 

one sees the ships of the R,,cc- f , because even i f 
so long as they to ^ Ungayen Gulf ’ 

And the President is rmt * ’ that 1S not yet invasion. 
Privilege of the writ of hall aUthonzed to suspend the 
reason why we lost Hu * cor PUS. That is the very 
Rights. S ‘ d lng debate on the Bill of 

would K that"' Presideilt - the Committee 
actual invasion, so that th S ate ] nen i on the so-called 
the minutes can be consult WU1 be strai ght and 
the Committee that even tf ^ been attr ihuted to 
the foreign shores on their,., f hips are alre ady leaving 
country, that is not Jl Zu °. invade ° r ov errun the 
will show that I was th e onlv ^ U u 1Vasion ' The records 
who stated that under the rul? 6 "? 61 ° f the Committee 
do not have to wait for an a t° i ternational law, we 
country, otherwise it will ah ™. ? ^ erru nning of the 
precisely and in accordance witoth » hat 1 Stated then > 
on the Laws of War is that an 6 ^ OUse Conventions 
intended for the projected invasion** beIligerent a <* 
invasion. Hence, the mere fact that ?u 1S already actual 
has not left the shores, are int^nHa Vesse1 ’ ev en if it 
refueled for the purpose of attacking’ the' Ph-r bemg 
that is already the start of invasio^ ,L Ph *' lpp “ es ; 
invasion. If planes are already warming'up, loaded^whh 


bombs in an airport of a foreign country, that is already 
the start of invasion because that is an overt belligerent 
act precisely for the purpose of invading the country; 
otherwise, we will have an absurd situation where the 
country is already completely surrounded by foreign 
warships, submarines and airplanes flying and buzzing 
around the country before we can say that that is actual 
invasion. Precisely, I made it very plain that any start of 
any overt belligerent act for the purpose of invading 
another country is not only an imminent danger; that is 
already actual invasion. And that appears in the Journal. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is seek- 
ing recognition. 

MR. ROMULO. I think this matter has been dis- 
cussed fully. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the matter has been suffi- 
ciently discussed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, just one 
sentence. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will have to go back to the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Monsod with 
respect to the deletion of the words “and, with the 
concurrence of at least a majority of all the members 
of Congress.” 

MR. ROMULO. That is right. 

THE PRESIDENT. That was sought to be amended 
by Commissioner Ople. It has not been accepted by the 
proponent, Commissioner Monsod. So, I think we 
have to vote on that first. 

MR. OPLE. No, Madam President, I withdraw that 
amendment in favor of an alternative amendment on the 
same subject. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the alternative amend- 
ment? 

MR. OPLE. With the kind permission of the Chair, 
may I proceed to read it. It is a proposed amendment 
with Commissioners Davide, Nolledo and myself as the 
authors. It reads as follows: THE PRESIDENT SHALL 
WITHIN FORTY-EIGHT HOURS FOLLOWING SUCH 
PROCLAMATION APPEAR BEFORE THE CON- 
GRESS TO REPORT ON HIS PROCLAMATION IF 
THE SAME IS IN SESSION AND, IF IT IS NOT IN 
SESSION, HE SHALL WITHIN THE SAME PERIOD 
CALL THE CONGRESS TO A JOINT SESSION FOR 
THE PURPOSE. So, it is just a reporting requirement 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


481 


but, at the same time, it will give the Congress the 
opportunity to consider its own role in helping the 
President manage a rebellion or an invasion, and I think 
this does not in any manner detract from the power of a 
President under the Monsod, et al. amendment to initiate 
the proclamation of martial law without consultation or 
concurrence. But shall we begrudge the representatives 
of the people at least the minimum dignity of being in- 
volved as to why there has been such a proclamation of 
martial law? Is that too much to expect? Is this asking 
too much of the President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that before we 
can take up this proposed amendment, we have to vote 
first. Do we agree to delete the phrase sought to be 
deleted? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. If there is no concurrence, then 
the alternative proposal would come in. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, the Chair is right. Thank you. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I would like to 
argue against the deletion proposed by Commissioner 
Monsod. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. I think it is important to consider that 
the imposition of martial law is not a singular event that 
happened in the Philippines. There are many instances 
where a state of emergency, a state of martial law, 
estado de sitio, was imposed in different parts of the 
world: in Brazil in 1964; in Argentina and Zaire in 
1966; in Peru in 1968; in Bolivia in 1970; in Uruguay in 
1972; in Chile in 1973. The point of all of these is that 
the imposition of martial law or emergency measures, in 
a sense, leads later on to violations of basic guarantees 
and allows the militarization of politics. That is pre- 
cisely the reason why the concurrence of Congress is 
necessary and which, I think, is a very strong point in 
the committee report. It is at the very start of the 
militarization of politics where we must put a stop to it, 
if possible, and try to get popular support. Because if 
martial rule is going to be genuinely beneficial, it must 
be supported by the representatives of the people; 
otherwise, what we will have is a militarization of 
politics, once the military tastes power and the radicali- 
zation of social conflicts which later on lead to different 
forms of resolving political problems. 

Secondly, as was already pointed out very well by 
Commissioner Nolledo, it there is a case ot rebellion or 
invasion, Section 15, in fact, grants the President the 
power to stop it by calling out the Armed Forces. But 
what I am objecting to is the declaration of martial law 
which institutionalizes the presence of the military in 


civilian life and its predominance during this period. It 
is at the very beginning, I believe, where the concur- 
rence of the representatives of the people is essential 
and important. 

I also would like to remind ourselves that very often 
the doctrine of national security is given as a reason to 
impose extraordinary measures which, once begun, 
leads to many other violations. I believe this is some- 
thing that we must guard against from the very 
beginning. 

Another point for us to consider is that, in fact, the 
International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights, in 
Article 27 thereof, allows states, of course, to declare 
martial law but even asks the member-states of the 
United Nations to make a written report to the Secreta- 
ry-General of the United Nations stating their specific 
reasons and the length of time for the declaration of 
martial law. 

And. lastly, I would like to remind ourselves that in 
the public hearings that we had, one of the most in- 
sistent demands of our people was precisely the con- 
currence of the legislature in the declaration of martial 
rule. I understand the comments of Commissioner 
Monsod earlier today when he said that because of the 
bicameral system now, there are more checks and 
balances. I admit, I agree, but at the same time, because 
of our recent history and experience of the past, we 
cannot but heed the very strong clamor of the people to 
precisely participate through their representatives in 
Congress, if and when martial law is deemed necessary 
in our land. 

MR. MONSOD. May I respond, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me, is there any other 
speaker who would like to interpellate? 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I respond to Commissioner 
Garcia’s statements? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod desires to 
respond. Commissioner Monsod then is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I briefly 
speak against the amendment before the response of 
Commissioner Monsod? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIEN TO. Madam President, I see the 
wisdom for the inclusion of this concurrence. It is pre- 
cisely the noninclusion of this provision in the 1973 

Constitution that we had untold sufferings and miseries 


482 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


during the past administration. If we include this provi- 
sion, then we will prevent the rise of another dictator in 
our midst. They say the length or the time limit will be 
good for only 60 days, but 60 days will be too much for 
us, for our civil liberties and human rights. It was pre- 
cisely during the past administration when arrests and 
incarcerations were made during the initial days of that 
period. And, secondly, it is only after martial law is pro- 
claimed that the Supreme Court can inquire into the 
factual basis. So, many things can happen during the 
initial days of martial law. Even the Justices can be 
arrested; the Supreme Court can be padlocked. 

I agree with Commissioner Garcia when he said that 
in our public hearings, the people were very supportive 
of the provision that the proclamation of martial law 
should have the concurrence of majority of the Mem- 
bers of Congress. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


I see that the situation and their constitutions as bases 
are the same. 

Second, we have been given a spectre of non sequitur, 
that the mere declaration of martial law for a fixed 
period not exceeding 60 days, which is subject to 
judicial review, is going to result in numerous violations 
of human rights, the predominance of the military 
forever and in untold sufferings. Madam President, we 
are talking about invasion and rebellion. We may not 
have any freedom to speak of after 60 days, if we put 
as a precondition the concurrence of Congress. That 
might prevent the President from acting at that time in 
order to meet the problem. So I would like to suggest 
that, perhaps, we should look at this in its proper 
perspective. We are only looking at a very specific case. 
We are only looking at a case of the first 60 days at its 
maximum. And we are looking at actual invasion and 
rebellion, and there are other safeguards even in those 
cases. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


nized E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Monsod 


is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


twc^speakets^vho objected mavl ^ ,hat ] lhere wer< 
allow Commissioner BacaniT ’ reqU f‘ the Chair tc 
then if I may also ha^Ta^ew words, Mafom President? 

n,™ PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog 
BISHOP BACANI Y 

President. Yesterd™ t JUSt 3 few words > Madan 
deliberation, ^rarefs's^ne^R 6 ™^ that during th 
we speak of martial law Bernas stressed that whe 
of martial law which r f,y ert t0 3 classical concep 
actual theatre oT war ? ?"? ' hat We are refe ™8 t0 a 
If such be the case the -? eat ’ an actua l theatre of wai 
always bind the President WOUld not be reasonable t 
the concurrence of the r, aS 1S stlpulated here, to see 
martial law because the reJ? 8 ? ef ° re he can im P°s 
war will not always allow ^ an actual thea tre c 
that condition £ thl r ™ ° S °' And if we pu 

allowed at all to impose J^f-Jhon, he wiU not b 
concurrence which m av not ^ aW Unless he § ets th * 
That is what, 

submit, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT 

nized. mmissioner Monsod 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, the Committee 
feels that the amendment which consists in the deletion 
of the phrase on lines 1 and 2, page 7, which reads: 
“and, with the concurrence of at least a majority of all 
the members of the Congress” be now submitted to a 
vote on the floor. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, before we 
vote, may I just ask some clarificatory questions of 
Commissioner Monsod? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. In proposing that amendment, 
did Commissioner Monsod take into account the wise 
words in the case of Barcelon vs. Baker, 5 Phil. 87, 
where it is said that: 

This power in the President is dangerous to liberty and 
may be abused. All powers may be abused if placed in 
unworthy hands but it would be difficult to point any 
other hands in which this power would be more safe and 
at the same time equally effectual. 

It means that it should be given to the President. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. MONSOD. With all d,.« 
of my colleagues, we were gWen^ l ° * h f C ° mi 
situations in Latin America I do n^t "t P 68 he 
constitutions contain the safeguards that we™e n 
here or if the entire system that their l P 

set up has the safeguards that we have in thi*s Cot 
tion. So, I am not prepared to accept the analog} 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you, Madam President. 
VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We are ready to vote now. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Monsod to delete lines 1 and 2 which 
reads: “and, with the concurrence of at least a majority 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


483 


r 


of all the members of the Congress,” please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 27 votes in favor and 1 1 against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Normally, we are very supportive and 
cooperative, but may we ask for a nominal voting on 
this critical matter which affects the lives of our 
citizens. 

NOMINAL VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Nominal voting has to be ap- 
proved by one-fifth of those present. 

As many as are in favor that we proceed with a 
nominal voting on this particular amendment, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. ( Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

There being the required number, the Chair declares 
that a nominal voting on this matter is in order. 

The Secretary- General will call the roll. 

FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Azcuna Yes 

Alonto Bacani 

Aquino 

THE PRESIDENT. The Members are free to explain 
if they desire to do so. 

COMMISSIONER BACANI EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, just two sentences. The 
reason I vote yes is that despite my concern for human 
rights, I believe that a good President can also safeguard 
human rights and human lives as well And I do not 
want to unduly emasculate the powers of the President. 
Besides, it will not always be practicable, even possible, 
to get the concurrence of the Congress. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify again. The yes vote 
is for the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Monsod. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Bengzon Yes Bennagen 


COMMISSIONER BENNAGEN EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. BENNAGEN. I am voting against the amend- 
ment. I think the first sentence of Section 15, lines 
26 to 29, is sufficient to empower the President to act 
in those cases. And to declare martial law, I think, it is 
important to have the concurrence of the representa- 
tives of the people. We cannot emasculate the power of 
the President enough because the Office of the President 
already has the highest symbolic content which can 
produce other types of power unpredicted in the Consti- 
tution. I wish to argue that we never can emasculate the 
power of the President even with all these provisions. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the vote is yes? 

MR. BENNAGEN. I am against the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. It is a no vote. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Bernas Calderon 

Rosario-Braid Yes Castro de 

Brocka No 

COMMISSIONER DE CASTRO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, because in case of actual 
invasion or actual rebellion, I do not like to see a useless 
President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Colayco Yes Foz Yes 

Concepcion Yes Garcia 

Davide Yes 

COMMISSIONER GARCIA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GARCIA. I am against the amendment for the 
following reasons: First, it is, in fact, in support of the 
President that we need the concurrence of the repre- 
sentatives of the people in the Congress. Martial law 
can be a very divisive action. And to gather legislative 
support in such a critical and difficult period is impor- 
tant for martial law to be understood and supported. 

Second, I think it is our experience in the past and 
those of other Third World countries that when one 
calls for such extraordinary measures as martial rule, 
the entry of the military in politics or in government 
brings in possible abuses which are very difficult later on 
to check. 

And, third — and this I feel very sad about — one of 
the clearest statements given to us by the people all over 
the Philippines in the public hearings we had was that 
alter the sad experience of martial rule, they felt that 
one of the safeguards could be the concurrence of the 
Congress before martial law is declared. And I think this 
was a very clear statement given to us? and our vote 


484 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


today simply negates the value of that voice we have 
heard. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Gascon 


martial law when there is imminent danger in the coun- 
try. He can only declare martial law when there is actual 
invasion or rebellion, and this is subject to legislative 
and judicial review; therefore, it can be reversed at any 
time. For these reasons, I vote yes . 


COMMISSIONER GASCON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I would like to 
explain my vote. 

I feel that in discussing the presidency and the issue 
of the declaration of martial law, we must assure the 
people that the evils of martial law which we have just 
experienced will not happen again. And we must also 
assure them that if in case such a situation occurs where 
we have to declare martial law, the people will be 
behind such a declaration. Therefore, I vote no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Guingona Jamir 


COMMISSIONER JAMIR EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

JAMIR I vote no because martial law and the 
ar P r? r * 1C P^ilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
Thev qrp f 6 K SeS a § a * nst actual invasion and rebellion, 
the Filini ° 6 t USed onl Y f° r the purpose of preventing 

S d com£rt C rr fr ° m d ° ing actS that wdl aid 

sumption that the F r nemy ’ and is a dan g erous P re ' 
mption that the FUipmo people are all treasonous. 

I reiterate my vote of no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Laurel ... v 

Lerum ' ‘ Maa mbong 


OMMISSIONER MAAMBONG EXPLAINS HIS V 

took note^^hf qu 0t ^ adam f President ' 1 vote 1 
sioner de los Reyes in lb" ° f my collea § ue ’ c °" 
and I think that th^ r CaSe ° f Barce ^n vs. B 
martial law is not rean^t the declaratic 

President, but for the" nln ? C lp the powers ° 
President. So, the saflnf/ 6 '° reall V select a 
process. Also, even if^/p^ ™° uld be 111 the elec 
Constitution, it will not s ton ! safe g uard s ii 

declaring the Constitution in P ? f bad Prcsident fron 
the person of the Pres idem fuTT' So ’ il is rea 
achieved. dent that the safeguard c; 

Thank you. Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Monsod y es Natividad 

COMMISSIONER NATIVIDAD EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 
MR. NATIVIDAD. Unlike the 1973 C r 
this Constitution does not allow the President to declare 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Nieva Yes Nolledo 

COMMISSIONER NOLLEDO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. NOLLEDO. I vote yes for two basic reasons, 
Madam President: 1 ) because of the Congressional 
power to revoke the proclamation at any time even 
befoie the lapse of 60 days, in fact, even the day fol- 
lowing the suspension of the privilege of the writ or the 
declaration of martial law; and 2) adverting to the 
opinion of Commissioner Rene Sarmiento, the declara- 
tion of martial law or the suspension of the writ of 
habeas corpus will not suspend the operation of the 
Constitution and, therefore, the declaration will not 
render inoperative the provisions of the Bill of Rights. 
Thus, the citizens are duly protected even in a state 
of martial law. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Ople 

COMMISSIONER OPLE EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. OPLE. My vote is yes. May I explain this briefly, 
Madam President. 

It is a tribute to this Constitutional Commission that 
early on, major decisions had been made strengthening 
the foundations of civil rights. In connection with the 
proclamation of martial law, this draft Constitution, in 
its present form, will not mean the abolition of the 
Congress. It will mean that the Congress will continue 
to exist. It will mean that the Constitution remains in 
full force and effect, including the Bill of Rights. It also 
means that no President may invoke the shield of 
political acts in order to exempt himself from judicial 
review, and any citizen may initiate this in terms df 
determining the sufficiency of the factual bases. And 
I think, in any number of forms, other countervailing 
safeguards have been introduced in this Constitution 
that will make it extremely difficult for a future Pres- 
ident to abuse this power of declaring martial law even 
without the concurrence of Congress. However, imme- 
diately after the voting, as the Chair has been notified, I 
would like to propose a brief amendment that will help 
meet some of the concerns expressed here by those who 
are voting against this amendment. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Padilla 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


485 


COMMISSIONER PADILLA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I vote yes because 
the Monsod amendment has included my own proposed 
amendment. I regret to state, however, that if the de- 
claration of martial law or the suspension of the privi- 
lege of the writ of habeas corpus can only be based on 
actual invasion and actual rebellion, we might as well 
eliminate the provisions on suspension and proclamation 
because it will present an absurd situation. There is 
already an actual theatre of war and yet, we will still be 
talking about declaring martial law or suspending the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. I regret that the 
situation to me looks very absurd unless we grant the 
President, as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, 
to exercise the powers of that office when public safety 
demands it, not only in cases of actual invasion or 
rebellion but even imminent danger thereof. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Quesada 

COMMISSIONER QUESADA EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

MS. QUESADA. I vote no. I believe that this very 
important decision of the President should really have 
the concurrence of the representatives of the people. 
And I agree with the reasoning of Commissioner Garcia 
that, in fact, when the President consults with the 
people through their representatives in the Congress, 
they will be more supportive of such a decision, if 
indeed it has this danger to the people. So, I feel very 
sad about this particular decision that has been 
approved by the body. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Rama No Reyes de los 

Regalado Yes 


COMMISSIONER DE LOS REYES 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I explain my vote, Madam 
President. 

My vote is yes. The power of the President to impose 
martial law is doubtless of a very high and delicate 
nature. A free people are naturally jealous of the exer- 
cise of military power, and the power to impose martial 
law is certainly felt to be one of no ordinary magnitude. 
But as presented by the Committee, there are many 
safeguards: 1) it is limited to 60 days; 2) Congress can 
revoke it; 3) the Supreme Court can still review as to the 
sufficiency of the actual basis; and 4) it does not 
suspend the operation of the Constitution. To repeat 
what I have quoted when I interpellated Commissioner 
Monsod, it is said that the power to impose martial law 
is dangerous to liberty and may be abused. All powers 


may be abused if placed in unworthy hands. But it 
would be difficult, we think, to point out any other 
hands in which this power will be more safe and at the 
same time equally effectual. When citizens of the State 
are in arms against each other and the constituted 
authorities are unable to execute the laws, the action of 
the President must be prompt or it is of little value. I 
vote yes . 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rigos 


COMMISSIONER RIGOS EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I vote yes . But this 
vote is related to the understanding that Congress by a 
vote of at least a majority of all its Members, in regular 
or special session, may revoke such proclamation or 
suspension. In other words, if the Members of Congress 
do not concur with the decision of the President, they 
can revoke such proclamation anytime they wish. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rodrigo Yes Rosales Yes 

Romulo Yes Sarmiento 

COMMISSIONER SARMIENTO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I vote against 
the amendment. I am sad that the members of the Com- 
mittee, after days of deliberation, made a radical turn- 
about. Madam President, dictatorship was the cause of 
untold sufferings to our people. I just could not describe 
the cries and the tears of the widows, orphans, victims 
of tortures, salvaging and hamletting. Madam President, 
never again should there be a dictatorship. To me, 
the deletion of this provision would pave the way 
for the rise of another dictator. So, I vote against the 
amendment. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Suarez 

COMMISSIONER SUAREZ EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, if I can only vote 
one hundred times, I will vote one hundred times 
against this provision. The past is prologue; I am rather 
frightened about the potential exploitation of this 
awesome constitutional power. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Sumulong 


486 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986 


COMMISSIONER SUMULONG EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President, I vote yes 
because, as pointed out by Commissioner Rigos, Section 
5 of this resolution clearly provides that Congress, by a 
vote of at least a majority of all its Members in regular 
or special sessions, may revoke such proclamation or 
suspension. In other words, whenever Congress believes 
that the situation is such that public safety no longer 
requires the declaration of martial law or the suspension 
of the writ of habeas corpus , Congress can do it. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Tadeo 


COMMISSIONER TADEO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. TADEO. I vote no dahilan sa mga sumusunod: 
na, sinabi ko noon sa mga public hearings na lahat ng 
repor ay aayusm at ang desisyon ng sambayanan ay 

rbUn r ° 0n8 i * m P act sa Con-Corn. Ito’y walang hunos- 
g pa & a ag sa kagustuhan ng sambayanang Pilipino. 

i«o« an ^ aWa ’ Phrase na “with the concurrence” ay 

sa nancn^ 1131 ’ San ® sa fety valve sa isang loophole. At 

akine sanlL^ ° a * to ’ ma y roon g m S a pangamba sa 
aking sanh at nalulungkot ako. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Tan .... _ 

Tingson 


COMMISSIONER TINGSON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

reasons^H Madam President, I vote yes for tv 

of the Presirlp °t’ n0t want to see further emasculati< 
danger S " S P ° Wer f^pecially in actual time 

have opted for a^r^H ° n S secunty; 2 ) now that ' 
in his lifetime, the future? Wl ^ hout f urther reelecti^ 
become a stat^™ 1 l Ure Presid ent of our country w 

generation rathe/thlm 3Ct ^ Pray f ° r the ne 
thinks of the next election 16 & P ° htlcian who or 
I vote yes . 


THE SECRETARY 

Trenas 


-GENERAL, reading: 

Uka . . 


COMMISSIONER UKA EXPLAINS HIS VOT 

MR. UKA. Madam President 
reasons of those who voted yes ’ and “ 
time, I vote yes. raer 1 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villacorta 


COMMISSIONER VILLACORTA 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I vote in the 
negative for two reasons: 1 ) no single official, not even 
the Commander-in-Chief, should be given rhe preroga- 
tive to deprive millions of his countrymen of their basic 
rights; 2) we should fully trust the judgment of the legis- 
lators, our people’s representatives, and their ability to 
discern clear dangers to public safety and national 
security and to make the appropriate decision expedi- 
tiously. 

Thank you very much. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villegas Yes 

How about the Madam President, will she cast her 
vote? 


THE PRESIDENT EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

THE PRESIDENT. I am voting no because this has 
been a promise that I had personally made during the 
time of the Marcos regime, the promise to the people 
that if ever the Opposition comes into power, this will 
be one of the things that we will do; that is, limit the 
power of the President in suspending the privilege of 
the writ of habeas corpus and declaring martial law. 
(Applause) 


SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
duct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Calderon 

Alonto Guingona 

Aquino Tan 

Bernas Trenas 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 28 votes in favor 
and 12 against; the Monsod amendment is approved. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I think we are all 
in imminent danger of collapsing from fatigue, and so, I 
move that we adjourn until tomorrow at nine-thirty 
in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 7:26 p.m. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


487 


R.C.C. NO. 44 
Thursday, July 31, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:47 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Lugum L. Uka. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. UKA. My friends, let us bow our heads and 
pray: 

Bismillah Ir Rahman Ir Rahim. 

Most merciful and compassionate Almighty God, 
Who guides the destinies of men and nations, we, the 
forty-eight (48) Members of this Constitutional Com- 
mission of 1986, humbly ask You to guide us on the 
right path. Grant us the wisdom to enable us to draft a 
Constitution that will bring about real democracy, 
unity, love, brotherhood, peace and prosperity among 
our people, Christians, Muslims and tribal communities 
alike. 

Instill in us the noble belief expressed in all Your 
Holy Books that all mankind, regardless of race, color or 
creed, are but one single nation, one big family, founded 
by Adam and Eve whom You have created as mankind s 
common ancestors. 

Fill our hearts, Almighty God, with the message of 
brotherhood, love and unity which You commanded 
Your holy messengers or prophets to preach unto every 
creature and which Moses, Jesus and Mohammad did. 

Make us more tolerant, kind, forgiving and peaceful 
so that peace, love and prosperity for all mankind shall 
prevail throughout the world. 


Hasten, O Lord, the dawn of that new day when all 
nations will sing together in perfect unison, “Peace on 
earth, goodwill to all men.” Amen. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 

ROLL CALL 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Nieva 

. . Present* 

Aquino 

. Present 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Bacani 

. Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

Brocka 

. Present* 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Suarez 

. . Present* 

Foz 

. Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Gascon 

, . Present* 

Tan 


Guingona . . . . 

, . Present 

Tingson . . . . 


Jamir 

. . Present 

Trefias 


Laurel 


Uka 


Lerum 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . . 


Maambong . . 
Monsod .... 

. . Present* 
. . Present 

Villegas . . 



The President is present. 

The roll call shows 35 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. 


^Appeared after the roll call 


488 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Bushress^ eCretary General WiH fead the Reference of 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

nications, the* President ^ llowing c °mmi 

references: making the correspondin 


COMMUNICATIONS 

nfmga^Brodkaster ^PT™ Hodreal f °r the Kapisan 
favoring the Filipinizatio ipm ^ s ’ Emitting its positii 
media to discourage ™ structurin § of broadc; 
ship provided thaf radioed tT — d crossmedia 
single medium sepa at from S™™ be treated aS ° 
rr nmm • • lther P nnt or cinema. 

of N °‘ 385 ~ Constitu tional Commissi 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication from Mr r. 

University of the PhilinV S ® 10 Z - Esmilla, Jr. of t 
thousand seven hundred f!ff S °l lege °f Music and o 
sion of a provisiorobSinf m°c herS ’ Seeking the inc 
of the unborn from the mom ent of^ t0 Pr ° teCt the 1 

(Communication No 386 r Conceptlon - 
of 1 986) ~ constitutional Commissi 

To the Committee on Preamhu xt .• 

Declaration of Principles. ’ ^ atl ° nal Territory a 

Letter signed by Dr. Miraflor r p„ 
from the Kalinga-Isneg Self-Rule andllelf Det S1X ° th 
Movement (KISSM), Province of S T atl 
opposing the creation of an Autonomous CordtE 
proposed by the Cordillera People’s Alliance «5 a5c 
dillera Bodong Association (CBA) because both spr 
from the CPP/NP A which seek to control the C 


dillera Region into a consolidated secured base of the 
NPA communist ideology operation in the Luzon area. 

(Communication No. 387 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Lorenzo M. Tanada, former Senator of 
the Philippines, saying that the foreign bases in our 
country must go and our foreign policy makers must be 
so mandated by the Constitution. 

(Communication No. 388 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Alexis V. Pardo for the GSIS Lawyers’ 
Guild, proposing the transfer of the compensation plan- 
ning function of the Ministry of the Budget to the Civil 
Service Commission, representation of government em- 
ployees in the CSC, strengthening of the security of 
tenure clause, and the government employees’ right to 
self-organization for the purpose of collective bargaining 

(Communication No. 389 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from Mr. Clem Manalo Leano of the GSIS, 
requesting the inclusion of a provision that government 
properties classified as immovable and real estate pro- 
perties sold and conveyed to private and juridical enti- 
ties shall be subject to escheat proceedings. 

(Communication No. 390 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Ramon A. Tagle, Jr. of the Family 
Planning Organization of the Philippines, submitting a 
resolution passed by its National Office, proposing the 
inclusion of provisions providing for the strengthening 
of the family as a basic social institution, recognizing 
the sacredness and inviolability of human life, and 
condemning abortion in all forms. 

(Communication No. 391 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Manuel A. Sanico of 4107 Corregidor- 
Pitogo, Makati, Metro Manila, proposing a provision 
for the award of home lots to the poor. 

(Communication No. 392 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Teofilo C. Ramos, Sr. of the Iglesia ni 
Kristo, stating that the Iglesia ni Kristo is unequivocally 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


489 


for the retention of the phrase “the separation of 
church and state” in Section 15, Article XV of the 1973 
Constitution and attaching a copy of the editorial of 
July-August 1986 issue of the PASUGO. 

(Communication No. 393 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Ben Rafols and one hundred seventy- 
four others of United Students for a Better Central, 
Central Philippine University, Iloilo City, proposing that 
the State should not only recognize but affirm the vital 
role of the youth in nation building and that the State 
should also promote respect for human rights. 

(Communication No. 394 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from Mr. Herman R. Juatas for Phil- 
ippine Unemployed Labor Association, proposing a 
transitory provision constituting the Constitutional 
Commission of 1 986 as an interim legislature for the 
purpose of enacting measures designed to counter 
problems of unemployment and poverty. 
(Communication No. 395 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Resolution No. 44, series of 1986, of the Sangguniang 
Bayan of Biliran, Subprovince of Biliran, Leyte, suggest- 
ing a provision making the Subprovince of Biliran a 
regular province. 

(Communication No. 396 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from the Honorable Commissioner Ambrosio B. 
Padilla, transmitting a letter of Mr. Bienvenido A. 
Castillo of 50 Mckinley, Pulilan, Bulacan, opposing the 
creation of autonomous governments tor Cordillera and 
Mindanao. 

(Communication No. 397 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Sr. Mary Clemencia Flora, RGS, for the 
Rural Missionaries of the Philippines, supporting the 
Program for Genuine Land Reform proposed by the 
Kilusang Magbubukid sa Pilipinas (KMP). 
(Communication No. 398 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Lunaz El Mismo, 264 N. Burlington 
Avenue, Los Angeles, California, proposing a six-year 


term for the President and Vice-President, English as a 
national language, dual citizenship for Filipino Ameri- 
cans, and the retention of U.S. military bases, among 
others. 

(Communication No. 399 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Rene S. Santiago, proposing a provision 
that would set a time limit on the life of government 
agencies and corporations. 

(Communication No. 400 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Pablo U. Ibe of Philippine National 
Bank, Macabebe Branch, Pampanga, proposing a six -year 
term for the President and Vice-President with one 
reelection but with a total tenure of 10 years. 

(Communication No. 401 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Letter from Mr. Ed Samson and eleven others of the 
Christian Education Committee, Negros District Con- 
ference of the United Church of Christ in the Philip- 
pines, opposing the move to make religious instruction 
in public schools compulsory. 

(Communication No. 402 — Constitutional Commission 
of 19*86) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication from Ms. Laureana Guanzon Tinio 
Alindada of Pamanang Salinlahi Foundation, Inc., 59 
Connecticut St., Northeast Greenhills, San Juan, Metro 
Manila, submitting proposed inclusions and exclusions 
in the new Constitution, mainly on education. 

(Communication No. 403 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 517 
(Article on the Executive)* 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. I move that we continue the consider- 
ation of Resolution No. 517, the Article on the Execu- 
tive. 

We are now in the period of amendments and the 
subject for amendment is Article 15. Commissioner 


*See Appendix 


490 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


Rigos had an anterior amendment which was forgotten 
or bypassed yesterday. So, I ask that Commissioner 
Rigos be recognized to present his anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
continue the consideration of Proposed Resolution 
No. 517 on the Article on the Executive? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The honorable Chairman of the Committee on the 
Executive and the members of said committee will 
please occupy the front table so as to receive the pro- 
posed amendments. 

MR. SUMULONG. The members of the Committee 
are requested to come forward. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee Chairman, Com- 
missioner Sumulong, Vice-Chairman Regalado, and 
Committee members: Commissioner Rama, Calderon, 
Alonto, Concepcion, Foz, Maambong, Jamir, Davide, 

atividad, Sarmiento, Aquino, Bernas and Lerum will 
please come forward. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 
niz™. E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Rigos is recog- 


REV. RIGOS. Yes, may we hear that proposal? 

MR. AZCUNA. The last portion of the amend- 
ment reads: “UNTIL THE PRESIDENT AND VICE- 
PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE BEEN ELECTED AND 
QUALIFIED.” Would the Commissioner allow it to be 
amended to read: “UNTIL THE PRESIDENT OR 
VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE BEEN ELECTED 
AND QUALIFIED”? Instead of “AND,” we use OR 
because either the President or the Vice-President would 
fill the gap. 

REV. RIGOS. I think we can accept that but we will 
see how the Committee reacts to the proposed amend- 
ment to the amendment. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, Madam President. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Committee ready to react 
to this proposed amendment of Commissioner Rigos? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


Section’s touU b,T Maambo "S believe tl 

bea,b ’ removal ft™ 

shall become the Pres’dentA'" 1 *" 1 ,. the Vlce - pt eiKleni 

to serve the unexpired term. 

We believe this sentence chm.iH u 

of the sentences up to li ne 18^ 3nd the r 

their place, we nronncp ti . ^ should be deleted and 

IN CASE OF PERMANENT T L )llowin g be insert* 
REMOVAL FROM OFFirp T rtD ISABILITY ’ DEA1 
BOTH THE PRESIDFMT a ?t R RESIG NATION < 
THE SENATE PRESIDENT oS VICE - p RESIDEf 
INABILITY, THE SPfaSp R ’ IN CASE OE * 
REPRESENTATIVES wS? ° F THE HOUSE * 
IDENT UNTIL THE PR F smJ£ EN ACT AS PE > 
IDENT SHALL HAVE H J AND VICE-PR] 

FIED. Madam President the mem. E t D AND QUA 
have copies of this proposal mbers of the Commit 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

Jf PRES,DENT Commissioner Azcuna is tec 


MR. AZCUNA. Will the honorable 
an amendment to his amendment? 


proponent allow 


MR. REGALADO. Our copies here speak of “in the 
absence of the Senate President.” Did the Gentleman, 
in his amendment, make a change in the phraseology? 


REV. RIGOS. That is the same wording in Section 5. 

MR. REGALADO. So, it will read: “IN CASE OF 
PERMANENT DISABILITY, DEATH, REMOVAL 
FROM OFFICE OR RESIGNATION OF BOTH THE 
PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT, THE SENATE 
PRESIDENT OR, IN CASE OF HIS INABILITY, 
THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTA- 
TIVES SHALL THEN ACT AS PRESIDENT UNTIL 
THE PRESIDENT OR VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL 
HAVE BEEN ELECTED AND QUALIFIED.” 

The Chairman told me to announce that the Com- 
mittee accepts the amendment. 

REV. RIGOS. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any comments on this? 
Is the proposed amendment clear to the Commis- 
sioners? 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I would like to ask Commissioner 
Azcuna what the point of his amendment is. If both are 
not able to continue the discharge of their duties, will 
a Vice-President alone be elected or be chosen by the 
people without any reference to the election of a 
President? 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


491 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes the Committee 
can answer the question. 

FR. BERNAS. The explanation is that there may be 
obstacles to the election or qualification of the Pres- 
ident. So, while waiting for the President to be elected 
or for the President to qualify, if the Vice-President has 
already qualified, then he acts as President until the 
President qualifies. The amendment, I understand, is 
only up to line 10. Is that correct? 

REV. RIGOS. It seems that lines 11 to 18 will 
become unnecessary already. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I address the members of the 
Committee again, Madam President. I think the even- 
tuality referred to is permanent disability of both the 
President and the Vice-President. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, so that even if elections for the 
President and Vice-President are held, there is a possibi- 
lity that there may be a delay in the announcement of 
the results of the election of the President. But if in the 
meantime the Vice-President has been announced, has 
been proclaimed and qualified, then he takes over. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. I would like to seek a further 
clarification from Commissioner Rigos because the 
amendment intends to delete also lines 11 to 18. As 
formulated, this is the order of succession: either the 
Senate President will be Acting President or in case of his 
inability, the Speaker of the House of Representatives 
shall then act as President. My question is: What hap- 
pens when that Acting President, either the President of 
the Senate or the Speaker of the House of Representa- 
tives, becomes incapacitated, or dies or becomes perma- 
nently disabled or resigns from office as contemplated 
on lines 1 1 to 18? 

REV. RIGOS. Then I will limit my proposed amend- 
ment up to line 10. 

MR. REGALADO. And lines 11 to 1 8 which refer to 
the Acting President under circumstances therein stated 
will remain. 

REV. RIGOS. Yes. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other clarification? 
Are we ready to vote on this proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Rigos on Section 9, which has been 
accepted by the Committee? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, because of the 
amendment of the sentence in the first paragraph of 
Section 9, the second paragraph should also be amended 
accordingly. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Rodrigo seeking 
some clarification? 

MR. RODRIGO. I am not ready to propose amend- 
ments. I just want to reserve my right to make the 
corresponding corrections or amendments on the second 
paragraph of Section 9, lines 11 to 18, which I will 
submit later on, so that it will conform to the first 
paragraph of Section 9, as amended. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. This is only for clarification. The 
section sought to be amended would refer to a vacancy 
occurring during the term. 

Yesterday, we discussed a situation where the 
vacancy occurred at the commencement of the term and 
we provided for the Senate President and the Speaker 
to assume. It may happen that at the commencement 
of the term, it would be the Speaker or the Senate 
President who will be the Acting President, but that 
occupancy of the position as Acting President may go 
within the term of the President. 

If we still insist on the Senate President or the 
Speaker, precisely, the Acting President at the time may 
himself be the Speaker or the Senate President. So, the 
proposal would become meaningless if that particular 
eventuality occurs. Remember that this is a succession 
to the Acting President who himself may be the 
Senate President or the Speaker of the House. So, what 
would be the effect of the proposal? We will be provid- 
ing a succession by somebody who is himself to be 
replaced because of his death, removal or incapacity. 

So I believe the present wording is adequate because 
it would now refer to other persons than those who may 
be acting because of the vacancy in the offices of the 
President and the Vice-President at the inception of the 
term. I wonder if the Committee will have to reassess 
the acceptance of the proposed amendment. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a 
few minutes to allow the Committee to confer with 
Commissioners Davide and Rigos. 

It was 10:14 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 10:16 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


492 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. The observations made by Commis- 
sioner Davide were based on the assumption that lines 
11 to 18 were also deleted. But they have not been 
deleted, so I think Commissioner Davide is withdrawing 
his observations. 

MR. DAVIDE. I withdraw my observations if the last 
paragraph has really been retained. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we be recog- 
nized for a few questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SUAREZ. Will that possibility preclude an Acting 
President from running for the position of either Pres- 
ident or Vice-President in the scheduled elections? 

MR. REGALADO. It will not. The Committee 
believes it will not preclude the possibility because he is 
only an Acting President. He may actually be the 
Speaker or he may be the Senate President. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, he would be qualified 
to run for the position of either President or Vice- 
President? 

MR. REGALADO. There being no disqualifications; 
there is an election . . . 


MR. SUAREZ. There is mention about the Actim 
President occupying the position without a specific 

hnth nT p r !™ ltation of period. I assume that since 

bee^ rP L re f r ent and the Vice -President would have 

have beTn n ^ ° r WOUld have died ° r would 

be cabled disabled ’ a new electio ” would 

gardins the ne * h ommittee have any provision re- 

vke p 'es dentil ^ Which that Presidential or 

vice presidential election would be called? 

Section R f(? i fo r A th?t ( ;° mmissioner Suarez may refer tc 
amendment yesterdav on lngency ' How ever, with the 
continuation "of Son wM V"® * 4 ’ Which is the 
was amended to read “isn^H ^ W ° rd “ sevent y V 
Commissioner Guimzona da ^ S 3S P ro P osed oy 
accepted. 8 ’ and which the Committee 

election or vice-p^esidentili^^ Y° rdS ’ the P resid ential 
interpreted in the light of th ^ ectlon ’ as the cas e may be. 
would be held as nmJ 1 the Provisions of Section 10. 

that other amendment thaUMh^w’ 6XCept subject t0 
m the period of 18 b t dsho u uId n ot be called with- 
of the term of he P S ! bef0re the ex PMon 
as the case may be Is m v h ° f the ^-President. 
President? y understanding correct, Madam 

MR. REGALADO Within th 
we stated 180 days. the penod of six months: 

MR. SUAREZ. Mea ' 

tion should be called? Wlthin that Period, the elec- 


MR. SUAREZ. That is understood, of course. 

Thank you for the clarification. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I ask some questions for 
clarification. In the case of the temporary disability of 
the President and Vice-President, I asked yesterday 
whether or not the Senate President, who acts as Pres- 
ident, would lose his position as Senate President and 
also as Senator, and the answer was “No, he does not 
lose it.” So, after he is through as Acting President, he 
goes back as Senate President and as Senator. And the 
same is true of the Speaker. 

Section 9 deals with permanent disability. So, if both 
the President and Vice-President die, become per- 
manently disabled or are removed from office, the 
Senate President becomes permanent President. 


MR. REGALADO. No, he is only in an acting capa- 
city. 

MR. RODRIGO. He is only Acting President until the 
end of the term or until a President is elected? 

MR. REGALADO. Until a President shall have been 
elected under the circumstances envisioned in Section 
10 . 


m 11 ^ LAD0 - No> Mada 
not be called because it is too cl 

presidential election. 


President, it should 
anyway to the next 


MR. SUAREZ. So, during that i 
the Acting President shall continue 


in office 


MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President 


MR. RODRIGO. So, the Senate President and the 
Speaker, in the same way, do not lose their positions 
as Senate President and Speaker and as Member of the 
Senate and of the House, respectively? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President, that is 
correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


493 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We are ready to vote now. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Rigos on Section 9, please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 32 votes in favor and none against; 
the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I want to ask the 
Committee a clarifying question on line 4 of page 7 as 
to whether the meaning here is that the majority ot all 
the Members of each House vote separately. Is that the 
intent of this phrase? 

MR. REGALADO. That was intended to be proposed 
today as a committee amendment, but since the Gentle- 
man has taken up the matter, the Committee would 
accept the insertion on line 6, after the word session 
of the words VOTING SEPARATELY and a comma 
(,)• 

MR. MONSOD. May I also suggest to the Committee 
that perhaps the same clarification be made on page 2, 
lines 21 and 22. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I quite realize that 
perhaps the Committee has accepted that phrase. 

MR. REGALADO. Not yet. 

FR. BERNAS. We would like a little discussion on 
that because yesterday we already removed the neces- 
sity for concurrence of Congress for the initial imposi- 
tion of martial law. If we require the Senate and the 
House of Representatives to vote separately for pur- 
poses of revoking the imposition of martial law, that 
will make it very difficult for Congress to revoke the 
imposition of martial law and the suspension of the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. That is just think- 
ing aloud. To balance the fact that the President acts 
unilaterally, then the Congress voting as one body and 
not separately can revoke the declaration of martial law 
or the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus. 

MR. MONSOD. In other words, voting jointly. 

FR. BERNAS. Jointly, yes. 


MR. MONSOD. May we be advised by the Committee 
of this, perhaps after we have discussed it thoroughly 
because we do need a clarification of this sentence. 

FR. BERNAS. No, it is not just a question of the 
Committee discussing it but perhaps the whole body 
should discuss this. I personally would favor their voting 
jointly, not separately. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I comment on the statement 
made by Commissioner Bernas? I was a Member of the 
Senate for 12 years. Whenever a bicameral Congress 
votes, it is always separately. 

For example, bills coming from the Lower House 
are voted upon by the Members of the House. Then 
they go up to the Senate and voted upon separately. 
Even on constitutional amendments, where Congress 
meets in joint session, the two Houses vote separately. 

Otherwise, the Senate will be useless; it will be sort 
of absorbed by the House considering that the Members 
of the Senate are completely outnumbered by the Mem- 
bers of the House. So, I believe that whenever Congress 
acts, it must be the two Houses voting separately. 

If the two Houses vote “jointly,” it would mean 
mixing the 24 Senators with 250 Congressmen. This 
would result in the Senate being absorbed and con- 
trolled by the House. This violates the purpose of having 
a Senate. 

FR. BERNAS. I quite realize that that is the practice 
and, precisely, in proposing this, I am consciously pro- 
posing this as an exception to this practice because of 
the tremendous effect on the nation when the privilege 
of the writ of habeas corpus is suspended and then 
martial law is imposed. Since we have allowed the Pres- 
ident to impose martial law and suspend the privilege of 
the writ of habeas corpus unilaterally, we should make 
it a little more easy for Congress to reverse such actions 
for the sake of protecting the rights of the people. 

MR. RODRIGO. Maybe the way it can be done is to 
vest this function in just one of the Chambers - to the 
House alone or to the Senate alone. But to say, “by 
Congress,” both House and Senate “voting” jointly is 
practically a vote by the House. 

FR. BERNAS. I would be willing to say just the 
vote of the House. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is less insulting to the Senate. 
However, there are other safeguards. For example, if, 
after 60 days the Congress does not act, the effective- 
ness of the declaration of martial law or the suspension 


494 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


of the privilege of the writ ceases. Furthermore, there is 
recourse to the Supreme Court. 

FR. BERNAS. I quite realize that there is this 
recourse to the Supreme Court and there is a time limit, 
but at the same time because of the extraordinary 
character of this event when martial law is imposed, I 
would like to make it easier for the representatives of 
the people to review this very significant action taken 
by the President. 


MR. BENGZON. It does not mean that if the 
Supreme Court revokes or decides against the declara- 
tion of martial law, the Congress can no longer say, “no, 
we want martial law to continue” because the circum- 
stances can change. 

FR. BERNAS. The Congress can still come in be- 
cause the factual situation can change. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. RODRIGO. Between the Senate being absorbed 
and controlled by the House numerically and the House 
voting alone, the lesser of two evils is the latter. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioners Aquino and Benna- 
gen would like to comment on this section as requested 
by the Committee. 


from\'hp^^^^* * woldd like to ask for clarification 
Commissioned Bernes’. ^ 1 W ° Uld Hke t0 addreSS thiS t0 

Supremddoim 6 1S h variance of decision between the 
prevail? an on gress, whose decision will 

FR. BERNAS. The Supreme Court’s decision prevails. 

the Supreme' Court 1 L^its* d to reca11 before 

become moot? S ltS decislon > does the case 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. 

gates its dedsion^ ahead of Co Suprem ® Court P romul - 
closed because the Sun Congress, Congress is fore- 

Which to loot fato TT CoUrt has 30 da ^ within 
Court comes out with ^he de? ^ If the Su P reme 
without Congress havmg ^ted T ° V the ° thef 
Congress foreclosed? g * d n the matte r, is 

FR. BERNAS Th \ 

will be based on its asseS!? 10 ? °/ the Su P rem e Court 
Necessarily, therefore the ent , of the factual situation. 
Court on that is a transit^ gm ® nt of tbe Supreme 
factual situation can chan a- *c Jud 8 ment because the 
the Supreme Court may be vaKd the decision of 

time, the situation may\h ang e s f, ^ “ rtai " po , in ‘ of 
be authorized to do something about it C ° ngress should 

MR. BENGZON. Does the r 0 *1 

decision of the Supreme CourLthen wouTh™ .T™ ,he 
thing transitory? " en would > ust some- 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I would like to 
introduce an amendment pertaining to Section 15, page 
7, line 7. Between the words “suspension” and “or,” 
insert the phrase WHICH REVOCATION SHALL NOT 
BE SET ASIDE BY THE PRESIDENT. After we have 
deleted the requirement of previous concurrence by the 
Congress, the recent imperative for us is to put a cap on 
the presidential prerogatives in the exercise of martial 
law powers. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I would be in favor 
of that, but I wonder if we could settle the matter we 
were discussing earlier. 

MS. AQUINO. I was called upon so I thought I was 
in order already. 

FR. BERNAS. May I request the Floor Leader, 
whether he could settle the matter of voting separately 
first before we go to the amendment of Commissioner 
Aquino. I would also like to comment on that. 

MR. ROMULO. In that case, Commissioner Benna- 
gen, who has general remarks, would like to be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Madam President. 

Last night, after we voted on the provision to remove 
the concurrence of Congress with the power of the 
President to declare martial law, I had a nightmare 
and I could not sleep. So this morning, I got here very 
early and wrote down some random thoughts. Let me 
read from what I wrote: 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


495 


Random Thoughts of a Dreamy-eyed Commissioner 

I got into the Con-Corn with a great deal of cynicism. 

It is a cynicism borne out of my social science training 
which tells me that a Constitution is just a piece of paper 
and in spite of its lofty objectives, it cannot remake the 
society out of which it emerged. It can only maintain that 
society. 

As early as June 3, I wrote in my own journal: 

A constitution can be any of two possibilities: 

1. A pro-people document suggestive of executive, 
legislative and judicial structures and processes that truly 
respond to the needs and aspirations of our people; namely, 
the peasants, workers, urban poor, national minorities and 
other oppressed sectors. 

2. An ideological document that promises a lot to the 
poor but which in reality only strenghens the structures of 
domination. 

But as I talked with many of the Commissioners and 
as I listened and observed — research techniques I 
learned as a social scientist - I began to entertain the 
possibility of a constitution worthy of our people. Such 
a change of attitude was reinforced when I listened 
to the daily prayers - so full of hope, so full of com- 
passion, so full of courage, and more so when the 
preamble was approved. I voted against it on procedural 
grounds but nonetheless accepted the decision of the 
majority since it, too, was full of hope, of compassion 
and of love. 

Even so, I maintained a healthy skepticism. Could we, 
as the cliche now goes, all be born-again democrats? 
Could we change our habits that easily? Have we 
learned enough from the trauma of martial rule? Or 
shall we soon forget the very context of the need for a 
new Constitution: the tyrannical past, the euphoric 
present and the optimistic future? 

There are no easy answers. But in a talk I gave at the 
UP last week, I gave the observation that at the very 
least we will' have an anti-dictatorship constitution. I 
said that we were so revulsed by the Marcos dictatorship 
that provisions will be made to obviate its repetition. 

After yesterday, after the Commissioners voted to 
grant the President the power to declare martial law 
without the concurrence of the Congress, it appears 
that I spoke too soon. 

I voted against the amendment because I thought 
that no one, all by himself, should be able to declare 
martial law. ' It should have at least the concurrence of 
the people’s representatives to serve as a check against 
the machinations of a potential dictator. 

For strange are the ways of power, and it does not 
lend itself readily to prediction. It is addictive. Who 
can forget that adage: power corrupts and absolute 
power corrupts absolutely? In my view, once martial 
law is declared, it would generate its own dynamics, 
create its own rules until it runs its own course, a 
democratic constitution, notwithstanding. 


The provision could suggest to any power-hungry 
ruler or clique tremendous possibilities for a power 
grab. That possibility can be prepared for as indeed 
it happened in the case of Marcos. “Invasion” and 
“rebellion” can be invented and set up to justify im- 
position of martial law and once martial law is declared 
and the apparatus of terror is set up, what is a Constitu- 
tion for? 

It can be mutilated, it can be reworded, it can take on 
various forms to legitimize martial rule. 

In a study of tyranny, we are told: The longer and 
tougher the struggle for power, the greater the prospect 
of stability and durability of the resulting dictatorship. 
The Marcos dictatorship is proof to this. 

Perhaps I am overreacting. But I cannot understand 
why a constitution coming in the wake of a dictatorship 
should include a provision that could pave the way for 
its resurgence. I find the idea incomprehensible. And as 
I ransacked my mental cabinet for explanation, I can 
only think of one thing. It appears that our conscious- 
ness has been so subjugated that we can no longer under- 
stand what it means to be free. We have turned against 
ourselves, forging our own chains, constructing our 
own cage. We have mistaken captivity for freedom. 

But perhaps it is not too late. Let us break free from 
that subjugated consciousness and try to know ourselves 
better by examining the structures and processes that 
have prevented us from making this dash to freedom. 
This is an act of courage which we all must do, if not 
for ourselves, then for the future generations. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Guingona 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

In connection with the inquiry of Commissioner 
Monsod, and considering the statements made by 
Commissioner Rodrigo, I would like to say, in reply 
to Commissioner Bernas, that perhaps because of 
necessity, we might really have to break tradition. 
Perhaps it would be better to give this function of 
revoking the proclamation of martial law or the sus- 
pension of the writ or extending the same to the House 
of Representatives, instead of to the Congress. I feel 
that even the Senators would welcome this because 
they would feel frustrated by the imbalance in the 
number between the Senators and the Members of the 
House of Representatives. 

Anyway, Madam President, we have precedents or 
similar cases. For example, under Section 24 of the 
committee report on the Legislative, appropriation, 
revenue or tariff bills, and bills authorizing increase 
of public debt are supposed to originate exclusively 


496 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


in the House of Representatives. Besides, we have 
always been saying that it is the Members of the House 
of Representatives who are mostly in touch with the 
people since they represent the various districts of 
our country. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Guingona 
proposing an amendment or just commenting? 

MR. GUINGONA. I will propose an amendment. 
I would like to get the reaction of the Committee 
first, Madam President. 


FR. BERNAS. The Committee has not had the 
opportunity to discuss this, and we would like the body 
to discuss this. My own personal reaction is against the 
Senate and the House voting separately. I would tend 
to accept the amendment the Gentleman is proposing 
and the reasons he has brought up. 

MR. GUINGONA. Was Commissioner Monsod 
making an amendment? 


™ PRESIDENT. May the Chair first clarify this 

nrnnn<vin mmiSS1 ° ner Monsod? Is Commissioner Monsod 

hnesTiTTT ame , ndment t0 this Particular sentence, 
lines 4 to 6, about the voting? 

bofh R Hou^ S h D ' 1 W ° Uld Pr6fer t0 have the vote of 

that must hp f tb * S a very serious question 

House of Rp n U y ]SCUss ed. By limiting it alone to the 

the advie anH reSen 1V6S> then We lose the benefit of 
woulT nreferTTIT ° f the MemberS of the Senate. 
bu7l wouT tl a \^ y W ° Uld be in J° int sess i° n , 
not be votin 8 66 Wlth Father B ernas that they should 
they shou d n8 be SeP T tely 35 Part ° f the °P tion. I think 

Senatt wmtv e °onfv JOintly ’ S ° that ’ in effect ’ the 
thebenemoftheTadle " ^ BUt at ^ We haVe 

the comnhUee ID repo T r t ^thTco W ° rdS ’ 3S reported in 

ofatleastam^orityofaBits^SI^^ ^ ^ 

MR. MONSOD Th • 

a clarificatory phrase like “otagioS,™ 1 ''’' *' " eed 

THE PRESIDENT. Are th« 
on this? lere an y other comments 


the Committee reexamine its position on the matter of 
voting separately? Let us break traditions, as Father 
Bernas said, to safeguard our people’s rights and protect 
their liberties. Since we have deleted a very important 
provision, “the concurrence of at least the majority of all 
the Members of the Congress,” may we plead to all 
the Members that instead of adopting the proposal 
of voting separately, we adopt the proposal of the 
honorable Commissioner Monsod? 

MR. MONSOD. My proposal is VOTING JOINTLY. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I thank Commissioner Monsod. 
May I join Commissioner Monsod and Commissioner 
Guingona that the Congress, voting jointly, should have 
the power to revoke the proclamation of martial law or 
suspension of tiie writ of habeas corpus. In this way, we 
make it easy for the people’s representatives to cut short 
a power which is very potent that could be the subject 
of abuse, and in the words of Commissioner Bennagen, 
could open the way for the resurgence of tyranny and 
dictatorship. I support then the proposal of Commission- 
ers Bernas, Monsod and Guingona. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I was the one who proposed that 
the two Houses vote separately because if they vote 
jointly, the Senators are absolutely outnumbered. It 
is insulting to the intelligence of the Senators to join 
a session where they know they are absolutely out- 
numbered. Remember that the Senators are elected 
at large by the whole country. The Senate is a separate 
Chamber. The Senators have a longer term than the 
Members of the House; they have a six-year term. They 
are a continuing Senate. Out of 24, twelve are elected 
every year. So, if they will participate at all, the Senate 
must vote separately. That is the practice everywhere 
where there are two chambers. But as I said, between 
having a joint session of the Senate and the House 
voting jointly where it is practically the House that will 
decide alone, the lesser of two evils is just to let the 
House decide alone instead of insulting the Senators 
by making them participate in a charade. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President r 
Sarmiento would like to comm . c °mnnssio: 

lo comment on this subject. 

nizld E PRES ' DENT ' Commissioner Sarmiento is reo 

MR. SARMIENTO, Just briefly Tim r • 
is known for breaking traditions; we have adoptin’ 
systems like the system of recall in the local gov" 
merits, referendum and initiative. May I suggest ti 


MR. REGALADO. May the Committee seek this 
clarification from Commissioner Rodrigo? This voting 
is supposed to revoke the proclamation of martial law. 
If the two Houses vote separately and a majority is 
obtained in the House of Representatives for the revo- 
cation of the proclamation of martial law but that same 
majority cannot be obtained in the Senate voting 
separately, what would be the situation? 

MR. RODRIGO. Then the proclamation of martial 
law or the suspension continues for almost two months. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


497 


After two months, it stops. Besides, there is recourse 
to the Supreme Court. 

MR. REGALADO. Therefore, that arrangement 
would be very difficult for the legislative since they 
are voting separately and, for lack of majority in one 
of the Houses they are precluded from revoking that 
proclamation. They will just, therefore, have to wait 
until the lapse of 60 days. 

MR. RODRIGO. It might be difficult, yes. But 
remember, we speak of the Members of Congress who 
are elected by the people. Let us not forget that the 
President is also elected by the people. Are we forget- 
ting that the President is elected by the people? We 
seem to distrust all future Presidents just because 
one President destroyed our faith by his declaration 
of martial law. I think we are overreacting. Let us not 
judge all Presidents who would henceforth be elected 
by the Filipino people on the basis of the abuses made 
by that one President. Of course, we must be on guard; 
but let us not overreact. 

Let me make my position clear. I am against the 
proposal to make the House and the Senate vote jointly. 
That is an insult to the Senate. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, will Commissioner Rodrigo 
please formalize an amendment to this particular 
section so that we will know what we are discussing? 

MR. RODRIGO. The sentence will then read: “The 
Congress, by a vote of at least the majority of all its 
members VOTING SEPARATELY in a regular or 
special session. . .’ 

THE PRESIDENT. So, that is what we are now dis- 
cussing. 

MR. RODRIGO. I thought somebody already made 

that amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I think there is 
a prior motion, the motion of Commissioner Monsod. 

MR. ROMULO. That is correct, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is not a motion; he was 
only seeking clarification. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I am not in- 
sisting on my proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. GUINGONA. As a matter of fact, I am willing 
to join Commissioner Monsod and Commissioner 
Sarmiento. I want to further add that the reason why 
I had thought of the House of Representatives is that 
it is in the House that we have sectoral representation. 

Thank you. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, if the Committee 
is ready, I suggest that Commissioner Monsod be 
allowed to present his amendment now. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is why we are trying to 
clarify from Commissioner Monsod whether he was 
seeking an amendment or just a clarification from the 
Committee. 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President, when I stood 
up the second time, I said that I was making a proposal. 
My amendment is the insertion of VOTING JOINTLY 
so that the sentence will read: “The Congress, by a vote 
of at least a majority of all its members VOTING 
JOINTLY. . .” 

Madam President, I was one of those who proposed 
the elimination of lines 1 and 2 yesterday, but I also 
think that there should be a good system of check and 
balance, and voting jointly would be one safeguard left 
to the people to revoke or amend the suspension. 

That is my amendment, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will the Gentleman yield to a ques- 
tion? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, in effect, if there is a joint 
session composed of 250 Members of the House plus 
24 Members of the Senate, the total would be 274. 
The majority would be one-half plus one. 

MR. MONSOD. So, 148 votes. 

MR. RODRIGO. And the poor Senators would be 
absolutely absorbed and outnumbered by the 250 
Members of the House. Is that it? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, that is one of the implications 
of the suggestion and the amendment is being made 
nonetheless because there is a higher objective or value 
which is to prevent a deadlock that would enable the 
President to continue the full 60 days in case one House 
revokes and the other House does not. 

The proposal also allows the Senators to participate 
fully in the discussions and whether we like it or not, 
the Senators have very large persuasive powers because 
of their prestige and their national vote. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, the Senators will have the 
“quality votes” but Members of the House will have 
the “quantity votes.” Is that it? 

MR. MONSOD. The Gentleman is making an as- 
sumption that they will vote against each other. I 
believe that they will discuss, probably in joint session 
and vote on it; then the consensus will be clear. 


498 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. So, we will vote on that amendment 
now. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. I propose an amendment to the 
amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. A proposed amendment to the 
amendment of Commissioner Monsod? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. This is not first choice. But 
just to save the Senators from this insulting, humiliating 
situation, my amendment is to insert THE HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES instead of “Congress.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable? 

MR. RODRIGO. The line will read: “The HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES, by a vote of at least a majority 
ot all its members . . .” 

ca^oi ^ 0N ? 0 ?' 1 regret > Madam President, that I 
S I P that because I believe that the advice 

in that foTuT ° ^ Senators would be ver V useful 
pleas!? ^ CASTRO. Madam President, one question 

nizld E PRESIDENT - Commissioner de Castro is recog- 

We Were workin g on this amend- 
that instead 3 f Gomrn i ss iorier Monsod proposed 
SonvinceH ° f f ? ngress ’ * ^uld b e the Senate. He 

Senate wil^h ^ 1 agree with him that only the 
law or the sn 6 6 ° ne t0 revoke or extend martial 

night? s Pension of the writ. What happened last 

the M postiWuS D andTh d t SCUSSin ^ With the Gentleman 

deadlock. That is whx 3 +v We wanted to avoid was a 
Senate alone, the Home ^ ° ptlons were either the 
Yesterday, I was inclined °* ne ’ ° r the j° int Congress, 
but after hearing our collea ° War< | s the Senate al °ne 
perhaps we do need to haS^’n T ?° nvinced that 
check and balance. So if the e ^ fectlv e system of 

me, I am proposing now thaut shn^dT 3 " . wlU forgive 
convincing the Gentleman to join me. C be J01nt and 1 am 

MR. DE CASTRO. Last nieht i 
the Gentleman to include the t House of RepreaSe"® 
Now, he is for the House of Representatives. I am for 
the proposition of Commissioner Rodrigo on the 
ground that this is only proclaimed by the President 
when the President is “eyeball to eyeball” with the 


enemy, when there is actual invasion and actual rebel- 
lion and it is limited only to 60 days. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will vote on that. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Padilla has an amend- 
ment to propose. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Madam President. 

Will the distinguished sponsor, Commissioner Mon- 
sod, agree to an amendment to his amendment that 
instead of the word “JOINTLY” it be “SEPARATELY” 
and let the body vote? Because if the proposal on a 
joint assembly is passed or approved, then it would 
be too late to ask for a separate voting. 

Madam President, I am in favor of the views ex- 
pressed by Senator Rodrigo not because I have been 
a Senator but because there should be separate voting. 
The fear is that if the House votes to revoke but the 
Senate votes not to revoke the proclamation, there 
would be a deadlock. Assuming that is the situation, 
then the declaration of martial law or the suspension 
of the writ of habeas corpus would last for 60 days. 
Definitely, we should not stop or interrupt or make 
less effective the declaration by the President when 
there is no majority of both Chambers of the Congress. 
In other words, unless there be a clear situation where 
the President has made a mistake in his declaration of 
martial law, then that martial law situation or the 
suspension of the writ of habeas corpus should remain 
until 60 days or unless the Supreme Court decides 
otherwise in an appropriate proceeding. 

MR. MONSOD. I regret I cannot accept it because 
those are mutually exclusive alternatives. In any case, 
if the body decides to vote down my amendment, 
then the body can consider other options. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Chair please be in- 
formed by Commissioner Rodrigo that his formal 
amendment is for the House of Representatives? 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, my amendment 
to the amendment was not accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but the Gentleman is pro- 
posing an amendment. I am just clarifying that. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


499 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes. My proposed amendment to 
the amendment which was not accepted is that of the 
House of Representatives alone. 

THE PRESIDENT. Because the Chair believes that 
we should vote first on the Gentleman’s amendment, 
if that is a formal amendment which has not been 
accepted. 

MR. RODRIGO. But it was an amendment to the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Which has not been accepted. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Just a question on this proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Monsod. 

If the proposed amendment of Commissioner Mon- 
sod is not approved, does it mean that the interpretation 
of the recommendation of the Committee is that the 
Congress will have to vote separately in case the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Monsod is not 
approved? 

THE PRESIDENT. Not necessarily, because there 
is an amendment to include “VOTING JOINTLY.” 
As it is, the phrase “VOTING JOINTLY” is not there 
although the interpretation is that it is supposed to be 
a joint session. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, if the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Monsod is not approved 
and is voted down, there is still the possibility of giving 
the power to revoke to either the Senate or the House 
of Representatives alone. 

REV. RIGOS. Yes, or separately. 

FR. BERNAS. Or separately. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, I have one 
question to the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Section 15, page 7, beginning on 
line 4, states: 

The Congress, by a vote of at least a majority of all its 

members in regular or special session, may revoke such 

proclamation or suspension, or extend. . . 

When the members of the Committee proposed such 
sentence what did they have in mind, voting separately 
or voting jointly? 


FR. BERNAS. This was originally formulated on the 
understanding that we will have one body, one House. 

MR. DE CASTRO. A unicameral body. 

FR. BERNAS. At that time, it was only a unicameral 
body; but now that we have a bicameral body the Com- 
mittee would like the Commission to decide the matter. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The paper I am holding is a substi- 
tute resolution adjusted to the bicameral legislature. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MR. DE CASTRO. But the Gentleman was unable 
to correct that portion? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. The parliamentary situation is, I 
presented an amendment to the amendment which was 
not accepted, so we should vote on my amendment 
to the amendment. However, I would like to state that 
I am not really happy about this amendment. To me 
it is just choosing between the lesser of two evils. So, 

I withdraw my amendment to the amendment to give 
way to the amendment by Commissioner Padilla. 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. Before we vote on this amendment, 
I want to express my observation. I listened to Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo and I could not believe my ears when 
he spoke of his reasons for objecting to the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Monsod — the humiliation 
and insult to the Senate. We are talking about a possible 
situation, a declaration of martial law, wherein the 
very basic and fundamental rights of the citizens are 
involved, and yet he talks about the humiliation of 24 
people! I just cannot believe it! We do not talk about 
humiliation. Whether martial law is declared for one 
day or 60 days, the fact is, when martial law is declared 
the very basic and fundamental human rights of the 
citizenry are taken away from them. It does not matter 
whether it is one day, one hour, or 60 days. So, I 
would like to express my agreement to Commissioner 
Monsod s amendment because yesterday we already 
took away the condition of prior concurrence of 


500 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


Congress; and now, Commissioner Monsod agrees that 
we have to provide a better safeguard by inserting this 
particular amendment of a joint decision of Congress. 

Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. I was alluded to 
so may I be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


a bicameral system. There are possibilities of dead- 
locks. However, that leaves precisely a zone for the 
political skills of the President. He must exercise leader- 
ship too. Why are we in advance getting so solicitous 
about sparing the President the exercise of his leadership 
skills so that he can overcome potential deadlocks? A 
bicameral system is always fraught with the potential 
for a deadlock but the tradeoff, precisely, is checks and 
balances. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. RODRIGO. May I say a few words. When I 
said that it is a humiliation, I was not referring to just 
24 individuals. These are 24 individuals elected by 
the whole nation, each and every one of them. So, any 
humiliation of any of those individuals is a humiliation 
of their constituents. We seem to forget that these 
people are elected by the whole country. 

Madam President, we are departing from a practice 
a practice which is accepted worldwide; a practice 
which is very logical, very reasonable that when we 
* wo ^ ouses > two Chambers - one composed of 
- th^ e muTh and the ? ther com P° sed of 24 Members 

coequaMs if th? eqUa , A ° d the ° nly Way they can be 
make them vnt^- VOt ? separate ly> because once we 

SSbST, Mi’ ,he <* 

bigger proun 2 * drop m the bucket to the 

ridiculous. It is against th?* aW . kward - To me > this is 
form of government t A Pra f 1Ce m ever y republican 
and make them * / — haVe . tWO le gr slativ e Chambers 

I repeat this is a ° 6 J ° mtly instead of separately. And 

provisions will be LTutinT'Th^'T 31 ’ 6 drafting here ’ ItS 
to have a provision such ^ Wh ° le WOrld ' And 

which would be ridiculed Tha^ haVe 3 provision 
s.ro„ §ly against app^g %£ ?£££" ' f "' "" 

Thank you. 

withdrawn hf s S propos T ed Com J lissioner Rodrigo has 
amendment of Comtnic amendm D nt to give way to tbe 
that amendment Comn^issionerP^adilla?^ ~ 

MR. OPLE. May I sneak fv* 
the amendment, Madam President? 006 mmUte against 


THE PRESIDENT. Pie ase 


Proceed. 


MR. OPLE. Earlier this rv, 
bicameral system and there ar mmission voted foi 
that decision. When we voted' conse 4 Uen ces follow 
we accepted the conseque^e 
should be able to act separately Cham 

Rodrigo has said, this is the key to the Commissl ° 
Chambers. Neither Chamber should h ^. allty of b< 
its own creator - in this case, Kja&SfU 
mission, where there is a possibility to estab 
equality. Commissioner Monsod is worried aboui 
deadlock, but that is the consequence of choos 


MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Gentleman yield to two 
or three questions? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. Madam President, although 
I only hope to speak for a minute, but I welcome it. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before I ask the questions, I would 
like to state that the stature of the Senators is, to my 
mind, immaterial in this case; that there is no humi- 
liation if they join the Members of the Lower House 
in joint session assembled to determine whether or not 
to revoke the declaration of martial law. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know what is the ques- 
tion? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The first question is: Is it not true 
that there is a crying need to limit the presidential 
power to declare martial law? 

MR. OPLE. I believe Commissioner Nolledo knows 
best what this Commission has done to insure that 
these powers will be checked for appropriate checks 
and balances. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And that, therefore, the para- 
mount consideration in the Monsod amendment is to 
limit the presidential power to declare martial law. 

MR. OPLE. I do not see how the Senate voting 
separately and the House voting separately, although 
meeting in joint session assembled, can detract from 
the checks and balances that we have built into the 
proclamation of martial law. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the purpose of 
the amendment is really to set forth a limitation be- 
cause we have to avoid a stalemate. For example, the 
Lower House decides that the declaration of martial 
law should be revoked, and that later on, the Senate 
sitting separately decides that it should not be revoked. 
It becomes inevitable that martial law shall continue 
even if there should be no factual basis for it. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, if this amendment 
is adopted, we will be held responsible for a glaring 
inconsistency in the Constitution to a degree that it 
distorts the bicameral system that we have agreed to 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


501 


adopt. I reiterate: If there are deadlocks, it is the 
responsibility of presidential leadership, together with 
the leaders of both Houses, to overcome them. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that this has 
been sufficiently discussed by the two Gentlemen. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that the Com- 
mittee submitting this report is of the opinion that 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Monsod 
should be first voted upon. Is that correct? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. We have proposed an amendment 
to. the amendment, and that is, VOTING SEPARATE- 
LY instead of “VOTING JOINTLY.” Since the pro- 
ponent, Commissioner Monsod, has not accepted 
our amendment to the amendment, I ask that the vote 
be on our amendment to the amendment. That means 
the Congress meeting separately, but need not be suc- 
cessively. It can be at the same time, but separately. 

FR. BERNAS. But, Madam President, that is not an 
amendment to the amendment, but rather a vote against 
the amendment. It is the complete opposite of the 
amendment proposed by Commissioner Monsod. 
So, let us vote on the amendment of Commissioner 
Monsod. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, would the Com- 
mittee consider an amendment to make the action to 
be taken by the House of Representatives an amend- 
ment to the amendment, and not a vote against the 
amendment? 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suggests that we take 
that up later. Let us find out first what the consensus 
of the body is regarding this particular action of the 
Congress voting jointly or voting separately. We will 
now submit in accordance with the recommendation 
of the Committee on the Monsod amendment to clarify 
line 5 of page 7. 

Those who are in favor of Congress “VOTING JOINT- 
LY” in revoking the action of the President regarding the 
proclamation or suspension of the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus or proclamation of martial law, please 
raise their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

Those in favor of “VOTING SEPARATELY,” please 
raise their hand. ( Few Members raised their hand. ) 


The results show 24 votes in favor of “VOTING 
JOINTLY” and 13 in favor of “VOTING SEPA- 
RATELY; the Monsod amendment is approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I propose 
an amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. On Section 15, page 7, line 4, I 
propose to change the word “Congress” to HOUSE 
OF REPRESENTATIVES so that the sentence will 
read: “The HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, by a 
vote of at least a majority of all its Members in regular 
or special session, may revoke such proclamation or 
suspension or extend the same if the invasion or rebel- 
lion shall persist and public safety requires it.” 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, the proposed 
amendment is really a motion for reconsideration. We 
have already decided that both Houses will vote jointly. 
Therefore, the proposed amendment, in effect, asks for 
a reconsideration of that vote in order to give it to the 
House of Representatives. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, the opposite of 
voting jointly is voting separately. If my amendment 
were to vote separately, then, yes, it is a motion for 
reconsideration. But this is another formula. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I ask the proponent a ques- 
tion. Madam President? 

MR. RODRIGO. Gladly. 

MR. DE CASTRO. What is the rationale of the 

amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. It is intended to avoid that very 
extraordinary and awkward provision which would 
make the 24 Senators meet jointly with 250 Members of 
the House and make them vote jointly. What I mean is, 
the 24 Senators, like a drop in the bucket, are absorbed 
numerically by the 250 Members of the House. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I speak 
briefly against the proposed amendment? 

THE PRESIDEN T . Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we need the 
wisdom ot the Senators. What is at stake is the future of 
out countiy — human rights and civil liberties. II 
separate the Senators, then we deprive the Congressmen 
of the knowledge and experience of these 24 men. I 


502 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


think we should forget the classification of “Senators” 
or “Congressmen.” We should all work together to 
restore democracy in our country. So we need the 
wisdom of 24 Senators. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I just 
answer. This advice of the 24 Senators can be sought 
because they are in the same building. Anyway, the 
provision, with the amendment of Commissioner 
Monsod, does not call for a joint session. It only says: 
“The Congress, by a vote of at least a majority of all its 
Members in regular or special session” — it does not say 
“joint session.” So, I believe that if the Members of the 
House need tne counsel of the Senators, they can always 
call on them; they can invite them. 


SR. TAN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. PAN. Have we not spent enough time on the 24 
Senators? May we now vote on the amendment? 


VOTING 

amIndmen R t ESI f DE r T ' Th ° Se in favor . of the proposec 

their hand < F . om J Tllss ^ oner Rodrigo, please raisi 

their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand (Severa 

Members raised their hand.) severa 

aJ n h s e t .r ltS Sh ° W , 5 votes in favor and 25 vote 
against, the proposed amendment is lost. 

laid fn f Tu' ,eS this particular issue can now b 

vot Of at lea J b ° dy haS VOted that “Congress, by 

jointly in rit i 3 maj ° rity of a11 its Members, votir 

proclamation 811 ^ ° f special ses sion, may revoke sue 
proclamation or suspension.” 

Madam lYes^dent^^ 1 ^ 30 anterior amendmen 


ALLY CONVENED IF NOT IN SESSION, and then 
continue with the phrase “by a vote of at least a major- 
ity . . The reason for this. Madam President, is that 
there is a period in a year during which Congress is not 
in session. We talk about Congress revoking a proclama- 
tion; we talk about some kind of checks on the 
President, but during this 30-day period of the year, 
there is no Congress to make such revocation. A schem- 
ing President could very well time his declaration of 
martial law during that period when Congress is not in 
session. This is a 30-day period and if his declaration of 
martial law is based upon fabricated facts or rigged 
events, or is not in accordance with the provisions in 
the Constitution, such President could get away with 
murder for 30 days without the process of revocation. 
So, it is necessary that Congress shall be able to convene 
automatically if not in session. 

Another reason is that it is only the President who 
can call a special session. So, a President who is hellbent 
on declaring martial law in order to militarize the 
people could very well not call for the session and that 
is going to be a legal issue. So, to avoid this confusion, it 
is necessary for clarity that we place this amendment, 
to wit: “Congress, WHICH SHALL BE AUTOMATIC- 
ALLY CONVENED IF NOT IN SESSION, by a vote of 
at least a majority of all its Members . . .” 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May we ask the distinguished Floor 
Leader a few questions? 

MR. RAMA. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. As I recall, in the Article on the 
Legislative, the Congress is supposed to be in session the 
whole year except during that period of 30 days before 
the next regular session. 


THE PRESIDENT. 


Is this on another section? 


MR. RAMA. That is correct. 


MR. OPLE. It is an Inc *• 

Madam President. tl0n of a sentence on line 

MR. ROMULO. Madam n .. 

Rama has an anterior amendm^ f Cnt ’ ^ omiTlissior 
Ople’s amendment. amend ment to Commissior 


MR. SUAREZ. So that would preclude the matter 
of automatic convening in the case of a regular session. 
Let us take the case of the special session, because I 
share the proponent’s sentiment about this. Therefore, 
the special session could be called only within that 
interregnum period of 30 days. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recognized. 
MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, this is an amendment 
to line 4. After the words “The Congress,’’ I propose to 
insert the clause WHICH SHALL BE AUTOMATIC- 


MR. RAMA. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is prior to the next regular 
session. So the proponent is speaking about that 
situation, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. This particular 30-day period when the 
Congress is not in session. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31 , 1986 


503 


MR. SUAREZ. That is what the Gentleman has in 
mind. 

MR. RAMA. That is what I have in mind. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is not in connection with the 
regular session. 

MR. RAMA. Not in connection with the regular 
session. 

MR. SUAREZ. Will the proponent accept the sug- 
gestion to put that clause after the words “special 
session”? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Suarez read 
the provision? 

MR. SUAREZ. . . in regular or special session 
WHICH SHALL BE AUTOMATICALLY CONVENED.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment acceptable to 
Commissioner Rama? 

MR. RAMA. It might be a little awkward. 

MR. SUAREZ. But that is the sense of what we had 
in mind. 

MR. RAMA. That would be the sense, but for clarity 
and elegance, we should place this after the word 
“Congress.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Can we leave that to Commissioner 
Rodrigo? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, we can leave this to Commissioner 
Rodrigo, because it is Congress which shall be convened. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I just comment on the discussion 
about the special session. Is it not that the special 
session can be called only within the 30 days preceding 
the commencement of a regular session? Under the 
proposal on the legislative power, the law itself may also 
determine the length of the session, in between the 
commencement on the fourth Monday of July and the 
beginning of the 30 days preceding the next regular 
session. So, special sessions can be convened at any time 
between these two periods, not just the remaining 30 
days. 

I would propose that there should be a separate 
sentence to be inserted probably between lines 8 and 


9 to read as follows: THE CONGRESS, IF NOT IN 
SESSION, SHALL WITHIN TWENTY-FOUR HOURS 
FOLLOWING SUCH PROCLAMATION OR SUS- 
PENSION, CONVENE IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS 
RULES WITHOUT NEED OF A CALL. This would be 
consistent with what had earlier beer, approved in the 
matter of a vacancy in the office of the President and 
the Vice-President. Instead of “automatic,” it should be 
WITHOUT NEED OF A CALL. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 

MR. RAMA. We accept the amendment. Madam 
President. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would just like to know what 
happens if a special session cannot be convened, or if a 
regular session is called off because majority of the 
Members of both Houses have been arrested, or that the 
Congress has been padlocked upon declaration of 
martial rule. 

MR. RAMA. That is precisely one of the risks and 
hazards that we have to take. That is why I wanted to 
reduce that hazard because, if we allow the President 30 
days of martial rule, which is the exercise of martial law 
powers, which in itself is a replacement of all the civil 
powers and which militarize the country, there is a 
bigger risk that these Congressmen would not be able to 
hold the session or would get arrested. That is the 
rationale of the amendment — that as soon as the Pres- 
ident declares martial law, there must be an automatic 
convening of Congress in session in order for it to 
exercise the right to revoke or not or to scrutinize the 
circumstances of martial law and its validity. 

MS. QUESADA. But there is a possibility then that 
the Congress cannot be convened because many of its 
Members have already been arrested. 

MR. RAMA. There is always that possibility; that is 
why I am narrowing that chance. 

MS. QUESADA. Yesterday, the understanding ol 
many was that there would be safeguards that Congress 
will be able to revoke such proclamation. 

MR. RAMA. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. But now, if they cannot meet 
because they have been arrested or that the Congress 
has been padlocked, then who is going to declare that 
such a proclamation was not warranted? 


504 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


MR. RAMA. That is why this amendment would 
strengthen the safeguard, because under the present 
provision the President can call or can proclaim martial 
law during the time that Congress is not in session. 


MS. QUESADA. One of the assurances was that there 
were enough safeguards that the President would not 
just be able to use that power without some other 
conditions. So, are there any parts of the Constitution 
that would so protect the civilians or the citizens of the 
land? 


MR. RAMA. Yes, there are safeguards. 

MR. REGALADO. May I also inform Commissioner 
Quesada that the judiciary is not exactly just standing 
by. A petition tor a writ of habeas corpus, if the Mem- 
bers are detained, can immediately be applied for, and 
die Supreme Court shall also review the factual basis, 
his is not exactly beyond solution. With regard to the 

wo , r . ry , th ^ the Con § ress wil l be padlocked, we can never 
padlock Congress. We can padlock the building, but not 

BammI ri? aUS u tbe ^ em bers can always convene in 

of the corn U f C ° r unc * er a s 4 u ad tent or in the middle 
of the coconut groves. That would still be Congress. 

h . app ™1 in 1972; I was 

were here then the hiiilH ? dmg to the P eo P le who 
These are comr ’ r building was indeed padlocked. 

made Z*Z° GILT'S ' "» ““ T Cisi0n we 

into our deliberations on 

the session could not nr session > wllen 

because many people would ^ ^ 5660 Called ’ 

just projecting some of have , ,^ een arreste d. I am 
maybe not in th* ■ * P° ssi bilities in the future, 

yarn to come Sd TZTT future - bu * “ th. m^ 

at this point in time. 6 may n0t be able to P r °j ect 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I was one of those padlocked out 
of circulation in the old Congress. That cannot happen 
now because of line 15, page 7 of Section 15 which 
states: 

A state of martial law does not suspend the operation of 
the Constitution, nor supplant the functioning of the civil 
courts or legislative assemblies, nor authorize the con- 
ferment of jurisdiction on military courts and agencies over 
civilians where civil courts are able to function, nor auto- 
matically suspend the privilege of the Writ. 

The old Congress was unable to meet because we had 
no power to have a rump session, but here there is a 
constitutional authority which says that the declaration 
of martial Hw does not supplant the functioning of the 
legislative assembly or Congress. So, whether we 
padlock the building or not, the Members will meet 
elsewhere and that would still be Congress, to confirm 
what Commissioner Regalado said. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have again the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Davide to the amendment 
of Commissioner Rama? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

It will be a new paragraph to be inserted between 
lines 8 and 9 on page 7, which will read as follows: 
THE CONGRESS, IF NOT IN SESSION, SHALL 
WITHIN TWENTY FOUR HOURS FOLLOWING 
SUCH PROCLAMATION OR SUSPENSION, CON- 
VENE IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS RULES WITH- 
OUT NEED OF A CALL. 

THE PRESIDENT. Has this been accepted by Com- 
missioner Rama? 


or not? PRESIDENT ' Is Commissioner Quesada satisfied 
MR. BENGZON. Mav T 

missioner Quesada said V JUSt cornment on what Com- 
THE PRESIDENT r 

nized. or nmissioner Bengzon is recog- 


MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, this is a joint amendment of 
Commissioners Rama and Davide. What does the Com- 
mittee say? 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee accepts the 
amendment. 


MR. BENGZON If an H ,„u 
sions of Commissioner Ouesad th * fe , arS or appreh 
what we Win have iumfetj 11 

it will already be a complete mffl^akt've^Leg- 
and technically. Congress will „ ot be padlocked beca 

the aa,° n6 r,h me , n r ? e Senators can meet even in 
middle of the streets, but in actuality if and when t 

happens, then it becomes a military takeover. 


MR- NATIVIDAD. Madam President 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendment of Commissioners Rama and 
Davide which has been accepted by the Committee? 

(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Ople be recognized for an amendment on the 
same section. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


505 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Madam President. 

This proposed amendment is a sentence to be added 
on line 4, following the phrase “martial law.” We do not 
quite substitute for the concurrence of Congress that was 
deleted, but it will provide Congress with the basis for 
revoking or not a presidential proclamation of martial 
law or the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus. And 
so, this amendment reads as follows: WITHIN FORTY- 
EIGHT HOURS OF THE PROCLAMATION OF MAR- 
TIAL LAW OR THE SUSPENSION OF THE WRIT 
OF HABEAS CORPUS THE PRESIDENT SHALL 
SUBMIT A REPORT, IN PERSON OR IN WRITING, 
TO THE CONGRESS. 

With this amendment, we build a reporting require- 
ment so that the President can be held responsible for 
that report. Later on, when the Congress wants to 
revoke the proclamation, the basis will be his report as 
checked against other facts and the perceptions ot the 
situation by the Members of Congress. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the proponent kindly read 
again the new sentence. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. On Section 15, 
page 7, line 4, after “law,” I propose to add a new 
sentence which reads as follows: WITHIN FORTY- 
EIGHT HOURS OF THE PROCLAMATION OF MAR- 
TIAL LAW OR THE SUSPENSION OF THE WRIT OF 
HABEAS CORPUS THE PRESIDENT SHALL SUBMIT 
A REPORT, IN PERSON OR IN WRITING, TO THE 
CONGRESS. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. REGALADO. It is accepted by the Committee, 
it being understood that the report or the statement 
therein is not conclusive on Congress. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but the President will be held 
accountable for his report. And on that basis, his 
proclamation can be revoked later. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. I feel that the intention of the 
amendment is good. But considering that the suspension 
of the writ of habeas corpus or the declaration of mar- 
tial law is now only dependent on actual rebellion and 
actual invasion, what the country needs is action 
rather than a mere report. When we require the Pres- 
ident to make a report within forty-eight hours, some 
valuable hours may be spent on a mere paper report 
when the circumstances demand action. I would tavor 


that proposal. Madam President, if we were not yet in 
actual invasion or actual rebellion. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I appreciate the con- 
cern of Commissioner Padilla about the difficulties of a 
President caught in an actual invasion or rebellion, but 
would he begrudge the representatives of the people 
under this amendment to report to them what he has 
done which will be of momentous importance for all 
Filipinos? The proposal does not quite substitute for 
concurrence, but I think the dignity of the nation 
through the representatives of the people in Congress 
requires that at least the President should tell them what 
he did and why he did so, so that the basis for an evalua- 
tion and appreciation of his proclamation of martial law 
is laid down and can be checked if necessary. 

I thank the Committee for accepting my amendment, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, just to be con- 
sistent, I propose that instead of “suspension of the writ 
of habeas corpus,” we say SUSPENSION OF THE 
PRIVILEGE OF THE WRIT. Will that be acceptable? 

MR. OPLE. I accept the amendment, although the 
Committee now has jurisdiction. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment clear enough 
to the Commissioners? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Sarmiento wishes to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I briefly 
speak against the amendment. I think it is very imprac- 
tical and unnecessary for the President to give his report 
to Congress. During an actual invasion or rebellion, it is 
very possible that before the President can give his 
report, Congress has already been bombed or destroyed. 
I think it is practically unwise, unnecessary and 
impractical for the President to give his report. I object, 
Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I do not think that in 
any circumstances, the President of the Philippines 
should be excused from tendering his report to the 
representatives of the people. He must find the time to 
do that in satisfaction of the dignity and the right of the 
people to know through their representatives. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog 
nized. 


506 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I also object to 
the proposal. That report can be done through television 
and the mass media very effectively, if it is still possible 
to do it at all. I think the proposal is not necessary. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The body is now ready to vote on 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Ople. 

Those in favor of the proposed amendment, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. ( Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 23 votes in favor, and 1 1 votes 
against; the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Aquino be recognized for an amendment on 
line 7. 


MR. SUAREZ. Why do wc not do it as a package 
deal and just state that there will be no presidential veto 
exercise insofar as a revocation or extension is con- 
cerned? 

MS. AQUINO. I am not in full agreement with that. 

MR. SUAREZ. This is my humble suggestion. 

MS. AQUINO. My qualification would pertain only 
to the powers of Congress to revoke, but not to extend. 
Anyway, the Committee has jurisdiction already over 
my proposed amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 


nized^ RESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 

rec 1 f S m^Dm^°'H Madam President > I will try to resur- 
lost S the he°an nf amen< i ment Which must have been 
pertains to Section is* pagtf 7 propo ^ ed amendment 
words “suspension” and “of” l’n Between the 

clause WHICH REVOCATION ^ha? f the 

ASIDE BY THE PREsfDEN? M L N ° T BE SET 
this proviso is nnt wi a ,f • * ' My concern is that if 
powfr of Con^M de ^ “ may be dee "« d “if the 

veto powers of the President W '!t k ave to , g ° through thc 
sion that martial law nr P my humble submis- 

should be effective^ r P e ^ ogatlves of the President 
the reqJi^T tf the ^ W£ ^ elimi »ated 
Congress. the previou s concurrence of 

THE PRESIDENT k 

acceptable to the Committee? Proposed amendment 
accepts this amendment. adam President ’ th e Committee 

nized for one quest^olhy^ 65 ^ 6111, may 1 be reco §' 

THE PRESIDENT Commie • 
nized. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 


FR. BERNAS. In answer to Commissioner Suarez, 
the President does not have to override the extension. 
All that martial law does is to give the President extra- 
ordinary powers. So, if he does not like the extension, 
then all he has to do is not to exercise the extraordinary 
powers. 

MR. SUAREZ. No, but the extension this time is 
being given by Congress, Madam President, and not 
by the President. In other words, martial law extension 
is not a presidential act any further. It becomes a 
congressional act. 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely, Madam President. Martial 
law powers precisely consist in an assumption of extra- 
ordinary powers, so that even if Congress says, “We are 
giving you extraordinary powers,” if the President does 
not want to exercise them, so what is the point? 

MR. SUAREZ. So, what is the point of extending it 
on the part of Congress if the President feels it should 
not be extended any further if you are going to deprive 
the right of the President to exercise the power of the 
veto? 

FR. BERNAS. The extension may be relevant with 
respect to the suspension of the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus, but as far as martial law powers are 
concerned, it really does not mean much. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President 

Will the proponent limit the insertion to the 
revocation and not to the right of extension? 

MS. AQUINO. I have conferred with Comn 
Azcuna who would qualify the right of extensi 
on. 


MR. SUAREZ. Let us say a situation develops where 
Congress, without seeking the prior consent and ap- 
proval of the President, would extend the suspension 
of the writ of habeas corpus. In such a situation, we 
would consider the President free to stop or prevent the 
further suspension of the writ of habeas corpus. Is my 
thinking correct, Madam President? 


FR. BERNAS. Let us ask Commissioner Concepcion. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


507 


MR. CONCEPCION. I did not get the question 
clearly. Will the Gentleman kindly repeat it. 

MR. SUAREZ. For example, the Congress, without 
first seeking the advice, approval, and consent of the 
President, would extend for an indefinite period the 
suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, do I take it 
from the statement and observations of Commissioner 
Bernas that in such a situation, the President is not 
under obligation to heed the act of Congress? 

MR. CONCEPCION. In my personal opinion, the 
power to suspend the privilege of the writ or to declare 
martial law is an executive power. The power is essen- 
tially an executive power, although it may be subjected 
by the Constitution, insofar as its exercise is concerned, 
to an action of Congress. But Congress cannot exercise 
it. 

MR. SUAREZ. Under the proposal, Madam President, 
Congress cannot exercise it, but can it extend the exer- 
cise in spite of the fact that it does not even count with 
the consent, approval, and knowledge of the President? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, but what has been exercised 
by the President has already expired. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. CONCEPCION. So, an extension, without the 
consent of the President or the concurrence of the 
President, is the exercise of an executive power by 
Congress. 

MR. SUAREZ. Under this proposal, it appears that 
the President cannot even veto this. For example, the 
Congress will extend it for six months, must the Pres 
ident comply with that , and extend an executive respect 
for that thinking or act of Congress? He cannot termi- 
nate the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus because 
the period had already been extended by Congress. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may we settle first 
the question of revocation before we go to the exten- 
sion? 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you; I yield. 

THE PRESIDENT. At this juncture, we would like to 
inform the body that we have several groups of students 
here with us. They come from the UP Sociology class, 
St. Bridget’s School, the Ateneo pre-law class, and the 
Philippine Women’s University High School. We 
welcome them. (Applause) 

We have before us the Aquino amendment. Does 
Commissioner Colayco want to comment on this? 

MR. COLAYCO. I would like to know from Commis- 
sioner Aquino if her proposal covers the right of the 


President, in effect, to counter the action of Congress 
revoking the proclamation of martial law. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, the proposal in 
effect forecloses the possibility of the President revok- 
ing the powers of Congress to revoke, such that the 
amendment would read: WHICH REVOCATION 

SHALL NOT BE SET ASIDE BY THE PRESIDENT. 

MR. COLAYCO. I see; thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, the final action 
is that of Congress. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I propose 
an amendment to the amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Is Commissioner Aquino willing 
to adopt the word VETO instead of the words “SHALL 
NOT BE SET ASIDE,” so that the clause would read: 
“WHICH REVOCATION SHALL NOT BE VETOED 
BY THE PRESIDENT”? 

MS. AQUINO. The substance is the same, but the 
Committee already has jurisdiction over my amend- 
ment. It may be just a matter of style. 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee wishes to inform 
Commissioner Sarmiento that what was envisaged here 
is a proclamation. A veto is exercised over a bill or a 
law. A proclamation is not subject to veto, that is why 
we instead used the term “SET ASIDE.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you for that information. 

1 withdraw my amendment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Aquino which 
has been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Azcuna be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to offer an amendment to Section 15, 
line 7 of page 7. After the word “or,” insert a comma 
(,) and add the phrase: AT THE INSTANCE OF THE 
PRESIDENT, so that the amended portion will read, 
“may revoke such proclamation or suspension which 
revocation shall not be set aside by the President, or AT 
THE INSTANCE OF THE PRESIDENT extend the same 


508 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


if the invasion or rebellion shall persist and public safety 
requires it. 

May we know the reaction of the Committee? The 
reason for this, Madam President, is that the extension 
should not merely be an act of Congress but should be 
requested by the President. Any extension of martial 
law or the suspension of the privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus should have the concurrence of both the 
President and Congress. Does the Committee accept my 
amendment? 


MR. REGALADO. The Committee accepts that 
amendment because it will, at the same time, solve the 
concern of Commissioner Suarez, aside from the fact 
that this will now be a joint executive and legislative act. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. ° 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

but mav^^iTio 11 proposa ^ °f Commissioner Azcuna 
o^the ex en S Sn h hat We . flX 3 pe ™ d for the duration 

Se IS T 1 * V6ry Wdl hapP6n th3t 

period and it could extend tl ) an the extended 

sioner Azcuna could out a indefimte jy • So if Commis- 

period, 1 would certainly' lmit t0 the extended 
President. y a PPreciate that, Madam 


TION OF. It will be upon the petition of the President 
to confirm the fact that any extension is just a matter of 
his request, not his prerogative. 

THE PRESIDENT. Not on his own initiative? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, not on his own initiative, Madam 
President. 

MR. AZCUNA. I believe the word “petition” is more 
proper for the courts, Madam President. Maybe with 
the intention put on the record that this is not manda- 
tory upon Congress to grant an extension simply be- 
cause the President is requesting it, I am willing to 
change it to INITIATIVE instead of “INSTANCE” but 
not “PETITION” because “petition” has more relevance 
to courts. So it will be “UPON THE INITIATIVE of 
the President.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. REGALADO. It is acceptable, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Azcuna which 
has been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Suarez is recognized. 


say? PRESIDENT - What d °es Commissioner Azcui 

is a MR ffoent U c N onceDt da d Eresident ’ 1 believe that tli; 
so as not to confuse the J° uld be voted on separate 
period with the P vt P * SSUe ° n the imitation of tl 
merely require that anv^ 11 ' amendment wou 
currence of both the Prei Should have the ™ 
missioner Suarez mav PreS ^ erd 3nd tbe Congress. Cor 
the period of the extensk.n P ° Se amendment to lini 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT Tq th 

sioner Azcuna a separate sentence? ' ‘ 1<3ment ° f C ° mm 
MR. AZCUNA. No M i 

comma (,) after “or” and th arp President. It is just 
THE INSTANCE OF Wpre SI DENT » ,he ' , ° rdS " A 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

^ THE PRESIDENT. Co mmissione , ^ , 


is recog- 


MR. DAVIDE. I would like to pronose thop • * 

t v t TUP FN^TANrF OP ” x P se that instead ol 
• AT THE INS 1 ANL t UP, we use UPON THE PETI 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

May we suggest that on line 7, between the words 
“same” and “if,” we insert the phrase FOR A PERIOD 
OF NOT MORE THAN SIXTY DAYS, which would 
equal the initial period for the first declaration just so 
it will keep on going. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. REGALADO. May we request a clarification 
from Commissioner Suarez on this proposed amend- 
ment? This extension is already a joint act upon the 
initiative of the President and with the concurrence of 
Congress. It is assumed that they have already agreed 
not only on the fact of extension but on the period of 
extension. If we put it at 60 days only, then thereafter, 
they have to meet again to agree jointly on a further 
extension. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is precisely intended to safe- 
guard the interests and protect the lives of citizens. 

MR. REGALADO. In the first situation where the 
President declares martial law, there had to be a pre- 
scribed period because there was no initial concurrence 
requirement. And if there was no concurrence, the 
martial law period ends at 60 days. Thereafter, if they 
intend to extend the same suspension of the privilege 
of the writ or the proclamation of martial law, it is upon 


THURSDAY, JULY 31,1986 


509 


the initiative of the President this time, and with the 
prior concurrence of Congress. So, the period of ex- 
tension has already been taken into account by both 
the Executive and the Legislative, unlike the first 
situation where the President acted alone without prior 
concurrence. The reason for the limitation in the first 
does not apply to the extension. 

MR. SUAREZ. We are afraid of a situation that may 
develop where the extended period would be even 
longer than the initial period, Madam President. It is 
only reasonable to suggest that we have to put a restric- 
tion on the matter of the exercise of this right within a 
reasonable period. 


MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. May I just pose a question to the Com- 
mittee in connection with the Suarez amendment? 
Earlier, Commissioner Regalado said that that point was 
going to be a collective judgment between the President 
and the Congress. Are we departing from that now in 
favor of giving Congress the plenipotentiary power to 
determine the period? 

FR. BERNAS. Not really, Madam President, because 
Congress would be doing this in consultation with the 
President, and the President would be outvoted by 
about 300 Members. 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, following 
that is the clause “extend the same if the invasion or 
rebellion shall persist and public safety requires it.” 
That by itself suggests a period within which the suspen- 
sion shall be extended, if the invasion is still going on. 
But there is already the cutoff of 60-day period. Do 
they have to meet all over again and agree to extend the 
same? 


MR. SUAREZ. That is correct. I think the two of 
them must have to agree on the period; but it is theore- 
tically possible that when the President writes a note to 
the Congress, because it would be at the instance of the 
President that the extension would have to be granted 
by Congress, it is possible that the period for the ex- 
tension may be there. It is also possible that it may not 
be there. That is the reason why we want to make it 
clear that there must be a reasonable period for the 
extension. So, if my suggestion is not acceptable to the 
Committee, may I request that a voting be held on it, 
Madam President. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may I just propose 
something because I see the problem. Suppose we were 
to say “or extend the same FOR A PERIOD TO BE 
DETERMINED BY CONGRESS” - that gives Congress 
a little flexibility on just how long the extension should 

be. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, but still the idea is to preserve the 
principle of collective judgment of that point upon the 
expiration of the 60 days when, upon his own initiative, 
the President seeks for an extension of the proclamation 
of martial law or the suspension of the privilege of the 
writ. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, the participation of the President 
is there but by giving the final decision to Congress, we 
are also preserving the idea that the President may not 
revoke what Congress has decided upon. 

MR. OPLE. The reason for my concern. Madam 
President, is that when we put all of these encumbrances 
on the President and Commander-in-Chief during an 
actual invasion and rebellion, given an intractable Con- 
gress that may be dominated by opposition parties, we 
may be actually impelling the President to use the sword 
of Alexander to cut the Gordian knot by just declaring a 
revolutionary government that sets him free to deal with 
the invasion or the insurrection. That is the reason 
I am in favor of the present formulation. However, if 
Commissioner Suarez insists on his amendment, I do not 
think I will stand in the way. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. We will accept the committee sug- 
gestion, subject to style later on. 


MR. REGALADO. Is the Gentleman placing his 
amendment after “same” and before “if”? 


THE PRESIDENT. May we ask the proponent to read 
his amendment so that the Members can clarify. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Maybe that can be added after the 
final word “it” so that the clause would read: “if the 
invasion or rebellion shall persist and public safety 
requires it, FOR A PERIOD AS MAY BE DETER- 
MINED BY CONGRESS.” 


r K. BUKINAS. 


ocdt™ ™ /: extend the same FOR A 

PERIOD TO BE DETERMINED BY CONGRESS if the 

invasion or rebellion shall persist and public safety 
requires it. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo 
nized. 


is recog- 


FR. BERNAS. It is a question of style, Madam Pres- 
ident. It seems to be very far from the verb. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by Commissioner 
Suarez? 


MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote, may I ask a ques- 
tion just for the record? Suppose all the 24 senators 
unanimously say, “No, we do not want any extension.’ 
may they act separately as a Senate to vote against the 
extension? 


510 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. Our answer would be “no.” For 
clarity we might even say: “TO BE DETERMINED BY 
CONGRESS VOTING JOINTLY.” 

MR. RODRIGO. I want that on record because I 
want to emphasize my stand that while he have reinsti- 
tuted a bicameral legislature, we are violating the very 
essence of bicameralism in this provision. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one inquiry. I do not want 
to engage in nitpicking, but when we say “FOR A 
PERIOD TO BE DETERMINED BY CONGRESS,” can 
Congress do it by law or by resolution, because there are 
certain acts to be done by Congress which may be done 
by resolution and some done by law? 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. I think we are ready to vote. Madam 
President. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair resolves to call this 
particular matter to a vote after lunch because of 
important repercussions on other matters that may be 
related to it. 

The session is suspended until two o’clock this 
afternoon. 

It was 12:12 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:08 p.m., the session was resumed. 


FR. BERNAS. By resolution, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you very much. 

CU IL1 ERNAS - R R * s done by law, it would need 
of the Pre™de P nt° CeSS ° f Readin § s P lus the a PP rov 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

niz!d. E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Padilla is reco 

cion, R ouf ^omtr "nv °f dl ? 8 t0 Commissi °ner Conce 
martial law or flip 16 . ^ us * ice > the declaration i 
of habeas cornu ^ Uspension of th e privilege of the wi 

be so and es^ecia v e$Se , ntlally an executive act - If th 
invasion or rebellion^ 6 ]/ 116 foUowmg clause; “if tl 
requires it ” I * S 3 pers * st and public safe 

determined’ by the r° ^ W , hy tbe period must 1 
executive are *“*>* a pure 

Justice said idfour Relieve what the former Chi 
executive act, but being essentially ; 

something tha, is Partic ipat S°rb y af Co r n^ e ss ini,iati0n 

MR. CONCEPCION If i 

who will do the fightin? k t u may add a word - The ° 
it is expected that if the r 6 executive but, of cour: 
will extend for the durationoTthff^ 1115 l ° extend > 
ing goes on, I do not think it flghtmg - If the figl 
Congress will refuse to extend fif t0 assume that t 
since in this matter the Conpm 6 penod > especial 
stance of the executive. HeTthe L must act at the i 
to know how long i, wilt take’ himT^hf ^ 

may reduce it but that is without prejudice to 
asking for another extension, if necessary. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

May we request our guests to please observe silence 
during our deliberations. 

We wish to welcome this afternoon our visitors who 
include students from the Philippine Science High 
School, the Philippine Women’s University, the Poly- 
technic University of the Philippines, the delegation 
from the Cordillera Region and Muslims from Mindanao. 

May we call the Chairman of the Committee on the 
Executive and the members to please occupy the front 
table so that we can continue deliberating on the 
proposed amendments to the Article on the Executive. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Padilla be recognized for an amendment to 
Section 1 5. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I propose to delete 
lines 21, 22, and 23 of Section 15 and in lieu thereof 
insert the following: DURING THE SUSPENSION OF 
THE PRIVILEGE OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS COR- 
PUS, ANY PERSON WHO HAS BEEN ARRESTED OR 
DETAINED SHALL BE JUDICIOUSLY CHARGED 
WITHIN FIVE WORKING DAYS, OTHERWISE HE 
SHALL BE RELEASED. If I may explain a little, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla has five 
minutes to explain his amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. The purpose of the amendment is to 
prevent a situation similar to the past regime when inno- 
cent persons were arrested, detained and confined in 
prison sometimes for one month, one year, or even 
more, without any criminal charge filed against them 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


511 


who oftentimes did not even understand why they had 
been arrested or detained. 

The last paragraph of Section 1 5 reads: 

The suspension of the privilege of the writ shall apply 
only to persons judicially charged for rebellion or for 
offenses inherent in or directly connected with invasion. 

If a person has been judicially charged, that means 
there has been a warrant of arrest issued by the courts. 
This paragraph will not protect innocent persons who 
have been arrested and detained by the military under 
orders of the past regime, such as the ASSO, PCO or 
PDA. What we are trying to protect is the right of the 
persons arrested and detained by requiring that at least 
within five working days a criminal charge be filed 
against them, otherwise, if there is no crime committed 
or no evidence in support of the culpability of such 
detained person, he should be immediately released 
after five working days. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Sarmiento has registered for an amendment to the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, when we 
adiourned this morning, there was a pending amen 
ment of Commissioner Suarez which we should dispose 
of now It was on the last sentence of the first paragraph 
of Section 15, which reads: “The Congress by a vote of 
at least a majority of all its members voting jotntly in 
regular or special session, may revoke such proclamation 

^„s P e^n,whi^^i-"Kset^by 

extend^the" same FOR A PERIOD TO BE DETER- 
^TXTpn RY CONGRESS if the invasion or rebellion 
Z peisLnd public safety requires it.” TTtat was the 

Z' phrase°‘ FOR A PERIOD TO BE 

DETERMINED BY CONGRESS" I think we can dis- 
OETEKM consider the last paragraph of 

Section 15. subject of the proposed amendment of 

Commissioner Padilla. 

padiLLA Madam President, I stated this noon 

fTohlec to the proposal that the period be deter- 
that I object to P because admittedly, this right is 

^prerogative of^the^xecutive and it should no, be 

determined by the legislative. 

THF PRESIDENT. We will take note of the objection 
of ”I Padilla. How about Comm.ss.oner 

Suarez? 

MR. SUAREZ. I am leaving it up to the Committee 
whether or not to accept the amendment, Madam 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, the Committee 
would prefer to submit the proposed amendment to the 
floor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready now to vote on this 
particular amendment which we had on the floor before 
we called a suspension of the session for lunch? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Before we vote, just one clarification. 
When we say “FOR A PERIOD TO BE DETERMINED 
BY CONGRESS,” we mean Congress voting jointly or 
by both Houses voting jointly. 

MR. SUAREZ. To be consistent, I will agree with the 
suggestion of Commissioner Bemas, Madam President. 
So it would be FOR A PERIOD TO BE DETER- 
MINED BY CONGRESS VOTING JOINTLY. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment clear to the 
Commissioners ? 

Those in favor of this particular amendment of Com- 
missioner Suarez which has been accepted by the 
Committee, please raise their hand. ( Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those who abstain, please raise their hand. (One 
Member raised his hand.) 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
record my vote of abstention because of a basic objec- 
tion and that is, that Congress would be voting jointly, 
instead of the Senate and the House voting separately. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 25 votes in 
favor, 4 votes against, and 1 abstention; the proposed 
amendment is approved. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Padilla’s amendment is now on the floor. 

MR. SUMULONG. Commissioner Concepcion will 
respond to the proposed amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioners Sarmiento and 
Davide also have amendments to the amendment o 
Commissioner Padilla. I believe that Commissioner de 
Castro wants to say something before we begin. 


512 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. May we hear Commissioner 
Concepcion first? 


MR. CONCEPCION. Before I express my views on 
the remarks by Commissioner Padilla, I wish to make it 
clear that the purpose of this paragraph is to require all 
those detained to be immediately turned over to the 
judicial authorities. Therefore, the suspension of the 
privilege will not apply to them until they are placed in 
the custody of a judicial officer, the reason being that 
the first important thing to consider is to preserve the 
life of the detained person. 


Even if the privilege were suspended, if the person has 
not been turned over to the court, the government 
cannot claim that the privilege of the writ has been sus- 
pended. I have no objection insofar as the period pro- 
posed by Commissioner Padilla. As a matter of fact I 
would prefer that the detainee be turned over to the 
court as soon as possible. The first important thing is to 
preserve his right and his life; the second is to avoid 
torture or other forms of oppression; and, of course, to 
place the detamee under the authority of the court so 

wo\ i r,r y r Ver l gain have a situation where a court 
mav refuc/t 6 ,° rder of rele ase, but some other party 
tivitv of thp 16 6aSe tde deta i n ed person. So the effec- 
respect to n pr SPenS1 ° n ° f tbe P rivi l e g e of the writ with 
effect onlv aftp 01 fh covered by the provision will take 

court o/courl > P6rSOn has been tumed over 
chafes but 2 ’ • m f y t3ke some t^e to file the 

suppose, sufficient n ° d ° f days *° ■*« ' 


stattLnt A o D f I Commks adam ? esident . 1 ^ree with tl 
fact, those are the sarm^ C ° nce P cion - As a matter i 
me to submit this amp sentim ents that have induce 
in my opinion it will U T 6nt by substitution becau 
the provision ’ make Clearer the intendment 

THE PRESIDENT n 

on his proposed amendment? 00 " 1 ” 118810116 " Padilla in si 

opinion the^ro^oS’a^T President - because in it 
emphatic because when "J ® ndme "t is clearer and mo 
apply only to persons iu^if^ the SUs P e nsion sh; 
embody the sentiment that & V charged ’ it does n 
the suspension of the writ lif ny P erson arrested durii 
within a few working hours ° be charged judicial 
within five working days Pr e ° r f SUggeste d by man 
that any person arrested should k’ the intendrr >ent 
and a person who has been judicial? JudlciaU y charge 
upon the issuance by the court f cbarged * s arrests 
So I submit, Madam President. ° 3 Warrant of arres 


MR. PADILLA. In lieu of lines 21 to 23, the last 
paragraph of Section 15, I propose the following: 
DURING THE SUSPENSION OF THE PRIVILEGE OF 
THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS, ANY PERSON 
WHO HAS BEEN ARRESTED OR DETAINED SHALL 
BE JUDICIALLY CHARGED WITHIN FIVE WORK- 
ING DAYS, OTHERWISE, HE SHALL BE RELEASED. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, may I speak in 
favor of the proposed amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair is sorry, but we have an 
arrangement with the Floor Leader that the Chair will 
recognize first those who have duly registered. So, Com- 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Sarmiento is willing to yield part of his time to Com- 
missioner de Castro. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, yesterday I 
informed the Floor Leader about my proposed amend- 
ment on the last paragraph of Section 15. My first im- 
pression was to delete the whole lines 21, 2-2 and 23, 
but after talking with the honorable Chief Justice, both 
of us expressed our concern on judicially charging those 
arrested under the writ, so I gave way to the amendment 
of Commissioner Padilla. My reason in doing so is that 
there are only two instances by which the writ may be 
issued, and that is during actual rebellion and actual 
invasion. We shall not talk of actual invasion because I 
really doubt the practicality of issuing a writ when there 
is actual invasion of our country. Instead, we will talk of 
actual rebellion in a certain area where the writ will 
have to be issued. I even doubt whether the detainee 
could be released within five working days considering 
that there is a fighting going on in that area, or a theater 
of war, as described by the Honorable Bernas. In the 
actual theater of war, I really doubt whether the autho- 
rities will have sufficient time to get the necessary 
affidavits, prepare the necessary complaint and submit 
the necessary charge before the court. I even doubt 
whether there will be a court existing in the actual 
theater of war or in the place where there is actual 
rebellion. Nevertheless, let me say that I finally would 
like to agree or to convince myself to agree that the 
five-day period in the actual operation, actual shooting, 
actual theater of war, when the authorities may be able 
to prepare the necessary charge, the necessary affidavits, 
the necessary evidence so that the court may accept the 
complaint, will be sufficient. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner 

his amendment? 


Padilla restate 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. J ask that Commissioner Sarmiento 
be recognized. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


513 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I wish to propose an amendment 
to the amendment of the honorable Vice-President. He 
is for the charging of the accused within five days. My 
submission, Madam President, is that five days is too 
long. Our experience during martial law was that torture 
and other human rights violations happened imme- 
diately after the arrest, on the way to the safe houses or 
to Camp Aguinaldo, Fort Bonifacio or Camp Crame. I 
repeat, five days is too long, Madam President. As a 
matter of fact, under the Revised Penal Code, and, of 
course the honorable Vice-President is an expert on 
criminal law, we have the 6-9-18 formula - 6 hours, 9 
hours, 1 8 hours within which to charge and bring the 
accused to judicial authorities. Of course, during martial 
law. the 6-9-18 formula was increased under P.D. 
No 1404 So I wish to suggest that we reduce the 
period of five days to THREE days as a compromise. 
That would be 72 hours, Madam President. Actually, it 

is still quite long. 

Will the honorable Vice-President yield to my amend- 
ment? 


habeas corpus only to those who have been judicially 
charged. 

So if the amendment is by addition, that is, we 
require that the accused be charged within a certain 
period or number of days, we will accept it provided 
that what stands here is not deleted. The suspension of 
the privilege of the writ will apply only to those who 
have been judicially charged. Until they are charged, 
the suspension does not apply to them. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, this period that 
shall apply only to persons judicially charged is not 
really very clear to me, because if they are judicially 
charged, then it becomes irrelevant because then there 
would have been a warrant of arrest issued. 

FR. BERNAS. It is not a question of whether or not 
a warrant of arrest can be issued. The question is 
whether in spite of the warrant, they can still be re- 
leased. What we are saying here is that to prevent 
release under a suspension of the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus , the person who is under detention 
must be judicially charged. Until he is judicially charged, 
he is not covered by any suspension. 


THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Padilla 
say? 

MR PADILLA. Madam President, I have no parti- 
cular conviction on the number of days or number of 
hours That was suggested by a few Commissioners ,n 
V' L vpsterdav It is true that under Article 125 
onhe Revised Penal Code which penalizes the delaying 
of the transmittal or delivery ot the person arrested to 
the judicial authorities, the period is based on the gravi > 
of the offense and this is punishable by the same penal- 
ties as those for arbitrary detention in Article 124 ot tne 
Code and the delay in the release under Article Ub. But 
this provision is made to apply when there is a suspen- 
on by he President of the ptivilege ol the writ of 
sion oy covers a different situation from 

thaf contemplated in the Revised Penal Code The Rules 
f rvmrt Rule 1 13 Section 6 thereof, also allows arrest 

; thou wa an under three situations. However, that 
without wan jod for delivery of the arrested 

person To the judicial authorities, which means to the 

courts through the fiscal. 

with reeard to the proposed amendment to our 
am^dmenf which is to reduce the period ot five 
working days to “THREE” working days, I have no 

particufar objection. Madam President. 

FR BERNAS. Madam President, after conferring 
with Commissioner Concepcion, we have no objection 
to the amendment if it is an amendment by addition but 
not by substitution, because if it is an amendment by 
substitution, it weakens the intent of the provision as it 
exists. The 'intention of the provision is precisely to 
apply the suspension of the privilege of the writ of 


MR. PADILLA. If other persons are not covered by 
the suspension except those who are judicially charged, 
what would be the effect of that to others not subject 
to the suspension? 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely, the purpose of the suspen- 
sion of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus is to 
enable the government to deal with a situation of 
an invasion or a rebellion and the government must 
charge judicially those who are involved in invasion or 
rebellion. Those who are not charged are not involved 
nor considered to be involved in the rebellion or inva- 
sion and, therefore, there is no reason for extending the 
suspension of the privilege of the writ to them. 

MR. PADILLA. But it they are not involved in 
lebellion or invasion, which is a ground for the sus- 
pension ot the privilege of the writ or for the declara- 
tion ot martial law, then they are innocent. 1 cannot 
understand why the suspension of the writ should apply 
only to persons judicially charged when the very idea is 
t lat any peison who has been arrested, even under the 

suspension of the writ, must be or should be judicially 
charged. 


MR. CONC EPCION. The fact is that many had been 
cetamed tor years without having any participation in 
a rebellion or insurrection. 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Precisely, to avoid that, the 
suspension oi the privilege of the writ will apply only to 
those who are turned over to the judicial authority. 


514 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


MR. PADILLA. What about the persons who might 
have been arrested but have not been turned over judi- 
cially? 


entitled to preliminary investigation, so that he can be 
immediately charged within the 72-hour period or 
five-day period as the case may be? 


MR. CONCEPCION. They can apply for a release. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair supposes that is where 
the proposed amendment can come in, as suggested by 
Commissioner Bemas, as a separate sentence, without 
deleting the last paragraph on lines 21 to 23. Would 
Commissioner Padilla agree? 


MR. PADILLA. I cannot really reconcile the three 
lines as presently worded. The last paragraph mentions 
“inherent in or directly connected with invasion.” If 
it is a crime inherent in, that should be absorbed in the 
offense. And while the grounds are actual rebellion and 
actual invasion, the last line talks of “connected with 
invasion. To me it is a little obscure. Whereas, my 
proposal would seem to be very clear that whoever is 
arrested or detained must be judicially charged within 
five or three working days, otherwise he is entitled to be 
re ease even if it is during the period of the suspension 
o e privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. 


MR. PADILLA. There is no intention to waive any 
right of a person who has been arrested or accused. 
As a matter of fact, even during the suspension of the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, there should be 
no arrest unless there be some probable cause that 
would justify his arrest or detention. So the amendment 
does not contemplate any waiver or abandonment of 
any right of a person arrested. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

Point of clarification only from the distinguished 
Vice-President. Is it my understanding that during the 
three-day period, and consistent with the firm stand and 
interpretation of the honorable Chief Justice Concep- 
cion, that particular respondent would not be deprived 
of the right to sue for a writ of habeas corpus? 


a romb^atin^ f^ 3 ? President, may I perhaps rea< 
the existing last° 16 ^ omm i ssioner ’s amendment am 
could nut it tv.- 1 Paragraph for Purposes of clarity. W 

“The suspend nflh Starting With Hnes 2 1 ’ 22 and 23 
onlv to nercn • privile § e °f the writ shall appt 

?enL inhe en?V UdlCl , aUy Charged for rebelli ™ or oi 
DURING THF snc°Pc\! reCt ^ connected with invasior 
JHE WRI? any S’ ON ° F THE PRIVILEGE Q] 
ARRESTED OR Y nc??i S x° N WH0 HAS THUS BEE1 
CHARGED WITHIN FIVF D hav^ BE JUDICIALL ' 

SHALL BE RELEASED^ YS OTHERWISE H 

THE PRESIDENT Or “THRFF h »» 

mended by Commissioner Sarnhenl ^ ^ 160011 

Pre“de„t ARMIENT0 ' “ Wi,llm ™REE days,” Mada, 

FR BER NAS. For “THREE days.” 

THE PRESIDENT, k that * r 
sioner Padilla? * satisfactory to Commi 

MR. PADILLA. I yield tn tv, k 
C ommittee, Madam President T e better Judgment of tl 

observations and I do not want t 3Ve already stated n 

not want to repeat them anymoi 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

^7 HE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recc 


MR. KtuALAUu. Does the amendment of 
sioner Padilla contemplate that such a perse 


MR. PADILLA. There is no waiver of any right ot the 
person arrested. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the Commissioner for the 
clarification. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote on the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Padilla, which 
has been accepted by the Committee, as reworded? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I think we 
should settle first the primordial question of whether it 
should be within five days or within three days as pro- 
posed by Commissioner Sarmiento. 

THE PRESIDENT. That has been accepted by Com- 
missioner Padilla; he has no objection to that. So the 
amendment is by addition after line 23. 

Is there any objection to this particular proposed 
amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Foz be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, my proposed amend- 
ment is on page 7, Section 16, line 26 which is to delete 
the words “and bureaus,” and on line 28 of the same 
page, to change the phrase “colonel or naval captain” 
to MAJOR GENERAL OR REAR ADMIRAL. 

This last amendment which is coauthored by Com- 
missioner de Castro is to put a period (.) after the word 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


515 


ADMIRAL, and on line 29 of the same page, start a 
new sentence with: HE SHALL ALSO APPPOINT, et 
cetera. 

MR. REGALADO. May we have the amendments one 
by one. 

The first proposed amendment is to delete the words 
“and bureaus” on line 26. 

MR. FOZ. That is correct. 

MR. REGALADO. For the benefit of the other Com- 
missioners, what would be the justification of the 
proponent for such a deletion? 

MR. FOZ. The position of bureau director is actually 
quite low in the executive department, and to require 
further confirmation of presidential appointment of 
heads of bureaus would subject them to political influ- 
ence. 

MR. REGALADO. The Commissioner’s proposed 
amendment by deletion also includes regional directors 
as distinguished from merely staff directors, because the 
regional directors have quite a plenitude of powers 
within the regions as distinguished from staff directors 
who only stay in the office. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, but the regional directors are under 
the supervision of the staff bureau directors. 

MR. REGALADO. With respect to other officers of 
the military, may we know the proposal of Commis- 
sioner Foz? 

MR. FOZ. On line 28, I propose to delete the phrase 
“colonel or naval captain” and substitute it with 
MAJOR GENERAL OR REAR ADMIRAL and put a 
period (.) after it. 

MR. REGALADO. Again, for the benefit of the Com- 
missioners, what would be the Commissioner’s justifica- 
tion for increasing the level of rank which will require 
confirmation? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. I think Commissioner de Castro has some- 
thing to say on that. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

I thank Commissioner Foz for introducing the 
amendment of changing “colonel or naval captain” to 
MAJOR GENERAL OR REAR ADMIRAL on my 
behalf. That saves me some words to say. 


As I said before, the phrase “colonel or naval captain” 
was taken from the 1935 Constitution. In 1935, we had 
only one general and a few colonels in the military and 
they were in the higher echelon, mostly occupying the 
supervisory positions. In fact, the only general during 
that time was General Jalandoni who was the Chief of 
Staff then. 

Madam President, we have increased the strength of 
our armed forces so now we have the ranks of up to full 
general. The officer corps constitutes 1 .2 percent of the 
entire strength of the armed forces. 

I introduce the change of “colonel or naval captain” 
to MAJOR GENERAL OR REAR ADMIRAL because 
the brigadier generals constitute the front line units; 
they are the front line generals directly fighting the 
insurgents while the major generals are the supervisory 
officers. I would say that when a brigadier general is 
sent to the front, he is selected by the Chief of Staff, 
concurred in by the Minister of National Defense and 
concurred in by the President, so he must be a real good 
general for the front line. So I do not believe that he 
should be concerned about his rank for confirmation of 
the Commission on Appointments. 

On the other hand, major generals are usually the 
service commanders, the supervising generals on top of 
the fighting units. They are the ones whose appoint- 
ments by the President may be looked into by the Com- 
mission on Appointments because there are those who 
may be good brigadier generals but are not as good for a 
service command. This, the Commission on Appoint- 
ments may look into before confirmation, and this goes 
also with the rear admiral. Madam President, this is the 
reason we have increased the rank to be submitted to 
the Commission on Appointments for confirmation. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, may I address 
some clarificatory questions to Commissioner de Castro? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Gladly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado will 
please proceed. 

MR. REGALADO. Under the 1935 Constitution, we 
took into account not only the number of colonels or 
generals then in the Philippine army, but also the num- 
ber of troops under the command of a particular person. 

enera y, under the Table of Organization and Equip- 
ment and even up to now, a colonel is a regimental 


MR. DE CASTRO. Not necessarily. In the 1935 
onstitution, a division commander is a colonel, now a 
division commander is a major general. 

MR. REGALADO. So what would be the area of 
command now of a colonel as distinguished from that o 


516 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


a brigadier general under the Table of Organization and 
Equipment as it now stands? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Under the Table of Allowance, a 
full colonel can now command a battalion or a unit a 
little higher than the battalion, maybe a reinforced bat- 
talion. In fact, we hear of colonels commanding infantry 
battalions with only a strength of about 700 men for 
each battalion. When I talk of reinforced battalion, it 
has a strength of about 1,200 men. Formerly, a colonel 
like Colonel Capinpin was commanding a division, 
almost the whole division that the military had at that 
time. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, the increased rank 
involved in the proposed amendment, which will require 
confirmation, is based, among others, on the number of 
colonels and general rank officers that we now have in 
the Philippine Army and the Armed Forces, 


MR. MAAMBONG. May I ask Commissioner de 
Castro a point of clarification. When he suggested the 
change of the word “colonel” to “MAJOR GENERAL,” 
what he is actually saying is that those who have lower 
ranks than major general are still appointed by the 
President but not with the consent of the Commission 
on Appointments? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, the Commis- 
sioner does not take away the power of the President 
to appoint officers. It is only the matter of confirmation 
by the Commission on Appointments. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Madam President. As I 
stated yesterday, the appointment of a cadet in the 
Philippine Military Academy is by the President. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, because the ratio of ranks i 
determmeci by the National Defense Act. and when w< 

up^fuSr- That mcludes brigadier general 




with^es^Ao 4 ^' ^ What Would be the ratio 
strength that we have of a^oul 25 o!oOQ? >n ^ ^ 


now 

total 


but 1 can consult the National Tf ^ A° rreCt " 
there. 1 do not believe that th ? efens , e Act: il is 
overstrong in the rank Perhaps 6 th*™^ F ° rCeS n °’ 

2-5 percent. I am not very sure but 1 ^ 1 . g ° t0 f 
National Defense Act V rC bUt 1 W1 consi >lt 


MR. MAAMBONG. Precisely, because I recall that my 
appointment as a reserve of the Armed Forces was 
signed by the President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. 

/ MR. MAAMBONG. May I direct a question to Com- 
missioner Foz? The Commissioner proposed an amend- 
ment to delete “and bureaus” on Section 16. Who will 
then appoint the bureau directors if it is not the Pres- 
ident? 

/ 

* MR. FOZ. It is still the President who will appoint 
them but their appointments shall no longer be subject 
to confirmation by the Commission on Appointments. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, it is in line with 
the same answer of Commissioner de Castro? 

MR. FOZ. Yes. 


of the observations^ vestenfay clarifi cation bee 

ing^he a ^935 S p^ovis?o^s for 6 ' 

° ns masons that he explainec 

MR. DE CASTRO. For thn , 
coup cl’ etat is started bv nff eaSOn that n °nna 
colonel. We have not had a m, witl1 tlle ran 
the Armed Forces was organized in i?L yet eVer : 
the colonels are better tamed than p 935 ' And 1 1 
and the captains when it comes to coup^)^ ^ 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this clear now? What is the 
reaction of the Committee? 

MR. REGALADO. Before we accept the amendment, 
Madam President, may I get a clarification from Com- 
missioner de Castro? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will please 
proceed. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President 


the PRESIDENT. 

recognized. 


Commissioner Maambong i s 


MR. REGALADO. Why does the Commissioner have 
to make a distinction between a brigadier general and a 
major general? Would it not be all right if all officers of 
general rank should be confirmed by the Commission on 
Appointments? 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


517 


MR. DE CASTRO. There is a very big distinction. A 
brigadier general has one star and a major general has 
two, which is a lot of difference. A brigadier general is 
a front line general now commanding reinforced bat- 
talions or a region, while a major general is the super- 
visor of that brigadier general. He is a service com- 
mander, such as the commanding general of the army, 
the commanding general of the air force, the command- 
ing general of the Philippine Constabulary and the rear 
admiral of the navy. 

MR. REGALADO. Does Commissioner de Castro not 
think, therefore, that since a brigadier general is a 
front line commander, his personal capabilities in the 
exercise of his command functions should be taken into 
account, so much so that in the 1973 Constitution, all 
officers of general rank had to be specifically appointed 
by the President? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Not in the 1973 Constitution. 
We have no Commission on Appointments in the 1973 
Constitution. 

MR. REGALADO. No, I mean, in the 1935 Constitu- 
tion, a division commander was a colonel. Regarding 
this matter of the brigadier general being the front line 
commander of troops, does the Commissioner not think 
that the Commission on Appointments now should be 
given an opportunity to go over his qualifications, 
especially since he is leading so many troops out in the 
field and subjecting them to exposure to enemy fire? 


appoint the heads of the executive departments, ambas- 
sadors . . 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to delete 
the phrase “and bureaus” on page 7, line 26? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

May the Chair have the next amendment on line 28. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, I was a little late, but 
then may I inform this Constitutional Commission 
of the presence of our brothers and sisters from the 
Cordillera Region and from the southern part of the 
Philippines. We will notice that this is the biggest crowd 
since we started over a month ago. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we have acknowledged their 
presence already. (Applause) 

MR. UKA. I did not ask for that applause; it so hap- 
pened that I noticed their presence in this hall which 
only shows their interest in our drafting of the Consti- 
tution. Some of them whispered to me that they are 
very much interested in regional autonomy, which we 
have not yet discussed. (Applause) 

THE PRESIDENT. For the information of Commis- 
sioner Uka, we have acknowledged their presence 
already in the course of our session this afternoon. 

MR. ROMULO. May I ask that Commissioner Jamir 
be recognized for an amendment. 


MR. DE CASTRO. As I said earlier, before a briga- 
dier general is given the front line troops to command 
during insurgency, he must first be chosen by the Chief 
of Staff, then concurred in by the Minister of National 
Defense and finally by the President. As such, it will be 
very, very difficult to see a brigadier general begging the 
confirmation of his appointment by the Commission 
on Appointments when he is there in the battleground 
fighting for us and who was already chosen by the Chief 
of Staff and concurred in by the Minister of National 
Defense and by the President. So we are just submitting 
the supervisory generals, like the major generals of the 
army, the PC, the navy and the air force, to the Com- 
mission on Appointments. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, the Committee 
feels that this matter should be submitted to the body 
for a vote. 


THE PRESIDENT. We will vote first on the amend- 
ment on line 28. May we know what the amendment is? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, on line 28, 
substitute the phrase “colonel or naval captain” with 
“MAJOR GENERAL OR REAR ADMIRAL.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. I wonder if the proponent would 
agree to an amendment to his amendment on line 28. 
'y® ac hieve a happy compromise, so instead of 

MAJOR GENERAL” it be BRIGADIER GENERAL 
and COMMODORE instead of “REAR ADMIRAL.” 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. We will take the amendments one 
by one. We will first vote on the deletion of the phrase 
“and bureaus” on line 26, such that appointments of 
bureau directors no longer need confirmation by the 
Commission on Appointments. Section 16, therefore, 
would read: “The President shall nominate, and with 
the consent of a Commission on Appointments, shall 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, the Commis- 
sioner is seeking a happy compromise by introducing 
an amendment to my proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, is that acceptable to Com- 
missioner de Castro? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, I would like to 
give a little background information on this matter. I 


518 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


have talked with General Ramos and Deputy Minister 
of Defense Ileto regarding the inclusion of the brigadier 
general and the commodore, and they were quite in- 
sistent in convincing me to start from the rank of major 
general and rear admiral. If my proposal to include the 
major general and the rear admiral will lose on the floor, 
which I doubt, I will be willing to go to the happy 
medium. 

I thank Commissioner Davide, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I request then for a vote on my 
proposed amendment, but before doing so, may I be 
allowed to explain? 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will please 
proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. It was stated by Commissioner de 
Castro that the brigadier generals and the rear admirals 

aT t commanders - Necessarily then, the security 

o t 6 tate is in issue. We should, therefore, allow the 
Commission on Appointments to review any proposal 

o° herwke m f vT 60 V tbeSe blgbly sensitive positions, 

are 86 commander s will believe that they 

HveTposRiorth^ ^he review of the legislative. So sensf- 

confirmation nf en wou d necessitate, necessarily, a 
nhrmation of any appointment of these officials. 

rep^'ifLt onL R °' A$ ^ before ’ and allow me to 

to the front has pas^th!^ bngadier general wh « goes 
of the Chief nf S scre enings - the screening 

generals who are ta he L ?? our r, * htin S 
firmation of their jl!- ? ° be beggmg th e con- 

on Appointments Oi^p lntments by the Commission 

on Appointments was Z™T th T ““ C °“" 
think about what it had ^ bad that we even refuse to 
not like our fXL "p n d °f . to Us ‘ As 1 said > we do 
Commission on Appointm?^ m ^ fr ° nt to beg the 
disagree with their armni t* 1 S ’ Wb ° m * gbt not °nly 

papers inside the drawer omeTable^ 1 ^ Wde their 

That is our sad py^ 

on Appointments whichTe^Jtg^ CommisSion 

If they alreIdy E underweM U t hree P ^’ Madam President 
reason then that the £pre^ t , S ^ nm ?- * ith more 

represented by the Commission on a £S °* tbe people 

be allowed to make the final scre^^f™ 6 ^^ 01 ^ 
sensitive positions which might involve ** i P J° ple ir 
human rights and the security 
SteitC' 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, the Presiden 
of the Philippines is a representative of the people whc 
screens the front line generals. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, may I take the 
floor just for the clarification of the Commissioners. I 
want to raise a vital and informative question. 


MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Abubakar wants to 
be recognized. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, we have been 
debating for so long on the inclusion of rear admiral, 
major general and colonel. I would like to point out 
that in the naval echelon of the Philippine Navy, there 
is only one rear admiral. Why do we not simplify this 
because this problem will not arise as frequently as we 
give the impression in our debate? Since the Commis- 
sioner is more acquainted with the organization of the 
army, may we know how many major generals we 
have? 

MR. DE CASTRO. As of now, we have six major 
generals and one rear admiral who are as follows: 
Major General Magno, commander of the Southern 
Command; Major General Mison, Vice-Chief of Staff; 
Major General Caneso of the army; Major General 
Farolan of the air force; the major general in the Phil- 
ippine Constabulary; Major General Ermita; and the 
rear admiral of the navy who is the flag officer in 
command. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. So we have six major generals 
and one rear admiral. They, as well as the higher echelon 
of the navy, the army and the air force, should not 
pose a big problem to the appointing power. As I un- 
derstand it, their succession is even automatic. As soon 
as a major general in command of a particular branch of 
the Armed Forces has retired, the next senior officer 
succeeds him. So the matter of submitting their appoint- 
ments for confirmation would not be difficult. We 
can solve this by adhering as simply as we had done in 
the previous Constitution and legislation that their 
appointments be confirmed only by the Commission. 
On that note, therefore, instead of exhausting our 
resources because we are not warlike people but peace- 
loving people, we should direct to and concentrate our- 
selves on, the development of a prosperous and happy 
Philippines, not a militaristic Philippines. I am sure this 
problem regarding the rank of military officials will 
not arise as frequently as we are fearful that it might. 
On those bases then, we can dispose of this matter by 
the simple provision as it now appears in the proposed 
draft of the Constitution. Since Commissioner de Castro 
is a general, I respect his ability and his experience. We 
will listen to his counsel and we would like him to tell 
us how this matter could be resolved. On that note, 
I give him my approval in advance. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


519 


MR. DE CASTRO. I thank the Commissioner. I hope 
the Committee will also follow the Commissioner’s 
advice. 


MR. DAVIDE. My amendment is to change “MAJOR 
GENERAL” to BRIGADIER GENERAL and “REAR 
ADMIRAL” to COMMODORE. 


MR. GARCIA. Madam President, may I argue briefly 
against the amendment proposed by Commissioner 
de Castro? 

MR. DE CASTRO. We submit it to a vote. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. May I request the patience and 
indulgence of the Honorable Davide because if I lose 
my amendment, I am going to return to his. So please, 
I request the indulgence of the Commissioner. 

MR. DAVIDE. I do not want Commissioner de Castro 
see a defeat on the floor. I would rather request him 
to agree to the proposal so that both of us will be 
victorious. 


MR. GARCIA. Thank you very much, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

I would like to argue briefly against the amendment 
proposed by Commissioner de Castro. 

I believe the Commission on Appointments, in the 
matter of confirming the appointments of military 
officers with the rank of colonel and naval captain, is 
important for two reasons: First, I think it is a re- 
affirmation of the importance of the principle of 
civilian supremacy; and second, because of the fact that 
military officers must also manifest public account- 
ability. I think our very sad experience during martial 
law proves this in that very often the appointing power 
can exact personal loyalty. And I think the composition 
of the Commission on Appointments where we have 
representatives of the people will make sure that mili- 
tary officers will be elected, nominated and appointed 
on the basis of these two principles. I think this is very 
important. 

I would like, therefore, to take a firm stand against 
the amendment of Commissioner de Castro. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I think we are now 
ready to vote since we have discussed this enough. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know how line 28 will 
now read? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Line 28 would now read: “from 
the rank of MAJOR GENERAL OR REAR ADMI- 
RAL.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. There was a proposed amendment to 
the amendment of Commissioner de Castro but it was 
rejected by the proponent. I would like to submit it to 
a vote. 


MR. DE CASTRO. I will go on with my proposal as 
of now. 

Madam President, may I ask for a suspension of the 
session. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 4:11 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 4:18 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Since Commissioner de Castro wants 
his proposal acted upon by the Commission, I am with- 
drawing my proposed amendment to his amendment 
and would stick to the original provision of the Article 
as proposed by the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the reaction of the Com- 
mittee? 


., ***'' mauam rres- 

i ent, prefers to have the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner de Castro submitted to the floor for the 
consi eration of all the Commissioners. However, the 
sentiment of the Committee is that it will stick to the 
oiigma provision on line 28 regarding the inclusion 
of the colonel and the naval captain. 


THE PRESIDENT. So the Committee does not 
accept the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
de Castro so that line 28 of the committee report 
remains as is. 


THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment to the 
amendment was to include “BRIGADIER GENERAL.” 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, with due 
respect to the amendment of Commissioner Davide 


520 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


to my amendment on line 28, I am relenting the change 
of “colonel” to BRIGADIER GENERAL and “naval 
captain” to COMMODORE. We will submit it to the 
floor if the Committee will not accept it. Line 28 
would now read: “armed forces from the rank of 
BRIGADIER GENERAL or COMMODORE.” 


MR. REGALADO. The Committee, Madam Pres- 
ident, does not accept the amendment. It is its senti- 
ment that it will stick to the original provision of the 
proposed Article and, therefore, we request that the 
proposed amendment be submitted to the floor. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 


VOTING 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro has 
explained already his reasons and, therefore, we are 
now ready to vote. 


Those in favor of the proposed amendment on page 
/, line 28 to change “colonel” to “BRIGADIER GEN- 
ERAL” and “naval captain” to “COMMODORE ” 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand ) 

raise their hand - <smna 

The results show 12 votes in favor and 22 against- 
is lost ° P ° araendmen ‘ of Commissioner de Castro 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT The Artino Fir, t j 
nized ' ine Actm g Floor Leader is recog- 


reco£iized OMUL0 ' 1 3Sk that Comm issioner Foz be 
THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized 

APPOINT ANY. * Xt Wlth HE sha LL ALSC 

/accepts th? proposed ^melldmen^be ^ ^ Committe 
clear that those other officers b ca , use makes i 
have to be confirmed by the Com ^ therein do no 
merits. Y 6 Comm ^on on Appoint 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recos 

nized. & 


MR. DAVIDE. I just would like to get a clearer in 
tion. With the acceptance of that proposed amendm 


would Congress be prohibited from creating an office 
and vesting the authority of appointing the officials 
therein on the President, with the requirement that such 
appointments should bear the conformity or consent 
of the Commission on Appointments? Under the 
proposal, it would seem that all other such officials 
may be appointed without the consent of the Commis- 
sion on Appointments, prohibiting, therefore, the 
legislature to so create an office for which the require- 
ment for consent of the Commission on Appointments 
for positions therein is stated in the law itself. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, the constitutional 
list of officers whose appointments need the con- 
firmation of the Commission on Appointments is not 
exclusive. If the Congress is so minded, it may require 
other officers also to be confirmed by the Commission 
on Appointments. 

MR. DAVIDE. So would the proponent accept an 
amendment to his amendment, so that after “captain” 
we insert the following words: AND OTHER OF- 
FICERS WHOSE APPOINTMENTS ARE VESTED IN 
HIM IN THIS CONSTITUTION? 

FR. BERNAS. It is a little vague. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, there are positions 
provided for in the Constitution whose appointments 
are vested in the President, as a matter of fact like those 
of the different constitutional commissions. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. This list of officials 
found in Section 16 is not an exclusive list of those 
appointments which constitutionally require con- 
firmation of the Commission on Appointments. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is the reason I seek the incor- 
poration of the words I proposed. 

FR. BERNAS. Will Commissioner Davide restate his 
proposed amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. After “captain,” add the following: 
AND OTHER OFFICERS WHOSE APPOINTMENTS 
ARE VESTED IN HIM IN THIS CONSTITUTION. 

FR. BERNAS. How about: “AND OTHER OF- 
FICERS WHOSE APPOINTMENTS REQUIRE CON- 
FIRMATION UNDER THIS CONSTITUTION”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President, that is modi- 
fied by the Committee. 

FR. BERNAS. That will clarify things. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept? 

MR. REGALADO. Just for the record, of course, that 
excludes those officers which the Constitution does not 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


521 


require confirmation by the Commission on Appoint- 
ments, like the members of the judiciary and the Om- 
budsman. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. That is very clear 
from the modification made by Commissioner Bernas. 

THE PRESIDENT. So we have now this proposed 
amendment of Commissioners Foz and Davide. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, before we vote, 
may I be clarified. As worded now, other officers, 
aside from those enumerated here, may also be 
appointed by the President with the confirmation of 
the Commission on Appointments, if it is so provided 
in this Constitution. I remember Commissioner Bernas 
say that officers may also need the confirmation of 
the Commission on Appointments if so provided by law, 
so that the approval of that amendment which says 
“UNDER THIS CONSTITUTION” does not exclude 
the power of the legislature to enact a law pioviding 
that these officials shall need the confirmation of the 
Commission on Appointments. 

FR. BERNAS. It does not. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to tins 
proposed amendment of Commissioners Foz and 
Davide as accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment, as amended, is 
approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I think the Com- 
mittee members have tailed to provide for recess 
appointments. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MS. AQUINO. Are we allowing the President to make 
appointments while the Congress is in recess? If so. I 
would suggest that we take up Article VII. Section 10 
of the 1935 Constitution, which directly pertains to this 

situation. 

FR BERNAS. Madam President, we quite recognize 
that but we have to think this out a little bit more 
because Article VII, Section 10 (4) of the 1935 Consti- 
tution provides: 

The President shall have the power to make appointments 

during the recess of the Congress, but such appointments 

shall be effective only until disapproval by the Commission 


on Appointments or until the next adjournment of the 

Congress. 

This provision, however, was written under the 
circumstances of the 1935 Constitution when the 
session days were only 100 days. Today, we only have 
a 30-day compulsory recess which, however, does not 
exclude a longer voluntary recess. So the question is: 
Can the President make appointments while Congress 
is in recess, either involuntary or compulsory? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we let Commissioner Bernas 
finish first with his comments. 

FR. BERNAS. I am just thinking aloud. Madam 
President, whether a provision similar to that of the 
1935 Constitution is necessary, or if we must adjust 
the provision of the 1935 Constitution to the circum- 
stances of the present Constitution which has a very 
brief recess. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I believe the provision in the 1935 
Constitution refers to ad interim appointments. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So that when appointments of 
the officials by the President which need the con- 
firmation of the Commission on Appointments are 
made when the Congress is in recess — these are ad 
interim appointments — the President may then submit 
such appointments to Congress when it begins to be in 
session. This is just for the information of the body, 
Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, we quite understand that, but 
as we say, our compulsory recess now is only 30 days. 
So under such circumstances, is it necessary to provide 
toi ad interim appointments? Perhaps there should be 
a little discussion on that. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. My concern is that unless this problem 
is addressed, this might present problems in terms of 
anticipating interruption of government business, consi- 
dering that we are not certain of the length of involun- 
tary recess or adjournment of the Congress. We are 
certain, however, of the involuntary adjournment o 


522 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


the Congress which is 30 days, but we cannot leave to 
conjecture the matter of involuntary recess. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct, but we are trying to 
look for a formula. I wonder if the Commissioner has 
a formula which we will discuss later but not at the 
moment. Perhaps, we can move on to something else. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, because the line states 
“courts.” It does not say which court. 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we seek the advice of 
Commissioner Concepcion? 

MR. ROMULO. He is not in at the moment. 


MR. ROMULO. Would the Committee like to defer 
that question? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will defer this particular 
question. 

Is there any other Commissioner who desires to 
propose an amendment? 


MR. DAVIDE. On Section 16, Madam President. 

^ R - DE L ? S REYES - Madam President, may I pro- 
pose an amendment on line 16. 

niz™ PRESIDENT - Commissioner Davide is recog- 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, on page 8 line 
folfowing C01Tlma ° aft6r “^Partments”" fnd ^dd tl 


amentofm. ^ REYES ' Madam President, anteri 

by^mmis^on^^^ojRej^es^ amendme 

‘‘courts” to MEMBO^OF ^HeTud^ICIARY ' 5^° 
^ds who is a pe.onm 

fore, rt should be MEMBERS Of^THE J UDICIAR 

CIARY,” P asabo D dy NT h Sh ° Uld be “in the JUE 

MR. ROMULO. Yes “in TI 
the MEMBERS.” ’ n the JU DICIARY,” not “ 


the appointment of inferior off t0 3 . read; “ h 
alone, in the courts, or i n the hi T the P 
so to have symmetry it shonlH a A° f depart 
- THE JUDICIARY” ° Uld be m th e ME 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say in 
changing “courts” to “MEMBERS OF THE JUDI- 
CIARY”? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Anterior amendment on page 8, 
line 1, Madam President, which I indicated during the 
period of interpellations regarding the use of the word 
“inferior.” I understand from the Commissioners that 
we can delete “inferior” without sacrificing its mean- 
ing. 

MR. REGALADO. So line 1 would now read: “of 
OTHER officers LOWER IN RANK.” 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee accepts the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted 
the amendment. 

Is there any objection to change “inferior” to “OTHER 
officers LOWER IN RANK”? ( Silence ) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Let us go back to the amendment of Commissioner 
de los Reyes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Does the Committee accept 
my proposed amendment? 

MR. REGALADO. The amendment of Commissioner 
de los Reyes is to change “courts” to “MEMBERS OF 
THE JUDICIARY.” 

FR. BERNAS. It is a little vague if we just say “in 
the MEMBERS OF THE JUDICIARY ” because we 
have collegiate and noncollegiate bodies. So for 
instance, if we take the case of the Supreme Court 
when we say “MEMBERS OF THE JUDICIARY,” 
which of the members of the Supreme Court would 
have the appointing authority? 


THE PRESIDENT So does the Commissi 
that every judge will be entitled to annoi, 
son nel? Am I correct? Ppon 


MR. DE LOS REYES. But the point is that the first 
sentence refers to the President alone; it does not say 
“executive.” And the last portion refers to “the heads 
of departments” because these are persons who appoint, 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


523 


but the middle portion refers to “courts” which do not 
appoint. How can the courts appoint? 

FR. BERNAS. How about “in the HEADS OF 
courts”? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is here 
now, may we seek his opinion on this matter? May we 
ask Commissioner Regalado to kindly inform Commis- 
sioner Concepcion of the issue. 

Commissioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I suppose that insofar as col- 
legiate courts are concerned, certain rules will be 
adopted by the Supreme Court. Under the present 
setup, court employees are actually appointed by the 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. I suppose in this 
case, when we speak of courts, it refers to the judges 
presiding in courts. After all, the presiding judge acts 
in behalf of the court. These are court employees, and 
whoever presides performs the administrative functions 
corresponding to his particular station. Insofar as clerks 
of courts are concerned, generally, they are appointed 
by the Supreme Court in agreement with collegiate 
courts through the passage of a resolution that is 
deemed to be an appointment by the court concerned. 
So I think we can retain the word “courts” since it has 
been used for so long in the past, and it has an estab- 
lished connotation. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I submit if that is the ex- 
planation, although I find the wordings inconsistent. 
It refers to the President and heads of departments as 
officers, but it does not say “or in the Executive Depart- 
ment.” The middle portion refers to courts, and I do 
not think the courts can appoint. But if the Committee 
wants to retain this in this particular Article, I submit. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Is Commissioner de los Reyes insisting on his amend- 
ment? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I am not insisting, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. On page 8, line 3, change the period 
(.) after “departments” to a comma (,) and add AGEN- 
CIES COMMISSIONS, OR BOARDS. This is just to 
complete the enumeration in the 1935 Constitution 
from which this additional clause was taken. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Just a point of clarification, 
Madam President. I think this was taken from the 1973 


Constitution. The 1935 Constitution speaks only of 
“heads of departments.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, it is the 1973 Constitution 
rather. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee need time to 
consider? 

MR. SUMULONG. We accept the amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
addition of the words “AGENCIES, COMMISSIONS, 
OR BOARDS” on line 3, page 8? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Bengzon be recognized for an amendment 
on Section 16 with regard to ad interim appointments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, apropos of the 
matter raised by Commissioner Aquino and after con- 
ferring with the Committee, Commissioner Aquino and 
I propose the following amendment as the last para- 
graph of Section 16, the wordings of which are in the 
1935 Constitution: THE PRESIDENT SHALL HAVE 
THE POWER TO MAKE APPOINTMENTS DURING 
THE RECESS OF CONGRESS WHETHER IT BE 
VOLUNTARY OR COMPULSORY BUT SUCH AP- 
POINTMENTS SHALL BE EFFECTIVE ONLY UNTIL 
DISAPPROVAL BY THE COMMISSION ON AP- 
POINTMENTS OR UNTIL THE NEXT ADJOURN- 
MENT OF THE CONGRESS. 

This is otherwise called the ad interim appointments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept? 

MR. SUMULONG. We accept the amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote, Madam President, 
may I propound just one or two questions? 

_ THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. The amendment refers to appoint- 
ments which require confirmation by the Commission 
on Appointments. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. It does not refer to appointments 
which do not need such confirmation by the Commis- 


524 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


sion on Appointments because it is understood that the MR. REGALADO. Madam President, may the Corn- 
President can appoint anytime. mittee react to that? 


MR. BENGZON. That is correct. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please. 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendment of Commissioners Aquino and 
Bengzon, adding a paragraph to the last paragraph of 
Section 16? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. I believe there are no more amend- 
ments on Section 16. We are now on Section 17. I ask 
that Commissioner Jamir be recognized. 

PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 


MR. JAMIR. Madam President, on Section 17, pag< 
M anr/’ “ convic tion ,” delete the perioc 

will now re-,H ‘‘f AL JUDG MENT, so that line ' 

BY FINAL JUDGMENT"” f ° rfeitUreS ’ after convictio 

MR. SUMULONG. The Committee accepts. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you very much. 

proposed ^m^ndment of C^ ° bjection to thi 
has been accents i °[ Comrnissl °ner Jamir whicl 
Chair hears none- tin ^ the , c °mmittee? (Silence) Th 
none ’ the amendment is approved. 

recognized^ Ic^im h aSk that Gornm issioner Tan b< 
section. introduce an amendment on the sam< 

RESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized 

S ™^; resident ’ iines 7 to 9 state: 
violations of cornm^ l * ° 8rant executi ve clemency for 

legislation. Practices laws may be limited by 

I suggest that this h« ^ , 

first, violations of corruntl! ^ ° n the grounds thal 

little offense like stealing n 1CeS may include a ver 
is more important, I ee t t , second > which I thinj 
wrongly, that subconscious 6 impression , rightly o 
tution on the premise that In WC r fe draftin g 3 consti 
be bad and dishonest and cn.° Ur future Presidents wil 
be lacking in wisdom. There for^m- 1 ^’ their acts wil 
contribute towards the creation / S Article seems t< 
Constitution or a President with^asT anti ' Presiden 
but no corresponding power except to S° nsibllltie 
law. Therefore. I request that these lines be deleted^ 13 


MR. REGALADO. This was inserted here on the 
resolution of Commissioner Davide because of the fact 
that similar to the provisions on the Commission on 
Elections, the recommendation of that Commission 
is required before executive clemency is granted because 
violations of the election laws go into the very political 
life of the country. 

With respect to violations of our Corrupt Practices 
Law, we felt that it is also necessary to have that sub- 
jected to the same condition because violation of our 
Corrupt Practices Law may be of such magnitude as to 
affect the very economic system of the country. Never- 
theless, as a compromise, we provided here that it will 
be the Congress that will provide for the classification 
as to which convictions will still require prior recom- 
mendation; after all, the Congress could take into 
account whether or not the violation of the Corrupt 
Practices Law is of such magnitude as to affect the 
economic life of the country, if it is in the millions or 
billions of dollars. But I assume the Congress in its 
collective wisdom will exclude those petty crimes of 
corruption as not to require any further stricture on the 
exercise of executive clemency because, of course, there 
is a whale of a difference if we consider a lowly clerk 
committing malversation of government property or 
funds involving one hundred pesos. But then, we also 
anticipate the possibility that the corrupt practice of 
a public officer is of such magnitude as to have virtually 
drained a substantial portion of the treasury, and 
then he goes through all the judicial processes and later 
on, a President who may have close connections with 
him or out of improvident compassion may grant 
clemency under such conditions. That is why we left it 
to Congress to provide and make a classification based 
on substantial distinctions between a minor act of 
corruption or an act of substantial proportions. 

SR. TAN. So. why do we not just insert the word 
GROSS or GRAVE before the word “violations”? 

MR. REGALADO. We feel that Cqngress can make a 
better distinction because “GRAVE” or “GROSS” can 
be misconstrued by putting it purely as a policy. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I speak in favor of the pro- 
posed amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


525 


MR. RODRIGO. The power to grant executive 
clemency is essentially an executive power, and that is 
precisely why it is called executive clemency. In this 
sentence, which the amendment seeks to delete, an 
exception is being made. Congress, which is the legis- 
lative arm, is allowed to intrude into this prerogative 
of the executive. Then it limits the power of Congress 
to subtract from this prerogative of the President to 
grant executive clemency by limiting the power of 
Congress to only corrupt practices laws. There are 
many other crimes more serious than these. Under this 
amendment, Congress cannot limit the power of execu- 
tive clemency in cases of drug addiction and drug 
pushing which are very, very serious crimes that can 
endanger the State; also, rape with murder, kidnapping 
and treason. Aside from the fact that it is a derogation 
of the power of the President to grant executive 
clemency, it is also defective in that it singles out just 
one kind of crime. There are far more serious crimes 
which are not included. 

MR. REGALADO. I will just make one observation 
on that. We admit that the pardoning power is an 
executive power. But even in the provisions on the 
COMELEC, one will notice that constitutionally, it is 
required that there be a favorable recommendation by 
the Commission on Elections for any violation of 
election laws. 

At any rate, Commissioner Davide, as the principal 
proponent of that and as a member of the Committee, 
has explained in the committee meetings we had why he 
sought the inclusion of this particular provision. May 
we call on Commissioner Davide to state his position. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am constrained to rise to object to 
the proposal. We have just approved the Article on 
Accountability of Public Officers. Under it, it is man- 
dated that a public office is a public trust, and all 
government officers are under obligation to observe 
the utmost of responsibility, integrity, loyalty and 
efficiency, to lead modest lives and to act with patriot- 
ism and justice. 

In all cases, therefore, which would go into the very 
core of the concept that a public office is a public trust, 
the violation is itself a violation not only of the eco- 
nomy but the moral fabric of public officials. And that 
is the reason we now want that if there is any convic- 
tion for the violation of the Anti-Graft and Corrupt 
Practices Act, which, in effect, is a violation of the 
public trust character of the public office, no pardon 
shall be extended to the offender, unless some limi- 
tations are imposed. 

Originally, my limitation was, it should be with the 
concurrence of the convicting court, but the Commit- 


tee left it entirely to the legislature to formulate the 
mechanics at trying, probably, to distinguish between 
grave and less grave or serious cases of violation of the 
Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act. Perhaps this is 
now the best time, since we have strengthened the Ar- 
ticle on Accountability of Public Officers, to accom- 
pany it with a mandate that the President’s right to 
grant executive clemency for offenders or violators of 
Taws relating to the concept of a public office may be 
limited by Congress itself. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I briefly speak in favor of 
the amendment by deletion. 

Madam President, over and over again, we have been 
saying and arguing before this Constitutional Commis- 
sion that we are emasculating the powers of the 
presidency, and this provision to me is another clear 
example of that. So, I speak against this provision. Even 
the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutions do not provide 
for this kind of provision. 

I am supporting the amendment by deletion of 
Commissioner Tan. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Tingson would like to 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I am also in favor 
of the amendment by deletion because I am in sym- 
pathy with the stand of Commissioner Francisco “Soc” 
Rodrigo. I do believe and we should remember that 
above all the elected or appointed officers of our Re- 
public, the leader is the President. I believe that the 
country will be as the President is, and if we sys- 
tematically emasculate the power of this presidency, the 
time may come when he will be so handcuffed that he 
will no longer be able to act like he should be acting. 

So, Madam President, I am in favor of the deletion of 
this particular line. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Colayco would like 
to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you very much, Madam 
President. 

I seldom rise here to object to or to commend or to 
recommend the approval of proposals, but now 1 
that the proposal of Commissioner Tan is worthy of 
approval of this body. 


526 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


Why are we singling out this particular offense? 
There are other crimes which cast a bigger blot on the 
moral character of the public officials. 

Finally, this body should not be the first one to 
limit the almost absolute power of our Chief Executive 
in deciding whether to pardon, to reprieve or to com- 
mute the sentence rendered by the court. 

I thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now? 


MR. ROMULO. We are ready to vote, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee, Madam Pres- 
ident, prefers to submit this to the floor and also 
because of the objection of the main proponent, Com- 
missioner Davide. So we feel that the Commissioners 
should vote on this question. 


MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Padilla would like to 
be recognized, and after him will be Commissioner 
Natividad. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR C PA DILLA. Only one sentence, Madam President, 
the Sandiganbayan has been called the Anti-Graft 
t J 1 * ^ s * s a U°wed to stay, it would mean that 
h/iinvti t * power to grant pardon or reprieve will 
when pi° . e cases decided by the Anti-Graft Court, 
the Revise sta ^^’ there are many provisions in 
offenses C ° de that penalize ™ re serious 

and the case W ^ en tkere is a judgment of conviction 
of executive J 116nts tke consideration of the exercise 
Revised Penal usu ally under Article V of the 

exercise of el ° 6 tke j uc * ge will recommend such 
amendment £V°- ‘ * favw ° f the 

deletion of ,h is , a P st sen, eLtaTcr„T7. *” 

Fi™Leade? IDENT ' Are we ready to vote now > Mr - 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Tan to delete 
the last sentence of Section 17 appearing on lines 7, 
8 and 9, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Few Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 34 votes in favor and 4 votes 
against: the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, there arc no more 
amendments on Section 17. There are two register . 4 
speakers for Section 1 8, Commissioners de Castro and 
Quesada. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

On line 1 5 of Section 1 8, instead of the words 
“Monetary Board,” insert CONGRESS so it will read: 
“The President may contract or guarantee foreign and 
domestic loans on behalf of the Republic of the Philip- 
pines with the prior concurrence of CONGRESS.” 


MR. NATIVIDAD. 


Just one more. 


nized. E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Natividad is recog- 


MK. NATIVIDAD I i 

which will again chin mrf™ a SO against th is pro\ 
In case of other crW ^ powers from the Presi 
we extend probation trwi S convicte( J in our soi 
have already been convicted™, in thiS Case ’ 
only way we can offer mercy to Th 
executive clemency extended^ h 1 her ? 1S througi 
If we still close this avenue to ** 

prejudiced even worse than th* tley wou 

iiscious killers in our society and the 

deserve this opprobrium and nnnid n0t tllink 
new Constitution. Punishment unde 

I am in favor of the proposed amendment of 

missioner Tan. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, the Committee 
does not accept the amendment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I be allowed to explain my 
amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro may 
explain his amendment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

The external debt of the Philippines is $26 billion, 
and this is the cause of our economic crisis at this time. 
All these debts were contracted by the Chief Executive 
without any check from the Batasan. We like a system 
of check and balance in our system of government; that 
is, between the executive, the legislative and the judi- 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


527 


ciary. We do not like to put in the hands of the Chief 
Executive alone the matter of contracting loans and 
increasing our external debt. The proposition of the 
Committee is through the Monetary Board. The mem- 
bers of the Monetary Board, as we know, are still 
appointees of the President. In short, it is still the Chief 
Executive alone who will contract foreign debt for 
us and put us into the morass of economic crisis. It is, 
therefore, under the system of check and balance 
that Congress should have a hand in contracting foreign 
debts or loans. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Villegas 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR VILLEGAS. I would like to suggest an amend- 
ment to the amendment of Commissioner de Castro. 
First, let me give the background. 

The function of borrowing is an executive prerogative 
that is subject to the vagaries of national and interna 
tional economic conditions. There are many reasons 
for the government, meaning the Executive, to bo 
collaDse of nrices of our export products that lead to 
very reduced government revenues; a sudden significant 
incTeaL in tte P*es of goods that we ^porf e^ec.aUy 

after the two oil shocks; a calamity that may affect the 
lives of thousands of Filipinos; a drop m govemnien 
revenues because of an econom.c dump, hmmng he 

poor and to pay employees R j not 

, xU „„ j y ran eo on and on. borrowing is noi 

and others, and 1 can gu there 

• i s-i ^nd a^ain, I would like to say tnar mere 

IsSendencyTo emTsculate the power of the Execu- 
tive even in this necessary economic function. 

As we have informed the body earlier, in the Article 
t r Fconomy and Patrimony, we are going to 

on National Mo ^ e tary Board be independent of 

rive through a composition which would make 
Z maior ty of °he members of the Monetary Board 
cole from the private sector. And as we have said, the 
nrivate sector is not synonymous with business The 
private sector can include representatives from labor 
private sect amendment to the amendment 

and other groups. t is: THE MONETARY 

board W shall fix a limit to foreign BOR- 

ROWING. 

To dve the background, there is a limit set by the 
Monetary Board to foreign borrowings, which is 20 
percent called the debt service ratio; that is, the ratio 
of the ’annual servicing of principal and interest to 
our total export earnings both in goods and services. 
That can be set by the Monetary Board because it has 
the expertise to determine what is a prudent limit. 
For Congress to concur, I would suggest that the Mone- 


tary Board shall fix a limit to foreign borrowings which 
can be exceeded only with the concurrence of the 
majority of Congress. I think that is where we should 
definitely have some kind of a check, if and when the 
Executive finds it necessary to exceed the limit set by 
the Monetary Board. And I maintain that there are 
extraordinary situations where the government should 
be able to go over the limit because of an emergency. 
Then, that is the time that we should get the Congress 
to concur. That is the amendment I would like to 
introduce. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, may I say a 
few words on the proposal of the Honorable Villegas. 
He speaks of a calamity which will prompt the Executive 
to contract foreign borrowings. The existence of a 
calamity is normally provided in our budget which is 
not part of the foreign borrowings. The existence of a 
calamity is normally provided in our budget which is not 
part of the foreign borrowings. He speaks of a proposal 
on the work of a new Monetary Board. Until we see that 
Monetary Board will we be able to gauge the inde- 
pendence of that body from the shackles of the Execu- 
tive. We are fully aware that our economic morass at 
this time is due to the extravagance and the use of 
power by the Executive without any check even from 
the Batasang Pambansa. 

Madam President, before we go into foreign borrow- 
ings, our economists, good as they are, should have a 
good planning, a three-year plan, a five-year plan and a 
ten-year plan, for the economic recovery of our coun- 
try, so that they will know from the very beginning 
how much they will borrow from a certain year to a 
certain year, and Congress should be part of this plan. 
Therefore, concurrence of Congress is necessary. 

I, therefore, present that foreign borrowings must 
have the concurrence of Congress voting jointly. 


MR. VILLEGAS. May I reply. 

First of all, definitely, there are contingencies that 
are always included in the budget of the government, 
but there are precisely certain types of calamities that 
cannot be included in these contingencies, and this is 
just, as I said, one of the many, many situations that 
may confront the Executive which would require 
foreign borrowings. 


. uiai me Jivc-yeai picu 

a is going to be submitted by a central plannin] 
agency — w ether we call it NEDA or something else - 
wi e determined by the legislature and should includi 
tlie amount of borrowings that can be foreseen within t 
live-year horizon, for example. But we know very wel 
a a pmn is only a plan. For example, no one could 
lave fc> reseen the tremendous increase in oil prices in 
le 'Os, and that was exactly why we have to give a 
lot of elbow room to the executive to meet the contin- 
gencies from year to year. And I think, as long as we in- 
clude the provision that would make the Monetary 


528 


THURSDAY, |ULY 31, 1986 


Board independent by making sure that the majority of 
the members will not be Cabinet ministers, it would be 
sufficient to have the Monetary Board concur in 
ordinary borrowings. And as I said, the exact amend- 
ment that I would like to suggest is on line 16 of page 8. 
After the word “Board,” the next sentence will read: 
THE MONETARY BOARD SHALL FIX A LIMIT TO 
FOREIGN BORROWING WHICH CAN BE EX- 
CEEDED ONLY UPON CONCURRENCE OF THE 
MAJORITY OF CONGRESS. Then continue: “The 
Monetary Board shall, within thirty (30) days . . .” 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, one question. How 
often will the Monetary Board fix the ceiling? 


MR. NATIVIDAD. May I ask Commissioner Villegas 
to yield to a few questions just to clarify certain mat- 
ters? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I would like to ask this question 
from the perspective of Congress. Before the Congress- 
men were elected for four years. In our draft, we are 
recommending that they be elected for three years. The 
proponent’s perception here is that the Monetary Board 
is given this duty and responsibility because it takes 
expertise and consistency to perform these duties. Am I 
correct? 


MR. VILLEGAS. This 20 percent that has been set 
by the Monetary Board has been there for 10 years. So, 
it is something that should be left to the Monetary 
Board to decide. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Exactly, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Which may be absent in the case 
of Members of Congress? 


MR. MAAMBONG. May we know the exact wordings 
again, please. 


Arrmc'rYi> L v E S AS ' 1116 ame ndment will read: TH 
FORFtr1e RY nr?P^ RD SHALL FIX A LIMIT T 
TFFnFn N nM?^ R0WING WHICH CAN BE E} 
MA E IORFT^nc Y ^ UP ° N CONCURRENCE OF TH 

LY 0?sEPArXte?? GRESS ' lhen " e Ca " Say ,0,N ' 


MR. DE CASTRO 
SEPARATELY” now? 


Does the proponent prefer 


MR. 


VILLEGAS. I will leave it to the Committee. 


.h^Mon^tai^^oai^slialTfix 5 ^ , Pr ° ponent said 

limit? 1 1 a hrmt > how mu ch is 


MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Because they are being elected 
every three years, and if they are not elected, there will 
be no consistencies. I am asking this question from the 
perception of a Congressman because I served in the 
Congress and I know the difficulties of a Congressman, 
even if he is an economist. 

As an economist, what are the qualities that the 
proponent would expect from a Monetary Board mem- 
ber in order to perform this particular responsibility? 

MR. VILLEGAS. He should understand, for example, 
the workings of the international financial community: 
what happens to interest rates and exchange rates year 
in and year out, and what the demands of the domestic 
economy are as far as money supply and credit are con- 
cerned. There are just so many that these should be left 
to experts in monetary management. 


MR. VILLEGAS. How much is the limit? 
MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. 


Board. Righ^no^,' ^ t0 the Mone 

debt service ratio. ld ’ the tlgure is 20 per 


MR. NATIVIDAD. And these are just the basic quali- 
fications? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Exactly. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. And even if one is an expert, his 
expertise must be updated. Is that not correct? 


MR. DE CASTRO. This is tn 
ident. The Monetary Board f Problem ’ Mada n 
had been cooperating with the"^ the P3St 1 
where we are today. This is tho Execu tive to \ 
a check by Congress. Very reason why v 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog 

nized e 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Then, it goes to say that even in 
the Monetary Board, we have to choose not only from 
among the most qualified but the most experienced as 
well to perform these duties. Does the Gentleman per- 
ceive a situation where he will find this particular, speci- 
fic and necessary qualification in Members of Congress? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Probably a few; yes, definitely. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Can he? 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


529 


MR. VILLEGAS. There can be some. I am not pre- 
judging the qualities of Congressmen. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But they can be removed every 
three years, and when we speak of expertise, we cannot 
speak in terms of three years. If a Congressman will no 
longer be there after three years, the consistency in up- 
dating the information will be interrupted and the 
necessary contacts will be terminated. I am for Congress 
to have the power to concur but I prefer that people 
should be qualified. Regardless of what happened 
before, because that was yesterday, I am worried about 
today and tomorrow. It is not just because the Moneta- 
ry Board connived or conspired before; I have no 
evidence to that effect. But granting, without admitting, 
that the Monetary Board failed in their duty to stop the 
debauchery of public funds or loans, it would not 
justify the putting up of a mechanism that is completely 
incapable of servicing this type of responsibility and 
advising our President on the viability of foreign loans. 
Am I correct, Madam President? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am putting aside what happened 
before. I just want to learn from what happened before 
so it will not be repeated today or tomorrow. And the 
lesson I learned was to put the necessary people who 
are qualified in this type of work. Maybe if Congress is 
fit for this type of work, well and good. But replacing 
the Monetary Board with Congress, I would object to. 
How about the Gentleman? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I would also object. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Monsod would like to 
interpellate Commissioner de Castro. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, before that, 
I would suggest that we clarify the parliamentary situa- 
tion. It appears to me that there was a primary amend- 
ment suggested by Commissioner de Castro, which was 
supposed to have been amended by a proposal of 
Commissioner Villegas. But the way I see it, the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Villegas is not really an amend- 
ment to the amendment. The proposed amendment ot 
Commissioner de Castro can stand on its own without 
the proposed amendment to the amendment by Com- 
missioner Villegas. So, I suggest very strongly, Madam 


President, that we take up at the proper time, according 
to the priorities of the Acting Floor Leader, the primary 
amendment of Commissioner de Castro, then probably 
we can take up the amendment of Commissioner 
Villegas. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the Acting Floor 
Leader agrees. 

THE PRESIDENT. Before that, let us hear first 
Commissioner Monsod, if he has anything to say on the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner de Castro. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, may I have a 
word on Commissioner Natividad’s comment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Just a minute. So that the Com- 
missioners can just reply to both. Commissioner Monsod 
would like to ask some questions. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I just want to ask 
Commissioner de Castro one question. In his proposal, 
is he saying that Congress voting jointly must concur 
with each and every loan that is going to be incurred 
by the government? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, because this thing is not an 
everyday loan. It is not thought of just in one night and 
then gotten the following day. As I said, there must be a 
five-year, ten-year economic plan. Based on that plan, 
we can now determine the amount to borrow at a par- 
ticular year, and Congress can then approve it. Also, the 
Congress will have to look into the capability of the 
country to pay before they will approve this. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just have 
one follow-up question on that. If Congress voting 
jointly must concur with each and every loan, can I also 
assume that Congress then will look into the merits of 
the companies and the projects for each and every loan 
in order to arrive at that conclusion? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Certainly. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I think we have 
discussed this enough. Can we have the reaction of the 
Committee and submit the amendment to a vote? 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee has already 
acted by not accepting the amendment ottered by 
Commissioner de Castro and has suggested that it be 
put to a vote. 


530 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


MR. DE CASTRO. Before we vote, may I answer 
Commissioner Natividad’s observations? He said that 
very few Congressmen are economists. They normally 
do not do what economists do. But Congressmen and 
Senators are supposed to be responsible men, so that 
before they decide or look into a certain matter, they 
invite experts, just as we do in the Commission; we are 
not all experts on a particular matter. For example, we 
invite experts from the Commission on Elections and 
get their opinions on matters of elections. The Congress- 
men alone will not decide, if they are responsible 
enough, without consulting experts. 

I submit the matter to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think the issue is clear enough. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the distinguished proponent 
yield to some clarificatory questions? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Gladly, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, before we vote, 
there is something that is not clear. The amendment, as 
I heard it originally, would delete the words “the 
Monetary Board” on lines 15 and 16 and change them 
with the word “CONGRESS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 


de M CasUo° D ,?i G then later on ’ Commissioner 

WhichTwS BU bv R b f S V ° TING ^^TLY 
our bicameral system toa ° han8ine 

plea” E anfwerftat RNT ' WU * Comm 'ssioner de Castro 


vot R ng^eparate?'y , be CONGRES 

it looks like thp R K A H EL ^' 1 put JOI NTLY becau 

is CONGRF<^ vnme c 6 " ° n this word - This time, 
is CUNOKESS VOTING SEPARATELY. 


vuuiNIj 


am™ment E of D C NT ' — many as are in favor of < 

- 

(S^erTMLil rs ^!7Srh^ ™ ,heir hal 

the proposed ame^domn'tls "ost”^ and 24 VOtes agair 
ViSsr "° W haVC tHe of Commissto 

MR. VILLEGAS. On line 16 of 
and the period (.), insert THE MONETARY BOA 
SHALL FIX A LIMIT TO FOREIGN BORROWn 
WHICH LIMIT CAN BE EXCEEDED ONLY w 
CONCURRENCE OF THE MAJORITY OF « 
GRESS, then delete “SEPARATELY.” C 


MR. DAVIDE. At present, we have the Foreign Bor- 
rowings Act which was originally a law enacted by the 
Congress of the Philippines and then amended by several 
decrees thereafter. Would an approval of this amend- 
ment amount to a repeal of the Foreign Borrowings Act? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, it would. 

MR. DAVIDE. The repeal will immediately take 
effect upon the ratification of the Constitution. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, before any further foreign borrow- 
ing may be made, it is necessary that the Monetary 
Board must first fix the limits. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Does not the proponent believe that 
the matter of fixing limits to foreign borrowings is a 
prerogative of the legislature? And that was exactly why 
the old Congress enacted the Foreign Borrowings Act. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No. As I see it, it is a prerogative of 
the Executive with the necessary check and balance 
from the legislative. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under the old Congress, the law itself 
defined the limits within which the President may 
pursue the matter of borrowing. In short, it is just the 
implementation which is vested upon the Executive. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, that is true. But precisely, in 
the old regime, the Monetary Board was not independent 
of the President and that is why we need the legislature 
to give the necessary check. But in this Constitution, we 
would like to have an independent Monetary Board and 
it would be sufficient for that Monetary Board to be the 
one to set the limit. 


THE PRESIDENT. “VOTING SEPARATELY.” 


MR. DAVIDE. And within the limit fixed by the 
Monetary Board, it would even deprive Congress of 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


531 


repealing or modifying the same. In short, we will have a 
Congress which is totally without any power to review, 
to modify or to repeal the limits fixed by the Monetary 
Board. So, we will be enshrining a Monetary Board 
which is even superior to those elected by the people. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, because foreign borrowing, as 
I said earlier, is a prerogative of the Executive. And as 
long as there is that check coming from the legislative, I 
think that would be sufficient. 

MR. DAVIDE. But under the proposal, the legislature 
would be deprived of that particular check. As a matter 
of fact, it may be exceeded only with the concurrence 
of the majority of Congress. In short, the authority of 
Congress to concur in cases where the borrowings may 
be in excess of the limit is limited. 


VIDED BY LAW.” Would that be all right considering 
that this phrase is found in the 1973 Constitution that 
covers everything including the very brilliant interpella- 
tion of Commissioner Davide? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. That will be in lieu of the entire 
sentence. Is that our understanding? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Quesada has an 
amendment to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. But basically, Congress cannot even 
touch what has been approved as the limit by the 
Monetary Board. So, this would insulate the acts of the 
Monetary Board from the representatives of the people. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The way by which Congress can 
influence the Monetary Board would be to include in 
this Constitution the proposed Article on the National 
Economy and Patrimony wherein Congress will deter- 
mine how the Monetary Board is going to be organized 
and its composition. I think this is where the legislature 
can exercise its influence; in fact, it is a very powerful 
influence on the Monetary Board. 

MR. DAVIDE. The influence would only be in the 
composition and creation. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. But not in the exercise of the authori- 
ty. What is important is the control or the check of the 
legislature on the exercise of that authority. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will Commissioner Villegas 
accept an amendment to his amendment? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. After hearing all these argu- 
ments, I propose that lines 13 to 15 will read as follows: 
“The President may contract or guarantee foreign loans 
on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines with the 
prior concurrence of the Monetary Board AND SUB- 
JECT TO SUCH LIMITATIONS AS MAY BE PRO- 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I would like to 
introduce an amendment to the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Villegas. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Just a minute; I think my 
amendment has been accepted by Commissioner 
Villegas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. It is different now. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So what happens? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner de los Reyes 
please read it for the benefit of Commissioner Quesada? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It will read: “. . . with the 
prior concurrence of the Monetary Board AND SUB- 
JECT TO SUCH LIMITATIONS AS MAY BE PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW.” 


mo. vucjAUft. DUI Still, i would like to introduce 
an amendment that will be in keeping with the idea that 
contracting big loans, as a matter of fact, puts the entire 
citizenry under an economic burden. It should not just 
be the responsibility of the government or the Monetary 
Board but the entire Filipino people, to be aware that 
these loans will be a burden for the rest of their lives 
and those of their grandchildren. And, therefore, my 
suggestion is that the President should allow public 
hearings before the concurrence of the Monetary Board. 
I think this is what we are talking about earlier; there 
must be the representation of the people. This is an 
important decision that the President will make and we 
siou e awaie that our children’s children are going 
to be indebted for the rest of their lives. 

I think we can draw a lot of lessons from the history 
o lgeria where the matter of borrowing from the IMF 
was submitted by the President to the people and it 
took them about three months to decide on this. But 
then, the people were educated; they were informed, 
and they knew what they were rejecting or what they 


532 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


were going into. So, I believe that this particular dimen- 
sion is a manifestation of our belief that the people 
should be consulted and it should not just be left to the 
seven members of the Monetary Board. I think the 
mechanisms for such a public hearing can easily be 
provided by Congress. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. Let us vote on that amendment, 
Madam President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No. What does the Committee 
say? 

MR. SUMULONG. The Committee accepts the 
amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 
nized. 


MR. GASCON. Before Commissioner Quesada 
presents her amendment, I would like to make a clarifi- 
cation. Has Commissioner Villegas withdrawn his pro- 
posed amendment? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, it is in addition to the proposed 
amendment. 


r Because the Gentleman’s amendment 

is on me 16, but Commissioner de los Reyes’ proposal 
is prior to this additional sentence. 


MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 


VilLgas if he E fs w^h T ' The Chair asks Commission 
Villegas if he is withdrawing this other amendment. 


MR. REGALADO. It being understood that the 
subsequent sentence proposed by Commissioner Villegas 
is withdrawn. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, then let us vote first on this 
amendment. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, before we vote on 
this amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes, may I 
just be clarified? When we say “SUBJECT TO SUCH 
LIMITATIONS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW,” 
would this process include the legislature? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. Would this entail public hearings? 


me“ wIl L To^™^be OW „'ed nd d erStand ' The amen< 

included ta that general expressfot ^ “ WOU “ 1 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, before the legislature 
enacts a law, it has to conduct public hearings in order 
to be informed of what to do. 


a^asssr:, 
ssr, isir ! wsass 


ordt R no^TvS e G th f d 7 **■*«*, precise!; 
ment, I think the amendment 6 T degr6e 21T 

sioner de los Reyes should ’ ^ a ™ ended b y Con 
Committee, and after that Cr, n ° W be presented tc 
present another amend™!’ 5 3m " llssloner Quesada 
amendment. n ln tbe nature of a prii 


MS. QUESADA. At the committee level? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. At the committee level and the 
plenary sessions. 

MS. QUESADA. So, with that understanding, Madam 
President, I suppose the primary concern that I pre- 
sented earlier would then be addressed. Is that correct? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. So, Madam President, I withdraw 
my amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT Sn tu ,,, 
now of Commissioners 

MR. ROMULO. Yes Madam d 
Commissioner de los Reyes to readT^gam.' ^ WC 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The first „ + 

18 will read: “The President may comraaor^uarar 
foreign loans on behalf of the Republic of the Phi 
pines with the prior concurrence of the Mone 
Board, AND SUBJECT TO SUCH LIMITATION 
may BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 


THE PRESIDENT. In view of that explanation of 
Commissioner de los Reyes? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, because of the understanding 
that when they go through this legislative process, there 
would be public hearings because that is to our interest; 
the people should know the loans that our country is 
contracting. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


533 


MR. GASCON. Before we vote on the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes, although 
Commissioner Quesada feels that the issue of public 
consultation may be included, I do not think her 
proposal will be prejudiced if she still wishes to con- 
sider and present that amendment after, because we are 
speaking of setting limitations and I think she is 
speaking of the process involved in setting such a 
limitation. I only want to clarify that. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Quesada said 
that because of the explanation that when the matter 
is presented to the Congress, as a rule Congress con- 
ducts hearings with the committees before a particular 
law is enacted, she has agreed to withdraw her amend- 
ment. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. Would Commissioner de los 
Reyes then accept me as a cosponsor with that under- 
standing? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Gladly, and I am honored. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, for further 
clarification of the idea of public hearings, would this 
also mean extensive and systematic public hearings 
which are out of town? I mention this because, I think, 
the question of economy is much too serious to be left 
to economists. For instance, as social science research- 
ers, it is our experience that in considering the economic 
programs, loans specifically, and the other sociocultural 
components of society, the environment is often forgot- 
ten. In the case of the Chico Dam and the other dams 
down in the south, tire question of loans is often seen 
merely in terms of energy equations but not in terms of 
the cultural values of the people. And our experience 
tells us that had we held extensive out-of-town public 
hearings, many of these problems would have been 
obviated. So, I am suggesting that public hearings should 
not be held only in the halls of Congress or wherever, 
but systematic and extensive public hearings should be 
held out of town where the people are. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, these proposals can be in- 
cluded in a proposed bill that will be presented to 
Congress. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. This is a joint amendment of 
Commissioners Villegas, de los Reyes and Quesada. 
After the word “Board” on line 16 of page 8, the words 
“SUBJECT TO SUCH LIMITATIONS AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW” are inserted. Did I put it cor- 
rectly? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. May I be informed if this is 
accepted by the Committee? 

MR. REGALADO. It is accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I think that is the 
end of Section 18. Commissioner Foz has an amend- 
ment on Section 19. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. This amendment of mine has prior clear- 
ance of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. On what line? 

MR. FOZ. This is on line 25. The amendment seeks 
to delete in the enumeration of the officials, the words 
“chiefs of bureaus or offices.” I have informed the 
Committee that not only chiefs of bureaus or offices 
and their assistants but also all government officials and 
employees falling under the career service of the civil 
service are already prohibited under the existing civil 
service rules from engaging in any business or in the 
practice of any profession without the permission of 
their department head. And the same rules also provide 
that the department head has the duty to see to it that 
if he grants such permission, there shall be no conflict of 
interest in the discharge of their official functions and in 
the pursuit of their private endeavors. 

MR. REGALADO. For the benefit of all the Commis- 
sioners, may we ask Commissioner Foz to please read 
the sentence starting with ‘The President,” minus the 
words that he seeks to delete? 

MR. POZ. So, Section 19, as amended, would now 
read. The President, Vice-President, members of the 
Cabinet, and their assistants shall not,” et cetera. So, 
delete the words “chiefs of bureaus or offices.” 

THE PRESIDENT. How about “their assistants”? 

MR REGALADO. Who are referred to as the assist- 
ants of the members of the Cabinet? 

MR. FOZ. The words “their assistants” would now 
refer to members of the Cabinet. 

^ THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 

REGALADO. Clarification, Madam President. 
Who are referred to here as the assistants of the mem- 
bers of the Cabinet? 


534 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


MR. FOZ. In my interpellation of the Committee 
Chairman during the sponsorship period, I asked the 
same question: Who are the assistants referred to here? 
And the answer given by the Committee was that they 
refer to the deputy ministers or the assistants of the 
chiefs of bureaus or offices. So then, we have to retain 
the words “and their assistants” in referring to the 
deputies of the Cabinet members. 

MR. REGALADO. So, shall we specify “The Pres- 
ident, Vice-President, AND members of the Cabinet, 
AND THEIR DEPUTIES”? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to be clear about this 
because I am the Chairman of the Committee on Style. 
I would like to know the meaning of “members of the 
Cabinet and their DEPUTIES OR assistants,” because 
since we went back to the presidential system, I remem- 
ber that the members of the Cabinet were called secreta- 
ries and undersecretaries. Is that what is meant here? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. FOZ. Yes, I accept the suggestion that instead 
of the words “their assistants,” it should be “their 
DEPUTIES.” Maybe we should also add “OR assistants.” 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. I see many vacant seats. The 
session is suspended for a few minutes. 

It was 5:46 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 6.10 p.m., the session was resumed. 

the PRESIDENT, -the session is resumed. 
Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

session President > before we suspended tl 

PUTIFS OR t T % su §g es ti° n to put the words D 

Sims ” So v ° Wed by the existi "g w ord “« 

So, line 26 will now read “DFPTTTTF^ c 
assistants shall not . .” DEPUTIES C 

the Committee accepting the amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
MR. SUMULONG. We accept the amendment. 

sioner Foz^ea^ep^auhe danfication ’ wil1 Comm 
repeat the proposed amendment? 


MR. RODRIGO. So that I can change this in the 
Committee on Style later? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular amendment of Commissioner Foz which has 
been accepted by the Committee? ( Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Is there any other amendment? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, this is the last amend- 
ment. On page 9, line 5, after the word . . . 

REV. RIGOS. I have an anterior amendment to that, 
Madam President, on page 8. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. On Section 19, line 26, delete the 
word “term” and in lieu thereof insert the word 
TENURE. Commissioner Nolledo is a coauthor of this 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. SUMULONG. We accept. 


on line 26, add^h^wor^ 

word “assistants.” UTIES OR before th 


MR. FOZ. May I proceed with my other amend- 
ment, Madam President? 


THE PRESIDENT. How about 
offices”? Have we approved that? 


‘chiefs of bureaus or 


MR. JKEljrAJLADO. n as hPon 
President, so that it will read: “Th^ President 
President, members of the Cabinet, and thei 
PUTIES OR assistants ...” 1 


THE PRESIDENT. There is a proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Rigos which has been accepted by the 
Committee. So, let us vote on that first. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Rigos which has been accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


MR. FOZ. May I proceed with my other amendment, 
Madam President? 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


535 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. FOZ. This is on page 9, line 5. Between the 
words “or” and “head,” I would like to insert the words 
CHAIRMEN OR. The intention is to specify just 
the persons being referred to when we speak of 
bureaus and offices. Or the additional amendments I 
will have later on have to do with government-owned 
or controlled corporations and their subsidiaries. On 
line 6, after the word “office,” insert the following 
words: INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR 
CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS AND THEIR 
SUBSIDIARIES. Those are the proposed changes. 

MR. REGALADO. How will the entire paragraph 
now read with the suggested amendments? 

MR. FOZ. I will read the paragraph: “The spouse and 
relatives by consanguinity or affinity within the third 
civil degree of the President shall not be appointed as 
ministers, deputy ministers, CHAIRMEN OR heads of 
bureaus or offices, INCLUDING GOVERNMENT- 
OWNED OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS AND 
THEIR SUBSIDIARIES.” 

May we hear the response of the Committee? I was 
informed that ministers and deputy ministers will be 
changed to secretaries or undersecretaries. That is part 
of the style, I suppose. 


So, the last section in the committee report is Section 
22, plus the amendment of Commissioner Ople, which 
will be Section 23. This will be Section 24. It reads as 

follows: SEC. 24. ALL POWERS AND FUNCTIONS 
NOT INCONSISTENT WITH THIS CONSTITUTION 
VESTED IN THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
UNDER EXISTING LAWS AS WELL AS THOSE 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS NOT VESTED IN ANY 
PARTICULAR OFFICIAL SHALL BE EXERCISED 
BY THE PRESIDENT UNLESS THE CONGRESS 
SHALL PROVIDE OTHERWISE. 

That is my amendment. Before the Committee 
decides whether to accept or reject the amendment, I 
would like to explain briefly. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think all of us are aware that we 
have laws consisting of acts of the old Philippine legis- 
lature, acts of the old Philippine Commission, decrees 
and proclamations that are still valid and existing. And 
there are provisions giving certain powers and functions 
to the President or the Chief Executive. In view of the 
legal maxim of inclusio unius est exclusio alterius, I 
think a safety valve in the form of this proposal should 
be contained in the Constitution. May we ask the 
reaction of the Committee? 


MR. REGALADO. The Committee on Style will take 
care of all those changes in terminology. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the proposed amendment 
accepted by the Committee? 

MR. SUMULONG. Accepted. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Foz which has been 
accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Nolledo wants to propose a posterior amendment, with 
the indulgence of the other Commissioners. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, my 
amendment consists of an additional section. This 
should be considered as Section 24, because I under- 
stand Commissioner Ople presented an amendment 
consisting of one section and it was accepted by the 
Committee. 


FR. BERNAS. The Committee would not violently 
react against this. But just for the record, we would like 
to be clarified about certain provisions which might be 
inconsistent with this Constitution. Specifically, for 
instance, is the power to sequester inconsistent with 
this Constitution, particularly the Bill of Rights? 

MR. NOLLEDO. This provision is fully consistent 
with the Bill of Rights, but 1 may say that this may be 
qualified by provisions in the Transitory Provisions of 
the Constitution. 


R. BERNAS. No, I realize that the intention is that 
the proponent is only adopting those which are con- 
sistent with the Bill of Rights. But specifically, in his 
judgment and in the spirit of this amendment, is it his 
in en ion to include the power to sequester as one of 

frovErhe^r be C ° n,imii " g Umil C °" SreSS 




•a- , “cuessamy, but without pre- 

e provisions in the Transitory Provisions. 


FR BERNAS. Perhaps, I should ask it more directly, 
oes le proponent consider the power to sequester as 
inconsistent with Section 3 of our Bill of Rights now? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would say so, and that is why 
there is a need for a qualifying provision in the event the 
Commission so decides in the Transitory Provisions. 


536 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Could I request the proponent to take 
this up in the Transitory Provisions? I strongly feel that 
the proper area for this or the proper situs is the Transi- 
tory Provisions. I understand that in the Transitory 
Provisions, there will be provisions to the effect that all 
laws, executive orders, etc., shall remain valid until 
otherwise repealed by the Congress of the Philippines. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman will note that in the 
1973 Constitution, there appeared as the last provision 
of the Article on the President a similar provision. I 
think its proper place is under the executive depart- 
ment. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, just for thi 
“ ° f Commiss ion, I am a member of th 
mmittee on Amendments and Transitory Provisions 

resolutior^simllar^t^the one beln^p ^ Wh ° 

“"«", ed ° f t And my 

has aTadyleeTa^veT “"* ‘ hePr ° P ° Sed resolo, io, 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank 
man a coauthor. 


you; I will make the Gentle- 


the Committee on Amendments and Transitory Pro- 
visions and had, in fact, been approved already. My 
Chairman, Commissioner Suarez, is here. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, for a parliamentary 
information. On July 22, 1986, the proposal submitted 
by the Honorable Maambong was approved by our 
Committee, and I will read this particular provision, if it 
will satisfy the fears expressed by the Honorable 
Nolledo: 

All existing laws, decrees, executive orders, proclama- 
tions, letters of instructions and other executive issuances 
not consistent with this Constitution shall remain operative 
until amended, modified or repealed by Congress. . 

If the Gentleman would like to be a coauthor of that 
resolution, he is most welcome. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez, this refers 
to laws or decrees. I believe the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Nolledo refers to powers of the 
Executive or the President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, powers pertinent to the 
President and not vested upon any particular official. 
So, I think there is a fundamental difference which the 
Madam President so correctly pointed out. 

MR. SUAREZ. Except that we will assume that 
those powers are granted by virtue of laws, decrees, 
executive orders, proclamations, etc. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Gladly, Madam President. 

mittee ' 7. rori8ly rccon "ncnd to the Com- 

Secuthe ,hlS ShOUld in the Article on the 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, in order to 
abbreviate the proceedings, I hereby withdraw my 
amendment. 

Thank you. 


Maambon^? s A jutt D waithle that Commi ssione 

direction. 8 for * to be thrown to hi 

does^heConrmittee say'Tptea'se 1 ?' 1 ™' 1 '° d ° that ' Wha 
THE PRESIDENT fn m 

nized. ' eom missioner Aquino is recoj 

MS. AQUINO. That nmno ^ 
missioner Nolledo is fraueht sed J* mendmen t of Con 
would likewise endorse the n 3 ^ ° f danger - 
Davide on this matter, that ifbe ° f Commissio ™ 

mittee that is perpetually in transition T the C ° n 
of Commissioner Suarez. ’ the Commute 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President I wil 
what I have said. The resolution which ’we fil< 
tically on the same term had already been take 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, this is also 
with respect to Section 1 9, page 9, lines 3 to 6. 

Before I propose my amendment, I would like to 
know the intent of the Committee. Is it the sense of 
this provision that if a Vice-President becomes Acting 
President to serve the unexpired term of the disabled 
or recently departed President, relatives of that Vice- 
President, now Acting President, who may be serving 
as ministers in the Cabinet will have to resign? In other 
words, would this particular prohibitory provision 
have retroactive effect on minister-relatives of a Vice- 
President who becomes Acting President? 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


537 


FR. BERNAS. Line 9 says “shall not be appointed,” 
so that prohibition is on appointment, not on con- 
tinuing the hold on the office. So, in a situation like 
that, if the Vice-President becomes President and a 
relative of his is already holding office, then that is not 
covered by this because he did not have to exercise 
any appointment. 


FR. BERNAS. I think we should leave that to the 
body, because the meaning of tills is, we want to pre- 
vent the appointing authority from using his appointing 
power to give this favor to relatives. In the particular 
example, it is not the successor who made the appoint- 
ment, but rather, his predecessor. So, strictly, there was 
no nepotism in the appointment. 


MR. VILLACORTA. In other words, the focus is 
on the appointing process. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. The restriction is on the appoint- 
ing authority. 

MR. VILLACORTA. So that the Cabinet members, 
as well as bureau heads, should not be related by blood 
to the appointing power? 

FR. BERNAS. No, they should not. The appointing 
authority should not appoint relatives. 

MR. VILLACORTA. The intendment of the provi- 
sion then is to prevent nepotism. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. VILLACORTA. But would it not also breed 
nepotism if a Vice-President, who is now Acting 
President, had close relatives within his Cabinet? 

FR. BERNAS. If the Gentleman would like to pro- 
pose an amendment to that effect, that is not covered 
by this. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, because I am addressing 
m y amendment to the real intent of this provision; 
that is, to prevent close relatives from serving a 
President or an Acting President. So, I wonder if the 
Committee would consider this amendment: IF THE 
VICE-PRESIDENT BECOMES ACTING PRESIDENT, 
HIS RELATIVES WHO ARE INCUMBENT SECRE- 
TARIES UNDERSECRETARIES, OR HEADS OF 
BUREAUS OR OFFICES, SHALL BE OBLIGED 
TO RESIGN IMMEDIATELY. 

FR. BERNAS. If he becomes Acting President? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes. In other words, he will 
be serving the unexpired term of a President who has 
become permanently disabled or who has died. 


FR. BERNAS. In that case, he is not Acting President. 

MR. VILLACORTA. So, the correct wording should 
5e: IF THE VICE-PRESIDENT BECOMES PRES- 
IDENT. 

With that modification, would the Committee accept 
that amendment? 


MR. VILLACORTA. But there might be a case of 
nepotism in the course of continuing their duties in 
the case of a Vice-President who is acting as President. 

FR. BERNAS. What I am saying is that nepotism, in 
the technical sense, applies to the act of appointment. 

MR. VILLACORTA. But I am using the word “nepo- 
tism” in its broadest sense; probably the right word 
is “favoritism,” or the difficulty on the part of the 
President to be objective in relating to members of his 
Cabinet because they are close relatives. 

FR. BERNAS. If the Commissioner’s intention is to 
cover that situation, we would have to change the 
words “shall not be appointed as Ministers” to SHALL 
NOT SERVE AS. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Would this phrase, “SHALL 
NOT SERVE AS,” as an alternative amendment, be 
acceptable? 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, may I ask Com- 
missioner Villacorta a question? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


BISHOP BACANI. Does not Commissioner Villacorta 
think that that might be unfair to those who may have 
previously risen to their posts by virtue of sheer merit 
and will now be prejudiced just because, by an accident 
of history , their relative has been elevated to the highest 
office in the land? 


MR. VILLACORTA. In the same vein, it would be 
considered unfair if we apply the original provision 
as is. The relatives of the President would also say that 
this provision is unfair because it bars them from any 
appointment by the appointing authority, just because 
they are related to the President. 


i oarrea trom appomi- 

ment by the President, but if they had been there 

y , t ° ie became President, then they will not 
be barred from continuing in office. 


MR. VILLACORTA. I am trying to go back to the 
root motive of this provision as I interpret it; that is, 
that we do not want to subject the President to public 
criticism. Neither would we want him to be tempte 
to favor his relatives if they are in his Cabinet. That is 


538 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


my interpretation of this provision. That is why I would 
like the Committee to clarify whether this is the real 
motive behind this provision — that we would really 
want the holder of the highest post in the land to be 
free from this burden of having to deal day to day 
with his relatives, who are also members of his official 
family. 


THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair be clarified. Are 
these related within the third civil degree? 

MR. VILLACORTA. These relatives would be in the 
third civil degree. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, will Com- 
missioner Villacorta accept an amendment to his amend- 
ment? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I would like to hear the Com- 
missioner’s amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. May we ask the proponent of the amend- 
ment a question? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 


MR- DE LOS REYES. My amendment is that the 
Commissioner’s proposal may apply to the secretaries 
and undersecretaries because they are members of the 
Cabinet. However, we may exclude the heads of the 
bureaus or other offices which are career positions 
oftentimes. 


MR. FOZ. Is the proponent suggesting that we add 
a new paragraph or sentence after line 6? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Either a new paragraph or a 
new sentence. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Career positions, yes. 


th^NBr^ureai) R ^ Y T^ S ri FOr exam P le > the Directors o 
To S extent n™?’ BureaU ° f Soils a " d others 

amendmem? 16 " 1, W '" * he C °™>^°ner accept m ; 


MR. FOZ. It must be one or the other. 

MR. VILLACORTA. If the Commissioner insists, 
then I propose a new paragraph. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 


,he Commissior 

read his amendmen« YES ' Wl " Commissloner P le! 


po“ R to V add A a CORTA ' ° n pa ® e 9 - after line 6, I ] 
PRFSincMT a r.^ 6W sect * on to read: IF THE VI 

TIVES E WHO B ARF M mrr PRESIDENT ’ HIS RE 

undersecretaries op M S^ NT SECRETARI 

OR OFFICES shaPt’ HEADS OF BURE? 
IMMEDIATELY ALL BE 0BLIGED TO RES] 


MR.. DE LOS REYFS T n 

“OR HEADS OF BTIFfattc ^E° Se to delete the words 
BUREAUS OR OFFICERS.” 

MR. VILLACORTA In ti 

that amendment to my amendment 386 ’ 1 ^ accepting 

MR. DE LOS REYFS wu * 

Committee? ' lat ls the reaction of the 


MR. REGALADO. Let us h 
ment, as amended. ave tEe entire amend- 


MK. VILLACORTA. IF THF vim™ 

becomes president, his RelativIs w E Hn 
incumbent secretaries and unde™ 
taries shall be OBLIGED to rest™ 

diately. 1 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I make an observation. If that 
amendment is approved, we will be more strict with the 
Vice-President than with the President because while the 
prohibition on the President is from appointing his 
relatives, the poor Vice-President who succeeds cannot 
appoint his relatives and not only that, his relatives who 
are already in those positions will have to resign. Why 
should we be more strict with the Vice-President who 
becomes President than with the President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would like to be 
clarified. Does the Commissioner envision a situa- 
tion where, let us say, the wife of the Vice-President is 
appointed by the President to a Cabinet position? When 
the Vice-President becomes President, he as President 
and his wife will be in the Cabinet. Is the Commissioner 
foreseeing such a situation? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, Madam President, that is 
exactly one of the situations that I foresee and that I 
would like to prevent because we have had many sad 
experiences in the past dispensation whereby many 
relatives of the President were appointed as officials of 
his government. At any rate, the heads of bureaus and 
offices will not be included in the prohibition. We are 
more worried about the Cabinet. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


539 


MR. RODRIGO. But my point still holds. May I 
read the provision on lines 3 to 5: 

The spouse and relatives by consanguinity or affinity 

within the third civil degree of the President shall not be 

appointed as minister . . . 

So in the case of the President, the prohibition is 
from appointing his own close relatives, while in the 
case of the Vice-President, even if his close relatives 
have already been appointed by somebody else not by 
him, these relatives would be affected; they would have 
to resign if by accident the President dies and the poor 
Vice-President becomes President. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. I am aware of a previous motion 
which suggested that the promotion to the career service 
would go as far as the undersecretary or the deputy 
minister. That is why we have a former undersecretary , 
Mr. Narciso Albarracin, who rose from the ranks. I 
wonder if persons such as he would also be included 
in the amendment proposed by the honorable Commis- 
sioner. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Is the Commissioner proposing 
an amendment to delete the “Deputy Minister’ ? 

MR. GUINGONA. I do not know what the practice 
would be. But if the ongoing practice then would 
eventually be adopted, perhaps we should exclude also 
the undersecretaries. I am not making any proposa 
but I have in mind the undersecretaries who have risen 
from the ranks like the bureau directors. 

I have another question, Madam President. What if 
an undersecretary has risen from the ranks and a relative 
is elected President? If the President-elect assumes 
office, would that particular undersecretary have to 
resign from his position because of the election of his 
relative as President? 

MR. VILLACORTA. If the Commissioner is talking 
about an elected President, then that would not be 
covered here because we are talking about a Vice 
President who becomes President. 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, but the Commissioner’s 
concern is not on the matter of appointment but on 
the day-to-day relationship between the President an 
the officials that he has mentioned. 

MR. VILLACORTA. So, the Commissioner is asking: 
If the Vice-President, after having served the unexpire 
term of the previous President is elected legitimate y 
to the presidency, should his relatives who are secre- 
taries and undersecretaries resign? 


MR. GUINGONA. No. I am talking of a situation 
where a person was already an undersecretary before the 
President had assumed office, but who happened to be 
related to the President within the third degree of con- 
sanguinity. If the Commissioner’s idea is that it is not 
important whether or not that person is appointed but 
what is important is their relationship, then perhaps 
that should also be covered in the prohibition. 

MR. VILLACORTA. My interpretation is that the 
prohibition in the last case that the Commissioner 
mentioned would be covered by the original provision 
“shall not be appointed as . . .” Usually, the spouse 
and relatives of the President shall not be appointed. 

In other words, a newly elected President now assumes 
an appointing power and, therefore, would be barred 
under this provision from reappointing. 

MR. GUINGONA. So, the Commissioner is talking 
not only of appointment but even reappointment. But 
there is no provision that will require the President 
to reappoint. He may allow a person to continue as an 
undersecretary. This undersecretary I am talking about 
was appointed by his predecessor. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I think that question should 
be thrown to the Committee. May we request clari- 
fication from the Committee whether or not this is 
also part of the intendment; that is, does this prohibit 
not only appointment but also reappointment? 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee, after listening 
to the proposed amendment and the reasons adduced 
in its favor and those against it, does not accept the 
amendment and prefers that it be submitted to the 
floor. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, may I make two 
observations? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. UKA. There is a saying during the days of the 
Roman Empire which says dura lex sed lex which means 
that the law is hard but that is the law. So, let us not 
make hard laws. Besides, this thing refers to appoint- 
ment. If they are already there and they have been pro- 
moted or they rose by sheer luck, by merit, or by 
accident, let us not try to bother them. Let us be merci- 
ful, let us tempei justice with mercy. Besides, we cannot 
choose our relatives. I have cousins who are not very 
good but I cannot say they are not my cousins. We 
cannot choose; we are products of accidents. Once a 
child is conceived, that poor child could not have any 
desire and say, “I want that man to be my father” or 
I want that woman to be my mother.” It has so 
happened that so and so met and something happened. 
So one cannot have any say on the matter. Talking about 


540 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


relations, it is hard to really define all these things. So, 
let us try not to be very harsh because we cannot choose 
our relatives. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I do not 
think that the last question of Commissioner Guingona 
was answered adequately by the Committee. We have 
not yet asked the Committee whether it would accept 
my amendment or not. The question posed by Com- 
missioner Guingona was whether this provision in this 
Article would cover reappointments. Would it constitute 
a prohibition against reappointments? 

MR. REGALADO. The original proposed paragraph 
will cover reappointments. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I propose 
an amendment to the amendment of Commissioner 
Villacorta? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, the proposed 
amendment pertains to Section 19, on page 8, lines 29 
and 30. For purposes of symmetry with line 28, on line 
29 I propose to insert OR INDIRECTLY between the 
words “directly” and “in,” so it would read: “financial- 
ly interested directly OR INDIRECTLY in any contract 
with. . .” 

On line 30, delete the word “financial” and substi- 
tute it with FRANCHISE. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee accepts. Actually, 
the word “financial” here is only a typographical error. 
We will substitute it with “FRANCHISE.” 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

r»FR^Prpi^?2?L A ' My amend ment is to delete “UN- 

th^r SECRETARIES ” ° r “ DEPU TY MINISTERS.” Will 
tne Commissioner accept? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I accept the amendment. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

toSStt'"*’ “ is limited only 

What does the Committee say? 

cause R becomes unnecessary anyway be- 

Se Cabinet ““ t ,hlt whe " therc * * President, 
Sgnatm":' memberS lender their courte*; 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MS. AQUINO. On page 9, line 4, after the word 
“not” add the words DURING HIS TERM such that the 
line would read: “within the third civil degree of the 
President shall not DURING HIS TERM be appointed 
as . . .” 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Will the proponent yield to an amend- 
ment? Instead of “TERM,” I propose TENURE. 


Pre I ^den^ I w^ AC ° RTA ‘ Therefore > the former Vice 
not to aDDoint iv n °t W ^ res Ment, will be constraine< 
. - — 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Villacorta S have any^th^2nm nent Ii D ° eS Commissione 
y otner proposed amendment? 

MR. VILLACORTA T ho. 

Section 20. ' e an °ther amendment o: 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President ,h 
amendments to Section 20. nt ’ ™ ere are P n0 

THE PRESIDENT. Then, let us call th™ 
amendments. US Cal1 those w *h pnc 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Aquino has an ar 
terior amendment on Section 19. 


MS. AQUINO. That means that if the President 
resigns halfway during his term, then he cannot ap- 
point. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is why we should use the word 
TENURE instead of “TERM,” because the elected 
President may not be able to finish his term. 

MS. AQUINO. Considering that these are executive 
appointments, I will accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection from the 
Committee? 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee accepts the 
amendment. It makes the period more specific. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


541 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President, Commissioner 
Padilla, is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. On that same line, line 4, it mentions 
“third civil degree” of relationship. That would include 
first degree — father or son; second degree — brother or 
sister; and third degree — uncle or nephew. But most of 
our close relatives would include the fourth civil degree 
— the first cousin. Will the Committee agree to change 
the word “third” to FOURTH? 

MR. REGALADO. Originally, the Committee con- 
sidered the fourth civil degree relationship as it is the 
standard prohibition even in statutes, but it was felt by 
some Committee members that we might be depriving 
the country of the services of some competent ofticials 
who just happen to be the first cousins of the President. 
So we would submit it to the floor. 

MR. PADILLA. Usually we do not appoint those in 
the first degree like the father or the son; those in the 
second degree like the brother or the sister; and those 
in the third degree relationship like the uncle or the 
nephew. But most of the appointments which may be 
considered as nepotism, are first cousins, and that 
would fall under the fourth degree. 

MR. REGALADO. My original proposal in the Com- 
mittee was within the fourth civil degree, but there was 
not a common concordance on that, so we suggest that 
the matter now be submitted to the wisdom of the 
body. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, as a cosponsor 
of Proposed Resolution No. 1 28 together with Com- 
missioners de los Reyes, Ople and Natividad, let me add 
that originally we did place the term “third civil 
degree,” but as pointed out by the Vice-President, 
there was a move to include the fourth civil degree to 
which we resisted, and that is why it still remains as 
“third civil degree.” This is just for the record, Madam 

President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We can proceed to vote on this. 

Those in favor of the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Padilla changing the word “third’ to 
“FOURTH,” please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 20 votes in favor and 9 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

These are minor amendments. On page 8, line 27, 
after the word “employment” add the following: EX- 
CEPT WHEN OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS 
CONSTITUTION. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. May we just ask the proponent of the 
amendment a question? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. FOZ. In the Commissioner’s amendment's he 
referring to a public office or employment? 

MR. DAVIDE. I am referring to any office in the 
government. I introduced that particular amendment 
because we have allowed the Vice-President to be 
appointed to the Cabinet. Without that particular 
phrase, the Vice-President may no longer be appointed 
as a member of the Cabinet. 

MR. FOZ. I ask the question because during my 
interpellations of the Committee yesterday and the 
day before, I precisely asked just what the Committee 
had in mind, whether it is a public office or a private 
office and the answer I got was that it is a private office 
or private employment. 

MR. DAVIDE. I was not aware of that. 

MR. FOZ. The Commissioner’s proposed amend- 
ment would clearly indicate a public office or public 
employment. 

MR. DAVIDE. I cannot remember that the Com- 
mittee had answered that the phrase “office or em- 
ployment” referred to here is a private office or em- 
ployment. I would like to inquire from the Committee 
if that was really the interpretation. 

MR. REGALADO. I explained it during the sus- 
pension of the pioceedings to Commissioner Foz that 
it refers to employment in a private office as well as in 
a public office which may otherwise be incompatible 
with the functions of his own office or where he is 
disqualified. It is a prohibition against private office 
and public office unless otherwise allowed. 

MR. FOZ. In other words, it is in both senses that 
we are using the term “office or employment.” But 
then I just do not know how any provision ot the 
Constitution could provide that the President, the Vice- 


542 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


President or members of the Cabinet could be allowed 
to occupy any private office. 

MR. DAVIDE. We have the provision here which 
the body took up yesterday on the matter of the Vice- 
President. The Vice-President may be appointed as a 
member of the Cabinet. Such appointment requires no 
confirmation. That is the last paragraph of Section 3. 
That is precisely the reason I am introducing this 
particular amendment making it really an exception. 
So it should be EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE 
PROVIDED IN THIS CONSTITUTION. Otherwise, 
we will have conflicting provisions. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, will the Gentle- 
man yield? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. REGALADO. I think the purpose of Commis- 
sioner Rigos is just for symmetry because it is preceded 
by “hold any other office or employment, nor may 
they practice any OTHER profession.” 

It that the purpose of Commissioner Rigos? 

REV. RIGOS . Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. That will be all right. We accept 
the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted 
the amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Davide is recognized. 


• there any need for such a provi- 

sion. Is it not a rule in statutory construction that when 

rule isfolCt ml£ and " PartiCUlar mle ’ the P articular 

the M fam^ A rule D & be true - Bu t there is also 

provision shall prevS ^ COnstruction that the later 

because ft^w^cleL That* Ihl ^ u redundancy 
provision here + 1 1 ^ at . w ^ e we have a general 

not being able to hot/ Preside " t and Vice-President 

specific provision° ,h°J? ,17 °‘ her p off i7 «>ere is a 
appointed as a * Vlce - p resident may be 

understood that thTt is an ^ Cabinet - 1 think * is 
rule. an ex ception to this general 

the M reco^ V for E purpise in J erpr , etation to be rea d into 
tion or interpretation nf°tvf U T m8 SLlbsequent aPPlica- 
that despite Section 19 Seitfo ^' °, nStlt " tion ’ wouId be 
Vice-President should prevail T thematter of the 

the thinking and the nJo V 111 not insist if that is 
Committee? nin g- Is that the thinking of the 

MR. REGALAnn tu ^ • 

mittee and it even was sn n h the thinkin S of th e Corn- 
Constitution. n ersto °d under the previous 


MR. DAVIDE. On page 9, line 5, after the word 
“as,” insert the following: MEMBERS OF THE CON- 
STITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS, THE OFFICE OF 
THE OMBUDSMAN, OR THE JUDICIARY OR so that 
the amended line will read: “be appointed as MEM- 
BERS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS, 
THE OFFICE OF THE OMBUDSMAN, OR THE 
JUDICIARY, OR as ministers, deputy ministers or 
heads of ... ” 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Would the distinguished pro- 
ponent accept an amendment to his amendment to 
limit this prohibition to members of collegiate courts? 
The judges of the lower courts perhaps would not have 
the same category or the same standing as the others 
mentioned here. 

MR. DAVIDE. Pursuant to the post amendment, we 
already included here government-owned or controlled 
corporations or their subsidiaries which are not even 
very sensitive positions. So with more reason that the 
prohibition should apply to appointments in these 
bodies. 


MR. DAVIDE. Then I 

amendment on page 9, li ne 5 raw ’ but * bave another 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President f /- 
Davide will allow me, I have an Qm 1 ’ i* Comm issioner 
line 27, " am «"<iment on page 8, 


THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept? 

FR. BERNAS. What is common among these people 
— Ministers, Deputy Ministers, heads of bureaus or 
offices — is that they are under the control of the 
President. 


Between the words “any” and “profession 
the word OTHER. The line will now read- 
they practice any OTHER profession.” 


, insert 
nor may 


MR. GUINGONA. That is correct. 

FR. BERNAS. Whereas, the other offices the Com- 
missioner mentioned are independent offices. 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


543 


MR. DAVIDE. The idea of the proposal is that about 
the end of the term of the President, he may prolong 
his rule indirectly by appointing people to these sensi- 
tive positions, like the commissions, the Ombudsman, 
the judiciary, so he could perpetuate himself in power 
even beyond his term of office; therefore foreclosing 
the right of his successor to make appointments to 
these positions. We should realize that the term of the 
President is six years and under what we had voted on, 
there is no reelection for him. Yet he can continue to 
rule the country through appointments made about the 
end of his term to these sensitive positions. 


fact that he will now become a statesman rather than 
a partisan politician. Then he will be acting for the good 
of our country; that is, we base that philosophy with 
that predicate. So I am just wondering why we should 
not utilize these men who, according to Commissioner 
Uka, happen to have committed a crime of being related 
to the President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Is the Commissioner proposing that 
as an amendment to my amendment? 

MR. TINGSON. I would like to. 


FR. BERNAS. At any rate, there are other checks 
as far as the appointment of those officers is con- 
cerned. 

MR. DAVIDE. Only insofar as the Commission 
on Appointments is concerned for offices which would 
require consent, and the Judicial Bar Council insofar 
as the judiciary is concerned. 

FR. BERNAS. We leave the matter to the body for 
a vote. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I just ask one 
question of the proponent? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Even though the members of the 
President’s family are related to him, shall we bar the 
men of probity, honesty and specialized technical 
knowledge from being appointed? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is precisely the core or the meat 
and the heart of the prohibition. In effect, it is just 
extending it to these sensitive positions that 1 have 
mentioned. 


MR. DAVIDE. In the sense that the Commissioner’s 
amendment is to delete the entire sentence? 

MR. TINGSON. Is that the Commissioner’s thinking 
also? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, I am entirely for the opposite. 

MR. TINGSON. Then, I am not insisting anymore. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the Commissioner is introducing 
it as an amendment, I am sorry, I have to reject his 
proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, let us now proceed to the 
amendment of Commissioner Davide. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I just offer 
one more amendment to the distinguished proponent? 
After the word “JUDICIARY,” we insert: EXCEPT 
JUDGES OF THE METROPOLITAN TRIAL COURTS. 

MR. DAVIDE. To avoid any further complication, 
I would agree to delete “JUDICIARY.” 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 


MR. TINGSON. But in a sense would that not be 
counterproductive? 

MR. DAVIDE. If that is the thinking of the Com- 
missioner, he should rather propose for the deletion 
of the entire sentence since that is really its effect. 

MR. TINGSON. Will the Commissioner join me if 
Ido? 


MR DAVIDE. No. As a matter of fact, I am expand- 
ing the prohibition. But if the Commissioner’s position 
is that we might be prohibiting these capable men who 
are relatives of the President, then the deletion would 
be proper, which I am not in favor of. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, we have already 
limited the presidency to one term, predicated on the 


MR. DAVIDE. So, on line 5, the only amendment 
would consist of the following: after the word “as,” 
insert MEMBERS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSIONS OR THE OFFICE OF THE OMBUDSMAN. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee prefer to 
throw this to the body? 


MR. REGALADO. We prefer that we submit it to 
the body. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of this proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Davide on page 9, line 5, 
to include these two offices: the constitutional com- 
missions and the office of the Ombudsman, please 
raise their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 



Those against the proposed amendment will please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 24 votes in favor and 9 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, we are almost at 
the end of our long journey. I ask for continued 
patience on the part of everyone. We are now on Sec- 
tion 20. We have consolidated all the amendments for 
presentation by one person; and that is, Commissioner 
Sarmiento. Will the Chair recognize him please? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 


MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. But when we say “shall 
not be valid and effective,” we say AS REGARDS 
THE PHILIPPINES. 

MR. SARMIENTO. So, the Commissioner is for the 
inclusion of the words “AS REGARDS THE PHILIP- 
PINES”? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. No agreement will be 
valid unless the Philippines ratifies it. 

MR. SARMIENTO. So may I know the final position 
of the Committee with respect to my amendment by 
deletion? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. I humbly propose an amendment 
o the proposed resolution of my Committee and this 
is on page 9, Section 20, line 7, which is to delete the 
explain ^ mternational agreement.” May I briefly 

menthan ^ntp C ^ e ^ tbe ^35 Constitution does not 
Convention on^h 0 *! 3 agreement - Second, the Vienna 
is an international Uw ° n Treaties sta tes that a treaty 
of this provision th agr i e T ement ' ^ bird ’ the ver Y source 
not speak of int ’ f- ^ mted States Constitution, does 

treaties. So wTh ThTbrie f agre ™ ent: il »■>& speaks of 
Committee to consider our amendment"' ’ ““ ‘ he 

supportive of this aiSment™ 13 ' 0113 ^ Aquin0 *" 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President. 

recogifized RESIDENT- Comm issioner Concepcion is 


MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. Madam Preside: 
effectwTupon ra^!!? entS f Can become valid 

parties to the agreement^ 0 ! 3 designated numbe 
that it shall not be vai n BUt , What we can say he 
Philippines. For instance th^ effective as re §ards 
ments with 1 50 parties anri l ^ mternational a ! 
requiring say, 50, to ratify th™ 1S 3 provision § ene 
be valid; then only those who raSTr 1 -!^^ ' 
Ratification is always necessa-v in h * be bo 
ment will be valid and binding! ° rder that the aj 

MR. SARMIENTO. Do I take it 
national agreements should be retained ?n Ihis n 

sion? p 


MR. CONCEPCION. I would say “No treaty or inter- 
national agreement shall be valid and effective AS 
REGARDS THE PHILIPPINES unless concurred in 
by at least two-thirds of all the members of the Senate.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. If that is the position of the 
Chief Justice who is an expert on international law . . . 

MR. CONCEPCION. I am not an expert. 

MR. SARMIENTO. . . . then I will concede. I think 
Commissioner Aquino has something to say about 
Section 20. 

THE PRESIDENT. This particular amendment is 
withdrawn. 

Commissioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, first I would like a 
clarification from the Committee. We have retained the 
words “international agreement” which I think is the 
correct judgment on the matter because an interna- 
tional agreement is different from a treaty. A treaty is a 
contract between parties which is in the nature of inter- 
national agreement and also a municipal law in the sense 
that the people are bound. So there is a conceptual 
difference. However, I would like to be clarified if the 
international agreements include executive agreements. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That depends upon the parties. 
All parties to these international negotiations stipulate 
the conditions which are necessary for the agreement 
or whatever it may be to become valid or effective as 
regards the parties. 

MS. AQUINO. Would that depend on the parties or 
would that depend on the nature of the executive 
agreement? According to common usage, there are two 
types of executive agreement: one is purely proceeding 
from an executive act which affects external relations 
independent of the legislative and the other is an 
executive act in pursuance of legislative authorization. 
The first kind might take the form of just conventions 
or exchanges of notes or protocol while the other, 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


545 


which would be pursuant to the legislative authoriza- 
tion, may be in the nature of commercial agreements. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Executive agreements are 
generally made to implement a treaty already enforced 
or to determine the details for the implementation of 
the treaty. We are speaking of executive agreements, 
not international agreements. 

MS. AQUINO. I am in full agreement with that, 
except that it does not cover the first kind of executive 
agreement which is just protocol or an exchange of 
notes and this would be in the nature of reinforcement 
of claims of a citizen against a country, for example. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The Commissioner is free to 
require ratification for validity insofar as the Philippines 
is concerned. 

MS. AQUINO. It is my humble submission that we 

should provide, unless the Committee explains to us 
otherwise, an explicit proviso which would except 
executive agreements from the requirement of con- 
currence of two-thirds of the Members of the Senate. 
Unless I am enlightened by the Committee I propose 
that tentatively, the sentence should read: No treaty 

or international agreement EXCEPT EXECUTIVE 
AGREEMENTS shall be valid and effective.” 

FR. BERNAS. I wonder if a quotation from the 
Supreme Court decision might help clarify this: 

The right of the executive to enter into binding agree- 
ments without the necessity of subsequent Congressional 
approval has been confirmed by long usage. From the 
earliest days of our history, we have entered into executive 
agreements covering such subjects as commercial and con- 
sular relations, most favored nation rights, patent rights, 
trademark and copyright protection, postal and navigation 
arrangements and the settlement of claims. The validity 
of this has never been seriously questioned by our Courts. 

Agreements with respect to the registration of trade- 
marks have been concluded by the executive of various 
countries under the Act of Congress of March 3, 1881 (21 
Stat. 502) . . . International agreements involving political 
issues or changes of national policy and those involving 
international agreements of a permanent character usually 
take the form of treaties. But international agreements 
embodying adjustments of detail, carrying out well estab- 
lished national policies and traditions and those involving 
arrangements of a more or less temporary nature usually 
take the form of executive agreements. 

MR. ROMULO. Is the Commissioner, therefore, 
excluding the executive agreements? 

FR. BERNAS. What we are referring to, therefore, 
when we say international agreements which need con- 
currence by at least two-thirds are those which are 
permanent in nature. 


MS. AQUINO. And it may include commercial 
agreements which are executive agreements essentially 
but which are proceeding from the authorization of 
Congress. If that is our understanding, then I am willing 
to withdraw that amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. If it is with prior authorization of 
Congress, then it does not need subsequent concurrence 
by Congress. 

MS. AQUINO. In that case, I am withdrawing my 
amendment. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Aquino satis- 
fied? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. There is already an agreement 
among us on the definition of “executive agreements” 
and that would make unnecessary any explicit proviso 
on the matter. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized first because he has been standing there earlier. 

MR. GUINGONA. I am not clear as to the meaning of 
“executive agreements” because I heard that these 
executive agreements must rely on treaties. In other 
words, there must first be treaties. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, I was speaking about the 
common use, as executive agreements being the imple- 
mentation of treaties, details of which do not affect the 
sovereignty of the State. 

MR. GUINGONA. But what about the matter of 
permanence, Madam President? Would 99 years be 
considered permanent? What would be the measure 
of permanency? I do not conceive of a treaty that is 
going to be forever, so there must be some kind of a 
time limit. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I suppose the Commissioner’s 
question is whether this type of agreement should be 
included in a provision of the Constitution requiring 
the concurrence of Congress. 

MR. GUINGONA. It depends on the concept of the 
executive agreement of which I am not clear. If the 
executive agreement partakes of the nature of a treaty, 
then it should also be included. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Whether it partakes or not of 
the nature of a treaty, it is within the power of the 
Constitutional Commission to require that. 


46 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


MR. GUINGONA. Yes. That is why I am trying to 
clarify whether the words “international agreements” 
would include executive agreements. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, not necessarily; generally 
no. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. If the Floor Leader would allow me, 
I have only one short question. 

MR. ROMULO. I wish to be recognized first. I have 
only one question. Do we take it, therefore, that as far 
as the Committee is concerned, the term “international 
agreements does not include the term “executive 

agreements as read by the Commissioner in that 
text? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


President of the Philippines. So it has the nature of 
a treaty. It is not an executive agreement. 

When it was signed by President Roxas, although it 
was no longer necessary he still referred it to the Philip- 
pine Senate because he thought that the matter was 
of such importance that he wanted that not only him- 
self should be bound by the agreement but also the 
Members of the Philippine Senate. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, we now come to 
the final amendment to this Article. I ask that Com- 
missioner Azcuna be recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, this is in con- 
nection with the matter that we have just discussed 
and particularly with respect to the text that Commis- 
sioner Bernas read. May I just ask a question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona may 
proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. Is the text that Commissioner 
Bernas read from an American case? 


MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 


FR. BERNAS. The citation I read is from page 936, 


pr™e E d. PRESIDENT ' C ° mmissioner Tin gson may no 

. TINGS0N - Thank you. Madam President I ai 
Cw 2 l ° 1Sk ‘ he CWef ,usti “ because I need i 

tarv Bases Tm, ‘ C ° f ? e Phili PPines-United States Mi: 

2nfr„au 8 a i y e r„ d « the ° f a ” < 

on^ase E sc) N l CEPCI0 ^' 1 have not read the agreemei 

stoned s question. “ "° P ° SW ° n *° *»<= C °"™i 

that'miiitOT \ aSk this because 1 understand th: 
fully ratified bv ttf w ith the United States W; 

by the Senate of the^nRed^t 0 ? 116 !^ 111151311165 bUt 
what its category is. * d States - 1 am just wonderii 

MR. CONCEPCION Th + 

insofar as the United <n Q ? 1S my i m P ress i°n. J 
executive agreement but inS 1§ Concerned > it is < 
it is a treaty. ’ sofar as we are concerne 


MR. TINGSON. I see. Thank 


you. 


Ph ilipp in e Reports, 1955. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. On other matters touching also on 
executive agreements, the case of Gonzales vs. Hecha- 
nova, page 230, 9 SCRA, 1963 would also be helpful. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. I would like to propose what I hope 
is the final amendment to Section 21, page 9, lines 10 
to 13, which is to delete the whole Section 21 on the 
ground that it is already covered by the report of the 
Committee on the Legislative, Section 26 (1) thereof, 
containing substantially the same words, which has 
already been amended by the Commission. I am refer- 
ring to the submission by the President to the Congress 
of a budget of receipts and expenditures. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. Will the Commissioner repeat it, 
please? 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President 


MR SUMULONG. May I say a few words or 
The military bases agreement is an agreement e 
into by the President of the United States duly a 
ized by the Congress of the United States ar 


MR. AZCUNA. I propose to delete the whole of 
Section 21 because it is already contained in Section 
26, the provision on the legislative power. As amended, 
Section 26 (1) reads: 

The President shall submit to the Congress within thirty 
days from the opening of each regular session, as the basis 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


Sff 


of the general appropriations bill, a budget of expenditures 
and sources of financing, including receipts from existing 
and proposed revenue measures. The Congress may not in- 
crease the appropriations recommended by the President 
for the operation of the Government as specified in the 
budget. The form, content, and manner of preparation of 
the budget shall be prescribed by law. 

MR. SUMULONG. We will note that Section 21 
simply refers to the submission by the President of the 
budget within fifteen days of the opening of the regular 
session. We precisely limited it to the act of submission 
of the budget by the President. We did not continue 
anymore because we knew that in the committee report 
to be prepared by the Committee on the Legislative, the 
details about this budget of receipts and expenditures 
will be discussed. 

MR. REGALADO. May I add to that. Commissioner 
Davide is also a member of the Committee on the 
Executive. That was precisely the agreement, that this 
duty of the President — in the first sentence — will be 
retained in the provision on the executive, then the 
provision on the legislative will take care of all other 
details after this. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then, we can leave it to the Commit- 
tee on Style, but with the consent of the Commission, 
we will change “fifteen” in Section 21 to THIRTY. We 
use THIRTY days instead of “fifteen.” So it will be har- 
monized with Section 25. So the amendment would 
only be the change of the word “fifteen” to THIRTY 
on line 10 of page 9, and then the Committee on Style 
will later harmonize the two provisions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Chair understand that 
Commissioner Azcuna is not insisting on the deletion 
of Section 21? 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, I am not insisting. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the change will be from 
“fifteen” to “THIRTY” days? 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee accepts. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May I also add that the language 
should be harmonized because we specifically made 
changes in this section of the Article on the Legislative. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that would be harmonized, and I 
so move that it be harmonized with Section 25 of the 
Article on the Legislative because Section 25, as stated, 
had already undergone amendments on the floor, 
especially the amendments of Commissioners Natividad 
and Monsod. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President; I 
also thank the Acting Floor Leader. 

There are just two points I would like to clear up. 
With the permission of the Chairman of our Committee, 

I would just like to formally record the reservation of 
the Committee to rearrange the presentation of the ap- 
proved sections to achieve proper sequence so that we 
will not be confused when we will have a clean draft, 
probably and hopefully, by tomorrow. 

Second, Madam President, in view of the intense 
interest shown by the searching questions of Commis- 
sioners Nolledo, Foz, de los Reyes and Monsod on 
Section 4, paragraph 2, regarding the canvass of votes 
for the President and Vice-President, I found it only fair 
to them to supplement my answer by inserting in the 
record the written explanation of the authors of Resolu- 
tion No. 198; namely, myself, Commissioners Ople and 
Natividad on this particular section to complete our 
record of the proceedings.* 

May I be permitted, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. We will just insert them in the 
Record. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May we reserve the right to read that 
and also present whatever we feel is necessary to ampli - 
fy or clarify certain points? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. So please have copies of that 
distributed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I will give Commissioner Monsod 
a copy of it immediately. But 1 would just like to in- 
form the Commission that the points in this report 


*See Appendix 


548 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


which we submitted to the Commitee on June 29, 1986 
have already been taken up by the Committee. 

My only purpose is to inform those who are inte- 
rested on how this particular Section 4, paragraph 2 was 
formulated, in order to complete their picture of the 
whole situation. 

I will gladly give Commissioner Monsod a copy for 
his comment. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other proponent? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Commissioner Bengzon would 
like to be recognized. 


sioner Monsod’s proposal to reconsider the decision on 
that “total prohibition on the President from running 
for reelection,” Commissioner Regalado suggested that 
I withdraw my amendment for the time being. Since I 
have not heard from Commissioner Monsod whether or 
not he will pursue his amendment, I am ready to ask 
for a reconsideration of my motion. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I was informed 
that a motion for reconsideration has to be filed within 
one day. So if the Commissioner will recall, I have asked 
the Chair’s advice on how we could proceed with that 
but it seems it could only be done if we suspend the 
Rules. Perhaps that can be taken up at another time 
rather than today because it would need a suspension of 
the Rules. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, if the body would 

S’hTr subject to the comments and observations 

on the Artvi mmiSS i? n c r ^aambong, I move that we vote 
on the Article on the Executive on Second Reading. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

would be E b«er thU?™ Presidem " 1 <hat it 

Second Readinf ft 6 VOte on the resolution on 
clean copy tomcro" 316 ^ a consolida,ed and 

pem, ^ that case, Madam President, 

matters before S 3 \\r ^ at tomorrow , we have several 

Accountability of ^bU^ff 6 ^ Reading on the 

have enough numbed 1°^® at . the first hour if we 
report on the t • /’ .^ e , can continue the committee 

the multiseeto < i glS atlve ’ Just on the party list system, 
Which SyStem and the terms of the office 

ceed to’the^Donso T"" 5 left After we can pro- 
Committee on Soc,af Juftft ddebat<: on the re Port of the 

committee^eport on llT and the clean co PV of the 
within the morn m a n,r ex ecutive distributed to us 
ing before we recL at “"c V °‘ e ° n Second Read 
that, Madam President 1 i oon ’ So > hi accordance with 
until tomorrow. ’ move for the adjournment 


MR. ROMULO. Madam P™ vt . ^ 

Jamir would like to be recognized^ 611 ’ Comrnissionei 
before we go to Second Reading. ma<e a reservatior 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, yesterday I proposed 
an amendment on Section 4. But because of Commis- 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee on Rules or the 
Steering Committee is the only one that can suspend 
the Rules; is that correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Jamir insist on 
his proposed amendment? 

MR. JAMIR. My amendment is to insert a new para- 
graph between the first and second paragraphs of 
Section 4 of the Committee’s draft. It reads: NO PER- 
SON WHO HAS SERVED MORE THAN THREE 
YEARS AS PRESIDENT SHALL BE QUALIFIED FOR 
ELECTION TO THE SAME OFFICE AT ANY TIME. 

May I explain my purpose, Madam President. If the 
President dies, let us say two years after assuming office, 
and the Vice-President succeeds him, the Vice-President 
will be serving for more than three years, in which case 
he will not be eligible for election to the same office. 
That is to take care of a seeming vacuum with respect to 
the qualification of the Vice-President to run for 
election for a second time, if he succeeds in the office 
of the presidency. 

MR. UKA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recognized. 

MR. UKA. If by that amendment, we cannot act on it 
without suspending the Rules, I move that we suspend 
the Rules and act on that manana por la manana. 

MR. JAMIR. I do not think we have to suspend the 
Rules. May we know from the Floor Leader. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, just for clarifica- 
tion, I think it is only in the case of my intended 
request for reconsideration where the Rules has to be 


THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986 


549 


suspended but not in the case of the amendment at 
hand. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, in fairness to the 
proponent of the amendment, perhaps everyone will be 
in a better frame of mind to consider it objectively if we 
take it up tomorrow. 

MR. JAMIR. I have no objection, Madam President. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. I move for the adjournment of the 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at 9:30 a.m. 

It was 7:39 p.m. 






























. 























FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


551 


R.C.C. NO. 45 
Friday, August 1, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:52 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Bernardo M. Villegas. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. VILLEGAS. God Almighty, You created us so 
that we may perfect ourselves mainly through human 
work. Through our first parents, You commanded us to 
exercise dominion over the whole earth. Work, far from 
being a punishment, has always been part of our human 
nature. Work — whether manual or intellectual — is the 
main instrument You have given us for our personal 
sanctification. 

Lord, thank You for giving us during these past few 
weeks the opportunity to work with unusual vigor. We 
are edified to see among our colleagues in the Commis- 
sion outstanding examples of diligence, thoroughness, 
patience, perseverance, attention to details and an 
abhorrence for sloppiness and mediocrity in professional 
work. May the lessons we are learning from them last 
for the rest of our lives and may we spread these exem- 
plary attitudes to work far and wide among our fellow 
Filipinos. 

Through the work we have been performing in 
writing a Constitution for our people, we want to par- 
ticipate in Your continuing task of creation by helping 
in a small way to build a just and humane society. We 
want this work to give glory to You and to serve our 
people, especially those who are poor and defenseless. 
Through a preferential concern for the poor, let us fulfill 
the new commandment which Your only begotten Son, 


Jesus Christ, brought to us. Let us love in deeds, and not 
just in words. Let us learn once and for all that love, 
more than being an emotional or sentimental feeling, is 
an act of the will by which we seek the good of others 
even at our own expense. May we continuously exercise 
this act of the will in good and bad times, in joy and in 
pain. 

All these we ask You through Your Beloved Son, 
Jesus Christ. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary -General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Monsod .... 

. . Present 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Aquino 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Padilla 


Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Quesada .... 


Bernas 

. Present 

Rama 


Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present* 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rigos 


Castro de . . . . 


Rodrigo .... 


Colayco 

. Present* 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present* 

Rosales .... 


Davide 


Sarmiento . 


Foz 


Suarez . 


Garcia 


Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Gascon 


Tadeo . . 


Guingona . . . . 


Tan . . . 


Jamir 


Tingson . . . . 


Laurel . . . 


Uka 

. . Present 

Lerum .... 

. . Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

Maambong . . 

• . Present* 

Villegas 

. . Present 


The Secretariat is in receipt of official advice of 
absence of Commissioner Trenas. 

The President is present. 

The i oil call shows 34 Members responded to the call . 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence oi 
a quorum. 


Appeared after the roll call 


552 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the last session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
approve the Journal of the last session? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


Telegram from Mr. Anacleto O. Ranises of Lapasan, 
Cagayan de Oro City, requesting the Commission to give 
the Visaya-Cebuano language equal treatment with 
Tagalog in the Constitution. 

(Communication No. 406 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from former MP Princess Potri Ali Pacasum of 26 
Marunong, Central District, Diliman, Quezon City, 
urging the Constitutional Commission to include in the 
Constitution a provision granting autonomy to the 
Bangsa Moro Nation of the South and the Cordillera 
people of the North. 

(Communication No. 407 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

ThI Chafr^ea^n^ 7 ' th there any ob J ecti °n? (Silence, 
the Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Business* eCre,ary " Genera * read «« Reference of 


REFERENCE of business 


The Secretary. General 
munications, the President 
references: 


read the following Corn- 
making the corresponding 


COMMUNICATIONS 

of vai ° Le vt^e ' i? 1Ceto . Z . Lim piedo, Municipal May< 

series of ^986 TT^ ng Resoluti ™ Nos. 72 to 7. 

requesting inclusion of prollsionTm 

providing for ^ ^ Constitutic 

benefits for elective m'unicTp?rofficia[r m<!nt ““ 

(Communication No. 404 - Constitutional Commissk 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Maedalpnrv c • 

Volunteer Program (Philippines^ 11 ®’ { T -> of Scho 
UP Bliss, Diliman, Quezon Qtl ^ 823 ’ Buildin 8 

provisions in the Constitution’ ’ rr qU r tlng inclll sion 
compulsory elementary and seconds ^ ) f ° r free a ’ 
recognizing the role of private colleges ® d , UCatlon a! 

edUCa,IOn by an^irs 

(Communication No. 405 - Constitutional Commissi 
of 1 986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Communication from the Movement for a Filipino 
Federal Republic, signed by Mr. Samuel C. Occena, 31 
Tionko Avenue, Davao City, submitting draft articles 
for a federal system of government. 

(Communication No. 408 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


Letter from the Southern Philippine Muslim Youth 
Association, c/o P.O. Box 5452, Iligan City, signed by 
Sultan Daud P. Salsal, requesting the Constitutional 
Commission to consider the full implementation of the 
Bangsa Moro Autonomous Government within the 
framework of the national sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of the Philippines. 

(Communication No. 409 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Ramon G. Santillan, President of the 
Tabaco Senior Citizens, Inc., 303 Ziga Avenue, Ta- 
baco, Albay, submitting his association’s Resolution 
No. 86-B-3, proposing a provision for a truly socialized 
program for the neglected and forgotten elders in the 
form of increased pension and government subsidized 
health care. 

(Communication No. 410 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Letter from Ms. Emma Susan I. Ortega of the Humanist 
Party, P.O. Box 5088, Makati, Metro Manila, applauding 
the inclusion of the article that gives equal rights to 
women in all fields and expressing opinions on the issue 
of legalizing abortion and on the legalization of divorce. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


553 


(Communication No. 411 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Sister Leontina Castillo, OSA and Brother 
Rafael Donato, FSC, Association of Major Religious 
Superiors in the Philippines, 214 N. Domingo Street, 
Quezon City, urging the Constitutional Commission to 
adopt measures on (1) Philippines sans foreign military 
bases and nuclear plants and arms, (2) genuine land 
reform, (3) nationalist agricultural development and 
industrialization, (4) free and nationalist education, 
(5) national language, (6) just labor laws, and (7) right 
of tribal Filipinos. 

(Communication No. 412 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from the Catholic Women’s League, Archdiocese 
of Manila, signed by its President, Susana P. Africa, and 
the other officers and members of the board of directors, 
expressing appreciation and support for the inclusion 
in the Constitution provisions on human rights of 
unborn children from the moment of conception and 
on the teaching of religion in public elementary and 
secondary schools under certain conditions. 

(Communication No. 413 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Politi- 
cal Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from the Honorable Commissioner Ponciano L. 
Bennagen, transmitting a letter from the Solidarity of 
Humane Organization for Equality and Sovereignty 
(SHOES) of Marikina, submitting various proposals for 
the consideration of the Constitutional Commission. 

(Communication No. 414 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Miguel LI. Moreno, transmitting Resolu- 
tion No. 24, series of 1986, of the Sangguniang Bayan 
of Taal, Batangas, informing the Constitutional Commis- 
sion of the objection of the Sangguniang Bayan of Taal 
to the scrapping of the death penalty from the Penal 
Code. 

(Communication No. 415 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Politi- 
cal Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 517 
(Article on the Executive)* 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 
MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Up for consideration this morning is the 
pending last amendment to the Article on the Execu- 
tive, Committee Report No. 26. This is the amendment 
that was proposed by Commissioner Jamir. So, in order 
to wind up our job on this Article on the Executive, I 
ask that Commissioner Jamir be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

May we request the honorable Chairman and mem- 
bers of the Committee on the Executive to please oc- 
cupy the front table. 

At this juncture, may we acknowledge the presence 
this morning of students from Maryknoll College, 
Ateneo de Manila, St. Scholastica College, Philippine 
Normal College, St. Bridget’s (Quezon City) and St. 
Bridget’s (Batangas). We thank you, specially our young 
people, for expressing interest in our deliberations. 

(Applause) 

Commissioner Jamir is recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you, Madam President. 

I will now restate my proposed amendment to insert 
a paragraph between the first and second paragraphs of 
Section 4 to read as follows: NO PERSON WHO HAS 
SERVED MORE THAN THREE YEARS AS PRES- 
IDENT SHALL BE QUALIFIED FOR ELECTION TO 
THE SAME OFFICE AT ANY TIME. 

May I know the response of the Committee? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. SUMULONG. Will the proponent explain why 
he added the phrase “AT ANY TIME”? 


MR. JAMIR. Madam President, under our approved 
provision on the President, we will have no reelection - 
the President is not entitled to any reelection. That is 
why in this proposal, I placed the words AT ANY 
TIME to accord with that provision. 


MR. REGALADO. May I inform Commissioner Jamir 
that Commissioner Monsod announced yesterday that 
he is toying with the idea of seeking a suspension of the 
Rules to enable a proposed motion for reconsideration 
of the provision that the President cannot run for imme- 
diate reelection, the word “immediate” having been 
eliminated. That is why I mentioned to the proponent 
that if that contingency comes to pass, this portion of 
his proposed amendment “AT ANY TIME” may be 
affected. 


♦See Appendix 


554 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


MR. JAMIR. Should that contingency arise, I will 
have no objection in deleting the phrase AT ANY 
TIME in order to coincide with the reconsideration, if 
ever that comes. 

MR. REGALADO. That will be replaced by the 
phrase IN THE NEXT SUCCEEDING ELECTION. 

MR. JAMIR. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, is it the position 
of the Committee that we defer this to some other time 
until we have taken up the manifestations of Commis- 
sioner Monsod? 


MR. MONSOD. May I just make a clarification with 
regard to the phrase, “the vote of the majority of all 
Members of Congress.” It is my understanding that this 
applies in all of those cases except in the exception we 
approved yesterday on the declaration of martial law. 
It would mean Congress or the Members of both Houses 
voting separately. Is that the understanding, Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we have the reaction from 
the Committee? 

FR. BERNAS. Except in the cases where we speci- 
fically said that they will be voting jointly. 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, anyway, 
Commissioner Jamir has accepted the condition that in 
the event the motion for reconsideration of Commis- 
sioner Monsod prospers, the phrase “AT ANY TIME” 
will merely be replaced with the phrase IN THE NEXT 

SUCCEEDING ELECTION, which was in his original 
proposal. 

MR. JAMIR. I affirm that, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. So, I think we can consider this. 

be™d by^the^CorJ — 6 Chaif suggests that a caucus 

«ha, has cl" 8 ° n ' hiS impOTt “‘ p ° ipt 

advise the Cnmm- • Commissl °ner Monsod. We will 
place Kecau ° nerS when <his caucus will take 

ffwfflbe Jt h T y be ° ther "alters be taken 
take on this issue. ? a " y declslon ‘he body would 

latet 0 ;ime n ? We °" ^ C ° ra ™sioner Jamir. at some 
MR. JAMIR. Yes, Madam President. 

Committee accep^hi pfri’ ] Ma ^ am President, the 
ment, subject to these coSXctaT Pr ° P ° Sed amend ' 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam Presidpnt u- 
tions of the Committee nmi r SUbject to the reserva- 
move that we close the nerir , ° mmiss ioner Jamir, I 
Article on the Executive fnm •? amendments on this 

6 ’ Com mittee Report No. 26. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is then* a 
close the period of amendments on t ° h bjec . tlon that we 
Executive? m§ ° n thls Ar ticle on the 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. Which is only one case. Madam 
President. 

FR. BERNAS. Two. 

MR. MONSOD. No, one case only. 

FR. BERNAS. Two. 

MR. MONSOD. Which is the other one? 

FR. BERNAS. The concurrence in martial law, the 
revocation of martial law and the extension of martial 
law. 

MR. MONSOD. I agree. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there is a motion that 
we close the period of amendments on the Article on 
the Executive. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
close the period of amendments on Proposed Resolution 
No. 517 on the Article on the Executive? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the voting on Second 
Reading on the Article on the Executive will have to be 
deferred until we shall have received our copies of the 
Article, as amended, so that everybody would know 
what he is voting for. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is our next business? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the other business 
was supposed to have been the Third Reading on the 
Article on Accountability of Public Officers, but the 
Chairman of the Committee on Accountability of Public 
Officers has just told me that he is not ready to present 
the Article for Third Reading. 

I move that we take up for consideration the pending 
matter of party list and sectoral representation in the 
Article on the Legislative. I understand that the propo- 
nents of these two systems have come to an agreement. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


555 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 10:13 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 10:23 a.m. , the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. We have an item under the Unfinished 
Business which has been pending for a long time now— I 
am referring to the motion for reconsideration of our 
vote on the Article on Amendment to the Constitution 
which was filed by Commissioner Gascon. May I ask 
that Commissioner Gascon be recognized to present his 
motion for reconsideration for final action by this body. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

RECONSIDERATION OF APPROVAL OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 322 
(Article on Amendments or Revisions)* 

MR. GASCON. Thank you, Madam President. 

This is with regard to Proposed Resolution No. 322 
which is now pending for Third Reading.. Before we 
go into Third Reading of the said resolution, I would 
like to ask the body to reconsider our decision on 
Second Reading with regard to Section 2 of the Article 
on Amendment or Revision which reads: 

Amendments to this Constitution may likewise be 
directly proposed by the people through initiative upon 
a petition of at least 12 percent of the total number of 
registered voters of which every legislative district must 
be represented by at least three percent of the registered 
voters thereof. No amendment under this section shall 
be authorized within five years following the ratification 
of this Constitution nor oftener than once every five years 
thereafter. 

My motion for reconsideration is based on my appeal 
to the body that we delete the last phrase after the word 
“Constitution” which says: “nor oftener than once 
every five years thereafter, which would actually mean 
that the people can exercise initiative only every five 
years as far as presenting amendments to the Constitu- 
tion is concerned. 

The Philippines is a republican state and sovereignty 
resides in the people and all government authority 
emanates from them. It is in recognition of this principle 
that we have sought to enshrine in the new Constitution 


a provision for amendment of the Constitution by 
initiative of the people. 

The provision as it stands now, however, limits such 
power of the people by prescribing a five-year limit to 
every amendment that may be brought through initia- 
tive, despite the difficult task of gathering at least three 
percent of the voters in every legislative district. 

There are various reasons why I am seeking for a 
reconsideration of the provision we just approved. 
Firstly, by enshrining the initiative process in the 
Constitution, we have recognized the supreme will of 
the people over the legislature composed only of elected 
representatives. We have provided a vehicle for amend- 
ing the Constitution by the people themselves who have 
firsthand knowledge of the problems we face. 

Secondly, we did not see it fit to limit the power of 
the legislature, composed of not more than 250 elected 
representatives, to propose amendments, but instead 
chose to limit amendments by initiative of the people 
which would be supported by at least 1 2 percent of the 
qualified voters, or roughly 3.2 million voters. This 
contradicts the principle that sovereignty resides in the 
people. 

Lastly, as I have said earlier, the three-percent 
requirement for every legislative district can serve as the 
necessary stopper for any abuse of the power of amend- 
ment by initiative. It is not an easy task to gather signa- 
tures of at least three percent of the voters in every 
district. Therefore, the fear that this will be abused is 
not a real fear. 

I therefore plead that this body reconsider our 
position if we are really determined to provide the 
people with this reserve power and we aim to establish a 
Constitution that will truly embody the ideals and 
aspirations of the people. If ours is truly a republican 
government, we should not create structures that would 
restrict, hamper, or impair the effective exercise of the 
people of their power to initiate amendments to the 
Constitution, thereby ensuring the atmosphere for a 
genuine, popular democracy. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are Commissioner Gascon’s 
amendments related to Section 2? 

MR. GASCON. Yes, Madam President. They are on 
the last two lines of Section 2 which read: “nor oftener 
than once every five years thereafter.” 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ask the Secretary-General 
to please read the provisions of Section 2 as already 
approved. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Section 2. Amendments to this Constitution may like- 
wise be directly proposed by the people through initiative 

upon a petition of at least twelve percent of the total 


* A mended title 


556 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


number of registered voters, of which every legislative 
district must be represented by at least three percent of the 
registered voters thereof. No amendment under this section 
shall be authorized within five years following the ratifica- 
tion of this Constitution nor oftener than once every five 
years thereafter. 

The National Assembly shall by law provide for the 
implementation of the exercise of this right. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear from the Chairman 
of the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SUAREZ. This matter had already been exhaus- 
tively discussed when we decided to approve this 
particular section. So we would like to leave it to the 
rr° a PP r ® c i ate this development in connection with 
riJwi!? 12 °/i he motion for reconsideration seeking the 
Gascon 1 ° 1S sentence as Presented by Commissioner 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I am supporting the 
amendment, but what I am really asking is why the 
proponent is not supporting more concessions. 

MR. GASCON. This was in agreement with the 
Committee Chairman. I tried to ask for more con- 
cessions but he was only willing to allow me to present 
my position on this matter because the issue of per- 
centages has already been thoroughly discussed. 

FR. BERNAS. I am not referring to the percentages, 
Madam President, I am just referring to the entire 
sentence. 

MR. GASCON. It is because I feel that we need to 
give this Constitution, at least, five years to be put into 
practice. If we allow amendments immediately after the 
ratification, then we will not be able to put the Constitu- 
tion into practice which is why I agree with the basic 
principle that we should allow this Constitution to be 
integrated in the whole political life of the people 
whereby the people will have a greater understanding 
of the Constitution and, thereby, will be able to present 
amendments to it. 


MR- RAMA. Madam Presidpnt K„f 

may I ask that Commissioner m we,akea ™ 
ask the nmn nno . u ^ sloner Bemas be recognized 

n ° ame ndment some questior 


FR. BERNAS. But the legislature will be able to 
propose the amendments even during the first five years 
or the like. 

MR. GASCON. Yes, that is right. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog 


FR. BERNAS. So, to that extent the legislature is still 
superior to the people. 


FR. BERNAS. Thank you, Madam President. 

the A last h Dhr!S°- S ^ by the Gentlema » for deleti 

thereafter” apply" °o rifeT^ 3 " ° nCe 6Very fiVe yCS 

why he is askwT , k! ? ntire sentence - May I knc 
Y ne is asking for the deletion only of the last phras 

cussed certaln^rame/ 1 ' 18 °h f dellberatior >s, we d 
could be reserve POW 

agreed to allow a 12 anH tvf f ° r whlch reason we ha 
each legislative dltrkft th ^: perc ® nta g e P a rameter f 
already presented mv • loug h originally I h; 
been less strict I have P ° Sltl °i' t * lat ^* s should ha 
majority. However the S h'° the posi,ion of " 
once every five yearf thereaf.e “l’ 01 ° ftener ,h: 

that the people can only beam "the^ d actually imp 
initiative after five years from^n practlce of tl 
Constitution is ratified, to which*! ? 8 that 

have to give the Constitution time to bepuJi? 56 ' 
tice. But after that it will only be practiced evS/fi 

years. That means we would only have one initiati 
every five years at the most. I feel this is too much ol 
restriction on the people as far as amending the Cons 
tution is concerned. 


MR. GASCON. That is true. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I am the original author of this 
amendment by initiative. To complete the record, when 
this matter was under debate in the Committee on 
Amendments and Transitory Provisions, some fears were 
expressed that although the requirements for proposing 
constitutional amendments through initiative had been 
raised through a rigorous standard — 1 2 percent of the 
total number of votes nationwide, not less than three 
percent in every legislative district or for that matter, 
province or city — there could be too frequent exercise 
of this power of initiative to a degree that the govern- 
ment could not anticipate the budgetary requirements 
needed for such exercises. 

A referendum or a plebiscite costs at least P97 million 
at present prices. And also the fear was expressed then, 
I think by General Crispin de Castro, that we could be 
exacerbating the political process by holding too many 
referenda, to a degree that this can affect the stability of 
the government and district government from its normal 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


557 


course of action. However, on further reflection, I think 
I am now prepared to support the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Gascon, if only to insure that the 
power qf initiative will, in no way, be inferior to the 
powers of Congress in constituting themselves into a 
constituent assembly or in calling a national convention. 
1 think it is prudent to let alone for the first five years, 
provided that after that there will be no restrictions on 
the number of times that this power can be invoked by 
the people. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rigos be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. The argument I advanced when the 
question was discussed here a few weeks ago, Madam 
President, was that while Congress was given the oppor- 
tunities to propose constitutional amendments without 
time limits, the people were allowed to make the same 
proposals once every five years. I think the suggestion 
of Commissioner Gascon is to give substance to the 
sovereign power of the people by eliminating the phrase 
“every five years,” so that the idea is to give the same 
privilege to the people, the same privilege given to the 
Congress in making constitutional amendments. I 
support the position of Commissioner Gascon on this 
score. 

MR. RAMA. Before we take a vote. Madam President, 
one more question is forthcoming from Commissioner 
Sarmiento. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Commissioner Gascon, we are 
here trying to achieve a balance between stability and 
respect for popular will. Would the proponent agree 
with me that instead of completely leaving it to the 
people after the initial five years, to make it after every 
three years? Will that be all right? 

MR. GASCON. Actually, I personally feel that we 
should not place any time limit any longer. However, 
when an initiative for referendum in the Constitution 
will be started by the people and submitted to the legis- 
lature for action, for practical purposes, most piobably 
the legislature will provide for the mechanism foi such 
a referendum during election. And in this case, it is not 
synchronized with our proposed election. So toi prac- 
tical reasons, perhaps everytime there is an election 
every three years, the legislature would assign a refer- 
endum on certain initiatives which the people have 
presented to the legislature. 


MR. SARMIENTO. In other words, the proponent 
wants to leave it to the legislature. 

MR. GASCON. Because of the last statement which 
says, “the National Assembly shall by law provide for 
the implementation of the exercise of this right,” I be- 
lieve this would provide the National Assembly the 
freedom to allocate the system whereby this referendum 
will be presented to the people. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner 
Romulo would like to express his views before we take a 
vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, as this body 
knows, I am very much for initiative and referendum. In 
fact, as far as the original proposal for initiative and 
referendum for the legislature is concerned, I filed the 
first resolution. However, I am against relaxing this 
provision for the moment because amendment by the 
people of a Constitution should be an extraordinary 
remedy. We are now experimenting with this provision, 
so instead of going all the way, we ought to give it a 
chance to see how it will work. In the United States, 
their experience is that when a direct ability of the 
people to amend the Constitution was first given in 
some of the states, for example, in California, many 
frivolous proposals were made. 

We have to remember that once we get the required 
number of signatures, the process begins, and that is an 
expensive process because we have to have a special 
referendum. Moreover, if the people really want an 
unlimited ability or power to amend the Constitution, 
they can do it the first time. But as I say, Madam 
President, this is an extraordinary remedy and amending 
the Constitution is not a joke. Our Constitution is sup- 
posed to last for a long time. In the 200-odd years 
ot the American Constitution, it has been amended 
only 22 times. So, Madam President, I believe that what 
Commissioner Gascon wants accomplished can be 
accomplished by the people once we have tested this 
provision. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I agree with Com- 
missioner Romulo that it is not a joke to amend the 
Constitution, which is why we have set very strict 
limitations. Twelve percent of the population is 3.2 
million people at present, and that is not an easy task 
tor anyone to make. Considering the proposals made by 
Commissioner Sarmiento, it would actually mean syn- 
chronization with the elections, which will mean every 
three years in real terms. I think it would be best that 


558 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


we consider it. Considering that the term of our election 
is every three years, we can minimize costs as well. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words. Commissioner 
Gascon is agreeable to change the period from five to 
three years, as suggested by Commissioner Sarmiento. 

MR. GASCON. I was thinking that if we keep quiet 
on this and allow the National Assembly to provide for 
the implementation of the exercise of this right, it will 
not contradict the Constitution. So, as a principle, we 
do not put any limitations, but the National Assembly 
may provide for such real terms. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other speaker? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, one question from 
Commissioner Bacani. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the motion to 
reconsider our approval on Second Reading of the 
amendment of Section 2, Proposed Resolution No. 322, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand. ) 

The results show 1 8 votes in favor and 14 against; the 
motion for reconsideration is approved. 

We are still in the period of amendments. May we ask 
Commissioner Gascon to restate his proposed amend- 
ment. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, my proposal is to 
put a period (.) after the word “Constitution” in the last 
sentence of Section 2, and to delete the phrase “nor 
oftener than once every five years thereafter.” 


BISHOP BACANI. Commissioner Gascon is working 
° n . I 1 ® P^® su PPosition that the power to legislate is 
delegated by the people to the legislators. Am I correct? 

MR. GASCON. That is correct. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner 
Monsod would like to speak against the proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


®' S ,, H0P BACANI. Am I also correct 
hat the one delegating should not have K 
the one delegated? 


presuming 
power than 


MR. GASCON. That is right. 
BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 


debated m tht '• Madam Preside] it, we have sufficien 
debated on the issue, so, may we take a vote? 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, do we realize that 
whenever there is a move to amend the Constitution, we 
have to have three million signatures, that even before 
the move is brought to the Congress, the Commission on 
Elections is supposed to look into the sufficiency of 
the signatures, as well as the proposal? This means that 
we have to authenticate and look into three million 
signatures. I think what has been stated here is that it is 
expensive to conduct a referendum. Even the first step 
is a very tedious and expensive proposition. Madam 
President. 


please. “ CASTR ° Mad ™ P ™ d «>t, P°i« of inqr 


MR. GASCON. Yes, I am aware of that. 


nizId. E PRESIDENT - Commissioner de Castro is re 

forTre?o E nsM A em t fon'. T^hink"^^ f 6 ha$ S °’ 

whether to approve his nw e Erst votln g shouk 

not. And the next voting shorn? bV re f c : onsideratio] 

g snou *d be on the amending 

THE PRESIDENT. We u , 
the Secretary-General. ClecE the records’ 


MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. GASCON. But, as I said, democracy is never 
easy. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just respond 
to that. I believe that this whole body is for democracy. 
1 think what we are trying to do is to balance reserve 
power with the principle of representation. 

Thank you. 


JVU\. 


• audin ^resident, I will < 
made a motion for reconsideration and I Dre J 

. But my motion for reconsideration ha 

ted upon. If the Chair ha 


reasons. But my motion for reconsideration h- 
been acted upon. If the Chair would please 
would like to find out what the sentiment of tli 
with regard to my proposal. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. I regret to say that I would have to express 
my reservation over the amendment on the basis that 
historically, at present we do not need more trouble. 
Our situation is so tenuous; we have a new Constitution 
which is not yet ratified. We need integration, unity, 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


559 


patience. We should not be opening the floodgates again 
for our people to express their amendment. When we 
say “people,” we do not mean that all our people are 
nationalists and good. We have also the antinationalists 
and the ones who want to make trouble. 

I cannot approve this proposal, especially because 
there are no limits. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now? Those 
hi favor of the proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner Gascon, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. ( Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I record my 
vote of abstention. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I be allowed to explain why I 
am abstaining? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. RODRIGO. I am abstaining because while I do 
not have any objection to the proposed amendment, I 
am already on record as having opposed the use o 
“initiative” in amending the Constitution., I have no 
objection to “initiative” and “referendum themselves 
or even “recall,” but I cannot see the mechanics and the 
practicality of it. I would like to state, Madam Pres- 
ident, that even the UP Law Center, which advocates 
referendum and initiative for ordinary legislation, does 
not advocate initiative for proposing amendments to t e 
Constitution, and this was a well-studied matter by t e 
UP Law Center. The Center does not recommend ini- 
tiative to propose amendments to the Constitution, 
although it proposes initiative and referendum or 
ordinary legislation. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 13 votes in 
favor, 33 against and 1 abstention; the amendment is 
lost. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 1 0:52 a. m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:59 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Commissioner Garcia was on the floor before I sus- 
pended the session. 


MR. GARCIA. Madam President, thank you very 
much. 

I submit to the Rules of the House; I withdraw my 
inquiry. I simply want to make this comment that the 
power of the people, as I understand from our dis- 
cussions during the brief recess, can still be employed 
in the intervening years on the Congress for the legis- 
lature to make the necessary amendments. In other 
words, it is not lost. That is the way we perceive it, 
although utilizing the mechanism of synchronization of 
the referendum with the elections every three years 
could have been, perhaps, a much more effective 
manner of pursuing this. But we submit to the Rules of 
the House, and we thank you very much. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

The body will recall that we had reconsidered the 
approval of Proposed Resolution No. 322 on Second 
Reading in order to open and receive this particular 
amendment. We will have to go back again and vote on 
Second Reading on Resolution No. 322, the Article 
providing the procedure for the amendment of the 
Constitution. 

Those in favor of approving Proposed Resolution 
No. 322 on Second Reading, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (No Member 
raised his hand. ) 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I register my 
abstention. 

APPROVAL ON SECOND READING OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 322 
(Article on Amendments or Revisions)* 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 28 votes in 
favor, none against, and 1 abstention; Proposed Resolu- 
tion No. 322, as amended, is approved on Second 
Reading. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


NOMINAL VOTING 
ON PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 322 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on Amendments or Revisions)* 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we vote on Third Read- 
ing on Proposed Resolution No. 322. 


*Amended title 


560 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Proposed Resolution No. 322 were 
distributed on July 10, 1986 pursuant to Section 28, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission. 

Voting on the proposed resolution on Third Reading 
is, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read the title of the 
proposed resolution. 


COMMISSIONER RODRIGO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I explain my 
vote for one minute? 

Notwithstanding my misgivings about the practicable- 
ness of Section 2, that is, using initiative to propose 
amendments to the Constitution, for reasons I have al- 
ready stated and which are on record, I find the other 
sections of this Charter good and necessary. And so, I 
vote yes . 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 322, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
AN ARTICLE PROVIDING THE PROCEDURE FOR ITS 
AMENDMENTS. 


FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on this 
bill, and the Secretary-General will call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar 

Alonto . . 


Azcuna 


Bernas 



Brocka . 



Calderon 


Yes 

Castro de 


Yes 

Colayco 


Yes 

Concepcion . 


Yes 

Davide 


Yes 

Foz . . 


Yes 

Garcia 


Yes 

Gascon 



explain m^vote^f Madam President ’ 1 would like to 
explain my vote for one minute. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

COMMISSIONER GASCON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

mentLn G d A Rev? N - this ^ticle on Amend- 

introduced a new wa/tcT^ § n° d m6ritS 3S 11 haS n ° W 
the people, Istill feel tint l mend ’ whlch ls initiative by 
tions and ^f 11 t0 ° many Umita ' 

this in my motion for he P. eople - 1 llave expressed 
fact that I recS z r a r nH 0nSlderati0n - In view of the 
majority, I would like to abstain^ ^ decision of the 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading- 

Guingona Yes 

Jamir Yes 

Laurel 

Lerum Yes 

Maambong Yes 

Monsod Yes 

Natividad Yes 

Nieva Yes 

Nolledo Yes 


°ple Yes 

Pa dilia ; Yes 

Munoz Palma Yes 

Quesada .... Yp , 

Rama Yes 

Regalado Yes 

Reyes de los Yes 

Ri S° s Yes 

Rodri g° Yes 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Romulo Yes 

Rosales Yes 

Sarmiento 

Suarez Yes 

Sumulong Yes 

Tadeo Yes 


Tan Yes 

Tingson Yes 

Trenas 

Uka Yes 

Villacorta Yes 

Villegas Yes 


SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will 
conduct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Laurel 

Alonto Sarmiento 

Colayco Trenas 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 322 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on Amendments or Revisions)* 


THE PRESIDENT. The results show 41 votes in 
favor, none against and 1 abstention. 

Proposed Resolution No. 322 is approved on Third 
Reading. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that the Chair- 
man of the Steering Committee, Commissioner Bengzon, 
be recognized for an important announcement. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


CONSIDERATION OF C.R. NO. 22 
(Article on the Legislative/National Assembly) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, the Secretariat 
has promised to distribute the clean copy of the Article 
on the Executive before twelve o’clock. If this happens, 


♦Amended title 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


561 


I would like to propose that we vote on Second Reading 
on the Article on the Executive at the first hour this 
afternoon. I now request, Madam President, that the 
Article on the Legislative be discussed for a voting on 
the compromise formula for the party list and multi- 
sectoral system. I request that Commissioner Davide be 
called, together with the members of the Committee on 
the Legislative. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

May we call on the Chairman and members of the 
Committee on the Legislative to please occupy the front 
table. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Although it was announced earlier 
that the last matter to be taken up on the Article on the 
Legislative is the party list and sectoral representation, 
we would like to inform the Commissioners that the 
Committee itself will propose amendments to Sections 
3 and 6 to align the terms of the Senators and the Mem- 
bers of the House of Representatives with what the 
Commission has decided on regarding the limitations for 
reelections. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I would like to report that the 
proponents of sectoral representation and of the party 
list system met to thoroughly discuss the issues and have 
arrived at a compromise formula. 

On this first day of August 1986, we shall, hopefully, 
usher in a new chapter in our national history by giving 
genuine power to our people in the legislature. Commis- 
sioner Monsod will present to the Committee on the 
Legislative the amendment to Section 5 which we have 
agreed upon. May we request that Commissioner 
Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the proposal that 
we discussed and arrived at consists of amending page 1 , 
line 29 of the draft Article on the Legislative, beginning 
with the word “elected,” and which reads as follows: 
THROUGH A PARTY LIST SYSTEM OF REGIS- 
TERED NATIONAL, REGIONAL AND SECTORAL 
PARTIES OR ORGANIZATIONS AS PROVIDED BY 
LAW. THE PARTY LIST REPRESENTATIVES 
SHALL CONSTITUTE TWENTY PERCENT OF THE 


TOTAL MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRE- 
SENTATIVES PROVIDED THAT FOR THE FIRST 
TWO TERMS AFTER THE RATIFICATION OF THIS 
CONSTITUTION TWENTY-FIVE OF THE SEATS 
ALLOCATED TO PARTY LIST REPRESENTATIVES 
SHALL BE FILLED BY SELECTION OR ELECTION, 
AS PROVIDED BY LAW FROM THE LABOR, 
PEASANT, URBAN POOR AND YOUTH SECTORS. 

Madam President, there were seven Commissioners 
who were involved in these discussions which took place 
a couple of days ago, and I would like to mention their 
names so that they can indicate if they are still in full 
accord with this provision and could consider them- 
selves coauthors of this amendment. 

In addition to Commissioner Villacorta and this 
representation, we have Commissioners Bemas, Benna- 
gen, Gascon, Garcia, Davide, Bengzon, Nieva, Azcuna, 
Bacani, Rigos, Tan, Suarez, Sarmiento, Ople, Tingson, 
Guingona, Foz, Romulo, Uka, Rosario Braid and 
Villegas. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I am in full ac- 
cord with the proposal read by Commissioner Monsod, 
but I would like to have the opportunity to ask a clari- 
ficatory question later. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Gusto ko lamang magpahayag ng susog 
o amendment by deletion. Ngunit bago ko ito sabihin, 
kinausap ko si Commissioner Monsod bago ito pinag- 
usapan, bago kami umuwi. Ang sabi ko sa kanya, ako 
bilang kinatawan ng mga dukha siguro ang nasa posisyon 
na dapat maging bahagi ng pagtalakay nito, at sumagot 
naman siya sa akin na hindi ito tatalakayin, na ang kina- 
tawan ng magbubukid ay wala. Nagkataon lamang na 
mayroon akong nasagutang pagsasalita sa Institute of 
Social Truth and Action na noon pang Abril ay nasagu- 
tan ko na, ngunit nang dumating ako ay naayos na ito. 
Ang akin lamang susog o amendment by deletion ay ang 
pag-aalis ng that for the first two terms after the ratifi- 
cation of this Constitution.” Bakit naman natin bibig- 
yan ng limit? Kung gagawa tayo ng isang Saligang 
Batas dapat na natin itong paghusayin, lalo na kung 
magbibigay ng kapangyarihang pampulitika sa mga 
dukha o marginalized sector. Ang totoo isa ito sa mga 
magpapabago ng political system ng Pilipinas sapagkat 
ang Section 5 at Section 3 1 na tinalakay natin kangina 
ay totoong napakahalaga, sapagkat ang mga ito ang mag- 
bibigay ng kapangyarihang pampulitika o political 


562 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


power sa marginalized sectors. Sinabi namin, hindi na 
mahalaga kung ang porma ng pamahalaan ay presiden- 
tial o parliamentary. Ang pinakamahalaga ay ang nilala- 
man o ang substance. 

Ang Cory government ay iniakyat ng people’s power. 
Kaya kami naririto sa Con-Corn ay dahil sa people’s 
power — nasa amin ang people, wala sa amin ang power. 
Ganito ito kahalaga. 


Kaya ang gusto kong mangyari, dahil ito’y totoong 
napakahalaga, gusto kong talakayin ito ng apatnapu’t 
walong bumubuo ng Con-Corn, sapagkat ito ang magbi- 
bigay sa kanila ng kapangyarihang pampulitika. Kaya 
ako na ang magsisimula ng pagtalakay sa isang free- 
wheeling discussion. Gusto ko munang banggitin ang 
nakalagay sa ating “Primer on Emerging Issues” na 
ginamit natin sa mga public hearings. Ang sabi sa page 3, 
last paragraph. III — Manner of Apportionment and 
Representation to the Legislature: 

No. 1. What is the relevance of understanding apportion- 
ment and representation? 


The Legislature is supposed to implement or give flesh to 
the needs and aspirations of the Filipino people. 

Ganoon kahalaga ang National Assembly kayat nap; 
kahalaga noong Section 5 and Section 3 1 ng atir 
ons i ution. Our experience, however, has shown th: 
egis a ton has tended to benefit more the propertie 
ass . const i t utes a small minority in our societ 
livp k ^ ™P° ver khed majority, 70 percent of whoi 
e °w tile poverty line. This has come about b 

thp f / 1C bave managed to dominate and contr 
the lecture, while the basic sectors have been left oi 

am nip r a’ ° cr \ t ^ ca ^ Question is, how do we ensu 

so that 1 presei l tatlon of basic sectors in the legislate 
so that laws reflect their needs and aspirations? 

ito G ^oona kabalaga an § Pag-uusapan natin sa araw i 

hanggang s^c^fr"- T*™ 3 " g term " g Presiden 
dalawang J ? ° fflCia1 ’ gumamit tayo halos . 

bigyan natin it Kay3 S3na ang pakiusap ko laman 
Preamble ng “love " gpa f kakataon - Naglagay tayo 
Preamble na sivanu hp^ 8 ^ t3y ° " g pag ' ibig sa atil 
ng ating Saligang Bates At^r magtatakda ng direksi y ( 
Emmanuel Pelaez na an^t bl miSm ° m Ambassad 
sa Preamble, kung na g . 3 ^ aw magandan gnagawa nat 

sioners, ay ang salita ng 

kahulugan ang salitang “ °ve ” Ann u u 

ng “love”? Hindi ko na k ? A ° ang lblg sablh 
ang Parable of the Good 1 S 08308 banggitin pa sa in : 

Luke, 10:3Ck37. N gun °, a „o S‘ an f Gospel of 1 

inyo ay ang ibig sabihin ng “love’^Ani h ™ ' amdng . 

laga sa iyo na ibinigay mo sa ;k a f bagay na mal 
gi y ing g y mo sa lba o love is an act 

Sa kalagayan ng ating political system noon a 
may hawak lang ng tinatawag nating political system 
ang five percent na naghaharing uri. Ano ang ibig sabil 
ng pag-ibig na imlagav natin sa ating Preamble"? Ku 
ang 70 percent ay walang political power, ang il 


sabihin ng pagkakalagay natin ng “love” ay: ’yong five 
percent ay bibigyan mo ng political power; ’yong 70 
percent ay walang political power. ’Yon ang ibig sabihin 
ng “love.” 

Tamang-tama kangina ang sinabi ni Commissioner 
Villegas. Tayo raw ay nilikha ng Diyos, ngunit hindi 
lamang tayo nilikha ng Diyos bilang kalarawan Niya. 
Nilikha tayo ng Diyos bilang cocreator Niya. Kaya 
gumagawa tayo ng isang Saligang Batas that will reflect 
the ideals and aspirations of the Filipino people. At 
winakasan ni Commissioner Villegas nang napakaliwanag. 
Sinabi niya: “Love in deeds; not in words.” 

Gusto kong banggitin dito ang I Corinthians 13:1. 
Ano ang sinasabi ng I Corinthians na siyang pinaka- 
mahalaga dito? 

Kung ako man ay makapagsasalitang tulad ng salita ng 
tao at ng wika ng anghel, kung wala naman akong pag- 
ibig . . . 

Ito ang kagandahan ng pagkakalagay natin ng “love” 
sa Preamble. Ang kahalintulad daw ng Preamble kung 
walang pag-ibig ay isang tanso lamang na tumutu- 
nog at batingaw na umaalingawngaw. Ayaw kong 
ang Saligang Batas nating gagawin ay isang batingaw na 
umaalingawngaw o isang tanso na tumutunog lamang. 
Dapat itong magkaroon ng “substance.” Sa ganitong 
kalagayan, napakahalaga ng araw na ito para sa mga 
dukha, sa marginalized sectors. 

Ngayon, gusto ko munang ipaliwanag ang party list 
sapagkat sinasabing hindi raw ito nauunawaan. Kung 
natatandaan ng lahat, nagpadala si Commissioner 
Monsod noong July 22, 1986 ng Memo to the Constitu- 
tional Commissioners, Subject: Explanatory Note on 
the Party List System na may dalawa lamang pahina. 
Pero nalulungkot ako, bakit naman sa dalawang pa- 
hinang ito’y marami pa ring nagsabi na hindi nila naiin- 
tindihan ang party list system? Bakit kapag ang kapang- 
yarihan ay ibibigay natin sa mga dukha, ang dalawang 
pahina ng papel na ito ay “tila hindi naman natin na- 
basa?” Marahil dapat na ituwid ninyo ako kung ako ay 
mali. 

Ngayon, sa ganitong kalagayan, gusto ko po lamang 
ipaliwanag ang party list. Ang ibig sabihin nito, doon sa 
ilalim ng two-party system, kapag kumuha ka ng 5 1 per- 
cent, iyong ibang partido ay wala nang nakuhang pu- 
westo sa legislature. Ang ibig sabihin ng party list system, 
makakuha ka lamang ng 2.5 percent ay mayroon ka 
nang isang puwesto. Ang ibig sabihin, ’yong 49 percent 
ay magkakaroon ng bahagi sa lehislatura at ito ay napa- 
kagandang bagay na napalagay sa ating Saligang Batas. 
Ngunit gusto ko itong palalimin. Ang 250 seats natin ay 
ganito po: Ang 200 seats na legislative district ay naka- 
laan sa bawat 200,000 sa botante; ’yong 50 ay para sa 
party list. Ngunit ang tanong ditong malinaw ay ganito: 
’Yon bang pumasok sa legislative district, ilagay nating 
halimbawa - UNIDO, PDP-Laban, Liberal, Nacionalista, 
PNP — ay hindi na kasali sa party list? Hindi po. Kasama 
rin ang mga partidong ito. Nahawakan na nila ang 200 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


563 


legislative seats, hahawakan pa rin nila ang party list — 
itutulak nila ang sectoral. Lalamunin din ng mga parti- 
dong ito ang sectoral. ’Yon po ang aming tinututulan. 
Dodominahan din. Uulitin ko sa inyo sapagkat ’yon ang 
puntong pinakamahalaga. Sa 250 seats, ’yong 200 ay 
legislative districts. ’Yon ay kokontrolin ng iba’t ibang 
partido. Ngunit ang mga partidong sasama sa legislative 
district, papasok pa rin sa party list. Kaya malalamon 
din ito at mawawala ang sektoral. 

Mga kasama, tanggapin naman nating ang pulitika'y 
logistics. Ang sabi nga ng aking kababayang Commis- 
sioner Natividad, “Jimmy, aba’y kapag sumama ka sa 
kandidato, milyon ang gagastusin mo. At ano’ng gagas- 
tusin ng marginalized sector? May pera ba sila para 
lumahok sa pulitika? Wala silang pera.” 

Kaya naman dito mga kasama, ang sinasabi lamang 
namin ay ito: Ang hinihingi lamang ng marginalized 
sector sa inyo ay 10 percent — sampling porsiyen to 
lamang ng upuan sa 250 ang hinihingi ng marginalized 
sector. Uulitin ko — 10 percent. Ihambing natin ito sa 
Constitution ng Egypt — Article LXXXVII ng Consti- 
tution ng Egypt, na ipinamigay rin sa inyo: 

The law shall determine the constituencies into which 
the State shall be divided and the number of elected mem- 
bers of the people’s assembly must be at least 350 persons, 
of which one-half at least must be workers and farmers 
elected by direct, secret, public balloting. 

Dito makikita namin. Dapat ang hiningi namin sa 
inyo ay 50 percent ng 250. Pero alam na naman natin 
’yong “science of attainable,” kayat ano ba ’yong atin 
lang puwedeng makamit? Alam namin na hindi namin 
puwedeng makamit, bagamat gusto namin na 50 percent 
ng puwesto ay ibigay ninyo sa marginalized sectors. Ito 
ang gusto namin, na gusto ko lang marehistro, pero 
alam namin na hindi natin ito makakamit. Kaya ang 
hinihingi lang namin sa inyo ay 10 percent, at gusto 
kong malaman ng mga kabataang naririto ngayon na 
kasama sa puwestong hinihingi ko na kayong kabataan 
ay magkaroon ng kinatawan sa lehislatura. Kaya ang 
dapat ninyong malaman ay kung ano ang ipinakikipag- 
laban ko; kasama ngayon dito, dapat ninyong maintin- 
dihan na sa 25 na ito kasama kayong kabataan na mag- 
karoon ng direktang upuan mismo sa lehislatura. 

Kaya, sa ganitong mga kalagayan, mga kasama, napa- 
kahalaga nitong tinatalakay natin sa araw na ito dahil 
kapag hindi natin nailagay dito na ang marginalized 
sector ay hindi natin binigyan ng kapangyarihang pam- 
pulitika, natatakot ako sa hinaharap ng ating Saligang 
Batas na gagawin. Tungkol naman sa Saligang Batas ni 
Ginoong Marcos noong 1973, kahit na isang pretensiyon 
lamang ito ni Ginoong Marcos, nagbigay siya sa youth 
ng anim na upuan; sa industrial labor, apat na upuan; 
sa agricultural labor, apat na upuan. Labing-apat na 
upuan ang ibinigay sa marginalized sector ni Ginoong 
Marcos. Mayroon siyang pagtatangka, labing-apat, at 
ang mapupuno lang na hinihingi ngayon sa panahon ng 
people’s power, labing-isa, magiging 25. Sa ilalim ng 


Proclamation No. 9 ni Ginang Cory Aquino, nakalagay 
doon ang marginalized sector sa Con-Corn kaya ako’y 
napalagay dito? kinilala ng Proclamation No. 9. Kung 
initiative ng mga tao’y naririto, iniakyat namin ang 
people’s power. Huwag nating kitlin, huwag nating 
patayin ang initiative ng mga tao. Ang hinihingi ko 
lang, uulitin ko ang aking amendment by deletion, alisin 
lang natin ’yong two terms. Bakit natin lilimitahan ’yon 
sa marginalized sector? Alisin na natin ’yong “provided 
that for the first two terms after the ratification of this 
Constitution.” Iyon lang naman ang hinihingi ko. Big- 
yan na natin ng 25 upuan ang marginalized sector. 
Uulitin ko, ang hinihingi ko lang, para ’yong pag-ibig ay 
maging makabuluhan sa ating Saligang Batas, ay 10 
porsiyento lang ng upuan ng Lower House. (Applause) 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may we remind 
those in the galleries that they are not supposed to 
express approval or disapproval. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we request our guests to 
please refrain from any outward manifestation of ap- 
proval or disapproval on anything that is being said here 
in this session hall. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Monsod wishes to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, my dear and es- 
teemed friend Commissioner Tadeo mentioned at the 
beginning of his remarks that we had an agreement and 
he suggested that I reneged on it. I would like to say, 
Madam President, that our agreement was that it would 
not be taken on the floor because at that time I already 
gave up the idea of a compromise with those who had 
proposed this party list system and sectoral repre- 
sentation. In fact, I was only invited to that meeting and 
I did not want to attend the meeting, as I believe Com- 
missioner Villacorta and all the rest would say. Madam 
President, I regret to say that the assertions of my 
triend are incorrect, and I would like to put it on 
record. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Lerum wishes to be 
recognized, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, I support the amend- 
ment offered by Commissioner Tadeo. Let me explain 
how sectoral representation came about. Organized 
laboi has always been asking for representation in all 
government bodies for the welfare and protection of 
the workers. Because of the insistence of organized 
labor for representation in government bodies, the 


564 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


government has been giving in little by little. For 
example, in the Social Security System, we have two 
labor representatives; in the National Labor Relations 
Commission, labor has three commissioners; in the Em- 
ployees Compensation Commission, labor has one 
commissioner; in the National Manpower and Youth 
Council, labor has two members; in the National Wages 
Council, it has two members; in the Pag-I.B.I.G., it has 
two members. 


At a time when we did not have a lawmaking body 
after martial law was declared, there were tripartite 
conferences called by the President for the purpose of 
acting as a recommendatory body regarding settlement 
of labor and management disputes. During the said con- 
ferences, labor had shown that it can act with maturity. 
As a result, in 1976, an amendment was introduced 
in the Constitution providing for sectoral representation. 
In the Constitution that was approved, the number of 
sectors was not indicated. However, in the Election 
Code of 1978, it provided for three sectors; namely, 
industrial labor, agricultural labor and the youth. The 
agricultural labor was given four seats; two for Luzon, 
one for the Visayas and one for Mindanao. The same is 
true with the industrial labor sector. As far as the youth 
are concerned, they were also given four seats: two 
with °, ne . ^° r Mindanao and one for the Visayas, 

at large a°h 1 lon tbat there will be an additional two 
four frnm^th S °' yoiltb had six representatives plus 

the industrial ? agricub:ura l labor sector and four from 
the industrial labor sector - we had 14 seats. 

course 1 ^ the ^ Con ^ titution was again amended. In the 
the Batasang P^h ment ’ the labor representatives in 

sentation b e 8 included S as Pr ° P ° Sed that sectoral re P re_ 
lawmaking body. d d 3 permanent addition to the 

in 1981 ' the nnmh ^ ons J itut i° n which was approved 
not indicated H er and the name of the sectors were 
approved before ^ 19*4 t . he Election Code that was 
definition of who will 84 e . . ectlon ’ there was really a 
they will be aDDoint^H ^ onstltute the sectors and how 
was passed in 1984 iwf quote from that law that 
bansa Big. 881 th«* n der Section 27 of Batas Pam- 
fined as follows- sc °P e of the sectors has been de- 

personally and^physicaHy tUMh TT ^ PerS ° nS Wh ° 
occupation. It includes • • f* 6 3nd 3S P rinci P a l 
rural workers and farm 8 ™ 1 * V*™ 1 tenants and lessees, 
settlers and small fishermen ^ ° yeeS ’ owner -cultivators, 

The industrial labor serw i . 
workers and employees. c u es all nonagricultural 

The youth sector embraces persons not more than 
twenty-five years of age. e tnan 


district representatives, the most representative and general- 
ly recognized organizations or aggroupments of members 
of the agricultural labor, industrial labor and youth sectors, 
as attested to by the Ministers of Agrarian Reform and of 
Agriculture and Food, the Minister of Labor and Employ- 
ment, and the Ministers of Local Government and of 
Education, Culture and Sports, respectively, shall, in 
accordance with the procedure of said organizations or 
aggroupments of members of the sector, submit to the 
President their respective nominees for each slot allotted 
for each sector. The President shall appoint from among 
the nominees submitted by the aforementioned organiza- 
tions or aggroupments the representatives of the sector. 

This came to pass because we had a difficulty in 
finding a solution on how the sectoral representatives 
should be elected. Some regional assemblymen had 
suggested that the names of the nominees of the sectors 
should be included in the ballot, but we objected to 
it because it would mean that people outside the sectors 
will be voting for them and, in effect, they will not 
become representatives of the sectors but rather repre- 
sentatives of all those within the district who voted for 
them. So, it was rejected because of that difficulty. 

Let me add to that. The sectors recommended that 
there should be a separate list of voters who will vote 
exclusively for the sectoral representatives. But it was 
called to our attention that this is very hard to do, 
because since there are three sectors, then there are 
three separate lists to be prepared by the COMELEC 
and that will be an additional expense to the sectoral 
representatives as well as the government. This recom- 
mendation was abandoned, and it was agreed that 
selection shall be by appointment. 

I think there seemed to be some opposition to sectoral 
representation at that time, because the representatives 
had been accused of being tools of the President in view 
of the wrong impression that they had been appointed 
by the President. As I have explained on this floor at 
the second meeting of this Commission, the sectoral 
representatives in 1978 were elected as provided for by 
the Election Code of 1978, and the Record of the 
Batasan will show that they were fiscalizers rather than 
blind followers of the President. There are still some 
Members here from the interim Batasang Pambansa who 
can testify to the fact that the sectoral representatives 
have always acted independently in this Commission. 
One cannot dictate to the sectoral representatives 
because they are responsible not to the President but to 
the sectors who have elected or recommended them. 
Even if they have been appointed by the President, they 
are loyal to the sectors because they will be called to 
account by the sectors, not by the President. And so, 
as sectoral representatives, we try to show this Com- 
mission that we have been acting independently. 


As to selection, it provides: 

SEC. 28. Selection of sectoral representatives. Not later 
than twenty days after the election of provincial, city or 


Just yesterday, I had to vote alone against six Mem- 
bers when the question of sequestration was raised be- 
cause we maintain that after the Constitution is ap- 
proved, there shall be no exemption from the operation 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


565 


of the Bill of Rights. We had voted alone, but we are 
used to voting alone. As a matter of fact, if I may dig- 
ress a moment, during our meetings with the President, 
at one time, the President said: “Let us hear Assembly- 
man Lerum first before we outvote him.” But that is the 
role of the sectors in the Batasan. Contrary to what the 
KMU has been saying time and time again that this 
representation is the author of Batas Pambansa Big. 
130 and 227, I said that is a lie. It is the KMU, during 
a public hearing on May 28 at the Army and Navy 
Club, which said that they are already in favor of the 
draft of the Committee on Labor which this repre- 
sentation has been opposing. 

Brother Tadeo submitted his arguments against the 
proposed amendment. I am joining him in that respect 
and I am reminding this Commission of a danger if that 
amendment will be approved because, in effect, we are 
giving reserve seats to the sectors and also to the party 
list. But if we approved his amendment, after two 
elections, all the seats reserved to the sectors will belong 
to the parties. The labor sectors, the youth sectors and 
the other sectors which are contemplated in this pro- 
posal will no longer be represented because the voting 
will be by all the voters in the district or cities con- 
cerned. 

This is the reason we are against this amendment. 
This amendment does not improve what has been pro- 
posed by the Committee which was a committee amend- 
ment. This party list system is intended to benefit only 
political parties that cannot elect their own candidates. 
It is intended that even the seat allotted to the labor and 
other sectors will be absorbed by them so that in the 
end there will be no more sectoral representatives. 

And so, I am opposed to that amendment and I am 
in favor of the amendment to the amendment intro- 
duced by Commissioner Tadeo. And before closing, 
because I am going to use this argument also when it 
comes to an amendment on sectoral representation in 
the Senate, let me read what the President promised 
to the labor sector on May 1, 1986, three months ago 
to this date. She said: 

It is part of my minimum program of government to 
assure labor’s meaningful participation in decision-making 
at all levels of our society. 1 shall soon appoint repre- 
sentatives of your unions in all policy-making bodies of 
government. I ask you to submit your recommendation 
in those positions. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner de los Reyes be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I would 
like to state for the record that I am in favor of giving 


reserve seats to the labor, peasant, urban poor, and 
youth sectors. And I would like to state my reasons 
by quoting the following words from a book entitled 
Ours To Share, by Jeremias U. Montemayor. He said: 

At the beginning, the land problem could have been 
purely economic insofar as the tenants and the landlords 
were concerned. But as time passed on, what was originally 
an economic problem became a social problem as well. 
Since the landlords had ample income, they were in a 
position to develop themselves physically, intellectually 
and culturally. On the other hand, since the peasants’ 
earnings were barely enough to keep them alive, they could 
not afford the education of their children. They were 
forced to keep their children as helpers in the farm or to 
send them to the households of the landlords to work as 
servants and maids. 

So, as the landlords and their children rose to social 
prominence, the peasants and their issue lost practically 
all social standing. But the problem did not end there. 
Since the landlords accumulated great wealth and acquired 
intellectual capability and social prominence, they logically 
became the political leaders of the country, while the 
peasants who remained destitute and ignorant, counted 
almost nothing in the political life of the nation. Thus, 
the imbalance finally permeated not only the economic 
and social fields but also the political sphere. 

The structure of society has assumed that of the inverted 
pyramid whereby the relatively few landlords practically 
monopolized all economic, social and political power, 
while the vast majority of citizens, mostly peasants, re- 
mained poor, ignorant and politically impotent. The 
situation tends to degenerate even with the growth of 
industrialization inasmuch as the landlords, due to their 
advantages, are also becoming the biggest industrialists. 
Moreover, the situation has become extremely more com- 
plicated because the various aspects of the problem — 
economic, social and political — continued to react one 
upon another. So that in time what was formerly a cause 
became also an effect and what was formerly an effect 
became also a cause — a vicious cycle. 

An intellectual superiority has enabled the landlords 
to acquire great political power. In turn, great political 
Powei has enabled the landlords to acquire more wealth 
and greater social superiority. The cycle continues to 
turn in a downward spiral and, at every turn, it 
depresses the economic, social and political condition 
of the whole world further and further. And, therefore, 
like playing golf, we should give “handicap” to the 
marginal class belonging to the labor, peasant, urban and 
youth sectois, but to give them only a period of two 
terms alter the ratification of the Constitution, accord- 
ing to Commissioner Tadeo, is not enough. They want 
reserve seats forever. 

In other words, if we are playing golf, they want to 
have the handicap” forever. According to Commis- 
sioners Tadeo and Lerum, if we give only two terms 
alter the ratification, sooner or later, the sectoial 


566 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


groups will be swallowed by the traditional political 
parties who are better financed. 

However, I think that if we give the sectoral groups 
their “handicaps” eternally or forever, they could 
remain weak forever; they will have no incentive to get 
stronger because they know that they will be enjoying 
the handicap forever. 


I was toying with the idea that perhaps we could 
reach a happy compromise because legislation is the art 
of the possible, I always say. Instead of completely 
adopting the amendment of Commissioner Monsod 
that the reserve seats are only for the first two terms 
after the ratification of the Constitution, it may state 
as follows: TWENTY-FIVE PERCENT OF THE SEATS 
ALLOCATED TO PARTY LIST REPRESENTATIVES 
SHALL BE FILLED BY SELECTION OR ELECTION 
FROM THE LABOR, PEASANT, URBAN POOR AND 
YOUTH SECTORS WHICH SHALL GRADUALLY 
DECREASE AFTER EVERY ELECTION FOLLOW- 
ING THE FIRST TWO TERMS AFTER THE RATI- 
FICATION OF THIS CONSTITUTION, UNTIL THE 

SEATS ARE NO LONGER NECESSARY 
AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 


S v ^' len y e play golf, we minimize the handi- 

cap un t e handicap is totally diminished. The same 
pnncip e app ies. That is my idea, Madam President. 
Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Who is the next speaker? 

recooniz^d^ L asJc that Commissioner Aquino 
recognized, Madam President. 

nized E PRESIDENt - Commissioner Aquino is recc 


menfwfth the °' President > 1 am in full agre 

ever I have som C °u CePt ° f sectora l representation. Ho 
> ave some disagreement on the mechanics. 

speaks of° n i°serv P Z„ OSal Which 1 have ‘° difl 

ratification of the Con*??/ 01 IY° terms after 1 
is: 1) we should r> ^frtution. M Y personal positu 

institutional seats f ™the b7' perpetual reservation 
I refer to the peasants th asic sectors - and by th; 
urban poor; and 2) that th 6 ab ° r ’ the youth and 1 
sentation should be done 6 ? r0ce , ss for sect °ral rep 
selection. I will propose the V e ectlon and not 
amendments to this at the necessar y and pertine 

President, I would preface mv°^m Bu J; Mad: 
that although the Constitution ^ en f dm ® nt by sayi 
if it is unable to achieve a proper 3 b^^f* 31 ^ 
its institutional virility is serioustydoubted. 06 ° f P ° W 

The problem with Philippine politics now is tl 
the concentration of socioeconomic and political pov 
is in the hands of the few, while the majority of i 
people are destitute and powerless. Now is the time a 


the unedited opportunity for us to transfer the center 
of gravity of socioeconomic power from the people on 
top to the people below. This proposal for sectoral 
representation is hardly iconoclastic; it is not a leftist 
aberration as some of us are inclined to think. Why do 
we have to look askance at it as a dynamic and powerful 
sectoral representation? Now, more than ever, is the 
time for us to realize the lessons of history. History is 
liberating, otherwise, we might as well consign it to the 
dung heap of oblivion. History has told us to be either 
nationalistic or wary of the forces that invade self- 
determination or it could also be just a kinetic over- 
reaction. But history is the best teacher in the sense 
that a people’s history is liberating history. We know 
that traditional politics has denied the people the right 
to make their own mistakes. Elite politics has been a 
sure-fire formula for depriving us of the luxury of 
making our own mistakes. I think that it is now the 
time to return the power to the people; let us have 
faith in them. And by faith, I mean real and abiding 
faith, not just looking at the people as some kind of a 
mystical entity in whose name the eternal politician in 
some of us have done themselves proud. In other words, 
let the Filipinos chart their own histories. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I would like to say 
a few words in support of the amendment proposed 
by Commissioner Tadeo for the “permanentizing” of 
reserve seats for the sectors. The basic premise for 
this is that by these sectors, we mean the underprivi- 
leged masses. That is clearly what is in our mind. The - 
sectors mentioned are understood as the underprivi- 
leged masses. In the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions, 
and again in our new Constitution, we have enshrined 
the concept of social justice; and we have understood 
the concept of social justice not so much as a philo- 
sophical concept but as a practical concept, meaning, 
that those who have less in life should have more in 
law. Now we are placing sectoral representation side by 
side with the party list system, and I think it is im- 
portant to look at it in that context. The effort to 
introduce the party list system has for its objective the 
equalization of political power. In other words, in 
order that political power will not be concentrated in 
two parties, we are attempting to introduce a party 
list system in order to distribute political power among 
various parties. But the distribution of political power 
is very much dependent, we might even say essentially 
dependent, on the distribution of economic power, and 
the effective distribution of economic power would 
take quite a while. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


567 


After we finish our discussion on the Article on the 
Legislative, we will be discussing the Article on Social 
Justice. I am sure that all of those who had the opportu- 
nity to read the proposals, if not just scan over them, 
will see that these are long-range goals which will not 
be attained immediately. It is only upon the attainment 
of these long-range goals that the very gross imbalances 
in economic power will be remedied, and I anticipate 
that the remedying of this will take place far longer 
than just two terms of the House of Representatives, 
which means only six years. It will take a little longer 
than that. We cannot anticipate that this preferential 
treatment of the underprivileged will no longer be 
needed after six years. I anticipate that it will still be 
needed after six years. After all, the concept of reserve 
seat is not something unusual to our Constitution. We 
have reintroduced the Upper House or the Senate with 
24 representatives which, in effect, represents reserve 
seats for those who have more political and economic 
power. Because these are seats which are quite beyond 
the capacity of the underprivileged to reach and because 
these are seats which, in the context of our history, 
require people who have had vast experience, broad 
education and, let us face it, economic wealth, there- 
fore, elitism in the Senate, although we might say that 
it is elitism in terms of political perspective, education, 
wisdom and experience, one cannot really separate 
from it class distinction. Class distinction is very much 
involved in this. 

Therefore, by “permanentizing” these twenty-five 
seats reserved for the underprivileged, I think that we 
will be permanently injecting into the legislative process 
direct contact, as it were, with the large masses of 
people whose economic position in life need to be 
elevated. I would, therefore, very strongly urge that we 
remove this limit of two terms. But when we reach 
such a time when we have succeeded in substantially 
removing the gross inequities of the economic situation 
of the nation, then a constitutional amendment can be 
introduced so we can move into the purely party list 
system because, hopefully, by that time, the under- 
privileged will no longer need to have this power deli- 
vered to them, as it were, on a silver platter. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Bennagen 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Madam President. 

I do not know if this is the appropriate time for me 
to say this, but I just want to find out why the in- 
digenous communities are not represented, although 
in a separate paper, it says that the representation of 
the four functional sectors could include indigenous 
cultural communities. What I am saying is this: I would 


argue for the inclusion of indigenous cultural commu- 
nities not so much because they are marginalized, but 
because they are still practicing customary laws which 
are specifically related to their central concerns, essen- 
tially the question of ancestral land. I have in mind the 
real possibility of cross-fertilization of legal systems, 
one that will take into account the viable indigenous 
legal systems in the Philippines and integrate this into 
other legal systems, so that, eventually, we might 
evolve a legal system that is truly Filipino, drawing 
sustenance from our indigenous traditions, as well as 
other traditions. I would imagine that such an inclusion 
of representatives from the indigenous cultural commu- 
nities would provide this rich opportunity. 

I should add that the College of Law of the Univer- 
sity of the Philippines, along with some anthropologists 
and political scientists, is already undertaking extensive 
and comprehensive studies of indigenous legal systems. 
But the mere presence of representatives of these 
indigenous cultural systems would provide a living 
laboratory for this kind of cross-fertilization. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Ople be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 

MR. OPLE. -Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to support the amendment now under 
discussion which was introduced by Commissioners 
Villacorta, Monsod and the others. Let us start with 
the theory of sectoral representation, whether as reserve 
seats or as may be achieved through a party list system. 

There are two kinds of representation: the territorial 
representation, which is based on representative govern- 
ment, and which started taking root at the beginning 
of the 19th century in many of the Western countries 
which we now call the Western democracies. It became 
evident later on that territorial representation has its 
limitations, that functional representation might be 
necessary in order to round off the excellence of a 
representative system. And that was how the theory of 
paity list representation or the reservation of some seats 
in a legislature for sectors came about. 

I think the whole idea is based on countervailing 
methods with the aim of perfecting representation in 
a legislative body combining the territorial as well as the 
functional modes of representation. The ideal manner 
o securing functional representation is through a party 
list system through popular suffrage so that when 
sectoial representatives get into a legislative body on 
this basis, rather than direct regional or district repre- 
sentation, they can rise to the same majesty as that of 
the elected representatives in the legislative body, 
rathei than owing to some degree their scats in the 
legislative body either to an outright constitutional 


568 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


gift or to an appointment by the President of the 
Philippines. I think, therefore, this proposed amend- 
ment now meets this test. There is an outright constitu- 
tional gift for the first two terms of the sectoral repre- 
sentatives but, after that, they will have to earn the 
seats through participation in a party list system or, 
even beyond that, to be direct competitors with estab- 
lished and more orthodox parties in the general political 
arena. I see no reason why after having occupied seats 
in the House of Representatives for two terms, the 
representatives of sectors may not be able to combine 
their forces in order to form their own political parties 
or become powerful adjuncts to existing political parties 
so that they will enjoy not only the benefits of a party 
list system but also the benefits of being able to com- 
pete directly in the wider political arena. 


Let me give an example. In many countries in Eu- 
rope, the labor parties today are direct competitors for 
power with the long-established conservative parties. 
And it is a fact that in many countries of Europe, for 
example, one sees labor or socialist parties actually 
alternating in power with the so-called conservative 
parties. In addition to that, in Germany, of course, the 
more ra ical parties win their seats routinely through 

tinn^ 31 ^ ft 1S f system and not as an outright constitu- 
t 81 ° reserve seats to which the marginalized 

SS,erin a rcS' 0 7t^‘v ,hrough ,he,r reP K e ' 

thp Prpe + c C f Se ot Philippine experience, by 

noJnaUon « f °,l on the basis of the 

nominations of the several sectors. 

wi^on^whpri 0 thi ! Monsod-Villacorta amendment a 
major disadva * ? Under a sd;ua tion where they start with 
overcome thrn m tke com P e titive arena, these are 

T“eTea ts ^rtcte^ar trigh, *« of 

terms the nr » sectoral representatives. But after two 
seats throueh ^ Ump i ° 1 ' 1 is > tp ey will have to earn these 
hat unnfth llSt system ' And 1 do not think 

“ak the Vctor 7° temS ’ WWch corres e°"‘' s * x 

of ample opportunV^ 686 ”* 3 ^ 68 Wl11 not make use 
selves through their nerfn ° rder t0 strengthen them ‘ 
that they am able to [. L ?- in the Mature so 
two terms or three term* ti Up> *u eir stren § th - And after 
to take full advantape f +vf n tkey w * d he in a position 
on the basis Party list system so that 

all the qualified voters in th lf Percent or two Percent of 
and that probablv rnrre e country, one seat is earned 

missioner Tadeo’s organlz^h ! 8 5 , 00 ’ 000 votes - Com ' 
bership of one million. The i?i 1 thu \ k ’ claims a mem ' 
a membership of half q .!, usang Mayo Uno claims 

Congress of ,L Phiiippines Si? The J rade U " io " 
million. The Federation of T_! 3 ™ emb ership of one 
membership of one million. Let' n Farmers claims a 
representatives of these organizatio S as . s . ume tbat the 
those who enjoy a membership of one mil Ho 1S t0 K say 
one million, occupy the seats for two terms, willnot^ 
years be enough for them to amalgamate their force" 
if there is enough basis of unification so that from 
their platform in the legislature, they can, through £ 


party list system, amass as many seats as are available 
now outside territorial representation? And beyond 
that, they can even rise to the level of a major political 
party able to compete for territorial representation both 
for the Senate and the House of Representatives. 

In my opinion, this will also create the stimulus for 
political parties and mass organizations to seek common 
ground. For example, we have the PDP-Laban and the 
UNIDO. I see no reason why they should not be able 
to make common goals with mass organizations so that 
the very leadership of these parties can be transformed 
through the participation of mass organizations. And if 
this is true of the administration parties, this will be 
true of others like the Partido ng Bayan which is now 
being formed. There is no question that they will be 
attractive to many mass organizations. In the opposition 
parties to which we belong, there will be a stimulus for 
us to contact mass organizations so that with their 
participation, the policies of such parties can be radical- 
ly transformed because this amendment will create 
conditions that will challenge both the mass organiza- 
tions and the political parties to come together. And 
the party list system is certainly available, although 
it is open to all the parties. It is understood that the 
parties will enter in the roll of the COMELEC the names 
of representatives of mass organizations affiliated with 
them. So that we may, in time, develop this excellent 
system that they have in Europe where labor organiza- 
tions and cooperatives, for example, distribute them- 
selves either in the Social Democratic Party and the 
Christian Democratic Party in Germany, and their 
very presence there has a transforming effect upon 
the philosophies and the leadership of those parties. 

It is also a fact well known to all that in the United 
States, the AFL-CIO always vote with the Democratic 
Party. But the businessmen, most of them, always vote 
with the Republican Party, meaning that there is no 
reason at all why political parties and mass organizations 
should not combine, reenforce, influence and interact 
with each other so that the very objectives that we set 
in this Constitution for sectoral representation are 
achieved in a wider, more lasting and more politically 
institutionalized way. Therefore, I support this amend- 
ment. It installs sectoral representation as a constitu- 
tional gift, but at the same time, it challenges the sector 
to rise to the majesty of being elected representatives 
later on through a party list system; and even beyond 
that, to become actual political parties capable of 
contesting political power in the wider constitutional 
arena for major political parties. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, will the honorable 
Commissioner Ople yield to some questions? 

MR. OPLE. Very glady, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


569 


MR. LERUM. As a former Minister of Labor, Com- 
missioner Ople is aware of the fact that labor is at 
present divided, and the reason for the inclusion of 
sectoral representation in the Batasang Pambansa was 
because of that situation. Is that not correct? 

MR. OPLE. I was instrumental in introducing that 
amendment in the Constitution of 1973 for sectoral 
representation in the Batasang Pambansa, as Commis- 
sioner Lerum must be aware. But I do not understand 
the question. Will he kindly repeat it? 

MR. LERUM. I am sorry. My question is: As a 
former Minister of Labor, is he aware of the present 
situation of organized labor? They are divided. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. LERUM. And the reason for this division is 
ideology and other reasons which I will not mention 
now. That is a fact. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. LERUM. And the reason why the Commissioner 
recommended, as he is admitting now, sectoral repre- 
sentation is that labor is divided. 

MR. OPLE. All sectors presumably are not immune 
from differences and division. 

MR. LERUM. I know that. But the question is, the 
Commissioner is aware of the fact that labor is divided 
that is why he recommended the inclusion of sectoral 
representation in the Batasang Pambansa. 

MR. OPLE . Whether labor is divided or not, they are 
entitled to sectoral representation under this proposal. 

MR. LERUM. I will ask another question. The 
Commissioner agrees that labor is entitled to sectoral 
representation, but is he against making this a per- 
manent provision in the Constitution? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, because I would like them, after 
two or three terms, to rise to the majesty of elected 
representatives through a party list system ; and I have 
no doubt in my mind that given this constitutional 
gift, after two or three terms, they will have the strength 
to earn it by winning through a party list system. 

MR. LERUM. I agree with the Commissioner on that 
point if they are united because if they are united they 
can even stop this government. If they can stop essential 
services, they can paralyze this government. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. LERUM. I agree with him on that point if they 
are united. But the fact is, they are not united, and that 


is why this kind of provision in the Constitution is 
needed so that this big group of workers would be 
entitled to a representation. In other words, the govern- 
ment or the State is trying to help them because of their 
disunity so that they can do something by having 
representation in the Assembly. That is the purpose 
of this. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, the freedom of associa- 
tion does not bestow on the government the right to 
interfere with labor organizations or other sectoral 
organizations. I do not think the government should 
impose unity on them. We will depend on them to work 
out their own unification across their well-known 
differences. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, I am not saying 
about the government compelling them to unite. What I 
am saying is that, during the time that they are not 
united, why begrudge them of sectoral representation? 

MR. OPLE. No. We want them to have sectoral 
representation. 

MR. LERUM. Yes. But, as far as the Commissioner 
is concerned, he wants this on a limited period only. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, in accordance with the Villacorta- 
Monsod amendment. 

MR. LERUM. On the other hand, he wants the party 
list system to be a permanent provision of the Constitu- 
tion. Is it not the fact that by providing for the party list 
system, he is also providing a reserve seat to those 
parties that cannot elect their representatives in the 
ordinary election? Is that not correct? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, as a countervailing mode to the 
well-established political parties, I consider the party 
list system a very important method of what Commis- 
sioner Bernas earlier had called the equalization of 
political power. 

MR. LERUM. My point is that the Commissioner is 
against a permanent grant of seats to sectoral repre- 
sentatives but he is in favor of granting permanent 
seats to certain organizations that cannot elect their 
own representatives in an ordinary election. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. LERUM. I cannot understand the logic of that. 

MR. OPLE. The logic lies in the use of popular 
suffrage which is exactly what a party list system is, 
except that certain advantages are stacked up legally in 
tavor of those who are weaker than those who are 
stronger. 


570 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


MR. TADEO. Commissioner Ople, maaari po bang 
magtanong? 


MR. OPLE. Maaari iyan sapagkat bukas ang party list 
system sa lahat ng mga partido. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just a minute, please. Is Com- 
missioner Lerum through? 

MR. LERUM. I will give way to Commissioner 
Tadeo. I have some more questions, but I can ask 
these in private so we will not clutter the Record with 
some more questions. 


MR. TADEO. Naniniwala ba kayo na ang sectoral ay 
maaaring lamunin ng political party sa party list? 

MR. OPLE. Sa ngayon, kung kaya binibigyan natin ng 
perfect constitutional gift ang mga sektor na maupo na 
riyan. Datapuwat sa loob ng anim na taon, aasahan natin 
na sila ay magbubuo ng kanilang sariling lakas upang 
magkaroon ng pagkakataong manalo sa isang party list 
system. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Hindi po ba ang Partido Nacionalista 
ng Pilipinas ay ang dating Kilusang Bagong Lipunan? 

MR. OPLE. Kung ang tinutukoy ng kaibigang Tadeo 
ay ang lapian na aking pinangunguluhan, ito marahil ay 
nagmula sa sinapupunan ng Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, 
datapwat hmdi na kumikilala ngayon sa Kilusang 


MR. TADEO. Isang tanong pa. Naniniwala ba kayo na 
ang pagpasok sa politika ay magastos? Bibigyan ko kayo 
ng isang konkretong karanasan. Taga-Bulakan tayong 
pareho. Noong kayo ay kumakandidato, walang titingin 
sa buong Bulakan na hindi po makikita ang inyong 
larawan; tumingin ka sa itaas, makikita mo ay streamer; 
tumingin ka sa lahat ng lugar, ang makikita mo ay 
pangalan ni Commissioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. Mas maraming larawan si Minister Nativi- 
dad at si Minister Hipolito kaysa sa inyong lingkod. 


narvf na^ih^ 0 !- Hindl po ba ito a Y mayroong maki- 
ng nahnhii m sa isang malaking makinarya na hindi 
pa nabubuwag at ito ay tinatawag nating political 


machine? 


gang Tad enn^ ma kinaryang tinutukoy ng kail 

mga bahS. arahlUy maraminang kalawangsa kanya 

PNP sa 1 IgtsUtNe district? tan ° ng ' Maklkiiahok ba a 

para sa lahat n^ 1 mo I ? IP ^ ma § b aharap ng buong tik 
ting na halalan & Puwesto na paglalabanan sa dai 

na ang PNP 1 

MR. OPLE. Kun« 

manggagawa at mavlou?^ 0 " karr ! mg 111 ga kapisanai 
ugnay sa amin, magpapasok k? nakahandan g makipa 
nominees diyan sa COMPicr 1 ng talaan ng sampui 

L para sa party list syster 

MR. TADEO. Doon sa os 

PNP kahit na w a la siyane m PUWedeng Pumasok ai 
organisasyon. Doon sa 25 « 9 agsasaka ° ma nggagawai 
ang PNP? Sa part y lls t, Papasok din 1 


MR. TADEO. Ang sabi ni Commissioner Natividad, 
siya iyong pinakamahirap; pero kahit na siya ang pinaka- 
mahirap, kahit saan ka tumingin ay makikita mo pa 
rin ang kanyang larawan. Ngayon, sa isang marginalized 
sector sa ganitong kalagayan, ano ang kanyang pag-asa? 
Hindi ba maaari lamang kaming itulak at lamunin ng 
isang makinarya? 

MR. OPLE. Sa party list system maliwanag na malaki 
ang pagkakataon ng mga sektor. Hindi ko naman pina- 
ngungunahan ng bait si kasamang Jaime Tadeo, datap- 
wat kung mayroong isang milyon na magbubukid ang 
kasama sa kanyang organisasyon at makikipag-ugnay, 
halimbawa. sa Partido Nacionalista ng Pilipinas o sa 
Partido ng Bayan, at ipapasok sa listahan doon sa 
COMELEC na ang nangunguna sa 15 tao na nakalista 
para sa Partido ng Bayan ay si Jaime Tadeo, aba’y katu- 
lad din ng pagsikat ng araw ang panalo ng kasamang si 
Jaime Tadeo sa pamamagitan ng party list system. 
Datapwat iyan naman ay payo ko lamang, hindi ko 
naman siya sisingilin diyan sa magandang payong iyan. 
Datapwat maliwanag ang nakikita ko na napakaganda ng 
pagkakataon ng mga sektor lalo na pagkatapos ng anim 
na taon dahil halos sa kanila na mauuwi talaga, sa 
pamamagitan ng mga partidong umiiral, ang mga 50 
likmuan na nakareserba sa party list system at sa mga 
sector diyan sa ating House of Representatives. 


MR- OPLE. Maaari, ganoon 
Laban, UNIDO, Partido ng Bayan 


din naman ang PDP- 
at iba pang mga lapian. 


MR. TADEO. Naniniwala ba kayo na ana t , 
puwedeng paghati-hatian ng UNIDO, PDPLatZ Pism 
Liberal at Nacionalista? Laban > PNP ’ 


MR. TADEO. Ang nais lang ng mga dukha ay isang 
mapagkalingang saligang batas at nakikita namin sa 
panahong itong hindi pa namin kayang tumindig. Gusto 
namin itong makita at ito’y nakatitig mismo sa atin. 
Kung gagawin lang natin itong two terms, mayroon 
lamang akong hindi maunawaan. Bakit kinakailangang 
bigyan pa ng limit? Bakit hindi pa natin ito pagandahin? 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


571 


Ang tanong ni Commissioner Natividad: “Eh, tinata- 
nong ako, Jimmy, sa amin, bakit baiyongmga political 
parties ay sasama pa sa party list, hindi na lang pabayaan 
iyan sa mga marginalized sector”? 

MR. OPLE. Napakadaling makiusap sa isang partido 
na isama sa party list diyan sa COMELEC iyong mga 
samahan ng manggagawa at magsasaka na nakikipag- 
ugnayan sa kanila. Datapwat ang mahalaga, palagay ko, 
ay bigyan ng pagkakataon ngayon din, as a constitu- 
tional gift, ang mga labor, peasant, youth and urban 
poor sa pamamagitan nitong Villacorta-Monsod amend- 
ment. Kung gusto naman ninyong makipagtawaran kay 
kasamang Monsod at kasamang Villacorta sa halip na 
two terms ay gawin na nating tatlo, palagay ko naman 
ay hindi kayo pagdadamutan. Iyon palagay ko ay 
subject to negotiation. 

Marami pong salamat, Ginang Pangulo. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. We will continue this very in- 
teresting and enlightening discussion after lunch. 

The session is suspended until two-thirty in the 
afternoon. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, before we 
suspend our session, I move that the Commission 
congratulate and extend its best wishes to two birthday 
celebrants, Commissioner Ahmad D. Alonto and the 
Secretary -General . 

It was 12:29 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:55 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

We will ask our guests and everybody else to please 
maintain silence during our deliberations. And before 
we proceed with the business for the afternoon, the 
Chair would like to recognize Commissioner Villacorta 
to introduce to the Commission the different groups 
that are with us here this afternoon. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Ginang Pangulo, kinikilala po 
natin at binibigyang pansin ang mga kinatawan ng mga 
manggagawa, magbubukid, mga minorya mula sa Cor- 
dillera, mga mag-aaral at mga kababaihan. Ang mga 
kinatawan po ng mga sektor na ito ay naririto sa Consti- 
tutional Commission upang pukawin ang ating kalo- 
obang makabayan, maka-Kristiyano at maka-Muslim, 
at bigyan sila ng sapat at makahulugang representas- 
yon sa ating Kongreso. 

Marami pong salamat. (Applause) 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, we will now continue 
our discussion on the Article on the Legislative. This 
concerns the issue between the proponents of the party 
list system and the sectoral representation. 

May I now ask that Commissioner Rodrigo be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we are continuing the dis- 
cussion on the party list system which is to be incor- 
porated in the Constitution. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to propound a few 
questions to the proponents, but before I do so, I would 
like to state that the purpose of the interpellations is 
that when the Constitution has been enacted and 
the people would like to know the exact meaning of a 
certain provision of the Constitution, they can refer to 
the transcript of proceedings and, based on the ques- 
tions and answers by the proponent, they can derive a 
basis for the correct interpretation of the provision. 
Usually, during interpellations, the one who answers 
the question is the proponent . . . either the Committee 
Chairman or the individual proponent of the amend- 
ment. Thus, the answer of the proponent is sort of 
authoritative because he is the proponent of the amend- 
ment. However, in this proposed provision regarding the 
party list and sectoral representation, there are 27 
proponents. So, I would like to know if there is a 
spokesman for the 27 proponents. 

THE PRESIDENT. This morning it was Commis- 
sioner Villacorta who made introductory remarks, 
followed by Commissioner Monsod. So, I will leave it to 
the two Gentlemen to decide who will be the one to 
answer any interpellation on this subject matter. 

MR. RODRIGO. The name of Commissioner Monsod 
is number one in the list of 27 Commissioners. So, I 
suppose he is the principal proponent. 

MR. MONSOD. I am willing to be questioned, but I 
would like to ask the help of the other Commissioners 
also, perhaps with other questions in which they are 
more knowledgeable than I am. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. Will the author of the amendment 
please read the cosponsors of the amendment so that we 
will know who they are. 


572 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. The ones who were in the list this 
morning, other than Commissioner Villacorta and 
myself, were: Commissioners Bernas, Gascon, Garcia, 
Davide, Bengzon, Nieva, Azcuna, Bacani, Rigos, Tan, 
Suarez, Sarmiento, Ople, Tingson, Guingona, Foz, 
Romulo, Uka, Rosario Braid, Villegas and Bennagen. 


MR. RODRIGO. Then, I will propound my question 
to Commissioner Monsod whose name appears as 
number one in the list. 


My questions have reference to the party list system 
and the sectoral representation in the House of Rep- 
resentatives. I would like to preface my questions by 
stating that I am in favor' of the basic idea of having 
sectoral representation and representation by means of 
the party list in the House of Representatives. However, 
from the very beginning, I already expressed my mis- 
givings about the mechanics, the practicableness of this 
idea. I think this is in line with the thinking of the 
Constitutional Commission on this matter. We like this 
party list and sectoral representation, if they can be 
implemented properly. And we should leave to the 
egis ature the enactment of the implementing laws or 
e ena ing acts. The legislature will have more time to 
s y e problem on how this can be implemented, 
hhe legislature can go into details on the mechanics. 

becan^Q C r nn ^ d ° ^ the Constitutional Commission 
ons ltution must be brief, concise and broad. 

ment' whirl/ 6 ?\ 8 !f d wEen 1 reacl this proposed amend- 
BY LAW ” T ft 3 tW1Ce the P hrase “ A S PROVIDED 
TY LIST SYSTFM e S^ r ° U8h it: “THROUGH A PAR- 

gional and sfpt™ egistered national, RE- 

TIONS AS PROVTn£? AL p ARTIES OR ORGANIZA- 

Representatives shaT t L ™ the party LIST 

PER CENT OF CONSTITUTE TWENTY 

HOUSE OF RFPRfIcJ^? TAL MEMBER S OF THE 
FOR THE FIRST R -ri^ N J ATIVES PROVIDED THAT 
CATION OFTHl^nJ5? MS AFTER THE RATIFI- 
OF THE SEATS^t TWENTY FIVE 

RESENTATlVES^Fr I I ( ?^ A J ED TO Pa RTY LIST REP- 
OR ELECTION a-^pd™ FILLED by SELECTION 
THE LABOR N ’ pfa<;aK V1DED BY LAW FROM 
YOUTH SECTORS ’’ ANT ’ URBAN POOR AND 


SO. Itiy fi r of- , . 

“AS PROVIDED BY Law » S: In the light of the phrase 
list system and the sectoral’ d ° 1 take jt that this party 
not take effect until an representation provision will 

legislation shall have hern ng act or an implementing 

enacted by Congress? 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, we are all wit- 
nesses to the difficulty in arriving at a consensus of 
these very novel ideas on the disputes that we have had. 
And up to now, there is no real consensus yet. Does the 
Commissioner believe that we should really try to go 
into the details by enacting an ordinance to the Consti- 
tution? In other words, should we force the issue? 
Should we insist that before this Constitution is submit- 
ted to the people in a plebiscite, we shall have already 
defined the details on how this party list system and 
sectoral representation can be implemented in the first 
election after the ratification of the Constitution? 

MR. MONSOD. We just want to establish the princi- 
ple of the party list system with sectoral representation 
in the present Constitution. We can discuss whether the 
body in its collective wisdom feels that it is qualified or 
should go into the ordinance after we have established 
the principle, and we will be guided by the vote or 
judgment of this Commission. 

MR. RODRIGO. Considering our time constraint and 
the many other provisions that we have not yet dis- 
cussed, does the Commissioner believe that we are in a 
position to draft, study and enact a virtual piece of legis- 
lation, with all details, regarding the implementation of 
this party list system and sectoral representation, so that 
it will be finished in time for the approval of this 
Constitution? Should we not abandon that idea and 
leave this matter to the legislature? 

MR. MONSOD. I believe that it is really not a very 
complicated system, and it is possible. But I will yield 
to the time problem, if there is really a time problem. 
Certainly, I do not think that this Commission would 
want to put an ordinance that is half-baked. 

Secondly, such an ordinance could also apply only 
to the first term under this Constitution, after which 
the regular Congress may provide as it sees fit on how 
the future system will work. 


MR. RODRIGO. So, the Commissioner then admits 
that in all probability it will be the first Congress to be 
elected after the promulgation of this Constitution that 
will enact the implementing law. 


MR. MONSOD. As I said, that would depend on the 
work and judgment of this Commission. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam rv Q 
will be in March or April Eu/wh 1 *’ the first Assemb 
VIDED BY LAW,” it ^ 

by ordinance appended to this rnnect 1 that 11 ma y 
cutive order by the inc„m ben ?TesW ent" " ” ” 
Gentleman has said, by law provided by the incom 
Congress. So, it could be any of these ways. 


MR. RODRIGO. Which is the more probable because 
this is important? 


MR. MONSOD. This is just a personal opinion. I 
believe that we can work out an ordinance that would 
be applicable to the first Congress after this Constitu- 
tion. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


573 


MR. RODRIGO. Suppose we will not have time to 
enact such ordinance and I personally believe that we 
will not have time? I want to be honest and candid. So, 
this will be left either to President Cory Aquino and she 
will enact an enabling legislation all by herself or to the 
first Congress. Considering that President Aquino is 
saddled with so many duties and worries — she is even 
going to the United States sometime in September — 
does not the Commissioner think that it is practical to 
expect that the President can enact the implementing 
legislation on this matter? 

MR. MONSOD. We approximately have a month and 
a half, and the President will have about six months 
to enact something that would apply to the first Con- 
gress. And the President does not work alone. Madam 
President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Did the Commissioner consult the 
Chief Executive or anybody connected with President 
Aquino on whether this can be accomplished? 

MR. MONSOD. We believe that this Commission is a 
plenary body and we should make our own judgment on 
the matter. 

MR. RODRIGO. All right, let me proceed then. I 
want to be very practical about this. First of all, I do 
not think that we will have time to enact an ordinance 
to be appended to the Constitution. Secondly, I do not 
think we should expect the President to be able to enact 
a legislation to implement this. And so, the most pro- 
bable thing to do is to have Congress enact an enabling 
act. Let us start from that practical premise. At least I 
will start from that practical premise. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just mention 
something? The Commissioner said that he is starting 
from a practical premise. I think we agree with him that 
we may have a time problem, but we think that there is 
enough time to implement it because we also must give 
voice to the sectors that we want represented even in 
the first Congress under this Constitution. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, Madam President. But then, we 
are appointed officials. This is a very important provi- 
sion for our people. The first Congress will be composed 
of representatives elected by the people. Does not the 
Commissioner think that they are in a better position to 
enact the enabling act or the implementing legislation 
since they are elected by the people? They are in closer 
touch with the people. So, does he not think that we 
have to be realistic and just say this will be imple- 
mented, hopefully, by the first Congress to be elected 
by the people after the ratification of this Constitution? 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Rodrigo have 
any proposed amendment to the amendment proposed 
by Commissioner Monsod and others? 


MR. RODRIGO. No, Madam President. We are not 
yet in the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. He has a proposed amendment, so 
my question is: Is Commissioner Rodrigo suggesting a 
proposed amendment to this draft that they have sub- 
mitted? 

MR. RODRIGO. No, I am just asking questions for 
clarification. I made that very clear from the very 
beginning, Madam President. 

Let us say that we fail to enact the needed ordinance 
to be appended to the Constitution, so the method left 
will be for the President or Congress to enact the im- 
plementing law. This proposed amendment reads: 

. . SHALL BE FILLED BY SELECTION OR ELEC- 
TION AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW FROM THE 
LABOR, PEASANT, URBAN POOR AND YOUTH 
SECTORS.” So, there is an enumeration of four sectors. 
If this amendment is approved by us and ratified by the 
people, it becomes part of the Constitution. May 
Congress or the President add any sector to the four 
sectors enumerated here? 

MR. MONSOD. These are generic terms for the 
sectors. And, of course, Congress may, if it wishes, 
break down these general classifications into more 
sectors. In other words, they can say that within the 
labor sector, it would mean these sectors or subsectors 
and they can have that enumeration. The enumeration 
of the four sectors, we believe, covers the marginalized 
sectors and the subsectors can be added or explained 
in more detail by law. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, the only thing that can be added 
by either the President or by Congress are the sub- 
sectors — subsectors of labor, subsectors of the peasants, 
subsectors of the urban poor or subsectors of the youth. 
Is that correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. As a matter 
of fact, we have discussed this with the people who were 
proposing this. Perhaps, to give an idea of the other 
categories that could be considered as included in these 
sectors, I would like to ask Commissioner Villacorta to 
please explain to us the coverage of the sectors. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I ask Commissioner Villacorta a 
definite question regarding this? For example, is the 
sector of indigenous communities included among the 
four sectors? May the legislature add indigenous com- 
munities as sector? 

MR. VILLACORTA. That was suggested by Commis- 
sioner Bennagen and, personally, I am open to that idea. 
We started with four functional sectors on the under- 
standing that members of all nonfunctionally classified 
sectors can fall under these four sectors. Therefore, 
women, teachers, indigenous communities, as originally 
conceived, could fall under any of these four sectors: 


574 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


but then, as I said, the proponents of the sectoral rep- 
resentation are open to the idea of incorporating one 
more sector. I think if we have too many, it might open 
the floodgates to suggestions to incorporate many other 
sectors and it will be an endless list. 

MR. RODRIGO. Precisely, my question is: Should we 
enumerate the sectors, thereby limiting them by means 
of this constitutional provision, or should we give the 
discretion to Congress to add to or subtract from later 
on? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, I withdraw my 
amendment to give way to Commissioner Aquino’s 
amendment which I also adopt. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let it be made of record that 
Commissioner Tadeo has withdrawn his proposed 
amendment. 

Commissioner Aquino is recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just add 
that as a matter of fact, one of the proposed amend- 
ments that we understand will be made is to put the 
phrase AS PROVIDED BY LAW in the second to the 
last sentence in order to give a little more flexibility to 
Congress or to the ordinance of the President. 

MR. RODRIGO. If that is the wording, Congress is 
still limited to the four sectors. Would the Commis- 
sioner agree to an amendment to this effect which will 
read: “LABOR, PEASANT, URBAN AND YOUTH 
SECTORS, AND SUCH OTHER SECTORS AS MAY 
BE PROVIDED BY LAW”? 

MR. MONSOD. We are willing to consider such an 
amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Because under this, I do not know 
where we can add the indigenous communities or the 
women. We have the youth sector. How about us, the 
elderly, senior citizens? 

MR. MONSOD. Under the proposed amendment, we 
will gladly include that as part of the total enumeration. 
We can even consider that as part of the youth. 

MR. RODRIGO. Second childhood? Just one last 
point. In case we fail to incorporate that ordinance and 
in case the President cannot act, then Congress meets 
and when Congress meets, that is the only time that an 
implementing legislation can be enacted. In that case, 
this provision, that the first two terms shall start after 
the ratification of this Constitution, would not be fair. 
Is that correct? 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, this proposed 
amendment is being cosponsored by Commissioners 
Bernas and Tadeo with this Member. 


THE PRESIDENT. Louder, please. 

MS. AQUINO. This proposed amendment is being 
cosponsored by Commissioners Benias and Tadeo and 
this Member. For purposes of clarity, our amend- 
ment would seek to: 1) provide basic perpetual institu- 
tionalization of reserve seats for the basic sectors, 
meaning, the labor, peasant, urban poor, youth and 
others as may be provided by law; and 2) that the 
process of selection of the sectoral representatives will 
be done by election. If the Commissioners will be 
guided by the xerox copies of the compromise amend- 
ment furnished them this morning, the amendment 
would read: “THROUGH A PARTY LIST SYSTEM OF 
REGISTERED NATIONAL, REGIONAL AND SEC- 
TORAL PARTIES OR ORGANIZATIONS AS PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW. THE PARTY LIST REPRESENTA- 
TIVES SHALL CONSTITUTE TWENTY PERCENT OF 
THE TOTAL MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REP- 
RESENTATIVES. TWENTY-FIVE OF THE SEATS 
ALLOCATED TO PARTY LIST REPRESENTATIVES 
SHALL BE FILLED BY ELECTION, AS PROVIDED 
BY LAW, FROM THE LABOR, PEASANT, URBAN 
POOR AND YOUTH SECTORS.” 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I would like to 
propose an amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nieva is recognized 
first. 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. It must be made to start from the 
first election where the party list and sectoral rep- 
resentatives are elected. Would that be correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Tadeo be recognized with regard to his amend- 
ment. 


MS. NIEVA. May I propose an amendment to the 
amendment of my fellow lady Commissioner, Com- 
missioner Aquino. This long-awaited breakthrough 
which would open up the system to the marginalized 
and basic sectors, as well as various parties and organiza- 
tions, I think, deserves the full support of this Con- 
stitutional Commission which is really comprised of 
members appointed as representatives of various sectors. 

My amendment would add a fifth sector to the list of 
four sectors, and this is the women sector. I think 
women, who comprise more than 50 percent of our 
population, would certainly deserve special mention 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


575 


here in the sense that we have been marginalized for too 
long as far as the political life of the country is con- 
cerned. So, since it is a provision for 25 seats to be filled 
by the sectors, this would make it a very even rep- 
resentation - five seats per sector. So, that is my 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the propo- 
nent? 

MS. AQUINO. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I just add 
that I was going to propose the same amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, Commissioner Guingona is a 
cosponsor. 

MR. GUINGONA. No, Madam President. What I 
would like to add is 25. This will facilitate our work 
insofar as the preparation or the drafting of the or- 
dinance is concerned, because 25 would be easier to 
divide by five than by four, at least for the first Con- 
gress. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 

MR BENNAGEN. Earlier this morning, I mentioned 
that when we are in the period of amendments, I would 
like to include the group of indigenous cultural com- 
munities not only because they are marginalized but 
they will contribute immensely to the evolution of an 
indigenous legal system. I did mention earlier that this 
will be an important contribution by representatives 
from the indigenous cultural communities who still live 
by viable customary laws. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 

MS AQUINO. Madam President, I would gladly 
accept that except that I would suggest that we address 
first the basic concepts that we are proposing before we 
approach the matter of representation of sectors, 
because it might clutter the issues. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MS AQUINO. I have no objection. It is just that I 
am proposing that we tentatively defer discussion of the 
identification of the sectors so that the issues will be 
focused on the major amendments that we are propos- 
ing. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I just want to mention that 
because I notice that the sector was again forgotten 


in the subsequent deliberations from this morning’s 
discussion. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. There was no intention to omit that, 
Madam President. 

May I be allowed also to mention, for the guidance 
of the Commissioners, that this proposal that I have 
read earlier will have to be intimately coupled with 
another paragraph which has to be referred to the 
Article on Transitory Provisions, and the proposal 
would read: FOR THE FIRST TERM OF CONGRESS 
FOLLOWING THE ADOPTION OF THIS CONSTI- 
TUTION, THE SECTORAL REPRESENTATIVES 
PROVIDED FOR IN SECTION 5 SHALL BE AP- 
POINTED BY THE PRESIDENT FROM THE LIST OF 
NOMINEES SUBMITTED BY THE SECTORS. 

This proposal is addressed to the difficulty of coming 
out with the mechanics and the logistics of the sectoral 
elections immediately after the adoption of this Consti- 
tution. 

THE PRESIDENT. For the guidance again of the 
Commissioners, will Commissioner Aquino please stress 
those points that she seeks to submit to the body in her 
proposed amendment? 

MS. AQUINO. In summary', the points that we are 
proposing to introduce in this article are: First, the per- 
petual reservation of institutional seats for the sectors 
thus defined; and second, the process should be done 
by election. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will that perpetual reservation 
consist of the 20 percent? The Commissioner is not 
changing the 20 percent? 

MS. AQUINO. No. The third is that for the first 
election following the adoption of the Constitution, 
the sectoral representatives will be appointed by the 
President. We have to yield to the difficulty of an 
immediate sectoral election. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, I am not objecting 
to the proposed amendment granting sectoral rep- 
resentation to the women, but that would mean we 
aie going to take some seats from the other sectors. So 
if that is to be done, then we have to increase the 
numbei of sectoral seats. What will happen now is this: 
It is a fact that representatives from the peasant, labor 
and youth sectors have their seats already. We are add- 
ing some more, but we are not increasing the number 
of seats. So if the amendment for the inclusion of 
women in the sectors will be approved, then we have 
to inciease the number of seats allotted to the sectois. 
Maybe only one seat will be left to the labor sector. 


576 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, may I reiterate my 
request that we focus first on the principles that are 
being proposed. Let us defer any discussion on this 
matter. This is likewise significant; I am not saying that 
we are quibbling over petty matters, but I would only 
like us to focus on the basic principles of the amend- 
ments which are major. 


the word “enumeration” and add AND SUCH OTHER 
SECTORS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 


MR. LERUM. Madam President, if that is the case, 
then what are we going to vote on? 

I agree with Commissioner Aquino that for the first 
election for Congress, it is impossible to have an election 
of the sectoral representatives because we still have to 
enact a law, and the only one that can enact it will be 
Congress. The moment we put in this Constitution the 
provision that the sectoral representatives will be 
elected, then a law therefor must be enacted. 

^ So I agree with the amendment that for the first 
Congress, the sectoral representatives should be chosen 
by appointment from recommendees of these sectors. 


FR. BERNAS. I would like to reiterate the motion 
made by Commissioner Aquino that we attend first to 
the essentials of the matter, whether or not we will have 
permanent reserve seats for the sectors. After we have 
decided that, then we can talk about what sectors will 
be included, because if we decide that there will be no 
permanent seats for the sectors, then we will have 
nothing to talk about. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 


REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would like to suggest 
to Commissioner Lerum that the body can vote in 
principle on this proposed amendment and then have it 
approved — because we do not know yet if this will be 
approved — then he can propose a subsequent amend- 
ment to change the number of the seats. The Chair 
thinks that will be perfectly in order. Can we do that? 

MR. LERUM. May we have a suspension of the session 
for a few minutes so we can discuss this matter rather 
than have interpellations of each other on the floor? 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is the. next proponent? 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I suggest that i 
finish the amendments first. Commissioner Rodrigo h 
another proposed amendment to the amendment. P< 
haps we should call on him first, after which the d 

cussion can take place in accordance with the list 
speakers I have. 

I ask that Commissioner Rodrigo be recognize 
nized E PRESIDENT - Commissioner Rodrigo is recc 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, this amendment 
on the last line of the text. The sectors as enumerat, 
are: abor, peasant, urban poor and youth. 1 thii 
somebody filed an amendment to that amendme 
by adding the word “WOMEN.” Moreover som 
body announced that he will file an amendment to tl 
amendment by adding “INDIGENOUS CUTTURA 
COMMUNITIES.” 

I do not know if anybody else will add any speed 
sector, but my amendment is to place a comma (,) aft 


REV. RIGOS. I understand that the Floor Leader is 
suggesting that we consider now all the proposed 
amendments, including that of Commissioner Aquino. 
Then, we can sit down together and find out how we 
can draft the whole thing. That is why Commissioner 
Rodrigo was allowed to present his amendments. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear first the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Rigos so that we can see 
if it can be adjusted? 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I do not know 
where to put my proposed amendment but the idea is, 
I would like to exempt the religious group. In other 
words, it should be clearly understood that in this 
particular section, we will not include any religious 
group. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May we just ask Commissioner 
Rodrigo a question before we vote on the proposal of 
Commissioner Aquino? Commissioner Rodrigo is sug- 
gesting the inclusion of the phrase “AND SUCH 
OTHER SECTORS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW” 
in the last portion of the proposed resolution. Is the 
Commissioner suggesting also that after the word 
“election” we delete the words “as provided by law”? 

MR. RODRIGO. I have not studied that very well so 
I have not come to any conclusion; and I do not know 
the consequences of that proposal. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


577 


MR. SUAREZ. I asked that because the process of 
election and the matter of choosing the sectors have to 
be provided by law. I think the two should be retained. 

MR. RODRIGO. I agree with the Commissioner. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready now to vote on the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Aquino? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. I move for a suspension of the 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 3:34 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:44 p.m . , the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR ROMULO. I ask the Commissioners Monsod 
and Aquino be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Will Commissioner Aquino inquire if 
her amendment to the amendment is accepted or not. 

MS. AQUINO. I am being instructed to inquire from 
Commissioner Monsod if my amendment is accepted by 
his group. 

MR MONSOD. We regret that we cannot accept the 

proposed amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. As agreed upon in the caucus, the 
body will now discuss the question of whether or not 
we will have permanent sectoral representation. The 
speakers are as follows: Commissioners Rosario Braid, 
Quesada, Brocka, Sarmiento, Garcia and Villegas. 

I ask that Commissioner Rosario Braid be recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify, is this for the per- 
manent sectoral representation? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. That is the 
only issue to be debated at this time. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, members 
of the Committee: While I do sympathize with the argu- 
ments of Commissioner Tadeo and the others about the 
need for sectoral representation, I would, however, 
argue against the institutionalization of sectoral rep- 
resentation. I think we could arrive later at a compro- 
mise agreement where we could increase the term to 
maybe three or four terms, at which time the sectors 
could be given the opportunity to become more self- 
reliant, to be able to forge horizontal links and coali- 
tions with other sectors who are in search of new 
political values and a new political culture. I think this 
is a great opportunity for us to be able to develop party 
issues and a platform that will provide countervailing 
force against elite party politics. 

Madam President, may I give some examples of 
similar experiences in other countries. The Green Party 
in Europe has emerged as a political movement that has 
cut across sectoral groups. It has been able to organize 
an imaginative program which started with the problems 
of the marginalized group, such as the exploitation of 
the poor, and has extended its efforts to problems like 
the search for authentic personal values, concerned with 
the environment and concerned with the values of frugal- 
ity and simplicity. This program has attracted various 
groups from different economic and social classes — the 
youth and the post-materialist groups. 

This is true, too, with the Solidarity Movement in 
Poland which has attracted other groups beyond the 
original group - the exploited labor group. This is also 
true with the Gandhian politics that emerged in India. 
These movements are attempts in coming up with what 
we call examples of participatory or communitarian 
democracy. These are movements that are able to come 
up with countervailing values against elite values which 
center around technology, materialism, depersonaliza- 
tion and bureaucracy. 

Madam President, I, therefore, hope that the sectors 
would be given reserve seats for 9 or 12 years and 
would have the opportunity to influence others and to 
move away from their sectoral concerns and from what 
could become a class struggle within that period of time. 
When they shall have organized into a party, they may 
move towards new approaches in problem-solving rather 
than merely focus on their particular sectoral problems. 

In view of this opportunity to move towards a new 
kind of party or political culture, I would support the 
need lor a party list system with this compromise that 
would lengthen the term to maybe three or four terms 
in older to give them opportunity to grow and evolve. 


578 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


In the final analysis, I think we do not want to give 
them patronage and neither would they want patronage. 
They may like to have opportunity to compete in the 
political arena. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Quesada be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. May I remind the speakers that we 
agreed on two-minute interpellations. The Commis- 
sioners will please look at the wallclock for the time. 

THE PRESIDENT. I will give them three minutes. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, members of the 
Committee: I would like to request that I speak in 
Pilipino, in behalf of the farmers, the workers and the 
minority groups here. (Applause) 

THE PRESIDENT. May we remind again our 

audience to please refrain from any outward mani- 
festation of approval or disapproval during our delibera- 
tions. 


MS. QUESADA. Ako ay bumoboto sa perpetual oi 
permanent reserve seats for the sectors. Ngunit ang ibif 
sabihm mto ay hindi “forever.” Ang gusto lang natin a> 
i di niaitatak sa ating Konstitusyon kung hangganr 

“two” terns 8 ” 3 ‘hh y reS6rVe „ S6atS ~ iyong sasabihing 
hindi natin t^i a terms ” 0 “four terms,” dahil 

sectors upang silf U^umah ‘ “ f 1 , 383 UUnlad ang mg£ 
party. Neavon 7 J- U ™ aban bilang isang politica: 

ang mga sectors no ^ ah f aga kinakailangang pumil: 

rixrkap"g n 8 pu^oT 8 „ a tanay na , kin ? tawa "- ^ 

lives sa larangan „ g pulitika av Lv ° , repre f senta 
tion na nanromari P i lKa , ay ma y r °ong transforma 
tungkol sa mea m ^ an ha. Marami na ang istory, 

r#r„ a 8a a ' „ ra c a fun u k k,d K na kapai 

sinasabi at dinadala nfla. Sa pagpasok sa pow^dy™ 
mics ng pulitika, natututo na ngayon silang pumasok s 
mga alliances, negotiations, mga trade-offs a? kadalasa 
ay nakakahmutan na nfla ang interes ng kanilang sectoi 
Kaya sa palagay ko ay napakahalaga na ang margina 
ized sectors ay may reserve seats sa lehislatura dah 
hindi pa magbabago sa isang dekada ang kanilang kah 
gayang pang-ekonomiya at pang-sosyal. Kaya ako a 
nanimwa ang mdi dapat lagyan ng taning kung kaila 
sila mawawalan ng reserve seats at tumakbo o mak 
lahok at lumaban sa larangan ng pulitika. Alam natin 
ang marginalized sectors ay wala pang kakayahan dah 
sa hindi pa nagbabago ang kanilang kalagayang panj 
ekonomiya at pang-sosyal. Iyon ang aking posisyon < 
sinusuportahan ko ang posisyon ni Commission! 
Bernas, Aquino at Tadeo. (Applause) 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, no one claps for 
the Floor Leader when he does all the work. 

I ask that Commissioner Brocka be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

However, may I remind again our guests to refrain 
from any outward manifestation of approval or dis- 
approval because if this goes on, then we will be con- 
strained to ask the audience to leave because we want 
our deliberations to be as impartial as possible. 

Thank you. 

MR. BROCKA. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to react to some of the opinions ex- 
pressed this morning. We are agreed that there should 
be not only territorial representation but also sectoral 
or functional representation. However, we are still 
divided on the question of whether sectoral or func- 
tional representatives should be provided with reserve 
seats on a permanent basis or on a temporary basis and 
whether they should be appointed or elected. 

Those who say that sectoral representatives should be 
given reserve seats for only two terms say that this 
provision is a constitutional gift we are giving them, and 
that if they want to keep those seats, they should earn 
them. I find this very patronizing. 

When we started the Constitutional Commission, one 
of the first things that we addressed ourselves to was 
this question of public hearing. We were very much 
aware of the fact that we were appointed by the Pres- 
ident. So, there was this necessity. It was almost 
imperative that we go to the provinces. We go to the 
people to listen to them. This is what we call public 
hearing. We keep talking about consulting and listening 
to the people. We keep talking about people power. 
However, it seems to me that we are reluctant to give 
this people power a definite or concrete political form. 
Let us remind ourselves for the nth time that it was 
people power that toppled the Marcos dictatorship and 
installed the Aquino government. We forget that in the 
darkest days of the dictatorship, when political parties 
were abolished or marginalized, it was the people’s 
sectoral organizations that really fought for justice, 
freedom and democracy. 

My point is that the people, through their sectoral 
organizations, have earned the right to be represented 
in the councils of state and in the legislature. They 
have earned the right through their blood, sweat and 
tears. 

We are not giving them a constitutional gift on a silver 
platter. What is demanded of us is that we, the Consti- 
tutional Commission, recognize and protect the people’s 
right to have reserve seats in the legislature. We must 
give due recognition and respect for this new force in 
the Philippine political scene — a force operating outside 
the traditional political parties, but a force powerful 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


579 


enough to have ousted a dictator and have given us the 
democratic space in which we are now moving. 

In fact, the very composition of this Constitutional 
Commission is a recognition of this new political force. 

I would not be here today if it were not recognized that 
artists and cultural workers, along with the laborers, the 
peasants, the youth, the teachers, the religious sectors, 
et cetera, deserve a chance to participate not only in the 
dreaming of dreams, but also in the making of laws. 

I agree with Commissioner Aquino that these sectoral 
seats should also be elective rather than appointive. At 
the same time, I agree with Commissioners Tadeo and 
Bernas that these seats should be permanently installed 
in the legislature. I might even go so far as to say that, if 
we really want a bicameral legislature, o^e entire House 
can be given over to sectoral representatives and the 
other House can be for territorial representatives. 

But perhaps, this idea is too unorthodox to be ac- 
cepted at this time. And so, I am willing to compromise 
and settle for 25 seats in the Lower House. What is 
important is, I repeat, for us to recognize that the 
people’s sectoral organizations have fully and over- 
whelmingly earned the right to be given permanent 
reserve seats in the legislature. 

And so, together with Commissioner Tadeo, and in 
behalf of the sectors sitting in the gallery — the laborers, 
the peasants, indigenous communities, the youth, the 
women, et cetera — I am begging my fellow Constitu- 
tional Commissioners to protect their earned right to 
represent themselves in the legislature. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Sarmiento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I will be brief. 

I will not consume two minutes. 

I see the wisdom of sectoral representation. I agree 
with my colleagues advocating for sectoral representa- 
tion. As a matter of fact, I believe that the sectors 
should be expanded to cover professionals and teachers 
and government employees because I believe they 
belong to the oppressed sectors in our society. 

However, I personally believe that five terms will be 
sufficient for them. I do not believe in perpetual sectoral 
representation. I believe in their capacity to develop 
themselves and in their innate talents to organize them- 
selves or to participate in the drama of genuine political 
struggle. 

Madam President, I think this is one way of develop- 
ing the concepts of self-reliance, self-independence, 
self-determination and genuine political maturity. After 
five terms, these sectors should now participate in the 


genuine struggle for independence, democracy and 
nationalism. 

This is no longer the Marcos era. We are entering a 
new stage of political development. This is a new season. 

So I believe that after five terms, these sectors would 
have matured and developed their capacities to govern 
themselves to participate in the drama of power play. It 
is like a baby. Madam President. For a while, we have to 
protect and nurture him. but, thereafter, he has to have 
complete independence to mature and to fend for 
himself. 

So, Madam President, I am against perpetual sectoral 
representation. I am in favor of three or five terms only. 

In this way we develop our people; we give full play to 
people power in our country. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Garcia be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to speak in support of permanent 
sectoral representation. My main thought or statement 
is briefly this: Politics and political representation must 
not be limited to party politics, but must explore means 
to make meaningful and effective the participation of 
the majority. In other words, I would like to advocate 
different forms of participation. First of all, I would 
like to remind ourselves of the context that, in fact, we 
are not speaking of a truly proportional, representa- 
tional Congress. We are speaking of a limited character. 
We are speaking not of the 200 seats to be given to 
political parties, who basically will try to seek power 
through territorial representation, both national, local 
and district. We are speaking of only 25 seats where 
people’s organizations, the four basic sectors, through 
the party list system, could be represented in the legisla- 
ture. Let me argue my case very briefly through the 
following reasons and by giving the context. 

We understand that what we went through in Feb- 
ruary was a political revolution. It is basically unfinished. 
It will take some time before social justice will prevail 
in the land; there is much work ahead. We also all agree 
that the basic problems we face in the country are the 
problems of poverty, hunger and land and these are 
essentially a problem of power. Therefore, the represen- 
tation of the majority is essential, if we are to resolve 
these basic problems. 

The limited sectoral representation we seek is not a 
gift to the basic sectors. It is an effort to correct t ® 
traditional politics of exclusion, a politics which large 
excludes the majority. The exercise of dcniocia & 
demands the organization of citizens. I believe tha 
horizons will precisely open to all those who aie 


580 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


organized as they will see the value of organization in 
order to be truly and effectively involved in democratic 
political exercise. 

Finally, I believe that permanent sectoral representa- 
tion will, in fact, result in the transformation of politics. 
The nature of our political parties at present is largely 
one based on personalities and it is nonideological. 

I think we will see the evolution of parties that defend 
the interest of large sectors. In this body, we have 
chosen the bicameral and presidential systems which, I 
believe, militate against sectoral representation, and 
tend to place power in the hands of parties and leaders 
that have the resources and the wherewithal to aspire 
for political power. 

I, therefore, submit that a permanent sectoral rep- 
resentation, although limited in character, will be a step 
in the right direction. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Bacani be recognized to interpellate Commis- 
sioner Aquino. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

.. ” BACANL 1 Promised Commissioner Romulo 
that I will ask only one question, but I have to ask one 
preliminary question. 

Does Commissioner Aquino want the words “per- 
petual reservation” to be provided in the Constitution 
which means that from the time of the ratification of 
this Constitution, there will always be reserve seats for 
the sectors? Or is the meaning rather the one that is 
given by Commissioner Quesada that we will not 
determine the term for this reservation? 


MS. AQUINO. Before I answer that, may I enlist the 
services of my other coauthors because anyway, we sin! 
or swim together here, so the Commissioners might a: 
well help me. Anyway, we are not incorporating the 
phrase perpetual reservation of institutional seats.’ 
But according to our amendment, this Article would 
now provide that there will be reservation of institu- 
tional seats for the sectors without necessarily limiting 
it to the first two terms. In effect, yes, although we wil 
not provide expressly that it would be perpetually 
reserved. Commissioner Bernas may shed light on the 
matter. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. By “permanent,” we do not mean 
until the end of the world but until the Constitution is 
amended. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much for that 
clarification. 


My main question is this: Even though I am in favor 
of sectoral representation and of strengthening this, 
precisely, the perpetuity in the sense that has been 
described above would seem to militate against that 
strengthening of sectoral representation. It might mean 
that the representatives of the sectors will become lax 
in trying to win the approval of the people and may 
resort to other means by which they can easily gain the 
patronage of their own constituents. And hence, that is 
the reason why I am in favor of a proposal like Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento’s and that of Commissioner de los 
Reyes. Will the Commissioner try to convince me to 
vote otherwise? 

MS. AQUINO. The question is gladly welcome now. 
Apparently, the bone of contention is on the matter of 
permanent reservation of the institutional seats; while 
others would advocate a relative term: three terms or 
four terms. This would likewise address the interpella- 
tion of Commissioner Sarmiento. 

May I proceed to answer the question of Commis- 
sioner Bacani? The principle of self-reliance or self- 
development in the dynamics of political growth as a 
democratic idea is beautifully simple, but it is wildly 
unrealistic. We are saying that there is a possibility — 
in fact, it is predictable that sectoral groups may gra- 
duate into political parties. But it is only possible if 
certain conditions are met. Unhappily, these conditions 
are not present. The conditions I could think of now 
are: (1) There should be a high level of development of 
political movements. By that I mean specifically the 
capability of political groups to crystallize their ideas, 
and to project and popularize them. (2) The logistical 
and organizational capability of these groups for a fair 
chance of success in an electoral struggle. The second 
condition is that the level of political development of 
these groups must be characterized by no other condi- 
tion but unity. In other words, unity should be the 
overriding factor in the level of development. We 
know that the political groups now are very fractious 
in terms of their ideological differences and variances 
in political perspectives. (3) The third condition is 
the milieu. There is a requirement for a democratic 
milieu for the political groups to be able to develop and 
consolidate. If there is any peculiar characteristic of 
Philippine politics, it is the fact that we do not have 
a long tradition of popular and democratic politics. 
My fear, therefore, is that if we leave it to the dynamics 
of political groupings as is the position of Commissioner 
Sarmiento, effectively the sectoral politics will be 
diluted and diffused. Then they will have to be forced 
to go into plain power concepts of coalition. This will 
diffuse the specificity of the sectoral concerns because 
the call now is survival. 

We have a lot of colleagues here who are far older 
than this humble Member, far more experienced in 
Philippine politics and I dare them to dispute my 
position that for any well-meaning peasant, for example, 
the road to an elective position is a tortuous obstacle 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


581 


course. We need money, an effective political machinery, 
and we have to draw deep into the arsenal of propa- 
ganda techniques. These are sorely wanting in sectoral 
organizations, such that a free play of political dynamics 
will render nugatory the possibilities of the full fruition 
of sectoral politics. If left to their own devices, it is my 
fear that sectoral groups will only fall victims to the 
antagonist and to their own inadequacies. 

It is my position that the sectors should be provided 
with permanent reservation of their representation in 
Congress. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I think Commis- 
sioner Bacani has completed his interpellations. May I 
ask that Commissioner Villegas be recognized as the last 
speaker on this subject. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, I would like to 
speak against permanent sectoral representation. 

First of all, in the analogous sector of local industries, 
there is a very unfortunate experience in giving a handi- 
cap protection to a certain sector. We are n( ^ w ac ^ 
with the most inefficient industries in the Asia-Pacific 
because we have coddled, pampered, babied local indus- 
tries over the last 30 years under the pretext of infant 
industry protection. I am afraid that exact y t e same 
thing will happen to these sectors that are to be pam- 
pered, coddled, babied, almost with a condescending 
attitude that we are taking, that they cannot, as Com- 
missioner Ople was saying this morning, rise up o 
political maturity, rise up to the majesty of electoral 
representation. And so, this is my first reason why I am 
against permanent sectoral representation. 

I question the statement made by Commissioner 
Aquino that people from the so-called marginalized 
groups cannot be politically mature, cannot organize 
themselves and cannot raise tunds. In fact, in my expe- 
rience over the last three years, in dealing with the so- 
called marginalized groups, I have been so impiessed at 
their tremendous shrewdness and ability to attain 
political objectives. In contrast, representatives from the 
middle-income class or from the rich are so naive and so 
politically immature compared to them. So I think 
giving them nine years to 1 2 years will be sufficient for 
them to be able to rise up to electoral representation. 

Secondly — and this is also a question asked by 
Commissioner Lerum — the Commissioner was puzzled 
why Commissioner Ople said that after these marginal- 
ized sectors have risen to political maturity, he would 
still be in favor of the party list system. That is precisely 
another reason why we cannot institutionalize sectors. 
These marginalized sectors can change in the dynamics 
of history. Remember, the “poor” are not just the poor, 
economically speaking. The poor, as we have already 
implied, include the youth; whether or not they are 
destitute economically, they are still marginalized. 


Women are also marginalized. And not to mention 
the unborn, the millions of innocent ones being killed 
in their mothers’ wombs. This kind of poor has nothing 
to do with economic destitution. Then, as society 
develops, those who have been speaking about eco- 
logical balance in many industrialized countries are 
voices in the wilderness. So there has to be individuals 
who can work for these causes. That is why the Green 
Party as mentioned by Commissioner Rosario Braid 
became a very important force in Germany. 

As history develops, more and more sectors will 
become marginalized, so we have to allow them to 
enter the political process through the party list system 
when they are sufficiently economically equipped to 
actually run for election. 

Finally, I would like to restate what I said very early 
in this constitutional body that I appreciate very much 
the warning made by Commissioner Aquino, that we 
should be very careful in distinguishing between a leftist 
and someone who is pushing for sectoral representation. 

I definitely appreciate that warning. Let us also be very 
careful, however, that unwittingly we do not fall into 
the Marxist paradigm that those who belong to the high- 
income groups or those who become elected into the 
Senate cannot work as energetically and as unselfishly 
for the poor as any representative of the poor. I think it 
is very clear if we cite names like Senators Diokno and 
Tafiada. They are people who come from the so-called 
elite group but who have worked for the poor much 
more unselfishly than some labor leaders who have been 
scoundrels. I am not referring to the labor leaders 
present here — but there is no question that working for 
the common good does not know class distinction. 

Thank you very much. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. I will have to take strong exception to 
the misleading attributions of Commissioner Villegas, 
and I will try to be very polite and sober. In the first 
place I did not say that the marginalized groups are 
not capable of political sophistication or political 
maturity. What I said was that a well-meaning sectoral 
group can be effectively frustrated by the strangehold 
and the deep entrenchment of traditional political 
parties. What I said was that I have full faith in the 
political maturity of the sectoral groups, but I would 
look askance at the insidious mechanisms of traditional 
political parties. That is all I said. 

On the matter of the Marxist aberration, the concept 
of sectoral representation is not just a Marxist aberra- 
tion. It is the pressing imperative of social justice. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote? 


582 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Padilla would like to 
say a few words. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I am in favor of 
giving the sectors some representation in the House but 
not in a permanent way or, as stated by Commissioner 
Bernas, “until the Constitution is amended.” We are 
trying to draft a Constitution that will not only be for 
a few years. So if the Constitution is not amended, then 
this provision may become permanent. 

Madam President, I have been listening throughout 
the morning and this afternoon and I would like to say 
that we should not be fomenting class distinctions, 
especially between the rich and the poor, the privileged 
and the underprivileged, the over-and-or-under marginal 
level. I agree with the Magsaysay dictum or maxim that 
“Those who have less in life should have more in law.” 
But the situation of the sectoral groups, say, for lack of 
organization or unification, should be the object of 
evolution towards more organization and more unity 
among themselves. I am reminded of the decalogue of 
President Lincoln which states: “You cannot help the 
poor by destroying the rich.” And the rich are not 
always identical with the powerful, especially the power- 
ful in politics. What we need is more productivity to 
develop our economy, not so much the exercise of 
power through representation. What will help the poor, 
the underprivileged or the so-called marginal sector is 
more productivity rather than political power by one 
class even as against the other. That is the reason why I 
suggested even in the Preamble of the Constitution to 
insert the word PROGRESS or PROSPERITY, be- 
cause increased or additional productivity will create 
more wealth, will mean more income not only for the 
rich but also for the poor, and a better life for all of us, 
under the guidance of Divine Providence. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Suarez would like to 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

As one of the voices ol the voiceless, the eyes of the 
blind, the ears of the deaf and the crutches of the crip- 
pled, I feel rather stiongly that our marginalized sectors 
deserve permanent representation in the legislature. 
From the time this matter came up for discussion, I 
have always espoused the setting aside, in a permanent 
character, of a number of seats for the marginalized 
sectors of our society. We can call it “gifting” if we 
wish. If it he so, should we not present this gift to our 
people with an open heart and without restrictions? 


Are we now turning out to be constitutional Indian 
givers? 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Bernas would like to 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, just one minute. 

I would like to correct any impression which may 
have been made — that this is an effort to foment class 
conflict. This is not. This is merely a recognition of the 
fact that there are vast numbers of underprivileged. We 
are not fomenting anything. We are just recognizing it 
and we are hoping to give them better protection of 
the law - greater protection than what is given to those 
who have more. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I believe we are 
ready to vote by ballot. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we will vote by ballot. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I would like to 
request that we vote by raising of hands, not by ballot. 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a request from the Floor 
Leader that it be by ballot. 


MR. GASCON. I feel that in this issue, we should not 
be hiding anything from the people. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, that is what I was 
made to understand, that the majority would like to 
vote by ballot. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, it will be by ballot. 

I wish to clarify that we will vote on the first portion 
of Commissioner Aquino’s amendment. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, but the first portion can only be 
best appreciated by also voting on the slashed paragraph 
which we propose should be transposed to the Article 
on Transitory Provisions, such that they are intimately 
coupled. 


THE PRESIDENT. Do the Commissioners have 
copies of the proposed amendment? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I raise a parlia- 
mentary inquiry? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


583 


MR. OPLE. Under the Rules of this House, is there 
any legal support to a secret ballot on any issue? 

MR. ROMULO. There is none in the Rules, Madam 
President; but, as we all know, we have been doing this 
with regard to many issues. 

If the body wishes to put it to a vote, the Acting 
Floor Leader has no objection. 

MR. OPLE. I would like to join Commissioner 
Gascon in his request for an open voting. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, Madam President, I would like 
to put this to a motion — that we divide the House on 
whether we should have secret balloting or open voting. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, we have done this 
secret balloting in the past, but I feel we should not 
continue with such voting, especially in crucial issues 
because I think we owe it to the people, since we were 
not elected, to tell them where we really stand and not 
hide anything from them. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we put it to a vote whether 
we shall vote by secret ballot or by the raising of hand? 

Those in favor of voting by the raising of hand, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

Those in favor of secret balloting, please raise their 
hand. ( Few Members raised their hand.) 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, may I explain my 
vote in just two minutes? 

THE PRESIDENT. Actually, this is out of the Rules, 
but anyway. Commissioner Colayco may do so. 

COMMISSIONER COLAYCO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. COLAYCO. The statement has been made that 
“since we were not elected” we should show our true 
colors. What color have we who voted against — red, 
white or blue? I believe this is an indirect form of coer- 
cion. We have followed that way of voting for at least 
five or six times. Why is it that some sectors in this 
room insist that we do not vote in private? That is nty 
question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

The results show 26 in favor of voting by the raising 
of hand, and 5 in favor of voting by secret ballot; so we 
will vote by the raising of hand. 

The Chair asks Commissioner Aquino to please 
restate her amendment. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I just want to 
make of record that I abstained from voting because 
from my personal point of view, it is immaterial either 
way. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino may now 
restate her amendment. 

MS. AQUINO. On page 1 , Section 5, delete on line 29 
the phrase “from the sectors and party list” and substi- 
tute it with the following: ELECTED THROUGH A 
PARTY LIST SYSTEM OF REGISTERED NATION- 
AL, REGIONAL AND SECTORAL PARTIES OR 
ORGANIZATIONS, AS PROVIDED BY LAW. THE 
PARTY LIST REPRESENTATIVES SHALL CONSTI- 
TUTE TWENTY PERCENT OF THE TOTAL MEM- 
BERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. 

TWENTY-FIVE OF THE SEATS ALLOCATED TO 
PARTY LIST REPRESENTATIVES SHALL BE 
FILLED BY ELECTION, AS PROVIDED BY LAW, 
FROM THE LABOR, PEASANT, URBAN POOR, 
WOMEN AND YOUTH SECTORS. 

The paragraph that would be transposed to the 
Article on Transitory Provisions will read: FOR THE 
FIRST TERM OF CONGRESS FOLLOWING THE 
ADOPTION OF THIS CONSTITUTION THE SEC- 
TORAL REPRESENTATIVES PROVIDED FOR IN 
SECTION 5 SHALL BE APPOINTED BY THE PRES- 
IDENT FROM THE LIST OF NOMINEES SUBMIT- 
TED BY THE SECTORS. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I think we should just vote on the 
issue of whether the sectoral representation will be 
permanent in the sense that unless the Constitution is 
amended to remove this then there will always be 
sectoral representation, or whether a time limit should 
be incorporated in this provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will leave that to the pro- 
ponent. We will ask Commissioner Aquino to make 
the decision as to how she would want her proposed 
amendment to be voted upon. 

MR. RODRIGO. But that was the subject of the 
debate, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, that is why the Chair is 
asking Commissioner Aquino to state her preference 
on this matter. 

MS. AQUINO. I am yielding to the better judgment 
of Commissioner Rodrigo. It is just that I was con- 


584 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


strained to present it because I thought the amendment 
can better be appreciated in the context of this para- 
graph. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, that was the 
agreement during the caucus, and that is the issue which 
I stated. So, with all due respect, I feel that the issue 
we should vote on is whether or not we will have 
permanent sectoral seats. 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of permanent 
sectoral seats in the House of Representatives, please 
raise their hand. ( Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 19 votes in favor of the amendment 
and 22 against; the proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner Aquino on that particular point is lost. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:30 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:25 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 


MR. SARMIENTO. I have no objection to the pro- 
posed amendment to my amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair did not get it. The 
Commissioner has no objection? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I have no objection, Madam 
President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May we seek clarification from 
Commissioner Rodrigo on one point only? When the 
Commissioner made that suggestion, I take it that if the 
sectoral representatives to the first Congress would be 
appointed, that term will not be counted. 

MR. RODRIGO. No. 

MR. SUAREZ. So after that, there will be three terms 
as proposed by Commissioner Sarmiento. Is that the 
meaning of the proposal? I just want to make it clear. 

MR. RODRIGO. I do not have in mind any ap- 
pointive Member of Congress. As a matter of fact, I 
would be against appointing sectoral representatives. I 
think they should be elected in accordance with the law 
to be enacted by Congress. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento 
be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is reco 
nized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I humblj 
propose a happy compromise between permaneni 
reserve seats and the principles of self-reliance anc 
independence. I suggest that between the phrases “ANE 
PROVIDED FURTHER THAT FOR THE” and “AF 
TER THE RATIFICATION OF THIS CONSTITU 
TION,” insert THREE CONSECUTIVE TERMS insteac 
of “TWO CONSECUTIVE TERMS ” 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR- RODRIGO. I have an amendment to the amend- 
ment. Instead of the phrase “RATIFICATION OF THIS 
CONSTITUTION” it should be AFTER THE ENACT- 
MENT OF THE IMPLEMENTING LEGISLATION. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. I presented the amendment because 
it is possible that at the first election after the ratifica- 
tion of the Constitution, there being no Congress yet, 
there can be no party list or sectoral candidates. Also, 
there can be no enabling legislation yet. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Will the Gentleman yield to a question? 

MR. RODRIGO. Certainly. 

MR. OPLE. If we follow this proposal, will this fore- 
close the possibility of an ordinance to be appended to 
the Constitution so that sectoral representation will 
become executory instead of waiting for Congress to 
convene? 

MR. RODRIGO. I do not have that in mind because 
it is very remote that we can append an ordinance to the 
Constitution going into the details of the mechanics of 
such election. But if there should be, then I am willing 
to make provisions for that because this is premised on 
no ordinance, no appointment. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


585 


MR. OPLE. I would rather that if we want them 
represented right there in the first Congress which will 
sit sometime on June 30 or July 1 following the first 
local and national elections - which according to the 
Committee on Amendments and Transitory Provisions 
have been determined to take place not earlier than 60 
days and not later than 90 days from the ratification of 
the Constitution - then we should seriously consider an 
ordinance that will make sectoral representation 
executory. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino had earlier 
stated that she was proposing an amendment to be pro- 
vided in the Transitory Provisions. I do not know if she 
has given that up. 

May we hear from Commissioner Aquino. 

MS. AQUINO. No, Madam President, in fact I ap- 
proached Commissioner Rodrigo about it and thought 
of the possibility of a merger between his proposal 
and our group’s position on the matter, that this be 
provided in the Article on Transitory Provisions — that 
the first Congress would accommodate sectoral repre- 
sentatives who are appointed by the President from the 
list of nominees of the sectors. 

MR. OPLE. That will be a satisfactory alternative for 
me in lieu of an ordinance. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


THREE CONSECUTIVE.” That is why we took out the 
word “FIRST.” We changed that to THREE CONSECU- 
TIVE TERMS. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, that means the three consecutive 
terms will start from the election or selection of sectoral 
candidates who are already qualified to be candidates. Is 
that it? 

MR. MONSOD. From the selection or election as 
may be provided by law. If they had not been selected 
or elected, then the three terms will not yet run. 

MR. RODRIGO. If that is clear on the record, I with- 
draw my amendment to the amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. As it is, the issue is the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento to my amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President; it is accepted. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, there are no other 
speakers anymore. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- jhE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote on this 
nized. now? 


MR. MONSOD. Actually, the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Sarmiento was discussed * v rON- 
ponents. That is the reason why it states “THREE 
SECUTIVE TERMS” rather than “FIRS1 ln KC 
TERMS.” If for any reason at all, the first Congress 
convenes and there has been no executive or er o 
ordinance appended to the Constitution, t en ™ 
count the three consecutive terms from the firs i 


the sectoral representatives actually sit. 

The rest of the proposal provides: SHALL BE 
FILLED BY SELECTION OR ELECTION, so that 
would cover the instance that Commissioner qui 
seeks to provide for in the Transitory Provisions. 


MR. RODRIGO. I think we are all agreed on 
objective. It is a matter of wording the amen m _ • 
When I filed my amendment, I was under the impre 
that if the three terms will start from the ratification 
this Constitution, it is then possible that ^ th ® tir 
ter m after the ratification, the sectoral candidates ar 
not yet qualified, in which case only two terms wi 
be left for them. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, in that case theii, 
the provision shall not run yet, because it says 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I just be clarified, because 
there were those who suggested for the inclusion of 
“WOMEN AND INDIGENOUS CULTURAL COM- 
MUNITIES.” May I just know if this will be included 
in our voting? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. The Chair is just thinking, 
because we have here a proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Monsod. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I move that we 
break into two parts this clause starting with “AND 
PROVIDED FURTHER.” We start with the first item to 
be voted upon by the body; that is, AND PROVIDED 
FURTHER THAT FOR THREE CONSECUTIVE 
TERMS AFTER THE RATIFICATION OF THIS 
CONSTITUTION. I move that we vote on this item, 
Madam President. 


586 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. May I make another pro- 
posal that instead of “THREE CONSECUTIVE 
TERMS,” put FOUR CONSECUTIVE TERMS. May we 
vote on this matter first. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we have accepted 
the amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento. May we 
request that we vote on that first. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Later on if Commissioner Rosario 
Braid insists, the Commissioner can propose the other 
amendment. 

Those in favor of the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Sarmiento, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (No Member 
raised his hand.) 

The results show 29 votes in favor and none against; 
the proposed amendment is approved. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 


THE PRESIDENT. No, we are just asking the body 
to clarify the situation. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, we seem to be 
a little confused. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We were not able to count those 
who are in favor of four terms. Those who are in favor 
of the amendment of Commissioner Rosario Braid, 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 10 votes in favor and 22 against; 
the amendment is lost. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we move then 
to the second c item regarding the inclusion of other 
sectors other than those provided in the compromised 
agreement. The original sectors would include labor, 
peasant, urban poor and youth sectors. 

We have this suggestion that we include indigenous 
cultural communities and women. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum was also 
suggesting the number 25. 

Is the Gentleman insisting on that or does he want 
to increase the number? 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, we vot 
on the proviso on the condition that we could hav< 
chance to ask the Commissioners if they are in favor 
four terms instead of three. 


MR. LERUM. Madam President, my suggestion will 
depend on whether or not we are going to increase the 
number. If we maintain the same number, then there is 
no need to increase the sectoral representatives. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

zec/E PRES IDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 


tha^heTefl^ 3 manif f a,i 

firs, Congress will already have™ n t«o! 
is a minimum of eight years and a maximum Ti l ye 
depending on how we synchronize on the taelectta 

f J HE PRESIDEN T Is Commissioner Rosario Bra 
still insisting on four years? 


THE PRESIDENT. So, the proposed amendment that 
is before us now is the inclusion of women and indi- 
genous communities. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I ask a 
question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

u BENGZON. Just for the record, what about 
t e fishermen, are they included in the classification 
of labor or peasants? 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of Commissiom 
Rosario Braid s amendment will please raise their ham 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, this woul 
amount to a reconsideration of the approval of tli 
amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. May we have Commissioner 
Monsod answer that, please? 

MR. MONSOD. My understanding from those who 
have studied it is that they are included in the classifi- 
cation of peasants. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I have this additional information, 
Madam President. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


587 


As of January 1986, it is estimated that there are 20 
million members of the agricultural sector. This figure 
includes small fishermen who number 2.2 million. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. My amendment to the amendment 
is after “WOMEN,” add the phrase AND SUCH OTHER 
SECTORS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 

MR. SARMIENTO. No objection, Madam President. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. After “AS PROVIDED BY LAW,” 

I propose to add the phrase EXCEPT THE RELIGIOUS 
SECTOR. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, will Commissioner 
Sarmiento entertain an amendment? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Can he consider including war veterans 
in his classification? 

I also speak for Commissioner Crispino de Castro. 
There are 600,000 veterans of World War II, but the 
term “veterans” is not limited to them. The veterans 
of all wars subsequent to World War II are also in- 
cluded, including the veterans of future wars. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I inform 
the honorable Commissioner that we cannot accept the 
amendment. If we accept that amendment, then we 
open the floodgates for more sectors like the elderly, 
represented by Commissioner Rodrigo and others. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

I wanted to discharge my obligation and that of 
General de Castro to the veterans. 

MR. UKA. May I also speak? I support the veterans. 

How about adding the third sex sector? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, if Congress 
in their collective wisdom decides to include the third 
sex, why not? After all, we have the provision, “AND 
SUCH OTHER SECTORS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY 
LAW.” The celibates, for example, we leave that to 
Congress. 


THE PRESIDENT. Let us go back to the amendment 
by insertion of Commissioner Rigos. 

Is the amendment accepted by the proponent? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I was thinking 
that the more we enumerate. . . 

THE PRESIDENT. It is an exception. 

MR. MONSOD. No, because I have not even res- 
ponded to the amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento. 

The more we enumerate, the more we may exclude. 

So, I was wondering if we already have the catch-all 
phrase “AND SUCH OTHER SECTORS AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW.” Would that not cover a lot of 
sectors that would like to be specifically mentioned? 

I believe “teachers” was also mentioned earlier. I was 
wondering whether the proponent could accept the 
omnibus phrase, “AND SUCH OTHER SECTORS AS 
MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. It was I who suggested the 
inclusion of teachers but because we have this catch-all 
provision - “AND SUCH OTHER SECTORS AS MAY 
BE PROVIDED BY LAW” — I withdraw my suggestion 
in favor of the suggestion of Commissioners Bennagen 
and Nieva, and the Honorable President for the in- 
clusion of “INDIGENOUS CULTURAL MINORITIES 
AND WOMEN.” Then, include the catch-all provision, 
“AND SUCH OTHER SECTORS AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, just one more 
clarification. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Could somebody please explain 
to me what “urban poor” means? Is there any kind of 
poor? 

MR. SARMIENTO. ‘Urban poor” refers to those 
persons who are staying in the urban areas and urban 
centers; to be clear about it, urban poor refers to the 
so-called squatters. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Why do we have to specify urban 
poor? If one is poor, whether he is rural or urban, he is 
poor. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May 1 briefly explain the reason 
for the inclusion of urban poor? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The statistics on the number of 
ui ban pool vary. Some say there are eight million, 
some, two million. It should perhaps be safe to go half- 


588 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


way and set it at five million, excluding those that have 
been transferred to various relocation areas in the coun- 
try. Around 65 percent of the urban poor live in public 
lands and are so-called squatters. Around 2.5 million 
are found in the Metro Manila area. Most of them are 
former peasants, who, unable to bear the poverty and 
lack of economic opportunities in the rural areas, were 
lured to the cities. There they find themselves living in 
the shanties of overcrowded squatter colonies per- 
petually searching and begging for work, and constantly 
threatened by the prospect of demolition and ejection. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one very short clarification. 
Could the representative of the urban poor also repre- 
sent the rural poor? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 


REV. RIGOS. Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, may I state for the 
record that I voted against because the provision is 
already flooded with too many enumerations. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I move that we 
now go to the term of office of the Senator. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee was not yet asked 
what would be its reaction to the proposed amendment. 
(Laughter) 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair saw that the Gentleman 
was voting. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now? 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Sarmiento, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (One 
Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 29 votes in favor and one against; 
the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 


MR MONSOD. Just a clarification, Madam President 
Was the amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo also 
included in that vote? ® aISO 


MR. DAVIDE. We voted but since this is supposed 
to be an amendment to the committee report, after 
this amendment was further amended, the Committee 
should still have to react. 


THE PRESIDENT. May we have the Commissioner s 
reaction now? 


MR. DAVIDE. Before reacting, I would just read 
what has been approved, if this is accurate. On line 29, 
page 1, after the words “shall be,” insert the following: 
“ELECTED THROUGH A PARTY LIST SYSTEM OF 
REGISTERED NATIONAL, REGIONAL AND SEC- 
TORAL PARTIES OR ORGANIZATIONS, AS PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW. THE PARTY LIST REPRESENTA- 
TIVES SHALL CONSTITUTE TWENTY PERCENT OF 
THE TOTAL MEMBERSHIP OF THE HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES.” 


THE PRESIDENT. It was included. 

MR. MONSOD Thank you. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, my amendment 
continues and says “PROVIDED THAT . . .” 

MR. DAVIDE. We would rather request that the 
words “AND PROVIDED, FURTHER, THAT” be 
deleted. 


THE PRESIDENT. How shall it read now? 


R^V; RIG0S What happened to my proposed amend- 
ment. I proposed it three times but somehow it has 
always been overlooked. While every group wants to 
get in, I would like the religious group to get out. 


MR. ROMULO. That was included, Madam President, 
because it was accepted by Commissioner Monsod. 


MR. DAVIDE. After “REPRESENTATIVES” we put 
a period (.) then, “FOR THREE CONSECUTIVE 
TERMS AFTER THE RATIFICATION OF THIS 
CONSTITUTION, TWENTY-FIVE OF THE SEATS 
ALLOCATED TO PARTY LIST REPRESENTATIVES 
SHALL BE FILLED BY SELECTION OR ELECTION 
FROM THE LABOR ...» 


THE PRESIDENT. That was included. 


MR. MONSOD. “AS PROVIDED BY LAW,” Madam 
President. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


589 


MR. DAVIDE. There was another “PROVIDED FOR 
BY LAW” that was approved earlier. 

MR. MONSOD. May I explain, Madam President? 

If we take “AS PROVIDED BY LAW” out, then the 
phrase “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW” will only 
refer to the sectors. What we want is that the phrase 
“AS PROVIDED BY LAW” also refer to the election 
or selection method. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will proceed. “SHALL BE FILLED 
BY SELECTION OR ELECTION, AS PROVIDED BY 
LAW, FROM THE LABOR, PEASANT, URBAN 
POOR, INDIGENOUS CULTURAL COMMUNITIES, 
WOMEN, YOUTH AND SUCH OTHER SECTORS 
AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. EXCEPT THE 
RELIGIOUS SECTOR.” 

Is that the entire proposal? 

MR . MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. May I just seek clarification on 
the Rigos prohibition about religious groups before the 
Committee accepts the amendment? May I ask Com- 
missioner Rigos certain questions for the enrichment 
of the record, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. VILLACORTA. When the Commissioner pro- 
posed “EXCEPT RELIGIOUS GROUPS,” he is not, of 
course, prohibiting priests, imams or pastors who may 
be elected by, say, the indigenous community sector to 
represent their group. 

REV. RIGOS. Not at all, but I am objecting to 
anybody who represents the Iglesia ni Kristo, the 
Catholic Church, the Protestant Church, et cetera. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Then the Gentleman’s answer 
to my question would be positive. In other words, he 
would not want an imam, priest or pastor to be one 
of the representatives of any of the sector. 

REV. RIGOS. That is correct, Madam President. 

MR. VILLACORTA. In other words, a priest in the 
Cordillera delegation, for example, would not be al- 
lowed under this prohibition to be a representative 
of the indigenous community sector. 


REV. RIGOS. Not at all, because that phrase is not 
representing the religious sector. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I think this 
is class legislation and against the constitutional prin- 
ciple that the exercise of political rights of citizens 
should not be limited by his religion. 

I voted in favor of the Rigos resolution on the under- 
standing that we shall not provide for a religious sector; 
but now the interpretation of Commissioner Rigos is 
different. 

REV. RIGOS. Mukhang hindi tayo nagkakaintindihan 
dito. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I see; he will allow. In that case, 

I withdraw. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Chairman Davide, is this clear 
now? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President, but the Com- 
mittee would move for a transposition of the first “AS 
PROVIDED BY LAW” after “ELECTION.” The pro- 
posal of the Committee is to place “AS PROVIDED 
BY LAW’ at the end of the second from the last line 
between the words “FILLED” and “BY” so that the 
second line will read as follows: “SHALL BE FILLED 
AS PROVIDED BY LAW, BY SELECTION OR ELEC- 
TION FROM THE LABOR, PEASANT URBAN 
POOR, INDIGENOUS CULTURAL COMMUNITIES, 
WOMEN, YOUTH AND SUCH OTHER SECTORS 
AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW EXCEPT THE 
RELIGIOUS SECTOR.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that clear? Does the Chairman 
need another vote on that? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee accepts the 
amendment. 

As many as are hi favor of the proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 32 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chairman of the Legislative 
Committee is recognized. 


590 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. As a consequence, on page 2 of the 
amended committee report. Committee Report No. 
22, lines 1 to 3 should now be deleted. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular proposed amendment? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 


THE PRESIDENT. That is right; they would now 
be deleted. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, consequently on 
page 4, line 14, we propose to delete the slash (/) and 
the word “or” in “and/or” at the end of the line. It 
should read “political parties and sectors represented 
therein,” with the interpretation that the political 
parties referred to are the regular political parties and 
the parties or organizations registered under the party 
list system. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposal of the Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MON SOD. Should we not be more explicit and 
say, on the basis of proportional representation from 
£? P? 1 ** P arties PARTIES OR ORGANIZA 

LISTSYSTEM”r NTED ° R UNDER THE PAR ™ 


MR. DAVIDE. What about the sectors? 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the Committee 
will also propose the following amendments on Section 
3, page 1, and Section 6, page 6 for the sole purpose of 
aligning the provisions therein with what the Commis- 
sion had approved in the matter of the term and the 
prohibition on reelections. 

So, the Committee would propose to substitute 
Section 3 on page 1 with the following provision, copies 
of which had been distributed earlier: THE TERM OF 
OFFICE OF THE SENATORS SHALL BE SIX YEARS 
AND SHALL COMMENCE, UNLESS OTHERWISE 
PROVIDED BY LAW, AT NOON ON THE 30TH DAY 
OF JUNE NEXT FOLLOWING THEIR ELECTION. 

NO SENATOR SHALL SERVE FOR MORE THAN 
TWO CONSECUTIVE TERMS. VOLUNTARY RE- 
NUNCIATION OF THE OFFICE FOR ANY LENGTH 
OF TIME SHALL NOT BE CONSIDERED AS AN 
INTERRUPTION IN THE CONTINUITY OF HIS 
SERVICE FOR THE FULL TERM FOR WHICH HE 
WAS ELECTED. 

The Committee moves for its approval. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. The sectors are part of the party 
list system because we defined on page 1 the party 
list system as registered national, regional or sectoral 
organizations. 


MR. GASCON. I would like to ask a question with 
regard to the issue after the second term. We will 
allow the Senator to rest for a period of time before 
he can run again? 


MR. DAVIDE. We accept the proposal with 1 
deletion of the word “sectors” on line 15 then ! 
begmmng on line 13, the provision will now re; 

the case may be, who shall be chosen on the ba 
of proportional representation from the political nart 
and PARTIES OR ORGANIZATIONS REGISTER] 

UNDER THE PARTY LIST SYSTEM represenl 

t h e n C h ' t Th rv Seni ° r jUStice 111 the Electoral Tribu 
shall be its Chairman.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there 
proposed amendment? (Silence) 
the amendment is approved. 


any objection to this 
The Chair hears none; 


MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. 

nr 

MR. GASCON. And the question that we left behind 
before — if the Gentleman will remember — was: How 
long will that period of rest be? Will it be one election 
which is three years or one term which is six years? 

MR. DAVIDE. If the Gentleman will remember, 
Commissioner Rodrigo expressed the view that during 
the election following the expiration of the first 12 
years, whether such election will be on the third year 
or on the sixth year thereafter, this particular mem- 
ber of the Senate can run. So, it is not really a period 
of hibernation for six years. That was the Committee’s 
stand. 


MR. DAVIDE. As a consequence of the « 
amendment, the Committee would also propo 
amendment on the same page, line 20. After “pa 
on line 20, add the phrase: AND PARTIES OP 
GANIZATIONS REGISTERED UNDER THE P/ 
LIST SYSTEM, to be followed by the deletion c 
words “or sectors” on line 2 1 . 


MR. GASCON. So, effectively, the period of rest 
would be three years at the least. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


591 


MR. MAAMBONG. Could I address the clarificatory 
question to the Committee? This term “voluntary 
renunciation” does not only appear in Section 3; it 
appears in Section 6. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It is also a recurring phrase all 
over the Constitution. Could the Committee please 
enlighten us exactly what “voluntary renunciation” 
means? Is this akin to abandonment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Abandonment is voluntary. In other 
words, he cannot circumvent the restriction by merely 
resigning at any given time on the second term. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Is the Committee saying that the 
term “voluntary renunciation” is more general than 
abandonment and resignation? 

MR. DAVIDE. It is more general, more embracing. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any further questions 
on Section 3? 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

Let us go to Section 6. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I request 
that the word “the” before the words “three con- 
secutive terms” be deleted because then, we will really 
start applying it beginning July, 1987. The reason 
we took up the word “first” was precisely to avoid a 
situation where they will have seats but there will be 
nobody there. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, it will only read: “for three con- 
secutive terms”? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would seek for a ruling of the 
Chair on this because this was earlier approved by the 
body. 

MR. MONSOD. But, Madam President, that was pre- 
cisely the discussion and question between Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo and myself. The amendment that I 
accepted from Commissioner Sarmiento did not have 
the word “the.” 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee will agree to its 
deletion. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 


MR MAAMBONG. Madam President, before we go 
to Section 6 I do not know if I was not attentive when 
Section* 0 ” was previously taken up. but I would jus. 
like to call the attention of the Committee to line 29 
of section 5, page 1, where it reads: “shall be elected 
from the sectors and party list. 


Does this need some amendments in line with the 
realignment of the other sections? 


MR DAVIDE. This has already been amended by 
the Monsod et al. amendment. 


MR. MAAMBONG. How does it read now? 


mr DAVIDE. Beginning on line 29, the provision 
reads “SHALL BE ELECTED THROUGH A PARTY 
T TST SYSTEM OR REGISTERED NATIONAL, RE- 
GIONAL AND SECTORAL PARTIES OR ORGANIZA- 
TIONS, AS PROVIDED BY LAW. The party list repre- 
sentatives shall constitute twenty percent of the total 
membership of the House of Representatives. For the 
three consecutive terms after the ratification of this 
Constitution twenty-five of the seats allocated to 
party list representatives shall be filled, as provided 
by law, by selection or election from the labor, peasant, 
urban poor, youth, indigenous cultural communities, 
women and such other sectors as may be provided by 
law except the religious sector.” 


MR. BENNAGEN. Just a simple question to the Com- 
mittee for clarification. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Reference is made to registered 
national and sectoral organizations. Is “registered” 
here referring merely to registration with the COM- 
ELEC or also registration with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission? 

MR. DAVIDE. In the light of the approved Article 
on Constitutional Commissions, more particularly the 
COMELEC, the Committee persists that this refers to 
registration in the COMELEC. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Not the SEC? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, not necessarily. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. May we now proceed to Section 6, 
Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on 
Section 6. 


592 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. Not yet, Madam President. There was 
a request for the deletion of the word “the” preceding 
“three consecutive terms” which the Committee 
endorses. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
elimination of the word “the” before the words “three 
consecutive terms”? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 


MR. DAVIDE. The Committee proposes to substitute 
the present wording of Section 5 with the following: 
THE MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRE- 
SENTATIVES SHALL BE ELECTED FOR A TERM 
OF THREE YEARS WHICH SHALL BEGIN, UNLESS 
OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW, AT NOON ON 
THE 30TH DAY OF JUNE NEXT FOLLOWING 
THEIR ELECTION. 

NO MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRE- 
SENTATIVES SHALL SERVE FOR MORE THAN 
THREE CONSECUTIVE TERMS. VOLUNTARY RE- 
NUNCIATION OF THE OFFICE FOR ANY LENGTH 
OF TIME SHALL NOT BE CONSIDERED AS AN 
INTERRUPTION IN THE CONTINUITY OF THE 
SERVICE FOR A FULL TERM FOR WHICH HE WAS 
ELECTED. 

The Committee moves for its approval. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

May we ask a clarificatory question regarding tl 
interpretation of the provisions in Sections 3 and 
m relation to Section 9 regarding the disqualificatic 
on the part of the Senator to run for two consecuth 
terms, and m the case of the Members of the House c 
Representatives, for three consecutive terms For exan 
pie, a special election is called for a Senator and tl 
Senator newly elected would have to serve the u. 
expired portion of the term. Would that mean th 

considered' onTterm? sTS alem * alread 

the correct statement plus one term would disqualil 
the Senator concerned from running? I s that the mea 
ing of this provision on disqualification, Madam Pre 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, because we speak of “ti 
and if there is a special election, he will serve 
for the unexpired portion of that particular tern 
one more term for the Senator and two more 
for the Members of the Lower House. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 
MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. I notice under Section 3 the phrase 
“and shall commence unless otherwise provided by law 
at noon on the 30th day of June, next following then- 
election. ” Section 6 also has the words “which shall 
begin” and I suppose it means the same thing as in 
Section 3; also “unless otherwise provided by law at 
noon on the 30th day of June next following their 
election.” Section 3 also has the same phrase “volun- 
tary renunciation” as in Section 6. Can we not, there- 
fore, simplify to avoid repetitions? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we already ap- 
proved Section 3. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, this is to correlate “The term 
of office of the Senators shall be six years. No Senator 
shall serve for more than two consecutive terms.” That 
is for Section 3. Section 6 states: “THE MEMBERS 
OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SHALL 
BE ELECTED FOR A TERM OF THREE YEARS. . . 
NO MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTA- 
TIVES SHALL SERVE FOR MORE THAN THREE 
CONSECUTIVE TERMS.” Then comes another para- 
graph which states: “A TERM OF THREE YEARS 
WHICH SHALL BEGIN, UNLESS OTHERWISE PROV- 
IDED BY LAW, AT NOON ON THE 30TH DAY OF 
JUNE NEXT FOLLOWING THEIR ELECTION.” Then, 
“VOLUNTARY RENUNCIATION OF THE OFFICE 
FOR ANY LENGTH OF TIME SHALL NOT BE CON- 
SIDERED AS AN INTERRUPTION IN THE CON- 
TINUITY OF HIS SERVICE FOR A FULL TERM FOR 
WHICH HE WAS ELECTED.” This is a matter of form; 
it is not an amendment of substance. The Committee 
makes our Constitution more formal, more cohesive, 
and other words can be added thereto. In other words, 
the idea is to avoid the repetition of the same clauses or 
words. The Committee will consider this as a matter of 
form, but instead of leaving it to the Committee on 
Style, perhaps we should . . . 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee, Madam President, 
moves that the particular matter be referred to the 
Style Committee with that observation as guide to the 
Committee on Style to reformulate the two sections. 

MR. P ADILLA. But if there is no objection on 
the part of the Committee, it is better that it be ap- 
proved by the body. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 

MR. OPLE. This question is addressed both to the 
Committee and to Commissioner Monsod, who is an 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


593 


authority on budgetary matters. I just want to find 
out if noontime of June 30 is a common date for the 
beginning of the term of the President, the Senate, 
and the House of Representatives. If this is so, is there 
a correlation with the fiscal year? As I remember it, 
the government used to go on a fiscal year beginning 
July 1, and then this was changed to a calendar year 
budget beginning January 1. If the two Houses of 
Congress take their oath to signal the beginning of 
their terms on June 30 and the fiscal year for the 
budget is actually a calendar year beginning January 1, 
then there will be no opportunity for them to influence 
the priorities of government through a budget because 
by that time the budget shall have already been running 
for the calendar year. Will this, therefore, eventually 
require returning to the fiscal year beginning July 1? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chairman is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the Gentleman will take note of 
Section 10, page 3, the Congress shall convene once 
every year on the fourth Monday of July for its regular 
session, unless a different date is fixed by law, and 
shall continue to be in session tor such number of 
days as it may determine until 30 days before the 
opening of its next regular session. 

It would mean, therefore, that the fiscal year is 
actually the calendar year because upon the commence- 
ment of the regular session on the fourth Monday of 
July, the body will discuss or will give priority to the 
budget for the succeeding year. So, for instance, starting 
the fourth Monday of July 1987, the body will have 
to decide on the budget for 1988, if we reckon now 
the election to be in May, or earlier, of 1987. 

MR. OPLE. That is to say that they will be governed 
by the existing budget before their assumption to 
office. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now on 
Section 6? 

MR. DAVIDE. We are ready but there was a proposal 
by Commissioner Padilla, and the suggestion of the 
Committee is to leave this to the Style Committee 
headed by Commissioner Rodrigo. If we now incorporate 
Sections 3 and 6, it will dislocate the order of the sec- 
tioning of the entire Article on the Legislative Depart- 
ment. So, we request that that matter be left entirely 
to the Style Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Padilla 
agree? 


MR. PADILLA. No, I am not satisfied, Madam 
President. I would prefer the body to vote on the 
simplification and the clarification, without too many 
repetitions. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, it will be noted 
that there are two intervening sections. Sections 4 and 
5, and which will be totally affected by any combina- 
tion of Sections 3 and 6. 

MR. PADILLA. After Section 3, Section 6 can come 
in at Section 5, and the others can be renumbered. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We will submit to a vote whether 
the body sustains the report and recommendation of 
the Legislative Committee that these observations 
of Commissioner Padilla be referred to the Style Com- 
mittee. 

As many as are in favor of the report and recom- 
mendation of the Committee on the Legislative, please 
raise their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (One 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 24 votes in favor and one against; 
the recommendation of the Committee is accepted by 
the body. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bengzon be recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the body has not 
yet acted on Section 6. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, I am sorry. 

MR. DAVIDE. May we place it to a vote? 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Section 6 was read by the Chair- 
man of the Committee on the Legislative. 

As many as are in favor of Section 6, as recom- 
mended by the Committee, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(No Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 28 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 6 is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one more clarification. I 
lecall that we approved an amendment by addition on 


594 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


Section 5 which reads: “where a city is entitled to 
more than one representative they shall be elected 
at large.” 


MR. DAVIDE. These need not be harmonized be- 
cause of the composition of the position and, secondly, 
because of the very nature of the position involved. 


MR. DAVIDE. That amendment was not approved; 
it was withdrawn because the matter can be taken up 
in the ordinance to be appended to the Constitution 
in the matter of districting the seats. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I was just about to ask this ques- 
tion because I understand the Commission on Elections 
has submitted a redistricting of cities. 

MR. DAVIDE. A proposal. 

MR. MAAMBONG. A proposal, yes. Just one more 
point. In Section 9, which we have already approved, 
there is a provision in case a vacancy arises in the 
Senate or in the House of Representatives 18 months 
or more before a regular election. However, I notice 
that Section 10 of the Article on the Executive, which 
we have approved reads: 

No special election shall be called if the vacancy occurs 
within 180 days before the date of the next presidential 
election. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I just wanted to call the Gentle- 
man’s attention to that and the attention of the Chair- 
man of the Committee on the Executive. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Chairman Davide, is there any 
other matter pending in your Committee? 

MR. GASCON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. During the suspension, I was talking 
to Commissioner Lerum and I believe he was going to 
propose an amendment to Section 2. I was wondering 
if he will still propose such an amendment because if 
he does not, I will be proposing my own amendment 
to Section 2. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President. 


Does the Gentleman not feel that we should realign 
this provision because in the case of vacancy in the 
House of Representatives, we can call a special election 
at least 18 months or more, whereas in the case of the 
President, it is only 180 days? We should even have a 
shorter period in the case of vacancy in the House of 
Representatives because we are supposed to have a 
three-year term for that office while the term for the 
office of the President is supposed to be six years. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I wonder if the Chairman o 
this Committee and the Chairman of the Execute 
Committee could put their acts together and find ; 
happy compromise so that we can realign these pro 
visions. Would that be all right, Madam President' 


MR. DAVIDE. The vacancy contemplated in Section 
9 is a vacancy occurring 1 8 months or more before 
a regular election. We feel that it is not necessary for 
the reason that, first of all, there are many who are 
in the Senate and there are many more in the Lower 
House; whereas in the matter of the presidency, there 
is really an exigency which would necessitate an imme- 
diate filling up because it is the entire Philippines that 
will be involved. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Is the Gentleman saying that 
these two provisions need not be harmonized? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. I have made a reservation to submit 
an amendment on Section 2. On line 13, after “Philip- 
pines,” delete the words “as may” and insert the follow- 
ing: EXCEPT FOUR TO REPRESENT THE SECTORS 
WHOSE ELECTION SHALL. So, the section, as 
amended, shall read as follows: “The Senate shall be 
composed of twenty-four Senators who shall be elected 
at large by the qualified voters of the Philippines, EX- 
CEPT FOUR TO REPRESENT THE SECTORS WHOSE 
ELECTION SHALL be provided by law.” The reason 
for this amendment is to complement the provision in 
Section 5 which provides for sectoral representation. 
We believe that if the sectors will be given representa- 
tion in the House, they should also be given representa- 
tion in the Senate. As I said this morning, that is part of 
the promise of the President made to the labor sector on 
May 1, 1986. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee is rather confused 
by the proposal, if it will not affect the total member- 
ship. The total membership is 24 to be elected at large 
by the qualified voters of the Philippines. With that 
particular exception, it is not determined how many of 
the 24 will be represented in the Senate. Besides, we 
feel that since the Senate is to be elected at large, any 
number beyond 24 might not be really conducive to 
a higher body as the Senate. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


595 


MR. LERUM. If that is the objection, this amend- 
ment will not increase the membership of the Senate 
because the four will be taken from the 24 so that, in 
effect, 20 will be elected at large and four will be 
selected from the sectors, as may be provided by law. 

MR. DAVIDE. We would rather submit it to a vote 
by the Commission, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman kindly read 
again his proposed amendment on Section 2? 

MR. LERUM. As amended, Section 2 will read as 
follows: “The Senate shall be composed of twenty- 
four Senators who shall be elected at large by the 
qualified voters of the Philippines, EXCEPT FOUR, 
TO REPRESENT THE SECTORS WHOSE ELECTION 
SHALL BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

May I ask one clarificatory question. Madam 
President? 

MR. LERUM. Willingly. 

MR. SUAREZ. As I understand it, under this section 
and other sections, there will be elections for the 
Senate at large but this will refer only to the 20 
Senators under the proposal of the Gentleman. 

MR. LERUM. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. The four would be elected or selected 
from the sectors in the manner provided by law. 

MR. LERUM. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. If the situation is that there will 
be 12 Senators to be elected during every election for 
the Senate, I assume there will be only two from the 
sectors every election or selection, as the case may be. 

MR. LERUM. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, there will be 10 Senators to be 
elected at large and two to be selected or elected from 
the sectors as the case may be. Is that the meaning 
of this? 

MR. LERUM. Will the Gentleman kindly repeat his 
question? 

MR. SUAREZ. Let us say, there is an election for 
12 Senators, but the 10 would have to be elected at 


large and the two must come from the sectors. Is my 
understanding of the Gentleman’s proposal correct? 

MR. LERUM. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I make a short observation on 
this? 

When I opted for a bicameral system, I expressly 
stated that I would favor a bicameral system if the 
Senators are elected nationally, nationwide or at large, 
and I gave my reasons for this. One is that the Senators 
will look at issues on a national scale since they are 
national leaders. Since the Senators are elected by the 
whole country, they win or lose by hundreds of thou- 
sands of votes, if not by millions of votes, and so 
they are less susceptible to pressure. If we dilute this 
with four elected by sectors, the philosophy behind 
establishing a Senate, an Upper House, would be lost 
insofar as these four are concerned. I am also thinking 
that in order to win as Senator, he will have to be in 
the first 12 on top of the list since he is elected at 
large. From experience, the last among those who would 
win would gamer, maybe, about more than six million 
votes. But if we vote by sector, it is possible that a 
sectoral Senator might win with only 500,000 votes 
because the system of election is different. This is 
contrary to the philosophy of a Senate elected at 
large which motivated me, and I think many others, to 
vote for a bicameral legislature. I think it is enough 
that we have the sectoral representatives in the House 
of Representatives. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, may I comment on 
that? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. I do not agree with the assumption 
that senators cannot be pressured. I have seen many 
senators who have been pressured. So, that assumption 
is not coriect. I do not also agree with the assumption 
that when the Gentleman proposed the creation of the 
Senate, that view was shared by everybody. I do not 
think that is so. As a matter of fact, we voted against 
having a bicameral legislature. That is the Gentleman’s 
assumption, but I do not agree with his assumption that 
is why I am proposing this amendment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


596 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


MR. DE CASTRO. Will the proponent answer some 
questions please? 


the Senate in relation to the House. This is just to 
inform the body of the mathematics of this. 


MR. LERUM. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The Gentleman is asking for four 
out of 24, is that right? 

MR. LERUM. That is correct. 

MR. DE CASTRO. If we compute that, that is 16 
percent of 24. Is that correct? 

MR. LERUM. That is correct. We can increase that to 
20, if the Gentleman is agreeable. 

MR. DE CASTRO. No, I am still on the computation. 
Of the 250, the Gentleman is asking for 20 oercent, is 
he not? 

MR. LERUM. Is the Gentleman referring to the 
House of Representatives? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. 

i LERUM. It is already agreed on. It is on record 
reco^’ S ° P 6aS6 d ° not ask me something on the 


MR. LERUM. So, it is not a question, after all. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now? What 
is the reaction of the Committee? Will the Committee 
refer it to the body? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee prefers to have the 
same voted by the body. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I object to the 
proposed amendment not because I have been elected 
Senator for three terms in the past but because all 
sectors are represented nationwide. So, the Senators 
who are elected at large count on the majority of all the 
votes of all registered voters throughout the country. 
A nationwide election should no longer distinguish 
between the people under the parties or some sectoral 
groups because all qualified and registered voters already 
vote for the Senators in a senatorial election nation- 
wide. 


a ^ G ^TRO. Of the 250, the Gentleman 
asking for 20. That is the one agreed on, is it not? 

MR. LERUM. The records show that that is so. 


THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote on this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Lerum? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 


24 thatk ^ STR0 - If we impute 250 in relation 
, that is 12 percent. Madam President, 250 is abo 

nrne times of 24. If we multiply 16 percent by 9, that 

a littkoverdie 068 ^ P entleman not thin k that that 
chosen and 1 r ^ Uir cd Percentage of those who will I 
chosen and not elected for the first time? 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment has 
been read by Commissioner Lerum. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand.) 


. LERUM. The way the Gentleman computes i 
suggestion? ^ t0 S °’ What is the Gentle ™an 

MR. DE CASTRO. I am only computing; I am m 
prepared tor any suggestion. 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 9 votes in favor and 21 against; the 
proposed amendment is lost. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President. 


MR. LERUM. As far as we are concerned, we a 

c l If ,h” r 8< T e SeCtOTal ^Presentation in tl 
Senate, f the Gentleman is making the suggestion th 

that will make it possible, we are willing to listen 
hint. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Iam just informing the body that 
the four out of ^4 is 16 percent of 24. If we relate that 
mathematically, 250 divided by 24 is about nine times; 
16 percent times 9 equals 136 percent representation in 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. I would like to propose an amend- 
ment. On Section 2, line 12, after the word “large” put 
the phrase THROUGH A PARTY LIST SYSTEM. So, 
the provision will read: “The Senate shall be composed 
of twenty-four Senators who shall be elected at large 
THROUGH A PARTY LIST SYSTEM by the qualified 
voters ol the Philippines, as may be provided by law.” 
During the period of amendments, I asked the Commit- 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986 


597 


tee if this is a possibility and the answer was “yes.” It is 
a possibility and, in fact, it is much easier to implement 
a party list system on a national or at large level than at 
the district level. That is the first reason why I am pro- 
posing such. The major reason why I am proposing that 
we should encourage a party list system for the 24 
Senators is to eliminate the possibility that the Senate 
will be dominated by one, or at the most, two large 
political parties; and to encourage small political parties 
to compete for senatorial seats even though they will be 
elected at large. By my computation, if we elect 12 
Senators every election, a party would only need eight 
percent of the votes to have one Senator. Of course, 
larger parties should get more than eight percent, let us 
say, 40 percent, to entitle them to five seats of the 12 
while other smaller parties can only muster eight per- 
cent and they would be entitled to one seat. But, in 
effect, the direct result of such system is that in every 
election we would encourage more than one party to be 
elected. In the process, we are democratizing and 
encouraging a system of election based not only on 
the personalities of the candidates but also on the issues 
and ideology of the parties that are presenting their 
programs. That is the basis for my proposal. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

\ 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I would like to comment on that 
proposal, Madam President. Under the party list system, 
when the parties register, they put down the names of 
their candidates in the order in which they would sit. If 
the party list system in the Senate is applied, each party 
will have 12 candidates but the bottom ones are sure 
not to win unless that party gets 93 percent of the 
votes. In the case of the House of Representatives, we 
are putting a ceiling of 10 or 15 seats that a party may 
earn under the party list system. There is a difference 
there, Madam President. When they list down 15 names, 
those 1 5 have a chance of winning if they get something 
like 20 percent of the votes. So, there is a difference 
when we are voting on a House that has only 24 Mem- 
bers and only 12 seats are being voted on in an election, 
unlike in the case of the House where you have 50 seats 
and there is a cap on how many you can seat. In this 
case we will find anybody who will run for the lower 
numbers because they are sure not to sit. 

MR. GASCON. I recognize that problem but I feel 
that if we encourage other parties to, let us say, com- 
pete on an even level to some degree through the party 
list system, we may be able to come out with results 
during our elections. But the cream of the crop of each 
party would be elected and we would have a very 
dynamic and progressive Senate which would be very 
healthful for a growing democracy. That is the first 
point. 


Second, I am not sure whether each party is bound 
to field all 12 seats. But it is possible that if they feel 
they will not be able to get the last four seats because 
of the party list system, maybe they will field only eight 
and concentrate on the eight and encourage other 
parties as well, to compete for the other four. My only 
point is, through this party list system, we may break 
the two-party system in the Senate. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, it is true that during 
the suspension of session, this representation answered 
Commissioner Gascon that the party list system for the 
Senate is a possibility; however, this representation did 
not say that it is probable. The Committee would only 
state for the record that the party list system in the 
Senate will not accomplish what Commissioner Gascon 
had in mind — allowing other smaller parties to get a 
voice in the Senate — because whether it would be 
through the party list system or through a regular 
political party, the same opportunity will be accorded. 

Secondly, we will be restoring block voting for a 
party. In other words, we will deprive the people of the 
greater opportunity to know the merits of each indi- 
vidual candidate since what will be submitted by a party 
will only be a list of people, a list to be submitted to the 
COMELEC. It is very likely that the people who will 
be voting all over the country will never have a chance 
of knowing exactly the capabilities of the particular 
candidates listed in the party 'ist. 

Thirdly, I do not think that it will actually be a 
vote for a particular party which would, therefore, 
amount to block voting. I understand that the Article 
on the Constitutional Commissions, more particularly 
on the COMELEC, except for the party list system, 
really would not allow such. So, we would rather leave 
it to the Commission to vote on the issue, Madam 
President. 

MR. GASCON. Before we vote, I would like to make 
a clarification. 

The Committee said that they were agreeable to my 
position in as far as the word “probable” is concerned; 
what I meant to say is that the party system is a possi- 
bility for the Senate. That is all. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, we are ready to 
vote. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Gascon on 
Section 2, please raise their hand. ( Few Members raised 
their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 


598 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 1 , 1 986 


The results show 10 votes in favor and 22 against; the 
proposed amendment is lost. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 


will distribute copies of the Article with realigned or 
renumbered sections. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. If the Committee has no further 
matter to take up, I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro if recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I move for a suspension of the 
session for five minutes so we will have an opportunity 
to read this. I have not had an opportunity to read this 
because I have been very busy the whole afternoon. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, that wraps up our 
discussion on the Committee Report on the Legislative 
and as per clearance of the Chairman of the Commit- 
tee, I move that the body vote on Second Reading 
on the Article on the Legislative. But before we vote, 
may I withdraw my motion because the Chairman 
requests that clean copies of the Article on the Execu- 
tive be distributed first. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a 
few minutes. 

It was 6:57 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


Since clean copies have already been distributed, I 
would like to move that the Article on the Executive 
be voted upon on Second Reading. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


MR. REGALADO. On a point of information whil 
we already have the clean copies of the Article on th 
Executive, by tomorrow as we have made reservation 
for that purpose, we will circulate the same copies fo 
Second Reading, but this time with the numbers re 
aligned, meaning just a transposition of sections bu 
containing exactly the same as is now being distribute 
among the Commissioners. 


THE PRESIDENT. So, what is the Gentleman’s pro- 
posal - that we postpone the voting until tomorrow? 

MR. REGALADO. No, we can proceed, Madam 
President. I just wanted to point out that tomorrow we 


At 6:58 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Commissioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, having listened to 
the reaction of the Commissioners and considering that 
everyone is tired, I withdraw my motion. Therefore, we 
will vote on Second Reading on the Articles on the 
Legislative and on the Executive tomorrow morning 
at nine o’clock. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recop- 
nized. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I move for the 
adjournment of the session until nine o’clock tomorrow 
morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
nine o’clock tomorrow morning. 

It was 6:59 p.m. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


599 


R.C.C. NO. 46 
Saturday, August 2, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:35 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 
NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 


Nolledo Present 

Ople Present 

Padilla Present 

Quesada Present 

Rama Present 

Regalado ...... Present 

Reyes de los ... Present 

Rigos Present 

Rodrigo Present 

Romulo Present 


Rosales Present 

Sarmiento Present* 

Suarez Present 

Sumulong Present 

Tadeo Present* 

Tan Present 

Tingson Present 

Uka Present 

Villacorta Present 

Villegas Present 


of official advice of ab- 


The Secretariat is in receipt 
sence of Commissioner Trenas. 


THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Cirilo A. Rigos. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

REV. RIGOS. Most gracious and loving God, let Thy 
Spirit guide us in our work today. Help us to realize our 
inadequacy that we may look up to Thee for guidance 
and wisdom. 

Grant us the strength equal to our task, and the faith 
that will enable us to overcome all difficulties. 

In Jesus’ name we pray. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 


THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . 

. Present* 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Alonto . . . 


Davide 

. Present 

Aquino 


Foz 

. Present 

Azcuna 


Garcia 

. Present 

Bacani 

. Present* 

Gascon 

. Present* 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Jamir 

. Present 

Bernas 

. Absent 

Laurel 

. Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Lerum 

. Present* 

Brocka 

. Present* 

Maambong . . . 

. Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Monsod 

. Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Natividad .... 

. Present* 

Colayco 

. Absent 

Nieva 

. Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 35 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


^Appeared after the roll call 


600 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1 986 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Communi- 
cations, the President making the corresponding refer- 
ences: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from former Senator Magnolia W. Antonino, 
1 5th Floor, G.E. Antonino Building, T.M. Kalaw Street, 
Ermita, Manila, submitting some proposals for inclusion 
in the Constitution, to wit: (1) There shall be a Commis- 
sion on Appointments composed of members of the 
legislature; (2) The only elective provincial officials 
shall be the Governor and the Vice-Governor. The 
Governor and the Vice-Governor shall be the chairman 
and vice-chairman, respectively, of a provincial assembly 
composed of all the municipal mayors in the province; 
(3) The only elective municipal officials shall be the 
Mayor and Vice-Mayor who shall be chairman and vice- 
chairman, respectively, of the municipal assembly com- 
posed of all barrio captains; and (4) The right of every 
citizen to possess firearms in his residence subject to 
reasonable restrictions and qualifications. 

(Communication No. 416 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


Letter from Mr. Ramon R. Batino, Jr. of P.O. Box 627, 
Bacolod City, expressing apprehension over the possible 
s the dismantling of the U.S. bases in the 
hihppi nes in the areas of national security, economic 
stability and religious freedom. 

of 0 1986) niCati0n N ° 417 ~ Constitutional Commission 
To the Committee on General Provisions. 


dltion^th r ' i‘? ander de JeSUS 0f the Miners Ass 
honors hi/ Phlhppines ’ Inc -> submitted thru t 
• • . 0 / nrniss ioner Ambrosio Padilla, suggesting 

of a find !T the Constitution that “a petition for revie 
law 2th ° n °l the Supreme Court during mart: 
contra rv tn f mani C est ly against the evidence and 

ratification of be fded within one year from t 
at 200 of this Constitution and given due course.’ 

^Communicati 0 " No. 418 - Constitutional Commissi. 


To the Committee 
Provisions. 


on Amendments and Transitory 


Letter from Mr. Jose R. Reyes of 2278 Pasong Tam 
Extension, Makati Metro Manila, and 28 others, urgir 
the Constitutional Commission to adopt a provision i 
the Constitution for the renewal of the U S Militai 
Bases Agreement upon its expiry in 1991, and to take 
firm stand with the forces of freedom, instead of takin 
a stance of neutrality and nonalignment. 


(Communication No. 419 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Ms. Dolores A. Endriga, OIC, School of 
Urban and Regional Planning, University of the Philip- 
pines, Diliman, Quezon City, submitting a resolution 
adopted by the U.P. School of Urban and Regional 
Planning Faculty, suggesting incorporation in the 
Constitution of a provision on housing. 

(Communication No. 420 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Ricardo Amador of 32 Badminton 
Street, New Saint Francis Village, Cainta, Rizal, suggest- 
ing among others, the adoption of the electoral college 
type of voting for national elections. 

(Communication No. 421 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Communication signed by 1,254 people with their 
corresponding addresses, seeking to include in the 1 986 
Constitution a provision obliging the State to protect 
the life of the unborn from the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 422 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Polit- 
ical Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Letter from the Honorable Bienvenido A. Tan, Jr., 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, expressing doubts 
whether the adoption of important provisions by mere 
majority vote is a sufficient indication of the real will 
of the people, suggesting therefor that when voting at 
the referendum/plebiscite, the electorate can then in- 
dicate a vote for the Constitution as a whole document 
and the disputed provisions thereof and the resulting 
vote will decide what the final document will be. 

(Communication No. 423 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Ms. Rosa Maria Juan Bautista of the Divi- 
sion of Research and Law Reform, U.P. Law Center, 
proposing provisions renouncing child labor, protecting 
working children, and giving aid and support to the 
Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court; and enclosing 
copies of lectures delivered at the U.P. Institute of 
Industrial Relations. 

(Communication No. 424 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


601 


Communication from the Integrated Bar of the Philip- 
pines, entitled: “Explanatory Note of the Proposed 
Commission on Justice.” 

(Communication No. 425 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Letter from Ms. Antonnette Queri, Campus Ministry 
Team, requesting a provision protecting the unborn. 

(Communication No. 426 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Communication from the Family Planning Organization 
of the Philippines, Sorsogon Provincial Chapter, Sorso- 
gon, Sorsogon, signed by its President, Cecilia A. Ortiz 
and other officers, petitioning the Constitutional Com- 
mission to incorporate in the Constitution a clear-cut 
statement of national policy on family planning. 
(Communication No. 427 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication from the Family Planning Organization 
of the Philippines, Davao Provincial Chapter, 33-F J.P. 
Laurel Avenue, Davao City, signed by its Chapter Pres- 
ident, Roberto V. Alcantara and other officers and 
members, expressing among others the desire to have a 
Commission on Population whose activities are inde- 
pendent of any social or health agency. 

(Communication No. 428 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Ms. Rosalita Bengzon Moran of 686 Aurora 
Blvd., Quezon City, voicing the plight of small land- 
owners whose landholdings were covered by land 
reform, saying that small landowners were made the 
sacrificial lambs to quiet rural restiveness, and that she 
has not been paid her lawful share for some years now, 
among others. 

(Communication No. 429 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Ben Divina, c/o United Nationalist 
Democratic Organization, Old Congress Bldg., Manila, 
submitting a newspaper clipping captioned Overseas 
Workers as Capitalists.” 

(Communication No. 430 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 
(Article on Social Justice) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. The scheduled voting on the Article on 
the Legislative, as amended, has to be postponed because 
the clean copies have not yet been distributed. Also, we 
have to postpone the voting on Second Reading on the 
Article on the Executive because there is still an amend- 
ment that has to be taken up according to the Vice- 
Chairman of said Committee. 

Therefore, Madam President, I move that we consider 
Committee Report No. 34 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 534 as reported out by the Committee on Social 
Justice. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. Before we proceed further, the 
session is suspended for a few minutes. 

It was 9:47 a. m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 9:51 a.m. , the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 534 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secretary- 
General will read only the title of the proposed resolu- 
tion without prejudice to inserting in the Record the 
whole text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 534, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE. 


(The following is the whole text of the proposed resolution 
per C.R. No. 34.) 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 34 

The Committee on Social Justice to which were referred the 
following: 

Proposed Resolution No. 19, introduced by Hon. Azcuna, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION ON THE ROLE OF FARMERS AND WORK- 
ERS, 


602 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 20, introduced by Hon. Azcuna, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR AUTHENTIC LAND 
REFORM, 


Proposed Resolution No. 25, introduced by Hon. Nolledo, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION LIMITING OWNERSHIP OF PRIVATE 
LANDHOLDINGS, 


Proposed Resolution No. 37, introduced by Hon. Davide enti- 
tled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING GENUINE AND BROADER 
LAND REFORM POLICIES AND FOR THE INCOR- 
PORATION IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF A SEPA- 
RATE ARTICLE ON LAND REFORM, 


Proposed Resolution No. 82, introduced by Hon. Bennagen, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE SEPA- 
RATE AND DISTINCT FROM THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES AND STATE POLICIES, 

SlTe d nS Uti0n N0 ' 91 ’ intr ° dUCed by H ° n - GaSCOn and 

R To L N U r,= G THE constitu tional COMMIS- 
omI 4 Spro ™ E PE0PLE ’ S proposal for 

SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SERVICES, 
e2led ed ReS °' Uti0n N0 ‘ 93 ’ imr ° duCed by Hon - Davide > 

A P R Z L TP TI ^: RGP0SING T ° LIMIT THE AREA 0F 

aSrfh Sv X LTURAL LAND THAT MAY BE 

AND PROVTnTWr N ^ URAUZED FILIPIN0 CITIZENS 

m EXCELS op tS c ° R ™ E ESCHEAT 0F ANY HELD 
liN EXCESS OF THE LIMITATION, 

Garcia, entitled^ 10 " N °’ l0 °’ mtroducei1 b y Hon. Gascon and 

R ToN™Zm G T™™S 

URBAN POOR, SUES AFFECTINC THE 


s:: ; .■ b > h °*- . 

rsssr. 

ZENS THE RIGHT TO STANDARDS OP LIVING NE 
SARY TO MAINTAIN THEIR WELL-BEING AND 
PROVISION BY THE STATE OF ESSENTIAL SERVI 
PERTINENT THERETO, 


Proposed Resolution No. 1 26, introduced by Hon 
Jr., Maambong and Natividad, entitled: 


• de los Reyes, 


RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE GENERAL PROVT 
SION OR DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES A PROVI 


SION TO AID AND ASSIST THE DISABLED, HANDI- 
CAPPED, ORPHANS, AGED AND OTHER DISAD- 
VANTAGED CITIZENS, 


Proposed Resolution No. 167, introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO DECLARE RURAL DEVELOPMENT AS 
A PRIMARY OBLIGATION OF THE STATE, 


Proposed Resolution No. 171, introduced by Hon. Villegas, Sar- 
miento and Rosario Braid, entitled: 

RESOLUTION THAT A BROAD WORKING DEFINITION 
OF ‘SOCIAL JUSTICE’ BE ADOPTED, 


Proposed Resolution No. 180, introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION MANDATING COOPERATIVISM AS A 
BASIC PRINCIPLE OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT, 
COOPERATIVES AS ITS VEHICLE, THE ESTABLISH- 
MENT OF THE NECESSARY CONDITIONS THEREFOR, 
AND CREATION OF A NATIONAL COOPERATIVE 
AND LAND REFORM AUTHORITY, 


Proposed Resolution No. 181, introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ELIMINATE DISCRIMINATION AS A 
BARRIER TO WORK OPPORTUNITIES, 


Proposed Resolution No. 227, introduced by Hon. Villegas, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INTRODUCE A SEPARATE ARTICLE 
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND TO SET CRITERIA FOR DIS- 
TINGUISHING ITS PROVISIONS FROM THOSE PRO- 
PER TO THE BILL OF RIGHTS AND OTHER ARTICLES, 

Proposed Resolution No. 253, introduced by Hon. Villegas, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE TO IMPLEMENT THE STATE’S 
POLICY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE, 

Proposed Resolution No. 277, introduced by Hon. Quesada, 
Suarez and Sarmiento, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON A NATIONAL HEALTH 
POLICY FOR A COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH CARE 
DELIVERY SYSTEM FOR THE ENTIRE COUNTRY, 


Proposed Resolution No. 279, introduced by Hon. Nolledo, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT THE STATE SHALL FOSTER AND PROMOTE 
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF COOPERATIVES AND SUP- 
PORTING SERVICES ALL OVER THE COUNTRY 
ESPECIALLY IN THE RURAL AREAS, 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


603 


Proposed Resolution No. 316, introduced by Hon. Tingson, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT IN THE CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION DECLARING LAND REFORM A 
CORNERSTONE IN THE ECONOMIC REFORM OF THE 
COUNTRY. 

Proposed Resolution No. 320, introduced by Hon. Tingson, 
entitled: 

A RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION ON THE PROTEC- 
TION AND WELFARE OF WORKERS, 

Proposed Resolution No. 340, introduced by Hon. Tadeo and 
Suarez, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE A SEPA- 
RATE SECTION ON AGRARIAN REFORM IN THE 
ARTICLE ON TRANSITORY PROVISIONS, 

Proposed Resolution No. 342, introduced by Hon. Tadeo and 
Quesada, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE AFFIRMATION OF 
AGRARIAN REFORM AS A FUNDAMENTAL ELE- 
MENT IN ACHIEVING SOCIAL EQUITY AND JUSTICE 
AND THEREFORE MUST BE ENSHRINED IN THE 
DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES OF THE NEW consti- 
tution, 

Proposed Resolution No. 343, introduced by Hon. Tadeo, 
Aquino, Brocka, Villacorta, Ople, de los Reyes, Jr., Quesada, 
Maambong, Bennagen, Sarmiento, Garcia, Suarez and Gascon, 

entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR A SEPARATE ARTICLE 
ON AGRARIAN REFORM AS A FUNDAMENTAL ELE- 
MENT IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A JUST, HUMANE 
AND PROGRESSIVE SOCIETY , 

Proposed Resolution No. 366, introduced by Hon. Nolledo, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT ALL KINDS OF IDLE OR ABANDONED LANDS 
NOT PUT TO APPROPRIATE USE AS DEFINED BY 
LAW WITHIN FIVE YEARS FROM RATIFICATION OF 
THE NEW CONSTITUTION SHALL BE FORFEITED IN 
FAVOR OF THE STATE TO BE DISTRIBUTED TO 
BENEFICIARIES OF LAND REFORM, 

Proposed Resolution No. 376, introduced by Hon. Gascon and 
Garcia, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION AFFORDING MORE PROTEC- 
TION TO LABOR AND GUARANTEEING BASIC 
HUMAN AND TRADE UNION RIGHTS, 

Proposed Resolution No. 379, introduced by Hon. Trefias, 
entitled: 


RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CON- 
STITUTION A PROVISION TO EMPHASIZE AND 
STRENGTHEN THE CONSTITUTIONAL BASE FOR A 
SOCIAL HOUSING PROGRAM, 

Proposed Resolution No. 397, introduced by Hon. Sarmiento 
and Tan, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION CREATING AN AGENCY FOR 
THE MANAGEMENT OF GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES’ 
UNIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS, 

Proposed Resolution No. 398, introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and 
Tan, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION GRANTING THE RIGHT TO 
FORM UNION AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING TO 
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES, 

Proposed Resolution No. 413, introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, 
Jr., entitled: 

RESOLUTION FOR A CONSTITUTIONAL COMMITMENT 
OF THE STATE TO ASSIST THE DISABLED INTO BE- 
COMING PRODUCTIVE AND USEFUL MEMBERS OF 
SOCIETY, 

Proposed Resolution No. 419, introduced by Hon. Tan, Villa- 
corta and Rigos, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION GUARANTEEING 
A DECENT SHELTER FOR EVERY FILIPINO, PRO- 
TECTION AGAINST ARBITRARY AND INHUMAN 
DEMOLITION OF DWELLINGS AND AN ASSURANCE 
FOR PROPER RESETTLEMENT UNDER A COMPRE- 
HENSIVE SHELTER PROGRAM, 

Proposed Resolution No. 421, introduced by Hon. Nieva, Mon- 
sod, Tan and Bacani, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION TO INSURE THAT THE STATE 
SHALL UNDERTAKE AND IMPLEMENT AN URBAN 
LAND REFORM AND SOCIAL HOUSING PROGRAM, 

Proposed Resolution No. 425, introduced by Hon. Sarmiento, 
Quesada and Tadeo, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION GUARANTEEING 
INALIENABILITY AND INSURANCE OF A MINIMUM 
PATRIMONY OF EACH FAMILY THAT ENSURE DE- 
CENT FAMILY LIFE, 

Proposed Resolution No. 426, introduced by Hon. Sarmiento, 
Quesada, Tadeo and Bennagen, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION ESTABLISHING 
WORK AS A RIGHT AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, 
STATE ENDEAVOR TO ACHIEVE FULL PRODUCTIVE 


604 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


EMPLOYMENT AND CREATION OF A CENTRALIZED 
MONITORING SYSTEM AND UNEMPLOYMENT WEL- 
FARE PROGRAM, 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION MORE SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR PROMOT- 
ING AND PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF LABOR, 


Proposed Resolution No. 429, introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo 
and Sarmiento, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS A PROVISION FOR THE 
EXPROPRIATION OF ALL AGRICULTURAL AND 
NON-AGRICULTURAL LANDS FRAUDULENTLY AC- 
QUIRED BY GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND THEIR 
CRONIES AND IMMEDIATE SUBIECTION OF THE 
SAME TO URBAN AND RURAL LAND REFORM, 


Proposed Resolution No. 431, introduced by Hon. Natividad, 
Ople, Maambong and de los Reyes, Jr., entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION IN THE NEW ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
THAT AS A RESTITUTION, THE VICTIMS OF CRIME 
BE GIVEN A SHARE OF FINES PAID IN COURT BY 
CONVICTED CRIMINALS, 


Proposed Resolution No. 479, introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES THE RECOGNITION OF RURAL DE- 
ELOPMENT AND AGRARIAN REFORM AS PRIORI- 
TIES OF THE STATE, 


Proposed Resolution No. 491, 
Tadeo and Aquino, entitled: 


introduced by Hon. Quesada, 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION PROVISIONS FOR THE PROTECTION OF THE 

SrsTfowT^ ° F FILIPIN ° overseas 


Proposed Resolution No. 504, introduced by Hon. Villegas, 

^TKJN^OF THF A ?q° 7 P / AS AMENDED ARTICLE 2, SEC- 
RATION INTO THF 3 n C c?. NSTITUTI0N F0R INCORp O- 

AND STATE POLICTF^od ' ARATI0N 0F PRINCIPLES 
LICIES OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION, 

Proposed Resolution No. 50 Q 

and Quesada, entitled: ’ uce< ^ Hon. Sarmiento 

RESOLUTION TO INCOPPnp atc 

TUTION A PROVISION ^EOUTRTM^ NEW C0NSTI " 
SECURITY AGENCY To PROVmrco ™^' to 
ALL WORKERS WHO WORK FOR PRIVATC MPLOV 
ERS INCLUDING DOMESTIC HELPERS SELF 

M^THEMSE LVFS Pnprn WH ° ^"lYS^ 
MIT THEMSELVES FOR COVERAGE, 


Proposed Resolution No. 513, introduced by Hon. Garcia and 
Gascon, entitled: 


Proposed Resolution No. 515, introduced by Hon. Garcia and 
Gascon, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS TO REGULATE THE OWNER- 
SHIP, USE AND DISTRIBUTION OF LAND, 

Proposed Resolution No. 520, introduced by Hon. Quesada, 
Bennagen, Brocka, Sarmiento and Suarez, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON AN EFFECTIVE HEALTH 
CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM, MAINTENANCE OF AN 
EFFECTIVE FOOD AND DRUG MONITORING BODY 
AND HEALTH MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT, 

has considered the same and has the honor to report them back 
to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recom- 
mendation that attached Proposed Resolution No. 534, prepared 
by the Committee, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE, 

be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution Nos. 19, 20, 
25, 37, 82, 91, 93, 100, 113, 126, 167, 171, 180, 181, 227, 253, 
277, 279, 316, 320, 340, 342, 343, 366, 376, 379, 397, 398, 
413, 419, 421, 425, 426, 429, 431, 479, 491, 504, 509, 5 13, 5 15 
and 520 with Honorable Nieva, Gascon, Tadeo, Monsod, Aquino, 
Brocka, Suarez, Ople, Quesada, Bacani, Garcia, Lerum, Tan, 
Villacorta, Bennagen, Bengzon, Jr., Rodrigo, Azcuna, Nolledo, 
Davide, Jr., Sarmiento, de los Reyes, Rosario Braid, Villegas, 
Guingona, Tingson, Trenas and Natividad as authors. 



(Sgd.) Ma. Teresa F. Nieva 
Chairperson 

Committee on Social Justice 

(Sgd.) Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon 
Vice-Chairman 

(Sgd.) Jaime S. L. Tadeo 
Member 

(Sgd.) Christian S. Monsod 
Member 

(Sgd.) Lino O. Brocka 
Member 

(Sgd.) Felicitas S. Aquino 
Member 

(Sgd.) Jose E. Suarez 
Member 

(Sgd.) Minda Luz M. Quesada 
Member 

(Sgd.) Bias F. Ople* 
Member 

(Sgd.) Teodoro C. Bacani 
Member 

(Sgd.) EdmundoG. Garcia 

Member 

(Sgd.) Eulogio R. Lerum 
Member 

(Sgd.) Christine Tan 
Member 

(Sgd.) Wilfrido V. Villacorta 
Member 

(Sgd.) Ponciano L. Bennagen 
Member 


*With reservation on language 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


605 


(Sgd.) Jose F. S. Bcngzon, Jr. (Sgd.) Francisco A. Rodrigo 
Member Member 


limits as the National Assembly may prescribe and subject to a 
fair and progressive system of compensation. 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE. 

Resolved , as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional Com- 
mission in session assembled , to incorporate in the New Constitu- 
tion a separate Article on Social Justice, with the following provi- 
sions: 


ARTICLE 

SOCIAL JUSTICE 


SECTION 1. Social Justice, as a social, economic, political, 
moral imperative, shall be the primary consideration of the 
State in the pursuit of national development. To this end, Con- 
gress shall give the highest priority to the formulation and imple- 
mentation of measures designed to reduce economic and political 
inequalities found among citizens, and to promote the material 
structural conditions which promote and enhance human dig- 
protect the inalienable rights of persons and sectors to 
health welfare and security, and put the material wealth and 
powerof the community at the disposal of the common good. 

SEC 2 * Towards these ends, the State shall regulate the 

isition, ownership, use and disposition of property and its 

promote the establishment of self-reliant, socio-political 

1U1 ec0 nomic structures determined by the people themselves, 

al1 ct labor, rationalize the use and disposition of land, and 

PF thp satisfaction of the basic material needs of all. 
ensure tne 

LABOR 


SEC 3- ^h e ^ tate a ff° r d full protection to labor both 
. stic and overseas, organized or unorganized, and shall pro- 
T f u ]j ernpl°y ment anc * equality of employment opportuni- 
m ° rHless of sex, age, culture or creed. 

ties regaraies 

SFC 4- Th e ^ tate & uarantee the rights of workers to self- 
ization, collective bargaining and negotiations, peaceful and 
organ , activities for their own protection, welfare and mutual 
C °, nC nC iuding r ^^ lt to stl 'ike. It shall also guarantee job 
31 5 *tv i ust anC * h umane conc htions of work and participation in 
SeC ] U decision-making affecting their rights and benefits. 

Th °State shall promote voluntary modes of settling disputes 
b t een workers and employers and shall regulate their relations 
in a manner that recognize the primacy of the right of labor to its 
• a share and at the same time protecting the right of capital to 
realize its growth potential and reasonable returns on invest- 
ments. 


AGRAR iaN AND Natij RAL resource reform 

SFC. 5 - ^ tate S ) 13 ^ Ur >dertake a genuine agrarian reform 
nroeram f° untiecl 011 t lL P lirn acy 0 f the rights of farmers and 
farmworkers to own jrect Y or collectively the lands they till. 

To this end’ the a s ia encourage and undertake the just 
distribution of all agncultural lands, subject to such retention 


SEC. 6. The State shall recognize the right of farmers and 
farmworkers, and of cooperatives to participate in the planning, 
organizing, and management of the program and shall provide 
support to agriculture through appropriate technology, and 
adequate financial, production and marketing assistance. 

SEC. 7. The State shall apply the principles of agrarian reform 
in the disposition of other natural resources, including lands of 
the public domain under lease or concession, subject to prior 
rights of original inhabitants and without violating the homestead 
rights of small settlers and the rights of indigenous communities 
to their ancestral lands. 

AQUATIC RESOURCES REFORM 

SEC. 8. The State shall protect the rights of fishermen and 
local communities to the beneficial or communal use of marine 
and fishing resources, both inland and offshore, and shall provide 
appropriate financial, technical and research assistance for the 
development and conservation of such resources. 

SEC. 9. The State shall promote the integrated development of 
agricultural, fishing and marine resources to meet the basic needs 
of the people and the industrialization objective of the country. 

URBAN LAND REFORM AND HOUSING 

SEC. 10. The State shall regulate the ownership and use of 
urban land for the common good and undertake a continuing 
Urban Land Reform and Housing program that will ensure decent 
housing at affordable cost to deserving low-income citizens in 
urban centers and resettlement areas, together with comple- 
mentary infrastructure, neighborhood services and employment- 
generating economic activities. 

SEC. 11. Urban poor dwellers shall not be evicted nor their 
dwellings demolished without due process of law. No resettle- 
ment shall take place without consultation with the communities 
to be relocated and their involvement in its planning and imple- 
mentation. 

SEC. 12. The housing program shall extend to low-income 
rural dwellers in the context of a comprehensive agrarian reform 
and development program. 


health 

SEC. 13. The State shall protect and promote the people’s 
right to health and to this end, establish and maintain an inte- 
grated and comprehensive health care program that shall make 
e ^ eil j* a | 8 00 ^ s an d social services available to all citizens at 
a oi a c cost, with priority for the needs of the disadvantaged, 
the sick, women and children, aged and disabled. 

SEC. 14. The State shall maintain an effective food and drug 
monitoring system and promote appropriate health manpower 
development and research on health care problems. 


606 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


SEC. 15. The State shall establish a special body for dis- 
abled persons which shall consolidate the functions of existing 
government agencies and provide for the rehabilitation, self- 
development and self-reliance of the disabled towards their total 
integration to the mainstream of society. 

WOMEN 

SEC. 16. The State shall afford protection to working women 
by providing for optimum working conditions especially in 
relation to their maternal functions. It shall ensure equal work 
opportunities and equality in employment and compensation. 

SEC. 17. The State shall develop facilities and services that 
will promote the welfare and well-being of women to realize their 
capabilities for maximum participation in the service of the 
country. 

INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES 

SEC. 18. The State shall undertake, foster and protect the 
development of the education, culture, communications, health 
and the economy of indigenous communities, in consideration 
of their cherished traditions, values, beliefs and practices. 

ROLE AND RIGHTS OF PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATION 

SEC. 19. In the pursuit of the ends of Social Justice, the State 
shall respect the independence and the role of people’s organiza- 
tions as a principal means of empowering the people to pursue 
and protect their legitimate and collective interests and aspira- 
tions. 

SEC. 20. The State shall respect the basic right of people and 
their organizations to free, direct and responsible participation at 
all levels of social, political and economic decision-making, ensur- 
ing that proper and adequate consultation mechanisms shall be 
instituted in the formulation and implementation of local, 
regional and national priorities, plans, programs and projects that 
affect the people’s lives. 


MR. RAMA. I ask, Madam President, that the Chair- 
man of the Committee on Social Justice be recognized 
to make her sponsorship speech. 

THE PRESIDENT. The honorable Chairman of the 
Committee on Social Justice, Commissioner Nieva, is 
recognized. 

We request the members of the Committee to please 
occupy the front table. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER NIEVA 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, our Committee on 
Social Justice is now presenting Committee Report 
No. 34 which is contained in Proposed Resolution 
No. 534, to wit: RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN 
THE NEW CONSTITUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE. 


Our Committee hopes that social justice will be the 
centerpiece of the 1986 Constitution. The rationale for 
this is that social justice provides the material and social 
infrastructure for the realization of basic human rights, 
the enhancement of human dignity and effective parti- 
cipation in democratic processes. Rights, dignity and 
participation remain illusory without social justice. 

Our February 1986 Revolution was not merely 
against the dictatorship nor was it merely a fight for the 
restoration of human rights; rather, this popular revolu- 
tion was also a clamor for a more equitable share 
of the nation’s resources and power, a clamor which 
reverberated in the many public hearings which this 
Constitutional Commission conducted throughout the 
country. 

If our 1986 Constitution would enshrine the people’s 
aspirations as dramatically expressed in the revolution 
and ensure the stability, peace and progress of our 
nation, it must provide for social justice in a stronger 
and more comprehensive manner than did the previous 
Constitutions. 

Social justice, in its substance and as a reflection of 
the needs of Philippine society, must include the follow- 
ing: provision for basic needs, equalization of access to 
productive resources and promotion of people’s organi- 
zations. In a nation where more than half of the people 
are below the poverty line, the first target of a social 
justice measure should, therefore, be provisions, direct 
and indirect, for adequate responses to these basic needs 
such as health, shelter and education. It is not the 
intent, however, that the State will take away the initia- 
tive from the people and will do everything. This is 
against the principle of enhancing human dignity. The 
State should only provide, in most cases, the necessary 
and sufficient condition for the people to take the 
active role. And one such important condition is the 
democratization of productive resources. In a very real 
way, inequality in the sharing of the fruits of develop- 
ment can be traced to the concentration of productive 
resources in the hands of a very small minority, and this 
is especially true of land and capital resources. There- 
fore, access to these resources must be democratized if 
the nation is to permanently achieve social justice. Here, 
the State must go beyond merely affirming the social 
character of property or the concept of stewardship for 
the common good. It must also promote measures to 
realize this democratization; and models and experiences 
also of other countries abroad in land reform, coopera- 
tives, profit sharing and workers’ participation in 
industry are not lacking. 

The successful implementation of all these programs 
would, however, require the active participation of 
people’s organizations in all levels and it is through these 
people’s organizations that the creativity and initiative 
of the people are harnessed and which embody and 
activate grassroots democracy. It is, therefore, proposed 
that the State promote the formation of various forms 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


607 


of people’s organizations as effective vehicles for grass- 
roots democracy and the promotion of social justice. 

Our Article consists of the following major areas of 
concern: the social justice concept, labor, agrarian and 
natural resources reform, urban land reform, housing, 
health, indigenous communities and the role and rights 
of people’s organizations. 

In Sections 1 and 2, the provisions mandate the State 
to give social justice the highest priority to promote 
equality in the social, economic and political life of the 
nation through the redistribution of our resources, 
wealth and power for the greater good. 

Sections 3 and 4 deal with labor. Here, it expands the 
scope of State protection for the close to 21 million 
labor force in the country by including not only 
domestic but also overseas workers estimated at no less 
than half-a-million and it also takes cognizance of the 
vast majority of workers who are not organized. The 
percentage of unionized workers is estimated at about 
5 1 percent only of the total labor force, while the vast 
majority in the public sector, in small businesses, agri- 
culture and self-employed workers do not enjoy the 
rights of organized labor. 

We have also added a new concept in Section 4, not 
only of collective bargaining but also collective negotia- 
tions which would extend the right to bargain for the 
protection of the rights of the unorganized sector and 
the rights to strike and the promotion of voluntary 
modes of settling disputes between the workers and em- 
ployers. This addition was made in view of the mani- 
festations of both labor and management that they 
would not want compulsory arbitration as provided for 
in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. 

Another important aspect here is the statement that 
recognizes the primacy of the right of labor to its just 
share and at the same time in protecting the right of 
business enterprises to realize reasonable returns on 

investments. 

On the area of agrarian and natural resources reform, 
Section 5 stresses the social justice principle that to him 
w ho tills the soil principally belongs the fruits of his 
labor. Therefore, Section 5 mandates that farmers and 
farm workers have the right to own the lands they till, 
individually or collectively, through cooperatives and 
similar organizations. 

The scope of land reform is also extended to all 
agricultural lands, subject to maximum retention limits 
to be provided by Congress and a fair and progressive 
system of compensation. 

Section 7 underscores the importance of cooperatives 
and similar farmers organizations, as well as adequate 
support systems in technology, financing and marketing 
as. imperative requirements for a successful land reform 
program. In Section 7, we specify that agrarian reform 
should apply also to other natural resources; for 
example, lands of public domain under lease or con- 


cession. However, the prior rights of the original inha- 
bitants. small settlers and cultural communities should 
be respected. 

Section 8 provides for the very first time a specific 
reference to the rights of small fishermen who number 
about 700.000 so that they may be given the beneficial 
use, direct or communal, of marine and fishing re- 
sources, as well as assistance — financial, technical and 
research — for the development and conservation of 
these resources. We feel that this is a very important 
provision in view of the fact that the sea area is six times 
bigger than the land area in our country. 

On urban land reform and housing, which is contained 
in Sections 1 0 and 11, we feel that the Committee 
addresses the urgency for an effective and continuing 
urban land reform and housing program for the more 
than 25 million Filipinos who do not enjoy the ad- 
vantages of home and landownership. We are an ill- 
housed nation with a high percentage of our urban 
population estimated at five million squatters living in 
subhuman conditions. This concern was the target of 
the 1984 plebiscite and is now provided for in Article 
XIV, Section 12 of the 1973 Constitution. However, 
efforts in implementing this program have been far from 
satisfactory. An example of this are the BLISS programs 
which are certainly not within the reach of the poor 
majority. 

This section also provides that the housing program 
should necessarily provide for complementary infra- 
structure, neighborhood services and opportunities for 
employment, because the Philippine experience in the 
resettlement areas for squatter families has shown that 
unless the above-mentioned conditions are present, the 
“relocatees” are forced to leave these areas and come 
back to the cities where at least they have some live- 
lihood opportunities. 

Then, Section 1 1 would place in the Constitution 
protection for the thousands of homeless urban poor 
who have to be evicted or resettled. And we provide 
here that this cannot be done unless the targets or the 
beneficiaries should be consulted and given a share in 
the decision-making as regards the protests against 
relocation and the implementation of this. 

In Section 12, we would also extend the housing 
program to low-income rural dwellers within the 
context of the comprehensive agrarian reform program. 

Sections 13, 14 and 15 are based on what we all 
realize is the principle that a healthy nation is a strong 
nation. In previous Constitutions, there had only been a 
passing mention of the important sector of health. And 
here we hope to provide for an integrated and compre- 
hensive health care program at an affordable cost to the 
average citizen, especially to the majority of the disad- 
vantaged. As we know, many here in the Philippi nes 
would say that it is cheaper to die than to go tor 
medication. 


608 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


Also, in Section 14, the State shall maintain an 
effective food and drug monitoring system. The 
problem of the dumping of harmful and adulterated 
food and drugs in the country from foreign countries 
has been a very significant problem that has to be 
addressed through this provision. 

In Section 15, we take cognizance of the need of the 
millions of disabled persons so that they may be in- 
tegrated into the mainstream of society. 

Sections 16 and 17 are the sections for women, and 
here, we especially recognized the need for protection 
for the working women vis-a-vis their maternal function 
for optimum working conditions, and also a provision 
that would provide for women to fully realize their 
capabilities in the service of the country. 

Section 18 deals with the indigenous communities. 
We say that the State should take into serious considera- 
tion the needs of the indigenous communities consistent 
with their cherished traditions, values, beliefs and 
practices. 

And, finally, in the last Sections 19 and 20, we 
highlight the importance of people’s organizations in 
order to realize the above objectives of social justice. All 
throughout the Constitution we have stressed the 
importance of people’s participation. Here we highlight 
this and say that we hope that the State should not only 
respect the rights of the people and their organizations 
but that it should institutionalize this participation and 
consultation mechanisms at all levels of social, political 
and economic decision-making. By people’s organiza- 
tions, of course, we are referring to all sectoral organiza- 
tions. trade unions, peasant organizations, urban poor, 
cooperatives and consumer organizations, human rights 
groups, basic Christian communities and the like. 

May we suggest, Madam President, that in the period 
ot amendments, we should take the different sections 
one by one so that we need not tackle the different areas 
simultaneously. Perhaps, this will expedite the discus- 
sions and the amendments thereto. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I already told the 
interpellators about the desire of the Committee to take 
the provisions one by one in chronological order. 


™ E PRESIDENT. And the interpellators will plea 
register with the Floor Leader. 


MR. RAMA. Yes. But some of them have replied that 
the provisions are very important; some of them very 
novel. They would be allowed to ask questions on one 
provision to another for purposes only of the interpella- 
tions. But during the period of amendments, we will 
follow the stiict rule of introducing amendments section 
by section in chronological order. 

So, may I ask that Commissioner Nolledo be recog- 
nized, please? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to pose some questions to the honorable 
Chairman and the members of the Committee on Social 
Justice. With respect to Section 2, page 1 , after provid- 
ing for the concept of social justice, it is provided that: 

Towards these ends, the State shall regulate the acquisi- 
tion, ownership, use and disposition of property and its 
fruits, promote the establishment of independent and self- 
reliant, socio-political and economic structures determined 
by the people themselves. 

I notice that if we analyze this provision, there are 
two parts involved. The first part is about diffusion of 
property; and the second part refers to supporting struc- 
tures. I also notice that, as I heard the honorable Chair- 
man explain the provisions, the report does not cover 
only the concept of property and its supporting struc- 
tures. But the report touches upon the rights of women 
and the disabled, including the rights of the people to 
organize. 

So, if the Committee will agree, I recommend that 
Section 2 should reflect not only property and support- 
ing structures but provisions pertinent to women’s 
rights, the disabled, etc., for purposes of symmetry. 
What does the Committee say about this? 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the response from 
any member of the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, because after giving the general 
concept of social justice, the report says: “Towards 
these ends. It seems that the words following the 
phrase ‘Towards these ends” do not reflect the entire 
report. It speaks of property and supporting services 
only. So, if the Committee is amenable, I recommend 
that there should be some wordings indicative of the 
recognition of women’s rights, rights of the disabled 
designed to give importance to human dignity. We will 
present the amendment later on. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes. I think that is implied also on 
lines 9, 10 and 1 1 on the reduction of social, economic 
and political inequities. More or less, the women’s rights 
would be covered in the economic and social inequities. 
That is a very good observation and I think we can 
tackle that suggestion in the period of amendments. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

^ n . 2, Section 4, with respect to the words 

participation in policy and decision-making” on line 1 5 
and the words “just share” on the part of labor and 
ending on “investments” on line 22, am I correct in 
including, taking all these words together, that the 
Committee is recommending “profit sharing” and that 
the workers be represented in management? 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


609 


MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So. there are two aspects that are 
involved. The workers should also participate in manage- 
ment. 

MS. NIEVA. That is right. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Perhaps, they should have rep- 
resentation in the board of directors of a corporation. 
And profit-sharing is also recommended. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, but we are not mandating profit- 
sharing as such. We are recognizing the importance of 
profit-sharing. 

MR. NOLLEDO. What does the sponsor mean by not 
mandating because on line 12, it says: “shall regulate.” 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, but profit-sharing can be encour- 
aged in various ways. There have been contradictory 
reviews in this regard and even the Ministry of Labor did 
not recommend a mandatory profit-sharing scheme, but 
various schemes that would result in the same benefits 
for labor. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And, therefore, it is reasonable to 
conclude that the provision on profit-sharing is not 
self-executory. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. There must be an implementing 
statute should Congress decide to adopt profit-sharing, 
am I right? 

MS. NIEVA. That is the way I see it. Maybe Com- 
missioner Aquino, who is the Chairperson of the Sub- 
committee on Labor, might want to add something to 
that. 

MS. AQUINO. The committee report does not 
provide for mandatory profit-sharing. It is very clear 
from the tenor of the presentation that at best we are 
providing for a mandate on equitable sharing of fruits, 
without specifically saying that the scheme of profit- 
sharing is self-implementing. We considered here the 
position of the Ministry of Labor when they did not 
specifically advocate for a specific mandate on profit- 
sharing. But Section 4 is best understood as the major 
centerpiece of social justice while Section 2 essen- 
tially recognizes the social function of the means of 
production, and that would include labor and capital. 

MR- NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Commissioner Nolledo is correct, it is 
not self-executory as it is formulated here. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just suggest 
that when we read the entire section, we should high- 
light the fact that when we talk of the phrase “participa- 
tion in policy and decision-making” on lines 8 and 9 on 
page 2, it is qualified by the phrase “affecting their 
rights and benefits.” Secondly, on line 17, the whole 
idea is the promotion of voluntary modes of settling 
disputes and at the same time the role of the State in en- 
forcing mutual compliance thereto. With respect to 
profit-sharing, I think the operative words are “to its 
just share” and we read that in connection with the 
voluntary modes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank Commissioner Monsod for 
his answer. I notice that the report dispensed with 
“compulsory arbitration.” May we know from the Com- 
mittee the reason for dispensing with the provision 
found in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions which runs 
like this: “That the State may provide for compulsory 
arbitration.” There is no provision on compulsory 
arbitration in the report. 

MS. NIEVA. One thing that was very clear in all the 
public hearings that we held with the different labor 
groups, as well as the management group, is that both 
partners were very firm in ruling out “compulsory 
arbitration.” They felt that the two partners should be 
left free without government interference in deciding 
their labor disputes. 

MR. MONSOD. Perhaps the intent of the Committee 
is to emphasize the primacy of voluntary modes. That is 
the reason for that, but nothing in this Article precludes 
it because there may be sections in various laws where 
that is provided for. We just do not want to show in this 
section that that is the way it should be settled as a 
primary way of settling disputes because that was the 
wish of both management and labor. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In the event that the methods of 
voluntary arbitrations prove ineffective and neither 
party wants to give way, thus resulting in a stalemate, 
what is then the consensus of the Committee on what 
will be the piocedure if there is no compulsory arbitra- 
tion and the parties could not agree? Will the strike 
continue? Suppose there are many strikes in different 
paits ol the country, may not national chaos or con- 
fusion exist should the methods of voluntary arbitration 
do not prove successful? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, there are certain 
steps there and, ot course, it ends with the right to 
strike by the labor group. We are saying here that this 
function ot the State in regulating the relations between 
labor and management is not absent. The State is always 
there. But we are saying that settlement of disputes 
should be made to the extent possible and to all the 
rights available to labor and management, therefore, if 
should be through voluntary means and the rights avail- 
able to labor should be given, such as the right to strike. 


610 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. And do I understand it correctly 
that the provision does not prevent the legislature from 
providing for a process known as compulsory arbitra- 
tion? Am I correct? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. May I specify the procedures in 
labor and management negotiations. First, the primary 
focus of settling labor and management conflict is 
through the voluntary modes of settling disputes. We 
first avail of the grievance procedures that are usually 
provided in the collective bargaining agreement. In 
the absence of a CBA. they are usually provided in the 
internal rules and regulations of the company. Then 
we avail of the conciliation proceedings, which is part 
and parcel of the voluntary modes of settling disputes 
usually under the guidance of the Ministry of Labor. 

In the 1973 Constitution, there is a specific proviso 
for compulsory arbitration. As has been previously cited 
by the Committee Chairman, there is an overwhelming 
reaction against a specific mandate for compulsory 
arbitration. Even the management sector is very re- 
luctant in reinstating the same formula in this Constitu- 
tion, such that when we attempted to incorporate in the 
committee report the phrase “promote voluntary modes 
of settling disputes,” the idea is to focus primarily on 
the voluntary modes of settling disputes rather than 
to preempt the procedures of settling management and 
labor conflict through compulsory arbitration. We very 
well know that the effect of compulsory arbitration is 
that any labor-management conflict is immediately 
certified by the National Labor Relations Commission, 
and that if there is an impending strike, automatically’ 
by compulsory mandate of the law and upon certifica- 
tion, the strike would have to be lifted. Both labor and 
management are in confluence in terms of their position 
that all disputes should first be approached by exhaust- 
ing voluntary modes. This does not preclude, however. 
Congress from providing for statutory implementation 
of other modes of settling disputes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

With respect to Section 5, line 20, the terms “farm- 
ers and farm workers” were used. Does the sponsor 
understand that the term “farmers” includes tenants, 
whether on leasehold or sharehold? Am I correct? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And that the word “farmworkers” 
refers to employed farmers in a plantation by adminis- ■ 
tration? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And when we talk of the phrase “to 
own directly, we mean the principle of direct owner- 
ship by the tiller? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 


MR. NOLLEDO. And when we talk of “collectively,” 
we mean communal ownership, stewardship or State 
ownership? 

MS. NIEVA. In this section, we conceive of coopera- 
tives; that is, farmers’ cooperatives owning the land, not 
the State. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And when we talk of “collectively,” 
referring to farmers’ cooperatives, do the farmers own 
specific areas of land where they only unite in their 
efforts? 

MS. NIEVA. That is one way. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Because I understand that there are 
two basic systems involved: the “moshave” type of 
agriculture and the “kibbutz.” So, are botn contem- 
plated in the report? 

MR. TADEO. Ang dalawa kasing pamamaraan ng 
pagpapatupad ng tunay na reporma sa lupa ay ang pag- 
mamay-ari ng lupa na hahatiin natin sa individual na 
pagmamay-ari — directly — at ang tinatawag na sama- 
samang gagawin ng mga magbubukid. Tulad sa Negros, 
ang gusto ng mga magbubukid ay gawin nila itong 
“cooperative or collective farm.” Ang ibig sabihin ay 
sama-sama nilang sasakahin. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, nais ko lang 
dagdagan iyong sagot ni Ginoong Tadeo. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Kasi, doon sa “collective owner- 
ship,” kasali din iyong “communal ownership” ng mga 
minorya. Halimbawa sa Tanay, noong gumawa kami ng 
isang pananaliksik doon, nagtaka sila kung bakit kaila- 
ngan pang magkaroon ng “land reform” na kung saan ay 
bibigyan sila ng tig-iisang titulo. At sila nga ay nagpunta 
sa Ministry of Agrarian Reform at sinabi nila na hindi 
ito ang gusto nila; kasi sila naman ay magkakamag-anak. 
Ang gusto nila ay lupa at hindi na kailangan ang tig- 
iisang titulo. Maraming ganitong kaso mula sa Cor- 
dillera hanggang Zambales, Mindoro at Mindanao, kayat 
kasali ito sa ko^septo ng “collective ownership.” 

Marami pong salamat. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I continue my questions, 
Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you very much. 

On line 22 of Section 5, with respect to the words 
‘‘just distribution of all agricultural lands,” am I right 
in saying that “agricultural lands” refers only to private- 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


611 


ly owned lands, because retention limits and payment 
of compensation are mentioned? 

MR. TADEO. Ang ibig sabihin nito ay all arable 
public and private lands sapagkat sa Section 7, makikita 
natin dito ang “principles of agrarian reform in the 
disposition of other natural resources, including lands of 
public domain.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is the reason I ask about that. I 
presume that Section 7 covers lands of the public 
domain and that Section 5, lines 22 and 23, should 
necessarily refer only to private lands. I am calling the 
attention of the Committee to some conflicts because 
one does not talk of retention limits or the system of 
compensation with respect to lands covered by the 
public domain. 

So, I ask that the Committee reconcile the two provi- 
sions when the appropriate time comes, because the 
term “all” is used and then two instances were men- 
tioned that will qualify the term “all agricultural lands.” 
Tli at will indicate that all agricultural lands contem- 
plated in Section 5 should refer only to privately owned 
lands. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, Section 7 
would include public agricultural lands. So, the reason 
we mentioned retention limits, as the Gentleman cor- 
rectly pointed out in Section 5, is that this would apply 
to privately owned lands. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

What has the Committee done about the small land- 
holders? Small landholders, as defined by the Supreme 
Court, refer to those who own 24 hectares or less, 
because the Supreme Court itself, in the case of Nilo vs. 
Court of Appeals, decided in 1984 that small land- 
holders consist of the retirees, the public school teach- 
ers, etc., who acquired lands out of their small savings 
because they wanted to be farmers during the period of 
retirement. 

Does the Committee agree with me that these small 
landholders should be given adequate protection and 
that their landholdings should not be subject to expro- 
priation in order to give the same to the others and thus 
create a new group of impoverished people? 

MS. NIEVA. That is why we have provided here on 
line 23, “subject to such retention limits as Congress 
may prescribe.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, if the members of 
the Committee will not mind, when we consulted with 
the farmers in Naga City, who were well experienced 
and very knowledgeable, they told us that it is not the 
area of the land that should count but its productive 
state. It seems to me that land reform experts keep on 
saying that the land area is material and pertinent and 


should be given primary consideration. Does the Com- 
mittee agree with me then that it is the productive state 
of the land that should prevail? Because it may happen 
that one owns 24 hectares but the production will be 
much lesser compared to two hectares owned by a 
farmer, because the 24 hectares, no matter how much 
fertilizer one may use, will not yield what the two 
hectares may yield. Am I correct? Does Commissioner 
Tadeo agree with me? 

MR. TADEO. Iyong tanong ni Ginoong Nolledo 
kangina tungkol sa “retention limits” na nasa line 23 ay 
patungkol sa owner-cultivator. Magkakaroon ng limit 
ang mga may-ari ng lupa na sila na rin ang nagbubungkal 
nito. The phrase “retention limits” refers to owner- 
cultivator. Agricultural lands refer to all arable public 
and private lands regardless of crop, size of landholding 
and tenurial arrangement. Ayon sa karanasan ng mag- 
bubukid, ang pangunahing batayan ng pagpapaunlad ng 
kanilang kabuhayan at kapakanan ay ang pagmamay- 
ari ng lupa. Naniniwala silang sa pamamagitan ng pagma- 
may-ari ng lupa, magkakaroon sila ng labis na kapital. 
Ang kapital na hinahanap natin sa labas ng bansa ay 
natutulog lamang sa lupa. Ito ang natutulog na surplus 
kapital na kung magagamit ay mapauunlad ng magbu- 
bukid ang kanilang kabuhayan. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Salamat po sa inyong paliwanag. 

Commissioner Monsod would like to speak. 

MR. MONSOD. Other considerations when we talk 
about retention limits to be determined by Congress 
would be economic size and local conditions. As the 
Commissioner said, there may be some areas where the 
economic size will differ because of local conditions. 
These are some of the considerations that will be taken 
into account by Congress. We just do not want to 
provide the details because that is not our work. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With the kind indulgence of my 
colleagues in the Commission, I still have two or three 
questions. With respect to Section 6, lines 27 and 28, 
with emphasis on the words “planning, organizing, 
and management of the program,” I would like to 
underscore the word “management.” This particular 
section also covers cooperatives and farm workers. 
Would the Commissioner agree with me if I conclude 
that it is perhaps the intent of the Committee that farm 
workers will also participate in the management of the 
farm in some way? 

MR. TADEO. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So the farm workers who are plain 
laborers can participate in the management of the farm 
where they work as employees, not as tenants. 

MR. TADEO. As regular farm workers or even non- 
regular farm workers. 


612 


SATURDAY, AUGUST'2, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. Farm workers in the contemplation 
of the Code of Agrarian Reforms, refer to farm laborers 
without tenancy relationship. 

MR. TADEO. Oo, iyan ang ibig sabihin ng farm 
workers. Dapat umiral din sa farm workers ang prin- 
ciples of agrarian reforms, hindi lamang sa tillers of the 
soil with tenancy relationship. Sinasabi nating talagang 
kasama ang mga farmers at farm workers. Ginamit natin 
itong “farmworkers” sa kadahilanang itong mga mang- 
gagawa natin sa mga babuyan at manukan ay agricul- 
tural workers din. 

MR. NOLLEDO. What is the concept of the Commit- 
tee about agro-industrial farms owned by corporations? 
To what extent may they own landholdings? I did not 
find any provision in the report about these entities that 
may be owned by Filipinos or perhaps partly by aliens. 

MS. NIEVA. I think that would pertain more to the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony. 


paign for funds to save the lives of poor people who are 
sick. 

I would like to say in advance to the Committee that 
this Member would present an amendment to the effect 
that the State shall provide free medical care to paupers. 
Paupers are those who have no source of livelihood or if 
they have some source of livelihood, they do not earn 
enough to maintain their family even in a hand-to- 
mouth existence. I will not accept as a reason that the 
State cannot afford. If there is a will, there is always a 
way. I think it is the duty of the State to see to it that 
no Filipino shall die because of lack of medical care. 
Does the Commissioner agree with me? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. I think we will welcome that 
amendment at the proper time. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. The next interpolator is Commissioner 
Guingona. 


MR. TADEO. Kay Commissioner Nolledo, ayon kay 
Dr. Mahar Mangahas, nang imbitahin namin siya sa isang 
public hearing, ang kanyang definition ng “land” ay ito: 
In principle, the term land” should include all forms of 
natural resources including mineral, forest and water 
resources, whether public or private, whether titled or 
untitled, or whether presently controlled by Filipinos or 
non-Filipinos over which there is social conflict induced 
by an unjust distribution. Kasama po iyan. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Salamat po. 

MR. MONSOD. May I just clarify one more point? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


MR. MONSOD. When the Commissioner asked aboi 
^ ra u S& planmn g> organizing, and management,” 1 
should have noticed that the phrase that follows is “< 
the program which refers to the agrarian reform ar 
natural resources program. Perhaps, he should di 
tinguish that from participating in the management < 
companies engaged in agriculture. This section does nc 
refer to that. However, those who work in those comp; 
mes would be covered by the provisions on labor whei 
we are talking about their participation in policy-makin 
and decision-making affecting their rights and benefit; 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

My last question is on page 4, Section 13, line 9 We 
talk of social services available to all citizens at afforda- 
ble cost. That means they have to pay. What is afforda- 
ble to the middle-class may be different from what is 
affordable to families belonging to the upper class. 

I am concerned that paupers die because of lack of 
medical care. We often notice that newspapers cam- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, this is just for 
clarification regarding Section 3, line 1 on page 2. When 
we talk of the phrase “promote full employment,” do I 
understand that the Commissioner also includes in this 
concept or perception the free choice of employment? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. GUINGONA. Would this free choice of employ- 
ment be without prejudice to known union security 
measures, such as the close-shop agreement? Would it 
affect these? 


MS. NIEVA. I am not very clear about what the 
Commissioner is asking. 


MR. MONSOD. Perhaps, the Commissioner is refer- 
ling to Section 4 because I think “full employment” on 
Section 3 is a macroeconomic approach saying that the 
State should pursue policies that will increase the 
number of employment opportunities and will try to 
promote full employment in that sense. 

When the Commissioner is talking about specific 
labor-management relations at the firm level, he is 
referring to Section 4. Maybe Commissioner Aquino can 
amplify this matter. 

MR. GUINGONA. Is the Commissioner saying that 
it will not affect those security agreements? 

MS. AQUINO. The only concern of the provision on 
full employment is to address the two problems of 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


613 


employment — unemployment and underemployment. 
It does not have any effect on the union-shop or the 
close-shop agreements in the security of employees. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

Secondly, after having gone through the work that we 
have been doing since June 2, and when I say “we,” I 
refer not only to the honorable Commissioners but to 
the members of our Secretariat, 1 fully appreciate a right 
which is contained in this Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights to which our country is a signatory and 
which has been ratified by us — the right to rest and 
leisure. I wonder whether this could be included in the 
Article on Social Justice since this is provided under 
Article 24 of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, which says: 

Everyone lias the right to rest and leisure, including 

reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic 

holidays with pay. 

MS. NIEVA. We shall be amenable to any suggestions 
or amendments at the proper time. 

MR. GUINGONA. When we talk of social justice, one 
usually connects it with social security. I wonder what 
would be the reaction of the honorable members of the 
Committee if later on I propose an amendment to the 
effect that the State shall aim to maintain a com- 
prehensive system of social insurance for the protection 
of every person from the economic consequences of 
unemployment, old age, sickness, disability, widowhood, 
and other such circumstances. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. As we said, we would gladly enter- 
tain any suggestion. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

The last point, Madam President, is about housing. I 
think all of us are convinced about the importance of 
housing and I see that the Committee has provided for 
this concern in this Article on Social Justice. But as 
indicated by the honorable Chairman, the provision here 
is more of a declaration of principle which would not be 
self-executory. 

Commissioner Villegas and I submitted a proposed 
resolution which will provide for a special provident 
fund to be used exclusively to provide homes for the 
homeless poor at subsidized costs. This we gathered 
from the concept of a BAYANIKASAN which was 
espoused by the late Dr. Salvador Araneta. Apparently, 
the Committee did not accept the basis of securing the 
necessary funds. I wonder whether the Committee could 
perhaps study the possibility of finding a source for this 
special provident fund because although, as former 
Senator Rodrigo has said, we should make our Consti- 
tution brief and concise, we should also be aware that 
all these declarations in the Constitution would be 


meaningless unless they are realized. And as former 
Senator Manglapus said: 

If you need to give details in order to give meaning to 
a provision in the Constitution, then there is nothing 
wrong with giving or spelling out details. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. We appreciate the concern of the 
Commissioner. But this Committee has actually become 
the forum already of a lot of specific grievances and 
specific demands, such that, understandably, we may 
have been, at one time or another, dangerously treading 
into the functions of legislation. Our only plea to the 
Commission is to focus our perspective on the matter of 
social justice and its rightful place in the Constitution. 
What we envision here is a mandate specific enough 
that would give impetus for statutory implementation. 
We would caution ourselves in terms of the judicious 
exercise of self-censorship against treading into the 
functions of legislation. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Foz be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

This is in connection with Section 4 on the rights 
of workers. Before asking the questions, I just would 
like to state that there are at least three other provisions 
which we have approved in various parts of our New 
Constitution which are relevant to this. The first one is 
the provision on the civil service which provides that the 
civil service embraces all instrumentalities, agencies and 
branches of the government, including government- 
owned or controlled corporations with original charters. 
The second provision is also found in the same sub- 
article on the civil service. This provision reads: 

Notwithstanding any provision in this article of the 
Constitution, the right to self-organization shall not be 
denied to government employees. 

Finally, the third relevant provision is the one found 
under the Bill of Rights which provides: 

The right of the people, whether in the private or public 
sector, to form unions shall not be abridged. 

In the case of the first provision on civil service, I 
have always maintained that this provision about the 
scope or extent of the term “civil service” does not 
nullify the Bill of Rights provision on the right to form 
unions, it merely defines the scope of the civil service; 
it does not grant any right, much less does it deprive any 
group of workers, whether in the government or in the 
private sector, of any right, particularly that ot self- 
organization and with its concerted activity. With regard 
to the second provision also on the civil service, I have 
said that it reinforces the workers’ right to organize and 
engage in concerted activities which must necessarily 


614 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1 986 


include the right to strike. About the third provision 
in the Bill of Rights, I have said that it embraces the 
right to engage in concerted activities. One of these 
concerted activities is to negotiate with the employer on 
terms and conditions of employment, and another con- 
certed activity is to declare a strike as an ultimate tool 
of labor in case of disengagement from negotiations 
with management. 

Section 4 in the proposed Article on Social Justice 
reads: 

The State shall guarantee the rights of workers to self- 
organization, collective bargaining and negotiations, peace- 
ful and concerted activities for their own protection, wel- 
fare and mutual aid, including the right to strike. 

The first question is: When we speak of workers, do we 
have in mind those in the private as well as in the public 
sectors? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we do. However, we have that 
reservation as regards the members of the Armed Forces 
and the civil defense. 

MR. FOZ. Madam Chairman, I was informed before 
that the original provision on this Article would make 
an exception with regard to members of the Armed 
Forces and members of the civil defense, referring to 
members of the police. 


discuss other exceptions. But from our point of view, it 
is also possible that we will arrive at a phrase saying “in 
accordance with law.” There are many ways to tackle 
that issue. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

I have another question. Section 4, line 4 says: 
“collective bargaining and negotiations.” What is the dif- 
ference between collective bargaining and negotiations? 
Do they not amount to the same thing? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. Collective negotiations are espe- 
cially intended for the great majority of workers who 
are not covered by CBAs. We feel that there are dif- 
ferent ways of negotiating for the protection of their 
rights. Generally, when we say collective bargaining, we 
refer to those that are unionized and covered by CBAs. 
As mentioned here, those constitute only about 3.1 
percent of the total labor force of the country, so we 
felt that there has to be worked out some other way of 
negotiating for the rights of these greater majority of 
people who are not covered by CBAs. 

MR. FOZ. In other words, in a private firm for 
instance, the employees may group among themselves 
or organize an association short of calling their associa- 
tion a labor union? 


MS AQUINO. The Committee is sharply divided 
on this matter. In fact, the subcommittee report 
earned a specific proviso which would exempt members 
of the Armed Forces, members of the civil service and 
the civil defense from availing of the right to strike But 
in view of the very strong divergence of opinions within 
the Committee, I think there was a consensus to just 
reflect it for purposes of the committee report and 
throw it to the body for deliberation. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, there are different ways. 

MR. FOZ. Then they can negotiate with management 
as to terms or conditions of employment. 

MS. NIEVA. That is right. 

MR. FOZ. Short of organizing themselves into a 
formal labor union or organization. 


MR. FOZ With that last response of Commission 
Aquino, is the Commissioner saying that the Committi 
has no precise intention as to the scope of this fir 
sentence under Section 4, whether this should apply 
both private and public employees? 


MR. MONSOD. What the Committee is saying is that 
it recognizes that there may be exceptions to this rule 
and we want to throw it to the body precisely to define 
it more clearly before it is finalized. 

MR. FOZ. The Committee has in mind members of 
the Armed Forces and members of the police force. 


MS. NIEVA. These may be preliminary steps that 
they may take. 


MR. FOZ. I recall a provision under our existing 
Labor Code precisely encouraging, without making it 
mandatory, the formation of what it calls “employees 
committees.” These are voluntary groups of employees 
to be set up within different companies. The only 
unfortunate thing about that provision is that it gives 
management the initiative to form such employees 
committees. But then, perhaps the law involving the 
matter could provide that the initiative should come 
from the employees themselves to avoid any manage- 
ment influence in the running of such committees. 


MR. MONSOD. As among the exceptions? 

MR. FOZ. What other exceptions could there be? 

MR. MONSOD. That is why we wanted to throw it to 
the floor for discussion in case the body may want to 


MS. NIEVA. That is right. This can be left again to 
the legislature to work out. 

MS. AQUINO. May I clarify the concept of collective 
negotiation. It is an innovative concept introduced to us 
by the Institute of Labor and Management Relations of 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


615 


UP. The specific concern of this concept is, first, to 
address the difficulties of the nonunionized employees 
and laborers and second, that of the government em- 
ployees. These two groups would suffer the same diffi- 
culty in not having a specific collective bargaining agent 
to represent them. So the process of collective negotia- 
tion is to offset that disadvantage already. The idea is 
to recognize it and provide a constitutional mandate for 
the process of collective negotiation. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

My next question is on page 2, line 8 of Section 4 
which states: “participation in policy and decision- 
making.” Does the Committee have in mind representa- 
tives of the employees being allowed to sit in the board 
of directors of the companies organized as corporations? 

MR. MONSOD. The Commissioner’s question has 
relation to the earlier question of Commissioner 
Nolledo. We suggest that the Commissioner read that, 
together with the following phrase: “affecting their 
rights and benefits.” The proper implementation of that 
provision would rest to a large degree on management 
and labor themselves because that is not something that 
can be mandated by the Constitution. In some cases, 
labor does not want to be in certain bodies of the 
management and the company for their own reasons; in 
others they do. So we are leaving a lot of room here for 
management and labor to discuss and agree on the areas 
on which the participation should be promoted. 

MR. FOZ. But may not Congress in implementing 
this provision provide that employees should be allowed 
to sit in the board of directors of a corporation to par- 
ticipate in the discussion of matters affecting their rights 
and benefits? 

MR. MONSOD. If the Commissioner is saying that 
they will be invited to participate in the discussion when 
it affects their rights and benefits, that probably is in 
order. I do not know whether the Commissioner means 
that they are the elected directors of the company but 
can only participate in areas affecting their rights and 
benefits. I do not think that the intent of this Commit- 
tee is to tell Congress to mandate that labor sit on the 
board. There is nothing in this provision that says that. 

MR. FOZ. But they may be allowed under such a law 
to sit in the board of directors if the matters on hand to 
be decided will affect their rights and benefits. 

MR. MONSOD. All these details could be a matter of 
legislation. 

MR. FOZ. That is right. 

My last question which is about compulsory arbitra- 
tion has been taken up by a previous Commissioner 
during the interpellations. I would just like to get it 


clarified again that we are not ruling out compulsory' 
arbitration in certain cases, so that the law to be passed 
by Congress providing for compulsory arbitration in 
certain serious cases may serve as an ultimate way of 
resolving industrial or labor disputes in case of failure of 
labor and capital to decide or to settle their own 
disputes. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you, Madam President 
and members of the Committee. 

First of all, may I make a few comments on the 
Committee provisions on social justice, which I see as a 
unifying theme for several articles. I agree with the 
Chairman of the Committee when she said that this is 
the centerpiece. I have difficulty in seeing this as a sepa- 
rate article unless it is of a general nature. I had hoped 
that some provisions on agrarian reform and on labor 
could be included in the Article on National Economy 
and Patrimony. In this way, we do not give the Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony the impression 
that it is dealing primarily with the formal economy but 
not with the subsistence sector which consists of the 
majority of our population. 

What I am saying is that the concept of non- 
monetized economy is perhaps an area that could be 
addressed by both the Articles on Social Justice and on 
National Economy and Patrimony. Likewise, I see the 
need, after reviewing about 25 constitutional provi- 
sions in different countries, for locating the concepts 
of social justice within a more comprehensive frame- 
work. It is one which views rural transformation and the 
delivery of services side by side with the transformation 
in attitudes and the transformation of some of the 
values and philosophies of development. I see that this 
Article is addressed to the need to move from a “zero- 
sum society where one sector wins and the other loses 
to a nonzero-sum society” which is a society of 
sharing. I, therefore, see the need for linkages with non- 
tormal education, attitudinal changes, a value placed on 
egalitarianism, and, further, a reorientation in the atti- 
tudes of workers so that they may become more 
productive and able to compete in the formal economy. 

Having said this, I see the need to harmonize the 
provisions with the Articles on Human Resources and 
on National Economy and Patrimony, hi Section 5, 
the provision on Agrarian Reform, I do not see the 
State’s concern for forging partnership with nongovern- 
ment and voluntary community-based institutions, 
think that those of us who have examined the history 


616 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


of land reform have seen successful examples of volunta- 
ry land sharing. The Negros example, for instance, has 
merit in terms of a model for future land reform. Let 
me cite a study of the Club of Rome which reviewed the 
impact of 20 years of rural development in all the Third 
World countries. They found that government-led 
development has led to more poverty and a greater 
widening of disparities. Therefore, I hope to see the 
promotion of partnership with nongovernment agencies 
which perhaps is what is meant by the provisions on 
people’s organizations except that it is not as explicit 
as I had hoped. 

In Section 9, page 3, there is a provision on the 
promotion of integrated development of agricultural 
fishing and marine resources. I think we have to go back 
to the experiences in the past 20 years of implementa- 
tion of large-scale integrated area development program 
of the government which failed to improve the lives of 
the marginalized groups. It failed to trickle down to 
the poorest of the poor. The concept of integrated 
development may not be perceived as a positive con- 
cept. There are also new modes of organizing develop- 
ment in the rural areas which are smaller scale integrated 
development projects built around the smaller commu- 
nities. We have nucleus states which are patterned after 
Malaysia, Kenya and Indonesia. We have communal 
farming. And I see that although this is the intent, 
perhaps there is a need to come up with more specific 
and alternative ways of organizing labor and rural insti- 
tutions. I say this because, as I have said, at least 25 
Constitutions have been more specific in presenting 
alternative models of development. Although there is 
one mention of cooperatives in this Article, I am quite 
disappointed that it has not been given more mention. 
In many countries, cooperative associations are given 
due importance as models of organizing social and eco- 
nomic institutions. If we review the experience in 
cooperatives, we find many successful programs in 
developing countries as well as in developed countries 
like the United States, England, Scandinavia, Japan and 
others. I think that we are perhaps still suffering from 
the negative history of cooperatives. Perhaps, it is 
because they have not been given their rightful place in 
terms of the appropriate legal mandate, as well as 
structures of government. 

I, therefore hope that since a provision in the De- 
claration of Principles supports cooperativism as a 
principle, t e Committee may see fit the need to include 
one on democratic cooperatives. The latter could serve 
as instruments in guiding the ownership, utilization and 
exploitation o natural resources, as well as in the opera- 
tion of public utilities. I hope that during the period of 
amendments, I would have a chance to suggest some 
amendments along my concern for the need to see 
social justice within a more comprehensive framework 
which is linked with attitudinal changes and a trans- 
formation of the development philosophy of society. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MS. NIEVA. I thank the Commissioner for those 
observations. I think Commissioner Bennagen would 
like to add his remarks. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. The observations of Commissioner 
Rosario Braid are well taken. As a matter of fact, we 
would like to emphasize that the Committee on Social 
Justice has had the greatest number of consultations with 
various sectors of our constituency and that we spent a 
great deal of time in trying to evolve a comprehensive 
framework which, unfortunately, could not be included 
in this report. At some point, we had with us several 
formulations: one including something like around 70 
provisions but we thought that that would just not do in 
a Constitution. What we did was to synthesize and 
digest these provisions, and this is the result. We wish to 
assure our fellow Commissioners that we spent a great 
deal of time, a great deal of debate in trying to come 
up with an Article that seeks to encompass the various 
philosophies that came out as a result of the debate but 
not to raise false hopes among our citizens. With an 
Article like this in the Philippine society, all would be 
well in the next decades or even in centuries. 

We did not fail to incorporate aspects of attitudinal 
change, as well as structural change, and these are fairly 
evi ent in the first two sections. As indicated in Sec- 
tion 1 , we did emphasize that social justice should be a 
social, economic, political and moral imperative. The 
moral component is important because we feel that a 
justice provision should be on the side of the poor, the 
disadvantaged, the so-called deprived and the oppressed. 

15 | s a P°i n t that has been raised a number of times 
especially by social scientists. Specifically, I would like 
to mention Dr. Mahar Mangahas who, in his extensive 
studies on social justice, feels that the State itself has 
been a major source of injustice and that, therefore, the 
State should be able to correct that and must assume a 
moral stance in relation to the poor, the deprived and 
the oppressed, a moral stance that we feel should also 
permeate the bureaucracy, the technocracy and eventu- 
ally, with the changes in structures, also the whole of 
our Philippine society. 

We are arguing therefore that our best efforts tried to 
encompass the results of the numerous consultations 
which in a sense could be captured in terms of the cry 
for the correction of centuries of social injustice. As to 
t le specific linkages between this Article and the others, 
we should be able to see those when all the other Ar- 
ticles shall have been seen in their interrelationship. 

With that general comment, I would like to go to 
Section 9, which is specifically referred to in relation to 
the duty of the State to promote integrated develop- 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


617 


merit of agricultural, fishing and marine resources. When 
we discussed these, we did not have in mind the ex- 
periences of integrated area development, a concept 
which is very good on paper but extremely bad in imple- 
mentation. Note also that we emphasized that this 
integrated development project should respond to the 
basic needs of the people. I think the integrated area 
development projects responded to the demand of the 
external market rather than to the needs of the people. 
We also said that the efforts of integrating the develop- 
ment processes in agriculture, in fishing and marine 
resources should also provide the basis for industrializ- 
ing the country. That was the intent of the provision 
and no reference was ever made to the integrated area 
development concept. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, this is just a small 
reference to what Commissioner Rosario Braid said. 
When we talk about voluntary distribution and coopera- 
tion between owners and farmers, I think that is the 
reason Section 5 says: “To this end, the State shall 
encourage and undertake.” It is because we feel that 
there are voluntary arrangements that are being made 
and should be respected and encouraged. 

MR. RAMA. I ask, Madam President, that Commis- 
sioner Regalado be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President. 

Before I pose some questions, I wish to assure the 
Committee that I am 101 percent in favor of the objec- 
tive of the social justice provisions because the touch- 
stone is - as attributed to the late President Magsaysay 
-“He who has less in life should be more favored in 
law.” This actually dates back to even the 17th century 
legal philosophers and writers who state that, in the 
exercise of proprietary rights, it should be bajo el 
principle) de que a los que la vida ha dado menos desele 
mas por la ley. 

I also take note of the observations of one of the 
Committee members that there was an attempt at self- 
censorship here in that they tried to condense so many 
provisions to make these appear as a sort of a declaration 
of principles, although this Committee has desired to be 
emancipated from the original Committee on Declara- 
tion of Principles and State Policies. 

I notice that the 1935 Constitution had only one 
section on social justice; the same is true with the 1973 
Constitution. But they seem to have stood us in good 
stead; and I am a little surprised why, despite that at- 
tempt at self-censorship, there are certain provisions 
here which are properly for legislation, which I will take 
up, of course, at the proper time. But many of these 


formulations here — forgive me for saying so, because of 
my benighted limitations on the concept — appear to be 
a little too technocratic for me, will the Commissioner 
please help me by clarifying some of these esoteric 
cogitations so I will know how I will vote when this is 
presented on the floor, instead of voting with a group as 
they vote, for the simple reason that I do not belong to 
any group in this Commission. 

First, Section 1, line 7, attempts a definition of what 
social justice is, when it says, “Social justice, as a social, 
economic, political, moral imperative . . .” If that was 
an attempt at a definition, I wonder why the Commit- 
tee did not look at, as part of the imperatives, the legal 
aspect. Because after all, regarding social justice — for 
those who are not lawyers, but every lawyer knows 
this — the classic definition given by Justice Laurel in 
the case of Calalang vs. Williams is: 

Social justice is neither atomism, nor communism, nor 
anarchy but the humanization of laws and the equalization 
of social and economic forces by the State, so that justice, 
in its rational and objectively secular conception may at 
least be approximated. 

I do not know why the Committee sort of overlooked 
the legal imperative for purposes of social justice. 
Perhaps there might be a reason. Then it also says that it 
“shall be the primary consideration in the pursuit of 
national development.” It seems to give the impression 
that all other considerations should take a back seat to 
the social justice aspect. 

Line 13 states: “the inalienable right to human 
dignity, and redistribute wealth and power. . .” I do not 
know whether the power referred to here is political 
power vis-a-vis Section 19, or some other kind of power. 

I suppose the Committee can help me along this line 
later. 

Line 16 states: “shall regulate the acquisition, owner- 
ship, use and disposition of property and its fruits.” We 
all know that the ownership of property has, among its 
attributes, the jus fruendi — the right to the fruits. Since 
it is specifically provided here, we could be misunder- 
stood; or is it correct, or was it intentional that this 
phrase thereby excluded the other attributes of owner- 
ship, like the jus possidendi — the right to possess; the 
jus disponendi — the right to dispose; the jus abutendi— 
the right to abuse; and the jus destruendi — the right 
to destroy? Here the Committee singled out the right 
to the fruits. I wonder why. Or should that have been 
already implied as part of all the attributes of ownership? 

The phrase “and promote the establishment of 
independent and self-reliant socio-political and econo- 
mic structures,” has for its antecedent “property.” 
Perhaps at a later time, the Committee could help me 
find my way into the maze of the statements as to what 
are the self-reliant, socio-political and economic struc- 
tures involved for purposes of these restrictions on 
property. 


618 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


On the other portion about the right to strike, I will 
leave that later to the Committee after the comments 
of Commissioner Foz. 

Line 19 refers to a genuine reform program founded 
on the primacy of the right of farmers and farm work- 
ers. I wonder if it means that leasehold tenancy is 
thereby proscribed under this provision because it 
speaks of the primary right of farmers and farm workers 
to own directly or collectively the lands they till. As 
also mentioned by Commissioner Tadeo, farm workers 
include those who work in piggeries and poultry 
projects. 

I was wondering whether I am wrong in my apprecia- 
tion that if somebody puts up a piggery or a poultry 
project and for that purpose hires farm workers therein, 
these farm workers will automatically have the right to 
own eventually, directly or ultimately or collectively, 
the land on which the piggeries and poultry projects 
were constructed. 

The provision says “all agricultural lands, arable, 
public and private.” Of course, we have the rice and 
com lands right now as part of the agricultural reform 
program. Of course, I understand there is a move to in- 
clude coconut lands, fishponds and sugarcane lands, but 
1 was wondering about agricultural lands which are 
exclusively devoted to the cultivating and raising of 
vegetables. How about those which are used only for 
feed grains - not rice and com - like sorghum? Are 
they all included since the phrase “all agricultural lands, 
arable, public or private agricultural lands” is all- 
embracing? Perhaps, I could later ask for a clarification. 

Again, this is for the cogitative pleasure of the Com- 
mittee over the weekend so that by Monday, I may have 
succeeded in depriving another committee of a happy 
weekend for the simple reason that I do not enjoy any 
weekend because I work on weekends. That is why ever 
since I was concominuted” in this organization, I have 
lost my weekends. 

Commissioner Tadeo had mentioned self-cultivation. 
I think he used the phrase “ang nagbubungkal ng lupa.” 
I wonder if that involves personal cultivation or cul- 
tivation through workers because we all know there has 
been plaint of schoolteachers. They were able to 
acquire a little piece of land — less than seven hectares 
as covered by P.D. No. 27 - for their old age and retire- 
ment. If we were to require personal cultivation, I do 
not know how a poor retired schoolteacher, at the age 
of 65, can still handle the plow and the harrow. 

On another matter: Congress may prescribe a fair and 
progressive system of compensation. I do not know if it 
is embraced in the concept of “just compensation” 
under the Rules of Court, as well as in jurisprudence, on 
the matter of appropriation as an exercise of the State’s 
right of eminent domain. This merely means the simple 
formula of just compensation — the fair market value 
plus the consequential damages minus the consequential 


benefits, provided that the consequential benefits shall 
not exceed the consequential damages. 

But what bothers me is the progressive system of 
compensation. That again, to my mind, is within the 
arcanum of the economists because I have never pre- 
tended to be an economist — I do not think I will ever 
be one — for the simple reason that monetarily, I do not 
know how to count. 

Section 7 provides that: 

. . . the State shall apply the principles of agrarian reform 

in the disposition of other natural resources . . . 

It has been mentioned here that natural resources 
include mineral lands. I do not know whether offshore 
mineral lands within the continental shelf are also in- 
cluded here. The provision includes inland or offshore 
marine and fishing resources. I was wondering, however, 
whether it would include waters used for hydroelectric 
power. Assuming that they are all included since Section 
7 says that the State shall apply the principles of agra- 
rian reform, I was wondering what scheme or formula 
could be used for the principles of agrarian reform in 
applying them to mineral lands, whether offshore or 
inland, forest lands, sources of hydroelectric power; and 
with respect to mineral lands, whether it will affect the 
age-old concept of the regalian doctrine with respect to 
minerals under one’s own property. 

Section 8 is with respect to the communal use of 
marine and fishing resources. I assume that the Commit- 
tee has taken into account the problem posed to the 
Laguna Lake Development Authority on which there 
was a very strong sentiment when we had a public 
hearing at Calamba. 

Section 9 again is a matter on which I will seek the 
assistance and succor of the Committee later to explain 
to me what is meant by an “integrated development of 
agricultural, fishing and marine resources.” 

The provision also speaks of the industrialization 
objective of the country. I do not know what is the 
objective of the present government, whether we are 
going to stick to an agricultural economy like Thailand 
which has weathered several crises, or whether we are 
aspiring for an industrialized program wherein we 
suffered serious financial reverses of those 10 or 11 
major projects, or we are opting instead for the agro- 
industrial system. 

With respect to Section 10, it states that: “The State 
shall regulate the ownership and use of urban land,” 
as distinguished from rural land. In 1984, there were 
decisions of the Supreme Court with respect to the 
distinction between urban and rural land. One held that 
the distinction between urban and rural land was depen- 
dent on the actual use or the purpose to which the land 
was devoted. The other decision was to the effect that 
whether it is urban or rural depends upon its geogra- 
phical situation, whether it is within a town, munic- 
ipality or city or outside thereof. This I will later ask 
the Committee to enlighten me on. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


619 


On Section 1 1 regarding urban poor dwellers, I do 
not know if the discussion yesterday covered the con- 
cept of urban poor dwellers, or to put it bluntly, squat- 
ters. We have an Anti-Squatting Law and a presidential 
decree on anti-squatting. I do not know if that was 
the purpose here, but I would think it would refer to 
squatters because of the provision about dwellings and 
habitations. 

I have no property that can be squatted upon by 
squatters and “squattresses” in the urban area, but what 
bothers me is the provision: “No resettlement shall take 
place without consultation with the communities to be 
relocated.” Will it be the terms of relocation, the cir- 
cumstances under which they can be relocated or the 
places to which they will be resettled or relocated? For 
instance, they will say that they are willing to be reset- 
tled; they will leave the land on which they are squat- 
ting but they want to be resettled or relocated in a 
particular community. If they cannot be resettled there, 
they will not agree to be resettled. Considering their 
involvement in its planning and implementation, could 
they also be given the right to be consulted and insist 
on the type of dwellings that they will be resettled to, as 
well as the facilities thereof? 

In other words, the provision is so broad that they 
can say they would be willing to be resettled only in 
such a place provided that it has three bedrooms and 
two bathrooms. We actually resort to reductio ad ab- 
surdum. I am just trying to point out the dangers in the 
broad scope of language because while there are those 
who affect the mastery of the language, we must also be 
careful about the tyranny of language. 

There is still a provision here that I cannot really 
understand. It says: 

The housing program shall extend to low-income rural 

dwellers in the context of a comprehensive agrarian re- 
form and development program. 

Does this refer to residential lands classified as private 
property but on which the squatters outside the urban 
areas have settled and who now demand to be placed 
under a comprehensive agrarian reform program? It 
would be a little dangerous because sometimes we give 
farm lots to our workers in the provinces which they are 
occupying in order to facilitate their access to the lands 
which they till; and yet they may demand these farm 
lots as part of a comprehensive agrarian reform program 
so that ultimately the owner of the land will be left 
with only his own residential lot. All his other residen- 
tial lots on which these farmers, who were originally 
given just an entitlement to possess and use for their 
dwelling, will eventually go to the farmers, in addition 
to the agricultural lands they till. In other words, the 
means granted to them to till the riceland was also at 
the same time an enabling mechanism for them to 
eventually oust the owner from both the agricultural 
portion of his lands, as well as the residential part there- 
of. 


With respect to Section 16, I believe I will seek 
guidance from the Committee, either together or indivi- 
dually, in understanding the phrase “optimum working 
conditions especially in relation to their maternal func- 
tions.” I will have to ask my daughter who is a pedia- 
trician what are these “optimum working conditions” 
which have to be taken into account in connection with 
maternal functions. Why maternal functions are speci- 
fied here, I do not know because definitely I am sure 
women cannot have paternal functions. 

Section 1 7 states: 

The State shall . . . promote the welfare and well-being 
of women to fully realize their capabilities in the service of 
the country. 

Does this refer to educational service, civil service or 
military service? 

Section 1 9 provides: 

. . . people’s organization as a principal means of empower- 
ing the people to pursue and protect through peaceful 
means their . . . aspirations. 

I do not know what is meant by political participation 
because we have had a lot of discussions here about 
political participation by the common tao, not only for 
political purposes. So, I hope that by Monday, after 
we shall have lost our respective weekends, we can meet 
here early and then after the Committee has guided me, 
perhaps I can formulate some acceptable, rational and 
sane amendments. But if the Committee can explain 
them fully to me, then I will not participate anymore 
because I am satisfied and that will save the Secretariat 
the duty of having to mention my participation in the 
Journal of this Commission, such mention I am not 
particularly interested in at all. 

Thank you. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you. 

I think Commissioner Garcia who is responsible for 
the section on social justice and people’s participation 
would like to respond. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, before Commis- 
sioner Garcia responds, I would like to respond to the 
tenor of Commissioner Regalado which smacks of 
professional ethnocentrism, meaning superiority, just 
because he can talk in legalistic terms and we cannot 
express ourselves in the way that the legalist minds can 
express themselves. His view that we were irrational and 
that we had to come out with a more sane and rational 
presentation of our provisions certainly sounded very 
condescending. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I said I intend 
to come up with sane and rational amendments. There 
was no attempt at legalese. In fact, what I pointed out 
was that some phrases are actually phrases used by 
technocrats. How many of us really understand these 


620 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


phrases? I confess, without any attempt at self-delusion, 
that there are some phrases I really cannot understand, 
an example of which is “an integrated economic pro- 
gram.” I frankly do not know what it really is. Other 
phrases like “socio-economic structures and processes,” 
frankly, I do not know what they mean. I am always 
the first to confess to something I do not know. 


THE PRESIDENT. May we have the next speaker of 
the Committee? 

Commissioner Garcia is recognized. 

MR. GARCIA. Actually, one of the parts which were 
deleted in the version was the definition of social jus- 
tice. 

Earlier in our deliberations in the Committee, we 
were striving to recognize one definition; of course, it 
was not a very easy task. In fact, I think during the period 
of amendments, even the Committee members will find 
out that we differ. I recognize that this is a very com- 
plex area and, therefore, even among the members of 
the Committee, there may be differences. 

Anyway, let us discuss the definition and concept of 
social justice. I would like to discuss with the body one 
of our earlier formulations of social justice which are 
not incorporated in the document but which we dis- 
cussed in the subcommittee. In speaking of social justice, 
we deal with justice not as practised among individuals 
but justice as embodied in the structures and institu- 
10 ns o society, namely, its system of law such as regu- 
a mg the relationship between the owner and the 

1 f nd; OI 7 he relationship between the man 
who sells his labor and the manager of the company or 

ff wellXand i t S | neSS enterprise ' lt is distribution 

bLlse one m C P ° Wer - 1 mention this Precisely 

whole ^Arficle ri th^t T S1Stent P ° intS throu g hout this 

will have^to^b^ a^redis^triMitio^of 0 T 7““' ,here 
wealth hut aio^ istribution of not only economic 

sav when we K f POWer -. What we Wended <° 

must also be in^handroTthe 5 ^ . politica * power 

can help shape the future that rffecuheirTes' Regard* 

attained through some kind of involvemen't'and partite 
pation in decision-making. paruci 

wWcrgovem°this' h a e Md common understanding 
which govern this, a concept of social justice involves a 

vision of man m society. Fundamental to this Sn are 
two notions which must be held in a sort of dynam c 
tension. First, man is a person with personai dignityTnd 
possessed of certain rights which the State did not 
confer and cannot take away. He can never illegiti- 
mately become supply the instrument of another man 
or of the State. Also, man has certain inalienable rights 
which are inherent to his dignity. 

Secondly — and this is very important — he is by 
nature a member of various communities. He is a 


member of the family; he can be a member of indi- 
genous communities; he can be a member of a sector; 
and finally he is a member of the national and the world 
community. He needs these communities to achieve his 
full development as a person. The communities them- 
selves are concerned about his welfare. And just as he 
receives from them, he is obliged to contribute to them. 
So, the definition that we originally agreed on in the 
Committee but which is not part of the Article is that 
social justice is a condition of the structures and institu- 
tions of society which reflect on the one hand the 
inherent dignity and inalienable rights of the person, 
and the obligation of the community to use the material 
wealth and political power at its disposal for the welfare 
of all its members, especially the poor and the weak; 
and on the other hand, the individual’s obligation to the 
community and to the welfare of all its members. 

As we can see, there is a dynamic tension through- 
out this Article on Social Justice — the individual and 
the community, and their mutual obligation to each 
other. We must admit that there is a definite bias for the 
poor and the weak; but as the Gentleman himself men- 
tioned, those who have less in life must have more in 
law. 

Finally, why the primacy of social justice? Because 
we want to tell the State that the emphasis should not 
be simply on economic growth but basically, to create 
egalitarian conditions, to create social justice. This is 
what will provide lasting peace that could be the condi- 
tion or the atmosphere within which all other projects 
prosper. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just add an 
idea. In case there is some apprehension about what 
this means, Section 1, lines 10 to 14, provides that the 
State will directly redistribute power in the sense that it 
takes a position from one person and gives it to another. 
I think this should be read in the context of Congress 
in the clause: “Congress shall give the highest priority.” 
We must assume that Congress does it in terms of 
measures that reduce social, economic and political 
inequities, promote structures, redistribute wealth and 
power. So, it is in that context that this should be read. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner de Castro is the next 
registered interpellator. 


MS. NIEVA. Excuse me, Madam President. I think 
Commissioner Tadeo would like to give some reactions 
to the questions for clarification that were raised by 
Commissioner Regalado. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


621 


MR. TADEO. Madam President, ibig ko lamang 
sagutin ang mga paglilinaw ni Commissioner Regalado. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. TADEO. Natutuwa naman ako sa mga tanong 
dahil kinakailangan talagang linawin ang mapanlikhang 
kaisipan ng magbubukid. Hindi kami “technocrat” 
bagamat nagpapasalamat kami kay Commissioner 
Regalado na, sa kauna-unahang pagkakataon, ang 
magbubukid ay tinatawag niyang “technocrats.” Ngunit 
ito ay buhat lamang sa mapanlikhang kaisipan ng mag- 
bubukid. Iisa-isahin ko ang mga katanungan ni Commis- 
sioner Regalado at sasagutin ko nangisa-isa. 

Sinasabi niyang ipinagbabawal daw namin ang lease- 
hold; hindi ito totoo. Ang tenurial status ay ganito; 
mayroong share tenant na 50-50, 60^1-0, 55-45, or 70-30 
ang sharing. Ang isa naman ay ang leasehold na may- 
roong fixed rental; hindi rin ito ipinagbabawal. Ang isa 
rin ay iyong owner-cultivator o owner-operator na hindi 
rin ipinagbabawal. Ang ibig lang sabihin ay, mula sa 
isang yugto ng reporma sa lupa — leasehold — tayo ay 
patungo na sa ganap na pagmamay-ari. Kayat isang 
yugto lamang ang leasehold. 

Sa pangalawang katanungan ng Ginoo ay medyo hindi 
kami nagkaunawaan. Ipinaaalam ko kay Commissioner 
Regalado na hindi namin inilagay ang agricultural 
worker sa kadahilanang kasama rito ang piggery, poultry 
at livestock workers. Ang inilagay namin dito ay tarm 
worker kaya hindi kasama ang piggery, poultry at 
livestock workers. 

Ang pangalawang katanungan ay tungkol sa coverage. 
Ang coverage nito ay all agricultural lands — all arable 
lands, public and private. Ang ibig sabihin ay kasama ang 
coconut, sugar, sorghum — na binanggit ng Ginoo 
kangina — vegetable, pineapple at banana plantation. Ang 
ibig pa ring sabihin ng arable agricultural land ay cul- 
tivated area at iba pang mga lupaing maaaring sabihing 
nababagay sa agrikultura. 

Ano ang ibig sabihin ng owner-cultivators? Itinata- 
nong ninyo kung ang ibig sabihin nito ay personal 
cultivation. Ang ibig sabihin dito ng retention limits ay 
ang owner-cultivators. Ang ibig sabihin ng owner- 
cultivators ay ang panginoon ng lupa ay gumagawa rin 
sa bukid at lahat ng gawain sa bukid ay kanyang pinama- 
mahalaan; wala siyang regular na farm workers. Siya ay 
namamahala sa land preparation, transplanting, care of 
crops hanggang sa pag-aani bagamat wala siyang regular 
na farm workers. 

Tungkol naman sa fair and progressive compensation, 
maganda ang katanungan ng Ginoo dahil ito ay nabibi- 
lang sa mga matitinding usapin. Ang ibig sabihin ng fair 
and progressive compensation ay ganito: Kapag ang 
lupa mo ay malawak - big landholding - ang halaga 
nito ay dapat maging mas mababa kaysa maliit na lupa. 
Habang lumiliit ang lupa, lumalaki ang halaga ng lupa; 
subalit habang lumalaki ang lupaing sinasakop, lumiliit 


ang halaga ng lupa ngunit hindi sa kapinsalaan ng land 
reform beneficiaries. Linawin natin ngayon ang just 
compensation; ito ay mahalaga kaya nagpapasalamat 
ako sa katanungan. Ano ang ibig sabihin ng just com- 
pensation sa jurisprudence? Sinasabi nating ito ay ang 
fair market value. Under Republic Act 3844 on the right 
of preemption and right of redemption, sinasabi po na 
ang just compensation ay ang reasonable capacity 
of the farmer to pay, ang kakayahan ng magbubukid na 
bayaran ang lupa. Ang gagamitin nating kahulugan ng 
just compensation ay hindi ’yung nasa jurisprudence 
kundi ang RA 3844 on the right of preemption and 
right of redemption. 

Tungkol naman sa Section 7, maganda po ang katanu- 
ngan ng Ginoo kaya nililinaw ko. Ano ba ang other 
natural resources? In principle, the term “land” should 
include all forms of natural resources, including mineral 
and forest resources. Tama ang katanungan ng Ginoo. 
Hindi po maaaring manahin ang mina sa ilalim ng agra- 
rian reform dahil ito ay pag-aari ng State ayon sa 
regalian doctrine. Ang ibig po naming sabihin ay hindi 
dapat maabala ang ecological balance ng lupa; ang 
minahan ay maaaring kunan ng mina, huwag lamang 
iiwanang nakatiwangwang ang lupang maaaring pang- 
agrikultura. Napakarami ng landless agricultural workers 
ngayon. Ano ang mangyayari sa landless agricultural 
workers sa tunay na agrarian reform? Narito ang tinata- 
wag na statistics sa kasalukuyan: Ang bilang ng landless 
agricultural workers noong 1971 ay 800,000. Ayon sa 
National Census and Statistics Office, noong 1984, ang 
bilang na ito ay umabot na sa 1 .9 million. Sinasabi ng 
mga nananaliksik na mayroon nang tatlo hanggang apat 
na milyong landless agricultural workers. Kaya isinama 
natin ang Section 7 upang ang mga landless ay madala 
natin dito. 

Noong magkaroon ng public hearing, sinabi ni Com- 
missioner Bemas na mayroon nang 605,000 kaingineros 
na pumapanot ng ating bundok. Magiging isang malawak 
na disyerto ang Pilipinas. Saan natin ngayon dadalhin 
ang mga kaingineros na ito? Dito sa sinasabi nating pub- 
lic domain sa Section 7. 

Tungkol naman sa communal fishing, ang halimbawa 
nito ay ang Laguna Lake na binanggit ng aking kababa- 
yang Commissioner Natividad. Sa Laguna Lake, Ulan 
lamang ang nagmamay-ari ng fish pens at nakikinabang sa 
biyayang bigay ng Panginoon sa atin. Dapat ay magka- 
roon din ng karapatan sa direct and communal use ang 
mga small fishermen. Iyan ang ibig sabihin dito. 

Sa Section 9, ang ibig sabihin ay hindi tayo dapat 
tumigil sa pagpapaunlad ng ating agrikultura bilang isang 
agricultural country. Ang kailangan ay ang tinatawag na 
integrated o pinag-isang pagpapaunlad ng agrikultura 
kapanabay ng pagpapaunlad ng industriya gaya ng coco- 
nut na isang tree of life. Huwag tayong titigil sa pagi- 
ging hilaw na sangkap lamang nito; kailangan natin itong 
gawing gatas sapagkat mayroon itong 20 hanggang 21 
porsiyentong protina na maaaring tumugon sa mal- 
nourishment ng bansa. Ang ibig sabihin nito ay hindi 


622 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1 986 


dapat tayong tumigil sa raw materials lamang; dapat ay 
magkaroon ng high value added. 

Tumungo tayo sa Section 12 ukol sa urban compre- 
hensive agrarian reform program. Ayon sa RA 1 199, sa 
300 square meters na lupa ng magbubukid na ibinigay 
noong panahon ni Magsaysay ay maaaring maglagay ng 
bahay upang maalagaan niyang mabuti ang bukid. Hindi 
niya kinukuha ang residential lot na pag-aari ng pangi- 
noong may lupa. Sa isang ektaryang lupa ay magkaka- 
roon lamang siya ng 300 square meters na home lot. 
Makakatulong naman ang pagkakaroon ng tirahan doon; 
hindi naman ito makapipinsala sapagkat araw-araw ay 
maaalagaan ng magbubukid ang lupa. Kung ang bukid 
naman ay walang home lot at hindi naman pumupunta 
ang magbubukid - absentee tenant - babagsak pa ang 
produksyon. Kaya hindi po ito makapipinsala. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President. 


gabi, masisira ang kanyang biological rhythm. Mahihira- 
pan siyang mag-adjust dahil mayroon na siyang dinadala 
na kailangang protektahan. Kaya kailangang bigyan ang 
kababaihan ng special care. Ang isa pang kundisyon sa 
loob ng pagawaan na maaaring magbigay ng kabuwisitan 
ay ang social at psychological environment. Maraming 
mga tao ang walang appreciation sa pangangailangan ng 
mga nagdadalangtao. 

Ano ang maternal functions? Ito ay may reference sa 
kababaihan dahil sila lang ang nagbubuntis at naghihirap 
sa pagdadala ng siyam na buwan sa sanggol sa kanilang 
sinapupunan. Kaya kailangang bigyan ng lipunan ng 
special care ang kababaihan dahil kaiba ang kanilang 
function kaysa sa lalaki. Sa palagay ko, ito ang simpleng 
paliwanag na hindi technocratic. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, may I comment 
on that? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other comment from 
the members of the Committee? 


MR. VILLACORTA. I would like to briefly react to 
the statement of Commissioner Regalado with respect 
to the primary consideration given social justice. 

He mentioned the Calalang vs. Williams case, and if 

mntPH q »th te fr ° m , that case > soc ial justice will be pro- 
moted through the exercise of power underlying the 

™ ° f ? governments on the time-honored 
principle of salus populi est suprema lex. ” So, I think 

the pScv of W “I in tWs Particular judicial decision 

ments was reitLSed ^^ 6 ^ 3 desideratum of g° ve ^- 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President gusto ko rine 
taCpa a angTune ni Commissioner Regalado na hihin- 
ng “optimum w^ P ^JKT n ' ibig sabihin 
to maternal function”' C ° ndl * 10ns es ' ,eciaU 5' “ «lation 

n.hitam. 1 i2; itl ’ ay masasa g°f na natin at hindi 
na kailangang hintaym pa ang weekend upane ioaliwa- 

nag kung ano ang ibig sabihin ng “working condMom” 
na mahalaga para sa kababaihan. 

Ang ibig sabihin ng optimum working conditions ay 

S “ Pa68awa kung saa " hindi makara 
ranas ang kababaihan ng anumang harmful o mapanganib 
„a kundisyon. Ang working conclitjon ka P Uan ea ™ 

raaging healthful at safe. Halimbawa, kung ang iSang 
buntis na manggagawa ay ma-expose sa maraming ha 
zardous elements sa loob ng isang pagawaan, siguradong 
masama ang epekto mto sa kanyang embryo, ang kan 
yang magiging anak. Kaya kailangang ang conditions of 
work ng isang nagdadalangtao ay magingsafe and health- 
ful. These would refer to the physical, chemical, biolo- 
gical and other condttions in the work environment. 

Isa pang optimum condition na kailangang healthful 
para sa kababaihan ay ang hours of work, lalo na iyong 
scheduling. Kapag ang isang buntis ay pinagtrabaho sa 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, I am a member 
of the Committee except that I chose to be on this side. 

In the interest of having debates that would generate 
more light than heat so that our weekend will not be 
spoiled, let me share with you two quotations. On the 
first quotation, a philosopher gives us his answer on 
the question: What is justice? 

No other question has been discussed so passionately; 
no other question has caused so much precious blood and 
so many bitter tears to be shed; no other question has been 
the object of so much intensive thinking of the most illus- 
trious thinkers from Plato to Kant; and yet this question is 
today as unanswered as it evei was. It seems that it is one 
of those questions that man cannot find a definitive answer 
for, but can only try to improve the question. 

I think we have done that in terms of the questions that 
have emerged. But let me read the second: 

A society in which the questionings of justice ceased to 
be a constant prod and perplexity would not be humane in 
any sense that matters. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, may I sav 
something on this? y 

I am wondering whether the Committee will also take 
into account the employment of minors. Right now, we 
have laws protecting female workers and minors. But I 
notice that under the present labor laws, there are provi- 
sions about apprentices, handicapped workers and 
minors. Perhaps the Committee may take into account 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


623 


that the State shall also provide protection for minors 
because the present protection to minors is only a 
statutory precept which could be amended. And yet 
from what I understand — and I think Commissioner 
Ople will bear me out on this — about 28 percent of the 
labor group are minors. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de Castro, who has been standing there for the 
last hour, be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I like the Article on Social Justice because, as Pres- 
ident Magsaysay said, we should give more laws to the 
poor. Bibigyan mo, aniya, ng pangdamit ang isang tao, 
ang mahirap, sa kanyang likod at nang siya naman ay 
mabuhay nang husto. I also like the peroration in 
Tagalog of Commissioner Tadeo yesterday: “Kaming 
mga dukha ay dapat bigyan ng nararapat ng ating 
gobyerno.” I like it because I am also a dukha. 

My father was a rig driver; my mother was a vegetable 
vendor in the market. We lived in a one-room house, 
with a rotten roof and almost no sidings, squatting on 
the lot of a cousin. 

I also like to see that while we are helping the poor, 

I hope that they are also helping themselves. That is the 
reason I objected to the illiterates voting because they 
refuse to receive adult education and learn how to write, 
and instead go drinking at night, spending what they 
earned the day before. 

I read the Article last night - I must confess I read it 
no less than three times — and I have my comments 
here. I am glad that I found a brilliant man, a Commis- 
sioner, who is also in the same category as I am, failing 
to understand the many phrases. Sa amin kung tawagin 
ito ay “naglulubid ng buhangin.” I am glad that I am 
not alone. I was about to stand and say the same thing 
as Commissioner Regalado did. But they may say that 
I am not even a seventh grade graduate not to under- 
stand these things. I am glad that a distinguished legal 
mind in our Commission finds himself in the same 
position as I am. That is why I am saying this. Of the 
many times I read this Article, I thought it contains 
socialistic, if not communistic, ideas. Pardon me if I am 
wrong. 

Of the few words I understand on page 2. Section 4, 
line 6, does the word “strike” include a wildcat strike? 
I had to see Commissioner Ople and ask him what a 
wildcat strike is. According to him, it is a strike without 
notice. So, will any member of the Committee answer 
my question if it includes a wildcat strike? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I will not 
answer the second question but the first one. Being a 


professor of political science, I think I know something 
about communism. I do not know what the honorable 
Commissioner means by communism as reflected in 
Section 2. If he will recall, Section 6, Article II of the 
1 973 Constitution is almost identical to our Section 2. 

MR. DE CASTRO. With a twist. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Is the Gentleman saying that 
the 1973 Constitution has elements of communism. . . 

MR. DE CASTRO. This is with a twist. This is not 
exactly identical to the 1973 Constitution. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman please allow 
Commissioner Villacorta to finish his reaction to his 
question? 

MR. DE CASTRO. I am sorry. Madam President. 

MR. VILLACORTA. If I may read Section 2: 

. . . the State shall regulate the acquisition, ownership, 

use and disposition of property and its fruits 

This is almost identical to Section 6, Article II of the 
1973 Constitution. In fact, the 1973 Constitution is 
even stronger because it says, “equitably diffuse pro- 
perty ownership and profits” which we do not have 
here. That is closer to socialism, in fact. If the Gentle- 
man is referring to the second part of Section 2 which 
says, “promote the establishment of independent and 
self-reliant socio-political and economic structures,” I 
do not see anything communistic. “Independent” simply 
means self-reliant. If we are not for mendicancy and 
charity, we are for teaching the poor to fish but not 
giving them fish. If the Chair will allow me, I will give 
an enumeration of the salient sections of this Article 
that provide assistance to the poor, being far behind the 
starting line in comparison to the elite and the more 
privileged sectors. We are simply providing aid, not 
perpetual assistance and patronage to the poor. 

For example, Section 4 guarantees the right of workers 
to self-organization, again a right guaranteed in the 
previous Constitutions; Section 5 gives the opportunity 
for tillers of the soil to own the land that they till; 
Section 6 provides participation of farmers and farm 
workers in the planning and management of agrarian 
reform programs; Section 8 grants fishermen’s right to 
communal use of marine and fishing resources; Section 
10 provides for ownership and use of urban land for the 
common good; Section 17 protects the welfare of 
women and affords them ample opportunities to serve 
the country; Section 18 is on the development of 
indigenous communities; and lastly, Sections 19 and 20 
provide for the independent role and effective and 
reasonable participation of people’s organizations at all 
levels of decision-making, and insure adequate consulta- 
tion mechanisms for said participation. 


624 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


These are the salient features of the Article on Social 
Justice. Pardon my ignorance and probably density but 
I do not see anything communistic here. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

I am not a professor of political law; I may not see 
what the Gentleman sees but he may not see what I see. 

Last night as I was reading this Article, my daughter 
from Switzerland who happens to be vacationing with 
me, a diplomate in international law and foreign rela- 
tions and has studied the government of Russia and the 
governments of the international community, said: 
“Ano iyan, Papa?” Sabi ko: “Binabasa ko ito pero hindi 
ko maintindihan.” “Tingnan ko nga,” sabi niya. Then 
she said: “Papa, mayroon naman yatang communism 
iyan.” 

I did not see what she saw, and I cannot see what the 
Gentleman sees, and perhaps he does not see what I see. 

I will go to my question. On line 6, page 2, does the 
word “strike” include a wildcat strike? 

MR. MONSOD. May we answer that? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. 

strikf MONSOD - No > it would not include a wildcat 


gusto ko lang pong banggitin ang nakasulat sa Acts 
of the Apostles 2:44-45. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Saan po ito? 

MR. TADEO. Mayroong salita roon sa Chapter 2 ng 
Mga Gawa ng Mga Apostol sa Bibliya. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Hindi po ako nagbabasa ng 
Bibliya. 

MR. TADEO. Ito po ang sinasabi sa Acts of the 
Apostles 2:44-45: 

Ang pag-aari ay para sa kalahatan at ito’y ibibigay, 

ipamamahagi batay sa pangangailangan ng bawat isa. 

Ngayon po, sinasabi rin sa Mateo 23:23, “Ang 
pinakamahalaga’y ang katarungan.” Iyon ang pinaka- 
mahalaga sa lahat. At ito’y katarungang dinadala namin 
sa inyo. Maganda po ang katanungan ng Ginoo ngayon. 
Hindi kasama rito ang mga farm workers sa hasyenda, 
at iyong mga nanggagapasan, hindi rin po kasama. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, temporary farm workers are 
not included here? 

MR. TADEO. Iyon lang mga nasa plantasyon, korpo- 
rasyon, at pasture leases or concessions. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Then why not say so? 

norHusfL??' 011 ^ ° f the Manila International Air- 
™ 3 WddCat Strike and as a result > hundreds 
of international passengers slept on the cement floor. 

MR. MONSOD. That is why earlier when this 

rTouirbe^n ^ C ° mmiss -ner Foz, we sZ that 

would clarify twf^e^oftiiTT amendments that 
entertained l the' ^ 

among several alternatives. Wlth law ’ 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

Then the Committee prefers that the members of the 
Commtsston see ,t. Kung makakalusot ay lusot naman 
Mabuf at naktta naman. I am not asking for honesty 
but let us be frank. When we put up a paper before thl 
Comm.ss.on, let us not allow the other Members to be 
looking for what it really means. I become suspicious 
of any paper being placed on my table now. 

On page 2, Section 6, line 26, the term “farm 
workers is mentioned. Ang sabi ni Ginoong Tadeo, ito 
ay ang mga katulong sa paggawa sa farms - mga mag- 
aani. Are they part of the farm workers to participate in 
planning, organizing and managing the program*^ 


MR. DE CASTRO. Are temporary farm workers not 
considered farm workers? 

MR. TADEO. Mayroon po kasing ganitong mga farm 
workers; talaga pong medyo “complicated” iyan. May- 
roon po tayong mga regular at seasonal workers. May- 
roon din po tayong sakada. Ang ibig po nating sabihin, 
ang mga regular at seasonal workers ay kasama rin sa 
sinasabi nating mayroong cooperative right. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mabuti sana’y maipaliwanag natin 
sapagkat nalilito ako. Iyong mga nanggagapasan, nag- 
aani at naglalagay ng fertilizer ay mga temporary , hindi 
ba sila kasama rito? 

MR. TADEO. Hindi po sila kasama. Tama po. Magan- 
da pong katanungan. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Section 11, page 3 says: “Urban 
poor dwellers shall not be evicted nor their dwellings 
demolished without due process of law.” There is no 
question that this refers to squatters. Is that right? 

MS. NIEVA. That is right. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Are we constitutionalizing squat- 
ters? 


MR. TADEO. Magandang muli ang katanungan ni 
Commissioner de Castro, pero bago ko sagutin iyan, 


MR. MONSOD. No, actually if we read the whole 
page, it says “without due process of law.” 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


625 


MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. I think the intent of the provision 
is to avoid the abuses of the past where the military 
and police just go in, bulldoze the dwellings and beat 
the people up. We are not making a judgment as to title 
to the property. We are just establishing a principle that 
due process must be observed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is a general statement against 
the army and the police, bulldozing houses and beating 
them up. The Gentleman is accusing them without due 
process. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we just mentioned 
that there were instances like those but we were not 
saying that the military and the police do these every- 
time. There were instances like those, and we cannot 
deny that these happened in the past because of the 
policy of the State then under Mr. Marcos. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I am only after the accusation 
without due process. Lately, when some people learned 
that that portion in the Pasig area was a prized property 
of Mr. Marcos, everybody went there and put their 
stakes. The police went there, and without going to 
court, they drove away those who were already build- 
ing their shanties. This is of public knowledge. Is this a 
violation of this portion which is being drafted? 

MR. MONSOD. Under this provision, if the processes 
were not observed, that would be a violation. This does 
not say, however, that they cannot be evicted. It just 
says that due process must be observed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Now, to my example — when 
these people learned that the property belonged to the 
Marcoses, they immediately went there and staked their 
claims. And so, the police and the army, without due 
process, went there and drove them away. 

Is this now a violation of this Constitution? 

MR. MONSOD. It would be, if they did not observe 
due process. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

I hope I can still learn the many “lubid ng buhangin” 
in the Article on Social Justice. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you very much. 

May we just make a request. Since the body will be 
submitting proposed amendments and since we are a 
rather large committee of 1 7 members who are very 
democratic in our consultations, it might take us a little 
more time than the other committees to be able to 
come to an agreement on some of the proposed amend- 
ments. So, may we request that we receive copies of 
the proposed amendments ahead of time so that we will 
have time to meet on these and we will not waste time 


trying to get a consensus on whether we will adopt or 
reject the amendments as proposed. We would be very 
grateful for that. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, for the last inter- 
pellator this morning, I ask that Commissioner Padilla 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Madam President. 

The Declaration of Principles in the 1935 Constitu- 
tion reads: 

Sec. 5. The promotion of social justice to ensure the 

well-being and economic security of all the people should 

be the concern of the State, 

This was rewritten in the 1 973 Constitution this way: 

The State shall promote social justice to ensure the 

dignity, welfare, and security of all the people. 

The Bill of Rights provides as its first section due 
process and equal protection of the law; Section 2 
speaks on expropriation of private property. I notice 
in this Article on Social Justice the many duties of the 
State because practically every section begins with the 
phrase “The State shall.” We are imposing many duties 
on the State. Likewise, we are granting additional rights. 
Is it the intention of the Committee to grant more rights 
in addition to those mentioned in the Bill of Rights? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. Those mentioned in this Article on 
Social Justice cover the social and economic rights of 
the citizens — social, economic and cultural rights. 
Whereas the Bill of Rights more specifically refers to the 
political rights of the citizens, as well as their civil rights. 

MR. PADILLA. No. The Bill of Rights states the 
fundamental, inalienable, God-given rights of the 
people. These are the basic restraints, we might say, or 
limitations on the exercise of governmental power for 
the benefit of the people. But the provisions of the 
1935 and 1973 Constitutions speak of all the people. 
Mention was made of salus populi est suprema lex. 
Salus populi means the welfare of the people, not any 
particular sector of the people. And in the exercise 
of the police power, the State promotes the general 
welfare, the common good and the interest of all the 
people. If we grant some exceptional rights to some 
sectors or classes of people, even in favor of labor 
workers, farmers, farm workers but in contravention 
of the rights of the other sectors of society, we are not 
promoting the common welfare of all the people. 

For example, Section 1 says: “. . . redistribute wealth 
and power.” Does this mean that private property can 
also be redistributed, or does it refer to property belong- 
ing to the State or the public domain and other lands 
that are not privately owned properties, which are 


626 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


covered by the law on land registration, known as the 
Torrens system? Can registered private property be 
redistributed also under this provision? That is one 
basic question that should be clarified. When the Com- 
mittee proposes to redistribute power, 1 suppose that is 
covered by our electoral system — this refers to the 
election of the President, Vice-President, Senators, 
Congressmen, the local officials and others because 
sovereignty resides in the people. I cannot understand 
redistribution of political power unless it is through 
periodic elections under a representative government. 
The question is on the redistribution of wealth — I 
understand it means material wealth. If they are the 
natural resources of the country, they should be avail- 
able to all with equal opportunity; there should be no 
discrimination; there should be no injustice. But does 
the statement “redistribute wealth for the common 
good” mean that one who has private property — 
according to Commissioner Bengzon in a brief remark to 
me, one has, for example, a farmland of only 20 hec- 
tares or so, planted with calamansi, and he also has a 
small mill to produce calamansi juice, not only for local 
consumption but also for possible export — should have 
his business expanded, or should such kind of property 
be redistributed? That is a question I am propounding 
to the Committee because it is a basic principle. 

MR. MONSOD. Earlier we said that the intent of the 
sentence beginning with line 9 of Section 1 , which says: 
To this end, Congress shall give the highest priority,” 
is that there should be measures that will promote 
those items enumerated therein, such as the reduction 
of social, economic and political inequities, the promo- 
tion of structures and processes and the redistribution 
of wealth and power. With regard to the provisions on 
labor, for example, giving labor certain rights to bargain- 
ing and negotiation, giving workers the right to strike in 
accordance with the law, as well as participation in 
decisions that affect their rights and benefits, these in 
e ^ redistribute some of the profits or revenues 
° f u 6 ru ^ Ut should at the same time protect the 
right of business enterprises to realize their growth 
potentials and reasonable returns so that, in effect, this 
redistribution will not, in any way, run the business 
enterprise to the ground. 

The agrarian natural resources reform program would 
also be a form of redistribution, but should this be 
subject to retention limits which would cover economic 
units, and should this be subject to a fair and progressive 
system of compensation? 

With regard to the redistribution of power, we refer 
to measures that see to it that the electoral process, for 
example, works in such a way that it is enforced so that 
people truly have access to elective offices, regardless of 
whether they are rich or poor. The measures that were 
approved yesterday and which opened up the system so 
that minority parties and sectoral groups can have access 
to legislative seats are measures that would also result in 
redistribution of power. As we have mentioned earlier, 


this does not mandate anybody to say: “Tomorrow, I 
take away your position in government and give it to 
somebody else,” or “We will take away your land and 
give it to Joe or Juan de la Cruz on the other side.” 
There are certain processes that must be honored and 
respected and which also require justice. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I also respond to an earlier 
question of Commissioner Padilla on whether we are 
adding more rights in this proposed Article. I think the 
distinction that was given during the presentation of the 
provisions on the Bill of Rights by Commissioner Bernas 
is very apropos here. He spoke of self-executing rights 
which belong properly to the Bill of Rights, and then he 
spoke of a new body of rights which are more of claims 
and that these have come about largely through the 
works of social philosophers and then the teaching of 
the Popes. They focus on the common good and hence, 
it is not as easy to pinpoint precisely these rights nor the 
situs of the rights. And yet, they exist in relation to the 
common good. 

So that while we speak here of contraventions — are 
these rights contraventions of other rights — on closer 
analysis, one finds out that they are not contraventions 
of the rights of anybody else, but the point of recon- 
ciliation with those rights must be discovered. This is 
what we are trying to do here. We are not saying that it 
is always easy to find out the point of reconciliation of 
these rights with other rights; and yet that exists. And 
so these claims are asserted and it is for lawmakers to 
determine more precisely just where the point of 
reconciliation lies or must lie. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, just one more 
point. Commissioner Padilla mentioned earlier about 
costs in respect to this program. I think the Committee 
took pains to mention, for example, on line 20 of page 
3 where we talk about housing. If the Gentleman will 
notice, we put in the words “at affordable cost,” and 
on line 9 of page 4 on social services, we again used the 
same phrase. The message we are putting here is that 
there should not be free goods. We are saying that those 
who benefit should pay for these benefits, but the poor 
sometimes cannot afford the real cost of the benefits 
and, therefore, in those cases provision must be made so 
that they are given to them at affordable cost. 

MR. PADILLA. There are so many explanations on 
subsequent paragraphs of the committee draft. My only 
question was on the phrase “redistribute wealth and 
power.” For example, the Bill of Rights provides the 
rights and freedoms of the people, not only of employ- 
ees or workers, but of all the people. The Bill of Rights 
provides “the right to form associations, unions, or 
societies for purposes not contrary to law shall not 
be abridged.” That is the fundamental right for self- 
organization. The committee report grants the addi- 
tional rights to workers, not only “to self-organization, 
collective bargaining and negotiations, peaceful and 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


627 


concerted activities for their own protection, welfare 
and mutual aid, including the right to strike.” It seems 
that with the right to strike, especially by employees of 
the government, we are adding more rights than what 
are provided in the Bill of Rights. 

With regard to material wealth or property which 
may either be public or private, our Constitution says 
that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or 
property without due process of law, nor shall any 
person be denied the equal protection of the laws. 
Section 2 of the Bill of Rights provides that private 
property shall not be taken except by competent 
authority for public use and upon payment of just com- 
pensation. These are the first two sections in the Bill of 
Rights. They are the fundamental principles of good 
government. Section 1 7 of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, a copy of which I received this morning, 
says: 

Everyone has the right to own property alone, as well as 

in association with others. No one shall be arbitrarily de- 
prived of his property. 

This Universal Declaration of Human Rights is essential- 
ly the same as our provision in the Bill of Rights. When I 
learned that the word “wealth” includes private pro- 
perty, although it is followed by the phrase “for the 
common good” which expresses common welfare or 
the promotion of social justice for all the people, the 
alarm may be sounded against the so-called urban land 
reform issued by President Marcos during martial law as 
P.D. No. 1517 which he himself did not implement 
except in the so-called depressed urban areas. The com- 
mittee report also mentions “Urban Land Reform, on 
page 3, line 19. Does this mean that the Committee is 
endorsing P.D. No. 1517 and that a tenant will have the 
right to acquire the premises he has occupied for, say, 
ten years as a tenant? And is the supposed right of the 
tenant compulsory as against the lessor’s, a supposed 
compulsory obligation on the part of the owner? It 
seems that the Committee, in including “Urban Land 
Reform” is not only recognizing and adopting the very 
extensive but objectionable decree of the former regime, 
but it may constitutionalize said PD on urban land re- 
form. Said PD was issued not for the common good or 
the common welfare, but to appease or flatter the 
group of urban tenants as a particular sector of our 
society. Is that the intention? 

BISHOP BACANI. Commissioner Padilla, please 
understand that the provisions in the Article on Social 
Justice are not in contradiction with the other sections 
of the Constitution, but they are meant to be comple- 
mentary. Hence, when we speak here of redistributing 
wealth, this is with due respect for the rights that are 
already enshrined in the Bill of Rights - that this will 
not be without due process of law. The Gentleman 
seems to see these rights not as explications or comple- 
ments of what are said in the Bill of Rights, but as 
contradictions which are not intended to be. 


MR. GARCIA. Madam President, may I try to 
respond. I would also like to give the rationale. I think 
what Commissioner Bacani said was a very good answer. 
With regard to the phrase “redistribute wealth and 
power,” I think the rationale for this is that, in our 
society when we have unlimited access to economic 
wealth and economic power, we are effectively cutting 
off a large majority of the people from enjoying those 
same rights which normally are enjoyed by a few. Those 
who amass both wealth and power have undue advan- 
tage over those resources and are effectively cutting off 
a majority from the enjoyment of these. 

However, I do not see in this draft Article any kind 
of undue limitation on private property. In fact, Con- 
gress is supposed to promote and provide those 
measures which, under certain conditions and with due 
process, are always for the common good. Can we then 
limit excessive property regarding land, for example, if 
it is excessive, but with due process always and for the 
common good? 

So, what I am trying to say is that basically the rights 
which we say could be enjoyed by all are illusory if the 
protection over unlimited access to both wealth and 
power is not, in a sense, checked and controlled. 

MR. PADILLA. We have seen former President 
Marcos or some of his allies in government distributing 
land certificates, but oftentimes he was distributing the 
lands of private owners. So, it is very easy to distribute 
what is not yours. 

But the fundamental Latin maxim is nemo dat quad 
non habet. Justice Laurel in trying to explain “social 
justice” in that case of Calalang vs. Williams also had 
difficulty in defining social justice. But he stated, as 
quoted by Commissioner Villacorta, “salus populi est 
suprema lex.” And it was very difficult to make a 
positive definition, for what appears in the Calalang 
decision is like a negative definition, that social justice is 
not anarchy; it is not despotism; it must be the equi- 
librium of all forces. I cannot quote exactly. Maybe 
Commissioner Nolledo who has his book on the Consti- 
tution can quote that. 

But Justice Laurel was stressing the equitable equili- 
brium of all political, economic and social forces, so as 
to attain the objective of common welfare, the common 
good, the welfare of all the people. And as stated in the 
Constitution, it says “all the people.” 

Madam President, it is not safe nor correct to be 
granting additional rights to a few sectors in the guise of 
promoting the common welfare at the expense of other 
sectors of society which must all be united in the com- 
mon effort to produce wealth. I have always been say- 
ing, Madam President, that the solution to our basic 
problems is for more production that will benefit not 
only the capitalist in management of business and com- 
merce and agriculture, but also those involved therein 
including the farm workers, the workers, the distribut- 


628 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1 986 


ors, wholesalers and retailers. In other words, the entire 
fabric of society. 


BISHOP BACANI. May I reply. Madam President? 

Commissioner Padilla, the idea here is to attain the 
good of all those who have less but should be enabled. 
What is being done here is to enable the depressed 
sectors of our society, those who have been deprived 
precisely to exercise their rights so that all in society 
would benefit. In other words, the intention is not to 
harm anybody or anybody’s rights, but to be able to 
empower others who are not able to assert claims or 
who, though they may have rights, are not able to 
enforce them at present. Let us take the example of 
access to fishing grounds. If there are people who claim 
that they have licenses to a certain area for fishing and 
then they fence off the others, people who do not have 
licenses may in fact be deprived of their own livelihood. 
So empowerment of these small people so that they will 
have access to those lands may perhaps lend to dis- 
mantling of fishpens which may have been legally 
attached at a certain point but to the prejudice of these 
little fishermen. The dismantling of these fish pens will 
be in accordance with social justice because it will 
benefit those who are deprived while at the same time 
still enable those who are now being deprived of the 
exercise of a fishing license in order to live with dignity. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I agree with 
Commissioner Bacani, but his example of Laguna de 
Bay refers to something that is communal or that be- 
longs to the people. It is not correct to limit the utiliza- 
tion or exploitation of water resources to a few who are 
privileged and who may have, as the Commissioner said, 
licenses. There must be an equal opportunity for all the 
fishermen, whether big or small, especially because these 
are public waters. I agree that one, two or ten people are 
exploiting our communal waters, and that is wrong I 
agree with that but there must be an assurance of 
equality or equal opportunity. To allow a few and 
deprive a great majority is social injustice; that is moral 
injustice and, even in law, is legal injustice. With that 
example of Commissioner Bacani, we do not seem to be 
in disagreement. But when he says “those who have less,” 
should they have more? The slogan is: “Those who have 
less in life should have more in law.” Let us take, fox 
example, a millionaire who has five million pesos worth 
of properties, but his neighbor is a poor laborer who 
wants to work but cannot even find work, and he can 
hardly support his family, much less give education 
to his growing children. This is social inequality, but it 
does not mean that the rich man must redistribute his 
assets or his properties among the less favored. It is t 
good Christian virtue to share your benefits because 
after all, those benefits come from Almighty God. Ir 
connection with this, Commissioner Villacorta has made 
reference to this statement of the Chinese philosopher 
Confucius, which says: “Do not give him (that mean: 
his neighbor) fish, but teach him how to fish.” Some 


handouts are not the solution; he must learn a trade 
and work for his living. 

If we have no social discrimination, and we extend 
equal opportunity to all and there is justice in the 
administration and dispensation of equal rights, then we 
may have the correct solution to our many nagging 
problems, particularly our economic bankruptcy. 

BISHOP BACANI. Would Commissioner Padilla be 
excluding, for example, the redistribution of land with 
due compensation from among the just acts that can be 
done by society or by the State? Would the Gentleman 
be excluding that as a possibility within the purview of 
justice? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, since 1935, it has 
already been provided that big landed estates can be 
divided to small lots and distributed among deserving 
Filipinos. Now, many decisions have justified that pro- 
vision because there is no reason for a family — espe- 
cially during the Spanish regime — to receive a grant of 
public land which extends to as far as our eyes can see, 
and covers not only some towns but sometimes some 
municipalities. Let us consider also the case of an enter- 
prising agro-industrialist who owns some hectares where 
he plants, for example, palm trees to produce palm 
oil needed in the manufacture of soap and other cosme- 
tics which we used to import, especially from Malaysia. 
Then there is the case of a Filipino firm that has planted 
palm trees and has built a mill to produce palm oil. And 
the example can apply to coconut or any other product. 
In these cases the owner /corporation owns 1 ,024 hec- 
tares which was the limit prescribed under the 1935 
Constitution, and employs many technicians and 
workers who are usually prosperous or enjoying the 
comforts of life with dignity. The question is, would 
such a farm devoted to productive agriculture and 
transformed to industrial products necessary for our 
economy be subject to redistribution? 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, ang mga katanungan 
po ninyo kangina tungkol sa mga lupain at sa “just 
distribution” naming tinatawag ay hindi naman nag- 
aalis ng “right to property.” Ang ibig po kasing sabihin 
ng right to property rito sa Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights ay ito: kapag ang pag-aari mo’y hindi 
pumipinsala sa iyong mga kalapit. Sinasabi nating social 
conflict and unjust distribution kapag ang nakapaligid sa 
iyong pag-aari ay ang mga magsasakang walang lupa at 
iba pang manggagawa sa bukid na walang lupa. Ito’y 
masasakop nitong genuine agrarian reform. 

Nabanggit ng Commissioner ang mga palm and coco- 
nut trees. Ang totoo, hindi tayo dapat magtanim ng 
palm trees sa Pilipinas sa kadahilanang ang coconut 
natin ay sapat na sapat na sa atin at kumukumpetensiya 
lamang ito sa ating coconut oil at coconut trees. Masa- 
sakop din ito ng genuine agrarian reform. 

Ang pagpapatupad ng tunay na agrarian reform ay 
gagawin sa isang lehislatura kung saan mayroon itong 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


629 


phasing — mayroong phase 1, phase 2 at phase 3. At 
tungkol dito sa small landowner na inyong pinanga- 
ngambahan, ang pagpapatupad ng genuine agrarian 
reform sa small landowner ay sa hiding bahagi kung saan 
ang industriyalisasyon ay maunlad na. Kung makikita 
niyang hindi na produktibong manatili pa siya sa lupa, 
mas magaling pang lumipat na siya sa industriya. 

Tungkol naman sa palm trees na sinasabing bahagi 
rin ng ating agricultural lands, ang ibig pong sabihin, 
magsisimula riyan sa farm workers’ union. Dapat magka- 
roon sila sa organization ng tinatawag na joint consulta- 
tion dahil mayroong social injustice. Dapat magkaroon 
sila, halimbawa, ng profit sharing. Ang pagpapatupad ng 
genuine agrarian reform ay hindi naman biglaan; ito ay 
mayroong mga phasing. 

Ang dahilan ng kahirapan natin sa Pilipinas ngayon ay 
ang pagtitipon-tipon ng vast tracts of land sa kamay ng 
iilan. Lupa ang nagbibigay ng buhay sa magbubukid at 
sa iba pang manggagawa sa bukid. Kapag inalis sa kanila 
ang lupa, parang inalisan na rin sila ng buhay. Kaya kina- 
kailangan talagang magkaroon ng tinatawag na just dis- 
tribution. Ang puntong ginagamit natin ay ang sinabi sa 
Chapter 2 ng Acts of the Apostles na binanggit kangina: 
Ipamahagi ang lupa; at ang right to property, batay sa 
pangangailangan ng bawat isa. Kung lumalampas na sa 
pangangailangan ng isa at pumipinsala na sa iba, ang 
karapatan niya sa lupa ay nawawala. Ngunit hindi siya 
inaalisan, Madam President, ng right to property. Ang 
tinatawag nating retention limit ay makatarungan pa 
rin. Ano ba ang pag-aari na kayang bumuhay ng isang 
pamilya? Kaya makikita ninyo rito ang pagiging makata- 
rungan nitong napalagay ditong genuine agrarian reform. 

MR. PADILLA. May I just give one last remark 
because I do not wish to continue my interpellation 
much longer. If the holding of property can be injurious 
to the rights of others, that is the limitation already 
recognized in the Civil Code on jus abutendi. Article 
43 1 provides: 

The owner of a thing cannot make use thereof in such 

manner as to injure the rights of a third person. 

However, the old Roman principle, as remarked by 
Commissioner Regalado, has jus utendi, fruendi, dis- 
ponendi, possidendi and also abutendi. The Christian 
principle has already been adopted and the owner has 
no right to abuse because the enjoyment of his property 
should not injure the rights of others. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, may I just 
have one minute? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I am just trying to follow up 
Commissioner Padilla’s concerns which are for balanced 
social order without really lessening or underestimating 


the need to reduce inequalities and to move towards 
preferential options for the poor, but to focus also on 
the need to improve individual capacities for produc- 
tivity. This is why I underscored earlier the need for 
cooperatives that would increase and provide better 
incomes for producers and better buying powers for 
consumers. What we should really focus on is the need 
to improve individual capabilities and productivity and 
to improve access to opportunity by strengthening capa- 
bilities through education and information so that the 
individual can compete. This would, therefore, lead to 
an equilibrium or what is called a better, a more 
balanced social order. I think that is what Commissioner 
Padilla would want to underscore in the amendments. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be 
recognized for two short announcements. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 535 
(Recognizing the invaluable support 
and contribution of the PSSC) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I just would like 
to get these two proposed resolutions out of the way. 
May I inform the body that there were two big organiza- 
tions which helped the Commission in the public hear- 
ings and in this connection we have Proposed Resolu- 
tion Nos. 535 and 532 to be presented to the body. 

Proposed Resolution No. 535 is in recognition by the 
Constitutional Commission of the invaluable support 
and contribution of the Philippine Social Science Coun- 
cil in the public consultations and for providing resource 
materials for the drafting of the new Constitution. This 

was sponsored by Commissioners Bennagen, Villacorta 
and Garcia. 

Madam President, I move that we consider Proposed 
Resolution No. 535. 

PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 535 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secretary- 
General will read only the title of the proposed resolu- 
tion without prejudice to inserting in the Record the 
whole text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 535, entitled: 


630 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


RESOLUTION IN RECOGNITION BY THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL COMMISSION OF THE INVALUABLE SUP- 
PORT AND CONTRIBUTION OF THE PHILIPPINE 
SOCIAL SCIENCE COUNCIL IN THE PUBLIC CON- 
SULTATIONS AND FOR PROVIDING RESOURCE 
MATERIALS FOR THE DRAFTING OF THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION. 


(The following is the whole text of the proposed resolution.) 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 532 
(Expressing the profound appreciation 
of the Con-Com to the NAMFREL) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we consider Proposed 
Resolution No. 532. 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 535 

RESOLUTION IN RECOGNITION BY THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL COMMISSION OF THE INVALUABLE SUP- 
PORT AND CONTRIBUTION OF THE PHILIPPINE 
SOCIAL SCIENCE COUNCIL IN THE PUBLIC CON- 
SULTATIONS AND FOR PROVIDING RESOURCE 
MATERIALS FOR THE DRAFTING OF THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION. 

Whereas, the Constitutional Commission called for all sectors 
of society to help and join hands in the historic task of drafting a 
new constitution reflective of the genuine needs and aspirations 
of the people; 

Whereas, the Philippine Social Science Council, in response to 
this call, offered its services to the Members of the Constitutional 
Commission; 


Whereas, despite financial and time constraints, the Philip- 
pine Social Science Council actively participated in these public 
consultations by providing facilitators in various parts of the 
region where public hearings took place ; 

Whereas, the Philippine Social Science Council even offered 
t eir building facilities where some of the public hearings were 
held; 


Whereas, the Philippine Social Science Council also pro- 
vided relevant and useful resource materials needed in the draft- 
ing of our new constitution: Now, therefore, be it 


Resolved by the Constitutional Commission, To give due 
recogn'tion to the invaluable support and contribution of the 
lippine oci Science Council in the public consultation: 
and for their full cooperation by providing relevant and usefu 
resource materials for the drafting of the new constitution. 


Resolved farther. That a copy of this Resolution be tra 
mitted to the Philippine Social Science Council. 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 535 
(Recognizing the invaluable support 
and contribution of the PSSC) 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve Proposed Resolution No. 535. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Proposed Resolution No. 535 is approved. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 532 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secretary- 
General will read only the title of the proposed resolu- 
tion without prejudice to inserting in the Record the 
whole text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 532, entitled: 

RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE PROFOUND APPRECIA- 
TION OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION TO 
THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT FOR FREE ELECTION 
(NAMFREL) FOR THE INVALUABLE ASSISTANCE IN 
ORGANIZING PROVINCIAL CONSULTATIONS. 


(The following is the whole text of the proposed resolution.) 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 532 

RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE PROFOUND APPRECIA- 
TION OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION TO 
THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT FOR FREE ELECTION 
(NAMFREL) FOR THE INVALUABLE ASSISTANCE IN 
ORGANIZING PROVINCIAL CONSULTATIONS. 

Whereas, the Constitutional Commission is tasked with the 
drafting of a charter “truly reflective of the ideals and aspira- 
tions of the Filipino people”; 

Whereas, consultations with the Filipino people whose ideals 
and aspirations are sought to be reflected in the proposed charter 
is essential: 

Whereas, owing to the limited time allowed to finish the draft 
of the charter, preparations for the provincial consultations have 
to be made in the shortest time possible; 

Whereas, the NAMFREL, in the very limited time given to it, 
selflessly extended all the assistance necessary for the success of 
the provincial consultations in forty-seven places outside Metro- 
politan Manila; 

Whereas, the NAMFREL, notwithstanding the constraints and 
sacrifices personally encountered by individual members in terms 
of demands on their time and money, untiringly continued to ex- 
tend their support and involvement that carried the public con- 
sultations to its successful culmination: Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved by the Constitutional Commission, To express its 
profound appreciation to the National Movement for Free Elec- 
tion (NAMFREL) for the invaluable assistance, selfless coopera- 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1986 


631 


tion and untiring support in organizing the public consultations 
all over the country; 

Resolved, further. That a copy of this Resolution be transmit- 
ted to all the chapters of the NAMFREL mobilized to organize 
the public consultations. 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 532 
(Expressing the profound appreciation 
of the Con-Coni to the NAMFREL) 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve Proposed Resolution No. 532. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Proposed Resolution No. 532 is approved. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Guingona has a short announcement. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I would like to 
inform our esteemed colleagues that the sponsoring 
Committee will start working next week and will be 
making use of computers including the ones that we got 
from IBM. 

Thank you. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I move that we 
adjourn until Monday at nine-thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
Monday at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 1:05 p.m. 















































I 












































* 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


633 


R.C.C. NO. 47 
Monday, August 4, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:52 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Adolfo S. Azcuna. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. AZCUNA. Remember You are Mother Mary, 
that You won’t say You won’t because You are our 
Mother and You can’t say You can’t because You are 
God’s mother, so You will, won’t You? Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Foz 

. . Present 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Garcia 

. . Present 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Gascon 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Guingona . . . 

. . Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Jamir 

. . Present 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Laurel 

. . Present* 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Lerum 

. . Present* 

Bernas 

. Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present* 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Monsod . . . . 


Brock a 

. Present 

Natividad . . . 


Calderon 

. Present 

Nieva 


Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Nolledo . . . . 


Colayco 

. Present* 

Ople 


Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Padilla 


Davide 


Quesada . . . . 



Rama 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Regalado .... 


Tadeo 


Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Tan 

. . Present* 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . . 


Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Trenas 

. . . Present 

Romulo .... 


Uka 


Rosales 

. . Present* 

Villacorta . . 

. . . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present* 

Villegas .... 

. . . Present* 

Suarez 

. . Present 



Tire President is present. 

The roll call shows 33 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Tire Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


* Appeared after the roll call 


634 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Atty. Paz E. Vicada, Chairman, Socio- 
Cultural Task Force, PCCC, Misamis Oriental, and fifty- 
six teachers with their corresponding schools, requesting 
inclusion in the Constitution of the following proposals: 
(l)that the educational system shall be free from 
political intervention; (2) that public school teachers 
shall have the right to unionize as well as the right to 
strike; (3) that city and barangay schools have their 
budget nationalized; (4) that teachers shall have repre- 
sentation in the legislature and in academic policy- 
making bodies; and (5) that there shall be a national 
commission to investigate offenses committed by 
administrative officials against classroom teachers. 

(Communication No. 43 1 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Ambrosio Rilloraza of 383 Bo. Cruz, La 
Trinidad, Benguet, submitting for consideration of the 
Constitutional Commission his version of a new Consti- 
tution. 

(Communication No. 432 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


Letter from Mr. Daniel M. Mercado, Jr., President, 
Filipino Life Insurance Companies Association, Inc., 
suggesting that life insurance be included among those 
to be considered for limitation of ownership of 100%, 
if not at least 75%, Filipino. 

(Communication No. 433 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Commumcation from Mr. Hermogenes Martin, Jr. 
DatAl Amarah, P.O. Box 1727, Jeddah, Kingdom , 
Saudi Arabia suggesting, among others, (1) that tl 

? e P resident be six years with one reelectio 
(2) that the term of the Members of the legislature 1 
six years with two reelections, (3) that there should 1 
”°. constitutional convention during martial law, ar 
(4) that the voting age should be twenty-one. 

( ?™ Cati ° n N °' 434 - Constitutional Commissi, 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


Letter from Mr. Rafael A. Pabillore of Sagay Camigi 
submitting for consideration by the Constitutional G 
mission, his views and suggestions on such issues 
schedule of elections, bloc voting, political parties, t< 
of office, and presidential immunity. 


(Communication No. 435 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


To the Steering Committee. 


Letter from Mr. Ciriaco S. Nietes of Binoligan, Kidapa- 
wan, Cotabato, submitting an outline of a new Constitu- 
tion for study and deliberation by the Constitutional 
Commission. 

(Communication No. 436 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Ms. Nila Fragante of 9 Victoria Avenue, 
New Manila, Quezon City, and one hundred seventy 
others with their corresponding addresses, urging the 
Constitutional Commission to incorporate in the Consti- 
tution a provision obliging the State to protect the life 
of the unborn child from the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 437 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Fr. Mario Cruz, 319 Elm Avenue, Apt. 37, 
Long Beach, California 90802, U.S.A., urging the 
Constitutional Commission to include in the Constitu- 
tion a provision allowing Filipinos to have dual citizen- 
ship. 

(Communication No. 438 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Ms. Ma. Luisa D. Palillo of the Planning 
Service, Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports, 
Manila, submitting through the honorable Commissioner 
Joaquin G. Bemas, S.J., her position papers, which are 
self-explanatory, on religion in the Philippine schools, 
colleges, and universities. 

(Communication No. 439 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Dr. Jesus V. Tamesis of 42 Quezon Avenue, 
Quezon City, submitting for consideration by the Con- 
stitutional Commission, his position paper on the 
protection of the patrimony of the nation. 

(Communication No. 440 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Communication from Ms. Teresita Quintos Deles of 6 1 
Molave Street, Monte Vista, Marikina, Metro Manila, 
and one hundred five others, entitled: “Statement of 
Common Position and Concern re: Proposed constitu- 
tional provision on the ‘Right to Life from the Moment 
of Conception’.” 

(Communication No. 44 1 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


635 


To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 
(Article on Social Justice) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. I move that we continue the considera- 
tion of Committee Report No. 34 on Proposed Resolu- 
tion No. 534, known as the Article on Social Justice. 

We are now in the period of interpellations. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The honorable Chairman and members of the Com- 
mittee on Social Justice will please come forward and 
occupy the front table. 

MR. RAMA. Next on the list of interpellators, 
Madam President, is Commissioner Rigos. I ask that he 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will just first await the Chair- 
man and the members of the Committee. 

Is the Committee ready? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, my short comment 
has something to do with Section 4, page 2, line 8, on 
the words “and participation in policy and decision- 
making.” This must refer to the desire of the labor 
unions to have participation in the management of the 
company. I just wonder whether the Committee would 
consider adding a line or two on management participa- 
tion in the policy- and decision-making of the unions. 

And then on line 13, it says; “recognize the primacy 
of the right of labor to its just share.” It was intimated 
here last Saturday that probably this phrase refers to 
profit-sharing which, we are happy to note, is being 
done right now in many companies. My inquiry here is: 
Would the Committee also consider adding a line or two 
on loss-sharing in case the company does not make 
money or in case of loss? What about the share of labor 
in the loss of the company? 

Thank you. 


MS. NIEVA. With regard to the suggestion that 
management should also participate in the policy- 
making of the unions . . . 

REV. RIGOS. To make it balanced, not just one way. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. Is the Commissioner going to say 
something there? I think it will be a very difficult 
situation. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. With the recognition of the Commit- 
tee Chairman, may I be clarified on that point where 
management will have a share in the policies of the 
union. 

REV. RIGOS. No, I am just asking, Madam President. 
In this section, I think the Committee is asking that the 
labor unions or the laborers be represented or at least be 
allowed to participate in policy- and decision-making; 
and I understand this to be referring to management. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, of course. 

REV. RIGOS. How about the other way around? 
That is the question. 

MS. AQUINO. That might be out of the question 
because the essence of unionism is to preserve the 
sanctity and independence of workers when they 
organize as a collective bargaining agent. And it would 
not sit well with the concept of unionism for manage- 
ment to be part of their policies. In other words, man- 
agement intrusion into the union activities of the 
workers is anathema to the concept of trade unionism. 

REV. RIGOS. That may be correct but I thought we 
are talking of social justice here; at least, from a lay- 
man’s point of view, we also have to allow the other 
side to know what is going on in the other side. 

MS. AQUINO. We understand the sentiment of the 
Gentleman, but then, on the matter of unionism, we 
cannot allow an anachronistic situation wherein manage- 
ment would sit or be part of the union policies or union 
management. There may be a system of offsetting in the 
other aspects of labor-management relation, but it 
would go against the grain and the tide of trade union- 
ism if we accommodate that particular aspect that he is 
suggesting now. 

REV. RIGOS. At any rate, I will think more about 
that answer. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bengzon be recognized to interpellate. 


636 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Bengzon will be ready 
later, so I ask that Commissioner de los Reyes be recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I pro- 
pound some questions to Commissioner Tadeo? 

On the recommendation of Commissioner Tadeo 
regarding agrarian and natural resources reforms, Section 
5 states that the State shall undertake a genuine agrarian 
reform program founded on the primacy of the rights of 
farmers and farm workers. The 1973 Constitution 
emancipated the farmers from the bondage of the land 
which they were tilling. P.D. No. 27 of the deposed 
resident has been hailed as the most revolutionary and 
most advanced land reform decree, although said decree 
was confined to rice and com lands. Aside from P.D. 

, O' “ ’ sever ^l letters of instructions and presidential 
W6 ^ e issued sucb as ^e letter of instructions 
tion h ti S a ^ ting of aU landholdings; Letter of Instruc- 
ns No. 46 on pilot projects and surveys; Letter of 

and^uider 8 N °P n 4 l providin 8 implementing policies 
of cases S e \ P - D - No ' 3 16 which Prohibited the filing 
the Cornmitf ment 38ainSt tenants > etc - w hat is it that 
alreadv ^ aside from all these guarantees 

SrucTil m / D ’ Na 27 and <>*« related letters 

agrarian reform presidentla l decrees, to make the 
rm program more genuine than it is now? 

pro^r R amI A p D ara°m MakabUbUtin8 SUriin muna natin ang 
ilalim ng P D. No ^ i! t0 0308 mahusay ' Sa 

and com Ane WahiT ’ ang nasa k°P lamang nito ay rice 

hecta^a, a„ 8 g "?„ Palayan ay 3 5 ™«“>" 

uan, ito av 6 8 !,!! Y l 3 mdll0n hectares. Sa kabu- 
lamang ng program ayTqb^'^Ohec 1 ! 6 ' 0 ^ naSak ° P 

a„/ nasakop 

only 13 percent ng kabu,.! m H representing 
Kaya kung titingnan nahn L ng ° 8 magbubuk i d - 

hindi pa nabasag nho ang ST” 8 " 8 ^ monopoly ’ 
ong napakaliit lamang ng cove r ,r x? P ° ly dahil tot °- 
kop lang ay rice and corn kava S Ngayon > na sa- 

* « ■? 

yaran ay iyong compensation sa panginS may 
lupa, masasabi natmg maliit p a rin pero hindi ito inaTot 
noong kakayahan ng magbubukid na makabayad Sang- 
ayon na nn sa record ng Ministry of Agrarian Reform 
ang nakabayad lamang na amortizing owners sa kabu- 
uan ng programa ay 9 percent. Ang 91 percent ay hindi 
nakabayad ng amortization. Batay sa pagsusuri, ito ay 
bunga ng napakaliit na ani, napakahinang kita at 
pagkabaon sa kumunoy ng kahirapan ng magbubukid. 


Kapanabay ng programang P.D. No. 27 ang isang 
malaking pagkakamali nito. Ang malalawak na lupain ay 
kapanabay namang ibinigay sa mga cronies at mga 
multinationals. Nilabag nito ang sinabi ng ating Saligang 
Batas na puwedeng mag-angkin ng 24 hectares ang isang 
individual at puwedeng mag-develop ng hindi lalagpas 
sa 500 hectares, at ang puwedeng angkinin ng isang kor- 
porasyon ay 1,024. Pero, ang batas na ito na nakalagay sa 
ating Saligang Batas ay nawalang kabuluhan dahilan sa 
Amendment No. 6. Dahil dito, nagawa ng Dole Pine- 
apple, Philippines na mag-angkin ng 30,000 hectares, 
mismong paglabag na sa ating Saligang Batas; ang Del 
Monte ay nagkamit ng 24,000 hectares; ang Goodrich 
Sime Darby, 8,000 hectares; ang Aguinaldo Develop- 
ment Corporation, 27,000 hectares; ang Manila Paper 
Mills, 35,000 hectares at iba pa. Kaya makikita nating 
bagamat mayroon itong nagawang tulong sa rice and 
com, kapanabay naman kasi nito ay umiral din ang 
G.O. No. 47, iyong corporate farming program nila, 
kung saan ito ay sumakop ng 104 corporations at may- 
roong 81,000 hectares ang nakuha nito. Kaya kung 
titingnan natin ang kabuuan ng programa ay mayroong 
maliit namang tagumpay pero ang naging napakalaking 
kabiguan nito ay kapanabay namang ibinigay ang 
malawak na lupain, lalo na sa Visayas at Mindanao, sa 
malalaking korporasyon at mga cronies at ang coverage 
nga ay totoong napakaliit kaya hindi nabasag ang 
monopoly. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Ako ay sumasang-ayon sa 
prinsipyo ng land reform, subalit katulad doon sa amin 
sa lalawigan ng Laguna, ang tinatamaan ng land reform 
ay hindi iyong malalaking hacienda na nakakaiwas sa 
land reform sapagkat ito ay pinalalabas na nahaluan ng 
agro-industrial entity, na ang mga nagtatrabaho rito ay 
suwelduhan, kundi ang kalimitan pong tinatamaan ay 
iyong mga “middle-class families.” Hindi naman lingid 
sa inyong kaalaman na sang-ayon sa Public Land Act 
noong araw ay hanggang sa ngayon, ang mga taong 
masipag ay maaaring magkaroon ng 24 hectares of 
alienable and disposable land, at ito ay naging kanila 
sapagkat sila mismo ay magsasaka rin. Dahilan sa kani- 
lang pagpupunyagi, nakapagpaaral sila ng mga anak; 
ang iba ay naging professionals — doktor, abogado,' 
titser. Kung aagawin natin sa kanila ang kanilang 
lupang sinasaka na naging kanila sa pamamagitan ng 
pagtatrabaho, sa pamamagitan ng homestead — at alam 
naman ninyong bago naging kanila ang lupang iyan ay 
gubatan iyan, pinagtatabasan nila ng katakut-takot na 
mga damo, mga malalaking kahoy, at halos ang kanilang 
buhay ay ipinain sa mga elemento, at ang iba riyan ay 
natutuka pa ng ahas — iyan ang idinadaing ng mga taga- 
amin sa Laguna. Baka raw naman dito sa ating pagsusu- 
mikap na magkaroon ng land reform ay silang mga 
middle-class ang siyang maapektuhan at mawalan. 

Hindi bale na raw na ipamigay iyong malalaking 
hacienda sapagkat iyan naman ay kalimitang minana 
lamang nitong mga kasalukuyang nagmamay-ari. Pero 
iyong naging lupa nila sa pamamagitan ng pagtatrabaho, 
papaano po ba iyan? 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


637 


MR. TADEO. Kasi gunito iyan. Dapat muna nating 
makita ang prinsipyo ng agrarian reform, iyong m aging 
may-ari siya ng lupa na kaniyang binubungkal. Iyon ang 
kauna-unahang prinsipyo nito. Hindi dapat mangyari 
na pagkaraang ipairal ang reporma sa lupa ay mawalan 
siya ng saka, ma-eject siya. Sa ilalim kasi ng RA 3844 
ay nagkaroon ng personal cultivation. Ang nangyari, 
ginamit itong paraan ng mga panginoong may lupa para 
i-eject ang tenant, kaya iyon mismong prinsipyo, layu- 
nin o objective ng programa ay nasira. Sa halip na 
maging may-ari ay napalayas pa. 

Kaya ang ginawa rito noon ng Federation of Free 
Farmers, sa 85 araw at 25 bagyo na pinagdaanan, nag- 
karoon ito ng susog; inalis ang loopholes gaya ng per- 
sonal cultivation. 

Ngayon, sa ilalim ng P.D No. 27, ang sinakop lamang 
kasi nito ay rice and corn, at ang isang paraan para ma- 
iwasan ang P.D. No. 27 ay ang huvvag magtanim ng 
rice and corn. Hindi sakop iyan ng agrarian reform 
program ni Ginoong Marcos. Sa ilalim kasi ng agrarian 
reform program, may dalawang phases ito - iyong 
tinatawag na Operation Land Transfer, seven hectares 
and above ang coverage nito at bibigyan ng Certificate 
of Land Transfer ang magbubukid na huhulugan niya 
bilang amortizing owner sa loob ng 15 taon papunta 
roon sa tinatawag na pagkakamit niya ng emancipation 
patent or title of land. 

Pero itong mga maliliit na panginoong may lupa, 
iyong may seven hectares below, covered naman sila ng 
operation leasehold; magkakaroon sila ng fixed rental. 
Tama naman ang mungkahi na ang pagpapatupad ng 
reporma sa lupa ay dapat simulan sa malalawak na 
lupain. Kaya dapat mapasama rito ang lahat ng pananim, 
hindi rice and corn lamang. Dapat simulan ito. 

Sa maliliit na mga panginoong may lupa, maaapektu- 
han sila ng leasehold. Magkakaroon ito ng rental sa ka- 
nila. At gaya nga ng sinasabi ko noong Sabado, maaa- 
pektuhan ang maliliit na panginoong may lupa sa isang 
yugto ng pag-unlad ng industriya, kasi kapanabay ng 
pagtutulak sa tunay na reporma sa lupa, itutulak din ang 
pambansang industriyalisasyon. Sa isang yugto ng 
pag-unlad ng industriya, makikita ng maliliit na 
panginoong may lupa na hindi na produktibo pa na 
manatili sila sa rental na ibinibigay ng tenant. Mas 
magaling na pumunta sila sa industriya dahil sa sila ang 
unang bibigyan ng pagkakataong makapag-invest o ma- 
kabili ng share of stock. Sila rin ang unang bibigyan 
ng pagkakataon na mapasok sa industriya. Ganito kasi 
ang paraan noon. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Nais ko lang ipaabot sa kaala- 
man ng Committee na doon sa amin sa Laguna ay iisa 
lang naman ang malaking lupain, ang Hacienda Canlu- 
bang na pag-aari ng mga Yulo, at ang kalimitan diyan, 
katamtaman lang ang lupang binubungkal nila kaya 
nagkaroon ng niyugan. Tungkol sa mga kasama sa 
niyog, idinadaing ng mga maliliit na may-ari ng niyugan 
na wala naman daw masyadong ginagawa ang mga mag- 


sasaka riyan at inaabangan na lamang nila na magka- 
roon ng bunga ang niyog; pagkatapos, sa panahon ng 
pamumuti ay pumaparte sila; kaunti lamang ang pagta- 
tabas diyan. At kung nagkakaroon ng tinatawag na 
“intercropping,” iyong pagtatanim sa ilalim ng niyugan 
ng mga halamang katulad ng pinya, kape, at kung anu- 
ano pang gulay, sang-ayon sa custom sa Laguna, walang 
kaparte riyan ang may-ari ng lupa at ang lahat ng naki- 
kinabang diyan ay ang mga manggagawa. 

Kaya ko ito sinasabi sa inyo ay hindi dahil sa ako ay 
kontra sa land reform, kung hindi gusto rin nating 
magkaroon ng katarungan itong mga middle-class 
people, sapagkat sa tingin ko naman, ang social concept 
of justice does not mean grabbing the lands of the 
middle-class families in order to give them to the poor. 

MR. TADEO. Kaya nga kami naglagay dito sa line 23 
ng retention limits sa owner-cultivator. Sinasabi natin 
dito: Ano ba itong retention limits? Siyempre, kagaya 
ng sinasabi ko, gaano ba ang sukat nitong retention 
limits? 

Sa mga pag-aaral na isinagawa sa mga public 
hearings, nakitang pitong ektarya pababa ang puwedeng 
maging retention limits sa owner-cultivator. Ang pangu- 
nahing batayan nito ay iyong nakalagay sa Bible para 
makita ninyo ang pagkamaka-Diyos ng agrarian reform 
na ito; duon sa Chapter 2, verses 44-45 ng Acts of the 
Apostles: “Ibibigay ko ito batay sa pangangailangan ng 
bawat isa.” Ano ba ang sukat ng lupa na dapat maiwan 
sa panginoong may lupang binubungkal o owner-cul- 
tivator na makasasapat sa bilang ng kanyang pamilya? 
Kaya ang retention limits ay batay pa rin sa kanyang 
needs at capacity. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I would like to congratulate 
the Committee for the provision of Section 8 especially 
that which concerns the rights of Fishermen and local 
communities to the direct or communal use of marine 
and fishing resources. Even Commissioner Padilla agrees 
that the Laguna Lake should be a communal fishing 
ground. 

At ang issue po riyan ay ganito: 10,000 pamilyang 
nakatira riyan sa paligid ng Laguna de Bay ang nawalan 
ng pagkakataon na makapangisda sa tinatawag nilang 
ancestral fishing grounds dahilan sa malalaking korpo- 
rasyon. Korporasyon na naman ang problema, kathlad 
ng nasabi ninyo sa lupa. Ito ay korporasyon namang 
nagtatayo ng mga tinatawag na fish pen at halos iisa 
lamang ang may-ari ng mga korporasyong iyan. Dahilan 
diyan ay nawalan ng pagkakataon ang mga maliliit na 
mangingisda. 

Ang kinakatuwiran diyan lagi nitong mga fish 
operators ay magiging mahal daw ang isda sa Kalakhang 
Maynila kapag inalis iyan sapagkat sila raw ang supplier 
ng maraming murang isda. Pero sa Laguna, ang nararam- 
daman ko, itong mga 1 0,000 pamilyang nakatira rito sa 
paligid ng Laguna de Bay ang madaling naaakit ng mga 


638 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


kapatid natin sa labas na nagsasabing ang pamahalaan 
at ang batas ay para lamang sa mga mayayaman at hindi 
sa mahihirap. That is why I would like to congratulate 
the Committee for this very revolutionary and 
progressive provision. 


When one of the Commissioners interpellated a 
member of the Committee, he pointed out the use of 
the word “shall.” For example, “The State shall under- 
take a genuine land reform”; “The State shall recognize 
the right of farmers.” And his question was: Can the 
citizen, for example, sue the State if it fails or refuses to 
do what is mandated in these provisions? Then, a com- 
parison was made between the Bill of Rights and the 
proposal on social justice. And the answer was that the 
Bill of Rights contains civil and political rights while the 
latter contains provisions to enhance the social and 
economic rights of the citizens. 


In other words, the civil and political rights which are 
contained in the Bill of Rights are for the protection of 
the citizens against the encroachment and violation by 
t e State of the right to due process and equal pro- 
ec ion o the law. In short, the individuals exercise 
ese nghts as inalienable and being recognized as such 
y e a e. The State cannot prevent the individuals 
rom exercising said rights without violating the guaran- 
tees in the Bill of Rights. 


° f . the BiU of *fchts, therefore, is to 
protect and free the citizens from interference by the 

™ nt ^ the provisions ^ the Article on Social 
hP,nl tre " 8t + h( f soclal justice rights and the State is 
dat6d u through its instrumentalities, like 
j ss passing the necessary laws to give real meaning 

a merp b nh a r ce conce Pt of social justice, not just 

stand ' n P ° s< ? p k ica l or rhetorical concept. Is my under- 

Sce cone^ 6 Pr ° Visions of the ^le Social 


EVA. Yes. Basically, I would say it is correc 

some^ofmir^con EE ^ ES - ^nd contrary to the fears 

istic or socialistic 38 frr’h e th Pr ° P0SalS are not commu 
countries there is a ^ 

nomic nghts. For exsmnio * uwe on social and ec 

Russia, Chapter X, Article lRO^h^ co f stltut J° n 
citizens of the USSR h hereof states that t 

the right to guarantee elV^ ' iSht to WOrk; ,hat 

their work in accordance withT 6 * 1 ’ P a y ment f 
Article 1 1 9 static . 1 lth lts quantity and qualii 
Art e 119 states that the citizens of the U.S S R ha 

the right to rest. Article l?n ctoto 

the U.S.S.R. have thfrilh? • , the C ‘ teenS 

. .. - n , “ e n &ut to material security; a 

Aitmle 12 states that the citizens of the U.S.S. 

have the right to education. Women in the USSR ' 

accorded equal rights with men. These are not found 

the proposals of the Committee. The proposals of ( 

Committee merely enjoin Congress to enact the nec 

sary laws in order to enable citizens to enjoy social a 

economic rights. Is that correct? 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, we agree with the Gentleman. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you, Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I add, however, that even if 
we have those rights in the Article on Social Justice, 
that would not necessarily mean that the Article is 
communistic because those are very human rights also. 

MR. TADEO. Siguro’y magandang linawin na itong 
usaping ito tungkol sa salitang “communistic.” Gusto 
kong makita ng lahat na mismong si Pope John Paul II 
ay nanawagan ukol sa just distribution of income. 
Noong pumunta siya sa Bogota, Colombia, ito ang 
kanyang sinabi. Ito ay para lang makita ninyo ang 
pagkamaka-Diyos ng Article on Social Justice na aming 
ginawa. 

In an Indian mountain village and in a poor Bogotan 
neighborhood, Pope John Paul II made strong calls in 
support of peasant property rights and more just dis- 
tribution of income, thus, championing the cause of the 
peasants who comprise about 40 percent of Colombia’s 
28,000,000 people. The Pope said that those who work 
on the land deserve safeguards on their legitimate right 
and guarantees for legal forms of landownership. He said 
that unjust situations have to be changed, especially in 
the case of agricultural workers who are obliged to cul- 
tivate the land of others and who are exploited by big 
landowners, without the hope of ever having possession 
of even a tiny piece of land. About two-thirds of Colom- 
bia’s arable land is in the hands of four percent of the 
population. 

The Pope went on to say that the people have spent 
their hard life in the field without sufficient salaries, 
without hope of obtaining a minimal piece of land of 
their own and without receiving the benefits of a duly 
planned and sweeping and effective agrarian reform. 
And for those who are small landowners, they had met 
many difficulties just to obtain adequate credits. He also 
said that nobody should forget that the gifts which God 
has conferred on man have universal destiny and, there- 
fore, these cannot be the exclusive property of the few, 
be they individuals, groups or nations. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Romulo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I have a few questions on Section 1 for the record. 
I would like it confirmed that Congress, in the name of 
social justice, cannot redistribute the powers set forth in 
the Constitution. Will the Committee confirm that? 

MS. NIEVA. Commissioner Garcia will respond to 
that. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


639 




MR. GARCIA. What this part tries to provide is that 
there must be an effort to redistribute economic wealth, 
therefore, political power must be accessible to the 
majority of our people. For example, on our sectoral 
representation, the party list system in a sense tries to 
provide this availability of political power to those who 
normally are excluded from political decisions. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

As to Section 2, is the power of the State to regulate 
the acquisition, ownership, use and disposition of 
property total and absolute? 

MR. GARCIA. No; in fact, during our previous 
discussions, we were mentioning that under certain 
conditions, properties should be used for the common 
good. Under this provision, when the property is ex- 
cessive and when its use is unlimited, the State can come 
in to make sure that it is used properly for the common 
good. 

And finally, due process of law, I think, is very 
important. It does not violate any other rights of an 
individual as found in the Constitution. 

MR. ROMULO. And Section 2 would apply to all 
types of property because it says property without 
qualification. What does tlie Committee mean by 
“property”? Is it real property, intangible property or 
any kind of property? 

MS. NIEVA. I think that would apply to land 
resources and wealth but, as one says, how do we 
regulate bank accounts and so forth? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, because “property” is an all- 
encompassing term. It can include money, jewelry and 
cars. So, what does the Committee really mean? 

MS. NIEVA. The State regulates this through taxa- 
tion. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, in a negative way. But the term 
“property” in Section 2 refers to what type of pro- 
perty? 

MS. NIEVA. I would say then that it would refer to 
practically all properties that may be taxable or that 
may relate to the social good of the people; that is, for 
the common good. 

MR- ROMULO. In its broadest meaning, that applies 
to everything including the clothes I have on. Is that 
correct? 

MS. NIEVA. I suppose, if we extend it to that limit. 
But I do not know if the State will take the trouble to 
regulate that kind of property. 

MR. ROMULO. I only ask because of future inter- 
pretations. 


MS. NIEVA. This was lifted from the 1973 Constitu- 
tion. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, but nevertheless, this is a new 
Constitution. So, we would like to determine the limits 
or the nonlimits of the terms proposed in Section 2. As 
I am beginning to understand the Committee, it can 
apply to everything and all types of property. 

MS. NIEVA. And at the same time, it respects the 
right of ownership, according to the declaration. 

MR. ROMULO. It respects that, but on the other 
hand, we give the State the right to regulate the acquisi- 
tion, the ownership and the disposition of property. I 
am not against this Article; I just want the parameters. 

MS. NIEVA. I think our parameters would be what- 
ever the common good demands. 

MR. ROMULO. The common good can be inter- 
preted in many ways; that is of no help. 

MR. TADEO. Palagay -ko, nakalagay ito sa 1973 
Constitution. Ngunit halimbawa, mayroon kang punong- 
kahoy at pag-aari mo ang punongkahoy na ito, subalit 
kung ang punongkahoy mo ay hahadlang sa kabutihan 
ng nakararami, ang karapatan mo sa punongkahoy ay 
mawawala. 

MR. ROMULO. In any case, this is always limited by 
the Bill of Rights and due process and subject to legisla- 
tive acts. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, I would say so, like just compensa- 
tion and all the rest. 

MR. ROMULO. In Section 4, when we speak of 
participation in policy- and decision-making affecting the 
rights and benefits of labor, I take it that a collective 
bargaining agreement would be one of the modes where- 
by they would participate. Is that correct? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

w 

MR. ROMULO. If a company does not have a collec- 
tive bargaining agreement, in what form should this 
participation be? 

MS. NIEVA. I think we provided for voluntary modes 
of settling disputes between workers and employers, as 
well as collective negotiations which would cover the 
unorganized working force who do not enjoy the 
benefits of CBAs. 

MR. ROMULO. Therefore, is the sponsor saying that 
the latter part of this section spells out the ways and 
means whereby participation in policy- and decision- 
making can take place? Is that its intention? 


h. 


A 


640 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


MS. NIEVA. In a very general way, but I think this 
can be worked out depending on the situation of the 
companies, and maybe depending on what the legisla- 
ture would provide for. It just provides in general for 
the right. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask this because the opening line 
here says: “It shall also guarantee.” They are very strong 
words, but the thrust of the sponsor’s answers seems to 
indicate that she is leaving this to voluntary methods. 
Is that correct? 


MR. GARCIA. If I may add, the reason why guaran- 
teeing the rights of workers to self-organization is 
important is, one of its consequences is that once 
workers get organized, the possibility of participation 
becomes more real and effective. And I think that 
recognition is rather crucial in this entire arrangement. 

MR. ROMULO. Fine. So, the base is really the first 
part of the sentence; that is, self-organization. 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly. 


MS. NIEVA. Maybe, that is as far as disputes between 
workers and employers are concerned, but maybe the 
Gentleman is referring to just and humane conditions of 
work and job security. 


MR. ROMULO. On lines 15 and 16, where reasonable 
return on investment is mentioned, for the record, I 
assume that the Committee will take into consideration 
the risks involved. 


MR. ROMULO. I am referring to the participative 
rights being granted to employees and the manner by 
which those participative rights will be carried out. It is 
very important for us to know that. The sponsor has 
agreed that one method is the collective bargaining agree- 
me !?u’ I think that is probably one of the best 
h*> S ^ Ut wbat are other methods being envi- 


MS. NIEVA. Certainly, that is definitely an important 
element. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

On agrarian reform, I have very few questions. 
Generally, did the Committee calculate the potential 
costs of agrarian reform? 


npffntiatinr, ‘ A S sa *d> we Provided for voluntary 
disnufes hpt 311 Voluntar y m °des for the settling ol 
various forrm : een f W i 0 u kerS and em P lo y ers which can take 
other mu t • 0 a ^ or ' mana g e ment cooperation as in 
or co of n neS ® ecause as we pointed out, five percent 
m • ? Ur wor ^ ers are covered by CBAs, so the vasl 
trvina t ° n ° j enj °y these rights. That is why we are 
seek redre Pr ° Vlde ^ or some means by which they can 


there rin^' CBA ^ iS precisel y m y Question. W 
mere is no CBA, because labor is onlv in ner 
orgamzed, wha, f orm does this 


we sa^it^ri^n^t 16 ^ 6 are . bein 8 ver y general becau 

later on as well P °f be egislature to provide for th 
later on, as well as for the 

out different ways of ustl , com P a mes to wo 
negotiations. mg volunta ry methods . 

Maybe our Chairperson for labor can add somethin 

MS. AQUINO. One may notice that on line 4 page 
there is a provision for collective bargaining and negoti 
tions. The concern here is to nmvicL r s dna negon 
workers. So. this is the forum wThta 

tentphtie statutory implementation “sums S 

would accommodate the need of unionized worke 
in their collective negotiation with management. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 


MS. NIEVA. There have been different figures set up 
by the Ministry of Agrarian Reform itself; so, I think, 
Commissioner Tadeo here may have more to say. 

MR. TADEO. Noong binabalangkas pa lamang ang 
RA 3844, nakita nilang kakailanganin ang malaking 
pondo para sa pagpapatupad nito. At ang isang nakita 
nilang paraan ay ang ibenta ang mga military camps, 
katulad ng Camp Aguinaldo. Kasi nakita nilang bakit 
kailangang mas marami ang militar kung nagugutom 
naman ang sambayanan? Mula rito sa mga kampong ito, 
nakita nilang matutugunan ang pagpapatupad ng tunay 
na reporma sa lupa kayat hindi na kailangan ng militar 
ang mga kampong napakalalawak. Ito ay noon pang 
panahon ni Ginoong Macapagal noong 1963. Isang 
maaaring pagmulan ng pondo ay ang pagbebentahan 
sa mga kampong ito. Isa sa mga sinasabi ni Ginoong 
Montemayor ay kung hindi natin mapapaalis ang foreign 
military bases, dapat lakihan ang rentals dito para 
maging pondo ng agrarian reform. Isa lang iyan sa mga 
pagtanaw nila. Ngayon, nakikita naming kung iyong 
mahigit na dalawang bilyong piso na ginasta sa power 
plant ay iniukol lamang dito, baka ngayon ay walang 
insurgency at hindi na nagugutom ang mamamayan. 


MS. NIEVA. And Commissioner Monsod may have 
something to add to that. 

MR. ROMULO. So, what is the calculated cost of 
land reform? The methods whereby it may be financed 
were indicated but I am just curious as to what the 
cost may be. It is never certain, but what would be the 
total cost if this program is carried out? 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


641 


MS. NIEVA. When I spoke to Minister Alvarez, he 
pulled out a figure from the air, but the Ministry itself is 
still studying this very seriously. I think it does not 
have these figures. 

MR. ROMULO. In other words, we are not certain. 

MS. NIEVA. No. 

MR. TADEO. Isa lang ang sagot ko roon; kakailanga- 
nin nga rito ang malaking pondo, pero ang itutugon 
nanian kasi ng magbubukid sa sambayanang Pilipino ay 
ang kaunlaran, ang pagkalutas ng problema sa bumabag- 
sak na ekonomiya dahil magkakaroon ng purchasing 
power ang mga magbubukid na mayroong mga 35 to 40 
million. Uunlad ang mga industriya, magkakaroon ng 
job opportunities. Kaya bagamat malaki ang kakailanga- 
nin, ang magiging tugon naman dito ay ang kaunlaran ng 
sambayanang Pilipino. 

MS. NIEVA. I think the land reform record of 
Taiwan would give us a lot of insights into how the 
Chinese have managed to improve their economy and 

everything. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, but Taiwan, in area and popula- 
tion, is very different from us. For the record, I take it 
from Commissioner Tadeo’s previous answers to other 
interpellations that “fair and progressive system of com- 
pensation” is now the norm when it comes to land 
reform, rather than the old formula of “just compensa- 
tion.” Is that correct? 

MR. TADEO. Opo, dahil ang just compensation ay 
hindi naman ginamit sa ilalim ng RA 3844 bagamat nasa 
jurisprudence ito kasama ang fair market value. Ang 
ginagamit natin sa ilalim ng RA 3844, sa ilalim ng right 
of preemption and right of redemption ay ang reason- 
able capacity of the farmer to pay. 

MR. ROMULO. Section 6 says: 

The State shall recognize the right of farmers and farm- 
workers ... to participate in planning, organizing and man- 
agement of the program . . . 

which I take would be the program of land reform. 

MR. TADEO. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. Again, this is correct and just but it 
leaves out the landowner. That cannot be the intention 
of the Committee. Should he not equally participate? 

MS. NIEVA. I would say he is essential to the whole 

program. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. But the way this is written, it 
would seem to be determined by the government and 
the farm workers to the exclusion of the landowners. 


MS. NIEVA. I do not think that was the intention 
at all. It was here just to highlight the right of the 
farmers and farm workers to the organization of cooper- 
atives and to participate in farmers’ organizations. It 
does not say to exclude but just to be consulted. 

MR. ROMULO. So, in no way does the Committee 
exclude the landowners? 

MS. NIEVA. In no way because I do not see how it 
could possibly even begin to work without the land- 
owners being an important element. 

MR. ROMULO. How does the Committee envision 
the farm workers participating in the management of 
the program? 

MR. TADEO. Mayroong isang interview na ginawa sa 
ating Secretary-General Flerida Ruth Romero tungkol sa 
agrarian reform. Ang title nito ay “The Government 
Should Pay Attention to the Needs of the Small 
Farmers.” Ito iyong tanong sa ating Secretary-General: 
“What should the government consider in formulating 
land reform policies?” Ang sagot ng ating Secretary - 
General ay: “The first thing which government planners 
should do is to consult the farmers and the real farmers’ 
organizations, kung kaya nilagyan namin ng ‘indepen- 
dent,’ not the so-called Samahang Nayon which was run 
by the government. They must involve the farmers from 
the beginning of the policy-making stage to goal-setting, 
implementing and problem solving.” Iyon ho ang sagot 
ng ating Secretary-General. 

MR. ROMULO. So, that is the general concept of the 
Committee? 

MR. TADEO. Sa pagpapatupad po kasi ng tunay na 
reporma sa lupa, kakailanganin natin dito mismo ang 
mga magbubukid mula sa pagpaplano pa lamang at sa 
pagpapatupad nito hanggang sa mga nayon. Mula sa 
lahat ng opisina ng agrarian reform ang lahat ng farmers’ 
organizations ay kabalikat nila sa pagpapatupad nito. 

MR. ROMULO. Before I forget, I want to join in the 
comments of Commissioner de los Reyes with regard to 
the middle-class farmers and so on, because these are the 
same sentiments I heard in Quezon and Batangas. 

Section 7 says: 

The State shall apply the principles of agrarian reform in 

the disposition of other natural resources, including lands 

of the public domain under lease or concession, subject to 

prior rights of original inhabitants 

Again we have the same basic questions; but I do not 
think the Committee is excluding the lessees and the 
concessionaires in the disposition and application of 
agrarian reform because apart from the original inhabi- 
tants and homesteaders, there are obviously the lessees 


642 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


and the concessionaires. Their rights, I take it, will be 
respected. 

MS. NlEVA. Under the due process of law, I think so. 

MR. TADEO. Narito po iyong paliwanag tungkol dito 
sa statement na “The State shall apply the principles of 
agrarian reform in the disposition of other natural 
resources”: it means full natural resource coverage in 
principle. The term “land” should include all forms of 
natural resources, including mineral and forest re- 
sources. Inuulit ko, ang mga mina, under the regalian 
doctrine, ay pag-aari ng State. Ang ibig sabihin, iyong 
puwedeng sakahin ay suited for agriculture; pero iba pa 
rin ang tinatawag na ecological balance upang mapanga- 
lagaan ang ating kagubatan, at hindi kasali rito iyon. 
Ang sinasabi lamang dito ay iyong suited for agriculture 
na hindi sisira sa ecological balance: 

. . . and water resources, whether public or private, 
whether titled or untitled, whether presently controlled by 
Filipinos or non-Filipinos over which there is social conflict 
induced by an unjust distribution. 

MR. ROMULO. Since the problem of mining rights is 
raised, the Commissioner realizes that the government 
in giving concessions grants the concessionaires certain 
rights and so on. This Section 7 does not mean to inter- 

ere with those rights assuming, of course, they were 
lawfully acquired. 

MS. NIEVA. I do not think that with this present 
ormulation, the rights of the existing lessors or lessees 

or concessionaires should be ignored or not taken into 
consideration. 

MR. ROMULO. With regard to urban land reform and 
ousing, particularly, did the Committee calculate the 

potential cost of giving them affordable housing? 

MS. NIEVA. I think the word “housing” here would 
now embrace the newer concepts of sites and services. 

e w just provide for the development of the sites 
an services and encourage the urban poor themselves 
to u their own houses. There are different methods 
now that are being considered. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MS. NIEVA. And I think it is beginning to be 
evident that there will never be enough funds to give 
everybody a home fully built and all that. Since the 
government cannot do that, the private sector has to 
come in very strongly. And, therefore, we wanted to 
include here that the government should encourage 
home financing to assist the poor to acquire their 
homes. 

MR. ROMULO. In providing the infrastructure and 
neighborhood services, et cetera . . . 


MS. NIEVA. That would be the role of the govern- 
ment, specifically. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. But did the Committee consult 
the housing authority as to the potential cost of this 
program? 

MS. NIEVA. We did not get the exact figures, but 
certainly that is the trend now of the program of the 
housing authority itself; that is, to provide for sites 
and services and the Zonal Improvement Program that is 
called ZIP. 

MR. ROMULO. So, we have not determined the cost 
of this either. 

With regard to Section 1 1 which says: 

Urban poor dwellers shall not be evicted nor their 

dwellings demolished without due process of law . . . 

did the Committee take into account the fact that 
squatting has been declared as a nuisance per se and it is 
punishable under the Revised Penal Code? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. Because what else does “due process 
of law” mean assuming “urban poor dwellers” refers to 
squatters? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. That is a problem that we have to 
iron out. 

Does Commissioner Aquino have something to say in 
this regard? 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, the provision on 
squatters and the urban poor would address the problem 
of squatting as a social problem, such that when the 
committee report carries the provision that it should be 
in compliance with the due process, I think the focus 
was essentially on procedural due process. However, at 
the proper time, we would be willing to yield to the 
amendments of the body on this matter. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. I have no quarrel with the ap- 
proach. I just want to make sure that if we wish to 
change the law, that should be made clear in this 
provision. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. But it is seen better in the 
context of that premise that squatting is a social pro- 
blem. That may avoid any misleading, any misinter- 
pretation of the provision. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

MR. GARCIA. I would just like to address a general 
question regarding what Commissioner Romulo has 
presented several times already on the affordability of 
the programs on agrarian reform, natural resources 
reform and also urban land reform. As one will notice, 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


643 


the Committee on Social Justice presents provisions 
that have very general directions. In fact, in the sections, 
we enjoin Congress to draw up a program that will 
effectively make real the general directions that we have 
provided. And we, in fact, hope that it will be Congress 
that will create the structure and provide the necessary 
funds that will make possible these objectives. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I understand that. My concern is 
that we may be raising the expectations of our people 
too much and if these remain unfulfilled, there will be 
further frustrations. So, I am just wondering whether a 
cost-benefit analysis was undertaken in all of these 
programs that we are commanding — to use Commis- 
sioner Bernas’ favorite phrase — the legislature to under- 
take. We have to balance this with the expectations of 
the people once they read this Constitution. It is by way 
of caution really that I raised the point. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, I think that is understood. In 
other words, for us, these are desired objectives. If we 
were to create social justice in our land, these are the 
desired objectives for the people. Regarding the creation 
of an economy that will give priority not just to the 
growth of the economy, to the profits of the companies 
and so on, but precisely to the basic needs of our people 
regarding land, regarding housing and so forth, we feel 
these should be the priority tasks that the legislature 
should consider in enacting laws. In a way, that is how 
one gives flesh or gives concrete reality to giving more in 
law to those who have very little in life. 

MR. ROMULO. Tli an k you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan desires to 
make some comments. 

SR. TAN. I just want to comment on the subject of 
squatters. To the layman, when we say “squatter,” we 
usually think of those people who live by the esteros 
or those who just come one night and take over a piece 
of land. But to us the word “squatter” really means 
“landowner” who has been there for 10 years, 20 years, 
50 years, 60 years and has been paying for the land but 
he just does not get it because of the bureaucracy and 
graft and corruption. So, the squatters are just asking 
for such services as our Chairman said and, when possi- 
ble, shelter and land. When we say “anti-squatting,” it 
refers to the overnight squatters in that sense. 

MR. ROMULO. I am happy to hear that distinction. 

Just for information, I gather that comprehensive 
agrarian reform, as found in Section 12, is synonymous 
to genuine land reform and that there are no differences 
in meaning. Is that correct? 

MS. NIEVA. I think that is what we mean. 


MR. ROMULO. Thank you. I must again ask the 
basic question of health. Do we know how much this 
will cost? It is a very extensive program which, of 
course, is desirable even from the point of view of the 
MEDICARE. Did the Committee calculate the cost of 
an integrated and comprehensive health program? And 
who will bear that cost? 

MS. QUESADA. I am glad the Gentleman has finally 
asked questions on health because I have been waiting 
to explain what we mean by integrated and compre- 
hensive health care program services. Actually, when we 
talk of integrated health care services, we are thinking 

in terms of unifying all the instrumentalities of govern- 
ment as well as the private sector in providing the 
much-needed health care to our people. And this does 
not really fall just within the purview or the responsibi- 
lity of one government entity like the Ministry of 
Health, but that is the responsibility as well of the 
Ministry of Education and Culture which provides 
school health services to the school population. It covers 
also the occupational health and safety services provided 
by the Ministry of Labor and Employment. It also in- 
cludes the services provided by the Ministry of National 
Defense and the health services provided by nongovern- 
mental organizations. We are also talking in terms of 
how all these entities, private and government, will be 
able to unify themselves in providing the necessary 
protection and promotion of health of the people. 

This concept actually extends beyond just structures 
or organizations. Integration includes unifying these 
instrumentalities in terms of primary health care as an 
approach that has been adopted by the Philippines toge- 
ther with the 134 member-states of WHO and UNICEF 
in meeting the health care needs of the people by the 
year 2000. So, while we would like that unification in 
terms of policy in meeting these health care needs of 
the people, we have not come up with a computation 
of costs because, as I said, there has been no unified ap- 
proach. So, we cannot expect, for example, all the 
ministries to adopt this approach. Right now, it is only 
the Ministry of Health which has responded to the call 
ot Health for All in the year 2000, but we would like 
the Ministry of Labor and Employment to also adopt 
this approach. The approach aims to make essential 
health services affordable and available to the popula- 
tion in a manner that is both within the means of the 
government as well as of the people. 

When we talk of comprehensive health care, we mean 
the coverage of all the services that should be provided 
to the people. This includes services in relation to health 
promotion; disease prevention or specific protection 
through programs like immunization, establishment of 
protective measures and use of protective wear to 
prevent injury or illness; and early detection and treat- 
ment. The latter refers to the provision of treatment to 
the people so that they do not die and be denied their 
right to life because we do not have the necessary treat- 
ment or medicines. 


644 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


And then the fourth area is rehabilitation which 
addresses itself to the problem of the disabled. The 
people who become disabled as a result of a complica- 
tion of injury, trauma or disease, and even the people 
who are mentally retarded need to be provided with 
necessary services. 

So, at this point in time we have not computed the 
cost of this integrated and comprehensive approach. 
As I said, we would like the State to respond to this 
kind of integration and comprehensiveness of health 
services to meet people’s basic right to health. 

MR. ROMULO. So, the thrust of this Article is to 
rationalize and integrate all the health services being 
offered by various governmental agencies as the first 
phrase of the program. 

So, I take it at that point that it will involve mainly 
administrative costs? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. I take it, however, that in the second 
phase, the program aims to improve the services being 
given by these various programs. 

MS. QUESADA. Definitely. 

MR. ROMULO. Of course, that is where additional 
funding will be required. 

MS. QUESADA. That will necessarily involve addi- 

tio , nal J un ding if we want to address ourselves to the 
nght of people to health. 


two. It might be better just to have parallel services 
rather than a totally public-private integrated system. 

MS. QUESADA. I think the nitty-gritty of this kind 
of collaboration will be left to legislation but the 
important thing now is the conservation, utilization 
or maximization of the very limited resources. We know 
that the government alone cannot provide health 
services. That is why we believe it is the State’s responsi- 
bility to encourage more intersectoral efforts in the 
delivery of health services to our people. The Ministry 
of Health right now has done so by looking into how 
the private sector can provide the health services 
which the State facilities alone could not provide. 

MR. ROMULO. The other problem is that, by and 
large, government services are inefficient. So, this is a 
problem all by itself. On Section 19, where the report 
says that people’s organizations as a principal means 
of empowering the people to pursue and protect through 
peaceful means . . ., I do not suppose that the Com- 
mittee would like to either preempt or exclude the 
legislature, because the concept of a representative 
and democratic system really is that the legislature is 
normally the principal means. 

MR. GARCIA. That is correct. In fact, people cannot 
even dream of influencing the composition or the mem- 
bership of the legislature, if they do not get organized. 
It is, in fact, a recognition of the principle that unless a 
citizenry is organized and mobilized to pursue its ends 
peacefully, then it cannot really participate effectively. 


MR. ROMULO. From what the sponsor is saying, tl 
refers mainly to government services. The private sect 
has its own rather extensive MEDICARE Program. Dc 
the Committee envision to integrate that as well or £ 
these separate concepts? 

MS. QUESADA. I think when we talk of integratic 
it is a merger a collaboration between private a 
public sectors Right now, I think out government 
looking into this collaborative effort with the privt 
sector. 


ROMULO. Yes, f or example, we have medical 

? nef !! S l™” 1 f he > SSS and we have MEDICARE bene- 
fits which we find inadequate. So, in the private sectoi 

we supplement these with private health benefit pro- 
grams. And the problem arises when one tries to inte- 
grate the two. It is not an easy job to do and, more 


often than not, we prefer to just do it on a private 
basis because each program has different benefits and to 
try to supplement those benefits is not easy for the 
private insurances or whatever other programs are 
available. This is because they work on a different basis. 
So, one has to really think how he can integrate the 


MR. ROMULO. And it is meant to say “influence the 
legislature” or “supplant the legislature.” 

MR. GARCIA. No, not to supplant the legislature. 
But there are periods, for example, when a legislature 
can be remiss in its obligations and, therefore, the 
proper atmosphere is created so that the legislature can 
take note that there is a clamor for a particular issue or 
direction. During martial law, this was evident. When 
the legislature was no longer responsive to the needs of 
the people, organizations of ordinary citizens — a very 
concrete example is the NAMFREL and other citizens 5 
groups — took on the task of ensuring that the objec- 
tives of the people are defended. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, even in our Constitution now we 
have even provided for initiative and referendum, 
and I think for these to really work, the people have to 
organize themselves. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I wanted that clarified. 

How does the Committee envision Section 20 to 
operate, especially when it says: “participation at all 
levels of social, political and economic decision-making”? 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


645 


MR. GARCIA. First of all, it is again a recognition of 
the principle that people must be consulted especially 
regarding decisions which will affect their lives. Very 
often, it is the people who are very close to the pro- 
blem that is why they can tell what the problem is, and, 
perhaps, the solution lies along the same lines. The 
proper function of the legislature in this regard would 
be to try to formulate mechanisms of consultation that 
would ensure talking with the people and finding out 
their ideas. This should be done on a regular and direct 
manner so that the State or the different planning 
agencies will be able to harness the participation of the 
people in an institutional manner. 

MR. ROMULO. I guess my question is really on the 
extent to which the Committee would like the decision- 
makers to undertake such consultation. 

MR. GARCIA. As much as possible and as much as 
practicable. In the Ministry of Trade and Industry, I 
understand they have now created the people s econo- 
mic councils. I remember a dialogue with Minister 
Concepcion where he was discussing how multisectoral 
representations in different regions are now being put 
together so that they can help identify the resources 
in the area, the proper use of those resources and the 
marketing facilities that they could make available. The 
Ministry of Health, I understand, is also doing this kind 
of consultation in many regions. So, I think this is a 
very interesting phenomenon that should be duplicated 
at all levels of the government. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Would Commissioner 
Romulo yield to one question? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. When he speaks of cost- 
benefit analysis, is he referring to economic and finan- 
cial cost or social cost, such as the enhanced dignity and 
pride of the farmer? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I refer to all those elements, 
particularly the financial and economic cost. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. These are difficult to quan- 
tify. 

MR. ROMULO. I do not think so. There must be 
studies concerning these. My point is, we cannot just 
hand Congress these and say, “Now, you go on and do 
it” without considering the cost. All of us will pay for 
it, by the way, through taxation. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, I am supporting the 
notion, except that I just want to be sure that it is a 
comprehensive cost-benefit analysis which includes 
social, cultural and environmental cost. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. I take it that the social aspects 
of these have been very well considered by the Commit- 
tee. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. On the question of cost, I wonder 
if the Committee considered Proposed Resolution 
No. 253 which is a proposal by Commissioners Guingo- 
na and Villegas. Since the question of cost was raised, 
maybe it is appropriate to look into this. Let me read 
the proposal: 

A citizen, upon acquiring a fortune sufficient to ensure a 
reasonable security for the members of his/her immediate 
family, as indicated by the amount of his/her net assets, 
shall pay an annual tax of not more than one percent 
thereof. The amount of tax on the level of the taxable net 
assets shall be determined by law. The proceeds from the 
above tax shall constitute a Special Provident Fund to 
provide homes for the homeless poor at subsidized cost. 

I suppose that if this were considered, it would have 
provided some supplements to the cost that is expected 
to be shouldered by the State. And I suppose that it 
would not be limited merely to housing, but also to the 
other social services. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we have the Pag-I.B.I.G. 

MR. BENNAGEN. No. 

MS. NIEVA. Pag-I.B.I.G. is in the same vein as a 
provident fund. 

MR. BENNAGEN. No, but this is a special proposal. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, 1 know. 

MR. BENNAGEN. It says that a citizen, upon acquir- 
ing a fortune sufficient to insure a reasonable security 
for the members of his/her immediate family as indi- 
cated by the amount of his/her net assets . . . 

MS. NIEVA. I said that will be taken cognizance of 
by the legislature, I am sure, when they prepare the 
statutes that would implement this. 

MR. BENNAGEN. My interest, of course, is to bring 
this out, so that maybe it can be considered in the 
deliberations of Congress as a very concrete way of 


646 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


meeting some of the costs, without necessarily just 
depending on the State, because, as is, the government 
is already strained for finances. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


BISHOP BACANI. May I also add that when the 
programs are implemented, they will be implemented 
gradually. Hopefully, with the greater development of 
the country, funds will become more available. And 
then finally, as was mentioned before, the cooperation 
of nongovernmental offices (NGOs) and private enter- 
prises will be sought. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, for some prejudicial 
questions on behalf of the Committee on Sponsorship, 
Chairman Guingona would like to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

As indicated by the distinguished Floor Leader, I 
would like to raise what I would consider as prejudicial 
questions on behalf of the members of the Committee 
on Sponsorship who announced last Saturday that they 
will start their work this week. As a matter of fact, we 
are scheduled to meet this coming Wednesday. Madam 
President, the Committee on Sponsorship and the Com- 
mittee on Style are tasked under the Rules of this Com- 
mission to look into corrections on the draft Constitu- 
tion to avoid inconsistencies, inaccuracies and repeti- 
tions. 


During the weekend I reviewed the various articles 
that have already been approved on Third Reading, 
particularly the Article on the Bill of Rights. In my 
opinion, there are at least two provisions thereof which, 
depending upon the decision of this Commission, might 
bring 5 about inconsistencies. The first of these is the 
questum of whether government employees would have 
the right to strike. This Commission approved the final 
text regarding the right to form associations, as amended 
by Commissioner Lerum. and further amended by 
Commissioner de los Reyes, to read as follows: 


The right of the people including those employed in the 
public and private sectors to form associations, unions or 
societies for purposes not contrary to law shall not be 
abridged. * 


reviewed the Journal of the preceding day when 
deliberations on this were made prior to amendments 
and there was nothing said regarding this particular 
section on the right to form associations except the 
comment of Commissioner Bemas that there must be 
the addition of the word “UNION.” That is all. 

Of course, there are some who say that it is true that 
this provision does not include the right to strike, but, 


at the same time, it does not exclude. As far as I am 
concerned, this means that we are leaving this matter to 
judicial construction or interpretation. But now we have 
in the proposed Article on Social Justice a specific 
reference regarding the right to strike. Thus, I will 
respectfully suggest that in deciding this matter of 
whether government employees, with or without ex- 
ceptions, would have the right to strike, we should 
relate this to the approved provision under the Bill of 
Rights so that our decision would carry with it an 
authorization for the Committees on Sponsorship and 
Style to add to the Bill of Rights a provision which 
includes the right to strike with or without exceptions. 
Without that authority, I do not believe either Commit- 
tee could make an addition to the provisions on the Bill 
of Rights because this would be a matter of substance. 

The other point that I would like to respectfully 
bring to the attention of the honorable Commissioners 
is the matter of just compensation. We have provided in 
our Bill of Rights, in the matter of the exercise of the 
power of eminent domain, the payment of just com- 
pensation which Commissioner Bemas has explained to 
us as enunciated by the courts in many cases, to be the 
market value plus the consequential damages minus the 
consequential benefits, provided the benefits do not 
exceed the damages. Madam President, I see two other 
forms of compensation mentioned. In Section 5 of the 
proposed provision on agrarian and natural resources 
reform, we speak of a fair and progressive system of 
compensation. In Section 10 of the provision on urban 
land reform and housing, we speak of compensation 
which should be affordable to deserving low-income 
citizens. I would respectfully suggest that we should 
perhaps decide on whether or not these two types of 
compensation suggested by the Committee actually 
mean just compensation because if they really mean so, 
then , we should change the wording to “just compensa- 
tion.” But if they do mean different things, then who is 
going to bear the difference? Nevertheless, under the 
provisions of the Article on Social Justice, I assume that 
the difference would be that the proposed compensa- 
tion would be less than the just compensation as 
contained in our jurisprudence. Again, the question 
would be: Who is going to bear the difference? If it is 
the State, through subsidy or through some other form 
of State assistance, there will be no problem because 
the owner in the transaction would still be receiving just 
compensation. But if it is the owner who will bear the 
difference between the market value and the so-called 
progressive system of compensation, then we should 
make exceptions here. In which case, we in the Commit- 
tee on Sponsorship — as well as those in the Committee 
on Style, with the permission of Chairman Rodrigo — 
would like to seek authority to add the exceptions in 
the provision on the exercise of the power of eminent 
domain already approved by us under the Bill of Rights. 
Without that authority again, we cannot include such 
exceptions in the Bill of Rights because these will be a 
matter of substance. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


647 


Finally. I notice that in our previous deliberations, we 
have not been very clear on the use of the word “shall.” 
This has prompted some of us to ask whether the word 
“shall” in certain cases means mandatory while in other 
cases it means merely directory. I suggest that in the 
discussion of this particular Article, the Committee 
should inform us which provisions use the word “shall” 
to mean “must” and which provisions use the word 
“shall” to mean “maybe.” 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair and the Commission 
appreciate the remarks of the honorable Chairman of 
the Committee on Sponsorship. But as to the authority 
being desired, the Chair suggests that the Committee on 
Sponsorship take time in its work until after the dif- 
ferent provisions shall have been clarified and settled in 
plenary session so as to avoid any difficulty. We are sure 
that the Committee will be guided by whatever is 
decided here on the floor. In fact, caucuses will be held 
to harmonize, if there is need to harmonize or reconcile, 
provisions in the different Articles of the proposed 
Constitution. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. May I just be allowed to make two 
remarks about the remarks made by Commissioner 
Guingona. First of all, also in line with what Madam 
President has already said, I would oppose any attempt 
to give the Committee on Sponsorship an advance 
authority to make any adjustment. If it is going to 
make any adjustment, this adjustment has to be done 
by way of presenting it to the body for approval or 
disapproval. 

Second, on the matter of just compensation as 
mentioned in Section 5 of the present report — and I 
am glad this came up — my thinking is that there 
is no incompatibility between what the Bill of Rights 
says and what this provision says when it defines “com- 
pensation” as fair and progressive system. Rather, what 
we have here, it seems to me, is an attempt to fine-tune 
the meaning of just compensation, which is a flexible 
meaning, for the purposes specifically of agrarian re- 
form. The very general meaning of just compensation 
in the Bill of Rights is that it is the price which the 
property will command in the free market; that is, con- 
sidering a seller who is not obliged to sell but is willing 
to sell and a buyer who is not obliged to buy but is 
willing to buy. I think that the just compensation in the 
Bill of Rights takes primary consideration of the cost to 
the owner, what is just to the owner. But in the attempt 
here to call just compensation fair and progressive, there 
is a very clear attempt to determine what is just com- 
pensation in the context, not just of what is due the 
owner but of the capabilities precisely of the under- 


privileged. It will entail not a diminution of the sub- 
stance of what the seller or the owner will get but 
rather, I see “progressive” as meaning, as entailing not a 
reduction of the price but a programming of the com- 
pensation in such a way that it becomes affordable to 
one who cannot pay immediately. So I really do not see 
here incompatibility between tire two but rather an 
attempt, as I say, to fine-tune just compensation, 
precisely to give substance and meaning to the general 
concept of social justice as an attempt to enable the 
law to make things more affordable for those who 
cannot afford. 

Those are just the two points I would like to make. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, just a point of 
information. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. With respect to this matter of just 
compensation, the basic jump-off point is the matter 
of fair market value because the formula is: fair market 
value plus consequential damages, minus consequential 
benefits - provided that consequential benefits will not 
be more than the consequential damages — equals just 
compensation. 

Commissioner Bernas has given us the jurisprudential 
meaning of what is fair market value - the amount for 
which the owner who is not compelled to sell will part 
with his property to a buyer who is not compelled to 
buy. But under martial law, that concept was changed 
by Mr. Marcos in a series of decrees, some of which 
found their way into the Tax Code, to the effect that 
fair market value is the amount which the owner of the 
property declares to be worth vis-a-vis the amount 
which the assessor declares the property to be worth, 
whichever is lower. Of course, at that time we could not 
raise that issue of why the assessor is given the power to 
countermand the declaration of the owner. 

So I think the Committee will also look into that 
aspect because we all start with the phrase “fair market 
value. But this has two meanings now — the first, by 
jurisprudence, because there was no law on that point 
but it was declared by the Supreme Court as its inter- 
pretation, and the second, by presidential decree, which 
says that it is the amount declared by the owner or the 
amount declared by the assessor, whichever is lower. 
The latter is the present rule on that point. I request 
that the Committee also look into this because we are 
talking here of just compensation also in relation to the 
Bill of Rights. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 


648 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


FR. BERNAS. This is still in relation to just com- 
pensation and to the presidential decrees as referred to 
by Commissioner Regalado. In the course of our dis- 
cussions of just compensation during our discussions of 
the Bill of Rights, we always stated that the determina- 
tion made by presidential decree was a prima facie 
determination and, again, I do not see that as contra- 
dictory to the jurisprudential meaning of just compensa- 
tion; but rather, it is an attempt by the legislative 
authority to create a prima facie case — prima facie 
meaning of just compensation — always subject to 
review by judicial bodies because it is a question of fact. 
I am not aware of any Supreme Court decision which 
says that that meaning is binding on the courts. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RODRIGO. I would like to propound a few 
questions to Commissioner Bemas. I had a cursory 
glance at land reform in Taiwan when I was still a mem- 
ber of the Senate. The purpose of land reform in Taiwan 
is two-pronged: to give the land to the cultivator and, at 
the same time, to give enough compensation to the 
previous owner so that he could invest that money in 
usmess. And so, land reform is successful in Taiwan. 


,, ? , en ’ ^ or der to enable the owner from whom 

e an was going to be taken to invest the money in 
business, he had to be given a lump sum. Otherwise, if it 
were just a yearly pittance, he could not invest that in 
usmess. And so, this is where the government comes in. 
Ihe government finances the land reform by paying the 
landowner the full amount. And the tenants pay the 
government. 


here? qUeStl ° n is: Is this Taiwanese practice feasi 


I base mv ^ NAS ‘ 1 not a member of the Committee 
tPYt r L S ^ er com P letel y on what is written in th 

ha t poMibmtv T the COmmittee as excludin 

sioner that thJn, t! 8ree /° mpletely with the Commis 

involve a dim’ V er ° f Ust com P ensa tion should no 
involve a diminution of what the owner gets Th 

primary thing here when we sneak nf nr n l • in 
negation k th* nm speak ot Progressive com 

n I n! Programming of what is due from th 
poor. The programming could be in terms of what i 
given to the government at the same time. That 
perfectly possible under this system. 


. i^ R ' R °jpRIGO. In other words, there might be a 
difference between the amount of just compensation 
and the affordable cost. In all probability, there will be 
such a difference. The affordable cost will be less than 
the just compensation. 


In that case, under this proposal, will the government 
come in to finance the difference between the just 
compensation and the affordable cost? 


FR. BERNAS. I do not see the possibility of massive 
land reform unless the government somehow gets in- 
volved in the financing-, and I think one of the reasons 
the past land reform program did not have the success 
that it gave the impression of having was precisely the 
fact that there was no effective financing system for it. 

So, all of these will have to be necessarily packaged 
into the land reform program. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is why the questions by Com- 
missioner Romulo were very pertinent. Has there been 
an estimate of its cost to the government? It is not only 
in the difference in the cost but also in the mode of 
payment. As I said, in order to enable the former owner 
of the land who will lose his land and the income from 
that land to invest in business, the money that he will 
get as payment for the land must be paid in lump sum, 
unlike what was done here, where a pittance was given 
and the rest was in land bonds, payable in many years. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, may I volunteer 
some information concerning the question of Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo. 

MR. RODRIGO. I will be very glad to listen to the 
explanation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Although all the details will have to 
be threshed out by legislation, definitely right now, as 
Commissioner Bernas says, unless the government and 
the so-called official development agencies get involved 
with our land reform, it will never take off. 

Let me just inform the body that right now there are 
quite a number of official development agencies, both 
government as well as nongovernment, that are willing 
to commit large funds to get small holders to acquire 
land from existing landowners who will be compensated 
by these official grants or aid that will be coming in. So 
for the first time in our land reform history, there is the 
possibility of our following the Taiwan model where 
existing landowners do not have to be saddled with land 
bonds which were very unproductive in the past. Also, 
there are very friendly outsiders who realize that we will 
never have economic and social stability unless we have 
a thorough land reform program going on that will 
apply not only to rice and corn but also to the other 
crops. 

So, this is what is going on right now, and I am sure 
the Minister of Agrarian Reform, Minister Alvarez, can 
give more information or details of what I am describ- 
ing. But let me inform the body that definitely, we are 
looking into the Taiwan model on how to enable land- 
owners to immediately get a lump sum instead of 
waiting forever for a land bond. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


649 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 


MR. ROMULO. I understand the Committee’s pro- 
blem, but the Rules is rather clear when it says in part: 


MR. GUINGONA. I submit to the ruling of the Chair. 
May 1 just clarify that both the Committees on Sponsor- 
ship and Style have included in our proposed timetable 
that we would submit or jointly present to the body in 
plenary session the proposed corrections for approval. 
But according to the timetable as contained in our 
Rules, we are supposed to begin our work on August 16, 
so that would give us only one week. 

I particularly mention this because what I perceive 
to be inconsistent as regards the right to strike can be 
resolved now. I do not foresee any other Article where 
this problem of just compensation would come up in 
the future. If this can be decided now, the body would 
save us time which is a very important element in our 
work since we are under time constraint. But, ot 
course if the body feels that it is better for us to wait 
and present the whole thing together, then we submit. 

Commissioner Bemas also gave us an additional 
explanation on the concept of just compensation by 
citing jurisprudence, that it refers to the price which a 
seller who is not compelled to sell would get, and which 
a buyer who is not under compulsion to buy would pay. 
I fail to see, however, how we could say that a seller, 
under an expropriation proceeding, is not compelled to 

sell. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair has one question for 
Commissioner Guingona. Does he mean that all diffi- 
culties should be decided this morning or after the ter- 
mination of the discussion on the Article on Social 

Justice? 


MR GUINGONA. The point is that perhaps this 
could be decided now because there was no decision 
made when we discussed the Article on the Bill of 
Rights. The only reference to the right to strike was 
made by Commissioner Foz just before the approval on 
Third Reading of that Article. And he mentioned to me 
early this morning that he only expressed a personal 
opinion then and that there was no discussion nor 
consensus reached on the matter. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we will still have time for 
that particular issue during the period of amendments. 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other speaker? 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Azcuna is next. But before we call on him, may I just 
comment on the problem of the Committee on Sponsor- 
ship. 


. . . the committee shall have no authority to change the 
sense, substance or purpose of any proposal referred to it, 
and the sponsorship of the final draft of the Constitution. 

Whenever a proposal covers subject matters falling 
within the jurisdiction of more than one committee, said 
proposal shall be referred to the committee within whose 
jurisdiction the principal subject matter falls. 

The sense of this as we had composed it is that any 
problem which may arise with regard to interpretation 
is referred to the proper committee. If it falls within the 
jurisdiction of several committees, then those commit- 
tees should meet jointly to settle the problem. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Azcuna be recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. May I react first to the statement 
of Commissioner Romulo? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. The Commissioner envisions a 
situation where there is no conflict among committees. 
We are assuming that there would be conflict and we 
would have to bring the matter to the Commission in 
plenary session. That is what we are thinking about. Of 
course, if the committees agree in view of what is con- 
tained in the Rules that Commissioner Romulo read, 
then we would have no problem. However, if they do 
not agree, then we would have to run to the Commis- 
sion in plenary session to find out the real intention of 
the Commission because the committees cannot speak 
for the Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you; who is the next 
speaker? 

Commissioner Azcuna is recognized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you, Madam President. 

I just would like to ask the Committee some clarifica- 
tory questions. 

The first opening section of the Article on Social 
Justice states that social justice is an imperative, and yet 
it does not state what social justice is. Consequently, the 
subsequent sentence says: “To this end, Congress 
shall. . .” and Section 2 says: “Towards these end, the 
State shall . . .” To what end will all these be done to 
promote social justice? 

These sections do not define the components oi 
elements and the end or objective of social justice. It is 


650 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


stated here that it should be given primary considera- 
tion in the pursuit of national development. But what is 
it? 


MS. NIEVA. I think that is contained on lines 10 to 
18, which read: 

. . . reduction of social, economic and political inequities 
and the promotion of structures and processes which pro- 
tect and enhance the inalienable right to human dignity, 
and the redistribution of wealth and power for the common 
good. 


MR. AZCUNA. Would the Committee have any 
difficulty in rewording that first sentence to something 
along this line: THE PROMOTION OF SOCIAL JUS- 
TICE IS A NATIONAL IMPERATIVE TO INSURE 
THE WELL-BEING AND ECONOMIC SECURITY OF 
ALL THE PEOPLE BUT PARTICULARLY THE POOR 
AND THE DISADVANTAGED IN LIFE? So, we would 
have an objective right away. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, as we said before, the Commis- 
sioner may submit his proposal ahead of time so that we 
can consider it. 

^ es > * w iE have it typed; I have a 
J! w< * ^ Section 1 , which I will submit to the Commit- 
tee at the proper time. 

+ ot h er PQint is regarding Sections 1 to 18 which 
fh f ^ tate shall do this; the government shall do 
bn « tu o n 8 re ss shall do this, and yet Sections 19 and 
JT a- 3y at the people and their organizations should 
given preference in determining how social justice is 
o e ac leved. I feel that there might be an inconsisten- 
cy in saying that it is the task of the State to provide for 
s mctures that will allow for social justice and yet in the 

that >^ e peo P^ e determine the structures 

i ac leve it. Is there no inconsistency here? 

sav^here^n^t A nv? 0 ’ prec * sely w hat we are trying to 

to make sure th t ^° Ug U i§ the obli g ation of th e State 
os le Z V 16 3re structures wh ich will make 

meet" S Vsl ‘et T* Z * h ? e " abli " 8 

the nennlp Wo u ^ stlce m lts most genenc sense is 
neoole but' tZ, pr ° tect the aspirations of the 

without the ne S 1 °? d be pro P erly organized because 

las, part is: ■■Role an, m g L TfZopZs Zantacs" 
MR. AZCUNA. Yes. 

MR. GARCIA It is a recognition of the importance 
of these organizations. And the State should recognize 
also their independence so that the people themselves 
can pursue their objectives. The State can provide the 
support and the conditions but eventually it has to be 


the people, properly organized in their movements, who 
can pursue these objectives till the end. 

MS. NIEVA. Maybe one example is the Samahang 
Nayon which was imposed by the State with very little 
consultation with the people. Most of these organiza- 
tions are now inactive and have not been effective 
because the people themselves were not consulted from 
the very beginning. 

MR. AZCUNA. That is all right. Finally, regarding 
this provision on women, I believe that this treats more 
of rights of working women rather than women’s rights 
in general. Is that right? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, because we have included women’s 
rights in general in the Declaration of Principles. 

MR. AZCUNA. Would the Commissioner be amena- 
ble to the inclusion of CHILDREN in this particular 
provision to read: “Women and CHILDREN”? 

MS. NIEVA. We are open to that. 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you. 

Madam President, Commissioner Bengzon has some 
remarks with regard to the observations of the previous 
speakers. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. I just would like to remark on the 
comments of Commissioner Rodrigo and the thrust of 
the questions of Commissioner Romulo a few minutes 
ago. 

I am a member of the Committee and I would like to 
state that the Article on Social Justice is an article that 
articulates concepts and objectives. This is very clear. 
We do not want to spell out details in this Article. It is 
up to the Congress or to the proper agency of the 
government to pursue these concepts and objectives 
under circumstances that are available to the govern- 
ment and to the people. This could take a few years; 
this could be on a long-term basis. But what we are 
putting here are concepts and objectives which we feel 
should be attained. As to whether they would be at- 
tained or they may remain Utopia is another question. 
But the fact is that we are providing the direction. So I 
hope that the Commissioners would take it in that light. 
If there is any vagueness in these concepts, then we 
would be happy to hear their remarks and be open to 
amendments that would be introduced. 

Thank you. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


651 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Let me add a few comments to 
those of Commissioner Azcuna regarding that seeming 
contradiction between some of the provisions, particu- 
larly the role of the State and the role of people’s 
organizations. 

In the context of this Article, we pinpoint two major 
actors in the realization of social justice: On the one 
hand, we have the executive, legislative, and judicial 
structures of government, and on the other, we have the 
people’s organizations. 

The Article mandates the State to provide the formal 
structures that would allow the achievement of social 
justice. People’s organizations would complement these 
formal structures by providing certain informal struc- 
tures within which they can exert pressure on the 
various structures of government to be more responsive. 
We do not see these as contradictory; rather we see 
them as complementary. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


MS. AQUINO. Section 5, line 22 provides that the 
State undertakes the just distribution of all agricultural 
lands, regardless of whether planted with rice or corn. 
This provision is pertinent to our background discussion 
in the Committee that as the land reform program 
stands now, it covers only about 4.1 million hectares, 
which is only about one-third of the agricultural lands. 
On the basis of this program, there is only a maximum 
of 17.1 percent of the landowners who would be af- 
fected by “operation land transfer.” As for the tenants, 
it covers only about 393,780 or roughly only five per- 
cent of the 7.7 million workers engaged in agriculture, 
fishing and forestry. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I go to another point, 
Madam President. 

Section 5, line 8 reads: “The State shall undertake a 
genuine agrarian reform program . . When the Com- 
missioner says “genuine agrarian reform program,” is he 
referring to several phases of genuine agrarian reform? 
For instance, phase 1, confiscation and distribution of 
lands owned by the deposed President and his cronies; 
phase 2, the expansion of free distribution to all crop 
lands; and phase 3, the nationalization of transnational 
agri-business plantations and the total abolition of 
feudalism. 

May I be clarified on this point by Commissioner 
Tadeo? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to address a few questions for “Mr. Agra- 
rian Reform,” Commissioner Tadeo. 

On page 2 Section 5, line 22 states: “undertake the 
just distribution of all agricultural lands.” I would like 
to underscore the word “all.” When the Commissioner 
speaks of all agricultural lands, is he referring to the 
following: (1) all tenanted private agricultural lands 
regardless of crop; (2) all haciendas and plantations 
regardless of crop and land tenure arrangement; (3) idle, 
abandoned and foreclosed lands suited for agriculture; 
and (4) public lands and/or government and military 
reservations and ranches suited for agriculture? Is this 
the intent of the words “all agricultural lands”? 

MR. TADEO. Yes. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I proceed to another ques- 
tion, Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. On behalf of the Committee, may I 
briefly reply to Commissioner Sarmiento? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Ang binabasa ni Commissioner Sar- 
miento ay ang programa sa lupa ng Kilusang Magbubu- 
kid ng Pilipinas. 

MR. SARMIENTO. When he speaks of genuine agra- 
rian reform program, is the Commissioner referring to 
all these phases I mentioned? 

MR. TADEO. Those phases are still subject for legisla- 
tion. The phases of that genuine agrarian reform are 
those being envisioned by the farmers’ organization 
known as the Kilusang Magbubukid ng Pilipinas Ngunit 
dahil ito ay Saligang Batas, iyon lamang mahahalagang 
bagay ang mapapalagay dito. 




... _ . ' *•“*> uic uueni oi uic 

Committee on Social Justice or of the Kilusang Magbu- 
buktd ng Pilipinas which is the largest peasant organiza- 
tion in the Philippines? 


TADEo - Sa panig ng Kilusang Magbubukid ng 
Pilipinas, may dalawang yugto lamang ang reporma sa 
lupa. Ngunit magdadaan pa naman ito sa lehislatura. 
Ang mahalagang ilagay sa Saligang Batas ay iyong maa- 
anng maging gabay sa paglikha ng mga detalye ng 
lehislatura. 


652 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MS. AQUINO. On behalf of the Committee, it is very 
clear from the tenor of Sections 5 to 9 that the genuine 
land reform program is not confiscatory. Social justice 
in land reform intends to equalize bounty. It does not 
intend to equalize oppression. We do not advocate 
confiscation of property. 

BISHOP BACANI. Besides, even though that is the 
sense of the proposal of a particular group, I do not 
think that that is precisely the sense of the Committee. 

MR. SARMIENTO. That is why I want to be clarified. 

Anyway, thank you for the clarification. 

Section 10 on lines 8 to 19 speaks of a continuing 
urban land reform and housing program. When the 
Committee speaks of urban land reform, does it refer to 
t e urban land reform which was initiated by the 
deposed President? 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, we are referring to that land refor 
program initiated by the deposed President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. All right. 

decrees 0 ^'^ 6 p n 6 xf President Marcos, he issued mar 
Nos. 1767 iso^ fl OS ' and 1640; Proclamatic 
of fact one ’.^67, and many others. As a matt 

Manila ’as an Thailand 11 iSSUed declaring Metl 
could avail nf n, land reform area but before oi 

there were cn 6 ^ ene ^ ts under that proclamatio 

sh^ld have stayeTrnVat q r m r entS; ^ inSta " Ce ’ 1 
be a genuine ^ m ^ at P^ ace for 10 years, he shou 

refusal. And na ” t ’ anc * should have the right of fii 

several limitat' 00 ^ n ^ ^ at President Marcos issu< 

rzrzz £ b r, iand •» 

Manila area. V 244 Sltes ’ not the entire Met: 

these 244 ^tesa'nd^o thef C ° mmittee > to refer only 
proclamations on urban la, 'Reform? Pr ° Vided in SeVe ' 

I S^vh^ll^pl.cale, ‘thTTh' 1 ' 3 ! Ar ‘ iCle XIV - Sectil 

maintained. However for tf 3n and re ^ orni proviso, 
we are formuMn' w ° * e ^"‘Constitution th 

on, the impiementtU^a “Z 

President^Marcos had Z 

,o implement and ^ 

prwlamations and decrees issued 6 n °' *“ ad ° Ptin8 " 


MS. NIEVA. No, we are not adopting them in toto 
The concept is very, very sound. But. again, the way it 
was carried out left many loopholes. 


MR. SARMIENTO. I thank the Commissioner for 
that clarification because such decrees to me were 
restrictive and oppressive because they limited urban 
land reform to certain sites but not to all sites with 
urban poor dwellers and squatters. 

Section 1 1, line 25 on page 3, states: “their dwellings 
demolished without due process of law.” I have to 
commend the Committee for the inclusion of the 
words “without due process of law” because during the 
past administration, we handled several cases of the 
urban poor. After their houses had been dismantled, the 
dwellers were ejected on the basis of mere clearances 
issued by the National Housing Authority and the City 
Engineer’s Office. As a matter of fact, another decree 
was issued during the past regime, P.D. No. 691, dated 
May 16, 1978, which, according to the then adminis- 
trator of the NHA, General Tobias, was the strongest 
anti-squatting issuance from the President. It was the 
strongest because the decree directed all local govern- 
ment officials to immediately apprehend all squatters 
and demolish the illegal constructions they had built on 
public and private lands and after the arrest and demoli- 
tion, it was only then that they were prosecuted before 
the appropriate court. 

I have two more points. My concept of social justice 
is justice to the common tao — to the little man. Dean 
Sinco of the UP College of Law defines social justice as 
looking after the well-being and economic security not 
only of large groups but also of particular persons or 
interests who are under real handicaps in the struggle for 
existence. 1 notice that the Article on Social Justice — 
and this was also the observation of Commissioner 
Azcuna — mentions groups like farmers, fishermen, 
workers, indigenous cultural communities and women, 
but it has no provision on youth. In the Article on the 
Legislative, we provided a system of sectoral representa- 
tion whereby groups like women, urban poor, peasants, 
indigenous cultural communities and youth were in- 
cluded. But in this Article on Social Justice, no mention 
is made of those important sectors, as well as those of 
children, infants and mothers. We all know that these 
sectors are exploited in our society. We have child labor, 
child prostitutes, et cetera. 

MS. NIEVA. We do not want to duplicate, since 
we were told that the Article on the Declaration of 
Principles has several sections that deal with the youth, 
providing for their physical, mental and spiritual welfare 
and also against their exploitation. 

Also, in the Article on Human Resources, there is 
a section on that; likewise in the Article on Family 
Rights, we are also adverting to the youth. So we 
thought that we would not wish to be accused by the 
Committees on Style and Sponsorship of duplication. 
But I think the observation was already made that the 
exploitation of minors at work should certainly be 
mentioned here. And we will deal with that. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


653 


MR. SARMIENTO. Does hot the Chairman of the 
Committee think a provision on youth should be in- 
cluded since we already have a provision on women? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. SARMIENTO. We can also include provisions on 
indigenous cultural communities and on labor just for 
the sake of fairness. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, the Article on 
Social Justice assumes a very peculiar bias, and the 
bias is in favor of the underprivileged, the oppressed 
and the marginalized sectors. Our focus is that the 
cause of this inarginality is the social structures. 

The problem of the youth such as exploitation of 
minors as workers or as farmhands might be the only 
problem pertinent to this Article. We also believe that 
the problem of pedophilia and other problems would 
be more effectively addressed in the other Articles of 
the Constitution. 

MR. SARMIENTO. But during our discussion on 
sectoral representation, we made it clear that the youth 
is one of the marginalized sectors, so much so that 
we included the urban poor, laborers, peasants, women, 
indigenous cultural communities and the youth. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, we appreciate that. 

MR. SARMIENTO. So maybe at some appropriate 
time, will the Committee be willing to accept an 
acceptable and palatable provision on youth? 

MS. AQUINO. For clarification, if only to settle and 
put to rest the problems of the youth, I think the reason 
we incorporated the youth as a sector in the scheme of 
sectoral representation is that they comprise a basic 
sector, not essentially because they belong to an under- 
privileged or marginalized sector. That would give us 
the conceptual difference of approaches in the Article 
on Social Justice. 

MR. SARMIENTO. But will the Committee be willing 
to accommodate at the appropriate time provisions on 
infants or children and mothers? 

MS. AQUINO. For the moment, I am very reluctant 
to incorporate those provisions in this Article on Social 
Justice, but it is my humble submission that they should 
be rightfully placed in the Articles on Human Re- 
sources, Declaration of Principles and State Policies and 
Family Rights. 

MR. SARMIENTO. As for my last point. Section 1, 
line 10, speaks ol reduction of social, economic and 
political inequities. Does not the Commissioner think 
that since the thrust of social justice, being the center- 
piece of the 1986 Constitution, is the enhancement of 


human rights or the realization of human dignity, 
should we not use the word ELIMINATION instead of 
“reduction”? 

MS. NIEVA. I think we are just being practical, and 
so we feel that we can start with reducing. I do not 
know if we will ever eliminate those inequities entirely. 
But as the Commissioner says, we will entertain any 
amendment to that effect. 

MR. SARMIENTO. That is all right. Line 1 1 speaks 
of promotion of structures and processes. Can we not 
replace the word “promotion” with CREATION, so 
that it will read: “CREATION of structures and pro- 
cesses which protect and enhance the inalienable right 
to human dignity”? 

MS. NIEVA. We can consider that as another amend- 
ment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you very much, Madam 
President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Tingson would like to 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I have just two or 
three short questions directed to Commissioner Tadeo. 

I know that a great deal of ideas about the agrarian 
reform programs of this committee report, if I under- 
stand it right, are mainly from Commissioner Tadeo. 
When we say here “genuine agrarian reform,” does 
this mean that the Commissioner was not satisfied with 
President Macapagal s agrarian reforms and those of the 
deposed President Marcos’ P.D. No. 27 which attempted 
to introduce agrarian reforms? 

MR. TADEO. Sa kaalaman ni Commissioner Tingson, 
kagaya po ng ipinaliwanag ko kanina, ang coverage ng 
land reform program ay mga areas planted with rice 
and corn lamang. Sa P.D. No. 27, ang nasakop na ka- 
buuang area cultivated by 13.7 percent lamang at ang 
fanners involved ay 13.1 percent lamang. Kay a makiki- 
tang hindi pa nawasak ang land monopoly. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, may I add some 
more to the answer of Commissioner Tadeo. The inade- 
quacies of the land reform program of President Maca- 
pagal and that of President Marcos in P.D. Nos. 2 and 27 
would account for four factors: 


654 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


The first factor is the inadequacy or the very narrow 
coverage when it provided only for the rice and com 
lands which according to statistics would only benefit 
less than 1/3 of the tenants or about 393,000 as com- 
pared to 521,000 more who remain as leaseholders 
because they work in farms which are less than seven 
hectares. 

The second factor is the very weak governmental 
machinery in the implementation of the program 
because the implementors are either inadequate or 
indecisive. 

The third factor is the economic difficulties arising 
from the mandate of President Marcos’ land reform 
program. P.D. No. 27 speaks of high-yielding varieties 
which necessitate heavy infusion of expenditures for the 
purchase of machinery and fertilizers. This is a kind of 
relationship that breeds all the more the dependence 
of the farmers on usurious interests. In the long run, 
what we have are paid or waged farm workers because 
they are being eased out from the equitable sharing in 
the land reform program precisely because of the 
oppressive consequences arising from the implementa- 
tion of the program. Then, of course, we are aware of 
e forced contribution to the Samahang Nay on which 
a so raws further the purchasing power of the farmers. 

Finally the fourth factor is that the land reform 
program of President Marcos is basically flawed because 
1 S i* e P ar ^ c iP a ti°n of the farmers in its planning 
an implementation. This is the comprehensive concern 
Ol genuine land reform as it is being envisioned in this 


MR. TINGSON. The 
thank the Commissioner 


answers are very well said and I 
very much. 


Hirp^i neXt qu .® stlon ls: When we speak here of “to ow 

for thl mi C ° Uec I ively the land s they till,” is this lar 

we i h ^ 6 Vi rat u er than land for the landless? Befo 

Zelnt ? h H ea / land for th e Endless,” but now tl 
slogan is land for the tillers.” Is that right? 


I notice that Commissioner Tadeo is very fond of 
quoting verses from the Scriptures and I appreciate that 
because we were all given copies of the Holy Bible by 
the Philippine Bible Society and the Koran by the 
Moslem Society. 

In the Book of Acts, Chapter IV, may I read just a 
few verses: 

The group of believers was one in mind and heart. No 
one said that any of his belongings was his own, but they all 
shared with one another everything they had. With great 
power the apostles gave witness to the resurrection of the 
Lord Jesus, and God poured rich blessings on them all. 
There was no one in the group who was in need. Those who 
owned fields or houses would sell them, bring the money 
received from the sale, and turn it over to the apostles; and 
the money was distributed to each one according to his 
need. 

Since Commissioner Tadeo seems to be very know- 
ledgeable in the Scriptures and I am sure he has read this 
portion, may I ask whether or not Section 5 is partly 
based on the philosophy of this portion from the 
gospel? 

MR. TADEO. Ito ay isang paglilinaw lamang. Iyong 
sinabi ko tungkol sa ating Secretary-General Flerida 
Ruth Romero ay halaw sa isang interview na naganap 
noong April 20, 1986 noong wala pang Con-Com. Baka 
masabi ninyong nakikialam ang ating Secretary-General. 
I just quoted her in that interview. 

Ang mahalaga kasi dito sa Acts 4:32-35 ay kung ano 
bang talaga iyong “just society” o lipunang ninanais ng 
mga unang Kristiano noong namatay na si Kristo. Ang 
isa pang mahalaga dito ay ang konsepto o kaisipan ng 
Panginoon tungkol sa “property” o pag-aari. Dito ay 
sinasabi Niyang ang pag-aari ay para sa lahat, at ito ay 
ipamamahagi batay sa pangangailangan ng bawa’t isa. 
Dito po natin makikita ang ibig sabihin ng isang “just 
society” na nagsisimula sa “concept of property” na 
ayon sa Panginoon ay para sa lahat. 


land foJ^th^mi P^nsipyong umiiral dito ay iyonj 

Mad °a A " s ibi S ng “directly" aj 

saan inaari na no ntasyon sa ri ce and corn lands kunf 

nila Arm ihio 83 ma ® sasa ^ a an 8 lupang binubungka 
mla. Ang ibig namang sabihin ng “collectively” av sarna 

samang paggawa sa isang lupain o 7s7ng bukid LiX 
ng sitwasyon sa Negros. 8 ’ katulac 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 

LTr WhT Negr ° S °, CCidental s ° I need to know thi: 
mattei When we speak of “distribution of all agricul 

tural lands in relation to this genuine land refom 
program, does this include sugar lands? 


MR. TINGSON. Maraming salamat po. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I suggest a 
suspension of the session? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty this afternoon. 

It was 12:18 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 2:48 p.m., the session was resumed. 


MR. TADEO. Yes. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


655 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. We are still in the period of interpella- 
tions on the Article on Social Justice. There are still 
nine Commissioners registered to interpellate, and we 
are hoping to close the debate to enable us to move a 
little faster. 

I ask that Commissioner Natividad be recognized, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

May we ask the members of the Committee on Social 
Justice to please join the Chairman. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you, Madam President. 

At the outset, I would like to premise my questions 
with my belief that there can be no social justice unless 
there is a redistribution of land and more equitable 
diffusion of wealth. 

During the Fifth Congress of the Philippines, that was 
two terms before martial law, we were then in the 
opposition and we were sponsoring the Agrarian Re- 
form Code. We were told that the failure of the agrarian 
reform laws was due to the fact that the government 
bought large landed estates from landlords and then 
gave or sold these lands to the farmers. Thereafter, the 
relationships between the tenants and the landlords 
ere presumed to have been cut and the farmers who 
became owners of the land were expected to be suc- 
essful However, the fact that they did not have the 
funds to maintain the cultivation of the land was a vital 
f ctor In addition, the farmers did not have the funds 
for fertilizer, for their day-to-day living, for the educa- 
tion of their children, and for medicine. Consequently, 
we were told when we were drafting the Agrarian Re- 
form Code at that time that within five years the lands 
were sold back to the former landowners and the 
government had to buy the Janded estates once again 
in a vicious circle. 

Then came the time of President Marcos. Again, we 
were told that land reform failed because the Land Bank 
did not perform well as expected. It was supposed to fill 
the void left by the landlords by lending money and 
helping the farmers sustain their day-to-day living. We 
wer e also told that land reform failed because not all 
agricultural lands were included under land refonn, and 
so forth. 

j^y question is: Since we are embarking on this new 
thrust in land reform, would these pitfalls that once 
caused the failure of land reform before be avoided in 
this proposal? May I ask the Committee whether these 
itfalls that have been cited are now dealt with effec- 
tively and adequately in this new Article on Social 
Justice? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, with regard to the second part of 
the Commissioner’s observation. A portion of Section 6 


says that the State shall provide the necessary support to 
agriculture through appropriate technology and ade- 
quate financial production and marketing assistance 
because we agree that the lack of such support was the 
main reason for the failure of land reform. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. On what page is that? 

MS. NIEVA. This is on page 2, Section 6, lines 28 up 
to 30. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. What role does the Land Bank 
play in this matter? 

MS. NIEVA. I suppose that is one of the instrumenta- 
lities that would be called upon to provide adequate 
financial assistance. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, so this includes the support 
that the Land Bank will extend even without mention- 
ing that bank. Is that correct? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, but we presume that it would 
include the various agencies. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. The other observation I 
would like to mention is that in the implementation 
of land reform the small landowners like teachers 
who have served to own two, three or seven hectares 
of land were the main complainants against the 
land reform program of the previous administration. 
Will this be repeated in the same vein in this new 
program? Will they not be allowed to manage and till 
their own lands? Remember that these are small land- 
owners. Our teachers have developed the habit of being 
frugal and saving in order to buy land for themselves. 
When we were young, the slogan was “land is wealth.” 
This slogan was printed even on school books. And so, 
consequently, our teachers saved money and bought a 
few hectares for themselves. However, under land 
reform they were deprived of their lands and they cried 
out and complained against this unfair and unjust prac- 
tice. My question, Madam President, is: Shall we main- 
tain this unfair and unjust feature of our present land 
reform program in the land reform program being 
proposed under this Article? 

MS. NIEVA. We have said that the distribution will 
be subject to the retention limits that would be pro- 
vided for by Congress. Congress would provide specifi- 
cally for the size ot land that may be kept in order to 
preserve the viability of the operations. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But our command to the legisla- 
ture is not clear on this matter. 

MS. NIEVA. We are not stating here the specific 
sizes of land because these might vary with the dil* 
ferent crops that we are considering. 


656 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


MR. NATIVIDAD. How about mechanization, is this 
important to the Committee? 

MS. NIEVA. I think that will be referring to appro- 
priate technology as found on line 29. 


MS. NIEVA. That is why those of us who believe that 
this right to strike should not be extended to all govern- 
ment employees have taken such examples in other 
countries into consideration. So I think this is a matter 
that will be debated upon very strongly in this forum. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Is this not prescribed by this 
Article? 

MS. NIEVA. No. we just say it should be appropriate 
because the mechanization may take forms which may 
not be appropriate to the situation. So, definitely we 
are not against technology as such. We think that if it is 
called for, there should be mechanization of these 
farms. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 

Am I correct to presume that the principle estab- 
lished in the case of Samanillo vs. Cruz in 1947, that 
social justice cannot be invoked to trample on other 
ng ts which are also protected by the Constitution, is 
still upheld in this Article on Social Justice? 


MR. NATIVIDAD. In other words, the Committee is 
willing to consider an amendment so that the matter 
can be decided by the Commission? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. For example, a military organiza- 
tion goes on strike and it refuses to obey orders to 
return to work. Another military unit is sent to enforce 
the orders. We will have an armed military confronta- 
tion in this case. 

MS. NIEVA. There is a school of thought among the 
members of the Committee that the military and the 
civil defense forces do not strictly fall under the purview 
of the term “workers.” I do not know how the Commis- 
sioner views that concept. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, I think we have stated that. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I just want to clarify this for the 
record. Will the provision on the right of workers for 
sell-organization again include public employees? 


MS. NIEVA. As stated here, yes. 
police? NATIVIDaD - w iH this include military and 


MR. NATIVIDAD. The very nature that they are 
armed is dangerous to the stability of our government. 
If the government will allow them to strike, then I will 
have to object. 

MS. NIEVA. Personally, I agree with the Commis- 
sioner. But, as I said, we are divided in the Committee. 
There are some of us who feel that perhaps the term 
“workers” does not cover the military and the civil 
defense. So that will be really up to the body to decide. 


is diviripri We said last Saturday, the Committe 

had exclnH^H S?* SC ° re ‘ 0ri g inall y> the subcommitte 
exercising th • u mi * tary anc l the civil defense fron 

and we “ 

tha^fhew^Ikl^h^e bright to sel^ 5 ag3in ' Uw * Sa] 
it follow in the rv,™ 6 nght to se lf-°rgamzation, doe 

taduShe righuo swSr er>S C °" Cept - ,hat ,hat righ 


some of us it dL" 8 SaM ' We are divided here 

others, 1, does So we atleST* f °‘ IOW; ““ 
the body. having again this decisi< 

MR. NATIVIDAD. May I, therefore, cite an e> 
ence of another country where the police is allow* 
strike. During a police strike in New York City " 
a riot occurred which caused $1 billion 'im- 
proper ty. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. I thank the Chairman, anyway. 

So, that will have to be settled by an appropriate and 
seasonal amendment. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. As we said, we welcome the amend- 
ment ahead of time so the Committee can discuss this 
matter. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Just one more question. I know 
the Floor Leader would like me to abbreviate matters 
so I am cooperating. 

Section 14 on page 4 states: “The State shall main- 
tain an effective food and drug monitoring system. . .” 
I am interested in this provision because I am wondering 
whether or not this drug monitoring system will include 
a program on the prevention of drug abuse. We all know 
that drug abuse is a very serious threat not only to the 
health of the nation, but also to the general well-being 
of the people, most specifically the youth. 

I would address this to Commissioner Quesada, that 
perhaps we can include in this provision the prevention 
of drug addiction. It should be the main concern of the 
State because when we speak of the health of the 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


657 


nation we have to face reality that we ought to have a 
program for the prevention of drug addiction. 

MS. QUESADA. The problem of drug abuse is defi- 
nitely addressed in this particular provision. In fact 
this goes beyond the problem of drug abuse. When 
we talk about the food and drug monitoring body, it 
encompasses all other areas that would refer to food 
and drugs. But definitely we consider the problem of 
drug addiction as a major health problem which the 
State should address, and if the Commissioners can 
come out with a formulation that would address speci- 
fically the problem of drug addiction, then I suppose 
the Committee will be amenable to its consideration, 
except that I think that would probably fall within the 
purview of legislation. 

In fact, we have already the Dangerous Drugs Act, 
which I understand the Commissioner himself for- 
mulated when he was in the Congress. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, I was the author of that law; 
but there should be a continuing concern for this 
problem to be enshrined in the Constitution. 

May I ask one more question. What is the percentage 
of the disabled in our country? 

MS. NIEVA. During a public hearing, we were told 
that they constitute 13 percent of the population but 
then that is probably a very broad view. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I was the author of the law on 
mobility of the disabled in the previous Batasan and I 
wrote that law on the basis of the figure that they 
constitute 10 percent of the population. This is a 
universal ratio. Now, it is 13'percent, so it is increasing. 

MS. QUESADA. There are an estimated 800,000 

disabled. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, the figure that 
was submitted to us in the public hearing is around 
5 75 million disabled. 

MR- NATIVIDAD. So, this provision on the disabled, 
Section 1 5, goes beyond just giving them more mobility. 
It also provides a program for their rehabilitation. 

MS. NIEVA. That is the main emphasis; so that they 
may be totally integrated into the mainstream of 
society. That is the objective. 

MR- NATIVIDAD. In the old Batasan, our attention 
was often called that this was a very neglected area of 
public service. That law which I authored is the first law 
on the disabled, but it only gives increased mobility for 
the disabled. So this provision goes beyond that. Is that 

right? 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, as we said, it is for the rehabilita- 
tion, self-development and self-reliance of the disabled 
towards their total integration into the maintenance of 
society. In fact, we are providing for a special body that 
will handle this efficiently. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Will it be private or government? 

MS. NIEVA. It is a government body. The State shall 
establish a special government body with private partici- 
pation. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Maambong be recognized to interpellate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I just want 
to clarify certain points from the members of the 
Committee. I notice that our sections now on social 
justice total 20 as against the previous social justice 
section which was only one. However, I would like to 
ask the Committee whether or not these social justice 
provisions are all-encompassing, considering that I 
notice in other portions of the 1973 Constitution 
carried over to the present formulation that we have 
several social justice clauses. To give an example, we 
have the clause on social services, protection to labor, 
equal protection of the law, due process, non-imprison- 
ment for debt or non-payment of poll tax, the clause 
against involuntary servitude, the clause on the non- 
imposition of excessive fines, free access to the courts, 
emancipation of the tenants, expropriation of private 
lands and free education. Are these also covered by the 
social justice provisions or are these considered in their 
totality as part of the social justice concept? 

MS. NIEVA. Most of them are explicitly provided for 
in this Article. However, some of them are included in 
the Bill of Rights, Education, Human Resources and 
some are in the Aiticle on the Judiciary, like free legal 
services. 

, M^- - MAAMBONG. In other words, when we say 
social justice, we also think of other provisions of the 
Constitution? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, definitely. 

MR. MAAMBONG. According to Commissioner 
Bengzon, we have to proceed in terms of concepts. I 
would want to be clarified on Section 1 . It is my under- 
standing of Section 1 — unless I am wrong — that the 
main objective of the social justice provision is the 
pursuit of national development because it says that the 
primary consideration of the State is the pursuit of 


658 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


national development. In the pursuit of national communities are aimed towards this goal under 
development, I notice that there are two things that the Section 1 . 

State is supposed to do: One is to reduce inequities in 

social, economic and political life; and the second is the MS. NIEVA. Yes, that is correct, 
promotion of structures and processes. Is that a correct 

understanding that the main objective is pursuit of MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you for that, Madam 
national development? President. 


MS. NIEVA. No, I do not think so. Actually, we 
should consider all of these while we are pursuing our 
objectives of national development. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Because my understanding of the 
provision is that to pursue national development, first, 
we must reduce inequities. I have no difficulty with 
that. However, I have some difficulty on the promotion 
of structures and processes. Does this refer to govern- 
ment structures or private structures? 


MS. NIEVA. That would encompass both. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is clarified then. 

Mention is made about the protection of the rights of 
t e people which are inalienable to human dignity. I 
have here the provision of the Universal Declaration of 

uman lg ts, Article XXII. I would like to read it for 
the record. It says: 

Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social 
security and is entitled to realization through national ef- 
ort and mtemational cooperation and in accordance with 
the organization and resources of each state of the econo- 
mic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity 
and the free development of his personality . 

Does this have a relation to the proposed provision in 


differen?! EVA ' Defmitel y> 1 would think that it is a 
different expression of what we are trying to say here. 

Section ^ Madam ^sklent. Again, 

common eood ” T l. ”^ ute . wea lth and power for the 

five is the mirsuh 6 f 6arlier whether our main objec- 
t e pursuit of national development or the 
common good because I thint +r. iu pmeni or me 
, . u ^ 1 trunk there is a slight distinc- 

t.on when we say pursuit of national devSntent or 
pursuit of the common good. Which is really P the main 
objective of the social justice provision? 


MS. NIEVA. I think in social justice, it is 
common good that we are most concerned with 
therefore, in the pursuit of national development ol 
fives, the common good should take primary consk 
tion; social justice should take primary considera 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you for that clarification. 

I would like to find out whether all the provisions 
on labor, agrarian and natural resources reform, urban 
land reform and housing, health, women and indigenous 


The second point I would like to call the Commis- 
sioner’s attention to are basic concerns of several 
Commissioners when they interpellated the Committee 
members earlier. Regarding the concepts on social 
justice, we have established conceptual determinations 
of social justice in our jurisprudence regarding the 
meaning of the same, and I would like to read this for 
the record because Commissioner Padilla was not able to 
put this on record at the same time when he was the one 
interpellating. 

In the case of Calalang vs. Williams, 70 Phil 726, it 
says: 

Social justice is neither communism nor despotism, nor 
atomism, nor anarchy, but the humanization of laws and 
the equalization of the social and economic forces by the 
State so that justice in its rational and objectively circular 
conception may at least be approximated. Social justice 
means the promotion of the welfare of all the people, the 
adoption by the government of measures calculated to 
insure economic stability of all the component elements of 
society through the maintenance of proper economic and 
social equilibrium in the interrelations of the members 
of the community, constitutionally through the adoption 
of measures legally justifiable or extraconstitutionally 
through the exercise of powers underlying the existence of 
all governments on the time-honored principle of salus 
populi est suprema lex. 

I think what is in the mind of many Commissioners 
is this: Is this principle or meaning of social justice, 
as enunciated in the case I cited, still applicable in the 
present provision on social justice? 

MS. NIEVA. I do not see any contradiction at all. I 
think this is just a clearer formulation of how we think 
social justice can be achieved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you for that, Madam 
President. 

I think it solves a lot of problems. 

I will also cite another case, Guido vs. Rural Progress 
Administration, 1984 Phil. 847. This refers to the rights 
guaranteed by social justice and it says: 

Social justice does not champion the decision of pro- 
perty or equality of economic status; what it and the 
Constitution do guarantee are equality of opportunity, 
equality of political rights, equality before the law, equality 
between values given and received, equitable sharing of the 
social and material goods on the basis of efforts exerted in 
their production as applied to metropolitan centers, 
especially in relation to housing problems. It is a command 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


659 


to devise ways and means for die elimination of slums, 
shambles, shacks and houses diat are dilapidated, over- 
crowded, without ventilation, light and sanitation facilities 
and for the construction in their places of decent dwellings 
for die poor and the destitute. Condemnation of blighted 
areas bears direct relation to public safety, health and/or 
morals and is legal. 

My question is: Does this principle enunciated in the 
case cited apply to the present configuration of the 
social justice provision? 

MS. NIEVA. Definitely, we are grateful for the 
support of the provisions through the cases the Gentle- 
man has just cited. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

Finally, I will cite another case, Samanilla vs. Cruz, 
CA-G.R. No. 598, decided in 1947. The decision said 
in effect that social justice is not a license to trample 
upon the rights of others. It says: 

Charity and social justice cannot be properly resorted to 
to trample upon the rights of odiers nor to shield illegal 
acts prejudicial to the rights of property owners who, under 
the Constitution, are also entitled to protection. 

In another case, Astudillo vs. Board of Directors of 
PHHC, L-28066, September 22, 1976, the Supreme 
Court said: 

The State is committed to promote social justice and to 
maintain adequate social services in the field of housing, 
but the State solicitude for the destitute and the have-nots 
does not mean that it should tolerate usurpations of 
property, public or private. 

Do these enunciations still apply in the present configu- 
ration of the social justice provisions? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we have stated that all of these 
provisions will be subject to the due process of law; and 
the provisions of the Bill of Rights will definitely be 
observed when we discuss the details of the imple- 
mentation of the various provisions. Congress will 
definitely take this into consideration, while at the same 
time recognize the need of providing for the greater 
good of the greater number. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Forgive me for citing these 
principles enunciated by the Supreme Court but these 
are basic ones which are clear. 

I will go to another portion which speaks of genuine 
agrarian reform program. This has been taken up by 
other interpellators, but I would like to call the atten- 
tion of the Committee that the agrarian reform 
program, from my notes, appears to have started way 
back in 1 963. 

On August 8, 1963, the Agricultural Land Reform 
Code or Republic Act 3844 was enacted. On Septem- 
ber 10, 1971, Republic Acts 6389 and 6390, known as 
the Code of Agrarian Reforms, were passed. Finally, on 


October 21, 1972, P.D. No. 2 was passed, emancipating 
the tenants from the bondage of the soil; then there 
was an agrarian reform decree, P.D. No. 27, which 
proclaimed the whole country as a land reform area. 

My question is: Are the principles enunciated in all 
these laws I cited applicable to the present formulation 
of our social justice provision on agrarian reform? 

MR. TADEO. Yes. 

MS. NIEVA. I do not see any conflicts; definitely 
the principles are applicable. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, if this provision 
on agrarian reform is passed, it will not repeal these laws 
at all because the principles enunciated are the same. 

MR. TADEO. Yes. 

MS. NIEVA. They would just extend the scope but 
they will not repeal. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

Section 10 also says that it regulates the ownership 
and use of urban land for the common good. This 
phrase “common good” has been recurring in all the 
provisions and I would like to call the attention of the 
Committee to this citation. It says in the book of 
Tanada and Fernando: 

The principle asserts that the well-being and economic 
security of all the people is the end and justice the means. 

It is a recognized fact, however, that social justice is not 
necessary for the well-being and economic security of the 
higher-income groups because through their own efforts 
they can stand even without governmental help. 

When we say “common good,” do we, therefore, 
refer to those in the low-income groups? 

MS. NIEVA. I think we refer to the whole of society. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The whole of society. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, to the whole, but we are focusing 
our attention to those who have less because they have 
less opportunities and less voice. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Regarding the portion on urban 
land reform, I would like to call the attention of the 
Committee that we have several laws on urban land 
reform. For the record, we have P.D. No. 1893, declaring 
the entire Metropolitan Manila area as an urban land 
reform zone; P.D. No. 1517 (June 11, 1978) which is 
the Urban Land Reform Decree; and P.D. No. 1640 
(September 21, 1979) freezing the prices of land in 
Metropolitan Manila at current market value. 

My question will be the same as to other decrees on 
land reform: Could these decrees stand under the 


660 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


present provision? I am referring to the land reform 
decrees promulgated by President Marcos. 

MS. NIEVA. We are upholding the principles, as we 
said; however, there were implementing decrees that we 
felt did not do justice to the overall objective of provid- 
ing the poor with shelter. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, they stand until 
they are repealed or amended? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, it seems so. 


MR. MAAMBONG. My last point is: We have here a 
provision which mentions housing program. Will this 
provision not amend, in any way, our provision on 
contracts of lease, the Rent Control Law and the Anti- 
Squatting Law? vVill they not affect these laws because 
the provisions on lease are found specifically in the new 
Civil Code, the Rent Control Law is covered by B.P. 
Big. 25 (April 10, 1979) which was extended by P.D. 
No. 1912 and extended further in the last Regular Bata- 
sang Pambansa by B.P. Big. 867. We even have P.D. No. 
1642, freezing the rates of rental at P300 a month on 
residential and commercial buildings, houses, apart- 
ments and dwelling units in Metropolitan Manila at 
current levels. 


As the present provision, which the Committee ; 
proposing, stands, I think these laws which are genen 

have th? S? t t be K affeCted b6CaUSe the dwellers wi 
resettled ^ be consulted before they can b 


So, these possible conflicts between the Civil Code 
provisions governing possession and ownership may have 
to be subordinated to the constitutional provisions 
which the Commission is in a position to approve. 

Of course, after that, legislation takes over; but any 
legislative measures that would have to be adopted must 
be in line with the constitutional provisions. But basical- 
ly they will be respected. 

There may be, like what was pointed out by the 
Honorable Regalado and the Honorable Padilla regarding 
jus abutendi, jus ustendi and jus disponendi, which legal 
terms may not be understandable to many of us who are 
laymen here . . . For example, in jus disponendi, this 
right to dispose of one’s properties may be circum- 
scribed because of the greater interest of the people for 
the common good. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That last reply specifically gives 
me some worry because when rights granted to owners 
by some provisions in the Civil Code, particularly Arti- 
cles 428, 429, 435, 437, et cetera, will be affected by 
the provisions on social justice — and these rights are 
not only in the law; they have been enshrined by our 
jurisprudence — that could give some sort of alarm 
unless it could be explained in such a manner that the 
property owners will really be assured that the due pro- 
cess clause of the Constitution will specifically protect 
these rights which are now in the Civil Code. 

But anyway, I leave that for Commissioner Padilla to 
comment on later. I am not an expert in civil law. 

Thank you very much. 


deckfe S A f ^ k We are leaving the legislature 

andth^ould s e ,ay WS “ rePea ‘ ed ° r ™ end ' 


MR. MAAMBONG. I see. 

affect the 6 provisions of the'r 77^ n0t draStica 
Commissioner Padilla*? Comm' m ^d 6 alluded to 
ing about the Civil r Commissioner Padilla was thii 

the St Sf r ° visions such « Article 42: 

429— the right to ei l ° '' Jlspose ynd to recover; Arti 
right to enclose’ TS&tS. T, S" prope ^ 1 

to' S qufe h t t mie aCCeSS10n; ^ AftiCleS 476 to 48^£e * 

mi .^ese Civil Code provisions not be affected 
the social justice provisions? 

MR. SUAREZ. I suppose these are specific provisk 
under the Civil Code that may be affected if there v 
be full implementation of the constitutional provisic 
as they now appear. The reconciling factor will be 1 
safety clause “in a manner as may be provided by lav 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. On behalf of the Committee, may 
I be allowed to speak. There have been questions that 
relate to concepts regarding many of the provisions and 
the basic philosophy that underlies the provisions on 
social justice. We discussed this rather thoroughly in the 
committee hearings including the one that was quoted 
extensively when the Committee Chairman, Commis- 
sioner Nieva, asked that the title of the Article be trans- 
formed from Social Justice and Services to simply Social 
Justice. 

I would like to repeat that because, in my view, it 
has guided the deliberations of the Committee. This is 
also for the sake of the other Commissioners who had 
not participated in the deliberations of the Committee. 

This is essentially the position of Atty. Diokno in his 
paper in Batas at Katarungan, Volume I, No. 1, a pub- 
lication of the UP Law Center, where he dealt with the 
concept of Filipino social justice. The concept inciden- 
tally is drawn from his study of Philippine languages; 
for example, concepts such as katarungan, batas at kara- 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


661 


patan came from the revolutionary heritage as articu- 
lated by Filipino revolutionaries, including Mabini, 
Jacinto and Bonifacio, as well as the insights of other 
scholars. Let me read: 

Social justice for us Filipinos means a coherent, in- 
telligible system of law made known to us, enacted by 
a legitimate government freely chosen by us and enforced 
fairly and equitably by a courageous, honest, impartial and 
competent police force, legal profession andjudiciary that: 
First, respect our rights and our freedoms both as indi- 
viduals and as a people; second, seek to repair the injustices 
that society has inflicted on the poor by eliminating 
poverty as our resources and our ingenuity permit; third, 
develop a self-directed and self-sustaining economy that 
distributes its benefit to meet firstly, the basic material 
needs of all, to provide an improving standard of living for 
all, but particularly for the lower income groups, with 
enough time and space to allow them to take part in and to 
enjoy our cultures; fourth, change institutions and struc- 
tures, our ways of doing things and relating to each other so 
that whatever inequalities remain are not caused by those 
institutions or structures, unless inequality is needed tem- 
porarily to favor the least favored among us and its cost is 
borne by the most favored; and, fifth, adopt means and 
processes that are capable of attaining these objectives. 

For those who want to go further into this, I suggest 
that they go through the article in Batas at Katarungan. 
It is available at the UP Law Center. 

Just a brief background on Section 1 where social 
justice is mentioned as a social, economic, political, 
moral imperative in the pursuit of national develop- 
ment: 

The concept of national development as expressed 
in several national development plans of the previous 
regime was developed around three major objectives: 
growth, equity and the preservation of our natural 
resources not only for the present but also for future 
use. 

In practice, however, development has been skewed 
in favor of “growth,” to the extent that in cases where 
it happened, the gap between the rich and the poor 
widened. It is our feeling that at this stage, the State, as 
an agency of change, can so order its resources as to 
favor the majority or the poor. 

This is in violation of existing theories of the State 
where, one, the State is assumed to be a neutral agency 
serving all classes. In the other formulation usually 
identified with classical Marxism, the State is nothing 
more than an alliance of dominant classes which, 
through the government, becomes also the executive 
committee of these dominant classes. What we are 
trying to say is that the Article on Social Justice will go 
against these major classical formulations on the nature 
of the State so that for once, following certain tradi- 
tions of Filipinos, perhaps we can develop a Filipino 
style theory of the State that responds to the need of 
our historical conditions as well as the structures of 


society today in favor of the poor. It is for this reason 
that several provisions so mandate the State. But even 
as we mandate the State, the people themselves should 
be drawn from their inertia and participate through the 
people’s organizations in providing the necessary stimu- 
lus, the necessary impulse for the State to respond to 
the needs of the greater majority or to the poor. But 
it does not mean that it should be at the expense of the 
rich. Essentially, what we are saying is that the State, 
now acting as an agency of the poor, should not do 
these against the interest of the rich. We are merely 
saying that it should pay attention to the basic inequi- 
ties of society, so that society itself shall maintain and 
reproduce itself, without necessarily going to those 
convulsions usually associated with the historical 
traditions both in the West and in the Philippines. 
Time will test the validity of this theory. 

Having stated that, let me just go back to the concept 
of agrarian reform as embodied in the Article. There 
have already been discussions as to the reasons for the 
failure of agrarian reform. Let me just refer to a survey 
of tire literature done by two American economists 
covering agrarian reforms both in ancient times and in 
modem societies in Europe, Latin America, North 
America and in Asia, particularly. East Asia. In this 
survey of literature, they claimed that the reasons for 
failure of agrarian reform are: 1) lack of management 
capabilities; 2) apathy of government and sometimes 
even of peasants themselves; 3) inefficient or inadequate 
organization of complementary resources and services- 
this would refer to services like credit, irrigation, tech- 
nical inputs and others; and (4) lack of indigenous 
research and development, and where research and 
development exist, insufficient diffusion of its results. 
These have to do essentially with making scientific 
the process of agrarian reform. The studies point out 
that this is the single element lacking in many of the 
agrarian reforms but which are present in successful 
agrarian reforms. It was pointed out that eventually, 
the success of agrarian reform, particularly the liquida- 
tion of feudalism, has taken place alongside with indus- 
trialization, the expansion of markets as well as in the 
in ci ease in disposable income of the marginalized 
sectors. The study also shows that in cases where feud- 
alism has failed in increasing productivity as well as in 
enhancing the egalitarian distribution of income, it is 
because it has taken place within a wider framework of 
power and privilege. This has been the case in the 
Philippmes for several years. This one should be in- 
teresting to us, particularly to Congress which should 
see to it that indeed the appropriate legislation for 
successful agrarian reform should be enacted. 

Let me quote: 

Successful agrarian refonns, both in Europe and East 
Asia, have been characterized by economic growth, coupled 
with equitable distribution of income. In these cases, land 
is open to peasants, decisions over prices and products arc 
vested in the peasants, terms of trade are not manipulated 


662 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


through prices, taxes or monopoly rent and last, peasants 
are not discriminated against in the provisions of credit 
and technical inputs. 

We are saying, therefore, that there are already 
extensive and comprehensive studies on agrarian reform 
and we should profit from these. Mention was made of 
Taiwan, but I would imagine that there would be other 
models that could be investigated. More importantly, it 
is for us to really go into the historical and structural 
background of agrarian reform in the Philippines, and 
pay attention to these particular conditions because as 
the literature itself says, it is difficult to draw generaliza- 
tions from the comparative studies because it is the 
particularities of that society’s history and structure 
that define the success of agrarian reform. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Ople be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

I am a member of the Committee and, of course, I 
support the main thrust of the Article on Social Justice 
but 1 did take the prudence to indicate that they would 
have some reservations, especially in the matter of 
constitutional language. But I think it is incumbent on 

t0 try t0 discover > unravel and perhaps 
determine the significance and implications of a radical 
proposa for the reorganization of our society in terms 
° ln Particular, a land reform program. I would like to 
thin J,n * We Cann0t em P lQ y our time more usefully 
solndni Y f ? t0 determine n ot only the merits and 

intent of the CcTm?ttee 0 and oHtaf r the Underlyins 
ciHprino the* mee and of the Commission, con- 

art involved I! 0 " 8 ° f , mdividual and famil y interests 

radical annrnarh c ° nsiderin ® the great passions that 

based on land are 6S t( ? social and economic relations 
based on land are capable of being generated 

thitk he t e o W o a nVta: h tet 19 me S nti a V ^ ^ 1 

Dovertv in Asia it y mentioned, on the causes of 

ZZZZfZ P Ca " ed ne Aslan ~ An 

probably the teMwZtimiZS '7 Gu " nar Myrdal > 
time. After three volumes of detailed COnomist of our 
of the South Asian economic, social and^olitTcal'seb 
ttngs, he cathe to two major conclusions: First he reason 

U S a”sLte C s 0 ' ’Z iCa ^ backward » <ha. most of 
it are sott states. They did not have the political will 

for example, to enforce genuine civil equal ty u”dir 

the Constitutions prevailing, the rich and poor are equal 

before the law. But the public could not miss many 

glaring evidences m their own lives of how, in real life 

this principle of genuine civil equality is mocked. 

The second major conclusion was that these countries 
are arresting their own growth by lacking the political 
will to introduce radical social reforms, especially in 


land. Of course, he traced the long history of land 
reform effort in Asia, including the Philippines and the 
other Southeast Asian nations, and his dismal con- 
clusion was that while professing to inaugurate a social 
revolution through land reform, most of these govern- 
ments in the region, in actual fact, sought every means 
and every pretext to thwart genuine land reform. Of 
course, all it took was for the National Assembly or the 
Parliament to deny funds to land reform in order to 
stifle it. 

In this regard, we heard Commissioner Romulo 
raising the favorite bogy of most governments in South- 
east Asia against meaningful land reform — there is no 
money. Yet, this morning, I saw in the business page of 
the Manila Bulletin that P29 billion is being allocated 
under the 1986 budget to the so-called GFIs, govern- 
ment financial institutions, primarily the PNB and the 
DBP . The reason for this equity infusion is to prevent 
them from total collapse. Of course, P29 billion is about 
20 percent of the entire national budget, all of which 
will disappear without a trace during the year 1986. 
These banks have to be made viable, of course, but if 
one were weighing all these budgetary allocations on a 
scale of justice and priority, I think this would dwarf 
the entire budget of the Ministry of National Defense 
and the Ministries of Health and Education combined. 
But these are fait accompli to which the government 
must respond. 

Government corporations in 1 986 will absorb more 
taxpayers’ money than we ever dreamt of spending for 
land reform or even for new school buildings for our 
children, especially in the distressed communities. 

The point, therefore, is that it is possible the Philip- 
pines today has become the economic laggard of its 
statute because we have not mustered the will to trans- 
form social and economic relations based on land 
through a meaningful land reform program. 

That is the reason: It is in terms of our social rela- 
tions that we can be imprisoned in poverty. It is prac- 
tically choosy to remain stagnant economically. 

Later on, I hope the Committee will consider, from 
one of its own members, an amendment on Section 1 
which will link social justice to another jugular value 
and goal; that is, economic growth. It is not only a case 
of dividing the existing limited pie more equitably. It is 
through this that we can enlarge the pie for the enjoy- 
ment of all our citizens, and I am referring in particular 
to the land refonn program. I think the money will 
come when there is the political will to commit a whole 
nation to land reform. It is at this point that I hope to 
get some elucidation from Commissioner Tadeo con- 
cerning Sections 5, 6 and 7. Of course, I hope to 
address a few minor questions to Commissioner Aquino 
later on on the labor portion, and a question or two to 
Commissioner Garcia concerning Sections 19 and 20. 

I think there is no question that we need a radical 
land refonn, and by “radical” I mean the original Latin 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


663 


sense of going down to the roots of the problem. That is 
what I mean by “radical” social justice proposals be- 
cause, in fact, the land reform provision here goes to the 
roots of our social and economic situation. 

The old socialist condemnation of property was 
summed up by Pradeau in France as “property step.” 
That was in the 19th century and, of course, later on 
this was elaborated into a slogan which is “expro- 
priate the expropriators” in the sense that property 
owners were the original expropriators, so, why should 
they not be expropriated now? I do not think it is 
in that sense - to expropriate the expropriators - that 
the land reform provision here is intended. But when 
the Constitution directs the Congress to the effect that 
the State shall encourage and undertake the distribution 
of all agricultural lands, subject to limitations put by 
law especially on retention limits, does this contem- 
plate - this question I address to the Committee and 
particularly to Commissioner Tadeo — a blanket ap- 
proach to all agricultural lands so that we do not dis- 
tinguish between, let us say, the owners of Hacienda 
Luisita, the biggest plantation in Luzon with 6,000 
hectares and this ordinary chap in Laguna or Quezon 
who has only 10 hectares of coconut plantation? Sa 
inyo bang masid at wari ay masasagasaan ng land redis- 
tribution ang dalawang ito: ang may-ari ng pinakama- 
laking hasyenda dito sa Luzon at isang hindi naman 
mayaman, ni hindi mariwasa, pangkaraniwang tao la- 
mang na nagmamay-ari ng isang sukat ng lupang tina- 
tamnan ng niyog na hindi hihigit sa sampung ektarya? 

MR. TADEO. Pareho. 

MR. OPLE. Therefore, we now have to talk about 
ultimate objectives in order to shed light on the more 
immediate concerns. Is it the intention of the Commit- 
tee to dismantle all plantations in the Philippines regard- 
less of crop, differences in size, equity and history of 
tenurial terms and productivity? 

MR. TADEO. Sakop ang mga plantasyon. 

MR. OPLE. Buwagin ang lahat ng plantasyon upang 
maipamahagi sa mga bumubungkal nito. Iyon po ba ang 
ating pangkalahatang layunin na nakatitik dito sa ating 
pinag-uusapang Article on Social Justice? 

MR. TADEO. Sasakupin nito ang mga hasyenda at 
ang mga plantasyon kagaya ng sinabi ng Ginoong 
sampung ektarya, subalit kung ang may-ari ng lupa 
ay owner-cultivator lamang, wala siyang mga kasama 
hindi ito masasakop. Kung mayroon siyang mga kasa- 
mang farm workers, ang lupa ay masasakop. 

Marahil ay dapat iwasan ang salitang “buwag” dahil 
ang pagpapatupad ng agrarian reform ay dadaan pa sa 
Kongreso. Ang Kongreso ang magbibigay ng mga 
detalye. 


MR. OPLE. I am not concerned about the big estates. 

I think we have dismantled a lot of big estates since the 
time of Roxas, foremost of which were the friar lands. 

In January 1954, President Magsaysay made me 
chairman of the first agrarian committee created under 
that government. I investigated the Dinalupihan Land 
Estate in Bataan so that it could be redistributed to the 
tenants there. I am not concerned about these big 
landed estates including Canlubang, Hacienda Luisita, 
although probably later on, we should also take them 
up. I am concerned about literally millions of small 
plantation owners in the coconut industry and sugar 
industry as well. Is it the intention that wherever 
there are tenants, the land should be broken up and 
distributed to the tenants? Is that a correct assumption? 

MR. TADEO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Alam natin na sa industriya ng asukal, iba 
ang Luzon sa Bisayas. Dito sa Luzon ang umiiral ay 
tenancy. Sa Bisayas, lalo na sa Region VI, ang umiiral 
ay labor-management relations. Baka naman kung ang 
patakaran ay batay sa kung mayroong tenant o wala, 
lahat ng plantasyon ng asukal sa Luzon ay masasakop ng 
land reform; ang Bisayas hanggang Mindanao ay ligtas 
sa land reform. Gusto ko lamang na pag-aralan natin 
iyan sa kalaunan, at gusto ko ring itanong kung kasama 
rito ang mga palaisdaan. Kaming dalawa ni Commis- 
sioner Tadeo ay galing sa isang lalawigang ang hanap- 
buhay ng karamihan ay sa baybay-dagat nagmumula, sa 
palaisdaan. Alam ni Kasamang Tadeo na ang inyong 
lingkod ay lumaking isang mangingisda at magsasaka. 
Maaari bang malaman kung kasama ang palaisdaan? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. TADEO. Siguro makabubuting i-define natin ang 
agricultural land batay sa principles of agrarian reform 
cooperatives and taxation sa pahina 121 ng aklat ni 
Commissioner Nolledo: 

Agricultural land means land devoted to any growth 

including but not limited to crop lands, saltbeds, fishpond, 

idle land and abandoned land. 

MR. OPLE. Tungkol sa mga palaisdaan, alam naman 
ni kapatid na Tadeo kung anong uri ang pamamahala sa 
palaisdaan — mayroon diyang isa o dalawang bantay. Sa 
karamihan ng pangyayari ay hindi lamang sila hindi 
binabayaran, kundi hindi pa kasama sa tinutubo. Ano 
ngayon ang magiging epekto nitong Saligang Batas lalo 
na kung ang Sections 5 at 8 ay isasaalang-alang sa kani- 
lang kaugnayan? Ano ang ibig sabihin ng genuine land 
reform para sa mga nagtatrabaho sa palaisdaan? 

MR. TADEO. Sa palagay ko ay bahala na ang Kongre- 
so kung paano ipatutupad ang agrarian reform o aqua- 
tic reform. 


664 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


MR. OPLE. Datapuwat sa akala ng Ginoo, ang mga 
palaisdaan ay tiyak na sakop o saklaw ng itinatadhana 
dito sa Sections 5 and 8? 


MR. TADEO. Kasama po ito. 


MR. OPLE. Salamat po. 

Ngayon, gusto kong dumako sa Section 7 na nagsasa- 
bing: 


The State shall apply the principles of agrarian reform 
in the disposition of other natural resources, including 
lands of the public domain under lease or concession, sub- 
ject to prior rights of original inhabitants and without 
violating the homestead rights of small settlers and the 
rights of indigenous communities to their ancestral lands. 


This section has no provision concerning existing rights, 
earned rights, contractual rights and vested rights. We 
are talking of the public domain here and mainly lease 
or concession. To what extent will these be stopped, let 
us say, existing leases on forestry, because we know that 
timber concessions have just been parceled up all over 
the country. These are held to be existing rights since 
there is no provision in Section 7 except for the prior 
rights of the original inhabitants. Does this mean that 
the security of tenure of the holders of these leases, 
which can number by the thousands, operating the 
timber industry right now, will be disturbed under 
Section 7? Maaanng bawiin ang lisensiya. Kung sabagay 
s Gmoong Maceda lamang ang kayang magbawi ng lisen- 

authontf r/ T 1Str ? tlVe POWer; k 15 an excecutive 
authority. But is that what is intended in Section 7? 


MR. TADEO. Uulitin ko 
ni Mahar Mangahas tungkol 
coverage: 


ang definition na ibinigay 
sa full natural resource 


In principle, the term “lands” would include all forms of 
natural resources, including mineral, forests and water 

unZd 8 ’ u l PUbHC ° r PriVate ’ whether titled or 
untitled, whether presently controlled by Filipinos or non- 

Filipinos, over which there is social conflict induced by an 
unjust distribution. y 


MR. OPLE. So, the timber concessions are included 

Speaking o f land in general - and we know that the 
Philippines has been under a Torrens title system for the 
better part of a century since the start of the American 
regime, while Taiwan opted for a Torrens title system 

only after World War II - will this whole infrastructure 
of land rights represented by the Torrens title system 
be made insecure by a general mandate of the Congress 
to redistribute all agricultural lands, except I suppose 
where residences stand on these lands, and where com- 
mercial and industrial improvements have been estab- 
lished thereon? All the rest may be presumed to be 
subject to redistribution provided there is fair and pro- 
gressive compensation regardless of crop. Will this be 
correct? 


MR. TADEO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

I think I will put this question again to the Commit- 
tee at a convenient time so that it may present a more 
balanced answer because the Torrens title system 
underpins the entire system of private property in the 
Philippines based on land. Many people would be 
concerned, if the Committee admits that this will be 
the start on a wholesale basis by this proposed Article 
on Social Justice. 

I think the other question to ask is: Will all these 
earned rights, contractual rights, vested rights in land, 
in effect, in the ultimate stage be nullified by our land 
reform proposal? Or do we merely contemplate a situa- 
tion where the Torrens title will be transferred to new 
owners? 

MR. TADEO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

With respect to just a few enormous landed estates, 
I have already given examples: Hacienda Luisita, the 
biggest in Luzon, with 6,000 hectares of rice and corn 
land and sugar land and with 6,000 tenants and workers; 
the Canlubang Sugar Estate, just across the city in 
Laguna; and in the West Visayas alone with about 
30,000 sugar planters or hacenderos — the aggregate 
for the nation escapes me for the moment. In the 
ultimate stage of the land reform program as now en- 
visioned, will all of these estates be redistributed to their 
tenants, and if they have no tenants to whom will they 
be redistributed? 

MR. TADEO. The principle is agrarian land for the 
tillers and land for the landless. Ngunit inaasahang 
magkakaroon ng problema sa tatlo hanggang apat na 
milyong landless agricultural workers sa implemen- 
tasyon ng tunay na agrarian reform. Gaya ng sinabi ko 
kahapon, mayroong 605,000 kaingineros. Ayon sa kapa- 
tid ni Fr. Bernas na dumalo sa isang committee hearing 
natin, kung magpapatuloy sila sa pagkakaingin, magiging 
disyerto tayo; magkakaroon ng baha sa panahon ng tag- 
ulan at pagkatuyo sa panahon ng tag-araw. Saan natin 
dadalhin ang 605,000 na kaingineros na ito? Kaya kaila- 
ngan talagang mapasama dito ang iba pang natural 
resources upang itong tatlo hanggang apat na milyong 
landless agricultural workers ay magkaroon ng lupang 
sasakahin. 

MR. OPLE. Tama po iyan, at kung maaalaala ni 
Kapatid na Tadeo, ipinagunita ko sa kanya na mayroong 
1 .2 million hectares of cultivable land considered alien- 
able and disposable na nilagom noong nakaraang pama- 
halaan upang mauwi sa isang tinatawag na land assembly 
trust at inilagay sa Makati Stock Exchange to liquify 
these natural resources. There was no response from the 
business community. Recently I read that President 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


66 5 


Aquino, on behalf of the government, had repossessed 
these alienable and disposable lands of the public 
domain. One-and-one-fifth million hectares already 
identified and segregated by the Ministry of Natural 
Resources all over the country will be a great warehouse 
of hope if these can be redistributed to the tenants and 
the kaingineios. 1 thinK it could be very reassuring for 
those who are now negotiating with the National 
Democratic Front on behalf of the government that 
they can promise 1.2 million hectares of land already 
previously assembled and which are now at the disposal 
of the government. Sa public domain, hindi tayo gaa- 
nong mahihirapan sapagkat kung ang gobyerno ang 
may-ari, mas malaya at walang sakit ng kaloobang 
maipagkakaloob ang mga lupa sa mga nangangailangan. 
Ang higit na magdudulot sa atin ng problema, sa aking 
palagay, ay ang tinatawag na private agricultural lands. 

Tungkol sa Section 9 na nagsasabing: “The State shall 
promote the integrated development of agricultural, 
fishing and marine resources,” hindi po ba ang ibig 
sabihin ng integrated development of agricultural re- 
sources ay katulad ng ginawang integrated development 
ni Ambassador Eduardo Cojuangco, na mula sa binhi ng 
niyog hanggang sa ito ay gilingin at maging coconut oil, 
hanggang sa bangkong pagdaraanan? Iyon po ba kaya 
ang kahulugan na ating ikakapit sa integrated develop- 
ment of agricultural fishing and marine resources, a kind 
of UNICOM, UCPB, COCOFED approach? 


MR TADEO. Puwede sigurong sagutin natin ng 
pflnito ‘ Ang Cojuangcong ito ay magiging mga magbu- 
bukid na magmamay-ari mula sa hilaw na sangkap hang- 
gang sa finished product. 

MR oPLE Mula sa binhi, sa bugsok hanggang sa 
^anrdsasvon ng COCOFED, UCPB at doon sa dakong 
SS Coconut oil mill at saka UNICHEM. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 


MR BENNAGEN. On behalf of the Committee, may 
I respond to that very briefly because I was part of the 
move which formulated that. When we speak of integra- 
tion we speak of one integration within each sector, 
for instance, within agriculture itself. We also speak of 
integration among the various components of agncul- 
marine and other resources, and the way they 
should be related to the overall industrialization thrust 
of the country. We are saying that we cannot simply 
rely on agrarian reform in terms of attaining the overall 
objectives of gross and equity, and that the agrarian 
reform program should be integrated, should be linked 
in appropriate ways with industrialization of the coun- 
try, the form of which shall, of course, be determined in 
due time. 


MR. OPLE. It is really saying that land reform bene- 
ficiaries can, at a certain stage, federate to enjoy eco- 
nomies of scale through integration. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. The State now pays for the land that is to 
be redistributed under a fair and progressive compensa- 
tion system; will the State ever recover this money of 
the taxpayers? 

Bibigyan ba natin ng pananagutan ang mga magsasaka 
na siyang magtatamo at magtatamasa ng lupa na magba- 
yad naman sa gobyerno ng ibinayad ng gobyerno para 
sa lupang ito? 

MS. NIEVA. When the Committee was discussing 
this, we did not mean to say that the beneficiaries 
would just be receiving these lands as doleouts. But 
where they are capable, they also have to pay back 
on amortization for cumulative years. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, mukhang hindi iyan 
ang nakita kong nakatitik sa programa ng Kilusang 
Magbubukid ng Pilipinas. Isa sa kanilang mga kahilingan 
ngayon ay tapusin na ang pagbabayad ng amortization 
sapagkat hindi na kaya ng magsasaka, lalo na ang presyo 
ng mga pesticide at pataba. Sa kabila ng pagbagsak ng 
presyo ng langis ay patuloy pa rin ang pagtaas ng presyo 
ng mga inputs ng mga maliliit na magsasaka. 

So, one of the demands is to stop the payments be- 
cause after all, this land belongs to them. 

Ano kaya ang masasabi ng Kapatid na Tadeo tungkol 
dito? 

MR. TADEO. Magkakaroon ng fair and progressive 
system of compensation. Priorities should be given to 
small and medium-size landholdings without adding to 
the burden of the beneficiaries. The compensation 
package should be improved at ang mga maliliit na 
panginoong may lupa should be paid promptly. Kung 
ang dating pagbabayad natin noon sa ilalim ng P.D. 
No. 27 or Republic Act 3844 ay 10 percent cash at 90 
percent bond, maaaring baliktarin natin ito upang 
maging 90 percent cash at 10 percent bond para sa mga 
maliliit na panginoong may lupa. 

MR. OPLE. I am calling for a separate policy for the 
small landowners to be placed under land reform and 
the bigger landowners. 

Sa ngayon ang bay ad ng Land Bank sa ilalim ng batas 
ay 90 percent Land Bank bond at 10 percent cash. Dati 
ay tinatanggap ng PNB at DBP bilang kolateral o pamba- 
yad ng mga existing arrears ang 90 percent bond ng 
Land Bank; ngayon ay ayaw na nila itong tanggapin- 
Samakatuwid lumilitaw na sa papel lamang itong 90 
percent bond; it has no negotiability now. Kung baba- 
yaran ng pamahalaan ang Hacienda Luisita, malaki-laki 
ito. Remember that its acquisition cost about 30 years 


666 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


ago was only P9 million so it will now cost hundreds 
of millions of pesos. Paano ngayon ang pagbabayad sa 
gobyemo? Hindi na makababawi ang gobyemo sapagkat 
naipamahagi na ang lupa sa mga magsasaka. 


MR. TADEO. Ang talagang layunin ng bonds ay 
upang bumili ng stock o share sa isang korporasyon. Ito 
ay maaaring i-convert sa cash at magagamit ito kung 
magtatayo ng mga industriya na kakailanganin ng ating 
bansa. Ito ang sinasabi namin noon na ang natutulog na 
kapital sa lupa ay dapat magamit sa pagpapaunlad ng 
industriya. Kaya kung ito ay susuportahan ng pama- 
halaan, hindi natin kakailanganin ang foreign loan, 
foreign aid, and foreign investment. Ang unang kaila- 
ngang gawin natin ay bigyan ng purchasing power o lag- 
yan ng laman ang bulsa ng 35 hanggang 40 milyong 
magbubukid. Sa pag-unlad ng domestic sector ay uunlad 
ang industriya kasabay ng genuine agrarian reform. 


MR. OPLE. Totoo po ang sinabi ng Ginoo. In the case 
of Taiwan, in the early 1950s, two billion nationalist 
Taiwan dollars was released by land reform so that this 
capital, otherwise locked in the land, was now liberated 
to become a fuel for the industrialization of Taiwan. 
But the vehicles for investments, government corpora- 
tions whole shares of stock, are available to the land- 
owner who has been placed under land reform. All 
ese corporations were making huge revenues and 
profits. So, we might say that the sequestered land- 

ofrtSlMn V6ry haPPY about receivin g bonds and shares 
thf> i 7 corporatlons that were profitable. Many of 
these landowners became richer through land reform. 

ronnt™ PP T°? d y haVmg been impoverished. But in this 
y ’ bope t}Te Gentleman can point to a single 
hv tiTrl corporation wh ose stocks will be coveted 

of land !e?„ r ° m WnerS Wh ° Wi “ '° Se ,heir lands as a resu " 

ssatwaa s t s 

i. 8 .TT ,he ri8h,s of wo ' kere <° 

M and concerted 'activltie^for o e g ot iations, peace- 

lf 8 ua“„ d ,,?ob indUdi " e ,he 

w^r , “:^r^ u ^’z a : co " di,i T° f 

affecting their rights and benefits. ecrsion-making 

I see that the option of th#* ct 0 *. * 

a “" has bin CStSZS 
1935. The provision for comouknrv l- 

in exactly the same form in both the 1 93 5 and "h? 1973 
Constitutions - ‘‘The State mav nrovl f the 973 
arbitration.” Since 

modes ol dispute settlements and compels attention for 
having eliminated a familiar provision in both the 1935 
and the 1973 Constitutions, what conclusion should 
arise from this is that, in the opinion of the proponent 
all disputes should now be settled through voluntary 


mode, and the State is deprived of the power of com- 
pulsory arbitration. Does this mean the abolition of the 
National Labor Relations Commission? 


At this juncture , the President relinquished the Chair 
to the Honorable Florenz D. Regalado. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. May I be allowed to answer that 
question in behalf of the Committee. The express 
proviso on compulsory arbitration is in the General 
Provisions of the 1935 Constitution. At best, it was 
adopted in the Industrial Peace Act, Republic Act 875, 
which provided for compulsory arbitration pertaining to 
the Court of Industrial Relations on matters which 
involve unfair labor practices and strikes which are 
certified by the President to involve national interest. 
However, the 1973 Constitution provided for an 
express designation of compulsory arbitration in the 
Declaration of Principles. When the Committee dropped 
that express proviso without intending to exclude the 
right of the State, by a statutory implementation, to 
provide for acceptable norms of compulsory arbitration 
whenever they are warranted by the situation, the Com- 
mittee is very well aware that the exclusive use of free 
collective bargaining as a mode of settlement of labor 
disputes is ideal only in highly industrialized countries. 
But a developing country such as the Philippines where 
the framework of labor-management relations is very 
fragile does not have the systemic stability to withstand 
prolonged work stoppages. Such that in the context of 
this recognition, we would yield to the requirement of a 
developing country to accommodate modalities of 
compulsory arbitration. 


MR. OPLE. I am very glad to hear that, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. That is very reassuring because there are indeed 
times in history when, even by implication, the State 
should not be prevented from taking steps to reestablish 
peace especially where strategic installations and facili- 
ties of a nation are at stake. I imagine that if there is a 
simultaneous strike of the MERALCO and the PLDT, 
there must be something in the law that will enable the 
State to act on behalf of the general welfare. So, that 
is not precluded at all. 


MS. AQUINO. May I just be allowed to underscore 
the intention behind the dropping of the provision on 
compulsory arbitration. It is just a reiteration of a 
genuine and firm commitment of the State to encourage 
and reinforce free collective bargaining methods and 
voluntary methods of settlement of labor disputes. 
However, as a colatilla, for purposes of record, the 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


667 


reservation for compulsory arbitration should lie only as 
a last resort when the free collective modes and the 
voluntary modes shall have been exhausted and shall 
have been proven unavailing in settling labor disputes. 

MR. OPLE. I certainly agree with that. Concerning 
the right to strike, that is made explicit here. The right 
to strike and the right to lock out generally go together. 

Is it the Committee’s impression that the phrase “in- 
cluding the right to strike” also provides for the right to 
lock out even if it is not here? 

MS. AQUINO. In cases provided for by law, yes. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President. 

MS. NIEVA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think Commis- 
sioner Lerum, a member of the Committee, would also 
like to comment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Lerum is recognized. 

MR LERUM. May I comment on the so-called right 
to lock out? There is no such right to lock out. There is 
nothing in our Constitution that gives management the 
right to lock out. Under the present Constitution, what 
is recognized is the right of workers to security of 
tenure but there is no provision recognizing the right of 
any employer to lock out its employees because this is 
against the right of the workers to security of tenure. 

MR. OPLE. I am speaking of the general practice the 
world over. 

MR. LERUM. But that is not so in the Philippines. It 
may be true in other countries but in the Philippines, 
there is no such right. 

MR OPLE. Does the Gentleman mean that the right 
to lock out is denied to the employers but the right to 
strike may not be abridged for the workers? Is that how 
Commissioner Lerum stands on this question? 

MR. LERUM. The question is whether the right to 
lock out . . . 

MR. OPLE. Employers have no right to lock out even 
where there is a right to strike by the workers? 

MR. LERUM. Yes, that is how the present Constitu- 
tion reads. I am referring to the present, not to this 
proposed Constitution that we are discussing today. 
Because the moment we recognize the right of the 
workers to security of tenure, that means they cannot 
be locked out. 


MR. OPLE. I do not know what the Supreme Court 
may have said about that but it is generally true that 
there is a symmetry of final actions in collective bargain- 
ing acknowledged throughout the world and that is the 
right to strike and the right to lock out because without 
arbitration we are back to a trial of strength between 
the parties in the picket line and that is what American 
collective bargaining is all about — that there is finally 
a trial of strength. Naked economic coercion will deter- 
mine the outcome of the contest and that is the reason 
I feel reassured about the statement of the Committee, 
through Commissioner Aquino, that with this provision 
in Section 4, we do not really forego the instrument of 
compulsory arbitration provided it is a last resort. 
Strikes and lockouts have to be acts of last resort and 
perhaps at the proper time, I can propose a minor 
amendment just to take care of that contingency. May 
I ask the Committee whether in terms of the voluntary 
modes of dispute settlement and the primacy given to 
collective bargaining, the State may not now enact a 
minimum wage law to fix minimum wages, whether 
nationally or by industry, because that is State inter- 
vention and perhaps State coercion? It is noteworthy in 
this respect that recently, both the NEDA and the 
Ministry of Labor and the President have said that they 
were no longer going to abide by a minimum wage 
system which is very important especially for the unor- 
ganized workers because they prefer labor and manage- 
ment to settle the terms and conditions of work. Is 
there anything in this provision, Section 4, that pre- 
cludes Congress in the future from enacting new 
minimum wage laws? 

MR. LERUM. May I answer that. There is nothing in 
this proposed Constitution that will prohibit the govern- 
ment from fixing wages or from fixing a minimum wage. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. I think I have used more than my first share of 
the time. Thank you very much for giving me the floor. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bennagen is recognized. 

BENNAGEN. I wonder if Commissioner Ople 
would yield to just a few questions. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER 
missioner Ople may reply. 


(Mr. Regalado). Com- 


. BENNAGEN. Mention was made of political 
will, of political commitment as a sine qua non of a 
genuine agrarian reform and all the other reforms that 
are suggested in the Article on Social Justice. I am con- 
stiained to ask this question on the assumption that 
since he has seceded from the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, 
he has acquired some objective distance from the 


668 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


Marcos years to be able to provide us some object or 
moral lesson in the study of political commitment or 
political will. As an insider, could the Gentleman share 
with us some of the limitations of the concentrated 
power of the Marcos’ years that prevented the successful 
implementation of agrarian reform? 


MR. OPLE. I participated in agrarian reform planning 
during that period and I think P.D. No. 27 did achieve a 
sort of transformation in the lives of those that bene- 
fited from it. We have in this Commission colleagues 
who lost their lands to their own tenants as a result of 
P.D. No. 27. Commissioner Bengzon lost the family land 
in Pangasinan; Commissioner Rodrigo lost the family 
land in Bulacan. It was a painful and traumatic experi- 
ence for many Filipino landowners. And I think that 
program should have been extended beyond rice and 
com to other crops. 


But at that point, the government really ran into a 
so wall of resistance. All the politicians served notice 
at t ey would rebel politically if coconut and sugar 
lands were touched. So, notwithstanding what I thought 
were the mighty efforts that Minister Estrella and I, 
together with Montemayor, Lerum, Tame and others, 
th^p v! extend No. 27 to other crops, politically 

time thought that the cost was 

refon^nroa’ W3S the reason wh Y the agrarian 

not move h 8ram f ° t u StUCk ° n rice and corn and could 
crops b d the met6S and bounds of these two 


herV, h n n LT* r T° n We have a more ^citing propo 
W r beclf'I 15 ° n SociaI is that land refo 

approach e r»^ J °?’ PaSsin8 ' althoU8h the sped 

SSta* « b. '2KS within *** of ^ 

Piece of agricultural llnf 61688 t0 determine - But 
after we aDDrnve n an d may be considered exen 
on Social Justice 6 pertinent sections of this Arti 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

1 aak « 


MS. NIEVA. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, in the application and 
interpretation of this proposed Article on Social Justice, 
the said doctrines I mentioned in the cases I enumerated 
would remain valid and subsisting and are not deemed 
modified, repealed, or superseded in any way? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we understand that until Congress 
shall decide otherwise. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, in the interpretation 
and application of this proposed Article on Social 
Justice, the doctrines laid down by the Supreme Court 
as such shall prevail. 

MS. NIEVA. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. In the proposed Section 1, I would 
like to invite the attention of the Committee on the 
concept of promotion of structures and processes. For 
the record, we would like to know what these struc- 
tures and processes are, or what are included in these 
structures and processes? 

MS. NIEVA. May we ask Commissioner Garcia. 

MR. GARCIA. When we speak of structures and 
processes which deliver social justice to the people, we 
speak of both economic and social, and political struc- 
tures of a given society which provide equality of op- 
portunity. These structures provide, for example, in the 
area of housing, decent shelter to the majority of its 
inhabitants; or work for the great majority of the people 
in a given society. 

MR. DAVIDE. In concrete terms, what are these? 

MR. GARCIA. Basically in a given structure, for 
example, housing, it is the ability of a given society to 
provide shelter for the majority of its people. In con- 
crete terms, it means the housing services given to com- 
munity in a determined place. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER 
missioner Davide is recognized 


(Mr. Regalado). Com- 


MR. DAVIDE. On the matter of processes, could we 
be enlightened on what these processes are and what are 
excluded from these processes? 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer 
I seek clarification on certain points from the 

the Committee answered that the doctrine laid dn\ 
the Supreme Court in the following cases ' ' Catl 
Williams Guido vs Rural Progress Admintl 
Samamlla vs. Cruz. Astudillo vs. Board of Direct , 
PHHC decided in 1 976 had been taken into accour 
the provisions on social justice would be deemed tc 
actually taken into account the said doctrine c 
Supreme Court in these cases. Is my impression co 


MR. GARCIA. Basically the processes which are 
referred to in a given society are those of participation 
and consultation, mechanisms whereby popular consul- 
tation is afforded so that people become part of deci- 
sion mechanism, giving them a say in decisions which 
affect their lives. 

MR. DAVIDE. And included, therefore, are initiative 
and referendum? 

MR. GARCIA. Initiative, referendum, and even 
elections. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


669 


MR. DA VIDE. This includes their participation, tor 
instance, in the legislative body through the party list 
system or sectoral representation. 

MR. GARCIA. These are different mechanisms within 
the proper legislative structures, or there can be extra- 
legal processes whereby the people can participate, 
through their own freedom to organize and demonstrate 
the consultation mechanism in the different ministries, 
the Office of the President and in the public hearings 
that the legislature provides so that they can give their 
ideas. These are the processes envisioned to shape the 
direction of that society’s future. 

MR. DAVIDE. Definitely then, in the interpreta- 
tion/application of the Article on Social Justice, 
everything must be within the framework ofdemocratic 
processes. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. within the framework ofdemo- 
cratic exercise and also of a just and humane society. 
That is the ultimate. 

MR DAVIDE. Is it within the context of the concept 
of a just and humane society as embodied in the 
Preamble, and nothing more? 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly. 

MR DAVIDE. I would like to invite the attention of 
the Committee to Section 5 which provides that lands 
ire to be distributed to farmers and farm workers. Are 
landless farmers and farm workers the beneficiaries 
under Section 5, meaning, farmers who do not originally 
have lands of their own, and farm workers who do not 
have lands of their own? 

MS. NIEVA. I think the section refers to the lands 
which farmers till. 

MR DAVIDE. Yes, but could the particular fanner 
tilling a land which does not belong to him, and who has 
a land of his own, still be allowed? For instance, I am a 
farmer with five hectares of land exclusively belonging 
to me, but I am working on the farm of another. Would 
that owner of the land I am working on be under obliga- 
tion to give in payment of just compensation the very 
parcel or portion cultivated by me because 1 am the 
fanner? Such that if I am working on two hectares of 
the property of “B,” but I have my own six hectares, 
will I eventually own a total of eight hectares? 

MR. TADEO. Kung mayroong five hectares si Com- 
missioner Davide at owner-cultivator pa siya, pagkatapos 
gumagawa siya sa iba, batay iyan sa “needs and capa- 
city.” 

MR. DAVIDE. But I can afford to cultivate 10 
hectares. I already own six hectares and I still work on 
the land of another. 


MR. TADEO. Dahilan sa “just distribution,” ang 
timing bibigyan ng prioridad ay iyong maliit anglupang 
sinasaka at walang sinasaka. Kung ang sinasaka ng Gino- 
ong limang ektarya ay sapat na sa kanyang pangangaila- 
ngan. mawawalan na siya ng karapatan doon sa isang 
ltipain at ito’y ipagkakaloob sa maliliit ang mga lupang 
sinasaka. 

MR. DAVIDE. So. it is now very clear that the 
intention is to give priority to the landless farmers. 
Would that be the same interpretation insofar as farm 
workers and seasonal workers are concerned? For 
instance, I am a farmer with, two hectares of land, but 
off-season in my land, I can work on the land of 
another. Would 1 be entitled to that portion of the 
property of another which I am working on? 

MR. TADEO. Kung wala kayong sinasakang dalawang 
ektarya. 

MR. DAVIDE. But I have my own two hectares. 

MR. TADEO. Does the Commissioner own the two 
hectares? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, but off-season in my farm, I 
work on the farm of another. 

MR. TADEO. Kung ang dalawang ektarya ay hindi 
makasasapat sa inyong pangangailangan may karapatan 
kayo doon sa kabila. 

MR. DAVIDE. Who shall determine whether what I 
own is enough or not enough for me? 

MR. TADEO. Dapat tayong magkaroon muna ng 
mga batay an tulad ng RA 3844. Makikita rito na ang 
tatlong ektaryang irrigated ay kayang magtaguyod ng 
pamilyang mayroong lima o anim na miyembro. Maaa- 
ring maging batayan ang mga batas na ito. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will give a very concrete example. I 
have a one-hectare land. My neighbor has another one 
hectare. I planted corn on my land and 1 have to wait 
for about three months before I could harvest the corn. 
While awaiting the harvest of my corn, I will work on 
the kmd of my neighbor; I work about half a hectare 
of his one-hectare land. Would I be entitled to that 


MR. TADEO. Gaya ng sinabi ko, kung ang sinasaka 
nmyo ay hindi makasasapat at gumagawa pa kayo sa iba, 
maaan kayong magkaroon ng karapatan doon. 

MR. DAVIDE. 1 see. In that particular case, my 
neighbor would lose one-half and I will have all in all 
one and a-half. That could be the effect. 

MR. TADEO. Ang may-ari ba ng sinasaka ninyong 
lupa ay magbubukid o nakikigawa lamang? 


670 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. My neighbor is also a farmer. 

MR. TADEO. Kung magbubukid lamang ay hindi. 
Akala ko po ay panginoon siya at may lupa. 

MR. DAVIDE. He can be the landlord because he 
allows people to work on his land because he is already 
infirm — for instance, he is disabled. So, he cannot work 
on the land. 


farmers’ organizations? By qualifying the farmers’ 
organizations as independent, it would necessarily 
follow that there are farmers’ organizations which are 
not independent. So, for the moment may we know 
what are the independent farmers’ organizations and 
what are the nonindependent farmers’ organizations? 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I answer that, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 


MR. TADEO. It shall be unlawful for the agricultural 
lessee to contract or work on additional landholding 
belonging to a different agricultural lessor. Akala ko 
kasi kangina ay iyong panginoong may lupa. 


MR. DAVIDE. In other words, all laws affecting land 
reform now or agrarian land reform shall remain valid 
and in force. Is it also the sense of the Committee that 
upon the effectivity of this Constitution, the land 
reform or agrarian reform program will be governed by 
existing laws? y 

What are P r °P° se d in this draft Article 
will still have to be refined and improved. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Presiding Officer, 
missioner Bennagen^ recognized.^" Regalado) - Com - 

whether B ex^h n A g G laws shalT^ ^ , Gentleman is askin § 
Constitution be aDDlieri .’ u P° n * le rat ifi ca tion of this 
’ 3Pplied Wlth respect to agrarian reform. 

MR. DAVIDE Tii* r 

remain in force. °mmittee said that they will 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bennagen is recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. When we formulated that, we had 
in mind the experiences during the Marcos years where 
peasant organizations themselves were manipulated by 
the regime, or that the government itself created its 
own organizations. We feel, and I think this is also con- 
sistent with the ILO Convention 141 to which the 
Philippine government is a signatory, that farmers’ 
organizations or peasant organizations should be inde- 
pendent of the government so that they can develop 
their own programs. We are also saying that even as they 
are independent organizations, they also deserve support 
from the government. My analogy during the delibera- 
tion was something like an autonomous university that 
can develop its own curricular programs but would 
accept support from the State. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am glad that the Gentleman has 
enlightened us on that matter. Does the Committee 
admit that even nonindependent farmers’ organizations 
are entitled to support? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. BENNAGEN Of ™ 

general provision saying thatch 7h 1 

with the new Constitute , Y ttose not consist 
there was a prooo ' T be nullified - B “‘ ' th. 

Amendments and Transited? 1 t °- th ® Committee 
agrarian reform code shall be f lovl ^ lon ^ sa y in § that 
with affected sectors rmulated in consultat 


lawson tTref™ 6 Said * a < 

rLr^r idei r r d ' 


MR. BENNAGEN. I a m 
general principle. I have not 
laws. 


operating only from that 
gone into an inventory of 


MR. DAVIDE. At the end of line 26, page 2 we find 
the qualification “independent farmers’ organizations.” 
What exactly does the Committee mean by independent 


MR. DAVIDE. If nonindependent organizations of 
fanners are similarly entitled to support, why did the 
Committee still qualify the fanners’ organizations as 
only those which are independent? 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think there is an important 
underlying principle here, in a sense that farmers’ 
organizations, like other people’s organizations, should 
establish some distance from any regime, so that they 
will be able to be more critical of the regime without 
necessarily . . . 

MR. DAVIDE. Does the Commissioner mean the 
government? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. But how can they establish distance 
from the government when they are supposed to receive 
aid and support from the government? Should they not 
work for their mutual benefit? 

MR. BENNAGEN. That is really the idea, but what 
we are saying here in terms of independence is relative 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


671 


independence. The organization is not dictated upon 
by the government in terms of its developmental thrust 
and its programs but it could participate in a process 
of consultation which is mutually beneficial to the 
independent organization and to the government, as 
well. 

MR. DA VIDE. So, the qualification of “independent” 
is still necessary insofar as the Committee is concerned? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. But the Committee just answered a 
while ago that even those members of nonindependent 
organizations are entitled to support and assistance. To 
what degree will the support and assistance to non- 
independent organizations be then? 

MR. BENNAGEN. I really have no idea, but we are 
saying here that independence is crucial not so much in 
terms of being deprived of support, but in teims of the 
organization’s capability to develop its own programs of 

action. 

MR DAVIDE. But this particular section relates 
precisely to the support and assistance by the govern- 
ment. 


of agricultural lands as cited in Section 7 of the draft 
Article? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we have defined this as forest and 
pasture concessions, like those especially parceled out to 
cronies and occupied by cultural minorities. We have 
lands of the public domain . . . 

MR. DAVIDE. What is really the extent of the term 
“other natural resources”? Under Section 8 of Article 
XIV of the 1973 Constitution, natural resources refer 
to: 

All lands of the public domain, waters, minerals, coal, 

petroleum and other mineral oils, all forces of potential 

energy, fisheries, wildlife . . . 

MR. TADEO. Ang ibig sabihin dito ay ang mga 
“arable lands” na maaaring sakahin. Ngayon, itong 
mga coal, petroleum, mineral oils, under the regalian 
doctrine, ay pag-aari ng Estado. Pero mayroong mga 
bagay sa natural resources na naaangkop lamang para sa 
agriculture. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, these can be classified as agricul- 
tural lands. 

MR. TADEO. Yes. 


MR. BENNAGEN. That is right. 

MR nAVIDE If we have to qualify and distinguish 

hp tween members of independent farmers’ organiza- 
betwee f non independent farmers orgam- 

tl0nS f wT are practically creating a class struggle 
f' 1 ” 1 ’!;. tw0 kinds of farmere’ organizations, and that 
,s ‘consistent with the thrust of social justice. 

MR BENNAGEN. No, not necessarily, because I 
ih imagine that there will be other organizations 
w ° ud are sponsored by the State such as officially 
Wh nred cooperatives which are not formally indepen- 
SP °t S I think the distinction is crucial in the sense that 
dent ' hrudd have organizations which are formally 
^dependent of the government. 

iuR DAVIDE. I see. What is really bugging me is the 
nlication of the principle of agrarian reform in the 
option of other natural resources. I wonder if the 
remittee has defined natural resources in the manner 
met the term is defined in the present Constitution - I 
‘ referring to Section 8, Article XIV of the 1973 

Constitution: 

All lands of the public domain, waters, minerals, coal, 
petroleum and other mineral oils, all forces of potential 
energy, fisheries, wildlife, and other natural resources of 
the Philippines belong to the State. 

I think this is really the concept of natural resources. 
Is this the meaning of “other natural resources” outside 


MR. DAVIDE. In other words, the use of the words 
“and other natural resources” is really meaningless 
because the phrase actually refers to agricultural lands. 

MS. NIEVA. In addition to that, we are referring to 
such areas as forest and pasture concessions, especially 
those occupied by cultural communities. 

MR. DAVIDE. I understand that the Committee on 
the National Economy and Patrimony, in its report, 
allows grants by way of leases or concessions to private 
corporations or to individuals. In the latter case, the 
grants are given to Filipino citizens and, in the former, 
to corporations, sixty percent of whose capital is owned 
by Filipino citizens. 

Now, my question is, under that particular proposal 
of the Committee, and as provided in the 1973 Consti- 
tution, will these grants be in the nature of leases or 
concessions, and therefore the ownership remains with 
the government or the State? Under this proposal, once 
a certain area is leased to a corporation or to an indivi- 
dual and this particular corporation will now hire 
certain individuals to work in the concession or leased 
area, they can now acquire ownership over the area 
which they are tilling or cultivating. Is that the intention 
of the Committee? 

MR. TADEO. In principle, the term “lands” should 
include all forms of natural resources, such as miner s, 
forest and water resources, whether public or pri vate > 
whether titled or untitled, whether presently contro c 


672 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


by Filipinos or non-Filipinos, over which there is social 
conflict induced by an unjust distribution. 

MR. DAVIDE. What exactly does the Gentleman 
mean by a social conflict in an area covered by a con- 
cession or a lease? Necessarily, I would suppose that the 
conflict is between the workers in this area under 
concession or under lease, and the concessionaire. 

MS. NIEVA. Not necessarily. Like in the case of 
CELLOPHIL in Abra, it was the minority group of Ting- 
ians which was most affected. The group was not neces- 
sarily the workers at that area but they were residents 
there. 


housing at affordable cost to deserving low-income 
citizens.” What is the perception of the Committee with 
regard to deserving low-income citizens? Up to what 
level do we consider the earner as low-income? And once 
having classified citizens as low-income, how do we now 
determine whether one is deserving or not? If a low- 
income earner is deserving, what about those who are 
less deserving? Will not social justice apply to them? Is it 
not that social justice is more called for because they are 
less deserving? 

MS. NIEVA. Is the Gentleman saying that we should 
provide for those who have no income whatsoever? 


MR. DAVIDE. But does not Commissioner Bennagen 
believe that if there is the necessity of protecting the 
interests of these cultural communities, the rule should 
be in the Article on the National Economy, that no 
leases shall be granted over lands where there is a claim 
for ancestral homes or ancestral domains by the tribal 
groups? This is not really the proper subject of agrarian 
reform, otherwise, if we apply the principle of agrarian 
reform, this means that workers in the concession will 
be entitled to obtain that particular portion which they 
are working on. It may be a lease for grazing purposes, 
so there are some hired hands. 


respect l May 1 answer that - The idea with 

Te Present n th 10 " Clt ? d is that the workers could 

necessarily L 3rea ’ C ° Uld WOrk on the land > without 
necessarily acquiring personal, private titles to this land. 

MR. DAVIDE. “Without necessarily . . .”? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, it could be stewardship. 

which saysT^ 0 ^ ^°’ 1116 mand ate under Section 7 

the disposition T the prmci P les of agrarian reform in 

of the pSb do° natUral rCS0UrCeS ’ includin S lands 

of the public domarn under lease or concession, 

simply means that lands covert 

cannot really be given to those wlw are 'working' there 
doctrine. WOU ‘ d PreCiSel> ' the egafi, aria" 


MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, but we are also saying tl 
complementary structures which allow the developme 
of these areas for the benefit of those who are worki 
should be set up. The situation is that, even if the 
areas are being worked on by those staying in the lar 
the kaingineros, for example, the objectives of grow 
and equity are not attained without the complement 
structures. That is the reason mention is made of t 
application of the agrarian principles. 


MR. DAVIDE. My question on urban land reform 
and housing refers to line 20 which provides “decent 


MR. DAVIDE. My point is, we should not qualify in 
favor of the low-income citizens entitled to decent 
housing because we are practically granting relief to 
those who are deserving since they are of low income; 
but what about those who are deserving and yet are 
without any income or have a much lower income? 
They cannot enjoy social justice. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I answer that with a general 
principle. That partly answers the query as to the mean- 
ing of “structures and processes.” I think that in non- 
market allocation of goods and services largely through 
the bureaucracy, some things have to be done in tenns 
of setting the rules for classifying beneficiaries or 
clients, as some agencies call them. Some sets of priori- 
ties and the rules for implementing these would have to 
be established so that not anyone who claims to be poor 
and deserving should be granted these services. This is 
because in the history of access to goods and services, 
the rules and methods have been honored in the breach" 
We are saying now that given adequate monitoring of 
statistical information and adequate research into the 
social and demographic characteristics of Philippine 
society, we ought to have some clear scientific basis for 
categorization. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is exactly the reason why 
categorizing low-income citizens into deserving or not 
deserving or less deserving is, in effect, dangerous be- 
cause I do not think that the concept of social justice 
should also categorize the people as to whether they are 
deserving or not, especially in the matter of urban land 
reform and housing. 

Section 1 1 provides: 

Urban poor dwellers shall not be evicted nor their dwell- 
ings demolished without due process of law. 

We have the Anti-Squatting Law which is P.D. No. 772. 
According to the law it is a crime to squat, and one’s 
dwelling unit can be demolished even without court 
order because the act itself of occupying a private land 
or a public land according to that decree is a crime. I 
agree that this should be interpreted to mean that P.D. 
No. 772 would be deemed repealed upon the ratifica- 
tion of this Constitution. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


673 


I would like to get the sentiment of the Committee 
because that is my stand. 

MS. NIEVA. We shall welcome some kind of amend- 
ment or reformulation of this section because this 
is a very crucial issue, and different views have been 
presented on why we should not punish the poor for 
being what they are, and whether we are referring here 
to those who have already been paying for their lands 
but are being evicted unjustly. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is why I am really for the imme- 
diate repeal of that unjust decree. 

Another point, Mr. Presiding Officer, on Section 1 1 
again. Of course, this does not refer to private contracts 
for occupancy of a house by an urban poor dweller. 
This has reference to urban poor dwellers on lands 
where they have built their own barong-barong. In 
short, this is not intended to negate or to be in deroga- 
tion of the ordinary contract of lease. 

MR. GARCIA. May I answer that. Our historical 
experience precisely refers to urban poor communities 
occupying unused idle lands or abandoned lands where 
they have been living for a long time. In the past, when- 
ever there was an excuse for the government to evict 
them, it would bring in the military or police to drive 
the people out by force without any kind of considera- 
tion as to the historical circumstances and to the rights 
of these inhabitants who, after many long years, have 
been residents of that area and have found jobs nearby. 

MR- DAVIDE. So in other words, the answer is no. 

MR- GARCIA. No. 

MR. DAVIDE. Is this not to be interpreted as a nega- 
tion or a derogation of the ordinary contract of lease 
entered into between private individuals, with one as 
the lessee and the other as the lessor? 

MR. GARCIA. No, definitely not. As I said initially 
when we were discussing the framework for social jus- 
tice, this deals with age-old social aberrations, situations 
where sectors of the population are in. In the City of 
Manila, one-third perhaps of the population is found in 
this kind of situation, and also in many cities like Cebu 
and Davao. This is the kind of question being addressed 
in this provision. 

MR- DAVIDE. So for clarification again, the urban 
land reform and housing programs as contemplated here 
will not affect contractual rights between lessors and 
lessees of lands or buildings. 

MS. NIEVA That is correct. 

MR- DAVIDE. If that is so, we would not affect the 
urban housing program presently being undertaken 


because if a lessee has constructed a house on the land 
of a lessor and he has been occupying this for more 
than ten years, he can already benefit under the 
program. 

MS. NIEVA. That is what we think, yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer and 
members of the Committee. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we ask for 
a short suspension so that the Committee can have a 
brief respite? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 5:08 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:36 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I remind all 
Members that at twelve or twelve-thirty tomorrow 
noon, we will have an important executive caucus at the 
request of the leadership of the Commission. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Mr. 
Floor Leader, who is next in line to interpellate? 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, on behalf of 
the Committee, Commissioner Villacorta would like to 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Villacorta is recognized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, this is a 
reaction to the observations and questions, particularly 
of our lawyer-colleagues in the Commission. 1 can 
understand why they are especially concerned with 
existing laws and with how these laws harmonize with 
the sections that we are proposing. However, we should 
not foiget that the Article on Social Justice spells out a 
vision that will take our society towards a certain 
desiied direction. Our Committee provides the legal 
framework tor such a vision and does not seek to shelve 
laws or judicial precedence for as long as they are con- 
sistent with this vision and unless they are subsequently 
repealed. I say this because I am bothered by this preoc- 
cupation with existing laws, decrees and judicial pre- 
cedence. I would also like to stress that the vision ot om 
Committee is not new; it was also the spirit underlying 
the 1971 Constitutional Convention. Even former Chiei 
Justice Fernando, in his book on constitutional law, 


674 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


acknowledged that the spirit of the times is not inclined 
towards laissez faire but towards social welfare. Com- 
missioner Maambong has referred to the Calalang vs. 
Williams case which affirms that social justice means 
“the adoption by the government of measures cal- 
culated to ensure economic stability of all the com- 
petent elements of society through the maintenance of a 
proper economic and social equilibrium in the inter- 
relations of the members of the community.” 


Economic and social equilibrium is predicated on the 
idea of social balance. In the situation of acute im- 
balance that we are now in, the proposals of our Com- 
mittee, which seek to achieve balance by raising the 
poorest quality of life, take on an extreme urgency. 
Social equilibrium assumes an environment in which 
peaceful transactions are possible. But we know that 
given unjust relations and structures, the future of 
peaceful transactions is imperilled in our country. Wide- 
spread insurgency and continuing unrest will bear out 
the claim that this equilibrium in its very serious form 
prevails in Philippine society. 


Tlie purpose of social justice measures, therefore, as 
enunciated by our Committee, is to correct this serious 
imbalance. Should there be a conflict between the com- 
mon good and the right to private property which I 
think is enshrined in the Civil Code formulated circa the 


1950s, and in Supreme Court decisions which wei 
penned in the 1940s. then we must be reminded th. 
the imperatives of our present social and econom 
enses dictate that we give priority to the common gooi 
U we accept that the common good has primacy th 
concept of salus populi or people’s welfare assumes 
more contemporary meaning - the good of the majorit 
m the Philippine context, the good of the poor, th 
workers and the peasants. 


Before us now, fellow Commissioners, are t\ 
choices Do we effect change, meaningful reforms, 
social structures and relations through our Constitute 
oi can change be achieved only through a total overlu 
of society possible only after a revolution, a milita 
solution. I flunk that the issue boils down to these t\ 

P °" *- » «» a-len 


Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. 
missioner Concepcion is recognized 


Regalado). Com- 


MR. CONCEPCION. I agree with th, . 

, , D , c, fo ll -c witn the observatio 

1,1 1,01 V'ltoorta but I want to call atk 
lion u> one tiling. My colleagues will notice that wl, 
lawyers ask them. Is this decision affected 9 Is tl 
within the framework of such decision?” that meai 
they do not know, and many of us do not know what 
actually encompassed by the thoughts that we i 
i !• \ elop in g. I his is an impoitant tiling because we hs 
; 1 1 1 1 only lo vote on it. but we have to explain to t 


on 


hlk 


When lawyers who are supposed to be intelligent, 
although many disagree, find it difficult to understand 
these things, how do we expect the masses to under- 
stand the same? And it will be our task, after the 
adoption of the Constitution or even before the plebi- 
scite, to explain it to the people. So, the problem is one 
of communication or understanding. 

There seems to be the impression on the part of some 
that certain ideas are set forth in beautiful phrases, but 
the substance of the ideas escapes them insofar as they 
affect status quo. So, please do not misunderstand the 
position of lawyers. They may be candid when they ask 
questions which they foresee are those they will have 
to answer later. It would be embarrassing for Members 
of this Commission to be unable to explain adequately 
the contents of the new Constitution in simple language 
understandable by the masses. And that is our actual 
problem as we draft the Constitution. Some are appa- 
rently under the impression that there is so much 
verbiage that the substance is lost in elaborating the 
form. It is something like one of these beauty pageants 
where the first presentation shows the candidates in 
elaborate costumes more or less exaggerated, that one 
would not really know who is pretty and who is not. 
( Laugh ter) 

Thank you. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I just 
address a clarificatory question to the honorable Com- 
missioner Concepcion. I think this is very fundamental 
since we are speaking of premises in our discussions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Villacorta is recognized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I fully appreciate the manifesta- 
tion, but 1 would like further clarification. Is it correct 
tor us to assume that this Constitution we are framing 
will necessarily ovemile our existing laws and decrees? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That depends upon the provi- 
sions of the Constitution we are drafting. 

MR. VILLACORTA. What about in cases of con- 
flicts? 


MR. CONCEPCION. That is precisely the problem of 
the lawyers. They do not know how the Constitution 
we are drafting will affect the past jurisprudence. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Many of us are getting the 
impression that there is so much preoccupation with 
legalese. And in speaking about a basically nonlegal issue 
such as social justice, the main consideration should not 
be the legal status quo precisely because the provisions 
on social justice are aimed at restructuring society for 
the good of all. So that when we speak of the rights of 
the poor, we are not particularizing solely for the 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


675 


benefit of the poor, but for the benefit of society as a 
whole. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I agree with the Gentleman 
entirely. But still we cannot help those of us who have 
grown up in a climate of legality not to think in terms 
of legality because these provisions will have to be 
brought to the courts of justice. So we are supposed to 
defend them one way or the other or apply them or 
reconcile them or state that they have been modified. 
And that is the point; it is communication. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. I think the clarification has helped 
very much to improve communication between us and 
sharpen future perceptions. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. 

SR. TAN. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. Commissioner Concepcion’s intervention 
has given me the courage to speak like this, because 1 
have been feeling very uneasy about these lawyers and 
nonlawyers. We work very hard in our Committee, but 
it seems that we are working on two parallel lines. 

So we plead to the lawyers to help us because we do 
not know how to formulate this in legal language. In- 
stead of trying to look for loopholes and our mistakes, 
we ask that they help us so that what will come out will 
be legal and will be helpful to the 70-percent majority, 
instead of trying to catch us every time. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, Commissioner 
Rosario Braid would like to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer, mem- 
bers of the Committee: since we are trying to evolve a 
genuine agrarian reform program, perhaps we could link 
it with a little of history in terms of the attempts ot 
past laws, such as P.D. No. 27, in trying to transfer 
power from the hands of many to a few, and how we 
tried to rectify the Macapagal Land Reform Code which 
did not have enough safeguards against the transfer of 
ownership and tax evasion by landlords. With all its 
rhetoric, P.D. No. 27 failed to materialize because of 
programs of government that lessened its effectiveness. 
For instance. General Order 47 established the Corpo- 
rate Farm Program to boost food production. It became 
clear that the Corporate Farm Program proceeded at a 
much faster pace than the agrarian reform program. For 
example, from 1977 to 1982, there were a total of 


60.424 hectares divided among the 487 participating 
public and private corporations. P.D. No. 619 permitted 
the conversion of such lands into reserves for large-scale 
grazing projects. LOI 46 stated that in the implementa- 
tion of the agrarian reform program, the requirements 
of tiie agro-industrial program should be given equal 
consideration. 

So, what I am saying is that some of these decrees — 
and I could cite other decrees — placed the government 
in a situation where it had to reconcile its conflicting 
goals of social justice and productivity. Also, we have to 
operate in present-day realities where the issue of sur- 
vival is paramount, where putting employment and 
income in the hands of the farmer is a priority goal. The 
search for alternatives such as making some of these 
existing corporate farms available to individual farmers 
with technical assistance from the former provides 
another alternative. There are alternatives in the form of 
communal farms and nucleus estates. 

When we examine the agrarian reform program in the 
past in terms of costs, we could see that only one 
million beneficiaries have benefited. On the other hand, 
there were 1.4 million agricultural workers who were 
left out. Only 17 percent of the total agricultural lands 
is under the land reform program. We also learned from 
research about the dependency on export markets and 
imported inputs. We have seen that where there was 
increased productivity, there were negative conse- 
quences such as an estimated loan default of P3.5 billion 
in 1 983 as a result of the land reform program. 

With regard to the first section on social justice, may 
1 suggest such concepts as “equitable sharing of fruits 
and means of production and power,” “need rather than 
merit,” and “active participation of people in planning 
and implementation of development.” Another concern 
is the apparent lack of linkage with nonformal educa- 
tion and information that would insure the needed atti- 
tudinal transformation. This would require reaching the 
middle class, the employer, the landowners, the planters 
as the linking mechanisms in development. If we could 
direct existing human resource development programs 
in terms ol reorientation ol these sectors so that they 
would voluntarily share land, voluntarily share profit 
and power, we could accelerate the process of develop- 
ment. 

Lastly, I would like to suggest in the sections on 
women that we also include the illiterate women who 
are even more exploited. 

In the health section, could we include the need tor 
information on appropriate food habits and appropriate 
use ol indigenous resources such as herbal medicines? 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento 
be recognized for one question. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Sarmiento may pose his question. 


676 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I 
seek clarifications from the distinguished Committee 
members. 

On June 11, 1978, President Marcos issued P.D. 
No. 1517, proclaiming urban land reform in the Philip- 
pines and providing for the implementing machinery 
thereof. Section 6 of P.D. No. 1517 reads: 

Land Tenancy in Urban Land Reform Areas. Within the 
urban zones, legitimate tenants who have resided on the 
land for ten years or more, who have built their homes on 
the land and residents who have legally occupied the lands 
by contract, continuously for the last ten years shall not be 
dispossessed of the land and shall be allowed the right of 
first refusal to purchase the same within a reasonable time 
and at reasonable prices, under terms and conditions to be 
determined by the Urban Zone Expropriation and Land 
Management Committee created by Section 8 of this 
Decree. 

May I know from the members of the Committee 
whether this Section 6, especially on the right of first 
refusal by legitimate tenants, is within the intendment 
of Sections 10 and 1 1 on urban land reform and housing 
of the Article on Social Justice? May I address this 
question either to Commissioner Aquino or Commis- 
sioner Suarez. 


If I may call the attention of the body to the provi- 
sions of Section 11, there is the catch-all provision 
saying “without due process of law,” which means that 
we are governed by the rules until Congress shall provide 
otherwise. So, I say that even if we enact drastic provi- 
sions which would call for a change in the complexion 
of government-people relationship, we will have to be 
governed by the existing laws until such time that the 
legislature shall provide otherwise. 

MR. SARMIENTO. In other words, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, I am made to understand that this right of first 
refusal by legitimate tenants is still valid. 

MR. SUAREZ. It is still valid. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you very much for that. 

I have one last question. During the past administra- 
tion, the President issued eight decrees on urban land 
reform; namely, P.D. Nos. 1517, 1640, 1 642; Proclama- 
tion Nos. 1767, 1893, 1967; LOI No. 935 and B.P. 
Big. 25. 

May I know the effect of the ratification of this 
Constitution on these existing proclamations or laws 
on urban land reform? 


MR. SUAREZ. Commissioner Sarmiento, is it tru< 
that many of the lawyers in the Commission are alarmec 
by the constitutional impact of some of the provision: 
proposed by the Committee on Social Justice? One o 
those problems is with respect to the implications o: 
Sections 10 and 1 1 on the existing decrees governint 
the situation. The Gentleman cited the provisions 
particularly P.D. No. 1517. 

The way the Committee on Social Justice envisions it 
we are not so much concerned about the legal implica 
tions because we feel that the holding of property ha' 
something to do with social equality. Of course, we have 
a nght to assert, especially from the legal standpoint 
and this was correctly pointed out by our belovec 
former Chief Justice Concepcion, that since many of u: 
in the Committee are nonlawyers and the lawyers a 1 
usual cannot get out of that mental groove of de 
pending on jurisprudence and precedents, we may have 
to ive with the Calalang vs. Williams doctrine. So now 
we have to wrestle with this problem of the realities a< 
against the law. 


MR. SUAREZ. I think there is a general provision 
regarding those. All of those presidential decrees, laws, 
general orders or letters of instructions which may be 
inconsistent with the provisions of this new Constitu- 
tion will no longer have valid effect and will no longer 
be operative. In the Committee on Amendments and 
Transitory Provisions, we have provided, as a matter of 
fact, such a section and I suppose the Commissioner 
has in mind what are known as the blighted areas where 
the BLISS Housing Programs had been organized, 
principally in Metro Manila. If those eight or nine 
decrees enumerated will not be inconsistent with the 
provisions in the Article on Social Justice which may be 
approved by the Commission, they would continue to 
flourish, prosper and perhaps solve ultimately our social 
problems obtaining in Metro Manila. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. 


MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Bacanj be recognized. 


Yes, the correct direct answer to the question oft 
Gentleman is, it would have to be affected by t 
provisions of Sections 10 and 1 1. The only justificath 
is the fact that under the Preamble of the Constitute 
which we have approved, we must establish a gover 
ment that is just and humane, and we must be govern' 
by the rule of law. What we are constitutionalizii 
must be for the common good. These are the on 
constitutional justifications for what Commission 
Sarmiento is trying to picture before the Commission. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I was warned that we are going to 
adjourn at six o’clock, so I will just ask two very brief 
questions. I belong to the Committee but I signed with 
minor reservations and these are the two points that I 
would like to bring up. After a long discussion on the 
right to strike, even by government employees, I was 
wondering whether a distinction that we use in social 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


677 


philosophy could be helpful here and solve the difficul- 
ties of the other Members of the Commission. In social 
philosophy, we admit the existence of a right while, at 
the same time, we say that that right may, under some 
circumstances, not be exercised. For example, every 
man has a right to marry, but when he takes the vow of 
celibacy, he cannot exercise that right, although the 
fundamental right remains and is acknowledged by the 
Church, even in our case. We have the right to marry 
and that is not denied, and yet we cannot exercise that 
right. A Carmelite sister has a natural right to travel and 
to change abodes but when she takes a vow as a Car- 
melite, then she cannot travel; that is, she therefore 
renounces the exercise of that right. 

And so, would not that be a solution to possible 
difficulties regarding the statement that even govern- 
ment employees have a right to strike, but under certain 
circumstances, they will not be able to exercise that 
right? For example, the doctors and nurses who are 
about to conduct an operation cannot join a strike, 
otherwise the patient will die. So, would that be a dis- 
tinction admissible to the Commission? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, I think that is a very useful 
explanation of how the exercise of such right could be 
restraining for certain sectors. And I am one of those 
who personally believe that the right to strike should 
not be denied the government workers; that is why we 
deleted the early formulation of Commissioner Aquino 
that we include a proviso that the Armed Forces and 
civil defense and civil servants be excluded in the 
exercise of the right to strike. I believe that they have 
such an understanding, and I personally believe that 
government workers who have been for years con- 
ditioned and indoctrinated to subservience, obedience 
and compliance will not resort to that particular 
measure. During the previous years, we saw that 
teachers and some other health workers have tried to 
exercise concerted action, precisely because of the 
neglect of the State to correct the conditions that 
prevent them from exercising their obligation, which is, 
to render essential services to the people. We have heard 
of doctors and nurses actually resorting to concerted 
action because they believed that the conditions they 
were exposed to prevented them from exercising prima- 
rily their right and their duty to render essential ser- 
vices — to prolong lives or take care of the sick— because 
of the decision of officials to deny the people of those 
basic rights. So, there are situations where government 
workers resort to the ultimate recourse for them to 
correct the conditions which prevent them from 
exercising their basic duties as members of government. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I ask the lawyer in the Com- 
mittee whether in law there is admitted that distinction 
between having a right and actually being able to 
exercise that right, or will the denial of the ability to 
exercise a particular right actually mean in law the 
denial of a right? 


MR. SUAREZ. I think the conclusion of Commis- 
sioner Bacani is correct in that regard. The right may 
exist, but the exercise of that right may be restrained; 
it all depends upon the one exercising the right. But the 
mere fact that that right exists will pose a number of 
complex problems. Of course, one can always waive that 
right, except in certain instances where a right granted 
by law or by tire Constitution is not waivable, but 
normally that right may not be exercised by the one 
entitled to the exercise of that right. But it is very 
difficult to provide for that in the Constitution. 

BISHOP BACANI. My second question is this: We 
had a long discussion on Section 5 but, finally, we could 
not come to a full agreement regarding the primacy of 
the rights of farmers and farm workers to own directly 
or collectively the lands they till. I am mindful that this 
Constitution is being written not only for the next five 
years or ten years, and that in twenty-five years’ time 
we might have highly mechanized farming in the Philip- 
pines. Suppose a man is employed to farm a certain land 
owned by another man, and works on it for about three 
or four hours a day, would Commissioner Tadeo say 
that the man would have the primacy of right to own 
the land? Is there no need to change this? 

The more important thing does not seem to be the 
right to own, but the right to use and the right to enjoy 
the fruits of one’s labor or one’s crop or one’s property. 
That is why I would like to propose that the Commit- 
tee, without going into the question of primacy of the 
rights of farmers and workers to own directly or collec- 
tively the land they till, could state as a policy of the 
government the encouragement and undertaking of the 
just distribution of all agricultural lands. 

MR. TADEO. Ang tunay na reporma sa lupa ay 
pangunahing nakabatay sa kapakinabangan ng mga 
biyaya nito sa nagbubungkal ng lupa at lumilikha ng 
yaman nito at sa nagmamay-ari ng lupa. 

BISHOP BACANI. Ngunit katulad noong kasong 
binanggit ko sa inyo, bakit ba siya ang dapat magmay- 
ari kung mayroong may-ari ng lupa at ito’y tinatra- 
baho lang niya, halimbawa sa isang araw lamang dahilan 
sa mechanized farming? 

MR. TADEO. May mga katangian para masabi nating 
siya ay isang magsasaka. Halimbawa, mula sa pagpu- 
punla at sa paghahanda ng lupa, siya ang gumagawa. 
Siya rin ang nangangasiwa sa laliat, bagama’t mayroong 
mga pagkakataong umuupa siya. Lahat ng operasyon ay 
ginagawa niya, at ang pagsasaka ay ang kanyang primary 
occupation. 

BISHOP BACANI. Nang ako’y nagbakasyon sa 
France, doon sa village na tinirhan ko ay mayroong mga 
nagtatrabaho roon, ngunit hindi nila pag-aari ang lupa. 
Sila raw ang nagtanim at sila rin ang aani. Sandaling- 


678 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1 986 


sandali lang nilang inani ang mayroong limang ektarya. 
Ang magsasaka ang siyang nagtanim, siyang nag-alaga 
at siyang nag-ani. Puwede ba niyang sabihin, kung 
mangyari iyon dito sa Pilipinas, “Dapat ako na ang mag- 
may-ari nito, basta’t mayroon akong ibabayad. Kaila- 
ngang ipagbili ninyo sa akin.” At iyon ay maaaring hindi 
na malayo kung tayo’y umunlad sa ating agrikultura. 

MR. TADEO. Sa ilalim ng RA 3844, para masabi 
mong tenant ka, kinakailangang magkaroon ng tenancy 
relation — na nagbubuwis ka, para masabing ikaw ang 
siyang tunay na tenant. Ito’y iiral doon sa mga asyenda, 
mga plantasyon, regardless of tenurial arrangement. Para 
bang ipinapakitang ang pangunahing katangian ng isang 
tunay na reporma sa lupa ay iyong ikaw ang nagbubung- 
kal, regardless of crops, regardless of tenurial arrange- 
ment. 

BISHOP BACANI. Hindi ba ang dapat ay mapunta sa 
iyo ang karapatan mo at ikaw ang dapat maunang 
magtamasa ng bunga ng iyong ginawa? 

MR. TADEO. Ganito lang po iyon, Commissioner 
Bacani, parang inilalabas mo lamang ang tricycle ng 
may-ari. Iba iyong pag-aalaga mo sa tricycle kung pag- 
aari mo ito kaysa sa ito’y nililinis mo lamang. 


BISHOP BACANI. Ngunit maaaring mangyari it( 
n i natin masasabi na hindi mangyayaring ang isan 
tao ay magmana sa kaniyang magulang ng lupa na withi 
a retcnrion limit naman. Pagkatapos, iyong lupang iyon 
mdi mya mismo matrabaho ay maaaring ipatrabah 
mya sa iba. Dahil sa minana lamang sa ninuno ang lup; 
sasabihm mya: “Mahal na mahal sa amin ang lupan 
ito. Maaan bang sabihin noong magsasaka: “Dahil ak 
ang natatrabaho rito, kahit na minana mo pa iyan s 
tatay mo o sa lolo mong nagpakahirap diyan, kailangan 
ipagbili mo na sa akin.” 6 

MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

,™ E p RESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Con 
missioner Villacorta may reply. 


rungang panlipunan, sa akin lang pong hamak na pala- 
gay, ay higit na mahalaga ang kabutihan ng karamihan 
kaysa sa kabutihan ng kakaunting nakamana. 

Salamat po. 

BISHOP BACANI. Ngunit hindi naman siya ang hari, 
hindi naman siya ang sakim dahil maaaring hindi naman 
siya mayamang-mayaman. Pero mahal lang iyon sa 
kanya at hindi naman niya ipagkakait ang bungang nara- 
rapat doon sa magsasaka. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Maaari kayang magdagdag sa 
pagpapaliwanag ng “primacy”? Kasi may cultural back- 
ground ito. Dahil agrarian society pa ang lipunang Pili- 
pino, maigting talaga ang ugnayan ng mga magsa- 
saka sa k anil ang lupa. Halimbawa, sinasabi nila na ang 
lupa ay pinagbuhusan na ng dugo, pawis at luha. So land 
acquires a symbolic content that is not simply negated 
by growth, by productivity, etc. The primacy should be 
seen in relation to an agrarian program that leads to a 
later stage of social development which at some point in 
time may already negate this kind of attachment. The 
assumption is that there are already certain options 
available to the farmers. Marahil ang primacy ay ang 
pagkilala sa pangangailangan ng magsasaka — ang pag-aari 
ng lupa. Ang assumption ay ang pag-aari mismo ng lupa 
becomes the basis for the farmers to enjoy the benefits, 
the fruits of labor. But later on, since we are saying in 
Section 9 that this process of reforming an agrarian 
society would lead to some kind of industrialized 
society, mawawala iyong mga ganoong cultural con- 
siderations. Marahil ang primacy na sinasabi rito ay 
magbabago rin ang kahulugan. Kaya lang long-term 
dapat ang ating pagtingin sa program ng agrarian reform. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mainam sana kung ganoon dahil 
masasabi ko ring may symbolic values sa akin iyong 
lupang iyon dahil pinaghirapan naman ng lolo at ng 
tatay ko. 

MR. BENNAGEN. But eventually, magkakaroon din 
pagbabago iyong ganoong pananaw. Kaya nga long- 
term ang dapat na pagtingin sa agrarian reform. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Dahil sa si Bishop Bacani ai 
nagsasakta naalaala ko iyong Ebanghelyo kahapc 
buhat kay San Lukas na kung saan sinabi ng isang U 
na sumasalubong kay Kristo, “Tulungan Mo nama 
aKong makuha ko sa kapatid ko iyong karapatdap: 
kong minana. ’ Ang sabi ni Kristo, “Ano ba ang palaga 
mo sa Akin, arbiter o huwes?” Pagkatapos ay nagki 
wento Siya ng isang parabula tungkol sa isang taong na 
tatambak ng kayamanan na pinarusahan ng Diyos. Ar 
sabi ng Diyos: “Napakagahaman mo naman. Kukuni 
Ko na lang ang buhay mo ngayon. ’ Ang leksyong ipin 
hihiwatig diyan ng Bibliya, sa palagay ko, ay hindi nati 
dapat bigyan ng lubusang halaga ang pamana sapagk; 
ito’y isang pribilehiyo, hindi isang karapatan. Sa pagmi 
muni-muni at pagsasaalang-alang ng konsepto ng kat; 


BISHOP BACANI. Maraming salamat po. 

5^’ ^^MULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, Commissioner 
Padilla wishes to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have been 
earing many statements which I feel should not remain 
as truth and should be challenged. In answer to Commis- 
sionei Bacani, Commissioner Villacorta made the state- 
ment that “Ang mana ay hindi karapatan; it is a 
privilege.’ That is a strange doctrine because that will 
destroy the whole system of succession in the Civil 
Code. Why will parents sacrifice and work hard to 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


679 


provide financial security for their children? The theory 
will abolish incentives to hard work and industry. I also 
heard that there is a right but it may not be exercised. 
Right and duty are correlative. If one has a right, others 
affected by that right have an obligation. One may 
waive his right or the exercise thereof may be limited by 
law or by some public interest or by the police power of 
the State. But if a person has a right, he should have the 
right to exercise it. Commissioner Bacani mentioned the 
right of a person to marry. Is that a right or is it more a 
freedom? One may have the right to marry but no one 
is bound by a reciprocal duty. 

There was also that biblical quotation from Commis- 
sioner Tingson regarding a small community that works 
together, maybe owns property together, and shares 
the benefits together. That is all very good, but that will 
be some sort of a voluntary association or a partnership 
or co-ownership sharing the profits proportionately. Let 
us consider the case of Commissioner Bernas who, by 
joining the Society of Jesus, waives certain rights 
because he takes voluntarily the vows of poverty, 
obedience and chastity. But it is not correct to apply 
that biblical quotation to the entire nation. That is good 
from a voluntary standpoint. 

We always invoke the common good — there can be 
no dispute about the common good or common wel- 
fare. In fact, it is the inherent power of the State to 
promote the common welfare by the exercise of police 
power. Whether we like it or not, if our acts or even our 
rights are detrimental to the common good, these ob- 
struct the promotion of common welfare. These rights 
can be restricted, limited or even denied. But when we 
talk of common good, the members of the Committee 
assume that all that they have proposed in the commit- 
tee report are for the common good even if by so doing, 
they have imposed so many obligations for the State 
to provide this, to undertake, to help this and that. We 
are actually restricting, if not impairing, the rights of 
others. 

I am alarmed by a statement of Commissioner 
Villacorta when he said that there is now a present 
far-reaching imbalance which we must correct in this 
Constitution, otherwise we may have a revolution. I 
think that is not only an overstatement but a misstate- 
ment. Let us not alarm the Members of the Commission 
to approve all these very far-reaching programs under 
the so-called social justice because of the fear that our 
people and our nation cannot proceed gradually and 
peacefully. I have always been mentioning that one can 
have progress and prosperity through investments and 
hard work, but not through rights- granted to one sector 
at the expense of other sectors. 

What is wrong with a person having property, private 
property? According to President Lincoln: 

Property is the fruit of labor. Property is desirable. It is a 

positive good in the world. That some should be rich shows 

that others may become rich, and hence, it is just en- 
couragement to industry and enterprise. Let not him who 


is homeless pull down the house of another but let him 
work diligently and build one for himself, thus, by exam- 
ple, assuring that his own shall be safe from violence when 
built. 

Some questions like those of Commissioner Sarmiento 
assume that the urban land reform program by presiden- 
tial decree of President Marcos during martial law was 
not only for the common good or was valid or was 
proper and desirable. My own personal opinion is that 
many decrees of the past regime during martial law 
should no longer be honored because they are not good 
laws. On one occasion, I came across a distinction 
between a republic act passed by Congress and ap- 
proved by the President and a presidential decree, a uni- 
lateral act of the past regime under dictatorship exercis- 
ing Amendment No. 6 by issuing proclamations, de- 
crees, orders and instructions. In my opinion, the urban 
land reform program (P.D. No. 1607) is illegal and 
unconstitutional because it is directly in violation of the 
right to private property which is guaranteed by the 
Constitution. 

With regard to social justice, we have mentioned 
Calalang vs. Williams, 70 Phils. 726 which reads: 

The promotion of social justice is to be achieved not 
through a mistaken sympathy towards any given group. 
Social justice therefore must be founded on the recognition 
of the necessity of interdependence among diverse units of 
society and of the protection that should be equally and 
evenly extended to all groups as a combined force in our 
social and economic rights . . . 

We should be careful that in trying to protect and 
promote the well-being of what so many call the poor, 
the underprivileged, the marginal and other similar 
terms, we do so by fomenting progress and prosperity 
by increasing our productivity, goods and services, 
whether it be by domestic investments or foreign invest- 
ments. But this requires private entrepreneurs who will 
risk their capital in extending the wheels of industry to 
be able to absorb a portion of our growing unemployed. 
Verily, my friends, a worker or a farm worker — I am 
not discounting his potentialities - by himself cannot 
promote oui economic development. Labor is an essen- 
tial element of development, but there must not be too 
muc l stress ike primacy and other preferential words 
or le wor ers, forgetting completely the other sectors 
o our society who can extend the production of our 

an s — more fish from our waters, more mines from 
our mountains . . . 

I do not want to read further some of the statements 
by Justices Tuazon and Montemayorin Guido vs. Rural 
Progress, and in Republic vs. Baylosis, but let me just 
cite a few short lines: 

The promotion of social justice ordained in the Consti- 
tution does not supply a paramount basis for the untrani- 
meled expropriation of private land by the Rural Progress 
Administration or any other government instrumentality. 


680 


MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 1986 


Social justice does not champion division of property 
or equality of economic system. What it and the Consti- 
tution do guarantee are equality of opportunity, equality 
of political rights, equality before the law, equality within 
values given and received, and equitable sharing of the social 
and material goods on the basis of efforts exerted in their 
production. 

And from the Baylosis case on the Article on the 
Constitution about landed estates, I quote: 

It intended to discourage the concentration of excessive 
landed wealth in an entity or a few individuals but surely it 
did not intend or seek to distribute wealth among citizens 
or take away from the citizen land which he did not actual- 
ly need and give it to another who needs it. That does not 
come within the realm of social justice. 

I have many more statements but I will not impose 
upon the indulgence of the Commission. 

Thank you. 


from St. Luke and use it as an equally authoritative 
source for determining principles of morality and law. I 
will not quote from Abraham Lincoln nor from other 
Chief Justices. I would like to quote from respected 
fellow Commissioner Francisco “Soc” Rodrigo: 

Ang payo nila sa mga kulang-palad 
ay gumising sana’t sikaping malaman 
Ang kanilang mga laya’t karapatan 
Sa loob ng isang pambayang lipunan. 

Kung ito ay hindi nila malalaman, 

Kung di nila ito ipagsasanggalang . . . 

Ay wala na silang sukat na asahan 
Liban sa kanilang aping katayuan. 

Sikapin din nilang maalis, mahawan 
Ang mga balakid na kasasabitan 
Ng mga mahina’t dukhang mamamayan 
Sa gubat at sukal ng ating lipunan. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, a matte 
of personal privilege since I was alluded to twice. 


And lastly, Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to 
quote from Chapter 18 of Sirach in the Old Testament, 
which says: 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com 
missioner Villacorta is recognized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I would just like to mentior 
that I cited the Bible which is a source of moral law no 
a source of positive law. When I said that my interpreta 
tion of that biblical excerpt is that inheritance is ; 

t ge K a n 6r w an , 3 rfght ’ 1 Was invokin 8 wh *t we be 
I th ^ he Word ° f God ’ notwhat human laws say 
I think that even in a legalistic body such as this we 

cannot be constrained from quoting from the Christiar 

statement Tf ^ ^ * m ° re rdiable tha " 
statements. It we are to take literally, for example, the 

?miml > \ Pen T ned by Supreme CoUrt Ch ief Justice Jose 
Laurel, Sr., I can see no reason why we could not quote 


When you have all you want, think what it is like to be 
hungry, what it is to be poor. Things can change in a single 
day; the Lord can act very quickly. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask for 
an adjournment until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the 
morning. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the 
morning. 

It was 6:39 p.m. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


681 


R.C.C. NO. 48 
Tuesday, August 5, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:48 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Teodoro C. Bacani. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

BISHOP BACANI. Father, for more than two months 
now we have been working at our appointed task of 
formulating a Constitution that will be truly responsive 
to the Filipino people. Often now we feel weariness, 
perhaps, on occasions, discouragement. 

Father, give us renewed strength. Continue to pour 
down Your light upon us; continue to fill our hearts 
with love and concern for our brethren, especially the 
less privileged; and continue to give us strength of body 
and soul, so that with unflagging zeal we may continue 
the task that You have given us and that what You have 
begun so marvelously in us may be accomplished by 
You through us. 

This we ask You through Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Calderon .... 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 


Castro de ... 

. . Present 

Rama ...... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. . Present* 

Regalado .... 


Concepcion . . 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. . Present 

Rigos 


Foz 

. . Present 

Rodrigo .... 


Garcia 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 


Gascon 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. . Present 

Suarez 


Laurel 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 


Lerum 

. . Present 

Tadeo 


Maambong . . 

. . Present 

Tan 


Monsod . . . . 

. . Present 

Tingson .... 


Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Trenas 


Nieva 

. . Present 

Uka 

. . Present 

Nolledo . . . . 

. . Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Villegas 


Padilla 

. . Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 39 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto . . . . 

. . . Present* 

Aquino .... 

. . . Present* 

Azcuna .... 

. . . Present* 

Bacani .... 

. . . Present 


Bengzon Present* 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 
Brocka Present 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chaii hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


Appeared after the roll call 


682 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1 986 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Communi- 
cations, the President making the corresponding refer- 
ences: 

COMMUNICATIONS 


Social Justice in the Constitution, the definition and 
principles of “just wage” and “labor has priority over 
capital.” 

(Communication No. 446 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Letter from Mr. Oscar N. Rivera of Zobel Street, San 
Miguel Village, Makati, suggesting that the issue of 
United States military bases in the Philippines be treated 
as a separate proposal independent of the main Consti- 
tution when the Constitution is presented to the people 
for ratification. 

(Communication No. 442 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 


Letter from Mr. Elviro P. Lagrana of Pulupandan, 
Negros Occidental, submitting a position paper for the 
retention of U.S. military bases in the Philippines until 
such time as we attain economic strength capable of 
developing our land, air and naval defenses against 
external attack. 

(Communication No. 447 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Letter from Fr. Raymundo Hilot of the Episcopal Com- 
mission on Tribal Filipinos, 372 Cabildo Street, Intra- 
muros, Manila, submitting a resolution adopted by the 
5th SILDAP-SIDLAKAN General Assembly, seeking 
inclusion in the Constitution of provisions on the 
national tribal Filipinos’ right to self-determination. 

on986) niCati ° n N °' 443 “ Constitutional Commission 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Communication from Sheikh Ahmad Bashier Chairm 

of the Bangsa Moro Multi-Sectoral Conference suhm 

ting proposals on autonomous governments and aul 

nomy for the Bangsa Moro nation aTTpecfaUonsS 
tional provisions. F ounsm 

(Communication No. 444 - Constitutional Commissi, 
To the Committee on Local Governments. 

rican Chamh^/' Tr C Whi,ing - Presid «"t, The Am 

PO Box ™5 78 MCr’uT' 0 ' ° f ,he Phmppto es, >"< 
1 u. BOX 1578 MCC, Makati, Metro Manila exDressii 

the opinion that proposed resolutions before’ the Con 

tu tional Commission regarding foreign participahon 

' he Phmppines ^ count* 

productive to the government's goal of making tl 
business climate attractive to foreign investment, urgi, 
therefor a very serious consideration of the negate 

60/40 rat , oS" from «» prese, 

(Communication No. 445 - Constitutional Commissic 

To the Committee on the National Economy an 
Patrimony. 


Letter from Ms. Remedios C. Galsim and five others of 
the Concerned Citizens Council, B.F. Homes, Parana- 
que, Metro Manila, suggesting inclusion in the Article on 


Letter from Mr. Delfin R. Manlapaz of 1707 E. Rodri- 
guez, Sr. Blvd., Cubao, Quezon City, Metro Manila, 
submitting proposed amendments to “Resolution to 
Incorporate in the New Constitution an Article on 
Education, Science and Technology, Sports, Arts, and 
Culture” (Committee Report No. 29). 

(Communication No. 448 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication from the Tribal Filipino Apostolate, 
Diocesan Pastoral Services, Sacred Heart Convent, 
Zamora Street, Butuan City, signed by Mr. Erric Rico 
and forty-one others, urging the Constitutional Commis- 
sion to consider the following proposals: (1) that the 
Lumads be given the right to own/utilize their an- 
cestral domain; (2) that the Lumads be given the right 
to self-determination; (3) that the Lumad culture be 
honored and respected; (4) that a government agency 
motivated to serve the Lumads and the rest of the 
minority peoples be created; and (5) that government 
services be made available to the Lumads. 

(Communication No. 449 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letters from Mr. Bienvenido A. Castillo of 50 McKinley, 
Pulilan, Bulacan, suggesting the following: prohibiting 
elected officials from acting as sponsors in weddings 
or baptism to do away with the padrino system; 
congressional approval of the declaration of martial law, 
suspension of the writ of habeas corpus and foreign 
borrowings; prohibiting members of the Cabinet from 
olding other government offices; prohibiting the Pres- 
ident to grant reprieves, commutations and pardons; 
trial by jury, among others; opposing the creation of 
autonomous governments of Cordillera and Mindanao; 
opposing land reform, saying that it is outright landgrab- 
bing and a political gimmick of the past regime; and 
opposing the discussion of the U.S. military bases issue 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


683 


at this time as it is delaying the country’s economic 
recovery. 

(Communication No. 450 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Briccio T. Aguilos, Jr., Provincial 
Attorney of Leyte, submitting, upon direction of the 
Sangguniang Panlalawigan of said province, proposals 
on local government autonomy. 

(Communication No. 45 1 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 
(Article on Social Justice) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR RAMA. On the agenda this morning, we still have 
the continuation of the consideration of the Article on 
Social Justice. We have just finished the period of spon- 
sorship and debate. The last interpellator spoke at the 
end of the session yesterday. So, I move that we close 
the period of sponsorship and debate on the Article on 

Social Justice. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR RAMA. I move that we proceed to the period 

of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The body is now open to consider amendments. We 
are requesting the different proponents to submit their 
proposed amendments to the Committee. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. To give the Committee time to 
deliberate on the amendments and to enable its mem- 
bers to express their reactions thereto, the Chair 
suspends the session for a few minutes. 

MR. RAMA. Thank you, Madam President. 

It was 9:59 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 10: 17 a.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. After conferring with the mem- 
bers of tire Committee and the proponents of various 
amendments, I would like to announce that this will be 
our procedure this morning. First, the proponents will 
present their amendments. Should there be a clarifica- 
tion, the members of the Committee will give their 
explanation but without necessarily accepting the 
amendments. All the proponents will present their 
amendments and tire Committee will pool all of these 
and then discuss the amendments this afternoon or 
tonight. Then, by tomorrow, they will give their ruling 
on these amendments presented by different propo- 
nents. 

So, let this be clear that we will not vote on the 
various amendments that will be presented by the pro- 
ponents tills morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is the first proponent? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Villegas would like to yield to Commissioner Romulo 
for his amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, on Section 1, I 
have an amendment by substitution which reads as 
follows: THE STATE SHALL PURSUE SOCIAL JUS- 
TICE IN ALL PHASES OF NATIONAL DEVELOP- 
MENT. IN PURSUIT THEREOF, CONGRESS SHALL 
ENACT MEASURES TO ENHANCE HUMAN DIGNI- 
TY BY REDUCING SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND 
POLITICAL INEQUITIES AND BY EQUITABLY 
DIFFUSING WEALTH AND POWER FOR THE 
COMMON GOOD. 

MR. BENGZON. Would Commissioner Romulo be 
willing to change the word “REDUCING” to ELIMI- 
NATING? 

MR. ROMULO. Is that possible in the real world? 

MR. BENGZON. Some of our fellow Commissioners 
in the Committee are opting for that word but, of 
course, the Committee is divided on that. 

MR. ROMULO. My only objection is that it is unreal. 
MR. BENGZON. All right. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


684 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Would the proponent be willing to 
add the word PROFITS after “WEALTH”? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I accept that amendment. 


MEASURES TO PROMOTE PRIVATE INITIATIVE 
IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY TO ENHANCE THE 
DIGNITY.” 

MR. ROMULO. I accept the amendment, Madam 
President. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President. THE PRESIDENT. We request Commissioner 

Romulo to give the Secretariat a copy so that we can 
THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- provide all Members copies thereof, 
nized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. May I present an amendment to the 
amendment of Commissioner Romulo? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas may 
proceed. 


MR. VILLEGAS. After the clause “CONGRESS 
SHALL ENACT MEASURES,” I propose to add TO 

PROMOTE PRIVATE INITIATIVE IN ECONOMIC 
ACTIVITY. 

Let me explain this amendment to the amendment. 

I think quite a number of Commissioners have 
expresse the apprehension that we have overly con- 
rpntra+ e ^ ° n d ' str ibuting the pie, and we have not con- 
ininctw ° n making the pie grow. There are a lot of 
have n rp f have been committed in the past which 

medium 7 6 i d mmi0nS Upon millions of small and 
Sohalkm 6 , entrepreneurs from growing. Crony 
justices n f T State cap * ta ^ sm have inflicted untold in- 
milhons nf °" Workers ’ not on fanners, but on the 
afraid the e t- 6 "® m pl°y e d entrepreneurs whom I am 
we have h v seems to have forgotten, because 

Iter? ^ eCOn ° miC under Privile g ed 
people who w °rkers. What about the millions of 

People who one f lther WOrkers nor farmers - the 
who are eking out n ?\ cycles ’ who °wn sari-sari stores, 

types of goods'? Th]v in§ trymg t0 SeU cigarettes or a11 
not subject to exDloit Jt u 0t em P lo y ees and they are 
policies of the <it tatl0n by employers but by specific 
stifle their md ° f ° ther !arge businesses that 

^portant in P th 6 a lmtiative ’ That is why it is very 

nition to milhons^of ° n ]f S ° Cia ! Justice to give recog ' 
Hence that is ° f self ' ern ployed entrepreneurs. 

expression- TO Poruf,? SOn 1 would like to insert this 
SKP PR,VATE 'NITIATIVE in 

we“Luha“° N ' WhiCh P ° rti0n iS ,ha,? Where should 

y iL LEGAS. D Commissioner Romulo ’s amend- 
ment states, CONGRESS SHALL ENACT MEASURES 
TO ENHANCE THE DIGNITY,” etc. Before the phrase 
“TO ENHANCE THE DIGNITY,” I propose to insert: 
TO PROMOTE PRIVATE INITIATIVE IN ECONOMIC 
ACTIVITY so as to read: “CONGRESS SHALL ENACT 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 


FR. BERNAS. Would Commissioner Romulo enter- 
tain an amendment? I propose that “ENACT” be 
deleted and substituted with GIVE HIGHEST PRIORI 
TY TO THE ENACTMENT OF so that it reads- IN 
PURSUIT THEREOF, CONGRESS SHALL GIVE 
HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE ENACTMENT OF. .” 
I suggest “HIGHEST PRIORITY” to emphasize the fact 
that this is a very important matter. If all we say is that 
“CONGRESS SHALL ENACT MEASURES,” it means 
that Congress should exercise police power But if we 
say, “GIVE HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE ENACT 
MENT OF MEASURES, ENHANCE HUMAN DIGNI- 
TY,” and so forth, plus the amendment of Commis- 
sioner Villegas, then we are giving it a sense of urgency 

MR. ROMULO. I accept. 

MR. BENGZON. So, where do we insert that amend- 
ment? 


MR. ROMULO. This is, I believe, subject to corr 
tions. My proposed amendment, as amended will rCC " 
read: THE STATE SHALL PURSUE SOCIAL JUSTin? 
IN ALL PHASES OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT tkt 
PURSUIT THEREOF, CONGRESS SHALL rn!S 
HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE 7 ENACTMENT Xc 
MEASURES TO PROMOTE PRIVATE INITIATIVE 
IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES AND TO ENETAnXc 
HUMAN DIGNITY BY REDUCING SOCIAL ECOKtT 
MIC AND POLITICAL INEQUITIES AND nv 
EQUITABLY DIFFUSING WEALTH, PROFIT Aivm 
POWER FOR THE COMMON GOOD D 


BISHOP BACANI. May I ask whether Commissione 
Romulo would be agreeable to say, “SHALL GIVE THP 
HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE ENACTMENT OF 
MEASURES TO ENHANCE HUMAN DIGNITY ry 
PROMOTING INITIATIVES IN ECONOMIC ACTIV 
ITY AND BY REDUCING SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND 
POLITICAL INEQUITIES,” so that the centerpiece is 
human dignity - the “ENHANCEMENT OF HUMAN 
DIGNITY”? 


TUESDAY, AUGUSTS, 1986 


685 


MR. ROMULO. I have no objection to that; we 
accept the transposition. 

Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Will Commissioner Romulo entertain 
another amendment by transposition to his amend- 
ment? I think the focus of Section 1 is on the reordering 
of social and economic relations in order to bring about 
structural social justice. The insertion of another major 
philosophy, which is the freedom of initiative or the 
freedom of enterprise, tends to offset the central mean- 
ing of Section 1 , unless it can be transposed to a new 
section or perhaps, postponed till the last part of this 
paragraph. 

I did not bring a prepared text with me; but the 
freedom of initiative may detract from the central 
meaning of the principle of social justice unless it is 
transposed to a more appropriate part of Section 1. 

MR. ROMULO. That was the suggestion of Commis- 
sioner Bacani, to transpose it after “HUMAN DIGNI- 
TY.” 

MR OPLE. That will still be too early in the para- 
graph. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. I share the sentiment of Commis- 
sioner Ople and I object to the inclusion of that phrase 
in that section. In fact, growth in the development of 
private initiative or private entrepreneurship does not 
necessarily mean social distribution of its benefits, and 
it does not fit well with the concept of social justice as 
it is being envisioned. I would see some kind of an 
imbalance in concepts, unless this is transposed or 
deleted from that section. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I favor a transposition, Madam Pres- 
ident. Moreover, I think the right way of entry for 
freedom of initiative should be in connection with the 
consequences of social justice in the sense that this 
opens up new opportunities for economic development. 

I laid the basis for this amendment yesterday when I 
said that in the case of the so-called economic miracles 
now in our neighborhood such as Japan, Taiwan and 
Korea, it was necessary to introduce first radical land 
reform before new courses and new capital could be 
released from the land, so that land reform fuelled 


industrialization rather than hindered it. If this is 
correct, I see no reason why it can be controverted. 

Then the new growth, new development through 
freedom of initiative can become the consequence of 
the social justice policy. I will leave it to the craftsmen... 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. May I ask Commissioner Ople 
and Commissioner Aquino to indicate where they feel 
this “freedom of initiative” or “private initiative” 
should be placed? 

MR. OPLE. It will look more technically correct and, 
perhaps, more elegant in terms of constitutional 
concepts if this probably can be made supportive of 
Section 1 in a new section. 

MR. ROMULO. May I ask Commissioner Villegas if 
he will agree? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I can agree; it can be a separate 
section. 

Let me just reiterate what I said. A lot of injustices 
are being committed against small entrepreneurs or 
self-employed people and they should also be the object 
of our concern for social justice. So, I am not thinking 
of economic growth here. Economic growth will be 
addressed sufficiently in the Article on National Econ- 
omy and Patrimony. 

I am thinking here of precisely historical, mono- 
polistic, feudalistic and other practices which favor 
either state corporations or large corporations to the 
detriment of a lot of people who are trying to start their 
own businesses. I think this has to be recognized in the 
Article on Social Justice because we are trying to give 
everyone his due. Remember, justice is defined as trying 
to give everyone his due, and from our analysis of 
Philippine economic history, a lot of small- and medium- 
scale entrepreneurs have been systematically prejudiced 
by State policies, as well as by the practices of private 
monopolies whether multinational or national. 

MR. ROMULO. Therefore, Madam President 1 
believe I should withdraw for the moment to compose 
this new section, together with the other proponents. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Romulo is still on the floor. So if there 
are any other remarks, let us concentrate first on the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Romulo. 

We aie not voting on any amendment this morning. 
Actually, this is a freewheeling discussion of proposed 
amendments. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 


686 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


MR. TINGSON. My amendment would be in connec- 
tion with the amendment of Commissioner Romulo as 
further amended by Commissioner Villegas. 

May I state my amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I am impressed by 
the original statement of the Committee which states: 
“Social justice, as a social, economic, political, moral 
imperative.” In the light of the good remarks of the 
Chairman of the Steering Committee yesterday that 
what we are stating here are goals, ideals and objectives 
and that probably we are to reach the ultimate or the 
immediate, I wonder if Commissioner Romulo will 
accept my amendment. I propose that we reword the 
first sentence of Section 1 to read: THE STATE SHALL 
PURSUE THE MORAL IMPERATIVE OF SOCIAL 
JUSTICE IN ALL PHASES OF NATIONAL DEVELOP- 
MENT. 


Originally, the Committee wanted to put under mora 
imperatives social, economic and political goals. So nr 

“S* T would be: THE STATE SHALL pursui 
pl?A^cc IMPERATIVE OF SOCIAL JUSTICE If 
ALL PHASES OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. 


say? HE PRESIDENt - Wha t does Commissioner Romulo 


MR. DE CASTRO. No. Madam President. We cannot 
follow the discussion of the amendments because we do 
not have a copy of what the proponent is trying to 
propose. 1 suggest that we be given copies of proposed 
amendments so that we can participate in the discus- 
sion of this important subject matter. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we have asked the Secretariat 
to prepare copies for distribution to the different 
Members. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. This is in connection with 
Commissioner Romulo’s proposed amendment. I think 
the amendment thereto of Commissioner Villegas could 
be accommodated as a new provision after Section 9 
which would attend to the needs of small-scale indus- 
tries. This is the underground economy. We also propose 
to include a new provision on agricultural workers who 
have also been left out. Perhaps we could formulate it 
afterwards. So, the amendment of Commissioner 
Villegas could be deleted from the first section. 

Thank you. 


accent' the^a^^?’ Madam Presiden t, I regret I cannot 
notice in th 611 m ^ nt . Eecause if the Commissioner will 
“moral” • tbe . onglnal statement of the Committee, 
accent th t th y ° ne ° f the im P e ™tives. Hence, if we 
paragraph 1 be restr i cdn § the sense of this 

Son that is unnl f Cial jUstice b V now has a defini- 
te do is to aonl" °° i and . what the Committee wants 
development. ^ soclcd Justice in all phases of national 


THE PRESIDENT. By the way, may we request all 
Members who have already proposed amendments to 
give copies to the Secretary-General so that they can be 
reproduced and distributed? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


to ^e^ satis fieef^v Madam President, I would 

understanding h Y . le ailswer °* the Committee 
understanding here is that since “moral imoerativ 
preceded by the article “a ” th™ - unperativ 
political” are all catesonW? social, economic 
otherwise thL ,!, 8 ? ed as a moral impen 

TOatTs whv I a m° d J aVe S3id “ moral imperatr 

not stren^ fen th wond enng if my amendment w 
not strengthen the Gentleman’s amendment. 


l ^ PRE f IDENT - Commissioner 
already stated his position. 

Thank you. 


Romulo has 


MR. REGALADO. May I offer a further amendment 
a very simple one, to the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Romulo. I propose to insert the word CUL- 
TURAL after “SOCIAL,” so that it will read: “gv 
REDUCING SOCIAL, CULTURAL, ECONOMIC AND 
POLITICAL INEQUITIES,” because there are such 
things also as “cultural inequities” especially when we 
consider our indigenous cultural communities. 


MR. ROMULO. I accept, Madam President. 
MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 


MR. DE C ASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. Is the Commissioner’s amendment in relation to 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Romulo? 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I think I should 
now retire and rewrite this section together with the 
amendments I have accepted, and then ask the Secre- 
tariat to circulate it so that somebody else can proceed 
with Section 2. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


687 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. By the way, we have already 
stated that the Committee will be given time to go over 
all these proposed amendments. We are not expecting 
the Committee to give its official reaction right away, 
unless there are individual Members who would like to 
react on these amendments. So. we can now proceed to 
the next proposal. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, 1 ask that 
Commissioner Davide be recognized for Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Section 2. Is there any other 
amendment or version for Section 1? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Padilla be recognized for Section 1. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I am in favor of 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Villegas with 
regard to promoting, enhancing or encouraging private 
enterprise and economic activity, because that is the real 
cause that will give social justice substance and enhance 
human dignity. So I do not exactly agree to transposing 
it to a lesser position in the section. In my estimation, 
such private initiative and economic activity will lead to 
productivity or to the growth of economic wealth which 
will underlie the blessings of social justice. 

MR SARMIENTO. Madam President, all the pro- 
ponents are now pooling all their amendments. They are 
now conferring with one another. May I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized for his amendment on 
Section 2? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

IViR DAVIDE. Madam President, on the Romulo 
roposal, I am requesting a deferment of the con- 
• deration of Section 2, because my original intendment 
^, as to combine Sections 1 and 2. It would depend on 
the result of the Romulo proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would like to know if 
the Committee has copies of Commissioner Davide’s 
proposed amendment. 

jyjS. NIEVA. Yes, we have. 

MR- DAVIDE. Yes, it might be incorporated eventu- 
ally in the Romulo proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, is Commissioner Davide sub- 
mitting this formally so it can be taken up by the 

Committee? 

MR DAVIDE. After the Romulo proposal is ap- 
proved. one way or the other. 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask that Commissioner 
Romulo be recognized for his amendment to Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. I am one of 
those who are proposing an amendment to Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Tire Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I request Commissioner Romulo 
to consider my amendment which is to use INCRE- 
MENTS THEREOF instead of “fruits.” So. line 16 will 
read: “acquisition, ownership, use and disposition of 
property and INCREMENTS THEREOF.” 

THE PRESIDENT. We do not have the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Romulo yet. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Commissioner Romulo has 
already accepted my amendment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. But what is his amendment? This 
is the problem of the Chair. The Chair is equally con- 
fused. We are not given copies of the proposed amend- 
ments, so how can we be expected to participate even 
just by way of making our own comments? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
we proceed to Section 3 because the proponents are 
pooling their amendments on Sections 1 and 2 and 
preparing a draft thereof? 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we proceed to Section 3? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that 
Commissioner Davide be recognized for his amendment 
on Section 3. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May I have a stenographer right 
here beside me? 

MR. DAVIDE. The proposed amendment will actual- 
ly cover Sections 3 and 4 or a combination of both. The 
same is contained in the mimeographed copies of this 
amendment. 

It shall read: 

t S a^ T 1^ N ~- it SHALL Bf: THE duty or THE 
STATE TO: 

(A) AFFORD FULL PROTECTION TO LABOR, 
BOTH DOMESTIC AND OVERSEAS, ORGANIZED 
AND UNORGANIZED. AND TO PROMOTE FULL 
EMPLOYMENT AND EQUALITY OF EMPLOY- 


688 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


MENT OPPORTUNITIES REGARDLESS OF SEX, 
AGE, RACE, CULTURE, CREED OR POLITICAL 
AFFILIATION; 

B) GUARANTEE THE RIGHTS OF WORKERS OF 
ANY CLASS OR KIND TO SELF-ORGANIZATION, 
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND NEGOTIATIONS, 
PEACEFUL CONCERTED ACTIVITIES, FOR THE 
MUTUAL BENEFIT, WELFARE OR AID, SECURITY 
OF TENURE, JUST AND HUMANE CONDITIONS OF 
WORK, AND TO PARTICIPATION IN POLICY AND 
DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES AFFECTING THEIR 
INTERESTS; 


C) PROMOTE VOLUNTARY MODES OF SET- 
TLING DISPUTES BETWEEN WORKERS AND EM- 
PLOYERS, INCLUDING CONCILIATIONS AND 
ENFORCE MUTUAL COMPLIANCE THEREOF; 

D) REGULATE RELATIONS BETWEEN WORK- 
ERS AND EMPLOYERS IN A MANNER THAT 
RECOGNIZES THE MUTUALITY OF THE RIGHTS 

?Lnp° R f^ S ., TO ,UST RETURNS OP THEIR 
LABOR AND EMPLOYERS TO REALIZE THEIR 

AND REASONABLE RE 
TURNS ON INVESTMENTS; AND 

BEWEFN^opS compulsory arbitration 
C A^WHEDE^ r 8 AND employers in such 

MENT S (TR H axtvI? E STABILITY 0F THE GOVERN- 

mTEREST GFMPpT? AGENCIES > OR THE PUBLIC 

GOOD flsF pScfv 1 WELFARE OR COMMON 
GOOD IS SERIOUSLY AFFECTED. 


thIcLTsS T Have copies been distributed 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

copies h° aU the Commissioners ha 

Davide? Proposed amendment of Commissior 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT r™, • • 
nized. ' < “ omm rssioner Nolledo is rec< 


MR. NOLLEDO. I am T 
mitted an amendment com hi, I 0 came late - 1 als o si 
2. I would like ,o plsen, R hA “'I 0 " 1 wlth Sccti 
consideration if the Chair would pemSme”™"' 8 

THE PRESiDENT. We will take that up later we » 
settle first the proposed amendment of Commissio, 
Davide. We are not voting on the amendments ri, 
now. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

This is just to enumerate the duty of the State with 
respect to labor. Aside from the Committee’s proposal 
in the matter of full employment and equality of em- 
ployment opportunities, I have added RACE AND 
POLITICAL AFFILIATION. This is very important 
because in the Philippines we have two classes of 
citizens: the natural-bom and the naturalized Filipinos 
who may belong to a particular nationality or race, and 
so the Constitution, insofar as labor is concerned, must 
also assure protection to those citizens belonging to 
another race. The inclusion of political affiliation is 
necessary in order to avoid the possibility that by 
reason of one’s political affiliation, he may be dis- 
criminated upon. 

On another point, this Member has, in effect, deleted 
the phrase, “including the right to strike,” because it is 
my sentiment and it is my view that “strike” is already 
included in concerted activities. Jurisprudence is well 
settled that strike is only one of the means of indicating 
or demonstrating a concerted act or activity of labor, so 
that would not be necessary. As a matter of fact, to 
include the phrase “including the right to strike” may 
only provide greater room for misapprehension and 
misunderstanding because it may be believed that the 
State would no longer have the right in the exercise of 
its police powers to prevent strikes in certain areas. By 
excluding the phrase “including the right to strike,” we 
can really strike a balance where in some instances, 
like in cases involving the exercise of purely constituent 
or governmental functions, we leave to Congress the 
authority to determine whether strikes may be allowed 
there or not. But excluding that particular phrase does 
not mean that we already deleted or rather prohibited 
the right to strike because, as I said, it is included in 
“concerted activities.” 

This proposal also recommends the restoration of 
compulsory arbitration in certain cases. This is again in 
the light of settled provisions of the 1935 and the 1973 
Constitutions which I believe must be restored because 
the State may not at all be given that exclusive power in 
certain cases. Its deletion in the proposed provision 
might again be the subject of a misapprehension or mis- 
understanding that since the same authority was vested 
in the 1935 and in the 1973 Constitutions, its deletion 
may amount to a prohibition of that particular right. 
So, in order to preserve the very meritorious intent of 
compulsory arbitration, it is proposed that we retain 
that particular power. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I ask Commissioner Davide 
two questions? When the Commissioner refers to the 
equality of employment opportunities regardless of 
race, would that mean that a noncitizen would be 
deemed under our laws to have the same opportunities 
for employment as a citizen? 


Does Commissioner Davide desire to explain his 
proposed amendment by substitution? 


MR. DAVIDE. What I added are only the words 
RACE and POLITICAL AFFILIATION. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


689 


BISHOP BACANI. But suppose a person is of another 
race and he is not a Filipino citizen, will the matter of 
citizenship be the more preponderant consideration? 

MR. DAVIDE. Precisely I included the word RACE 
because there might be a distinction between a natural- 
bom Filipino citizen and a naturalized citizen. So to be 
very clear about it, we should add the word RACE. 

BISHOP BACANI. So that is the point of the Com- 
missioner? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I be clarified also on the 
deletion of the words “including the right to strike.” 
Even with that deletion, is the Commissioner never- 
theless really including the right to strike? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, as a matter of fact, the language 
of the original proposal already indicates that that right 
is there. So it is included already in the phrase “con- 
certed activities.” 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

MR- RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR- RODRIGO. May I ask a question of the pro- 
ponent. 

In the 1973 Constitution, the duty of the State to 
afford protection to labor is found on Section 9, Article 
II under Declaration of Principles and State Policies 
which reads: 

The State shall afford protection to labor, promote full 
employment and equality in employment, ensure equal 
work opportunities regardless of sex, race, or creed, and 
regulate the relations between workers and employers. 
The State shall assure the rights of workers to self-organiza- 
tion, collective bargaining, security of tenure, and just and 
humane conditions of work. The State may provide for 
compulsory arbitration. 

YVe do not have yet the report of our Committee on 
Declaration of Principles. Where does the Commissioner 
^jnk this particular provision should be incorporated? 
Should it be in the Article on Social Justice or, as in- 
dicated in the 1973 Constitution, in the Article on 
Declaration of Principles and State Policies? 

MR. DAVIDE. In the light of the special importance 
we are giving now to social justice and the necessity 
of emphasizing the scope and role of social justice in 
national development, I strongly believe that it should 
be here in the Article on Social Justice and not just in 
die Article on Declaration of Principles and State 
Policies. 


MR. RODRIGO. I think the Chairman of the Com- 
mittee on Declaration of Principles and State Policies is 
Commissioner Rosales and the Vice-Chairman is Com- 
missioner Tingson. So, they can just get together and 
decide where it will be included. 

MR. ROSALES. It should be in the Article on Social 
Justice. In the 1973 Constitution, there was no separate 
article on social justice. There is such an article now, 
and we concede this declaration in favor of the Article 
on Social Justice. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would just like to make some 
comments on the presentation of Commissioner Davide. 

The body must know that we have had about four 
public hearings involving labor. In all these public hear- 
ings, the people have been very strong in their position 
that their right to strike should be really spelled out in 
the Constitution. As a matter of fact, they did comment 
that in other Constitutions of the world, such right has 
been very explicitly mentioned. 

The Constitution of Uruguay says: 

The strike is declared to be a right of trade unions. 
Regulations should be made governing its exercise and 
effect on that basis. 

The Constitution of Argentina under Article XIV, the 
Declaration of Rights and Guarantees, states: 

Trade Unions or gremios are hereby guaranteed the right 
to conclude collective labor agreements; the right to resort 
to conciliation and arbitration and the right to strike. 

The Constitution of the Turkish Federated State of 
Cyprus states that: 

(1) Employees shall have the right to collective agree- 
ment and to strike in their relations with employers for the 
purpose of protecting and improving their economic and 
social status. (2) Their exercise of the right to strike may be 
regulated by law for the purpose only of safeguarding the 
security of the State or the Constitutional order of the 
Public order or the rights and liberties guaranteed by this 
Constitution to any person. 

The Constitution of Costa Rica under Article LXI 
thereof states: 

The right of employers to lock out and of workers to 
strrke rs recognized, except in public services, in accordance 
with provisions of law and regulations on the subject. 

So, would Commissioner Davide be amenable to the 
retention of the earlier provision which includes the 
tight to strike, except that we provide a clause that 
would spell out that the law would provide limitations? 

MR. DAVIDE. I would be willing to accept that 
proposal and stand that, in one of the Constitutions 


690 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1 986 


referred to, excluded in the right to strike are those in 
the public services. 

If the Committee would be amenable to putting 
INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO STRIKE, EXCEPT IN 
MATTERS INVOLVING PUBLIC SERVICES, I would 
have no objection. 

MS. QUESADA. But that would run counter to the 
general spirit or intention of the Article on the Civil 
Service which did not specify whether it would grant 
such right to civil servants. According to Commissioner 
Foz, they were silent on this. Although civil servants 
have the right to self-organization, that Article did not 
spell out whether or not they have the right to strike. 


MR. DAVIDE. That would not really be inconsistent 
because of the silence of the Article on the Civil Service. 
So, I think the proper area really for the spelling out of 
the exception will be here; that is, if the thinking of the 
ommittee is to exclude public services from the scope 
o strike. As a matter of fact, personally I would even 
say at it should apply only in instances which would 
mvo ve e exercise of governmental functions or 
constituent functions. 


r 1 r!ft S ^ Q i UESA ?^' 7116 earUer proviso in the original 
defense Y eXClUded 1116 Armed F °rces and the civil 


MR. DAVIDE. I would rather opt for functions in- 
vo ving exercise of constituent functions or govern- 
mental functions. 


i ? ENGZ0N - Madam President, the Committee is 
so mded on this issue. So, I would suggest that we 
leave the discussion on that particular point. When the 
proper time comes, we can just throw that matter on 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 


MR RODIUGO. since the Committee is going to 
study this matter, I would like to add a point. 

onfoAhT 1 Commissioner Quesada correctly, she read 
one of the provisions of a constitution in Latin Ame- 

nca In menriomng strikes, she also mentioned lockouts. 
So, that is something which should also be studied by 
the Committee. I think during the interpellations, this 
was brought out by one of the Commissioners, that if 
we guarantee the right to strike, should we not also 
protect or guarantee the right to lock out? I am just 
submitting that for the study of the Committee. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that 
Commissioner Foz be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, my proposed amend- 
ment would only affect the last sentence of Section 4. It 
would actually be rearranged, but it is not a matter of 
style because some substantive ideas are sought to be in- 
corporated. My proposed amendment is as follows: 
THE STATE SHALL REGULATE THE RELATIONS 
BETWEEN LABOR AND CAPITAL, RECOGNIZE 
VOLUNTARY MODES OF RESOLVING LABOR OR 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES, ENSURE MUTUAL COM- 
PLIANCE THEREWITH AND PROVIDE FOR COM- 
PULSORY ARBITRATION ONLY IN NATIONAL 
INTEREST DISPUTES. Then another sentence follows: 
THE STATE RECOGNIZES THE PRIMACY OF THE 
RIGHT OF LABOR TO ITS SHARE OF THE FRUITS 
OF PRODUCTION AND THE CORRESPONDING 
RIGHT OF CAPITAL TO A REASONABLE RETURN 
ON INVESTMENT. 

Madam President, may I give a brief explanation of 
my proposed amendment. This clause, to the effect that 
the State shall regulate the relations between labor and 
capital, is actually nothing new. This is still the subject 
of a lot of decisions and commentaries in the sense that 
the relations between labor and capital are not merely 
contractual. This is something invested or affected by 
public interest, and so this gives the State, through the 
government, the right to impose certain minimum 
regulations or rules to be followed by both sides for the 
orderly relationship between them, so that the larger 
interest of society or the community is not adversely 
affected. On the second phrase: RECOGNIZE VOLUN- 
TARY MODES OF RESOLVING LABOR OR INDUS- 
TRIAL DISPUTES, instead of the word “promote” as 
contained in the draft provision of the Committee, I 
would use the word RECOGNIZE to stress the fact that 
both sides, labor and capital, are actually in a position 
to resort to certain methods on their own, without 
intervention of the government, to peacefully and 
promptly resolve whatever differences they have in then- 
day-to-day relations and in their long-term relations in 
the work scene. And because the government recognizes 
these voluntary modes of resolving disputes, then it is 
incumbent upon the government to insure that both 
parties comply with what they have agreed upon which 
is actually the law between the parties. 

As to compulsory arbitration, my amendment would 
limit it only in the so-called national interest disputes or 
cases. The phrase “national interest disputes” is well 
recognized in our labor law jurisprudence as referring to 
certain cases which affect the national interest way 
above the interest of labor or capital. The last sentence 
is just a rewording of what is already contained in the 
draft provision of the Committee. But just the same, I 
use the phrase “RECOGNIZES THE PRIMACY OF 
THE RIGHT OF LABOR” to give stress to the primacy 
of the right of labor to share the fruits of production. I 
add the words OF PRODUCTION after the word 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


691 


“fruits,” and, of course, the corresponding right of capi- 
tal to a reasonable return on investments. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. For Commissioner Foz, may I just 
clarify the intention of the Committee in deleting the 
provision on compulsory arbitration to facilitate the 
harmonization of our interest. This is as far as the Com- 
mittee’s intention is concerned. I have initially discussed 
this with Commissioner Davide and he is amenable like- 
wise to delete a provision on compulsory arbitration on 
the firm and strong commitment that the intention of 
an express provision on voluntary modes of settling 
disputes does not exclude the right of the State to 
provide for compulsory arbitration in situations where it 
may be warranted such as when it involves a threat to 
the national interest or to the national welfare. Would 
the Commissioner not be amenable to the deletion of 
that provision on this strong commitment that the 
State, in any case, is not precluded from providing for 
compulsory arbitration anyway? 

MR. FOZ. We must remember that the provision on 
compulsory arbitration is contained in both the 1935 
and the 1 973 Constitutions. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. If the new Constitution would no longer 
expressly provide for compulsory arbitration, the impli- 
cation might be that we are no longer authorizing or 
empowering the State to resort to compulsory arbitra- 
tion as a means of resolving labor or industrial disputes. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I sympathize with 
the difficulty of Commissioner Foz, but if only to focus 
on the essentials, it will help us to be reminded that the 
provision in the 1935 Constitution, which is in the 
Article on General Provisions, and the provision in the 
1973 Constitution which is a section in the Article on 
the Declaration of Principles are express provisos in 
terms of “may.” Both say “The State may provide.” In 
other words, both in the 1935 and in the 1973 provi- 
sions, there was an implicit reservation of the right to 
provide for compulsory arbitration. In fact, the juris- 
prudence would bear out that the intention is to give 
preference and priority still to voluntary modes of 
settling labor disputes. It is just that in the nature of a 
compulsory arbitration which is, shall we say, direct 
interference of the State, there was an explicit proviso 
to allow the State to interfere. However, even as there is 
an omission of a proviso on voluntary modes in both the 
Constitutions, it did not likewise exclude voluntary 
modes of settling labor disputes. What we are proposing 
here in the new draft is a 180-degree turnabout, by 


making an express proviso of preference or priority for 
voluntary modes without precluding compulsory modes. 

MR. FOZ. If that is the interpretation of the Commit- 
tee, that while emphasizing voluntary arbitration for 
solving labor and industrial disputes, we do not rule out 
completely the reserved authority and power of the 
government to provide for compulsory arbitration, then 
I am amenable to delete the term “compulsory arbitra- 
tion.” 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. Madam President; I also 
thank the Commissioner. 

MR. BENGZON. May we request Commissioner Foz 
to give his proposed amendment to the Secretariat so 
that we can have it in the Committee. 

MR. FOZ. I have submitted a copy to the Secretariat 
for action. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Commissioner Rodrigo invited our 
attention to Section 9 on the Declaration of Principles 
and State Policies of the 1973 Constitution, which 
reads: 

The State shall afford protection to labor, promote full 
employment and equality in employment, ensure equal 
work opportunities, regardless of sex, race or creed, and 
regulate the relations between workers and employers. 

The State shall assure the rights of workers to self-organiza- 
tion, collective bargaining, security of tenure, and just and 
humane conditions of work. The State may provide for 
compulsory arbitration. 

According to Commissioner Rosales, the Chairman of 
the Committee on Declaration of Principles and State 
Policies, because of this special Article on Social Justice, 
they would have no objection to transferring Section 9 
under the fundamental principles to a paragraph or to a 
section on social justice. 

In my opinion, the Declaration of Principles is 
stronger than another paragraph or section in the Consti- 
tution because these are fundamental principles. My 
suggestion is, alter Section 1, whatever appears in 
Section 2 with regard to labor, we just adopt Section 9 
to cover the social justice on labor. I understand that 
Commissioner Lerum, who is known for his concern for 
labor, will have no objection to such a suggestion. In 
other words, instead of rewriting Section 9 and making 
it much longer and more complicated, I wonder if the 
Committee will consider the transposition of Section 9 
of the Article on the Declaration of Principles to the 
Article on Social Justice. 


692 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. We will consider that, Madam 
President. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, may I comment on 
the statement of Commissioner Padilla? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. LERUM. I told the Commissioner that I am in 
favor of having that incorporated in the Article on 
Social Justice, but it does not prevent the inclusion later 
on of other provisions. Actually, that provision is all- 
embracing, and I think it covers several sections on 
social justice. So, my conformity is that it could be a 
part of the Article on Social Justice. 

MR. PADILLA. But if this provision, this Section 9— 
Declaration of Principles — is already all-embracing, 
pursuant thereto, regarding details or some measures to 
implement those princples, it will be for the Congress to 
enact the measures as suggested in the Romulo amend- 
ment to Section 1. We declare the fundamentals or the 
objectives, and let us not burden the Constitution with 
so many additional words or additional paragraphs. 
Make it simple, of course, with the understanding that 

e ongress may always enact measures to implement 
these fundamental principles and objectives. 

in the CommUtee!^ ** W “' C0,1Sider - Madam President ’ 
MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 
nized. E PRESIDENT - T he Acting Floor Leader is recog- 


Notedo btre^ogm Z T ed'fo^an a ^ Commissioner 
g izea tor an anterior amendment. 

nizld E PRESIDENT ‘ Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

1 . would llke to express my gratitude for this oppor- 
tunity of presenting an anterior amendment. 

. 1 ca ™ e late ’ Madam President, because I was snarled 
in a traffic jam at EDSA. 

I am presenting this amendment for serious considera- 
tion of the Committee, and the purpose of this amend- 
ment is to reflect the contents of the entire report ol 
the Committee, and it is to the credit of the Committee 
that I am reproducing many of the words used by them 
I hope that they will not be unduly influenced by the 
Romulo amendment. I would like to give emphasis tc 
the words “regulating property” because I did not find 
them in the Romulo amendment. 


I think the concept of property articulated even by 
the Vatican many years ago has already changed. The 
demands of the times indicate that we have to abandon 
the usual concept of property contemplated in the 1935 
Constitution and the 1973 Constitution. 

Before I present my amendment, I would like to cite 
for the record some statements indicating the stand of 
the Vatican, of the Pope, on the nature of property. 

In the documents of Vatican II, it is stated: 

By its very nature, private property has a social quality 
deriving from the law of the communal purpose of earthly 
goods. If the social quality is overlooked, property often 
becomes a source of greed and of serious disturbance. Thus, 
to those who attack the concept of private property, a pre- 
text is given for calling the right itself into question. 

In another paragraph, also from the documents of 
Vatican II, it is stated: 

God intended the earth and all that it contains for the 
use of every human being and people. Thus, as all men 
follow justice and unite in charity, creative good should 
abound for them on a reasonable basis. Whatever the forms 
of ownership may be, as adopted to the legitimate institu- 
tions of people, according to diverse and changeable cir- 
cumstances, attention must always be paid to the universal 
purpose for which creative goods are meant. 

In using them, therefore, a man should regard his lawful 
possessions not merely as his own but also as common pro- 
perty, in the sense that they should accrue to the benefit of 
not only himself but of others. 

My amendment consists of combining Sections 1 and 
2 of the report of the Committee on Social Justice, 
because I think* Section 2 is merely a sequel to Section 1 
and, therefore, Sections 1 and 2 must go together. 

I have reproduced many of the words of the Commit- 
tee. 

I would like the Commission to know that the 
Supreme Court of the Philippines, in the case of de la 
Cruz vs. Paras, on July 25, 1983, said that regulation 
does not mean control. There is no control involved; 
there is no prohibition involved. So, regulation for 
the common good is an expression that should find 
acceptance in modem Filipino society. 

So, Section 1, as amended, should read: “Social 
Justice, as a social, economic, political AND moral 
imperative DESIGNED TO PROTECT AND ENHANCE 
THE INALIENABLE RIGHT TO HUMAN DIGNITY 
AS WELL AS TO PROMOTE THE COMMON GOOD 
shall be CONSIDERED BY the State in national develop- 
ment. To this end, THE Congress shall give the highest 
priority to the reduction of social, economic and 
political inequities BY REGULATING THE ACQUISI- 
TION, OWNERSHIP, USE AND DISPOSITION OF 
PROPERTY AND ITS FRUITS, ESTABLISHING 
INDEPENDENT AND SELF-RELIANT SOCIO- 
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC STRUCTURES, AF- 
FORDING PROTECTION TO LABOR, WOMEN AND 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


693 


MINORS, UPLIFTING THE CONDITION OF THE 
POOR, PROTECTING THE HEALTH OF ALL THE 
CITIZENS AND RESPECTING THE RIGHTS OF 
INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES.” 

Madam President, this provision reflects the entire 
contents of the report of the Committee on Social 
Justice. We will notice that the definition of “social 
justice” by Jose P. Laurel in Calalangvs. Williams talked 
only of social and economic structures or aspects. I 
commend the Committee on Social Justice for adding 
the political aspect as well. When Commissioner Rega- 
lado asked about the legal aspect, I think it is already 
included in the political aspect. 

There are some good points in the Romulo amend- 
ment such as respect for human dignity and distribution 
of political power. I did not find the word “political”; I 
found only the word “power.” So, I would be happier 
if the Romulo amendment will incorporate the power of 
the State to regulate property of any kind for the 
common good. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the reaction of the 
Committee? 


vision on Section 3. The original intent was really for 
the State to recognize the right and welfare of Filipino 
overseas workers, and for the State to exercise firm 
control over manpower export and promote bilateral 
labor agreements with countries of employment. There 
is recognition that the problems of overseas or migrant 
workers are distinct and they have characteristics 
entirely different from domestic labor, more particu- 
larly under the social environment in which these 
migrant workers operate. 

So, this section is with the understanding that the 
State should afford special protection to our overseas 
workeis who are not covered by Labor Code provisions 
precisely because they are operating in a foreign social 
environment. 

This is just for the record, so that legislators will later 
on take note of this particular intention. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. This is on Section 5, Madam Pres- 
ident. This is an amendment by substitution. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, the Committee 
has more than enough enlightenment from Bible quota- 
tions. We will consider the . . . 

MR. ROMULO. Just a point of clarification, Madam 
President. Actually, I did not amend Section 2. I was 
only concerned with Section 1 . So, as tar as I am con- 
cerned, Section 2 is still in the draft. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we understand that, Commissioner 
Romulo. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Davide be recognized for his amendment 

on Section 5 . 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, before we proceed 
to Section 5, may I be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 


MR. OPLE. Anterior amendment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the anterior amendment 
of Commissioner Ople? Is it on Section 4? 

MR. DAVIDE. There is still a pending amendment to 
Sections 3 and 4 which the Committee is still studying. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Commissioner Ople, is it in 
connection with Section 4? 

MR. OPLE. It is in connection with Section 4, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Because no actiGn is being taken 
by the Committee. We are just receiving amendments. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I will most graciously yield to Com- 
missioner Davide if he wants to take precedence, but 
this will probably take just a minute of the Commis- 
sion s time. 


MS. QUESADA. I would like to state some observa- 
tions on Section 3, on labor, which I would like to put 
on record because these have not been brought out in 
earlier discussions. This is the inclusion in Section 3 of 
the State affording full protection to labor, both 
domestic and overseas. I would like to highlight the 
problem of Filipino overseas workers. 

As a matter of fact, in our Committee, there was a 
proposal to have a separate section, particularly for the 
problems of overseas workers. But since we wanted to 
be brief but broad, we covered this as part of the pro- 


MR. DAVIDE. My amendment is with the Committee 
already. 


y°u, Commissioner Davide. Thank 
you, Madam President. 


•f * 1 ° n - 1S arnen dment may not be necessary at all 
1 +* 6 i ' ommi ttee, through Commissioner Aquino, in 

particular, can give a satisfactory answer. 

In connection with Section 4, the Committee may 
lave overlooked a major source of government inter- 
vention in labor disputes, usually in favor of manage- 


694 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


ment and against labor. 1 refer to judicial injunctions 
against strikes. Both the National Labor Relations 
Commission and the courts routinely issue injunctions 
against strikers with a view to terminating them by 
firing especially with respect to the right of the freedom 
of egress and ingress and warnings of violations of law 
in the picket lines, all of which have the effect of judi- 
cial intimidation of workers picketing a firm, which 
means that the hand of the law, in this case, an injunc- 
tion by the courts, is seen as repressive of the right to 
picket. I therefore would like to inquire whether the 
authors of this Section 4 may have taken this into 
account and whether they agree that we should add a 
sentence or insert a new section which will prohibit the 
courts from enjoining strikes. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, on behalf of the 
Committee, may I reply to Commissioner Ople? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Aquino may 
proceed. 

MS. AQUINO. I would have a lot of difficulty accept- 
ing his proposal for an expressed provision on the 
prohibition against court injunctions. In the first in- 
stance, it is a generally accepted principle of labor- 
management relations that the court cannot by judicial 
fiat enjoin labor disputes by way of retum-to-work 
orders. Besides, there is a statutory provision in the 
Labor Code on this matter which prohibits courts from 
enjoining labor disputes. 

MR. OPLE. Which the courts routinely disregard. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, in fact, the origin of the statute 
is the Norris-La Guardia Act. 

My problem is that an expressed proviso which 
attains the level of a constitutional provision might 
unduly stymie the possibilities of settlement of disputes 
which would involve national interest and national 
welfare However, I would like to assure Commissioner 
Ople that when we say there should be preference for 
voluntary modes of settling disputes, the position is to 
reduce to the barest minimum State intervention and 
State interference in the settlement of labor-manage- 
ment conflicts. 

MR. OPLE. And this includes court injunctions. 

MS. AQUINO. This includes court injunctions. 

MR. OPLE. If that is the intendment of the Commit- 
tee and of the Commission, then I will not press this 
amendment, Madam President. 

Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. I thank the Gentleman. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Lerum? 

MR. LERUM. May I make a comment? Under the 
Labor Code, the courts are prohibited from issuing in- 
junctions. The injunctions that Commissioner Ople is 
talking about are injunctions issued by the Ministry of 
Labor. During the discussion of Cabinet Bill No. 45 
which became B.P. Big. 130, we objected to the power 
of the Minister of Labor to issue injunctions ordering 
striking workers to return to work. We objected to this 
strenuously, and we were even brought to Malacahang 
about this provision. What I am trying to say is that the 
injunctions were not issued by the court. 

MR. OPLE. Commissioner Lerum is referring to 
injunctions issued by the NLRC. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us allow Commissioner Lerum 
to finish his sentence. 

MR. LERUM. May I continue please? The other 
subject of injunction that the Gentleman is talking 
about is this: Whenever there is a strike and the gates of 
the factories are blocked or sometimes padlocked, 
laborers who are not involved in the strike — because 
most of the strikes are carried out by minority unions— 
have to get injunctions in order that they can get in the 
factory. That is the problem we had and that is also the 
problem at present. The problem then is that the Minis- 
ter of Labor had been allowing this kind of obstruction. 
We have no objections to an injunction to remove the 
obstructions in violation of the law. 

I hope Minister Ople will remember that when we 
talked about Cabinet Bill No. 49 which became B.P. 
Big. 227, I objected to the provision which says that 
ingress and egress to a strike-bound plant should not be 
obstructed. I said that that was unnecessary because 
that was already covered by the Penal Code. I said that 
if we put this provision in the law, the laborers will 
feel that the Batasang Pambansa is the author of this 
provision when, in fact, that is already covered by the 
Penal Code. 

So, my point is that under the Labor Code, the courts 
are already prohibited from issuing injunctions. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you for that reply. 

MR. LERUM. What should be the subject now is the 
injunction issued by the Ministry of Labor. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, thank you for that reply. 

Of course, I exonerate Commissioner Lerum from 
any blemish of B.P. Big. 227, which we helped put toge- 
ther during the Batasang Pambansa days. Commissioner 
Aquino and I took cognizance earlier that the Labor 
Code does explicitly prohibit court injunctions against 
strikes. But this is not the same as saying that this is not 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


695 


ignored. At the same time. Commissioner Lerum is right 
that the more likely source of injunctions is the Nation- 
al Labor Relations Commission, which is the quasi- 
judicial body attached to the Ministry of Labor 
empowered to issue injunctions. 

The trend of my questioning, directed to the Com- 
mittee, precisely embraces the injunctions issued both 
by the regular courts and the National Labor Relations 
Commission. The way I understood the reply of the 
Committee, through Commissioner Aquino, is that 
under Section 4 now, even the National Labor Relations 
Commission should not issue injunctions. It is on that 
understanding that I withdraw my proposed amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
make a short comment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I think it is safe to say that under existing 
law — referring to the Labor Code — the entire range of 
labor-management relations is already out of judicial 
competence. There is no single case or instance of a 
labor dispute which the courts or the judiciary is 
allowed by existing law to resolve. Under our provision 
here, the proposed Section 4, there is nothing to prevent 
the Congress from changing all that so that the judiciary 
may be empowered by Congress to provide that labor 
cases may be or shall be decided by the regular courts. 
But under existing law, the Labor Code, no courts are 
authorized to resolve a labor dispute. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask that Commissioner 
Davide be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. This is 
just an amendment to Section 5. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. May I be allowed some kind of a 
redirect on the matter because the manifestations of 
Commissioner Foz are fraught with danger that might 
be susceptible to misinterpretations of the mandate of 
the Constitution on the labor provisions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino may pro- 
ceed. 


MS. AQUINO. I am in full agreement with the first 
part of his manifestation and it is correct to say that to 
a certain extent the spectrum of labor-management 
relations has been virtually taken out of the jurisdiction 
of the court, except when there is a specific law which 
vests in the court jurisdiction over that certain matter. 
However, it is not correct to say that Congress may at 
any time overturn the constitutional mandate on the 
sanctity of labor-management relations and the primacy 
of the voluntary modes of settling labor disputes over 
the compulsory modes. It will in effect disturb the 
established interpretation which we have put on record 
to enrich the intention of the provisions now being 
proposed. It should remain that the Committee’s inten- 
tion is to really vest authority and jurisdiction over the 
resolution of labor disputes in the various modalities 
of voluntary and free collective bargaining reducing to 
the barest minimum State interference in the form of 
compulsory arbitration as to even prohibit court injunc- 
tions or injunctions issued by the Ministry of Labor. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, in response to the state- 
ment made by Commissioner Aquino, there is nothing 
to prevent Congress from passing a law authorizing the 
courts to handle compulsory arbitration. 

Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I proceed to Section 5? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide now 
proceed without any interruption? 

MR. DAVIDE. The proposed amendment would be 
by substitution. I already submitted to the Committee 
the proposal. It reads: THE STATE SHALL UNDER- 
TAKE A GENUINE AGRARIAN AND LAND RE- 
FORM PROGRAM UNDER WHICH FARMERS AND 
FARMHOLDERS, WITH PRIORITY TO THE LAND- 
LESS, MAY OWN INDIVIDUALLY OR COLLEC- 
TIVELY THE LANDS THEY TILL. SUCH PROGRAM 
SHALL COVER ALL AGRICULTURAL LANDS 
WHICH, SUBJECT TO SUCH LIMITATIONS AS CON- 
GRESS MAY PRESCRIBE TAKING INTO ACCOUNT 
CONSERVATION, ECOLOGICAL AND DEVELOP- 
MENTAL REQUIREMENTS, SHALL BE EQUITABLY 
DISTRIBUTED, UPON PAYMENT OF JUST COM- 
PENSATION IN RESPECT TO PRIVATE LANDS. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, minsan pa gusto 
kong ipaliwanag ang agrarian and natural resources 
reforms bago ko sagutin si Commissioner Davide upang 
maiwasan ang kaguluhan sa isang napakaselan at napaka- 
halagang seksyon sa ating Saligang Batas. 

Kung sinasabi nating si Kristo ay liberating dahil ang 
api ay lalaya at ang mga bihag ay mangaliligtas, sinabi 
rin ni Commissioner Felicitas Aquino na kung ang 
history ay liberating, dap at ding maging liberating ang 


696 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


Saligang Batas. Ang magpapalaya sa atin ay ang agrarian 
and natural resources reforms. 


The primary, foremost and paramount principles 
and objectives are contained on lines 19 to 22: 
“primacy of the rights of farmers and farmworkers to 
own directly or collectively the lands they till.” Ito ang 
kauna-unahan at pinakamahalagang prinsipyo at layunin 
ng isang tunay na reporma sa lupa — na ang nagbubung- 
kal ng lupa ay maging may-ari nito. 

Ano naman ang ibig sabihin ng “farmworker”? Dito 
nagkakaroon ng problema. Alam natin na ang farmers 
ang tiller of the soil. Ayon sa Kilusang Magbubukid ng 
Pilipinas, dalawa ang ibig sabihin ng “magbubukid”: 
tiller of the soil at manggagawang bukid o farm worker. 
Kaya ang ibig sabihin ng magbubukid ay farmer at farm 
worker; to own directly means magmay-ari. Ang ibig 
sabihin nito ay maaari kong ariin ang isang ektaryang 
lupa, halimbawa. 


Sa salitang “farmworkers,” hindi kasama rito ang 
hired laborer, ang seasonal laborer at ang mga sakada. 
Ano ang ibig sabihin ng farm workers? Ito ay ang mga 
regular farm workers. Mas mahalaga ang kanyang 
tungkulin sa produksyon kung ihahambing sa hired 
laborer. Ano ang ibig sabihin ng “collectively”? Ang ibig 
sabihin nito ay ang sama-samang paggawa batay sa 
tenant prerogatives; sa tanim tulad ng asukal, pinya at 
saging; at sa sukat ng lupa sapagkat kung ito ay maliit, 
makakamit ng mga magbubukid ang economies of scale 
sa sama-samang paggawa. Iyan ang ibig sabihin ng 
“collectively.” & 


Tungkol naman sa sinasabing “just distribution of a] 
agricultural lands, ang ibig sabihin nito ay tuluyan nan 
wawasakin ang tinatawag na land monopoly On lines 

and 2 *: the telm “retention limits” ay nangangahulu 
gang binibigyan ng proteksiyon ang maliit na panginom 
ng lupa lalo na ang owner-cultivator na maUwanan „ 
lupang maaari myang sakahin. Ang pangalawang napaka 
halagang nagbtbtgay proteksiyon sa panginoon ng lup 
ay ang fair and progressive system of compensation ' 
Ito ay hindi just compensation na nangangahLgang fai 
market value sa jurtsprudence. Ang batas ay pasulong a 
hind, paatras sa Halim ng right of preemption and ri|h 
of redemption. Ang .big sabihin nito ay kailangan m 
reasonable capacity of the tenant to pay. Ayon sa nJ 
linyang 23 at 24 kapag maliit ang lupa, malaki ang ha 
aga nito; at habang lumalaki ang lupa, lumiliit ang ha 

SnerrcL°rie U s PanS " E 


Ang ibig sabihin ng Section 6 ay may mga component 
ang agrarian reform gaya ng farmers’ and farm workers’ 
participation in planning, organizing and management of 
the program, plus appropriate technical assistance, 
adequate financial and marketing assistance. Ito ang mga 
component ng isang matagumpay na programa. 

Ang Section 7 ay tungkol sa pagbibigay o disposisyon 
ng ibang natural resources, public domain and public 
lands sa tatlong milyong tao. Ito ay ang pagpapatupad 
ng prinsipyong “land for the landless.” 

Bumalik tayo ngayon sa Section 5. Gaya ng sinabi 
ko, nawawala rito ang primacy of the rights of farmers 
and farm workers. Inalis na ba ng Ginoo ang land 
reform? 

MR. DAVIDE. By the way, I would like to make a 
correction. Instead of “FARM HOLDERS ” it should be 
“FARMWORKERS.” 

MR. TADEO. Iminungkahi ng Ginoo na tanggalin na 
ang “natural resources” subalit isinama namin ito sa 
kadahilanang saan natin dadalhin ang tatlo hanggang 
apat na milyong landless agricultural workers? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is on the title only, not on 
Section 5. 

<t MR- TADEO. Hindi na kasi ginamit ng Ginoo ang 
“land reform”; mas tamang salita ang “agrarian reform.” 
Ang ibig sabihin ng land reform ay problema sa lupa 
lam ang; ang ibig sabihin ng agrarian reform is the land in 
relation to farmers and farm workers. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. 

MR. TADEO. Kayat sa “agrarian reform,” kasama 
na rito ang relasyon ng lupa sa tao at sa lipunan, sa pang- 
kalahatan. Subalit nakita kong nawala ang una. 

Iminungkahi rin ng Ginoo ang mga salitang “MAY 
OWN” subalit parang nahihinaan ako rito, hindi potent 
Dapat ay MUST OWN dahil hindi potent ang “MAY ’’ 

Inalis din ng Ginoo ang “retention limits.” Sa akin ay 
napakahalaga ng “retention limits.” Kapag ang pangi- 
noon ng lupa ay hindi nagbubungkal ng lupa, hindi siya 
magkakaroon ng retention limit. Ang ibig nating sabihin 
ay subject to such limitation, mayroong karapatan ang 

owner-cultivator na maiwan ang pagsasaka. 


Ang Section 6 ay nagsasabi ng m ga component r 
agrarian reform; hmdi sapat lam ang ang agrarian reforn 

MR. DAVIDE. My amendment is only on Section 
yet. 


MR. TADEO. Kung maaari lamang ipaliliwanag ko 
munang lahat. Magpapaliwanag muna ako upang malutas 
ang kaguluhan sa dalawang araw nating pagtatalakayan. 
I to ang layunin ko. 


MR. DAVIDE. May I respond now? 

Madam President, the proposal would even strengthen 
the concept of reform. I insisted on the addition of 
LAND because there is really a distinction between 
agrarian reform and land reform. Obviously, agrarian 
reform will relate only to instances of lands where we 
have somebody working there who is not the owner of 
the property. But in land reform, we allow the distribu- 
tion even of public lands to the landless, or to those 
who are qualified to acquire, especially to farm workers 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


697 


and farmers who do not own their own land or who are 
only working on another’s land. So, we broaden the 
effect of land and agrarian reforms because, I repeat, 
technically speaking, there is a distinction — a wide dis- 
tinction — between agrarian reform on the one hand, 
and ordinary land reform on the other hand. 


Secondly, in this particular case, we did not delete 
the concept of the primacy of the rights of farmers and 
farm workers. In other words, this only confirms the 
existence of the right, as worded; it is confirmatory 
of that right. There is no need to reemphasize that right 
because that right is conceded, and it now becomes the 
duty of the State to undertake these genuine and au- 
thentic land and agrarian reforms. We do not need to 
state “retention limits” because in the course of the 
interpellations. Commissioner Tadeo always emphasized 
that it will be left to the Congress. So, we will leave it to 
the Congress. I am sure that the matter of retention 
would be among those to be taken up, especially taking 
into account the provisions on the national patrimony 
with respect to public lands and privately owned lands. 


Under my proposal, we do not even compel the 
payment of just and progressive compensation if it 
would be for public lands. The State would have the 
sole authority, the discretion even, to distribute these 
lands freely. But under the original proposal, the farmers 
and farm workers are required to pay just and progres- 
sive compensation even for public lands. Under my 
proposal we leave it to the State; we leave it to the 
Congress to decide whether to require payment for it 
or not But with respect to private lands, we should not 
go against the mandate of the Bill of Rights on just 
compensation. After all, it would be the State that will 
expropriate; it is the State that will pay; and it is now 
for the State to determine how reimbursement of such 
payments will be made by the farmers or the farm 
workers to the government. So, it should not be said 
that I am trying to delimit or diminish the impact of the 
original proposal; I am even helping broaden its impact. 


MR TADEO. Nagpapasalamat ako kay Commissioner 
Davide. 

Marahil ay mayroon tayong suliranin dito. Ang 
pag-uusapan natin dito ay iyong natural resources o land. 
Palagay ko, ito ang magiging problema natin. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. That should belong to the Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony, a copy of which 
I brought with me. I believe that the proper area for this 
would really be the Article on National Economy an 
Patrimony. I have here Committee Report No. 24 o t e 
Committee on the National Economy and Patrimony. 
I believe that the objectives of the Committee on 
Social Justice are all embodied in the proposed Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony which is even 
broader in effect. So, we have to give due recognition 
also to the proposed Article on National Economy 
and Patrimony. I understand that Commissioner Villegas 
would support this particular view that the provisions in 


the proposed Article on National Economy and Patri- 
mony would even be broader than what is recom- 
mended. So, we should delete “natural resources re- 
form” and transfer it to the Article on National Econ- 
omy and Patrimony. 

MR. TADEO. Iilan na lamang ang hindi natin napag- 
kakasunduan dito. Para akong nahihinaan sa salitang 
“may” kayat baka maaari itong ga wing MUST. 

MR. DAVIDE. It can be changed to SHALL. I agree. 

MR. TADEO. Maliwanag na nandito iyong primacy of 
the rights. 

MR. DAVIDE. Certainly, it is inherent, it is conceded, 
and that is why we give a mandate. We make it a duty 
on the part of the State to respect that particular right. 

MR. TADEO. Pinasasalamatan ko si Commissioner 
Davide. 

MR. BENGZON. Am I to understand that perhaps 
the underlying reason why the Gentleman used the 
word “may” is that he is envisioning a situation where 
there may be some farmers who may not wish to have... 

MR. DAVIDE. To enjoy the benefit. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is really at the back of my mind 
but we can put it there as SHALL. 

MR. BENGZON. But that is the underlying reason 
why the Gentleman placed the word. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, certainly, because we also cannot 
compel a farmer to avail of the advantage or the right if 
he does not want to. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I ask a few 
questions for clarification in the record? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. On the fourth line of the proposed 
amendment, the two words “to own” have been a sub- 
ject of much misunderstanding in Central Luzon, 
particularly in my home province of Bulacan. As was 
stated by Commissioner Ople, I was one of the small 
landowners in Bulacan whose land was subjected to 
land retorm; I agreed to relinquish those lands volun- 
tarily. However, after the tenants obtained their Land 
Transfer Certificates, most of them came back to me, 
disillusioned, disappointed, even bitter. They said. 


698 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1 986 


“Hindi pala kami ang tunay na may-ari ng lupa.” This 
has reference to the word “own.” “Hindi pala kami ang 
may-ari ng lupa. Ngayon lang namin nalaman na ito 
palang lupa ay hindi mamanahin ng aming mga anak 
kapag kami ay namatay.” “Tuladkohalimbawa,” sabi ng 
isa, ‘lima ang aking anak. Itong napunta sa aking bukid 
ay dalawang ektarya lamang. Akala ko ba kapag ako ay 
namatay, ito ay mamanahin ng aking limang anak; hindi 
pala.” 


Under the law, there is a system of primogeniture. 
If the recipient of this land has five children and he dies, 
his five children will not automatically inherit the land 
intestate. No, the procedure will be something like this. 
If none of the five children wants to cultivate the land, 
then the land goes back to the Samahang Nayon at 
pipiliin ng Samahang Nayon kung sino ang taong 
pagbibigyan ng lupa upang ito ay sakahin. 


If, let us say, out of the five children, three would 
like to cultivate the land, only one would be entitled 
and that is the eldest. Primogeniture. May nangyari 
nang ganyan. Yaong panganay ang nakakuha ng lupa. At 
ang kadalasang sinasabi ng apat na mas nakababatang 
kapatid: Suklian mo kami. Ikaw naman ang nakakuha 

ng lupa ng mga magulang natin, kaya dapat ay suklian 
mo naman kami.” Kayat iyan ang mga problema. 


That is why I want a clarification on the record of 

? a n W ° rd own ” because it has been the cause of much 
disillusionment and misunderstanding. At the same 
ime, paano naman kung maaari itong manahin 
ng mga anak subalit dalawang ektarya lamang ang lupa 

* ng a 7 ak ay . luna? Masyado nang maliit ang magiging 
saka ng bawat isa. At sa susunod na saling lahi o heneras 
yon, 1 along hint ito. 

At hindi lang iyon. Sabi pa ng iba: “Hindi pala kami 

iTpa ” ^ubaUt hindi Pala namin mai P a 8bibili ang 
Sagkat bat ™ dapat PW ipagbili ito 

kS ne lim r 7? 1 Xt ° Sa hindi naman nagbubung- 

“Hindfoalatmi ° d Pa rit °’ may mga "agsasabing: 
di pala kami ang may-ari, gusto sana naming sawing 
residential lot ang kalahati ng lupa.” g 

That is why I want to make clear in the Record the 
meaning of the word “own” because in law as well as in 
common understanding, if one is the owner, he has 

-7 thC rfght to use ’ ^ right to sell, the 

lo bequeat anCe> ““ “ °" e haS ** 


• , K t at , iya J f” 8 gUSto kong itan °ng- What are th 
rights and what are the limitations of the rights of 

fanner or a tiller who, let us say, becomes the bene 
ficiary of two hectares of riceland which, according t 
this provision, he will “own individually”? Ano an 
kahulugan ng own individually”? What is the scop 
of these words? 


MR. TADEO. Pinasasalamatan ko si Commissioner 
Rodrigo sa napakagandang katanungan. 


Nagkataon kasing ang lupain ng Ginoo ay sa Plaridel. 
Ako ay taga-Plaridel at nang ipairal ang reporma sa lupa 
ng panahon ni Macapagal, isa ako sa kauna-unahang 
technician. Nais kong ipaliwanag sa Ginoo na kaya hindi 
maaaring ipamana ang lupa ay dahil bawal ang land 
fragmentation. 

MR. RODRIGO. Iyon nga ang sinabi ko. 

MR. TADEO. Ayon sa RA 3844, ang economic 
family-size farm ay isang sukat ng lupang kayang tugu- 
nan ang pangunahing pangangailangan ng isang pamil- 
yang may lima hanggang anim na miyembro, gaya ng 
food, clothing, shelter, education and hospitalization. 
Kapag pinayagan natin ang land fragmentation at ipina- 
mana ang lupa sa limang anak, mawawala na ang econ- 
omic family-size farm. Kaya ito ay proteksiyon. Ang 
ibig sabihin nito, kapanabay ng land reform ang pam- 
bansang industriyalisasyon. Kung ipamamana ang lupa, 
masisira na ang konsepto ng economic family-size farm. 

Bakit naman hindi ito maaaring ipagbili? Ito ay 
proteksyon sa kanila upang kapag sila ay nagipit ay 
hindi nila maipagbibili ang pinagkukunan nila ng 
kanilang ikinabubuhay. Kayat binibigyan lamang natin 
sila ng proteksyon. 

MR. RODRIGO. Maraming salamat. 

Iyon din ang pagkakaalam ko. Gusto ko lang maging 
maliwanag ito sa Record upang hindi masawi ang pag- 
asa ng mga magsasaka na ang akala ay magiging sa kanila 
ang pag-aari ng lupa. Nais nating liwanagin na hindi ito 
complete ownership, limited rights lamang. 

MR. TADEO. Salamat din po. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. I heard Commissioner Tadeo state 
that this proposal of a fair and progressive system of 
compensation is a deviation from or is not in con- 
formity with the basic concept of just compensation. He 
mentioned preemption or redemption. The Civil Code 
has recognized the rights of preemption and/or redemp- 
tion in the law on sales in favor of a co-owner or an 
adjacent owner when a co-owner sells his share in the 
co-ownership or has a ready buyer for his undivided 
share. The right of preemption is for one of the co- 
owners to exercise that right before actual sale by offer- 
ing to pay the same price offered by a prospective buyer 
to a co-owner. The right of redemption is exercised 
when the sale is consummated by a third person cover- 
ing the portion of a co-owner of the undivided property. 
So, the rights of preemption and redemption are based 
on actual sale of property, and that is the meaning of 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


699 


just compensation, where a person who wants to sell 
and another who wants to buy can agree on the value of 
the property. 

So, I want to clarify that these rights of preemption 
or redemption are not an infringement of the principle 
of just compensation. They are, in fact, a clear applica- 
tion of that principle of just compensation because 
there is a prospective sale or an actual sale which is 
voluntary and the parties have agreed on the value or 
the price thereof. 

When this committee report says that the farmers or 
workers will “own the lands they till,” I suppose we 
have to make a distinction, as Commissioner Davide 
said, between public lands and privately owned lands. If 
they are public lands, there will be no problem because 
they are part of the lands of the public domain which, 
if alienable, can and should be distributed for more 
cultivation and production. But with regard to privately 
owned lands, will this not violate the principle in the 
Bill of Rights regarding the exercise of eminent domain? 

The three powers of government are taxation, police 
power and eminent domain. The Bill of Rights pro- 
vides: 

No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property 

without due process of law, nor shall any person be denied 

the equal protection of the laws. 

And Section 2 states: “Private property shall not be 
taken for public use without just compensation.” 

Article 43 5 of the Civil Code provides for the same 
principle that private property may only be taken in the 
exercise of eminent domain by competent authority for 
a public purpose and upon payment of just compensa- 
tion Some people will say: “If we pass this section on 
agrarian reform in the Constitution, then it cannot be 
unconstitutional because it is in the Constitution.” But 
it violates the principle of private property and the 
proper exercise of the right of eminent domain. 

Should we not reconcile or harmonize both provi- 
sions? Otherwise, I am afraid that a provision that 
private lands be owned by the farm workers will be em- 
bodied erroneously in the 1986 Constitution, that 
provision will be unconstitutional or, at least, an illegal 
exercise of the purported right of eminent domain or 

expropriation. 

The 1935 Constitution pennits the distribution of big 
landed estates. But that provision, in many decisions of 
our courts, does not pennit the distribution or division 
of private property for disposition to or to be allocated 
in favor of other persons because we will then be sacri- 
ficing the right of private property which is guaranteed 
in the Bill of Rights. I would like the Committee to 
consider. 

MR. TADEO. Ibig ko lamang sagutin ang Ginoo na sa 
ilalim ng 1973 Constitution, nakalagay sa Declaration 
of Principles, Article II, Section 6, ang “equitably 


diffuse property ownership.” Pahayag ito ngisangpani- 
nindigan ng isang saligang batas. 

Tingnan natin ang social justice ayon sa Calalang vs. 
Williams case. Ang sumusunod ang naging desisyon sa 
nabanggit na kaso: 

But the humanization of laws and the equalization of social 
and economic forces by the State, the promotion of the 
welfare of all the people, the adoption by the government 
of measures calculated to insure economic stability of all 
the component elements of society through the mainte- 
nance of the proper economic and social equilibrium . . . 

Sinasabi rin natin sa salus populi est suprema lex, the 
voice of the people is the supreme law. 

Ayon sa pananaliksik ni Mahar Mangahas, 

The new Constitution should recognize that the people 
cannot be compelled to obey unjust laws or to acquiesce to 
action which are based on such unjust laws. 

Again, the voice of the people is the supreme law. It is 
the people, not the law, who ultimately define social 
justice and how the law should be made and, wherever 
necessary, reformed to conform to the people’s consen- 
sus of justice. 

MR. PADILLA. Ang sinabi ng Ginoo, Madam Pres- 
ident, speaks of all the people, all the components of 
society, and salus populi est suprema lex, the welfare 
of the people is the supreme law. That is why the 
government, the State, has the police power, in addition 
to taxation and eminent domain. Police power is 
precisely to promote the general welfare, which the 
Committee has been using as common good. But com- 
mon good and general welfare is for all the people, all 
the components of society, not the privilege of one 
sector at the expense of others. That is very important 
because we must have a just and humane society. We 
must protect and promote the rights of labor, workers, 
fishermen and others. We have no objection to those 
principles of social justice but there must be, as the 
Calalang decision says, the equilibrium of all forces - 
social, economic, political, et cetera — so that we may 
have stability, not anarchy on the one hand, nor 
despotism on the other. 

Thank you. 

MS. NIEVA. I thank Commissioner Padilla. 

May we have any proposed amendment that the 
Gentleman may have. We would like to have it in writ- 
ing, if possible, because we will be discussing this 
amendment this afternoon. 

Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. I have not prepared an amendment 
because I feel that the basic concepts on expropriating 
private property for even the deserving farm workers 
under a system of compulsory land expropriation, 
private land expropriation, under a system of com - 


700 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


pulsory private land expropriation are, in my opinion, MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
illegal and unconstitutional. sioner Nolledo be recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I think the concern of Commissioner 
Padilla is well taken care of in my proposal. Under my 
proposal, with respect to private lands, payment of just 
compensation is required. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the Committee will study this 
particular proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Davide. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we shall. We have it in written 
form. 


MR. SaRMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. It is now 1 2: 1 5 p.m. I move for a 
suspension of the session until 2:30 p.m. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

May we remind the Commissioners that we are havir 
our caucus with our luncheon at South Caucus Roon 
A and B immediately after this session. 

It was 12:16 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
A 1 2:50 p.m. , the session was resumed 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed 
MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognizi 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Romulo 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is rec 

nized. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I will justmanif 
that Commissioner Ople and I have also submitted 
amendment for Section 5 which is already with i 
Committee and everyone has been furnished a copy 
it. 


Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I am recommending to the Committee on Social 
Justice to combine Section 5 and 7 of its report 
because they are related to each other. This is for 
purposes of symmetry and legal craftmanship but with 
substantial modifications which I would like to explain 
before this honorable Commission. 

As combined, Sections 5 and 7 should read as fol- 
lows. The State shall undertake a genuine agrarian 
reform program founded on the rights of farmers and 
farmworkers to own directly or collectively the lands 
they till. To this end, the State shall encourage and 
undertake the just distribution of all agricultural lands 
subject to such EXEMPTIONS.” My original amend- 
ment mentioned RETENTION LIMITS but upon con- 
sultation with a number of colleagues, I changed tire 
term RETENTION LIMITS to EXEMPTIONS. 

To continue: “AND PRIORITIES,” which is a 
substantial amendment, then “as Congress may pre- 
scribe and subject to a fair and progressive system of 
compensation AS DEFINED BY LAW.” 

The second paragraph of this section should now 
read: THE PRINCIPLES OF AGRARIAN REFORM 
SHALL LIKEWISE APPLY TO LANDS OF THE 
PUBLIC DOMAIN UNDER LEASE OR CONCESSION 
SUBJECT TO PRIOR RIGHTS OF SMALL SETTLERS 
OR LANDHOLDERS — there are Filipinos granted 
landholdings, homesteads, and they are not merely 
settlers - AND THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS 
COMMUNITIES TO THEIR ANCESTRAL LANDS IN 
APPROPRIATE CASES, THE PRINCIPLES OF 
AGRARIAN REFORM SHALL LIKEWISE APPLY IN 
THE DISPOSITION OF OTHER NATURAL RE- 
SOURCES. In the case of the last sentence, it seems to 
me that Commissioner Davide has a point when he said 
that this should be referred to the Committee on the 
National Economy and Patrimony. I have no objection 
if the Committee refers this to the Committee on the 
National Economy and Patrimony because it seems to 
me that the explanations of the Committee with respect 
to the application of the general principles of agrarian 
reform to the disposition of other natural resources is 
nebulous, but I have a feeling ‘that the Gentleman must 
be referring to security of tenure when he provided for 
the application of principles of agrarian reform to the 
disposition of natural resources. 

I would like to explain, Madam President, for a few 
minutes this proposed amendment. I am deeply con- 
cerned about the plight of small landholders because 
they constitute a great bulk of the middle class of 
Filipino society. I would like to quote the Journal of 
Saturday, August 2, 1 986. It says on page 32: 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


701 


On genuine land reform, Mr. Tadeo stated that Congress 
would enact a scheme for implementation. He stated that 
small landowners should not be apprehensive about the 
program since the scheme contemplated by the Committee 
would be implemented on them on its last phase when the 
country shall have reached the stage of industrialization. He 
stressed that the program would be implemented gradually. 

I am concerned about these small landholders to 
whom we will present the Constitution for ratification. 
They now own their landholdings and their plight was 
brought to the fore in this Constitutional Commission 
by no less than our Journal Officer, Mr. Vicente Roy 
Kayaban, Jr., who distributed a dissertation on the 
plight of the small landholders. 

I know very well that these small landholders have 
also some tenants and they are considered farmers in 
contemplation of the committee report. I would like to 
mention that I talked to some members of the Commit- 
tee and they even articulated before this Commission 
that the retention limit with respect to small landhold- 
ers should be seven hectares, perhaps influenced by the 
pertinent provisions of P.D. No. 27. Some of them 
recommended 1 0 hectares. 

There are many factors to be considered in determin- 
ing the retention limits or the exemptions that I 
mentioned in my proposed provision. I said that 24 
hectares may cover lands that are not productive com- 
pared to two hectares that are highly productive, 
because there are lands that are not productive in the 
sense that they are stony and no matter how much 
fertilizer is used, the produce of the land may not even 
support a family with four or five members. 

So I think we should leave it to Congress to deter- 
mine’ the extent of the exemption that should be 
granted instead of Congress determining the intention 
of the Commission from separate statements coming 
from the members of the Committee. 

I would like to quote the Supreme Court about these 
small landholders whose lands might be subject to 
agrarian reform, thereby creating a new set of im- 
noverished people. By transferring one land from a 
group to another group of landless people, we thereby 
create another group of landless citizens, which is a 
grave injustice. The Supreme Court referred to these 
small landholders in the case of Nilo vs. Court of Ap- 
peals, speaking through Justice Gutierrez. According to 
the Supreme Court, these small landowners are teachers, 
clerks, nurses and other hardworking and frugal people 
who, in a lifetime of sacrifice, gathered their pitiful 
little savings and purchased small farms to supplement 
the inadequate pension from the Government Service 
Insurance System or the Social Security System. 

The Supreme Court went further by saying that these 
landowners constitute part of the economic middle class 
which the government is trying to build. They deserve 
as much consideration as the tenants themselves in order 
not to create economic dislocation, where the tenants 


are solely favored while this particular group of land- 
owners is impoverished. 

So, ladies and gentlemen, I think we should leave it 
to Congress to determine priorities and exemptions with 
respect to the implementation of the land reform pro- 
gram. I think this is a sane proposal. These landowners 
constitute a great bulk of the Filipino population. They 
are alarmed by the statement of Mr. Tadeo that their 
landholdings shall be subject to agrarian reform. 

I am in favor of agrarian reform, a meaningful and 
genuine agrarian reform. But I think the Members of 
Congress should be given some leeway. They are not less 
patriotic as the members of the Committee or the Mem- 
bers of this Constitutional Commission. Besides, they 
can articulate more validly the sentiments of the people, 
they being elected by the people, and thereby enjoying 
the mandate of the people. 

Some people outside say that the Members of this 
Commission do not enjoy a real mandate from the 
people, although I think that the people tacitly gave us 
that mandate. And so, I hope the Committee will 
seriously consider my reasonable amendments. 

I would like to mention here, Madam President, that 
in yesterday’s Manila Chronicle, quoting Minister 
Heherson Alvarez, of the 710,000 hectares of land that 
should come under the operation of P.D. No. 27, only 
1 1 ,000 hectares are covered by land transfer certificates. 
That is the reason why I mentioned the word “priori- 
ties” in the amendment, in view of the statement of 
Minister Mitra that we should still finish land reform 
covering rice or com land before we go to land reform 
of coconuts or sugarland. I think the supporting struc- 
tures of the land reform program will entail a lot of 
expense, Madam President, and we cannot raise the false 
hopes of our people, in the words of Commissioner 
Rodrigo. 

I want to be realistic on this aspect, although I am 
fully in favor of a genuine land reform program because 
with respect to sugar or coconut lands, we should leave 
much of the discretion to Congress because we may be 
bound by certain international commitments on quota 
requirements. For example, we cannot apply the land 
reform program as understood with respect to rice or 
com to sugar or coconut land or even to saltbed or to 
fishponds. I think much leeway should be given to 
Congress, because Congress has the facilities. Congress 
may have the technological knowledge or the expertise 
but we are subject to constraints of time and we are 
likewise subject to limitations of facilities. I think we 
should have more confidence in the representatives ot 
the people. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May I inform the body that we 
have just approved a rule in our caucus that we will limit 
the time for every speaker to ten minutes. Let us be 
guided, and I shall ask the Secretariat to put on the 
timer. 


702 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


MS. NIEVA. Can we get the amendment of the 
Commissioner in writing? Is this a new one? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I submitted the amendment in 
writing to the Committee. I will give the original to the 
Committee, and 1 hope this can be reproduced soon. 
Commissioner Gascon has the amendment. Instead of 
using “retention limits,” upon consultation with some 
of my colleagues, I changed it to EXEMPTIONS for 
wider coverage. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May the Committee make a few 
remarks in response to the remarks of the Commis- 
sioner? 


they are the ones given that right, we expect that they 
will take better care of the area because their children 
and grandchildren will still be there and, therefore, they 
would undertake activities like reforestation. 

On Section 7, Commissioner Davide proposed that 
the words “natural resources” be amended and replaced 
with the word “land.” The intent of the Committee is 
more than just “land”; it means other natural resources 
and lands of the public domain suitable to agriculture, 
regardless of whether it be disposable or alienable, or 
under lease or concession. That is the intent of the 
Committee. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I got the point, Madam President. 
At any rate, I am reproducing in my amendment almost 
the exact words of the Committee. 

Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR. MONSOD. We just want to make a clarification. 
In Section 7 , the Gentleman mentioned that he thought 
the intent of the Committee in mentioning “principles 
of agrarian reform” was merely to reiterate security of 
tenure. We just want to clarify that the Committee 
means more than that. Commissioner Tadeo answered 

6 ° tu da ^ na ^ ura ^ resources may be of several 
types. These may be forestry, mining, lands of the 
public domain, but which are subject to alienation, lease 
or concession. 


Wi ! h res .P ect to lands and the public domai 
rn itti 6 * ag 5 lculture .- it is the intention of the Cor 
t - . k tt* P 1 ™ 0 ^ 168 °f agrarian reform be pra 

lanrk nf th* itself when it: does dispose or aliena 
D aim oil nln ^ U * b lC d ° main - Th e example is the Guthr 
lv rWi P h u ta ! lon of which 8,000 hectares were initu 

were dknn h f Cree _ to be alienable and disposable, bi 
were disposed of m favor of the NDC. The NDC the 

went into an agreement with Guthrie on a 60-40 basi 

fiTst h av ?th Xam k P e r h6re ’ Perhaps the State shouId 
.L , , , ° ugbt of the people who were there, th 

owner4i°in nf h tk e ^ ^ Ven an opportunity to have tl 
and disnnced f 1S ^ S * nce ^ Was going to be alienate 
Sate i n °/ anyWay ‘ ^ P rinci P al thing is that tl 
State should start with its own backyard, if it is serioi 
about agrarian reform. 


In the case of other natural resources, let us say 
ores ry °r mining, the intent of this provision is merely 
to sa y that in applying the principle of agrarian reform 
the chief beneficiaries should be the people in the areas 
So, instead of having absentee logging concession: 
owned by people from outside the area, the people ir 
the area and the communities themselves should be 
considered, too, as the principal beneficiaries. The 
people may be entrusted with the land but need not be 
given to them by title. It can be the same kind of con 
cession or rights that are now given under the law. Ii 


MR. MONSOD. May I also add another aspect to this. 
The Committee feels that there are several instances 
where it might be termed “an unjust acquisition,” for 
example, if it is the product of political patronage or 
cronyism. If it is a product of a real, honest and bona 
fide transaction, certainly in the transition from a single 
beneficiary to the community as the principal bene- 
ficiary, there would be scope for just compensation. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I would like to 
request all those who desire to present amendments to 
present the text of the same to the Secretariat to be 
immediately typed and distributed for more expedi- 
tious proceedings so that the Commissioners, besides 
the Committee members, can study them intelligently. 

MR. NOLLEDO. For the information of the Floor 
Leader, Madam President, I submitted the amendment 
to the Committee. That amendment was given by the 
head of the Committee to Commissioner Tadeo. 

MR. RAMA. Please submit them to the Secretariat 
who will distribute the same. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is our next speaker? 

MR. RAMA. The next speaker, Madam President, is 
Commissioner Davide who started amending this par- 
ticular section this morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. This is on Section 5, Madam President. 
I wonder if the Committee has already resolved the issue 
with regard to the amendments on changing the word 
“may” before “on” to SHALL, and “farmholders” to 
FARMWORKERS, and “justly” to EQUITABLY. The 
entire proposal on Section 5 will now read as follows: 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


703 


THE STATE SHALL UNDERTAKE A GENUINE 
AGRARIAN AND LAND REFORM PROGRAM 
UNDER WHICH FARMERS AND FARMWORKERS, 
WITH PRIORITY TO THE LANDLESS, SHALL OWN 
INDIVIDUALLY OR COLLECTIVELY THE LANDS 
THEY TILL. SUCH PROGRAM SHALL COVER ALL 
AGRICULTURAL LANDS WHICH, SUBJECT TO 
SUCH LIMITATIONS AS CONGRESS MAY PRE- 
SCRIBE TAKING INTO ACCOUNT CONSERVA- 
TION ECOLOGICAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL RE- 
QUIREMENTS, SHALL BE EQUITABLY DISTRIB- 
UTED UPON PAYMENT OF JUST COMPENSATION 
IN RESPECT TO PRIVATE LANDS. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any reaction from the 

Committee? 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, we will consider that 
among the other amendments. 


MR. BENGZON. Before that decree of President 
Marcos, did “just compensation” mean the true market 
value? 

MR. DAVIDE. That should be aligned with the mean- 
ing of “just compensation” in the Bill of Rights. 

MR. BENGZON. So that is the kind of meaning the 
Gentleman would impute to these words “just com- 
pensation” under the proposal. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that was the meaning indicated 
by the Chairman of the Committee when we took up 
the Article on the Bill of Rights. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. May we also suggest that in the case 
of “just compensation,” we merely state the compensa- 
tion to be paid to the former landowner? 


MR. TADEO. Ang problema lang ay tungkol sa “just 
compensation” dahil, sa ilalim ng P.D. No. 27 ni Gino- 
„ Marcos, ang pagbabayad ng lupa ay ibinatay doon 
sa average harvest ng tatlong nakaraang ani times 2.5. 


MR DAVIDE. That was for leasehold. 

MR TADEO. Hindi, sa amortizing owner, kaya ito 
• M Operation Land Transfer, under a certificate of 
! y °d 8 transfer. Ano ang halaga ng lupang babayaran for 
rft en years with equal annual amortizations? Ang 
fittee hindi sumusunod sa just compensation 

hal f 8 fr market value. Actually, with six percent na na- 
° f sa principal, inaabot ito ng PI 3,000 to PI 5,000. 
lW£ | n mismo sa karanasan mula noong 1972 hanggang 
Batay sa umalis na diktadura, ang nakabayad lamang 
d °° n von na rin kay Minister Heherson Alvarez ay nine 
sang-ay ^ halaga i an g ay PI 5,000, huhulugan mo pa 
P erce ^ ng j 5 years. Kaya ang punto rito na suliranin 
sa loo ng j ust compensation. Ang nakikita namin dito 
k ° rlaoat gamitin ang RA 3844, ang right of preemption 
ay right of redemption or reasonable capacity of the 

farmer to pay. 

„ pA VIDE. Madam President, since the use of the 
M “just compensation” is also in the Nolledo pro- 
term , _ an d I understand this is also the proposal of 
r°mmissioner Padilla - I would request for a defennent 
til the Committee shall have taken into account and 
un die d all the proposed amendments to Section 5. 


MR- TADEO. Salamat po. 

jdR. BENGZON. Would Commissioner Davide be 
willing to go back to the old definition of “just com- 
pensation”? 

MR- DAVIDE. Yes. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. However, as far as the source of the 
repayment is concerned, it may be that the farmer is not 
able to afford the just compensation. This is a proper 
area where the State can come in, if it intends to give 
support or subsidy. That may be called for in order that 
the farmer will get a chance to own a piece of land. 
Besides, there might not be a strict correspondence 
between a just compensation for the landowner and the 
capacity of the farmer to pay. 

MR. DAVIDE. As a matter of fact, the opening 
sentence of my proposal states: “It is the duty of the 
State.” This means that the State should first expro- 
priate, distribute and then the government will deal with 
the farmers or the farm workers as to the mode of reim- 
bursement or refunding the amount that the govern- 
ment had paid to the landowner, which should be a 
more just and equitable arrangement for the farmers 
and the farm workers. It is now a duty. 

MR. MONSOD. That is why I believe that this is 
consistent with the comments of Commissioner Tadeo 
because the objective of agrarian reform is equity. It is 
really not efficiency or production, but the first objec- 
tive is equity. In that sense, the State may have to step 
in to help the farmer pay for the land. 

MR. TADEO. Iyon ang ibig sabihin ng fair and 
progressive system ot compensation. Kayat binibigyang 
proteksyon dito iyong owner-cultivator sapagkat kapag 
maliit ang lupa mo, mas mataas ang halaga. Pero, kapa- 
nabay noon, binibigyan din ng proteksyon ang tenant- 
beneficiaries, iyong sinasabi ni Commissioner Monsod. 
Doon ngayon papasok ang government na tutulong 
upang magkaroon siya ng “reasonable capacity.” Dahil 
sinasabi natin dito upang protektahan natin ang maliit 


704 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1 986 


na panginoong may lupa, kinakailangang maging mataas 
ang halaga ng kaniyang lupa, ngunit hindi kaya iyon ng 
tenant. Kayat makikita natin, tama iyong sinasabi ni 
Commissioner Monsod. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under the proposal of Commissioner 
Tadeo, we would rather leave it to Congress to define 
what should be the compensation. If Commissioner 
Tadeo says the smaller the area, the higher the value, 
there seems to be no specific parameter for determining 
how small is small and where the value will be higher. 
So, the best is to define “just compensation” in the 
language of the Bill of Rights, and then leave it to 
Congress to restate how to require payment by way of 
reimbursement of the amount paid by the State to the 
landowner. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Jamir be recognized for one clarificatory 
question. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. I have one simple question addressed to 
Commissioner Davide. This morning, with respect to 
Section 5, Commissioner Davide used the phrase “may 
own, and I understand that he used the word “may” 
advisably because no individual should be compelled 
to own a parcel of land if he does not want to. Then, 
I understand that he has changed it to “shall own.” 

re W n 1° unc ^ ers ^ an d now that individuals may be 
compelled to own lands? 


the^n^^Vm^ c °urse, a right may be waived, bu 
he 5S5! °n Proposal is to clarify the mandate o: 

eniov the he to , the farmer or the farm worker t 

joy the benefit or the privilege or the right. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you for the clarification. 

mis^one* President ’ ma V 1 ask that Com 

missioner Maambong be recognized for another amend 

recognized. RESIDENT ' Commissi °ner Maambong i 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President 

In Section 5 the word “genuine” is used to cim 
the agrarian reform program, and this word has 
carried over in the proposed amendment of Com 
sioner Davide and that of Commissioner Nolledo 
only proposed amendment is to change the u 
CONTINUING so that it would „ 
CONTINUING agrarian reform program. This agra 
reform program has been with us for a long time If 
memory serves me right, in the prize-winning oratio: 
then Senator Raul Manglapus in the Ateneo while 
was still a student, he was already talking about agra 


reform in his piece entitled “Land of Bondage.” And 
because of that oration, I understand President Quezon 
took notice of him. Yesterday, I mentioned the favorite 
Republic Act of Commissioner Tadeo — RA 3844, the 
Agricultural Land Reform Code. In 1971, we had the 
Code of Agrarian Reforms, RA Nos. 6389 and 6390, 
and then we had P.D. Nos. 2 and 27. So, it would not 
really be in keeping with correctness if we use the word 
“genuine” with the agrarian reform program. To my 
mind, we would rather use the proper tenn “continuing 
agrarian reform.” If we say “genuine,” it gives a sad 
commentary on the reform programs undertaken not 
only by President Marcos, but also by the previous 
Presidents of this Republic. I am submitting this for 
consideration but the Committee does not have to rule 
on it right now. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. TADEO. Commissioner Maambong, ang pro- 
blema po kasi kapag sinabi mong “continuing” ang P.D. 
No. 27, ito’y tinawag ng mga magbubukid na “fake land 
reform.” Ang ibig ba nating sabihin ay “continuing the 
fake land reform program,” kaya ginagamit namin ang 
“genuine agrarian reform program”? 

MR. MAAMBONG. While we can say for the record 
what the Commissioner just said: that is, that it is 
“fake,” yet he has always been quoting RA 3844 since 
the beginning of our discussion. Are we also saying that 
RA 3844 is fake, since the Committee has been quoting 
it time and time again? If we can put it on record that 
P.D. Nos. 2 and 27, as far as the Committee is con- 
cerned, are fake, let it stay that way as part of the pro- 
nouncement of the Committee, but let us not say that 
RA Nos. 3844, 6389 and 6390 are also fake. I am pre- 
senting this so that the language used in the Constitution 
will be in keeping with what is exactly intended here — 
to continue the agrarian reform program. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, perhaps the better 
words would be “a more effective land reform or 
agrarian refonn,” in order to avoid the implications of 
whether it is genuine or fake. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am open to that suggestion, 
Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized to amend Section 6. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. On Section 6, we should eliminate the 
distinction between “independent farmers’ organiza- 
tions” from other kinds of farmers’ organization, and 
insofar as “support” is concerned, I added the word 
REFINANCING so, as proposed, it will now read as 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


705 


follows: “The State shall CONSULT the farmers, farm 
workers, farmers’ cooperatives OR ORGANIZATIONS 
in the planning, organizing, and management of the 
program and shall provide support to agriculture 
through appropriate technology and adequate financial, 
CREDIT, REFINANCING, production and marketing 
assistance AND OTHER AIDS.” 

May I elaborate on the new kind of refinancing 
assistance. In the United States, there is an agency of 
the Department of Agriculture known as the Farm 
Credit Administration, with facilities to be expanded in 
times of economic depression in agriculture, and utilized 
for the refinancing of farm indebtedness. This should be 
entirely different from the simple concept of financial 
assistance. My proposal is intended to help the farmers 
in times of economic depression in agriculture, by 
allowing them refinancing scheme for farm indebted- 
ness. This will broaden the concept of assistance in 
agrarian reform. 

MR. TADEO. Maraming salamat. Commissioner 
Davide, sa isang napakagandang susog, dahil ang katoto- 
hanan, 90 percent ng mga magsasaka natin ay nakabaon 
sa kumunoy ng pagkakautang, kaya mahalaga iyong ipi- 
nasok po ninyo. 

MR. ROMULO. Would Commissioner Davide con- 
sider a minor amendment? 


MR. DAVIDE. Very gladly. 

MR. ROMULO. Between the words “the” and 
“farmers,” I propose to insert LANDOWNER, and 
between the words “the” and “program,” insert AGRA- 
RIAN REFORM for clarity. 

MR- DAVIDE May we have the first amendment 
again. 

MR- ROMULO. The first part will read: “The State 
shall CONSULT the LANDOWNER, farmers, farm- 
workers . • • 


MR- DAVIDE. What about the second amendment? 

MR- ROMULO. The second shall read: “. . . organiz- 
es and management of the AGRARIAN REFORM 
program,” so that we know what program we are talking 

about. 

MR. DAVIDE. I gladly accept the amendments. 

MR. ROMULO. On the last line, I think we can delete 
“and” between “production” and “marketing.” 


MR. RAMA. What does the Committee say? 

MR. TADEO. Pag-aaralan muna namin itong plain 
owner. 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed to the next. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Nolledo be recognized to amend Section 7. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 7 was already included in 
my original amendment because 1 recommended that 
Sections 5 and 7, which are related to each other, 
should be combined. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. In that case. Madam President, Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento has some clarificatory questions to be 
addressed to Commissioner Nolledo. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sanniento is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Just one brief clarificatory ques- 
tion, Commissioner Nolledo. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Gladly. 

MR. SARMIENTO. In the amendment to line 23, the 
proponent added the words “exemptions and priorities” 
as Congress may prescribe. As a noted professor on land 
refonn, may we know from the proponent the scope, 
the extent and the nature of these exemptions and 
priorities for the guidance of future legislators? 

MR. NOLLEDO. In my explanation, I alluded to 
small landholders. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Is this the only exception? 

M R NOLLEDO. No, 1 am giving that only as an 
example. That is the reason I did not give other exemp- 
tions so I emphasized that Congress should be given 
much leeway in determining the exemptions. 1 would 
recommend one exemption, for example, agro-industrial 
corporations that have been viable and are involved in 
exportation of certain products that contribute to the 
development of the national economy in the sense that 
Congress determines that. Applying* £ p"“p?e ^ 

S nre'hiZ ‘° em|,loyees of corporation! 

on expoZon ” S ° me Way ,he V 10 ' 3 


MR. DAVIDE. I agree. The amendment is willingly 

accepted. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Davide 
has registered to amend Section 8. 


706 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1 986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. My amendments would affect lines 7 
and 8 of the proposed Section 8. On line 7, I seek for 
the insertion of the word MARGINAL before the word 
“fisherman” and the change of “fisherman” to FISHER- 
MEN. On line 8, I propose to delete the words “direct 
or communal”; on line 11,1 popose to insert the words 
TO SAID FISHERMEN AND before the word “for.” 
The entire section will now read: “The State shall 
protect the rights of MARGINAL FISHERMEN and 
local communities to the use of marine and fishing 
resources, both inland and offshore, and shall provide 
appropriate financial, technical and research assistance 
TO SAID FISHERMEN AND for the development and 
conservation of such resources.” 


MR. DAVIDE. I agree that we have these laws but let 
us also consider what is actually happening to the mar- 
ginal fishermen and the local communities. They are 
deprived by those who can have the political clout, the 
protection of politicians. There are also big fishermen 
who have the monopoly of certain areas. 

We direct it as a right. We mandate the State to 
respect it as a right and, therefore, it cannot be removed 
by legislation. The Fisheries Act can be amended at any 
time to deprive the marginal fishermen of the rights. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, Madam President, 
all these rights proposed to be granted in this Constitu- 
tion are already covered by the Fisheries Act, as 
amended, and the administrative provisions of the 
Bureau of Fisheries but we just want them constitution- 
alized. 


MR. TADEO. Bakit po natin kinaltas ang “direct or 
communal” use? 


MR. DAVIDE. Frankly speaking, this is not even 
necessary because marine and fishing resources are 
considered communal. The idea really is to protect the 
interest of the marginal fishermen. So whether the 
is ermen will directly use or not, they are entitled to 
e use of the marine and fishing resources. My second 
proposal is that the assistance is only for development 
and conservation, not an assistance to the fishermen 
emselves, so there is the necessity of mandating such 
assistance to the fishermen themselves and not just to 
the conservation and development of the resources. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, mayroong isang 
on etong halimbawa sa Laguna Lake. Hindi ba maha- 
aga^ na kung ilalagay natin ang “direct or communal 
use, ang ibig sabihin ay mayroon silang atas na 
mangis a doon sa Lawa ng Laguna? Kung aalisin natin 

iyon, hrndi ba mahalaga na manatili ang “direct or 
communal use”? 


MR. DAVIDE. For me, it will not really destroy 
very concept of the recognition of the right It i 

'ftncl " If the r eCt u° r n0t ’ 3nd 80 * "^es'the 
ference. If the Gentleman insists on his proposal 

& &■**“*• tadire?t r V 

because that is already conceded in t°he rightTsell in 
first opening sentence. That is already a right! 

MR. RAMA. One clarificatory question from C< 
missioner Maambong. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I direct 
this question to Commissioner Davide or to the Com- 
mittee. 

Does not the Committee think that the right granted 
in this particular section is already covered by Fisheries 
Act No. 4003, as amended by Commonwealth Act 
No. 471, as amended by so many presidential decrees? 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, because this particular law and 
the regulations and rules thereof have always been made 
in favor of not the marginal fishermen but others who 
I said can have some political clout or can have the 
patronage of politicians. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I ask the Committee to com- 
ment on this? 

MR. MONSOD. We agree with the position of Com- 
missioner Davide that it might be appropriate to 
expressly mention it in the Constitution. However, we 
would like to inform Commissioner Davide that two of 
the problems that we wanted to address is a situation in 
Laguna de Bay where areas of the bay were appro- 
priated or allowed to be used by private fishpen owners 
to the exclusion of the marginal fishermen. The other 
one is the question of the offshore fishermen where by 
reason of certain treaties with other countries, the off- 
shore fishermen were really deprived of a livelihood 
because of the presence of large-scale trawlers within 
seven kilometers from the seashore. We sought to 
address ourselves to the problem by emphasizing com- 
munal use of water resources in inland waters, as well as 
offshore. 

Would the amendment of the Gentleman still cover 
and emphasize the rights of these fishermen to these 
areas, or can he suggest appropriate language so that 
we amply cover those problems? 

MR. DAVIDE. The opening of this section reads: 
“The State shall protect the rights of fishermen.” So, 
here we already recognize the existence of that right 
whether that right is direct or indirect; but it is a defi- 
nite, concrete, positive right that is being recognized. 
We also mandate the State to respect that particular 
right. So, insofar as the problems addressed to earlier 
are concerned, necessarily, any special grant over these 
areas will have to yield to this specific mandate now. 
So, all permits or concessions — I do not know how to 
call these benefits granted — will have to be reconciled 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


707 


with this and, therefore, if these would affect the rights 
of the marginal fishermen, those grants must necessarily 
have to be repealed or revoked. 

MR. MONSOD. In other words, the amendment 
actually is less limiting than putting in the words “direct 
or communal.” 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. It is precisely to 
emphasize the positive character of the right. 

MS. NIEVA. Would this also cover the problem of 
these big Japanese trawlers which come in and take 
advantage of the fishing resources so that the small 
fishermen can hardly finance? 

MR. DAVIDE. Undoubtedly, because this is now a 
right of first impression. Before, they did not have the 
right, it was only a privilege, especially for offshore 
fishermen. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, would it also help 
in the interpretation if we put PROTECT THE PRE- 
FERENTIAL RIGHTS OF MARGINAL FISHERMEN 
AND LOCAL COMMUNITIES TO THE USE OF 
FISHING RESOURCES? 


MS. NIEVA. Yes. I think that is precisely what the 
Committee thinks - that it is the local community who 
should be the first beneficiaries of the resources. 

MR. MONSOD. We also want to say that while the 
intent is that there should be some preferential rights 
by shore communities, this is not to the exclusion of 
everybody else. What we are trying to avoid is a situa- 
tion where other people come in and completely take 
over the communal grounds and the people in the shore 
communities which derive their livelihood from that 
communal fishing ground, thereby losing all their live- 
lihood opportunities. That is the intent of the Commit- 
tee, Madam President, and we would be very happy to 
receive suggestions as to what may be properly reflected 
in the provision. 

MR. RODRIGO. In other words, if Congress enacts a 
law, saying that only those Bulakenos living in the 
municipalities by the shoreline may fish in that com- 
munal fishing ground, that would not be valid. 

MR. MONSOD. That would not be the intent, Madam 
President. 

MR. OPLE. May I ask Commissioner Rodrigo and the 
Committee a question concerning this? 


MR DAVIDE. That would be much better really. I 
agree to the use of “SHALL PROTECT THE PRE- 
FERENTIAL RIGHTS.” That would remove all possible 
doubts in the inteipretation of the right. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Rodrigo be recognized for one clarifica- 
tory question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. My question has reference to the 
words “local communities” on line 8. The State shall 
protect the rights of local communities, not only fisher- 
men, to fishing resources, both inland and offshore. 
Does “local communities” mean the communities 
bordering the fishing ground? 

MR. DAVIDE. I would refer the matter to the Com- 
mittee. It is not covered by my proposal. 

MR. RODRIGO. I want to give an example. In my 
own province of Bulacan, we have municipalities border- 
ing Manila Bay — Hagonoy, Paombong, Malolos, 
Bulacan and Obando. These are good fishing grounds; 
we call them communal fishing grounds. Fishermen 
from Bataan and Cavite go there to fish. Now, is it the 
purpose of this Article to instruct Congress to reserve 
these communal fishing grounds bordering the towns of 
Bulacan to Bulakefios only? 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 


MR. OPLE. I am concerned about the exclusivity of 
any section concerning marine resources including 
communal fishing grounds because it is a fact that 
fishermen from Bulacan go to Bataan and Pampanga to 
fish and, of course, this is reciprocated. Many of our 
fishing boats in Hagonoy actually go to Quezon, to the 
Lamon Bay especially where the catches are better in 
some parts of the year and also to Palawan. I hope 
there is no suggestion here that the communities border- 
ing these waters could be given grounds under the 
Constitution and future laws to restrict the fishing only 
to the people from those localities. The mobility and 
interaction of fishermen along the Manila Bay coast and 
the coast of Luzon, since I do not know about the 
Visayas and Mindanao directly, is very important 
because this widens the scope of opportunities for them, 
especially since fishing is seasonal. In many instances 
where the Manila Bay is barren, one can proceed to the 
Quezon coast and try his luck there. 


And so, I would welcome an interpretation by Com- 
missioner Rodrigo and the Committee itself to the 
effect that there is no intention in this provision to 
restnct the mobility of small fishermen. 

Thank you. 


MR. MONSOD. The comment is well taken, and that 
is why we did not use the word “exclusive.” One of the 
reasons why we also used “communal” with respect to 
these communities is that it is not the intention of the 


708 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1 986 


Article to say that some privileged people within those 
communities can parcel out among themselves exclusive 
areas for their own fishing benefits. That was one of the 
original reasons why we used the word “communal.” 
But with the explanation of Commissioner Davide that 

that would all be encompassed, and with the further 
modification and interpretation of Commissioners 
Rodrigo and Ople that this is not exclusive, the intent 
of the provision is already clarified. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you, Madam President. 

I wish to clarify that point of Commissioner Davide 
on these communal fishing grounds for the reason that 
I was the author of a law during the old Congress days 
setting aside the 2,695 hectares of communal fishing 
grounds in Bulacan referred to by Commissioner 
Rodrigo for the bay shore area of Bulacan, Bulacan. The 
idea was that the area was dedicated and was reserved 
for the marginal fishermen, but anybody can fish with- 
out him building a fishpond in that place. I put in the 
aw that anyone building or parcelling a lot there to the 
preju ice of the marginal fishermen will have his 
obstruction removed as nuisance per se. I placed that in 
e aw as nuisance per se and in a summary manner it 
can be removed by the government, expenses for which 
can e charged against the one responsible for the 
o s That is the reason why we have a com- 

munal fishing ground in Bulacan. 

Now the point is, I am also interested in emphasizing 

e ng t o the fishermen to the reserved communal 

r *V ng groui J ds becau se these are reserved for marginal 

mppH ^ W i ° cann °t be ex pected to have the equip- 

80 l eper int0 the sea - ™ ey are only marginal 

fhPvTnt 11 iT sm , a11 generators and small bancas and 

^hont thp aUy u ee r r help - May 1 inform the body 
about the results of this law 

As soon as this 2,965 hectares rich in shrimps were 
declared as communal fishing grounds, big fishpond 
owners from other provinces began to build fishponds 
there. Despite the law, which prescribes that the Consta- 
bulary wiU take charge of the area and the Department 
of Agriculture will protect the area, there was no such 
protection. I am just giving the body our own expert- 
ence. 


And so, I agree that in the Constitution it is time that 
we devote our attention to communal fishing grounds 
but more importantly we should command the legisla- 
ture to protect these communal fishing grounds, for 
without this protection we will just be giving the fisher- 
men illusions because while they will have at the start 
communal fishing grounds, they will soon be deprived 
of this privilege as proven from our past experience. 


MS. N1EVA. Therefore, does Commissioner Natividad 
want the retention of the phrase “the communal use”? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am for the retention of “com- 
munal” fishing grounds and that they should be pro- 
tected by the State. I would like to say that any 
obstruction should be dealt with summarily. As men- 
tioned by Commissioner Maambong, there is a plethora 
of laws, but all of these laws only give a procedure. Tire 
complaint of the fishermen is brought before the district 
engineer, then appealed to Malacanang, and then later 
on to the courts, but it will take ten years before the 
fishermen can have their case resolved. In the end, the 
fishermen choose to keep quiet because they cannot 
wait for ten years to get back an area in which they can 
eke out a marginal livelihood. 

So, I am just giving the body our experience in this 
regard because we should not have only communal 
fishing grounds, we should also say that they should 
be protected by the State. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. NIEVA. So, would the Gentleman be recom- 
mending an amendment to add that protection? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I would like to, yes. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, and we would welcome such an 
amendment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I make an inquiry of the 
Committee? 

I admire the Committee forgiving the marginal fisher- 
men the preferential rights to communal fishing grounds 
and mention has been made of Laguna de Bay, along 
which I am particularly residing. The area along Laguna 
Bay is 90,000 hectares wide but began dying some- 
time in 1983 up to about 1986, so that I even wrote an 
article entitled “A Requiem to Laguna Bay” which I 
submitted to the Laguna Lake Development Authority. 
Has the Committee inquired why from 1 983 up to early 
1986 Laguna Bay has been dying? I would put an in- 
formation because we know that the one that killed 
Laguna de Bay was the Napindan Control Structure 
built by the old regime for P220 million allegedly for 
the use of the waters of Laguna Bay for domestic use 
and for irrigation purposes. The purpose of the Napin- 
dan Control Structure was to prevent the entry of salt 
water from Manila Bay to Laguna Bay through the Pasig 
River. We complained to the Laguna Lake Develop- 
ment Authority that there is no water circulation in 
Laguna Bay, that is why from 1983 to 1985, the fishes 
in Laguna Bay got sick and began to die. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


709 


Now, has the Committee taken into consideration 
what is to be done with the Napindan Control Structure 
so that the communal fishermen whom we are protect- 
ing here can be given their better livelihood? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, during the hearings 
we received the testimony from both the associations of 
fishpen operators and of the fishermen around Laguna 
de Bay. There have also been quite a number of studies 
made, including an estimate of what would be an 
optimum area for fishpen operators. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I am not talking of the fishpens in 
Laguna de Bay. I am talking of the Napindan Control 
Structure which prevents the entry of salt water to 
Laguna de Bay, thereby preventing water circulation 
and killing the very source of livelihood for the maiginal 
fishermen whom we are protecting here. 


records of the Commission will be a very good source of 
information with regard to this matter. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

SR. TAN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. I would like to express my appreciation to 
the Committee who thought of the small fishermen and 
for the elucidation of Commissioners Ople and Rodrigo. 
When we were in the public hearing in Pagadian, we 
were told that the small fishermen are being swallowed 
up by the big fishermen from the Visayas and Luzon. 

Does “communal” mean that the big fishermen will 
have equal rights as the marginal fishermen? What was 
the intent of tire Committee? 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we also received 
some technical testimonies on the effect of the Napin- 
dan Dam because of the inability of salt water to come 
in and help generate the food for fish to grow in Laguna 
de Bay. That was also presented to us in testimony 
although we ourselves are not the people who would say 
what should be done with the structures. We believe 
that this was one of the considerations when we decided 
to draft the Article emphasizing the communal use 
which would also be a mandate to the government to 
make sure that the fishing potential of the area is not 
hurt by artificial structures. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I inform the body that due 
to our continuous representation in the Laguna Lake 
Development Authority, the gate to the control struc- 
ture has been opened and after six months Laguna de 
Bay became alive again. And so, we asked for the total 
dismantling of the Napindan Control Structure. Has the 
Committee taken that into consideration? 

MS. NIEVA. I am afraid, Commissioner de Castro, 
that we were not really concerned with such matters as 
with actually providing protection to the marginal 
fishermen. I think we were not really going into the 
technical aspects of our studies. 


MS. NIEVA. Precisely, our intent was to protect the 
preferential right of these marginal fishermen. 

SR. TAN. But if we say “communal,” does it mean 
protection? 

MS. NIEVA. For the communities that live there. 

SR. TAN. Preferential for the community? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

SR. TAN. Is it enough to protect them from the 
sharks — from the big fishermen? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. I think this 
was part of the clarification made by Commissioner 
Davide that the right being sought to be protected is 
also the right to exclude the big fishennen from taking 
over completely the areas to the detriment of those who 
rely on it for their livelihood. While we are saying that it 
is not exclusive for such fishermen, the State has the 
duty to exclude the big fishermen who deprive them of 
their livelihood. 

SR. TAN. Thank you very much. 


MR. DE CASTRO. If we are concerned about the 
preferential rights and the livelihood of 10,000 families 
around Laguna de Bay, then we should look into the 
reason why Laguna Bay is dying. And so, I will request 
the Committee to make appropriate representation in 
order that the Napindan Control Structure be de- 
molished so that the fishermen whom we are protecting 
be given their proper livelihood. 

Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we are grateful for 
the manifestation of Commissioner de Castro and the 


. paiagay ko po, 

kasama ang laot, dahtl ang nakalagay dito ay “both 
inland and offshore. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
£ed. 


’ DAVIDE. May I just comment on the clarifica- 
tion earlier made by Commissioner Natividad that we 
should retain the “communal” provision. I fear that it 
we have to put in said provision, there might be a possi- 


710 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


bility that Congress will define a certain area in off- 
shore or inshore marine resource — fishing resources — 
as noncommunal. So necessarily we might, in effect, 
diminish the exercise of the right because it may be 
exercised only in areas which the law may declare as 
communal. Under the proposal, without the use of the 
word “communal,” it simply means that this entire 
marine fishing resource — inland or offshore — will be 
open to the marginal fishermen for them to exercise 
preferential rights. And so, if we now place “com- 
munal,” I am afraid that Congress will have a way of 
limiting the area within these resources as communal 
and the rest may be open to big fishermen. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Nolledo be recognized for his amend- 
ment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I have a very short amendment on Section 13. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

already? NOLLED °' HaVC W ® reached Section 13 
MS. QUESADA. Not yet. 

hefhrp m°h LLE n 0 ' Section 7 wa s included in Section 5 
before, Madam President. I think this is the second time 

i , was caEed to present that amendment. It was 
already presented before. 

MR. BENGZON. We are only in Section 9. 

rr,™ w ^5 >L Jr EDO - Yes - I presented an amendment tc 
combine Sections 5 and 7. 

Thank you. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, could I just make 
a comment on the proposed amendment by substitution 
of Commissioner Davide? 


intention of the Committee which is to recognize the 
right of farmers and farm workers of cooperatives, et 
cetera, to participate in the process of planning, organiz- 
ing and management of agrarian reform? My concern is 
that, instead of giving them that right, the Commis- 
sioner is actually just giving them the right to be con- 
sulted. We know a lot of consultations are taking place, 
but what is gathered from consultations actually does 
not end up as significant in the decision-making. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, in the substitute 
proposal, the State is mandated to consult, while in 
the original proposal, it is recognition of a right. There 
is a difference in just merely recognizing a right from 
the more positive directive that they should really 
be consulted. It does not mean that these organizations 
will have to supplant the policies which Congress may 
finally decide. So, in effect, we consider the views 
of these groups in order that the legislature may be 
enlightened on the formulation of policies. So in other 
words, the proposal is stronger than just recognizing the 
right. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, the difference 
is with respect to the matter of consultation and par- 
ticipation in the planning. Under the draft proposal 
submitted by the Committee, a recognition on the 
part of the State to allow the farmers, farm workers, 
cooperatives and other independent farmers’ organiza- 
tions to participate in the planning is demanded. As the 
Commissioner proposes it, its target is the matter of 
consultation. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under the proposal, is it the intention 
of the Committee to require that representatives from 
the farmers, the farm workers, the farmers’ organiza- 
tions or associations will sit in these agencies or instru- 
mentalities of the government which would enforce or 
implement the agrarian reform program? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is the thrust of the proposal 
under Section 6, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, is the State mandated now to 
provide a seat? 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, instead of the 
State recognizing the right of farmers and farm workers, 
of cooperatives and other independent farmers’ organi- 
zations to participate in the planning, organizing, and 
management of the program, Commissioner Davide is 
proposing the word CONSULTATION - TO CONSULT. 
But we would like the Commissioner to know that in a 
study of the levels of citizens’ participation in decision- 
making, consultation is one of the lower ranks of real 
participation of the people. So, does not the Commis- 
sioner think that his proposal does not quite capture the 


MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Does this mean in any agency related 
to the formulation, planning, organizing and imple- 
mentation of the agrarian reform program? 

MR. SUAREZ. Not necessarily a formal seat, but 
participation for some ... 

MR. DAVIDE. Would that participation be the 
matter of public hearings or consultations? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, more in public hearings and con- 
sultations. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


711 


MR. DAVIDE. It is not necessarily then an allocation 
of a seat in policy-making bodies. 

MR. SUAREZ. Not a formal seat in the planning 
body, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, if that is the intention, I think the 
alternative proposal would reflect the real intention. 
Under the original proposal, it does not mandate that 
there should be seats allocated to them. 


and shall ensure adequate consultation mechanisms for such 
participation. 

This is very broad already as to cover Section 6. 

MR. GARCIA. Especially in the pursuit of the ends 
of social justice which is the thrust of all of these dif- 
ferent provisions on the different sectors. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. Probably, we could amend 
Section 20 to cover everything. 


MR. BENGZON. That is not tire idea. I think, as 
Commissioner Garcia will explain, we will have to corre- 
late Section 6 with the last section of the Article on the 
role and rights of people’s organization. 

MR. DAVIDE. Correct, because a broader interpreta- 
tion is possible on the present provision as proposed; 
that is. Section 6, together with the last particular 
section — possibly two interpretations: one, participa- 
tion in the formulation by way of public hearings or 
two, submission of position papers or a situation where 
it has become a mandate that in these agencies in charge 
of the formulation, organizing and the implementation, 
representatives must be allowed to sit as either regular 
members or as ex-officio members. 

MR. GARCIA. If I may be allowed to explain, I think 
this Article on Social Justice must be seen as a whole. 
One will notice that when we tackled the different 
sectors - farmers, workers, the indigenous communities, 
women - and the problem of health and the urban poor 
in the last section, we precisely recognized the role and 
the rights of people’s organizations: first of all, their 
right to participate, and, secondly, the State shall ensure 
adequate consultation mechanisms for such participa- 
tion. I think it is in this area of implementation of 
decisions which affect the lives of these sectors that 
they be made participants. 


MR. GARCIA. Precisely, that is the intention — for 
this to become a vehicle so that these sectors who 
normally are excluded from political decision-making 
and from economic rewards of their work will have a 
just share. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, consequently, in view of the all- 
embracing provision of the proposed Section 20, we can 
limit Section 6 with the provision regarding support to 
agriculture. 

MR. GARCIA. I think the reason it was placed here 
was that farmers, specifically, and their organizations 
want to participate in the land reform program from its 
organization up to its management. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. That would be covered by Sec- 
tion 20. 

MR. GARCIA. But more specifically, the intent of 
Section 6 is to provide for this precise program of land 
reform. Although I agree with the Gentleman that in a 
general manner, this is covered at the end, still, it does 
not in any way complicate . . . 

MR. DAVIDE. It is already covered, so if the inten- 
tion is just to . .. 


MR. DAVIDE. If that is the intention of the Commit- 
tee, tli ere is no need to state in Section 6 the right of 
farmers and farm workers because that is recognized 
already in another section. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. But, precisely, what we are trying 
to do here is to tie this up and make it specific. Sections 
19 and 20, in a sense, are the enabling mechanisms. Not 
only is it the duty of the State to provide and to facili- 
tate the rights of these people but the organizations of 
the people themselves must try to make these effective 
and real. 

MR. DAVIDE. Tli at is correct. In other words, 
Section 20 would be a general principle which will cover 
everything, to wit: 

The State shall respect the right of the people and their 
organizations to effective and reasonable participation at 
all levels of social, political and economic decision-making, 


MR. GARCIA. In fact, it zeroes in on the need of 
fanners to have this vehicle of participation. 


MR. DAVIDE So that there will be no different 
interpretations between Section 6 and Section 20, we 
should reword Section 6 to carry the intent of Section 

MR. BENGZON. I was precisely going to suggest that 
having known the intentions of the Committee and the 

Centleman^tr 66 ? SeCtl0ns 6 and 20. May we have the 
Gentleman s thoughts on this matter? Perhaps, he could 

116 wt* 3 rr |° ment and re align Section 6 and give us his 
thoughts on this. 

MR. DAVIDE. Retire for some moments, Madam 
President. I need time. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 


712 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1 986 


MR. TADEO. Kaya namin ito inilagay sa Section 6 
dahil isa itong component para sa implementation ng 
genuine agrarian reform program. Ang kailangan kasi 
dito ay participation mismo ng mga beneficiaries sa pag- 
papatupad ng programa. Kaya kailangang mapalagay 
dito iyong Section 6. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. NIEVA. May we ask one question? There is a 
provision here that says “in order to meet the basic 
needs of the people.” Would this be amply covered by 
that? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
the honorable Commissioner Villegas be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, with due respect 
to the Committee members, I would like to suggest the 
deletion of Section 9. The reason is that the very first 
section of the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony is an omnibus provision actually worked 
out by a member of this Committee, the Honorable 
uarez, stipulating that all Philippine resources will be 
used for the Filipinos, with particular emphasis on the 
welfare of the poor, and I think Section 9 is more than 
adequately covered by such a provision. The other 
reason Section 9 is really controversial is that it uses the 

Word “integrated,” especially referring 
to different sectors - agriculture, fishing and marine. 

* 301 sureman y °f u s still painfully remember, 

word ‘mtp Ce ?^ ady in the Past regime who used this 

grated and 6 r nauseam - Everything was inte- 
section we ^ tbat ^ we put * n ^ this specific 

neoDle ’ The 1 3 very ne § ative reaction from the 

mics ins t t W ° r ^ nte S ra t e d’ 5 as used in macroecono- 
So when we^nf t ® chnical i ar gon, is easy to explain, 
ment nrnmm k of an integrated national develop- 

Sctors are TtnT ^ SUre that 311 the VarioUS 
start aonlvino •+ V coordinated - But the moment we 
tadus.S ly ” t f J , - “ integrated area development. 

with a lot of 8 ve!i? t d S0 on ’ we § et bogged down 
be«er left to m nC3te problems - 1 think this is 
the Constitution. ^ atUre rather than a P rovis ion in 

So, I submit that we completely delete Section 9 
Thank you. 

tee M ^scuSd S 1 TereTware’ th^" theCommit ' 

duplication of the Article on Natir. ^ v might be a 
Patrimony. We have agreed that we wffl transposTl’t “it 
rs amply covered there, but just to tell the body ou 
mtention when we talk about integrated development 

W h M h C r mitt ! e Wa " ts ,0 ex P ress * ‘hat there 
should be a forward or backward integration so that it 

would include processing of these resources, and 

perhaps even the marketing, so that the goods may be 

made available particularly to the poor at a reasonable 

cost. And since the Gentleman made the manifestation 

that this is amply covered in the other Article, we are 

willing to have it transposed and taken out from here. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, because the wording of this 
omnibus provision says that “all the goods produced 
in the Philippines should be produced for the benefit of 
the Filipino people with priority to the welfare of the 
poor.” And then it goes on by talking about “all sectors 
being developed without priority to anyone.” In fact, 
the members of the Committee on the National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony will remember that some people 
objected to singling out agriculture, industry and 
services because there are so many sectors. We just 
made an omnibus statement that all sectors, without 
any bias, will be developed, whether forward, backward 
or sideward. So, that is more than covered in this 
provision. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
the honorable Commissioner Rosario Braid be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, may I 
comment on Section 8, regarding fishermen, wherein 
Commissioner Davide has suggested the adjective “mar- 
ginalized” to describe them. Several studies have shown 
that the small-scale traditional fishermen are often 
classified as “municipal” fishermen. They are fishermen 
using vessels three tons or less with gears that do not 
require beats and who work in marine and inland 
waters. Forty percent of them own the boats they use 
in fishing. The category of “municipal” fishermen is 
acceptable in some studies. 

I have earlier proposed also to transfer Sections 7 
and 9 to the Article on National Economy and Patri- 
mony. But should we retain Section 9 in this Article, 

I would suggest that we include the concepts of alter- 
native community approaches in the development of 
agricultural small- and medium-scale industries. 

Some of the concepts that I would like to submit 
to the Committee include approaches such as communal 
farms, cooperatives, nucleus states, etc. 

The other comment that I would like to make is on 
Section 5 where I would substitute the word “genuine” 
with COMPREHENSIVE. This concept is used to 
describe land reform which seeks to expand areas 
beyond rice and com. 

In Section 1, on social justice, I hope the Committee 
would consider my proposal which seeks to incorporate 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


713 


the concept of equitable sharing of the fruits and means 
of production and power, as well as the concept of 
“achieving a balanced social order.” In the latter phrase, 
I would like to suggest the concept of placing primacy 
on “need” and then working towards the distribution of 
resources in order that society becomes a habitat 
worthy of the dignity of man. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I ask a question of 
the Committee now that Section 9 is eliminated, or is it 
merely transposed? 

MR. MONSOD. It would be transferred to the Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony because they have 
a similar provision. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

I hesitated to propose this amendment before for fear 
that this section, I mean, the sections under “Aquatic 
Resources Reform,” might become bloated. But now 
that Section 9 is transposed, can we address more direct- 
ly and specifically these urgent concerns that were 
expressed by the fishennen in the hearings of some 
of our committees, both here and in the provinces, 
so that there will be another section to replace Section 
9 and it will simply read: THE STATE SHALL PRO- 
TFCT MUNICIPAL FISHING GROUNDS FROM 
INTRUSIONS EITHER BY MAJOR TRAWLERS OR 


FOREIGN FISHING VESSELS? 

Commissioner Monsod had earlier stressed the fears 
and grievances of the small fishermen, especially from 
the Manila Bay area and the Laguna Lake. It will be 
remembered that even the commercial treaty between 
the Philippines and Japan was frequently cited as a 
threat to the rights of the small fishermen. 


And when we speak of municipal fishing grounds, we 
really refer to what otherwise would have been called 
communal fishing grounds. These are the relatively small 
coastal areas where poor fishermen - and there are 
600,000 of them according to the census — eke out 
their living day to day, when the weather permits. And 
yet we know that off Zambales - I was there sometime 
ago’ - and in Iba, the fishermen were complaining about 
Japanese and Taiwanese poachers just two or three kilo- 
meters off the coast. And these fishing fleets are so 
powerful, so unscrupulous and so insensitive to national 
feelings that they are said to ram the small fishing boats 
of the municipal fishermen off Zambales. 

I think this is not confined to Zambales, meaning, 
that these poachers from Japan, Taiwan and Korea 
routinely oppress our own small fishermen in tlieii own 
municipal fishing grounds. 


And so, if the Committee will be open to an amend- 
ment, specifically addressing these concerns raised by 
the small fishermen, I would like to formulate this in a 
more precise form to be submitted to the Committee. 


And before we leave the subject, may I call the 
attention of the Committee to the fact that about 
200,000 families along the Manila Bay coast — and this 
extends all the way from Zambales up to Cavite and 
portions of Batangas — may lose their livelihood entirely 
in just a matter of years because the Manila Bay is being 
drained of marine life, mainly because of the activities 
of the big trawlers that day taday bring up the catch 
from the seabed, including the genns of life, the fry, the 
spawners and the offspring. That is the reason the 
Bureau of Fisheries has proposed a sanctuary off Bula- 
can and Pampanga just to make sure that marine life will 
not ultimately disappear in the Manila Bay area. 

And so, I also would like to address this problem of 
the depletion of the means of livelihood of our people 
in areas, like the Manila Bay and Laguna Lake, through 
a more specific amendment. If the Committee cares, 
these amendments will be precisely framed for its kind 
consideration. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, in the previous 
interpellations, I think it was made explicit that the 
situations and the concerns that the Gentleman has 
expressed were covered by Section 8. However, we 
would still be happy to look at some of the additions or 
modifications he may want to propose. For example, 
when we talk about the use of marine and fishing 
resources, both inland and offshore, maybe we can put 
the phrase PARTICULARLY MUNICIPAL FISHING 
GROUNDS or something like this. 

But it is our interpretation that we are covering 
already the concerns which the Gentleman has men- 
tioned in this Article. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

I was referring to the elimination of one section from 
the subject “Aquatic Resources Reform.” It is true that 
under Section 8, we are trying to accommodate the 
protection of small fishermen, but it was in a manner 
that they would fail to appreciate it unless a new section 
is added that will address the concerns that they urgent- 
ly expressed in our public hearings, so that by appreciat- 
ing this concern of the Constitutional Commission — 
there are 600,000 of them times five members of their 
household — quite a load of votes may be earned in 
favor of the ratification of this Constitution I was 
wondering whether tire Committee will take that into 
account when I present the more specific amendments. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
the honorable Commissioner Romulo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 


714 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I have some minor amendments on Section 10, line 
19. I would suggest that we delete the word “ensure” 
and in lieu thereof insert the word MAKE. On line 20, 
between “housing” and “at,” insert the word AVAIL- 
ABLE. And on line 21, put a period (.) after “areas” 
and delete the rest of the sentence. 

The amendments for lines 19 and 20 are obvious. I 
feel that to say “ensure” is a very brave thing. One can 
never ensure but he can make available decent housing 
at an affordable cost. Probably, that is realizable. 

The reason I suggest the deletion of the phrase 
“together with complementary infrastructure . . .” is 
that this should be left to Congress, otherwise, we may 
have the unintended result that if Congress cannot 
provide anyone of the enumerated qualifications, they 
will not go into basic housing at all. For example, if 
they can provide for infrastructure but not employ- 
ment-generating economic activity, is it then the sense 
of the Committee that they should not go into decent 
housing available at affordable prices? 

MS. NIEVA. In this specific provision, we took into 
consideration the sad experiences brought about by 
relocation where they would transfer thousands of low- 
income urban poor dwellers to the different relocation 
centers only to get them all back because there are no 

emp oyment opportunities in the areas where they were 
sent. 

MR. ROMULO. I realize that problem and I do not 
eny it. But what I want the Committee to consider is 
iat we may be unintentionally limiting Congress. 


Let me complete my suggested amendments. On line 
21, put a period (.) after “relocated” and delete the rest 
of the sentence. This is with the thought that, again, this 
could probably be worked out together with the Com- 
mittee’s program, rather than deciding at this point 
exactly how, when and where the urban dwellers are to 
participate in this kind of a program. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, when we talk of 
urban poor dwellers, let me just tell the Gentleman 
what we are trying to address ourselves to and maybe 
he can help us with the wording. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, certainly. 

MR. MONSOD. We realize that there are urban poor 
dwellers who may have a valid claim, but as what Com- 
missioner Tan has mentioned yesterday, for some 
reason or another, they encounter red tape and all 
kinds of impediment that they cannot get titles to their 
land. In that case, it is quite clear that there is already 
an existing valid claim and, therefore, they have a right 
to receive title because they have been there for some- 
time. But there is another kind of urban poor dweller 
whom people would call squatters, and under the law, 
they may even be considered a nuisance per se. And we 
want to address ourselves as well to this problem, that 
even when there is no apparent legal claim or right 
these urban poor dwellers should be dealt with in a 
humane manner. In effect, we have two types of urban 
poor dwellers here — those who may have a valid claim 
and those who may have no claim at all. One is subject 
to due process and the other, perhaps, to a just and 
humane manner of relocation. 


MR MONSOD. Would the Gentleman say that wh 

I ^ b T urban land re f°rm and housing prograi 
rerni program” would necessarily include 

available P ° SSible and the resourc 

tine ! Vf T 6 3n mtegrated a PProach to the s< 
ting up of a decent housing? Would that be encoi 

Program”? Phr3Se “ UrbaJ1 Land Reform and Hou ^ 


fr R0MUL0 ‘ YeS ’ 1 think SO> In f3Ct ’ it is Und 
od from even recent developments in this field tl 

w len we say urban land reform and housing progra 
these are terms of art which include the business 
infrastructure, neighborhood services, etc. Anyw; 

I am presenting this for the consideration of the Co 
mittee. 


On Section 1 1 , line 24, I am now thinking of Com- 
missioner Tan s distinction with regard to the urban 
poor dwellers which she described the other day. And I 
wonder if the following qualifying phrase may be help- 
ful. Between “dwellers” and “shall,” insert WITH 
LEGALLY VALID CLAIMS. I am not saying “title”; I 
am saying CLAIMS. So, that distinguishes them from 
outright squatters. 




W. X '-'O, 




two concepts because they are probably incompatible. 

, ^ oldd the Gentleman consider some- 

thing like this: EVICTION AND RELOCATION OF 

™ R °? R DWELLERS SHALL BE MADE IN A 
T AND HUMANE MANNER, and here we include 
rural communities. There are rural communities that 
have to be evicted and relocated also. Can we provide 
for something like that? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, even violators and criminals are 
entitled to humane treatment. 


M . NIEVA. Yes, but because of the many sad 
experiences that we had with forced eviction and reloca- 
tion where even the military was brought in . . . 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, these are the outright squatters. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. I think even they would have to be 
evicted and relocated in a just and humane manner. 

MR. ROMULO. Let me then come back to the Com- 
mittee with a possible wording. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


715 


MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. Section 12 is merely a compression. 

I think the term “agrarian reform program” has a mean- 
ing already because that was defined in a prior section. 
So, I would say that on line 2, delete “a comprehensive” 
and on line 3, delete “and development,” so that the 
line will read “in the context of THE agrarian reform 
program.” That is all. 

Thank you. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Tan be recognized for one clarificatory 
question on urban poor dwellers. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. Madam President, it is about the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Romulo to insert “WITH 
LEGALLY VALID CLAIMS” on Section 11. I believe 
that it is the basic right of every person to be entitled 
to due process of law, so that my differentiation yester- 
day about the two kinds of urban poor dweller does 
not apply here. I support the Committee; I think it 
would apply more to Section 10. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I be 
allowed to make one comment. With respect to Section 

I I I think we should not make distinctions on whether 
one is an urban poor dweller with legally valid claim and 
an urban poor dweller with no legally valid claim. I 
request that we maintain the same provision because 
both types of dweller are entitled to due process of 

law. 

I have reservations with the comment of one of the 
members of the Committee that if one is an urban poor 
dweller with no legal valid claim, he should be evicted 
but do it in a humane or compassionate manner. I think 
that is not our concept of the rule of law. Whether one 
is an urban poor dweller with or without legal valid 
claim, still he should be respected; he should be given 
the due process of law. So, I humbly request that we 
maintain the same provision of Section 11, without 
amendments. 

I have another comment on the amendment of the 
honorable Commissioner Romulo about the exclusion 
of lines 21 to 23. With that amendment by exclusion, 
may I suggest that on line 20, we add after housing, 
the words AND SERVICES. Therefore, the lines will 
read: “decent housing AND SERVICES at afforda- 
ble cost to deserving low-income citizens . . . Will that 
be acceptable? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I accept that. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you very much. 


May I ask, Madam President, that Commissioner 
Padilla be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I am referring to 
Section 10, particularly line 19, on the mention of 
Urban Land Reform and Housing Program. If the inten- 
tion is to refer to the urban land reform decree issued 
by the past regime under P.D. No. 1517, may I suggest 
that the words “Land Reform and” be eliminated and 
instead “Urban Housing Program” be substituted be- 
cause we will be constitutionalizing the decree issued by 
the past regime under Amendment No. 6.1 mentioned 
the other day that even President Marcos did not imple- 
ment his own decree. There were subsequent PDs de- 
claring Metro Manila an urban land reform area, but 
these were again modified to limit it to a hundred or so 
of the so-called depressed areas. If we retain this urban 
land reform, then we not only assume the validity of 
P.D. No. 1517 which, in my opinion, is illegal and un- 
constitutional, but we are even constitutionalizing it. 
Why should this 1986 Constitution make the presiden- 
tial decrees of President Marcos during the martial law 
regime a constitutional provision, or at least, giving it a 
constitutional recognition which may even prevent the 
Congress to pass the necessary legislation to modify or 
even repeal said P.D. No. 1517? 

I hope that the members of the Committee will 
consider the deletion of the line and if not, at least 
the words “Land Reform and,” so that it may remain 
as “Urban Housing Program.” 

MR. BENGZON. We will consider it. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. PADILLA. With regard to Section 1 1, I do not 
understand why we have to distinguish between dwellers 
with a claim and dwellers without a claim. There was a 
question propounded by Commissioner Davide on 
whether there is no intention to repeal or amend the 
provisions on lease so we will have a contractual lessee. 
But there are also circumstances where there is forcible 
entry, unlawful detainer or some squatters do not have 
any color of right whatsoever and these are all governed 
by Rule 70 of the Rules of Court. As stated before, 
there is an article in the Revised Penal Code on all other 
forms of trespass. There is P.D. No. 772, 1 believe, which 
penalizes squatting and another presidential decree 
which penalizes squatting on public agricultural lands. 
There should be no order of ejectment or eviction unless 
there is an action in court and a judgment or a decision 
has been rendered. An eviction or an order of execution 
follows a judgment. 

All these are governed by ordinary existing laws ol 
the Revised Penal Code and the Rules of Court. Why 
are we going to put in the Constitution certain provi- 


716 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1 986 


sions that may render nugatory or even have the effect 
of repeal of these existing provisions of law? I suggest 
that Section 1 1 be eliminated. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much. Madam 
President. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me, before we proceed 
further, we will suspend the session for a few minutes. 
It was 4:43 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 5:23 p.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

May we request the honorable Chairman and mem- 
bers of the Committee on Social Justice to please come 
forward. 

How many speakers do we still have. Commissioner 
Sarmiento? 


m SARMIENTO. We have about eight speakei 
more, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Who will be the first? 

, SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
16 onorable Commissioner Villegas be recognized for 

one clarificatory remark. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 


MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President the remarks 

ph“S Pa H dffla l ed me *° -confer scme of tl 
bXrounTrou" srn^of 1 V n „ d ‘ et me just 8ive 

this countrv fw / „ y ° f the housm 8 problem 
basically a^urhln ° f S’ We found out that housing 

any"wta“' y PeopS' Wo£‘ V' ^ de ™' 
upper middle-income S« can b! 

at the present cost. 1U lo 01 

The second category is called economic housing Th 
,s housing that is affordable only ifthern are some sub! 

II! ' A?!' 3 of intere st to the buyers. S 
what the SSS, the GSIS and the other financial institi 

tions have been doing over the years was to address tl 
programs to the so-called economic housing sector. 

The remaiks of Commissioner Padilla reminded n 
that, really, what we are tiying to address in this specif 


section of the Article is what is known in technical par- 
lance as social housing — a type of housing that can be 
made available to low-income families only, almost as a 
dole out; that one cannot really expect these low- 
income families to afford paying for these houses no 
matter how low the cost may be. That is why, his- 
torically, people have realized that when they talk about 
low-cost housing, they really mean no-cost housing, 
because the low-income families who are earning P2,000 
a month, for example, can never afford even the lowest 
cost of housing that is made available. And so, after the 
remarks of Commissioner Padilla, I was thinking that we 
delete the words “Urban Land Reform” and instead, 
this line should read: “a continuing SOCIAL HOUSING 
PROGRAM THAT WILL MAKE DECENT HOUSING 
AVAILABLE”; and delete “at affordable cost.” It is 
very clear that we can never make social housing affor- 
dable to low-income families. So, it is an actual recogni- 
tion that the State will have to make units available 
either through rentals or through actual doleouts to 
deserving low-income families. I think this is really the 
intent of this specific section. We are not talking here of 
economic housing because this can be addressed by the 
appropriate policies of the SSS, the GSIS and, if we will 
remember, even the DBP was very much involved with 
some actual subsidy being given by government finan- 
cial institutions, which I do not think we are really 
concerned with. 

So, that would be my remark on Section 10. 

MR. MONSOD. May we just respond a bit? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We would like to be enlightened. 

MR. MONSOD. We were aware that social housing 
was necessary for a certain segment of the population. 
What we wanted to avoid was a provision that constitu- 
tionalized a doleout. That is why we put “affordable 
cost.” But it does not mean that the total cost of tire 
housing will not need State subsidy. We just wanted to 
state tli at whatever can be afforded by the recipients 
should be paid. If that is not sufficient to cover the real 
cost of the housing, then that is when the State comes 
in. I guess this is parallel to our ideas on agrarian reform 
where again we have that idea that if the fanner cannot 
afford it, then the State has to step in in order to make 
up the difference between the actual cost and the 
affordable cost. 

With respect to line 19, the intent of the Committee 
is to cover more than mere housing. We think that 
Commissioner Padilla’s comments on the identification 
with Mr. Marcos’ program of urban land reform can be 
avoided if we use something else, maybe a land-use 
program or land-use and housing program. These are 
some of the terminologies we are considering. But we 
take the comment that it should not refer or it should 
not appear to refer or be identical with Mr. Marcos’ 
urban land refonn program but the coverage is certainly 
more than just pure housing. It includes a land-use plan. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


717 


MS. NIEVA. In this connection, we would like to 
state that we are not limiting this idea to strictly ready- 
made housing but also to the development of sites and 
services. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Infrastructure, Madam President, 
before the word “services.” 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, because, I think, the new trend of 
just providing sites and services and encouraging tire 
urban poor dwellers to build their own homes as they 
increase their incomes, adding another room as they go 
along, has been found to be effective in giving shelter 
to those who otherwise could never have afforded 
shelter. I think there have been quite a number of 
studies on this, and they have identified the cost of 
developing some 85,000 new sites and services each year 
in all urban centers. So, I think tire Gentleman is not 
only speaking of complete housing perse but improving 
the sites and services and developing them. 

MR. VILLEGAS. These are actually enumerated on 
lines 21 to 23. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. As regards Section 12, 1 mentioned 
the findings from studies on the housing problem-, 
namely, that there is no real housing problem in the 
rural areas and people in rural areas are very flexible in 
adopting to their appropriate housing conditions. That 
is why I questioned the need for Section 12, unless 
there is a specific aspect of the agrarian reform program 
that we want to specify. But I think that is better left 
to future legislations on agrarian reform. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Foz be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, in connection with what 
has been discussed about socialized housing for the 
urban poor, I wonder if the Committee has come across 
a particular report submitted by a task force on reor- 
ganization which is assigned to the Ministry of Human 
Settlements, headed by Mr. Horacio Morales, regarding 
its findings on housing for the urban poor. Anyway, 
the findings of that task force headed by Mr. Morales 
are, among others: First, they have gone into some 
computations and, in consultation with the representa- 
tives of the urban poor in Metro Manila, they have come 
up with a specific cost of a small lot for an urban poor 
family. They have come up with a figure of a little over 
P8,000 for a lot. And according to the urban poor rep- 
resentatives, they can afford an P8,000 lot and all that 
they are asking is to be given this lot which they are 
willing to pay on an installment basis and they are 
going to build the house by themselves according, of 


course, to certain specified standards to be supplied by 
the government. So, it is not going to be a give-away 
thing. Tie urban poor are willing to be given the lots at 
a very low cost; not only lots, of course, but tire place 
should be provided with water and electricity, and the 
cost estimated is a little over P8,000. According to 
them, all they want, after being assigned a lot, is to have 
security from demolition. That is all they are asking for. 

Tiank you, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we just make 
a short comment. We appreciate the studies that have 
been made on that subject, but we would like to be 
careful not to give the impression that there is abso- 
lutely no need for a subsidy. I think we have to face 
that reality rather squarely, that in many cases, maybe 
in most cases, there might be a need for a subsidy. And 
to assume that there is no need for a subsidy might 
foreclose a housing program for the urban poor. 

MR. FOZ. May I add, Madam President, that another 
finding of the task force is that about 75 percent of the 
squatters in Metro Manila are renting their squatter huts 
from other people, in other words, from the profes- 
sional squatters; and only the 25 percent of the squat- 
ters are themselves the real squatters; 75 percent are 
paying from P100 to PI 50 per month to professional 
squatters. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask the 
Commissioners to be brief with their answers, inter- 
pellations, questions or amendments to give time to the 
Committee to deliberate on the proposed amendments. 

I think we have to end early to give them more time. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is next? 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask, Madam President, that 
Commissioner Maambong be recognized for his brief 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. This is really very brief, Madam 
President. I was made to understand in my interpella- 
tion a day or so ago that while tire Committee is adopt- 
ing the principles of the urban land refoim of the 
previous administration, it has been properly explained 
that they are not equating this with the previous urban 
land reform decrees like P.D. Nos. 1517 and 1893. 
However, I notice that in Section 1 0, line 1 1 , when the 
Committee used the words “Urban Land Reform and 
Housing,” the Committee capitalized the first letters of 
the words “urban,” “land,” “reform ” and “housing.” 
This to me indicates a specific urban land reform pro- 
gram. And tlie only land reform program that I could 


718 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1 986 


think of is the urban land reform and housing program 
of the previous administration. 

And so, my very short amendment is not to capitalize 
these words because it will indicate that these refer to 
the urban land reform and housing program of the 
previous administration. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President, we appre- 
ciate it. 

MR. MAAMBONG. On this score, I just might add 
that this urban land reform program, as far as my inter- 
pretation is concerned and as far as the City of Manila 
is concerned, did not really start with the previous 
administration. I have with me the excerpt of RA 1 162. 

MR. BENGZON. We have that mateidal, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. And this Act provides for 
the expropriation of landed estates or haciendas or lands 
which form part thereof in the City of Manila, their 
subdivision into small lots and the sale of such lots at 
cost or their lease on reasonable terms or for other pur- 
poses. This indicates that even before the previous 
administration, there was already an urban land reform 
program. Is that the unde istan ding also of the Commit- 

e ?’ as ^ ar 38 the City of Manila is concerned, the 
ur an and reform program did not really start with the 

previous administration, but it started way back with 
KA I 162? 


MS. NIEVA. Yes. We have all those documents. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you very much. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask, Madam President, th 
Commissioner Regalado be recognized for a very she 
amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT, 
nized. 


Commissioner Regalado is recog- 


MR. REGALADO. It will be very short and sweet. 

Madam President, I notice here that under Section 
10, in relation to Section 12, there is a distinction 
between the urban poor and the rural poor. It would 
appear that in the case of the urban poor, not only will 
they be afforded lots but they will also be given low- 
cost housing at affordable cost and possibly with 
governmental subsidy. Whereas in the case of Section 
12, the rural poor, since they are supposed to be ap- 
pended to in the context of agrarian reform program, 
they may possibly just be, at the most, entitled to a 
home lot as envisaged in RA 3844. 


We have been talking about urban poor and rural 
poor, and the Supreme Court itself has admitted that 
there is a little difficulty in determining whether it is an 
urban area or a rural area. Right in the Metropolitan 
Manila area, there are still many areas which are planted 
to rice and the same thing in the provinces. 

So, to be brief about it and possibly to nelp the 
Committee, I will furnish them a copy of that decision 
of the Supreme Court in the case of Fabia vs. Inter- 
mediate Appellate Court, November 21,1 984, so that in 
their preparation of their report, they may take into 
account how the Supreme Court considered the dis- 
tinction between urban and rural areas. 

Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Nolledo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. For a short amendment, Madam 
President. After the word “disabled” on line 1 1, page 4, 
add the following: THE STATE SHALL PROVIDE 
FREE MEDICAL CARE TO PAUPERS. 

I will explain for one minute only. Madam President. 
This is a provision that implements the role of the State 
as parens patriae . . I do not like to accept the argument 
that the State has no funds. I think that where there is a 
will, there is a way. If we have money for junkets, the 
government can create funds from various sources, like 
special levies, residence taxes and postage stamps. 
Paupers have acquired an established meaning in juris- 
prudence, Madam President. They are basically those 
who have no source of livelihood, and even if they have 
sources of livelihood, they are living on a hand-to-mouth 
existence. Because of the economic turmoil which was 
brought about by the repressive and corrupt Marcos 
regime, the number of paupers has increased con- 
siderably. While many of them have developed re- 
sistance to disease because of antibodies developed by 
poverty, when disease strikes, they depend on the 
charity of others, and when that charity is inadequate, 
they simply die. 

So, I hope the members of the Committee will 
consider favorably my recommended provision. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you, we shall do so. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Davide be recognized, this time for his 
short amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


719 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

I have several amendments on Sections 13, 14 and 
15, but these are just realignments to clarify the provi- 
sion. I am more interested in two new sections. One 
would be on minors and it is similar to the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento. The Commit- 
tee may take them together. It shall read: THE STATE 
SHALL PROVIDE A SPECIAL PROTECTION TO 
MINORS ESPECIALLY WORKING MINORS AND 
SHALL PROHIBIT THEIR EXPLOITATION AND 
ENSURE THEIR FULL DEVELOPMENT. 

The other will be on social security, and this is now 
on page 5 of my submitted document. It reads: THE 
STATE SHALL PROVIDE ADEQUATE SOCIAL 
SECURITY SERVICES, RELIEF FROM UNEMPLOY- 
MENT SUCH AS UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE, 
AND OTHER SOCIAL WELFARE SERVICES FOR 
THE OLD. 

There is a proposal by Commissioner Guingona to 
add after “OLD ” the words THE AGED AND THE 
SICK OR DISABLED. 

All the others, I leave to the Committee to con- 
sider. 


MR SARMIENTO. Madam President, since Commis- 
• er Davide mentioned his proposed amendment, may 
^? n . briefly read the proposed amendment introduced 
u JU rvimmissioners Villacorta, Quesada and myself. It 
hy .„ CHILDREN SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT TO 

PROPER CARE, NUTRITION, A RELEVANT AND 
P t at ITY EDUCATION AS WELL AS PROTECTION 
ALL forms OF NEGLECT, CRUELTY AND 
F niTATION PARTICULARLY IN EMPLOYMENT 
E omPIJL TO THEIR PHYSICAL, MENTAL OR 
moral well-being. 

distributed copies of this proposed amendment to 
m bers of the Committee for their proper con- 
the me believe that this is one sector that should 

t de p ”en”pe^ care and at'enEon. 

NIEVA. Yes, and we shall try to reconcile this 
• ^ the Declaration of Principles on family rights, the 
youth and children. There are two others. 

MR SARMIENTO. Thank you, Madam President. 

j as j C) Madam President, that Commissioner 
Natividad be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 


a danger to physical health but to mental health also, 
especially of the youth. 

Therefore, after the end of the sentence in Section 
14, I am proposing an additional sentence to read: A 
PROGRAM FOR THE PREVENTION OF DRUG 
ABUSE SHALL BE UNDERTAKEN BY THE STATE. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, may I ask Com- 
missioner Natividad a few questions? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Gladly. 

MS. QUESADA. Of course, the Gentleman is aware 
that there is an existing drug abuse prevention program 
under the jurisdiction of the Dangerous Drugs Board. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, Madam President, I hap- 
pened to be the author of the Dangerous Drugs Act. 
But what I mean here is for the State to emphasize this 
campaign and not to let up in this campaign because 
the problem is not being solved. 

The treatment approach, as well as the approach 
being undertaken now, seems not to reduce the incidence 
of drug addiction. In one instance alone, on the addic- 
tion to marijuana, it seems that the mental health of the 
youth is being affected. The latest findings on marijuana 
show that the brain is the one being affected. I am a 
witness to many young people who are now in Bicutan 
and other treatment centers, whose brain damages are 
serious because of drug addiction. And, therefore, 
because of this unabated drug situation, it is important 
to emphasize this area of public service and, if possible, 
expand the services against drug addiction. I think no 
student in this country would say that the drug addic- 
tion problem in this country has been solved already. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you. 

MS. QUESADA. Does the Gentleman not think that 
ordinary legislation would be able to strengthen the 
existing drug abuse prevention program? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. As a matter of fact, yes, I am 
the author of the law. What I mean is a mandate from the 
Constitution, not only for the legislature to update our 
laws but also to inspire cooperation in a program of this 
nature because this problem saps the vitality of the 
nation. A constitutional mandate would help focus the 
State s attention to a very serious malady in our society 
affecting the old and the youth alike. 


MR NATIVIDAD. Thank you, Madam President. 

Even without being reminded, I will make it very 
brief This is in connection with Section 14, page 4. I 
have drawn a remark from Commissioner Quesada that 
she also considers it a concern of the State to take care 
qP -jhc problems on drug abuse because this is not only 


MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you. 

We will take it up in the Committee. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 


720 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1 986 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Romulo be recognized. 


“promote appropriate health, manpower development 
and research.” 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. ROMULO. I only have a few perfecting amend- 
ments, so I will take it up with the Committee after we 
adjourn so as not to delay anyone. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Rosario Braid be recognized for her 
integrated amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you, Madam President 
This is on Section 14. I propose to insert a phrase on 
13 ’ after “ shaU >” to read: “The State shall 
“TE THE UTILIZATION OF INDIGENOUS 
F ? C l DS f AND HEALTH PERSONNEL.” This is in view 

hlrhZ faCt l ha V We would Uke to Promote the use of 
If radltlonal midwives and traditional foods. 

Section acc !r ptable > we could integrate this with 

maintain an • t S ^ 311 d and ^ read “establish and 
AND NIJTRTTTnM t nl> and com P re hensive health care 
MO?F^mfrTA ( ^ PROGRAM THAT SHALL PRO- 

health personnel 0 ” indigenous foods and 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I would like to 
? if° me u commei rts on the proposed amendment. 
a1readv y ’<- W ei \, We talk about nutrition program, that is 
TlStlLne V nf re th m a comprehensiv e health program, 
nrovide to th the + essential servic es that the State should 
, e C1 hzens. The concept of a comprehensive 

health program ako includes the concepts of utilization 
of indigenous foods and the inculcation of scientific 

h 6a ]th Practices - Tbls would also include the primary 
health care approach which is based on the principles £f 
appropriate health care technology, peopled par tic pa- 
tion intersectoral linkages and a stress on the educa- 
ttonal component of health program. So, we would like 
the proponent to know that these are actually covered 
and we will be gomg into the details if we mention just 
a few of these components, such as indigenous foods 
and health practices. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, my question 
will require a veiy brief answer from Commissioner 
Quesada. May I know the meaning of these words: 


MS. QUESADA. When we talk about “appropriate 
health, manpower development,” we refer to a national, 
relevant and responsive health manpower. “Develop- 
ment” refers to how they are trained and how they are 
utilized so that they are responsive to the health care 
needs of the country, instead of serving the other needs 
of other developed countries. This would mean, among 
others, the teaching of more prevention, instead of cure, 
more community-based rather than of hospital orienta- 
tion and more service rather than profits which should 
be the undergirding principle of health professions. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, with the brief 
answers and brief amendments, I move that we adjourn 
until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, before we adjourn, 
I would just like to put on record that I would like to 
submit a more comprehensive presentation of this 
health provision so that it will be entered into the 
Journal, because we did not have time to really explain 
just what are the concepts and underlying principles of 
these health provisions. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I can save my question which is a very 
nef one until tomorrow, if it is the desire of the body 
to adjourn now, provided I will be allowed to ask a 
question of the Committee, especially Commissioner 
Quesada. 

THE PRESIDENT. Why do we not have the question 
now so that the Committee can go over whatever the 
question is? 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, with the in- 
dulgence of the Acting Floor Leader. 

We are talking about the promotion of health man- 
power. Is that correct? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. I have in mind some data that I have 
s ored in my head as a matter of professional duty 
un .* recently. It seems that, precisely, because of the 
rapid development of our health manpower, we now 
have about 12,000 unemployed nurses in the Philip- 
pines. Is that correct? 

MS. QUESADA. I think there are more than 12,000 
unemployed nurses. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986 


721 


MR. OPLE. Anyway, this is the officially recorded 
figure. And our nursing schools every year graduate 
about 6,000 nurses, most of whom would compete not 
for jobs at home but for opportunities to work in the 
Middle East, the United States and Europe. Would that 
be correct? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. And at one time, this has impelled the 
Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Labor and Employ- 
ment and the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports 
to consider closing some of these nursing schools 
because of the sheer glut of graduates that they produce 
for jobs that do not exist in the Philippines. Would that 
be correct? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. And, therefore, when we speak of health 
manpower development, the sponsor is not thinking of 
increasing the number of nursing schools and aggravat- 
ing the existing glut in the labor market for nurses. 

MS. QUESADA. We are thinking of rationalizing 
health manpower development. 

MR- OPLE. I am glad to hear that. 

Moreover, Commissioner Quesada is aware that there 
is an urgent demand for nursing manpower in most of 
the rural health units of our country, and most of them 
do not want to go there. They want to congregate in the 
urban areas waiting for opportunities to work here, but 
also" and this is more important, to scout for opportuni- 
ties to go abroad. Is that not correct? 


MS. QUESADA. Yes, that is so. 

MR. OPLE. And so, the contemplation of health 
manpower development is really to rationalize this 
disturbing situation and to shift the emphasis, perhaps, 
from quantity to quality. 

MS. QUESADA. That is right. And this includes the 
reorientation of the training or the education of our 
health professionals. 

MR. OPLE. So that maybe the Committee will allow 

me in due time to present a minor amendment that will 
reflect this concern for quality. * 

MS. QUESADA. We would welcome that. Madam 
President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Madam President. 

MS. NIEVA. May we now ask the members of the 
Committee on Social Justice to remain behind to put 
these amendments into shape. We will meet at the South 
Lounge. 

Til an k you. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I reiterate 
my motion for adjournment? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 5:57 p.m. 

























' 






imp 1 

» ; ^ 




■ 
























WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


723 


R.C.C. NO. 49 
Wednesday, August 6, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:41 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, called the session to order. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 
NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Joaquin G. Bemas. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

FR. BERNAS. “Hesus na aking kapatid, sa lupa 
nami’y bumalik: 

Iyong mukha’y ibang-iba, hindi kita nakikilala. 
Tulutan Mong aking mata mamulat sa katotohanan: 
Ikaw, Poon, makikilala sa taong mapagkumbaba. 

Hesus na aking kapatid, putikan man ang Iyong sapin, 
Punit-punit ang Iyong damit, nawa Ika’y mapasaakin. 

Ikaw Hesus na aking kapatid, sa bukid Ka nagtatanim, 
O sa palengke rin naman, Ikaw ay naghahanapbuhay.” 

“Walang sinuman ang nabubuhay para sa sarili lamang; 
Walang sinuman ang namamatay para sa sarili lamang. 

Tayong lahat ay may pananagutan sa isa’t isa. 

Tayong lahat ay tinipon ng Diyos na kapiling Niya. 

Sa a ting pagmafnahalan at paglilingkod sa kanino man, 
Tayo ay nagdadala ng balita ng kaligtasan.” 

“Hesus na aking kapatid, tulutan Mong aking mata 
mamulat sa katotohanan: 

Ikaw, Poon, makikilala sa taong mapagkumbaba.’ 
Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present 

Alonto 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Aquino ...... 


Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Ople 


Bacani 


Padilla 

. . Present 

Bengzon 


Quesada .... 


Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Brocka 


Rigos 


Calderon 


Rodrigo .... 


Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 


Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales 


Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 


Davide 

. Present 

Suarez 


Foz 

. Present 

Sumulong . . . 


Garcia 


Tadeo 


Gascon 


Tan 


Guingona . . . . 


Tingson .... 


Jamir 


Trefias 


Laurel 


Uka 


Lerum 

. Present* 

Villacorta . . 


Maambong . . . 
Monsod 

. Present 
. Present 

Villegas . . . 



The President is present. 

The roll call shows 40 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading ol the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 


Appeared after the roll call 


724 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move to 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munications , the President making the corresponding 
references: 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication signed by Atty. Ramon Tagle, Execu- 
tive Director, Family Planning Organization of the 
Philippines, and nine others, proposing an amendment 
to Section 8 of Proposed Resolution No. 53 1 , attaching 
tiereto the registration list of participants in the meet- 

°* non S overn mental organizations involved in the 
r map pine population program. 

(Communicati 00 No. 452 — Constitutional Commission 
To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communications from the Philippine Nurses Associa- 
tion; Adolescent Center, Dagupan City; Philippine 
ssociation of the Deaf, Inc.; Kapatiran-Kaunlaran 
oundation, Inc.; Integrated Midwives Association of 
t e Philippines, Inc.; NORFIL Foundation, Inc.; and all 
Nations Women’s Group signed by Ms. Florida R. 

artinez and seven others, urging the Constitutional 
Commission to incorporate in the Constitution provi- 
sions for the protection of Filipino children, youth and 
mothers. 

(Communication No. 453 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1 986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Atty. Leandro P. Garcia, 9th Floor Strata 
100 Building, Emerald Avenue, Pasig, Metro Manila, 
submitting, for the consideration of the Constitutional 
Commission, a summary or analysis of a personal survey 
of public opinion on vital issues before the Constitu- 
tional Commission. 

(Communication No. 454 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from Ms. Ledelina A. Cruz of 105 
Evangelista Street, Santolan, Pasig, Metro Manila, and 


one hundred thirty-eight others with their respective 
addresses, urging the Constitutional Commission not to 
include in the Constitution the United States Military 
Bases issue. 

(Communication No. 455 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication signed by Ms. Carol Doria of Quezon 
City and thirty-two others, mostly from Metropolitan 
Manila, seeking a constitutional provision giving the 
legislature the power to regulate foreign investments. 

(Communication No. 456 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Ms. Isabel Oriol, c/o Oriol Marble Works, 
Tels. 833-7254/831-0906, and eighty-two others, urging 
the Constitutional Commission to favor the retention of 
the U.S. military bases in the Philippines after 1991 and 
to give President Aquino the opportunity to renegotiate 
for better terms and conditions favorable to the Philip- 
pines. 

(Communication No. 457 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication from the Women’s Health Care Founda- 
tion, Inc., 1589 Quezon Avenue, Quezon City, signed 
by its Executive Director, Florence M. Tadiar, submit- 
ting, for the consideration of the Constitutional Com- 
mission, a “Statement on Women’s Rights.” 

(Communication No. 458 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Hector L. Bisnar of 3 Kalamansi St., 
Matina, Davao City, transmitting his suggestions and 
proposals regarding a new Constitution of the Philip- 
pines. 

(Communication No. 459 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from Ms. Fe Samaniego of 1070 cor. 
Roxas-Bautista Streets, Singalong Subd., Manila, submit- 
ting, for consideration of the Constitutional Commis- 
sion, proposed provisions under the Declaration of Prin- 
ciples and State Policies, attaching thereto some printed 
materials related to the attainment of world peace. 

(Communication No. 460 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


725 


Letter from Mr. Elly Velez Pamatong, 131 Aurora Blvd., 
San Juan, Metro Manila, transmitting a resolution 
adopted by the Ad Hoc Committee of Filipino-Canadians 
for Dual Citizenship, requesting the Constitutional 
Commission to include in the Constitution a provision 
allowing Filipino emigrants to retain their citizenship 
upon being naturalized as citizens of another country, 
and restoring Filipino citizenship to former Filipino 
citizens who have lost it by acquiring citizenship from 
another country. 

(Communication No. 461 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Communication from Mr. Jose Rojas and fifty-five 
o filers, urging the Constitutional Commission to leave to 
the legislature regulation of foreign investments and to 
determine the areas where foreign investments will be 
welcome. 

(Communication No. 462 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication from Ms. Norhata D.M. Alonto, submit- 
ting in behalf of Abdul Khayr Alonto a position paper, 
entitled “Autonomy of the People.” 

(Communication No. 463 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Communication from Mr. Vic Felipe, Editor, Manila 
Hotline Magazine, Room 404, Plywood Industries Bldg., 
T.M. Kalaw corner Mabini Streets, Ermita, Manila, sub- 
mitting a proposal re: “Edukasyong Tunay na Maka- 
Pilipino” and “Ang Populasyon at ang Pambansang 
Kaunlaran,” requesting the revival of the real Pilipino 
education (ABAKADA instead of ABC), and limiting 
the number of children for every couple to be able to 
meet/provide their children’s needs. 

(Communication No. 464 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication from Ms. Marisse C. Reyes, Correspond- 
ence Secretary, Office of the President, transmitting 
letters from the following: Gabriel Ma. J. Lopez of 105 
Kentucky Avenue, S.E., Washington D.C. 20003, pro- 
posing that Filipino citizens residing abroad be allowed 
to vote in national elections; Mr. Francisco L. Balingao, 
c/o Mr. Ely Cruz Ramirez, Radio Action, DZXL, Intra- 
muros, Manila, proposing that the Philippine statehood 
issue be submitted to the people in the plebiscite for the 
ratification of the new Constitution; Mr. Juan L. Cabida 
and 75 others of Bayugan, Agusan del Sur, proposing 
that the Philippine statehood issue be submitted to the 


people in a plebiscite in the forthcoming local elections; 
MARILAG, proposing a change in the Agrarian Reform 
Code in line with capitalism and free enterprise, among 
others; Dumaguete Fellowship of Reconciliation, Silli- 
man University, opposing compulsory religious instruc- 
tion; and Mr. Pablo B. David of San Juan Nepomuceno, 
Betis, Guagua, Pampanga, proposing a Constitution that 
is for freedom, justice and equality, and authority of the 
State to put order on the first three, and saying that the 
power balance in this part of the world occasioned by 
U.S. military pressure be not disturbed at this time. 

(Communication No. 465 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from Mr. Fulgencio S. Factoran, Jr., 
Deputy Executive Secretary, Office of the President, 
transmitting a letter of Mr. Apolonio G. Ramos of 42 
Mindanao Street, Filipinas Village, Marikina, Metro 
Manila, submitting the following propos als ^ among 
others: a presidential type of government with a uni- 
cameral legislature composed of elected members only; 
a six-year presidential term with no reelection; the 
President can only declare martial law for a specific 
period and with the concurrence of three-fourths of the 
legislature; the President and other officials shall not be 
immune from suit; the President shall not have law- 
making powers; political plurality rather than the two- 
party system shall be practised; the creation of a 
Commission on Appointments; the barangay system 
shall be abolished; municipal, city and provincial coun- 
cils shall likewise be abolished; revision of the Local 
Government Code to provide for uniform local laws and 
ordinances; the Supreme Court shall have administrative 
control and supervision of all courts; provisions to 
improve the civil service and provisions providing for 
electoral reforms. 

(Communication No. 466 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Luciano G. Benigno of San Pascual, 
Masbate, suggesting that in the distribution of arable 
lands of the public domain priority be given to landless 
fanners; uniting to 50 hectares pasture land grants to 

m . 1V1 ua s cor P° ra tions, and the rigid reclassification 
of public lands. 

(Comraunfca'ton No. 467 _ Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Mr. Eufrasio B. Tepace of Catubig, Samar, 
suggesting the elimination of local elections for provin- 
cial, municipal and barangay officials, saying that these 
are expensive as well as divisive in nature, and proposing 


726 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


that these officials undergo competitive examinations 
to qualify for selection. 

(Communication No. 468 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Desiderio C. Villanueva of 1140 P. 
Villanueva Street, Butuan City, suggesting that the State 
shall pursue a national program to help workers esta- 
blish their own small-scale industries in the countrysides 
and to promote the formation of cooperatives among 
grain farmers and millers. 

(Communication No. 469 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Mr. Norberto N. Caparas for the Bayanihan 
Homeowners and Residents Association, No. 655 Kaun- 
laran Street, Barangay Commonwealth, Quezon City, 
proposing that government lands occupied by the squat- 
ters be donated to actual occupants, subject to certain 
conditions. 

( S°^!^ nication 470 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

DEFERMENT OF CONSIDERATION 
OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 
(Article on Social Justice) 

MR. RAMA. For consideration this morning is the 
r ic e on Social Justice which was amended yesterday. 

c * ean C °PY °f the Article, as amended or 

u 6 pr °P° sed amendments, has not yet been 
distributed. 

So, the Members would like first to see the clean 
copy with the proposed amendments before this Article 
on Social Justice be taken up during the period of 
amendments. 

In the meantime, Madam President, I move that we 
defer the consideration of the Article on Social Justice. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
defer for consideration the Article on Social Justice? 

The honorable Chairman, Commissioner Nieva, is 
recognized. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, how long will the 
deferment take? 

THE PRESIDENT. How long does the Committee 

need? 


MS. NIEVA. We worked on and finalized this up until 
past eight last night and copies are being distributed. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, it is just a question of dis- 
tributing the copies. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. I think we are more or less ready, 
and we shall give everyone a chance to go over the 
amended report. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we consider it an hour from 
now, about eleven o’clock? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a motion to defer con- 
sideration of the Article on Social Justice. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. In the meantime, Madam President, I 
ask that we take up for Second Reading some Articles 
that are ready for Second Reading. For this purpose, I 
ask that the Steering Committee Chairman, Commis- 
sioner Bengzon, be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much. 

Good morning, Madam President. We have finished 
our deliberations on the Articles on the Executive and 
the Legislative. Except for the wording with respect to 
the staggering of the term of the Senators, the Article 
on the Legislative is ready for approval on Second 
Reading. 

Before I make my motion, Madam President, Com- 
missioner Davide will make an explanation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the matter that is 
left is the staggering of the term of the Senate which 
will be in Section 3. It is the proposal that the first 
Senators elected will be divided into two groups: The 
first, consisting of 12, to serve for six years; and the 
second, consisting of 1 2, to serve for three years. 

However, there is a need to reconcile it with dates 
of the first and second elections to accomplish syn- 
chronization. If the body will allow later an amendment 
to accomplish the objective of synchronization and the 
staggering of the term, we can proceed with the voting 
on Second Reading. 

However, I invite the attention of the body that on 
page 2 of the amended draft, there is a space between 

organizations” and “the party” on line 13 as a result of 
the Committee’s deletion of the words “as provided by 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


727 


law” because these are merely a repetition of the same 
words on line 1 1 of the same page. On page 3, line 14, 
the original wording is “except the sectoral and the 
party list representatives.” We failed to delete “the 
sectoral” to harmonize it with what has been approved 
under the Monsod amendment. On lines 18 to 21, we 
seek for the deletion of the last phrase “and every six 
or three years respectively.” That should not appear in 
the final draft for Second Reading. So, we request the 
body to approve this motion to delete all the words on 
line 21, page 3, and to put a period (.) after “may” on 
line 20. After that, the Article on the Legislative would 
be ready for approval on Second Reading with the 
reservation made for Section 3 on page 1. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
deletion of the words mentioned by the Chairman? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF C.R. NO. 22 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on the Legislative/National Assembly) 

MR. BENGZON. On the basis of the reservation made 
by the Chairman of the Committee on the Legislative, I 
move that this body vote on Second Reading on the 
Article on the Legislative. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the honorable Chairman of the Steering Com- 
mittee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed Article on 
the Legislative to be incorporated in the new Constitu- 
tion, please raise their hand. (Several Members raised 
their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
(Two Members raised their hand.) 

MR. GARCIA. I would like to register my abstention, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 32 votes in 
favor, 3 against, and 2 abstentions. 

The proposed Article on the Legislative is approved 
on Second Reading, with the reservations made by the 
honorable Chairman. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 517 
(Article on the Executive) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chairman of the Steering 
Committee is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. We are also finished with the delibe- 
rations on the Article on the Executive. May I request, 
however, that the Vice-Chairman of the Committee on 
the Executive, the Honorable Florenz Regalado, be 
recognized for some explanations before I make my 
motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President. 

The amended copy of Proposed Resolution No. 517, 
now in the possession of the Commissioners, has some 
omissions on the resolutions which were accepted by 
the Committee but which we had to defer, and which, 
however, were eventually ironed out in the executive 
caucus yesterday. I will ask the Commissioners to kindly 
look at their respective copies so that I can read the 
insertions or additions. 

On page 1, line 23, we will notice that there is a 
blank space. That should be filled with the words 
“JUNE NEXT” so that the line will read: “NOON 
ON THE THIRTIETH DAY OF JUNE NEXT FOL- 
LOWING THE.” That was an oversight. 

With respect to page 2, between lines 7 and 8, a new 
paragraph will have to be added. The additional para- 
graph, which is actually the amendment of Commis- 
sioner Jamir accepted by the Committee and taken up 
in the caucus yesterday, will read as follows: “NO PER- 
SON WHO HAS SERVED AS PRESIDENT FOR MORE 
THAN FOUR YEARS SHALL BE QUALIFIED FOR 
ELECTION TO THE SAME OFFICE AT ANY OTHER 
TIME.” This is to put it parallel with the elected Pres- 
ident who, after his term expires, can no longer run for 
reelection. This contemplates also the situation where 
the President dies, let us say, a year or less than two 
years in office, and the Vice-President now becomes the 
President. This prohibition is intended to bar the Vice- 
President, who thereby becomes President under that 
situation, from again running for the Office of the 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify, Commissioner 
Regalado, this particular Jamir amendment has been 
approved. 

MR. REGALADO. It was accepted by the Committee 
but not yet approved by the body. 

THE PRESIDENT. Then we will have to submit it to 
the body. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 


728 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


possession of the Commissioners, to read: “NO PER- 
SON WHO HAS SERVED AS PRESIDENT FOR MORE 
THAN FOUR YEARS SHALL BE QUALIFIED FOR 
ELECTION TO THE SAME OFFICE AT ANY OTHER 
TIME.” 


MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote, I would like to ask a 
question. If I remember right, the original proposal 
regarding this matter of a Vice-President acting as 
President in case the President dies was that any person 
who had served as President for more than three years 
would no longer run tor election. And three years was 
the period stated in that original proposal because that 
is one-half of the term of six years. I am not aware that 
the three years was changed to four years, so I would 
like to know when this was accomplished. 


MR. REGALADO. I asked Commissioner Jamir about 
that yesterday, and he said he had amended his pro- 
posal. At any rate, Commissioner Jamir can explain to 
us. 1 know it was already three years. But later he said 
e wanted the term to be four years. That is similar to 
tne 1 wenty-First Amendment to the United States 

exnfain^n 011 1 ^°’ * think Commissioner Jamir can 
explain the change from three to four years. 

th ree^y ears^bu t ,1^^ President ’ 1 ready opted for 
Lners amon, T” ^ SUggestion of many Commis- 
Foz and several W th m T Commiss ioners Davide and 

four’ years msteid^f Three t0 inCfeaSe the tei ™ t0 


MR. RODRIGO. I have 
tion. 


some questions for clarifica- 


thp v- 1 d r ? s dent dies a day less than four years 
f lce resident serves as President one day less I 

that correct? ^ ^ ce ‘ Pres *dent can run for reelectio 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular amendment, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 3 1 votes in favor, 5 against and 1 
abstention; the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, on page 4, 
line 8, after the word “source” there are words in 
parentheses because we still have to iron out the matter 
of salaries of the President and the Vice-President. But 
yesterday during the executive caucus, it was agreed 
that there would also be a transitory provision with 
respect to their salaries. So, the proposed amendment 
by substitution in lieu of the words in parentheses will 
read as follows: THE CONGRESS SHALL PROVIDE 
BY LAW FOR THE ANNUAL SALARIES OF THE 
PRESIDENT AND THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The sala- 
ries of the incumbent President and Vice-President will 
be the subject of the Transitory Provisions of which I 
request Commissioner Suarez to please take note. 

To repeat, Madam President, after the word “source” 
on line 8, page 4, we add this sentence: THE CON- 
GRESS SHALL PROVIDE BY LAW FOR THE AN- 
NUAL SALARIES OF THE PRESIDENT AND THE 
VICE-PRESIDENT. 


MR. REGALADO. That is correct. 

MR RODRIGO. So, if he is elected for another 
years, he would serve for ten consecutive years? 

MR. REGALADO. That is correct. 


MR. GASCON. Madam President, may I ask a ques- 
tion? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. May we put that to a vote, Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman please read 
once more the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Jamir? 

MR. REGALADO. That would be a new paragraph 
between lines 7 and 8 of the amended copies in the 


MR. GASCON. Does this mean, therefore, that it is 
possible for Congress to increase or decrease the salary 
of the President within the six-year term every year? 

MR. REGALADO. No. The preceding sentence reads 
as follows: 

No increase in said compensation shall take effect until 
after the expiration of the term of the incumbent during 
which such increase was approved. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


729 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular proposed amendment, please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 32 votes in favor and none against; 
the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. REGALADO. Lastly, Madam President, on page 
5, line 21, the phrase “one hundred eighty days” is 
proposed to be changed to EIGHTEEN MONTHS, such 
that the entire last sentence of Section 10 will read as 
follows: “No special election shall be called if the 
vacancy occurs within EIGHTEEN MONTHS before 
the date of the next presidential election.” 

The reason for this is that, as reported to us by 
Commissioner Monsod, to hold a presidential election 
would involve an outlay or appropriation of about P270 
million. So, it would entail P270 million to elect a 
President within 180 days before the date of the next 
presidential election, meaning six months. So, in the 
interest of economy, it was felt that this provision will 
apply if the vacancy occurs within 18 months before the 
date of the next presidential election. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Just a point of clarification. I am 
afraid I did not quote that figure of P270 million for a 
presidential election. But it does not detract from the 
argument because there would still be quite a bit of 
expense. I just wanted to correct the figure. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify, will the Gentleman 
restate the amendment? 

MR. REGALADO. On page 5, line 21, instead of 
“one hundred eighty days,” we change it to EIGHTEEN 
MONTHS. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

May I make some point of clarification from the 
Committee? On page 2, line 23, does the phrase “vote 


of a majority of all the members of Congress” mean 
voting separately or voting jointly? 

MR. REGALADO. The Chairman is of the opinion 
that it is “voting separately.” 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

On page 3, lines 16 to 1 9, it is provided: 

The Congress shall provide by law for the case of death, 
permanent disability or inability of the officials mentioned 
in the next preceding paragraph and the manner in which 
one who is to act as President shall be selected until a 
President or a Vice-President shall have qualified. 

This is the same as the provision on page 4, lines 28 
to 32 and on page 5 up to line 3. Is this not a repetition 
of what we intend to have in the matter of succession? 

MR. REGALADO. No, Section 9, lines 28 et sequen- 
tia, refers to the case of an Acting President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, it is the same in the succes- 
sion. 

MR. REGALADO. Whereas, in the first situation that 
the Gentleman referred to, it refers to an elected Pres- 
ident and Vice-President. There are three situations 
under this Article wherein there can be an Acting 
President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Section 5, page 3, lines 16 to 20, 
refers to the succession where the President and the 
Vice-President shall have been disabled or shall have 
been removed or died in office and the President of the 
Senate or the Speaker of the House of Representatives 
shall take his place. In the event that the two are also 
disqualified, then Congress shall provide by law who 
should act as President. Section 9, lines 28 to 32, still 
speaks of Congress to provide by law who shall act as 
President in the case that the Senate President and the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives fail to qualify 
as such. Is this not a repetition? 

MR. REGALADO. Section 5 refers to the situation 
where the President-elect and the Vice-President-elect 
become incapacitated or die before they have assumed 
their office or before they have qualified thereto. 
Section 9, on the other hand, refers to death, permanent 
incapacity or resignation from the office of the Pres- 
ident or the Vice-President during the tenure or after 
either of them has assumed office. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

On page 8, lines 31 to 34, is this provision still 
necessary after we provide on lines 28 to 30 that the 
President is vested to appoint minor officials as called 
for in this Constitution? 


730 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. Yes, because while the President’s 
power of appointment is plenary, it is subject to limita- 
tions and classifications by the Congress. That is why we 
provide here that the President shall appoint all other 
officers of the government whose appointments are not 
otherwise provided for by law to avoid any hiatus or 
any lacuna in the matter of appointment, and those 
whom he may be specifically authorized by law to 
appoint. Then on line 31, there is a little classification 
there. The Congress may by law vest the appointment 
of other officers lower in rank either in the President 
alone, or in the courts, or in the heads of departments, 
or in the heads of agencies, commissions or boards. 
That would be a matter already for Congress to classify 
and specify. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 


such proclamation of suspension which revocation shall not 
be set aside by the President or upon the initiative of the 
President extend the same for the period . . . 

The way it is phrased, “extend” seems to be a verb 
related to revocation and not to Congress. So, may I 
suggest to the Committee that we put a period (.) after 
“shall not be set aside by the President.” Then start with 
another sentence, “Congress may, upon the initiative 
of the President, extend such proclamation or suspen- 
sion for a period to be determined by Congress ...” Will 
the Committee consider that, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. What page is this, please? 

MR. VILLACORTA. This is on page 7. lines 29 to 32, 
Section 16. 


MR. REGALADO. Incidentally, Madam President, I 
will inform the body in advance that, for purposes of 
Third Reading, we are furnishing them with copies of 
e same Article, rearranged and renumbered to make 
t em in more logical sequence but containing exactly 
the same substantive provisions. As prepared by Com- 
missioners Maambong, Davide and myself, the copy 
^^ distributed is merely a realignment to make the 
presentation in more logical sequence. 

siorrer Maamh^ ^ adam President, I ask that Commis- 
cation ° n ® e recognized for a question of clarifi- 


recognLed^^^^ Commissioner Maambong is 

MaHani Just a very minor clarification, 

nn nano resi d e nt, regarding the approved amendment 
The rimirp Tdi!’ hanging 180 days to 18 months, 
nresidemiai ° P27 ° mdlion cited as the cost of the 
to Commie ° r V1 ?f~ Presidential election wa s attributed 
citedthTf^ ner f M ° nsod - 1 am af raid I was the one who 
the testimoirip 16 V Commissioner Regalado, considering 

Monsod ' h 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 6 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, this is just a 
matter of style and for the purpose of clarity. On page 
9, lines 11 to 12, it reads: 

The Congress voting jointly by a vote of at least a majority 

of all its members in regular or special session may revoke 


MR. REGALADO. I think we are using different 
texts. 

MR. VTLLACORTA. Am I using a different copy? 

THE PRESIDENT. Maybe the Gentleman has the old 
one. 

MR. REGALADO. The Gentleman should use the 
one with the words “As Amended” on the upper right- 
hand corner: 


MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, Madam President. I will 
just go to the Committee to make my correction later 
on. 

Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. With regard to the powers of the 
resident as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces 
and, in particular, the power to call out the Armed 
orces to suppress lawless violence, the President has 
two other powers — the power to suspend the privilege 
of the writ of habeas corpus and the power to proclaim 
martial law. Madam President, When I interpellated the 
members of the Committee as to the possible distinction 
between these three situations, they - particularly Com- 
missioner Regalado - said that it could be entertained 
uring the period of amendments. When I was then pro- 
posing is distinction between the suspension of the 
writ and the proclamation of martial law, I was pre- 
vented from so doing on the observation of Commis- 
sioner Bemas that in the discussion of the Bill of Rights, 
the issue of the suspension of the privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus has already been decided. But I recall that 
when we were discussing the Bill of Rights, particularly 
the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus, Commissioner Bemas stated, and I quote from 
the July 17 session: 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


731 


Perhaps the better place to discuss this is in the Article on 

the Executive because the Gentleman placed this in the 

total context of the Commander-in-Chief powers of the 

President. 

When I was clarifying the distinction between the 
suspension of the writ and proclamation of martial law 
which should be discussed more thoroughly in our 
deliberations on the executive department. Commis- 
sioner Benias said that could not be done unless the 
Rules is suspended and a motion for reconsideration is 
filed on the provision in the Bill of Rights or the sus- 
pension of the writ. I disagreed with that position of 
Commissioner Bernas as inconsistent and unfair because 
it was not possible at that time during the period of 
amendments of the Article on the Executive to ask for a 
suspension of the Rules and for a rediscussion of the 
suspension of the writ of habeas corpus in the Bill of 
Rights. But the Chair ruled without further arguments 
that I was out of order because the decision had been 
made regarding the suspension of the writ of habeas 
corpus in the Bill of Rights. 

Madam President, I agree with the provisions of the 
Article on the Executive, except this section on the 
powers of the President as Commander-in-Chief of the 
Armed Forces, because through that technicality, we 
were not able to discuss fully the distinction, which I 
was trying to make, between the two situations — the 
suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
and the power to proclaim martial law. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Since I was alluded to, may I say a few 
words? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may please pro- 
ceed. 

FR. BERNAS. In the discussion we had on the Bill of 
Rights, the only subject matter that was under con- 
sideration was the power to suspend the privilege of the 
writ of habeas corpus. As everyone will recall, in the 
provision on the Bill of Rights, while there is a limita- 
tion on the power to suspend the privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus, there is no indication whatsoever as to 
who would suspend the privilege of the writ ot habeas 
corpus. That is taken up in the Article on the Executive. 

When the matter of making a distinction between the 
three powers of the President as Commander-in-Chief 
was brought up during the discussion on the Bill of 
Rights, I said that the proper place to discuss it was in 
the discussion of the executive power. That, I said, was 
the proper place to discuss the distinction between these 
three powers of the suspension of the privilege of the 


writ of habeas corpus when we discussed the Bill of 
Rights. 

When we were discussing the Article on the Executive, 

I recall very distinctly that Commissioner Padilla did try 
to make a distinction. I recognized the distinction, and I 
thought that he would offer a presentation of the Article 
on the Commander-in-Chief powers where there would 
be a division into three parts. There was an opportunity 
for that; it was never done. And in the course of our dis- 
cussion, we discussed very thoroughly what the basis for 
the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus was; we debated whether we should eliminate 
“insurrection and imminent danger of invasion, insur- 
rection or rebellion.” We debated that very thoroughly; 
we voted on that a number of times. When I made a 
motion on a point of order, the point of order was 
precisely on the fact that we had thoroughly discussed 
the basis for the suspension of the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus, and we had voted on that. The 
President upheld the point of order raised. 

I just want to bring this out because the suggestion is 
being made that I sort of reneged on what I said while 
we were discussing the Bill of Rights. When we were 
discussing the Bill of Rights, we were not discussing the 
powers of the President. We were discussing the right to 
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, not the 
distinct rights of the President as Commander-in-Chief 
of the Armed Forces. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. The issue was the elimination of the 
words “or imminent danger thereof.” Commissioner 
Bernas says I did not make any proposal for the dis- 
tinction between the suspension of the writ and the 
proclamation of martial law. Actually, I submitted two 
concrete proposals to cover said two situations and I 
recall that I even proposed to insert among the grounds 
for the suspension of the writ “subversion and sedi- 
tion, in addition to imminent danger of rebellion or 
invasion, because the declaration of martial law was 
then limited to actual invasion or actual rebellion. On 
my suggestion not only to reinsert “imminent danger 
thereof but also to add “subversion or sedition,” the 
honorable Commissioner Bernas stated that it was out 
of older because that matter had already been decided 
in the discussion on the Bill of Rights, and that under 
the Aiticle on the Executive, we could no longer amend 
or reinsert the grounds for such suspension, particularly 
the phrase “or imminent danger thereof.” I had before- 
hand warned the members of the Committee that I was 
going to make a distinction between the suspension ot 
the writ and the declaration of martial law, which was 
welcomed during the interpellations. It is not correct for 


732 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


Commissioner Bernas to say that I did not make any 
concrete proposal. I actually did propose two sentences 
— one on suspension of the writ and the other on pro- 
clamation of martial law. But my proposal unfor- 
tunately was not considered and much less discussed 
because of that technicality that my proposal on suspen- 
sion was out of order and which, unfortunately, the 
Chair sustained, to which I said, “I respect the decision 
of the Chair although I do not agree with it.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chairman of the Steering 
Committee is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I bring back the discussion now 
to the Article on the Executive, page 7. 

Commissioner Villacorta and the Vice-Chairman of 
the Executive Committee, Commissioner Regalado, have 
already finished their coordination on this. May I ask 
Commissioner Regalado to read lines 30 and 3 1 . 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


MR. AZCUNA. May I suggest the insertion of the 
words CONGRESS MAY IN THE SAME MANNER, so 
as to emphasize that it will also be Congress voting 
jointly and there would also be a need of at least a 
majority vote of all its Members for extension. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept the 
amendment to the amendment? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, the amendment is accepted; 
it makes the provision clearer. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I just want to make a statement for 
the record that I am still very unhappy about the words 
“voting jointly.” I said I think it is very much against 
the very basic idea of bicameralism. I still think that 
Congress, whenever it acts, since it is a bicameral body 
composed of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate, must vote separately. 


MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 

u Gn page start i n § on line 29, the provision will read: 
which revocation shall not be set aside by the Pres- 
Upon the initiative of the President, CONGRESS 

® xtend SUCH proclamation OR SUSPEN- 

, for a period to be determined by Congress ...” It 
ma es c earer the intention and does not involve a very 
long sentence and expresses the substance of what was 
accepted by the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman please repeat 


«r> MR j REGALADO After “dent” of the won 

rONCRFU m av 0 6 i 3 °’ PUt „ a Peri ° d Then insei 
CONGRESS MAY between ‘President” and “extend 

and add SUCH PROCLAMATION OR SUSPENSION 


So, I will repeat from line 26: “The Congress, voting 
jointly, by a vote ot at least a majority of all its Mem- 
bers in regular or special session, may revoke such 
proclamation or suspension, which revocation shall not 
be set aside by the President. Upon the initiative of the 
President, CONGRESS MAY extend SUCH PRO- 
CLAMATION OR SUSPENSION for a period to be 
determined by Congress ...” 


MR. BENGZON. May we vote now, Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment on lines 30 and 31 of page 7? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 5 1 7 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on the Executive) 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, on the basis of all 
these arrangements and adjustments made, I move that 
the body vote on the Article on the Executive, as 
amended, on Second Reading. 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Pro- 
posed Resolution No. 517, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 33 votes in favor and 8 against; 
the proposed Article on the Executive is approved on 
Second Reading. 


MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


733 


MS. QUESADA. May 1 be allowed to explain my 
vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada may 
proceed. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, last Wednesday, 
July 30. I voted no to this amendment and I still vote 
no on Second Reading because then we would hand on 
a silver platter to any power-driven Filipino President in 
the future the opportunity to reinstall a one-man rule in 
this country. So much has been said about the evil and 
corruption, the venality and utter disregard for human 
values that the Filipino people suffered these last 14 
years. We at the Con-Corn have conscientiously worked 
out provisions to ensure that such arbitrary rule and 
abuse of presidential power will never again be easily 
repeated. 

This overriding concern was uppermost in the minds 
of the people who participated in our public hearings 
here in Metro Manila as elsewhere in this country. They 
were happy to note that we at the Con-Corn would 
articulate their desire to eliminate every possibility that 
another dictator would ever rule over them again. 

It was, therefore, with a heavy heart that I witnessed 
the 180-degree turnabout of the Committee who 
worked so hard to incorporate in the charter the proper 
mechanisms that would eliminate such possibility. 

Madam President, I wish to put on record that I have 
opted not to grant the Office of the President such 
power, regardless of all the measures by Congress and 
the Supreme Court provided in the Article to rectify 
any such presidential act. 

Historical precedents within living memory have 
demonstrated the ineffectiveness and impotency of such 
fiscalizing measures. A power-mad dictator, exemplified 
by countless historical examples from Hitler to Batista 
to Marcos, would simply abolish the judiciary and pad- 
lock Congress and send all the dissenters to the stock- 
ade. That is a reality that proponents of the amendment 
seemed to have forgotten. 

Madam President, a wise man from Spain, the philo- 
sopher George Santayana, wrote once that “Those who 
forget the past are doomed to repeat it.” In the same 
vein the columnist of a popular daily titled his column, 
“They Never Learn.” The attribution is to the Constitu- 
tional Commission three days after the victorious 
passage of the amendment. 

Unfortunately, those who learned their lessons and 
did not forget the past were only in the minority. It is 
comforting to know, however, that a great many 
Filipinos outside this hall share the minority opinion. 
Regretfully, they are not empowered to cast their vote 
on this issue. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee has asked me to 
give a brief response because we might be misunder- 
stood. As the proceedings on the floor showed and as it 
appears in the minutes of that particular session, it was 
expressly made clear that to meet a very serious danger 
of actual invasion or rebellion, the President is now 
granted the power of immediate response by declaring 
martial law or suspending the writ of habeas corpus. 
Yet, the following day, if the Congress finds that the act 
of the President was not correct and not factually sub- 
stantiated, the very same proclamation can immediately 
be revoked by Congress even on the following day. That 
was the reason the members of the Committee agreed to 
that immediate response, reflexive action of the Pres- 
ident if the situation is really that serious because the 
Congress may not yet be in a position to convene and 
concur in the act of the President. But if they find out 
that the President was wrong right on the following day, 
the very same proclamation or suspension of the privi- 
lege of the writ of habeas corpus can be revoked by 
Congress. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, parliamentary in- 
quiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

We are now in the process of voting. I was wondering 
why a Member of the Committee stood up for alleged 
justification of the Committee’s action. Is this war- 
ranted under our Rules, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. We allowed Commissioner 
Quesada to explain her vote which really should come in 
the case of nominal voting. So, we also recognized 
Commissioner Regalado to answer the same. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, we respectfully 
submit that explanation of one’s vote as part of the 
voting process, but explanation of the Committee’s 
actions is not part of the voting process. That is why 
I am submitting this parliamentary inquiry because 
it could serve as a bad precedent in the future, Madam 
President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Bengzon 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


734 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, for the benefit of 
the Commissioners because a lot of Commissioners have 
approached me making inquiries, and for other persons 
who may be interested, may 1 just announce that if we 
do finish the Article on Social Justice today, the next 
Article we shall discuss will be Committee Report 
Nos. 21 and 25 on the local governments. Hence, all 
other reports will have to be moved back, particularly, 
the Declaration of Principles, National Economy and 
Human Resources. The proposed Article on Family 
Rights will be discussed together with the Article on 
Human Resources, which was scheduled to be con- 
sidered on August 14 and 15. But because of the delay 
in the deliberation of the Article on Social Justice, we 
may have to move this backwards. That is all, Madam 
President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

May I ask everybody in the galleries to please observe 
silence during our proceedings? May we ask the honor- 
able Chairman and members of the Committee on Social 
Justice to please occupy the front tables? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. In view of some remarks that have 
been made today and on other days, I would like to 
request permission to explain my vote in the case of the 
Article on the Executive. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod may p ro _ 
ceed. 


THE PRESIDENT. May we return first to the state- 
ment of Commissioner Suarez? The Chair has explained 
that Commissioner Regalado was recognized to make his 
own statement but we will take note of the statements 
made by Commissioner Suarez on this point. 

MR. RAMA. Thank you. 

Madam President, the Chairman of the Committee 
on Social Justice has informed the Floor Leader that she 
and her Committee are ready to present to the body the 
proposed amendments that the Committee has accepted 
and to defend its amendments. 

May I ask that Commissioner Rodrigo be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. The copies of the proposed amend- 
ments were distributed only about half an hour ago. 
After that, we discussed the matter of the executive 
department and legislative department. So, we have had 
no time to read as yet. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Gentleman need time? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, I would like to ask for at least 
1 0 minutes. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask for a sus- 
pension of the session? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 10:57 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 1 1:23 a.m. , the session was resumed. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I would like to 
explain my vote on the Article on the Executive with 
particular reference to an amendment of which 1 was a 
principal author, regarding the right of the President to 
declare martial law for a maximum period of 60 days 
which can be revoked by Congress at any time and 

which is subject to review by the judiciary at any time 

* 

There have been suggestions that those who voted for 
that amendment are victims of subjugated consciousness 
or cannot learn from the past, or even suffer from a lack 
ot awareness of the people’s sentiments. 


Madam President, to be free means having the con- 
fidence to fight a dictator. It also means the capacity to 
allow freedom to defend itself against actual invasion or 
rebellion. The delicate balance we seek is not clear-cut 
But we cannot define it either in terms of black 
white. Mr. Marcos relied on the Constitution to kee 1 
power. The premise of a dictator who is ready to d'^ 
regard the Constitution would mean that no amount 1S ~ 
safeguard can prevent him to make a naked assurnnr 
of power outside the Constitution. If one reads 
totality of the Article we approved, the color of C o • 
tutionality that Mr. Marcos used to his advantage j 11Sti ~ 
longer there. That is the difference between the iqt< 
and the 1986 Constitutions. " ^ 


Any insinuation of subjugated consciousness, lack f 
patriotism, irresponsiveness of so-called people senti- 
ment is an offensive generalization to those whose" 
records will show that they did not allow themselves to 
be cowed even at the height of Mr. Marcos’ power at the 
risk of their lives and livelihood. 


I find self-righteousness offensive particularly from 
those who want to make sweeping conclusions on the 
basis of one issue and not on the totality of one’s con- 
viction and one’s record. 


Patriotism is not the sudden and frenzied outburst of 
emotion but the tranquil and steady dedication of a 
lifetime. 


Thank you. Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


735 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I also wish to exercise the right of reply 
as one of those who voted with the majority. May I take 
one minute to do this, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

I think it is important, in the interest of justice and 
equity, to put into the Record of this Commission that 
in voting for the Article on the Executive, as amended, 
those who did so did not infringe any standard of in- 
dependence, intelligence and righteousness, and that 
they had the right to be accorded the courtesy of a 
genuine belief in their convictions. 

The amendment, first by the Committee and later on 
by the body, of the original provision requiring the con- 
currence of Congress was subjected to thoroughgoing 
debate and not a single aspect of it had been hidden or 
concealed from the view of the entire Commission. 

Madam President, there is a tendency to equate 
patriotism with rendering the executive branch of the 
Government impotent, as though by reducing drastically 
the powers of the executive, we are rendering a service 
to human welfare. I think it is also important to under- 
stand that the extraordinary measures contemplated in 
the Article on the Executive pertain to a practical state 
of war existing in this country when national security 
will have become a common bond of patnotrsm of all 
Filipinos especially if it is an actual invasion or an 

tual rebellion, and the President may have to be given 
3C minimum flexibility to cope with such unprecedented 
a ts to the survival of a nation. I think the Commis- 
. rea ha s done so but at the same time has not, in any 
S1 °nner, shunned the task of putting these powers under 
m whole system of checks and balances, including the 
3 ssible revocation at any time of a proclamation of 
P °£U-tial law by the Congress, and in any case a definite 
termination of these extraordinary powers, subject only 
e ano ther extension to be detennined by Congress in 
the event that it is necessary to do so because the 
emergency persists. 

So I think this Article on the Executive for which I 
voted is completely responsible; it is attuned to the free- 
dom and the rights of the citizenry. It does not render 
tire presidency impotent and, at the same time, it allows 
for a vigorous representation of the people through their 
Congress when an emergency measure is in force and 

effect. 

Thank you very much. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. I move that we now 
proceed to the period of amendments on the Article 
on Social Justice. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that the Committee Chair- 
man, Commissioner Teresa Nieva, be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chairman, Commissioner 
Nieva, is recognized. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, yesterday the 
Committee met up to almost nine o’clock in the evening 
to synthesize and incorporate all the various amend- 
ments that were proposed the whole day of yesterday 
and Saturday. So, we have distributed copies of the 
proposed amendments to the Article on Social Justice. 
Unfortunately, there were a few mistakes on pages 3 
and 4, so corrected copies will be distributed. Minor 
corrections on the other pages will be made as we go 
along. 

Section 1 rephrases tire original Section 1. We have 
removed the words “inequitably redistribute wealth” 
and replaced these with DIFFUSING WEALTH. This 
was in response to the probable misunderstanding of the 
word “redistribute” that was raised by several of those 
who had proposed their amendments. 

MR. ROMULO. If the Commissioner is discussing 
Section 1, that is my amendment. So, Madam President, 
may I be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. After discussing with my cosponsors, 
Commissioners Azcuna and Davide, we believe that the 
introduction of the phrase “primary imperative” makes 
the phrase “give highest priority” redundant. We are, 
therefore, asking that the phrase be deleted so that the 
section will now read: THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AS A PRIMARY IMPERATIVE IN 
ALL PHASES OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. IN 
PURSUIT THEREOF, CONGRESS SHALL ENACT 
MEASURES THAT PROTECT AND ENHANCE THE 
RIGHT OF EVERY CITIZEN TO HUMAN DIGNITY, 
REDUCE SOCIAL, CULTURAL, ECONOMIC AND 
POLITICAL INEQUITIES, AND EQUITABLY DIF- 
FUSE WEALTH AND POLITICAL POWER FOR THE 
COMMON GOOD. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, but the Bernas amendment says: 
“CONGRESS SHALL GIVE HIGHEST PRIORITY TO 
THE ENACTMENT OF MEASURES.” 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, but we are suggesting its dele- 
tion after second thought because it seems redundant in 
the face ot the term “primary imperative.” 


736 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


MS. NIEVA. So now, that will be out. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

FR. BERNAS. The phrase “primary imperative” was 
not in the original. 

MR. ROMULO. That is correct. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, concerning this subject 
of the word “imperative,” I want to take counsel 
with the Committee and other experts in the English 
language whether one can say “imperative” without the 
qualification of a territorial imperative, a moral impera- 
tive or a political imperative. The word “imperative” 
will have to be given a context before it can stand alone. 
Will the proponent consider the qualification of 
MORAL IMPERATIVE? 


FR. BERNAS. So, it is correct that “giving highest 
priority” gives a certain amount of redundancy to the 
phrase. I hesitate to take it away because I think the 
matter is so important that we can afford to be re- 
dundant. 

MS. NIEVA. So, what is now the final decision? 

MR. ROMULO. Can we depend on the Record as 
indicating that “primary imperative” includes the com- 
mand to the legislature to give this the highest priority? 

FR. BERNAS. Provided that that is understood in 
the Record. I just want to make that very clear because 
I think it is very important. As I said, we can afford to 
be redundant. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, how will we treat this now? 


MR. ROMULO. That is the phrase of Commissioner 
Azcuna, so I would rather that he reply. 

MR. OPLE. I suggest A MORAL or AN ETHICAL 
IMPERATIVE, because the basis for this IMPERATIVE 
if it is a MORAL IMPERATIVE or AN ETHICAL 
IMPERATIVE, is also political, according to the Aristo- 
telian definition of politics. But I doubt if the word 
“imperative” in good English usage can stand alone. 

MS. NIEVA. The original read: “social, economic 
political and moral imperative,” but we said that was 
redundant. 

MR. OPLE. Can we just settle with MORAL because 
moral in the Aristotelian sense is also “etWo” j 
“ politics”? S and 


MR. ROMULO. With the agreement of Commissioner 
Bemas and my explanation thereto, Section 1 shall 
read: THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE SOCIAL JUS- 

TICE AS A PRIMARY IMPERATIVE IN ALL PHASES 
OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. IN PURSUIT 
THEREOF, CONGRESS SHALL ENACT MEASURES 
THAT PROTECT AND ENHANCE THE RIGHT OF 
EVERY CITIZEN TO HUMAN DIGNITY, REDUCE 
SOCIAL, CULTURAL, ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL 
INEQUITIES, AND EQUITABLY DIFFUSE WEALTH 
AND POLITICAL POWER FOR THE COMMON 
GOOD. 


MR. BENNAGEN. May I answer that? I n the h r 
berations of the Committee, I pointed out specified !' 
in this particular section that it is primarily a « , 

imperative, in the sense that historically the n t ° ral 
development has worried itself with issues of growth ° na * 
development and equity without considering the 
imperative of development in favor of the rn ° ra l 


privileged. This is why 
ral” as 

“imperative.” I suggest that we retain that. 


in the original statements w nder ~ 
include “moral” as the underscoring adjectiv 6 d * d 


MR. OPLE. Yes, once again put the Bible 
Quran behind it. 


and 


the 


MS. NIEVA. Commissioner Garcia would like to 
make some remarks. 

MR. GARCIA. I believe that we can retain the same 
sense and at the same time underscore the urgency that 
Congress must take urgent action by, perhaps, para- 
phrasing it in this manner: “THE STATE SHALL 
PROMOTE SOCIAL JUSTICE AS AN IMPERATIVE 
IN ALL PHASES OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. 
IN PURSUIT THEREOF, CONGRESS SHALL GIVE 
HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE ENACTMENT OF 
MEASURES.” In other words, we retain the phrase 
on Congress giving highest priority to the enactment of 
social justice measures because I do not think the word 
“imperative” needs an adjective. 

MR. ROMULO. I have tried to save some words but I 
will leave it up to the Committee. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, that is right. That on 
a decision in favor of the poor moral. 6 nia kes 

MR. OPLE. Social justice is also advanrh, 
morality. § social 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, that is right. 

MR. MONSOD. May we hear from Commkci 
Azcuna. ° mn Hssioner 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, my only diffi cu i t 
with that is we will be delving into the grounds of i e i 
enforcement of morals here and, offhand, I would like 
to emphasize that social justice is not merely a moral 
command or a command of natural law unenforceable 
in the legal field. What is legally enforceable is a require- 
ment of the legal system, not merely of moral theology 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


737 


If we say, “shall promote social justice as a moral 
imperative,” it might be construed merely as a dictate 
addressed to the conscience rather than a legally en- 
forceable and demandable claim. It would be all right if 
we say, “social, political, economic and moral,” but not 
“moral” alone. 

I am searching for a word that would embrace all. 
Originally, I put “national imperative” — it was an 
imperative for the nation which is based on social, eco- 
nomic, political and cultural ideals. It is moral as well, 
but not merely moral, because it might be objected to as 
merely a moral ideal, and not enforceable in the realm 
of law. 

MR. OPLE. Is Commissioner Azcuna asking for a 
moment to reflect upon this so that we will find the 
right word? 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. My point is that “imperative” without 
being moral, territorial or political would be a clumsy 
word in this all-important section, unless it is modified 
in some way or given a context. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 


that Commissioner Bemas, who has an agreement to 
Section 1, be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Before I give my amendment I would 
say that I support the proposal of Commissioner Garcia 
by just removing “primary” and leaving “imperative” 
standing alone. I would disagree that “imperative” can- 
not stand alone in the English language, but I leave that 
to other authorities to judge. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee is prepared to accept 
this wording: “THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE SO- 
CIAL JUSTICE IN ALL PHASES OF NATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT. IN PURSUIT THEREOF, CON- 
GRESS SHALL GIVE HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE 
ENACTMENT OF MEASURES ...” The first state- 
ment would be a general statement, and urgency is given 
in the enactment of measures. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that all right, Commissioner 
Romulo? 


MR ROMULO. With due respect, the dilemma can 
be removed if we delete the phrase “primary impera- 
tive” and go back to Fr. Bemas’ amendment of “giving 
highest priority.” That was my original phrasing. 


twf PRESIDENT. That also occurred to the Chair, 
so the section shall read: “THE STATE SHALL 
PROMOTE SOCIAL JUSTICE IN ALL PHASES OF 
matiONAL DEVELOPMENT. IN PURSUIT THERE- 
OF CONGRESS SHALL GIVE HIGHEST PRIOR- 
ITY . . •” 


MR OPLE. That will be acceptable to me, speaking 
for myself alone, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


MS. NIEVA. Madam President, we are still discussing 
this among the members. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, I would like to 
retain but I will leave it to the Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. While they are still discussing and 
reflecting on this word, we would like to proceed. I ask 


MR. ROMULO. I would accept that. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the other proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Bemas? 

FR. BERNAS. My proposed amendment comes after 
line 5 of Section 1 which says: “reduce social, cultural, 
economic and political inequities.” My proposed amend- 
ment involves both a transposition and an addition. 
First of all, transpose “cultural” then add ERADICATE 
so that the phrase will read: “reduce social, economic 
and political INEQUALITIES, ERADICATE cultural 
inequities,” and so on. 

Let me explain why I prefer the use of the word 
“inequality. When I use the word “inequality,” there 
is no necessary moral judgment involved in that. It is 
merely a description of what obtains in the national - 
that there are gross social, economic and political 
inequalities. Implicitly these inequalities, although not 
morally wrong by themselves, can lead to various evils. 
Then I say cultural inequities” because the problem of 
culture is not so much of an inequality in culture. We do 
not want to equalize all cultures. We do not want to 
level all Filipinos to the same culture, but rather we 
want to protect the various cultures against inequities. 
So, the phrase now will read: “reduce social, economic 
and political INEQUALITIES, ERADICATE cultural 
inequities, and equitably diffuse wealth and political 
power for the common good.” 


738 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


MS. NIEVA. I think the Committee accepts. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will Commissioner Bernas 
accept an amendment to his amendment by substituting 
the word “reduce” with the word “ERADICATE”? 


MR. ROMULO. I thought we had voted down capital 
punishment. Now we will “eliminate.” 

MR. MONSOD. We have a problem with the word 
“eliminate” or “eradicate” in absolute terms. We prefer 
to use the word REDUCE. But if the proponent insists, 
we would like to present it to the body. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I would like to put it to a vote 
“MINIMIZE” is also “REDUCE.” 


FR. BERNAS. I think the Commissioner is asking the 
State to try to attain the unattainable goal. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No, no, that is not the point. 
We know that “ERADICATE” may not be attainable in 
the immediate near future, but we are speaking here of 
goals. When we say, for example, that graft and corrup- 
tion is unattainable, do we say that we should reduce 
graft and corruption simply because we know that 
people being what they are will always remain grafters 
and corrupt? We say we eradicate graft and corruption. 
We do not say reduce graft and corruption because 
when we say “reduce,” we are practically admitting in 
our subconscious that we shall tolerate inequities no 
matter how. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. As far as 
“inequities” are concerned, these are wrong; these are 
evil. So, we try to ask the State not just to reduce them 
but where possible, remove them. Perhaps we can use 
the word REMOVE. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, “REMOVE” seems much more 
acceptable. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It carries the same sense as my 
intention. I agree with the use of the word “REMOVE ” 

MS. NIEVA. So, if the Committee accepts that, we 
shall accept the use of the word “REMOVE.” 


FR. BERNAS. That is why I have changed the word 
“inequities” to INEQUALITIES - reduce INEQUALI- 
TIES. We eradicate graft and corruption because graft 
and corruption is evil. But inequality by itself is not evil. 
Perhaps the Commissioner could say: “reduce social, 
economic and political INEQUALITIES, ERADICATE 
cultural INEQUITIES “because “inequities” are evil. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I will accept that amendment 
inasmuch as the Gentleman has changed the word 
“inequities” to “INEQUALITIES.” 

MS. NIEVA. So, how will the amendment now read? 

FR. BERNAS. “Reduce social, economic and political 
INEQUALITIES, ERADICATE cultural INEQUITIES 
and equitably diffuse wealth . . .” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we have a little 
problem with the word “eradicate” because we are not 
trying to eradicate termites or rats. So, can we use 
another word? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I suggest ELIMINATE. 

MR. MONSOD. It is acceptable. 

THE PRESIDENT. Without prejudice to looking for 
a better word. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee 
accepts the word “REMOVE.” 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I am in favor of 
the present language: “reduce social, economic, political 
and cultural inequities.” 


I do not seem to fully realize, although Commission 
Bernas says so, that one is not necessarily evil and ti * 
other is evil. The word “inequities,” I think, is b ro 16 


enough but to some, these might be “inequalities 


insisting on the word “inequalities,” as distinguish ^ 
from “inequities,” we may be leading to the utopi a f 
equality. And it is not humanly possible to equalize °* 

The other point is that I was in favor of “MOP a 

IMPERATIVE” and this will be the moving facto ' ^ 

Congress to enact legal measures. The observit; f f ° r 
/-< a imr, . * . aL1 °n of 


Commissioner Azcuna is that if MORAL is i ns ° 
it may not lead to legal rights. Precisely the T ed ’ 
“IMPERATIVE” is used which would justify ° rd 
impel Congress to enact measures. So that will give ■ 
rights after the enactment of Congress. ° iegal 


and 


I would also object to the word “HIGHEST” t 
qualify “priority” because while social justice is verv 
important, we cannot compel the next or future 
Congress to give it the first or the highest priority 
because in my belief, social justice can be best achieved 
by more productivity, by economic advancement. And 
social justice may result from an improvement of our 
economic situation, that would lead to the social well- 
being of all the people. But why should this Commission 
of 48 Members now dare or even say: “control the legis- 
lative discretion of Congress in the future years,” when 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


739 


conditions may affect not only the economic situation, 
the national development program, but likewise, the 
resultant effect of an improved economy? My idea, 
Madam President, is that we cannot realize social justice 
unless we really improve our job opportunities. 

MS. NIEVA. May we get the Commissioner’s amend- 
ments one by one so that we can put these to a vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Padilla proposing 
an amendment or just making some comments? 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, may I speak for 
the Committee in this case? I remember Commissioner 
Bernas explaining quite clearly that “HIGHEST” does 
not mean number one, but among the first. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, that is why we are asking now if 
there is a specific amendment which we can vote on so 
that we can submit this to a vote. 

MR. PADILLA. My amendment is, instead of the 
word “primary,” just say “imperative.” 

MS. NIEVA. We have the phrase “as a primary im- 
perative” removed. 

MR. PADILLA. Has that been removed? 

MS. NIEVA. We have removed that entirely. 

MR. PADILLA. Then, eliminate the word “HIGH- 
EST.” 

MS. NIEVA. May we vote on whether we should 
retain “Congress shall give highest priority or just 
“Congress shall give priority to the enactment of 
measures”? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may I just say a 
word? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. I would like to emphasize the fact that 
the language says “give highest priority.” It does not say 
“give the highest priority,” but rather, it means give 
very high priority, not necessarily the highest but very 
high priority. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, what is before us now is the 
Romulo amendment which has been accepted by the 
Committee. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, it has been accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. With the deletion of the words 
“as a primary imperative” and preserving the phrase 
“give highest priority.” 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, for the record, this is a joint 
amendment of Commissioners Romulo, Bemas, Davide, 
Nolledo, Azcuna, Rosario Braid and de los Reyes. Those 
who will vote for the use of the word “HIGHEST” 
would be giving a negative vote to the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Padilla which seeks to eliminate 
the word “HIGHEST.” 

Those in favor of Section 1 as already worded now, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand. ) 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, it seems that the 
body is not clear as to what we are voting on. 

THE PRESIDENT. We are voting on Section 1, and 
this has been read by the Chairman. 

MS. NIEVA. Shall we repeeat it? This is now 
Section 1 as approved by the Committee: “THE STATE 
SHALL PROMOTE SOCIAL JUSTICE IN ALL 
PHASES OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. IN PUR- 
SUIT THEREOF, CONGRESS SHALL GIVE HIGHEST 
PRIORITY TO THE ENACTMENT OF MEASURES 
THAT PROTECT AND ENHANCE THE RIGHT OF 
EVERY CITIZEN TO HUMAN DIGNITY, REDUCE 
SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL INEQUALI- 
TIES, REMOVE CULTURAL INEQUITIES, AND 
EQUITABLY DIFFUSE WEALTH AND POLITICAL 
POWER FOR THE COMMON GOOD.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, parliamentary in- 
quiry. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, parliamentary 
inquiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, if I like to vote 
for the whole of Section 1 except the word “HIGHEST,” 
how shall I vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will vote “no.” 

MR. RODRIGO. That is the object of my parliamen- 
tary inquiry, Madam President. 

PRESIDENT. The amendment of Commissioner 
Padilla should be voted upon, first, according to the 
Rules. But I believe that we should first vote on the 
whole, as accepted by the Committee. And then, after- 
wards, if Commissioner Padilla insists on the elimination 
of the word HIGHEST,” then we shall vote on whether 
or not the word “HIGHEST” should be eliminated as 
already approved by the Committee. 


740 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. 1 am glad because I also have a 
particular amendment to this whole section. So, we are 
now voting on the Romulo amendment without prej- 
udice to other amendments to that section. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us put it that way. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I recommend or suggest a 
simplification of the voting? Let us first vote on 
whether or not we shall put the word “HIGHEST.” 
Then, we can vote on the whole section. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but we do not know if the 
body will even approve the whole section, as worded. 
So, let us vote first, in principle, on Section 1, as 
worded now. Afterwards, other changes in the wordings 
can come in. 

As many as are in favor of Section 1 as read by the 

onorable Chairman of the Committee, please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (One 
Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 37 votes in favor and 1 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

Let us now take up the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Padilla to eliminate the word “HIGHEST” 
on line 3. 

Those in favor of deleting the word “HIGHEST” on 
line 3 of Section 1, please raise their hand. (Few Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 10 votes in favor and 27 against; the 
proposed amendment is lost. 

What is the pleasure of Commissioner Rodrigo? Does 
he have a proposed amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, Madam President. 

Before propounding my amendment, may I ask some 
questions of the Committee on the use of the word 
“citizen” in the phrase “and enhance the right of every 
citizen” in Section 1. It seems that the benefits of this 
section are reserved for Filipino citizens. I would like 
to state that in both the 1973 and 1935 Constitutions, 
the benefits of similar provisions are not limited to 
Filipino citizens. Article II, Section 6 of the 1973 
Constitution reads: 


The State shall promote social justice to ensure the 
dignity, welfare, and-security of all the people. 

Article II, Section 7 of the 1 973 Constitution reads: 

The State shall establish, maintain, and ensure adequate 
social services in the field of education, health, housing, 
employment, welfare, and social security to guarantee the 
enjoyment by the people of a decent standard of living. 

In the 1935 Constitution, Article II, Section 5 reads: 

The promotion of social justice to ensure the well-being 
and economic security of all the people should be the con- 
cern of the State. 

Now my question is: Do we want to limit the benefits 
of social justice to just Filipino citizens, to the exclusion 
of other persons or noncitizens who might be residing in 
the Philippines? 

MS. NIEVA. I think our primary concern is really the 
Filipino people. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, this is a change from the con- 
cept of similar provisions in the 1935 and 1973 Consti- 
tutions. 

MS. NIEVA. We do not mean to prejudice anybody 
here; we just wanted to focus on the Filipino people’s 
rights to social justice. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will the Committee accept an 
amendment that instead of “every citizen” we say- 
“enactment of measures that protect and enhance the 
right of THE PEOPLE to human dignity . . .”? 

MS. NIEVA. Would the Gentleman accept THE 
FILIPINO PEOPLE? The suggestion was made here. 

MR. RODRIGO. But that would amount to the same 
thing, that we are limiting this only to Filipino citizens 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, the Committee a 

cepts. c ' 

MR. RODRIGO. So, my amendment would be in- 
stead of “every citizen,” insert THE PEOPLE. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, will the distin- 
guished sponsor of this amendment agree to an amend- 
ment that instead of saying “of THE PEOPLE,” we say 
ALL THE PEOPLE because those are the words in the 
1935 and 1973 Constitutions? 

MR. RODRIGO. I have no objection to that if the 
Committee would accept it. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


741 


MS. NIEVA. Would EVERY PERSON mean the same 
thing as “ALL.THE PEOPLE”? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, I think so. 

MS. NIEVA. So, perhaps, EVERY PERSON reads 
much better. 

MR. RODRIGO. But that would be a departure from 
the wordings of the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. And 
when a provision has been in existence for so many 
years, for decades, the words already assume a meaning, 
especially in jurisprudence. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, as far as I under- 
stand, we have retained that exact paragraph on social 
justice in the Declaration of Principles. So, here, we 
simply amplify, make more specific the rights given 
to the citizens, especially the poor sectors of society. 

MR. RODRIGO. The situation now is, my proposed 
amendment to use THE PEOPLE is now sought to be 
amended by Commissioner Padilla by adding “ALL.” 
My proposed amendment has already been accepted. I 
have no objection to adding “ALL,” if the Committee 
would accept it. 

MS. NIEVA. The Committee accepts, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Forgive me, but I am a little bit 
uneasy about the word “reduce,” considering the state- 
ment of Commissioner de los Reyes. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we first vote on the phrase 
“ALL THE PEOPLE”? 

Is there any objection to use the phrase “ALL THE 
PEOPLE” instead of “every citizen,” which has been 
accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. As I was saying, Madam President, 
I am a little bit uneasy about the word “reduce,” con- 
sidering the statement of Commissioner de los Reyes. I 
think when we use the word “reduce,” we are actually 
saying that we are only trying to minimize the social, 
economic and political inequalities. And since we are 
setting goals, it is a very sad commentary on the goals 
we are setting. I was thinking if we could probably use 
the word PREVENT because if we just say “reduce,” we 


are just minimizing inequalities. What goal are we setting 
anyway? 

MS. NIEVA. I think the Committee does not accept 
the use of the word “PREVENT” which refers to the 
future. We are referring to present existing inequalities. 
So, may we put that to a vote if the Gentleman insists 
on such a word. 

MR. MAAMBONG. We do not have to, Madam 
President. I am just pointing out that when we are try- 
ing to set goals, we should at least go all the way. But to 
say “reduce,” we only minimize — we are actually 
admitting that we cannot do anything about it — and 
we are up to that extent only. 

But I leave that to the Committee; I will not press for 
a vote. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, may I respond 
to that? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you, Madam President. 

As already emphasized by Commissioner Bemas, 
there is nothing inherently immoral or wrong in in- 
equalities as has been repeated many times by Commis- 
sioner Padilla. In this world, there are inequalities 
because people have different talents and different ef- 
forts; some people are more industrious than others; 
some people are more interested in specific efforts. So, 
let us, for the record, state that there is nothing 
inherently immoral about inequalities. 

And for the sake of logical substance, I find the last 
phrase redundant if we are going to adopt the following 
Bernas amendment which I accept: “reduce social eco- 
nomic and political INEQUALITIES.” If we have that, 
I find the last phrase “equitably diffusing wealth AND 
POLITICAL POWER” redundant because there is no 
way that we can reduce social, economic and political 
inequalities without diffusing wealth and political 
power equitably. So, just for the sake of brevity, 
although Commissioner Bernas has already said this, we 
can be redundant when we want to emphasize, but I do 
not see how we can reduce economic, political and 
social inequalities without equitably diffusing wealth 
and political power. 

ni™ E PRESIDENT ' C^issioner Bacani is recog- 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, may I speak not 
as a member ol the Committee, but may I respond to 
ia . ioug i it is true that there is nothing morally 
wrong about inequalities as such, there is something 
morally wiong about great inequalities. That is why 
it is imperative to reduce inequalities. So. it will not 


742 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


simply be correct to say that there is nothing wrong 
about inequalities, if by that the Gentleman means even 
great economic inequalities. 

MR. BENGZON. May we request Commissioner 
Bemas to respond to the comments of Commissioner 
Villegas as to that redundant phrase? 

FR. BERNAS. I have just conferred with Commis- 
sioner Villegas and he will probably join me in an 
amendment by recasting the final phrase, so that instead 
of saying “and equitably diffuse,” say BY EQUITA- 
BLY DIFFUSING. 

MR. BENGZON. What does Commissioner Villegas 
say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I accept the amendment to the 
amendment. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, the Committee 
accepts the amendment of Commissioners Bemas and 
Villegas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this last 
proposed amendment which has been accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 


MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. As a consequence of the amendment 
of Commissioners Bemas and Villegas, I propose to 
delete the comma (,) between the words “inequities” 
and “and.” 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we accept. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may we now read 
the entire Section 1 , as amended, thus far: “THE STATE 
SHALL PROMOTE SOCIAL JUSTICE IN ALL 
PHASES OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. IN PUR- 
SUIT THEREOF, CONGRESS SHALL GIVE HIGHEST 
PRIORITY TO THE ENACTMENT OF MEASURES 
THAT PROTECT AND ENHANCE THE RIGHT OF 
ALL THE PEOPLE TO HUMAN DIGNITY, REDUCE 
SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL INEQUALI- 
TIES AND REMOVE CULTURAL INEQUITIES BY 
EQUITABLY DIFFUSING WEALTH AND POLITICAL 
POWER FOR THE COMMON GOOD.” 

Do we have any other amendments on Section 1 ? 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Commissioner Rosales and I feel that 
some may vote against this section simply because of 
the word “HIGHEST.” In the light of the explanation of 
Commissioner Bernas, and the fact that there are other 
provisos in our Constitution which have the same 
category of priority, Commissioner Rosales and I were 
wondering if we could not change the word “HIGHEST” 
to just HIGH, so that the statement will read “CON- 
GRESS SHALL GIVE HIGH PRIORITY.” Probably by 
changing that we could be unanimous in voting for such 
a very important section as Section 1 . 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, we raise a point 
of order because Section 1 has been voted upon already. 

MR. TINGSON. I see. I am sorry. 

MR. BENGZON. Besides, the amendment of Commis- 
sioner Padilla removing the word “HIGHEST” has also 
been voted upon. 

MR. TINGSON. I submit. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized . 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. If there are no more amendments to 
Section 1, I would like to propose amendments to 
Section 2. I propose to delete the words “section” and 
the figure “2” and the period (.) after it. And then, 
instead of increments,” I propose to restore the word 
“fruits ” and to delete the word “thereof.” So this part 
will no longer read as a section but will immediately 
follow the first paragraph of Section 1 : “Towards these 
ends, the State shall regulate the acquisition, ownership, 
use, and disposition of property and its FRUITS, and 
promote . . .” 

I recommend that it should not be a separate section 
because this is irretrievably linked with the first para- 
graph of Section 1 . 

MR. BENGZON. So, apart from the fact that the 
Gentleman wants to make this part of Section 1, he 
also desires to remove the words “increments thereof” 
and retain the word “fruits.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. Is there any other amendment the 
Gentleman would like to propose? 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


743 


MR. DAV1DE. Of course, as a consequence, the word 
AND must be inserted before “promote.” 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. With respect to the Gentle- 
man’s desire to remove the word “increment,” may I 
suggest that he get together with Commissioner Sar- 
miento because this is his amendment which we 
accepted yesterday. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I just 
make a brief comment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nised. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I explain why I suggested 
the word “increments.” I checked the meaning of “in- 
crement” and the word covers fruits, profit and gains. 
So to have a term that would cover fruits, gains and 
profits, I suggested the word “increments” as an all- 
embracing term. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, in effect we will be 
restoring the original concept of social justice as pro- 
vided in the 1973 Constitution which includes the -right 
of the State to regulate acquisition, ownership, use, 
enjoyment, disposition of property, its fruits, as well as 
profits therefrom. 

MS. NIEVA. That is the way we understand this. 

MR. DAVIDE. If that is the understanding, then I 
would have no objection to retaining the word incre- 
ments.” So, my proposals will be three: Delete Section 
2, make the provision as the second paragraph to 
Section 1 ; delete the word “thereof” after “increments”; 
then add the word AND before “promote.” 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Will Commissioner Davide accept an 
additional amendment? I am not too comfortable with 
the phrase “Towards these ends.” I would propose the 
collective phrase TO THIS END. 

MR. DAVIDE. It should be singular? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes, but I am leaving it to the 
Committee. 

MR. DAVIDE. The “ends” are enumerated in the 
first paragraph. I think this is the sense of the Commit- 
tee. 

MS. NIEVA. Perhaps we can leave this to the Com- 
mittee on Style. 


MR. ROMULO. Will Commissioner Davide consider 
another amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to hear it. 

MR. ROMULO. The amendment is to delete the 
phrase “promote the establishment of independent and 
self-reliant socio-political and economic structures,” 
because I think that is a redundant phrase. That is part 
of the State’s program or measures to regulate owner- 
ship, and this should be left to Congress to decide. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am willing to agree, with the under- 
standing that Sections 19 and 20 be approved by the 
body because if we approve Sections 19 and 20, 1 really 
would agree with the Commissioner that the phrase 
“promote the establishment of independent and self- 
reliant socio-political and economic structures” is a 
redundancy. 

MR. ROMULO. I agree, subject to that reservation. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then I would agree. 

THE PRESIDENT. How then will this second para- 
graph read with the amendment of Commissioner 
Davide? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, it will now read as 
follows: “TOWARDS THESE ENDS, THE STATE 
SHALL REGULATE THE ACQUISITION, OWNER- 
SHIP, USE, AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY AND 
ITS INCREMENTS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Will the distinguished sponsor con- 
sider an amendment to his amendment? If this is a part 
ot Section 1 , would not the words “Towards these 
ends” be unnecessary or redundant because Section 1 
says “in pursuit thereof”? And then, should not the 
words “the State” be “the Congress” because in 
Section 1 we say “Congress shall give the highest 
priority”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, these are the 
otiginal words of the Committee. I would like to under- 
stand that fire sense here is that the phrase “Towards 
these ends lefers to the ends or objectives enumerated 
in the first paragraph, and that is why it is still necessary 
to state this. But as the Chairman has stated earlier, the 
Committee on Style may reformulate the wording, but I 
do believe that these are essential statements to give 
proper emphasis to the objectives or ends enumerated 


744 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


in the first paragraph, and to emphasize what the State 
should do to achieve said objectives. 

MR. PADILLA. Does the Gentleman not agree to 
change the word “State” to CONGRESS? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, Madam President, because even 
in the 1973 Constitution, that particular duty at the 
same time a right was given to the State because we do 
not need to repeat what Congress shall do in the first 
sentence or the first paragraph. 

MR. PADILLA. The first section already says “the 
State” and then it mentions through the instrumental- 
ity of the Congress. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment proposed by Commissioner Davide, so it 
now belongs to the Committee. May we react? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. VILLEGAS. May I just make some comments, 
Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas desires to 
make some comments. 

MR. VILLEGAS. This is an information to the 
ommittee in support of the deletion of the last 
phrase. The very first section of the Article on the 
National Economy and Patrimony says that: “The 
State shall promote a self-reliant and independent 
national economy.” That means that all the structures 
shall be independent and self-reliant. 

MR. BENGZON. May we request Commissioner 
Davide to read the entire paragraph. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, it will now read as 
follows: “TOWARDS THESE ENDS, THE STATE 
SHALL REGULATE THE ACQUISITION, OWNER- 
SHIP. USE, AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY AND 
ITS INCREMENTS.” 

MS. N1EVA. The Committee is divided as to whether 
we should remove the last two lines which say: “pro- 
mote the establishment of independent and self-reliant 
socio-political and economic structures.” We would, 
therefore, put the matter to a vote. 

MR DAVIDE. With the explanation that the deletion 
is due to the fact that, as stated by Commissioner 
Villegas, there is an almost similar and perhaps broader 


provision in the proposed Article on the National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony and we also have Sections 1 9 and 
20 in this very same proposed Article on Social Justice. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, before we vote, 
may I say something? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. During the deliberations on the 
Article on Social Justice the other day, I mentioned that 
there are two major actors in the attainment of social 
justice. On the one hand, we have the State and on the 
other, the people. We thought that to include this 
concept, these two lines should be included in Section 1 
which is really the statement of principle that encom- 
passes all those specific provisions that follow all the 
way from Section 3 in the amended version up to 
Section 20. We feel that this is important. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Before we vote on the issue 
whether to include or exclude the last three lines, may I 
know from the members of the Committee the meaning 
of “self-reliant socio-political and economic structures”'? 
What are these socio-political and economic structures? 

MR. GARCIA. To bring about social justice, it is not 
simply sufficient to try to reduce and to try to diff Use 
wealth and power. It is also important to create th 
structures that in themselves will enable and encoura 6 
people to create wealth to be able to make decisions 8° 
this is what is in a sense the objective of this section t° 
create structures or political processes that will enahi° 
people to bring about changes by themselves or throu n 
their communal or collective efforts. The word “• 
dependent” here refers to the nation — the nation 
be independent as much as possible, and not to t° 
subservient or not to be dependent on any other pow 6 
but on its efforts as a nation. er ’ 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 6 

MR. REGALADO. Since I think a number of Com- 
missioners share my concern on this abstract concept, 
will Commissioner Garcia please give us a more con- 
crete, simple and specific example so that we can 
consider it in that light? 

THE PRESIDENT . An example of a structure? 

MR. REGALADO. Any structure. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


745 


MR. GARCIA. On Sections 1 9 and 20 where we have 
people’s organizations, oneof the mechanisms envisioned 
or suggested is a mechanism of popular consultation. 
For example, whenever decisions affecting the lives of 
fishermen are made, like the problem of Laguna Lake, 
the fishermen are consulted, not only in the planning 
but also in the implementation program. Regarding land 
reform, farmers and even landowners later on are also 
consulted on these questions. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, that is an institu- 
tionalized consultative structure. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. We try to institutionalize the 
participation of people in political decisions, in political 
processes. So that the structures in a sense are moved 
by the efforts of people, together with government. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, a consultative 
process which is supposed to be institutionalized for this 
purpose resulting in a social structure? 

MR. GARCIA. It results in socio-political and econo- 
mic structures. That is why the system of initiative and 
referendum refers to the diffusion of political power. 
The system of sectoral representation is also along these 
lines. The system of cooperatives, of consultative 
assemblies could also be along these lines. 

MR. REGALADO. Are these not already covered by 
Sections 19 and 20 of the same Article, or are they dif- 
ferent? Are they complementary or supplementary? 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I add to the statements of 
Commissioner Garcia, Madam President? 

MR. NOLLE DO. Madam President, before we vote, 
I would like to make just one statement. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like the body to take note that if we delete 
the last three sentences in Section 2, the expression or 
the words “political power” in the last line of Section 1 
will be out of place. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, may I add to 
the comments of Commissioner Garcia? Commissioner 
Garcia has dealt lengthily on independent political 
organizations as consultative mechanisms. Let us also 
add the possibility of independent economic organiza- 
tions, like those belonging to small-scale enterprises or 
entrepreneurs, as well as cooperatives. 1 think all ot 
these are considered and contemplated in the concept ot 
independent and self-reliant socio-political and econo- 
mic structures. In a way, they parallel the existing 


formal organizations of government. But we must, as a 
matter of encouraging the people’s initiative and 
people’s enterprise, include this as a complementary 
effort in the attainment of social justice. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. As the proponent who accepted that 
particular amendment, may I just make a rejoinder to 
the statement of Commissioner Nolledo? The effect is 
not so, as stated by him, because we have clear provi- 
sions under Sections 19 and 20 which read as follows: 

Section 19. In the pursuit of the ends of social justice, 
the State shall respect the independence and the role of 
people’s organizations as a principal means of empowering 
the people to pursue and protect through peaceful means 
their legitimate and collective interests and aspirations. 

Section 20. The State shall respect the right of the 
people and their organizations to effective and reasonable 
participation at all levels of social, political and economic 
decision-making, and shall MAKE POSSIBLE adequate 
consultation mechanisms. 

So, the effect of the deletion is not that contem- 
plated by Commissioner Nolledo because of Sections 1 9 
and 20. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may I reply very 
briefly? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Because of the use of the words 
“Towards these ends,” I think the statements of Com- 
missioner Davide are gratuitous in the sense that we are 
concentrating merely on disposition, ownership, acquisi- 
tion of property, which are very restrictive. So, Section 
2 will not reflect what is contained in Section 1 . I am 
asking for legal craftsmanship, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. The issue has been amply debated. I 
move that we take a vote on this particular issue. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Davide, which is to include this as a 
second paragraph ot Section 1, has not been accepted 
because ot the division within the membership of the 
Committee. Is that correct? 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, the first part of the 
Commissioner s amendment was to remove the words 
"SECTION 2.” The Committee accepts the amendment. 


746 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. That is accepted. 

MS. NIEVA. Do we have to vote on that? 


MR. RAMA. Just one more speaker. Madam Pres- 
ident. May I ask that Commissioner Romulo be recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we will have to vote on that. 

MS. NIEVA. Then we shall have a vote on the first 
part of the amendment. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, if we vote on 
that first part, does that foreclose us from making fur- 
ther amendments should it be approved, or shall we 
follow the same procedure that we had where a section 
was first approved, and then subjected to further re- 
fining amendments? 


VOTING 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we will follow the same 
procedure. 


Those in favor of placing the first sentence of Section 
as a > se _cond paragraph of Section 1, as proposed by 
ommissioner Davide and which has been accepted by 
t e Committee, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 


Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 36 votes in favor and 2 against; the 
amendment is approved. 


Now, let us vote on the second portion of the pi 
ose amendment of Commissioner Davide to delete t 
last two lines of the original Section 2. 

M 'h R ® EN ^AGEN. May I just have one 
Madam President, before we vote? 


• PRESIDENT. Commissioner 
mzed. 


Bennagen is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. I would propose a new section to this 
Article we are now discussing by transposing what 
appears to be Section 10 in the draft of the Committee 
to what will now become Section 2. Inasmuch as Sec- 
tion 1 0 deals with the promotion of social justice which 
includes the commitment to create economic opportuni- 
ties based on the freedom of initiative, especially for 
small- and medium-scale entrepreneurs, I do not believe 
that belongs to the section under agrarian and land 
reform. It is a general section which more properly 
belongs to the first part. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the Gentleman proposes to 
transpose. 

MR. ROMULO. It is an amendment by transposition 
of Section 1 0, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. And mark it as Section 2. 

MR. ROMULO. As a new section, Madam President. 


MS. NIEVA. Madam President, when we discussed 
this last night, we did not intend this section to be one 
under agrarian reform because we certainly realized that 
this has nothing to do with agrarian reform. So, we 
thought it would be a separate section just like Agrarian 
Reform and Labor and this one would deal with the 
entrepreneurs. We thought this would be a separate 
section with a subsection entitled “Entrepreneurs.” 


MR. BENNAGEN. Since we are already conden 

necessary 'to tW ° sentences ’ 1 feel tha t thi 

rphtion C ti m ; unta,n some conceptual symmetry 

social justice ’ ^ a " d th ° people as instrument 

Thank you. Madam President. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the second pa 
ol the amendment of Commissioner Davide, please rai 
their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

Those against please raise their hand. (Few Membe 
raised their hand.) 

The iesults show 23 votes in favor, and 18 agaim 
the amendment is approved. 

So, we do not have any Section 2 right now. 


MR. ROMULO. So, this would precede “Labor.” 

MS. NIEVA. We thought it would come after “Agra- 
rian Land Reform.” 

MR. ROMULO. No, that does not make sense. At the 
very least, it should follow “Labor.” 

If the Committee asks me, it should actually precede 
Labor.” This is a general statement. 

MR. BENGZON. Would the Gentleman insist on his 
motion to transpose? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, because it provides balance to 
the first section, and that was precisely the point of 
Commissioner Villegas. To place it in Section 10 or 
under some heading would make it lose its whole effect. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


747 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think there are two concepts 
that are embodied in Section 10 — one, the commit- 
ment to create economic opportunities based on the 
freedom of initiative; and two, its special attention or 
concern for small- and medium-scale entrepreneurs. I 
think the commitment to create economic opportuni- 
ties based on the freedom of initiative applies to all, not 
only to small- and medium-scale entrepreneurs. But 
maybe that sector of small- and medium-scale entre- 
preneurs deserves a separate section which will attend to 
particularities. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. There are differences within the 
Committee on this matter. There are those of us who 
feel it should be right after Section 1 because Section 1 
talks about what the State should do. In other words, 
these are acts of the State; whereas, we also need to 
balance these with the promotion of private initiative. 
So, we are really talking about private initiative all 
throughout the economy. But we are making only a 
special mention of small- and medium-scale entrepre- 
neurs and this would balance State action with private 
initiative. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, one brief 
comment on Section 10. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. With due respect to the propo- 
nents, I humbly submit that this Section 10 is not 
necessary because we have Section 1 which provides 
that Congress shall give highest priority to the enact- 
ment of measures that will protect and enhance the 
right of all the people to human dignity; reduce social, 
economic, political, inequalities, etc. So here, we are 
specifying a particular sector. I humbly submit that 
Section 1 0 is already covered by Section 1 . 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I would like to 
support the proposal of Commissioner Romulo. Section 
1 deals with the diffusion of wealth; Section 10 deals 
with the creation of wealth. If we put the two together, 
we create and diffuse wealth. So the two of them are 
basic principles running through this. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty this afternoon. 

It was 12:45 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:44 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

When we suspended the session, Commissioner 
Romulo had the floor. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, my amendment is 
to transpose Section 1 0. 1 propose that it be made a new 
Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the reaction of the Com- 
mittee? 

MS. NIEVA. Will it have the same wording? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MS. NIEVA. The view of the Committee is that if we 
mention “small- and medium-scale entrepreneurs,” 
specifically singling out that sector and putting this in 
the definition, it would look like we are giving singular 
attention and privilege to that sector. We have discussed 
this in our Committee and we are wondering if the 
Gentleman is agreeable to this phraseology as Section 2: 
THE PROMOTION OF SOCIAL JUSTICE SHALL IN- 
CLUDE THE COMMITMENT TO CREATE ECONOM- 
IC OPPORTUNITIES BASED ON THE FREEDOM OF 
INITIATIVE AND THE PRINCIPLE OF SELF- 
RELIANCE. Could that be Section 2? 

MR. ROMULO. May I just consult my cosponsor, 
Commissioner Villegas, if that is acceptable. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, with due 
respect to Commissioner Romulo, I have a prejudicial 
motion before we suspended the session this morning. 
I moved for the deletion of this section on the ground 
that the provisions of Section 1 , particularly the words 
“give highest priority to the enactment of measures that 
protect and enhance the right of every citizen to human 
dignity,” would cover that of Section 10. And secondly, 
my argument was that here we are giving importance to 
one sector. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, that is why the 
amendment is to eliminate the phrase “especially 
through small- and medium-scale entrepreneurs.” 
Precisely, we want to get away from the idea that they 
are a privileged sector when they were mentioned in the 
general statement. But we want to focus on the need 
for freedom of initiative and principle of self-reliance 
to counterbalance the mandate for State action. 


748 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I request the reformulation 
of Section 10, as amended by the Committee itself. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. This was the way we formulated it: 
THE PROMOTION OF SOCIAL JUSTICE SHALL IN- 
CLUDE THE COMMITMENT TO CREATE ECONO- 
MIC OPPORTUNITIES BASED ON THE FREEDOM 
OF INITIATIVE AND THE PRINCIPLE OF SELF- 
RELIANCE. Basically, the first part is entirely the 
Villegas amendment but we felt that it was important 
to include the principle of self-reliance because we 
wanted to stress that social justice is not only the 
State’s responsibility but the citizens’ also. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Then, with that explanation and 
amendment by deletion, I withdraw my amendment. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. I accept the Committee’s amend- 
ment. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you. 

MR BENNAGEN. Also, may I add another com- 
ment. t also restores what was, in effect, lost in the 

e e ion of the three sentences, essentially the principle 
or sen-reliance because, as was explained earlier this 
morning, we feel that we should not simply mandate 

le , ,. at , e t0 ever ything for the people, including the 
so ca e private sector but should encourage also the 

o er side, which is to say, the nongovernmental organi- 
zations. 

MR. ROMULO. So, Madam President, with the 
amendment now of the Committee, the provision shall 

cuatt THE pr °motion of social justice 
INclude the commitment to create 
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES BASED ON THE 
FREEDOM OF INITIATIVE AND THE PRINCIPLE 
OF SELF-RELIANCE. 

THE PRESIDENT. And this will be Section 2? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Romulo, which 
has been accepted by the Committee, to transpose 
Section 2 with the wordings that have been recited by 
Commissioner Romulo and the Chairman of the Com- 
mittee. (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment 
is approved. 

MR. RAMA. To amend Section 3, Madam President 
I ask that Commissioner Foz be recognized. 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, my proposed amend- 
ment has to do with Section 3(b) under the title of 
Labor. But, first of all, I would like to ask the Chairman 
if it is true that the phrase “of any class or kind” has 
been deleted. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, the phrase has been deleted. We 
would like to confirm that. 

MS. NIEVA. It was a mistake to insert that. So, in the 
corrected pages that we gave, that was deleted. 

MR. FOZ. The amendment would consist of the fol- 
lowing: Insert the words INCLUDING THOSE IN THE 
PUBLIC SECTOR between the words “workers” and 
“to,” so that the clause will now read: “Guarantee the 
rights of workers INCLUDING THOSE IN THE PUB- 
LIC SECTOR to self-organization.” 

That is only in consonance with the response of the 
Committee to a previous interpellation on the scope of 
the term “workers.” The Committee said that it would 
include those in the public, as well as private, sector. So, 
to clarify, to put emphasis and to stress that these rights 
shall also pertain to those in the public sector, the 
amendment would include that phrase INCLUDING 
THOSE IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. This proposed Section 3 was taken 
from my proposed amendment and I would like to state 
that the intention of Commissioner Foz is already in- 
cluded in the words “of any class or kind.” 

MR. FOZ. But it has been removed. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee would like to react. 

deleted the phrase “of any class or kind” on lines 
-0 and 21 of the draft because we would like to avoid 
any formulation that would constitutionalize a dis- 
tinction. And if we put that in the insertion being pro- 
posed by Commissioner Foz, it might unjustly and 
without proper basis lay the basis for a distinction, 
which precisely we want to avoid. 

MR. DAVIDE. If this particular phrase has been 
deleted earlier, I would conform to the deletion, but I 
would object to the proposal of Commissioner Foz. 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee is of the same position, 
Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


749 


MR. FOZ. I cannot see why there should be any 
objection to the inclusion of such phrase, since the 
Committee itself responded before to a question that 
the term “workers” would include both workers in the 
public, as well as private, sector. 

MS. AQUINO. Are we in agreement with Commis- 
sioner Foz that the term “workers” contemplates all 
classes and kinds of employees and laborers? We are 
confused about his intention in inserting a particular 
reference, an expressed reference to the public sector. 
In other words, we think it is an unnecessary surplusage. 

MR. FOZ. In the first place, why was the phrase “of 
any class or kind” dropped from the provision, if it was 
ever proposed at all? 

MS. AQUINO. Precisely because we do not want to 
distinguish anymore. Essentially, our reference to 
workers here refers to any class or kind, and we are of 
the feeling that if we explicitly provide for that, we 
just might unnecessarily open the interpretation to some 
unwanted distinction. 

Madam President, we would like to submit this to the 
floor for decision. 

MR. FOZ. In view of the explanation, Madam Pres- 
ident, I am willing to withdraw the amendment, but I 
have other amendments concerning the same provision 
if the Committee will just allow me to proceed. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it on the same section? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. May I propound some questions to 
the members of the Committee? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I was about to propound a question 
to Commissioner Foz regarding the phrase that he wants 
to insert. The response by the members of the Commit- 
tee seems to imply that that is not necessary because 
this paragraph already includes those in the public 
sector. Do I get it right? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, that is right. 

MR. ROMULO. These rights guaranteed by this 
paragraph include the right to strike in accordance with 
law. So, even the policemen, the nurses in our Depart- 
ment of Health or at the Philippine General Hospital, 
and maybe even the members of the army, are included 
in that guarantee — the right to strike in accordance 
with law. 


MS. NIEVA. That is precisely why we placed that 
phrase “in accordance with law.” We know that there 
are exceptions, and these include the armed forces and 
the civil defense workers that the Gentleman has men- 
tioned. And so, these would not have that right to strike 
if it is not in accordance with law. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, Congress then has the power to 
enact a law stating that there is that right to strike 
except for the members of the armed forces, police 
forces and civil service employees. Is that correct? 

MS. NIEVA. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. Before Congress enacts such a law, 
what would be the situation? 

MS. NIEVA. We understand there are existing laws 
that would govern that. 

MR. RODRIGO. Existing laws? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, in connection with the 
same question of Commissioner Rodrigo, I would like 
to ask a question. Does the phrase “in accordance with 
law” refer to all the rights enumerated in this provision, 
such as self-organization, collective bargaining and nego- 
tiations, peaceful concerted activities and also the right 
to strike? Does the phrase have reference to the listing 
of the rights of workers? 

MR. SUAREZ. No, Madam President, because one 
will notice that there is no comma between the words 
“strike” and “in,” so the phrase “in accordance with 
law” is limited to the phrase “including the right to 
strike.” 

MR. FOZ. But does not the Committee think or 
believe that these rights listed here — self-organization, 
collective bargaining and negotiations, peaceful con- 
certed activities - are merely being guaranteed but the 
workers have these rights? They exist even without being 
mentioned here in this provision. 

MR. SUAREZ. That may be true, but the Gentleman 
was asking whether or not the phrase “in accordance 
with law” qualifies the other antecedent phrases. 

MR. FOZ. That is right. 

MR. SUAREZ. It does not. In this particular regard, 
it only qualifies the phrase “right to strike.” 

MR. FOZ. Does that mean that the law that may be 
passed on this matter will have to deal only with the 


750 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1 986 


right to strike but not with the rights to self-organiza- 
tion, collective bargaining and negotiations and peaceful 
and concerted activities? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is the thrust of this particular 
provision. Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. Does that also mean that while Congress 
may regulate the right to strike, it may not regulate 
activities as far as self-organization, collective bargaining 
and negotiations and peaceful and concerted activities 
are concerned? 


conditions of work that workers or trade unions would 
negotiate with management for them to be allowed to 
undertake continuing education as part of their 
manpower development program? 

MR. FOZ. But the terms and conditions of work may 
not adequately encompass the concept of a continuing 
education training of the workers. There is a need, I 
think, to specifically express this as a right of the 
workers to adequately prepare them for their work and 
also to keep up with changing technologies in their 
respective areas. 


MR. SUAREZ. I think Congress can, in an implied 
way. But in the case of the right to strike, we made it 
quite clear that this should be done strictly in accord- 
ance with what Congress may provide in the future. But 
it does not certainly preclude Congress from enacting 
laws that will guarantee the rights of workers to, say, 
self-organization, collective bargaining and negotiations 
and peaceful and concerted activities. 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we volunteer 
the information that in most collective bargaining agree- 
ments, there is a specific provision calling for promo- 
tional and educational campaigns on the rights of the 
laborers. In other words, they are even given union 
leaves in order to attend to labor seminars that are being 
conducted by the mother chapter organizations among 
the labor unions. 


MR. FOZ. But we can say that these rights exist, that 
t e workers have these rights. And by mentioning these 
m this provision, we are only saying that the State is 
under a mandate to guarantee these rights. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman is right. 


MR. FOZ. That is in the case of the organized labor, 
and we know very well that the organized labor consti- 
tutes but a very small fragment of the total employed 
labor force. And we have in mind, as Section 3(b) itself 
says, that it shall be the duty of the State to afford full 
protection to labor, organized and unorganized. 


u J wou ld like to proceed to the amendment, 

rf 111 resident - Still on the same section, between the 
Si h ™ ane ” and “conditions,” insert the words 
. h ^ at t ^ le Phrase will now read: “just 

and humane TERMS AND conditions of work.” 

President^^ acce ^ t that amendment, Madam 


word “work’^ on^th ? * am ® ndment wdl be, after the 
EDUCATION a ? Same hne > in^rt ADEQUATE 

theS ^f , R TRAINING PROGRAM. So thai 
condition! Tf fe ? d: “ just md humane TERMS ANE 

TRAINING Vr(Sums QU ^ TE EDUCAT1 ° NAL 0f 


e me explain the amendment. There is a convention 
o e ntemational Labor Organization recognizing or 
providing that workers, in general, should be given 
a equate opportunity to have a continuing education 
and tiaining not only for their self-improvement but 
also to keep up with the technological changes going on 
in the industry and in society. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Will Commissioner Foz 
entertain an amendment to his amendment? Since this is 
a component that is still important not only in terms of 
organized labor but also for farmers, would the Commit- 
tee be willing to include this concept when we go to 
Section 19 or Section 20 where we incorporate the 
concept of human resources development and non- 
formal education in the provisions on people’s organiza- 
tions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Rosario Braid 
referring to Section 3(b)? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. The amendment of 
Commissioner Foz is to include “ADEQUATE EDUCA- 
TIONAL OR TRAINING PROGRAMS” as an addi- 
tional phrase in Section 3(b), but the Committee feels 
that this is a component of every collective negotiation. 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President, could I just 
respond to the explanation of Commissioner Foz? 


MS. NIEVA. May we know what Commissioner Foz 
thinks about this amendment to his amendment? 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MS. QUESADA. Does not the Gentleman think that 
such a proposal is already covered in the terms and 


MR. FOZ. As long as the concept is there, I would 
agree to a deferment so that the proposed additional 
amendment will be taken up in connection with Section 
20. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


751 


MR. ROMULO. Will Commissioner Foz entertain a 
question, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. ROMULO. I think he is in agreement that when 
there is a CBA, the CBA will provide for what he is 
seeking to include. Is that correct? 

MR. FOZ. Usually, yes. 

MR. ROMULO. When there is no CBA, this provision 
would mean that it is the duty of the State to guarantee 
what he is suggesting and, therefore, it will be the State 
that will pay for what he is suggesting. Is that correct? 

MR. FOZ. Not necessarily, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Who else will pay? 

MR. FOZ. There could be a provision of law, let us 
say in the Labor Code, that would 'provide for such 
opportunity for the workers to obtain education or 
training at any level, general social or civic education or 
trade union education. 

MR. ROMULO. He will, therefore, make it manda- 
tory on the part of every employer to provide such a 
training and so on. 

MR. FOZ. Generally, it is management who will have 
to provide for the wherewithal of such a . . . 

MR. ROMULO. I think it cannot be meant generally 
if we will command the legislature to pass a law which 
will mandate the employer to provide these things. 

MR. FOZ. Because the improvement in the education 
of the workers will redound to the benefit of manage- 
ment. 

MR. ROMULO. There is no doubt about that, but we 
are talking of feasibility and the cost of making such a 
thing compulsory. 

MR. FOZ. One requirement would be that manage- 
ment would allow the workers to study, for instance, on 
management’s time or company’s time. That is one of 
the provisions that are envisioned. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, that is precisely my point. So, it 
will not only cost the company the time, but the wages 
of the individual. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 


MS. AQUINO. On behalf of the Committee, this 
might obviate the need to vote on the amendment of 
Commissioner Foz. Would it satisfy Commissioner Foz 
if the Committee gives him the assurance that from the 
proposed provisions in Section 3(b), there is sufficient 
mandate to the Congress to give impetus to a statutory 
implementation in the context of his proposal of 
educational training programs? Would it satisfy him if 
we give him that assurance now so that we do not have 
to vote on his proposed amendment? 

MR. FOZ. Without expressing it in so many words? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. I would agree, Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. In connection with Section 3(b), may I 
put a question to the Committee for clarification pur- 
poses, which may not lead to an amendment at all. 

Under the existing law, there are two grounds for 
declaring a strike, and these are unfair labor practice 
which may impinge on the . . . 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, before Commissioner 
Ople proceeds, may I ask if my previous amendment has 
been accepted by the Committee regarding the inclusion 
of the words “TERMS AND”? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we have included that; we have 
accepted that. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is after the word “humane”? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. After the word “humane” and before the 
word “conditions.” 

THE PRESIDENT. If that is all that we have there, 
then we will have to put that to a vote. Is Commissioner 
Foz through already with his proposed amendment? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What was the desire of Commis- 
sioner Ople? Did he have a proposed amendment to the 
amendment of Commissioner Foz? 

MR. OPLE. No, an amendment may not be necessary 
if the Committee can answer just one very simple ques- 
tion concerning Section 3(b), Madam President. If I 
stand in the way of a vote on the proposed amendment 


752 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


of Commissioner Foz, I will resume my seat and come 
back later. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Gentleman’s comment 
have something to do with the amendment of Commis- 
sioner Foz? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. COLAYCO. All the paragraphs in Section 3 
merely reflect the rights of labor which are already 
provided in existing laws. I am afraid that we are clutter- 
ing our Constitution unnecessarily. 

Repeatedly, I have received during our public con- 
ferences and by letter comments about the style and 
that the language used in framing our Constitution is 
too long. I have here before me a collection of writings 
and recommendations of constitutional writers which I 
would like to read. 

Generally, a constitution should be brief and should 
limit itself to fundamentals, avoiding all legislative matter. 

It should affirm general principles leaving details to legisla- 
tion. 

The constitution should be as short as possible which is 
little more than an enumeration of the powers of the 
various branches of the government to which is added the 
Bill of Rights. 

There are many other comments in the same tenor. 
What I would like to propose is that if the intent of the 
Committee is to elevate to the constitutional level the 
plethora of laws that have been enacted to date, includ- 
ing the Labor Code of the Philippines, I believe that 
with the statements in Sections 1 , 2 and even a portion 
of Section 3 to the effect that it shall be the duty of 
the State to afford full protection to labor, we will have 
accomplished the purpose of the Committee without 
the long paragraphs that have been submitted to us for 
approval. And I believe that, without in any way 
diminishing or reducing the importance of preserving 
the rights of labor, we can do that by simply making a 
short statement as suggested. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. On behalf of the Committee, it is our 
humble submission that the rights enumerated herein, 
most of which are just repetitions of the provisions in 
the 1973 and 1935 Constitutions, rightfully elevate to 
the constitutional level basic and fundamental rights 
pertaining to the workers and to the labor force which 


we think are immutable and unyielding to the protesta- 
tions of brevity. These are something that are basic and 
which cannot be compromised because of briefer 
expediency. 

MR. COLAYCO. I agree with the reasoning behind 
the statement. What I am saying is, all these rights that 
we are now being asked to approve are already in our 
law books and it is not likely that our legislature may 
turn around next time and say that all these laws are 
hereby annulled. What I am saying is: What is the use of 
repeating what is already in our law books? If all we 
want is to elevate to constitutional level the protective 
laws that we already have, a general statement that we 
have already approved in the first and second sections 
could be more than sufficient, I think. Anyway, I am 
addressing this proposal or this suggestion so that the 
Committee would bear in mind the accepted norms of 
constitutional writing. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is reco 
nized. 


MR. LERUM. I agree with the statement that the 
Constitution should be as short as possible. But a short 
Constitution is liable to misinterpretation. I am goin 
to cite this example. In the Bill of Rights of the 1935 
and 1973 Constitutions, there is a provision that the 
right to form associations whose purpose is not con 
trary to law may not be abridged. And yet, in the Labor 
Code, there is such a provision which prohibits govern- 
ment employees from forming unions; another provision 
which says that managerial employees and security 
guards cannot form unions. And so, it becomes necessa- 
ry that we make a detailed provision on these so that 
what is very clear m the Constitution will be clearly 
interpreted also. This is the reason why there seems to 
be a repetition of what has already been provided That 
is only one example. We can cite other examples but r 
think that should be enough. 


MR. COLAYCO. In our Bill of Rights which was 
already approved by this body, we have in Section 7 
the same provision which says: 


The right of the people including those employed in 
the public and private sectors to form associations, unions, 
or societies for purposes not contrary to law shall not be 
abridged. 

And we find the same statement in this Article. 

I am suggesting that the Committee be more parsi- 
monious in the use of words. Frankly, this has been 
repeatedly mentioned during our public hearings, and 
as I said, even in private communications. Probably, 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


753 


some of us must have received similar letters. I think we will proceed to vote. What is the suggestion of Commis- 
should take note of these suggestions. sioner Foz? 


MS. NIEVA. We appreciate those observations, 
Madam President, and we are very conscious really that 
we should not usurp the role of the legislature here. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Does Commissioner Colayco have 
any suggestion on how we can be less enumerative? We 
would be happy to receive his suggestions because his 
point is well taken. 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes. This occurred to me because I 
notice that during the period of amendments, the pro- 
visions are getting longer. We will never end with this. 
It took us more than one hour and a half just to approve 
one section, and already we are eight days behind. So, 
this suggestion is made not only to the Committee but 
to my colleagues. And I do not want to contribute to 
what I am trying to avoid. 

Thank you. 


MR. FOZ. I suggest, Madam President, that we vote 
first on my first amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. This has been accepted by the 
Committee. 

Is there any objection to this particular amendment? 

SR. TAN. Madam President, I object. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this correct? Has this been 
accepted by the Committee? 

SR. TAN. Has it been accepted by the Committee? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we have accepted that. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, that has been accepted. 

SR. TAN. But I would still like to object because we 
have been fighting for a living wage. 


MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR FOZ. I have one last amendment in response to 
previous statements, but I would like to ask the ques- 
tion first Is the concept of a decent living wage not 
subsumed in the concept of just and humane terms and 
conditions of work? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, the Gentleman may be right. So, is 
he suggesting that that be deleted? 

MR FOZ. In that case, I so move that the phrase 
“and to a decent living wage” be deleted on the ground 
that it is already covered by the phrase “just and 
humane TERMS AND conditions of work.” 

MR RODRIGO. Madam President, for a parliamenta- 
v inquiry. Before going into that next amendment by 
Commissioner Foz, I would like to ask: Have we voted 
lready on his first amendment inserting the words 
‘‘TERMS AND” between “humane” and “conditions” 
which was accepted by the Committee? 


MS. NIEVA. No, we are not there yet. 

THE PRESIDENT. We are still on the phrase 
“TERMS AND conditions of work.” 

MS. NIEVA. We are just talking about the phrase 
“just and humane TERMS AND conditions.” 

SR. TAN. I am sorry. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular proposed amendment of Commissioner Foz 
which has been accepted by the Committee? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, may I change my 
amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I object. 


THE PRESIDENT. Not yet. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, I think we should vote on that 
first. 

THE PRESIDENT. We have not yet voted on that; 
that is why we would like to get the other amendments 
which may be accepted by the Committee on this par- 
ticular line. If there are no more amendments then we 


PRESIDENT. To the inclusion of the word 

ltKMo : 

«TrLc A A\m» I object to the inclusion of the words 
1EKMS AND because these would be necessarily 
included in “living wage,” and I do not want “living 
wage” to be deleted later. The word “conditions” refers 
to the conditions of labor, like a better place, a habitat 
for the employees. These are the “conditions” referred 


754 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


to. We cannot speak of “just and humane TERMS” if 
we refer to the compensation or the wage which would 
be taken care of by the succeeding phrase. It could be 
“just TERMS and humane conditions,” but not both 
“TERMS AND conditions.” 

MR. FOZ. I agree, but “TERMS” would be a more 
encompassing word. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 3:28 p. m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 3:43 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colay co is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Upon the suggestion of some mem- 
bers of the Committee, since I am not quite ready to 
give my proposals at this moment. I am reserving the 
right to do so at the latest, if necessary, tomorrow 
morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Before we suspended the session, I pro- 
posed the insertion of the words TERMS AND after 
the word “humane” and before the word “conditions,” 
but it appears that although the Committee at first 
accepted the amendment, the Committee, I understand, 
has second thoughts about accepting the amendment, 
considering the opposition of Commissioner Davide. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, is Commissioner Foz insisting 
on his amendment? 

MR. FOZ. And also, in connection with that amend- 
ment, I would have suggested the deletion of the phrase 
“and to a decent living wage.” But I would like to hear 
the comments of the Committee at this point, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

The Committee has gone over the various proposals 
involving this particular provision, and the Committee 
has come up with a simplified version. I would like to 
read this new proposal. We will delete the words “just 
and” and it will be: “humane conditions of work, and 
to a living wage,” on the understanding that the defini- 
tion of the word “wage” would include total package 
which would mean allowances, bonuses, fringe benefits 
or whatever. 

So, as proposed, this particular portion will read- 
“security of tenure, humane conditions of work, and to 
a living wage, and to participation in policy . . 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, with the understanding 
that the term “wage” would refer not only to basic 
wage but to all other monetary emoluments to be given 
to the workers, I am willing to withdraw my amend- 
ment. 

MS. NIEVA Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask that Commissioner 
Regalado be recognized? 

MR. OPLE. I do recall, Madam President, that I 
yielded voluntarily and graciously to Commissioners 
Foz and Colayco. I said I would resume my seat so 
that I would not stand in the way of the resolution of 
the Foz amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, Commissioner Ople is reco 
nized. 8 ~ 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

I am looking at a vital clarification of Section 3(b) 
The intent of the Committee, I think, is critical and as 
to whether or not I would propose an amendment later 
on, I would like it to conform with the contour of their 
own wish and intent. There is in this paragraph the 
guarantee of the right of workers to self-organization, 
collective bargaining and negotiations, peaceful con- 
certed activities, including the right to strike as may be 
provided by law, for their mutual benefit, welfare or 
aid, security of tenure, just and humane conditions 
of work, a decent living wage, and to participate in 
policy- and decision-making processes affecting their 
interests. And, of course, I consider this a commendable 
paragraph, even if it may fall short of the expectations 
of Commissioner Colayco as to his standards of 
constitutional brevity. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


755 


But the vital question to ask — and I hope the Com- 
mittee will respond to this - is whether or not in the 
contemplation of this paragraph, mutual benefit, wel- 
fare or aid, security of tenure, just and humane condi- 
tions of work, decent living wage and also participation 
at the level of the undertaking by the workers consti- 
tute new grounds for declaring a strike in addition to 
what the existing law provides; namely, unfair labor 
practice or economic deadlocks. Is it the intention ot 
the Committee to expand the strikeable grounds in eco- 
nomic disputes by adding this new series of situations in 
the place of work? 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, on behalf of the 
Committee, there is no intention to expand the axiom 
in law and jurisprudence that the right to strike pertains 
only to collective bargaining deadlocks and unfair labor 
practice. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

MS. AQUINO. Amendments might be in order to 
clarify that intention. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. In conformity with that desire just 
expressed, may I ask the Committee, therefore, to 
consider a minor amendment, which is more for pur- 
poses of syntax and clarity. Could we delete the first 
sentence of Section 3(b)? Could we put a period (.) 
after the words “mutual benefit, welfare or aid” and 
then begin a new sentence which will read: “THEY 
SHALL BE ENTITLED TO security of tenure, just and 
humane conditions of work, and to a decent living wage, 
and to PARTICIPATE in policy and decision-making 
processes affecting their interests.” 

In addition, I move to strike out the word “mutual” 
describing “benefit” because I think this refers to in- 
ternal benefits of the organizations of workers, rather 
than to any mutuality between workers and employers. 

Is this amendment acceptable to the Committee, 
Madam President? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, Madam President, the Committee 

accepts. 

MR OPLE. Thank you very much. 

Till PRESIDENT. May we have this again? 

M R OPL E. It will read: “for their benefit, welfare or 
aid. THi \ SHALL BE ENTITLED TO security of 
tenure. . . 

MR. LERUM. Madam President. 

THE PR I SI DENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 


MR. LERUM. Will Commissioner Ople please restate 
his amendment? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, the amendment 
consists of the deletion of the word “mutual,” then put 
a period (.) after “welfare or aid,” and then start all over 
again with a new sentence: “THEY SHALL BE ENTI- 
TLED TO security of tenure, just and humane condi- 
tions of work, and to a decent living wage, and to 
PARTICIPATE in policy and decision-making processes 
affecting their interests.” 

MR. LERUM. Does this amendment mean that 
unions cannot strike even if an employer has committed 
an unfair labor practice by dismissing somebody? 

MR. OPLE. No, it does not follow. I think that is 
covered by the provisions on unfair labor practice. 

MR. LERUM. That is what I am asking. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. LERUM. It is not covered. 

MR. OPLE. No. 

MR. LERUM. In other words, the workers can still 
strike if the cause of the strike is an act of unfair labor 
practice. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. In connection with my proposed 
amendment for which I was recognized, but I notice 
now that . . . 

MR. OPLE. Do I understand, Madam President, that 
this amendment has been approved? 

MR. REGALADO. No. That is why I intend to pro- 
pose an amendment to the amendment. Commissioner 
Ople was lor the elimination of the word “mutual” 
Irom the phrase tor their mutual benefit, welfare or 
aid.” My proposal is to eliminate the entire phrase for 
the simple reason that it will necessarily refer to the 
workers as its antecedent. For whom else is the aid, 
welfare or benefit intended but for the workers which 
is the very antecedent at the start of Section 3 (b)? So, 
it will not even be necessary because it has its course in- 
tended, that it will be for the benefit, aid and welfare 
of the veiy workers which is the subject matter in the 
particular paragraph. 


756 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1 986 


MR. OPLE. Yes. I think it will strengthen the first 
sentence if we put a period (.) after the phrase “to strike 
in accordance with law.” All the rest is really super- 
fluous. 


MR. OPLE. That is under the existing law. Madam 
President, but there is nothing in this provision that will 
curtail the ability of Congress to expand the grounds for 
declaring a strike. 


THE PRESIDENT. So, Commissioner Ople accepts 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Regalado. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say 
now? 

MR. OPLE. I hope the Committee accepts it. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, put a period (.) 
after “with law,” then start a new sentence to read: 
“THEY SHALL BE ENTITLED TO security of tenure, 
humane conditions of work, living wage ...” Did we 
eliminate the word “decent”? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, “living wage” instead of “decent” 
is what we have accepted. So, with that understanding, 
the Committee accepts the elimination of that entire 
phrase “for their mutual benefit, welfare or aid.” 


MR. FOZ. But I heard the Committee say that that is 
not the intention. The intention is not to expand the 
grounds for strikeable issues. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Aquino en- 
lighten Commissioner Foz? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. There was no intention. The 
Committee may have been misinterpreted by Commis- 
sioner Foz. In fact, if he will read the provision as pro- 
posed, it grants plenary rights pertaining to the right to 
strike in accordance with law. We were just referring to 
the action in labor law and the jurisprudence in labor 
and management relations that recognize that the right 
to strike pertains to deadlocks in collective bargainin 
agreements and unfair labor practices. If there is anv g 
thing more encompassing than that, I could not fathc> 

it at the moment. m 

MR. FOZ. Yes. But Congress, under this provisio 
may provide for any strikeable issues. 5 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Madam President. MS. AQUINO. Yes. 


tt NIEVA. So that the entire Section 3 (b) will read: 
Guarantee the rights of workers to self-organization, 
collective bargaining and negotiations, peaceful con- 
certed activities, including the right to strike in ac- 
cordance with law. THEY SHALL BE ENTITLED TO 
security of tenure, humane conditions of work, and to a 
living wage, and to PARTICIPATE in policy and 
decision-making processes affecting their interests.” 


MR. FOZ. Thank you. 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, may I p roC e 
with the proposed amendment for which I was 
nized? 


rec °g** 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Was the amendment 

accepted by Commissioner Ople? 11 °t 


MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. In the light of the question asked by 
Commissioner Ople and the response of the Commit- 
tee, I would like to point out that there is nothing 
here but the basis of a conclusion that Congress cannot 
expand the grounds for declaring a strike. Why are we 
preventing Congress from exercising its plenary powers? 
Why are we preventing Congress from stating the 
grounds for declaring a strike? Why are we saying that 
strikes may only be declared on grounds of collective 
bargaining deadlocks on economic grounds? 

MR. MONSOD. I think if we read the sentence, it 
thus says, “including the right to strike in accordance 
with law So, Congress may provide for the limitations. 

MR. FOZ. Yes. But I heard the answer of the Com- 
mittee that strikes will only be declared on the ground 
of collective bargaining deadlocks on economic grounds. 


MR. REGALADO. It was amended, Madam 
ident. But I still have a few minor amendments Pres ~ 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it on the same topic k 
we will have to put the other amendment to a vote’ 31186 

MR. REGALADO. Then, I can defer in themeantim 
MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. In fact, we have not yet voted 
Section 5 (a). y 1 Voted on 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. Before it is voted, may I j ntm 
duce a very minor amendment? iro ~ 


THE PRESIDENT. Which one? 


MR. DAVIDE. On the proposal which 
of the Ople-Regalado amendment. 


was the subject 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


757 


MR. DA VIDE. It is just an insertion of the word 
AND before “peaceful.” 

MS. NIEVA. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. That has been accepted. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Before we vote, we would like to 
reiterate what was already stated in the Record so it will 
be very clear. In this portion of Section 3 (b), with 
respect to the right to strike, that also carries with it the 
right to declare a lockout. 

THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair inquire from the 
Committee: Are we ready to approve Section 3 (a)? 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, before we vote, may 
I be allowed to state my opinion on this? 

My opinion is that this provision does not empower 
nor give any right to the employer to declare a lockout. 
There is nothing in the provision which says that the 
employer can declare a lockout. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. I would attempt to clarify the position 
of Commissioner Bengzon. 

There is no intention to elevate the employer’s right 
to declare a lockout whenever provided by law. There 
is no intention to elevate it to the level of a constitu- 
tional mandate. If the intention of Commissioner 
Bengzon is just to recognize the employer’s right to 
declare a lockout in situations warranted and defined 
by law, it was just a matter of balancing interests and 
concerns both for the workers and the employers. 

MR. BENGZON. Can we vote now, Madam Pres- 
ident? 

MS. NIEVA. On Section 3 (a)? 

MR. BENGZON. We can vote on Section 3(a), 
Madam President, and then after that we can vote on 
Section 3 (b). 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, before we vote 
on Section 3 (a), I have a minor amendment that I have 
discussed with some members of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. On Section 3 (a)? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. My amendment is just to replace 
the word “domestic” with the word LOCAL because 
the word “domestic” to me, Madam President, is asso- 
ciated with household help. So, some of the members 
of the Committee have agreed to replace the word 
“domestic” with LOCAL. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, we accept. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you, Madam President. 

So, may I move, Madam President, that we vote on 
Section 3(a) before we vote on Section 3(b), as 
amended? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to Section 
3 (a), as amended? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I suppose it should 
be without prejudice to the reservation made by Com- 
missioner Colayco. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

Let us proceed to Section 3 (b), as amended. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, may I proceed 
with my proposed amendment? A part of this has been 
taken up when I was recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, before I do so 
may I ask the Committee just what is meant by that 
last phrase which reads: “participation in policy and 
decision-making processes affecting their interests”'? I 
am particularly concerned with the situation where the 
employer is a corporation, and policy- and decision- 
making processes are, of course, handled by a board of 
directors. Does it mean to say that the employees must 
also have a seat in the board of directors so that they 
can participate or is there a grievance mechanism where- 
by they can also participate in the deliberations of the 
board of directors which happens to be their employer? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, if authorized by the 
Committee, I would like to shed some light on the 
principle of workers’ participation at the level of the 
enterprise which is, more or less, the official jargon used 
in the International Labor Organization and other labor- 
related international bodies. 


758 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, we will reserve our 
right to agree or disagree depending on what Commis- 
sioner Ople will say. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

In most European jurisdictions, especially in northern 
Europe, they have established highly successful work 
councils at the level of the enterprise where largely non- 
adversarial issues are taken up so that before they can 
mature into adversarial issues, labor and management, in 
that atmosphere of cooperation through a work council, 
are able to come to an early agreement, which both 
sides consider helpful not only for industrial peace but 
also for productivity. And so, when I look at this and 
when I cast my vote in favor of Section 3 (b), that is 
what I would have in mind, that such fora within com- 
panies or work councils will precisely give both workers 
and employers the opportunity to consider matters of 
mutual interest. This is also a recognition that the 
productivity and profitability of a company are a vital 
concern of the workers and if that is so, then the ex- 
pectation is not given a forum, like a work council. They 
have something to contribute and that they can partici- 
pate in policies that redound to the mutual benefit and 
to the common good of the enterprise. 

That is how I view this particular phrase concerning 
workers participation, Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. Could I just add to what Commis- 
sioner Ople already explained about workers’ participa- 
tion in the light of the questions of Commissioner 
Regalado? Perhaps, it would be good for him to know 
that there are three levels in which employees could 
influence management in their decision-making, and one 
would be at the corporate level. This would refer to 
strategic policies pertaining to the mergers, acquisitions, 
pricing and marketing policies, disposition of profits and 
the like. The second level would be the plan on depart- 
ment level. It is here where administrative decisions are 
made. Decisions made in this level may refer to hiring, 
firing and promotion of employees, cost and quality 
control, resource allocations, achievement of target 
quotas, et cetera. And the third will be the shop-floor 
level. It is here where the so-called operating decisions 
are made. Decisions made in this level usually refer to 
scheduling of work, safety regulations, work methods, 
training of new employees. So, these are the different 
levels m which we hope there would be this democratic 
pariK ipation of workers in vital issues that affect both 
management and the workers. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Just some supplementary remarks 
to the example cited by Commissioner Ople. 

In the local scene, there are two outstanding, 
although admittedly exceptional, examples of corpo- 
rations that do not have labor unions but precisely 
have created over the years what they call employer- 
employee councils where a lot of issues affecting the 
welfare of the workers are discussed regularly by work- 
ers and employers in a completely nonconfrontational 
manner. I am referring to the United Laboratories and 
Timex, a multinational corporation. These have 
managed not to have labor unions, although I am sayin a 
that they are exceptional cases. They are models of 
corporations that can work and protect in a very exem- 
plary way the welfare of the workers without the need 
for confrontation. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, with those 
explanations . . . 

THE PRESIDENT. I thought Commissioner Romulo 
has something to say. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Regalado sati 
fied? s ~ 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, just one m 0r , 
amendment by transposition because of those exph ^ 
tions which reveal the deliberative intendment of t] 3 ' 
phrase. It will be noted that under Section 3 (b) ^j 1S 
State does not only recognize but it guarantees th^ 

seven rights mentioned herein; namely, self-organizati 116 

collective bargaining and negotiations, peaceful 00 °’ 
certed activities, including the right to strike, security ^ 
tenure, humane conditions of work, living wage * 
participation in policy- and decision-making proce 
as has been explained here. Since the State has to 
guarantee, of course, it can guarantee only through law 
And Commissioner Suarez has stated that while the 
phrase “in accordance wilh law” here refers to the right 
to strike, but since all these other rights mentioned can 
only be guaranteed by the State through provisions of 
law that will be enacted for that purpose, aside from 
other rights supplementary to those that may already be 
existing, then I would like to propose a transposition of 
the phrase “in accordance with law,” which comes after 
the phrase “the right to strike” to the first sentence, 
such that it will read; “Guarantee, IN ACCORDANCE 
WITH LAW, the rights of workers to self-organization, 
collective bargaining and negotiations, peaceful con- 
certed activities including THE RIGHT TO STRIKE. 
They shall be entitled to security . . .” 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


7 59 


In other words, all these are in accordance with law 
and the enumeration of the rights there is in a conse- 
cutive process, since we have already eliminated the 
phrase “for their mutual benefit, welfare or aid,” which 
in the first place was not necessary because of the 
necessity referred to them. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, before we vote on 
that proposal, I would like to ask the Committee 
exactly what it means by that phrase. The very cogent 
explanation of Commissioner Aquino is now out of con- 
text because the linkages provided before no longer 
exist. 

So, first, I would like to ask: What is exactly the 
intention of the Committee with regard to the phrase 
“AND TO PARTICIPATE IN POLICY AND DECISION- 
MAKING PROCESSES AFFECTING THEIR IN- 
TERESTS”? In other words, how does the Committee 
envision this to take place? What Commissioners 
Villegas and Ople are talking about is voluntary, if it 
exists in the Philippines. If that is the interpretation 
given to this phrase here, that it is guaranteed by the 
State, therefore, it will become compulsory. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. So, may I ask Commissioner Aquino 
who is speaking on behalf of the Committee. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, let me define and 
reiterate the parameters covered by the phrase “TO 
PARTICIPATE IN POLICY AND DECISION-MAKING 
PROCESSES AFFECTING THEIR INTERESTS.” 

We begin from the basic premise that at the barest 
basic minimum, the workers are consulted on matters 
pertaining to their interests, and the parameters would 
be references to the negotiations in the collective bar- 
gaining agreement and its terms. These would cover the 
processes of grievance machineries; likewise, these 
would pertain to the voluntary modes of settling labor 
disputes and the conciliation proceedings which can be 
initiated and mediated by the Ministry of Labor. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Does that satisfy the Commissioner? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, because that is the same answer 
which the Commissioner gave me the first time. 

Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. MONSOD. May we have a suspension, Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:1 3 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:59 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The Committee has reformulated 
Section 3 (b). May I ask that the Chairman of the Com* 
mittee, Commissioner Monsod, be recognized for the 
reformulation of Section 3 (b). 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May I ask Commissioner Aquino to 
restate the Article and to make an explanation of the 
issue we had discussed before the Chair suspended the 
session? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. First, we shall address the clarification 
of the position of the Committee on the matter of 
participation in policy- and decision-making. Some of 
the Commissioners may have perceived a measure of 
difference and conflict in the interpretation of the 
Committee, so this now will be our submission in inter- 
preting the phrase participation in policy and decision- 
making processes affecting their interests.” What is it? 
What it is in terms of processes has been previously 
defined in response to the query of Commissioner 
Romulo. We were referring to the grievance procedures, 
conciliation proceedings, voluntary modes of settling 
labor disputes and negotiations in free collective bar- 
gaining agreement. M at it is , pertaining to the scope 
and substance, would now be the rights and benefits of 
workers. In other words, the focus of participation is 
now mtroverted to the rights and benefits of the 
workers. W h at , it is . not refers to the practice in the 
industrialized nations in Europe and in Japan referring 
to codetermination which pertains to charting of 
corporate programs and policies. 

However, the other matters mentioned by Commis- 
sioner Quesada which she just read for purposes of 
informing the Commission are already rightfully covered 


760 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


in the negotiations of the collective bargaining agree- 
ment. So just to eliminate the confusion, these are the 
parameters contemplated by “participation in policy 
and decision-making processes.” 

The Committee is proposing an amendment to delete 
the word “interest” on the first page and substitute the 
words RIGHTS AND BENEFITS if only to clarify the 
intention of the Committee on this matter. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, may we ask a question 
in connection with what was said by Commissioner 
Aquino? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. FOZ. Is the Commissioner saying that codeter- 
mination is covered by this provision? 

MS. AQUINO. Precisely we were saying it is not. 

MR. FOZ. Then what is the use of this provision? It 
does not advance any labor’s position. It is just a state- 
ment of what is already provided for under existing 
structures or practices. 

MS. AQUINO. That was the reason why we defined 
codetermination in the context of the practice in Japan 
and the industrialized nations in Europe. The term 

codetermination” pertains to participation of the 
workers in corporate planning, the charting of corporate 
business, modes and procedures of corporate manage- 
ment and acquisition of property. 

MR. FOZ. The Commissioner does not foresee the 
passage of a law under this provision which would allow 
workers to be represented in the board insofar as certain 
matters are involved? 

MS. AQUINO. We envision that as the evolution of a 
process but not arising from a compulsory mandate 
from the Constitution. 

MR. FOZ. But a law may be passed? 

MS. AQUINO. Congress has the inherent right to pass 
legislation. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, on behalf of the 
Committee, may we be allowed to read the paragraph. 

Section 3(b) reads: “guarantee the rights of 

workers to self-organization, collective bargaining and 
negotiations and peaceful and concerted activities in- 
cluding the right to strike as may be provided by law. 
They shall be entitled to security of tenure, just and 


humane conditions of work and to a living wage, and to 
participate in policy and decision-making processes 
affecting their rights and benefits.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I request 
that we defer our voting on this section because of the 
reservation made by Commissioner Colayco. I talked to 
him and he told me that he will submit his proposal 
integrating paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) of Section 3 
tomorrow morning. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. I was on the floor just before the 
Chair suspended the session. I share the same view that 
considering the reservations made by Commissioners 
Colayco and Padilla, I will also defer any further pro- 
posals on this point so that they could all be integrated 
instead of being repeated. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I propose a vote qn 
this issue because there are some Members here, includ- 
ing myself, who feel that the very exhaustive and 
strenuous debates that have already taken place could 
end up as a highly futile undertaking unless we now take 
a vote on these amendments. Although I would like to 
agree with the others, without prejudice to the amend- 
ment that Commissioner Colayco may bring up to- 
morrow in accordance with the original agreement, I 
suggest ... 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, Commissioner 
Ople is suggesting that the body proceed to vote on 
principle on this point? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, without prejudice to any amend- 
ments that Commissioner Colayco will bring up tomor- 
row in accordance with the original agreement to which 
all of us subscribed. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Colayco 
say? 

MR. COLAYCO. I disagree with the thinking of 
Commissioner Ople. The discussion of the various 
rights, programs and principles which are embodied in 
Section 3 and the very illuminating comments given by 
Commissioner Ople himself, Commissioners Aquino, 
Quesada and will not go to waste because these 
are of record and whether these provisions which we 
have now discussed will be approved or not by tomor- 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


761 


row, or whether my own ideas are approved, surely 
they will constitute a point of reference for future 
Congress when it tackles the improvements which we 
are proposing in this Article. So it is not correct to say 
that they will go to waste; definitely not because 
Congress will surely consult the beautiful and very 
elaborate discussions that took place this afternoon 
when Congress tackles this section. 

So, I move that further discussions be postponed 
until tomorrow morning. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Before the session was suspended, 
the body had earlier agreed that we would proceed on 
discussing and amending Section 3 and all the other 
sections. 

With respect to Section 3, we have approved para- 
graph (a) without prejudice to incoming amendments. 
However, after its approval, there were amendments 
that were attempted to be introduced. This was also 
true in Section 3 (b). 

So, we can proceed and approve Section 3 (a), (b), (c) 
and (d), together with all the amendments thereto with- 
out prejudice to Commissioner Colayco’s amendment 
tomorrow. He will either rise or fall with his amendment 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I shall now resume my 
seat. But before I do so, I just want to say that I am 
addressing myself to a question of proportion, and I am 
talking about debates that have taken place the whole 
day on these highly controverted sections. I just want 
to point out that in accordance with the original agree- 
ment, we could act on these amendments now without 
prejudice to Commissioner Colayco’s proposals to be 
given tomorrow morning. 

Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. The Committee agrees with the 
points raised by Commissioner Ople, Madam President. 
If the Floor Leader, together with Commissioner 
Colayco, would insist on the motion to defer, the Com- 
mittee would request a vote on it. 

MR. COLAYCO. I will not insist; I leave it to the 
Committee. 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized, just for a moment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. When Commissioner Colayco stood 
up and mentioned about letters that he had received 


questioning the way we are making the Constitution, 
making allusions to* the fact that what we are doing is 
legislating by including all these details, I cannot help 
but wonder how the past Articles were approved with- 
out this particular question being brought up. Some of 
those Articles that we approved on Second Reading and 
Third Reading are full of details also. 

I felt that since this particular Article on Social 
Justice is a new one, it is only the consensus of the 
members of the Committee that some of these things be 
spelled out. Precisely, we have been very careful in the 
meetings because we are very conscious about the pro- 
blems of legislation. It is always cropping up. If the 
body is going to insist on that and vote on this part, 
then I would suggest that we be consistent from begin- 
ning to end in order to be fair to others because there 
will be other Articles that will still be submitted. I just 
cannot understand why this is being brought up now. 
Labor is such a delicate and a very important item in the 
Article on Social Justice. This is why it is necessary to 
come up with these details. If they are going to insist on 
that and if the body is going to vote on it, then I would 
suggest that, for the remaining articles, by all means, let 
us stick to that and come up with a noncontroversial 
article. I just find it a bit unfair. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now? 

MR. BENGZON. If there are no more amendments to 
Section 3(b), we can now proceed to vote, Madam 
President. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, may I say a few 
words? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. With regard to the remarks of Com- 
missioner Brocka, there is a great deal of difference 
between, for example, the executive, the legislative and 
the judiciary departments because both the 1935 and 
1973 Constitutions have many sections which are ab- 
solutely necessary. On the other hand, the provision on 
Social Justice under the 1935 Constitution is only 
expressed in one sentence; and under the 1973 Constitu- 
tion, in two sentences, only consisting of one section. 

On another point, I would like to inquire, before we 
undertake to vote on this Section 3(b) which consists of 
two paragraphs. After the phrase “the right to strike,” 
it says, in accordance with law.” I think that has been 
changed to “as may be provided by law.” Is that 
correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 


762 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1 986 


MR. PADILLA. Can we not also end the second 
sentence with the same phrase AS MAY BE PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW? 

MR. SUAREZ. I think that is substantially acceptable 
in principle to the Committee. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

I am making this observation because in our dis- 
cussions, Commissioner Lerum made reference to the 
Labor Code, which is a presidential decree; then Com- 
missioner Foz spoke not only of salary but also cost of 
living allowance and other benefits. If these are pro- 
vided in a collective bargaining agreement, well and 
good. But under the Marcos regime, through the exer- 
cise of Amendment No. 6, the Ministry of Labor issued 
Wage Order Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 which are all impo- 
sitions on the private sector. The benefits in those wage 
orders are not even applicable to the employees of 
government. I am glad that the proposed Section 3(b) 
says ‘as may be provided by law” so that it will be clear 
that we are not recognizing, and much less, constitution- 
alizing the provisions of the Labor Code by presidential 
decree or the wage orders issued by the ministry. It has 
been the complaint of many in the private sector that 
there are impositions on wages, COLA, benefits and so 
orth which are not made applicable even to the em- 
ployees of government. We should realize that some- 
times in our efforts to grant more rights and benefits to 
abor, they may result in discouragement to capital and 
management; and instead of protecting labor by giving 
more opportunities for work, they may result in detri- 
ment to labor. Some private firms, especially those on 
the marginal level and which barely make sufficient 
profits, have sometimes been induced, if not compelled, 
to close. So instead of having more industries and more 
opportunities for work, we might be reducing these 
same opportunities for work which will benefit labor. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I do not know whether I should address 
this question to Commissioner Padilla or to the Com- 
mittee. But certainly, the Committee is silent; it would 
be acquiescing to a strange theory that minimum wage 
fixing is by nature abhorrent to the State or to this 
Commission. 

Earlier, I had the privilege to put a question to the 
Committee and Commissioner Aquino graciously ob- 
liged with an answer to the effect that when we speak 
ot modalities, referring to voluntary modes of dispute 
settlement and strengthening collective bargaining and 
negotiations, there is no implication that the govern- 
ment is thereby abandoning minimum wage fixing as a 
national policy. The Minimum Wage Law was started in 
] 95 1 with the Minimum Wage Act of Congress of 1 95 1 . 

It was reasserted in 1965 when the minimum wage went 


up from P4 to P6. Then it was reasserted again in 1 970, 
when the minimum wage became P8 and, of course, it 
was continued later on because of intermittent econo- 
mic crisis beginning with the first energy crisis. When- 
ever the OPEC decided to raise the prices of oil by 
quantum leaps, then it became necessary to mitigate the 
plight of the workers here by enacting minimum wage 
orders. I think those wage orders benefited most of the 
workers, especially the unorganized workers without 
unions and without collective bargaining agreements. I 
just want to make sure that Commissioner Padilla’s 
views on minimum wage fixing do not go unchallenged 
and that the Committee, by its acquiescence, gives 
its own imprimatur to these views for purposes of 
determining the intent of the Committee and of the 
Constitutional Commission in paragraph (b) of Section 
3. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. The statement of Commissioner Padilla 
that the Ministry of Labor and Employment issued 
these minimum wage orders is not correct. These mini- 
mum wage orders and cost of living allowances were 
issued by then President Marcos in accordance with 
Amendment No. 6 and with the concurrence of the 
Batasang Pambansa. 

I remember that during a caucus wherein the labor 
sector was invited, it was agreed that as far as wage 
fixing and cost of living allowances were concerned, 
these would be done through decrees on the ground 
that the Batasang Pambansa would find it very diffi- 
cult to enact such measures. So, it is not correct to say 
that these issuances were made by the MOLE; these 
were done by the President. Of course, it was possible 
t at under Amendment No. 6 itself, the Batasang 
Pambansa could overrule the President. I think that is 
something that may have been forgotten by others. 
Under that decree, the President could be overruled by 

t e Batasang Pambansa through a bill filed and approved 
by it. 

We are very insistent that this provision on the living 
wage should be included here to emphasize to the legis- 
lature that wage fixing should not be forgotten and that 
w enever necessary, Congress should exercise its power 
so that the workers will not suffer. 

MR PADILLA. Madam President, if these Wage 
Order Nos. 1 to 6 were not issued by the Ministry of 
Labor and Employment but by President Marcos in the 
exeicise of Amendment No. 6, then I stand corrected. 

But the fact is that there were so many wage orders, 
like Wage Order Nos. 1 to 6, which were only made 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


763 


applicable to the private sector. The government em- 
ployees did not receive some of the benefits in those 
wage orders. I should not be misunderstood as against 
living or even decent, reasonable wage, but I believe that 
wages should be more the agreement between labor and 
management, as what we say, through self-organization, 
collective bargaining and negotiations, and peaceful 
concerted activities. Wages must be living wages; they 
must be decent wages, and if possible, profitable wages. 
What I am saying is that under the martial law regime 
Wage Order Nos. 1 to 6 were successively imposed by 
the government on the private sector which was not in 
full conformity with them because they were imposed 
regardless of the financial condition of the private 
firms. And so some private firms who barely made 
marginal profits and could not comply with these wage 
orders were forced to close. That is a fact that cannot 
be denied. 

So, Madam President, when wage orders lead to the 
closure of some business enterprises, it affects the eco- 
nomy. It is not only bad for the employers in the 
exercise of the controversial right to lock out but it is 
also bad for labor. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Padilla proposing 
an amendment on the last sentence? 

MR. PADILLA. I propose to add to the last sentence 
the phrase AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. SUAREZ. That has already been accepted by the 
Committee. 

MR. BENGZON. It has been accepted by the Com- 
mittee, Madam President. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, may I reply? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. In reply to the wrong statement made 
by the distinguished Commissioner Padilla, may I say 
that in every decree issued regarding minimum wage and 
cost of living allowance, there is always a provision that 
those who cannot afford can apply for exemptions. In 
other words, there is a saving clause so that nobody is 
forced to pay if he cannot pay. I know that as far as 
management is concerned, most of these firms do not 
want to pay even if they can afford to do so. It is really 
good that the labor unions can bargain with manage- 
ment and so they are able to obtain higher wages than 
those who are not organized. And the reason we have 
these decrees on minimum wage and these allowances 


here is to help those workers who are not members of 
unions and who have no collective bargaining agreement 
so that they can afford the high prices of commodities. 
There is always a safety clause there that those who 
cannot afford to pay are exempted, provided that they 
so prove that they cannot afford to do so. 

I have seen several applications for exemptions 
claiming that they cannot pay, but in between the 
figures in the financial reports, I found that some ex- 
penses were not really warranted. Instead of showing 
a profit, some showed an even proposition in which case 
the National Wages Council will decide to grant or not 
the exemption. But what we want to emphasize is this: 
That in these wage orders issued, there is always that 
provision that those who cannot pay may file for 
exemption. So it cannot be said that these are unjust 
impositions on management. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, with the 
manifestation of Commissioner Colayco and the ex- 
planation of Commissioner Bengzon, I think the body is 
now ready to vote on Section 3 (b). 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Aquino read 
once more the reformulated Section 3 (b) with Commis- 
sioner Padilla’s amendment which was accepted by the 
Committee. 

MS. AQUINO. The amended Section 3 (b) will read 
as follows: “Guarantee the rights of workers to self- 
organization, collective bargaining and negotiations and 
peaceful and concerted activities, including the right to 
strike as may be provided by law. They shall be entitled 
to security of tenure, humane conditions of work, and 
to a living wage and to participate in policy and de- 
cision-making processes affecting their rights and 
benefits, AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, I have a question to ask 
before we vote. 

Is there a comma between the word “benefits” and 
the phrase “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW”? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. Therefore, the phrase “AS MAY BE PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW” would refer not only to participation 
in policy- and decision-making processes, but also to 
security of tenure and humane conditions of work and 
living wage, is that correct? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. This is different now from the phrase “in 
accordance with law” in the provision containing the 
phrase “including the right to strike.” Is there no 
difference? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, there is a difference. 


764 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1 986 


MR. FOZ. What is the difference? 

MS. AQUINO. As the Commissioner may have 
noticed, the qualifier “as may be provided by law” in 
the first part of Section 3 (b) pertains only to the right 
to strike but it does not have any reference to the right 
to self-organization, collective bargaining and so on and 
so forth. 

MR. FOZ. There is a degree of difference then 
between the right to self-organization and the right to 
security of tenure? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May we suspend the session for 
minutes? ° 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended 
It was 5:33 p.m. 


MS. AQUINO. Yes, there is. 

MR. FOZ. In the case of security of tenure, Congress, 
through enactment of a law, may deprive certain groups 
of workers from enjoying the right to security of 
tenure? 

MS. AQUINO. Congress can only legislate to the 
extent that it is not inconsistent with the constitutional 
mandate. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 5:51 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed 
The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I 
Commissioner Colayco be recognized for his m ^ lat 
defer our voting on Section 3 (b). otl ° n to 


MR. FOZ. So Congress can do anything? 

MS. AQUINO. Therefore, when the constitutional 
mandate says that the security of tenure is guaranteed, 
that cannot be withdrawn by a statute from Congress. 

MR. FOZ. Is the Commissioner saying that with 
regard to security of tenure, Congress can withdraw it 
but in the case of self-organization, it cannot? 

MS. AQUINO. Precisely, that is what I am saying. 

I said previously that Congress can legislate only to 
the extent that it is consistent with the constitutional 
mandate. Therefore, when the Constitution says that 
workers shall be entitled to security of tenure, Congress 
cannot withdraw that right. 

MR. FOZ. Then what other things can Congress do 
with regard to security of tenure? 

MS. AQUJNO. It can amplify. It can reenforce. 

MR. FOZ. It can also restrict? 

MS. AQUINO. It can regulate; but it cannot withdraw 
and deny. 

MR. FOZ. It cannot restrict? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colavcn ; 
nized. ls re cog. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. Madam President 

My main reason for asking that the prov - . 

Section 3 be reduced to a minimum length i s th 10ns of 
of the rights and policies enumerated in Sectio^ m ° s t 
(b), (c) and (d) are already in our statute books 1 3 (a) > 
as recognized by our Supreme Court. For tt, aS We U 
of brevity, I am planning to capsulize all tli 6 Sa,Ce 
paragraphs and mention the two rights - , e f °U r 

to participate in policy-making and the right * ^ ri §ht 
share - which are not otherwise adequatelv t0 a JUst 
established in our statute books. y 0r Nearly 

If w 
formed 


ba natin bubungkalin pa?” Second I d _ aha P°n; bakit 
rushed into submitting a proposal dramen"?^ 6 to be 
has not received adequate thinking nn Ir ent w hich 
least I would like to ask is to give me a rh V Part Th e 
this over tonight, and I promise that first «f. nce to thi nk 

mnof fnmnrrn,,, T ... ' Ifling When WC 


meet tomorrow, I will submit it to the body 1 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the r rt • 
this motion of Commissioner Colayco? mmittee sa y to 


MS. AQUINO. It can regulate and, therefore, necessa- 
rily this contemplates that Congress can restrict accord- 
ing to the tenor and mandate of the Constitution. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 


opinion on this section on labor we thinl tw . ayco ’ s 
unfair to defer this because^^" of nTal 
worked on tins for over a month now, and we have 
taken into consideration all the views and the so 
called guidelines as to how constitutions should be 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


765 


made. We believe that the issue here is so important 
that we cannot simply capsulize the safeguard that we 
want to constitutionalize into one or two sentences or 
even into one paragraph. 

We tried our very best. If the Commissioner has sat 
down with us from the very beginning he would have 
known that our whole Article on Social Justice con- 
sisted of several long pages which had undergone about 
five or six exhaustive redrafting precisely because we 
wanted to do justice to what we hoped would be the 
centerpiece of the 1986 Constitution. 

I think I speak for the rest of the members when I 
say that we plead to our fellow Commissioners not to 
emasculate the section on labor which we had all 
worked for so long and so painfully for. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, the body is 
now ready to vote on the motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words the Committee 
is objecting to the motion of Commissioner Colayco 
for deferment of the voting on Section 3(b). Is that 
correct? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I propose a compromise. We have 
already voted on Section 3(a), have we not? 

We are now ready to vote on Section 3(b) which 
has been discussed thoroughly. 

My compromise is: Let us vote on Section 3 (b), and 
then defer discussion of Section 3 (c) and (d). Would 
that not be acceptable? 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, it is acceptable. 
Also, I would like to erase from the minds of some of 
our Members here that I have been unfair to the Com- 
mittee. I think the President knows that. 

MR. RODRIGO. Is my proposal acceptable to the 
Committee? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, the Committee accepts that pro- 
posal. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, we have a pending 
matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I am objecting to the amendment of Com- 
missioner Padilla adding the words “AS MAY BE PRO- 


VIDED BY LAW” after the word “benefits” at the end 
of the sentence. 

MR. BENGZON. Point of order, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. There is a pending motion to defer 
voting on this matter. Let us dispose of that first before 
we take up the objection of Commissioner Foz. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
say that there is already a compromise acceptable to 
both. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. So we are now discussing Commis- 
sioner Padilla’s amendment 4 AS MAY BE PROVIDED 
BY LAW”? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, and Commissioner Foz is 
objecting to it. 

Are there any other comments? 

Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I am objecting to the addition of the 
words “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW” on the 
basis of the explanation of the Committee on the effect 
of such an amendment on the rest of the sentence, in- 
cluding the phrase “security of tenure and humane 
conditions of work,” etc. 

If the amendment would only affect the last clause of 
the sentence, then I would withdraw my objection. But 
it seems that the intention of the proponent, as ex- 
plained by the Committee, is that the amendment 
would affect all the rest of the provision. 

I maintain that this would be a drawback to what is 
now contained in the 1973 Constitution, particularly 
the right of the workers to security of tenure. We do not 
find such a proviso or such a clause “AS MAY BE PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW” with regard to security of tenure in 
the present Constitution. It will weaken the workers’ 
right to security of tenure to say that it will be there 
“AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Foz through? 

Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I think the solution is very simple. 
The only issue here is about the comma. So, if we are 
willing to remove that comma after “benefits,” I think 
Commissioner Foz would be satisfied. I asked Commis- 
sioner Padilla, the proponent of the amendment, of “AS 


766 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1 986 


MAY PROVIDED BY LAW,” and he said he did not 
place a comma there. 

So, I would like to ask Commissioner Foz if he would 
be satisfied if that comma were removed. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Commissioner say? 


is the possibility that the law may not provide for such 
an implementation. 

MR. DAVIDE. What may be provided by law is the 
mechanics, but it is the duty of the State to provide for 
it. That is my interpretation. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 


MR. FOZ. May I give way to Commissioner Davide? I 
think he has a proposal, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I made a sug- 
gestion but I think the suggestion of Commissioner 
Davide is an improvement to my suggestion. So I yield 
to his suggestion if it is acceptable. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the Commissioner 
ing? 


w ithdraw- 


MR. DAVIDE. If the intention is to limit the phrase 
“AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW” to the last part of 
the paragraph; that is, “to participate in policy and 
decision-making processes affecting the rights and bene- 
fits,” as a happy compromise I would propose the fol- 
lowing: Between the words “and” and “to” insert a 
comma (,) and the following: AS PROVIDED BY LAW 
and another comma (,) so it will read: “and, AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW, to participate in policy and 
decision-making processes affecting the rights and bene- 
fits.’ I propose this amendment if the intention really is 
to contain that particular proviso to this last clause. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, as the prop 
I am sorry, I cannot accept the amendment P ? nent > 

amendment. ° the 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla ’ 

original proponent. 


the 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, if the amendment 
Commissioner Padilla has been accepted by the Coni ° f 
tee, it is for the Committee now to accept or to reject^' 


MR. PADILLA. In fact, I believe that my 
was already accepted by the Committee. 


pro Posal 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President, may I have some 
clarification from Commissioner Davide? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. When the Commissioner says, “AS 
MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW,” is the intention for 
the law to implement this particular provision on the 
participation in policy- and decision-making processes? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. Is it possible also that legislation 
may not provide for such participation? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, because the opening sentence of 
Section 3 is, “IT SHALL BE THE DUTY OF THE 
STATE TO. ” 

MS. QUESADA. So, legislation may not. 

MR. DAVIDE. This is just to avoid the misconstruc- 
tion, if the words “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW” 
will be after “benefits.” 

MS. QUESADA. The reason why some of us object to 
putting this clause “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW” 


MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aqu^o • 
nized. ls re cog- 

MS. AQUINO. To clarify the position of 
mittee, I think there may be a difference ’ lile Corn- 
appreciating whereof we come and whe” terms of 
missioner Foz comes. re °f Com- 

When we say “AS MAY BE PROVIDED Rv 
it does not necessarily mean that the law q ^AW,” 
delimit, withdraw, eliminate or subtract fi? f rest rict, 
phrase can be looked at in the context of « fact > this 
fining, reenforcing, giving specific mechanic ^ law de ' 
ing all in the positive aspect. s ’ arn Plify- 

MR. FOZ. But it can also be in the negative asp 

MS. AQUINO. In the same way that we 

that Congress will always have the inherent v a l‘d ° 8mZe 
provide for the statutory implementation of ti nght to 
tutional provision. le Cor >sti- 

MR. FOZ. The impression being created bv th* .lo- 
tion of the words “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW” 
is precisely to restrict the concept of security of t e AW 
of the workers. We do not find the same provisionor 
the addition of the words “AS MAY BE PROVIDED 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


767 


BY LAW” in the 1973 Constitution. Why should we put 
it here now? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. I think the problem is not just legal 
but also political. By political, I refer to the effect this 
would have on the workers because it would be read as 
a retrogression. Let me read the sentence in Section 9 
of Article II of the 1973 Constitution. It says: 

The State shall assure the rights of workers to self- 

organization, collective bargaining, security of tenure, and 

just and humane conditions of work. 

If we give now any impression that we are limiting 
these, it could be demoralizing to workers, even if the 
reaction of workers is a result of a misunderstanding by 
them of our intention. The only novel thing we have in 
Section 3(b) is really the last clause “and to participate 
in policy and decision-making processes affecting their 
rights and benefits.” My recommendation would be that 
we put a period (.) after the phrase after “living wage,” 
and treat this novel provision here as a separate sentence. 

MR. MONSOD. So it reads: “THEY SHALL PARTI- 
CIPATE . . .”? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, “THEY SHALL participate in 
policy and decision-making processes affecting their 
rights and benefits AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 
I think if we put this phrase “AS MAY BE PROVIDED 
3Y LAW” at the end of one continuous sentence, then 
the working class can easily misunderstand this as step- 
ping back, as being retrogressive. So my proposal would 
be to put a period (.) after “living wage” and start a new 
sentence to read: “THEY SHALL participate in policy 
and decision-making processes affecting their rights 
and benefits AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

MS. NIEVA. Can we say “THEY SHALL ALSO PAR- 
TICIPATE,” because there is the sentence starting with 
“They shall be entitled”? 

FR. BERNAS. It is a matter of style; I accept that. 
MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. How does Commissioner Padilla 
react to this amendment? 

MR- PADILLA. Madam President, I regret I cannot 
accept that proposed amendment to my amendment. It 
is the same as the previous one. 

MR- SARMIENTO. Madam President, I move that we 
now vote on Commissioner Padilla’s amendment. I think 
the matter has been sufficiently discussed. 


THE PRESIDENT. With all the interpretation that 
the phrase “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW” affects 
all the rights, security of tenure, et cetera, of the 
workers? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, this is just a 
comment. I think labor will misunderstand if the Com- 
mission will make them misunderstand. But the Com- 
mittee is very clear that the phrase “AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW” is meant to implement what in 
this provision is guaranteed by the State. So the law 
may not eliminate but it can only implement and 
execute that right. Since this provision is not self- 
executory indeed, how will we implement “security of 
tenure,” if not by law? How will the details for a living 
wage be provided if not by law? So, since we are going 
to do these all by law, what is the harm in saying “AS 
MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW,” as long as we under- 
stand that it is not in derogation of their rights, but 
rather in implementation and enhancement thereof? 

THE PRESIDENT. Which is the intent, as stated by 
the Committee. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 

MR. OPLE. I support the amendment of Commis- 
sioner Bemas because it establishes very clearly the 
intent of the Committee as the members have conveyed 
it. Besides, it is also expressed in better English than 
what we have heard. Also, it has a better syntax. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla does not 
accept it. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. May I just add something. I would say 
that it is not just a question of our trying to make the 
workers understand this correctly, but by phrasing it the 
way it is phrased now, we are giving ammunition or fuel 
to those who will be willing to mislead the workers. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that clear? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, the body is 
now ready to vote on the amendment of Commissioner 
Padilla. 


768 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1 986 


THE PRESIDENT. So, will the Chairman of the Com- 
mittee please read the amendment of Commissioner 
Padilla. 

The body is now voting on the whole Section 3(b), so 
may we request the Commissioner to please start from 
the beginning. 

MS. NIEVA. Referring to the Padilla amendment, the 
last sentence reads as follows: “They shall be entitled to 
security of tenure, humane conditions of work, and to a 
decent living wage and to participate in policy and 
decision-making processes affecting their rights and 
benefits, AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Padilla will please raise 
their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against the amendment will please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Romulo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. In view of the restructuring of the 
sentence, I must now ask Commissioner Aquino 
whether or not the previous interpretation she gave me 
as to the modes of participation still stands. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, the interpretation still stands 

MR. ROMULO. Is that the view of the Committee? 

Does the Commissioner speak for the Committee? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, that is the view of the Committee 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, may we von* 

Section 3(b)? 0r » 


MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, I am abstaining 
from voting. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 7 votes in favor, 
27 against, and 1 abstention; the amendment is lost. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we have not yet voted 
Section 3(b) as a whole. We voted only on the nm n ° n 
amendments. ^ ro Posed 


So, the body is requested to vote on subparagranh cu^ 
of Section 3, as finally worded. Will the honor ki 
C hairman of the Committee please read the „ u e 
section? wh °le 


THE PRESIDENT. What is the next amendment? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I move that we vote on the 
amendment of Commissioner Bemas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Chairman of the Commit- 
tee please read it. 

MS. NIEVA. The Bemas amendment reads like this: 
“They shall be entitled to security of tenure, humane 
conditions of work, and to a living wage. THEY SHALL 
ALSO participate in policy and decision-making pro- 
cesses affecting their rights and benefits AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW.” 


the 


MS. NIEVA. Section 3(b) reads: “Guarantee 
rights of workers to self-organization, collective bare 
ing and negotiations, and peaceful and concerted acr^' 
ties, including the right to strike as may be provid h*' 
law. They shall be entitled to security of t ^ 
humane conditions of work, and to a living wa& 6 ^ Ure > 
shall also participate in policy and decision-male ^ key 
cesses affecting their rights and benefits as m8pr °~ 


provided by law.” 


ma V be 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen ic 
nized. B n ls re co g . 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of this particular 
amendment will please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

Those against will please raise their hand. (Few Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 


MR. BENNAGEN. So I can vote intelligently eVf > 

I am a member of the Committee, I would like t n as 
the counsel of Commissioner Foz in his capacitv S6ek 
reviewer on labor laws for the Philippine Bar uL* 
present formulation an advance over the 1 973 . 

sion? Does the present formulation advance the 
of social justice for workers? ause 


MR. COLAYCO. I abstain, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 35 votes in 
favor, 2 against and 1 abstention; the amendment is 
approved. 


v,11Iuum > 1 reail y ao not know, but I am * 
little frustrated by the last sentence of the provision • 
subparagraph (b) about participation in policy- ai !!l 
decision-making processes affecting the rights and bene- 
fits of workers. At the beginning, I thought that that 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


769 


was the maximum that we would allow them, that the 
intention of the Committee was to enable representa- 
tives of labor to sit on the Board of Corporations, even 
as a minority group, to be able to voice their concern 
over issues affecting their rights and benefits in the 
corporation. But, as explained by the Committee, the 
intention was just to refer to matters provided for by 
existing laws and practices in labor-management rela- 
tion, which in effect would relegate labor not exactly to 
the level of the usual servant-master relationship. 

But this provision does not provide for anything new, 
so if I would have the chance, which I do not have, I 
would move for the deletion of this last sentence 
because we are providing for something that we do not 
intend to give to the labor sector. 

Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I ask the 
Commissioner a question? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. May I ask the honorable Com- 
missioner if his interpretation of this section is that the 
relationship between labor and management should be 
a master-servant relationship? 

MR. FOZ. May I have the question again? 

MR. MONSOD. The Commissioner mentioned that he 
is unhappy because this section is merely a reiteration of 
a master-servant relationship. Is that his interpretation 
of the meaning of this Section 3(b)? 

MR. FOZ. No; I just said that because I thought we 
are ready to make provisions like this to advance the 
cause of labor. This is a provision on labor. We have to 
go beyond what is happening now. If we do not provide 
for anything new, we might as well forget it. 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee believes that this last 
sentence is something new. So, it is only a matter of 
interpretation. That is why I was asking the Com- 
missioner if his interpretation is that this sentence is 
not new because it merely retains a master-servant 

relationship. 

MR. FOZ. It does not mean what it says. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we just ask 
for a vote because apparently there is a difference in 
perception? 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. I would like to raise a point of order, 
if there is a call for a vote. The body has just voted 
on the provision. It was just a personal view of Com- 
missioner Foz when he was asked a comment. 

MS. NIEVA. We have not voted yet on the entire 
Section 3(b). 

THE PRESIDENT. We are voting on the entire 
section now. 

MR. DAVIDE. I object to that. That would be out of 
order. In effect, it is asking for a reconsideration of the 
previous action of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair does not take it that 
way. We are not recognizing the statement of Com- 
missioner Foz as a motion to reconsider. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, will we take it as a motion to 
reconsider? 

THE PRESIDENT. No, we are not accepting it as a 
motion to reconsider. What was to be voted upon was 
the entire Section 3(b) as read by the Chairman. 

Is that clear now? Do we need to repeat because of 
these interruptions? 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, maybe we 
should be reminded of what Commissioner Felicitas 
Aquino said that even as it is worded now, this will 
allow for evolution later. It does not close avenues for 
future development. 

MR. BENGZON. Can we vote now on the entire sub- 
paragraph (b)? 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of Section 3(b) 
will please raise their hand. (Several Members raised 
their hand.) 

Those against will please raise their hand. (No Mem- 
ber raised his hand.) 

MR. COLAYCO. I abstain. 

THE PRESIDENT. Those who abstain will please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 36 votes in favor, none against, 
and 5 abstentions; the section is approved. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Rodrigo made a compromise proposal which was 


770 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986 


adopted by the Committee and the body that we defer 
discussions on Section 3(c) and (d). 

Madam President, in view thereof may I move for 
the adjournment of the session until tomorrow at nine- 
thirty in the morning? 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence ) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The session is adjourned until nine-thirty tomorrow 
morning. 

It was 6:23 p.m. 


APPENDICES 













771 


SUFFRAGE: A RIGHT FOR EVERYONE 
BY COMMISSIONER GREGORIO J. TINGSON 


Madam President: 

I would like to take this opportunity to explain why the right 
to vote in the election of officials of government and in the deter- 
mination of all questions submitted to tire people should be 
extended to the country’s disabled and the illiterate, and how we 
can ensure the sanctity of their votes. 

I believe in the theory that suffrage should be regarded as a 
natural and inherent right of every citizen, a right which belongs 
to him by virtue of his membership in the State. 

In the 1935 Constitution, a vital development has been 
achieved by our people when both men and women were allowed 
to vote. That momentous year when all our qualified women 
trooped to the polling place to assert their exercise of suffrage 
equal to that of men was an achievement long ahead of women s 
liberation movement of the present. 

We have advanced further than our 1973 Constitution, specify- 
ing that except as to citizenship, age and residence, no other 
disqualifications should be made. In fact, it further states lat no 
literacy, property or other substantive requirement may be 
imposed. 

For the disabled and the illiterate to vote is to give them the 
active chance to help shape the destiny of our nation. It is often 
said that the rich and the poor may have a gap as the heaven and 
earth, but in the exercise of their right of suffrage, they are equal, 
as they can only vote once. 

Personally, I feel that the disabled and the illiterate should not 
be deprived of this right, as their hapless condition is such that 
they get the feeling of being less fortunate than others. To take 
away this one and precious right would further lower their stature 

in society. 

But simply because they have physical deficiency or a low 
level of literacy, being unable to read nor write, we who are more 
fortunate should not deny them the only chance perhaps where- 
by they would feel as our coequals. 

Many great thoughts and deeds have originated from people 
who have physical defects or are unlearned. Perhaps it is part of 


God’s grand design for humanity. We should not hinder their 
right to live in this world as joyfully and as freely as the rest. 

Receptive as we are, this body should consider further that 
in the exercise of this right, two entities, the disabled and the 
illiterates, have difficulty casting their votes, especially so where 
their votes do not have the complete secrecy and sanctity as 
compared to the other members of society casting the votes by 
themselves. 

Under P.D. No. 1296, issued by our deposed President Marcos, 
a registered voter who is illiterate or physically unable to prepare 
the ballot by himself may choose a person of his confidence to 
assist him in the preparation of his ballot, preferably a relative 
by affinity or consanguinity within the fourth civil degree. The 
person thus chosen shall prepare the ballot for the illiterate or 
disabled voter inside the voting booth. The person assisting shall 
bind himself in a formal document to fill out the ballot strictly 
in accordance with the instructions of the voter and not to reveal 
the contents of the ballot prepared by him. 

While it is true that the procedure is good in theory, in 
practice it is not so. Just consider this: One who is allowed to 
accompany the disabled or the illiterate is chosen by the voter 
himself from among his relatives, but there is always no way of 
telling whether the person is really his relative especially so in the 
urban areas where residents do not normally know each other. 
So, the result is that political parties may bring the illiterate or 
disabled resident to a voting center and claim that the one accom- 
panying the disabled or illiterate voter is his or her relative. In 
other words, this procedure will always be subject to abuse, 
deceit or other fraudulent means. So, instead of really achieving 
the purpose of giving them the opportunity to exercise their 
political right, they become instruments to perpetrate fraud in 
the elections. 

It is my proposal, therefore, that in the case of the disabled 
or illiterate who cannot write, they should be assisted only by a 
schoolteacher of the area, who is not necessarily a member of the 
election committee. In this manner the voter can cast his vote in 
confidence, and the sanctity of his ballot will be preserved. 

Thank you for this opportunity. 


SCHEMES ON THE TERM OF OFFICE 
(Numbers Correspond to No. of Years) 


Scheme 

No. 

0 

Pres/ 

VP 

f f i c i 
Senators 

a 1 s 

Reps Local 

Frequency 

of 

Elections 

Prefer- 
ence 
(Pis. ✓) 

Results/ 
Total 43 

I 

6 

6 

4 

4 

Once every 
2 years 


20 

II 

6 

6 

3 

3 

3 


12 

III 

6 

6 

6 

3 

3 


1 

IV 

6 

6 

3 

6 

3 



V 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 j/ 


1 

VI 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 b / 


1 

VII 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4cJ 


5 

VIII 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4d / 


2 


Remarks re Scheme No. I 

1 . No reelection for the President 
No limit for all others 

2. No immediate reelection for President 
Senators - with reelection 
Congressmen - with reelection 

Local officials - with one reelection 

3 . Local officials - no immediate reelection 

4. No limit to reelection 

5. No reelection for all 

Remarks re Scheme No. II 

] . No reelection for President 
2. No immediate reelection 

Local officials - limited to 2 reelections 


Senators - limited to one reelection 
Representatives - allowed 3 reelections 

3. No reelection for President, immediate or otherw' 

Senators - no reelection, immediate or otherwise 
Representatives/Local officials - one reelection 

4. Unlimited reelection for Senators, Represent 

Local officials atlVes > and 


Remarks re Scheme No. VII 

National/Local officials elected the same year but 
same date to avoid confusion of issues not 

Remarks re Scheme No. VIII 
One reelection only 


a/ no reelection d/ one reelection for all except local officials who will 

b/ no reelection allowed unlimited reelections e 

c/ one reelection only, but official is allowed to run again 
after a one-term interval 


WHY THE SANDIGANBAYAN AND THE 
TANODBAYAN SHOULD NOT BE ABOLISHED 

by Commissioner Gregorio J. Tingson 


I have taken my piece for this issue on the Sandiganbayan and 
the Tanodbayan on the statements made by distinguished re- 
source persons invited by the Committee on Accountability of 
Public Officers. 

Last June 18, the resource person invited was Justice Raul 
Gonzalez, Presiding Justice of the Tanodbayan. 


As a backgrounder, Justice Gonzalez stated that the Tanod- 
bayan is a constitutionally mandated office that is created by 
P.D. No. 1487 (further revised by P.D. No. 1607). It has broad 
powers to include investigative, recommendatory and prosecu- 
torial functions. 


To make it more responsive, Justice Gonzalez submitted the 
following recommendations: 

1. That it be constituted as a constitutional office to insure 
its independence; 

2. That its thrust be first preventive instead of prosecutorial, 

3. That its proceedings be made public. 

Justice Gonzalez stressed that the Tanodbayan’s jurisdiction 
should include offenses penalized under the Anti-Graft Act 
(RA 3019, as amended, otherwise known as the Anti-Graft and 
Corrupt Practices Act) and Revised Penal Code under the title 
Crimes Committed by Public Officers (Chapter II, Title VII of 
the Revised Penal Code). This is due, he said, to the difficulty of 
delineating the specific offenses falling on either law. He, how- 
ever, made it clear that he will indorse administrative cases to the 
Civil Service Commission. 


When Commissioner Nolledo cautioned Justice Gonzalez to 
the effect that the Tanodbayan should dispense with its prose- 
cutorial power, citing the report prepared by 1971 Concon 
Delegate Robles to the Committee on Constitutional Bodies, 
Commissioner Nolledo contended that it should act as mobilizer, 
watchdog and special critic. Justice Gonzalez, at this juncture 
countered with the view that it should retain its prosecutorial 
function only as a last recourse. He believed that the Tanod- 
bayan should first exhaust the other legal remedies before starting 

to prosecute. 


Justice Gonzalez came out with two grounds why the Sandi- 
ganbayan and the Tanodbayan should not be abolished: 

1 Tanodbayan retains control of the cases if they are not dis- 
tributed to the different fiscals; 

2 Ordinary courts will be overburdened with the great 
number of cases filed before the Sandiganbayan when trans- 
ferred to them. 


Justice Gonzalez stressed that the creation of an independent 
commission on accountability is not necessary since as it is, the 
Tanodbayan is not a one-man body. He revealed that it has 4 
deputies to be distributed in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao and 
the nonimplementation of its regionalization is due to lack of 
funds. 

On June 20, Justice Manuel Pamaran, former Presiding Justice 
of the Sandiganbayan, present Presiding Justice of the Sandigan- 
bayan Francis Garchitorena and Sandiganbayan Justice Romeo 
Escareal were invited resource persons. 

According to Justice Pamaran, the Sandiganbayan was created 
(by P.D. No. 1486, as revised by P.D. No. 1606) to speed up the 
disposition of the cases against erring public officials. To strength- 
en the court, he advocated its direct creation in the Constitution 
by expressly providing its composition, jurisdiction and removal 
of the justices by impeachment. Additionally, he recommended 
that no pardon shall be granted to convicted public officials 
unless recommended by the Sandiganbayan. 

While it is expensive for litigants in the provinces to be tried in 
the Sandiganbayan, he stressed that there is also the advantage 
that the witnesses before it are more free to testify. Besides, he 
said, the court is given the option in the decree to try cases either 
in Manila or in the province. 

Commissioner Nolledo presented the consensus of several 
(may not be the majority) Commissioners to abolish the Sandi- 
ganbayan (even the UP Draft does not contain a provision on the 
subject matter) on the following grounds: 

1. Regional Trial Courts and Metropolitan Trial Courts have 
concurrent jurisdiction over graft cases; 

2. There is denial of due process by way of discrimination to 
those accused of nongraft cases due to the better protection 
afforded them by the Sandiganbayan; 

3. The expediting of the trial of graft cases can be done by law 
passed giving priority to graft cases or designating a division 
of the Intermediate Appellate Court to handle exclusively 
those cases. 

Justice Pamaran rebutted the said argument by stating that: 

1 . The Sandiganbayan can still assume jurisdiction of cases 
tried by ordinary courts because of the proviso in the law 
saying without prejudice of being tried anew by Sandigan- 
bayan for offenses already on trial or tried by other courts; 

2. There is no protection to grafters since appeal of the deci- 
sion to the Supreme Court is done only by certiorari on a 
question of law unlike in the ordinary courts whereby there 


774 


is the ordinary appeal. There, questions of facts and of law 
can be raised. The only time question of facts is reviewed in 
certiorari is when it is raised that the decision of the Sandi- 
ganbayan is not supported by facts. 

When it was Justice Escareal’s turn to speak, he cited that the 
decree creating the Sandiganbayan amply projects the right of the 
accused because he is tried by a collegiate body requiring unani- 
mous decision for conviction and that the Supreme Court decides 
en banc for cases brought to it; thus, lessening the possibility of 
erroneous decision. 

According to Justice Garchitorena, the present thrust of the 
Sandiganbayan is to prosecute the “big fish” in the government 
service. To meet such objective, he recommended that the Sandi- 
ganbayan and the Tanodbayan be reinforced or institutionalized 
or probably given additional powers. 


It was his contention that the abolition of the Sandiganbayan 
and the Tanodbayan will set back all gains of the government in 
its continuing efforts to prosecute dishonest officials. Further- 
more, he mentioned its own rules. Together with Justice 
Pamaran, he proposed to the body that it be composed of nine 
members having the same tenure of office as that of a justice of 
the Supreme Court. 


Personally, I believe that the principle of “public office is 
public trust” finds visible meaning in the creation of the Saudi 
ganbayan and the Tanodbayan. To an ordinary man, such ent V 
serve as the “Damocles Sword” over our officials in the * 

service, who may have the tendency of being corrupt and 1C 

to wrongdoings. To the masses, the Sandiganbayan and^ 6 
Tanodbayan are the vanguards of an honest and rp^n le 
government. es P°nsibl e 


775 


STATEMENT RE PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 198 


June 29, 1986 

TO : The Honorable Chairman and Members 

Committee on the Executive 

SUBJECT : Statement in Relation to Proposed Resolution 
No. 198 

The resolution seeks to add a sentence in Section 5, 2nd para- 
graph of Article VII of the 1973 Constitution, as amended, at the 
same time retaining the first and second paragraphs. 

The idea is to clarify that the canvassing duty is ministerial 
but it must be based on genuine returns. Technically, returns 
should be later on specified to mean “certificates of canvass.” 

Our proposal reads: 

“The counting of votes stated in genuine returns shall be a 
ministerial function of the National Assembly.” 

The UP Draft is more specific. Section 2, Article VII reads: 

“Upon receipt and determination of the authenticity and due 
execution of such returns in the manner provided by law the 
National Assembly shall forthwith, in public session, count the 
votes, and proclaim the persons elected President and Vice- 
President.” 

Concept and Problems: 

1. The word “Ministerial.” 

There seems to be no disagreement on the word “ministerial. 

In fact, the UP draft indicates that although the term is not found 
in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions “the legislature has invariably 
interpreted its power as a ministerial one” (Vol. I, p. 9). Indeed, 
the congressional records of the 1965, 1969 and 1981 presiden- 
tial elections support the UP statement. Commissioners Concep- 
cion and Bernas from my understanding of their statements 
believe so. I have cited all the cases decided by the Supreme 
Court reflected in the Board of Tellers’ resolution of objections 
in the canvass of the February 7, 1986 elections, which support 
this view. Just for emphasis the Supreme Court in Lopez vs. 
Roxas (17 SCRA 756) said: 

“xxx. Congress merely acts as a national board of canvassers, 
charged with the ministerial and executive duty to make said 
declaration, on the basis of the election returns duly certified by 
Provincial and City boards of canvassers. Upon the other hand, the 
Presidential Electoral Tribunal has the judicial power to deter- 
mine whether or not said duly certified returns have been iriegu- 
larly made or tampered with or reflect the true result of the 
elections in the areas covered by each and, if not, to recount the 
ballots cast, and, incidentally thereto, pass upon the validity of 


each ballot or determine whether the same shall be counted, and, 
in "the affirmative, in whose favor, which Congress has no power 
to do.” 

Indeed, after the canvass of the February 7, 1986 elections, I 
heard MP (now Minister) Neptali Gonzales declare the same thing 
in a television interview. 

So I believe we can leave it at that and proceed to the more 
problematic discussion of the determination of genuine returns. 

2. The word “genuine.” 

UP presented an alternative proposal to delete in its formula- 
tion the phrase “determination of the authenticity and due exe- 
cution” and “allow the legislature to make its determination of 
the nature of its power in the counting of votes” adding that “the 
members of the legislature are, in the end, responsible to the 
people.” 

I disagree. It was precisely on this point that a lot of accusa- 
tions were hurled against the Batasang Pambansa’s Board of 
Tellers in the February 7 elections. 

In my earnest attempt to clarify the situation before the com- 
mittee, I marked all the pertinent documents so that the commit- 
tee will know the procedure adopted and the rulings made by the 
Board of Tellers. I have five volumes of the transcript of the pro- 
ceedings for everyone to see. Many suspect that I was trying to 
justify the decision of the Board by inserting in the records 
these documents to establish the validity of the proclamation of 
President Marcos. 

That is not my intention, although I will continue to main- 
tain that the Board of Tellers of which I was an alternate member 
did not violate any law in the performance of our duties. These 
are public documents available in the Batasan archives. My only 
purpose is to indicate the objections posed during the canvass so 
that the committee can consider these in the interpretation of the 
word “genuine” in our proposal. How does the committee, for 
instance, feel about the lack of COMELEC paper seal in either the 
envelope containing the certificate of canvass and the statement 
of votes, or in the certificate of canvass, or in all of them; the 
nonuse of the authorized envelope; the lack of signature of one 
or more members of the board of canvassers, or allegations of 
unauthorized or forged signatures or fake certificates of canvass; 
erasures in the one-page certificate of canvass where the words 
and figures can be read; and even irregularities in the conduct of 
the elections? In ruling against the invalidation of these certifi- 
cates, the Board of Tellers availed of the decisions of the Supreme 
Court, the provisions of the Omnibus Election Code, and the 
rules and regulations of the COMELEC and congressional proceed- 
ings. In other words, we did not go beyond what was written in 


776 


the certificate of canvass. The allegation of statistical improbabil- 
ity was resolved on the basis of the certified records of the 
COMELEC as to the number of precincts and the number of 
registered voters and these records were made available to the 
opposition. 

The question is, when the Board ruled the way it did against 
the vote of all the members of the opposition, did the Board 
violate known and available standards and criteria of genuineness 
of the certificate of canvass? All I can say is we did our job as 
mandated by the Constitution. But what I really want is to bare 
all these documents to the Committee regardless of whether they 
will be put on record or not. Perhaps Commissioner Bernas will 
have some use for them in the future analysis of the word 

“genuine.” I am happy that Commissioner Regalado has requested 
me for acopy for his own study and Ihave gladly complied. Due to 
financial limitations, I cannot furnish a copy to all of you regret- 
fully but the Chairman has allowed me to leave the original with 
the Committee Secretary so that anyone who requests a copy 
can direct his or her request to the Committee. If I will have my 
way, however, I would rather have these documents on record for 
all legal researchers and historians to see. I assure all the members 
of the Committee that there is nothing illegal in the contents of 
these documents. If Commissioner Davide is fearful that these 
papers will topple the government, they won’t. His excitement 
and aggravation about my marking them for probable offer to the 
Committee is misplaced. If he insists to close his eyes to these 
contents, I will not insist. It is my right to have these documents 
marked and presented before the Committee but since I have 
achieved my purpose, I will desist from doing so. 

I am very thankful to President Cecilia Munoz Palma (who 
went out of her way to attend our meeting), Commissioner 
(former Chief Justice) Concepcion, Commissioners Regalado, 
Aquino and Jamir for contributing their talents in the discussions. 
As a result thereof, we have come up with an amendment to our 
original proposal using the UP draft, as follows: 

Sec The President shall be elected by direct vote of the 

people for a term of six years which shall begin at noon on 


the thirtieth day of following the day of the elec- 

tion and shall end at noon of the same date six years there- 
after when the term of his successor shall begin. 

The CERTIFICATES OF CANVASS of every election 
for President, duly certified by the Board of Canvassers of 
each province, city or district, shall be transmitted to the 
Speaker at the NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. UPON RECEIPT 
AND DETERMINATION OF THE AUTHENTICITY AND 
DUE EXECUTION OF SUCH CERTIFICATES OF CAN 
VASS, IN THE MANNER PROVIDED BY LAW, THE N 
TIONAL ASSEMBLY SHALL, NOT LATER THAN 
THIRTY DAYS AFTER THE DAY OF THE ELECTION 
OPEN ALL THE CERTIFICATES IN PUBLIC SESSION* 
AND THE VOTES SHALL THEN BE COUNTED. 

The person having the highest number of votes shall be 
proclaimed elected, but in case two or more shall have 
equal highest number of votes, one of them shall forthwith 
be chosen by a vote of a majority of all the members of the 
National Assembly in session assembled. 


Respectfully Submitted: 

OPLE, MAAMBONG, NATIVIDAD & DE LOS RFY 
Authors 

By: 

(Sgd.) Regalado E. Maambong 
Committee Member b 


Copies for: 

The Honorable Chairman and Members 
Committee on the Executive 
thru: The Committee Secretary 


Ill 


PROPOSED PROVISION ON IMPEACHMENT 


ARTICLE 

ACCOUNTABILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICERS 
xxxxxxxxxxx 

Section 3. (1) Impeachment may be initiated only by a resolu- 
tion filed by at least one-fifth (1/5) of all the Members of the 
House of Representatives indorsing a verified complaint for 
impeachment of a Member thereof or any citizen alleging ulti- 
mate facts constituting ground or grounds for impeachment. 

No impeachment proceeding shall be initiated against the same 
official more than once within a period of one year. 

(Note: The 1/5 requirement or even a lesser number is necessa- 
ry to protect the impeachable officers from BASELESS and 
embarrassing complaints FROM JUST ANYBODY. The Pres- 
ident and Vice-President are politicians and they may have 
political enemies; the other impeachable officers, by the very 
nature of their work, could step on the toes of a lot of people 
in the performance of their duties and they deserve protection 
from harassment. It will also be A WASTE OF TIME for the 
proper committee to take cognizance of a complaint without 
even a minimal support from the Members of the House be- 
cause in all probability, it will be dismissed. 

The requirement of a RESOLUTION is standard procedure 
even in the United States. It gives the complaint the formality 
it deserves considering that the respondents are not ordinary 
government employees.) 

(2) IF THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTA- 
TIVES FINDS THAT THE RESOLUTION IS SIGNED BY AT 
LEAST ONE-FIFTH (1/5) OF ALL THE MEMBERS THEREOF 
AND THE SUPPORTING COMPLAINT IS PROPERLY VERI- 
FIED AND SUFFICIENT IN FORM, THE RESOLUTION 
SHALL WITHIN THREE SESSION DAYS FROM RECEIPT BE 
INCLUDED IN THE ORDER OF BUSINESS FOR REFERRAL 
TO THE PROPER COMMITTEE FOR THE DETERMINATION 
OF PROBABLE CAUSE. 

(3) UPON DUE REFERRAL AND AFTER DUE NOTICE 
AND HEARING WHEREIN THE PARTIES ARE ACCORDED 
THE OPPORTUNITY TO ADDUCE THEIR RESPECTIVE 
EVIDENCE, THE COMMITTEE SHALL DECIDE BY A MAJOR- 
ITY VOTE OF ALL ITS MEMBERS WHETHER OR NOT A 
SUFFICIENT GROUND OR GROUNDS FOR IMPEACHMENT 
EXIST. IF THE COMMITTEE FINDS THAT PROBABLE 
CAUSE HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED. IT SHALL SUBMIT WITH 
ITS REPORT A RESOLUTION SETTING FORTH THE ARTI- 
CLES OF IMPEACHMENT ON THE BASIS OF THE EVIDENCE 


ADDUCED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE; OTHERWISE, THE 
COMPLAINT SHALL BE DISMISSED. THE REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE SETTING FORTH ITS FINDINGS AND RECOM- 
MENDATIONS MUST BE SUBMITTED TO THE HOUSE WITH- 
IN THIRTY (30) SESSION DAYS FROM SUBMISSION OF THE 
CASE FOR RESOLUTION. IT SHALL BE SCHEDULED FOR 
IMMEDIATE CALENDAR IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS 
RULES. 

(4) A MAJORITY VOTE OF ALL THE MEMBERS OF THE 
HOUSE IS NECESSARY FOR THE APPROVAL OF THE 
RESOLUTION SETTING FORTH THE ARTICLES OF IM- 
PEACHMENT. IF THE RESOLUTION IS APPROVED, IT 
SHALL THEN BE REFERRED TO THE SENATE FOR TRIAL, 
TOGETHER WITH THE COMMITTEE REPORT CONTAINING 
ITS FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS INCLUDING ALL 
THE EVIDENCE ADDUCED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE. ON 
THE OTHER HAND, IF THE RESOLUTION IS DISAP- 
PROVED, THE COMPLAINT FOR IMPEACHMENT IS 
DEEMED DISMISSED. 

WHEN THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE DISMISSES 
THE COMPLAINT, THE REPORT SHALL BE NOTED BY THE 
HOUSE AND SENT TO THE ARCHIVES, UNLESS A MAJORI- 
TY VOTE OF ALL ITS MEMBERS DECIDE TO RECOMMIT 
THE MATTER TO THE COMMITTEE OF ORIGIN FOR FUR- 
THER DELIBERATIONS. OR, THEY OVERRULE THE COM- 
MITTEE AND PRESENT BEFORE THE HOUSE A RESOLU- 
TION SETTING FORTH THE ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT, 
SIGNED BY SUCH MAJORITY OF THE HOUSE. SUCH RESO- 
LUTION SHALL THEN BE REFERRED TO THE SENATE 
FOR ITS ACTION, TOGETHER WITH THE ORIGINAL COM- 
MITTEE REPORT CONTAINING ITS FINDINGS AND REC- 
OMMENDATIONS DISMISSING THE COMPLAINT INCLUD- 
ING ALL THE EVIDENCE ADDUCED BEFORE THE 
COMMITTEE. 

THE VOTING ON THE REPORT AND RECOMMENDA- 
TION OF THE COMMITTEE SHALL BE BY ROLL CALL, AND 
THE VOTE OF EACH MEMBER SHALL BE RECORDED. 

(5) THE SENATE SHALL HAVE THE SOLE POWER TO 
TRY ALL CASES OF IMPEACHMENT. WHEN SITTING FOR 
THAT PURPOSE, THE MEMBERS OF THE SENATE SHALL 
BE ON OATH OR AFFIRMATION. WHEN THE PRESIDENT 
OF THE PHILIPPINES IS ON TRIAL, THE CHIEF JUSTICE OF 
THE SUPREME COURT SHALL PRESIDE BUT WITHOUT 
THE RIGHT TO VOTE. NO PERSON SHALL BE CONVICTED 


778 


WITHOUT THE CONCURRENCE OF TWO-THIRDS OF ALL 
THE MEMBERS OF THE SENATE. 

(6) JUDGMENT IN CASES OF IMPEACHMENT SHALL 
NOT EXTEND FURTHER THAN THE REMOVAL FROM OF- 
FICE AND DISQUALIFICATION TO HOLD ANY OFFICE 
UNDER THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES, BUT THE 
PARTY CONVICTED SHALL NEVERTHELESS BE LIABLE 
AND SUBJECT TO PROSECUTION, TRIAL AND PUNISH- 
MENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW. 

(7) THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SHALL PRO- 
MULGATE ITS OWN RULES OF PROCEDURE TO GOVERN 


THE INITIATION, COMMITTEE DELIBERATIONS, AND 
ACTION OF THE HOUSE IN IMPEACHMENT PROCEED- 
INGS. LIKEWISE, THE SENATE SHALL PROMULGATE ITS 
OWN RULES TO GOVERN THE TRIAL AND JUDGMENT IN 
IMPEACHMENT PROCEEDINGS. ALL SUCH RULES MUST 
PROVIDE DUE PROCESS AND MUST BE CONSISTENT Wrru 
THE PROVISIONS SET FORTH HEREIN UH 




Notes 

1 A verified complaint and a resolution initiates the impeach- 
ment in the House; on the other hand, the Senate only ac- 
quires jurisdiction upon receipt of the Articles of Impeach- 
ment from the House. The Articles is the equivalent of the 
“indictment” in the United States and the “information” in 
the Philippines. Usually, a Committee or some members of the 
House are assigned to present the Articles to the Senate in a 
bipartisan manner. Once the Articles are received, they can 


— j — ^ *** a 

filed before the Senate. 




of 


the Ho 


2. In impeachment, we come into com 
Resolution initiating (or indorsing) ^ * ith three re ^, 
peachment; Resolution of the proper r C ° m Plaint ^ 
the Articles of Impeachment; and a reT^^ Set ^g°f 
referring the Articles of Impeachment / U ° n of the H < 
for trial. (among other pap 


779 


PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO THE ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 


Section 1 of the proposed Modified Resolutions is hereby deleted 
and in lieu thereof insert the following: 


POTENTIAL AND REASONABLE RETURNS ON INVEST- 
MENTS. 


SECTION 1. THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AS A PRIMARY IMPERATIVE IN ALL PHASES OF 
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. IN PURSUIT THEREOF, CON- 
GRESS SHALL GIVE HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE ENACT- 
MENT OF MEASURES THAT PROTECT AND ENHANCE THE 
RIGHT OF EVERY CITIZEN TO HUMAN DIGNITY, REDUCE 
SOCIAL, CULTURAL, ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL IN- 
EQUITIES, AND EQUITABLY DIFFUSE WEALTH AND 
POLITICAL POWER FOR THE COMMON GOOD. 

SECTION 2. Towards these ends, the State shall regulate the 
acquisition, ownership, use and disposition of property and its 
(fruits and) INCREMENTS THEREOF, promote the establish- 
ment of independent and self-reliant socio-political and economic 
structures. 


AGRARIAN AND NATURAL RESOURCES REFORM 

SECTION 5. THE STATE SHALL UNDERTAKE A 
GENUINE AGRARIAN REFORM PROGRAM FOUNDED ON 
THE BASIC RIGHT OF FARMERS AND REGULAR FARM- 
WORKERS TO OWN DIRECTLY OR COLLECTIVELY THE 
LANDS THEY TILL OR, IN THE CASE OF OTHER FARM- 
WORKERS, TO RECEIVE A JUST SHARE OF THE FRUITS 
THEREOF. TO THIS END, THE STATE SHALL ENCOURAGE 
AND UNDERTAKE THE JUST DISTRIBUTION OF ALL 
AGRICULTURAL LANDS, SUBJECT TO SUCH PRIORITIES, 
REASONABLE RETENTION LIMITS AND OTHER CON- 
DITIONS AS CONGRESS MAY PRESCRIBE, TAKING INTO 
ACCOUNT ECOLOGICAL, DEVELOPMENTAL OR EQUITY 
CONSIDERATIONS AND SUBJECT TO A JUST AND PRO- 
GRESSIVE SYSTEM OF COMPENSATION. 


LABOR 

SECTION 3. IT SHALL BE THE DUTY OF THE STATE TO: 

a) AFFORD FULL PROTECTION TO LABOR, BOTH DOMES- 
TIC AND OVERSEAS, ORGANIZED AND UNORGANIZED, 
AND TO PROMOTE FULL EMPLOYMENT AND EQUALI- 
TY OF EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES REGARDLESS 
OF SEX, AGE, CULTURE, CREED OR POLITICAL AFFI- 
LIATION. 

b) GUARANTEE THE RIGHTS OF WORKERS TO SELF- 
ORGANIZATION, COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND 
NEGOTIATIONS, PEACEFUL CONCERTED ACTIVITIES, 
INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO STRIKE IN ACCORDANCE 
WITH LAW, FOR THEIR MUTUAL BENEFIT, WELFARE 
OR AID, SECURITY OF TENURE, JUST AND HUMANE 
CONDITIONS OF WORK, AND TO A DECENT LIVING 
WAGE AND TO PARTICIPATION IN POLICY AND DE- 
CISION-MAKING PROCESSES AFFECTING THEIR 
INTERESTS. 

c) PROMOTE THE PREFERENTIAL USE OF VOLUNTARY 
MODES OF SETTLING DISPUTES BETWEEN WORKERS 
AND EMPLOYERS, INCLUDING CONCILIATIONS, AND 
ENFORCE MUTUAL COMPLIANCE THEREOF. 

d) REGULATE RELATIONS BETWEEN WORKERS AND 
EMPLOYERS IN A MANNER THAT RECOGNIZES THE 
PRIMACY OF THE RIGHTS OF LABOR TO ITS JUST 
SHARE AND THE CORRESPONDING RIGHTS OF BUSI- 
NESS ENTERPRISES TO REALIZE THEIR GROWTH 


SECTION 6. The State shall recognize the right of fanners and 
farmworkers, of cooperatives and other independent farmer’s 
organization AND LAND OWNERS to participate in the plan- 
ning, organizing, and management of the program and shall 
provide support to agriculture through appropriate technology, 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT and adequate financial, 
production, and marketing assistance. 

SECTION 7. The State shall apply the principles of agrarian 
REFORM WHENEVER APPLICABLE IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
LAW IN the disposition of other natural resources, including 
lands of the public domain SUITABLE TO AGRICULTURE 
under lease or concession, subject to prior rights, (of original in- 
habitants and without violating) homestead rights of small settlers 
and the rights of indigenous communities to their ancestral lands. 

SECTION 8. The State shall protect the PREFERENTIAL 
rights of MARGINAL FISHERMEN and local communities to the 
(direct or communal) use of marine and fishing resources, both in- 
land and offshore, PARTICULARLY MUNICIPAL FISHING 
GROUNDS, and shall provide appropriate financial, technical and 
research assistance TO SAID FISHERMEN for the development 
and conservation of such resources. 

SECTION 9. The State shall promote the integrated develop- 
ment of agricultural, fishing and marine resources to meet the 
basic needs of the people and the industrialization objective ol 
the country. 


780 


ENTREPRENEURS 

SECTION 10. THE PROMOTION OF SOCIAL JUSTICE 
SHALL INCLUDE THE COMMITMENT TO CREATE ECO- 
NOMIC OPPORTUNITIES BASED ON THE FREEDOM OF 
INITIATIVE ESPECIALLY THROUGH SMALL AND MEDIUM 
SCALE ENTREPRENEURS. 

URBAN LAND USE AND HOUSING 

SECTION 1 1 . The State shall regulate the ownership and use 
of urban land for the common good and undertake a continuing 
urban land USE (Reform) and housing program that will (ensure) 
MAKE decent SHELTER/ housing AND SERVICES AVAIL- 
ABLE at affordable cost to deserving low-income citizens in 
urban centers and resettlement areas (together with comple- 
mentary infrastructure, neighborhood services and employment- 
generating economic activities.) 

SECTION 12. Urban poor dwellers shall not be evicted nor 
their dwellings demolished (without) EXCEPT IN ACCORD- 
ANCE WITH law AND IN A JUST AND HUMANE MANNER. 
No resettlement OF URBAN OR RURAL DWELLERS shall take 
place without consultation with the communities to be relocated. 
(, and their involvement in its planning and implementation.) 

(Delete Section 1 2 of the modified version) 

HEALTH 

^ ^ tate P r °tect and promote the RIGHT 
waft m people ’ s right to health and). TO this end, IT 
ADOPT (establish and maintain) an integrated and 
comprehen s iv e APPROACH TO health care (program that) 
shall make essential goods and social services available to 
a citizens at affordable cost, with priority for the needs of the 
isadvantaged, the sick, women and children, aged and disabled. 

SECTION 14. The State shall maintain an effective food and 
rug monitoring system and promote appropriate health man- 
power evelopment and research on health care problems. 


SECTION 15. The State shall establish a special body of 
disabled persons which shall consolidate the functions of existing 
government agencies and provide for the rehabilitation, self- 
development and self-reliance of the disabled towards their total 
integration to the mainstream of society. 

SECTION 16. The State shall afford protection to working 
women by providing for (optimum) SAFE AND HEALTHFUL 
working conditions especially in relation to their maternal func- 
tions. 

SECTION 17. The State shall PROVIDE FACILITIES THAT 
WILL promote the welfare and well-being of women to fully 
realize their capabilities in the service of the country. (Section 18 
on Indigenous Communities is hereby deleted and recommended 
for transfer to the Declaration of Principles.) 

MINORS 

SECTION 18. THE STATE SHALL PROVIDE SPECIAL 
PROTECTION TO MINORS, ESPECIALLY WORKING 
MINORS, AND SHALL PROHIBIT THEIR EXPLOITATION 
AND INSURE THEIR FULL DEVELOPMENT. 

ROLE AND RIGHTS OF PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATIONS 
SECTION 19. In the pursuit of the ends of Social Justice, the 

State shall respect the independence and the role of people’s 
organizations as a (principal) means of empowering the people to 
pursue and protect through peaceful means their legitimate and 
collective interests and aspirations. 

SECTION 20. The State shall respect the right of the people 
and their organizations to effective and reasonable participation 
at all levels of social, political and economic decision-making a h 
shall (ensure) MAKE POSSIBLE adequate consultation median 

isms (for such participation). 


781 


MANIFESTATION OF COMMISSIONER GUINGONA 


Commissioner Guingona requested the Presiding Officer that 
he be allowed to present his manifestation to the Secretariat con- 
cerning his view on the matter of compensation in the case of 
expropriation of property for agrarian and urban land reform 
purposes. The manifestation is as follows: 

At the outset, let me say categorically and emphatically that I 
favor giving the landless farmers and farm workers, as well as 
homeless urban poor, property of their own. As a matter of fact, 
Commissioner Villegas and I had submitted a proposed resolu- 
tion which would provide for a Special Provident Fund to be used 
exclusively to provide homes for the homeless poor at subsidized 
cost. But I strongly object to the expropriation of property to 
favor one sector of our society to the prejudice of another sector 
by denying the latter their right to just compensation. Of course, 
I realize that the poor may find it difficult to afford to buy the 
property needed. This can be remedied, however, through govern- 
ment subsidy or other forms of State assistance. I think that a 
number of landless and homeless poor of today through govern- 
ment aid will no longer be so in the future. They would be 
encouraged to own and expand their property knowing that they, 
their children, their children’s children cannot be deprived of 
their property without the payment of just compensation. 

In the expropriation of property for agrarian or urban land 
reform purposes, the State, as we know, exercises its inherent 
or sovereign power of eminent domain. This power dates back 
to the days of Grotius who described the said power as dominium 
eminens. This concept was adopted later in England. Today, the 
power of eminent domain is part of American law and juris- 
prudence. I would like to give a few citations from Grotius, as 
well as statements and rulings from authorities and court 
decisions, to underscore the fact that the concept of just com- 
pensation requires full and equivalent payment for the property 
to be expropriated. 

My stand is taken on the assumption that the proponents of 
the payment of compensation in expropriation for agrarian and 
urban land reform purposes conceive of a different and lesser 
amount of compensation for property taken than just compensa- 
tion as specified in the Bill of Rights (the concept of which is 
well established in our jurisprudence) when they speak of “fair 
and progressive system of compensation” (in the case of agrarian 
land reform) and “affordable cost” (in the case of urban land 
reform). 

The citations are as follows: 

Grotius - “. . . for ends of public utility, to which ends those 
who founded civil society must be supposed to have intended that 
private ends should give way. But it is to be added, that when this 


is done, the State is bound to make good the loss to those who 
lose their property.” 

Blackstone — . . while the good of the individual must yield 

to that of the community, the legislature alone may interpose to 
compel the individual to acquiesce, but such interposition is not 
arbitrary but only upon full indemnification and equivalent for 
the injury thereby sustained.” 

Among the U.S. cases we have the following: 

“The word ‘just’ is not used as an antithesis of unjust, but 
evidently to intensify the meaning of the word compensation.” 
Virginia & T.R. Co. v. Henry , 8 Nev. 165. 

“Market value means the fair value of the property as between 
one who wants to purchase and one who wants to sell an article; 
not what could be obtained for it under peculiar circumstances; 
not its speculative value; not a value obtained from the necessity 
of another. Nor is it to be limited to that price which the 
property would bring when forced off at auction under the 
hammer.” Lawrence v. Boston , 119 Mass. 126. 

In the Philippines, our Supreme Court had ruled that “the 
word ‘just’ is used simply to emphasize the meaning of compen- 
sation. Just compensation means a fair and full equivalent for the 
loss sustained from the act of expropriation. ” Manila R.R. Co. 
vs. Velasquez , 32 Phil. 286; Manila vs. Estrada , 25 Phil. 208. 

Kent in 2 Com. 339 says, “This principle, in American 
constitutional jurisprudence, is founded in natural equity, and is 
laid down by jurists as an acknowledged principle of universal 
law.” This means that the concept of just compensation is 
founded not only on law but also on equity. 

In the expropriation of property by virtue of the proposed 
provision on agrarian reform and urban land reform, the State 
exercises its power of eminent domain. The same State also 
exercises the same power of eminent domain in other extra- 
ordinary circumstances and for the common good, such as the 
construction or expansion of an airport or construction of a 
highway. Except for expropriation under the proposed provi- 
sions on agrarian and urban land reform, the Constitution in the 
Bill of Rights provides for payment of just compensation while in 
cases of expropriation for purposes of agrarian or urban land 
reform, a compensation less than the accepted measure of just 
compensation is provided for. Although the particulars are dif- 
ferent, the essence is the same. Eminent domain is exercised 
under extraordinary circumstances and for the common good. In 
providing for a lesser payment to the owner, the agrarian and 
urban land reform proposal would, in my opinion, be violative of 
the equal protection of law clause in our Constitution. 


782 


In summary, this representation favors strongly the granting of 
land or property to farmers, farm workers and urban poor but 
I strongly oppose the Robin Hood type of proposal of taking 
from those who have without payment of just compensation to 
give to the poor. In thus objecting, I speak on behalf of the many 
middle class and marginal landowners who have endured a life- 


time of hard work and savings to be able to own their properties. 
I object to their being compelled to sell their properties through 
the exercise of the State power of eminent domain at less than 
just compensation because (1) such a payment is not founded 
on law as well as on equity; and (2) it is violative of the equal 
protection guarantee in our Constitution. 


783 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 517 
(SUBSTITUTE RESOLUTION) 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE EXECUTIVE 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved, by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled. To incorporate in the new 
Constitution the following provisions on the Executive Depart- 
ment: 

ARTICLE 

EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 

SECTION 1. The executive power shall be vested in a Pres- 
ident of the Philippines. 

SEC. 2. No person may be elected President unless he is a 
natural-bom citizen of the Philippines, a registered voter, able to 
read and write, at least forty years of age on the day of the elec- 
tion, and resident of the Philippines for at least ten years imme- 
diately preceding such election. 

SEC. 3. There shall be a Vice-President who shall be elected 
with and in the same manner as the President and who shall have 
the same qualifications and term of office. He may be removed 
from office in the same manner as the President as provided in 
this Constitution. 

The Vice-President may be appointed as a member of the 
cabinet. 

SEC. 4. The President shall be elected by direct vote of the 
people for a term of six years which shall begin at noon on the 

thirtieth day of following the day of the election and 

shall end at noon of the same date six years thereafter. He shall 
be disqualified from immediate reelection. 

Upon receipt of the certificates of canvass, the National As- 
sembly shall, not later than thirty (30) days after the day of the 
election, open all the certificates in public session, and upon 
determination of the authenticity and due execution thereof 
in the manner provided by law, canvass the votes. 

The person having the highest number of votes shall be pro- 
claimed elected, but in case two or more shall have an equal and 
highest number of votes, one of them shall forthwith be chosen 
by the vote of a majority of all the members of the National 
Assembly. 

The Supreme Court, sitting en banc, shall be the sole judge of 
all contests relating to the election, returns and qualifications 
of the President or Vice-President. 


SEC. 5. If, at the time fixed for the beginning of his term, the 
President-elect shall have died, the Vice-President-elect shall 
become President. If a President shall not have been chosen 
before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if the 
President shall have failed to qualify, then the Vice-President shall 
act as President until a President shall have qualified. The Nation- 
al Assembly shall by law provide for the case where neither a 
President-elect nor a Vice-President-elect shall have been chosen 
or shall have qualified, or both shall have died at the time fixed 
for the beginning of their term, declaring who shall then act as 
President or the manner in which one who is to act shall be 
selected, and such person shall act accordingly until a President 
or Vice-President shall have qualified. 

SEC. 6. Before he enters on the execution of his office, the 
President or Acting President shall take the following oath or 
affirmation: 

“I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully 
and conscientiously fulfill my duties as President (or Acting 
President) of the Philippines, preserve and defend its 
Constitution, execute its laws, dojustice to every man, and 
consecrate myself to the service of the Nation. So help me 
God.” (In case of affirmation, last sentence will be omitted) 

SEC. 7. The President shall have an official residence. The 
President and Vice-President shall receive a salary to be fixed by 
law, which shall not be increased or decreased during their term 
of office. They shall not receive during their tenure any other 
emolument from the government or any other source. Unless the 
National Assembly shall provide otherwise, the President and the 

Vice-President shall receive an annual salary of - 

and pesos, respectively. 

SEC. 8. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice- 
President during the term for which he was elected, the President 
shall nominate a Vice-President from among the members of the 
National Assembly who shall take office upon confirmation by a 
majority vote of all the members of the National Assembly. 

SEC. 9. In case of permanent disability, death, removal from 
office or resignation of the President, the Vice-President shall 
become the President to serve the unexpired term. The National 
Assembly shall by law provide for the case of permanent dis- 
ability, death, removal from office or resignation of both the 
President and Vice-President declaring which officer shall then 
become Acting President or the manner in which one shall be 
selected. 


784 


The National Assembly shall by law provide for the case of 
death, permanent disability or resignation of the Acting President 
at the time the vacancy in the Office of the President occurs or 
subsequently thereafter, declaring who shall serve as President 
until the President and the Vice-President shall have been elected 
and qualified, subject to the same restrictions of powers and 
disqualifications as the Acting President. 


SEC. 13. An incumbent or Acting President shall not make 
appointments within two (2) months preceding the date of the 
next presidential election and thereafter until the expiration of 
the term of the former or the tenure of the latter, except tempo- 
rary appointments to executive positions when continued 
vacancies would prejudice public service or endanger public 
safety. 


SEC. 10. The National Assembly shall, at ten o’clock in the 
morning of the third day after the vacancy occurs, convene in 
accordance with its rules without need of a call and within seven 
days enact a law calling for a special election to elect a President 
and a Vice-President to be held not earlier than forty-five days 
nor later than sixty days from the time of such call. The bill call- 
ing such special election shall be deemed certified under para- 
graph (2),*Section 23,*Article VIII* of this Constitution and 
shall become law upon its approval on third reading by the 
National Assembly. Appropriations for the special election shall 
be charged against any current appropriations and shall be 
exempt from the requirements of paragraph (3),* Section 22,* 
Article VIII* of this Constitution. The convening of the National 
Assembly cannot be suspended nor the special election post- 
poned. No special election shall be called if the vacancy occurs 
within seventy days before the date of the next presidential 
election. 

SEC. 1 1 . Whenever the President transmits to the National As- 
sembly his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the 
powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a 
written declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall 
be discharged by the Vice-President as Acting President. 

Whenever a majority of all the members of the cabinet trans- 
mit to the National Assembly their written declaration that the 
President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his 
office, the Vice-President shall immediately assume the powers 
and duties of the office as Acting President. 

-■ Thereafter, when the President transmits to the National 
Assembly his written declaration that no inability exists, he shall 
resume the powers and duties of his office unless a majority of 
all the members of the cabinet transmit within five days to the 
National Assembly their written declaration that the President is 
unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. There- 
upon, the National Assembly shall decide the issue, convening 
within forty-eight hours for that purpose, if not in session. If the 
National Assembly, within twenty-one days after receipt of the 
latter written declaration, or, if not in session, within twenty-one 
days after it is required to assemble, determines by a two-thirds 
vote of all the members that the President is unable to discharge 
the powers and duties of his office, the Vice-President shall con- 
tinue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the 
President shall resume the powers and duties of his office. 


SEC. 14. The President shall have control of all the executive 
departments, bureaus, and offices. He shall exercise general super- 
vision over all local governments as may be provided by law, and 
shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed. 


SEC. 15. The President shall be the commander-in-chief of all 
the armed forces of the Philippines and, whenever it becomes 
necessary, he may call out such armed forces to prevent or sup- 
press lawless violence, invasion or rebellion. In case of invasion or 
rebellion, when the public safety requires it, he may, for a period 
not exceeding sixty days, and, with the concurrence of at least 
a majority of all the members of the National Assembly, suspend 
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, or place the Philippines 
or any part thereof under martial law. The National Assembly b 
a vote of at least a majority of all its members in regular or special 
session, may revoke such proclamation or suspension, or extend 
the same if the invasion or rebellion shall persist and public saf t 
requires it. 


The Supreme Court may review, in an appropriate proceed' 
filed by any citizen, the sufficiency of the factual basis of tl ^ 
proclamation of martial law or the suspension of the privilege of 
the writ or the extension thereof and must promulgate j ts 
decision on the same within thirty (30) days from its filing. 

A state of martial law does not suspend the operation of th 
Constitution, nor supplant the functioning of the civil courts & 
legislative assemblies, nor authorize the conferment of juri 
tion on military courts and agencies over civilians where 1C * 
courts are able to function, nor automatically suspend 
privilege of the writ. “ le 


The suspension of the privilege of the writ shall apply on l 
persons judicially charged for rebellion or for offenses inhere \ ^ 
or directly connected with invasion. ln 


SEC. 16. The President shall nominate and, with the consent 
of a Commission on Appointments, shall appoint the heads of 
the executive departments and bureaus, ambassadors, other 
public ministers and consuls, or officers of the armed forces from 
the rank of colonel or naval captain and all other officers of the 
Government whose appointments are not otherwise provided for 
by law, and those whom he may be authorized by law to appoint 
The National Assembly may by law vest the appointment of 
inferior officers in the President alone, in the courts, or in the 
heads of departments. 


SEC. 12. An Acting President shall not declare martial law or 
suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus without the 
concurrence of at least a majority of all the members of the 
National Assembly. 

Appointments extended by an Acting President shall remain 
effective, unless revoked by the elected President within ninety 
days from his assumption or reassumption of office. 


SEC. 17. Except in cases of impeachment, or as otherwise 
provided in this Constitution, the President may grant reprieves 
commutations, and pardons, and remit fines and forfeitures, after 
conviction. However, the power to grant executive clemency for 
violations of corrupt practices laws may be limited by legislation. 

He shall also have the power to grant amnesty with the concur- 
rence of a majority of all the members of the National Assembly. 


♦based on the draft Report on the National Assembly under Committee 
Report No. 22 


785 


SEC. 18. The President may contract or guarantee foreign and 
domestic loans on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines with 
the prior concurrence of the Monetary Board. The Monetary 
Board shall, within thirty (30) days from the end of every quarter 
of the calendar year, submit to the National Assembly a complete 
report of its decisions on applications for loans to be contracted 
or guaranteed by the government or government-owned and con- 
trolled corporations which would have the effect of increasing the 
foreign debt and containing other matters as may be provided by 
law. 

SEC. 19. The President, Vice-President, members of the 
cabinet, and chiefs of bureaus or offices and their assistants shall 
not, during their term, hold any other office or employment, nor 
may they practice any profession, participate directly or indirect- 
ly in any business, or be financially interested directly in any 
contract with, or in any financial or special privilege granted by 
the government or any subdivision, agency or instrumentality 
thereof, including any government-owned or controlled corpora- 


tions, and shall strictly avoid conflict of interest in the conduct of 
their office. 

The spouse and relatives by consanguinity or affinity within 
the third civil degree of the President shall not be appointed as 
minister, deputy minister or head of bureau or office. 

SEC. 20. No treaty or international agreement shall be valid 
and effective unless concurred in by a majority of all the 
members of the National Assembly. 

SEC. 21. The President shall submit within fifteen days of the 
opening of each regular session of the National Assembly a 
budget of receipts and expenditures, which shall be the basis of 
the general appropriations bill. 

SEC. 22. The President shall address the National Assembly at 
the opening of its regular session. He may also appear before it at 
any other time. 


786 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS APPROVED ON THIRD READING 


RESOLUTION NO. 9 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITUTION 
AN ARTICLE ON THE JUDICIARY 

Be it resolved by the Constitutional Commission in session 
assembled, To incorporate in the Constitution the following 
provisions: 

ARTICLE 

THE JUDICIARY 

SECTION 1. The judicial power shall be vested in one 
Supreme Court and in such lower courts as may be established 
by law. 

Judicial power includes the duty of courts of justice to 
settle actual controversies involving rights which are legally de- 
mandable and enforceable and to determine whether or not there 
has been a grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess 
of jurisdiction on the part of any branch or instrumentality of 
the government. 

SEC. 2. The National Assembly shall have the power to 
define, prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts but may not deprive the Supreme Court of its jurisdiction 
over cases enumerated in Section 7 hereof. 

No law shall be passed reorganizing the judiciary when it 
undermines security of tenure. 


bers who actually participated when the case was submitted for 
decision. 


concurrence of a majority of the members who actually parti 
cipated when the case was submitted for decision but if sucl" 
required number is not obtained, the case shall be decided ° 
banc: Provided, that no doctrine or principle of law laid d ^ 
by the court in a decision rendered en banc or in division ° 
be modified or reversed except by the court sitting en banc 


the Supreme Court or any lower collegiate court unless h * 
a natural-born citizen of the Philippines. A member of the sf * S 
reme Court must be at least forty years of age, and must h P 
been for fifteen years or more a judge of a lower court or 3VC 
gaged in the practice of law in the Philippines. r en ' 


(2) The National Assembly shall prescribe the 

cations of judges of lower courts, but no person may 
pointed judge thereof unless he is a citizen of the Ph r 6 . ap ' 
and a member of the Philippine Bar. lp Pines 

(3) A member of the judiciary must be a person of 

competence, integrity, probity and independence. pr °ven 


of lower courts shall be appointed by the President f r JUd ® es 
of at least three nominees prepared by a Judicial and B m 3 * ist 
for every vacancy. Such appointments need no confirmatio ° Unc il 

With respect to the lower courts, the President 
the appointments within ninety days from the submissio^ * SSUe 


SEC. 3. (1) The Supreme Court shall be composed of a 
Chief Justice and ten Associate Justices. It may sit en banc or in 
two divisions. In case of any vacancy, the same shall be filled 
within ninety days from the occurrence thereof. 

(2) All cases involving the constitutionality of a treaty, 
international or executive agreement, or law shall be heard and 
decided by the Supreme Court en banc, and no treaty, interna- 
tional or executive agreement, or law may be declared unconsti- 
tutional without the concurrence of a majority plus one of the 
members. The same number of votes shall be required for the im- 
position of the death penalty. 

(3) All other cases including those involving the constitu- 
tionality, application or operation of presidential decrees, pro- 
clamations, orders, instructions, ordinances and other regulations 
which under the rules of court are required to be heard en banc 
shall be decided with the concurrence of a majority of the mem- 


under the supervision of the Supreme Court composed CrCated 
Chief Justice as ex-officio Chairman, the Minister of j° f the 
and a representative of the National Assembly as ex-^fr™ 
members, a representative of the integrated bar a prof* ° 
of law, a retired member of the Supreme Court,’ anda 
sentative of the private sector. ’ re Pre- 


(2) The regular members of the council shall be appoint h 
by the President for a term of four years with the consent of th 
Commission on Appointments. Of the members first appoint h 
the representative of the integrated bar shall serve for four y e ^ 
the professor of law for three years, the retired justice for tw^ 
years, and the representative of the private sector for one year W ° 

(3) The Clerk of the Supreme Court shall be the Secretary 
ex-officio and shall keep a record of the proceedings of the 
Council. 


787 


(4) The regular members of the Council shall receive such 
emoluments as may be determined by the Supreme Court. The 
Supreme Court shall provide in its annual budget the appropria- 
tions for the Council. 

(5) The Council shall have the principal function of recom- 
mending appointees to the judiciary. It may exercise such other 
functions and duties as the Supreme Court may assign to it. 

SEC. 7. The Supreme Court shall have the following 
powers: 

(1) Exercise original jurisdiction over cases affecting am- 
bassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and over petitions 
for certiorari , prohibition, mandamus , quo warranto , and habeas 
corpus. 

(2) Review, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on appeal or 
certiorari , as the law or the rules of court may provide, final 
judgments and decrees of lower courts in: 

(a) All cases in which the constitutionality or validity 
of any treaty, international or executive agreement, law, presiden- 
tial decree, proclamation, order, instruction, ordinance, or regu- 
lation is in question. 

(b) All cases involving the legality of any tax, impost, 
assessment, or toll, or any penalty imposed in relation thereto. 

(c) All cases in which the jurisdiction of any lower court 
is in issue. 

(d) All criminal cases in which the penalty imposed is 
death or life imprisonment. 

(e) All cases in which only an error or question of law 
is involved. 

(3) Assign temporarily judges of lower courts to other 
stations as public interest may require. Such temporary assign- 
ment shall not last longer than six months without the consent 
of the judge concerned. 

(4) Order a change of venue or place of trial to avoid a 
miscarriage of justice. 

(5) Promulgate rules concerning the protection and en- 
forcement of constitutional rights, pleading, practice, and pro- 
cedure in all courts, the admission to the practice of law, the 
integrated bar, and legal assistance to the underprivileged. Such 
rules shall provide a simplified and inexpensive procedure for the 
speedy disposition of cases, shall be uniform for all courts of the 
same grade, and shall not diminish, increase, or modify substan- 
tive rights. Rules of procedures of special courts and quasi-judicial 
bodies shall remain effective unless disapproved by the Supreme 
Court. 

(6) Appoint all officials and employees of the judiciary 
in accordance with the Civil Service Law. 

SEC. 8. The Members of the Supreme Court and of other 
courts established by law shall not be designated to any agency 
performing quasi-judicial and/or administrative functions. 

SEC. 9. The Supreme Court shall have administrative 
supervision over all courts and the personnel thereof. 

SEC. 10. The Members of the Supreme Court and judges 
of lower courts shall hold office during good behavior until 


they reach the age of seventy years or become incapacitated 
to discharge the duties of their office. The Supreme Court en 
banc shall have the power to discipline judges of lower courts, 
or order dismissal by the vote of a majority plus one of the 
Members who actually participated when the matter was sub- 
mitted for resolution. 

SEC. 11. The conclusions of the Supreme Court in any 
case submitted to it for decision en banc or in division shall 
be reached in consultation before the case is assigned to a Mem- 
ber for the writing of the opinion of the court. A certification 
to this effect signed by the Chief Justice shall be issued and a 
copy thereof attached to the record of the case and serve upon 
the parties. Any Member dissenting or abstaining from a decision 
must state the reason for his dissent or abstention. The same 
requirements shall be observed by all lower collegiate courts. 

SEC. 12. No decision shall be rendered by any court with- 
out expressing therein clearly and distinctly the facts and the law 
on which it is based. 

No petition for review or motion for reconsideration of a 
decision of the court shall be refused due course or denied with- 
out stating the legal basis therefor. 

SEC. 13. The salary of the Chief Justice and of the Asso- 
ciate Justices of the Supreme Court, and of judges of lower 
courts shall be fixed by law. During their continuance in office, 
their salary shall not be decreased. Until the National Assembly 
shall provide otherwise, the Chief Justice shall receive an annual 

salary of and each Associate Justice 

pesos. 

SEC. 14. (1) All cases or matters filed after the effectivity 
of this Constitution must be decided or resolved within twenty- 
four months from date of submission for the Supreme Court, 
and unless reduced by the Supreme Court, twelve months for all 
lower collegiate courts, and three months for all other lower 
courts. 

(2) A case or matter shall be deemed submitted for deci- 
sion or resolution upon the filing of the last pleading, brief, or 
memorandum required by the rules of court or by the court 
itself. 

(3) Upon the expiration of the corresponding period, 
a certification to this effect signed by the Chief Justice or the 
presiding judge shall forthwith be issued and a copy thereof 
attached to the record of the case or matter, and served upon 
the parties. 

SEC. 15. The judiciary shall enjoy fiscal autonomy. Appro- 
priations for the judiciary may not be reduced by the legislature 
below the amount appropriated for the previous year and, after 
approval, shall be automatically and regularly released. 

SEC. 16. The Supreme Court shall, within thirty days 
from the opening of each regular session of the National As- 
sembly, submit to the President and the National Assembly an 
annual report on the operations and activities of the judiciary. 

Adopted, July 19, 1986. 


788 


RESOLUTION NO. 10 


B. THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITUTION 
AN ARTICLE ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMIS- 
SIONS 

Be it resolved by the Constitutional Commission in session 
assembled , To incorporate in the Constitution the following 
provisions: 


ARTICLE XH 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS 
A. COMMON PROVISIONS 

SECTION 1. The Constitutional Commissions shall be the 
Civil Service Commission, the Commission on Elections and 
the Commission on Audit. 

SEC. 2. Until otherwise provided by law, the Chairman 
and each of the Commissioners shall receive an annual salary 

of and respectively, which 

shall not be decreased during their tenure. 

SEC. 3. No Member for a Constitutional Commission 
shall, during his tenure, hold any other office or employment, 
or engage in the practice of any profession or in the active 
management or control of any business which in any way may be 
affected by the functions of his office, or be financially inte- 
rested, directly or indirectly, in any contract with, or in any fran- 
chise or privilege granted by the Government, any of its subdivi- 
sions, agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned 
or controlled corporations or their subsidiaries. 

SEC. 4. The Commissions shall enjoy fiscal autonomy. 
The approved annual appropriations for the Commissions shall 
be automatically and regularly released. 

SEC. 5. Each Commission shall decide by a majority vote 
of all its Members any case or matter brought before it within 
sixty days from the date of its submission for decision or resolu- 
tion. A case or matter is deemed submitted for decision or reso- 
lution upon the filing of the last pleading, brief, or memoran- 
dum required by the rules of the Commission or by the Commis- 
sion itself. Unless otherwise provided by this Constitution or by 
law, any decision, order, or ruling of each Commission may be 
brought to the Supreme Court on certiorari by the aggrieved party 
within thirty days from receipt of a copy thereof. 

SEC. 6. Each Commission en banc may promulgate its 
own rules concerning pleadings and practice before it or before 
any of its offices. Such rules however shall not diminish, increase 
or modify substantive rights. 

SEC. 7. Each Commission shall perform such other func- 
tions as may be provided by law. 

SEC. 8. The Constitutional Commissions shall appoint 
their officials and employees in accordance with law. 


SEC. 1. (1) The Civil Service embraces all branches, sub- 
divisions, instrumentalities and agencies of the Government, 
including government-owned or controlled corporations with 
original charters. 

(2) Appointments in the Civil Service shall be made only 
according to merit and fitness to be determined, as far as prac- 
ticable and except to those which are policy-determining, prima- 
rily confidential and highly technical, by competitive examina- 
tion. 

(3) No officer or employee of the Civil Service shall be 
removed or suspended except for cause provided by law 

(4) No officer or employee in the Civil Service shall en- 
gage, directly or indirectly, in any electioneering and other 
partisan political campaign. 

(5) Temporary employees of the government shall b 
given such protection as may be provided by law. 


SEC. 2. (1) The Civil Service shall be administered b 
an independent Civil Service Commission composed of a Cl * y 
man and two Commissioners who shall be natural-born C it* ^ 
of the Philippines and, at the time of their appointment, 
thirty-five years of age, with proven capacity for public admi^ 1 
tration, and must not have been candidates for any elecr* 8 ' 
position in the election immediately preceding their appoint 
ment. 


ine cn airman «.*ou De 

pointed by the President with the consent of the Comm' • 
on Appointments for a term of seven years without rean 1SSl ° n 
ment. Of those first appointed, the Chairman shall holdff 0 *' 
for seven years, a Commissioner for five years, and ° * iCe 
Commissioner for three years, without reappointment A anotl ' ler 
ment to any vacancy shall be only for the unexpired PP °. 
of the term of the predecessor. In no case shall any Mernb^ 00 
appointed or designated in a temporary or acting capacity ^ 

SEC. 3. The Civil Service Commission, as the 
personnel agency of the Government, shall establish Central 
service and adopt measures to promote morale eff C3reer 
integrity, responsiveness, progressiveness, and courtesy 
civil service. It shall strengthen the merit and rewards s t ^ 
integrate all human resources development programs for 0 !’ 
levels and ranks, and institutionalize a management climate * 3 
ducive to public accountability. It shall submit to the Presid° n " 
and the Congress an annual report on its personnel programs ^ 




SEC. 4. No elective official shall be eligible for appointment 
or designation in any capacity to any public office or position 
during his tenure. 


SEC. 5. No candidate who has lost in any election shall 
within one year after such election, be appointed to any office 
in the Government, or any government-owned or controlled cor- 
poration or in any of its subsidiaries. 

SEC. 6. No Member of the Armed Forces in the active 
service shall, at any time, be appointed or designated in any 
capacity to a civilian position in the Government including 
government-owned or controlled corporations. 


789 


SEC. 7. No elective or appointive public officer or em- 
ployee shall receive additional or double compensation unless 
specifically authorized by law nor accept without the consent 
of the Congress any emolument or official title of any kind from 
any foreign government. 

SEC. 8. Notwithstanding any provision of this Article, 
the right to self-organization shall not be denied to government 
employees. 

SEC. 9. The National Assembly or the Legislature shall 
provide for the standardization of compensation of government 
officials and employees, including those in government-owned 
or controlled corporations, taking into account the nature of the 
responsibilities pertaining to, and the qualifications required 
for, the positions concerned. 

Adopted, July 22, 1986. 


RESOLUTION NO. 1 1 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 

TION THE PROVISIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON 

ELECTIONS 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled , To incorporate in Article XII 
of the Constitution the following provisions: 

C. THE COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS 

SECTION 1.(1) There shall be an independent Commission 
on Elections composed of a Chairman and six (6) Commissioners 
who shall be natural-born citizens of the Philippines and, at the 
time of their appointment, at least thirty-five years of age, 
holders of a college degree, and must not have been candidates 
for any elective position in the immediately preceding election. 
However, a majority thereof, including the Chairman, shall be 
members of the Philippine Bar who have been engaged in the 
practice of law for at least ten (10) years. 

(2) The Chairman and the Commissioners shall be ap- 
pointed by the President with the consent of the Commission on 
Appointments for a term of seven (7) years without reappoint- 
ment. Of those first appointed, three (3) Members shall hold 
office for seven (7) years, two (2) Members for five (5) years, and 
the last Members for three (3) years, without reappointment. 
Appointment to any vacancy shall be only for the unexpired 
portion of the term of the predecessor. In no case shall any 
Member be appointed or designated in a temporary or acting 
capacity. 

SEC. 2. The Commission shall exercise the following 
powers and functions: 

(1) Enforce and administer all laws and regulations relative 
to the conduct of elections, plebiscites, recalls, initiatives and 
referenda; 

(2) Exercise exclusive jurisdiction over all contests relating 
to the elections, returns and qualifications of all elective regional, 
provincial, and city officials, and of all contests involving munici- 
pal or barangay officials on appeal from trial courts of general 


jurisdiction and from trial courts of limited jurisdiction, respec- 
tively; 

(3) Decide, except those involving the right to vote, all 
questions affecting elections, including determination of the 
number and location of polling places, appointment of election 
officials and inspectors, and registration of voters; 

(4) Deputize, with the concurrence of the President, law 
enforcement agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, 
including the Armed Forces of the Philippines, for the exclusive 
purpose of ensuring free, orderly, honest and peaceful credible 
elections; 

(5) Register, after sufficient publication, political parties, 
organizations or coalitions, which in addition to other require- 
ments must present their platform or program of government, 
and accredit citizens’ arms of the Commission. Religious deno- 
minations and sects shall not be registered. Those which seek to 
achieve their goals through violence, unlawful means or refuse to 
uphold and adhere to this Constitution, or which are supported 
by any foreign government shall likewise be refused registration; 

Financial contributions to political parties and organiza- 
tions or candidates from foreign governments and their agencies 
related to elections constitute an act of interference in national 
affairs and when accepted shall be an additional ground for the 
cancellation of the registration of a political party or organization 
in addition to other penalties that may be prescribed by law; 

(6) On a verified complaint or on its own initiative, file 
petitions in court for inclusion of voters in or exclusion from the 
registry of qualified voters; investigate and, where appropriate, 
prosecute cases of violations of election laws, including acts or 
omissions constituting election fraud, offenses and malpractices; 

(7) Recommend to the National Assembly effective 
measures to minimize election spending including limitations of 
places where propaganda materials shall be posted and prevent 
and/or penalize all forms of election frauds, offenses and mal- 
practices, nuisance candidacy or other similar acts; 

(8) Recommend to the President the removal of, or any 
other disciplinary action against, any officer or employee it has 
deputized for violation or disregard of or disobedience to its 
directive, order or decision; and 

(9) Submit to the President and the National Assembly a 
comprehensive report on the conduct and manner of each 
election, plebiscite, or referendum. 

SEC. 3. No votes cast in favor of a political party, organiza- 
tion or coalition shall be valid, except as may be provided in this 
Constitution under the party-list system. 

SEC. 4. A free and open party system should be allowed to 
evolve according to the free choice of the people, subject only to 
the provisions of this Article. 

SEC. 5. Bona fide candidates for any public office shall be 
free from any form of harassment and discrimination. 

SEC. 6. Political parties or organizations or coalitions 
registered under the party-list system shall not be represented in 
the voters’ registration boards, boards of election inspectors, 
boards of canvassers or other similar bodies. However, they shall 
be entitled to appoint poll watchers in accordance with law. 


790 


SEC. 7. The Commission may sit en banc or in two divi- 
sions, and shall promulgate its rules of procedures in order to 
expedite disposition of election cases, including pre -proclamation 
controversies. All such election cases shall be heard and decided 
in division, provided that motions for reconsideration of decisions 
shall be decided by the Commission en banc. 

SEC. 8. The enjoyment or utilization of all franchises or 
permits for the operation of transportation and other public 
utilities, media of communication or information, all grants, 
special privileges or concessions granted by the Government or 
any subdivision, agency or instrumentality thereof, including any 
government-owned or controlled corporation, may be supervised 
or regulated by the Commission during the election period, to 
ensure equal opportunity, equal time, equal space and right to 
reply including reasonable, equal rates therefor for public infor- 
mation campaigns and forums among candidates for the purpose 
of ensuring free, orderly, honest and peaceful elections. 

SEC. 9. Unless otherwise fixed by the Commission in 
special cases, the election period shall commence ninety days 
before the day of election and shall end thirty days thereafter. 

SEC. 10. No pardon, amnesty, parole or suspension of 
sentence for violation of election laws, rules and regulations shall 
be granted by the President without the favorable recommenda- 
tion of the Commission. 

SEC. 11. Decisions, final orders or rulings of the Commis- 
sion on election contests involving elective municipal and 
barangay offices shall be final, executory and not appealable. 

SEC. 12. Funds certified by the Commission as necessary 
to defray the expenses for holding regular and special elections, 
referenda and plebiscites shall be provided in the regular or 
special appropriations and, once approved, shall be released auto- 
matically upon certification by the Chairman of the Commission. 

Adopted, July 22, 1986. 


RESOLUTION NO. 12 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE PROVISIONS ON THE 
COMMISSION ON AUDIT IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 


have been candidates for any elective position in the election 
immediately preceding their appointment. At no time shall all 
Members of the Commission belong to the same profession. 


(2) The Chairman and the Commissioners shall be ap- 
pointed by the President with the consent of the Commission 
on Appointments for a term of seven years without reappoint- 
ment. Of those first appointed, the Chairman shall hold office 
for seven years, one Commissioner for five years, and the other 
Commissioner for three years, without reappointment. Appoint- 
ment to any vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion of 
the term of the predecessor. In no case shall any Member be 
appointed or designated in a temporary or acting capacity 


SEC. 2. (1) The Commission on Audit shall have the power 
authority and duty to examine, audit and settle all accounts' 
pertaining to the revenue and receipts of, and expenditures or 
uses of funds and property, owned or held in trust by or 
taining to, the government, or any of its subdivisions, agencies" 
or instrumentalities, including, on a post-audit basis: (a) con V 
tutional bodies, commissions and offices that have been g r ”+ h 
fiscal autonomy under this Constitution; (b) autonomous *1 ^ 
colleges and universities; (c) government-owned or controh ^ 
corporations and their subsidiaries; and, (d) such non-P 0 ° ^ 
mental entities receiving subsidy or equity, directly or indirect] 11 ' 
from or through the government, which are required by i a ^ Uy > 
the granting institution to submit to such audit as a co n dV° r 
of subsidy or equity: Provided , however , that where the i n te ^ 

control system of the audited agencies is inadequate th* 

. . i . 5 ue Lom. 


mission may adopt such measures including temporary or 
pre-audit as are necessary and appropriate to correct the^ 0 ' 3 ' 
ciencies. It shall keep the general accounts of the g 0v 6 de **' 
and, for such period as may be provided by law, pres 6011116111 
vouchers and other supporting papers pertaining thereto ^ 


(2) The Commission shall have exclusive author t 
ject to the limitation in this Article, to define the sc” ^ SUb ' 
audit and examination, establish the techniques and° Pe ° f * tS 
required therefore, and promulgate accounting and m ^ hods 
rules and regulations including those for the preventto tl08 
disallowance of irregular, unnecessary, excessive extrav ^ 
or unconscionable expenditures or uses of government f 83 ™ 
and properties. unds 


Be it resolved by the Constitutional Commission in session 
assembled, To incorporate in the Constitution the following 
provisions: 


ARTICLE XII 

D. THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT 

SECTION 1 . (1) There shall be an independent Commission 
on Audit composed of a Chairman and two Commissioners, who 
shall be natural-born citizens of the Philippines and, at the time 
of their appointment, at least thirty-five years of age, certified 
public accountants with not less than ten years of auditing ex- 
perience or members of the Philippine Bar who have been en- 
gaged in the practice of law for at least ten years and must not 


SEC. 3. The Commission shall submit to the Presiri 
and the National Assembly, within the time fixed by law 
annual report covering the financial condition and operaiin 
of the Government, its subdivisions, agencies, and instrumer 
tahties, including government-owned or controlled corporate 
and such non-governmental entities subject to its audit a\ 
recommend measures necessary to improve their efficiency ^ 
effectiveness. It shall submit such other reports as ma/h 
required by law. y 


SEC. 4. No law shall be passed exempting any entity 
of the government or its subsidiary in any guise whatever, or any 
investments of public funds, from the jurisdiction of the Com- 
mission on Audit. 

Adopted, July 22, 1986. 


791 


RESOLUTION NO. 13 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION AN ARTICLE ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled , To incorporate in the Bill of 
Rights of tile new Constitution the following provisions: 

ARTICLE 

BILL OF RIGHTS 

SECTION 1. No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or 
property without due process of law, nor shall any person be 
denied the equal protection of the laws. 

SEC. 2. Private property shall not be taken for public use 
without just compensation. 

SEC. 3. The right of the people to be secure in their per- 
sons, houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable searches 
and seizures of whatever nature and for any purpose shall be 
inviolable, and no search warrant or warrant of arrest shall issue 
except upon probable cause to be determined personally by the 
judge after examination under oath or affirmation of the com- 
plainant and the witnesses he may produce, and particularly 
describing the place to be searched, and the person or things to 
be seized. 

SEC. 4 (1) The privacy of communication and correspond- 
ence shall be inviolable except upon lawful order of the court, 
or when public safety or order require otherwise, as prescribed 
by law. (2) Any evidence obtained in violation of this or the 
preceding section shall be inadmissible for any purpose in any 
proceeding. 

SEC. 5. The liberty of abode and of changing the same 
within the limits prescribed by law shall not be impaired except 
upon lawful order of the court. Neither shall the right to travel 
be impaired except in the interest of national security, public 
safety, or public health as may be provided by law. 

SEC. 6. The right of the people to information on matters 
of public concern shall be recognized. Access to official records, 
and to documents and papers pertaining to official acts, transac- 
tions, or decisions, as well as government research data used as 
basis for policy development shall be afforded the citizen subject 
to such limitations as may be provided by law. 

SEC. 7. The right of the people including those employed 
in the public and private sectors to form associations, unions, or 
societies for purposes not contrary to law shall not be abridged. 

SEC. 8. No law shall be made respecting an establishment 
of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof. The free 
exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and worship, 
without discrimination or preference, shall forever be allowed. 
No religious test shall be required for the exercise of civil or 
political rights. 

SEC. 9. No law shall be passed abridging the freedom of 
speech, expression, or of the press, or the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble and petition the government for redress 
of grievances. 


SEC. 10. No law impairing the obligation of contracts shall 
be passed. 

SEC. 11. No ex-post facto law or bill of attainder shall be 
enacted. 

SEC. 12. No person shall be imprisoned for debt or non- 
payment of a poll tax. 

SEC. 13. No involuntary servitude in any form shall exist 
except as a punishment for a crime whereof the party shall have 
been duly convicted. 

SEC. 14. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall 
not be suspended except in cases of invasion or rebellion when 
the public safety requires it. 

SEC. 15. All persons shall have the right to a speedy dispo- 
sition of their cases before all judicial, quasi-judicial, or adminis- 
trative bodies. 

SEC. 16. All persons, except those charged with offenses 
punishable by reclusion perpetua when evidence of guilt is strong, 
shall, before conviction, be bailable by sufficient sureties, or may 
be released on recognizance as may be provided by law. The 
right to bail shall not be impaired even when the privilege of 
the writ of habeas corpus is suspended. Excessive bail shall not be 
required. 

SEC. 17. No person shall be held to answer for a criminal 
offense without due process of law nor shall any person be de- 
tained merely by reason of his political beliefs and aspirations. In 
all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall be presumed innocent 
until the contrary is proved, and shall enjoy the right to be heard 
by himself and counsel, to be informed of the nature and cause of 
the accusation against him, to have a speedy, impartial, and 
public trial, to meet the witnesses face to face, and to have 
compulsory process to secure the attendance of witnesses and the 
production of evidence in his behalf. However, after arraignment, 
trial may proceed notwithstanding the absence of the accused 
provided that he has been duly notified and his failure to appear 
is unjustifiable. 

SEC. 18. No person shall be compelled to be a witness 
against himself. 

SEC. 19. Any person under investigation for the commis- 
sion of an offense shall have the right to be informed of his right 
to remain silent and to have competent and independent counsel 
preferably of his own choice. If the person cannot afford the 
services of counsel, he must be provided with one. These rights 
cannot be waived except in writing and in the presence of 
counsel. 

No torture, force, violence, threat, intimidation or any other 
means which vitiates the free will shall be used against him. 
Secret detention places, solitary, incommunicado , or other similar 
forms of detention are prohibited. 

Any confession or admission obtained in violation of this or 
the preceding section shall be inadmissible in evidence against 
him. 

Penal and civil sanctions for violations of this section as 
well as compensation for and rehabilitation of victims of tortures 
or similar practices, and of their families, shall be provided by 
law. 



SEC. 20. Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor cruel, 
degrading or inhuman punishment, or the death penalty inflicted, 
unless for compelling reasons involving heinous crimes the 
National Assembly provides for the death penalty. Death penalty 
already imposed shall be reduced to reclusion perpetua. 

The employment of physical, psychological or degrading 
punishment against any prisoner or detainee or the use of sub- 
standard or inadequate penal facilities under subhuman condi- 
tions should be dealt with by law. 

SEC. 21. No person shall be twice put in jeopardy of 
punishment for the same offense. If an act is punished by a law 
and an ordinance, conviction or acquittal under either shall 
constitute a bar to another prosecution for the same act. 

SEC. 22. Free access to the courts and quasi-judicial bodies 
and adequate legal assistance shall not be denied to any person by 
reason of poverty. 

Adopted, July 22, 1986., 

RESOLUTION NO. 14 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION AN ARTICLE ON SUFFRAGE 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled , To incorporate in the new 
Constitution the following provisions on Suffrage: 


ARTICLE 

SUFFRAGE 


SECTION 1. Suffrage may be exercised by all citizens of 
the Philippines not otherwise disqualified by law, who are at least 
eighteen years of age, and who shall have resided in the Philip- 
pines for at least one year and in the place wherein they propose 
to vote for at least six months preceding the election. 

No literacy, property or other substantive requirement shall 
be imposed on the exercise of suffrage. 

The National Assembly shall provide a system for the 
purpose of securing the secrecy and sanctity of the vote as well as 
a system for absentee voting by qualified Filipinos abroad. 

In the case of the disabled and the illiterates, the legislature 
shall design a procedure which will not require the assistance of 
another person. Until the legislature provides for the appropri 
procedure, the illiterates and the disabled shall be allowed to v ^ 
under the existing law and such rules as the Commission ° * 
Elections may promulgate to protect the secrecy of the ballot 1 

Adopted, July 22, 1986. 






