Address of 
the President of 
the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines 

MANUEL L. QUEZON 

before the 
Senate of the United States 
Washington, D. C 
June 4, 1J42 



FOREWORD 



★ 

pon the request of Senator Alben Barkley, majority 
leader of the Senate, President Quezon addressed that 
body Thursday, June 4, 1942. His address was brief 
because important war measures were pending. 

At the conclusion of the address, Senator Barkley made 
the following comment, which coming from such high and 
experienced authority, should be recorded. 

Senator Barkley: 

President Quezon is an old colleague and friend from our 
years together in the House of Representatives. 

Ten minutes of persuasive eloquence, stirring and obviously 
from the heart. 

He has carried the flags of the United States and the Com- 
monwealth high over his own Christian land. 

Bataan and Corregidor demonstrated the gratitude and 
loyalty of the people of the Philippines. Their service and 
devotion under our own General MacArthur has resounded 
to their glory. 

Odds of 10 to 1, separated from outside assistance, they 
fought and died under their leader Manuel L. Quezon. 

President Roosevelt's promise of redemption has sustained 
him and his people, they know the Philippines will rise again. 




★ ★ * * 



The Vice President said: Members of the 
Senate, ladies, and gentlemen, it gives me the 
greatest pleasure at this time to introduce the 
most gallant leader of a most gallant people. 

Senators, ladies, and gentlemen, the President 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. 



★ ★ 



mm 



Mr. President and 

Gentlemen of the Senate: 

jjT is a very high honor and a rare privilege that 
you have conferred upon me in inviting me to 
address the Senate of the United States, the 
greatest legislative body in the world. I ap- 
preciate it more than I can say, and I thank you from the 
bottom of my heart. 

On August 19, 1 94 1, 4 months before Japan attacked the 
Philippines, it was my privilege to address Vice President 
Wallace over the radio from Malacanan Palace in Manila, 
and, through him, the people of the United States. 

On that occasion, I said: 

In this grave national emergency, the stand of the 
Filipino people is clear and unmistakable. We owe 
loyalty to America and we are bound to her by 
bonds of everlasting gratitude. Should the United 
States enter the war, the Philippines would follow 
her and fight by her side, placing at her disposal all 
our manpower and all our material resources, how- 



Page 4 



ever limited these might be. We stand with the 
United States in life and in death. 

[Applause.] 

Those words may have sounded then to some people in this 
country as more rhetorical than real. To the Filipinos, how- 
ever, the sentiments that I expressed and the pledge that I 
made were known to be not only sincere but perfectly 
natural. What else could be expected of a people whom 
America has treated justly and fairly and to whom liberty 
and independence have already been assured through the 
Tydings-McDuffie Act? 

Moreover, the tie which binds our two countries transcends 
all political and legal relationships. It depends not merely 
upon a written alliance, a declaration, or a treaty. It consists 
of spiritual kinship and relationship. Our aims, our hopes, 
our aspirations, are the same as your own. In the great moral 
causes the principles of righteousness, of liberty, of peace, the 
United States and the Philippines are in complete accord with 
one another; they are in absolute and hearty agreement. 

There has been no question, therefore, as to the loyalty of 
the Filipinos to the United States, or the extent to which they 
would go in fighting for the American flag. I say "in fight- 
ing for the American flag" advisedly, for we fought in the 
Philippi nes by your side against overwhelming odds, not only 
to defend our country against the invader but also to defend 
your flag against the attack of Japan. [Applause.] 



Page 5 



When you entered the first World War, although the 
Philippines were in no way involved therein, we offered to 
the Government of the United States one submarine and one 
destroyer, and also asked to be permitted to send one division 
to fight under your banner on the battlefields of Europe. 
That we did not have the privilege of actually taking part in 
that war by your side has always been a source of regret to us. 
However, even then, individual Filipinos fought and died in 
your ranks. I remember at this time Tomas Claudio, ^whom 
we have immortalized by giving his name to the training 
camp of our national guard. 

Gentlemen of the Senate, since I arrived in this country I 
have learned that there is a war slogan, "Remember Pearl 
Harbor." I approve and fully understand the slogan. The 
attack upon Pearl Harbor aroused every redblooded and 
patriotic American to a point where he can never be satis- 
fied with anything less than the definite and complete defeat 
of Japan. [Applause.] 

How about the Philippines? Of course, so far as their 
political relations with the United States are concerned, there 
is a legal difference between the position of Hawaii and that 
of the Philippines. Hawaii is as much an integral part of the 
United States as is Washington, D. C., or California, while 
the Philippines has already been formally declared by the 
Congress to be a distinct and separate nation, to become f ully 
independent of the United States on July 4> I94 6 - 

But, when we were attacked by Japan, the American flag 
was still flying over the Philippines, and we were still under 



Page 6 



the protection of, and owed allegiance to, the United States. 
Although in domestic affairs we had almost complete auton- 
omy, in foreign affairs all governmental powers and respon- 
sibilities rested exclusively in the hands of the United States. 
In other words, you were then, as you still are, the trustees 
for the Filipino people in their foreign affairs. No one will 
deny that the moral and legal responsibilities of a trustee in 
the care and protection of its trust are greater even than those 
of an owner in respect to his own property. 

Gentlemen of the Senate, I am not in this country to per- 
suade you to send forces at once to the Philippines to drive 
the invader out of my beloved fatherland. Nor will I try 
to convince you that the Pacific is more important than the 
European or the Atlantic theaters of war. Those decisions 
are to be made by you. You will always have in mind, I am 
sure, that only in the Philippines has your flag been hauled 
down and replaced by the flag of the Rising Sun. 

In view of this tragic event, I do hope that the American 
people in this hour of their great responsibility to the world 
will always keep before them the memory of the devotion 
and sacrifices of the people of the Philippines. Let me ask 
then, in turn, that your people adopt still another war slogan 
— "Remember the Philippines." 

[Prolonged applause; Senators and occupants of the gal- 
leries rising.'] 



[Prom the Congressional Record June 4, 1942] 



